
Romance Phonetics and Phonology


Romance Phonetics
and Phonology
Edited by
M A R K G I B S O N A N D J U A N A G I L
1

3
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, OXDP,
United Kingdom
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of
Oxford University Press in the UK and in certain other countries
© editorial matter and organization Mark Gibson and Juana Gil 
© the chapters their several authors 
The moral rights of the authors have been asserted
First Edition published in 
Impression: 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the
prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted
by law, by licence or under terms agreed with the appropriate reprographics
rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the
above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the
address above
You must not circulate this work in any other form
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press
Madison Avenue, New York, NY , United States of America
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Control Number: 
ISBN ––––
Printed and bound by
CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon, CRYY
Links to third party websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and
for information only. Oxford disclaims any responsibility for the materials
contained in any third party website referenced in this work.

Contents
Acknowledgments
vii
List of Figures and Tables
ix
List of Abbreviations
xvii
The Contributors
xxi
. Romance sounds: New insights for old issues

Mark Gibson and Juana Gil
Part I. Acoustic Studies
. Rhotic variation in Spanish codas: Acoustic analysis and effects of
context in spontaneous speech

Beatriz Blecua and Jordi Cicres
. The phonetics of Italian anaphonesis: Between production
and perception

Silvia Calamai
. A crosslinguistic study of voiceless fricative sibilants in Galician and
European Portuguese

Xosé Luís Regueira Fernández and María José Ginzo
. Acoustic realization of vowels as a function of syllabic position:
A crosslinguistic study with data from French and Spanish

Cédric Gendrot, Martine Adda-Decker, and Fabián Santiago
Part II. Articulatory Studies
. An articulatory account of rhotic variation in Tuscan Italian:
Synchronized UTI and EPG data

Chiara Celata, Alessandro Vietti, and Lorenzo Spreaﬁco
. Vowels and diphthongs: The articulatory and acoustic structure
of Romanian nuclei

Ioana Chitoran and Stefania Marin
. Temporal organization of three-consonant onsets in Romanian

Stefania Marin
. Articulatory setting, articulatory symmetry, and production
mechanisms for Catalan consonant sequences

Daniel Recasens and Meritxell Mira

Part III. Studies in Perception
. Perceptual cues for individual voice quality

Marianela Fernández Trinidad and José Manuel Rojo Abuin
. Perception of lexical stress in Spanish Lby French speakers

Joaquim Llisterri and Sandra Schwab
. Brazilian Portuguese rhotics in poem reciting: Perceptual, acoustic,
and meaning-related issues

Sandra Madureira
. Perceived phrasing in French: A survey of some sentence structures

Caroline L. Smith
Part IV. Phonological Issues
. Modeling assimilation: The case of sibilant voicing in Spanish

Rebeka Campos-Astorkiza
. Adjusting to the syllable margins: Glides in Catalan and Spanish

Jesús Jiménez, Maria-Rosa Lloret, and Clàudia Pons-Moll
. Galician mid-vowel reduction: A Stratal Optimality Theory account

Fernando Martínez-Gil
Part V. Studies in Acquisition
. Language proximity and speech perception in young bilinguals:
Revisiting the trajectory of infants from Spanish–Catalan contexts

Laura Bosch
. Production and perception in the acquisition of Spanish and Portuguese

Jaydene Elvin, Polina Vasiliev, and Paola Escudero
. Production of French close rounded vowels by Spanish learners:
A corpus-based study

Isabelle Racine and Sylvain Detey
. Phonetic behavior in proﬁcient bilinguals: Insights from the
Catalan–Spanish contact situation

Miquel Simonet
References

Index

vi
Contents

Acknowledgments
Dozens of people were involved in the production of the current volume. Authors,
editors, and publishers all played a crucial role in the development and execution of
the ﬁnal product. Add in the family members and support teams of all those
involved, and the number of dedicated people who have invested their time in this
book grows by the hundreds. However, of all the people involved who have made this
volume what it is, the editors are eternally indebted to the hard work, perseverance,
and dedication of one person, style and copy editor María Nuria Martínez García.
Nuria had the thankless job of dotting every ‘i’ and crossing every ‘t’, and performing
other odd tasks too numerous to mention here. We would like to formally thank her
for her outstanding and painstaking work. It was truly inspiring to work with
someone so meticulous and dedicated to her work.


List of Figures and Tables
Figures
.
Spectrograms of the sequences terce(ro), por lo, and corer, showing
single-component rhotics (occlusion, approximant, and fricative)

.
Spectrograms of the sequences porD(ios) and tard(e), showing rhotics of
two components (approximant + vocalic element and occlusion + vocalic
element)

.
Spectrograms of the sequences porte(ría) and (for)mar la(zos), showing
three-component rhotics (approximant + vocalic element + approximant,
and occlusion + vocalic element + occlusion)

.
Spectrogram of the sequence contarlo, showing an example of elision
(indicated by Ø)

.
Spectrogram of the sequence (inten)tar eh. The rhotic has ﬁve components
(occlusion + vocalic element + occlusion + vocalic element + approximant)

.
Spectrograms of the sequences (cual)quier co(sa), joder, and hacer,
two-component rhotics with a fricative component (occlusion + fricative,
approximant + fricative, and fricative + vocalic element, respectively)

.
Spectrogram of the sequence cerc(a), with a three-component rhotic
(occlusion + fricative + approximant)

.
Percentages of the number of components according to position

.
Dispersion diagram of the analysis of the correspondence between the
number of components and place of articulation of the following consonant

.Dispersion diagram of the analysis of the correspondence between the
number of components and manner of articulation of the following
consonant

.Numbers of tokens of the different component variants according to
the manner of articulation of the following consonant

.Percentages of realizations of the ﬁrst component according to the
position and the number of components

.Percentages of realizations of the third component according to position

.Percentages of realizations of the second component in the realizations with
an occlusive ﬁrst component according to their position

.Box plots of the duration according to the number of components and
the position

.Diagram of the average duration of rhotics (and of each of their components)
according to their number of components, position, and acoustic characteristics


.Average spectra for front sibilants (S) in female Galician (GF, grey) and female
Portuguese (PF, black) speakers

.Average of the three spectrum types for male Galician (GM) speakers: S
(average of four speakers), S(average of two speakers), S(average
of two speakers), compared with male Portuguese [s] (PM-S)

.Average spectra of the front sibilant of female Galician (GF) informants
from the apical [s̺] area and the laminal [s] area

.Average ﬁnal sibilant (PSF) and syllable-initial [ʃ] (PX) spectra in realizations
by Portuguese speakers, female (F) and male (M) groups

.Average spectra of [s̪] (GM–G–S), [ʃ] (GM–G–X), and the sibilant in
coda position (GM–G–SF), in the two Galician speakers with
lamino-dental seseo

.Average spectra for realizations of [s] (GF–S), [ʃ] (GF–X), and word-ﬁnal
sibilant (GF–SF) in female Galician speakers (GF)

.Normalized vowel formants (Fand F) in normalized Hz for Spanish
(left) and French (right)

.Normalized acoustic dispersion (in normalized Hz) for Spanish (left)
and French (right)

.Normalized acoustic dispersion (in normalized Hz), duration
(in normalized ms), and f₀ (in normalized Hz) values (from left to right) of vowels
in initial and ﬁnal syllables in French disyllabic words

.Normalized acoustic dispersion (in normalized Hz), duration
(in normalized ms), and f₀ (in normalized Hz) values (from left to right) of
vowels in initial unstressed syllables compared to ﬁnal stressed syllables
in Spanish disyllabic words

.Normalized acoustic dispersion (in normalized Hz), duration (in normalized ms),
and f₀ (in normalized Hz) values (from left to right) of vowels in initial stressed
syllables compared to ﬁnal unstressed syllables in Spanish disyllabic words

.Normalized formants of vowels (in normalized Hz) for French and Spanish
according to the presence of pause (the lower line for ﬁnal prepausal
vowels, the upper line for ﬁnal nonprepausal vowels)

.Distribution of the tense–lax feature for three alveolar sonorants in central
Europe and the Italo-Romance domain

.Percentages of rhotic variants in the corpus (by subject)

.Wiring diagram

.Results of the MCA of the rhotic variants: plane representation
of the category cloud

.Constriction duration values, Fand Fvalues at consonant onset and
offset for the singleton vs. geminate contrast as a function of vowel context

.Constriction Qp (left), CAa (middle), and CCa (right) for the singleton vs.
geminate contrast as a function of vowel context

x
List of Figures and Tables

.
Smoothing spline estimates and % Bayesian conﬁdence interval for
comparison of the mean curves for /r/ in /ar(ː)ra/, /ur(ː)u/, and /ir(ː)i/ for
subjects CHB (a) and CHC (b)

.
Smoothing spline estimates and % Bayesian conﬁdence interval for
comparison of the mean curves for /r/ in /ara/ vs. /arːa/ (a), /iri/ vs. /irːi/ (b),
and /uru/ vs. /urːu/ (c) for subject CHB (singletons: VRV; geminates: VRRV)

.
Smoothing spline estimates and % Bayesian conﬁdence interval for
comparison of the mean curves for /r/ in /ara/ vs. /arːa/ (a), /iri/ vs. /irːi/ (b),
and /uru/ vs. /urːu/ (c) for subject CHC (singletons: VRV; geminates: VRRV)

.Dynamic movement of the singleton /r/ (a) and the geminate
(b) in the /i/ context for speaker CHB

.Dynamic movement of the singleton /r/ (a) and the geminate (b) in the /i/
context for speaker CHC

.
Example measurement of vowel articulatory movement for vowel /e/ in
diphthong /ea/ in one repetition of the word /ka.ˈfea/

.
Vowel-to-vowel timing lag, representing the lag between maximal constriction
of the two vowels

.
Position of the ﬁrst vowel/glide (V) in diphthong/hiatus sequences
and position of vowel /e/

.
Position of the second vowel (V) in diphthong/hiatus sequences and position
of vowel /a/

.
Difference in position between the two vowel targets (V–V) at the point
of maximum constriction for each

.
Top: Diphthong /ja/ in [ˈpja.trʌ]. Bottom: Hiatus /i.a/ in [pi.ˈa.stru]

.
Mean and one standard deviation for acoustic duration (left) and Fvalues
at vowel-onset time point (right) as a function of category

.
Scatterplot of mean durations by mean Fas a function of speaker

.
Schematic representation of the timing changes predicted by a c‑center
organization as a function of onset complexity increase

.
Average lags of the vowel-adjacent consonant to the anchor

.
Average lags of the vowel-adjacent consonant to the anchor as a function of set

.
Averages of absolute (top) and normalized (bottom) intra-cluster timing
for three consonant clusters, between consonants and (CC) and
between consonants and (CC)

.
Mean COG values and COG ranges for fricatives and fricative + fricative
sequences (left) and for affricates and affricate + fricative sequences (right)
in Eastern, Western, and Valencian Catalan

.
Linguo-palatal contact patterns for fricatives and fricative + fricative
sequences taken at the midpoint of the frication noise according to the
Eastern Catalan speakers DR, JP, and JC

List of Figures and Tables
xi

.Linguo-palatal contact patterns for affricates and affricate + fricative
sequences taken at the midpoint of the closure and frication phases according
to the Eastern Catalan speakers DR, JP, and JC

.Discrimination rate by speaker (indicated by ‘S’) calculated
using the quotient of hit responses

.Intra- and interspeaker variation by parameter group (indicated by a letter)

.Inter- and intraspeaker variation by speaker and parameter group
(indicated by a letter)

.Changes in parameters per speaker when shifting registers (modal–falsetto)

.Average utterance length per speaker (indicated by ‘S’ and its corresponding
number) and register

.Spectrogram of a sample (Dica dadiva) in modal voice by Speaker 

.Spectrogram of a sample (Dica dadiva) in modal voice by Speaker 

.Percentages of correct identiﬁcation rates for Base stimuli as a function of
the stress pattern and the competence of French participants in L
Spanish (Advanced, With no knowledge)

.Percentages of correct identiﬁcation rate by French listeners for Manipulated
stimuli as a function of the seven manipulations and the competence in L
Spanish (Advanced, With no knowledge)

.Percentages of different (Diff) responses by French listeners as a function
of the pair member (PP > P paired with PP, PP > P paired with P;
PP=proparoxytone; P=paroxytone) and the competence in LSpanish
(Advanced, No knowledge) for the seven possible manipulations

.Percentages of different (Diff) responses by French listeners as a function
of the pair member (P > O paired with P, P > O paired with O; P=paroxytone;
O=oxytone) and the competence in LSpanish (Advanced, No knowledge)
for the seven possible manipulations

.Percentages of correct responses in the training session as a function
of the groups (Natives and Non-natives) and of the ﬁve training blocks

.Estimated probability of correct responses in the post-test as a function of the
percentages of correct responses in the training session (in Non-natives only)

.A voiceless glottal fricative produced in syllable coda position of the
word mar (‘sea’)

.An approximant produced in syllable coda position of the word mar (‘sea’)

.A voiced alveolar tap produced at the syllable coda position of the word
mar (‘sea’)

.A voiceless fricative trill produced at the syllable coda position
of the word mar (‘sea’)

.A voiced trill produced at the syllable onset position of the word
arranca (‘rip’)

xii
List of Figures and Tables

.Dendrogram showing the grouping of the stanzas in clusters

.The distribution of the groups of variables Gq(VPAS), Gc
(ExpressionEvaluator), and the perceptual evaluation of activation
(ZAP, Gc) in two dimensions (Dim and Dim ) of the vector space

.The projection onto two dimensions of the quantitative factor variables

.Comparison of b-scores and p-scores for read and spontaneous dislocations

.A sentence (‘She read a novel in Arabic.’) produced in broad-focus
condition by a female speaker, showing the waveform (above) and f₀ trace

.A sentence produced in narrow-focus condition by a male speaker, showing
the waveform (above) and f₀ trace

.Comparison of scores for words in different positions before and during the
focus phrases, under broad and narrow focus

.Scores for words ending focus phrases, comparing those that are
sentence-medial to those that are sentence-ﬁnal

.Comparison of the scores for the ﬁnal word in long- or short-subject noun
phrases (NPs)

.Spectrogram and waveform illustrating the three acoustic measurements,
i.e., vowel duration, voicing during the fricative, and fricative duration for
the word /atisˈbe/

.Distribution of the percent voicing for tokens with voiceless sequences,
i.e., /s/ followed by a voiceless consonant (Experiment )

.Distribution of the voicing categories of /s/ before a voiced obstruent for each
speaker

.Close (top panel) and open (bottom panel) approximant realizations
of the voiced obstruent in the word /atisˈbe/

.Histogram for the distribution of percent voicing in the intonational
phrase boundary condition

.Distribution of the percent voicing for tokens with voiceless sequences
(Experiment )

.Histogram for the distribution of percent voicing before a voiced obstruent
in the voicing condition in Experiment (left) and Experiment (right)

.Distribution of the voicing categories by speaker for the voicing condition
in Experiment (left) and Experiment (right)

.Realization of /w/ in huelo and cacahuete in Castilian Spanish

.Realization of /j/ in yugo, (el) yerno, and mayo in Castilian Spanish

.Realization of /w/ in diuen in Majorcan Catalan

.Realization of /j/ in deia in Majorcan

.Praat screenshot of a sound ﬁle and a TextGrid ﬁle

List of Figures and Tables
xiii

Tables
.Number of rhotic consonants before a consonant and before a pause
per speaker

.Acoustic characteristics used in the deﬁnition of the components

.Factors and variants

.Composition of the rhotic consonants according to the characteristics
of each of their components, and the number of realizations found
in the corpus

.Percentage of realizations in spontaneous and read speech, according to
number of components

.Scale of acceptability of velar clusters

.Percentage of the answers according to the factors Place and Vowel before
the velar cluster

.Percentage of the answers according to the factors Place, Vowel, and
Postnasal consonant

.Confusion matrix for the alveolar clusters–high vowels (control
items–percentage values)

.Confusion matrix for the velar clusters–high vowels (control
items–percentage values)

.Confusion matrix for the alveolar clusters–mid-high vowels
(test items–percentage values)

.Confusion matrix for the velar clusters–mid-high vowels (test
items–percentage values)

.Development of the sibilant system from medieval Galician-Portuguese
to modern standard Portuguese and Galician

.Spectral mean and standard deviation (all informants) for each sibilant
(in onset position) separated by sex

.Spectral means, standard deviations for alveolar and postalveolar
fricatives in Galician and Portuguese male and female groups

.Spectral mean, kurtosis, and skewness for Galician male (GM) groups
S, S, and S

.Correlations between fricatives for spectral mean in Galician speakers by sex

.Correlations between fricatives for spectral mean in Portuguese speakers
by sex

.Frequency of rhotic variants in the corpus (by subject)

.List of variables and corresponding values associated with the /r/
tokens in the MCA

.Average values (in Hz) and standard deviation of Fand Fat the acoustic
onset and offset of the constriction phase (single-constriction rhotics)

xiv
List of Figures and Tables

.
Effects of length (singleton vs. geminate), vowel context (/i/ vs. /a/ vs. /u/),
and length by vowel context on constriction duration, and Fand F
constriction onset and offset values

.
Effects of length (singleton vs. geminate), vowel context (/i/ vs. /a/ vs. /u/),
and length by vowel context on constriction Qp (left), CAa (mid),
and CCa (right)

.
Target stimuli for the articulatory study, with intervals of interest
shown in boldface

.
Target stimuli for the acoustic study, with intervals of interest shown in
boldface

.
Stimuli

.
Sentence list with the consonants and consonant sequences under analysis
underlined, and the syllable bearing sentence stress in boldface

.
Mean, highest, and lowest COG values, and COG ranges, plotted in
Figure .

.Mean, standard deviation, standard error of the mean, and conﬁdence
intervals for d-prime (ﬁfty-seven listeners)

.Number of glottal parameters (in groups) that each speaker varied
signiﬁcantly (p<.*) when shifting registers (modal–falsetto)

.Poem parts, their themes, and percentage of rhotic varieties produced in
syllable onset position

.Poem parts, their themes, and percentage of rhotic varieties produced
in syllable coda position

.Factor variables and their correlation coefﬁcients and p-values

.Positions of words identiﬁed for analysis, with number of words analyzed
in each position and abbreviation codes

.Means (ms) for preceding vowel duration, fricative duration, and percent
voicing, with standard deviations in parentheses

.Distribution of voicing categories depending on the voicing of the following
obstruent

.Distribution of following consonant manner as a function of stress

.Mean and standard deviation (in parentheses) for the percent voicing as
a function of stress and manner of the following consonant

.Distribution of voicing categories by following approximant type

.Mean vowel and fricative duration (ms) and percent voicing
for each boundary type

.Distribution of voicing categories by prosodic boundary type

.Sample stimuli for the stress-pattern condition (c)

.Distribution of voicing categories of /s/ following consonant manner

List of Figures and Tables
xv

.Mean vowel duration (ms) according to stress pattern

.Mean fricative duration (ms) by stress pattern and following
consonant manner

.Mean percent voicing by stress pattern and following consonant manner

.Distribution of voicing categories according to stress pattern with a
following obstruent (top) and a following sonorant (bottom)

.
SLM, PAM and PAM-L, and LLP models’ focus and predictions
for Lsuccess

xvi
List of Figures and Tables

List of Abbreviations
AFC
two-alternative forced-choice experiment
A
approximant
AAA
Articulate Assistant Advanced software
AE
American English
ALE
Atlas Linguarum Europae
ALeCMan
Atlas lingüístico etnográﬁco de Castilla-La Mancha
ALiR
Atlas Linguistique Roman
ALPI
Atlas Lingüístico de la Península Ibérica
ALPS
Alpine Laboratory of Phonetic Sciences
ANOVA
Analysis of Variance
AP
accentual phrase
ATR
Advanced Tongue Root
AusE
Australian English
AV
audiovisual
BFLA
bilingual ﬁrst language acquisition
BP
Brazilian Portuguese
C
consonant
C
second consonant
CAH
Contrastive Analysis Hypothesis
CCA
contact centrality in the anterior palate
CE
Californian English
CEFRL
Common European Framework of Reference for Languages
CETENFolha
Corpus de Extractos de Textos Eletrônicos of the Folha de São Paulo newspaper
CG
Category Goodness
CGal
Conservative Galician
COG
center-of-gravity
CSL
Computerized Speech Lab (data acquisition system)
ED
Euclidean Distances
EMA
electromagnetic articulography
EPG
electropalatography
ERP
event-related brain potential
ETRURiaS
Electropalatographic and Ultrasound tongue imaging Rhotics Synchronized
corpus
F
fricative

f₀
fundamental frequency
FFT
fast Fourier transform
FOLERPA
Ferramenta Online de Experimentación Perceptiva
GF
Galician female
GM
Galician male
HSD
honest signiﬁcant difference
Hz
Hertz
IGal
Innovative Galician
IP
Intonational Phrase
ip
intermediate phrase
IS
Iberian Spanish
IPFC
InterPhonologie du Français Contemporain
L
ﬁrst language
L
second language
LLP
Second Language Linguistic Perception
LD
left dislocation/left dislocated
LIMSI
Laboratoire d’Informatique pour la Mécanique et les Sciences de l’Ingénieur
LMEDS
Language Markup and Experimental Design Software
LPC
linear predictive coding
LSC
Lax-to-Stress Condition
LT
laryngeal tenseness
MCA
multiple correspondence analysis; multiple-category assimilation
MFA
multiple factor analysis
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
MVR
mid-vowel reduction
N
nasal
NCCF
Nijmegen Corpus of Casual French
NP
noun phrase
O
oxytone
OCP
obligatory contour principle
OO
output-to-output
OT
Optimality Theory
P
paroxytone
PAM
Perceptual Assimilation Model
PCA
Principal Component Analysis
PF
Portuguese female
PFC
Phonologie du Français Contemporain
PM
Portuguese male
xviii
List of Abbreviations

PP
proparoxytone
PRIMIR
Processing Rich Information from Multidimensional Interactive
Representations
PW
prosodic word
PX
Portuguese fricative (a form used simply for coding in this research)
QMU
Queen Margaret’s University
R
rhotic
R
row of electrodes
RD
right dislocation/right dislocated
RPT
Rapid Prosody Transcription
SCA
Single-Category Assimilation
SF
sibilants produced by females (a form used simply for coding in this research)
SLM
Speech Learning Model
SNS
Scuola Normale Superiore (Pisa, Italy)
T
tap
TB
tongue body
TCA
Two-Category Assimilation
Tr
trill
TV
theme vowel
TVT
vocal tract tenseness
UTI
ultrasound tongue imaging
V
vowel
VL
variation of loudness
VOT
voice onset time
VPAS
Voice Proﬁle Analysis Scheme
VRRV
vowel-rhotic-rhotic-vowel
VRV
vowel-rhotic-vowel
VV
vowel to vowel
XAB
refers to a type of perception test with two options (A, B) for stimuli
ZAP
perceptual evaluation of activation
List of Abbreviations
xix


The Contributors
MARTINE ADDA-DECKER holds an MD in Applied Mathematics and a PhD in Computer
Science from the University Paris-Sud (Orsay), France. She has been a CNRS researcher since
. She joined the Laboratory of Phonetics and Phonology (LPP, UMR ) in , after
her previous position dealing with the Spoken Language Processing group at LIMSI-CNRS
(Orsay), where she remains an associate researcher. Her research interests focus on man-
machine communication, language and accent identiﬁcation, multilingual speech recognition,
acoustic-phonetic and lexical modeling, pronunciation variants, phonetics, phonology, and
large corpus-based studies. She has authored or co-authored over peer-reviewed articles in
the ﬁeld. She is regularly reviewing papers in the major speech-related journals and confer-
ences. She collaborates as an expert in French national, Belgian, Canadian, Luxembourgish,
Swiss, and European research funding agencies.
BEATRIZ BLECUA is a Professor in Spanish Phonetics and Phonology at the University of
Girona. She obtained her PhD in Linguistics in from the Autonomous University
of Barcelona (UAB), doing her dissertation on rhotic sounds in Spanish, which continues to
be one of her main research interests. Her areas of specialization include Spanish phonetics,
acoustic phonetics, phonetic variation in speaking styles, and its relation with sound change,
and pronunciation problems in second-language acquisition. Her current research focuses on
the perceptual effects of phonetic variation, as well as on interspeaker variation related to
forensic phonetics.
LAURA BOSCH is Professor in Psychology at the University of Barcelona (UB) and member of
the Institute for Research on Brain, Cognition and Behavior (IRC) of this institution. Her
research interests are focused on early speech perception, language learning, and phonological
development, in both monolingual and bilingual populations. She coordinates the infancy
research lab at the University of Barcelona (APAL, Attention, Perception and Acquisition of
Language) and her current research also includes populations at risk of neurocognitive and
language-based disorders.
SILVIA CALAMAI received her PhD in Linguistics from the University of Perugia in . She is
now Associate Professor in Linguistics at the University of Siena. Her areas of research include
experimental phonetics, sociolinguistics, dialectology, and Intangible Cultural Heritage. At
present, she is the scientiﬁc co-coordinator of the Project Grammo-foni. Le sofﬁtte della voce
(Gra.fo) at the University of Siena (http://grafo.sns.it), and she is Associate Member of the
Intellectual Property Issues in Cultural Heritage (IPinCH) International Project (http://www.
sfu.ca/ipinch/). List of publications at https://sites.google.com/a/unisi.it/silviacalamai/home.
REBEKA CAMPOS-ASTORKIZA works on phonetics and phonology, from both a theoretical and
an experimental perspective. Her work illustrates how phonetic data can help us develop
theoretical models to explain sound patterns. In addition, she is interested in second-language
acquisition of phonology, with a focus on new methodologies and instructional implications.

Her mentoring experience has also allowed her to develop expertise in sociophonetics,
especially on how phonetic analysis and understanding can shed light on phonetic variation
and vice versa.
CHIARA CELATA is a researcher in Linguistics at the Scuola Normale Superiore (SNS) in Pisa,
Italy, where she teaches graduate-level courses in experimental phonetics and phonology. She
also coordinates the research activities in Speech Production and Perception at the SNS
Linguistics Laboratory. She is currently running two research projects, one looking at rhotic
variation in selected Italian varieties as a function of phonological and socio-communicative
variables, and the other, funded by the ESF and French ANR in collaboration with other
European universities, seeking to develop a psycho-computational account of the phonotactic–
morphology interface in several Romance and Germanic languages.
IOANA CHITORAN is Professor of Linguistics at the Université Paris Diderot, Clillac-ARP, and
CNRS—Laboratoire de Phonétique et Phonologie (UMR ). Her research focuses on the
phonetics–phonology interface, and the relation between temporal variability and phono-
logical structure, particularly in Caucasian and Romance languages.
JORDI CICRES is a Lecturer in language didactics and forensic phonetics at the University of
Girona. He holds an MA in Forensic Linguistics and a PhD in Applied Linguistics (University
Pompeu Fabra). His main research interests deal with descriptive phonetics both at the
segmental and at the suprasegmental levels, forensic linguistics (especially with applications
to speaker identiﬁcation, transcription of disputed recordings, and the construction of linguis-
tic proﬁles), language variation, and general language didactics. His recent work has focused on
the analysis of Spanish rhotics and ﬁlled pauses with both descriptive and applied purposes
related to speaker identiﬁcation.
SYLVAIN DETEY is Associate Professor of Applied Linguistics and French Studies at Waseda
University (Japan), formerly Maître de Conférences (Assistant Professor) in the Department of
Language Sciences and Communication at the University of Rouen (France). His current
research interests lie in the use of oral corpora for language education and the role of variation
and multimodality in second-language phonology acquisition. He is one of the coordinators of
the (Inter)Phonologie du Français Contemporain (IPFC) project, and co-edited Les variétés du
français parlé dans l’espace francophone. Ressources pour l’enseignement (, Ophrys) and
Varieties of Spoken French (, Oxford University Press).
JAYDENE ELVIN received her PhD from The MARCS Institute, Western Sydney University. Her
research focuses on second-language speech perception, word recognition and production,
with a particular focus on Australian English and Iberian Spanish learners of Brazilian
Portuguese.
PAOLA ESCUDERO is Associate Professor at the MARCS Institute, Western Sydney University.
Her research focuses on speech and visual development in diverse populations, including
human infants, children and adults, and zebra ﬁnches.
MARIANELA FERNÁNDEZ TRINIDAD holds a Master’s degree in Phonetics and Phonology from
the Spanish National Research Council (CSIC)–the Menéndez Pelayo International University
in Madrid, Spain. She is currently a researcher at the CSIC Phonetics Laboratory, where she is
xxii
The Contributors

developing her doctoral thesis and performs research, both focusing on the perception and
production of voice in the ﬁelds of Phonic Science and Forensic Phonetics. She has been and
continues to be a member of various research teams ﬁnanced by the Spanish government. In
Uruguay, she has participated in projects ﬁnanced by the Sectorial Commission for Scientiﬁc
Research (CSIC) and has been a researcher with the National Research and Innovation Agency
(ANII). She is author of several articles published in both Spanish and international journals.
CÉDRIC GENDROT is Maitre de Conferences (Assistant Professor) at the University Sorbonne
Nouvelle—Paris . His early work focused on articulatory prosody: the synchronous physio-
logical and acoustic analysis of phonemes according to their prosodic position. Recently, he has
specialized in large corpora analyses of several languages, trying to relate previous results from
the physiological data from small corpora with large acoustic data in order to evaluate
tendencies and individual strategies in speech. Over the past two years, he has coordinated a
number of research projects—including an ANR JCJC project involving a comparison between
physiological and acoustic data.
MARK GIBSON is Professor of Linguistics and Director of the Speech Laboratory at the
University of Navarra. His research focuses on articulatory timing in syllables from a Labora-
tory Phonology approach. His work mainly focuses on the timing of articulatory gestures in
syllables using electromagnetic articulography, ultrasound imaging, and aerodynamics.
JUANA GIL is currently Director of the Instituto Cervantes in Lyon, having previously held
positions at the Universidad Autónoma de Madrid and at UNED, the Spanish open university.
She also founded the Postgraduate Program in Speech Sciences organized by the Spanish
National Research Council (CSIC). She is mainly interested in the phonetics–phonology
interface and in some applications of phonetics, such as forensic phonetics and second-
language pronunciation learning and teaching. She is the co-editor, with Ricardo Mairal, of
Linguistic Universals (Cambridge University Press, ).
MARÍA JOSÉ GINZO is Researcher and Statistical Consultant in Statistical Consulting Services
(SCS) at the University of Santiago de Compostela (USC). Her research is concerned mainly
with statistical techniques in Geolinguistics and Onomastics Modeling. She is co-author of
several papers with Spanish researchers on different topics connected with her work as
Statistical Consultant and this experience is reﬂected in many contracts with government
bodies and/or private companies. She has been a member of organizing committees for several
international conferences and scientiﬁc gatherings.
JESÚS JIMÉNEZ is Associate Professor in the Department of Catalan Philology at the Universitat
de València, where he completed his PhD in with a study on the syllable structure of
Catalan. He is also a member of the research center Institut Interuniversitari de Filologia
Valenciana. His current research focuses on phonology, phonetics, and linguistic variation in
Catalan, Spanish, and other Romance languages. He is the author of the book L’estructura
sil·labica del català () and a contributing author in the Gramàtica del català contemporani,
vols. (, co-directed by Joan Solà, Maria-Rosa Lloret, Joan Mascaró, and Manuel Pérez
Saldanya). His work has appeared in journals such as Caplletra, Estudios de Fonética Experi-
mental, Estudis Romànics, Revista de Filología Románica, Rivista di Linguistica, and Verba.
Since , he is a member of a research group on the study of dialect variation led by
The Contributors
xxiii

Maria-Rosa Lloret, from the Universitat de Barcelona (Grup d’Estudi de la Variació Dialectal
(GEVaD), ww.ub.edu/GEVAD).
JOAQUIM LLISTERRI received a PhD in Romance Philology from the Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona (UAB) in , and he was appointed full-time lecturer in General Linguistics at
the same university in . He teaches courses in General Linguistics, General and Applied
Phonetics, Applied Linguistics, and Speech Technologies. His research, publications, and
participation in national and international projects have been concerned with the applica-
tion of experimental phonetics to speech technology—especially in the area of text-to-speech
synthesis—and with the study of phonetic transfer in second- and third-language acquisi-
tion. He has worked on the evaluation of synthesized speech and on the creation and
annotation of spoken databases and corpora, particularly in the domain of prosody. He
has also been involved in the use of communication and information technologies for
language teaching and for linguistic research.
MARIA-ROSA LLORET is Professor in the Department of Catalan Philology at the Universitat de
Barcelona. She completed her PhD in Linguistics at Indiana University in , with a study
on the morphophonology of Oromo (Cushitic). Her current research focuses on phonology,
morphology, and linguistic variation in Catalan, Spanish, and other Romance languages. She
is the author of the book La fonologia de català () and co-author of Manual de
transcripció fonètica (, with Eulàlia Bonet and Joan Mascaró) and Fonologia catalana
(, with Eulàlia Bonet). She co-directed the Gramàtica del català contemporani, vols.
(, with Joan Solà, Joan Mascaró, and Manuel Pérez Saldanya). Her work has appeared in
journals such as Language, Lingua, Linguistic Inquiry, Phonology, Probus, Dialectologia et
Geolinguistica, Revista de Filología Románica, Catalan Journal of Linguistics, Caplletra,
Estudios de Fonética Experimental, and Verba. Since , she has led a research group on
the study of dialect variation (Grup d’Estudi de la Variació Dialectal (GEVaD), ww.ub.edu/
GEVAD).
SANDRA MADUREIRA has a PhD in Applied Linguistics from Pontifícia Universidade Católica
de São Paulo (PUC-SP), and performed post-doctoral work at the LAFAPE-IEL- (Laboratory
of Phonetics and Psycholinguistics–Institute of Language Studies) UNICAMP. She is Full
Professor in the Department of Linguistics at PUC-SP, lecturer at PEPG (Graduate Studies
Program) in Language Science Studies, and a researcher at the LIAAC (Integrated Laboratory
of Acoustic Analyses). She is head of the Research Group on Speech Studies and the editor of
the Journal Intercâmbio at PUC-SP and of the Journal of Speech Sciences maintained by LBASS
(Luso-Brazilian Association of Speech Sciences). Her main line of research is in Experimental
Phonetics. Her main areas of interest are: Speech Expressivity, Voice Quality, Acquisition of L
Sounds and Prosody.
STEFANIA MARIN was born and raised in Romania, where she obtained a BA (English and
Portuguese Philology) and MA (Applied Linguistics) from the University of Bucharest. She
received her PhD in Linguistics in from Yale University, USA, and since then she has
been working at the Institute of Phonetics and Speech Processing at Ludwig Maximilian
University in Munich. Her research investigates how linguistically relevant structures such
as syllables are realized temporally at the speech-production level. The particular focus of her
work is on Romanian vowels and consonant clusters.
xxiv
The Contributors

FERNANDO MARTÍNEZ-GIL received his BA in Anglo-Germanic Philology from the University of
Salamanca, Spain, and his MA and PhD from the University of Southern California. He is an
Associate Professor of Spanish Linguistics in the Department of Spanish and Portuguese at Ohio
State University in Columbus, Ohio. He taught previously at Georgetown University. He has
(co-)edited several volumes on Spanish and Hispano-Romance phonology, including Issues in
the Phonology and Morphology of the Major Iberian Languages (, with Alfonso Morales-Front)
and Optimality-Theoretical Studies on Spanish Phonology (, with Sonia Colina). His main
research interests are Spanish and Galician phonology, phonological theory, and the historical
evolution of Spanish and the Hispano-Romance languages.
MERITXELL MIRA studied Chemical Engineering at the Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya. She
began her professional career as an engineer working in the ﬁeld of big data processing before
moving to the Universitat Autònoma de Bellaterra as a research technician. There, she
collaborated with Dr. Daniel Recasens in the phonetics laboratory of the Institut d’Estudis
Catalans, performing experimental studies in phonetics and sound change. She currently
works as an engineer in the pharmaceutical industry.
CLÀUDIA PONS-MOLL is a Tenured Professor in the Department of Catalan Philology at the
Universitat de Barcelona, where she completed her PhD in Catalan Philology in with a
descriptive and formal study on Balearic Catalan phonotactics. Her current research focuses on
the phonology, the morphophonology, and the linguistic variation of Catalan and other
Romance languages from a theoretical perspective. Her work has appeared in journals and
edited series such as Acta Linguistica Hungarica, Linguistic Inquiry, Phonology, Probus,
Proceedings of NELS, Studies in Language, Current Issues in Linguistic Theory, Catalan Journal
of Linguistics, Caplletra, etc. She is the author of the book La teoria de l’optimitat. Una
introducció aplicada al català de les Illes Balears (), and she is co-directing, along with
Joseﬁna Carrera, the project “Els sons del català” (http://www.ub.edu/sonscatala/). She is a
member of the Grup d’Estudi de la Variació Dialectal (GEVaD) (UB, PI: Maria-Rosa Lloret)
and of the Center for Theoretical Linguistics (UAB).
ISABELLE RACINE is Professor of French as a Foreign Language at the University of Geneva,
Switzerland. Her research focuses on Lphonological acquisition and on the implications of
phonetic and phonological variation at a pedagogical level. She has also published several
papers, book chapters, and conference papers on Swiss French. She is one of the coordinators
of the (Inter)Phonologie du Français Contemporain (IPFC) project, and co-editor of L’appren-
tissage de la liaison en français par des locuteurs non natifs: éclairage des corpus oraux (,
VALS-ASLA).
DANIEL RECASENS is Full Professor of Catalan Philology at the Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona and director of the Phonetics Laboratory of the Institut d’Estudis Catalans. He
holds a PhD in Linguistics from the University of Connecticut and has carried out doctoral and
postdoctoral research at Haskins Laboratories (New Haven, CT, USA). He has published
numerous scientiﬁc articles in highly ranked international journals, several books and book
chapters, and is currently Associate Editor of Phonetica and member of the Editorial Board of
the Journal of the International Phonetic Association. He has served as Chair of the th
International Congress of the Phonetic Sciences () and as Vice-President of the Inter-
national Phonetic Association (–). His research interests include the interarticulatory
The Contributors
xxv

mechanisms in speech production, the phonetic causes of sound change, and the phonetics–
phonology interface.
XOSÉ LUÍS REGUEIRA FERNÁNDEZ is Professor of Galician and Portuguese Language and Literature
at the University of Santiago de Compostela. His research interests focus mainly on Galician
phonetics and sociolinguistics (standardization, variation, and change). He has authored
Dicionario de pronuncia da lingua galega [Dictionary of Galician Pronunciation] (A Coruña,
), co-authored Gramática galega [Galician Grammar] (Vigo, ), directed and co-
authored Os sons da lingua [The Sounds of Language] (Vigo, ], among other books. He
has published numerous articles on these topics in journals such as JIPA, Revista Internacional
de Lingüística Iberoamericana, Estudos de Lingüística Galega, Estudios de Fonética Experimen-
tal, Verba, Revista de Filología Románica, as well as many book chapters. He is a research fellow
at the Instituto da Lingua Galega [Galician Language Institute] and a member of the Real
Academia Galega [Royal Galician Academy].
JOSÉ MANUEL ROJO ABUIN holds a bachelor’s degree in Statistics and a Master’s degree
in Science and Technology Statistics from the Universidad Complutense of Madrid. He is
the head of the Statistical Analysis Unit of the Center for Human and Social Sciences at the
Spanish National Research Council (UAE, CCHS, CSIC), Madrid, Spain. He participates in
the statistical design and analysis of research projects that are executed within the Institutes
and Research Groups in the CCHS. In this context, he is co-author of several books, chapters,
and papers published in national and international journals. He is a member of the Spanish
Society of Statistics and Operations Research (SEIO).
FABIÁN SANTIAGO completed a PhD in Descriptive, Theoretic, and Automatic Linguistics at
the University of Paris Diderot (Sorbonne Paris Cité) in . His research and publications
are mainly concerned with sentence phonology in both French and Spanish and the acquisition
of prosody (intonational and metrical aspects) of French as a foreign language. Recently, he has
worked on the applications of syntax–prosody mapping to automatic speech recognition
errors, hybrid phonetic annotations of multilingual synthetic voices, and the use of physio-
logical data (ultrasound) for modeling the articulation of the phoneme /r/ in French. He is
currently a postdoctoral research fellow at the Laboratory of Phonetics and Phonology at the
Université Sorbonne Nouvelle.
SANDRA SCHWAB is a Lecturer in French phonetics at the University of Geneva. At the same
time, she is working on a SNF Ambizione project at the Phonetics Laboratory at the University
of Zurich. Her research focuses mainly on prosody in Land L. More speciﬁcally, she has
published experimental studies on speech rate in Land L, on regional prosodic variation in
French, and on the perception of Spanish lexical stress by French speakers.
MIQUEL SIMONET is Associate Professor of Spanish Linguistics at the University of Arizona. At
Arizona, he is a member of the faculty in the Department of Spanish and Portuguese, and he is
afﬁliated with the Department of Linguistics, the Program in Cognitive Science, and the
Program in Second Language Acquisition. He is an experimental phonologist and phonetician
whose main goal is to comprehend the effects of language use on the mental representations of
sounds, the shape of sound patterns, and the structure of sound systems. Much of his research
has been focused on bilingualism, second language speech, and sound change.
xxvi
The Contributors

CAROLINE L. SMITH is Associate Professor of Linguistics at the University of New Mexico.
She received her PhD from Yale University; while a student she worked as a research assistant
at Haskins Laboratories. Besides New Mexico, she has also taught at UCLA, the University of
Ottawa, and the Université Lumière Lyon . Her research has focused on prosody, particularly
timing and rhythm, in a variety of languages, especially French. This work has investigated
durational variation, vowel devoicing, and intonational patterns as evidence of French pros-
odic structure, and also considers listeners’ understanding of this structure.
LORENZO SPREAFICO is a researcher at the Free University of Bozen-Bolzano. His current
research interests include monolingual, bilingual, and Lphonological acquisition, with special
emphasis on articulatory phonetics. He has co-edited the volume Rhotics. New data and
perspectives (BUP).
POLINA VASILIEV is a Visiting Assistant Professor in the Department of Spanish and Portu-
guese at UCLA. Her main area of research is second-language speech perception, with a
particular interest in English-speaking learners of Spanish and Portuguese.
ALESSANDRO VIETTI is a tenured researcher in Linguistics at the Free University of Bozen-
Bolzano and Director of the ALPS (Alpine Laboratory of Phonetics Sciences). His research
ﬁelds are laboratory phonology and sociophonetics. He has written on phonetic variation in
bilingual speakers, combining sociolinguistic, articulatory, and acoustic data. He has recently
co-edited the volume Rhotics. New data and perspectives ().
The Contributors
xxvii


1
Romance sounds
New insights for old issues
MARK GIBSON AND JUANA GIL
.Why Romance, why now?
The study of Romance sounds, and their structure, has for centuries occupied a
foundational position in core phonetic and phonological research. And for good
reason. By examining the typological symmetries and asymmetries among the
Romance languages we have learned much about the universal properties of language
and the production/perception mechanisms that underlie sound change and devel-
opment. Additionally, the errors and direction of errors, as well as nonstandard
pronunciations, which speakers produce synchronically in one language give a
glimpse into the impetus for diachronic changes in the sound system of other related
languages within the same family, in our case, the family of Romance languages. All
of these factors conspire to provide a rich terrain in which to formulate and test new
hypotheses related to sound systems and in which to ground new areas of speech
motor research.
It is, therefore, of utmost interest to obtain an overview of the different processes
that have conspired to shape the different Romance sound systems in order to test
how different yet interconnected tendencies in a single phonological environment
may emerge. To exemplify the relation between synchrony and diachrony in the
Romance languages, consider the synchronic process of ﬁnal consonant lenition in
Andalusian Spanish, as well as in certain Spanish dialects of Hispanic America and
Equatorial New Guinea. In these dialects, word-ﬁnal /n/ may often become velarized
(Canﬁeld , ; López Morales ; Lipski , ; Darias Concepción,
Ruisánchez Regalado, and Dohotaru ; Wireback ), /s/ and /θ/ are routinely
aspirated and/or deleted in all coda contexts (Alonso ; Salvador , ;
Alarcos Llorach ; Mondéjar ; Contreras Jurado ; Terrell ; Lipski
, , ; Romero ; Penny ; Gerfen ; O’Neill ; Kochetov
and Colantoni ), and /ɾ/ and /d/ are often precluded altogether (Chela-Flores
; Alvar [] ; Lipski ), as are other word-ﬁnal consonants. Although
Romance Phonetics and Phonology. First edition. Mark Gibson and Juana Gil (eds.)
This chapter © Mark Gibson and Juana Gil . First published by Oxford University Press.

such processes are interesting peculiarities in their own right, the symmetry between
ﬁnal consonant lenition in these Spanish dialects and the diachronic processes
that have contrived to shape the structure of codas in modern French, Portuguese,
Galician, Sardinian (R. Sampson ), Gascon (R. Sampson ), and Provençal
(Fernández González ) are indubitable.
In addition to studying crosslinguistic similarities among the Romance languages,
there is much to be gained by examining the asymmetries among them, especially
those cases that seem to present certain typological contradictions. One of the most
interesting innovations in the aforementioned Spanish dialects is the velarization of
word-ﬁnal /n/ because of its close relation to the diachronic development of vowel
nasalization in French, Portuguese, Gascon, and Provençal. The suppression of the
tongue tip gesture for [n] (in /n/![ŋ]) represents an intermediate stage of lenition en
route toward total coda elimination (Lipski ), which fulﬁlls assumptions regard-
ing crosslinguistic preferences for CV syllables. Omission of the ﬁnal nasal gesture
means that the nasal quality of the word-ﬁnal consonant is passed to the preceding
vowel, which, depending on one’s theoretical leanings, can be interpreted by way
either of feature spreading or of gestural mistiming. However proliﬁc lenition
processes have been across the Romance languages, though, there are also attested
cases of nasal velar intrusion following nasal vowels in some dialects of Brazilian
Portuguese (Barlaz, Fu, Liang, Shosted, and Shutton ), which challenge the
directionality approach to sound change based on universal preferences for certain
syllable types. So, on one hand, we see diachronic cases of nasal elimination that are
typologically symmetric among certain Romance languages, leaving in their trajec-
tories the nasal vowels of many Romance vowel inventories as the nucleus of a
preferred CV syllable, but, on the other hand, we also see the insertion of a nasal velar
gesture following nasal vowels in dialects of the same languages that originally lost
ﬁnal /n/ (and eventually the velarized nasal), contradicting so-called universal inclin-
ations for CV syllables. Although somewhat befuddling, such a scenario raises
interesting doubts about the universality and direction of sound change, as well as
the production/perception mechanisms that give rise to such changes.
An additional asymmetry that deserves special attention here owing to its prom-
inence in the literature is the case of vowel prosthesis before word-initial /sC/ clusters
in the Western Romance languages. As has been widely reported (see Alkire and
Rosen for a good review), in most of the Western Romance languages a
prosthetic vowel aligned to the left margin of the sibilant, presumably in order to
resyllabify the word-initial /s/ as the coda of a preceding syllable, a process that dates
back to Popular Latin (Alkire and Rosen ). And while diachronic relics can be
found in many of these languages today, not all retain the synchronic alignment of
such a vowel: In French, for example, the insertion of an epenthetic vowel is no
longer productive, yet in Spanish (Harris ; Cressey ), Catalan (R. Sampson
), Galician (Colina ), certain dialects of Brazilian (Major ; Carlisle
, , , ; Renzi ), and European Portuguese (Fikkert and Freitas
), as well as in some Northern Italian dialects (Repetti ), epenthesis is still
very much a productive process. Paradoxically, although vowel epenthesis occurs in
Brazilian Portuguese and in certain contexts of European Portuguese, the deletion

Mark Gibson and Juana Gil

of phonological vowels in European Portuguese preceding word-initial /sC/ clusters
is also attested: escola![ʃkɔlɐ]) (Miguel ; d’Andrade and Rodrigues ;
Mateus and d’Andrade ; Freitas and Rodrigues ; Henriques ). In
Romanian, as will be discussed in great detail in this volume (see Chitoran and
Marin, Chapter ; Marin, Chapter ), no prosthesis is attested either historically or
synchronically, and /sC/ and /sCC/ word-initial onsets are admissible, as in modern
French and Standard Italian.
The Romance languages, therefore, constitute a privileged framework for analyz-
ing common and divergent phonetic and phonological trends, and trends among
languages in general, both from the level of production and from that of perception
and acquisition. Although the treatment of the distinct phenomena depends on the
speciﬁc model in which the inquiry is couched in each of these ﬁelds, a notion readily
evident in the diverse and varied chapters of this current volume, the fact remains
that Romance phonetics and phonology are well poised to enjoy many more gener-
ations occupying their deserved position in the study of human speech sounds.
.New approaches to classic problems
Why, one must ask, if many of the topics taken up in this volume have been so
thoroughly scrutinized for centuries in Romance studies, must we detain ourselves
now to take yet another look at these recurring topics? The answer is clear, and
involves both internal (disciplinary) and external (extra-disciplinary) advances in
technology and in our thinking as scholars. Such advances have led to a profound
reassessment of many of the core questions present throughout the history of
phonetics and phonology since their inception as disciplines.
Perhaps the most fundamental question is precisely that which concerns the
relationship between phonetics and phonology as areas of scholarly attention.
Throughout the decades, there has been a systematic tendency toward the shifting
and blurring (two interdependent processes) of the boundaries between the two
disciplines (see, for example, Scobbie ). Not surprisingly, the location and the
very nature of the interface that relates them are still subjects of intense academic
debate. In recent years, the incorporation of new computational methods and the
ever-increasing use of novel technologies have contributed exponentially to this
blurring and shifting of the boundaries, with no lack of research on all sides of the
debate. Just as formal and generative computational approaches have been (and are)
informed by the technological advances of their day, ranging from early work on the
Turing machine to modern, powerful new computational methods using sophisti-
cated multi-paradigm numerical computing platforms, so now are new theoretical
foci being born from innovative multi and transdisciplinary approaches to the study
of human speech sounds. Many of these foci are informed by work in Gestalt-based
psychology, theories of dynamic patterning, and complex systems which have given
rise to phenomenological theories of speech that have broken ground in the way the
perception–production cycle and the dimensions of speech phenomena are envis-
aged. Work in psychology, statistical modeling, machine learning, cognitive science,
artiﬁcial intelligence, and philosophy, many times taking advantage of speech
Romance sounds


production and perception data, suggest—in some authors’ opinions—that the high-level
codiﬁcation and organization of speech sounds (i.e., competence) are directly con-
strained by the low-level principles that regulate speech production and perception
(i.e., performance). In other words, cognitive constructs of speech sounds are informed
and constrained—according to proponents of these theories—by the body (at least the
mechanics of the vocal tract). Such a paradigm shift is reﬂected in novel phonological
theories such as Articulatory Phonology (Browman and Goldstein ), as well
as other laboratory-based approaches that envisage the high and low levels of
speech as dimensions of the same complex and dynamical system, as opposed to
two independent systems.
These relatively new approaches contemplate the low-level continuous variables of
speech (and language) as the result of multiple interacting, and at times conﬂicting,
inﬂuences involving physiological, motoric, psychological, and cognitive factors.
Such a focus seeks to resolve many of the unanswered questions related to Chom-
skyan modularity and posits speech and language not only as high-level cognitive
constructs, but importantly, cognitive constructs that are informed by, and manifest
themselves in, spatiotemporally coordinated actions. While such modularity is still
the impetus for groundbreaking discoveries in the computational processing of
speech sounds, evidenced by their great success in text-to-speech technologies and
voice recognition systems among many others, the embodied, dynamical approach
espoused in certain academic circles seeks to reconcile phonetic and phonological
phenomena with data in other cognitive domains, though at the cost of further
blurring the boundaries between linguistic competence and performance. All of
these theoretical paradigms in speech production, perception, and acquisition, no
matter what their underlying proclivities, ﬁrmly position modern phonetics and
phonology at the crossroads of science, industry, and the humanities. And while
the languages under study have changed little in the past century, the way they
are addressed and the tools researchers have at their disposal with which to examine
them have. Unsurprisingly, researchers in Romance phonetics and phonology have
been at the forefront of these novel, laboratory-based approaches to the ﬁeld and
are naturally represented in this volume.
All of this notwithstanding, not an insigniﬁcant number of scholars consider that
“the best way to gain an understanding of the computational system of phonology is
to assume that the phonetic substance (say, the spectral properties of sound waves)
that lead to the construction of phonological entities (say, feature matrices) never
reﬂects how the phonological entities are treated by the computational system”
(Halle and Reiss : ). From this point of view, the phonology should not be
based on phonetic-level variables, since the phenomena that phonetics is supposed to
explain can be derived without any reference to phonetic substance. Thus, it is not
necessary to redundantly introduce the articulatory or acoustic principles that guide
the acquisition and the historical change of a language in an already constituted
synchronous grammar (see Newmeyer ; Hyman ; Barnes , among
others). Optimality Theory (Prince and Smolensky [] ), for example, in
its most classic conception, shares with the previous formalist models the goal of
formulating an explicit theory of linguistic competence, maintaining traditional

Mark Gibson and Juana Gil

generative assumptions about phonology understood as a computational system
aimed at explaining the discrepancies between underlying and surface representa-
tions. The chapter by Jiménez, Lloret, and Pons-Moll included in the present volume
(Chapter ) subscribes precisely to this concept of grammar, endeavoring to evalu-
ate, from the analysis of the modiﬁcations that glides undergo in Spanish and Catalan
in certain contexts, the adequacy of the model in addressing the typological differ-
ences between the two languages and their varieties; in fact, the Optimality-Theoretic
approach presented seems to be capable of deriving the whole typology of outcomes
from the same constraint set. In the same vein, Martínez-Gil’s chapter (Chapter )
provides a strictly formal explanation of the distribution of vowels in Galician from
a more recent version of Optimality Theory known as Stratal-OT (see Bermúdez-
Otero, ), a modular approach to the phonology–morphology interface that
envisions multiple levels of organization for the phonological grammar in line with
Lexical Phonology (Mohanan ) and Lexical Morphology (Kiparsky a).
Speciﬁcally, Martínez-Gil’s study examines the upper vs. lower mid-vowel contrast
and the reduction process that these contrasts experience in unstressed positions.
The author concludes that the Stratal-OT model allows a simpler treatment of the
question than that of other more classic versions of Optimality Theory.
The analysis of the various phenomena documented in the Romance languages,
thus, serves to elucidate the more profound questions concerning what is perhaps the
most fundamental aspect of all those concerned with phonic studies, and which dates
back to Saussure: that is, the relationship between form and substance, and, ultim-
ately, the vision of linguistic knowledge as either internal, modular, mental, and
autonomous or as external, physical, and functional.
So, if we return to the Romance epenthetic vowel example mentioned in
Section ., from a formalist approach structural well-formedness of complex onset
sequences is determined by the linear arrangement of atemporal segments, which is
governed by rules or constraints that make some abstract reference to static vocal
tract states, and the sonority of the individual units and their distance from one
another in a sonority hierarchy (Harris ; Clements ; Colina ; Martínez-
Gil , ; Parker ; Wright ). Word-initial /sC/ clusters are considered
typologically marked because they do not adhere to the general sonority proﬁles in
onsets (see Eckman and Iverson ; Carlisle ). Harris (: –), addressing
the Spanish data, proposes that complex onset formation is governed by a constraint
requiring a minimal sonority distance of two¹ between the segments, while Parker
() proposes a minimal sonority distance of three for Spanish complex onsets.
While with certain contingencies both approaches are computationally feasible ways
to motivate epenthesis as a repair strategy in /sC/ sequences, the inherent cyclicity of
the explanation based on sonority distance raises doubts among many researchers
¹ Patterns of vocal tract constriction in complex onsets are projected onto the grammar as restrictions
that stipulate a minimal sonority distance between the segments. First, segments are collocated on a
sonority hierarchy on the basis of their respective manner speciﬁcations: Stops < Fricatives < Nasals <
Liquids < Glides < Vowels. Later, each hierarchical position is allocated an abstract numerical value:
() Stops < () Fricatives < () Nasals < () Liquids < () Glides < () Vowels.
Romance sounds


regarding the cognitive validity of such constraints and their capacity to explain
phonological patterning (see Ohala ). For this very reason, new approaches to
the phonology have tried to explain the phenomenon not only in alluding to
conditioning related to production mechanisms but by relating those mechanisms
of production to a perceptual impetus. This focus on the interaction between
production and perception represents one of the most interesting theoretical and
methodological innovations that have emerged in recent decades, and is ever present
in this volume.
.Advances in speech production: from articulation action
to acoustic consequences
According to Fant (), in summarizing the state of the ﬁelds of phonetics and
phonology in the second half of the twentieth century, variability and variation in
speech constitute “a basic theme” from the moment in which “invariance exists in a
relational sense only, to be tested ‘ceteris paribus’, that is in the same context.
Absolute invariance is a property of the perceptual-cognitive process induced by
linguistic competence rather than a property of the physical form” (p. ). Indeed,
the sources of both intra- and inter-speaker variability in speech are many and
diverse, and continue to be an indisputable challenge that must be addressed
in order to advance general knowledge in phonetics and phonology, and in the
development of any of their applications.
To meet this challenge of ﬁnding the source of variability, today researchers have
at their ﬁngertips instrumentation that one hundred years ago would most certainly
have seemed like science ﬁction, and which affords the opportunity to empirically
address hypotheses related to production (and also to sound development and
perception) that were previously off limits, especially with regard to the temporal
dimension of speech, which until relatively recently was all but discarded in the
phonological literature. This, combined with the global trend toward multidisciplin-
ary approaches to scientiﬁc inquiry, has led many researchers to posit brand new
methodologies with which to test phonological hypotheses that incorporate to a
greater or lesser extent the use of the phonetic substance. This turn of events is
especially appreciable in the realm of speech production, particularly in studies
dealing with articulation. Several of these new protocols and instrumentation—
electropalatography (EPG), ultrasound imaging, and electromagnetic articulography
(EMA), among others—, which examine various types of data collected from both
spontaneous speech and laboratory corpora, are represented in the present volume.
With this in mind, Celata, Vietti, and Spreaﬁco (Chapter ) start off the part on
articulatory studies offering an integrated analysis of rhotic variation in Italian using
a state-of-the-art, custom-designed, synchronized ultrasound imaging and EPG
system in order to characterize tongue tip and tongue body movement as well as to
register linguo-palatal contact. Among its many contributions, this study corrobor-
ates the staggering amount of variation that characterizes the production of rhotic
sounds crosslinguistically, a fact substantiated, also in this current volume, in Blecua
and Cicres’ (Chapter ) acoustic study of rhotic variation in Spanish.

Mark Gibson and Juana Gil

Later, in Chapter , Chitoran and Marin offer an analysis of Romanian diphthongs
in hiatus sequences across word boundaries using kinematic (EMA) and acoustic
data. These authors provide evidence that Romanian vowels may form three distinct
categories of syllabic nuclei, and importantly, that each type of syllabic nucleus
involves different timing relations and degrees of coarticulation between the vowels.
In Chapter , Marin continues with an electromagnetic articulographic analysis
of four Romanian onset clusters (/spl-/, /spr-/, /skl-/, /skr-/). As the author eloquently
explains, three consonant clusters have been less systematically examined cross-
linguistically, and inconsistent results between languages render basing any deter-
mination of syllable afﬁliation on the c‑center hypothesis (see Browman and
Goldstein ) nettlesome. In her study of ﬁve native Romanian speakers, Marin
shows that although two-consonant clusters indeed show a c‑center effect, three-
consonant clusters do not.
To conclude this part on articulation, Recasens and Mira, in Chapter , also use an
experimental protocol combining electropalatographic and acoustic data in order to
explore the articulatory symmetry in lingual fricatives and affricates in Eastern,
Western, and Valencian Catalan. Generally, one can speak of the existence of
articulatory symmetry when the effects exerted on the articulation of certain seg-
ments by the different bases of articulation of the diverse dialects or languages are
observed equally in other elements of the system, though they might not share all the
speciﬁcations for place and manner of articulation. Effectively, Recasens and Mira
provide strong evidence for articulatory symmetry between fricative + fricative and
affricate + fricative sequences comprised of /s/ and /ʃ/ in the variants of Catalan
analyzed.
In spite of the diverse advances that have been made in articulatory research,
acoustic analysis remains the most accessible and widespread method for analyzing
speech production and its variability, especially due to the proliferation of free online
analysis software such as Praat (Boersma ) and many others. Precisely for this
reason, an entire part of the current volume is dedicated to acoustic studies. To
commence this part on acoustics, in Blecua and Cicres’ study of Spanish rhotics
(Chapter ) the authors detail the variation in Spanish rhotic production using
spontaneous speech, and address new contextual factors that condition this variation,
which have to date not been addressed in the literature. The authors show that the
more relaxed the speech style, the greater the degree of relaxation and weakening of
the various rhotic realizations, conﬁrming results found in previous studies.
In Chapter , Regueira and Ginzo’s crosslinguistic socio-acoustic study of European
Portuguese and Galician voiceless sibilants details the acoustic variation, in this case of
sibilant production, between these two closely related languages, which may lead to
further change over time. Here, the authors found a great deal of both inter- and
intraspeaker variation for the realization of the alveolar sibilants, though this trend was
found most notably in Galician, Portuguese sibilants being generally more stable.
Perhaps, as Regueira and Ginzo point out, this greater variability of the Galician
sibilants is due to the fact that this language coexists with Spanish in the northern
region of Galicia, and that the relatively recent and incomplete diffusion of a Standard
Galician has still not achieved a sufﬁcient degree of leveling.
Romance sounds


In the same vein, Gendrot, Adda-Decker, and Santiago (Chapter ) use acoustic
data to address vowel production in Spanish and French, and conclude that the
acoustic variations observed in the realization of the different vowels correspond to
different factors in both languages. For example, word frequency seems to play a role
in Spanish, such that higher-frequency words show less acoustic dispersion of vowel
formants, a result that does not hold for French. The vowel system of Spanish is
relatively simple, with only ﬁve vowel phonemes, whereas that of standard French
has thirteen, allowing for greater variability in the ﬁrst language than in the second,
because the Spanish vowels maintain a greater acoustic distance. For that reason,
higher variation in Spanish does not jeopardize the vowels’ distinctiveness and the
consequent intelligibility of the utterance.
We see therefore in all of these studies that acoustic analysis, in effect, provides a
glimpse into how linguistic units, whether segments, syllables, or words, manifest
themselves physically with different properties depending on certain biological,
emotional, and physical characteristics of the speaker, and/or the different properties
related to the environment—linguistic, stylistic, social, geographical—, and allows
researchers to quantify such differences. Paraphrasing Ciocca and Whitehill (:
), the greatest advantage of this type of analysis is that it serves as a bridge
between articulatory and auditory information, and, in this sense, allows inferences
about the movements that take place in the vocal tract and their auditory repercus-
sion, thus helping us to understand the complex relationship between articulation
and perception. In Chapter of the present volume, Campos-Astorkiza buttresses
this very notion, offering a model of voicing assimilation in preconsonantal sibilants
from a laboratory-based focus using acoustic data to propose that voice assimilation
is a byproduct of gestural mistiming between glottal and articulatory action that has a
linear effect in the acoustic domain.
Finally, acoustic analysis is considered to be an objective procedure less suscep-
tible to the subjectivity of the researcher. However, as is clear from many of the
chapters included in this volume (see, for example, Calamai, Chapter ; Madureira,
Chapter ; Racine and Detey, Chapter ), ﬁndings obtained from acoustic ana-
lyses need to be corroborated with perceptual testing in order to verify exactly
which acoustic dimensions are really relevant to the perception of human speech,
not to mention how the cues relating to the different acoustic dimensions are
weighted, and more generally, the nature of the relationship between production
and perception.
.Breakthroughs in speech perception
..The application of perception in phonology
Not until relatively recently has perception begun to occupy a central place in
mainstream phonological research, precisely in the wake of the emergence of the
new theoretical approaches mentioned in the previous section, particularly experi-
mentally based theories of the phonology espousing a nonmodularized view of
phonetics and phonology that enables the incorporation of experimental techniques
to account for phonological processes. The development of more recent versions of

Mark Gibson and Juana Gil

Optimality Theory has also allowed the inclusion of perceptual considerations in the
model, moving us closer to understanding the narrow relationship between produc-
tion and perception and the effects on the synchronous grammar. As follows,
perception has moved beyond the realm of psychology proper, and allowed phono-
logists to postulate groundbreaking theories regarding the processing and compre-
hension of speech sounds, and the interaction between audition, contextual
constraints on intelligibility, the role of memory, and the analysis of comparative
crosslinguistic perception, among countless other considerations (see Hume and
Johnson ; Hawkins , among many others).The fact that speech perception
has attracted the attention of phonologists in recent decades has made it possible to
explain certain processes that have previously only been approached from the point
of view of production. This paradigm shift, again, is manifest in the realm of
Romance studies, and many of the scholars included in this volume have been at
the forefront of the theoretical, experimental, and historical breakthroughs made
possible by this innovation.
To cite but one example of how the incorporation of perceptual considerations
into core phonological research has opened the metaphorical playing ﬁeld for
phonologists, let us return to the synchronous cases of word-initial vowel epenthesis
in Spanish cited in Section .. Traditionally vowel epenthesis has been considered a
production phenomenon that results from a function of the productive Spanish
grammar, which references constraints that govern structural well-formedness
(although much debate exists regarding the underlying principles that regulate
onset formation). Besides the previously mentioned explanation based on sonority
categories, Gibson (b), taking inspiration from Davidson and Stone ()²
shows, in a gestural-based version of Optimality Theory (Gafos )—which has
subsequently become known as Gestural OT—how the ranking of certain constraints
referencing coordination relations between articulatory gestures can theoretically
drive the production of a vowel to the left side of the illicit /sC/ cluster without
resorting to constraints referencing sonority values. Underlying this proposal is the
idea that high-level information referencing syllable afﬁliation (structure) is
embodied in the spatiotemporal relations among articulatory gestures (task). How-
ever, the available articulatory data for Spanish and other Romance languages offer
inconsistent evidence for a timing-based explanation for vowel epenthesis. Further,
the problem in relating vowel insertion to gestural timing is that we still do not know
² In order to empirically test how nonphonological vocoids can emerge as an upshot of gestural
mistiming, Davidson and Stone () elicited non-native /sibilant+consonant/ tokens to native speakers
of English. The hypothesis was that if mistiming due to the modiﬁcation of non-native coordination
relations were responsible for the insertion of an excrescent schwa, then the articulatory comparisons of the
schwa in pairs such as [zəɡ] (from the Polish nonce zgama) and [sək] (from the English succumb) should
exhibit important differences. If, however, the articulatory comparisons revealed no signiﬁcant differences
in tongue posture between the two schwas, then it was hypothesized that the insertion of the schwa in the
test tokens was phonological, and not related to the mistiming of the non-native target. Although results
were highly speaker-dependent, this study showed signiﬁcant differences in tongue posture for the two
types of vocoids, hinting at the possibility that vowel insertion may result from the mistiming of vocal tract
action, and that the extra-lexical vocoid-like element may not be a discrete phonological unit.
Romance sounds


enough about why typological differences exist between languages with regard to
timing nor why languages that exhibit typological similarities related to the temporal
organization of the gestures in complex onset clusters exhibit different strategies
to repair illicit gestural parses and vice versa. Although this can be explained by
language-speciﬁc (or even dialect-speciﬁc) phonotactic constraints based on spatio-
temporal coordination, the explanatory power to justify the emergence of a vowel to
the left side of the /sC/ cluster is crucially challenged in the sense that it still does not
explain why insertion emerges in one language but not in another, nor the conditions
on which ill formation of the /sC/ onset are based, not to mention the speciﬁc vowel
that inserts across the different Romance languages and dialects.
In the face of these problems and a myriad of others, a growing number of studies
provide evidence to suggest that vowel prosthesis may be a perceptual phenomenon
based on native-language phonological biases. The idea that listeners form biases
toward certain aspects of their native language is robustly supported in Bertoncini
and Mehler (), Hillenbrand (), Werker and Tees (), and Jusczyk,
Friederici, Wessels, Svenkerud, and Jusczyk (). The claim that the perception
of a continuous acoustic stream can be distorted by the phonology of a listener/
perceiver was ﬁrst introduced in Hallé, Segui, Frauenfelder, and Meunier () and
elaborated on in Dupoux, Hirose, Kakehi, Pallier, and Mehler (), Dehaene-
Lambertz, Dupoux, and Gout (), Kabak and Idsardi (). In these studies it
was shown that an illusory segment can be perceived even though no acoustic or
auditory evidence exists for such a segment.
More recently, following Hallé et al. (), Gibson (a) performed a series of
identiﬁcation and discrimination tests with ﬁfty native Spanish-speaking subjects
aged ten to eleven. In the ﬁrst test, the subjects were played nonce stimuli containing
both licit and illicit word-initial onset clusters. The subjects were asked to respond
with the number of syllables they heard. The results indicate that the perception of an
illusory syllable (i) is prevalent in all target sequences, and (ii) is unsupported in non-
target stimuli. A set of follow-up tasks revealed that the perception of an extra syllable
resulted from an erroneous interpretation of the word-initial /sC/ sequence. Import-
antly, the data from the tests reveal that the fundamental conditions of the bias
motivating the prosthetic vowel go beyond the mere linear organization of spatial
characteristics.³
To cite another example of the role perception may play in explaining phono-
logical structure, Silvia Calamai, in Chapter of this volume, offers experimental
perceptual data in order to understand the nature of an Italian phenomenon known
as anaphonesis, further linking synchronic grammars to diachronic changes. In the
historically attested underlying vowel inventory of Italian, the Latin short vowels
ĭ and uˇ opened to [e] and [o], but not all Italian dialects exhibit such behavior,
³ Additionally, and perhaps just as interesting, is the difference in vowels that insert. In Catalan
(Wheeler ), Galician (Colina ), and Spanish an [e] inserts (Cressey ), while epenthesizing
zones in Brazil and Italy insert [e]–[ɪ]/[i] respectively (Major ; Carlisle , , , ; Renzi
). In French, [i] inserted originally, but was lowered to [e] when Romance vowel lowering took effect
(R. Sampson ).

Mark Gibson and Juana Gil

especially those dialects in which the vowel occurs before a velar nasal consonant:
VĬNCO > vinco, *venco; LĬNGUA > lingua, *lengua. This phenomenon (so-called
anaphonesis of the second type) may equally emerge either by way of phonological
innovation or as a conservative strategy (known in other circles as faithfulness) to
maintain the high vowel. The ﬁrst hypothesis, based on phonological innovation, is
centered around the notion that the weakness of the nasal velar and the maximum
anticipatory nasalization of the vowel in this context originate at a given moment,
such that the latter is lengthened and becomes more tense, and thus, closes. The
second hypothesis, however, posits that the aperture does not take place simply
because of nasalization and the sonority of the postnasal consonant. The result of
Calamai’s perception experiment seems to point more toward phonological conser-
vatism, and not innovation, to explain this phenomenon.
This process of anaphonesis, which does not affect anterior and posterior vowels
alike, is much more complex than has been summarized here, but at the heart of this
question lies the idea that the essence of the diachronic phenomenon of anaphonesis
can be corroborated experimentally by synchronic perceptual behavior, as Calamai
proposes, based on the assumption that changes in the degree of nasal vowel opening
originate in the listener, who attributes some of the acoustic consequences of
nasalization to a distinct articulation of the vowel. In this sense, Calamai’s underlying
focus is reminiscent of Ohala ()—who, boldly yet assuredly, surmises that
coarticulatory changes always have a very important perceptual component—and
further proposals made in Evolutionary Phonology (Blevins , ), which argue
that the phonetic-phonological patterns to which speakers and listeners adjust to in
synchrony can explain attested changes over time.
The cases of prosthetic [e] insertion and Italian anaphonesis corroborate the
relevance of perception to phonological patterning and distribution, which until
relatively recently could only be addressed theoretically, and from the perspective
of production. Following in this line, Smith, in Chapter of this volume, analyzes
the phrasal units in French prosody (accentual phrase, intonational phrase, inter-
mediate phrase) from a perceptual perspective and demonstrates the way in which
French-speaking listeners perceive certain prosodic structures—dislocations, wide
and narrow focus, and particularly long noun phrases that function as subject—as
well as how these structures align with the phrasal units. Crucially, Smith provides an
analysis of how speakers interpret these structures and how they use them in their
communicative exchanges (see, for example, Local ), which would not be
possible exclusively from the standpoint of production.
..Perceiving ﬁne phonetic detail
In recent decades a relatively new movement toward uncovering the role ﬁne-grained
phonetic detail plays in speech encoding and processing has emerged in order to
address how different acoustic cues and dimensions are relevant to the perception of
human speech. The impact of this trend is appreciable in an ever-growing number of
new academic ﬁelds such as forensic phonetics, among many others (see Fernández
Trinidad and Rojo Abuin, chapter ). Additionally, this movement has also found a
niche in the industrial sector, where the inclusion of more ﬁne-grained phonetic
Romance sounds


detail is employed to enhance voice recognition and identiﬁcation systems. Nguyen
(), citing Hawkins (), deﬁnes phonetic detail as “subphonemic phonetic
variability that contributes to phonological or other contrasts that distinguish mean-
ings, but not necessarily lexical items” (p. ). And although a number of studies in
speech perception have shown that speakers utilize these details to process and
understand the message encoded in speech (cf. Hawkins , , among many
others mentionable), these oftentimes microscopic details are merely skimmed over,
if not ignored, in most classical theoretical frameworks. Notwithstanding, the role
that they play in the listening to and understanding of speech has gained much
currency in recent decades, in part owing to the fast-growing number of spontaneous
speech databases that are available for analysis, but also thanks to new conceptions of
the phonology that envisage the phonological representation as a detailed and
complex construct that possesses a high grade of indexical and phonetic information
(Pierrehumbert ). As a result, such non-abstractionist models are not hamstrung
by the necessity to eliminate redundancies (for a detailed discussion on exemplar
models of phonological encoding, see for example Gahl and Yu ).
Evidence for language-speciﬁc phonetic detail in the encoding of phonological
categories without a doubt obliges us to rethink the relationship between phonetics
and phonology. It should be understood that the analysis of such phonetic detail is
not conﬁned to those subphonemic properties or peculiarities that would be associ-
ated with the lexical representation (for example, the exact point of articulation of a
segment, the varying extent of coarticulation or variable duration of voice-onset
time), but also encompasses many other far-reaching features that contribute equally
to the correct understanding and interpretation of statements that are nested in
communicative interactions, such as characteristics related to language-speciﬁc
articulatory settings (see Recasens and Mira, Chapter , in this volume for further
details on language speciﬁc articulatory settings), voice quality, or certain micro-
ﬂuctuations in tone. As a consequence of the varied nature of the types of phonetic
detail, they can be classiﬁed, adapting a similar assertion by Payne (b), as either
local-domain or global-domain. In the former, the variability that characterizes the
realization of the same phoneme or a paradigmatic contrast—in a single language or
in different languages—would be understood as derived from more or less subtle
short-range differentiating phonetic details. By contrast, the latter refers to the
variability associated with differences extending beyond the segment, which is due
in many cases to distinctions of long-range phonetic detail.
A ﬁne example demonstrating the relevance of local-domain phonetic detail in
speech perception is Llisterri and Schwab’s chapter in this volume (Chapter ),
which offers a crosslinguistic perceptual analysis of Spanish lexical stress by French
listeners (ﬁxed stress in French, relatively free in Spanish; demarcating stress in
French, distinctive stress in Spanish, cf. also Gendrot et al., Chapter ), and of their
sensibility to minor variations of duration, intensity, and f₀. The perceptual cues that
listeners identify with prominence are not the same in both languages, and the
experiments carried out by Llisterri and Schwab show that “French listeners seem
to be more sensitive to ﬁne-grained details than Spanish listeners, whether in a task
that implies an acoustic processing of lexical stress or in a more demanding task that

Mark Gibson and Juana Gil

implies not only an acoustic but also a lexical processing of stress” (p. ). In
particular, it was found that French-speaking listeners who have no knowledge of
Spanish are sensitive to different cues, and probably assign different cue weights in
relation to the acoustic dimensions that are crucial in their language. Only as their
phonological and lexical representations of the second language (Spanish) are
updated will the French listeners be sensitive to the relative perceptual cues.
With regard to global-domain phonetic detail, Fernández Trinidad and Rojo
Abuin (Chapter ), in their study of the perception of voice quality in Italian, and
Madureira (Chapter ), who deals with the production and perception of emotional
substance transmitted by way of rhotic variation and voice quality settings in
Brazilian Portuguese, demonstrate how meaning can be manipulated, either by desire
to transmit some affective state of the speaker, as is the case in Chapter , or
purposefully to disguise one’s identity, as is the case in Chapter , by making ﬁne-
grained adjustments to the acoustic signal. It has indeed been found in various
languages that listeners are sensitive to more or less subtle changes in voice quality
and that such alterations can provide valuable information for the listener.⁴ Thus,
establishing the role that subtle changes in phonation and other ﬁne-grained phon-
etic details have in the sound-to-sense (and vice versa) mapping in the Romance
languages has very interesting implications vis-à-vis phonetic universals and typo-
logical symmetries. The chapters dealing with these topics in this volume certainly
advance knowledge in that direction.
In short, a better understanding of the perception of speech and its transcendence
for communication has become an object of privileged study in recent times.
Moreover, in addition to the patent theoretical advances this research inspires, an
enriched understanding of how humans perceive speech has both academic and
practical beneﬁts in the domain of (ﬁrst and second) language acquisition and
teaching, given perception’s link to sound discrimination and classiﬁcation, neces-
sary initial steps for a child or an adult to build their early lexicon.
.Discoveries in language acquisition and learning
Perceptual issues, along with production, occupy a prominent place in studies
dealing with second-language acquisition, in both monolingual and bilingual set-
tings. It is well known now that the perception of Lsounds is mediated by the
phonic categories existing in the L, which in turn conditions the production of
second language sounds (Best ; Flege ; Best and Tyler ; van Leussen and
Escudero ). Llisterri (), in a frequently cited study addressing the link
between perception and production in L, concluded that researchers are still far
from knowing the exact way in which both modalities, perception and production, of
an Lare interrelated since perceptual capacity cannot always predict articulatory
⁴ For example, creaky voice, a nonmodal phonation mode, has been purported to have linguistic-
phonetic value in Finnish, as a component of the turntaking system, independently of other syntactic or
intonative resources (Ogden , ). A similar phenomenon has been found for English as well (Laver
: ).
Romance sounds


accuracy and articulatory accuracy does not always reﬂect perceptual capacity. The
critical review that Elvin, Vasiliev, and Escudero offer in Chapter of the present
volume regarding the perception and production of Spanish and Portuguese vowels
arrives at the same conclusion: perception and production maintain a close and
undoubted relationship, although it is not possible to determine yet if perceptual
development precedes production or vice versa.
Later, Simonet, in Chapter of this volume, expounds the results of experiments
related to perception and production in bilingual Spanish–Catalan contexts, citing
potential effects of early linguistic experience on the perception and production of
sounds in bilingual subjects. In light of the previous research that Simonet reviews,
it seems reasonable to claim that both the ability to perceive, process, and represent
contrasts and phonological traits and the ability to produce them are conditioned,
at least to some extent, by the speciﬁc sequential order of acquisition of the two
languages. As Simonet explains, if there is not massive exposure to the second
language during the ﬁrst year(s) of life, the child is unlikely to achieve competence
on a par with native speakers. Notwithstanding, with regard to production, crude
explanations do not ﬁt, because many noncontrollable factors such as linguistic
experience, social networks, and so forth may condition a speaker’s behavior, leading
to a perceivable non-native-like accent (Piske, MacKay, and Flege ).
One of the noncontrollable factors that intervenes in second-language learning is
the greater or lesser perceived proximity of the Land Lin question, predicting a
greater or lesser probability of achieving native-like production (Elvin, Escudero, and
Vasiliev ). Such proximity, as Bosch elaborates on in Chapter of the current
volume, also plays an important role in simultaneous bilingual language acquisition.
In her chapter, Bosch reviews data related to early language differentiation skills,
phonetic perception, and word segmentation abilities from infants growing up in
Catalan–Spanish contexts and compares them with data obtained from children
who are exposed to more distant languages. The assumption is that greater or lesser
proximity between Land Lmay explain many differences in the acquisition
process of the different groups of bilingual children, in some cases hindering certain
aspects of acquisition while at the same time facilitating others. The author explains
that at the initial state of bilingual acquisition, the perception by infants of cross-
linguistic closeness or distance must come from the broad phonic conﬁguration of
the languages, especially those pertaining to prosody (i.e., rhythm and intonation),
and also—probably, although little is known in this respect—from external or
internal articulatory settings, which are linked to the language-speciﬁc conﬁguration
of the vocal apparatus (Laver ).⁵ In this sense, broad classiﬁcations, such as
⁵ As is well known, some articulatory settings are internal (not externalized, for example, the permanent
nasalization of certain sounds), but others are external, that is to say that they are visibly perceptible and
recoverable (for example, an articulatory setting consisting in moving the lips in an exaggerated motion
during infant-directed speech, which gives rise to a type of speech with very deﬁnite perceptual charac-
teristics, see Green, Nip, Wilson, Mefferd, and Yunusova ). It would be interesting to explore whether
the acoustic cues that result from these settings, which represent microscopic phonetic detail that the
infants receive from the ambient input, are also used, as prosody is, to discriminate languages.

Mark Gibson and Juana Gil

Romance languages versus Germanic languages, do not capture the nuances that
generate the impression of phonetic, phonological, and prosodic crosslinguistic
proximity and distance.
So, the notion of language-speciﬁc phonetic detail emerges again as an important
factor in the ﬁeld of language acquisition and learning. Selective attention to a certain
kind of phonetic detail speciﬁc to the L, rather than to other relevant cues in the L,
has consistently been found to account for the misperception of new Lcontrasts,
leading to variable degrees of non-native accentedness (Kondaurova and Francis
). Phonetic detail has long remained outside the grammar, but the point is
that these microscopic cues are not always automatic, nor mere repercussions of
random movements in the vocal tract, but rather constitute systematic codes used by
speakers to transmit extra and paralinguistic information in a particular language. So
while they might reside outside the grammar, they are not outside the language.
Thus, one of the tasks that Llearners must tackle is assimilating and internalizing
these gradual, quantitative, and subphonemic patterns of detail, as well as the
distribution of said variability of the patterns, in order to form more robust phono-
logical and lexical abstractions that can later be used to extend generalizations to new
words and utterances.
Nevertheless, the quantitative and qualitative study of speech variability that
precedes any subsequent analysis of its details can be carried out only if abundant
recorded data of spontaneous speech, that is, a corpus, are readily available. As
G. Sampson () points out, “the recent rise in corpus-based research methods
has been at least partly due to a reaction against . . . unempirical style of linguistic
research” (p. ). Concretely, for phonology this implies an ever-tightening rela-
tionship with innovative theoretical models of a bottom-up nature (from the low-
level dimension of speech to the high-level informational dimension) that utilize
instrumental and experimental procedures to falsify or conﬁrm their claims.⁶
In light of this new technology-driven focus in all strata of the speech sciences,
Rojo (), citing Dyson (), remarks that the main difference between concep-
tual revolutions and tool-driven revolutions is that, while conceptual revolutions
involve substituting one scientiﬁc paradigm for another in order to explain unre-
solved issues in new ways, tool-driven revolutions involve discovering brand new
issues to explain. In phonic studies, speech technologies and computer science in
general have made it possible to collect enormous quantities of spoken registers for
varying purposes, analyze them later statistically, and extract new insights and
hypotheses regarding the production, perception, processing, and computation of
speech sounds in any number of situations, constituting a veritable revolution in all
ﬁelds involved. The natural upshot of such a revolution in speech technologies is that
the study of speech sounds and systems, with special reference to the Romance
⁶ It is important to point out that the expressions used in Spanish, fonología de corpus, or in French,
phonologie de corpus, to translate corpus phonology are not especially adequate, since this framework does
not propose a different type of phonology, but rather combines the methods and theoretical principles of
phonology as we understand them with the support of a different type of instrumentation and analysis:
perhaps it would be more appropriate to speak of fonología con corpus / phonologie avec corpus.
Romance sounds


languages, is ﬁrmly positioned to occupy a permanent place in the burgeoning new
ﬁeld known as Big Data.
Certainly, this technological revolution has also had a bearing on the current
volume, speciﬁcally Racine and Detey’s (Chapter ) corpus-based study in second
language acquisition (SLA). As Gut () explains, “the use of corpus-based
methods in SLA research, however, is still rare. Only a handful of studies have so
far tested explanatory SLA hypotheses against corpus data and have attempted to
validate previous ﬁndings obtained in small-scale studies with corpus analyses. Yet
these ﬁrst results have been interpreted as very promising, so that many researchers
currently argue for a greater use and an increased development of second language
corpora for the analysis of second language data. . . . This is especially true for the area
of second language phonology, where corpus-based approaches are still few and far
between” (p. ). Responding to this need, Racine and Detey’s study examines the
phonemic contrast between the two French closed rounded vowels /y/ and /u/ by L
Spanish university students within the framework of the LFrench phonology
research program InterPhonologie du Français Contemporain (IPFC) (Detey and
Racine ; Racine and Detey ). The production of the vowels in question by
the Spanish speakers (learning French in Madrid, Spain, and Geneva, Switzerland) is
ﬁrst perceptually evaluated by naive native French speakers, then acoustically ana-
lyzed, and, ﬁnally, examined using the coding procedure of the IPFC project, with
convergent results.
An observation that is discussed in the chapter and which is interesting to mention
here, again, is the importance of phonetic detail in understanding issues related to L
acquisition. As Racine and Detey persuasively explain in their chapter, the results
seem to suggest that the Madrid learners are aware that all French vowels are more
closed than the Spanish vowels and, as a result, exaggerate lip movement in the case
of /u/, leading to a non-native-sounding accentedness. This is a case, therefore, in
which the learner enhances a primary acoustic cue of the segment beyond what is
necessary. In the case of /y/, on the contrary, the students also accentuate its lower
degree of openness in relation to /u/, but do not sufﬁciently enhance its anteriority in
the horizontal plane. The mastery of these subtle differences is what eventually makes
a speaker be perceived as more native-like, even though they may not signiﬁcantly
affect the intelligibility of the production. It is clear, therefore, that this type of ﬁnding
regarding the ﬁne-grained phonetic detail, as well as its perceptual impact (with or
without phonological signiﬁcance), which was made possible through the growing
presence of new speech technologies and their applications, is of considerable
importance for teaching the pronunciation of second languages.
.Aims, scope, and organization of the current volume
As can be deduced from the previous sections, the general proposal of the present
volume is to highlight innovative research in the classical and new areas of inquiry
outlined previously by outstanding senior researchers who have become inﬂuential
international competitors in their respective ﬁelds, and junior researchers who show
brilliant promise of becoming equally competitive contenders in the international

Mark Gibson and Juana Gil

community. In line with past editions (say, for example, Prieto, Mascaró, and Solé
) covering similar scholarly domains, this edition includes original research
from a variety of Romance languages and their dialectal variations. However, in
contradistinction to previous work, the volume is envisioned as a compendium that
provides a state of the science snapshot of many research queries currently being
explored in the international scientiﬁc community. For this reason, some of the
authors were asked to contribute chapters that trace the major advances in their ﬁeld
of study in order to offer the reader a macroscopic, contextualized vision of the
research being carried out in the discipline. In an attempt to provide a certain
global appeal to the volume, and to avoid unnecessary repetition, the bibliography
intentionally appears uniﬁed at the end of the volume.
Additionally, a conscientious effort was made in commissioning researchers
working in diverse theoretical frameworks in order to produce a volume that will
spark debate and discussion in the academic forum for years to come. For this reason,
we highlight research from novel laboratory-based approaches of the phonology, as
well as formalist perspectives, in order to offer the reader a more robust under-
standing of the different methods and tools being used in modern phonetics and
phonology.
Likewise, an intercontinental and intergenerational approach was taken in pro-
gramming author contributions. These are important aspects to recognize for two
reasons. First, the intercontinental approach was envisaged to encourage philosoph-
ical and methodological debate between researchers in Europe and the Americas.
Throughout the history of phonic studies, cultural divides have permeated many
aspects of linguistic theory: for example, American Behaviorism informed American
scholarship throughout the s and s, whereas European Humanism still
prevails in many aspects of linguistic research today (even types of argumentative
discourse often differ on both sides of the Atlantic). Not only this, but sometimes
there is a general lack of awareness of the projects under development and the
theoretical or applied advances that are made on the two continents. For that reason
it is interesting, in our opinion, to combine the two perspectives. Hopefully, our
volume serves to unify research and researchers, if only in spirit, between the two
continents.
The aim of the intergenerational approach, on the other hand, is to demonstrate
the evolution of research in the various disciplines and to illustrate how junior
researchers are tackling some of the recurring topics in the academic landscape
using innovative methods and novel theoretical foci.
The volume is divided into ﬁve principal parts. The ﬁrst part, Part I, Acoustic
Studies, starts the volume off with complementary research in the acoustic domain of
the phonetic sciences, addressing processes that take effect at the level of individual
sounds. In Part II, Articulatory Studies, a painstaking examination of the articulatory
processes that emerge at the levels of the sound and the syllable are presented.
Part III, Studies in Perception, attempts to resolve many of the unanswered questions
in the realm of speech perception. Part IV, Phonological Issues, moves logically to
high-level processing in the phonological domain. In this part, phonological models
are proposed from diverse theoretical frameworks ranging from formalist to
Romance sounds


articulatory approaches to the phonology, treating sound, syllable, and word-level
phenomena. Finally, Part V, Studies in Acquisition, picks up on some of the
research presented in the previous parts and presents pioneering research related
to the acquisition (ﬁrst language) and learning (second language) of Romance in
monolingual and bilingual contexts.
On a ﬁnal note, it is our hope that the current volume serves, not only to showcase
current research in Romance phonetics and phonology, but also to inspire future
researchers to continue discovering new theoretical foci, experimental protocols, and
analytical methodologies to produce increasingly more sophisticated research. Now,
more than ever, researchers in Romance studies have to be ever alert to shifting
trends in order to maintain our position at the forefront of the speech sciences. The
ﬁne tradition of Romance studies established throughout the past centuries demands
this inquisitiveness and the languages we study deserve it.

Mark Gibson and Juana Gil

Part I
Acoustic Studies


2
Rhotic variation in Spanish codas
Acoustic analysis and effects of context
in spontaneous speech
BEATRIZ BLECUA AND JORDI CICRES
.Introduction
Rhotic consonants in Spanish show most variation in coda position, both before a
pause and before a heterosyllabic consonant, where the two rhotics, /ɾ/ and /r/, are
noncontrastive. Allophones of both the tap and the trill appear in this position, with
all their possible realizations (Alarcos ; Martínez Celdrán b; Massone ;
Quilis ), and it is commonly believed that they occur in free variation, although
taps are generally preferred (Navarro Tomás ; Martínez Celdrán and Fernández
Planas ). Hualde () claims that what appears in this position is a “non-
distinct rhotic, which we could represent simply as [r]. In most regions this neutral-
ized coda [r] usually resembles the tap more closely, but it can also be realized as a
trill in somewhat emphatic speech” () (see Gili Gaya ; Malmberg ).
Blecua (: ) also states that rhotics are by nature taps in coda position,
although they can be reinforced and pronounced as trills (see also Recasens and
Espinosa b).
In order to explain this variation, several factors have been pointed out, including
emphasis (Quilis ; Hualde ), speech style (Martínez Celdrán b; Blecua
), the dialectal variety (Navarro Tomás ; Quilis ; Bradley ; Hualde
; Recasens and Espinosa b), and the speaker (García Antuña ; Blecua,
Cicres, and Gil ), although it has not been speciﬁed which particular conditions
foster each realization.
From the phonetic point of view, the articulation of the tap consists in a fast
ballistic gesture of the tongue tip against the alveolar ridge, generally with a brief
contact, with a quick return to the initial position (Ladefoged ; Martínez Celdrán
and Rallo ; Bradley ). This movement does not always imply contact
between the articulators, especially in continuous speech, but a short constriction
phase is produced to a greater or lesser extent, situated between two elements with
Romance Phonetics and Phonology. First edition. Mark Gibson and Juana Gil (eds.)
This chapter © Beatriz Blecua and Jordi Cicres . First published by Oxford University Press.

greater opening. Acoustically, it is realized as a short silent period with a voice bar in
the lowest frequencies, although formants or frication may also appear as a conse-
quence of the undershoot in the articulation (Quilis ; Ladefoged and Maddieson
; Blecua , ; Martínez Celdrán and Fernández Planas ). The average
duration of the closure phase is ms (Massone ; Quilis ; Martínez Celdrán
and Rallo ; Blecua ), and it can be considered the most characteristic trait of
rhotic consonants, as well as a fundamental indication to interpret them as such
(Blecua ; Romero ). Trills involve two or more short occlusions separated
by opening phases, although from the point of view of articulation they are not the
repetition of the tap gesture, but they respond to very precise aerodynamic require-
ments to produce vibration (Recasens and Pallarès ; Solé ; Martínez
Celdrán and Fernández Planas ). Despite the differences in the production,
acoustically “the taps look very much like the closure phase of a trill . . . a trill can
be regarded as a series of taps” (Lindau : ), so the two rhotics are basically
distinguished by the number of closure phases and can be described using the same
criteria (Blecua ).
When the tap is not in an intervocalic context, all the literature describes a short
vowel-like fragment between the closure phase of the rhotic and the adjacent
consonant, in both postconsonantal and preconsonantal positions, commonly
referred to as svarabhakti (Lenz ), but also known by terms such as “epenthetic,”
“vocalic element,” or “intrusive vowel,” among others (Gili Gaya ; Malmberg
; Quilis ; Navarro Tomás ). This element is not part of the syllabic
structure of the word, and the speaker is not aware of its existence. It shows a similar
formant structure as the ﬂanking vowel, and its duration usually equals and fre-
quently surpasses that of the closure phase, often approximating that of an unstressed
vowel (see Quilis ; Blecua ; Schmeiser for a detailed acoustic descrip-
tion). This fragment also appears in prepausal position, therefore the tap is always in
“intervocalic context” (Navarro Tomás ; Recasens and Espinosa b; Romero
), although there are no studies that analyze rhotics in this position in detail.¹
Therefore, in coda position, the rhotic is expected to be produced with a short
closure phase followed by a vocalic element, which is considered the most common
realization in this context (Hualde ; Martínez Celdrán and Fernández Planas
; Bradley in press). According to Blecua (), this would be the canonical form
in this context, although a realization without a vocalic element (either an occlusion,
an approximant, or a fricative) or with more than one, alternating with closure
phases (trill), as well as cases of elision, might also be possible owing to a weakening
or strengthening process. In particular, this author reports seven possible acoustic
realizations, depending on the number of components, the type of closure phase, and
the presence or absence of said vocalic element. She relates the frequency of
¹ The nature of this element will not be discussed in the present chapter (its presence is attributed to
articulatory reasons, perceptual reasons, or a combination of both, or just epenthesis; see Romero ).
The question of whether it is part of the rhotic or is an external element will not be discussed either,
although for the purposes of the acoustic analysis, it will be regarded as another component of the
consonant.

Beatriz Blecua and Jordi Cicres

occurrence of the different realizations to the communicative situation and to the
search for a balance between the needs of production and perception.
In this sense, it is expected that there will be a higher proportion of the weaker
realizations in spontaneous speech, and also, that other variants not described in the
literature based on read speech or on highly controlled laboratory experiments will
appear. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is no detailed description
available, with controlled variables and with a considerable number of cases, of
syllable-ﬁnal rhotics in spontaneous speech in Central Peninsular Spanish. Moreover,
it is necessary to highlight the fact that the aforementioned studies do not consider a
prepausal position, where variation might possibly be higher owing to the decrease in
the intensity and in the articulatory tenseness that are characteristics of such context.
Considering that many factors of different nature may affect variation (dialectal,
stylistic, sociolinguistic, or even individual), the present research is centered on speakers
of the same area (central Spain), similar social characteristics, same age range, and a type
of corpus as homogeneous as possible: spontaneous speech, obtained by means of
interviews in the same environment and recording conditions, and about similar topics.
The idea is to control these variables as much as possible so as to obtain reliable results
about the characteristics of rhotics in spontaneous speech, on the assumption that
practically all the rhotic variants described in coda position and even some new ones
will appear in this type of speech. Moreover, it is expected that, compared with other
types of corpora, the weaker realizations (elisions and single-component variants) will
appear more frequently in this type of speech. Besides, we regard the phonetic context as
a factor that can somehow inﬂuence the type of realization, favoring or limiting certain
variants; therefore, the possible effects of a group of contextual variables will be
analyzed. The results of all the speakers will be presented jointly, omitting the possible
interspeaker variation in order to provide general data.²
The main objectives of the present study are the following:
. To describe the variation that rhotics exhibit in coda position in spontaneous
speech in Central Peninsular Spanish and to explore the existence of variants
that have not been previously reported.
. To determine to what extent contextual factors (e.g., previous vowel, place and
manner of articulation of the following consonant, stress, and position) may
inﬂuence the different acoustic realizations.
. To provide a detailed description of the characteristics of rhotics in prepausal
position (scarcely dealt with in the literature) and to compare them with
preconsonantal rhotics.
. To compare the results obtained with those reported in the analysis of read
speech corpora.
Therefore, we aim to carry out a descriptive analysis that includes an inventory of the
existing syllable-ﬁnal realizations in spontaneous speech and their distribution
depending on the context.
² See Blecua, Cicres, and Gil () for a study of interspeaker variation in prepausal rhotics.
Rhotic variation in Spanish codas


.Methodology
..Corpus
The present study is based on the analysis of spontaneous speech, that is, utterances
that were neither read nor previously prepared. The corpus comprised six recordings
of an average duration of minutes and seconds in which each speaker had an
informal conversation about everyday topics with a technician from the CSIC
Phonetics Laboratory in Madrid. The informants were six male native speakers of
Central Peninsular Spanish (from Madrid and Salamanca), without a particularly
regional accent, aged between twenty-ﬁve and thirty-ﬁve and with higher education.
They all previously knew the interviewer and the context of the recording, which
helped the conversation to be smooth and relaxed.
The recordings were carried out in a soundproof booth at the aforementioned
laboratory, with an Ei Omnidireccional Earset microphone and the Adobe Audition
program (version .). Separate channels were used for the speakers’ voices and the
technician’s, so there was no interference or overlapping between the voices. The
sampling frequency was Hz and the bit depth was bits.
In each recording, all the occurrences of rhotic consonants in coda position were
extracted and analyzed, both before a heterosyllabic consonant (within a word and
across word boundaries) and in word-ﬁnal position before a pause. Given the charac-
teristics of the corpus, i.e., spontaneous and nonprepared, the contextual variables
could not be manipulated beforehand in order to get a balanced number of tokens for
each context and speaker, although enough occurrences were obtained to carry out an
adequate statistical analysis and to draw reliable conclusions. The corpus comprises a
total of rhotic consonants in coda position. The number of tokens extracted for
each speaker before a consonant and before a pause is provided in Table ..
..Acoustic analysis
The rhotic consonants were identiﬁed by means of a Praat (version ..) TextGrid
and were labeled taking into account their position (prepausal or preconsonantal),
the preceding vowel, the following consonant, and stress. The qualitative analysis of
the segments was carried out through the combined observation of spectrograms
(wideband and narrowband) and waveforms, in order to get a classiﬁcation of all the
tokens according to the number and acoustic characteristics of their components.
The total duration of the rhotic consonant and all its components was also
measured. Despite the articulatory differences between trills and taps mentioned
T.Number of rhotic consonants before a consonant and before a pause
per speaker
SPEAKER






TOTAL
Preconsonantal position







Prepausal position







TOTAL








Beatriz Blecua and Jordi Cicres

in Section ., this study focuses on acoustic criteria only. Thus, rhotics were
regarded as consisting of one or more components, which would correspond to a
sequence of closure or opening phases. For the classiﬁcation of the different
realizations, the vocalic element usually described for syllable-ﬁnal taps (svarab-
hakti or intrusive vowel) was considered a component of the rhotic, corresponding
to the opening articulatory phase.³
According to their acoustic characteristics, components were classiﬁed into four
different types (Table .): vocalic element, approximant, fricative, and occlusion
(sometimes with a visible release burst).⁴ The criteria that we used for the classiﬁca-
tion of each component were the presence/absence of well-deﬁned formants, the
presence/absence of noise at high frequencies, the presence/absence of a hold period
(and sometimes a release burst), and ﬁnally, the relatively large number of zero-
crossings per time unit.
Both vocalic element and approximant have the same results in Table .; conse-
quently, they were classiﬁed according to the position of the component (if found at an
opening phase it was considered a vocalic element, whereas if found at a closure phase
it was labeled as an approximant) and the intensity and deﬁnition of the formants.
However, the acoustic characteristics of some components were not always clear.
A difﬁcult distinction was that between approximants and fricatives when ill-deﬁned
energy at high frequencies could be observed on the spectrogram. If the formants were
measurable,despitebeing dim,the segmentwasconsideredanapproximant;otherwise—
and if the number of zero-crossings was deemed high—it was classiﬁed as a fricative.
The distinction between occlusion and approximant components also created some
confusion when the visible energy was very low; if formants could be distinguished at
the same time that a complex regular structure could be observed on the waveform, it
was labeled as an approximant; otherwise as an occlusion. Finally, sometimes it was
not easy to distinguish between short fricative components and the (longer than
expected) explosion bars of occlusions, in which case the number of zero-crossings
T.Acoustic characteristics used in the deﬁnition of the components
Well-deﬁned
formants
Noise at high
frequencies
Hold period (with or
without release burst)
Large number of
zero-crossings
Vocalic element
Yes
No
No
No
Approximant
Yes
No
No
No
Fricative
No
Yes
No
Yes
Occlusion
No
No
Yes
No
³ In this sense, the question of whether the vocalic element is part of the rhotic or whether it is an
intrusive vowel just following the rhotic was not properly answered.
⁴ The term occlusion has been chosen to refer to a closure component involving a break in the wave and
lack of energy, with a voicing bar in low frequencies. The term tap could have been used, but it could have
led to confusion, since it is also used to describe the closure components of a trill. Bradley and Willis ()
use “noncontinuant tap,” as opposed to approximant tap, although referring to intervocalic rhotics.
Components classiﬁed as occlusion in the present study correspond to their noncontinuant taps.
Rhotic variation in Spanish codas


was analyzed (if the value was considered high, the component was labeled as a
fricative; otherwise, it was considered to be an explosion bar of a plosive component).
..Statistical analysis
As described in Section .., the data obtained from the acoustic analysis have
different natures. On the one hand, there are data on the number of components of
each rhotic (a numerical ordinal variable) and their acoustic description (a categor-
ical variable). There are also data on the total duration of each of the rhotic
consonants, as well as on each of their components (closing and opening phases),
which correspond to scale numerical data. On the other hand, the factors described
in Table .are also taken into account, as independent variables.
The statistical approach that was used is based, ﬁrstly, on the analysis of categorical
variables by means of the Chi-square test and the results of contingency tables. In this
case, the adjusted residual values were calculated. Because these residual values
present a normal distribution (with a mean of and a standard deviation of ), the
values that are higher than .and lower than .indicate that more or fewer cases
of the analyzed variant occurred than if the variables were independent. Secondly, a
simple correspondence analysis was also performed, a technique of data reduction that
T.Factors and variants
Factor
Variants
Position
Prepausal
Preconsonantal
Stressa
Stressed syllable
Unstressed syllable
Place of articulation of the following consonantb
Labial
Coronal
Dorsal
Manner of articulation of the following consonant
Plosive
Fricative
Approximant
Lateral
Nasal
Voicing of the following consonant
Voiced
Voiceless
Vowel height
Close
Mid
Open
Vowel backness
Front
Central
Back
Vowel
/i, e, a, o, u/
a Variables related to intonation were not taken into consideration.
b A broad deﬁnition of the places of articulation was preferred so as to avoid an excess of
variants.

Beatriz Blecua and Jordi Cicres

allows a representation in a two-dimensional graph, so that the relationship between
the variables under study can be visually observed. Finally, the ANOVA test was used
for the analysis of duration (of both the rhotic as well as of its components).
.Results and discussion
..Rhotic realizations in spontaneous speech
As described in Section ., the literature centered on the acoustic analysis of syllable-
ﬁnal rhotics in Peninsular Spanish, which is generally based on read speech, describes
several basic combinations of closure and opening phases, according to the number
of components and their acoustic traits.⁵ All these realizations appear in the spon-
taneous data analyzed, but the range of variability uncovered is greater than what was
documented in previous studies.
The current study reports many different variants, from complete elision of the
rhotic segment to realizations comprising eight components, and with various acous-
tic characteristics both in the closure and opening phases. Single-component variants,
which consist only of the closure but are not followed by the expected vocalic element,
are documented with three different realizations: occlusion, approximant, and frica-
tive (Figure .); two-component variants consist of one closure phase and an opening
phase (which corresponds to the vocalic element), and follow the combinations
approximant + vocalic element and occlusion + vocalic element (Figure .); rhotics
with three components show alternation of two closure phases (which can be realized
as an occlusion, a fricative, or an approximant period) and an opening phase (a vocalic
element) (Figure .).⁶ Additionally, we found cases of elision (Figure .), as well as
[
θ
ɾ
e
e
]
t
[
]
p
o
l
o
ɾ˕
[
]
k
o
r
e
˚ɹ˔
F.Spectrograms of the sequences terce(ro), por lo, and corer, showing single-
component rhotics (occlusion, approximant, and fricative, respectively)
⁵ The criteria to classify the allophonic variants and the terminology used by different authors are not
the same. In order to be able to compare the different realizations described with the results of the present
study, we have adapted the criteria to the component classiﬁcation, therefore the so-called svarabhakti or
intrusive vowel corresponds to a second component. Additionally, the terminology has been uniﬁed.
⁶ The two closure phases in three-component rhotics may differ from one another (see Table .).
Rhotic variation in Spanish codas


approximant
vocalic element
occlusion
vocalic element
ð
[
p
o
]
ә
ɾ˕
ɾ
[
t
a
ð
]
ә
F.Spectrograms of the sequences porD(ios) and tard(e), showing rhotics of two
components (approximant + vocalic element and occlusion + vocalic element)
approximant
approximant
vocalic element
occlusion
occlusion
vocalic element
[
p
o
r
t
e ]
[
m
a
r
l
a ]
F.Spectrograms of the sequences porte(ría) and (for)mar la(zos), showing three-
component rhotics (approximant + vocalic element + approximant, and occlusion + vocalic
element + occlusion)
[ k
o
n
t
a
l
o
]
Ø
F.Spectrogram of the sequence contarlo, showing an example of elision (indicated by Ø)

Beatriz Blecua and Jordi Cicres

rhotics with more than three components (Figure .), which always keep the struc-
ture of alternation between opening and closure phases, and in some cases (those with
an even number of components) ending with an opening phase. All these realizations
were already described in the literature.⁷
In addition to these, we have found three other realizations that correspond to
rhotics of two components, one of which is fricative. They follow the combinations
occlusion + fricative, approximant + fricative, and, more sporadically, fricative +
vocalic element (Figure .). A type of trill realization with frication in the inter-
mediate opening phase was also documented (Figure .). The examples with a
second fricative component are interesting as they do not show the expected formant
structure of the opening phase, similar to a vowel (hence the usual name of vocalic
element, intrusive vowel, or vocalic fragment). In particular, the examples of approxi-
mant + fricative, although sporadic (ﬁve cases), are especially interesting in that they
show a ﬁrst component with a lesser constriction than the second one, which should
supposedly correspond to a more open phase. These two-component realizations
including either closure or opening fricative components were already reported by
Blecua, Cicres, and Gil (), also in spontaneous speech, although only in pre-
pausal position. They all appear here before a consonant too. As far as we know,
syllable-ﬁnal trills with a fricative opening phase have not been previously reported
for Peninsular Spanish. Even the presence of fricative components in the closure is
not usual in careful speech (Blecua quantiﬁes them in approximately two
percent, and ﬁnds them only before a fricative consonant). However, they are actually
occlusion
vocalic element
vocalic element
occlusion
approximant
[
t
a
r
e
]
F.Spectrogram of the sequence (inten)tar eh. The rhotic has ﬁve components
(occlusion + vocalic element + occlusion + vocalic element + approximant)
⁷ Trills with a ﬁnal opening phase in Spanish are reported by Blecua () and Martínez Celdrán and
Fernández Planas (). The latter claim that all trills, and even taps, end with a vocalic phase.
Rhotic variation in Spanish codas


occlusion
fricative
fricative
approximant
fricative
vocalic element
[ k
j
e
ɾ ɹ˔
k
o
]
[
]
x
o
ð
e
ɾ˕
ɹ˔
[
]
a
e
θ
ɹ˔
ə
F.Spectrograms of the sequences (cual)quier co(sa), joder, and hacer, two-
component rhotics with a fricative component (occlusion + fricative, approximant + fricative,
and fricative + vocalic element, respectively)
Note: The phonetic transcription of the sequences tries to reﬂect the acoustic realization of both the closure and the
opening phase in two-component examples.
[
θ
occlusion
fricative
approximant
e
r
k
]
F.Spectrogram of the sequence cerc(a), with a three-component rhotic (occlusion +
fricative + approximant)

usual realizations in some variants in Latin America, especially in casual speech
(Bradley ; RAE–ASALE : –). In fact, Bradley and Willis () report a
postapproximantized tap with aperiodic noise as a variant of the intervocalic trill in
Veracruz Mexican Spanish, which includes a period of frication after the contact.
Their spectrographic representations are very similar to those of the aforementioned
occlusion + fricative tokens. Henriksen and Willis (: ) also describe fricative
components in intervocalic trills in Andalusian Spanish: “The most commonly
occurring phonemic trill variant in the Jerezano corpus contained one visible occlu-
sion and was followed by r-coloring, assibilation, or frication.”⁸
All the variants documented in the current study are listed in Table ..
Blecua () states that the different acoustic realizations of the rhotic conson-
ants in all the contexts can be arranged on a weakening scale, as a function of
articulatory effort, and claims that the variants are related to each other by means
of processes of lenition or fortition on the basis of a canonical or basic form. In coda
position, occlusion + vocalic element is proposed as the canonical form. Single-
component realizations (which lack a vocalic element) and, of course, those with an
elision, would correspond to more weakened variants, whereas the trills, with two or
more closure phases, would be the result of a strengthening process. With the same
number of components, the allophonic realizations of the closure phase would also
correspond to points along a lenition continuum: the fricative and approximant
realizations imply a greater level of reduction, and they would be the result of a
gestural undershoot.⁹ As Recasens and Espinosa (b) point out, “taps are very
often realized as approximants because of failure to achieve a complete closure” ().
Regarding reinforced realizations of syllable-ﬁnal rhotic consonants: “Speakers could
implement strengthening through an increase in constriction degree and dorsopala-
tal contact size as for initial consonants in general, or else through little dorsopalatal
contact in line with speciﬁc production requirements for trills and with the trend for
syllable ﬁnal consonants to undergo some articulatory reduction” (Recasens and
Espinosa b: ). The realizations in spontaneous speech obtained in the present
analysis could be organized in the same way along the strengthening–lenition
continuum.
..Number of components
The analysis of the variants reveals a clear predominance of rhotics made of one and
two components (with a .% and a .% of the cases, respectively), although a
signiﬁcant number of elisions have also been found (.%), as well as realizations of
three components (.%). On the other hand, the sum of rhotics of four or more
components (up to eight) is symbolic (overall, .%). Thus, the two types of more
frequently occurring variants consist of only one closure phase, either followed or not
⁸ Recasens and Espinosa (b) also document a brief frication-like interval in this position in some
Majorcan Catalan examples.
⁹ Bradley and Willis (: ) propose a similar scale to explain the variation of the tap in intervocalic
position in Veracruz Mexican Spanish and Dominican Spanish.
Rhotic variation in Spanish codas


by an opening phase.¹⁰ All the tokens with two or more closures, which correspond to
a trill, were collapsed into the same category, and make up the .% of the total.
T.Composition of the rhotic consonants according to the characteristics
of each of their components, and the number of realizations found in the corpus
Number of components
of the rhotic
First
component
Second
component
Third
component
Number of
realizations
(elision)


Occlusion

Approximant

Fricative


Occlusion
Vocalic element

Approximant
Vocalic element

Fricative
Vocalic element

Occlusion
Fricative

Approximant
Fricative


Approximant
Vocalic element
Approximant

Approximant
Vocalic element
Fricative

Approximant
Vocalic element
Occlusion

Fricative
Vocalic element
Fricative

Occlusion
Vocalic element
Approximant

Occlusion
Vocalic element
Fricative

Occlusion
Vocalic element
Occlusion

Occlusion
Fricative
Approximant


Approximant + Vocalic + Approximant + Vocalic
Approximant + Vocalic + Occlusion + Vocalic
Occlusion + Fricative + Vocalic + Approximant


Approximant + Vocalic + Approximant + Vocalic
+ Approximant/Occlusion


Approximant + Vocalic + Approximant + Vocalic
+ Approximant + Fricative


Vocalic + Approximant + Vocalic + Approximant
+ Vocalic + Approximant/Occlusion + Vocalic

Realizations not previously reported in the literature are highlighted in bold.
¹⁰ This component will be referred to in general as an opening phase in the present chapter, in the sense
that it implies a lesser articulatory constriction than the closure phase of the rhotic, in order to include the

Beatriz Blecua and Jordi Cicres

One of the aims set in the present study was to verify whether the same acoustic
realizations of syllable-ﬁnal rhotics described in the literature for read speech, and
even some other variants, would be found in the analysis of spontaneous speech, but
with different proportions. The idea behind this is that the communicative situation
would have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the presence of some or other variants, and also
in the frequency of their realizations, so that the more relaxed the speech style is, the
higher the proportion of weaker realizations.
The results obtained provide evidence to conﬁrm this hypothesis. Table .shows
the results compared to the results reported in Blecua (: ), which were
obtained through a corpus of read speech (of a text, and therefore a more natural
technique than reading word lists), and uses the same method of analysis.
The following step was to verify whether some of the analyzed contextual variables
(see Section ..and Table .) had any statistical effect that favored a speciﬁc
number of components in the rhotic realization. The results of the analysis of
contingency tables (by means of Pearson’s Chi-square test and the analysis of the
adjusted residual values) shed some light on the variables that have a signiﬁcant effect
on the number of components.
Figure .shows the percentage of rhotics according to the number of compo-
nents and position (prepausal or preconsonantal). Both contexts exhibit cases of
elision and of one, two, and three or more components, although the distribution is
different. The most frequent realization in both cases is the rhotic comprising two
components, that is, one contact tap followed by an opening phase, but while it
clearly predominates in preconsonantal position, it is quite balanced with the single-
component forms in prepausal position. Other clear differences can be observed in
the cases of elision (more common in preconsonantal position) and in those of three
or more components (more common before a pause). The results of the statistical
analysis conﬁrm that the differences in the number of components are generally
signiﬁcant (Pearson’s Chi-square = .; df = ; Sig. < .). The adjusted residual
values allow us to corroborate that in prepausal context the proportion of elisions
and two-component rhotics is signiﬁcantly lower and the proportion of rhotics with
three or more components is signiﬁcantly higher than what is expected on the basis
of the null hypothesis of independence (and inversely in preconsonantal context).
T.Percentage of realizations in spontaneous and read
speech, according to number of components
Acoustic realization
Spontaneous speech
Read speech (Blecua )
Elision
.%
.%
component
.%
%
components
.%
%
or more components
.%
.%
examples of frication, which do not have vocalic characteristics. The term vocalic element will also be used,
but only when referring speciﬁcally to vowel-like opening phases.
Rhotic variation in Spanish codas


The effect of stress is also signiﬁcant (Pearson’s Chi-square = .; df = ;
Sig. = .), so trills appear more often in stressed syllables than in unstressed
syllables, whereas two-component variants seem to be favored by an unstressed
context. However, stress does not have an inﬂuence on the distribution of either
the realizations of one component or those with elisions, which appear equally in
stressed and unstressed syllables.
In addition, the place of articulation of the following consonant has a signiﬁcant
effect on the number of components (Pearson’s Chi-square=.; df=;
Sig.<.): trills appear in a higher proportion before labial consonants, whereas
single-component realizations seem to be favored by coronal consonants, and dorsal
consonants are related with rhotics of two components. The analysis of simple
correspondences (Figure .) also shows this tendency.
Thus, a realization without an opening phase is more probable before a homor-
ganic consonant, whereas a trill is particularly triggered by a context in which the
Position
Number of components
0
1
2
3 or more
Prepausal
Preconsonantal
3%
38%
10%
30%
55%
5%
41%
19%
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
F.Percentages of the number of components according to position

Beatriz Blecua and Jordi Cicres

articulator involved is not the tongue. The reason for this might be that the tongue is
not engaged in the following articulatory gesture, and therefore it has more freedom
to carry out the vibration, which requires very precise articulatory gestures and
aerodynamic conditions.
The fact that homorganic consonants seem to favor realizations without a vocalic
element had already been observed in other variants of Spanish and languages such
as Catalan, which has a very similar rhotic system. Bradley () documented cases
of fricative (assibilated) rhotics in highland Ecuadorian Spanish only before a
homorganic consonant, thus conﬁrming the distribution already reported by
Argüello (). Similarly, in a comparative study about the characteristics of rhotics
in different dialects of Catalan, Recasens and Espinosa (b: ) reported that
“vowel insertion is favored in heterorganic consonant clusters and disfavored in
sequences where C[the second consonant] is (quasi-) homorganic with the rhotic,”
regarding preconsonantal rhotics of Valencian and Majorcan Catalan.
The manner of articulation of the following consonant has also turned out
to be relevant (Pearson’s Chi-square=.; df=; Sig. < .). Elisions and
single-component variants seem to be favored by laterals and fricatives (in fact, a
1,0
0,5
0,0
1,0
3
2
1
0
Dorsal
Coronal
Labial
0,5
0,0
–0,5
–0,5
Dimension 1
Dimension 2
–1,0
–1,0
–1,5
–1,5
Number of components
Place of articulation
F.Dispersion diagram of the analysis of the correspondence between the number of
components and place of articulation of the following consonant
Rhotic variation in Spanish codas


single-component rhotic is the most common realization in these two contexts, even
more frequent than the two-component one, as can be seen in Figure .). Realiza-
tions with two components predominate before plosives and approximants, and trills
are more frequent before a nasal consonant than in other contexts. The analysis of
simple correspondences is reﬂected in Figure ..
These results coincide only partially with those described in Blecua (), who
claimed that the highest percentage of trill realizations occurred before a lateral
consonant, a fact that contrasts with the only four cases found in the present analysis.
On the other hand, the nasal context was also reported to favor trilling in the
aforementioned study. It is also important to highlight that some manners of
articulation inhibit trills completely (or almost completely). Echoing Blecua’s results,
the current study did not ﬁnd a single case of trill before an approximant consonant,
and only one before a fricative. Likewise, this realization does not tend to appear
before an approximant in Catalan, a language that also alternates between the tap and
the trill in coda position, but with a higher tendency toward the trill than Spanish
(Recasens b).
Nasal
3 or more
Plosive
2
Approximant
0
Fricative
Lateral
1
2,0
1,5
1,0
0,5
0,0
0,5
–1,0
–1,0
–0,5
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
Dimension 1
Dimension 2
Manner of articulation
Number of components
F.Dispersion diagram of the analysis of the correspondence between the number of
components and manner of articulation of the following consonant

Beatriz Blecua and Jordi Cicres

Finally, it should be mentioned that neither the voicing of the following consonant
nor the effect of the preceding vowel have turned out to be signiﬁcant. Yet other
studies claim that the vowel plays an important role in the variation between taps and
trills in coda position. Gibson () ﬁnds a higher probability that a trill is produced
after the vowels [a] and [o], whereas [i] would be the least propitious context, a fact
that “may be related to the similarities in the articulatory settings, especially in the
predorsum region, between trills and low mid and back vowels. Since the position of
the tongue body is already low for the production of [a], minimal predorsum
lowering is needed in order to achieve the articulatory setting required for trilling”
(). The present study carried out an analysis of the distribution of the
realizations obtained according to the two vocalic variables taken into account, i.e.,
200
100
150
50
0
Plosive
Fricative 
Approximant
Manner of articulation
Nasal
Lateral
3 or more
1
2
Number of components
0
F.Numbers of tokens of the different component variants according to the manner
of articulation of the following consonant
Rhotic variation in Spanish codas


height and backness, as well as each of the ﬁve vowels of Spanish, but results were not
statistically signiﬁcant.¹¹
..Acoustic characteristics of the components
This section analyzes the type of acoustic realizations of the different components of the
rhotic consonants. The explanation is divided in two sections: the components that
correspond to the closure phases (...) and those of the opening phases (...).
...Closure phases
The position in which the rhotic consonant is placed (before
a consonant or before a pause) has a signiﬁcant effect on the acoustic deﬁnition of its
components. Moreover, the number of components of the realization is also relevant,
especially in prepausal context.
As for the structure of the ﬁrst component, i.e., the ﬁrst closure phase, Figure .
shows the percentage data of the two positions taking into account the number of
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
1
2
3 or more
Position
Number of components
11%
1
2
3 or more
Prepausal
Preconsonantal
60%
29%
47%
11%
42%
66%
87%
3%
5%
5%
35%
54%
1%
44%
62%
38%
First component
Approximant
Fricative
Occlusion
F.Percentages of realizations of the ﬁrst component according to the position and
the number of components
¹¹ However, the type of analysis and the recording conditions as well as the characteristics of the corpus
are totally different. Gibson’s study was based on a very controlled pronunciation of nonce words, with a
pneumotachograph and a catheter inserted between the lips.

Beatriz Blecua and Jordi Cicres

elements that make up the rhotic. There is a high percentage of fricative realizations
in prepausal single-component rhotics, whereas occlusion predominates in two-
component variants. In preconsonantal position, however, approximant realizations
are more frequent independently of the number of components, whereas fricative
components have a very low frequency of appearance.
In order to analyze the inﬂuence of the different contextual variables on the type of
realization of the ﬁrst closure phase, rhotics of one, two, and three components will
be considered separately, since they show signiﬁcantly different distributions. More-
over, in single-component realizations, the following consonant is in contact with the
closure phase, without any element that separates them.
Regarding single-component rhotics, the results obtained by means of the analysis
of contingency tables show, similarly to what can be seen in Figure ., that the
factor that has a higher inﬂuence on the acoustic characteristics of the closure phase
is the position (Pearson’s Chi-Square=.; df=; Sig.<.). Thus, a prepausal
context seems to favor the realization as a fricative at the expense of approximant and
occlusion realizations, whereas a preconsonantal context is related to a higher
percentage of approximant and occlusive ones. The presence of fricative rhotics in
prepausal position was already reported in Cicres and Blecua (), who compared
this friction with that of the voiceless alveolar fricative [s].
Another factor that inﬂuences the appearance of single-component fricative
rhotics is stress (Pearson’s Chi-square=.; df=; Sig.=.), since these real-
izations seem to be favored by stressed positions. Concerning the timbre of the
preceding vowel, the results are signiﬁcant (Pearson’s Chi-square=.; df=;
Sig.=.). The adjusted residual values indicate that the approximant realizations
are favored by the contact with [o] both before a consonant and before a pause.
The effect of the following consonant (which obviously does not affect prepausal
tokens) is also signiﬁcant for both the place of articulation (Pearson’s Chi-
square=.; df=; Sig.=.) and the manner of articulation (Pearson’s
Chi-square=.; df=; Sig.=.). According to the results of the adjusted
residual values, there seem to be more approximant realizations before plosives
than expected, whereas fricative rhotics predominate before fricatives, independ-
ently of the place of articulation. Finally, rhotics with one occlusive component are
favored by coronal consonants.
Fricative rhotics have not been described for Central Peninsular Spanish, but they
are characteristic of many dialects of the Spanish of Latin America. As mentioned in
Section .., Bradley () reports fricative rhotics in the casual speech of highland
Ecuadorian Spanish, but only before a homorganic consonant, a context which freely
alternates such realizations with realizations involving a vocalic element. In contrast,
a fricative is ruled out before a heterorganic consonant. Following an Articulatory
Phonology approach (Browman and Goldstein ), he explains that assibilation is
due to a gestural overlap and blending involving same-tier gestures in casual speech,
“removing the open articulatory transition between the two consonants, along with the
svarabhakti vowel it normally produces. Without the opening transition to ensure a
brief constriction period, the duration of /ɾ/ is increased, yielding a fricative [r]” (Bradley
: ). The present study has obtained cases of fricative rhotics before a
Rhotic variation in Spanish codas


homorganic consonant, but also in other contexts that imply different articulators
(before labial [f] and before velar [k] and [x]), even in a higher proportion than
preceding a coronal consonant. However, the frequency of appearance of the fricative
realization before a consonant is very low, therefore it is difﬁcult to obtain statistically
reliable results. On the other hand, fricative rhotics clearly predominate in prepausal
context.
In two-component realizations, the ﬁrst component (which corresponds to the
closure phase) is mainly an approximant or an occlusion, and in rare occasions it is
fricative. The main factors that affect the acoustic characteristics of this ﬁrst com-
ponent are the position (Pearson’s Chi-square=.; df=; p=.) and
the manner of articulation of the following sound (Pearson’s Chi-square=.;
df=; p < .). In prepausal position, occlusion occurs in sixty-six percent of the
cases, whereas approximant realizations constitute twenty-nine percent of the cases.
In preconsonantal position, the percentage is more balanced, although it is higher in
the approximant closure phase (ﬁfty-four percent against forty-four percent of
occlusive realizations), as can be seen in Figure . Regarding the manner of articu-
lation, the adjusted residual values indicate that the approximant realizations appear
in a higher proportion before an approximant consonant, and in a lower proportion
than expected before a plosive or lateral. In contrast, the proportion is the contrary
for realizations in which the ﬁrst component is an occlusion: they are favored by a
contiguous plosive or lateral consonant, and disfavored by an approximant. The
voicing of the following consonant is also signiﬁcant (Pearson’s Chi-square=.;
df=; p < .): voiced consonants favor approximant closure phases, whereas the
proportion of occlusions is greater before voiceless consonants. These results coin-
cide with those obtained by Blecua ().
Finally, neither the place of articulation nor the following consonant, nor the
preceding vowel, nor the stress of the syllable where the rhotic is found have any
statistically signiﬁcant effect.
As for the realizations classiﬁed as trills, the most frequent structures include two
closure phases that are the same: approximants (thirty-seven percent) or occlusions
(twenty-two percent). Although some examples have been found of all the combin-
ations of closure phases in the trill (approximant, fricative, and occlusion) (see
Table .), there are not enough cases to carry out a reliable statistical analysis.
In any case, the main factor of variation in the closure phases is, again, the
position. As represented in Figures .and ., fricative closure phases have only
been found in prepausal position (except one single case in the third component).
Regarding the second closure phase (third component of the rhotic), the distribution
among occlusive, approximant and fricative realizations varies signiﬁcantly (Pearson’s
Chi-square=.; df=; p=.):¹² in prepausal position forty-ﬁve percent of trills
end with a fricative component and in very few cases there is a ﬁnal occlusion. On the
¹² Realizations of more than three components have been excluded for this statistical test owing to the
nonsigniﬁcant number of cases that they represent.

Beatriz Blecua and Jordi Cicres

other hand, the third component realized as an occlusion makes up forty-three percent
of the trills before a consonant.
...Opening phases
The second component of rhotics corresponds to what we
have called ‘opening phase’, in contrast with the closure phase that is characteristic of
these consonants. In trills with more than three components, two or more opening
phases appear, which alternate with closure phases. The nature of this segment,
which, as mentioned in Section ., has given rise to different interpretations, is in
any case different from the point of view of the production of the rhotics that only
include one closure phase followed by such an element, and those produced as trills.
The svarabhakti vowel, as its name indicates, is characterized by the presence of
formants and a structure typically belonging to a vowel, normally very similar to the
one that constitutes the nucleus of the syllable. The proposals based on Articulatory
0%
Prepausal
Preconsonantal
Position
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
45%
45%
9%
54%
3%
43%
Third component
Approximant
Fricative
Occlusion
F.Percentages of realizations of the third component according to position
Rhotic variation in Spanish codas


Phonology consider that it is part of that vowel, which results in the lack of temporal
overlap between the gestures for the rhotic and the following consonant: “The
separation between these two gestures results in the perception of a small portion
of the ﬂanking vowel, which would correspond to the above-mentioned svarabhakti
vowel” (Romero : ).
In the present study the majority of opening phases in the realizations of two
components coincide with what is described in the literature and have been classiﬁed
as vocalic elements. However, other segments with fricative characteristics have also
been observed in this position (see Section ..and Table .). These cases are
especially interesting since they can hardly be explained as part of the vowel that
emerges, and they cannot be called svarabhakti or intrusive “vowel.” They present a
lesser degree of constriction than that in the adjacent closure phase, but they do not
show formants.
Rhotics with a fricative opening phase appear in a signiﬁcantly higher proportion
in prepausal position than before a consonant (Pearson’s Chi-square=.; df=;
p < .). They make up more than half of the realizations of two components
before a pause (ﬁfty-six percent), in comparison with the thirteen percent of pre-
consonantal realizations. Yet this last percentage cannot be neglected, since it
corresponds to ﬁfty-three tokens with a fricative opening phase.
A closer analysis of the distribution of the opening phases shows that the acoustic
characteristics of the second component are clearly related to the characteristics of the
ﬁrst one. When the ﬁrst component is approximant or fricative, the second one is a
vocalic element in virtually all the cases. However, if the ﬁrst component is an
occlusion, the second one is a fricative in one third of the rhotics with two components.
When focusing solely on the rhotics whose ﬁrst component is an occlusion, and
with the aim to determine whether any variable has a statistical effect that favors that
the second component is a fricative or a vowel, again the main factor that explains
this variation is the position (Pearson’s Chi-square=.; df=; Sig. < .): a
prepausal context clearly fosters the appearance of friction in the second component
(Figure .). Other factors also have a statistically signiﬁcant effect, although to a
lesser extent: stress (Pearson’s Chi-square=.; df=; Sig.=.) and the manner
of articulation of the following consonant (Pearson’s Chi-square=.; df = ;
Sig.=.). The majority of the rhotics with a fricative second component are in
stressed position, and if the following consonant is approximant, the opening phase
is always a vocalic element.
The trill realizations show a fricative intermediate opening phase in ﬁfteen percent
of the cases, which are divided similarly between prepausal and preconsonantal
position (four examples per context).
..Duration
As regards the total duration of rhotic sounds, including both closure and opening
phases, Figure .shows that the larger the number of components, the longer the
duration. Moreover, in prepausal position durations are signiﬁcantly longer than
before a consonant in all the cases. Thus, in prepausal context, the average duration
of single-component realizations is ms, ms in those with two components, and

Beatriz Blecua and Jordi Cicres

ms in rhotics with three or more components. In preconsonantal position, the
averages are signiﬁcantly lower: ms, ms, and ms for rhotics with one, two,
and three or more components, respectively. These data indicate that the position
factor (prepausal or preconsonantal) is highly relevant, since the average length
of single-component rhotics before a pause is even higher than the average of the
realizations with three or more components in preconsonantal position. The
ANOVA tests show that the differences in the duration according to the number of
components are signiﬁcant both in preconsonantal (F=.; df=; Sig. < .) and
in prepausal position (F=.; df=; Sig. < .). The multiple post-hoc compari-
sons show signiﬁcant differences among all the rhotics before a consonant, but not
between rhotics of one and two components in prepausal position (signiﬁcance value of
the Games–Howell post-hoc test=.).
29%
71%
72%
28%
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
Prepausal
Preconsonantal
Position
Second component
Vocalic
Fricative
F.Percentages of realizations of the second component in the realizations with an
occlusive ﬁrst component according to their position
Rhotic variation in Spanish codas


In addition to the global values, the duration of each of the components has been
analyzed, taking into account both the number of elements of the rhotic and the
position and type of component, as can be seen in Figure .. Again, the results
show clear differences between prepausal and preconsonantal position: the values in
the ﬁrst case, both in the opening and the closure phases, widely exceed those
obtained before a consonant. In fact, in prepausal context closure phases show a
longer duration than that typical of a tap, especially and more prominently in the
realizations with only one component, but also when they are followed by an opening
phase and if they are realized as a trill. Precisely, the brevity of the closure phase is
considered to be the most relevant acoustic characteristic of rhotics in all the
literature (Romero ), and the values obtained in the present study for prepausal
realizations are higher than expected.
300
200
100
0
Duration
1
2
3 or more
Number of components
Position
Prepausal
Preconsonantal
F.Box plots of the duration according to the number of components and the
position

Beatriz Blecua and Jordi Cicres

Durations in preconsonantal position agree with those mentioned in the literature,
in the sense that closure phases last around ms (except in one-component
realizations, where the duration is longer). If we compare the results reported by
Blecua (), the opening and the closure phases of every type of realization
coincide, despite being based on a corpus of sentence reading.
Data from the literature reveal that duration of the svarabhakti fragment is very
variable, and it frequently surpasses the duration of the closure phase that it follows.
Gili Gaya (: ) claims that these differences could be due to the speed or length
of the pronunciation, and to the fact that the speaker is not aware of the existence of
such a segment, and considers that its duration is not inﬂuenced by the nature of the
consonant or stress. Our results also reﬂect a great variation in the opening phases,
with a higher average duration in prepausal position than before a consonant. In two-
component rhotics, the values vary between and ms in prepausal position
(= ms), and between and before a consonant (= ms). Regarding rhotics
with three or more components, the values of the opening phase are situated between
and ms in prepausal position (= ms) and between and before a
consonant (= ms).
When analyzing the duration of each component in detail, there seems to be a
certain compensatory effect: the duration of the components decreases when the
number of elements increases (although with important differences depending on
the characteristics of each component, as we will show later on). In other words,
rhotics of two components are not equivalent the addition of an opening phase to a
realization of one component. As reported in previous studies (Blecua : ), and
as described also for onset clusters including a rhotic sound, in single-component
Duration of the components
Prepausal
Preconsonantal
1 component
2 components
3 components
67 ms (fricative)
26 ms
47 ms
28 ms
40 ms
84 ms (fricative)
18 ms
19 ms
20 ms 
28 ms
40 ms
44 ms (approximant)
22 ms
26 ms
41 ms (fricative)
30 ms (ap/pl)
F.Diagram of the average duration of rhotics (and of each of their components)
according to their number of components, position, and acoustic characteristics
If left unspeciﬁed, the average duration does not exhibit signiﬁcant differences that depend on the acoustic structure of the
component.
Rhotic variation in Spanish codas


realizations the duration of the closure phase is signiﬁcantly longer than in rhotics
comprising two or more components, so durations are compensated.
Figure .also reﬂects differences in the duration of the components depending
on their acoustic deﬁnition. Thus, a clear tendency can be observed toward fricative
components having a longer duration than the rest in closure phases.
As for fricative rhotics in preconsonantal position, Bradley () also discusses a
compensatory lengthening effect associated with a precoronal assibilation in high-
land Ecuadorian Spanish. Although based on few cases, he obtains similar results to
those obtained in the present study when comparing the duration of assibilated
rhotics with the sum of a closure phase and a svarabhakti vowel in the realizations
without assibilation. Moreover, the author claims that the longer duration of the
former may be due to aerodynamic factors: “while the presence of an open transition
ensures a brief approximant articulation of the tap, the absence of the transition
allows for a durational increase in the assibilated fricative” (Bradley : ) (see
also Romero ).
.Conclusions
The main contribution of this chapter is to provide a detailed description of all the
realizations in spontaneous speech of syllable-ﬁnal rhotic sounds in Central Penin-
sular Spanish, both before a consonant and in prepausal position. Moreover, the
different contextual factors that may inﬂuence the realization of one or other type of
rhotic, as well as their duration, have been analyzed.
Firstly, and meeting one of the objectives of the present study, it should be
highlighted that the same basic realizations (regarding number of components)
that had already been described in other studies dealing with laboratory speech
have been found, ranging from elision to complex trills, but with a different distri-
bution. Although the most frequent realization in spontaneous speech is the one
formed by a closure phase followed by an opening phase (as described by the
literature for read speech), the proportion of elision cases and single-component
rhotics—only comprising the closure phase and without the vocalic element—is
higher in spontaneous speech, whereas the proportion is the contrary in rhotics
realized as trills. These results conﬁrm proposals such as Blecua’s (), who states
that the more relaxed the speech style is, the higher the tendency to more weakened
realizations.
The acoustic structure of the different components also coincides with what has
been commonly reported in Spanish, although some new realizations were docu-
mented: a fricative opening phase instead of the traditional vocalic element in two
component variants, and also in some cases of two-closure trills.
Secondly, we have shown that the position of the rhotic (before a pause or before a
consonant) is the most decisive factor regarding both the number of components
and their acoustic and duration characteristics. Although the realizations in both
positions are the same, the proportions change in a signiﬁcant way. Particularly
interesting is the fact that a prepausal position favors the appearance of friction in
single-component rhotics, as well as in trills, whereas elision is much less frequent

Beatriz Blecua and Jordi Cicres

than in preconsonantal position. Furthermore, we have conﬁrmed that the so-called
svarabhakti vowel does not appear systematically in prepausal rhotics, since they
have been detected in only forty-one percent of the examples. As regards duration, a
prepausal position favors much longer realizations than a preconsonantal position.
We have also analyzed the effect of other contextual variables—both on the number
of components and on their acoustic characteristics. The timbre of the preceding vowel
does not have any clear inﬂuence in the rhotic. However, both the place and the
manner of articulation of the following consonant, together with stress, have a signiﬁ-
cant effect in the number of components. On the other hand, the acoustic character-
istics of the closure phases seem to be inﬂuenced only by the manner of articulation
(and the voicing), but not the place of articulation. The acoustic realizations found in
the opening phases, however, basically depend on the type of realization of the ﬁrst
closure phase, so that if it is approximant or fricative the closure phase is almost always
a vocalic element, whereas if the ﬁrst component is an occlusion, frication appears in
the opening phase in one third of the cases.
Finally, the total duration of the rhotic, as well as that of each component, is longer
before a pause than in preconsonantal context. Moreover, we have found a kind of
compensatory lengthening regarding the number of components: the more compo-
nents are observed, the shorter the duration of each of them is.
In sum, the current study ﬁlls a gap existing in the literature by analyzing syllable-
ﬁnal rhotics in spontaneous speech, as well as by providing a detailed description of
prepausal rhotics. It also states the contextual factors that can account for some of the
variation in the coda. Future studies should try to provide articulatory, perceptual, or
phonological explanations for these results, which could shed some more light on the
variation in the acoustic realizations of rhotic consonants.
Acknowledgments
Work on this chapter was supported by grants FFI-, FFI-and FFI-
-C--P from the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness.
Rhotic variation in Spanish codas


3
The phonetics of Italian anaphonesis
Between production and perception
SILVIA CALAMAI
.Introduction
The aim of this study is to present a contribution to the investigation of anaphonesis,
which has been claimed to have some relationship with the universals of vowel
nasality and nasal consonants. Anaphonesis appears to be a tricky phonetic process
in the history of Italian, occurring before a velar nasal (i.e., vinco ‘I win’ instead of
venco, punto ‘point’ instead of ponto). In order to explore the parallels between
documented synchronic and diachronic variation, the complexity and diversity of
nasal vowel evolution in Romance is considered in the light of the results of the
production and perception experiments presented in this chapter.
The chapter is structured as follows. First, it tackles the issue of deﬁning the effect
of nasalization on vowel systems, with particular attention to Romance languages
(Section .). Second, it presents the phonetics of anaphonesis in Italian (Sections .
and .). Two different experiments are then described, together with their relevant
results, in terms of both production and perception, in order to verify how the
phenomenon is reﬂected both synchronically in Florentine vernacular speech and
in the perceptual domain (Section .). The last section of the chapter discusses the
experimental ﬁndings and advances some general conclusions.
.Nasalization and Romance languages
Nasal consonants exert considerable inﬂuence on preceding and following vowels.
These effects are vowel nasalization and changes in vowel height. In particular, it has
been found that coarticulatory activity associated with lowering of the velum spreads
mostly backward over the speech chain. Accordingly, coarticulation is anticipatory
rather than carryover (Chafcouloff and Marchal ). It would thus appear that
the nasalization of oral vowels is perceptually more salient if the vowel in question
comes before rather than after the nasal consonant. As a consequence, the expected
Romance Phonetics and Phonology. First edition. Mark Gibson and Juana Gil (eds.)
This chapter © Silvia Calamai . First published by Oxford University Press.

tendency is for “vowel assimilations associated with the presence of a nasal consonant
to occur at the regressive level” (Recasens : ). The spread of nasalization on the
preceding vowel has important acoustic and perceptual consequences: the listener
“hears” a vowel as more closed or more open than it actually is, because of the
coupling between the nasal murmur and the ﬁrst formant of the vowel. In this
respect, the outcome of quality changes in nasalized vowels may be accounted for
on perceptual grounds, i.e., listeners interpret as the ﬁrst formant of the vowel either
the ﬁrst spectral peak of the nasalized vowel or the spectral centroid encompassing the
ﬁrst oral and nasal spectral peaks (Ohala ; Wright , among others).
Not infrequently, sound change processes originate from auditory misparsing,
that is, “when the listener fails to normalize the variations in the speech signal or
‘corrects’ details that did not require correcting” (Ohala : ). In both cases, a
perceptual reinterpretation of ambiguous signals by the listener is at work, and the
sporadic misalignment between the way speakers produce and listeners perceive
coarticulation patterns can be at the origin of sound change. When the listener
correctly attributes contextual modiﬁcations of sounds to the context itself (e.g.,
when a vowel is nasalized preceding a nasal consonant, and this contextual nasaliza-
tion is not reinterpreted as inherent in the vowel but is attributed to the consonant),
the phonetic input is perceptually normalized by listeners. Nevertheless, since the
acoustic signal is often noisy and ambiguous, listeners may on occasion fail to
normalize: that is, they may fail to correctly attribute a feature to the adjacent
phonetic context and ascribe it instead to the segment being analyzed. In French,
for instance, the assignation of the nasality to the vowel rather than to the consonant
and the resulting development of a phonemic oral–nasal vowel contrast may come
about if listeners do not attribute enough of the coarticulatory effect to the source
that gives rise to it (Hajek , ; Hajek and Maeda ). It has been observed
that similar types of sound change occur in, and shape, the sound systems of many
languages (Harrington a, b).
Diachronic data from geographically distant and genetically unrelated languages
show strong phonological effects of nasalization on vowel height. Seminal work by
Beddor () demonstrates that while high and low vowel data show consistent
patterns, mid nasal vowels do not reveal a uniform rising or lowering tendency. In
other words, in the world’s languages they may either rise or lower. Thus, the author
claims that factors other than vowel height must be taken into account: contextual
(allophonic) or noncontextual (phonemic) nasalization; vowel context (i.e., presence
or absence of an adjacent nasal consonant) and vowel backness (front or back). As far
as mid contextual nasal vowels are concerned, the -language sample in Beddor
() supports the following generalizations:
a. Mid back contextual nasal vowels rise;
b. Mid front contextual nasal vowels lower, unless nasalization affects both front
and back vowels, in which case both front and back nasal vowels rise.
It follows that mid front contextual nasal vowel raising implies mid back contextual
nasal vowel raising. Otherwise, mid front contextual nasal vowels are lowered. It is
important to observe that a front–back asymmetry holds for all vowels: front vowels
The phonetics of Italian anaphonesis


are more likely to be lowered than back vowels, and the lowering of a back nasal
vowel in a language implies lowering of the corresponding front nasal vowel in the
language in question (Beddor ; Maddieson ). We will see throughout the
chapter that a sort of front–back asymmetry is also a peculiarity of the phonetic
phenomenon under investigation. Let us now turn speciﬁcally to the situation in
Latin and in Romance languages.
In the history of Latin, vowels were more or less strongly nasalized, since certain
phonological changes “seem to imply heightened vowel nasality” (Sampson :
–). In the pre-literary period, short mid vowels [e, o] were raised to [i, u] in the
context VNC, where the vowel precedes a nasal consonant which is followed by
another consonant: ŬNGUIS ‘nail’ (Clackson and Horrocks : ). Since the
raising of mid vowels is rare in non-nasal contexts, it may be attributed to the
nasality of the context and, consequently, to increased nasality in the vowel con-
cerned. Signiﬁcantly, on the basis of the number of exceptions to the raising action of
the different context types, it is possible to assume that the implementation of this
change began with mid vowels preceding [ŋ] (Sampson : ), since only two
forms fail to show raising before [ŋ] in the standard language: LŎNGUS ‘long’ and
TŎNGERE ‘to know’. LŬNGO and LŬN<GUM> are nevertheless attested in inscriptions and
were therefore presumably used in nonstandard varieties.
Phonemic vowel nasalization typically arose from the action of regressive assimi-
lation in French, Portuguese, several Northern Italian dialects, and a few varieties of
Sardinian (Harris and Vincent ; Sampson ). In other Romance languages—
literary Italian included—vowel nasalization appears to be of restricted importance: it
is not distinctive, and therefore should be considered as a mere coarticulatory effect
associated with the following nasal consonant. In these cases, vowel nasalization
seems to have some effects only before (certain) nasal clusters (Lausberg :
sections –), producing the neutralization of contrasts between the mid vowels
/ɛ/ ~ /e/ and /ɔ/ ~ /o/,¹ or between the mid-high and high vowels /e/ ~ /i/ and /o/ ~ /u/.
In Italian, Catalan, Castilian, and Portuguese, high vowels have developed where
mid-high vowels would be expected (Barbato ). Crucially, this sort of develop-
ment is subject to strong constraints. Among these is the presence of the velar nasal,
which comes into play in the phenomenon of anaphonesis in Italian, the subject of the
present contribution.
.Italian vowel system and anaphonesis
As is widely known, Italian is one of the most conservative Romance languages with
respect to Latin. The stressed vowel system is quite simple and is the consequence of
¹ As far as Italian is concerned, in syllables containing a nasal coda, stressed low-mid vowels [ɛ, ɔ] rose to
[e, o] (and in several cases, such raising might also be affected by the co-presence of a preceding nasal
consonant, thereby giving heightened nasality to the vowel; Sampson, pers. comm.): MĔNTE(M) > mente
/ˈmente/ ‘mind’, MĔNTU(M) > mento /ˈmento/ ‘chin’, PŎNTE(M) > ponte /ˈponte/ ‘bridge’, MŎNTE(M) > monte
/ˈmonte/ ‘mountain’. Actually, such raising appears rather irregular (at least on the front axis), since we
have dente /ˈdɛnte/ ‘teeth’, lente /ˈlɛnte/ ‘lens’, and gente /ˈdʒɛnte/ ‘people’ with a mid-low vowel.

Silvia Calamai

two phenomena: a) the loss of vowel length and b) the expansion of the aperture
distinction (Loporcaro a, b). Latin short vowels were pronounced with a
more open articulation than their long cognates. In the vowel system historically
underlying Italian, the short vowels (other than already maximally open [a])
enhanced these aperture distinctions: while long [iː] and [uː] retained their quality,
short [i] and [u] opened to [e] and [o], thereby merging with the reﬂexes of Latin
long [eː] and [oː]. In stressed syllables, short [e] and [o] assumed a low mid
articulation ([ɛ] and [ɔ]). The result was a symmetrical system with seven vowels:
/i e ɛ a ɔ o u/ (Loporcaro b).
This evolution is inhibited in two different contexts that are usually known by the
label of anaphonesis—a term coined by Castellani () to describe two different
phenomena that have often been confused in the literature (see Lausberg :
section ). The ﬁrst one (the so-called anafonesi del primo tipo, ‘anaphonesis of
the ﬁrst type’) occurs with a palatal sonorant as a coda (CONSĬLIU(M) > consiglio
‘suggestion’; GRAMĬNEA(M) > gramigna ‘Bermuda grass’) and is not the object of the
present study. The second type of sound change (anafonesi del secondo tipo, ‘ana-
phonesis of the second type’) can be described as follows: Latin Ĭ and Ŭ appear,
respectively, as [i] and [u], rather than as the regular [e] and [o], before a velar nasal
consonant (see ()):
()
vinco ‘I win’ < VĬNCO
punto ‘point’ < PŬNCTUM
lingua ‘tongue’ < LĬNGUA
unghia ‘ﬁngernail’ < ŬNGULA
Some peculiarities are worth underlining. First, the Italian forms lembo ‘hem’ <
LĬMBUM and rompo ‘I break’ < RŬMPO, together with entro ‘within’ < ĬNTRO, Old It.
and Tosc. endice ‘souvenir’ < ĬNDICE(M) prove that for Italian the presence of a velar
nasal consonant is a decisive factor, thus constituting a serious limitation with respect
to the universal patterns concerning phonological effects of nasalization on vowel
height (see Section .for more on this topic). In other words, since raising does not
involve different nasal consonants, we may argue that height change is a function of
both place of articulation and nasality. Second, the front context does not behave in
the same way as the velar context, since the raising [o] > [u] does not normally occur
when [ŋ] is followed by the voiceless consonant /k/:² tronco ‘trunk’ < TRŬNCU(M),
spelonca ‘cave’ < SPELŬNCA(M). Finally, it appears very similar to the development of
high vowels (instead of mid-high vowels) in the Ibero-Romance varieties, as it is
claimed in Sampson () and Barbato () (see Section .). As for the dating,
Castellani ([] : ) underlines the fact that raising applies to forms such as
VĬNCERE > vincere ‘to win’ and SPŌNGIA(M) > spugna ‘sponge’, where palatalization
occurs. Thus, anaphonesis is operative before or at the latest contemporaneously with
the palatalization of velar plosives. It remains productive into the period when the
Germanic sufﬁx -ING enters the language, yielding forms such as ramingo ‘vagarious’,
casalingo ‘domestic’. To sum up, this change appears to have been productive from
about the third century (or even before), and continued to be productive until at least
² With the only exception of giunco ‘reed’ < IŬNCU(M).
The phonetics of Italian anaphonesis


the sixth–seventh centuries. A different chronology is proposed by Barbato (): in
his view, anaphonesis is coeval with the evolution of the Romance vowel system.
From a geographical point of view, anaphonesis of the second type undoubtedly
affected the central area of Tuscany, including Florence, Prato, and Pistoia but also
Pisa and Lucca. At the beginning, the southern part of Tuscany (i.e., the areas of
Siena, Grosseto, and Arezzo) was not affected (Rohlfs [] : sections , ).
The absence of anaphonesis in some parole bandiera (that is, a commonly recognized
shibboleth or linguistic stereotype associated with speakers of a particular dialect) was
clearly used in order to identify the origin of the speakers: it is said that in the
sixteenth century, during the Guerra di Siena (‘war of Siena’), the inhabitants of Siena
were identiﬁed and consequently slain by Florentine troops on the basis of the fact
that they called a particular ﬁsh tenca ‘tench’ rather than tinca.³ Nowadays, the
Florentine patterns with anaphonesis have spread throughout the whole region,
although in some isolated rural communities lexical forms without anaphonesis
were preserved at least until the s or s (Paggini and Calamai ).
According to Giannelli ([] : ), in popular Florentine speech the words
containing /e, o/ in anaphonetic contexts are still not permissible. Nevertheless,
rather than raising these vowels to /i, u/, native speakers usually lower them to /ɛ, ɔ/.
The /-eŋɡo/ sufﬁx is therefore uttered [-ɛŋɡo] in toponyms and anthroponyms (e.g., the
surname Girardengo is pronounced Girard[ɛ]ngo, as it is proved by the production
experiment described in Section ..). Notwithstanding, such restriction turns out to
be effective with front more than with back vowels, and several vernaculars other than
Florentine do accept /e/ and /o/ in anaphonetic contexts (e.g., Nocentini : for
Arezzo speech) (see also Section ..for the comparison between Florentine and
Arezzo popular speech).
.Is anaphonesis a raising process or a conservative phenomenon?
The trigger for anaphonesis remains obscure. Paraphrasing Rohlfs, both types of
anaphonesis refer to a single process involving a special sort of metaphony, caused by
the raising of the tongue triggered by the following palatal [“La mutazione vocalica da
ẹ a i sarà stata presa per una specie di metafonia; e dipende da un innalzamento della
posizione della lingua provocato dalla palatale seguente”] (Rohlfs [] :
section ). This explanation appears somehow weak, since “it is not easy to
understand how metaphonic conditioning triggered by a following palatal consonant
could have operated on cases like lingua, tinca < LĬNGUA, TĬNCA where no palatal
consonant is present” (Sampson : ). It seems more likely that the two types of
anaphonesis—which Rohlfs brings together in his explanation—represent “originally
separate developments, even if their outcomes are similar” (Sampson : ). In
anaphonesis of the second type, “the inﬂuence of nasality has seemingly been the key
factor” (Sampson : –).
³ See for instance the testimony in Girolamo Gigli ([] ).

Silvia Calamai

In his paper on nasalization in Northern Italy, Tuttle () also deals with
anaphonesis of the second type. On the basis of the previous experimental phonetic
literature, he proposes the following explanation: the velar nasal leads to the highest
level of anticipatory nasalization, and from an acoustic point of view it appears to be
the weakest among the nasal consonants. As a consequence, vowels preceding velar
nasal clusters were lengthened and tensed, and thus closed.
Anaphonesis of the second type is considered by the great majority of scholars to
be a raising process (e.g., Lausberg ; Patota ). Nevertheless, the phenom-
enon can also be seen from a different point of view: that is to say, Florentine lingua
and fungo could be seen as conservative rather than innovative forms. In this view,
one might argue that only in the case of the /uŋk/ cluster has the passage Ŭ > [o]
regularly developed, with the presence of the velar nasal inhibiting the regular
lowering in all other cases (i.e., /iŋk/, /iŋɡ/, /uŋɡ/ clusters). Sampson () and
Barbato () are inclined to the conservation hypothesis. Although Sampson
(: –) concentrates on the Spanish forms tinto < TĬNCTU, punto < PŬNCTU,
he clearly claims that the acoustic and perceptual effects of nasalization might play
a role in the retention of Ĭ and Ŭ as high vowels [i] and [u] by preventing them
from opening. Likewise Sampson (: ) singles out the role of the velar nasal
with respect to the other nasals because of its acoustic features (i.e., higher nasal
formant):
Some increased level of nasality may be inferred as a contributory factor in raising, since a velar
non-nasal coda has no such raising effect. Thus, we have secco < SĬCCUM and in particular forms
like legno < LĬGNUM, where presumably there was an oral velar coda in the stressed syllable for
much of all the Empire period, the pronunciation being [ˈleɡnu] or [ˈleɣnu]. The developments
in Tuscan, where it is the velar nasal [ŋ] in particular which has triggered raising, replicate in a
striking way what happened in pre-Classical Latin, for here it was precisely the group [ŋn]
which evidently exerted a more powerful raising effect than other nasal groups with a non-
velar initial segment.
(Sampson : )
Barbato () offers a reassessment of anaphonesis from a Romance perspective,
recalling in closing the explanation proposed by Georges Straka and cited in
Castellani ([] : –) as a personal communication: considering the almost
total absence of [uŋk] and the regularity of [uŋɡ] in the Italian lexicon, precisely the
voiced postnasal consonant could have been the triggering factor in the raising
process. Continuing with this line of reasoning, we could add the following consid-
eration. It is known that the ﬁrst formant frequency does not acoustically specify
perceived vowel height when the frequencies of the two vowel formants are relatively
close, as in back vowels. In this case, the perceived height is partially determined by
the second formant (the well-known centroid effect). It has been found that nasal-
ization raises the centroid value of high and mid front but not that of back vowels; at
least for English, the differences between oral and nasal mid vowels show few
consistent effects (Beddor : ff.). Therefore we might speculate that, for
perceptual raising on the back axis to occur, the contribution of the voicing effect
of the postnasal, which may have a lowering effect on the ﬁrst formant offset of the
vowel (Crowther and Mann ), may be necessary.
The phonetics of Italian anaphonesis


.The experimental approach
As highlighted above, diachronic data indicate that anaphonesis of the second
type presents some irregularities, according to (a) the anteriority/posteriority of
the vowel, and (b) the voicing of the postnasal consonant. There is an evident
front–back asymmetry in the triggering words: front vowels are more prone to
anaphonesis than back vowels. Moreover, there appears to be an effect of the
postnasal consonant, since back vowels show anaphonesis only in the case of voiced
postnasal consonants (fungo vs. tronco). Two experiments were therefore designed
in order to verify:
i) whether the two asymmetries historically associated with anaphonesis (front–
back vowels, voiced–unvoiced postnasal) are nowadays present in dialects for
which anaphonesis is historically attested, absent in those for which it is not;
ii) if present, whether they show a diverse perceptual salience.
..The production experiment
In the Italian phonotactics, the presence of both high and mid-high vowels before
velar nasal clusters is admitted only on the back axis (e.g., tronco but also fungo),
while on the front axis /eŋk/ and /eŋɡ/ clusters are not admitted (tinca, lingua). That
is, before velar nasal clusters, the traditional Italian vowel system is reduced to ﬁve
elements instead of seven: /i, ɛ, a, o, u/. Crucially, mid vowels /ɛ, o/ are not
symmetrical with respect to tongue height.
In order to verify to what extent synchronic variation mirrors historical change, a
phonetic survey among Florentine and Arezzo speakers was run. Arezzo speakers
were used as a control sample since the Arezzo area was historically free from
anaphonesis (Castellani ; Giannelli [] ; Nocentini ) and usually
admit /e/ and /o/ before velar nasal (see Section .). The working hypothesis is that
also present-day Florentine speakers do not admit [eŋk]–[eŋɡ] clusters, preferring
the corresponding mid-low vowel, whereas they are more permissive toward the
back side, admitting [oŋk] clusters, and—to a consistent lesser extent—also [oŋɡ]
clusters. In this view, in Florentine dialect, one would expect the simultaneous
presence of mid-low, mid-high, and high vowels before nasal velar clusters to be
admitted only on the back axis showing the following system: /i, ɛ, a, ɔ, o, u/. Arezzo
speakers, on the contrary, would admit words with mid-high vowels in both series
(/i, e, ɛ, a, ɔ, o, u/).
A phonetic questionnaire containing ﬁfteen words was built in order to assess the
present-day real pronunciation of stressed vowels before velar clusters. The words in
the questionnaire were chosen according to the following criteria. First, the surnames
and the toponyms mentioned in the literature (Castellani [] ; Giannelli
[] ; Larson ) were included: Longo, Marengo, Cottolengo, Girardengo,
Castellonchio, and Lonco. Second, a group of nouns containing Latin -UNC- clusters
(thus, nouns that do not manifest anaphonesis) were selected: bofonchio ‘gripe’
(< *BUFUNCULU), carbonchio ‘anthrax’ (< CARBUNCULU), roncola ‘pruning hook’ (from
the verb RUNCĀRE), and spelonca ‘cavern’ (< SPELUNCA). Finally, the words mongolo

Silvia Calamai

‘Mongolian’, gongola ‘gloat-SG.INDIC’, and vongola ‘clam’ were added although
they do not have an anaphonetic origin, in order to verify whether the context with a
voiced postnasal consonant elicited a mid-low or mid-high vowel (on the front axis,
also arengo ‘assembly’ and ﬂamenco ‘ﬂamenco’ were inserted).⁴ Fifty subjects from
Florence and ﬁfty subjects from Arezzo answered the phonetic questionnaire in the
presence of the researcher: they all read aloud the word list and had to choose
between an open or a closed pronunciation of the stressed vowel.⁵ Two well-
known minimal pairs of the Italian language (i.e., p[e]sca ‘ﬁshing’ vs. p[ɛ]sca
‘peach’; b[ɔ]tte ‘hits’ vs. b[o]tte ‘barrel’) were described at the beginning of the test
in order to draw the subjects’ attention to the pronunciation of the stressed vowels of
the word list.⁶
It was anticipated that all the clusters would be admitted among Arezzo speakers.
On the other hand, among Florentine speakers a scale of acceptability was postulated,
according to the vowel and the postnasal consonant, as shown in Table ..
The distribution of the answers showed a clear effect of the anteriority/posteriority
of the vowel before the velar cluster (see Table .). Among Arezzo speakers, mid-low
and mid-high vowels were equally possible on the front side. On the back side, a
stronger preference toward the mid-high vowel can be identiﬁed (seventy-eight
percent vs. twenty-one percent). On the contrary, among Florence speakers the
front mid-high vowel was extremely rare (six percent vs. ninety-three percent),
while on the back axis both outcomes were possible (with a rather solid preference
toward the mid-high vowel: sixty-four percent vs. thirty-ﬁve percent).
In the Florentine sample, the distribution of the answers split by the factors Place,
Vowel, and Postnasal consonant showed that, only in the case of back vowels
T.Scale of acceptability of velar clusters
place
[eŋk] / [eŋɡ]
[oŋk]
[oŋɡ]
Florence *
fully admissible partially admitted
Arezzo
fully admissible fully admissible fully admissible
⁴ The selected nouns are attested in the CoLFIS corpus (Bertinetto, Burani, Laudanna, Marconi, Ratti,
Rolando, and Thornton ), from which several statistical and distributional properties of the clusters
under investigation can be derived.
Given the uneven distribution of the clusters under investigation in the Italian lexicon, the selected
words of the questionnaire were not balanced for vowel quality and voicing of the postnasal consonants. In
the tables percentages are given. Unanswered questions are not displayed, being rather sporadic.
⁵ Several demographic characteristics of the respondents (e.g., year of birth, sex, cultural level) were
collected. In the sample from Arezzo, twenty subjects were female and thirty were male; ages ranged
between ten and eighty-four. In the sample from Florence, thirty-three subjects were female and seventeen
were male; ages ranged between twelve and eighty. In both samples, educational levels achieved ranged
from the ﬁfth grade of elementary school to a master’s degree.
⁶ This strategy proved to be particularly useful in the case of uncultivated or old informants (e.g., “Do
you pronounce Marengo with the e of pesca ‘ﬁshing’ or with the e of pesca ‘peach’?”).
The phonetics of Italian anaphonesis


followed by voiced postnasals, mid-low and mid-high vowels were almost equally
possible, whereas in the Arezzo sample the distribution of the answers between mid-
high and mid-low did not vary signiﬁcantly according to the voicing factor: that is, in
both cases, mid-high vowels were preferred (see Table .).
Among Florentine speakers, in the back axis there was a clear bias toward the mid-
high vowel in the case of the unvoiced postnasal (e.g., bofonchio, carbonchio, Lonco as
It. tronco), thus conﬁrming our hypothesis. Signiﬁcantly, when the postnasal is
voiced, the answers were equally distributed between the two possibilities, proving
the simultaneous presence of mid-high and mid-low vowels on the back side. In
other words, the answers with back mid-high vowel were overall less common in the
case of [ŋɡ] clusters than in the case of [ŋk] ones, since when a voiced postnasal
consonant is in this back context anaphonesis is fairly active.
To summarize, the phonetic survey carried out among the two samples of speakers
proved that in Florentine vernacular speech [eŋk] and [eŋɡ] are still not admitted,
unlike [oŋk] and—to a lesser extent—[oŋɡ], thus mirroring the asymmetry between
front and back vowels that has been observed in the process of anaphonesis. On the
contrary, Arezzo speakers largely admit mid-high vowel outcomes, not only on
T.Percentage
of
the
answers according to the factors
Place and Vowel before the velar
cluster
place
vowel mid-low mid-high
Florence front
[ɛ]
[e]
back
[ɔ]
[o]
Arezzo
front
[ɛ]
[e]
back
[ɔ]
[o]
T.Percentage of the answers according to
the factors Place, Vowel, and Postnasal consonant
place
vowel
postnasal
mid-low
mid-high
Florence
front
unvoiced
voiced
back
unvoiced
voiced
[ɛ]
[ɛ]
[ɔ]
[ɔ]
[e]
[e]
[o]
[o]
Arezzo
front
unvoiced
voiced
back
unvoiced
voiced
[ɛ]
[ɛ]
[ɔ]
[ɔ]
[e]
[e]
[o]
[o]

Silvia Calamai

the back side but also on the front, thus envisaging a robust difference between the
Arezzo dialect, which is historically free from anaphonesis, and the Florentine dialect.
..The perceptual experiment
It has been observed that shifts in nasal vowel height originate with the listener
(Section .), who attributes some of the complex acoustic consequences of nasal
coupling to changes in tongue height. In doing this, the listener perceives nasal
vowels as higher or lower than their non-nasal counterparts. To verify the presence
of perceptual effects of nasalization on vowel height, a perception experiment was
designed. The aim was twofold: i) to verify whether nasal clusters activate perceptual
raising of the previous vowel, regardless of the place of articulation of the postnasal
consonant (velar /k/, /ɡ/ vs. alveolar /t/, /d/, considered as control samples), and ii) to
verify whether front/back and/or voicing effects are at work in both series, velar and
alveolar. As for (i), it was assumed that high vowels would be plainly perceived as high
vowels in the overwhelming majority of cases. In the case of mid-high vowels, the
scenario was expected to be more complex. It was hypothesized that perceptual raising
might be at work in both series—alveolar and velar—according to the universal
patterns of vowel nasalization, or, alternatively, that the place of articulation of the
postnasal might assume a relevant role, thus differentiating the alveolar clusters from
the velar ones. As for (ii), it was assumed that among the alveolar clusters no vowel or
postnasal effect would be observed, while both factors were expected to be potentially
relevant with regard to velar clusters. That is, it was expected that the highest rate of
misperception appeared in the [oŋk]–[uŋk] clusters, where historically the phenom-
enon of anaphonesis is rather irregular.
Pseudowords with VNC clusters were read in isolation at a comfortable rate in a
carrier sentence by a Florentine middle-aged male speaker: the VNC clusters varied
for vowel height (mid-high vs. high) and front–back dimension (front vs. back); place
of articulation (velar vs. alveolar), and voicing (voiceless vs. voiced) of the postnasal
consonant. VNC clusters from the collected pseudowords were segmented and
sixteen word fragments were isolated, with the duration of the vowel limited to the
twenty-ﬁve percent of the ﬁnal part, as this was the part in which more nasalization
occurs. The word fragments with mid-high vowels were [ent], [end], [eŋk], [eŋɡ],
[ont], [ond], [oŋk], and [oŋɡ] (as test items), and the word fragments with high
vowels were [int], [ind], [iŋk], [iŋɡ], [unt], [und], [uŋk], and [uŋɡ] (as control items).
A forced-choice identiﬁcation task was run by means of Presentation® program
(Version .). Subjects were instructed to listen to a word fragment (e.g., [oŋk])
and to identify the stimulus, and press either of the keys Alt or AltGr on the laptop
keyboard to indicate that the fragment corresponded to the one written on the left
(e.g., ONK) or on the right of the screen (e.g., UNK), respectively. The visualization of
the two possible clusters was synchronized with the audio.⁷ All the stimuli were
⁷ The maximum value of the interstimulus interval (ISI) was set at ,ms, with ,ms of black
screen (without sound) between the subject’s response and the following stimulus, and a maximum of
,ms for listening to each stimulus, the visualization of the clusters on the screen, and the subject’s
response.
The phonetics of Italian anaphonesis


randomized and the random ordering of stimuli was different for each subject in the
listening experiment. In order to familiarize the subjects with the task, eight stimuli
were added at the beginning of the series as training items. Each subject listened to
the same stimulus seven nonconsecutive times. In this way, a total of stimuli were
presented to each subject. Since according to the results of the production experiment
described in Section ..the variety spoken in the Arezzo area showed a percentage
of [eŋk]–[eŋɡ] and [oŋk]–[oŋɡ] answers (that is, of mid-high vowels) always greater
than (or equal to) ﬁfty percent, subjects were chosen entirely among Arezzo speakers.
In other words, all the clusters under investigation in the experiment were possible in
the Arezzo vernacular speech, thus avoiding a bias toward high vowels that could in
principle alter the results. The stimuli were presented to sixty listeners; none of them
reported a history of speech, language, or hearing disorders.⁸ The listening test was
done separately online by each subject in a silent room of the Department of
Education, Human Sciences, and Intercultural Communication in Arezzo, and sub-
jects wore professional earphones when listening to the stimuli. One listening session
took about ten minutes (with an optional pause after listening to sixty stimuli).
The results were pooled across ﬁfty-nine subjects and ,answers. As for the
control items, percentages displayed in Tables .and .show that high vowels were
for the great majority labeled as high vowels, on both the alveolar and the velar side.
It is worth noting that in the case of the alveolar clusters, the percentage of correct
responses was the highest (always more than eighty percent), while in the case of
velar clusters the percentage does not exceed seventy-ﬁve percent. The lowest rate
appeared precisely among the [uŋk] clusters, which were misperceived as [oŋk] in
twenty-eight percent of cases.
The picture was remarkably different as far as test items were concerned, where a
robust perceptual raising was at work and the percentage of misidentiﬁcations was
T.Confusion matrix for the alveolar clusters–high vowels
(control items–percentage values)
Responses by listeners
Sound that was played
[ent] [int] [end] [ind] [ont] [unt] [ond]
[und]
[int]


[ind]


[unt]


[und]


The real stimulus is shown in the ﬁrst column label, and the listener’s perceived vowel is shown in the
row label.
⁸ One subject was discarded for technical reasons. Several demographic characteristics of the listeners
(e.g., year of birth, sex, cultural level) were collected. Thirty-ﬁve subjects were female and twenty-four were
male; ages ranged between nineteen and sixty-seven; educational levels achieved ranged from the ﬁfth
grade of elementary school to a master’s degree.

Silvia Calamai

T.Confusion matrix for the velar clusters–high vowels (control
items–percentage values)
Responses by listeners
Sound that was played
[eŋk] [iŋk]
[eŋɡ]
[iŋɡ]
[oŋk] [uŋk]
[oŋɡ]
[uŋɡ]
[iŋk]


[iŋɡ]


[uŋk]


[uŋɡ]


The real stimulus is shown in the ﬁrst column label, and the listener’s perceived vowel is shown in the
row label.
T.Confusion matrix for the alveolar clusters–mid-high vowels
(test items–percentage values)
Responses by listeners
Sound that was played
[ent]
[int]
[end]
[ind]
[ont]
[unt]
[ond]
[und]
[ent]


[end]


[ont]


[ond]


The real stimulus is shown in the ﬁrst column label, and the listener’s perceived vowel is shown in the
row label.
T.Confusion matrix for the velar clusters–mid-high vowels (test
items–percentage values)
Responses by listeners
Sound that was played
[eŋk] [iŋk] [eŋɡ] [iŋɡ] [oŋk] [uŋk] [oŋɡ]
[uŋɡ]
[eŋk]


[eŋɡ]


[oŋk]


[oŋɡ]


The real stimulus is shown in the ﬁrst column label, and the listener’s perceived vowel is shown in the
row label.
The phonetics of Italian anaphonesis


clearly higher than the percentage of correct identiﬁcations. In the case of mid-high
vowels, at least seventy-eight percent of alveolar clusters were labeled as high, with
no substantial differences between front and back vowels, nor between voiced
and unvoiced postnasals (see Table .). In the velar cluster, perceptual raising was
much less evident, and the highest rate of misperception appeared in the [oŋk]–[uŋk]
clusters (see Table .).
Misperception of mid-high vowels is reduced in nasal + velar clusters, yet the
misperception of high vowels increases in the same consonantal environment. Since
mid-high vowels before nasal + velar clusters were overall better identiﬁed than the
ones before nasal + alveolar clusters, we could argue that clear evidence of the raising
effect of a nasal sound in a cluster was shown only in the case of nasal + alveolar
clusters, that is, in a context which does not present anaphonesis in Italian. Although
more analyses are certainly needed, all these data could be seen as an indirect
evidence of anaphonesis as a conservative phenomenon.
.Discussion and conclusion
The features of anaphonesis appear to be somehow cyclical. Sampson (: )
underlines the striking similarity between the mid-vowel raising before the [ŋ]
+consonant sequence that occurred in pre-literary Latin and Florentine anaphonesis,
also “suggesting the possibility that the Tuscan development may represent the ﬁnal
stages of this Latin change.” From a general point of view, such a similarity can also
be seen as evidence of the Florentine matrix of the Italian language and, likewise, of
the strong proximity of the Florentine variety to Latin: in this view, anaphonesis is
therefore a feature which distinguishes Italian with respect to other Italo-Romance
dialects (Maiden ; Patota ). Constraints similar to those of anaphonesis are
at work also in the Ibero-Romance languages; it is thus possible to envisage a clear
areal distribution, with Ibero-Romance and Tuscan as conservative areas and French
and Northern Italian dialects as innovative ones (Barbato ).
Many aspects of anaphonesis are clearly in need of further research. Crucially, the
weakness of the sporadic explanations advanced by some scholars lies in the lack of
experimental data speciﬁcally designed to understand the dynamics of the clusters
under investigation. A full comprehension of anaphonesis must incorporate insights
from many areas of linguistics, including historical linguistics, Romance philology,
experimental phonetics, and dialectology. The fact that anaphonesis appears to be a
“weak phonetic law” or a sort of “opposition” (Barbato ) to the general lowering
of Ĭ and Ŭ does not exempt researchers from searching for a balanced explanation,
one that accounts for the temporal, acoustic, aerodynamic, and perceptual dimen-
sions involved in the sound change in question. These dimensions may come
together to create constraints that shape the phenomenon in various ways. Let us
consider, for instance, the case of durational aspects. Within Italo-Romance nasal
clusters, the shorter the nasal, the longer the vowel (Tuttle ). Moreover, vowels
before nasal clusters with unvoiced postnasal consonants were as long as those in an
open syllable, while vowels before nasal clusters with voiced postnasal consonants
were as short as those in a closed syllable (Fava and Magno Caldognetto ; Celata
and Calamai ). Duration values certainly play a part, but the percentage of

Silvia Calamai

nasalization in the stressed vowel—which may vary according to the vowel quality
and the voicing of the postnasal—likewise appears relevant (Beddor ).⁹ Lastly, it
is worth mentioning the acoustic effects of velum lowering in the preceding vowel,
usually associated with the raising of the second formant and the lowering of the ﬁrst
formant (Stevens : ; Baker, Mielke, and Archangeli ).
Although the present study is exploratory in nature, and any conclusive state-
ments must await further experimental research, some tentative conclusions may be
advanced. Anaphonesis does not represent a case of the universal pattern of nasal-
ization: it appears, instead, to be a more “local” phenomenon in which the height
change appears to be a function of nasal place of articulation rather than nasality tout
court. First, in very few segments of Italian phonology have nasals in clusters
exercised a considerable inﬂuence on patterns of vowel evolution: the phonetic effects
of nasals in consonantal clusters appear to be to some degree weak and only in the
case of nasal velar clusters do they seem clearly detectable. Second, had the effect of
nasalization in the preceding vowel been the key factor, a “place of articulation” effect
should have been absent in the perceptual experiment. On the contrary, our results
show that mid-high vowels before nasal + velar clusters were overall better identiﬁed
than the ones before nasal + alveolar clusters. In addition, anaphonesis highlights a
complex interaction between voicing of the postnasal consonant and vowel quality,
which is proved not only by the history of the Italian language but also by Florentine
vernacular speech. In the triggering contexts for anaphonesis, Florentine vernacular
speech synchronically mirrors the asymmetry between front and back vowels that
has been observed all through the history of Italian. Crucially, the simultaneous
presence of [oŋk] and [uŋɡ] clusters in the Italian lexicon is mirrored both in
synchrony and to a certain extent also in perception. In Florentine vernacular speech
[oŋk] clusters are admitted, while [eŋk] clusters are considered almost impossible. In
the perceptual domain, [oŋk]–[uŋk] clusters showed the highest rate of mispercep-
tion: they are precisely the clusters that appear to be somehow singular with respect
to the others ([iŋk], [iŋɡ], [uŋk])—whatever the origin of anaphonesis may be.
Acknowledgments
I wish to thank Laurie J. Anderson, Marcello Barbato, Pier Marco Bertinetto, Chiara Celata,
Reza Falahati, Luciano Giannelli, Pär Larson, Giovanna Marotta, Giuseppe Patota, Rodney
Sampson, and Luigi Talamo. I also would like to thank the editors and the anonymous reviewers
for their suggestions and comments. Any errors or shortcomings are entirely my own.
Chiara Bertini (Laboratorio di Linguistica, Scuola Normale Superiore-Pisa) helped me with
the building of the perceptual experiment. Valentina Paggini helped me in ﬁnding the subjects
from Arezzo.
⁹ The experimental work carried out by Calamai and Celata () on Florentine Italian showed that:
i) vowels before velar nasal consonant cluster were signiﬁcantly more nasalized than vowels before alveolar
nasal consonant cluster; ii) in [ŋ] + /k, ɡ/ clusters, the percentage of nasalization differed signiﬁcantly
across vowel contexts; iii) the percentage of nasalization was partly dependent on vowel duration; and
iv) the percentage of nasalization was signiﬁcantly greater before [ŋg] than before [ŋk]—thus supporting
the hypothesis that the properties of the speech signal which might have triggered Florentine anaphonesis
in the past are present as synchronic variation in a laboratory speech corpus.
The phonetics of Italian anaphonesis


4
A crosslinguistic study of voiceless
fricative sibilants in Galician and
European Portuguese
XOSÉ LUÍS REGUEIRA FERNÁNDEZ
AND MARÍA JOSÉ GINZO
.Introduction
The ﬁrst spectrum analyses of fricative consonants were undertaken at an early date
(Hughes and Halle ; Heinz and Stevens ), though the ﬁrst studies to usher in
important breakthroughs did not come until much later, beginning with Forrest,
Weismer, Milenkovic, and Dougall (). Most such studies examined English
fricatives (see Gordon, Barthmaier, and Sands : and the references therein),
although other languages have been considered more recently. Gordon, Barthmaier,
and Sands () surveys fricatives in seven languages from different language
families, while Żygis () examines ﬁve Slavic languages. More recently, fricatives
in other languages such as Welsh (Jones and Nolan ), Belarusian (Zeller ),
and Greek (Nirgianaki ) have been examined.
There have been few studies of fricatives in the Romance languages. Portu-
guese was covered by Lacerda () in an acoustic-perceptive study, followed by
Jesus and Shadle (), and later Andrade and Slifka (). For Galician,
following descriptive studies using spectrograms and linear predictive coding
(LPC) that produced few conclusive results (Martínez Mayo ; Formoso
Gosende ; Rodríguez Álvarez ), Labraña Barrero (, , )
carried out a larger-scale study of fricatives in several regions of Galicia, differ-
entiating between [ʃ] and three types of [s] (S, S, and S), which are identiﬁed
with two places of articulation: alveolar (Sand S) and dento-alveolar (S).
Regueira Fernández (), using spectral proﬁles and center-of-gravity calcula-
tions, examined variation in fricative realization in a variety of Galician that has
both lamino-alveolar [s] and lamino-dental [s̪] fricatives, as well as the lamino-
postalveolar [ʃ].
Romance Phonetics and Phonology. First edition. Mark Gibson and Juana Gil (eds.)
This chapter © Xosé Luís Regueira Fernández and María José Ginzo . First published by Oxford
University Press.

In this chapter we examine Galician and Portuguese voiceless fricative sibilants
using a broader sample of informants than is usual in such studies. While Andrade
and Slifka () had two informants, Jesus and Shadle () had four, and Labraña
Barrero (, , ) had ten, we used seventeen Galician speakers and twenty-
two Portuguese speakers (see Section ..). One of our objectives, then, is to study
intralinguistic variation in the production of these fricatives, which is something not
yet widely studied using acoustic methods. This will also make comparisons possible
between Galician and Portuguese: such a comparison is of interest in itself given the
close relationship between these two languages. It is precisely in their phonological
and phonetic systems where both standard languages diverge most obviously
(Álvarez Blanco ). Traditional dialectology has shown that there is a territorial
continuity between Galician and Portuguese regarding phonological and lexical
features (Cintra ; Álvarez Pérez ); that information has been supplemented
and updated in works such as Dubert García and Sousa Fernández (), as well as
Álvarez Pérez (, ), among others. Recent studies comparing aspects of
Galician and Portuguese phonetics including unstressed ﬁnal vowels (Regueira
Fernández ), nasalization (Regueira Fernández ), and intonation (Moutinho,
Coimbra, and E. Fernández Rei ; E. Fernández Rei, Moutinho, and Coimbra ,
among others), have revealed complex relationships involving some similar behaviors
and continuities in the two languages but also some rather divergent ones. This is
hardly surprising in view of the contrasting sociolinguistic situations of the two
languages (Galician is treated as a minority language in relation to Spanish, whereas
Portuguese is the ofﬁcial language of a state), yet the survival of continuities despite
centuries of linguistic isolation between the language communities is worthy of
scholarly attention.
We shall see in Section .that there are also such partial continuities in the
system of sibilants, but that features diverging from the standard varieties
are receding or disappearing. The sibilant systems of certain Galician varieties that
are similar to forms of Portuguese in some respects are losing ground in Galicia, as
they are being replaced by the standard Galician system and are inﬂuenced by
Spanish. In this project, rather than focusing on the most conservative forms, we
studied young university students (except for two of the Galician speakers). Our
informants were native speakers of either of the two languages examined, who come
from a variety of places in Galicia and the north of Portugal. This information
allows us to see whether the shift from local language varieties to the standard
language is already complete, or whether, on the contrary, the uniform descriptions
given of the standard varieties conceal a signiﬁcant degree of variation in the
realization of sibilants.
.Galician and Portuguese sibilants
One of the most striking divergences in the development of Galician and Portuguese
concerns the system of sibilant fricatives: two distinct systems have emerged in
Portuguese and Galician (see for example Lorenzo ; Cardeira ). Table .
summarizes these divergent developments.
Voiceless fricative sibilants in Portuguese


As Table .shows, present-day Portuguese has two pairs of sibilants differenti-
ated by place of articulation and voicing, while Galician has three fricatives
and no voicing opposition. In both languages there is no phonological contrast in
coda position: where in Portuguese a palatal /ʃ/ is found, in Galician an apical
/s̺/ appears.
The dialect situation is more complex than that shown in the table. Portuguese /s/
and /z/ are usually described as predorso-alveolar (Barbosa : ) or lamino-
alveolar (Emiliano : ), although Mateus and d’Andrade (: ) state that
they are “produced in the dento-alveolar region.” There are, however, conservative
dialectal varieties in the north of Portugal that still have a system that is similar to the
medieval one, with two pairs of sibilants in the alveolar region: “a laminal pair and an
apical pair . . . In terms of the passive articulators, it is said that the former are dental
([s̪], [z̪]) and that the latter are alveolar” (Mateus and d’Andrade : ). This
system is one of the features used by Cintra () to draw the boundaries between
dialect varieties in the north of the continental Portuguese language area, although he
also records another system with a single pair of voiceless and voiced apico-alveolar
sibilants (). Cintra’s data, which are from the surveys of the Atlas Lingüístico de la
Península Ibérica (ALPI), were checked by Álvarez Pérez (), who shows that the
vitality of the apico-alveolar pronunciations is unequal and often limited in these
data collected in Portugal between and . A comparison with the data
collected for the Atlas Linguarum Europae (ALE) (in surveys carried out in )
by Martins and Saramago () shows the four-sibilant system to be receding so fast
that it was recorded as stable in only two localities.
The twenty-two informants consulted for our study are from areas in northern
Portugal, including many of the districts formerly noted as retaining apico-alveolar
sibilants. However, when asked about differences between the speech variety of
their home district (such as Chaves, Bragança, Barcelos, Montalegre, or Pinhel)
and standard Portuguese, they mentioned the lack of a /b/ : /v/ opposition and
some other phonetic features almost unanimously, yet showed no awareness of any
difference in the pronunciation of sibilants, even when asked directly.
The situation in Galician with regard to the sibilants is complicated too. Besides
the standard system with /θ/ (see Table .), where the alveolar sibilant is always
T.Development
of
the
sibilant
system
from
medieval
Galician-
Portuguese to modern standard Portuguese and Galician
Galician-Portuguese (medieval)
Portuguese (standard)
Galician (standard)
Voiceless
Voiced
Voiceless
Voiced
Voiceless
[t͡s] > [s]
paço ‘mansion’
[d͡z] > [z]
cozer ‘to boil’
[s]
paço
[z]
cozer
[θ]
pazo, cocer
[s̺]
passo ‘step’
[z̺]
coser ‘to sew’
passo
coser
[s̺]
paso, coser
[ʃ]
queixo ‘chin’
[ʒ]
queijo ‘cheese’
[ʃ]
queixo
[ʒ]
queijo
[ʃ]
queixo, queixo

X. L. Regueira Fernández and M. J. Ginzo

described as apical (e.g., ALGa ; Regueira Fernández ; Álvarez Blanco and
Xove ), there are other systems including that which F. Fernández Rei (:
) calls “galego con seseo predorsodental” (‘Galician with predorso-dental
seseo’). These varieties present only two sibilants: a lamino-alveolar /s/ (as in
caza ‘hunt’, casa ‘house’) and a lamino-postalveolar /ʃ/ (as in caixa ‘box’), so
that the phonological opposition of the standard language between /s/ and /θ/ is
not found, and thus from the perspective of the standard speakers /θ/ is pro-
nounced as /s/ (seseo). In word-ﬁnal position the apico-alveolar realization [s̺] (voz
‘voice’, vós ‘you, pl.’) is usually found, although in some places an apico-postalveolar
fricative occurs (González González ), represented with [ʂ] (Vidal Figueroa
). So in this respect, the system of these varieties resembles standard Portuguese
except for the lack of a voice opposition (note also that [ʂ] is auditorily and
acoustically very similar to [ʃ]; see Section .). This system has been observed
to be very unstable (González González ), and shows a tendency to depa-
latalize the postalveolar fricative ([ʃ] > [ʂ] ~ [s̺]). In another study (Regueira
Fernández ), realizations of the front sibilant in these varieties were shown
to exhibit important variations in both syllable onset and coda. In onset position
lamino-alveolar sibilants are mostly found, with some speakers also using
lamino-dental pronunciations. Syllable-ﬁnally, fricatives close to [ʃ] appear,
corresponding to apico-alveolar and apico-postalveolar realizations, while other
speakers realized fricatives similar to [s].
Important changes are taking place in these Galician varieties that affect the
sibilant systems (González González ; Regueira Fernández , ),
involving social and economic changes that the communities where these dialects
are spoken are undergoing, along with increasing contact with both standard
Galician and Spanish (Regueira Fernández ). The sibilant system called seseo
is one typical feature of dialect speech, especially when rural; within those speech
varieties the lamino-dental realizations are even more stigmatized. Given, as
seen, that the Portuguese region is also undergoing replacement of local speech
varieties by the standard variety, linguistic diversity in this area is rapidly
diminishing as society becomes increasingly urbanized and traditional culture
is replaced. Thus, the continuity between Galician and Portuguese language
forms that still existed in the rurally based traditional culture, as registered in
standard works of dialectology (such as the language atlases and studies of rural
speech produced in past decades) is disappearing to a great extent. One inter-
esting aspect of the present study is the insight that it provides into how
phonetic differences across the border are being intensiﬁed by these cultural
and social changes.
.Method
..Questionnaire and informants
For this study, Galician speakers recorded answers to a questionnaire that aimed to
detect the pronunciation of fricatives corresponding to the standard /θ/, /s̺/, and /ʃ/ in
initial position before stressed vowels /i, a, u/ (cinco, standard pronunciation [ˈθiŋkʊ]
Voiceless fricative sibilants in Portuguese


‘ﬁve’, sidra [ˈs̺ið̞ɾɐ] ‘cidre’, xira [ˈʃiɾɐ] ‘(it) spins’, etc.); a front-mid vowel (which
could be either /e/ or /ɛ/: cero [ˈθɛɾʊ] ‘zero’, sete [ˈs̺ɛtɪ] ‘seven’, xente [ˈʃen̪tɪ] ‘people’,
etc.); and another of the back-mid vowels (either /o/ or /ɔ/: zocas [ˈθɔkɐs̺] ‘clogs’, sol
[ˈs̺ɔl] ‘sun’, xogo [ˈʃɔɣ̞ʊ] ‘game’, etc.). The inclusion of two different front- and back-
mid vowels is due to the scarcity of examples preceded and followed by low-mid and
by high-mid vowels. In intervocalic position, preceded and followed by the same
vowel (/i_i/, etc.) wherever possible, with stress on the second vowel (oﬁcina,
standard pronunciation [ɔﬁˈθinɐ] ‘ofﬁce’, invisible [imbiˈs̺iβ̞lɪ] ‘invisible’, corrixir
[koriˈʃiɾ] ‘to correct’, etc.). Fricatives were also recorded in word-ﬁnal position
following the same set of ﬁve stressed vowels (nariz [naˈɾiθ] ‘nose’, anís [aˈnis̺] ‘anisette’,
etc.). Each word was repeated twice, so we obtained twenty samples of each sibilant in
onset (ten ininitial position and ten inmedialposition) and ten inﬁnal position. In areas
that have seseo (indicated later in this section), given that the realizations corresponding
etymologically to /θ/ and /s̺/ constitute a single sibilant (Regueira Fernández ), the
numberoftokensofthat sibilantisdoubled.ForthePortuguesespeakers(describedlater
in this section), a questionnaire following similar criteria was designed, and samples
were obtained from each informant. Samples comprise forty tokens of the front sibilant,
twenty of /ʃ/, and twenty of the sibilant in ﬁnal-word position.
Informants for this study were young adults from diverse places of origin, prefer-
ably small towns and villages, with a university education. All had intense exposure
to the standard language both as students and in their day-to-day life. The only
exceptions were two Galician informants with no university education, who, in a
previous study (Regueira Fernández ), were found to be resistant to change and
to maintain the traditional system of their local area (Mazaricos), even though their
lifestyles are no longer traditional: they are members and employees of a modern
agricultural ﬁrm. They were included in the study in order to compare their realiza-
tions of the seseo variety with those of other Galician and Portuguese informants.
Seventeen Galician informants (nine female and eight male) between twenty-two
and thirty-ﬁve years old took part in the study. Given the dialect situation described
above, we chose eight individuals (four female and four male) from the seseo area
located in the west of Coruña province (from the town districts of Dumbría,
Mazaricos, and Negreira). The remaining seven informants were from other areas:
A Terra Chá (in Lugo province), Santiago de Compostela and Touro (in Coruña
province), Leiro and Xinzo de Limia (in Ourense province), and Hermisende (in
Zamora). These latter two are both located near the Portuguese border.
Informants were asked to use their usual informal pronunciation in their regional
or local dialect variety. Notwithstanding, young Galician speakers are well aware of
the stigma attached to the seseo, which is considered rural and inappropriate in
formal speech. Some of the informants even told us that they felt uncomfortable
using that variety in the recording. Hence, to avoid the risk that reading the
questionnaire might tend to favor the production of responses in standard Galician,
replies were elicited using pictures (showing a picture and asking ‘What is that?’,
or ‘What is it/he/she doing?’).
As for Portuguese, the twenty-two informants (eleven female and eleven male)
were university-educated and aged between nineteen and thirty-three, nineteen of

X. L. Regueira Fernández and M. J. Ginzo

them from districts in the north of Portugal (Braga, Vila Real, Bragança, Porto,
Aveiro, Viseu, and Guarda) and three from the center of the country (Leiria,
Santarém, and Lisbon districts). In this case words were read from a list, since the
informants themselves did not perceive any difference between their fricatives and
those of the standard language; it has been shown in other studies that Portuguese
speakers do not modify their pronunciation of these fricatives when reading (Martins
and Saramago : ).
..Procedure
The recordings were made using a Shure SMA headset microphone and a Marantz
PDMrecorder with a sampling frequency of kHz, with a -bit resolution.
Acoustic analysis was carried out using the Kay Elemetrics Multi-Speech platform.
StatisticalanalyseswereperformedusingR(Rversion..),therelevantpackagesbeing
e1071 (Meyer, Dimitriadou, Hornik, Weingessel, and Leisch ), nortest (Gross
and Ligges ), car (Fox and Weisberg ), and energy (Rizzo and Szekely).
For each sample, a ms spectrum of the central part of the fricative, from to 
kHz, was measured. Although some studies indicate that sibilant articulation is
dynamic in nature, i.e., sibilants vary both articulatorily and acoustically in the course
of their production, it has also been found that this variation is less pronounced in
syllable-initial position (Munson ), and that the articulators reach their closest
distance at the center of the sibilant (Iskarous, Shadle, and Proctor ). Shadle
and Mair () have shown that in intervocalic position sibilants’ center of gravity
remains fairly constant, while Iskarous, Shadle, and Proctor (), when studying
the production of /s/ in English, indicate that in prevocalic position the degree and
location of closure stay relatively constant throughout the consonant. In her study of
Greek fricatives, Elina Nirgianaki (), following an analysis of the results for
different moments in three windows (at the beginning, middle, and end of the
fricative), concludes that “in general, across moments, window location (middle)
contained the most distinctive information regarding the fricative place of articula-
tion [sic]” (: ). Using a ms window at the center of the fricative, Jong-
man, Wayland, and Wong () were able to distinguish the place of articulation of
English fricatives, as did Zeller () for Belarusian; Gordon, Barthmaier, and Sands
() for seven languages from different families, and as Regueira Fernández ()
has done in a previous study of Galician fricatives.
We obtained the spectra by means of a fast Fourier transform (FFT). Each
spectrum was treated as a random probability distribution, the ﬁrst four moments
of which were calculated (center of gravity, variance, skewness, and kurtosis). But in
line with the ﬁndings of Forrest et al. () and subsequent studies, we focused on
the study of the ﬁrst moment, i.e., the spectral mean or center of gravity. Although
only a rude measure, this parameter has proved itself an efﬁcient indicator for
differentiating sibilants. Various studies have shown that alveolar sibilants present a
higher spectral mean than postalveolars (Nittrouer, Studdert-Kennedy, and McGowan
; Shadle and Mair ; Jongman, Wayland, and Wong ; Gordon, Barth-
maier, and Sands ; Jones and Nolan ; Maniwa, Jongman, and Wade ;
Żygis ; Nirgianaki ).
Voiceless fricative sibilants in Portuguese


Although most of the studies referred to above examine only the contrast between
/s/ and /ʃ/, some recent work also examines other fricatives. Zeller () examines
different realizations of sibilants by Belarusian speakers inﬂuenced by Russian, in
particular the production of [s], [sʲ], [tʲ], [tʃʲ], and [ʂ], while Żygis () manages to
differentiate between [ʃ] and [ʂ] using the spectral mean.
For the present study, we have departed from Labraña Barrero (, , ),
who uses LPC with a -pole ﬁlter. Using this procedure, she is able to distinguish
effectively between /ʃ/ and /s/-type fricatives as well as the realizations of the sibilant
in ﬁnal position. However, because LPC calculations tend to emphasize contextual
variation, we opted to use spectra and spectral moments in order to facilitate
comparisons with other languages for which data are available. This is in line with
most fricative studies, including Regueira Fernández ().
.Results and discussion
..Groups by sex
A number of studies point to the existence of substantial differences between the
fricative sounds produced by men and women, particularly in the sibilants. In a
groundbreaking paper, Schwartz () proved that hearers could distinguish the sex
of a speaker by listening to isolated samples of voiceless sibilants since those produced
by women had higher frequencies than those of men. Later studies found spectral
differences between sibilants produced by female and male speakers (e.g., Jongman,
Wayland, and Wong : ; Gordon, Barthmaier, and Sands : ). These
differences are usually accounted for by the size of the vocal tract, a biological factor, but
it was also shown that the differences are affected by sociophonetic (i.e., social and
cultural) factors (Munson, McDonald, DeBoe, and White ; Fuchs and Toda ).
The results shown in Table .contain no surprises in this respect (see also the
ﬁndings of Regueira Fernández ).
In all cases, the frequency values are higher for the female groups than for male
speakers and the differences are statistically signiﬁcant. Given these results, compari-
sons will only be performed for same-sex groups.
T.Spectral mean and standard deviation (all informants) for each sibilant
(in onset position) separated by sex
Spectral
mean (Hz)
Female
Std dev (Hz)
Spectral
mean (Hz)
Male
Std dev (Hz) Student t p-value
[s]




.
<.
[ʃ]




.
<.
[SF]




.
<.
SF represents all realizations of sibilants in word-ﬁnal position.

X. L. Regueira Fernández and M. J. Ginzo

..Alveolar and postalveolar sibilants
On one hand, the behavior of postalveolar sibilants is fairly uniform among speakers,
and the two languages also resemble each other to a considerable extent with regard
to both spectra and spectral moments. On the other hand, there are marked differ-
ences when it comes to the alveolar sibilants (see Table .).
For postalveolar sibilants [ʃ], Galician informants have slightly lower values than
Portuguese speakers, but the similarity between language groups and the uniformity
across speakers of the same group are striking. The only deviation worth mentioning
is that of one male Galician speaker whose realization is more fronted and is heard as
an apical, Spectral Mean = Hz (with values between and Hz). The
differences between front and postalveolar fricatives are always statistically signiﬁ-
cant: t = .for Galician females (GF), t = .for Galician males (GM),
t = .for Portuguese females (PF), and t = .for Portuguese males
(PM); in all cases p<..
In Table .we observe a substantial difference between the spectral means of
Galician and Portuguese front sibilants. Consequently, the distance between the
values for /s/ and /ʃ/-type sibilants is considerably smaller in Galician (with 
Hz for women, Hz for men, averaged across all speakers) than in Portuguese
(Hz for women, Hz for men, also averaged across all speakers).
..Alveolar and dento-alveolar sibilants
Distinguishing between alveolar and dento-alveolar realizations of front sibilants
using spectra and spectral means is challenging, owing mainly to high variability not
only between languages but also between speakers of the same language. This
variability was pointed out in various earlier studies (e.g., Dart ; Gordon,
Barthmaier, and Sands ; Andrade and Slifka ). With regard to Galician
speakers, both Labraña Barrero (, ) and Regueira Fernández () found it
difﬁcult to distinguish types of /s/ because of the high level of variation among
individuals and even among realizations by the same individual. This variability is
T.Spectral means, standard deviations for alveolar and postalveolar
fricatives in Galician and Portuguese male and female groups
Groups
Galician
Spectral
mean
(Hz)
Std dev
(Hz)
Groups
Portuguese
Spectral
mean (Hz)
Std Dev
(Hz)
Student t
p
value
[s] GF


[s] PF


.
<.
[s] GM


[s] PM


.
<.
[ʃ] GF


[ʃ] PF


.
.
[ʃ] GM


[ʃ] PM


.
<.
G = Galician, P = Portuguese; F = Female, M = Male. t-values and p-values are provided for comparison of groups
by sex.
Voiceless fricative sibilants in Portuguese


an obstacle to statistical calculations and needs to be borne in mind when interpret-
ing the results.
The ﬁndings of the present study conﬁrm this variability, which is much greater
among the Galician informants, whereas the Portuguese speakers exhibit a more
similar behavior across speakers.
Figure .shows average spectra for front sibilants for female Galician and Portu-
guese informants. For Portuguese speakers the spectrum rises to a maximum peak
above kHz (spectral mean Hz), while the spectra for Galician speakers form an
arc that tends to reach its spectral maximum around kHz (spectral mean Hz).
The spectra for male Portuguese (see Figure .) speakers have similar proﬁles to
those for female speakers, with spectral peaks higher than kHz, although slightly
lower than those of female speakers. The results for Portuguese spectral mean (means
[GF - S]
[PF - S]
40
30
20
10
0
–10
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
Hz
F.Average spectra for front sibilants (S) in female Galician (GF, grey) and female
Portuguese (PF, black) speakers
0
0
–10
10
2000
4000
6000
Hz
8000
10000
12000
20
30
[GM - S1]
[GM - S2]
[GM - S3]
[PM - S]
F.Average of the three spectrum types for male Galician (GM) speakers: S(average
of four speakers), S(average of two speakers), S(average of two speakers), compared with
male Portuguese [s] (PM-S)

X. L. Regueira Fernández and M. J. Ginzo

of Hz for women, Hz for men) are consistent with Silva’s () ﬁndings
for Brazilian Portuguese. Male Galician informants show a more varied behavior in
which we may identify three spectrum types (the statistical analyses are explained
later in this section), based on maximum peaks and centers of gravity (see Figure .).
As can be seen in Figure ., the ﬁrst group (S) is characterized by a prominent
peak in relatively low frequencies (between and Hz, averaging Hz),
and a proﬁle showing some similarity to that of [ʃ] (see Figure .). The Stype
presents no narrow band peaks but a presence of high energy between and kHz
(the average highest peak is Hz). Type S, on the contrary, is characterized by
two peaks, one of which, almost always the main one, is over kHz (with an average
of Hz), and a secondary peak between and kHz (averaging Hz).
Taking spectral mean, kurtosis, and skewness into account (see Table .), we ﬁnd
that the three groups are statistically different. Since the analysis of variance
(ANOVA) hypotheses were not conﬁrmed for one factor, the Kruskal-Wallis non-
parametric test showed signiﬁcant differences in the averages for each group (p-value
< .) (spectral mean: chi-squared=., df=, p-value < .e-; N=;
n=, n=; n=; Kurtosis: ., df=, p-value < .e-; N=; n=,
n=; n=; Skewness: chi-squared=., df=, p-value < .e-; N=;
n=, n=; n=).
The results of Tukey HSD tests (post-hoc analysis) carried out to reveal whether
the three groups are mutually distinct show three separate groups for all three
measures (spectral mean, kurtosis, and skewness) (p < .for all contrasts).
Articulatory identiﬁcation of these three groups is difﬁcult because of the scarcity
of acoustic analyses dealing with the issue and because the mechanisms for fricative
production and the effect of different articulatory variables (constriction length,
sublingual cavity, etc.) are poorly understood. We provide an overview of available
data for Portuguese, Spanish, and Polish for a comparison.
Andrade and Slifka () analyze two Portuguese female speakers’ realizations of
lamino-dental and apico-alveolar sibilants. The lamino-dentals present a similar
spectral proﬁle to that which we have found for our Portuguese informants (and
type-Smale Galician speakers), but the apico-alveolars present two different pat-
terns, one that is closer to the lamino-dentals and another that is more similar to the
proﬁle for [ʃ], as in type S(Figure .). The authors conclude that the constriction
commonly described as apico-alveolar may be more fronted in speakers of the
dialect they are examining and that acoustic characteristics that make it possible to
T.Spectral mean, kurtosis, and skewness for Galician male (GM) groups
S, S, and S
Groups Galician
Spectralmean(Hz)
Std dev (Hz)
Kurtosis
Skewness
SGM


.
.
SGM


.
.
SGM


.
.
Voiceless fricative sibilants in Portuguese


differentiate apical and laminal articulations are due to the contribution of the
sublingual cavity.
Toda, Maeda, and Honda () study the formant-cavity afﬁliation for Polish
alveolo-palatal [ɕ] and apico-postalveolar fricatives (this latter transcribed there as
[ṣ]: see footnote on p. of their study) using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
and acoustic data, and they conclude that the front oral cavity, larger for the latter
sibilant, is responsible for the lower frequency of its ﬁrst fricative formant (), but
they do not attribute a signiﬁcant role to the sublingual cavity per se.
As for Spanish, Martínez Celdrán and Fernández Planas (: ) say that in the
apical sibilant the ﬁrst peak is the one with the greatest intensity and is situated at
relatively low frequencies (Hz), whereas in the laminal the most prominent
peak is the second one, situated at Hz.
Albeit using different methods, we can identify our S-type sibilant with the S
spectral type of Labraña Barrero, which she identiﬁes with the lamino-dental
fricative [s̪] (Labraña Barrero : ). In her study, the remaining Sand S
types are identiﬁed by Labraña Barrero with apico-alveolars, and the differences
were mainly attributed to the inﬂuence of the context. However, our data, sup-
ported by the references mentioned in the preceding paragraphs, have led us to a
different conclusion. The S-type spectrum appears in the Galician area with
lamino-alveolar seseo (Regueira Fernández ), area of origin for ﬁve of the
subjects of the present study (three women and two men). Indeed, this is the
spectral type of all our female Galician informants, among whom we did not ﬁnd
any instances of an S-type spectrum (see Figure .), even among speakers who
come from areas where only a sibilant [s̺] was described in previous works. The
realizations of some of these female speakers are acoustically very similar to
“laminal seseo”. When asked, later, about the articulatory gesture they carried out
when producing the sibilant, some described a laminal gesture while others said
they placed the tip of their tongue in the dento-alveolar region, supporting Andrade
and Slifka’s () conclusion.
When we compare the average spectra of the four women of our study from areas
with [s] to those of four others from areas that apparently have [s̺] (see F. Fernández
Rei : , map ), the spectra are almost identical (see Figure .).
The spectral means for both groups are also very similar (laminal group: Hz,
St. Dev. ; apical group: .Hz, St. Dev. ). Student’s t-test (two-tailed)
shows the two samples to be statistically equal: t=., p=., df=, N=.
This seems to mean that the existing articulatory descriptions are not accurate and
there has probably been an ongoing change in the realization of these sibilants, with
regard to the type-Smodels, present in several of the male informants. This type of
spectrum has not been observed among Portuguese informants, which with some
variation all follow the proﬁles shown in Figures .and ..
..Final sibilants
The articulatory descriptions of Galician and Portuguese sibilants show a clear
difference in that Portuguese ﬁnal sibilants are considered lamino-postalveolar [ʃ]

X. L. Regueira Fernández and M. J. Ginzo

(Mateus and d’Andrade : –), while in Galician an apico-alveolar [s̺] is
usually assumed, even in areas with lamino-alveolar seseo (i.e., [s] in onset; see
Section .); in some cases in these areas [s̺] alternates with an apico-postalveolar
[ʂ] realization, which is acoustically very similar to the Portuguese realization
(González González ; Regueira Fernández ).
For Portuguese speakers, our ﬁndings support the descriptions: the ﬁnal sibilant in
both men and women has a less intense spectrum, but with the same shape as
syllable-initial [ʃ] (see Figure .).
Male speakers’ spectral means are slightly lower for the ﬁnal sibilant than for [ʃ] in
onset (Portuguese males: (PM) Hz in coda, as compared to Hz; Portuguese
females (PF): Hz in coda, as compared to Hz in onset).
For Galician, only two male informants (i.e., the group with S-type sibilant) out
of all Galician speakers with the lamino-dental sibilant [s̪] show a similar pattern (see
0
5
0
10
15
2000
4000
6000
Hz
8000
10000
12000
20
25
30
[GF - apical]
[GF - laminal]
F.Average spectra of the front sibilant of female Galician (GF) informants from the
apical [s̺] area and the laminal [s] area
(see F. Fernández Rei : )
0
0
–10
10
2000
4000
6000
Hz
8000
10000
12000
20
30
40
[PSF - F]
[PSF - M]
[PX - F]
[PX - M]
F.Average ﬁnal sibilant (PSF) and syllable-initial [ʃ] (PX) spectra in realizations by
Portuguese speakers, female (F) and male (M) groups
Voiceless fricative sibilants in Portuguese


Figure .), with a sibilant that we can identify as a lamino-postalveolar fricative [ʂ].
The two speakers’ spectral means are and Hz, respectively, which is in line
with the values that Zeller (: ) considers to be those of this sibilant.
However, when we compare the sibilant in coda position of female informants
with the average spectra of the two fricatives [s] and [ʃ] in onset position (see
Figure .), we notice that the spectral shape of the ﬁnal sibilant resembles that of
[s] in onset position, although it presents a lower spectral mean (Hz in coda,
Hz in onset, as compared to Hz for [ʃ]).
Tables .and .show correlations of the spectral mean of the fricatives [s] and
[ʃ], in onset position, and the sibilant in ﬁnal position (SF), grouped by sex, in
Galician and Portuguese informants, respectively. The relevant correlations (those
over .) are shown in grey.
0
0
–10
–20
10
2000
4000
6000
Hz
8000
10000
12000
20
30
[GM - G3 - X]
[GM - G3 - S]
[GM - G3 - SF]
F.Average spectra of [s̪] (GM–G–S), [ʃ] (GM–G–X), and the sibilant in coda
position (GM–G–SF), in the two Galician speakers with lamino-dental seseo
GM = Galician males, G= Group with S-type sibilant
0
0
10
2000
4000
6000
Hz
8000
10000
12000
20
30
[GF - S]
[GF - X]
[GF - SF]
F.Average spectra for realizations of [s] (GF–S), [ʃ] (GF–X), and word-ﬁnal sibilant
(GF–SF) in female Galician speakers (GF)

X. L. Regueira Fernández and M. J. Ginzo

For Portuguese (Table .) there are strong correlations between [ʃ] and SF for
both sexes. However, in Table .we see that for Galician women the ﬁnal sibilant
correlates strongly with [s]. In male informants there are no clear correlations given
the heterogeneity of realizations in word-ﬁnal position. The different groups for S,
S, and Samong Galician males are too small (four, two, and two speakers) to
present signiﬁcant correlations.
.Conclusions
The analysis of spectra and spectral moments, chieﬂy the spectral mean, has allowed
us to differentiate between postalveolar sibilants /ʃ/ and front (alveolar or dento-
alveolar) sibilants in both Galician and Portuguese. In line with previous studies, we
encountered a great deal of variation in the realization of alveolar consonants
between speakers and also in different realizations by the same speaker, which can
be an obstacle for the statistical treatment of the data.
Variation is most notable in the Galician sample, particularly among males, where
we can distinguish three different groups. We suggest that these correspond to three
realizations of the front sibilant in onset position: apico-alveolar [s̺], lamino-alveolar
[s], and lamino-dental [s̪]. However, further study is necessary to conﬁrm this
T.Correlations between fricatives for spectral mean in Galician speakers
by sex
Galician
Women
Men
Spectral mean
[s]
[ʃ]
SF
Spectral mean
[s]
[ʃ]
SF
[s]

.
.
[s]

.
.
[ʃ]
.

.
[ʃ]
.
.
SF
.
.

SF
.
.

SF represents the sibilant in ﬁnal position.
T.Correlations between fricatives for spectral mean in Portuguese
speakers by sex
Portuguese
Women
Men
Spectral mean
s
ʃ
SF
Spectral mean
s
ʃ
SF
s

.
.
s

.
.
ʃ
.

.
ʃ
.

.
SF
.
.

SF
.
.

SF represents the sibilant in ﬁnal position.
Voiceless fricative sibilants in Portuguese


hypothesis, because the S-type spectra could arise from different articulatory gestures,
one of which is a more fronted apical articulation, in contrast to the Stype, which is a
more back apical articulation. In other words, we cannot be sure that the acoustic
differences reﬂect exclusively differences in the place of articulation, or that follow from
a different shape and length of constriction (Andrade and Slifka ). Instrumental
articulatory studies are needed in order to achieve a more precise characterization of
the articulatory gestures responsible for the observed acoustic differences.
The Portuguese realizations present a more uniform picture where, even though
there is some signiﬁcant variation, the front sibilants are in all cases lamino-dental or,
at the most, a very fronted lamino-alveolar.
The greater uniformity of the Portuguese samples than the Galician ones may
reﬂect greater linguistic uniformity among Portuguese university-educated young
people, whereas the more varied and heterogeneous Galician sample reﬂects the
much more limited leveling achieved by standard Galician, which has spread through
Galician society much more recently and far less completely.
In any event, the data suggest that the pronunciation of sibilants in Galician is
more complex than most descriptions indicate and that the apico-alveolar type is not
the only way that the front sibilants are pronounced in varieties of Galician without
seseo (i.e., with an opposition between /θ/ and /s̺/). The standard descriptions of
Portuguese also seem imprecise on this point.
Finally, the type of Galician that most resembles Portuguese (with lamino-dental
realizations and postalveolar ﬁnal sibilants) does not occur in any of the university-
educated speakers. It may be that this absence is due to the small size of the sample,
but our experience suggests that speakers who come from those areas avoid such
pronunciations, which are considered dialectal and rural. The pronunciations in
question are on their way out, and they are avoided when speaking in public and
interacting with people who are not members of one’s own speech community. No
instances occurred of apico-alveolar pronunciations of sibilants in Portuguese. Thus
the data point to the fact that language change on both sides of the border leads to the
reduction of diversity and the increase in distance between Galician and Portuguese.
Acknowledgments
This chapter was written within the project “Cambio lingüístico no galego actual,” funded by
the Ministry of Economy and Competitivity of the Spanish Government (FFI-), and
within the Tecnoloxías e Análise dos Datos Lingüísticos network, funded by the Xunta de
Galicia (R/).
We would like to thank Lurdes de Castro Moutinho and Alberto Gómez Bautista, of the
Universidade de Aveiro, and Fernando Groba from the Universidade do Minho, for their
invaluable help with recording the Portuguese samples. We also wish to express our gratitude
to all the Galician and Portuguese speakers who kindly took part in this study. Special thanks are
due to Xosé Afonso Álvarez Pérez for the useful references he provided to us, to Sabela Labraña,
who kindly allowed us to use her questionnaire, to Naír García, for her help with the treatment
of acoustic data, and to the editors and two anonymous reviewers for their comments and
suggestions.

X. L. Regueira Fernández and M. J. Ginzo

5
Acoustic realization of vowels
as a function of syllabic position
A crosslinguistic study with data
from French and Spanish
CÉDRIC GENDROT, MARTINE ADDA-DECKER,
AND FABIÁN SANTIAGO
.Introduction
..Prosodic systems of the languages under investigation
Two Romance languages are under the scope of this study: French and Spanish. The
acoustic realization of vowels in these two languages is compared according to their
position within the word or the presence of a pause. As they are two languages with
different accentual systems, we hypothesize that these accentual differences have some
impact on the realization of vowels: the strong metrical positions within the word
should have more importance in French owing to its having no distinctive lexical stress.
Spanish is a lexical stress language. Thus, all content words must have at least one
stress (primary stress) on one of their three last syllables (Navarro Tomás ;
Quilis ). With respect to the stress position within the word, we ﬁnd oxytonic
words such as camaleón ‘chameleon’; paroxytone words, for example, cabeza ‘head’;
and proparoxytone words such as América ‘America’. Note that there are no lexical
words containing a stressed syllable beyond the antepenultimate (as in *Ámerica).
The only cases where stress seems to appear beyond the third syllable are (i) verb
forms with clitics attached, as in escribiéndotela ‘writing it to you’ and (ii) compound
adverbs formed with the sufﬁx -mente ‘-ly’ such as lentamente ‘slowly’, which are
considered as words with two primary stresses (see Navarro Tomás ; Quilis
; Hualde ).
French, on the other hand, has no lexical stress. The domain of stress in French is
phrasal and accounts mainly for prosodic phrasing. French accentual patterns rely on
the existence of an obligatory ﬁnal stress that marks the right edge of minor prosodic
Romance Phonetics and Phonology. First edition. Mark Gibson and Juana Gil (eds.)
This chapter © Cédric Gendrot, Martine Adda-Decker, and Fabián Santiago . First published 
by Oxford University Press.

groups referred to in previous studies as “Accentual Phrases” (Jun and Fougeron
), but also “Phonological Phrases” (Post b), “Prosodic Words” (Di Cristo
a, b), or “Intonation Groups” (Mertens ), among other terms. In
French, this prosodic unit is the lowest intonationally marked prosodic constituent.
Most authors agree with the deﬁnition of this prosodic unit as follows: an Accentual
Phrase (AP) consists, minimally, of a lexical word plus all its dependent clitics
positioned at its left side (Vaissière ; Post ; Di Cristo a, b; Jun
and Fougeron , among others). For instance, the sentence Les enfants de Marie
sont allés à la plage ‘Mary’s children went to the beach’ is generally parsed in the
following APs: [Les enfants]AP [de Marie]AP [sont allés]AP [à la plage]AP. However,
according to Martin (), Post (), and Jun and Fougeron (), an AP can
group more than one lexical word in order to maintain eurhythmic metrical patterns.
Hence, the phrase une journée chaude ‘a hot day’, containing two lexical words, is
generally parsed in only one AP: [une journée chaude]AP, instead of two (*[une
journée]AP [chaude]AP) in order to avoid the accentual clash. In other cases, APs can
contain more than one lexical word in order to group a minimal number of syllables
(three or four on average). Most authors agree that the distribution of stress in
French accounting for APs depends mainly on both morphosyntactic and eurythmic
metrical criteria.
The domain of stress in Spanish (as in English) is the word or the Prosodic Word
(PW). PWs, comparable to APs in French, are the lowest intonationally marked
prosodic constituents. A PW in Spanish is also deﬁned as the prosodic group
including a lexical word with all its dependent clitics at its left side (Sosa ; Prieto
; Hualde , but also see later in this section). In Spanish, stress has a
culminative function: any PW must carry stress on one syllable (Hyman ;
Hualde ). For instance, the chain Los hijos de María se fueron a la playa
‘Mary’s children went to the beach’ is divided into the following PWs, that must
have only one stressed syllable each: [los hijos]PW [de María]PW [se fueron]PW
[a la playa]PW.
The two prosodic units in question (AP and PW) do not have the same function in
each language. The culminative function of PWs in Spanish contrasts with the
demarcative function observed in French APs: whereas in Spanish stress enhances
word recognition, in French, stress does not aid in word identiﬁcation, but rather
signals word boundaries. In French, each AP is ended by a ﬁnal pitch accent (stressed
syllables realized with an important pitch excursion) that marks its right edge (Post
; Jun and Fougeron ). Thus, the main role of stress in French is marking
chunks or prosodic phrasing into the utterances (Post ). In Spanish, since pitch
accent (if any) falls on lexically stressed syllables and may be located at different
positions within the PW, it generally does not mark intonational group boundaries,
e.g., unlike French, pitch accent does not allow for prosodic phrasing in Spanish
(Sosa ; Hualde ). Pitch accent in PWs in Spanish is more an accentual than
an intonational phenomenon, while it is both in French. In Spanish, melodic breaks
allowing for phrasing (and in that way Spanish is similar to French) are located at
different prosodic units occupying a higher level in the prosodic hierarchy, for
instance at the intermediate phrase level (grouping a few PWs together), or at a

C. Gendrot, M. Adda-Decker, and F. Santiago

higher level such as the intonational phrase level (grouping one or more intermediate
phrases together).
No study addresses the levels of prosodic hierarchy in the same way for both
languages. Moreover, levels above the PW in Spanish and the AP in French are
difﬁcult to deﬁne. For instance, in the analysis of phrasal accents in Spanish (tonal
targets associated with the intermediate phrase’s domain and hence accounting
for prosodic phrasing), studies considering scripted speech have proposed two
different levels: intermediate phrases and intonational phrases (see Frota, D’Imperio,
Elordieta, Prieto, and Vigário ). Other authors, when analyzing unscripted
speech, consider that more research is needed before it can be clariﬁed whether
intermediate phrases have a phonological status or not and propose only one
prosodic level above the PW: the intonational phrases (see Hualde and Prieto
). The same problem is discussed for French regarding the existence of inter-
mediate phrases (see Delais-Roussarie ; Post ; D’Imperio, Elordieta, Frota,
Prieto, and Vigário ).
We consider that the only minimal prosodic units comparable between the two
languages are the AP and PW in French and Spanish respectively. In order to best
serve our purposes, we assume that the morphosyntactic criteria already indicated
above are necessary for analyzing both APs and PWs. In the remainder of this
chapter we do not address whether other prosodic units need to be analyzed, such
as intermediate phrases in both French and Spanish, since our focus is to analyze the
acoustic properties of vowels according to their position in the word domain rather
than their position in the right phrase boundary.
As for the acoustic properties of stress, it has been generally accepted that in
stress-accent languages, stressed syllables serve as anchoring places for pitch accents
(Beckman ). Yet note that not all primary stresses surface with pitch accents. In
Spanish, accented stressed syllables are typiﬁed by an important pitch movement, an
increase in intensity, and/or an increase in stressed vowel duration, all of which
appear in the speech signal (Quilis , ; Canellada and Kuhlman-Madsen
; Sosa , among others).
As for the perception, some studies have shown that tonal alignment patterns are
the main cues signaling the presence of a pitch accent (Prieto, van Santen, and
Hirschberg ; Llisterri, Machuca, de la Mota, Riera, and Ríos ). Other
authors have proposed that in Spanish, stress contrasts in deaccented contexts (for
instance, in postfocus positions, contexts in which there is an absence of important
melodic movements) are still maintained by essentially using variation of duration
and spectral tilt differences of the stressed vowels (Ortega-Llebaria and Prieto ).
In French it is often considered that boundary tones are anchored to the ﬁnal
syllables of APs, in which case pitch accents may overlap with boundary tones. The
vowels marking the end of APs are produced normally with an increase of pitch and/
or an increase of duration (Di Cristo a, b). Note that owing to the lack of
lexical stress, the pitch accent notion may be objectionable when considering French,
but it may be comparable in both languages if one’s considering that the syllable
bearing metrical weight coincides with a melodic movement and an increase in vowel
duration (Di Cristo ; Delais-Roussarie ; Post ). The analyzed vowels are
Realization of vowels—syllabic position


not necessarily anchor points for pitch accents, be it for Spanish or for French.
However, since French stressed syllables are systematically located on the ﬁnal
syllable, while for Spanish they may be located elsewhere, we hypothesize that
word-ﬁnal positions allow for less strengthening (this concept is deﬁned in
Section ..) in Spanish than in French, although we expect to ﬁnd word-ﬁnal
lengthening for both languages.
..Acoustic strengthening of vowels
It has been accepted that consonants and vowels are more strongly articulated when
they are produced in prosodically strong positions. This phenomenon is known as
prosodic strengthening: an articulation characterized by a greater magnitude in the
acoustic space due to the locations of prosodic edges/pitch accents. Studies analyzing
the prosodic strengthening reveal that the prosodic positions of vowels and conson-
ants also inﬂuence their articulation and thus their spectral realization (see for
example Keating, Cho, Fougeron, and Hsu ). For instance, pitch accents tend
to enhance the distinctive features of accented vowels (hyperarticulation), in contrast
to unaccented vowels, which are produced with a relative reduction.
Note that both French and Spanish are syllable-timed languages, with no phono-
logically relevant spectral reduction in the case of non-accented syllables, unlike
stress-timed languages such as English, which shows phenomena of vowel reduction
at the phonological level. However, some phonetic reduction may still be found in
both French and Spanish: prosodic position can be as large as position within the
syllable, the word, the phrase, the utterance, or other larger linguistic units. The
position within the word and within the utterance will be investigated in this study.
In previous studies, it was conﬁrmed that, for French, the spectral realization of
vowels is greatly inﬂuenced by their duration (Gendrot and Adda-Decker ), that
is, longer vowels are considerably strengthened compared to shorter vowels. In other
words, the longer the vowels, the larger the acoustic space they occupy, being thus
theoretically more and more distinct from one another. If we consider this result from
an opposite view, a tendency to reduction for vowels of short duration clearly emerges.
One way of explaining this variation is the enhancement of distinctive features.
Following this, a [+spread; +high; +front] vowel (/i/ for example) will have these
three characteristics enhanced when it is in strengthening position. Strengthening is
calculated by measuring vowel formants and evaluating the vocalic space through the
enhancement of vowels (see Section ..).
The link between spectral realization of vowels (through their formant values) and
their duration has long been known, ﬁrst observed by Lindblom (), and con-
ﬁrmed many times since. It has also been shown that the reduction of short vowels
(see Figure .for an example) is not a mere centralization of the acoustic space, but
rather coarticulation: short vowels take the acoustic characteristics of consonants,
which draws them for most contexts toward the center of the acoustic space. The
relation between acoustic realization and articulation of vowels can be estimated
from formant measurements (Stevens and references therein). Indeed, Fis
positively correlated with vowel aperture, notably for open and mid-open vowels,

C. Gendrot, M. Adda-Decker, and F. Santiago

while Fis more dependent on frontness/backness of the vowel. As for F, it provides
a good indication of rounding, especially for French vowels /y/, //, and /œ/.
Our interest in this chapter is to examine the variations of F(correlated to
opening/closing) and F(correlated to frontness/backness) of cardinal or peripheral
vowels in both languages. In the case of Spanish, all the phonological vowels are
studied: /i/, /e/, /a/, /o/, and /u/. As for French, from the sixteen phonological vowels,
we analyzed only its peripheral vowels /i/, /e/, /ɛ/, /a/, /ɔ/, /o/, /u/, and, additionally,
the nonperipheral vowel /y/. Although /y/ (and also /i/) are part of our study, they are
further detailed in other studies because their different realizations may be more
dependent on Fmovements (Schwartz, Boë, Vallée, and Abry ; Gendrot, Adda-
Decker, and Vaissière ). Finally, let us recall that in Spanish no phonological
distinction can be made through rounding and thus Fis of limited use.
.Study
..Hypotheses
The ﬁrst question is to what extent we ﬁnd similar cases of vowel acoustic reduction
across languages. Vowel duration, speech rate, and word frequency were investigated
as a prerequisite for our object of study. Based on past work on eight languages
(Gendrot and Adda-Decker ), we hypothesize that acoustic reduction should be
similar in both languages.
The second question is an inquiry into whether the prosodic strengthening in
vowels produced in ﬁnal syllables of PWs and APs is greater in French than in
Spanish. Both French and Spanish are languages in which ﬁnal lengthening is found
at the end of APs and PWs. However, we hypothesize that the variation of acoustic
strengthening is less important in Spanish than in French. This idea is motivated by
the fact that acoustic strengthening would be systematically used for marking lexical
stress in the case of Spanish. Hence, we expect that the realization of Spanish vowels
is more dependent on stress patterns than that of French vowels, which would be
more dependent on their syllabic position.
At the same time, we analyze the difference between stressed and unstressed
vowels in different positions in French and Spanish and the features on which this
difference is based. We expect the stress/unstressed difference to be acoustically more
prominent in Spanish owing to lexical stress being distinctive, while word stress in
French is not. Delattre () investigated phonetic characteristics of French and
Spanish and showed that the amount of centralization of unstressed vowels in
Spanish was signiﬁcantly smaller than that observed in English, French, or German.
This idea is somewhat recurrent in the traditional literature and conﬁrmed by Quilis
and Esgueva (), who reported that Spanish unaccented vowels had only a slight
tendency to occupy a more centralized location within the acoustic space. We have,
however, no reason to believe that acoustic reduction could be smaller in Spanish
than in French.
The third and ﬁnal research question deals with the presence of pauses. Indeed,
pauses are often indicative of the presence of a prosodic boundary higher than the
Realization of vowels—syllabic position


PW/AP, such as an intermediate/intonational phrase. We hypothesize that the
presence of pauses has a similar impact on the strengthening in ﬁnal prepausal
vowels in French and Spanish.
..Corpora
Two corpora of similar speech styles were used: broadcast speech for French¹ and
political speech for Spanish.² These corpora can be considered similar insofar as their
speech is intended to be clearly understood by the majority of listeners and can be
characterized as clear speech; they correspond to approximately ﬁfteen hours for
French and thirteen hours for Spanish. Such speech cannot be described as spon-
taneous, but rather as prepared speech: only few hesitations, repetitions, and word
fragments are observed and syntactic structures often remain close to those of written
language. Hypoarticulation vowel phenomena are undoubtedly less present here than
in more conversational-style spontaneous speech.
Both corpora were automatically aligned per phoneme and word using the
Laboratoire d’Informatique pour la Mécanique et les Sciences de l’Ingénieur
(LIMSI) speech transcription and alignment system (Gauvain, Lamel, and Adda
). Using previously speciﬁed orthographic transcriptions, phone boundaries
are located, and the system is used to choose among potential pronunciation
alternatives (in particular, those for liaisons and schwas), and discard silences, breath,
and other noise segments. The segmentation resolution was limited to ms and the
minimum duration of a segment was set at ms. Such a procedure, as opposed to
labeling phonetic segments, produces a phonological or phonemic labeling (corres-
ponding in most cases to standard word pronunciations).
For both corpora, algorithms for syllabiﬁcation were applied. For French, we
created a Praat script with syllabiﬁcation rules inspired by Pallier () and
Adda-Decker, Boula de Mareüil, Adda, and Lamel (). These rules were applied
on the continuous strings of phonemes, that is, not taking word delimitations into
account. For example, the two-word sequence petit ajout ‘small addition’ is seg-
mented into four syllables: /pə/, /ti/, /ta/, and /ʒu/ unless they are separated by a
pause. For Spanish, stress and syllabic annotation was automatically performed with
the aid of EasyAlign (Goldman ), using the same criteria.
..Analyses
Peripheral vowels were automatically analyzed by measuring formants, fundamental
frequency ( f₀), and duration. Only disyllabic and trisyllabic words are under inves-
tigation; in both languages they represent the most frequent words.
Formant extraction was made possible with the use of the Burg algorithm imple-
mented in the Praat software (version ..). The detection of amplitude peaks
was determined in a band lower than kHz for male speakers and lower than .kHz
for females. Measurements were taken at /, /, and /of the vowel segments,
¹ ESTER: http://catalog.elra.info/product_info.php?products_id=&language=fr.
² http://catalog.elra.info/product_info.php?products_id=.

C. Gendrot, M. Adda-Decker, and F. Santiago

and then averaged to provide a single value. The interpretation of the extracted
amplitude peaks for formants can be controversial on a considerable number of
segments owing to the presence of noise, excessively high f₀, nasality, etc. Two
methodological safeguards were applied to reduce errors: (i) nasal vowels were
excluded from the study, and (ii) amplitude peak values were ﬁltered in order to
reject erratic items.
For each vowel, upper and lower formant value limits were set for the ﬁrst three
formants (see Gendrot and Adda-Decker for the values): if one of the formants
lay outside the limits, the corresponding vowel segment was rejected. Formant ranges
were delimited as follows: one hundred visual inspections were carried out for each
vowel in order to reject as errors only severe formant-detection problems and not the
deviating values that might be due, for example, to contextual assimilation effects,
prosody, or speaker’s characteristics. After this ﬁltering, approximately ,vowels
out of ,analyzed vowels were rejected for French (% of segments rejected)
and ,out of ,for Spanish (.% of segments rejected). The majority of
these rejections correspond to segments of very short duration (smaller than ms).
Other reasons were a partial or total devoicing of vowels, thus making formant
detection more difﬁcult (or even impossible) and potentially producing implausible
formant values. Similarly, when two formants of a vowel are close, especially in
lowfrequency ranges (which is the case for posterior closed vowels), the algorithm
may detect only one formant instead of two, thus entailing a shift toward the higher-
order values. The /u/ is particularly prone to rejection because all mentioned reasons
may apply. More details and rejection rates for each vowel are described in Gendrot
and Adda-Decker ().
Data were normalized by speaker so that they can be presented together for both
men and women and a Lobanov normalization procedure (Lobanov ) was used.
This procedure is useful for keeping phonemic differences while reducing physio-
logical differences between speakers (Adank, Smits, and van Hout and refer-
ences therein). Fundamental frequency and duration were also normalized according
to the same Lobanov procedure.
We evaluate vowel strengthening through vowel F–Fformant measurements.
According to the hypotheses previously developed, we expect to observe an enlarging
of the vocalic space when vowels are strengthened. In order to quantify these
differences, we calculated the dispersion (Euclidean distance) from the acoustic
center as measured on the whole data (Bradlow, Torreta, and Pisoni ; Gendrot
and Adda-Decker ); if the vowel is moving away signiﬁcantly from the acoustic
center calculated as the average value of calculated means for each vowel and each
language, then it is considered as strengthened. We bear in mind that this measure is
inappropriate in some ways, as it is related to the measurement of vowel centraliza-
tion, which as indicated previously is only a secondary effect of vowel coarticulation
(see Section ..). However, with all vowels moving simultaneously away from the
acoustic center, the acoustic space/distance between vowels increases, thus favoring
phoneme identiﬁcation (see the theory of adaptive dispersion of Schwartz et al. 
for an interpretation of this in the shape of vocalic systems). As for statistical
analyses, we used mixed modeling, with Word and Speaker as random effects with
Realization of vowels—syllabic position


the lmerTest package (Kuznetsova, Brockhoff, and Christensen, ) developed
in R (version .-).
..Results
...General acoustic variations: speech rate and vowel duration
In the ﬁrst place
we measured vowel formants in relation to the vowel duration. Three categories were
determined according to a balanced distribution for all vowels: short for vowels
shorter than ms; mid for vowels longer than ms and shorter than ms, and
long for vowels longer than ms. We can observe a fairly common phenomenon:
the longer the vowel, the further it is from the acoustic center (see Figure .).
The variation of Euclidean distance (i.e., acoustic dispersion) is more important in
Spanish than in French, as shown in Figure .. We also tested the effect of speech
rate (not illustrated here) by considering three categories (fewer than phonemes
per second, between and phonemes per second, and ﬁnally more than 
phonemes per second). We observe similar results with a slower speech rate, imply-
ing longer vowel durations and a larger vocalic space.
short
mid
long
200
150
100
50
0
Acoustic dispersion
200
150
100
50
0
Acoustic dispersion
short
mid
long
F.Normalized acoustic dispersion (in normalized Hz) for Spanish (left) and French
(right) according to three categories of duration (short, mid, and long)
i
i
i
e
e
e
a
o
o
u u
u
u°
o
200
0
–200
–200
0
200
–200
0
200
–200
200
0
o-u
u
o
a
a
a
a
a
ɔ
ɔ
ɔ
ε
o
o
εε
ε
e
y
i
i i
yy
e
e
Norm. F2
Norm. F2
Norm. F1
Norm. F1
F.Normalized vowel formants (Fand F) in normalized Hz for Spanish (left) and
French (right) according to duration
Top line indicates short, middle line intermediate, and bottom line long.

C. Gendrot, M. Adda-Decker, and F. Santiago

...Acoustic variation due to stress and syllable position within the word
In a
second step, we analyzed the realization of vowels in relation to the presence of stress
as well as to their position in the word. Words neither followed nor preceded by
pauses were selected for this analysis. Words followed by a pause will be considered
in Section ....
For disyllabic words (Figure .), we can observe that French vowels in word-ﬁnal
syllables (and thus bearing a metrical weight) are characterized by more peripheral
formants (p<.), longer duration (p<.), and a higher f₀ (p<.) than
vowels in word-initial syllables.
As for Spanish vowels, we analyzed them according to whether they appeared in
stressed or unstressed syllables. Words preceded or followed by pauses were excluded
from this analysis, in the same way as for French. Figure .shows that Spanish
vowels in initial unstressed syllables, when compared to ﬁnal stressed syllables in
disyllabic words, have a lower duration (p<.) and f₀ (p<.), but have a
similar acoustic dispersion (p=.). This result doesn’t match what was found in
Section .... We expound on this mismatch between f₀, acoustic dispersion, and
duration more thoroughly in Section ..
200
150
100
50
0
–50
–100
–50
–100
0
50
150
200
100
initial
final
initial
final
initial
50
0
100
150
200
final
acoustic dispersion
duration
f0
F.Normalized acoustic dispersion (in normalized Hz), duration (in normalized ms),
and f₀ (in normalized Hz) values (from left to right) of vowels in initial and ﬁnal syllables in
French disyllabic words
100
50
0
–50
–100
duration
initial
final
200
150
100
50
0
–50
–100
f0
initial
final
200
150
100
50
0
acoustic dispersion
initial
final
F.Normalized acoustic dispersion (in normalized Hz), duration (in normalized ms),
and f₀ (in normalized Hz) values (from left to right) of vowels in initial unstressed syllables
compared to ﬁnal stressed syllables in Spanish disyllabic words
Realization of vowels—syllabic position


For Spanish disyllabic words with an initial stressed syllable and a ﬁnal unstressed
syllable, the ﬁnal syllable is longer than the initial syllable, while we observe the
opposite tendency for f₀ and acoustic dispersion, i.e., the ﬁnal syllable has lower f₀ and
acoustic dispersion. Figure .shows that Spanish vowels in initial stressed syllables,
when compared to ﬁnal unstressed syllables in disyllabic words, have a higher
acoustic dispersion (p<.) and f₀ (p<.) although they have a smaller dur-
ation (p<.). This result is once again rather unusual, as we expected acoustic
dispersion to be positively correlated with duration.
If we compare unstressed initial syllables with unstressed ﬁnal syllables in Spanish,
we ﬁnd that the former have lower duration (p<.) and f₀ (p<.) but a higher
acoustic dispersion (p<.). Similarly, stressed initial syllables, when compared with
stressed ﬁnal syllables, have lower duration but a higher f₀ and acoustic dispersion.
We can conclude from these results that ﬁnal syllables in Spanish disyllabic words
are characterized by longer vowel duration, like French vowels in ﬁnal syllables,
whether stressed or not. However, unlike French, vowels in unstressed word-ﬁnal
syllables in Spanish are characterized by a smaller acoustic dispersion. For f₀, results
are less straightforward, with f₀ basically positively correlated to the presence of
stress. This reveals a different pattern as a function of language. We hypothesize that
word-ﬁnal lengthening is necessary for word delimitation in a listener-oriented
perspective. However, in a non-accented language such as French, vowels’ acoustic
dispersion seems to be systematically correlated with their duration, while it can be
differentiated in Spanish.
If we consider trisyllabic words (not illustrated here), we ﬁnd a very similar pattern
to that encountered with the disyllabic words. For French, ﬁnal syllables are charac-
terized by longer vowels, with higher f₀, and more peripheral formants. Vowels in
initial syllables are characterized by the smallest duration and dispersion values. For
Spanish, once again we separated stressed from unstressed syllables, and much like
what we signaled for disyllabic words, dispersion values for vowels display opposite
tendencies to their duration values. While ﬁnal syllables are characterized by the
longest vowel durations, dispersion values are the smallest, be it for vowels in stressed
or unstressed syllables. As for initial syllables, they are characterized by the highest
dispersion values only when stressed but have an intermediate value when unstressed.
acoustic dispersion
200
150
100
50
0
0
–50
–100
200
150
100
50
0
–50
–100
200
150
100
50
–50
–100
initial
initial
initial
final
final
final
duration
f0
F.Normalized acoustic dispersion (in normalized Hz), duration (in normalized ms),
and f₀ (in normalized Hz) values (from left to right) of vowels in initial stressed syllables
compared to ﬁnal unstressed syllables in Spanish disyllabic words

C. Gendrot, M. Adda-Decker, and F. Santiago

These results on disyllabic and trisyllabic words in Spanish show that, unlike
what we observed for French, vowel duration and acoustic dispersion show
opposite tendencies. Results for f₀ are more variable for Spanish. Since we showed
in Section ...that duration values and acoustic dispersion are positively correl-
ated for both languages, we may question why these differences are found between
French and Spanish. We analyzed vowels in accented syllables versus vowels in non-
accented syllables in Spanish. The ﬁrst ones are characterized by a higher f₀, longer
duration, and more peripheral formants. We hypothesize that while ﬁnal word
lengthening is found both in Spanish and French and is used to delimit words
by the listeners, French is characterized by word ﬁnal syllables with higher f₀
and more acoustic dispersion. For Spanish, however, f₀ and acoustic dispersion
are more correlated with the presence of accent. For Spanish, the initial syllables
have more acoustic dispersion, be they stressed or not.
...Acoustic variation due to the presence of pauses
This section studies the
characteristics of vowels when immediately followed by a pause (and thus also word-
ﬁnal). The presence of pauses is usually typical of a right boundary of intonational
phrases, one of the highest prosodic levels of the prosodic hierarchy (Nespor and
Vogel ). We notice some ﬁnal lengthening with a higher f₀ (p<.for French
and p<.for Spanish) with higher acoustic dispersion (see Figure .). This reveals
a prosodic factor of higher level than that observed for word-ﬁnal syllables and shows
that both languages are sensitive to that higher prosodic level. Prepausal vowels have
more extreme formant values in terms of ﬁrst and second formants than non-
prepausal vowels in the acoustic space.
.Discussion and conclusion
The major result of this study is that, while for both languages an overall strength-
ening of the vowels with a longer duration and a slower speech rate is observed, vowel
strengthening due to syllable position within the word reveals signiﬁcant differences
a
a
ε
ε
e
e
y
y
i
i
200
0
–200
–200
200
Norm. F2
Norm. F1
0
–200
–200
0
200
200
Norm. F2
Norm. F1
0
ɔ
ɔ
u
u
o
o
i
e
e
a
a
o
o
u
u
i
F.Normalized formants of vowels (in normalized Hz) for French and Spanish
according to the presence of pause (the lower line for ﬁnal prepausal vowels, the upper
line for ﬁnal nonprepausal vowels). French vowels are shown on the left; Spanish vowels on
the right
Realization of vowels—syllabic position


between French and Spanish. This seems to indicate that while strengthening
phenomena due to vowel duration values and speech rate are articulatory, the
differences in vowel duration may have different causes. We noticed that vowel
lengthening responds to the presence of lexical stress, syllabic position within the
word, and to the presence of a pause. Stress in French is located at the end of words,
while its location may vary in Spanish, as it is lexicalized. In both languages, the
presence of stress on the syllable implies vowel lengthening and strengthening.
The lengthening observed before pauses comes from a higher prosodic level
(intonational phrase) and entails vowel strengthening in both languages. However,
the lengthening we found in word-ﬁnal syllables does not induce vowel strengthening
in Spanish. It is not possible to evaluate this phenomenon in French, since word-ﬁnal
syllables also bear metrical stress, but we propose that vowel strengthening in French
is due to the presence of metrical stress on the last-word syllable, while lengthening is
merely a word delimitation cue in both languages. Ortega-Llebaria and Prieto ()
found that stressed vowels in Spanish are systematically longer than unstressed
vowels (for words with more than two syllables). They also found that ﬁnal vowels
are all in all longer than nonﬁnal vowels, but that vowels are longer when stress is in
ﬁnal position, which agrees with our results.
It would be useful to do syntactic chunking and compare Spanish with French so
as to evaluate strengthening for accentual groups (in French) and prosodic words (in
Spanish) (Gendrot, Gerdes, and Adda-Decker ). In this respect, we would expect
strengthening to be more important in French than in Spanish for the same reasons
as those mentioned for word-ﬁnal lengthening. Factors such as word frequency and
grammatical category could also be taken into account. A superﬁcial examination of
the data presented in this chapter reveals that, when considering word frequency
(normalized on a log scale and separated into two categories, i.e., words with
frequency lower or higher than the mode of its distribution), it plays a role in
Spanish, with a smaller acoustic dispersion when word frequency increases. How-
ever, no such differences can be observed for French.
As a ﬁnal remark, Spanish has a ﬁve-vowel system, while French has a thirteen-
vowel system (in standard French). This difference may have an impact on the
acoustic variations observed. Indeed, the possibility for more variation in Spanish
vowel production may be due to the greater acoustic distance (as compared to
French) between vowels.

C. Gendrot, M. Adda-Decker, and F. Santiago

Part II
Articulatory Studies


6
An articulatory account of rhotic
variation in Tuscan Italian
Synchronized UTI and EPG data
CHIARA CELATA, ALESSANDRO VIETTI,
AND LORENZO SPREAFICO
.Introduction
Rhotic sounds are known for their exceptional degree of syntagmatic, crosslinguistic,
and even cross-individual variability (e.g., Recasens b; van Hout and Van de
Velde ; Scobbie ; Wiese ; Spreaﬁco and Vietti ). An integrated
acoustic and articulatory perspective on the dynamics of the vocal tract during rhotic
production is expected to provide clues for a deeper understanding of rhotic phonetic
properties and systemic behavior. The Italo-Romance area is understudied as far
as rhotic variation is concerned, although a growing amount of evidence documents
a plurality of variation processes, sometimes exploited by the speakers to convey
socio-indexical meanings or communicative-interactional functions (Canepari ;
Spreaﬁco and Vietti ; Vietti, Romano, and Spreaﬁco ; Spreaﬁco and Vietti
; Contini and Gally ; Celata ; Celata et al. ; Spreaﬁco and
Vietti ; Kaland et al. ; Vietti and Spreaﬁco ).¹
Contemporary standard Italian inherited its phonemic inventory from the Tuscan
(Florentine) dialect and is phonetically very close to the variety spoken in Florence
and other Tuscan areas (Maiden and Parry ). In the diachrony of Tuscan Italian,
clusters with /r/ and intervocalic singleton and geminate /r(ː)/ were generally pre-
served since their Latin origin (e.g., Rohlfs [] : –, , , –),
with some exceptions concerning lambdacism phenomena affecting the pronunci-
ation of /pr/, /br/, and /r/+C clusters in the Pisa and Livorno (and partly Lucca and
Florence) areas (Rohlfs [] : –and –; Giannelli ; Calamai
¹ The research described in this chapter has been jointly developed by the three authors. However, for
academic purposes, CC takes responsibility for sections ., .., and .., AV for section ., LS for
section ... Sections .., .., and .were jointly written.
Romance Phonetics and Phonology. First edition. Mark Gibson and Juana Gil (eds.)
This chapter © Chiara Celata, Alessandro Vietti, and Lorenzo Spreaﬁco . First published 
by Oxford University Press.

). Information about how rhotics are phonetically realized, how the phono-
logical distinction between singleton and geminate rhotics is maintained, and pos-
sible differences across regional and subregional varieties, is however scanty.
Some phonetic information for contemporary standard Italian is provided in
Ladefoged and Maddieson (: –). According to these authors, Italian
intervocalic rhotics are realized as trills. Singleton trills are produced with one or
two apical contacts, whereas geminates are produced with no less than ﬁve and up to
seven contacts.² The apical alveolar trill is also reported by Bertinetto and Loporcaro
(: ) to be the “unmarked allophone” of the rhotic phoneme in standard
Italian. According to Canepari (: ), the trill can be produced intervocalically
for both the singleton and the geminate rhotics and in both hetero- and tautosyllabic
clusters. The trill can however be reduced to a tap (“single linguo-palatal contact”;
Bertinetto and Loporcaro : ) or to a “double contact” (Canepari : ;
Bertinetto and Loporcaro : ) in intervocalic position (singletons only), word
and utterance initially, and in heterosyllabic /rC/ clusters. Unfortunately, in the
studies that have experimentally investigated the production of intervocalic single-
tons and geminates in Italian, rhotics are never included in the analysis (e.g., Smith
; Dunn ; Esposito and Di Benedetto ; Pickett, Blumstein, and Burton
; Payne , b; Zmarich, Gili Fivela, Perrier, Savariaux, and Tisato ,
). Celata and Costamagna (: ) provide durational information for one
speaker of a central variety only, showing that the geminate rhotics are more than
three times longer than the singleton. Consequently, we do not know how the
phonological length distinction, which is said to hold for most of the consonants of
the Italian inventory, is phonetically realized in the speciﬁc case of rhotics.
The impression of many researchers is that rhotic production is one of the most
variable features across geographic and social Italian varieties (Vietti, Romano, and
Spreaﬁco ; Romano ; Vietti and Spreaﬁco ). For the Tuscan varieties,
the lambdacism phenomena already mentioned represent a clear example of social
and geographical variation but additional data can be reported for the singleton–
geminate distinction too. According to Canepari (), the intervocalic geminate
/r:/ may be reduced to a singleton in the spoken varieties of Pisa, Livorno, and the
Elba island (as well as in other non-Tuscan accented Italians, e.g., Rome Italian
(D’Achille ; Marotta ), varieties of Liguria, Umbria, and Marche). No
explicit information is given in that work on how such a degeminated variant is
phonetically realized. While the author states that degemination may occur in these
varieties, it is unclear whether he believes that the process is optional in the speech of
the native speakers (possibly because of social or individual conditioning factors), or
whether degemination has a scattered distribution across the territories mentioned.³
² Given the critical articulatory–aerodynamic trade-off necessary for trilling to be produced and
sustained, trills very often alternate with nontrilled variants. For this reason, Ladefoged and Maddieson
() include single-constriction rhotics in the class of trills, provided that they are produced with the
“positioning of the articulators in a conﬁguration such that, given the right aerodynamic conditions,
vibration would occur” (), “regardless of whether vibration actually occurs” ().
³ Intervocalic degemination occurs in the variety of Lucca as well (a northern Tuscan variety), especially
in the rural areas surrounding the town (since the end of the nineteenth century; see Pieri –), and

C. Celata, A. Vietti, and L. Spreaﬁco

The nonuniform, geographically spotted distribution of intervocalic degemination
of rhotics in Western Tuscany is also discussed by Giannelli (). According to this
study, and similarly to Canepari (), degemination is locally present in the
vernacular, nonurban varieties of the Pisa, Livorno, and Elba areas. The author
recognizes that it is not easy to assess where degemination is, and was, attested across
the Tuscan territory (Giannelli, pers. comm.); most probably, what we currently
observe are the residual vestiges of a past tendency, being challenged by the diffusion
of more standard-like realizations with full maintenance of the singleton–geminate
contrast. In Giannelli () there is no mention of nonstandard realizations of /r/ in
consonant clusters.
Another piece of dialectological evidence reinforcing the idea that the singleton–
geminate distinction for rhotics is not maintained in some western Tuscan varieties
can be found in the Atlas Linguistique Roman (ALiR). The Atlas shows the distri-
bution of the feature “tendu vs. lâche” (i.e., ‘tense vs. lax’, grossly corresponding to the
geminate vs. singleton contrast) for the three sonorants /r, l, n/ in the Romance
domain (see also Contini, Martins, Proﬁli, Saramago, and Vitorino : ; Contini
and Gally ). The map showing this feature, which is taken from Contini et al.
(: ), suggests that, moving southward from the La Spezia–Rimini linguistic
border there is a small area roughly corresponding to the Pisa and Livorno urban
territories, in which the /r/ vs. /rː/ contrast is lost (Figure .).⁴
In sum, there seems to be some dialectological evidence that in the Tuscan mid-
coastal varieties of Italian, the realization of rhotics in intervocalic position and
clusters undergoes some variation processes, which question either the preservation
of the length contrast or the maintenance of a rhotic segment as such (as in the case
of lambdacism).
The current study is an acoustic and articulatory investigation of rhotic variation
in the Livorno and Pisa varieties of Tuscan Italian. The primary goal is to document
rhotic variation across different phonotactic contexts, with a particular focus on the
phonetic properties of intervocalic singletons and geminates. Rhotic variation in
these particular Tuscan varieties is shown to be most aptly described as the result
of three fundamental parameters of variation in rhotic articulatory structure: the
number of articulatory gestures involved (constrictions and vowel-like apertures), a
scalar measure of constriction degree for the constriction gestures, and the acoustic
duration of the (ﬁrst) constriction gesture. Contextual tongue raising in the presence
of high vowels is an additional factor multiplying the number of possible phonetic
outputs.
The data come from an innovative multilevel articulatory approach, based on an
original system for the acquisition, real-time synchronization, and analysis of acous-
tic, electropalatographic (EPG), and ultrasound tongue imaging (UTI) data. We
show in particular that multilevel synchronized acoustic and articulatory informa-
tion is essential to account for the variation patterns across phonotactic contexts
survives in the present-day speech of Lucchese speakers, at least in speciﬁc lexical items and particularly for
the rhotics (Giannelli [] ).
⁴ The map shows that the rhotics also lack the distinction in other territories such as northeastern
Corsica and Rome. On Elba island, the distinction is absent not only for rhotics but also for alveolar nasals.
Rhotic variation in Tuscan Italian


z
z
z z
z
z
z
z
z z
z
z
z z z
z
z
z z
z z z z
l
l l
l l
l
l
l l l
ll
ll
l l ll
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l l
l
l
l
l
l l l
l
l
l
z z
z z
z
z
z
z
z
z
m
m
m
m
m
m
mm
m
z
z
z
z
z
z z
z
z
z
z
z
z
z
/rr , ll , nn/ - /r , l , n/
/rr , nn/ - /r , n/
/ll, nn/ - /l , n/
/ll/ - /l/
/rr/ - /r/
z
l
m
F.Distribution of the tense–lax feature for three alveolar sonorants in central Europe and the Italo-Romance domain. Double consonants
indicate tense, single consonants indicate lax
Adapted from Contini et al. (: ), with permission.

because vowel-dependent variation in the lingual constriction gesture can be differ-
ently evaluated according to whether one takes into account the size of the oral
cavities (as indicated by formant analysis), the dorso-palatal contact pattern in the
hard palate, the midsagittal tongue proﬁle from tongue tip to postdorsum, or a
combination of the three. A second goal of this chapter is therefore to highlight the
theoretical and methodological challenges of multilevel articulatory analyses in the
study of speech and dialect variation (see also Chen et al. for a similar approach).
The subsequent sections are structured as follows. Section .provides informa-
tion on the speech corpus used for rhotics investigation (..) and illustrates the
methodological challenge of combining the acoustic, EPG, and UTI channels into
real-time synchronized recordings, by explaining how this was achieved for the
purposes of the present study (..). Section .analyzes the distribution of the
rhotic variants across phonotactic contexts in the corpus, taking into account not just
traditional phonetic categories such as taps or trills but also their most relevant
phonetic properties, and showing how variation in the phonotactic context motivates
the surfacing of some phonetic properties rather than others. Section .focuses on
the acoustic (..) and articulatory analysis (separately for the EPG and UTI data, in
Sections ..and .., respectively) of the constriction gesture of intervocalic
singletons and geminates, and shows the details of contextual and cross-subject
variation in the production of this particular subset of rhotics. We show that the
phonological length distinction is conveyed by a combination of durational and
nondurational cues, and that coarticulation with the surrounding vowels is different
for the singleton from how it is for the geminate rhotics. The concluding section, .,
contains a summary of the major ﬁndings, evaluates the advantages of the multilevel
acoustic and articulatory approach, and discusses the implications of the obtained
results for the theories of synchronic and diachronic variation in Italian varieties.
.Methodology
..Materials
The data analyzed in this contribution come from the ElecTRopalatographic and
Ultrasound tongue imaging Rhotics Synchronized corpus (ETRURiaS), a data set
designed to investigate rhotic production via a multilevel articulatory approach. At
the time of writing, ETRURiaS contains the production of two adult female speakers
of a mid-coastal Tuscan variety of Italian spoken in the Livorno and Pisa districts.
Further data are being collected for the same linguistic variety. A list of sixty-two
sentences containing /r/ in word-initial (prevocalic), intervocalic, and pre- and
postconsonantal positions has been designed to cover as many contexts of occurrence
of rhotics as possible. The sentences are all of almost equal length (seven to nine
phonetic syllables) and have a consistent intonational structure. In six sentences, /r/
is in intervocalic position either as a singleton or as a geminate, with /a/, /i/, and /u/ as
the ﬂanking vowels (e.g., Questa è amara non è dolce ‘This is bitter, not sweet’ vs.
Premi barra spaziatrice ‘Press the spacing bar’); in an additional three sentences, /r/ is
in word-initial and sentence-initial position (e.g., Rado cresce il serpillo ‘Sparse grows
Rhotic variation in Tuscan Italian


the wild thyme’), also with /a/, /i/, and /u/ as the following vowel. An additional
thirty-one sentences contain the rhotics in /pr/, /tr/, /kr/, /br/, /dr/, and /ɡr/ clusters,
in both word-internal position (e.g., Questa è sacra un po’ per tutti ‘This is sacred for
almost everyone’) and word- and sentence-initial position (e.g., Cranio e colonna
vertebrale ‘skull and spine’); in these cases as in the previous ones, the ﬂanking vowels
are /a/, /i/, and /u/ (there are fewer than thirty-six sentences because not all phonetic
combinations are present in the Italian lexicon). A group of seventeen sentences
contains the rhotics in preconsonantal position, that is, in /rp/, /rt/, /rk/, /rb/ /rd/, and
/rɡ/ clusters (also in /a/, /i/ and /u/ environments and in both word-internal and
word- and sentence-initial position). A ﬁnal group of ﬁve sentences contains rhotic–
lateral clusters (e.g., Quando parla è molto bravo ‘When speaking, he’s very cool’).
For the purposes of the present experiment, the sentence list was read aloud four
times by speaker CHB and ﬁve times by speaker CHC; the ﬁnal data set therefore
comprises (= ) stimuli in total.
The rhotic segments in the corpus were segmented and annotated in Praat
(version ..). The rhotics were identiﬁed on the basis of visual inspection of
their waveforms and sonograms. For each identiﬁed /r/-sound, we separately anno-
tated constrictions and apertures. In fact, a fundamental distinction must be made
between rhotic sounds that are realized with a single consonantal gesture (a con-
striction), and rhotic sounds that are realized as a combination of constriction and
aperture gestures. In the former case, the rhotics are said to be single-phase segment.
In the latter case, the combination of articulatory phases can give rise to different
types of multiple-phase rhotic segments. Prototypical examples of multiple-phase
rhotics are trills, in which multiple apical constrictions are interspaced with multiple
vowel-like aperture gestures; trills are therefore multiple-phase and multiple-
constriction rhotics. Taps, by contrast, may surface as single-phase rhotics when they
are composed each of a single constriction gesture (thus being single-phase and single-
constriction rhotics at the same time); when ﬂanked by a vocoid (or svarabhakti vowel,
e.g., Baltazani and Nicolaidis ; Savu ), taps are to be considered single-
constriction but multiple-phase rhotics (speciﬁcally, they are realized as a combination
of consonantal constriction and vocalic aperture—both orders possible).
After individuation of constrictions and apertures, each rhotic segment was then
categorized as either trill, tap, approximant, or fricative. Trills are relatively rare in
the corpus. The number of linguo-palatal contacts is never higher than two.
Although trills prototypically show three to ﬁve linguo-palatal contacts, an acoustic
deﬁnition of trills would include any realization with more than one period of actual
vibration (Ladefoged and Maddieson : ). From the auditory point of view,
the two-contact realizations found in the data set sound very close to trills with a
vibrating tongue tip. However, the duration of the opening and closing phases is
longer than the expected –ms (Lindau ) and approaches –ms in most
cases. It is possible that increased coronal stiffness produces longer closure phases
than those reported elsewhere for trills. Alternatively, two-contact rhotics might be
interpreted as a sequence of two apical taps with an intervening opening gesture. In
view of the lack of aerodynamic evidence, it is impossible to determine the produc-
tion dynamics of two-contact rhotics; we adopt for the moment the label of trills,

C. Celata, A. Vietti, and L. Spreaﬁco

given the auditory similarity with prototypical trills and in order to distinguish them
from taps, which are characterized by a single consonantal constriction. In addition
to trills and taps, approximants are classiﬁed as rhotics with a clearly detectable
formant structure distributed over the whole duration of the segment. Approximants
represent the least constricted realizations and are followed by fricatives as slightly
more constricted variants. Fricatives are characterized by an intense aperiodic noise
located at mid and high spectral frequencies. Approximants and fricatives are
generally single-constriction rhotics (although sporadically they can be accompanied
by an opening gesture).
Table .and the corresponding Figure .report the frequency counts and
percentages of the rhotic variants in the corpus, separately for each of the two
T.Frequency of rhotic variants in the corpus (by subject)
CHB
CHC
Total
Approximant



Fricative



Trill



Tap



Total



approximant
fricative
trill
tap
CHC
CHB
100
80
60
40
20
0
F.Percentages of rhotic variants in the corpus (by subject)
Rhotic variation in Tuscan Italian


speakers. The tap is by far the most frequent realization in the speech of both
informants, thus representing a sort of default variant in the corpus. The trilled
variant, which is rather rare in the corpus, is attested in the speech of one speaker
only. Besides taps and trills, alveolar fricatives and approximants are present, though
with a different relative frequency in the speech of the two subjects: approximants are
more frequent than fricatives in the speech of subject CHB while the reverse pattern
holds for the production of subject CHC. A larger speaker sample in future investi-
gations will allow the determination of the role of cross-individual variation in rhotic
production for the selected speech variety. For the moment, it is worth noticing that
approximants and fricatives as allophonic realizations of rhotics are unattested in
previous accounts of standard Italian and Tuscan Italian phonetics and phonology;
the allophonic system resulting from the analysis of the ETRURiaS corpus appears
therefore to be far more complex than expected.
..The multilevel acoustic and articulatory platform
The data were collected using an original platform for the real-time synchronization
and analysis of acoustic, EPG, and UTI information (Spreaﬁco, Celata, Vietti, Bertini,
and Ricci ). The system has been jointly developed by the Alpine Laboratory of
Phonetic Sciences (ALPS) of the Free University of Bozen (Bolzano) and the Labor-
atorio di Linguistica of the Scuola Normale Superiore in Pisa. The acquisition
platform is based on hardware and software components provided by Articulate
Instruments Ltd.⁵ EPG data were collected at Hz through the WinEPG (SPI .)
unit. UTI data were collected at Hz via the Ultrasonix’ SonixTablet unit.⁶ Audio
data were sampled at Hz and digitalized at bit via the Marantz PMD
Solid State Recorder. The pieces of equipment were connected as illustrated in
Figure ., and the EPG, UTI, and audio signals were synchronized using the
Articulate Assistant Advanced software (AAA) (version ..).
The segmentation, annotation, and acoustic analysis were realized using Praat (see
Section ..). The acoustic analysis included the measurement of the duration of the
constriction phase of each rhotic segment, and the automatic extraction of Fand F
values at the acoustic onset and offset of the constriction phase. In case of multiple-
constriction rhotics, only the ﬁrst constriction has been considered.
Segmentations and annotations have been imported into AAA for the articulatory
analysis. EPG data have been analyzed qualitatively (linguo-palatal contact patterns)
and quantitatively. According to the traditional contact index method (since Font-
devila, Pallarès, and Recasens ), the artiﬁcial palate has been divided into the
alveolar zone (or anterior palate, rows –) and the palatal zone (or posterior palate,
rows –). For the purposes of the present study, three articulatory indices have been
extracted at the acoustic midpoint of the constriction phases. The Qp index indicates
⁵ We acknowledge the contribution and technical support of Alan Wrench (QMU, Edinburgh) and
Chiara Bertini and Irene Ricci (SNS, Pisa) during the implementation procedures.
⁶ Probe: Ultrasonix microconvex C-/. Field of view: .. Depth: mm. Scanlines: . Pixel per
scanlines: .

C. Celata, A. Vietti, and L. Spreaﬁco

the quantity of activated electrodes on the posterior palate and has been calculated to
assess contact extension and posteriority in the palatal zone. The CAa index refers to
contact anteriority in the anterior palate and has been used to determine the
anteriority of the linguo-palatal contact. The CCa index refers to contact centrality
in the anterior palate and has been calculated to determine the coronal extension of
the linguo-palatal contact in the anterior palate. While CAa is informative about the
constriction location in the anterior palate (the more anterior the contact, the higher
the CAa values), CCa gives information about the constriction degree (the more
central the contact, the higher the CCa values).
As for the UTI data, the tongue splines for each /r/ token have been traced using
the best ﬁt ﬁtting algorithm provided in AAA. Subsequently all splines have been
checked and, if necessary, manually corrected to ﬁt the tongue proﬁle in the ultra-
sonic images. Then, the XY values of the tongue proﬁles at the temporal midpoint of
all annotations have been exported into a matrix for the comparison of the articu-
latory patterns.
.Constraints on the variation of /R/: A multivariate approach
The ﬁrst goal of the present study is to document rhotic variation and evaluate the
role of contextual factors in determining the apparent polymorphism of rhotics in the
selected speech sample. As anticipated in Section .., the corpus is designed to elicit
as much variation as possible as a function of contextual parameters referring to the
3
17
13
12
14
16
2
11
4
5b
5a
10
8
AC
audio
out
Host R5 232
back
back
back
front
Palate A
Multiplexer
Input
Palate B
front
EPG3-SPI (5)
9
7
15
1
6
AC
Ultrasound
Ethernet
Port 2 right
BCN port 21
Probe
MIC
Audio out
Loudspeakers
Audio in (blue)
USB
PulseStretch
Sync IN
Sync OUT
AUDIO OUT LEFT
(red)
Computer
EPG3-Scanner
EPG3-Scanner
25 way
connector
Select
palate
F.Wiring diagram
() Microphone, () XLR cable, () ultrasound, () computer, () EPGserial port interface: (a) serial/VGA output cable,
(b) VGA/USB adapter, () AI Pulse stretch unit, () BNC cable, ()–() RCA cable, () mini jack .mm to RCA cable,
() audio output, () BNC cable, () BNC to Lemo -pin plug adapter, () RJcable, () loudspeakers,
() ultrasound probe, () AC adapter.
Rhotic variation in Tuscan Italian


quality of the adjacent vowel(s) and, in the case of rhotic clusters, the constriction
location and voicing of the adjacent consonant. To examine the web of connections
among the factors that may constrain rhotic variation in the selected data sample, we
have carried out a Multiple Correspondence Analysis (MCA) (Greenacre ;
Husson, Lê, and Pagès ).⁷ The choice of this technique is primarily motivated
by the need to detect and represent the relationships between variables, especially
when they are numerous and/or characterized by multiple values.
Table .shows the variables considered in the present MCA. Each occurrence of /r/
in the corpus is encoded according to seven variables: the subject (CHB vs. CHC), the
phonetic class of the variant, as determined by the analysis of constrictions and vowel-
like apertures (trill vs. tap vs. fricative vs. approximant; see Section ..), the phono-
tactic context (intervocalic singleton vs. intervocalic geminate vs. postconsonantal vs.
preconsonantal vs. word- and sentence-initial vs. lateral cluster), the phonetic structure
of the rhotic segment (single- vs. multiple-phase, as deﬁned in Section ..), the
quality of the surrounding vowel (low vs. front vs. back), the constriction degree, and
the duration of the ﬁrst constriction phase. The constriction degree and duration refer
to continuous variables as determined by the CCa index and acoustic duration values,
respectively. For the purposes of the MCA, continuous variables have to be trans-
formed into categorical variables. Speciﬁcally, the CCa index values have been trans-
formed into an ordinal variable ranging from .(minimum constriction degree) to 
(full closure). The grouping into three ordered categories is motivated by the
T.List of variables and corresponding values associated with the /r/
tokens in the MCA
Categorical variables
Values
Subject
subject (CHB), subject (CHC)
Variant
trill (r), tap (t), fricative (f ), approximant (a)
Phonotactic context
CrV, VrC, VrV, VrrV, #rV, Vrl
Structure
single phase (single), presence of more than one phase, e.g., an
opening phase ﬂanking the constriction, as in taps; or a sequence
of constrictions and openings, as in trills (multiple)
Vowel
/a/ (low), /i/ (front), /u/ (back)
Continuous variables
Values
Constriction degree
values of the CCa index are grouped into three categories: –.
(c), .–.(c), .–(c)
Constriction duration
duration values are categorized according to a threshold of ms
(>, <)
⁷ MCA was performed using the function MCA() in the R package (..) FactoMineR (Lê,
Josse, and Husson ).

C. Celata, A. Vietti, and L. Spreaﬁco

observation of a marked three-modal distribution in the data.⁸ The acoustic duration
of the ﬁrst constriction phase has been divided into two discrete categories according to
a threshold of ms. The threshold is chosen as a temporal landmark to discriminate
between typical tap closures (< ms) and constrictions that are longer than ms and
are thus incompatible with average tap or trill closure durations (Lindau ;
Ladefoged and Maddieson ; Recasens and Pallarès ).
In MCA, distances between points in a Cartesian plane visually represent the
relations between categories of the selected variables. The leading principle in
the interpretation of the resulting map is the examination of the relative position
of the points: the proximity of two points indicates an association between the
corresponding categories. The association is positive if the points are close to each
other and lie in the same quadrant and negative if the points are close in one
dimension but are opposite one another. The meaning of the dimensions can be
attributed only on the basis of the observation of the overall conﬁguration. The most
extreme categories on one axis are those that provide the major contribution to the
determination of the meaning of that particular dimension.
The results of the MCA for the allophonic variants of /r/ are shown in Figure .,
which plots a bidimensional plane deﬁned horizontally by Dim and vertically by
Dim . According to the classiﬁcation along the horizontal dimension, the right half-
plane is occupied by approximants (Approx), fricatives (Fric), rhotics with a con-
striction duration > ms (Dur_long), intervocalic contexts (VRV, VRRV), and
single-phase rhotics (single). Opposed to these categories, on the left half-plane, are
taps, the postconsonantal context (CRV), multiple-phase rhotics (multiple), rhotics
with a constriction duration < ms (Dur_short), and variants adjacent to low
vowels (low) and characterized by full closure (CCa-).
Such an overall conﬁguration thus reveals that single-phase /r/ variants are more
likely to be approximants and fricatives than taps, that their production is favored in
intervocalic contexts (including geminates, and particularly when either a front or a
back high vowel is present), and that they tend to be longer than ms. By contrast,
taps are strongly associated with a rapid and complete closure (CCa-), they are more
likely to appear in postconsonantal contexts (particularly if the low vowel /a/ is
present), and they are more likely to be preceded by a vocoid. Thus the presence of a
short closure phase, being particularly frequent in the adjacency of another conson-
antal gesture (i.e., in clusters) implies the concomitant presence of additional aper-
ture interval(s), most probably with epenthetic function, as already suggested in the
literature for the rhotics of other Romance (Blecua ; Bradley ; Savu )
and non-Romance languages.
The vertical dimension of classiﬁcation (Dim ) distinguishes approximants, the
lowest constriction degree (CCa-) and subject CHB on the top half-plane from
fricatives, intermediate degree of constriction (CCa-), and subject CHC on the
bottom half-plane. Thus, if the horizontal dimension establishes a distinction
⁸ The distribution of the CCa index is characterized by three clear peaks in the distribution around the
values of ., ., and ..
Rhotic variation in Tuscan Italian


between less constricted variants (fricatives and approximants) and discontinuous
and pulse-like variants (taps) as a function of constriction duration, phonotactic
context, and the number of articulatory phases, the second dimension operates as a
ﬁner discrimination in the realm of less constrained variants. The approximants are
thus separated from fricatives mainly on the basis of a decreased constriction degree.
A further, but less relevant, factor of differentiation is the speaker, because CHB
seems to prefer approximants as alternatives to taps, whereas CHC selects fricatives
more frequently.
As Figure .shows, trills are not straightforwardly captured by either of the two
dimensions of the plane. As for their phonetic properties, trills appear to be mostly
different from approximants and fricatives, particularly in exhibiting multiple articu-
latory phases (multiple) with a relatively high constriction degree (CCa-). However,
these properties are equally valid for taps. Such indeterminacy of trills in the context
of the MCA output may be related to the relatively low frequency of occurrence of
Variant
Context
Vowel
Subject
Structure
CCa
Duration
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5
Dim 2
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Dim 1
CCa–1
Approx
CHB
low
#RV
CRV
Dur_short
multiple Trill
Tap
CCa–3
CHC
VRC
front
VRL
back
VRV
Dur_longsingle
VRRV
CCa–2
Fric
F.Results of the MCA of the rhotic variants: plane representation of the category
cloud
Dimand Dimstand for ﬁrst and second dimensions of the plane, fric for fricative, appr for approximant.

C. Celata, A. Vietti, and L. Spreaﬁco

trills in the corpus but is also revealing of the fact that trilled variants are not easily
separable from other classes on the basis of their phonetic and distributional prop-
erties. To evaluate further the position of trills in the multidimensional space of MCA
and to account for the residual variance in the observations, we have included the
analysis of a third dimension (Dim), not plotted in the bidimensional map of
Figure .. According to Dim, only two categories contribute the most to the
residual variance: notably, the trill, and the word-initial context (#RV). As in the
case of the ﬁrst two dimensions, there appears to be a strong association between
phonetic properties and preferred context of occurrence. There is at least one
phonotactic context in which trills are most likely to occur: the word- and
sentence-initial CV syllable onset. In the framework of the phonetic and contextual
variables deﬁned at the beginning, this distributional generalization turns out to be
the most appropriate parameter for distinguishing trills from taps.
Overall, the MCA reveals that the variation found in the corpus is not random but
rather can be accounted for by a combination of structural phonetic properties,
contextual factors, and individual preferences of the speakers. The structural organ-
ization of rhotic segments (i.e., the number of articulatory phases and their temporal
and articulatory properties) is a fundamental criterion for classifying rhotic variants.
The distinction between variants made up of a single constriction phase and variants
comprising a sequence of constriction phase(s) and vowel-like aperture(s) is able to
account for a large part of the variability of the data; moreover, it is related to both
constriction degree of the consonantal gesture and its temporal duration. Thus,
single-phase variants are associated with a low (Approx, CCa-) or moderate (Fric,
CCa-) degree of constriction and a relatively longer duration, whereas multiple-
phase variants (taps and trills) are associated with complete closure (Tap, CCa-) and
with a relatively shorter duration of the (ﬁrst) constriction phase. Variations along
these three phonetic parameters are additionally predictable on the basis of phono-
tactic constraints, with a primary distinction holding between intervocalic and non-
intervocalic contexts, and a secondary distinction opposing postconsonantal to
preconsonantal contexts.
.The phonetic properties of intervocalic singletons and geminates
A further goal of the analysis is to investigate the acoustic and articulatory properties
of intervocalic rhotics, both singletons and geminates, as attested in the relevant
subset of the ETRURiaS corpus. For the statistical analysis of the acoustic and EPG
parameters, the data are pooled together for the two subjects, with the exception of
the /i/ contexts, which are more numerous and for which a comparison between the
two speakers is also provided. The UTI data are analyzed for the two speakers
separately.
..Acoustic analysis
Overall consonant duration is signiﬁcantly different in the singleton vs. geminate
rhotics for both subjects (subject CHB: ms vs. ms, t=., df=, p<.;
subject CHC: ms vs. ms, t=., df=, p<.). However, the two
Rhotic variation in Tuscan Italian


informants differ qualitatively in the way that the singleton–geminate contrast is
implemented. In subject CHB, both short and long /r/’s are realized as single-
constriction rhotics; by contrast, in subject CHC, the geminate /rː/ can also be realized
with multiple constrictions. The latter are the two-contact trills that have been already
mentioned (see Figure .). Trills in CHC production are present in the /a/ and /u/
contexts only; in the /i/ contexts, only single-constriction variants are allowed.
Subject CHB therefore produces the same single-constriction variants for both
the singleton and the geminate phonemes and uses durational variations of the
closure gesture as a cue to convey the phonological distinction. By contrast, subject
CHC uses contact durational variations consistently in the /i/ context and in a
minority of the /a/ and /u/ contexts, while establishing a qualitative distinction
between single contact (for the singletons) and multiple-contact variants (for the
geminates) in the majority of the /a/ and /u/ contexts.
The single-constriction variants thus represent the large majority of the realiza-
tions in intervocalic position; in what follows, we focus on the acoustic (this section)
and articulatory analysis (Sections ..and ..) of their constriction phase.
The duration of the constriction phase varies as a function of vocalic context in the
single-constriction variants, as the statistically signiﬁcant vowel by length interaction
demonstrates (see Table ., column Duration, and Figure .). In fact, the average
durational difference is signiﬁcant only in the /a/ (t ()=., p<.) and /u/
(t ()=., p<.) contexts, with the /i/ context substantially neutralizing
the difference between the singleton’s and the geminate’s constriction duration
(t ()=., p>.). Therefore, the /i/ context is phonetically the least favorable
for the maintenance of the length distinction, with the singleton showing durational
values close to those of the geminate.
However, if we compare the production strategies of the two subjects in the /i/
context, we ﬁnd that the distinction is blurred in the speech of subject CHB (average
durations: ms for the singleton vs. ms for the geminate; t ()=., p>.);
subject CHC maintains a statistically signiﬁcant durational contrast in the proximity
of a front vowel (average durations: ms for the singleton vs. ms for the
geminate; t ()=., p<.). This cross-subject difference is important if we recall
that subject CHC does not realize multiple-constriction variants in the context of
front vowels. Thus a clear duration-based strategy appears to be exploited by subject
CHC in those contexts in which a qualitative differentiation between singletons and
geminates cannot be maintained. By contrast, subject CHB, who does not rely on
qualitative differentiations, distinguishes between short and long rhotics (temporal
differentiation) in only two out of three contexts. In both cases, the blocking context
is represented by front vowels.
The formant values extracted at the acoustic onset and offset of the constriction
phase vary systematically according to changes in the vocalic context, with Falways
highest for /a/ and lowest for /i/ and Falways highest for /i/ and lowest for /u/ (see
Table .). Thus, rhotic constriction location appears to be highly inﬂuenced by the
articulatory conﬁguration of the surrounding vowels. By contrast, the length distinc-
tion does not affect formant values to a large extent. Fvalues tend to be higher in the
singleton than in the geminate at both onset and offset of the constriction in the /a/

C. Celata, A. Vietti, and L. Spreaﬁco

and /u/ contexts (thus suggesting higher tongue position and more constricted
conﬁguration for the singleton), but the differences are not statistically signiﬁcant.
For Fat the onset and offset of the constriction phase there is however a
signiﬁcant interaction between the two factors of length and vocalic context, thus
suggesting that variations in the size of dorso-palatal contact can be different for the
singleton and the geminate. Fhas been shown to be positively correlated with the
size of dorso-palatal contact, e.g., in the differentiation between clear and dark
laterals, the former involving dorso-palatal contact and higher Fvalues, the latter
showing postdorsal velar or pharyngeal constriction and concomitant lower F
values (Recasens ). Post-hoc tests indeed reveal that, for onset F, there is a
signiﬁcant difference between the singleton and the geminate in the /i/ context, with
higher Fvalues for the singleton and lower Fvalues for the geminate (t() =
., p<.). The same effect is found in the speech of both subjects (average values
for CHB: Hz (s.d. ) vs. Hz (s.d. ); for CHC: Hz (s.d. ) vs. 
Hz (s.d. )). Equally signiﬁcant is the difference between the average Fvalues of
the singleton and the geminate at the offset of the constriction location (t() =
., p<.; average values for CHB: Hz (s.d. ) vs. Hz (s.d. ); for
CHC: Hz (s.d. ) vs. Hz (s.d. )). It can therefore be concluded that at
the beginning and the end of the constriction gesture, singleton rhotics have more
dorso-palatal contact than geminates when adjacent to an anterior vowel. Moreover,
considering that durational variations tend to be neutralized adjacent to /i/, such
discrepancy in the coarticulatory behavior could indicate that the speakers rely on
different production parameters to realize the singleton–geminate distinction in this
speciﬁc vocalic environment (see Table .).
..Linguo-palatal contact
As already mentioned, the three EPG indices of Qp, CAa, and CCa have been
extracted at the temporal midpoint of the constriction phase. Table .reveals that
the length factor (singleton vs. geminate) is never signiﬁcant, whereas the vocalic
context inﬂuences the rhotic production for two out of three articulatory indices. The
T.Average
values
(in
Hz)
and
standard
deviation of Fand Fat the acoustic onset and offset
of the constriction phase (single-constriction rhotics)
Fonset
Foffset
Fonset
Foffset
/a/ singleton () ()
()
()
geminate () ()
()
()
/i/
singleton () ()
() ()
geminate () ()
() ()
/u/ singleton () () ()
()
geminate () ()
() ()
Rhotic variation in Tuscan Italian


post-hoc tests show in fact that the rhotics (singletons and geminates altogether) have
signiﬁcantly higher Qp values in the /i/ context than in the /u/ context, and Qp in the
/u/ context is signiﬁcantly higher than in the /a/ context. As for CAa, the value is
signiﬁcantly higher in the /i/ context than in both the /u/ and /a/ contexts. These data
indicate that there is more vowel-related than length-related contact variation in the
data set. The rhotics thus appear to be characterized by a rather low degree of
coarticulatory resistance, at least with respect to the variations induced by the vocalic
context; this is in line with previous studies showing that taps are less resistant to
coarticulation than are other types of rhotics, such as trills, in different Romance
languages (e.g., Recasens and Pallarès ; Recasens and Espinosa b). The fact
that both Qp and CAa show higher values in the /i/ context suggests that both the
tongue anterodorsum and the tip or blade are raised and advanced in this vocalic
T.Effects of length (singleton vs. geminate), vowel context (/i/ vs. /a/ vs.
/u/), and length by vowel context on constriction duration, and Fand F
constriction onset and offset values
Duration
F_onset
F_onset
F_offset
F_offset
d.f.
F
p
F
p
F
p
F
p
F
p
Length
, ..
..
..
..
..
Vowel
, 
..........
Length*Vowel , 
..
..
..
..
..
Signiﬁcant results are shown in boldface.
duration (sec)
,060
,070
,050
,030
,040
,020
,010
a
i
u
F2_onset (Hz)
2000
2250
1750
1500
1250
a
i
u
F2_offset (Hz)
2000
2450
2200
1800
1600
1400
a
i
u
F1_onset (Hz)
700
800
600
500
400
a
i
u
F1_offset (Hz)
700
600
500
400
a
i
u
F.Constriction duration values, Fand Fvalues at consonant onset and offset for
the singleton vs. geminate contrast as a function of vowel context
Singletons in grey, geminates in black. Bars represent % conﬁdence interval of the mean.

C. Celata, A. Vietti, and L. Spreaﬁco

environment. By contrast, the absence of variation for the CCa index suggests that the
vocalic environment does not inﬂuence the centrality of the contact, i.e., rhotic
constriction degree does not vary as a function of vowel-induced coarticulation. The
difference between singletons and geminates is also not directly captured by the EPG
indices when the overall data set is considered, thus suggesting that variations between
singletons and geminates are not primarily related to the linguo-palatal contact pattern.
However, there is a different Qp pattern as a function of vocalic context, as the
statistically signiﬁcant vowel by length interaction demonstrates (see Table .and
Figure .). Qp values are signiﬁcantly higher (thus suggesting more extended con-
tact in the posterior palate) for the singletons than for the geminates only in the /i/
context (t ()=., p<.), whereas the difference in the /a/ (t ()=.,
p>.) and /u/ (t ()=., p>.) contexts was nonsigniﬁcant. An increase in the
posterior palate contact can be explained by the raised and fronted position of the
anterodorsum necessary for the production of /i/. The singleton turns out to have
more dorso-palatal contact than does the geminate, as the analysis of Fvalues has
also shown (Section ..). When considering the two speakers separately, high Qp
values for the singleton in the /i/ context are found only in the production of subject
CHC (average Qp: .for the singleton vs. .for the geminate; t ()=., p
<.), whereas the difference is nonsigniﬁcant in the production of CHB (average
Qp: .for the singleton vs. .for the geminate; t ()=., p>.). This is
consistent with the previous ﬁnding about shorter singletons in the /i/ context in
subject CHC’s production; for this subject, the length distinction appears to be cued
1.000
.950
.900
.850
.800
.750
a
i
u
CAa
.500
.400
.300
.200
.100
a
i
u
Qp
.800
.600
.400
.200
a
i
u
CCa
F.Constriction Qp (left), CAa (middle), and CCa (right) for the singleton vs.
geminate contrast as a function of vowel context
Grey dots and bars: singletons; black: geminates. Bars represent % conﬁdence intervals of the mean.
T.Effects of length (singleton vs. geminate), vowel
context (/i/ vs. /a/ vs. /u/), and length by vowel context on
constriction Qp (left), CAa (mid), and CCa (right)
Qp
CAa
CCa
d.f.
F
p
F
p
F
p
Length
, 
.
.
.
.
.
.
Vowel
, 
.
.
.
.
.
.
Length*vowel
, 
.
.
.
.
.
.
Rhotic variation in Tuscan Italian


by both duration and posterior palate contact extension, with singletons being
shorter and more coarticulated in the posterior palate with the adjacent vowel. On
the contrary, in CHB’s production neither duration nor posterior palate coarticu-
lation appear to vary as a function of length.
The length by vowel interaction is not signiﬁcant when contact anteriority in the
anterior palate (CAa) is considered (see Table .mid). The CAa is highest in the /i/
context, which indicates a more fronted constriction location for the rhotics when
adjacent to front vowels, but this is essentially found for both singletons and geminates
(although Figure ., mid, seems to suggest a larger difference among singletons than
among geminates). However, the CAa values are signiﬁcantly higher in the /i/ context
for the singleton than for the geminate in the production of CHB (average CAa: .
for the singleton vs. .for the geminate; t ()=., p < .). Thus for this
speaker, who does not realize durational or posterior palate contact differences in the
/i/ context, the singleton–geminate contrast is maintained at the level of different
degrees of vowel coarticulation in the anterior palate constriction location.
Similarly nonsigniﬁcant is the length by vowel interaction when contact centrality
in the anterior palate (CCa) is considered (see Table ., right). The CCa does not
vary as a function of length or vowel quality either, thus suggesting that rhotics do
not substantially vary for the centrality of contact in this data set. Equally, nonsigni-
ﬁcant results are given by the analysis of cross-subject variation in the /i/ context.
..Lingual proﬁles
We look for lingual correlates of the singleton vs. geminate distinction by examining
the position of tongue root, dorsum, and blade. Our interpretative comments are
based on static and dynamic ultrasound data. In Figures ., ., and .we report
smoothing spline estimates for the comparison of the mean curves at the acoustic
midpoint of the constriction phase of the rhotic as computed according to the
proposal in Davidson ().
Figure .(a, b) shows tongue-shape differentiation as a function of the vocalic
context. For both speakers, the tongue dorsum is consistently raised and advanced
for /ir(ː)i/, whereas the posterodorsum is retracted for /ur(ː)u/. For speaker CHB,
there is also a difference in the anterior tongue, which is lower for /ur(ː)u/. For
speaker CHC, the anterior part of the tongue is more advanced for /ir(ː)i/.
The data thus conﬁrm the presence of strong vowel-related variability in
the speech of both subjects. As the linguo-palatal contact indices also revealed
(Section ..), rhotic constriction patterns signiﬁcantly vary according to the lingual
requirements of the contextual vowels: tip fronting and/or anterodorsum raising for
/i/ vs. dorsum retraction for /u/. The subjects may vary in the details of their speciﬁc
implementation strategy, but a three-way distinction is in general maintained at the
level of tongue dorsum, although the distinction is more likely to be reduced to two
(/i/ vs. non-/i/) the more we move to the front of the tongue at the level of the
anterodorsum for CHB and at the level of the tongue blade or tip for CHB. This
picture appears to be consistent with linguo-palatal contact patterns (three-way
distinction for Qp; two-way distinction for CAa; see Section ..). The high degree

C. Celata, A. Vietti, and L. Spreaﬁco

of vowel dependence for rhotics is in agreement with the observation that most of the
rhotics in the data set are relatively unconstrained anterior variants.
Regarding the singleton–geminate distinction, Figures .(for speaker CHB) and
.(for speaker CHC) show that the overall lingual proﬁle is distinct in only some of
the vocalic contexts.
Y
X
60
(a)
(b)
60
80
100
120
50
40
40
20
10
30
Y
X
60
60
80
100
120
50
40
30
Vowel
back
front
low
F.Smoothing spline estimates and % Bayesian conﬁdence interval for com-
parison of the mean curves for /r/ in /ar(ː)ra/, /ur(ː)u/, and /ir(ː)i/ for subjects CHB (a)
and CHC (b)
The tongue tip is on the right and the tongue root is on the left. The axes and scale are the same for all ﬁgures.
Rhotic variation in Tuscan Italian


60
40
80
X
100
120
50
55
(a)
(b)
(c)
40
45
35
30
Y
VRRV
Phon_Context
VRV
60
40
80
X
100
120
50
60
40
30
20
Y
50
40
30
60
40
80
X
100
120
Y
F.Smoothing spline estimates and % Bayesian conﬁdence interval for comparison
of the mean curves for /r/ in /ara/ vs. /arːa/ (a), /iri/ vs. /irːi/ (b), and /uru/ vs. /urːu/ (c) for
subject CHB (singletons: VRV; geminates: VRRV)

The singleton produced by CHB displays marked whole tongue lowering in the /a/
context (Figure .b) and anterodorsum fronting in the /i/ context (Figure .a),
while showing minimal (postero)dorsum raising in the /u/ context (Figure .c).
Thus for this speaker, when the overall lingual conﬁguration is considered, the /u/
context is the least favorable for the maintenance of the distinction, whereas single-
tons and geminates are distinct enough in the proximity of an anterior vowel (as
already shown by Fdata in Section ..and CAa data in Section ..) and close to
a low central vowel.
For speaker CHC, tongue shape and position differentiations are overall less
visible. The singleton presents moderate (antero)dorsum fronting in the /i/ context
(Figure .a) and posterodorsum retraction in the /u/ context (Figure .c) but no
differentiation in the /a/ context (Figure .b). As in the case of subject CHB, then,
the UTI proﬁles suggest that the tongue conﬁguration is different for the singletons
compared with the geminates also in non-anterior vowel contexts, contrary (or
complementarily) to what can be inferred from acoustic and EPG evidence. As for
the /i/ context, the two subjects’ proﬁles consistently show that in those phonetic
environments in which constriction lengthening or constriction duplication cannot
be used to signal the presence of a geminate, the speakers can nonetheless resume
other production strategies to differentiate the geminate from the singleton. The
different lingual conﬁgurations shown by UTI are consistent with both formant
analysis (which points to more anterodorsum involvement for singletons in both
subjects) and the EPG data (which indicate more dorsum contact in the posterior
palate for CHC and more anterodorsum contact in the anterior palate for CHB)
(Section ..).
As a further investigation of the singleton–geminate distinction in the /i/ context,
we propose an analysis of how the tongue surface changes its shape and position along
the midsagittal plane over time.⁹ The dynamics of tongue movements can be repre-
sented by tracing a succession of tongue curves within a given time frame. In
Figures .(a, b) and .(a (left), b (right)), the dynamic movement of four
representative tokens of singleton and geminate rhotics in the /i/ context are shown.
The curves refer to tongue conﬁguration from the acoustic midpoint of the preceding
/i/ to the point of maximum constriction (as articulatorily detected) of the /r(ː)/. The
curves are approximately ms apart in time. Following Scobbie et al. () the
arrows show the direction of movement in time. Figure .(a, b) shows that for
speaker CHB, tongue shape is slightly different in the singleton (Figure .a) com-
pared with the geminate (Figure .b); for singleton /r/ the tongue is overall more
bunched toward the palate. The articulatory dynamics are nevertheless very similar in
the two cases: the tongue root is mostly inactive and only the tongue dorsum and
blade move. Wide spacing of the traces in the blade area on the right indicates rapid
movements as the blade and tip move upward. Narrow spacing of the traces for the
tongue dorsum indicates slower movements, especially when the tongue is about to
⁹ An alternative method for the analysis of the dynamics of the tongue is presented in Pini et al. (a, b).
Rhotic variation in Tuscan Italian


60
(a)
(b)
(c)
50
40
Y
60
80
100
120
X
60
50
40
20
30
Y
60
80
100
120
X
60
50
40
30
Y
60
80
100
120
X
VRRV
Phon_Context
VRV
F.Smoothing spline estimates and % Bayesian conﬁdence interval for comparison
of the mean curves for /r/ in /ara/ vs. /arːa/ (a), /iri/ vs. /irːi/ (b), and /uru/ vs. /urːu/ (c) for
subject CHC (singletons: VRV; geminates: VRRV)

reach the constriction location and stay still for a few frames. The movements are
indeed coordinated and the blade and tip rise as the dorsum lowers.
Figure .(a, b) shows the dynamic movement from /i/ into singleton and
geminate /r/ for subject CHC. Also in this case, the articulatory target is very similar
for the singleton and the geminate. However, tongue dynamics are quite different
and the tongue appears to be more active for /r/ than for /rː/. In the articulation of the
singleton, the tongue root, dorsum, and blade are coordinated: rapid upward move-
ments of the blade and tip are synchronized with root fronting and dorsum lowering.
Narrower spacing of the traces for the posterior part of the tongue indicates slower
and smaller movements, especially when the tongue starts moving toward the
constriction location for the consonant. Conversely, as for the geminate, the tongue
almost remains immobile: there are no movements in the tongue dorsum and root,
and only small upward movements in the blade.
Thus for subject CHC, the geminate appears to be articulated with very small
changes with respect to the lingual conﬁguration requested by the preceding vowel.
The tapping movement is almost invisible.
When considered in conjunction with the results of the static UTI analysis, which
has shown essentially comparable results for lingual proﬁles of CHC and CHB in the
/i/ context, with the singleton being produced with higher tongue position and more
x-Axis
xxx
(a)
(b)
xxx
xxx
142.146
42.6638
x-Axis
y-Axis
y-Axis
62.3571
48.8279
xxx
F.Dynamic movement of the singleton /r/ (a) and the geminate (b) in the /i/ context
for speaker CHB
The wide lines show the ﬁrst and the last curves.
x-Axis
140.2045
44.9276
17.0245
64.4369
y-Axis
x-Axis
130.1052
42.32
17.60
y-Axis
96.943
(a)
(b)
F.Dynamic movement of the singleton /r/ (a) and the geminate (b) in the /i/ context
for speaker CHC
The wide lines show the ﬁrst and the last curves.
Rhotic variation in Tuscan Italian


extended dorso-palatal contact than the geminate, the results of the dynamic analysis
additionally suggest that the tapping movement may change across contexts, at least
for one of the subjects. Speciﬁcally, for subject CHC the tapping movement for the
geminate is reduced. An increase in the duration of single-constriction rhotics may
imply a reduction of the tapping movement. Variations in the magnitude of the
tapping movement can therefore be seen as an additional nondurational parameter
of the singleton–geminate distinction in rhotics. The observation is also consistent
with the distributional preference for fricatives and approximants to occur in inter-
vocalic position, non-low vowel contexts, as the MCA in Section .has shown.
.Summary of the results and discussion
In this chapter, we have assumed a multilevel integrated perspective, based on real-
time synchronization and analysis of acoustic, electropalatographic, and ultrasound
tongue imaging data, to study rhotic variation in the production of two speakers of a
western Tuscan variety of Italian. The study conﬁrms the exceptional degree of
variability that notoriously characterizes rhotic sounds across the world languages,
as well as the pervasiveness of cross-individual variation in the articulatory strategies
that can be pursued to produce /r/ sounds.
In particular, we have shown that constriction location is strongly inﬂuenced by
vowel-induced coarticulation: the rhotics produced by the two subjects of the
ETRURiaS corpus are relatively unconstrained lingual consonants. Moreover, the
data set—though relatively small—attests to the presence of much more variation
than expected for a (Tuscan) Italian variety, including, besides taps and trills,
approximants and fricatives.
The proposed analysis has additionally shown that a better characterization of
rhotic variation in the selected speech variety can be reached if we overcome purely
segmental classiﬁcations and provide an accurate description of three major phonetic
parameters of variation: the number of the articulatory phases (which can be two or
just one according to the presence or absence of a vocalic aperture ﬂanking the
constriction gesture, and which can sporadically be more than two, in the realization
of multi-constriction trilled variants), constriction degree (which varies according to
a continuum of contact values from complete alveolar contact to unconstricted
approximant realizations), and constriction duration (which can also be seen as a
continuum, from the shortest closures characterizing trills to the relatively short
closure of taps and up to the longest constriction of fricatives and approximants).
These three parameters combine in nonrandom associations and the presence of a
given property along one of the three parameters implies the presence (or the
absence) of a different property along another parameter. One example of such
mutual predictiveness of phonetic properties is found in the inverse relationship
involving duration and constriction degree. The results of the MCA (according to
which fricatives and approximants co-occur with constrictions longer than ms)
and of the UTI dynamic analysis (showing that, for one subject, intervocalic gemin-
ates lack the tapping movement) provide converging evidence in this direction
(although from a different perspective, the analysis of the CCa index conducted on

C. Celata, A. Vietti, and L. Spreaﬁco

the singleton–geminate distinction does not register any systematic increase of
contact centrality for the singleton).
Syntagmatic variation is also very strong in the dataset. In most cases, the
phonotactic context predicts the presence (or the preferential occurrence) of a
speciﬁc phonetic property in spite of others. This not only applies to the already-
mentioned vowel quality changes but also to the difference between intervocalic,
prevocalic, and postvocalic rhotics. Trills are the most extreme example of the
predictiveness of the phonotactic context because, according to the MCA, they are
deﬁned by the fact of occurring preferentially in word-initial contexts rather than by
any other differential phonetic property. The association of single-phase variants
with the intervocalic position is another case of syntagmatic variation in the phonetic
properties of /r/ in the speech sample under investigation.
The analysis of singleton and geminate single-constriction rhotics has additionally
shown that the phonological length distinction is variably realized and is not always
cued by durational changes. As for duration, the data suggest that taps, fricatives, and
approximants can undergo lengthening when used for geminates (although there
seems to be a negative correlation between duration and size of contact area). This is
worth noticing if one considers that in most geminating languages the durational
variation for rhotics is implemented by trills, which have a clear potential for
temporal expansion given the possibility of varying the number of linguo-palatal
contacts (Ladefoged and Maddieson ). Aspects of the articulatory conﬁguration
that do not directly impact on consonant duration are also involved in cueing the
length distinction. This is particularly visible in the /i/ context, in which the dur-
ational contrast tends to be lost. Singleton rhotics are more coarticulated with the
vowel than the corresponding geminates, particularly as far as the anteroposteriority
of the contact is concerned. Duration is inversely related with dorso-palatal contact
in the speech of one speaker but with the size of anterior palate contact in the speech
of the other. In both cases, the articulatory variations are consistently signaled by
Fvalues and EPG contact indices. The singleton rhotics in the /i/ context are also
characterized by a more distinct tapping movement of the tongue tip toward the
alveolar region, whereas geminates seem to be characterized by a less constricted
conﬁguration in the anterior oral cavity.
The UTI proﬁles additionally note that tongue postdorsum conﬁguration may
also change as a function of the length of the rhotics: although tongue root and
posterodorsum are only indirectly involved in articulation, the lingual proﬁles for
one subject reveal a tendency for the singleton to be produced with a backward
displacement of the most posterior region of the tongue in the /u/ context, thus
suggesting that the inﬂuence of the vowel context on the singleton rhotics is not
limited to the gestures of the anterior tongue.
Taken together, all nondurational indices consistently indicate more vowel-
dependent coarticulatory variation in the singleton than in the geminate. This
tendency is in agreement with Payne’s (, a) analysis of durational and
nondurational properties of the singleton–geminate distinction in several Italian
consonants (rhotics not included). In those studies, coronal geminates basically
showed a more palatal conﬁguration, with increased constriction and more extended
Rhotic variation in Tuscan Italian


dorso-palatal contact. Farnetani () similarly shows larger contact surface and
less sensitivity to V-to-C coarticulation for the geminate than for the singleton in
Italian dental stops. Whether the motivation has to be found in the increased stiffness
of the articulators during geminates’ production or in the gestural undershoot of the
singletons due to reduced duration, it is worth noticing that nondurational variations
accompany durational variations in the realization of the length distinction and
sometimes appear to take over the distinction, particularly in those contexts in
which durational variations tend to decrease.
Given this picture, it is possible to hypothesize that the variable rhotic degemina-
tion process attested in the literature for this Tuscan variety is rooted in the
incomplete neutralization of singletons and geminates that can be observed particu-
larly in the /i/ context. High vowels produce reduction of contrast between singletons
and geminates, as proven by the loss of trilled variants in one subject and the
neutralization of the durational contrast in the other subject. The EPG and UTI
analyses reveal, by contrast, that the articulatory conﬁgurations change as a function
of rhotic length most often (though not exclusively) in the /i/ context. Thus one
possible scenario in a hypothetical sound change is that the articulatory distinctions
in the /i/ context, no longer supported by durational distinctions, gradually become
impoverished, until the length feature is completely lost (and then the length
neutralization could generalize to non-/i/ intervocalic contexts). According to an
alternative scenario, the length distinction could progressively be restructured from
having a predominantly durational basis to having a nondurational, articulatory basis
only, ﬁrst for the rhotics in the /i/ context, and subsequently in other vocalic contexts.
Such an articulatory-based distinction could in principle be valid in (or expand to)
non-intervocalic positions too; for instance, the more coarticulation-resistant variant
could generalize to syllable-initial strong positions (/#rV/ or /VC.rV/), whereas the
less resistant variant could generalize to syllable-ﬁnal positions or branching onsets
(/Vr.CV/ or /CrV/, respectively). The preference of two-constriction rhotics (or trills)
to occur in the /#rV/ context in the present data set (see Section .) would be
consistent with such a prediction. More generally, this scenario would certainly be
reminiscent of the phonological systems of other Romance languages, such as
contemporary Spanish or Catalan, in which a qualitative distinction between
(short) taps and (long) trills is phonologically contrastive in intervocalic position
but the two phonemes are in complementary distribution elsewhere (Harris ;
Recasens and Pallarès ; see also Celata et al. for Sicilian Italian). It must,
however, be recognized that the articulatory differences between the singleton and
the geminate variants pointed out for the two Tuscan speakers of the present study
are smaller than the Ibero-Romance tap–trill distinction; the articulatory gestures for
the different rhotic variants are essentially the same, apart from scalar variations in
contact degree and duration. Less salient distinctions are necessarily less likely to
undergo phonologization.
In any case, both scenarios assume that the variable degemination process men-
tioned in the literature has phonetic motivations, such as the ones observed in the
current study: low compatibility between the gesture for anterior vowels and the
gesture for multiple-phase rhotics; strong coarticulatory inﬂuence exerted on short

C. Celata, A. Vietti, and L. Spreaﬁco

single-phase constrictions by the surrounding vowels; and the tendency of long
constrictions to have a reduced constriction degree (and probably also to lose the
tapping movement). Of course, there might be other nonphonetic factors intervening
and pushing the system toward either suppression or maintenance (or even enhance-
ment) of the phonological length feature in rhotics; however, this issue is beyond the
scope of the present study.
The multilevel approach has proven to open interesting perspectives for the study
of speech variation. The two sources of articulatory inspection, i.e., EPG and UTI, in
several cases complement each other and contribute to the interpretation of the
acoustic data. In some other cases, they do not give completely consistent results.
One such example is the absence of CCa variations as a function of rhotic length in
the EPG analysis, which is contradictory with the differences in tongue tip activity
observable for one subject in the UTI dynamic analysis. If the tapping movement is
absent in the geminate production of speaker CHC and the overall tongue proﬁle is
lowered with respect to the singleton, then one would have expected to ﬁnd lower
CCa values for the geminate than for the singleton. Similar cases of imperfect
correspondence between linguo-palatal contact data and lingual imaging data are
particularly stimulating with respect to future possibilities of making predictions
about how changes in the overall lingual conﬁgurations (including tongue poster-
odorsum and root) impact constriction location and extension and vice versa (see
Chen et al. for further examples concerning nonrhotic consonant articulation in
Tuscan Italian).
Finally, the observation that a relevant part of the variation observed in the corpus
is also related to individual choices of the speakers calls for an expansion of the
speech sample in future investigations.
Acknowledgments
We acknowledge the ﬁnancial support of Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa, Laboratorio di
Linguistica (director Prof. P. M. Bertinetto); Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa, project grant
-GR-to Chiara Celata; and to Provincia Autonoma di Bolzano-Alto Adige,
Ripartizione allo studio, Università e ricerca scientiﬁca –project grant “The articu-
latory sociophonetics of bilinguals in South-Tyrol: the Ultrasound Tongue Imaging potential”
to Alessandro Vietti and Lorenzo Spreaﬁco.
Rhotic variation in Tuscan Italian


7
Vowels and diphthongs
The articulatory and acoustic
structure of Romanian nuclei
IOANA CHITORAN AND STEFANIA MARIN
.Introduction
Within Romance typology, Romanian belongs to the group of languages that have
undergone diphthongization, with diphthongs developing historically from several
sources, as we detail later in this section. As a result, Romanian distinguishes between
typologically rare mid diphthongs /ea/, /oa/ and high diphthongs /ja/, /wa/. At the
same time, Romanian is the only Romance language that has, to some extent,
maintained a contrast between diphthongs and hiatus sequences of the same vocalic
elements (see Chitoran and Hualde , and references therein). We know that
Romance languages differ diachronically with respect to the diphthongization of mid
vowels under stress (e.g., Spanish p[je]dra, but Portuguese or Catalan p[e]dra ‘stone’).
They also differ synchronically in the tendency to maintain hiatus sequences. Below are
relevant examples from a subset of the Romance varieties experimentally studied by
Chitoran and Hualde (). The more common realizations are marked in boldface.
()
Diphthong [jV]–hiatus [i.V] variability in three Romance languages:
French: no hiatus, all diphthongs
[mjɔp], [bjɛl], [medjan]
‘shortsighted’; ‘rod’; ‘median’
Spanish: variable, diphthong predominant
[mi.ope] or [mjope], [bi.ela] or [bjela], [meðjana]
Romanian: variable, hiatus predominant
[mi.opu], [bi.ela], [medi.ana] or [medjana]
The present study extends this comparison to hiatus sequences formed across word
boundaries, relying on articulatory and acoustic production data.
Following Graur and Rosetti (), Chitoran (), and Renwick (), we
assume a “square” vowel system of Romanian, which includes the diphthongs /ea/
and /oa/.
Romance Phonetics and Phonology. First edition. Mark Gibson and Juana Gil (eds.)
This chapter © Ioana Chitoran and Stefania Marin . First published by Oxford University Press.

()
i
ɨ
u
e
ʌ
o
ea
a
oa
The nine-vowel inventory is based on the phonological behavior of the diphthongs.
Chitoran (a) shows that /ea/ and /oa/ are phonemic, as well as being phonolo-
gically and morphologically conditioned. Following Renwick (), we use the
symbol /ʌ/ for the central mid vowel, in keeping with its phonemic status and its
distribution in both stressed and unstressed positions.
Many of these vowels can combine, resulting in a lexicon characterized by an
abundance of glide–vowel and vowel–vowel sequences. This raises the question of the
nature of a syllable nucleus in Romanian. In this study we address this issue by
bringing together articulatory and acoustic evidence that identiﬁes the differentiating
properties of these three categories, limiting our observations to the front context:
/ea/, /ja/, /e.a/, /i.a/.
The diphthongs that we study have the following historical sources:
()
Historical diphthongs
/ja/ from Late Latin stressed /ɛ/ after labials:
[ˈpɛtra] > *[pjetra] >[ˈpjatrʌ] ‘stone’
Palatalization of /l/ in velar–liquid clusters: CLAMAT>[ˈkjamʌ] ‘calls’
/ea/ from Latin stressed /e/:
SERA>[ˈsearʌ] ‘evening’
/ea/ from loss of geminate [lː] and diphthongization of a ﬁnal stressed vowel:
STELLA> [ˈstea] ‘star’, MAXILLA> [mʌˈsea] ‘tooth’
/ea/ from stressed /e/ in later borrowings:
Turkish: [kaˈfea] ‘coffee’, [perˈdea] ‘curtain’
In addition to diphthongs, we examine vowel–vowel sequences in hiatus, word
internally ([fi.ˈasko] ‘ﬁasco’) and across word boundaries ([ˈkra.bi#ˈa.rʌ] ‘the crabs’
plow’, [ˈkrabj#ˈa.rʌ] ‘crabs plow’). In the last two examples, the ﬁnal [i] of [krabi] is
the plural deﬁnite marker, and the ﬁnal [j] of [krabj] is the plural indeﬁnite marker,
realized as palatalization of the ﬁnal consonant.
On the basis of their phonotactic properties (see Chitoran , a), the mid
diphthong /ea/ has been assumed to form a complex nucleus, while the high diphthong
/ja/ has been represented as an onset–nucleus sequence, with hiatus sequences such as
/e.a/ and /i.a/ occupying two consecutive syllable nuclei. We predict that this three-way
phonological distinction should be reﬂected in differences at the articulatory and
acoustic level. The diphthong /ea/ as a complex nucleus should exhibit the greatest
temporal overlap between the two vowels and the largest coarticulation (blend)
between its targets. The hiatus sequences as vowels in two sequential syllables should
show the least overlap and coarticulation, while the diphthong /ja/ should be inter-
mediate, more similar to /ea/ than to hiatus sequences in terms of timing, because of it
being a tautosyllabic vs. heterosyllabic sequence.
Previous empirical evidence has shown that indeed /ea/ and /ja/ are reliably
distinguished perceptually and that they also differ in their acoustic properties at
Vowels and diphthongs


the onset (Chitoran b). In terms of duration, /ja/ has also been shown to be
longer than /ea/, providing empirical evidence for the proposed structural difference
(an onset–nucleus sequence vs. a complex nucleus). A more recent articulatory study
(Marin, ) examining the three-way contrast between /ea/, /ja/, and /e.a/ has
reported a difference in articulatory position among the three categories. However,
because of measurement limitations due to the stimuli recorded, this study could
only indirectly infer possible timing differences between the categories.
The current chapter, with a set of stimuli better suited for an articulatory identi-
ﬁcation of vowel movement, aims to bring direct evidence on the timing differences
between the categories, while at the same time providing both articulatory and
acoustic evidence on the main characteristics differentiating /ja/ and /i.a/, two
sequences not previously compared experimentally. In the following sections we
present the results of an articulatory (EMA) study and of an acoustic study that
address these questions.
.Articulatory study: method
The articulatory study focuses on the following comparisons:
• diphthong /ea/ vs. diphthong /ja/. Contexts: [Cea#C], [C#jaC]. Both diphthongs
are stressed.
• diphthong /ea/ vs. cross-word sequence [e#a] and monophthongs /e, a/.
• diphthong /ja/ in [C#jaC] vs. cross-word sequences [Ci#a] and [Cj#a]. As a
reminder, in the latter, the glide is a plural marker, the palatalization of the root-
ﬁnal consonant.
..Stimuli and data acquisition
Data were recorded from ﬁve Romanian native speakers (three female) with no
reported speech, hearing, or language problems. They all spoke standard Romanian
and were naive regarding the purposes of the experiment. They were familiarized
with the list of utterances prior to data collection and were instructed to speak at a
comfortable rate. During data collection, speakers saw the target utterance on
a computer screen and were visually cued when to speak. They repeated each
utterance twice per trial in three randomized blocks, resulting in a targeted number
of six repetitions per utterance. The stimuli, presented in Table ., consisted of
target words containing diphthongs /ea/ or /ja/, corresponding cross-word vowel
sequences, and control single vowels, all spoken in a constant sentence. In order to
match the total number of syllables in the sentence across the /ea/ and /ja/ contexts,
two carrier phrases were used: /ˈspun__ / ‘I say__’ for the /ea/ series, and /spu.
ˈneam__/ ‘I was saying__’ for the /ja/ series. These sentences were interspersed with
ﬁller sentences constituting data sets for other experiments.
Because the aim of this experiment was to identify the vowels on the basis of their
articulatory movement, it was necessary for the context preceding the target sequence
to be labial. This requirement further limited our choice of stimuli, so that hiatus
sequences had to be cross-word rather than within-word, and one diphthong had to
be word-ﬁnal and the other word-initial.

Ioana Chitoran and Stefania Marin

The kinematic data were collected using the EMA magnetometer system at the
Institute of Phonetics in Munich (AG, Carstens Medizinelektronik). The system
records articulatory movement over time by tracking, within an electromagnetic
ﬁeld, the position of sensors glued on various organs relevant for speech. In the
current experiment, four sensors were attached to midsagittal points on the speaker’s
tongue, spaced fairly equidistantly from tongue tip to tongue velar region: a tongue
tip (TT) sensor, an anterior tongue body (TB) sensor, a posterior tongue body
(TB) sensor, and a velar (tongue dorsum, TD) sensor. Additional sensors were
placed on upper and lower lips, and on the lower gums (jaw) to determine jaw
movement. Reference sensors were placed on the nose bridge, upper gums (maxilla),
and behind the ears. An outline of the hard palate was obtained for each speaker by
sliding a sensor along the midline of the speaker’s hard palate. The movement data
were sampled at Hz and subjected to standard post-processing procedures
following an algorithm developed at the Munich Institute for Phonetics (Hoole and
Zierdt ). The kinematic signals were ﬁltered at Hz cutoff frequency for the
reference sensors, at Hz for the TT sensor, and at Hz for all other sensors. The
data were corrected for head movement on the basis of the reference sensors and
rotated to each speaker’s occlusal plane, with the origin approximately at the incisors,
and such that the x-axis is parallel to the occlusal plane and the y-axis lies perpen-
dicular to it.
..Measurement and analyses
For segmentation, we used the Matlab-based Mview software developed by Mark
Tiede at Haskins Laboratories. Vowel articulation was determined on the basis of the
movement of the tongue body (TB, TB) sensors. The movement of the two sensors
was similar, so for convenience, the ﬁrst vowel/glide in a sequence (/e/, /j/, or /i/) was
determined on the basis of TBmovement, while the second (/a/), on the basis of
TBmovement. Tongue body trajectory (movement) was determined on the basis
of the relative distance of the relevant sensor (TB, TB) to the outline of the hard
palate, calculated as the minimal Euclidean distance of every time sample of the
sensor to all sample points of the palate. Using information of the tongue position
T.Target stimuli for the articulatory study, with intervals of interest
shown in boldface
Category
Items
Stimuli
Diphthong
/ea/
/ja/
ka.ˈfea # ﬁnʌ coffee, ﬁne ‘ﬁne coffee’
ˈkrab # ˈja.rʌ ‘crab again’
Cross-word vowel
sequence
/e_a/
/i_a/
/j_a/
ˈga.fe # ˈa.ﬁ.ne blunders blueberries
ˈkra.bi # ˈa.rʌ crabs-the plow ‘the crabs plow’
ˈkrabj # ˈa.rʌ crabs plow
Single vowel
/e/
/a/
ˈga.fe # ˈﬁ.ne blunders ﬁne ‘ﬁne blunders’
ˈga.fa # ˈﬁ.nʌ blunder-the ﬁne ‘the ﬁne blunder’
Vowels and diphthongs


relative to the palate has the advantage of normalizing between speakers’ different
anatomies, compared to using the horizontal/vertical position coordinated. It also
simpliﬁes sensor position information to one dimension, by capturing both horizontal
and vertical sensor position in one single measurement reﬂecting constriction degree.
Kinematic events deﬁning target achievement (Target), maximal constriction
(Max), and release (Release) of a vowel were determined on the basis of changes in
the tangential velocity proﬁle of tongue body movement (see Figure .). Maximal
constriction was automatically detected as the minimum velocity between the two
velocity peaks (Peak , Peak ) in the interval of interest determined by visual
inspection, while target and release of the vowel were deﬁned as the points in time
at which velocity was % of the preceding and following velocity peaks, respectively
(see Figure .). In the context of vowels, the term constriction should be understood
as referring to the vowel’s target, whether it is more constricted in relation to the
palate (as is the case for /i/ or /e/) or more open (as is the case for /a/).
Maximal constriction was used for determining vowel-to-vowel timing, deﬁned as
the temporal lag between maximal constriction of the ﬁrst vowel (V) and maximal
constriction of the second vowel (V): Timing = MaxV–MaxV. This measure
indicates how much the two vowels overlap: the smaller the measure, the greater
the temporal overlap between the two vowels. Indirectly, this is also a measure of
coarticulation, as segments that overlap more have the potential for more coarticulation.
Given our hypothesis, we expect diphthong /ea/ to exhibit the shortest vowel-to-vowel
timing, hiatus sequences /i.a, e.a/ to exhibit larger timing lags, and diphthong /ja/ to be
intermediate.
Maximal constriction was also the time point at which the articulatory position of
each vowel was determined in terms of distance of the relevant tongue body sensor to
the palate trace. Values around indicate that the tongue is near or touches the
6
4
2
0
–5
–10
TB1
Palate distance
(mm)
kHz
TB1
Velocity
(cm/s)
–15
4
Peak 1
Target
AUDIO
Max
Release
Peak 2
500
520
540
Time (ms)
2
0
F.Example measurement of vowel articulatory movement for vowel /e/ in diphthong
/ea/ in one repetition of the word /ka.ˈfea/. The visible part is the interval [a.ˈfea]

Ioana Chitoran and Stefania Marin

hard palate, and negative values indicate that the tongue is below the palate; while
the tongue never actually goes beyond the palate, the EMA measurement error rate of
+/mm may result in measured positive values when the tongue is very close to the
hard palate (Yunusova, Green, and Mefferd ). A low, open vowel such as /a/ is
expected to have a greater distance from the relevant tongue body sensor to the palate
(larger negative values) than higher, more constricted vowels such as /i/ and /e/.
Additionally, greater temporal overlap between vowels (and hence conﬂicting targets)
is expected to also be reﬂected in the tongue position that these vowels achieve. In other
words, the observed vowel position reﬂects the coarticulatory inﬂuences that the vowel
targets exert on one another.
For statistical analyses, linear mixed models were computed using the lme4
package (version .-; Bates, Maechler, Bolker, and Walker ) for R (R version
.., R Core Team ), with p-values being determined by a χlog-likelihood
ratio test comparing a model including the factor of interest with a model with no
ﬁxed factor (see Bates ). This method circumvents the difﬁculty in estimating
denominator degrees of freedom for mixed linear models. For post-hoc comparisons,
p-values were determined using the Tukey adjusted contrast in the multcomp
package for R, a package appropriate for mixed models (Hothorn, Bretz, and Westfall
). Means and standard deviations of the measurements taken are presented in
Appendix A.
Given the phonological analysis of diphthongs /ea/ and /ja/ and of the corres-
ponding hiatus sequences, it is expected that the diphthongs differ both in timing
(temporal overlap) and articulatory position from the corresponding hiatus
sequences. It is also expected that /ea/ as a complex nucleus will differ in its timing
and degree of blending between its targets from /ja/.
..Results
Figure .shows vowel-to-vowel timing across the two diphthongs and respective
cross-word sequences. Recall that this is a measure of overlap between the two
vowels/diphthong targets, with smaller values indicating more overlap. Indirectly,
100
i_a
j_a
ja
ea
e_a
Item
Vowel-to-vowel timing lag (ms)
150
200
F.Vowel-to-vowel timing lag, representing the lag between maximal constriction of
the two vowels. A smaller timing lag indicates more overlap
Vowels and diphthongs


this measure also predicts degree of coarticulation, as segments that overlap more are
expected to inﬂuence each other and blend into each other more. A linear mixed
model on dependent variable: Timing Lag, with ﬁxed factor: Item (levels: /i_a/, /j_a/,
/ja/, /ea/, /e_a/) and random intercept for factor: Speaker, showed that vowel-
to-vowel timing differed as a function of category (F() = ., χ= .,
p < .). Post-hoc comparisons showed that the diphthong /ea/ had signiﬁcantly
shorter vowel-to-vowel timing lags than all cross-word sequences (p < .). The lags
for diphthong /ea/ were also tendentially shorter than for diphthong /ja/ (p = .).
Diphthong /ja/ had timing lags comparable to those of sequence /e_a/ (p = .), but
signiﬁcantly shorter than sequences /i_a/, /j_a/ (p < .). Sequences /j_a/ and /i_a/
also showed longer vowel-to-vowel timing lags than sequence /e_a/ (p < .). The
results thus show a clear difference in vowel-to-vowel timing between the cross-word
sequences and the diphthongs, and also tendentially between the two diphthongs:
Diphthong /ea/ was produced with its two targets overlapping the most, the two
vocalic targets of hiatus sequences overlapped less, while diphthong /ja/ exhibited an
intermediate timing pattern, with less overlap than diphthong /ea/, but more overlap
than hiatus sequences /j_a/ and /i_a/.
Articulatory position during Vin a sequence is shown in Figure ., and during
Vin the sequence in Figure .. Recall that this position represents constriction
degree of a vowel, expressed in terms of distance to the palate of a tongue body
sensor. As the tongue approaches the palate, the value of this measure approaches
value (indicating a full constriction, or a high tongue position close to the palate).
As the values decrease from zero, they indicate a more open, lower tongue position.
For Vdistance to the palate, Figure .shows that /j/ and /i/ were produced, as
expected, with a high tongue position or constriction, while /e/ was less constricted
(about mm tongue body distance to the palate). A linear mixed model (ﬁxed factor:
Item and random intercept for factor: Speaker) indicated a signiﬁcant difference in
Vposition as a function of item (F() = , χ= ., p<.). Post-hoc com-
parisons showed that this effect was due to the high vowel/glide having a smaller
distance to the palate than the mid vowel (p<.), but no other differences were
0
–2
–4
–6
V1 distance to the palate (mm)
i_a
j_a
ja
ea
e_a
e
Item
F.Position of the ﬁrst vowel/glide (V) in diphthong/hiatus sequences and position
of vowel /e/

Ioana Chitoran and Stefania Marin

observed. Thus, in terms of Vposition, a difference was observed as a function of
vowel height, but not as a function of category (diphthong vs. cross-word sequence).
A linear mixed model on the position (distance to the palate) of V, with ﬁxed
factor: Item and random intercept for factor: Speaker also indicated a signiﬁcant
difference between items (F() = ., χ= ., p<.). A post-hoc analysis
further revealed that the position of /a/ was affected by category. Thus /a/ in both /ea/
and /ja/ was signiﬁcantly closer to the palate (less open) (p<.) than in the
comparable cross-word vowel sequences (/e_a/ and /i_a/–/j_a/, respectively). Fur-
thermore, vowel /a/ in diphthong /ea/ was signiﬁcantly higher than in diphthong /ja/
or singleton /a/ (p<.). Position of vowel /a/ in diphthong /ja/ and sequence /e_a/
was comparable to position of singleton vowel /a/ (p>.).
It must be noted that series /ea/ is followed by vowel /i/ in the next syllable, while
series /ja/ is followed by vowel /ʌ/.The quality of the following vowel is also expected
to affect the position of /a/ differently in the two series (see Renwick ). However,
if distance to the palate were entirely due to coarticulation with the following /i/,
then we would expect Vin all three contexts—/ea/, /e_a/, /a/—to be comparably
close to the palate. Instead, when we compare these three contexts (Figure .), they
pattern as predicted by the hypothesis of the syllable organization: Vin the
diphthong /ea/ is closest to the palate, and Vin /e_a/ patterns with singleton /a/.
Only in the diphthong do the two vowels share a nucleus.
A linear mixed-model analysis of the difference in position between the two vowels
(plotted in Figure .), with random intercept for speaker, indicated that the categories
changed by different amounts (F() =., χ= ., p<.), and that position of
the vowels in /ˈea/ changed signiﬁcantly less than in all other categories (p<.).
..Discussion
Vowels in diphthongs are timed closer together than in sequences, with the shortest
timing lag observed for diphthong /ea/. In terms of position, vowel /a/ in the two
diphthongs had a signiﬁcantly higher tongue position than in the comparable vowel
sequences, suggesting a higher degree of coarticulation with the preceding vowel for
the diphthongs (expected given the closer timing).
i_a
V2 distance to the palate (mm)
–12
–10
–8
–6
j_a
ja
ea
e_a
a
F.Position of the second vowel (V) in diphthong/hiatus sequences and position of
vowel /a/
Vowels and diphthongs


Furthermore, tongue position changes the least during /ˈea/, pointing to the
conclusion that diphthong /ˈea/ is a complex vowel with two articulatory targets,
but overlapping and coarticulating to such an extent that the two targets blend into
one, supporting its analysis as a monophthong.
The absence of difference in the ﬁrst part of the vowel sequence for either the high
(/ˈja/–/j_ˈa/–/i_ˈa/) or the mid (/ˈea/–/e_ˈa/) stimuli is possibly due to experimental
design limitations. Thus, /j/ in diphthong /ˈja/ was in word-initial position and in a
stressed syllable, but was compared to /i/–/j/ in word-ﬁnal unstressed position.
Likewise, /e/ in /ˈea/ was in a stressed syllable, while /e/ in /e_ˈa/ and as a singleton
was in unstressed position. Stress asymmetries may have thus obscured potential
differences in position as a function of category (diphthong vs. hiatus). However, it
may also be the case that in terms of degree of aperture (reﬂected in the distance to
the palate measure) the categories do not differ articulatorily in the ﬁrst part of the
vowel, but only in the second. High vocalic elements in V(/i, j/) pattern together in
having a smaller degree of aperture than mid-vocalic elements, and this major
difference between them affects the degree of aperture of V.
.Acoustic study: method
The goal of the acoustic study is to compare the historical diphthong /ja/ and the hiatus
sequence /i.a/ in a stressed word-initial context: [#CjV] vs. [#CiV]. Chitoran and
Hualde () have shown that in several Romance languages, including Romanian,
hiatus sequences of this kind (such as /i.a/) vary in duration as a function of prosodic
factors such as position in the word and proximity to stress. Sequences are longer in a
word-initial than in a word-medial syllable. Sequences are also longer the closer they
are to primary stress. They are thus longer in the immediately pretonic syllable
(dia’mant ‘diamond’) than in a pre-pretonic one (diapa’zon ‘tuning fork’). The short
/i.a/ sequences fall in the duration range of the historical /ja/ diphthongs, and it is
0
–2
–4
–6
–8
–10
–12
V2–V1 difference in position (mm)
i_a
j_a
ja
ea
e_a
Item
F.Difference in position between the two vowel targets (V–V) at the point of
maximum constriction for each

Ioana Chitoran and Stefania Marin

proposed that variability along this acoustic parameter is exploited in production–
perception in a potential phonologization of a diphthong–hiatus contrast.
In the present study we narrow down the comparison to the context where the
difference between hiatus sequence and diphthong is enhanced, namely in word-
initial position. We predict that diphthongs, in addition to being shorter than hiatus
sequences, will show stronger coarticulation between the onset consonant and the
nucleus vowel. The acoustic parameter of coarticulation we examined is the F
value at the onset of the vocalic sequence and diphthong. In the hiatus sequence
the nucleus vowel is assumed to be /i/. This should result in a higher Fonset value
compared to the diphthong. In the diphthong, the nucleus vowel is assumed to be /a/,
the Vof the diphthong, so Fshould have a lower value at onset.
..Stimuli and participants
Data from four native speakers of Standard Romanian (three female) were recorded
in a soundproof booth using a Sony DAT recorder, sampled at kHz. Eight words
paired for diphthong–sequence conditions were used for spectral analysis. Seven
repetitions of each word were recorded, embedded in the frame sentence /ˈspu.ˈne __
de ˈtrejˈorʲ/ ‘Say __ three times’, for a total of ﬁfty-six words per speaker. The
sentences were read in randomized order. The words were controlled for stress,
number of syllables, the quality of the nonhigh vowel, the preceding consonant, and,
whenever possible, the following consonant. Table .presents the target stimuli for
the diphthong /ˈja/ and the hiatus sequence /iˈa/.
Representative spectrograms of the diphthong /ja/ in [ˈpja.trʌ] and the hiatus
sequence [i.a] in [pi.ˈastru] are shown in Figure ..
In the diphthong (top) no steady state is seen corresponding to /j/. A short
formant rise from the [p] release burst into the glide suggests the presence of target
undershoot. After the release, Fhas a fairly ﬂat trajectory. This is quite different
from the hiatus sequence (bottom), where the high vowel /i/ has a clear steady state,
followed by a more abrupt transition toward /a/. A longer and higher formant rise is
visible from the /p/ release burst into the following /i/.
T.Target stimuli for the acoustic
study, with intervals of interest shown in
boldface
Category
Items
Stimuli
Diphthong
/ja/
ˈfjar.tʌ ‘boiled’ (fem.)
ˈpja.trʌ ‘stone’
ˈpja.rʌ ‘perish’ (subj.)
ˈpja.zʌ ‘omen’
ˈpja.rdʌ ‘lose’ (subj.)
Hiatus sequence /i.a/
fi.ˈa.sko ‘ﬁasco’
pi.ˈa.stru ‘old coin’
pi.ˈa.nu ‘piano’
Vowels and diphthongs


The acoustic analysis was done in Praat (version ..). The analysis consists in
running formant tracks over the vocalic portion of each sequence and diphthong,
and extracting the value of Fat the onset of the diphthong/sequence. A short-term
spectral analysis is performed in a ms window, at a time step of .ms. For each
analysis window the Praat algorithm computes the LPC coefﬁcients. The formant
ja
ia
F.Top: Diphthong /ja/ in [ˈpja.trʌ]. Bottom: Hiatus /i.a/ in [pi.ˈa.stru]
Top: The visible part is [e#pjatr]. Bottom: The visible part is [e#pias]

Ioana Chitoran and Stefania Marin

settings were adjusted for male and female speakers. The extracted Fvalues were
then compared to the corresponding spectrograms. Deviating values and the corres-
ponding tokens were excluded from the statistical analysis.
..Results
Our results, plotted in Figure ., show a difference between categories both in terms
of duration and F(Mean and standard deviations are reported in Appendix B).
Paired sample t-tests showed that the hiatus sequence /i.a/ was longer in duration
than the diphthong /ja/ (t()=., p=.), and that it had a higher Fvalue at its
onset (t()=., p=.). This suggests that the formant structure of /j/ in
the diphthong is affected more by coarticulation with the following /a/ (i.e., its F
is lowered in comparison to that of /i/ in the hiatus sequence).
The scatterplot in Figure .shows that subjects differed in the extent to which
they realized a contrast between the two categories. Speaker shows the least
difference in either duration or Fvalues, while Speaker shows the greatest contrast
in terms of duration, and Speaker in terms of F.
As already pointed out, Figure .shows that all four speakers maintain a contrast
between diphthong [ja] and hiatus sequence [i.a]. Speaker shows a tendency toward
merging the two categories, representative of interspeaker variation.
..Discussion
Conﬁrming the pattern observed in the articulatory study, the acoustic study showed
that the difference between diphthong and hiatus sequences was reﬂected in the
duration of the sequence: diphthong /ja/ was acoustically signiﬁcantly shorter than
the hiatus /i.a/ sequence. The acoustic study conﬁrms that the difference in overlap
(reﬂected in acoustic duration) is not restricted to diphthong /ja/ vs. a cross-word
sequence (as we could observe in the articulatory study), but that it also applies to
within-word hiatus sequences (see also Marin for a similar ﬁnding).
250
200
150
100
50
0
Duration (ms)
/ia/
/ia/
/ja/
/ja/
2300
2200
2100
2000
F2 (Hz)
F.Mean and one standard deviation for acoustic duration (left) and Fvalues at
vowel-onset time point (right) as a function of category
Vowels and diphthongs


Although in the articulatory data there was no difference in position between /j/ in
the diphthong and /j/, /i/ in a cross-word sequence, the better controlled acoustic data
clearly indicated a qualitative difference between the two (indicative of a difference
in the articulatory positions of the two). The lack of a difference in our articulatory
study may thus have been due to confounding factors resulting from the experimen-
tal design (hiatus sequences were cross-word, with the ﬁrst part of the sequence being
word-ﬁnal and in an unstressed syllable, unlike the diphthong, which was word-
initial and in a stressed syllable).
.Conclusions
In our study we tested the phonological hypothesis that vocalic elements in
Romanian can combine to form three different categories of syllabic nuclei: (i)
single complex nucleus (diphthong /ea/); (ii) tautosyllabic onset–nucleus sequence
(diphthong /ja/); and (iii) heterosyllabic hiatus sequence (/i.a/, /e.a/). The three
types of nuclei are predicted to be differentiated by different timing relations
between the vocalic elements, reﬂected both in the timing of the elements and in
the degrees of coarticulation between the vocalic elements. The vocalic elements
sharing the same nucleus are predicted to show the highest degree of blending, and
those of the hiatus sequence, the lowest. The results of our articulatory and acoustic
studies support the hypothesis.
120
1900
2000
2100
F2 (Hz)
2200
2300
1
2
3
2
4
1
4
3
2400
2500
140
Duration (ms)
160
180
200
220
/ia/
/ja/
F.Scatterplot of mean durations by mean Fas a function of speaker

Ioana Chitoran and Stefania Marin

The predictions are borne out ﬁrst by temporal measures. Articulatory vowel-to-
vowel timing is found to be the shortest for /ea/, tendentially longer for /ja/ and /e_a/,
and signiﬁcantly longer for /i_a and /j_a/. In terms of acoustic duration, hiatus /i.a/ is
signiﬁcantly longer than the diphthong /ja/.
Articulatory and acoustic measures of coarticulation also support the hypoth-
esis. In the analysis of kinematic data, coarticulatory measures are based on
articulatory position of the tongue achieved during the two vocalic portions, and
measured as Vdistance to the palate, Vdistance to the palate at the point of
maximum constriction, and the difference between the two points. The results for
Vshow that in terms of degree of constriction/aperture, /i/ and /j/ are similar.
They both have a higher degree of constriction than mid /e/. There is no difference
in terms of the type of nucleus. However, measures of Vdistance to the palate
show that /a/ in /ea/ has a higher degree of constriction than in /ja/, and higher still
than in /j_a, i_a, e_a/. These results indicate that V/a/ is most strongly coarticu-
lated with Vin /ea/, somewhat less so in /ja/, and even less in cross-word and
hiatus sequences. The diphthong /ea/ also has the smallest change in distance from
the palate between Vand V.
In the acoustic data, coarticulation is measured at the C–V transition. The results
indicate that the location of the lingual constriction at that moment is more anterior
in /i.a/ than in /ja/. This acoustic result suggests that Valso coarticulates with V,
but the locus of this coarticulation is earlier than the point of maximum constriction
of V. We conclude that the different phonological behavior of diphthongs and
vowel sequences is reﬂected in their acoustic and articulatory structure. The articu-
latory and acoustic data provided complementary information that, taken together,
supports the presence of three different types of syllable nucleus organization in
Romanian.
.Appendix A
Means and standard deviations (in parentheses) for the measurements in the articu-
latory study (Section .)
Items
Vowel-to-vowel
timing lag (ms)
Vdistance to the
palate (mm)
Vdistance to the
palate (mm)
V–Vdifference
in position (mm)
/ea/
.(.)
.(.)
.(.)
.(.)
/ja/
.(.)
.(.)
.(.)
.(.)
/e_a/
.(.)
.(.)
.(.)
.(.)
/i_a/
.(.)
.(.)
.(.)
.(.)
/j_a/
.(.)
.(.)
.(.)
.(.)
/e/
n/a
.(.)
n/a
n/a
/a/
n/a
n/a
.(.)
n/a
Vowels and diphthongs


.Appendix B
Means and standard deviations (in parentheses) for the measurements in the acoustic
study (Section .)
Acknowledgments
Stefania Marin’s work has been supported by DFG Grant PO /-and the European
Research Council under the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP/–)/
ERC Grant Agreement n. -SCSPL. We thank Susanne Waltl for help with the articulatory
data collection.
Items Duration (ms) F(Hz)
/ja/
.(.) (.)
/i.a/
.(.) (.)

Ioana Chitoran and Stefania Marin

8
Temporal organization of three-
consonant onsets in Romanian
STEFANIA MARIN
.Introduction
Onsets have been hypothesized to exhibit a so-called c‑center organization (Browman
and Goldstein , ), whereby onset-to-vowel timing changes as a function of
onset complexity increase. In a c‑center organization, as more consonants are added
to the onset, the rightmost (vowel-adjacent) consonant temporally shifts toward the
vowel, and the leftmost (vowel-remote) consonant shifts away from it, so that the
singleton and cluster line up along their temporal midpoints (c‑centers) rather than
along the edges. As a consequence of this organization, the vowel-adjacent consonant
is hypothesized to overlap more with the vowel as onset complexity increases: for
example, consonant /l/ in played is expected to overlap the vowel more than /l/ in
laid, and /l/ in splayed more than /l/ in played (see Figure .for a schematic
representation of this prediction). Translated in terms of timing lags from the
vowel-adjacent consonant (e.g., /l/ in laid, played, splayed) to a constant anchor
point (e.g., /d/ in laid, played, splayed), this increasing overlap with the vowel should
manifest itself as decreasing lags going from words with singleton onsets to words
with three-consonant onsets.
Formally, this organization has been hypothesized to arise as a compromise
solution to speciﬁc coupling modes between the onset consonant(s) and the vowel,
under the theoretical assumption that consonants and vowels can be modeled as
oscillators, and the relationships between them (including syllable organization) can
be understood in terms of speciﬁc coupling relationships between these oscillators
(see Goldstein, Byrd, and Saltzman ; Nam, Goldstein, and Saltzman ;
Pouplier ; Goldstein and Pouplier ). Speciﬁcally, onset consonants have
been hypothesized to be coupled in-phase to the vowel and anti-phase to one
another, resulting in competitive coupling demands that cannot be met simultan-
eously, i.e., multiple-onset consonants cannot all be synchronous to the vowel and
sequential to one another, so some compromise solution, such as the apparent c‑center
alignment across singleton and cluster onsets, arises instead at the production level
Romance Phonetics and Phonology. First edition. Mark Gibson and Juana Gil (eds.)
This chapter © Stefania Marin . First published by Oxford University Press.

(see for instance Marin and Pouplier , ; and Pouplier , for a more
detailed overview).
This pattern of organization has been proposed on the basis of the pioneer work of
Browman and Goldstein (), who noticed on the basis of articulatory data from
one speaker that singletons and two- and three-consonant onsets lined up along their
midpoints (c‑centers) rather than along their left or right edges: these c‑centers were
more stable (had smaller standard deviations) than either the left or the right edges of
the onset. Recent systematic work in several languages has conﬁrmed the predictions
made by a c‑center organization for a variety of two-consonant clusters (Marin and
Pouplier for American English /sC-/ and /Cl-/ onsets; Pouplier for
German /sk-/, /km-/, /ɡm-/, /bl-/; Hermes, Mücke, and Grice for Italian /Cl-/
and /Cr-/ onsets; Hoole, Pouplier, Beňuš, and Bombien for German /tr-/ and
French /ɡr-/; Marin , Marin and Pouplier for Romanian /sC-/, /Cl-/,
and /Cr-/ onsets; Pastätter and Pouplier , for Polish /sC-/, /ʃC-/, /Cn-/, and
/Cl-/ onsets; for a comprehensive overview of older studies, see Marin and Pouplier
). There are, however, also onset types that have been shown to exhibit a temporal
organization different from the predicted one, suggesting that additional factors
may play a role in shaping onset timing (e.g., Italian /sC-/ clusters: see Hermes,
Mücke, and Grice ; Romanian onsets /Cs-/, /kt-/, /kn-/: see Marin ; Polish
onsets /Cs-/, /Cʃ-/: see Pastätter and Pouplier , ; Slovak onsets: see
Pouplier and Beňuš ).
Onsets consisting of three consonants have been less systematically examined, and
recent results from American English (Waltl and Marin ) suggest that three-
consonant onsets such as /spl-/ and /skl-/ may not conform to the predictions made
by the c‑center hypothesis regarding onset-to-vowel timing: overall, the vowel-
adjacent consonant /l/ did not overlap with the vowel more in the three-consonant
onset words than in the two-consonant onset words, although the expected
increase in vowel overlap was observed between two-consonant onsets and single-
ton words. As a result, the c‑center was not a stable timing landmark across
V
V
V
l
l
l
splayed
played
laid
C-center
Anchor
p
s
p
F.Schematic representation of the timing changes predicted by a c‑center organization
as a function of onset complexity increase
The shaded rectangles represent the vowel-adjacent consonants; the horizontal arrows represent timing lags from the
vowel-adjacent consonant to a constant anchor point.

Stefania Marin

singletons, two- and three-consonant onsets. The same pattern has also been observed
for Italian three-consonant clusters (Hermes, Grice, Mücke, and Niemann ), but
in this language, /s/-initial clusters (whether /sp-/ or /spl-/) have a special morpho-
phonological status. The lack of a c‑center organization of /s/‑initial clusters in Italian
(together with their special morphophonological properties) has been used to argue for
the fact that /s/ in these Italian clusters is not part of a complex onset, but rather
extrasyllabic. Similarly, the c‑center predictions have been used as a diagnosis tool for
syllable afﬁliation in other controversial cases, such as Tashlhiyt Berber (Goldstein,
Chitoran, and Selkirk ; Hermes, Ridouane, Mücke, and Grice ) and Moroccan
Arabic (Shaw, Gafos, Hoole, and Zeroual , ). Nevertheless, the fact that a
c‑center organization could not be observed for English three-consonant clusters,
which are uncontroversially parsed as complex onsets, makes the c‑center predictions
problematic to use as a diagnostic test for syllable afﬁliation.
In this context, the current study investigates, using electromagnetic articulography
(EMA) data from ﬁve speakers, the temporal organization of the three-consonant
clusters /spl-/, /spr-/, /skl-/, /skr-/ in relation to corresponding two-consonant clusters
/pl-/, /pr-/, /kl-/, /kr-/ and singletons /l-/ and /r/. Under the predictions of the c‑center
hypothesis, it is expected that the timing of the vowel-adjacent consonant changes,
overlapping the vowel more, as onset complexity increases from singletons to two-
consonant onsets to three-consonant onsets. However, if the observed American
English pattern is generalizable to three-consonant onsets in other languages, it may
be expected that no timing change occurs as complexity increases from two-
consonant onsets to three-consonant onsets. The current study not only adds to the
scarce data available on the temporal organization of three-consonant onsets, but also,
using data from a different language family may inform on the generalizability of the
English pattern, and the possible limitations of using the predictions of the c‑center
organization as a test for syllable organization. Because Romanian three-consonant
clusters are unequivocally parsed as complex onsets, being thus similar to three-
consonant clusters in English, and unlike those in Italian, the study is especially
informative in terms of testing the predictions of the c‑center for three-consonant
onsets, and at the same time testing its possible limitations as a diagnostic tool for
syllable afﬁliation.
In addition to the global timing of the onset to the vowel, the current study also
explores how the consonants in the three-consonant onsets /spl-/, /spr-/, /skl-/, and
/skr-/ are timed to each other (intra-cluster timing). Intra-cluster timing of two-
consonant onsets has been shown to be affected by the segmental composition of the
cluster. Thus, consonants in a cluster where the second member is a lateral have been
shown to be timed closer together than in a cluster where the second member is a
rhotic (see Cunha for European and Brazilian Portuguese; Hoole at al. for
French and German; Marin and Pouplier for Romanian). This difference has
been hypothesized to be due to the different physiological requirements for initiating
a lateral vs. a rhotic (see Hoole et al. ; Marin and Pouplier ). On the other
hand, whether the ﬁrst consonant in such clusters was a labial or a velar stop had no
signiﬁcant effect on intra-cluster timing (Cunha ; Bombien, Mooshammer, and
Hoole ; Marin and Pouplier ). Likewise, no intra-cluster timing difference
Temporal organization—three-consonant onsets


has been observed between Romanian /sp-/ and /sk-/ onsets as a function of place of
articulation of the second consonant (Marin ). How intra-cluster timing is
affected when complexity increases from two to three consonants has not yet been
addressed. The current data, consisting of three-consonant clusters (CCC, where
C stands for ‘consonant’) differing in liquid type and stop place of articulation, can
elucidate whether intra-cluster timing is affected only locally, such that the potential
timing differences between C–Cand C–Care those of the corresponding two-
consonant clusters, or whether there is a global intra-cluster reorganization, with
nonlocal timing effects such as, for instance, an effect of Con timing between C
and C.
.Method
..Data acquisition
The data were produced by ﬁve native speakers of Romanian (three female) with no
reported speech, hearing, or language problems and naive with respect to the
purposes of the experiment. They all spoke standard Romanian with no dialectal
features. Prior to recording, the speakers were familiarized with the list of stimuli and
were instructed to speak at a comfortable rate. The utterances were presented on a
computer screen and a visual cue was used to prompt initiation of production. Each
utterance was repeated twice per trial, in three randomized blocks, resulting in a
targeted number of six repetitions per stimulus.
Kinematic data were recorded using the EMA system at the Munich Institute of
Phonetics (AG, Carstens Medizinelektronik). The system records articulatory
movement over time by tracking in an electromagnetic ﬁeld the ﬁve-dimensional
position of sensors attached to various points on the speaker’s vocal tract. The
articulatory data were recorded at a sampling rate of Hz. Acoustic data were
recorded simultaneously at a sampling rate of kHz.
In the current experiment, four sensors were placed on the tongue from tongue tip
(attached approximately cm behind the actual tongue tip) to tongue dorsum (in the
estimated velar constriction region), with anterior and posterior tongue body sensors
placed equidistantly between those two. One sensor each was also placed on the
upper and lower lips and on the lower gums to measure jaw movement. Reference
sensors were placed on the nose bridge, upper incisor (maxilla), and behind the ears,
one sensor for each location. All sensors except for the ones behind the ears were
placed midsagittally.
Standard calibration and post-processing procedures were conducted using an
algorithm developed at the Munich Institute of Phonetics (Hoole and Zierdt ).
The kinematic signals were low-pass ﬁltered at a Hz cutoff frequency for the
reference sensors, at Hz for the tongue tip sensor, and at Hz for all other
sensors. The data were corrected for head movement on the basis of the reference
sensors, and rotated to each speaker’s occlusal plane, with the origin approximately at
the incisors, and such that the horizontal axis would be parallel to the occlusal plane
and the vertical axis would be perpendicular to it.

Stefania Marin

..Stimuli
The stimuli consisted of target words containing onset clusters and singleton controls
(Table .). Henceforth we refer to singletons as C, two-consonant clusters as CC,
and three-consonant clusters as CCC. Within each set (clusters and corresponding
singleton), the context preceding and following the target consonant(s) was held
constant to the extent possible. However, because the choice of three-consonant
onset words and matching controls was rather restricted, perfect matches could
not always be constructed. Thus, because coda /-sp/ does not exist in Romanian,
for sets SPL and SPR the singleton could not be recorded in a consonantal context
(e.g., /*-sp # l-/, /*-sp # r-/), and was instead recorded in the same context as
the three-consonant word. Each target word included a constant anchor point in
reference to which the timing of the consonant of interest was measured. For sets
SPL- and SPR-, no coda was available, so the nucleus vowel was used as anchor point.
For set SKL-, the anchor consonant was within the set either [p] or [v], based on
available words. For set SKR-, the anchor point was consonant /m/ throughout the set.¹
The two-word phrases in Table .were recorded in set carrier phrases, listed in
the Appendix. While for each stimulus word six repetitions were targeted, not all
the repetitions could be used in the analyses owing to technical problems with
data recording, processing, or labeling. Out of a total of targeted utterances (sets
T.Stimuli
Set
Three-consonant cluster (CCC)
Two-consonant cluster (CC)
Singleton (C)
SPL
ˈpa # ˈsplaj
ˈpas # ˈplaj
ˈpa # ˈlaj
SPR
ˈba # ˈspre
ˈbas # ˈpre
ˈba # ˈre
SKL
ˈpa # ˈskla.və
ˈpas # ˈkla.pə
ˈpask # ˈla.və
SKR
ˈpa # ˈskri.mə
ˈpas # ˈkri.mə
ˈpask # ˈri.mə
Consonants of interest (clusters and singletons) are shown in boldface; anchor points are in italics. Glosses are
given in the Appendix.
¹ For the sake of comparability with similar crosslinguistic studies, a consonantal anchor was chosen
where available, rather than a vocalic one across all four sets. While at the planning level, onset consonant(s)
are assumed to be directly timed to the nucleus vowel and not to a coda or following onset consonant, a
vowel is, in certain contexts, more difﬁcult to segment articulatorily. For this reason, a consonantal anchor
has customarily been used in this type of analysis. Furthermore, previous research (e.g., Marin and
Pouplier ) has also shown that syllable afﬁliation of the consonantal anchor does not affect the
qualitative timing pattern between singleton and two-consonant onsets, i.e., no qualitative difference has
been observed between sets PL- and KL-, although the former had a coda consonant anchor (/ˈplak/
‘liking’—/ˈlak/ ‘lake’), and the latter had a consonant anchor that was the onset of the following syllable
(/ˈkla.mə/ ‘hair pin’—/ˈla.mə/ ‘blade’). The consonantal anchors in the current study were in this respect
similar to those for set KL- in previous research.
Temporal organization—three-consonant onsets


* conditions * repetitions * speakers), tokens across speakers and conditions had
to be excluded.
..Segmentation
The kinematic data were analyzed using the Matlab-based Mview software developed
by Mark Tiede at Haskins Laboratories. Labial consonants were deﬁned on the basis
of lip aperture, calculated as the Euclidean distance between the upper- and lower-lip
sensors. For some utterances, owing to technical problems for the lower-lip sensor
during recording, the labial constriction had to be measured on the basis of upper-lip
movement only (no qualitative differences in the results were observed depending on
measurement). Alveolar consonants were deﬁned on the basis of the vertical movement
of the tongue tip sensor, velar consonants, on the basis of the vertical movement of
the tongue dorsum sensor. Vowel anchors for set SPL- were deﬁned on the basis
of tongue body sensor movement (anterior tongue body for speakers S, S, posterior
tongue body for the others, depending on which of the two better captured the vowel
movement), and for SPR-, on the basis of the jaw sensor movement.
Kinematic events deﬁning articulatory target—achievement of target and target
release—were determined on the basis of changes in the velocity proﬁle of the
appropriate signal (lip aperture for labial consonants, vertical tongue tip movement
for alveolar consonants, vertical tongue dorsum movement for velar consonants and
vertical tongue body movement for vowels). First, two velocity peaks corresponding
to the articulator moving toward and away from its target were automatically
detected in the region of interest. Achievement of target (Target) and release
(Release) were deﬁned as the points in time at which velocity was below twenty
percent of the preceding and, respectively, following velocity peak. Consonant or
vowel plateau was deﬁned as the interval between Target and Release; its midpoint is
henceforth referred to as the plateau midpoint (see Marin for an illustration of
the same measuring procedure).
In the case of /r/, the automatic algorithm reliably detected these landmarks for
tap productions. For trills, in some cases the Target and Release labels had to be
manually adjusted so that they would be associated with the achievement of target of
the ﬁrst tap and release of the last tap, rather than with achievement and release of
just one tap.
..Analyses
Onset-to-vowel timing was determined indirectly by measuring the timing lag of the
vowel-adjacent consonant relative to a ﬁxed anchor point. This lag was deﬁned as the
timing from the plateau midpoint of the vowel-adjacent consonant to the plateau
midpoint of the anchor (see Marin for an illustration). For example, in set SPL:
/splaj/ – /plaj/ – /laj/, the timing lag was measured from the plateau midpoint of /l/ to
the plateau midpoint of anchor /a/; in set SKR: /skrimə/ – /krimə/ – /rimə/, the
timing lag was measured from the plateau midpoint of /r/ to the plateau midpoint
of /m/. A shortening of this timing as a function of onset complexity increase, would
indicate an increasing overlap between the consonant and the vowel, which is the
pattern predicted by a c‑center organization (see Figure .).

Stefania Marin

Intra-cluster timing was calculated pairwise between the consonants in the cluster:
C1C2 Timing = C2Target  C1Release;
C2C3 Timing = C3Target  C2Release.
These measures were also normalized by dividing the respective values by the entire
constriction interval (CRelease  CTarget). Both the absolute and the normalized
measures capture the timing lag between release of the preceding consonant and
target achievement of the following consonant.
For statistical analyses, linear mixed models were computed using the lme4
package (Bates, Maechler, Bolker, and Walker ) for R (R version ..;
R Core Team ). Probability (p)‑values were obtained by a χlog-likelihood
ratio test in which the full model was compared to a model without the factor(s) in
question (see Bates ). This method circumvents the difﬁculty in estimating
denominator degrees of freedom for linear mixed models. Together with the log-
likelihood ratio test and the corresponding p‑values, the F values of the full model are
also reported for reference. For post-hoc comparisons, the p‑values were determined
using the Tukey adjusted contrast in the multcomp package for R, which is
appropriate to use in mixed-model analyses (Hothorn, Bretz, and Westfall ).
Random effects were modeled by including the intercepts of the random factor(s).
.Results
..Onset-to-vowel timing
Under a center organization, onset-to-vowel timing is predicted to change as a
function of onset complexity increase. That is, the vowel-adjacent consonant in a
cluster is expected to progressively shift toward the vowel, overlapping it more as
complexity increases. That is, the consonant-to-anchor lag is expected to be shorter
in CC vs. C condition, and further shorter in CCC vs. CC condition. The lags across
all clusters are shown in Figure ., while the lags are plotted separately for each set in
Figure .. Overall, it can be observed that the lags are shorter in the CC and CCC
condition compared to the singleton (C) condition; however, no further shortening
can be observed as onset complexity increases from CC to CCC.
A linear mixed model on the lags from the vowel-adjacent consonant to the
anchor point with ﬁxed factors: Onset complexity (C, CC, CCC) and Set (SPL,
SPR, SKL, SKR), and with random intercept for factors: Speaker and Word, showed
200
100
0
Lag (ms)
C
CC
CCC
F.Average lags of the vowel-adjacent consonant to the anchor
C = singletons; CC= two-consonant onsets; CCC = three-consonant onsets
Temporal organization—three-consonant onsets


that both ﬁxed factors and the interaction between them were signiﬁcant (Complexity:
F() = .,
χ= .,
p < .;
Set:
F() = .,
χ= .,
p < .;
Complexity * Set: F() = ., χ= ., p < .). Post-hoc comparisons indicated
that the main effect of Complexity was due to lags in the CC condition being
signiﬁcantly shorter than in the C condition (p < .). The signiﬁcant interaction
between Complexity and Set was due to the comparison between CC and CCC
being signiﬁcant for set SKL (p < ., with CCC lags larger than CC lags), but not for
the other sets (p > .). To summarize the results, increasing complexity from singleton
to two-consonant cluster resulted in shorter vowel-adjacent lags, as predicted by a
c‑center organization. However, as complexity further increased, no additional short-
ening was observed, contrary to the hypothesis, and in one case (set SKL), some
lengthening was actually observed.
It must be noted that the signiﬁcant main effect of Set is only interesting in that it
captures the overall intrinsic differences due to different anchor points and different
vowels across sets: post-hoc tests (p < .for all comparisons, keeping complexity
constant) indeed showed that lags were, as expected, longer for sets with consonantal
anchor points (SKL, SKR) than for those with vowel anchor points (SPL, SPR), and
within them, for sets with vowel /a/ (SPL, SKL) than those with vowel /e/ or /i/ (SPR,
SKR). However, anchor- and vowel-type differences did not give rise to different
Lag (ms)
0
C
CC
SPR
CCC
50
100
200
C
Lag (ms)
0
50
100
200
CC
SPL
CCC
Lag (ms)
0
50
100
200
C
SKL
CC
CCC
Lag (ms)
0
50
100
200
C
CC
SKR
CCC
F.Average lags of the vowel-adjacent consonant to the anchor as a function of set
C = singletons; CC = two-consonant onsets; CCC = three-consonant onsets

Stefania Marin

qualitative patterns when various levels of complexity were compared, suggesting
that neither anchor type nor vowel quality confounded the results of interest.
A further difference in design between SPL/SPR on the one hand and SKL/SKR on
the other concerns the context in which the singleton word was recorded. Thus, while
the singleton in SKL/SKR was recorded in a consonantal context (/ˈpask#ˈlava/;
/ˈpask#ˈrima/), the singleton in the SPL/SPR sets was recorded in a vowel context
(/ˈpa#ˈlaj/; /ˈba#ˈre/). However, the comparison between C and CC conditions has
shown no difference across these sets, suggesting that this asymmetry has not
inﬂuenced the results.
In summary, regardless of the set’s segmental composition and design differences
across sets, a consistent shift of the vowel-adjacent consonant toward the vowel could
be observed as a function of onset complexity (simplex vs. complex onsets), but an
incremental shift increase as a function of cluster complexity (two- vs. three-
consonant onsets) could not be observed.
..Intra-cluster timing
For three-consonant cluster stimuli, we evaluated the relationship between each two
adjacent consonants in turn (between Cand C, and between Cand C). Intra-
cluster timing lags are shown in Figure .for both absolute and normalized meas-
ures (see Section ..). Overall, it can be seen that intra-cluster timing is determined
by identity of the liquid, regardless of place of articulation of the stop (see CC
Timing, showing that /r/ is timed further apart from either /p/ or /k/ than /l/ is).
Interestingly, even the timing of the sibilant and the stop (CCTiming) seems to be
determined by identity of the liquid in the cluster: thus, Cand Care timed closer
together when followed by /l/ than by /r/.
Linear mixed models carried out for each of the dependent variables (absolute and
normalized CCand CCtiming), with ﬁxed factor: Cluster (/spl/, /skl/, /spr/,
/skr/) and random intercept for factor: Speaker, indicated that all measures were
signiﬁcantly affected by cluster type (CCabsolute timing lags: F() = ., χ=
., p < .; CCnormalized timing lags: F() = ., χ= ., p < .;
CCabsolute timing lags: F() = ., χ= ., p < .; CCnormalized
timing lags: F() = ., χ= ., p < .()).² Post-hoc comparisons showed
the same patterns across absolute and normalized measures. CCTiming was
affected only by identity of the liquid: thus, the timing between the stop and the
liquid was signiﬁcantly greater (p < .) when the liquid was a rhotic than a lateral
(/spr/ vs. /spl/ and /skr/ vs. /skl/), but no difference was observed as a function of stop
/p/ or /k/ as long as the liquid was kept constant (/spl/ vs. /skl/, /spr/ vs. /skr/). CC
Timing was signiﬁcantly affected by identity of both Cand C. Thus, there were
signiﬁcantly shorter CCtiming lags for clusters with a labial than for those with a
velar (/spl/, /spr/ vs. /skl/, /skr/ p < .), but also for clusters with a lateral than for
those with a rhotic (/spl/, /skl/ vs. /spr/, /skr/, p < .).
² Only one random factor was used for these analyses, since factor Cluster consisted in this subset of the
data of a single item.
Temporal organization—three-consonant onsets


Overall, the timing between the consonants composing three-consonant onsets
was inﬂuenced by the type of liquid present in the cluster, with all consonants being
timed further apart in /r/ than in /l/ clusters: Identity of the liquid inﬂuenced not only
its timing with the previous stop, but also the timing of the sibilant with the stop in
the cluster. Identity of the stop only inﬂuenced its timing with the sibilant, with velars
being timed further apart from the sibilant than labials were; Identity of the stop did
not affect its timing with the liquid.
.Discussion
In testing the predictions of a c‑center organization for onsets, the current data have
shown that in terms of onset-to-vowel timing, two-consonant clusters exhibited the
predicted pattern, while three-consonant clusters did not. Thus, as onset complexity
increased from a singleton to a two-consonant cluster, the vowel-adjacent consonant
overlapped the vowel more, as demonstrated by a signiﬁcantly shortened temporal
lag between the consonant and an anchor point in the CC vs. C condition. However,
as complexity increased from two to three consonants, no additional timing change
0.4
0.2
0.0
Lag normalized by constriction interval
/spl/
/spr/
/skl/
/skr/
C1C2 Timing
0.4
0.2
0.0
Lag normalized by constriction interval
/spl/
/spr/
/skl/
/skr/
C2C3 Timing
C2C3 Timing
80
60
40
20
0
Lag (ms)
/spl/
/spr/
/skl/
/skr/
80
60
40
20
0
Lag (ms)
/spl/
/spr/
/skl/
/skr/
C1C2 Timing
F.Averages of absolute (top) and normalized (bottom) intra-cluster timing for three
consonant clusters, between consonants and (CC) and between consonants and 
(CC)

Stefania Marin

was observed. This was true across all four sets: SPL, SPR, SKL, and SKR. Whether
the sets contained monosyllabic (SPL, SPR) or disyllabic words (SKL, SKR) did not
make a difference; it also did not make a difference whether the anchor point was a
vowel or a consonant, or whether the singleton was recorded in a consonantal or
vocalic context. The current result suggests that the measure used for uncovering
onset-to-vowel timing is robust to variations in anchor point and word structure, as
long as these variations are constant within a set.
Formally, the c‑center organization has been hypothesized to be the result at the
production level of the competition between conﬂicting coupling relations between
the onset consonant(s) and the vowel: an anti-phase coupling of the consonants to
each other, concomitant with an in-phase coupling of each consonant to the vowel.
The pattern we observe suggests that in the case of Romanian three-consonant
clusters, which are uncontroversially assumed to be complex onsets, speakers con-
verge to a solution to the competing demands present in complex onsets that diverges
from the strict predictions of a c‑center organization. Because no additional shift is
observed for the three-consonant clusters relative to the two-consonant cluster
timing, it is probable that the competitive solution from two-consonant clusters is
used, with the anti-phase relation of the leftmost consonant to the other consonants
being favored over its in-phase coupling to the vowel. It is not clear, however, how
one can distinguish between a non‑c‑center solution to an underlying complex onset
structure, such as that observed for Romanian and English three-consonant onsets,
and a non‑c‑center pattern resulting from word-initial consonants not being parsed
as complex onsets (see for Tashlhiyt Berber: Goldstein, Chitoran, and Selkirk ,
Hermes et al. ; for Moroccan Arabic: Shaw et al. ; for Italian: Hermes,
Mücke, and Grice ). Further crosslinguistic data may better clarify the issue,
but so far it seems that beyond certain two-consonant sequences, the predictions of a
c‑center organization in their current form cannot be reliably used to test syllable
afﬁliation issues.
Assuming that the complex coupling requirements hypothesized for onsets are
correct, the solution favored for three-consonant onsets observed in the current
Romanian data (and in Waltl and Marin’s () English data) may not be acciden-
tal. Rather, the observed timing pattern may be the only one allowed given additional
factors independent of the underlying organization of onsets. Thus, recent work on
Polish has shown that the degree of coarticulatory resistance of a consonant greatly
inﬂuences whether an onset does or does not exhibit the timing pattern predicted by
a c‑center organization (Pastätter and Pouplier ). In Polish, two-consonant
onsets with highly coarticulation-resistant vowel-adjacent consonants such as /s/
and /ʃ/ (e.g., /ps/, /pʃ/) did not exhibit increasing overlap with the vowel as onset
complexity increased, but clusters with vowel-adjacent consonants with a low degree
of coarticulation resistance, such as /p/ (e.g., /sp/, /ʃp/), did show the expected
increasing overlap with the vowel. Clusters with vowel-adjacent consonants with
an intermediate degree of coarticulation resistance, such as /l/ and/or /n/, (see
Recasens and Espinosa for a hierarchy) showed less increasing overlap with
the vowel than /p/ but more than /s/ and /ʃ/. In light of these results, the lack of
increasing overlap of /l/ and /r/ in Romanian three-consonant clusters compared to
Temporal organization—three-consonant onsets


their timing in two-consonant onsets may be explained as due to coarticulatory
resistance factors: the degree of coarticulatory resistance of /l/ and /r/ does not allow
increasing overlap with the vowel beyond the overlap exhibited in the context of two-
consonant onset clusters. The English results could be explained in the same manner.
Additionally, this explanation would make speciﬁc testable predictions about other
types of three-consonant clusters. Speciﬁcally, three-consonant clusters whose vowel-
adjacent consonant is one with a low degree of coarticulation resistance (e.g., /p/, /k/)
should exhibit some additional overlap as complexity increases from two- to three-
consonant onsets, while clusters with a higher degree of coarticulation resistance (/l/,
/r/, /n/) do not. This remains to be explored in future studies on languages that
permit such three-consonant onsets (e.g., Russian, which permits three consonant
clusters such as /psk-/ and /ʃkv-/, in addition to /skl-/). The current results therefore
suggest that onset-to-vowel timing is determined not only by abstract syllable
organization at the planning level, but also by additional factors (such as degree of
coarticulatory resistance of particular consonants with the vowel; see Pastätter and
Pouplier ) that inﬂuence how this timing is implemented at the production level.
Regarding intra-cluster timing, the current data have shown evidence for nonlocal
timing effects within the onset: thus intra-cluster timing between the ﬁrst two
consonants (CC) in a cluster was not only determined by identity of C(labial
or velar), but also by identity of C. Interestingly, greater CClags were observed if
Cwas a rhotic than if it was a lateral. Thus, identity of Cshaped not only the local
CCtiming (expected given the pattern reported for two-consonant clusters), but
also the more distant CCtiming. For two-consonant clusters, the greater lags
between an obstruent and a rhotic were attributed to the physiological requirements
for rhotic formation. The current data suggest that these requirements also affect the
nonlocal timing of the sibilant and stop in three-consonant onsets. Additionally,
place of articulation of Cturned out to be a signiﬁcant factor in the consonant
timing of three-consonant clusters, although this did not affect timing of two-
consonant onsets (see Marin ). The fact that greater lags were observed between
the sibilant and /k/ than between the sibilant and /p/ in the three-consonant onsets
(but not in previous work on the two-consonant onsets, see Marin ) can be
explained as a physiological effect: both the labial and the velar are ﬂanked by two
alveolar articulations, but while the medial /p/ is produced with an independent
articulator (the lips), the medial /k/ is produced with a dependent lingual articulator
(the tongue back vs. the tongue tip for /s/ and the liquid). As such, two independent
articulators (the tongue tip and the lips) can be timed more tightly than two
dependent articulators (the tongue tip and back). Further perceptual requirements
may also play a role, since a velar (more posterior) articulation may more easily be
masked by two ﬂanking and potentially overlapping alveolar articulations than by a
labial (more anterior) articulation. Neither the physiological nor the perceptual
considerations would be as important in the case of a two-consonant onset, where
the stop would be followed by a vowel.
To conclude, while in terms of their timing to the vowels, the three-consonant
onsets did not differ qualitatively as a function of segmental composition (they
all exhibited no additional overlap with the vowel compared to corresponding

Stefania Marin

two-consonant onsets), they did differ in terms of the internal timing within the
cluster, and the presence of a rhotic in the onset determined larger intra-cluster lags
not only between the stop and the rhotic (CC), but also between the sibilant and
the stop (CC). The current study provides evidence that the temporal organization
of onsets is determined not only by their underlying speciﬁcation, but by additional
factors, such as the coarticulatory properties of the consonants involved, which may
affect both onset-to-vowel timing and intra-cluster timing.
.Appendix
List of stimuli embedded in carrier phrases, given in Romanian orthography (c = [k]
ă = [ə])
SPL
Zic pa splai/pas plai/pa lai mereu.
‘I say bye boulevard/no meadow/bye black always’.
SKL
Zic pa sclavă/pas clapă/pasc lavă rar.
‘I say bye slave woman/no trap/I eat lava slowly’.
SPR
Zic ba spre/bas pre/ba re mereu.
‘I say indeed towards/bass on/indeed re always’.
SKR
Zic pa scrimă/pas crimă/pasc rimă rar.
‘I say bye fencing/no crime/I eat (a) rhyme slowly’.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by DFG Grant PO /-and the European Research Council
under the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP/–)/ERC Grant
Agreement no. -SCSPL. I thank Susanne Waltl for help with data collection, Simone
Beg for help with data segmentation, and two anonymous reviewers and the editors for their
useful suggestions.
Temporal organization—three-consonant onsets


9
Articulatory setting, articulatory
symmetry, and production
mechanisms for Catalan consonant
sequences
DANIEL RECASENS AND MERITXELL MIRA
.Introduction
Languages and dialects may differ among themselves with regard to base of
articulation, namely, in the way speakers place their articulatory organs for produ-
cing the vowels and/or consonants of their own language in continuous speech.
Thus, it has been claimed that dento-alveolar consonants are more anterior and
mostly articulated with the blade and a raised tongue dorsum and jaw in French,
and more posterior, and preferably produced with the tongue tip and a lowered
tongue body and jaw, in English (Honikman ). These articulatory differences
accord with /l/ being light in French and dark in English, and with the presence of
alveolo-palatal consonants such as /ɲ/ in the former language but not in the latter.
Consonant production data for Catalan dialects also show that dental /t/ and
several alveolars are more anterior in Valencian than in Eastern Catalan, Majorcan
falling in between (see Recasens for this and the examples cited in the
Discussion section).
Speciﬁc articulatory setting characteristics may also apply to consonants having
the same place of articulation while differing in manner of articulation. An illustra-
tive example of this articulatory symmetry effect is that of the two consonants /ɲ/ and
the allophone [c] of /k/, which differ in manner while exhibiting roughly the same
closure location at the alveolo-palatal or palatal zone depending on speaker in
Majorcan Catalan. Another case exemplifying the symmetry effect in question is
the opening degree for mid-low vowels, which may affect both front /ɛ/ and back /ɔ/
rather than just one of the two vowel cognates, as in the Catalan dialects Valencian
and Majorcan, where the two vowels have a lower realization than in the Eastern
Catalan dialect.
Romance Phonetics and Phonology. First edition. Mark Gibson and Juana Gil (eds.)
This chapter © Daniel Recasens and Meritxell Mira . First published by Oxford University Press.

In a similar vein to the /ɲ/–[c] case just referred to, the goal of this chapter is to
explore whether articulatory symmetry operates on lingual fricatives and affricates
for Eastern, Western, and Valencian Catalan. In particular, we will investigate the
extent to which the phonetic implementation of the affricate + fricative sequences
/ts#ʃ/ and /tʃ#s/ parallels that of the fricative + fricative sequences /s#ʃ/ and /ʃ#s/,
respectively, where # stands for a word boundary. (These four clusters will be referred
to as /tsʃ/, /tʃs/, /sʃ/, and /ʃs/ throughout the chapter.) We believe that this ought to be
the case insofar as affricates and their fricative cognates are supposed to agree in place
of articulation according to phonetic descriptive studies, i.e., /ʃ/ and /tʃ/ are labeled
postalveolar and /s/ and /ts/ are labeled alveolar in the International Phonetic
Alphabet (IPA) chart. (In this chapter /ʃ/ and /tʃ/ will be referred to as palato-
alveolar.) In addition, the study will explore the extent to which differences in base
of articulation among dialects affect the ﬁnal phonetic outcome of consonant adap-
tation in the sequences of interest (see Niebuhr, Clayards, Meunier, and Lancia 
for evidence in support of this possibility). Along the lines of available experimental
evidence (Nolan, Holst, and Kühnert ; Niebuhr and Meunier ; Pouplier,
Hoole, and Scobbie ), this research hypothesis will be evaluated for /sʃ, ʃs, tsʃ, tʃs/,
and also for the single consonants /s, ʃ, ts, tʃ/ to be used as controls, using linguo-
palatal contact data collected with electropalatography (EPG) for the Eastern dialect,
and acoustic data for all three dialects, Eastern, Western, and Valencian. Based on
articulatory and acoustic data for Catalan fricatives and affricates reported elsewhere
(Recasens and Espinosa a; Recasens and Mira ), the following hypotheses
will be put to test:
(a) The sequence /tsʃ/ ought to be realized as [tʃ] in Eastern Catalan since, in
parallel to English, /sʃ/ is supposed to undergo regressive place assimilation
and therefore the ﬁrst consonant C= /s/ should acquire the realization of /ʃ/
throughout its entire duration. Thus, the phonetic outcome of [ɡɔts] ‘glasses’ +
[ʃiˈnɛzus] ‘Chinese, pl.’ ought to be [ɡɔtʃiˈnɛzus] for the same reason that the
lexical string [dos] ‘two’ + [ ʃajs] ‘muttons’ should be realized either as [doʃ
ˈʃajs]or else as [doˈʃajs] through shortening of the long fricative. On the other
hand, /tʃs/ should be implemented mostly as [tsʲ] in Eastern Catalan if, as
appears to be the case, a blending process involving the lingual gestures for the
two fricatives causes /ʃs/ to be resolved through a stable constriction location
occurring midway between the lingual constrictions for /s/ and /ʃ/ (regarding
the meaning of the term ‘blending’, see Browman and Goldstein ).
Therefore, [bɔtʃ] ‘mad’ + [sɔl] ‘alone’ ought to be realized as [bɔˈtsʲɔl] just as
[peʃ] ‘ﬁsh’ + [səˈlat] ‘salted’ should become [pesʲ(ː)əˈlat].
The fact that /ʃ/ overrides /s/ in the sequence /sʃ/ has been attributed to stricter
production requirements for /ʃ/ than for /s/, resulting from the raising of the dorsum
of the tongue toward the palate during the articulation of the former versus the latter
fricative consonant. Moreover, the reason why this assimilatory effect occurs leftward
rather than rightward, and thus in the sequence /sʃ/ rather than in /ʃs/, is presumably
differences in articulatory complexity between the two clusters: the transition from
Cto Cinvolves essentially a single articulatory action in the former cluster (i.e., an
Catalan consonant sequences


increase in tongue dorsum raising and thus in tongue contact behind the alveolar
constriction) and two noncomplementary actions in the latter (i.e., simultaneous
lowering of the tongue dorsum and raising of the tongue tip and blade).
(b) In Western Catalan and for the same reason as was argued for the Eastern
dialect in (a) above, the cluster /tsʃ/ should be realized as [tʃ] through merging
of word-ﬁnal /ts/ and following [tʃ], which is how /ʃ/ is produced word-initially
in this dialect, i.e., [ts] + [tʃ] > [tʃ]. Thus, [ɡats] + [tʃiˈnezos] ‘Chinese cats’ ought
to be realized as [ɡatʃiˈnezos]. On the other hand, the sequence /sʃ/ is expected
to yield the outcome [stʃ], which will not be subject to investigation, since it
does not include two fricatives in succession. Finally, /tʃs/ is expected to be
realized as [tʃ] ([bɔtʃ] + [sɔl] > [bɔˈtʃɔl]), just as /ʃs/ ought to be implemented as
[ʃ] ([peʃ] + [saˈlat] > [peʃ(ː)aˈlat]). These two phonetic outcomes, [tʃ] and [ʃ(ː)],
result from the progressive assimilation of /s/ to a preceding palato-alveolar or
alveolo-palatal consonant, a process which also applies to other consonant
sequences in the same dialect (e.g., /aɲs/ ‘years’ is often realized as [aɲ(t)ʃ]).
(c) Since in Valencian /ʃ/ has an /s/-like alveolar constriction, the sequences /sʃ, ʃs/
and the frication period of /tsʃ, tʃs/ ought to exhibit a more anterior realization
in this dialect than in Eastern and Western Catalan. In principle, the articu-
latory proximity between the Valencian alveolar and palato-alveolar fricatives
renders unclear what the ﬁnal phonetic outcome of the segmental adaptation
processes in the fricative + fricative and affricate + fricative sequences of
interest should be. Two issues deserve to be explored in this respect. First,
whether /sʃ/ and /tsʃ/ undergo regressive assimilation as in the Eastern dialect
and other languages. Secondly, which one of the following outcomes for /ʃs/
and /tʃs/ applies given that /ʃs/ involves a more complex articulatory mechan-
ism than /sʃ/ (see (a)): blending into [sʲ(ː)], as in Eastern Catalan; progressive
assimilation yielding [ʃ(ː)] (/ʃs/) and [tʃ] (/tʃs/) in light of the fact that,
analogously to Western Catalan, /s/ may become [ʃ] after an alveolo-palatal
or palato-alveolar consonant in Valencian; regressive assimilation into [s(ː)]
(/ʃs/) and [ts] (/tʃs/) in view of the alveolar-like realization of /ʃ/ in this dialect
and a tendency in the world’s languages to favor regressive over progressive
assimilatory processes (Jun ).
In sum, if a symmetry relationship holds between fricatives and affricates, /tsʃ/
should behave like /sʃ/ and /tʃs/ like /ʃs/. The two former sequences ought to undergo
regressive assimilation and therefore should be realized as [ ʃ(ː)] (/sʃ/) and [tʃ] (/tsʃ/)
in Eastern Catalan and perhaps in Valencian as well; in Western Catalan, where
word-initial /ʃ/ is realized as [tʃ], /tsʃ/ should also yield [tʃ]. On the other hand, /ʃs/
and /tʃs/ ought to exhibit an intermediate realization between /s/ and /ʃ/ in Eastern
Catalan and undergo progressive assimilation into [ʃ(ː)] and [tʃ] in Western Catalan,
respectively; as for Valencian, it remains to be seen whether the frication element of
the two sequences is resolved through blending, progressive assimilation into a
palato-alveolar fricative, or else regressive assimilation into an alveolar fricative.
In addition to the possible outcomes just reviewed, it may be that the production
of the complex sequence /ʃs/ involves no articulatory adaptation between the two

Daniel Recasens and Meritxell Mira

fricative consonants but continuous fronting from the constriction location for /ʃ/ to
that for /s/. This outcome is not expected to hold for /tʃs/, however, since there does
not appear to be enough time during the frication noise for a two-target realization to
occur in this case (the frication phase is about ms long for intervocalic /tʃs/ and
ms for intervocalic /ʃs/ according to the Eastern and Western Catalan data
subject to analysis in the present investigation).
.Method
..Recording procedure
In order to explore the production mechanisms of the fricative + fricative sequences
/sʃ, ʃs/ and those of the affricate + fricative sequences /tsʃ, tʃs/ in Eastern, Western, and
Valencian Catalan, articulatory and acoustic data for these consonant sequences and
for the single fricatives and affricates /s, ʃ, ts, tʃ/ were recorded in meaningful seven-
or eight-syllable-long sentences exhibiting the same prosodic pattern (see Table .).
Sentence a, which was recorded by the Eastern and Western Catalan speakers, had
to be replaced by sentence b for the Valencian subjects, the reason being that
‘xenòfobs’ is pronounced with [tʃ], and ‘xabiencs’ with [ʃ], in the latter dialect. Single
fricatives and affricates were placed utterance-ﬁnally, since /ts/ does not occur in the
required vowel context word-internally in Catalan; in spite of occurring prepausally,
the frication noise of /s, ʃ, ts, tʃ/ was not weakened but long and robust.
Simultaneous EPG and acoustic recordings of the sentences listed in Table .were
obtained for the three male Eastern Catalan speakers, DR (the chapter’s ﬁrst author),
JP, and JC. Ten repetitions were solicited for each subject. Linguo-palatal contact
conﬁgurations were gathered every ten ms with artiﬁcial palates equipped with sixty-
two electrodes using the WinEPG system from Articulate Instruments.¹ As shown by
the linguo-palatal contact displays at the top rightmost graph in Figure ., electrodes
T.Sentence list with the consonants and consonant sequences under
analysis underlined, and the syllable bearing sentence stress in boldface
/s/
. De llibretes en vull tres.
‘I want three notebooks’.
/ʃ/
. Per dinar, jo no vull peix.
‘I do not want any ﬁsh for lunch’.
/ts/
. La realitat dels fets.
‘The reality of the situation’.
/ʃ/
. Aquest gatet ja no el veig.
‘I do not see the small cat any longer’.
/sʃ/
. Es prenia tres xarops.
‘He/She was taking three kinds of syrup’.
/ʃs/
. Per dinar, vull peix salat.
‘I want salted ﬁsh for lunch’.
/tsʃ/
a. Aquells foren fets xenòfobs.
‘Those were xenophobe events’.
b. Aquells foren fets xabiencs.
‘Those were events from Xàbia’.a
/ʃs/
. Al magatzem veig saquets.
‘I see small sacks in the storehouse’.
a Xàbia is a town located in the Valencian region.
¹ http://www.articulateinstruments.com/epg-products/.
Catalan consonant sequences


are distributed into four rows at the alveolar zone and another four rows at the palatal
zone, and into four columns at the right and left sides of the palate median line. The
acoustic data for the EPG data recordings just referred to were not submitted to
analysis owing to possible interferences with the subjects’ articulation with an artiﬁcial
palate in place. Acoustic analysis was performed on acoustic data for seven tokens
of each of the sentences listed in Table ., produced by four male Eastern Catalan
speakers (DR, the chapter’s ﬁrst author; AL, MO, SO), ﬁve female Western
Catalan speakers (MA, EV, IM, CL, NO), and three male and seven female Valencian
Catalan speakers (males, EL, JO, RI; females, EVA, IS, LA, LD, NA, AI, ME). All
subjects who took part in the recording sessions were –years of age and use Catalan
in their everyday life. Gathering data analysis for speakers of different sexes is justiﬁed by
the fact that the study compares spectral values among different consonant sequences
and single consonants within speakers and dialects, not absolute spectral values among
speakers and dialects (which would have been unacceptable, since females are known to
have higher noise spectral values than males as a general rule).
The acoustic recordings were carried out at Hz in quiet environmental
conditions using either the Computerized Speech Lab (CSL ) acoustic data
acquisition system of Kay Pentax or a -bit Sound Blaster card plugged into a
laptop. The EPG data were converted into CSL format for segmentation based on the
simultaneous inspection of the linguo-palatal contact patterns and the waveform and
spectrographic displays. CSL was used for spectral analysis after downsampling the
acoustic signal to Hz.
As pointed out in Section ., data for /sʃ/ were not gathered for Western Catalan,
since word-initial /ʃ/ is realized as [tʃ] in this dialect (data for /sʃ/ for the Eastern
speaker MO were not analyzed for the same reason). In addition, data for Western
Catalan /tsʃ/ were processed for speakers who merged the two affricate clusters into a
single affricate (IM, LA), but not for those subjects who kept the two affricates
separate and thus produced /tsʃ/ as [tstʃ] (EV, MA).
..Segmentation and data analysis
Regarding both single fricatives and fricative + fricative sequences, frication onset
was taken to occur at the onset of an intense and high-frequency noise patch placed
immediately after the offset of the period of formant structure for the preceding
vowel. As for affricates, the closing phase was taken to coincide with a period of
airﬂow interruption, as determined by complete tongue contact at one or more rows
of the artiﬁcial palate whenever the EPG signal was available, or otherwise by the
absence of acoustic energy on spectrographic displays. Their frication phase was
judged to start immediately after closure offset or a stop burst about ms long
whenever visible, and to last until the period of formant structure for the following
vowel (in intervocalic position) or to the end of the frication noise (prepausally) on
the spectrographic displays.
The EPG data were evaluated by applying the following center-of-gravity (COG)
index formula to each of the linguo-palatal contact patterns occurring during the
frication phase of all segmental units /s, ʃ/ and sequences /sʃ, ʃs, ts, tʃ, tsʃ, tʃs/. (In the
formula the symbol R stands for “row of electrodes.”)

Daniel Recasens and Meritxell Mira

COG=((0.5*R8)+(1.5*R7)+(2.5*R6)+(3.5*R5)+(4.5*R4)+(5.5*R3)+(6.5*R2)+
(7.5*R1)) / (R8+R7+R6+R5+R4+R3+R2+R1).
COG values are indicative of maximal contact placement over the palate surface, i.e.,
the more anterior the maximal tongue contact area, the higher the COG value. This
computation procedure is carried out by assigning a coefﬁcient in the above formula
whose value increases with anteriority degree of the row of electrodes and thus from
row Rto row R(Hardcastle, Gibbon, and Nicolaidis ).
A center-of-gravity measure was also used in order to evaluate the acoustic data.
COG for a given spectral conﬁguration was computed by adding the products of
all spectral frequencies by their corresponding amplitudes, and dividing the result-
ing total by the sum of all the amplitude values. In principle, the acoustic COG
values should be inversely dependent on the dimensions of the cavity in front of
the lingual constriction, i.e., the more anterior the lingual constriction for the
fricative consonant, the shorter the front cavity and the higher the acoustic COG
value (Cho, Jun, and Ladefoged ). Thus, since /s/ is more anterior than /ʃ/,
the corresponding COG value should be higher for the alveolar fricative than for
the palato-alveolar fricative. COG measures were obtained from FFT spectra over a
frequency range spanning from kHz to kHz using a ms length Hamming
window that was shifted through the frication noise in ms steps; the lower
frequency limit was ﬁxed at kHz so as to avoid artifacts due to possible residues
of voicing. COG data were gathered for all tokens of single consonants and
consonant sequences, using a MatLab script written and kindly provided by
Leonardo Lancia.
For both the articulatory and acoustic COG values the following calculations were
carried out: () mean COG across the total number of individual slices during the
frication noise, which provides information about the overall articulatory and spec-
tral characteristics during the frication noise; () COG ranges over time obtained by
subtracting the highest and lowest COG values across all temporal slices, which
provides a measure of COG temporal variability (the higher the COG range, the
higher the COG variability during the frication noise); () COG trajectories over
time, which allow the determination of how much, and where, linguo-palatal contact
and spectral changes occur during the frication noise. Regarding the latter measure
only data for fricative + fricative clusters are reported, since continuous COG
lowering all throughout the affricate + fricative clusters appears to be related not to
dialect-dependent differences but to the way affricates are produced and, more
speciﬁcally, to a gradual opening and possible retraction of the lingual constriction
during the frication phase of the affricate.
Whether a given fricative + fricative or affricate + fricative sequence underwent
assimilation or blending, or else exhibited two successive articulatory targets, was
determined based on the following criteria:
(a) Assimilation was taken to occur when the COG values throughout the entire
frication phase for /sʃ/ and /ʃs/ were not signiﬁcantly different from those for
either /s/ or /ʃ/, and those for /tsʃ/ and /tʃs/ did not differ signiﬁcantly from
those for either /ts/ or /tʃ/.
Catalan consonant sequences


(b) Blending was considered to apply whenever the COG values for /sʃ/ and /ʃs/
were intermediate between those for /s/ and /ʃ/, and the COG values for /tsʃ/
and /tʃs/ laid between those for /ts/ and /tʃ/ as well.
(c) Neither assimilation nor blending, but two separate Cand Ctargets were
judged to occur in fricative + fricative sequences whenever the frication noise
underwent continuous COG changes between /s/ and /ʃ/ and, therefore, a
continuous COG increase for /ʃs/ and a continuous COG decrease for /sʃ/.
Separate General Linear Model Univariate analyses were run separately on the EPG
and the acoustic data for each dialect so as to account for dialect-dependent differ-
ences in base of articulation (Eastern, Western, Valencian) and also for each
sequence type (fricatives and fricative + fricative sequences; affricates and affricate
+ fricative sequences). As in Recasens and Mira , the statistical analyses were
performed on the cross-token COG values for the individual speakers excluding
the unavailable data referred to in Section ... In each test, Consonant was the ﬁxed
variable (with the levels /s/, /ʃ/, /sʃ/, and /ʃs/; and /ts/, /tʃ/, /tsʃ/, and /tʃs/) and Speaker
was a random factor. The signiﬁcance level was established at p < ., and Bonferroni’s
post hoc comparisons were performed on those variables yielding a main consonant
effect. All analyses were performed using IBM SPSS Statistics (version ).
.Results
Figure .displays the mean COG values and the corresponding COG ranges across
the frication noise for the single consonants and consonant sequences under study.
Data have been pooled across speakers of Eastern Catalan (EPG and acoustic data)
and of Western Catalan and Valencian (acoustic data only). The actual numerical
values are given in Table ..
..Eastern
As regards the COG values for the Eastern Catalan (Figure ., four top graphs), the
ANOVAs yielded a signiﬁcant effect of consonant for both EPG and acoustic data on
single fricatives and fricative + fricative sequences (EPG: F(, ) = ., p < .;
acoustics: F(, ) = ., p < .), and for the acoustic data only on affricates and
affricate + fricative sequences (F(, ) = , p < .).
As shown in the ﬁgure, all COG values were low and nonsigniﬁcantly different for
/sʃ/ vs. /ʃ/ and for /tsʃ/ vs. /tʃ/. Moreover, COG trajectories for /sʃ/ remained essen-
tially constant during the entire frication phase, which is in accordance with previous
reports indicating that /sʃ/ undergoes regressive assimilation in Eastern Catalan. This
scenario demonstrates that articulatory symmetry is at work in the sense that
speakers use the same production strategy for fricative + fricative and affricate +
fricative sequences. In agreement with these statistical results, the EPG data for the
Eastern Catalan speakers DR, JP, and JC displayed in Figures .and .show a
similar constriction location and analogous linguo-palatal contact conﬁgurations for
/sʃ/ and /ʃ/ (Figure .) and for /tsʃ/ and /tʃ/ (Figure .).

Daniel Recasens and Meritxell Mira

Articulatory symmetry may also be considered to apply to /ʃs/ and /tʃs/ to the
extent that the COG values for these two sequences are higher than those for /ʃ/
and /tʃ/ (EPG, acoustics), and nonsigniﬁcantly different from those for /s/ and /ts/
(acoustics). Moreover, data for the individual speakers reveal that several subject-
dependent production strategies may be at work for /ʃs/ and /tʃs/: blending
involving a single COG value placed somewhere between the COG values for the
single alveolar and palato-alveolar consonants; some COG rise during the
sequence /ʃs/, which reﬂects lingual constriction fronting proceeding from C=
/ʃ/ to C= /s/; and regressive assimilation, at least in the case of the affricate +
fricative sequence /tʃs/.
The data in the four top graphs in Figure .show other less salient characteristics,
which will be accounted for in greater detail in Section .. In contrast to the
articulatory COG values, the acoustic COG values are unexpectedly higher for /ʃs/
and /tʃs/ than for /s/ and /ts/, respectively; when compared to the COGs for the single
consonants, the articulatory COG value for /ʃs/ is somewhat higher than that for /tʃs/,
i.e., the COG for /ʃs/ is nonsigniﬁcantly different from the COGs for /s/ and /ʃ/, while
the COG for /tʃs/ approaches that for /tʃ/.
T.Mean, highest, and lowest COG values, and COG ranges, plotted in
Figure .
s
ʃ
sʃ
ʃs
ts
tʃ
tsʃ
tʃs
Valencian
females
(acoustics)
mean COG
highest COG
lowest COG
COG range
4751.2
5107.6
4283.7
823.9
4636.9
4943.1
4201.0
742.1
4729.7
5054.1
4255.1
799.0
5123.4
5403.8
4708.5
695.3
4931.1
5555.4
4347.9
1207.6
4950.2
5544.8
4275.5
1269.3
5050.7
5523.8
4499.7
1024.0
5470.1
5878.3
4964.0
914.3
Valencian
males
(acoustics)
mean COG
highest COG
lowest COG
COG range
4034.4
4309.3
3639.2
670.1
3828.0
4167.1
3352.5
814.5
4030.8
4357.5
3524.7
832.8
4417.3
4736.2
4028.5
707.7
4340.0
5068.8
3707.4
1361.4
4034.8
4561.2
3473.1
1088.1
4325.9
4699.7
3715.8
983.8
4759.5
5156.1
4325.1
831.0
mean COG
highest COG
lowest COG
COG range
5091.8
5457.9
4587.7
870.2
4173.8
4407.2
3900.5
506.7
4819.7
5047.8
4516.4
531.4
5206.3
5662.5
4686.7
975.8
4420.7
4744.1
4044.9
699.2
4927.4
5203.8
4623.0
580.7
5354.6
5639.0
4952.8
686.2
Western
(acoustics)
mean COG
highest COG
lowest COG
COG range
3960.6
4259.5
3668.5
591.0
3450.5
3773.5
3124.6
648.9
3552.2
3818.2
3311.3
506.9
4257.4
4525.9
3924.4
601.6
4095.9
4413.6
3802.4
611.3
3689.7
4021.4
3351.8
669.6
3871.3
4108.6
3627.9
480.7
4524.4
4806.2
4208.2
598.0
Eastern
(acoustics)
mean COG
highest COG
lowest COG
COG range
3.75
3.90
3.31
0.60
3.12
3.26
2.89
0.36
2.96
3.13
2.69
0.43
3.38
3.63
2.89
0.74
3.73
4.04
3.41
0.63
3.25
3.65
2.94
0.71
3.14
3.53
2.62
0.91
3.35
3.80
2.67
1.13
Eastern
(EPG)
Catalan consonant sequences


..Western
Statistical tests run on the Western Catalan data for /s, ʃ, sʃ, ʃs/ and for /ts, tʃ, tsʃ, tʃs/
yielded a signiﬁcant effect for Consonant (F(, ) = ., p < .; F(, ) = .,
p < .) (Figure ., two middle graphs). The cross-speaker COG value for /ʃs/ is
intermediate between those for /ʃ/ and /s/ and nonsigniﬁcantly different from any
Hz
Western
(acoustic)
Hz
Valencian
females
(acoustic)
Hz
Valencian
males
(acoustic)
2
3
4
5
6000
5000
4000
3000
6000
5000
4000
3000
s
ʃ
sʃ
ʃs
6000
5000
4000
3000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2
3
4
5
6000
5000
4000
3000
6000
5000
4000
3000
ts
tʃ
tsʃ
tʃs
6000
5000
4000
3000
6000
5000
4000
3000
Hz
Eastern
(acoustic)
EPG
row
Eastern
(EPG)
F.Mean COG values and COG ranges for fricatives and fricative + fricative
sequences (left) and for affricates and affricate + fricative sequences (right) in Eastern,
Western, and Valencian Catalan

Daniel Recasens and Meritxell Mira

two of them. Moreover, the individual speakers show either a low and stable COG
and thus perhaps a progressive assimilation scenario (subjects NO and MA), or else a
COG value, which is intermediate between the COGs for /ʃ/ and /s/ or rises from an
/ʃ/-like to a more /s/-like spectral conﬁguration and thus corresponds to a blending or
a two-target production mechanism (speakers EV, IM, and LA). On the other hand,
in parallel to Eastern Catalan, the COG value for /tʃs/ is as high as that for /ts/ and
signiﬁcantly higher than that for /tʃ/. As for the single speakers, /tʃs/ may show high
COG values that may even exceed those for /ts/ and thus could denote a regressive
assimilation process (EV, IM, LA), or else are intermediate between those for the two
single affricates, thus suggesting that blending is at work (NO, MA). Finally, the COG
value for /tsʃ/ (i.e., [ts] + [tʃ]) lies between the COG values for /ts/ and /tʃ/ and does
not differ signiﬁcantly from them (speakers IM, NO, LA).
Speaker DR
Speaker JP
Speaker JC
Alveolar zone
Palatal zone
s
ʃ
ʃs
sʃ
F.Linguo-palatal contact patterns for fricatives and fricative + fricative sequences
taken at the midpoint of the frication noise according to the Eastern Catalan speakers DR, JP,
and JC
Electrodes have been ﬁlled in black or grey, or have been left unﬁlled depending on contact activation (above %,
between % and %, and below %, respectively).
Catalan consonant sequences


..Valencian
The statistical analyses run on the COG data for Valencian Catalan /s, ʃ, sʃ, ʃs/ and
/ts, tʃ, tsʃ, tʃs/ yielded a main consonant effect in both cases (F(,) = , p < .;
F(, ) = ., p < .) (see the four bottom graphs in Figure ., where data for
males and females are displayed separately).
Results for the post hoc test also reveal that, in this dialect, the COG relationship
between affricates and affricate + fricative sequences is quite similar to that which
occurs between fricatives and fricative + fricative sequences, supporting a symmetry
effect. In contrast with the Eastern and Western Catalan data, /s/ and /ʃ/, and /ts/ and
/tʃ/, exhibited nonsigniﬁcant COG differences, mostly due to the fact that the constric-
tion location for /ʃ/ is especially anterior and thus very close to that for /s/. Also, no
statistical COG differences were found to hold between /sʃ/ and /ʃ/ or /s/, and between
/tsʃ/ and /tʃ/ or /ts/. The COG values for /sʃ/ and for /tsʃ/ for the individual speakers
could be /ʃ/- and /tʃ/-like, respectively, thus suggesting regressive assimilation (/sʃ/: EL,
RI, LA, EV, LD, IS, NA; /tsʃ/: RI, LA, LD, ME), or else intermediate between /s/ and /ʃ/
or /ts/ and /tʃ/, thus pointing to a blending scenario (/sʃ/: JO; /tsʃ/: JO, NA, IS, AI, EL).
The cross-speaker COG values for /ʃs/ and /tʃs/, on the other hand, were high and
signiﬁcantly different from those for all single consonants and other consonant
sequences, a trend that obtained for the individual subjects as well. Auditory percep-
tion conﬁrmed the /s/-like realization of the consonant sequences /ʃs/ and /tʃs/ in
Valencian, which is in line with /ʃ/ being particularly anterior in this dialect, while
suggesting that large degrees of regressive adaptation or even regressive assimilation
Speaker DR
Closure
Frication
Closure
Frication
Closure
Frication
Speaker JP
Speaker JC
ts
tʃ
tʃs
tsʃ
F.Linguo-palatal contact patterns for affricates and affricate + fricative sequences
taken at the midpoint of the closure and frication phases according to the Eastern Catalan
speakers DR, JP, and JC
Electrodes have been ﬁlled in black or grey, or have been left unﬁlled depending on contact activation (above %,
between % and %, and below %, respectively).

Daniel Recasens and Meritxell Mira

may occur in this case. It should be added that the COG trajectories for /ʃs/, and to a
large extent for /sʃ/, remained quite stable over the entire frication noise.
.Discussion
The present study shows that Catalan dialects differ regarding the base of articu-
lation for single fricatives and fricative + fricative clusters, and that in most
instances these differences are transferred to the phonetic implementation of
affricates and affricate + fricative sequences by virtue of a symmetry effect. Regard-
ing single consonants, while place differences between alveolar and palato-alveolar
fricatives and affricates are available in Eastern and Western Catalan, Valencian
speakers barely distinguish, or do not differentiate at all, /s/ from /ʃ/ (and /ts/ from
/tʃ/), owing to the especially anterior realization of /ʃ/ (and /tʃ/). Parallel interseg-
mental adaptation processes operate on fricative + fricative and affricate + fricative
sequences in several instances:
(a) Regressive assimilation may be said to apply to /sʃ/ and also to /tsʃ/ in the
Eastern dialect, where the former sequence is realized as [ ʃ(ː)] and the latter as
[tʃ], and apparently to /ʃs/ and /tʃs/ in Valencian, where the ﬁnal outcome is
not clearly different from /s/ and /ts/.
(b) In all dialects, /ʃs/ shows higher COG values than /ʃ/ and /sʃ/, and the same
relationship applies to /tʃs/ vis-à-vis /tʃ/ and /tsʃ/.
As pointed out for Majorcan Catalan in Section ., this symmetry effect operates on
other linguistic sounds differing in manner of articulation, such as /ɲ/ and [c], which
may be articulated at the alveolo-palatal or purely palatal zone, depending on speaker
and perhaps on dialect or language.
Analysis results revealed the existence of speciﬁc dialect-dependent differences
regarding the degree and direction of the intersegmental adaptation process in
fricative + fricative and affricate + fricative sequences. As for Eastern and Western
Catalan, /ʃs/ may undergo blending or a two-target production in both dialects and,
in addition, progressive assimilation in the Western dialect; on the other hand, /tʃs/
may be realized through either blending or presumably regressive assimilation, which
also emerge in both dialects. As for Valencian, the presence of an especially anterior
realization of /ʃ/ renders /s/ more aggressive than /ʃ/, which may be why the
sequences /ʃs/ and /tʃs/ undergo regressive assimilation while /sʃ/ and /tsʃ/ may
undergo regressive assimilation or blending, depending on speaker.
Our research reports other relevant production strategies for the fricative and
affricate sequences of interest. Temporal COG trajectories show that assimilatory
processes apply categorically as a general rule. This is so for the regressive assimila-
tions operating on /(t)sʃ/ in Eastern Catalan and on /(t)ʃs/ in Valencian for essentially
all speakers, and for the progressive assimilation process applying to /ʃs/ in the case of
several Western Catalan speakers. As claimed in Section ., the reason why assimi-
lation takes place in the sequences /sʃ/ and /tsʃ/ rather than in /ʃs/ and /tʃs/ appears to
be production constraints, namely, to a higher degree of articulatory complexity
involved in lowering the tongue body while raising the tongue front simultaneously,
for the two latter sequences, than in lowering the tongue front and raising the tongue
Catalan consonant sequences


body, for the two former ones. A high degree of articulatory complexity may also
explain why the realization of /ʃs/, and to a large extent that of /tʃs/, may be so
variable over the time domain and across the Eastern and Western Catalan subjects.
This research also reports a lower COG for the EPG data for /tʃs/ vs. /ʃs/ relative to
the other single consonants and consonant sequences in Eastern Catalan, which
could be associated with an especially extended closure or constriction and/or a
relatively large dorso-palatal contact degree during the closing and frication phases in
the former sequence (see the linguo-palatal contact conﬁgurations displayed in
Figures .and .). Morever, it remains unclear why the acoustic COG values are
higher for /ʃs/ and /tʃs/ than for all other sound types. At least in part, this spectral
contrast could be due to position-dependent differences, namely, to the fact that
single fricatives and affricates were utterance-ﬁnal while fricative + fricative and
affricate + fricative sequences were utterance-medial. It could also be that speakers
produced /ʃs/ and /tʃs/ with a specially anterior constriction in order to avoid the
progressive palatalization of C= /s/, which could impair the comprehension of the
sentence meaning. Another possibility is that a slightly more retracted constriction
and larger sublingual cavity size for /ʃs/ than for /s/ (and for /tʃs/ than for /ts/) did not
result in a lower acoustic COG value, since the two constrictions occurred in the
same quantal area (Stevens ).
.Conclusion
This study provides evidence for articulatory symmetry between fricative + fricative
and affricate + fricative sequences composed of /s/ and /ʃ/, which parallels the
scenario for other consonants sharing the same place of articulation but differing
in manner of articulation, reported earlier in the literature. The adaptation mechan-
isms for consecutive consonants in consonant sequences have been shown to depend
on the degree of constraint imposed by speakers on the articulatory organs during the
production of the single consonants involved, as well as on differences in articulatory
complexity among sequences. In addition, dialect-dependent differences in conson-
ant articulation (which may be attributed to base of articulation) affect the adaptation
mechanisms in question. Thus, for example, while /ʃ/ is commonly labeled as a
palato-alveolar fricative, its realization may be more anterior (in Valencian) or
more posterior (in Eastern and Western Catalan), which has a great impact on
whether the sequence combinations /(t)sʃ, (t)ʃs/ are resolved through assimilation,
blending, or a two-consonant target by speakers. In sum, phonetic detail appears to
be crucial in order to gain insight into how speakers program the articulatory
structures for the production of consonant sequences in speech.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by project FFI--P of the Spanish Ministry of Economy
and Competitiveness, by the ICREA Academia program, and by project SGRof the
Catalan Government.

Daniel Recasens and Meritxell Mira

Part III
Studies in Perception


10
Perceptual cues for individual
voice quality
MARIANELA FERNÁNDEZ TRINIDAD
AND JOSÉ MANUEL ROJO ABUIN
.Introduction
The aims of this study are to look into the importance of laryngeal features in
determining voice quality and to study to what extent the voluntary distortion of
voice by means of a change in phonation—speciﬁcally by using the falsetto register—
affects the perception of that voice quality with respect to the recognition of the
speaker’s individuality. Also, we will try to elucidate on what perceptual cues listeners
rely to determine whether two voice samples, one of which has been disguised, have
been uttered by the same person or not.
.Voice quality, vocal registers, and speaker recognition
Voice quality refers to the characteristics of a person’s voice that pervade speech and
that derive from a set of laryngeal (source) and supralaryngeal (ﬁlter) properties.
These vocal features are usually long-term, that is, present in all the utterances of a
speaker (see for example Abercrombie ; Laver , among others). Neverthe-
less, a person can modify voice quality voluntarily by changing the conﬁguration of
the larynx or of the supraglottal cavities.
Each physiological conﬁguration that the glottis can adopt generates a speciﬁc
acoustic result, which from a perceptual point of view is associated with a particular
voice quality. The term register is a way to denote the physiological, acoustic, and
perceptual characteristics of voice (see Pérez Sanz ). Although authors agree that
registers exist in both speaking and singing, they have not reached a consensus on
how to deﬁne them, identify their number, or label them (see Henrich ).
In this study we follow Titze (), who deﬁned registers as “perceptually distinct
regions of vocal quality that can be maintained over some ranges of pitch and loudness”
(). The basic voice registers—to authors such as Hollien (), Laver (), or
Titze (), among others—are three, from highest to lowest: falsetto, modal voice, and
creak or pulse register. As Pérez Sanz (: –) explains, physiologically, they are
Romance Phonetics and Phonology. First edition. Mark Gibson and Juana Gil (eds.)
This chapter © Marianela Fernández Trinidad and José Manuel Rojo Abuin . First published 
by Oxford University Press.

phonation mechanisms that produce a determined voice quality that is perceived as
homogeneous. Then, at a certain range of frequency or intensity, it becomes
impossible to sustain the same laryngeal conﬁguration and voice switches to the
adjacent register, originating an abrupt change in voice quality (see Titze ).
There is also a lack of consensus on the precise limits of each register, and authors
have proposed different ranges of frequencies to signal the transition from one
“zone” to another. Roubeau, Henrich, and Castellengo () pointed out that the
transition from modal voice to falsetto in male voices (during a glissando) can start
at Hz; however, not all authors agree (Henrich ). The transition from one
register to the next can be voluntary or involuntary and more or less abrupt,
depending on voice training.
As already explained, registers are determined by the behavior of the glottis and
not by the conﬁguration of the vocal tract. Glottal activity characterizes the three
registers mentioned according to the degree of vocal fold closure, vocal fold
adduction, medial compression, and adductive tension (Laver ). In addition
to the speciﬁc conﬁgurations that the vocal folds can adopt, their mass and tension
during the various mechanisms of phonation are important (see for example
Roubeau and Núñez , among others). In the view put forward by Titze
(), the biomechanical behavior of the vocal folds can be divided into two parts:
the body and the cover. The body of the vocal fold consists of the thyroarytenoid
muscle (also known as vocalis muscle), the deep lamina propria, and the inter-
mediate lamina propria, while the superﬁcial lamina propria and the epithelium
constitute the cover.
In normophonic male voices, the most frequent and spontaneous mode of phon-
ation is modal voice. In this mechanism, the vocal folds present a moderate degree of
longitudinal, adductive, and medial tension. The vibration is periodic and of large
amplitude. The body of the vocal folds is activated and the cover remains more or less
lax. The contact between the vocal folds is complete and prolonged, and the pressure
in the midline is not excessive. In modal phonation, the closure of the vocal folds is
quasisimultaneous along their length, and the airﬂow is zero during the time that the
glottis remains closed. Because the vocal folds are completely closed and their closure
is prolonged, the resultant voice is rich in harmonics. In this laryngeal conﬁguration
no audible friction noises are produced (van den Berg ; Hollien ; Laver
; Titze , among others).
Falsetto is a register with a very high pitch: generally the fundamental frequency
(f₀) goes up by at least an octave with respect to modal voice. This register is used by
men and women in both speaking and singing, and it falls between a mid-high and a
high frequency range, depending on the anatomical possibilities of the individual (see
Henrich ). It can occasionally appear in speech when a person tries to convey
more expressiveness in certain communicative situations (see Poyatos , ).
In addition, it can be used in a more permanent way to index sexual identity (Podesva
). The rise in f₀—and sometimes the transition from modal voice to falsetto—is
also one of the laryngeal mechanisms most commonly used when disguising one’s
voice and, therefore, one’s identity (Masthoff ; Wagner and Köster ; Künzel
, among others).

M. Fernández Trinidad and José Manuel Rojo Abuin

From the point of view of production, unlike modal voice, where the whole surface
of the vocal folds vibrates, in falsetto only the external layers oscillate; consequently,
the amplitude of vibration is much smaller. Contact is very superﬁcial or even
nonexistent, so the number of harmonics generated decreases. Compared to modal
voice, in falsetto vocal fold mass is very much reduced while tension and stiffness
increase dramatically, mainly in the more external layers of the vocal cords (Hirano
; Titze ). As a consequence, the vibration is fast, and this increase in the
frequency of vibration results in a rise in tone (Hollien ; Laver ; Titze
, among others). The opening phase is always longer than the closing phase—
in contrast to modal voice, whose closing phase is longer and more abrupt—, and
thus the values of the opening quotient are higher (Henrich, Alessandro, Doval,
and Castellengo ; Roubeau, Henrich, and Castellengo ). For this reason,
the main acoustic correlate of falsetto is the ﬁrst harmonic (H) dominance
(Sundberg and Högset ). The arytenoids tend to open and to create a perman-
ent air leakage in the posterior part of the glottis, which produces a greater spectral
slope, a loss of sound energy, and that “piping voice” that characterizes the falsetto
aurally, many times (see Laver and Poyatos , , among others).
As Kreiman, Vanlancker-Sidtis, and Gerratt said (: ), “voice is one of
the main means that speakers use to project their identity”. Nevertheless, voice
undergoes modiﬁcations according to many factors. Some of those changes are not
voluntary (for example, a person’s voice is different in relation to sex, age, state of
health, mood, or emotional state), but it is also possible to exert a certain control
over the production of voice and sometimes modify it for several purposes, such
as to conceal one’s identity, namely to disguise the voice in order to hinder or
make impossible the recognition of the individual (Kreiman and Sidtis ).
A person is able to mask voice in several ways (see Masthoff and Rodman
), which have been studied in forensic phonetics because disguise reduces
discrimination and speaker recognition signiﬁcantly, for both familiar and
unfamiliar voices (Reich and Duke ; Clifford ; Hollien, Majewski, and
Doherty ; Hirson and Duckworth ; Wagner and Köster ; Künzel
, and many others).
Researchers have found that several factors that can affect voice perception and
the human recognition of disguised voices exist, such as, for example, the shared
knowledge of a language, the familiarity or unfamiliarity of the voices, the gender of
the listener, the choice of perception task, and the auditory training of the judges.
(See Hollien, Majewski, and Doherty for disguised speech; see Kreiman 
and Kreiman and Sidtis for a summary of the inﬂuence of these and other
factors on the recognition of disguised and nondisguised voices.)
The possibility of altering the phonation mode is common, in principle, to all
languages; our research is concerned with speakers of Italian. We conducted a task
based on voice disguise to observe what characteristics in voice quality are modiﬁed
by falsetto and how that transformation may hinder speaker recognition. We chose
to study the shift in male voices from modal to falsetto because the latter differs
markedly from the prototypical male voice. The results will show which parameters
are altered and which are not in the register shift, and what is the perceptual
Perceptual cues for individual voice quality


relevance of those parameters for the deﬁnition of the falsetto register and for
individual voice quality.
.Corpus design
The sound samples were taken from six male native speakers of Italian (from Naples)
aged between twenty-ﬁve and thirty-ﬁve years old, who had completed university
education. The speakers were able to disguise their voices through the falsetto register
and did not present any speech pathologies.
We decided to work in the domain of the phrase so as not to limit the perception
of register to a sole word. Speakers had to read the same short sentence (to control, as
much as possible, temporal and intonation aspects that could affect the speaker
discrimination task later), but long enough so that the register shift would be well
grounded. The meaningless phrase was Dica DAdiva aDAgio e VAda a casa (‘Say
dadiva slowly and go home’), designed to contain CV syllables where ‘C’ was [+son;
–nas] and ‘V’ was stressed [a] (Alves, Gil, Pérez Sanz, and San Segundo , and San
Segundo, Alves, and Fernández Trinidad, ).
The recordings were made in the soundproof booth of the Phonetics Laboratory,
Spanish National Research Council (CSIC, Madrid), by means of a Countryman Æ
Ei Omnidirectional Earset condenser microphone, a Roland Æ UA-EX USB
audio interface, and a PC with the software program Adobe Audition .for
Windows. Before the ﬁrst recording session, the speakers familiarized themselves
with the falsetto register through audio samples embedded in a computer slide
presentation. The data were recorded in wav format at a sampling rate of ,
Hz and a -bit resolution. The same sentence was recorded by each participant on
different occasions to cover for possible intraspeaker variability. Each speaker
recorded a total of sixty sentences (thirty per register).
.PERCEPTion task
..Design
To evaluate to what extent listeners would be able to distinguish a speaker correctly
despite the change of his register, we created a same–different discrimination task
(AX). In this task, listeners heard pairs of stimuli, one in modal voice and the other
one in falsetto, and had to judge if they belonged to the same or to different speakers.
The goal of this study is to detect the vocal characteristics that make a speaker
identiﬁable when the voice is disguised; consequently, only the modal–falsetto pairs
of stimuli uttered by the same person were taken into account in the analysis. The
pairs that consisted of the two elements uttered by two different people were included
solely as distractors to prevent the listener developing a learning strategy, and thus
ensure that, if performance was above chance level, it meant that that person was able
to distinguish the speaker. Also, the number of same-pair and different-pair stimuli
was the same, to account for the possibility of participants in a perception task
expecting an equal number of same-pair and different-pair stimuli (see McGuire ).

M. Fernández Trinidad and José Manuel Rojo Abuin

For the discrimination task we selected, based on the quality of the utterances, ﬁve
valid repetitions per speaker and register, that is, ﬁve sentences  two registers
(modal–falsetto)  six speakers.¹
Sixty pairs corresponding each to the same speaker (AA) or different speakers
(AB) were presented in random order, which was kept constant for all listeners.
The interstimulus interval (i.e., the interval between the stimuli in a pair) was .s,
and the intertrial interval (i.e., that between pairs) was s; the response time was
up to the participants. Each listener judged every speaker and the total of sixty
pairs of stimuli.
..Listeners and procedure
Before the task, listeners completed a questionnaire with the following information:
gender, age, level of education, native language, other languages spoken, auditory
training in hearing and evaluating voices, and existence of hearing problems.
Sixty native speakers of Spanish (ﬁfty-three female, seven male) between and
years old (M=.), all university students, took part in the experiment. The
participants had not received training in evaluating voices, they did not know any of
the recorded speakers, and none of them had hearing problems.
The experiment took place in a computer room at the Universidad Complu-
tense de Madrid. Participation was voluntary, and judges were informed before-
hand that those who achieved the highest number of correct answers would be
awarded a small sum of money. Each listener had access to a computer and a set
of headphones. The experiment was run using the tool FOLERPA (Ferramenta
On-Line para ExpeRimentación PerceptivA) (Fernández Rei ), developed
by the Instituto da Lingua Galega, Universidade de Santiago de Compostela.
To make sure that the participants understood the task procedure and
were acquainted with the interface and the type of stimuli that they would hear,
ﬁve pairs of stimuli were randomly selected as a practice trial. Afterward, the
experiment proper started, ﬁrst with the instructions and then with the stimuli.
The program played each pair of stimuli with a repetition, and then judges had
to choose from two answer options, namely whether the pair’s stimuli belonged
to the same speaker or to different ones. After answering, the program played
the following pair. The sixty pairs were distributed into two thirty-stimuli
blocks separated by a three-minute pause. The whole experiment lasted about
ﬁfteen minutes.
¹ All recordings were normalized at -dB with the audio editor Audacity (win-..) to adjust them to
the same intensity level and thus avoid the possibility of the judges being inﬂuenced by the volume.
Although speakers recorded the sentence Dica dadiva adagio e vada a casa, in the perception task and its
analysis only the segment Dica dadiva adagio e vada was used. We avoided presenting the last segment of
the sentence as part of the stimulus because it soon became evident that the tonal movements corres-
ponding to the end of the utterance varied considerably and in a very apparent way among speakers;
consequently, they could provide a clear cue about the individuality of the speaker. Regarding the
phonation analysis (see Section ..), the last segment of the sentence was avoided as it could affect
voice quality.
Perceptual cues for individual voice quality


.Results and interpretation
..Perception task
Only three listeners (all female) out of sixty were discarded after calculating
d-prime. Table .shows the mean, standard deviation, standard error of the
mean, and the conﬁdence intervals for d-prime for the ﬁfty-seven listeners. The
conﬁdence intervals show that listeners’ discrimination rate was signiﬁcantly
higher than chance (p < .*).
The global mean of accurate answers was %. The test to determine whether the hit
rate was the same across speakers yielded a p-value of ., which did not reach a
signiﬁcant value. The difference between the worst-recognized speaker (Speaker : %)
and the best recognized one (Speaker : %) was statistically signiﬁcant (p < .***).
The results from the perception task show that all speakers were recognized
above chance level despite the disguise of their voices by means of the falsetto register
(see Figure .). However, Speaker had the lowest rate of recognition by the
listeners, whereas Speaker displays the highest rate. To comprehend the perception
results we conducted the following analyses from the point of view of production.
..Voice production: phonatory behavior
For the analysis of phonation we used the application BioMet®Phon² (Gómez,
Rodellar, Nieto, Martínez, Álvarez, Scola, Ramírez, Poletti, and Fernández ),
developed by BioMetroSoft® and designed in the Universidad Politécnica de Madrid
by the team of engineers led by Pedro Gómez-Vilda. This program can decouple
the biomechanical content from the glottal source by subtracting the vocal tract
transfer function and the lip radiation effect. It calculates the glottal wave from the
acoustic signal by means of inverse ﬁltering, and from there it produces estimates
of seventy-two glottal features or parameters that can be gathered into seven distinct
subsets³ (Gómez-Vilda, Fernández-Baillo, Rodellar-Biarge, Nieto Lluis, Álvarez-
Marquina, Mazaira-Fernández, Martínez Olalla, and Godino-Llorente, ();
Gómez, Rodellar, Nieto, Martínez, Álvarez, Scola, Ramírez, Poletti, and Fernández
T.Mean, standard deviation, standard error of the mean, and conﬁdence
intervals for d-prime (ﬁfty-seven listeners)
Mean
Standard
deviation
Standard
error of mean
% Interval for mean
Lower bound
Upper bound
d’ (judges)
.
.
.
.
.
² http://www.biometrosoft.com.
³ Glottal source is not smoothed, as the irregularities found in it are important clues to speciﬁc glottal
behavior. The ﬁlter function is adaptive, combining a lattice and a ladder ﬁlter to extract the glottal source
and the vocal tract concurrently (Deller, Proakis, and Hansen ).

M. Fernández Trinidad and José Manuel Rojo Abuin

(); Gómez-Vilda, Álvarez-Marquina, Tsanas, Lázaro-Carrascosa, Rodellar-
Biarge, Nieto-Lluis, and Martínez Olalla (). The subsets are the following (see
Palacios Alonso : –):
• Group A: perturbation parameters. These are parameters related to f₀ and its
distortion.
• Group B: cepstral parameters. Their goal is to capture the frequency-domain
characteristics of the glottal source. Together with others, they can be useful in
speaker identiﬁcation and veriﬁcation. Usually the mel-cepstrum implementa-
tion within the cepstral parameters is the standard parameter used in speaker
identiﬁcation and veriﬁcation applications, as well as in voice quality evaluation
(Godino-Llorente, Gómez-Vilda, and Blanco-Velasco ).
• Group C: spectral parameters. They refer to the envelope of the power spectral
density of the glottal source. Along with others, they help in the identiﬁcation
and veriﬁcation of the speaker and in determining the presence of dysphonia of
organic origin.
• Group D: biomechanical parameters of the vocal folds. These parameters are
related to biomechanical estimates of vocal fold mass, tension, and energy losses.
Speaker discrimination
1,00
,80
,60
,40
,20
,00
47
27
42
88
73
129
148
128
s2
s1
s3
s4
s5
s6
F.Discrimination rate by speaker (indicated by ‘S’) calculated using the quotient of
hit responses
Perceptual cues for individual voice quality


They constitute a robust group of descriptors of the mechanical functioning of the
glottis, and together with others help in determining the types of phonation.
• Group E: temporal parameters of the glottal wave. They are related to the time-
domain glottal coefﬁcients and to the values of closure, opening, or air leakage of
the vocal folds.
• Group F: glottal gap parameters. They constitute a set of descriptors of defects in
closure, adduction, abduction, and permanent gap of the vocal folds, and along
with others, they serve to characterize the imperfections detected in the glottal
cycle. They are calculated as area differences.
• Group G: tremor parameters. They provide information about the presence of
defects or irregularities in the neuromotor system related to glottal closure,
manifested in vocal tremor (controlled or not).
We extracted the seventy-two glottal features of stressed Spanish vowel [a] for
each speaker (three stressed [a]  two registers  ﬁve repetitions), which yielded a
total of thirty stressed [a] per speaker, ﬁfteen in modal voice and ﬁfteen in falsetto.
We then conducted a contrast between means (t-test with Bonferroni correction)
between the modal and falsetto registers for each parameter and speaker. Table .
provides a summary of the results. The graphics in Figures .and .show intra-
and interspeaker variation according to the seven groups of glottal features, and the
variation of each group for the six speakers, respectively.
When considering the overall behavior of the parameter subsets it is clear that not
all varied in the same way when shifting from the modal to the falsetto register; for
example, cepstral parameters (group B) behaved similarly for all speakers, whereas
tremor ones (group G) did not. Consequently, it is advisable to give relative weight
to parameter variation in speaker recognition depending on the variability that
parameters show in all speakers; to that end we calculated the weighted mean over
the number of parameters. Results are shown in Figure ..
With regard to speaker discrimination, the optimal situation is to ﬁnd a low intras-
peaker variability rate and the highest possible interspeaker variability; consequently, in
T.Number of glottal parameters (in groups) that each speaker varied
signiﬁcantly (p<.*) when shifting registers (modal–falsetto)
Parameter group
Total no. of parameters
S
S
S
S
S
S
A perturbation







B cepstral







C spectral







D biomechanical







E temporal







F glottal gap







G tremor







Total per speaker








M. Fernández Trinidad and José Manuel Rojo Abuin

1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
Speaker variation
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
F.Intra- and interspeaker variation by parameter group (indicated by a letter)
Speaker is indicated by ‘S’ and its corresponding number.
1.2
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
1
Variation per parameter group
Group B
Group C 
Group D
Group E
Group F
Group G
Group A
F.Inter- and intraspeaker variation by speaker and parameter group (indicated by
a letter)
Speaker is indicated by ‘S’ and its corresponding number.

the weighted calculations we gave more prominence to the parameter subsets that varied
the least, those that had low variability, that is to say: the tremor parameters (group G)
were given more prominence than the cepstral parameters (group B). Nevertheless, in
both weighted and non-weighted calculations the speakers were in the same order
according to parameter variation. Thus, Speakers (S) and (S) were the ones
that varied over the largest number of parameters, while Speaker (S) and Speaker
(S) varied the least. The other speakers also showed the same order in both cases.
However, in the weighted calculations, Sand S, Sand S, and ﬁnally, Speaker 
(S) and Speaker (S) had more mutual similarities.
In light of the results, we can conclude that Speakers Sand Sshowed the greatest
intraspeaker variability when shifting from modal to falsetto, which could imply a
greater difﬁculty in distinguishing them based on glottal parameters; variability was
minimal in Sand S, whose phonation was more stable in both registers and,
consequently, they could be more easily recognized; Sand Sshowed an intermedi-
ate variability between S–Sand S–S.
Group F (glottal gap parameters) and group G (tremor parameters) presented the
lowest intraspeaker rate in relation to register shift. Thus, they did not seem to be
subject to voluntary change by the speaker. Also, group D (biomechanical parameters
of the vocal folds) appeared to be the one that deﬁned best the falsetto register (in
agreement with the results obtained in Fernández Trinidad, Gil Fernández, Infante,
and Lahoz-Bengoechea ). Although f₀ changes (group A) are fundamental in the
register shift, the modiﬁcations in group D are essential in determining f₀.
S1
0.9
Speaker variation
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
weighted coefficient
non-weighted coefficient
F.Changes in parameters per speaker when shifting registers (modal–falsetto)
Weighted results are according to intra- and interspeaker variation.

M. Fernández Trinidad and José Manuel Rojo Abuin

..Analysis of the temporal aspects of speech
Although we tried to control the variable tempo in the experimental design, the shift
in register can bear some concomitant modiﬁcations to it (see, for example, Künzel
). Also, several authors have demonstrated that the time factor contributes
greatly to speaker characterization (see Johnson, Hollien, and Hicks ; Künzel
; Federico, Mori, and Paoloni ; Romito, Galatà, and Lio ; Romito,
Lio, Ferri, and Giordano ; Leemann, Kolly, and Dellwo , among others).
To analyze the characteristic tempo of each speaker, we exclusively calculated the
average length of each utterance because the corpus consisted of several cases of
the same phrase, uttered without pauses between the syllables.
An ANOVA showed a main effect of speaker over global length (pooled registers),
F(,)=., p < .***. A post-hoc analysis with Bonferroni correction revealed
statistical differences between all speakers (pooled registers) except between Sand
Sand between Sand S. All differences were signiﬁcant with a p-value lower than
.*** for all cases except between Sand S(p < .*).
When considering each register separately, there was also a main effect of speaker
over global length: modal, F(,)=., p < .***; and falsetto, F(, )=.,
p<.***. Post-hoc Bonferroni corrections yielded the following data for
modal: S–S, S–S, S–S, (ns); S–S, S–S, S–S(p<.*); S–S(p<.**),
and S–S, S–S, S–S, S–S, S–S, S–S, S–S, S–S(p<.***); for falsetto:
S–S, S–S(ns); S–S(p<.*), and for the other cases, p<.***.
The main effect for register was not signiﬁcant, although we conﬁrmed an inter-
action effect between speaker and register: F(, )=., p<.***. The post-hoc
analyses (Speaker*Register) yielded the following results between modal (M) and
falsetto (F): M6¼ F, M6¼ F, M6¼ F, M6¼ F, p<.* for all. The utterance
length of both registers for Sand Swas the same (i.e., M=Fand M=F).
Results of the explained analyses are summarized in Figure .. Conditions that
did not present signiﬁcant differences between them (i.e., between registers or
speakers) are shown in the same color.
...Global tempo
Regarding the main effect found between the variables
speaker and global length (modal + falsetto), only three speakers (S, S, and S)
stood out. Speaker took up the longest time when uttering the sentences, whereas
Sand Swere the fastest: these differences were signiﬁcant. Consequently, the
tempo could have served as a perceptual cue for the listeners when judging Sand
Sas a block and, on the other hand, S, in contrast to the other speakers (i.e., S, S,
and S), who did not speak noticeably faster or more slowly with respect to the mean,
that is: duration was not a parameter that stood out in the utterances of these
speakers; therefore, it could not have drawn the attention of the judges.
...Tempo according to register
Register did not have a homogeneous effect on
duration. Some speakers behaved differently depending on the register, and used
different and contrary strategies. Speakers , , , and showed signiﬁcant differ-
ences in average length (see Figure .). For Sand S, utterances were longer in
modal voice than in falsetto, that is, the speech rate was slower. Conversely, for S
Perceptual cues for individual voice quality


and Slength was greater in falsetto, and hence speech slowed down signiﬁcantly
in this register. This seems to suggest that speakers used different strategies when
dealing with the likely difﬁculty of maintaining the falsetto register.
...Interaction between Global Tempo and Tempo according to Register
As
already indicated, Sdid not present internal differences in duration between the two
registers, a fact that should contribute to speaker recognition. Presumably, if speakers
presented signiﬁcant differences between modal and falsetto, and those differences
were perceived, that would prevent them from being recognized. However, we have
already noted that Sand Sstood out in global length—which was slower for the
former and faster for the latter, along with S—but they presented intravariability,
as the modal and falsetto registers differed signiﬁcantly. Nevertheless, Sshowed a
particularity, namely that the utterance length in the modal register was signiﬁcantly
longer than that of the other speakers for the same register (*S–S; **S–Sand
***S–S, S–S, S–S), and likewise for his falsetto register (*S–Sand ***S–S,
S–S, S–S, S–S).
Thus, it seems that tempo can affect speaker performance in two ways. On the one
hand, a speaker may stand out in relation to global tempo and simultaneously not
2.0
Average utterance length per speaker and register
Speaker (modal..... falsetto)
1.5
1.0
Length (s)
0.5
0.0
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
F.Average utterance length per speaker (indicated by ‘S’ and its corresponding
number) and register
The error bars are two standard error units. The left bar corresponds to modal voice and the right to falsetto.

M. Fernández Trinidad and José Manuel Rojo Abuin

present signiﬁcant duration differences between registers; in short, that the speaker
presents maximum interspeaker variability and minimum intraspeaker variability.
On the other, a person may stand out globally and, in spite of showing internal
differences between the two registers, the tempo of each register may stand out in
relation to the rest of the speakers, which in turn may allow judges to perceptually
identify two utterances, one in modal voice and the other one in falsetto, as belonging
to the same speaker.
..Other aspects
We observed that Sproduced occlusive obstruents in a quite reinforced manner
(through an increase in intensity and duration in the release burst), which was
perceptually salient in both registers. Figure .shows a randomly selected sample
of Swhere this reinforcement is evident; see Figure .for a comparison with the
same segment uttered by S.
.Discussion and conclusions
All speakers were recognized above chance level despite the disguise of voice quality.
Contrary to some previous studies (for example Wagner and Köster ; Künzel
; Fernández Trinidad, Infante, and Alves ), our results reveal that the rise in
Modal voice in S4
0.205
1.054
F.Spectrogram of a sample (Dica dadiva) in modal voice by Speaker 
Modal voice in S1
0.011
0.795
F.Spectrogram of a sample (Dica dadiva) in modal voice by Speaker 
Perceptual cues for individual voice quality


f₀ and falsetto do not seem to complicate greatly the discrimination task, so falsetto
makes the correct discrimination of voices difﬁcult but not impossible, although we
cannot estimate the disadvantage caused by the shift in register because we have not
studied the ability of our listeners in judging nondisguised voices.
This study conﬁrms that voice quality is not determined exclusively by changes in
the glottal features, because they cannot justify the results in the discrimination task
completely. Thus, we need to elucidate what else intervened in voice discrimination.
With regard to speakers, Sand Schange few global parameters in the register
shift and do not present any remarkable segmental or suprasegmental features; as a
consequence, they are quite well recognized.
Although Schanges many glottal parameters between registers, he is recognized
quite well. Judges may have directed their attention to other features in order to
associate his modal voice with his falsetto. As already noted, Spresents a noticeable
segmental characteristic in both registers, namely, he produces occlusive obstruents
in a reinforced manner, with a longer and more intense release burst. His tempo is
also characteristic: although the speech rate is different between the registers, his
utterances in modal and falsetto are the longest of all speakers. The reinforced
articulation of occlusive obstruents and his tempo could have been useful perceptual
cues to the judges.
Speaker , who is recognized to a lesser degree, modiﬁes almost as many glottal
parameters as S, but unlike him, Slacks unique features in phonation or at the
segmental level. Regarding speech rate, although Spresents a characteristic tempo—
the fastest among the speakers, along with S—, differences between his modal and
falsetto are signiﬁcant, so the speech rate might not have been a useful enough cue in
the discrimination task.
Speaker changes few glottal features, almost as few as S, the speaker with the
smallest number of modiﬁcations; however, he does not present a characteristic
global tempo—such as those of Sand S—, which may explain why judges distin-
guished him quite well.
Lastly, S, the speaker whom the listeners discriminated most accurately, modiﬁes
the fewest glottal parameters in the shift from modal to falsetto, probably the
minimum necessary to achieve the change in register. The main characteristics of
Sare that he exhibits a fast global tempo and the fastest tempo per register, and that
he does not present signiﬁcant differences in speech rate between modal and falsetto.
To sum up, the perception of voice quality and voice recognition seem to be
multiparametric, as has been said very often. Judges had most likely to rely on different
parameters for each utterance in order to discriminate voices: segmental—for example,
the salient pronunciation of a certain sound—or suprasegmental, such as temporal
features, whose perceptual relevance in speaker characterization and recognition has
been mentioned profusely in the bibliography (Johnson, Hollien, and Hicks ;
Künzel ; Federico, Mori, and Paoloni ; Romito, Galatà, and Lio ; Romito,
Lio, Ferri, and Giordano ; Leemann, Kolly, and Dellwo ). Nevertheless,
listeners also relied on glottal features. Changes at the laryngeal level, although less
prominent, must have had perceptual relevance because listeners seem to have been
able to perceive them. With respect to this, the most interesting case in point is the

M. Fernández Trinidad and José Manuel Rojo Abuin

comparison of Sand S. Despite their sharing the same global length,⁴ Swas the
worst recognized speaker and Swas the easiest, most likely because Sis the speaker
who modiﬁes the largest number of laryngeal features, whereas Skeeps most of them
constant across registers.
As Kreiman and Sidtis (: –) describe, some evidence indicates that
listeners apply different strategies according to whether they hear familiar or
unfamiliar voices because the perceptual processing might differ. Moreover, in
some research it has been pointed out that for unfamiliar voices—which is the case
in this study—listeners do not apply a global pattern, perceptually holistic, which
is what happens essentially in the recognition of familiar voices. Many factors
are involved in voice recognition, and on some occasions certain factors are
decisive and other times the same factors are not. Kreiman () even suggests
that the perceptual cues about a person’s identity based on voice vary not only from
one voice to another, but also depending on the context in which those cues appear.
Thus, Kreiman (: ) explains that a peculiar accent may not be a deﬁnitive cue
to recognize a voice if that voice is very distinctive in other aspects; in short, there is
not a single key group of vocal features that can characterize all voices. The results of
our study support this idea: as already indicated, even though a speciﬁc feature has
changed equally for several voices, the recognition rates have been altered by the
presence or absence of other concurring parameters.
An interesting and quite well studied approach of the perception of segments in
foreign languages is the so-called contingent categorization in speech perception (see,
for example, Apfelbaum, Bullock-Rest, Rhone, Jongman, and McMurray ),
which could also be applied to voice quality perception. According to this interactive
approach, listeners extract multiple cues simultaneously from the acoustic signal,
and the decisions that they take regarding the relevance that a feature or cue has
inﬂuence the importance of the rest. In other words, auditory cues are processed in
terms of their contrast with the other cues. At the same time, cues can also be
calculated in relation to the listeners’ expectations about how cues have to behave
in different contexts, thus making the process even more ﬂexible. Following this
approach, there would not be a general criterion to decide whether a feature is a
primary or secondary cue; therefore, its perceptual relevance would not be deter-
mined by the feature itself, but would depend on the combination of features in each
case and on the context in which the combination occurs.
The perception of voice quality could be interpreted in terms of contingent
categorization. From the moment that, for various reasons, the voice of a speaker
does not meet the expectations that listeners have internalized, a diverging feature is
immediately noticeable and becomes a primary perceptual cue, a cue that plays a
pivotal role in recognition. The other cues that might as well be present could be
functioning as secondary or concomitant, that is, cues that add up but that do not
deﬁne. Moreover, the parameters that stand out in a speaker can be different from
⁴ It should be kept in mind, however, that although they exhibit the same global tempo, Spresents
differences between his modal and falsetto, whereas Sdoes not (see Section ..).
Perceptual cues for individual voice quality


those in other individuals: what for one voice constitutes a primary cue might be
secondary for another; a listener could primarily rely on a feature to recognize a
particular speaker and then not regard it as fundamental when recognizing another
speaker who presents the same feature. Thus, from all the cues that a listener can use
in order to recognize an unfamiliar voice—where a global pattern is not usually
applied, and instead the listener keeps on evaluating the perceptual weight of every
feature each time—the listener can pay attention to different factors in different
moments. In summary, as has been noted many times, voice perception is a very
complex phenomenon, which explains why the perception process is continuously
adaptive, contingent, and variable according to the circumstances.
.Further research
With regard to the study of voice production, speciﬁcally that of the analysis of glottal
parameters (see Section ..), we will try to reduce this dimensionality by using
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) so that it can be determined which principal
components are best used to classify modal voice vs. falsetto. Additionally, the
analysis of the stimuli will be supplemented by the study of the acoustic measure-
ments most frequently used in the estimation of glottal behavior and in the charac-
terization of registers. The measures of the glottal source spectrum that will be
analyzed are those related to the spectral slope (see Ní Chasaide and Gobl 
and Kreiman, Gerratt, Garellek, Samlan, and Zhang ).
As for the perception task, the inﬂuence that a particular language can have on
the perception of voice quality and on voice discrimination tasks will be studied,
speciﬁcally whether the fact that speakers and listeners share the same language
inﬂuences the ability of the latter to distinguish voices, and also whether these
listeners rely on the same perceptual cues as the listeners in the present experiment
when recognizing voices. In order to carry out this study, we will replicate the
perception task with sixty native Neapolitan listeners, that is, with listeners who
not only speak the same language, but also speak the same variety as the speakers
recorded in the present study.
Acknowledgments
The study described was supported in part by a grant awarded by the Spanish Ministry of
Economy’s Research Project FFI--C--P: EMULANDO: Estudios Multilingües
sobre el Acento No-nativo Disimulado (Multilingual Studies on Disguised Non-native Accents),
and by a doctoral fellowship awarded by the Spanish National Research Council (CSIC).
This study is part of a larger project that Marianela Fernández carried out for her PhD
dissertation at UNED. José Manuel Rojo contributed to the statistical analysis. Thanks to the
team of Statistical Analysis Unit (CCHS-CSIC).
We would like to thank the editors for giving us the opportunity to participate in this
volume. We are also very grateful to the anonymous reviewers for their constructive com-
ments, which contributed signiﬁcantly to improving the ﬁnal version of this chapter. Finally,
we would also like to thank Dr. Pedro Gómez-Vilda, José María Lahoz-Bengoechea, and
Carolina Pérez Sanz.

M. Fernández Trinidad and José Manuel Rojo Abuin

11
Perception of lexical stress in Spanish
Lby French speakers
JOAQUIM LLISTERRI AND SANDRA SCHWAB
.Introduction
..The accentual systems of French and Spanish
The accentual systems of French and Spanish differ in an essential characteristic:
whereas French has been traditionally considered a ﬁxed-stress language, Spanish is
described as a free-stress language (Garde ). The ﬁrst implication of this
difference concerns the fact that the position of stress in French is highly predictable,
while in Spanish it is a property of each lexical form. Thus, phonological stress
contrasts, such as [ˈnumeɾo] (número, ‘a/the number’), [nuˈmeɾo] (numero, ‘I num-
ber’), and [numeˈɾo] (numeró, ‘he/she numbered’), occur in Spanish but are not
found in French. The second implication is related to the function of stress: primary
stress in French, which serves as a delimiter of sequences of words (stress groups or
rhythmic groups), appears at the end of such sequences, especially in reading and in
neutral speaking styles (Carton ; Rossi ; Vaissière ). Spanish stress, on
the contrary, is usually described at word level—hence the denomination of “lexical
stress”—and fulﬁlls a distinctive rather than a demarcating role (Quilis , ).
Besides the differences at the phonological level, the acoustic phonetic manifest-
ation of stress also differs in French and Spanish. Although, as expected, prominence
is achieved through variations in fundamental frequency (f₀), intensity, and duration
in both languages, stress in French is implemented with an increase in duration and,
to a lesser extent, in f₀ (Léon and Martin ; Léon ); in Spanish, stress is
usually realized with a combined increase of duration and f₀ values (Quilis ).
The third implication is that there are also differences in the perceptual cues used
by native speakers to detect accentual prominences. While French listeners seem to
favor an increase in f₀ (Rigault ), changes in f₀ (Enríquez, Casado, and Santos
) combined with changes in either duration or intensity appear to be needed to
identify the position of lexical stress in Spanish isolated words (Llisterri, Machuca, de
la Mota, Riera, and Ríos ).
Romance Phonetics and Phonology. First edition. Mark Gibson and Juana Gil (eds.)
This chapter © Joaquim Llisterri and Sandra Schwab . First published by Oxford
University Press.

These differences in the accentual systems, at both the phonological and the phonetic
levels, might account for the stress “deafness” observed in speakers of a ﬁxed-stress
language when confronted with accentual contrasts in a free-stress language.
..The study of stress “deafness”
In , Polivanov coined the metaphor phonological deafness (surdité phonologique)
to explain the fact that the perception of a second language (L) is mediated by the
phonological categories of the ﬁrst language (L; Polivanov ). Trubetzkoy
(), also in the context of the concepts developed within the Prague Linguistic
Circle, suggested that the phonological system of the Lacts as a sieve—crible
phonologique in the French translation (Trubetzkoy )—, a ﬁlter that interferes
in the perception of contrasts that are present in the Lbut absent in the L. Building
on these ideas, the notion of accentual ﬁlter (crible accentuel) has been introduced by
several researchers as an explanation for prosodic transfer phenomena (Dolbec and
Santi ; Salsignac ; Frost ; Muñoz García ) and has been particu-
larly adopted by the practitioners of the verbotonal system of pronunciation teaching
(Borrell and Salsignac ; Billières ).
Several decades after Polivanov’s and Trubetzkoy’s proposals, in a series of studies
on the perception of lexical stress by French speakers, Dupoux and his collaborators
(Dupoux,Pallier,Sebastián-Gallés,andMehler;Dupoux,Peperkamp,andSebastián-
Gallés ; Peperkamp and Dupoux ; Dupoux, Sebastián-Gallés, Navarrete,
and Peperkamp ) have put forward the hypothesis of stress “deafness”—a
particular case of phonological deafness—to explain the difﬁculties experienced by
speakers of a language without contrastive stress when confronted with contrasts in
accentual patterns.
The results of an initial series of experiments reported in Dupoux et al. ()
showed that French-speaking participants performed less well than Spanish-speaking
participants in an ABX discrimination task where the stimuli differed only in the
position of stress (e.g., bópelo-bopélo). On the contrary, when participants were asked
to perform the ABX task ignoring the accentual information and to focus their
attention on the segmental information (for example, with stimuli such as bópelo-
sopélo), French-speaking participants performed the task better than Spanish-
speaking participants. This indicated that French listeners have difﬁculties in per-
ceiving stress, while Spanish listeners have difﬁculties ignoring it. However, it is
important to mention that, according to Dupoux et al. (), French listeners did
not show particular difﬁculties in perceiving stress in a simpliﬁed AX discrimination
task with stimuli produced by only one speaker. Thus, these ﬁndings suggested that
the introduction of phonetic variability in the stimuli and the use of more cognitively
demanding tasks had a negative effect on the French-speaking participants’ perform-
ance, which was conﬁrmed by Dupoux et al. () with a highly cognitively
demanding task, such as a sequence recall task.
A sequence recall task, together with a lexical decision task, was used in a study
that involved three groups of French learners of Spanish with elementary, intermedi-
ate, and advanced knowledge of the language (Dupoux et al. ). Again, Spanish
listeners performed better than French listeners in the perception of stress and,

Joaquim Llisterri and Sandra Schwab

interestingly, the results for the monolingual French participants were not different
from those of the French learners of Spanish, irrespective of their level of knowledge
in L. This led the authors to conclude that “stress ‘deafness’ is better interpreted as a
lasting processing problem resulting from the impossibility for French speakers to
encode contrastive stress in their phonological representations” ().
Mora, Courtois, and Cavé () have taken a different approach and have shown
that French listeners with no knowledge of Spanish were able to correctly identify
% of the stressed syllables in a sample of spontaneous speech in Spanish, although
they did not necessarily rely on the same acoustic cues as those used by native
Spanish listeners. Very similar levels of performance in a stress identiﬁcation task
(around %) have been reported by Muñoz García, Panissal, Billières, and Baqué
() for French speakers listening to isolated words and to words in a sentence
context in Spanish; moreover, participants with an advanced level of Spanish per-
formed better than those with basic or intermediate knowledge of the language.
Taken together, these results suggest that the effects of the accentual ﬁlter might
depend, among other factors, on the nature of the task performed by the participants
and on their level of proﬁciency in the L. In the following section, we present a series
of studies that we have undertaken in order to shed more light on the prosodic
transfer that may occur in in the perception of lexical stress by French listeners when
being exposed to a free-stress language such as Spanish.
.Experimental studies
The experimental studies that are presented in the next sections are based upon the
assumptions that the French-speaking listeners are able to detect the acoustic cues
that denote the presence of a prominent syllable, but they are not able to encode the
lexical stress in their lexicon, as previously suggested by Dupoux and collaborators
(Dupoux et al. ; Dupoux, Peperkamp, and Sebastián-Gallés ; Dupoux et al.
) and by Mora, Courtois, and Cavé (), who pointed out that the accentual
ﬁlter “se situe plutôt à un niveau phonologique qu’au niveau acoustico-perceptif”
(is located rather at a phonological, than at an acoustic-perceptual level) (). To
test these assumptions, we carried out two series of experiments. In the ﬁrst
series (described in Sections ..and ..), we tested to what extent the
French-speaking listeners could identify the position of stress by means of two
tasks that imply an acoustic-phonetic processing of the lexical stress (i.e., identiﬁca-
tion and discrimination tasks). In the second series of experiments (summarized in
Section ..), we examined to what degree the French-speaking listeners could
encode the accentual information in their lexicon with a more demanding task,
namely a task that involves not only acoustic but also lexical processing of the stress
at word level (i.e., a shape–pseudoword matching task).
..Identiﬁcation study
First,weperformedanidentiﬁcationstudy thataimed atdeterminingtheimportance of
the acoustic parameters (f₀, duration, and intensity) in the perception of Spanish lexical
stress by French-speaking advanced learners of Spanish and by French-speaking
Perception of lexical stress in Spanish L


listeners without knowledge of Spanish. We applied the experimental procedure that
had been initially designed for a study with native Spanish speakers (Llisterri, Machuca,
de la Mota, Riera, and Ríos ; Llisterri et al. ). The experimental design and the
resultsaresummarizedbelow.Thedetailedpresentationofthestatisticalanalysiscanbe
found in Schwab and Llisterri (, b).
Twenty French-speaking listeners with and without knowledge of Spanish (ten
participants in each group) performed a stress identiﬁcation task in which they
listened to Spanish trisyllabic stimuli (words and pseudowords), and had to
indicate, as fast as possible, the stressed syllable. The stimuli were Base and
Manipulated stimuli. The Base stimuli (i.e., stimuli with the original stress pattern)
were proparoxytone (PP) (e.g., [ˈnumeɾo] número ‘the/a number’), paroxytone (P)
(e.g., [nuˈmeɾo] numero ‘I number’) or oxytone (O) (e.g., numeró [numeˈɾo] ‘he/
she numbered’). The Manipulated stimuli were stimuli with the stress shifted from
its original position to the next syllable, as described in Llisterri et al. (). More
speciﬁcally, the so-called PP>P Manipulated stimuli presented a stress shift from
the antepenultimate originally stressed syllable (as in a proparoxytone, PP) to the
penultimate syllable (as in a paroxytone, P), while the so-called P>O Manipulated
stimuli presented a stress shift from the penultimate originally stressed syllable to
the ﬁnal syllable (as in an oxytone, O). In order to examine the role of the three
acoustic parameters involved in the perception of lexical stress (f₀, duration,
and intensity), the Manipulated stimuli presented the seven possible isolated
and combined manipulations of the acoustic parameters (f₀; duration; intensity;
duration and intensity; f₀ and duration; f₀ and intensity; f₀, duration, and intensity).
It is important to note that, since stimuli consisted of isolated words, “stress shift”
in this context does not refer to the phenomenon often described as “peak dis-
placement” (that is, the presence of an f₀ peak after the stressed syllable) that tends
to occur in continuous speech (Garrido, Llisterri, de la Mota, and Ríos ).
As can be seen in Figure ., results on the identiﬁcation of the Base stimuli
(those without stress shift) showed that, whereas, as reported by Llisterri et al. (),
native Spanish listeners had a ceiling performance, the French participants correctly
identiﬁed the position of stress in Spanish in % of the cases. Moreover, as can be
also observed in Figure ., the results revealed that the advanced learners of
Spanish exhibit a better identiﬁcation of the stress position than participants without
knowledge of Spanish. The different behavior of the two groups of participants was
conﬁrmed by differences in their reaction times, as explained in Schwab and Llisterri
(b): advanced participants were faster than participants without knowledge of
Spanish. Finally, the results indicated that French listeners have more difﬁculties in
identifying the position of stress in oxytone stimuli (i.e., the default pattern in
French), independently of their competence in Spanish.
Results for the Manipulated stimuli (those with a stress a shift induced by the
manipulation of the acoustic parameters) are presented in Figure .. The French-
speaking advanced learners of Spanish and the French-speaking listeners without any
knowledge of Spanish were not equally sensitive to the different acoustic parameters:
the listeners without knowledge of Spanish were more sensitive to the manipulations
of duration and intensity (presented independently or combined) than the advanced

Joaquim Llisterri and Sandra Schwab

learners of Spanish. Moreover, f₀ (alone or combined with duration or intensity)
seemed the most important cue for a syllable to be identiﬁed as stressed by French
listeners, independently of their competence in Spanish. Finally, as shown in Schwab
and Llisterri (b), when the French listeners did perceive the stress shift, it
appeared that their reaction times were mainly determined by intensity (alone or
in combination with duration), again, independently of their competence in Spanish.
This research shows that, since the stress identiﬁcation task involves a phonetic
rather than a lexical processing, the French-speaking listeners present a less strong
degree of stress “deafness” than that reported by Dupoux and colleagues in more
complex tasks (Dupoux et al. ; Dupoux, Peperkamp, and Sebastián-Gallés ;
Dupoux et al. ); however, our results seem to converge with those obtained by
Mora, Courtois, and Cavé () and by Muñoz García et al. (). Moreover, the
exposure to the second language not only affects the ability to identify the position
of stress, but also the impact of the acoustic parameters involved in perceiving
its position.
..Discrimination study
The results of the identiﬁcation task show that f₀ appears to be the most important
parameter in the perception of the stress position by French listeners, and that
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
PP
P
O
Stress pattern
Correct percentage
Advanced
With no knowledge
F.Percentages of correct identiﬁcation rates for Base stimuli as a function of the
stress pattern and the competence of French participants in LSpanish (Advanced, With no
knowledge)
Adapted from Schwab and Llisterri ()
Perception of lexical stress in Spanish L


participants with and without knowledge of Spanish were not equally sensitive to the
acoustic parameters that signal the prominence of the stressed syllable. The goal of
the discrimination study that we conducted was to examine in more detail the role of
the acoustic parameters in the perception of accentual differences by French listeners
in order to validate the conclusions of the identiﬁcation study. The experimental
design and the results are summarized below (more details can be found in Schwab
and Llisterri ).
The participants and stimuli were the same as in the identiﬁcation study described
in Section ... The stimuli were presented in pairs, where a Manipulated stimulus
was always compared to a Base stimulus. The Base stimulus appeared in half of the
stimuli with the original stress pattern of the Manipulated stimulus (i.e., PP Base
stimulus vs. PP>P Manipulated stimulus; P Base stimulus vs. P>O Manipulated
stimulus) and in the other half of the stimuli, with the intended shifted stress pattern
of the Manipulated stimulus (i.e., P Base stimulus vs. PP>P Manipulated stimulus;
O Base stimulus vs. P>O Manipulated stimulus). Control pairs with identical stimuli
Advanced
With no knowledge
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Manipulation
Dur
Correct percentage
Int
F0
Dur + Int
F0 + Dur
F0 + Int
F0 + Dur + Int
F.Percentages of correct identiﬁcation rate by French listeners for Manipulated
stimuli as a function of the seven manipulations and the competence in LSpanish (Advanced,
With no knowledge). A response was considered correct if the listener perceived the stress shift
induced by the manipulations
Adapted from Schwab and Llisterri ()

Joaquim Llisterri and Sandra Schwab

(Base vs. Base and Manipulated vs. Manipulated pairs) were also used, but not
included into the analysis. Participants performed a stress AX discrimination task
in which they listened to each trial (a pair of stimuli) and had to indicate, as fast as
possible, whether the position of stress in the two elements of the pair was the same
or different.
Results for the PP>P Manipulated stimuli (i.e., with a stress shift from the
antepenultimate syllable to the penultimate syllable) are presented in Figure ..
Note that a manipulation induced the perception of a stress shift if it triggered
more Different responses when the Manipulated stimulus (PP>P) was paired with
a PP stimulus than when paired with a P stimulus. The results showed that the
manipulation of duration and intensity, in isolation or in combination, did not
induce the perception of a stress shift. Moreover, the manipulation of f₀, alone or
with intensity, seems to have some effect, but not sufﬁciently so as to override the
perception of the PP>P Manipulated stimuli as being different from the Base PP or
P stimuli. Finally, the combined manipulation of f₀ and duration triggers the
perception of the stress shift, with or without a manipulation of intensity.
Results regarding the P>O Manipulated stimuli (i.e., with a stress shift from the
penultimate syllable to the ﬁnal syllable) are presented in Figure .. Again, a
manipulation induced the perception of a stress shift if it triggered more Different
responses when the Manipulated stimulus (P>O) was paired with a P stimulus than
when it was paired with an O stimulus. First, the results indicated that the isolated
manipulation of f₀, duration, or intensity, as well as the combined manipulation
of duration and intensity, did not induce the perception of a stress shift. Second, the
combined manipulation of f₀ and intensity seems to have some effect, but not
enough to override the perception of the stimulus as being different from the
stimulus with the original or the shifted stress pattern. Finally, the combined manipu-
lation of f₀ and duration, whose effect is reinforced by the manipulation of intensity,
did induce the perception of a stress shift.
As can be seen in Figures .and ., the differences between participants with
and without knowledge of Spanish mainly concern the role of duration, but they
present an opposite trend in PP>P and P>O stimuli. Whereas the participants
without knowledge tended to be more sensitive to duration than the advanced
participants in PP>P, they were less sensitive in P>O. This might be explained by
the fact that the participants without knowledge of Spanish expected the Spanish
lexical stress pattern to be similar to that of French.
To summarize, this research supports the idea that the perception of an accen-
tual difference depends on the acoustic parameters involved in the realization of
the stress shift. More speciﬁcally, we have shown that the role of the acoustic
parameters varies as a function of the accentual patterns (PP>P and P>O) and
the competence in L. In this respect, the ﬁndings of this discrimination experi-
ment are in agreement with the results reported for the identiﬁcation study (see
Section ..), namely that the French-speaking listeners without knowledge of
Spanish were more sensitive to a manipulation of duration than the French-
speaking advanced learners of Spanish.
Perception of lexical stress in Spanish L


100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Advanced
Duration
Knowledge
Competence in L2
Percentage of Diff responses
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Advanced
f0
Knowledge
Competence in L2
Percentage of Diff responses
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Advanced
Intensity
Knowledge
Competence in L2
Percentage of Diff responses
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Advanced
Duration and intensity
Knowledge
Competence in L2
Percentage of Diff responses
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Advanced
f0, duration, and intensity
Knowledge
Competence in L2
Percentage of Diff responses
PP > P paired with PP
PP > P paired with P
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Advanced
f0 and duration
Knowledge
Competence in L2
Percentage of Diff responses
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Advanced
f0 and intensity
Knowledge
Competence in L2
Percentage of Diff responses
F.Percentages of Different (Diff) responses by French listeners as a function of the
pair member (PP>P paired with PP, PP>P paired with P; PP = proparoxytone; P = paroxy-
tone) and the competence in LSpanish (Advanced, No knowledge) for the seven possible
manipulations
Schwab and Llisterri ()

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Percentage of Diff responses
Advanced
Duration
Knowledge
Competence in L2
Intensity
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Percentage of Diff responses
Advanced
Knowledge
Competence in L2
f0 , duration, and intensity
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Percentage of Diff responses
Advanced
Knowledge
Competence in L2
f0
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Percentage of Diff responses
Advanced
Knowledge
Competence in L2
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Percentage of Diff responses
Advanced
Knowledge
Competence in L2
f0  and duration
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Percentage of Diff responses
Advanced
Duration and intensity
Knowledge
Competence in L2
f0  and intensity
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Percentage of Diff responses
Advanced
Knowledge
Competence in L2
P > O paired with P
P > O paired with O
F.Percentages of Different (Diff) responses by French listeners as a function of the
pair member (P>O paired with P, P>O paired with O; P = paroxytone; O = oxytone) and the
competence in LSpanish (Advanced, No knowledge) for the seven possible manipulations
Schwab and Llisterri ()
Perception of lexical stress in Spanish L


..Shape–pseudoword matching study
The identiﬁcation and the discrimination studies have shown that the French-
speaking listeners were sensitive to the acoustic cues related to the lexical stress.
Nevertheless, these ﬁndings do not enable us to conclude that they encoded the
phonological representation of lexical stress in their lexicon. For that reason, we
carried out an experiment using a task that involved the encoding and the retrieval
of the accentual information, namely a shape–pseudoword matching task. In
this task, the participants had to associate a visual shape to an auditory stimulus.
Since a detailed description of this study is provided in Schwab and Llisterri
(a, , ), the experimental design and the most relevant results are
summarized below.
The ﬁrst goal of the research was to determine whether French-speaking listeners
were able to learn to perceive lexical stress contrasts, i.e., whether they are capable,
after training, of storing and retrieving accentual information. The second goal was
to examine whether training could improve their performance in identifying the
position of lexical stress in Spanish isolated words. Finally, the third goal was to
deﬁne the role of the acoustic parameters (f₀, duration, and intensity) in the storage of
the accentual information.
We built an experiment that was divided in two parts. The ﬁrst part (Training) was
designed to achieve the ﬁrst two goals, while the third goal was intended to be
reached in the second part (Test). The ﬁrst part involved three phases: a pretest, a
training session, and a post-test. We used a stress identiﬁcation task in the pre- and
post-tests, while a shape–pseudoword matching task was employed for Training. The
second part (i.e., the Test part) involved one session in which we also used a shape–
pseudoword matching task.
Three different groups of listeners participated in the Training part of the experi-
ment. The ﬁrst one consisted of twenty-two native speakers of French with no
knowledge or contact with Spanish (hereafter non-natives). The second group was
composed of sixteen bilingual Spanish–Catalan speakers (hereafter natives). Note
that since Spanish and Catalan are both free-stress languages, knowledge of Catalan
did not interfere with the goal of our study. Finally, the third group included fourteen
native speakers of French with no knowledge of or contact with Spanish (hereafter
non-native controls). While the non-native and native groups participated in the
training session, the non-native control group received no training (No Training
condition). Among the natives and non-natives who performed the ﬁrst part of the
experiment, sixteen native and fourteen non-native listeners also participated in the
Test part.
As for the materials of the Training part, in the pre- and post-test we presented
four triplets of trisyllabic Spanish words that consisted of Base PP, P, and O stimuli
(e.g., número, numero, numeró), as described previously in Section ... In the
training session we used, on the one hand, two triplets of Base PP, P, and
O pseudowords (lúguido, luguido, luguidó and máledo, maledo, maledó). Addition-
ally, six different visual shapes were created and randomly associated with the six
pseudowords. In the No Training condition, only the six visual shapes were pre-
sented, with no auditory stimuli. As far as the Test part was concerned, we used the

Joaquim Llisterri and Sandra Schwab

Manipulated PP>P and P>O stimuli of the two pseudowords maledo and luguido.
As in the experiments discussed in the previous sections, the Manipulated stimuli
presented each of the seven possible manipulations of the three acoustic parameters
(f₀, duration, and intensity) in isolation and in combination. We also used the same
six shapes as in the Training part.
In the ﬁrst part of the experiment, the three groups of participants (natives, non-
natives, non-native controls) performed the pre- and post-tests, which consisted of a
stress identiﬁcation task. Natives and non-natives participated in a training session in
which they were trained to perceive accentual contrasts, while non-native controls
had no training. In the training phase, a shape–pseudoword matching task was used:
four shapes were presented on the screen and the participants heard one of the six
pseudowords; then, they were instructed to click on the shape that they thought
corresponded to the pseudoword. The training session consisted of ﬁve blocks: four
with the feedback on the correct response, followed by one without feedback. This
particular kind of task was chosen because it implies not only a low-level acoustic
processing, but also a lexical processing, since the participants had to learn to
associate each shape with a pseudoword and with its corresponding stress pattern.
The task given to the non-native controls (who did not receive training) consisted in
clicking as fast as possible on the shape that appeared on the screen, without hearing
any auditory input.
In the second part, the participants heard Manipulated stimuli and performed the
same shape–pseudoword matching task as in the training session. But, in contrast to
the training session, they were instructed to answer as quickly as possible and did not
receive any feedback. Each Manipulated stimulus (e.g., PP>P) was presented with
the shape that corresponded to the original pseudoword (i.e., with stress on the
original position; e.g., PP) and with the shape that corresponded to the stress-shifted
pseudoword (i.e., with the intended shifted stress; e.g., P), in order to examine with
which shape (that is, with which accentual pattern) the Manipulated stimulus was
associated (e.g., PP or P).
The results of the Training part (on the correct/incorrect responses), presented in
Figure ., show that the French listeners, after a short training of approximately
thirty minutes, were able to learn the correspondences between the pseudowords (i.e.,
the accentual patterns) and the shapes (.% of correct responses at the end of the
training), although their performance did not reach that of the native speakers of
Spanish (.% of correct responses). This ﬁnding indicates that the French-speaking
listeners had the capacity to integrate and retrieve (at least, temporarily) the accen-
tual information present in a small set of Spanish pseudowords.
The results also reveal that the improvement from pre- to post-test did not depend
on the mere fact of receiving a training on stress contrasts, but that the performance
at the post-test was related to the participants’ learning performance at the end of the
training session. As can be seen in Figure ., the more the participants were able to
learn in the training session, the better they performed in the post-test.
As far as the Test part is concerned, the results (on the correct/incorrect responses
and reaction times, see Schwab and Llisterri for more details) reveal that, when
the manipulation involved duration and/or intensity, the French-speaking listeners
Perception of lexical stress in Spanish L


100
90
80
70
60
50
Correct percentage
Training block
40
30
20
10
0
1
2
3
4
5
Non-natives
Natives
F.Percentages of correct responses in the training session as a function of the
groups (Natives and Non-natives) and of the ﬁve training blocks
Schwab and Llisterri ()
0.9
Non-natives
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
Correct percentage in training
Probability of correct responses
in post-test
F.Estimated probability of correct responses in the post-test as a function of the
percentages of correct responses in the training session (in Non-natives only)
Schwab and Llisterri ()

Joaquim Llisterri and Sandra Schwab

associated more often than the natives, the Manipulated stimulus (e.g., PP>P) with
the shape corresponding to the intended stress-shifted pseudoword (e.g., P), which
suggests that the non-natives perceived the stress shift better than the natives.
However, the inverse trend was observed with the other manipulations. These
ﬁndings suggest that the French-speaking listeners were more sensitive than natives
to the Manipulated stimuli that present small differences from the Base stimuli that
they have learned (and stored) during the training session, while the native Spanish
speakers, who are used to such differences in their L, did not perceive them. We can
conclude that the accentual representation of the Spanish pseudowords acquired and
stored by the French speakers was more rigid than the representation encoded by the
Spanish native speakers.
To summarize, the French listeners were able to encode and to retrieve the
accentual information in a small set of Spanish isolated pseudowords after a short
training. Moreover, the correct identiﬁcation of the stress position was correlated
with the extent to which the participant was able to learn the matching between the
pseudoword and the shape during the training. Finally, the sensitivity that the
French-speaking listeners with no knowledge of Spanish showed toward the manipu-
lation of duration and/or intensity—previously reported in the identiﬁcation and
discrimination studies (see Sections ..and ..)—was also found in this study
with a very different experimental design.
.Conclusion
The idea that the perception of non-native listeners is mediated by the phonological
system of their Lhas led to the hypothesis that native speakers of a ﬁxed-stress
language (such as French) will exhibit a stress “deafness” when confronted by
accentual contrasts in a free-stress language (such as Spanish). However, the experi-
mental results that are reported here and in other studies show that French-speaking
listeners are sensitive to the acoustic cues that convey the presence of accentual
prominences in Spanish, even if they do not rely exactly on the same cues used by
native Spanish listeners. Additionally, the level of competence in Spanish and the
nature of the accentual contrast (proparoxytone vs. paroxytone or paroxytone vs.
oxytone) have an inﬂuence on the processing of the acoustic parameters involved in
the perception of lexical stress.
It has also been hypothesized that stress “deafness” occurs at the phonological,
rather than at the phonetic level. In this respect, our results reveal that, after a short
training, French listeners were able to phonologically encode and retrieve the accen-
tual information in a small lexicon of isolated pseudowords varying only in their
stress patterns.
The use of acoustically manipulated stimuli provides insight into the processing of
the acoustic cues involved in the perception of accentual prominences. In this
respect, French listeners seem to be more sensitive to ﬁne-grained details than
Spanish listeners, whether in a task that implies an acoustic processing of lexical
stress or in a more demanding task that implies not only an acoustic but also a lexical
processing of stress.
Perception of lexical stress in Spanish L


In summary, although there is evidence of a certain stress “deafness”, this meta-
phor should not be interpreted in a literal sense: although they do not behave as
Spanish listeners, French listeners are able to perform a variety of tasks that involve
accentual contrasts in Spanish.
Acknowledgments
Sandra Schwab’s work was supported by the Swiss National Foundation (grant Ambizione
PZP_/).

Joaquim Llisterri and Sandra Schwab

12
Brazilian Portuguese rhotics
in poem reciting
Perceptual, acoustic, and
meaning-related issues
SANDRA MADUREIRA
.Introduction
Speech is thought not only to inform but to impress as well (Bolinger ). Its
expressivity has to do with the power of the phonic matter to express meanings.
According to Albano () and Havelock (), meanings are not only derived
from sounds but they also sound, that is to say, sound produces meaning effects.
Following the same line of thought, which considers the potential of sounds to
express meanings, Tsur (: ) states that this expressive potentiality of sounds
is deeply rooted in the “ﬁrm intersubjective foundations of the acoustic, phonetic or
phonological levels of sound structure of language.” These statements accurately
point to the fact that meaning and sound are interwoven and this being so, the
properties of speech sounds are taken to express linguistic, paralinguistic, and
extralinguistic information.
The role of the phonic matter in expressing paralinguistic and extralinguistic
meaning is related to the potential of the phonetic detail to convey meaning, which
has to do with sound symbolism. Sound symbolism assumes direct links between
sound and meaning (Hinton, Nichols, and Ohala ; Ohala ), being the
relation between the signiﬁer and the signiﬁed taken to be non-arbitrary. The
controversial issue of the arbitrariness and non-arbitrariness of the signs has been
debated for centuries and as far as it is known, the dialogue ‘Cratylus’ by Plato is the
oldest piece of work that discusses the links between sound and sense.¹
¹ A version of Plato’s dialogue ‘Cratylus’ translated into Portuguese can be found in Vieira ().
Romance Phonetics and Phonology. First edition. Mark Gibson and Juana Gil (eds.)
This chapter © Sandra Madureira . First published by Oxford University Press.

Plenty of evidence has been accumulated throughout the centuries that suggests that
both arbitrariness and non-arbitrariness have important learning and communication
roles in language (Dingemanse, Blasi, Lupyan, Christiansen, and Monaghan ).
Sound symbolism makes speech unique in the sense that the same word, depending
on the way it is pronounced, can express a variety of meanings, attitudes, emotions,
social conditions, and physiological states. It is the meaning-expressive power of the
phonic matter that makes speech expressive, originates sound metaphors (Fónagy
, ), and creates the poetic mode of speech perception (Tsur ). Further-
more, speech expressivity can be considered a level of information in the spoken
message (Beller ) and it can also be described in terms of physiological and
behavioral readiness for action (Scherer , ).
The perceptual evaluation of speech expressivity is commonly undertaken by
means of rating scales. A rating scale was used in this work to analyze the emotion
primitive activation (arousal), which ranges from calm to excited states. The term
activation refers to high versus low excitation levels (Kehrein ). The choice of
this emotion primitive was determined by the interest in investigating how the use of
rhotic sounds and voice quality settings varies as a function of the changes in the
emotional content of the poetic narrative.
Emotion primitives are categories of dimensional approaches (Schlosberg ;
Osgood, Suci, and Tannenbaum ). Emotional states are very complex, and
discrete categories for classifying them are thought to be insufﬁcient to grasp their
characteristics. Dimensional approaches, in contrast to categorial approaches, make
it possible to evaluate the gradience of the emotional states using continuous scales.
Several approaches on emotional differentiation are discussed in Scherer (), who
comes to the conclusion that the arrangement of emotion categories in dimension
spaces is fruitful, which leads him to propose a two-dimensional approach based on
appraisal dimensions. Evaluating emotion primitives in multidimensional scales can
be helpful in relating phonetic features to emotional contents.
In Barbosa (), changes in speech expressivity are detected by a method that
combines a multidimensional analysis of speech expression, an automatic extraction
of acoustic measures, and two statistical kinds of analysis (Principal Component
Analysis and Multiple Regression Analysis). The author conducted a perceptual and
acoustic experiment with utterances of a set of fourteen podcast interactions
between radio-show presenters and anonymous participants. Fundamental fre-
quency, f₀ derivative, intensity, spectral tilt, and Long-Term Average Spectrum
(LTAS) measures were extracted. Perceptual evaluation of four emotion dimensions
(activation, valence, dominance, and involvement) was carried out by a group of
judges. Results indicated that a factor combining the dimensions of activation,
valence, and involvement explained % of the variance. This factor was referred
to by the author as promptness. Based on the results of the experiment obtained by
the author, promptness was considered to be a promising factor in identifying speech
expressivity phenomena.
In Madureira (), speaking strategies used by an actor and an actress when
reciting the same poem were analyzed and were found to be contrasting. The theme
of the poem was love and faithfulness. The actor varied speech rate, pitch range, and

Sandra Madureira

pauses to produce a climax effect (Bolinger ) and the actress used whispered
voice, whispery creaky voice, and a narrow pitch range. These differences in speaking
strategies were thought to reﬂect distinct kinds of interpretation of the poem based
on the speakers’ personal experiences. They were also considered to have inﬂuenced
the results of the perceptual test, which was applied to a group of judges. The judges
answered a semantic differential scale with four descriptors (sadness, anguish, soft-
ness, and enthusiasm). The actor’s performance was judged enthusiastic and the
actress’ performance as sad and full of anguish. The impressive effects on the listeners
were interpreted as having been inﬂuenced by the speakers’ stylistic work relating to
sound and sense.
In Madureira and Camargo (), speciﬁc uses of sound symbolism in the
reciting of a poem by a professional actor were investigated. The typology developed
by Hinton, Nichols, and Ohala () in the introduction (–) was taken as a
reference. The poetic narrative takes into account the narrator’s feelings toward the
girl he loved and her partner while watching them dance a waltz. A research
methodology comprising prosodic perceptual analysis, prosodic acoustic analysis,
and a perceptual experiment involving evaluation of affective states was proposed.
The results indicated that the actor’s speaking strategies made use of three types of
sound symbolism: synesthesic, imitative, and metalinguistic. The synesthesic sym-
bolism was used to express the dynamics of the dance, which starts fast (ﬁrst chorus
stanza) and gets slower toward the end (ﬁfth chorus stanza). The way the ﬁfth chorus
stanza is spoken is interpreted as indicating the end of the dance and the end of
the poet’s dreams about love. Measurement in ms of the VV (vowel to vowel) units of
the chorus indicated that the ﬁfth repetition of that chorus stanza had longer VV
units than the others.
A one-way ANOVA showed that it differed statistically from the other repetitions
(p < .). The use of an imitative kind of symbolism was found in the use of melodic
and lengthening patterns in an attempt to reproduce the melody of the waltz. The use
of metalinguistic symbolism was revealed by the analysis of the intonation patterns,
the width of pitch range, and the kinds of voice quality settings used to express
affective states. Correlations between production characteristics, acoustic properties,
perceived affective states, and text meaning production demonstrated the productive
use of sound symbolism.
In this work, the expressive use of Brazilian Portuguese rhotic varieties in the context
of poem recital by a professional actor are analyzed; also, articulatory and acoustic
descriptions of the Brazilian Portuguese rhotic varieties are provided. Along with the
phonetic characteristics of the rhotics, the prosodic aspects of voice quality and voice-
quality dynamics are analyzed, since prosodic and segmental speech unities interact and
their articulatory, acoustic, and auditory characteristics produce meaning effects.
The poem recited by the actor, ‘O Navio Negreiro’, starts with a description of the
beauty of nature and ends with a statement of the horror of slavery, contrasting
opposing affective states and displaying changes in speech expressivity. The choices
of phonetic variants used to express the affective states reported in the poem are
thought to make the reciting of the poem an interesting piece of work to analyze from
the speech expressivity perspective.
Brazilian Portuguese rhotics in poem reciting


.Rhotics in Brazilian Portuguese
There are two rhotic phonemes in Portuguese. The phonemic contrast between the
two occurs in intervocalic position. They are usually referred to as weak /r/ and
strong /R/. In syllable-initial position, the weak rhotic does not occur, and in syllable
coda position there is no phonemic contrast between the strong and the weak rhotics,
a fact that is interpreted by Câmara Jr. () and reinterpreted by D’Angelis ()
as an evidence of the presence of an archiphoneme.
The rhotic phonemes comprise voiced and unvoiced velar, uvular, and glottal
fricatives; alveolar and retroﬂex approximants; alveolar and retroﬂex taps; and
alveolar and uvular trills.
According to Cirigliano, Monteiro, Barbosa, Resende Jr., Couto, and Moraes
(), % of the sounds in Brazilian Portuguese are rhotics. Their research corpus
was extracted from the Corpus de Extractos de Textos Eletrônicos of the Folha de São
Paulo newspaper (CETENFolha).²
In the speech variety spoken in the Brazilian cities of São Paulo and Porto Alegre
the tap realization in coda position is more frequent (%) than in the varieties
spoken in Rio de Janeiro, Salvador, and Recife (%), cities where the glottal fricative is
more common, as stated in Callou, Moraes, and Leite () and Callou, Leite, and
Moraes (a, b).
In the state of São Paulo the velar fricative in onset-syllable position is very
productive, and because of that, it was chosen by Barbosa and Albano () to
transcribe the strong rhotic phoneme. Analysis of the rhotic varieties spoken in Rio
de Janeiro can be found in Callou () and Callou, Leite, and Moraes (), while
rhotic variation in Ceará is addressed by Alencar () and in the southern region of
Brazil by Brescancini and Monaretto ().
In intervocalic position, the allophone of the weak rhotic /r/ is always the tap. It is
one of the most productive sounds in Portuguese (Albano, Moreira, Aquino, Silva,
and Kakinohana ). In the other syllabic positions, that is, in onset- and coda-
syllable positions, a great variation is attested. Omission is common and conditioned
by morphological category, function, region, position in the word, speaker age,
phonetic context, schooling, and rhythmic pattern (Monaretto ).
Acoustic studies of rhotics in Brazilian Portuguese can be found in Silva (,
a, b, ), Silva, Clemente, and Nishida (), Nishida (), Gregio
(), and Clemente (). The acoustic description of some rhotic varieties of
Brazilian and European Portuguese, as well as the constraints (context, stress, and
syllabic position) on their duration and formant frequency can be found in Barbosa
and Madureira ().
In their acoustic description of rhotics, Barbosa and Madureira () mention
the following aspects: taps are characterized by Frising to the right end of the
preceding vowel and an abrupt fall of energy and short duration; velar and uvular
² This corpus was compiled by the Núcleo Interinstitucional de São Carlos (NILC/São Carlos) and can
be found at http://www.linguateca.pt/ACDC/.

Sandra Madureira

fricatives are rhotics characterized by low-amplitude spectrum and intensity over
Khz lower than nonrhotic fricatives; the glottal fricative is a rhotic sound whose
noise formant corresponds to a transition from the formant movement of the
preceding to the following speech segments; voiced fricatives are shorter than
voiceless fricatives; approximants have formants similar to the vowel following them.
An acoustic and sociolinguistic study of the rhotics in coda position produced by
inhabitants of Campinas was conducted by Leite (). It revealed, contrary to the
alleged occurrence of a typical rhotic variety in the city of Campinas, that the rhotic
realization found to be the most productive was the Caipira rhotic, which is not a
prestigious variety inBrazilian Portuguese. As Leite () points out, the Caipira rhotic
is described in the phonetic literature as having a typical retroﬂex place of articulation.
A stylistic study of rhotic varieties exploring form-to-meaning correspondences
was developed by Viola (). In her work, the trill was considered a symbolic
expression of strength and aggressive behavior. In soccer broadcasting, the trill is
productively used and, according to Rocha Filho (), it is a stylistic feature of
sports commentators’ talk. The productive use of the trill can also be related to
sociolinguistic variables such as age, origin, and region. The trill variety in Brazilian
Portuguese is more productive in older people’s speech (Matos ), in the speech
of Italian (Rossi ), German (Monaretto ), Portuguese or Spanish descend-
ants (Cagliari ), and in speech production of the inhabitants of the states of Rio
Grande do Sul, Santa Catarina, and Paraná (Monaretto ).
.The acoustic characteristics of rhotics, their expressiveness,
and their impressive effects
The expressiveness of sounds comes from their phonetic characteristics. Sounds can
be described as double-edged, as suggested by Tsur (), since more than one
meaning can be associated with a certain sound, depending on its phonetic charac-
teristics. Seen in these terms, the perception of the turbulent airﬂow characteristic of
fricatives can suggest harshness, a light current of air, or running water. These
meanings relate to the acoustic consequences of production characteristics.
As rhotics in Brazilian Portuguese occur in a great number of varieties, voicing,
noise, or vibration may or may not be involved in their realizations. My point of view
is that a rhotic sound combining voice, vibration, and noise is perceptually more
salient than rhotics presenting just one of these features or combining only two of
these features. Such a sound is the spirantized or fricative trill. It combines voice,
vibration, and noise sources.
All the remarks in the following paragraphs about the scale of gradience in terms
of the salience intensity are based on my proposal of the number of combinations of
sources involved in their production as well as on speciﬁc characteristics related to
places of articulation.
I consider the glottal fricative varieties of rhotics to be less perceptually salient
than velar or uvular fricatives, because the noise source is produced by glottal
constriction, yielding an aspiration noise whose auditory effect is weaker than the
frication noise produced by the articulators in supraglottal constrictions. This weak
Brazilian Portuguese rhotics in poem reciting


salience often leads to omission of glottal fricatives in northeastern Brazilian accents
(Callou, Serra, and Cunha, ).
Trills are very salient perceptually compared to other rhotics such as taps and
approximants, because they are produced with vibration of a given articulator driven
by aerodynamic forces. As mentioned in Ladefoged and Maddieson () trills can
co-occur with noise (spirantized or fricative trills), which makes them even more
perceptually salient, according to my point of view. On the other hand, approximants
are more vowel-like, in the sense that the constriction between articulators is not
great enough to produce the turbulent airﬂow associated with fricative sounds. They
have only a voice source, no vibration or noise sources. Owing to these characteristics
I consider them to be more sonorous and melodious than other rhotics.
Based on the characteristics of the rhotic sounds which can derive from various
combinations of presence or absence of voicing, presence or absence of noise, and
presence or absence of vibration, I propose a scale of perceptual salience from the
more salient to the less salient: trills > velar and uvular voiced fricatives > velar and
uvular voiceless fricatives > glottal voiced fricatives > glottal voiceless fricatives >
taps > approximants. My proposal is based on the auditory effects of voicing, noise,
and vibration.
.Experiment
The methodological procedures in this work conjugated acoustic and perceptual
analysis in discussing the impressive effects of the phonic characteristics of the
rhotics as produced in the stanzas of the analyzed poem.
The rhotics were articulatorily categorized based on the inspection of their
acoustic characteristics in wideband spectrograms as well as on auditory evaluation.
As explained in Section ., in intervocalic position the (weak) rhotic is always a tap;
consequently, only rhotic realizations in onset and coda positions were taken into
account. The production of the poem’s stanzas was analyzed by a set of acoustic
measures, and a group of judges evaluated the degree of activation perceived in the
way of speaking.
..Corpus
The corpus of this work is an epic poem of thirty-four stanzas entitled “The Slave
Ship,” written in by Castro Alves,³ a poet from the last period of literary
Romanticism, and published posthumously in . The Appendix provides the
full text in Portuguese and its translation into English by David Barnhart. The corpus
consists of the stanzas in boldface, which were the ones recorded by the actor.
The poem has six parts and the metrics of their stanzas differ according to the
topic dealt with. Heptasyllabic, hexasyllabic, decasyllabic, and dodecasyllabic verses
are used. In the ﬁrst part, the poet’s expression is lyrical and he praises the beauty of
³ Castro Alves became famous for his works on abolitionism. Slavery was abolished in Brazil some years
after the publication of “The Slave Ship” by a legal act known as Lei Áurea, enacted on May , , by
Princess Isabel.

Sandra Madureira

the sea under the sun in the sky and the sailors’ bravery. In the second part he writes
about the melody of the sea, the ships, and the sailors of several nationalities. In the
third and fourth parts, he describes the horror of slavery, and in the ﬁfth and sixth he
expresses his anger about the slaves’ situation.
The poem was recorded by Paulo Autran, a professional actor who, although born
in Rio de Janeiro, moved to Espírito Santo do Pinhal in the state of São Paulo as an
infant. At ﬁve years old he moved to the city of São Paulo, where he spent most of his
life. He died at eighty-ﬁve. At the time of the recording the actor was eighty years old.
The recording is available on a commercial CD entitled Quatro Séculos de Poesia
Brasileira, which was released by Luz da Cidade Productions in . It contains
twenty-two stanzas out of the thirty-four of the complete poem. The actor recorded
stanzas , , , , , and of Part I of the poem, stanza of Part III, stanzas , ,
, , , and of Part IV, stanzas , , , , , and of Part V, and stanzas
, , and of Part VI. No stanza from Part II, which refers to great feats of
Spanish, Italian, English, and Hellenic sailing, was recorded.
In the appendix, both the original poem in Portuguese and its translation into
English are provided. As the complete number of stanzas of the poem differs from the
number of stanzas recorded by the actor, the stanzas of the written poem were
numbered from to and the recorded stanzas were identiﬁed in boldface and
within brackets. Thus, the stanza numbered [] corresponds to the third stanza of
the written poem and to the second recorded by the actor.
..The analysis: methodological procedures
All the rhotics in the data were phonetically classiﬁed based on their acoustic charac-
teristics and on the inspection of their wideband spectrograms. Perceptual and acous-
tic analyses of all the stanzas recorded by the subject were carried out in order to
evaluate the emotion primitive of activation (relaxed–agitated). The idea was to verify
if trills, which I placed higher in a scale of salience, were more productive in the stanzas
perceived on average as agitated, and if glottal fricatives and approximants, which
I placed lower in a scale of salience, in productions categorized as relaxed.
The perception test was answered by a group of thirty undergraduate students
majoring in Portuguese and English. They listened to the stimuli (the stanzas
recorded by the actor) modiﬁed by the command “Reverse” in Praat (version
..), and were given a sheet on which they indicated their judgments of the stimuli
as: much relaxed, rather relaxed, neutral (not relaxed/not agitated), rather agitated,
and much agitated. These were transformed into values from to +: much relaxed
was assigned , rather relaxed ., neutral , rather agitated +., and much
agitated .. The stimuli were presented randomly. The variable related to the judges’
answers was called AP. In the results and graphics concerning the statistical tests
in this work it appears as ZAP, indicating that the z-score was applied. The decision
to present the stimuli modiﬁed by the temporal Reverse process in Praat was taken
in order to avoid any interference from the semantic content on the participants’
judgments of activation. Other methods of delexicalization, such as removing
lexical content but keeping f₀, duration, intensity, and other acoustic features
unaltered, could have been used but the Reverse process was preferred because it
Brazilian Portuguese rhotics in poem reciting


does not interfere with the perception of voice quality, which was the prosodic
element chosen to be analyzed in this work owing to its importance in affecting
emotional appraisals.
The acoustic measures were automatically extracted by the ExpressionEvaluator
Script developed by Barbosa () for Praat. The script extracts twelve measures to
analyze links between speech expression production and perception. The following
parameters were measured:
• fundamental frequency: f₀ median (mednf), inter-quartile semi-amplitude
(sampquartisf), skewness, and .quantile (quanf);
• fundamental frequency derivative: dfmean (medderivf), standard deviation
(desvpaddf), and skewness (assimdfdiv);
• intensity measures: intensity skewness (assimint);
• spectral tilt: spectral tilt mean (medinclinespec), standard deviation (desvadin-
clinespec), and skewness (assiminclinespec);
• Long-Term Average Spectrum: LTAS frequency standard deviation (desvapadltas).
As voice quality and vocal dynamics are important indexes of affective states in
speech (Gobl and Ní Chasaide ; Johnstone and Scherer , ; Laver ;
Scherer ; Scherer, Sundberg, Tamarit, and Salomão ; Tolkmitt and Scherer
; van Bezooijen ) the speech production of the stanzas was also analyzed in
terms of voice quality characteristics.
The panorama of voice quality description was remarkably changed by the intro-
duction of the componential descriptive phonetic model of voice quality analysis
devised by Laver (). Its analytical unit is the setting, a long-term muscular
adjustment of the vocal apparatus. An advantage of this componential model over
the holistic models of vocal quality description is that it provides a better mode of
voice quality comparison, making it possible to identify shared and nonshared
features in speakers’ vocal proﬁles. Perceived quality, anatomical and physiological
factors, and acoustic measurement are theoretically linked in Laver’s model of voice
quality description (Mackenzie Beck ).
In the phonetic descriptive model of voice quality proposed by Laver (), ﬁfty-
three types of vocal quality setting and two principles governing them are introduced.
The principle of susceptibility accounts for the fact that some speech segments are
more susceptible to the effects of some voice quality settings than others. Oral
sounds, for example, are more susceptible to the nasal setting of voice quality than
nasal sounds are. In fact, if a given statement has only oral sounds and nasality is
perceived when it is produced it means that a voice quality nasal setting was used by
the speaker, but if several nasal sounds are present the listener will have difﬁculty in
identifying if nasality is due to the segments that are inherently nasal or if it is due to
the use of a nasal-quality setting on the part of the speaker. The principle of
compatibility holds that some voice quality settings can co-occur while others cannot.
For example, a nasal setting cannot co-occur with a denasalized setting.
Based on the componential descriptive phonetic model of vocal quality descrip-
tion, a protocol called Voice Proﬁle Analysis Scheme (VPAS) was developed by Laver,
Wirz, Mackenzie, and Hiller () to categorize settings of voice quality. The VPAS

Sandra Madureira

include: vocal tract features, overall muscular-tension features, phonatory features,
prosodic features, and temporal organization. The fact that labels in VPAS are
phonetically grounded may be viewed as an advantage in identifying settings of
vocal quality provided that one has solid phonetic knowledge. Mackenzie Beck
() provides a thorough description of the VPAS and explains how to apply it.
To identify the vocal tract settings, it is necessary to have knowledge of the
inherent phonetic characteristics of the speech segments of a given language so
that the effects of articulatory and phonatory settings on segment production can
be evaluated. The effects of the settings on certain kinds of segments, namely key
segments, are more salient. In order to evaluate tongue back retraction, for example,
one should pay attention to front sounds instead of back sounds. Key segments play
an important role in the description of voice quality settings because they are more
susceptible to the effects produced by a given setting.
The identiﬁcation of the settings is made in reference to a neutral setting. The
neutral setting is characterized by a balanced mode of vocal fold vibration in terms of
adduction forces and longitudinal tension, with no audible phonatory noise source,
no constricted or expanded laryngeal and supralaryngeal vocal tract cavities, no
shortening or lengthening adjustments of the vocal tract unless demanded by
segment production restrictions, and moderate laryngeal and supralaryngeal tense-
ness (Laver ).
Most of the settings in the VPAS scheme can be according to a scale of degrees,
, , and being considered as typical of habitual voices in normal populations and ,
, and as frequent in voice and speech disorders (Mackenzie Beck ) or,
according to my experience in classifying settings, in paralinguistic uses of voice,
such as expressions of extreme anger.
By means of the VPAS (Laver ; Laver and Mackenzie-Beck ), vocal
qualities in the present work were classiﬁed as to the kinds of articulatory, phonatory,
and tension settings (Neutral/Tense Vocal Tract: Vocal Tract Tenseness (TVT);
Neutral Larynx/Tense Larynx /Lax Larynx: Laryngeal Tenseness (LT)) in scalar
degrees, , , and being rated moderate and , , and extreme.
Prosodic features (pitch, loudness, and speech rate) were also taken into account.
In the VPAS scheme, pitch and loudness are analyzed in relation to Mean, Range,
and Variability, and speech rate as Neutral/Fast or Slow. The number of degrees is the
same for the judgments of the vocal quality settings, that is, six scalar degrees.
The voice quality settings were described by an experienced phonetician with
ﬁfteen years of experience using the VPAS scheme. Experience and formal training in
the use of the VPAS is relevant as shown by a previous study by Lima, Rusilo, and
Camargo (). Statistical estimates of interrater and intrarater reliability of per-
ceptual judgments of voicequality settings using the VPAS and test–retest reliability
were performed so that scores for classifying the judges in their study were estab-
lished. To test the homogeneity of the variances, the Cochran test and the Snedecor
test, with signiﬁcance levels of % and cluster analysis were used and the judges in
their study were qualiﬁed according to their expertise, which coincided with their
amount of formal training and experience in using the proﬁle. These two factors were
found to be signiﬁcant (p< .).
Brazilian Portuguese rhotics in poem reciting


In order to correlate the quantitative and qualitative measures, the Multiple Factor
Analysis (MFA) method was applied using FactorMinerR (Husson, Josse, Lê, and
Mazet ). Multiple Factor Analysis is a statistical factorial method used to analyze
data described by a set of quantitative and/or qualitative variables. Quantitative
variables were normalized by z-score. In the report of the results of the analysis in
this work, the variables identiﬁed by a preceding Z are the ones that were normalized.
Multiple Factor Analysis was used to study similarities among stimuli relative to all
the research variables structured in groups. The use of MFA involves three steps:
ﬁnding a common structure among the groups of variables; describing the speciﬁcity
of each group of variables by means of correlation analysis, and comparing the
resulting values by means of the analyses of the individual variables. In order to verify
the similarity among the groups of variables the Pearson Lg coefﬁcient was used.
..Results and interpretation
In Part I of the poem, which describes Nature in a lyrical way, there is neutrality in
terms of laryngeal or vocal tract tenseness in the production of all the stanzas. In the
last two stanzas of Part I the speech rate becomes faster, degree according to
the VPAS. Speech rate had a different role in that both slow and fast rates occurred in
the expression of relaxed and agitated states respectively. Intercalated fast and slow
speech as analyzed perceptually are interpreted here as a means of producing
dramatic effects.
No trill was produced by the speaker in Part I. The rhotics in syllable onset
position were produced as voiced fricatives (%) and approximants (%). The
rhotics in coda position were produced as approximants (%), glottal fricatives
(%), or taps (%). There were four repetitions of the word mar (‘sea’): the ﬁrst
three ended with a voiceless glottal fricative and the fourth with a tap. Figure .
presents the word mar in the ﬁrst stanza as a voiceless glottal fricative.
0.09821
–0.006959
–0.1384
5000 Hz
0 Hz
☞ 1
m
a
h
0.475658
1
(5/5)
0.475658
F.A voiceless glottal fricative produced in syllable coda position of the word mar
(‘sea’)
From top to bottom: the waveform, the wideband spectrogram, and the phonetic transcription.

Sandra Madureira

At the penultimate stanza of Part I the word mar was produced with an approximant
when referring to ‘the furrow in the sea.’ Figure .displays this reading of the word
mar in the tenth stanza.
As already explained, no stanza from Part II was recorded by the actor. In the ﬁrst
stanza of Part III, stanza number , the trill variant was introduced when describing
the slave ships. The rhotic in onset position in the word horror (‘horror’) was
produced as a trill. In coda position, % of the rhotics were approximants and the
other % comprises equivalent percentages of fricatives (%) and taps (%).
In Part IV, which describes the way the slaves were treated in the slave ships, %
of the rhotics in syllable onset position were produced as trills. In coda position, %
were taps, % trills, % fricatives, and % approximants. Figure .illustrates a
voiced alveolar tap produced at the syllable coda position of the word mar.
0
0.3158
0
–0.08572
–0.2272
5000 Hz
102.7 Hz
☞ 1
0
m
a
Visible part 0.265170 seconds
0.265170
ɹ
1
(1/5)
F.An approximant produced in syllable coda position of the word mar (‘sea’)
From top to bottom: the waveform, the wideband spectrogram, and the phonetic transcription.
0.8915
0
–0.5118
5000 Hz
0 Hz
☞ 1
m
a
ɾ
0.369477
1
(5/5)
0.369477
F.A voiced alveolar tap produced at the syllable coda position of the word mar
(‘sea’)
From top to bottom: the waveform, the wideband spectrogram, and the phonetic transcription.
Brazilian Portuguese rhotics in poem reciting


In Part V, % of the rhotics in syllable onset position were produced as trills, % as
fricatives, and % as approximants. In coda position, % were taps, % fricatives,
and % trills. No approximants occurred. It is in Part V that the poet prays for God’s
intervention in favor of the slaves. Figure .illustrates a voiceless fricative trill
produced at the syllable coda position of the word mar.
In Part VI, % of the rhotics in syllable onset position were produced as trills. In
coda position, % were trills, % taps, % fricatives, and % approximants. It is
in Part VI that the poet expresses his full fury at the horror of slavery.
From Part IV to Part VI, the percentage of trills, as shown in Tables .and .,
increases as the horror of slavery and the anger toward slavery are expressed with
heart and soul in a trembling voice. In the last stanza, when the manifestation of
anger against slavery reaches its climax, the speaker says arranca (‘rip’) with a long
trill and produces vowels with a creaky-voice phonatory setting. Figure .illus-
trates the long trill sound produced by the speaker.
Table .and Table .summarize the percentage of rhotic varieties produced
by the actor in onset and coda syllable positions respectively.
Both in syllable onset and coda positions there is an increase of trill production
toward the end of the poem. As the poem treats the topic of slavery, speech is
characterized by voice quality tense settings (vocal tract tenseness and laryngeal
tenseness), increase in loudness and pitch, and it is perceived as agitated. In these
parts of the poem trills are produced more frequently. The opposite is true for
approximants, which occurred more frequently in parts judged perceptually as
relaxed and neutral concerning vocal tract or laryngeal tenseness. Vocal tract tense-
ness, in degree , was found in the recorded stanzas [, , , , , , , , ]
and in degree in [, , , , , ]. Tense larynx, in degree was found in the
recorded stanzas [, , , , , ] and in degree in [, , , , , ]. No
tense voice quality settings were found in Part I, stanzas [, , , , , ]. Intermittent
use of whispery voice settings occurred in Part I.
0.09857
–3.676.10–5
–0.1079
5000 Hz
37.45 Hz
☞ 1
m
a
R˕˚
1
(5/5)
1.016965
1.016965
F.A voiceless fricative trill produced at the syllable coda position of the word mar
(‘sea’)
From top to bottom: the waveform, the wideband spectrogram, and the phonetic transcription.

Sandra Madureira


The results of the evaluation of the emotion primitive activation (relaxed–
agitated) by the judges revealed that: stanzas [, , , , , ] were judged as much
relaxed; stanzas [, , ] as rather relaxed; stanzas [, , ] as neutral (not relaxed/
not agitated); stanzas [, , , , , , , ] as rather agitated; and stanzas
[, ] as much agitated.
The results of the perceptual evaluation of the degree of activation by the judges
showed that average values obtained in relation to the perceptual judgments of the
stimuli varied from .to ., standard deviation varying from .to ..
Interrater reliability, calculated with Cronbach’s Alpha coefﬁcient, was found to be
.. This coefﬁcient is fair given that the closer the Cronbach’s Alpha coefﬁcient is to
.the more adequate it is; the higher the value of the Cronbach’s Alpha coefﬁcient,
the greater the internal consistency reliability (Gliem and Gliem ).
Figure .shows the grouping of the stanzas into three clusters obtained by way
of the MFA. In the ﬁrst cluster (from left to right), stanzas to are grouped
together. No trills occur in these stanzas. These stanzas correspond to Part I of the
poem, which describes the beauty of the sea and the sky. In the second cluster the
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
1
2
5
4
3
6
16
17
18
7
14
10
20
21
8
9
22
15
11
19
13
12
Hierarchical clustering
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
Inertia gain
F.Dendrogram showing the grouping of the stanzas in clusters

Sandra Madureira

stanzas [, , , , , , , , , ], which present the description of the slaves
and a prayer for divine intervention to banish slavery are grouped. Trills occurred in
these stanzas.
In the third cluster the stanzas [, , , , , ], which describe the rage
against the horror of slavery are grouped. In this third cluster almost all productions
of rhotics are trills. The analysis using the VPAS shows that the stanzas in this third
cluster show higher grades of laryngeal (LT) and vocal tract tension (TVT), higher
pitch (HP), and varying loudness (VL). The results of the analysis using the VPAS
showed that the stanzas in this third cluster, stanzas [, , , , , ] presented
higher grades (degree ) of both LT and TVT than the other stanzas. High pitch,
degree , characterized stanzas [, ], and VL characterized stanza [].
The division into clusters by means of MFA already described took into account
the three groups of variables: the qualitative group of variables (Gq), reﬂected in the
VPAS; the quantitative groups of variables, namely the ExpressionEvaluator (Gc),
and the perceptual evaluation of the activation (ZAP), which constitutes the Gc. The
three variables can be projected onto a two-dimensional space, as shown in
Figure ..
In Figure ., all the signiﬁcant and nonsigniﬁcant variables of the Gcgroup
(ExpressionEvaluator) and the perceptual evaluation of activation (ZAP, Gc) are
displayed. The axes in Figure .represent the dimensions that best explain the
variance. It displays the projection of the variables or, in other words, their variance.
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
Dim 1 (25.42%)
Gc2
Gc1
Gq1
Variables and their projection in the vectorial space
Dim 2 (13.36%)
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F.The distribution of the groups of variables Gq(VPAS), Gc(ExpressionEvalu-
ator), and the perceptual evaluation of activation (ZAP, Gc) in two dimensions (Dim and
Dim ) of the vector space
Brazilian Portuguese rhotics in poem reciting


The length of the lines in the graphic indicate the projection of the variables. The
longer the line (further from the center), the greater the projection. The most
projected variables are the ones that are statistically signiﬁcative. In this work the
signiﬁcant variables can be checked on Table ..The sum (.%) of the percent-
age values of the dimensions (Dim and Dim ) in Figure .indicate the inertia
projected in the plane. The use of a two-dimensional representation of the variables
makes it possible to examine the variance in the data.
The projection of the variables in the vector space represented in Figure .
differs. The perceptual evaluation of activation (ZAP) and the quantitative measures
Zsampquartis f, Zmednf, Zassimint, and Zmedinclinespec are projected further
from the center. The variable ZAP is opposite to Zmedinclinespec, ZslopeLTAS,
Zassimdfdiv, and Zmedderivfand this can be interpreted as showing opposite
tendencies, that is: when the former factor increases, the latter factors decrease.
The same occurs between other factors: Zassimint, Zassiminclinesp, Zdesvpadincli-
nespec, Zdesvpaddf, Zquartf, and Zassimfare opposed to Zsampquartisfand
Zmednfin the vector space.
Not all the variables in Figure .were found to be signiﬁcant. In Table .only
the signiﬁcant variables of the three groups (Gc, Gc, and Gq) were included. As
shown in Table ., the quantitative variables ZAP (Gc) and Zsampquartisf,
Zmednf, ZslopeLTAS and Zmedinclinespec (Gc) were found to be signiﬁcant
(p<.) and showed a correlation coefﬁcient higher than % in Dimension .
–1.0
–1.0
–0.5
Dim 1 (25.42%)
Dim 2 (13.36%)
0.0
0.5
1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Z.assimint
Factor variables in the vector space
Gc1
Gc2
Z.quarf
Z.quarf995
995f0
Z.quarf995f0
Z.sampquartisf
Z.sampquartisf0
Z.sampquartisf0
ZAP
Z.mednf0
ZAP
Z.mednf0
Z.assiminclinespec
Z.assiminclinespec
Z.desvpaddf
Z.desvpaddf0
Z.desvpaddf0
Z.assimf
Z.assimf0
Z.assimf0
Z.slopeLTAS
Z.slopeLTAS
Z.assimdf
Z.assimdf0div
div10
10
Z.assimdf0div10
Z.medinclinespec
Z.medinclinespec
Z.medderivf
Z.medderivf0
Z.medderivf0
Z.desvpadinclinespec
Z.desvpadinclinespec
F.The projection onto two dimensions of the quantitative factor variables
Dimension(DIM): the ExpressionEvaluator variables (Gc); Dimension (DIM): the perceptual evaluation of
activation (ZAP, Gc).

Sandra Madureira

In Dimension the quantitative variable Zassimint, with a % correlation coefﬁ-
cient, was also found to be signiﬁcant (p<.).
As is also shown in Table ., among the qualitative variables concerning vocal-
quality settings as analyzed by means of the VPAS, the Vocal Tract Tenseness (TVT)
setting, and the Laryngeal Tenseness (LT) setting explain respectively % and %
of the data. These variables were found to be signiﬁcant (p<.) both in Dimension
and in Dimension , with an explanatory power of %. The Variation of Loudness
(VL) was also found to be signiﬁcant (p<.).
The results of the application of the MFA indicate that among the quantitative
measures, the perceptual evaluation of activation (ZAP), two acoustic measures
related to f₀ (sampquartisfand mednf), one related to intensity (assimint), and
two related to long-term spectrum (slopeLTAS and medinclinespec) were found to
be relevant in clustering the stanzas and consequently explaining the data.
More activation was related to more f₀ variability (higher sampquastisf), higher
median values of f₀ (mednf), more energy in high frequencies, and a decreased
steepness of the overall (slopeLTAS and medinclinespec) and to more extreme values
of intensity (assimint). As far as the qualitative measures are concerned, tenseness
and loudness and pitch were found to be relevant.
Higher degrees of perceived agitation are interpreted as related to a higher
activation of the organism, that is, a higher body tension, and the higher the agitation
the higher the degrees of tenseness, loudness, and pitch involved in speech. Acous-
tically, in high frequencies more energy is present and this fact suggests vocal effort
T.Factor variables and their correlation coefﬁcients and p-values
Factor variables–Dimension 
Factor variables–Dimension 
Quantitative
Quantitative
correlation
p-value
correlation
p-value
ZAP
.

Zassimint
.
.
Zsampquartisf
.
.E-
Zmednf
.
.E-
ZslopeLTAS
.
.
Zmedinclinespec
.
E-
Qualitative
Qualitative
R²
p-value
R²
p-value
TVT
.
.E-
VL
.
.
TL
.

The quantitative variables reported are: AP refers to the results of the perceptual judgments of agitation;
interquartile semi-amplitude (sampquartisf), f₀ median (mednf), spectral slope LTAS, spectral tilt mean
(medinclinespec), and intensity skewness (assimint). The qualitative variables reported above are: Vocal Tract
Tenseness (TVT), Laryngeal Tenseness (LT), and Variation of Loudness (VL).
Brazilian Portuguese rhotics in poem reciting


involvement. This higher degree of activation and vocal effort is reﬂected in the
choice of trills. Indeed, the analysis of the articulatory features of the rhotics in this
work revealed that trills were more proliﬁc in the speech production of the stanzas
perceived as having a higher degree of agitation. Trills are produced with voicing and
vibration of the articulators under the inﬂuence of aerodynamic forces: because of
these production and acoustic characteristics they are perceptually salient.
.Summary and conclusions
Rhotics are quite diverse in nature and can have different conditioning factors. In this
work the use of Brazilian Portuguese rhotic varieties in the context of the recital of a
poem by a professional actor was analyzed and articulatory and acoustic descriptions
of the Brazilian Portuguese rhotic varieties were provided.
The actors’ choice of varieties in the analyzed speech data was interpreted as
deriving from the acoustic shaping of the phonetic characteristics so as to produce
meaningful effects. These effects are achieved through the symbolic use of sound and
the fact that the sounds are sense-impressive and meaning-expressive is taken to be
the foundation of speech expressivity.
The analysis of the rhotic varieties, the voice quality settings, and the vocal
dynamic aspects produced by the actor in reciting “The Slave Ship” poem revealed
that he made use of sound symbolism in expressing meanings. His interpretative
choices were found to make use of correlations between sound and meaning,
reﬂecting analogies between acoustic characteristics and auditory effects.
The perceived changes from relaxing to tense states corresponded to changes from
less salient rhotic varieties such as the glottal fricative to acoustic salient varieties such
as the trill, and from neutrality in terms of laryngeal or vocal tract tenseness to
laryngeal or vocal tract tense settings of voice quality. Increase in pitch (HP) and
varying loudness were found to co-occur with tense vocal quality settings and trills.
These changes in form, which were motivated by changes in meaning, can be thought
of revealing symbolic uses of sound.
As Abelin (: ) puts it, “it is imaginable that people’s reactions are quicker,
stronger and more accurate to sound symbolic expressions, and therefore they can be
e.g. more effective, more emotionally arousing, more poetic.” This statement accur-
ately describes the performance of the speaker in reciting the poem analyzed in this
work, which addresses issues concerning speech expressivity, the links between
sound and meaning, and the impressive meaningful effects of sound. These effects
are achieved through the symbolic use of sound and the fact that the sounds are
sense-impressive and meaning-expressive is taken to be the foundation of speech
expressivity.
.Appendix
Original poem written in Portuguese by Castro Alves.
In the following text of the poem, the numbers in boldface and within brackets
refer to the stanzas recorded by the actor. These stanzas are also in boldface and they

Sandra Madureira

constitute the corpus of this work, and are the ones referred to in the analysis and
ﬁgures. In the translated version of the poem in English, the stanzas were numbered
accordingly.
O Navio Negreiro
by Castro Alves
Part I
. []
‘Stamos em pleno mar . . . Doudo no espaço
Brinca o luar—dourada borboleta;
E as vagas após ele correm . . . cansam
Como turba de infantes inquieta.
.
‘Stamos em pleno mar . . . Do ﬁrmamento
Os astros saltam como espumas de ouro . . .
O mar em troca acende as ardentias,
—Constelações do líquido tesouro . . .
. []
‘Stamos em pleno mar . . . Dois inﬁnitos
Ali se estreitam num abraço insano,
Azuis, dourados, plácidos, sublimes . . .
Qual dos dous é o céu? qual o oceano? . . .
. []
‘Stamos em pleno mar . . . Abrindo as velas
Ao quente arfar das virações marinhas,
Veleiro brigue corre à ﬂor dos mares,
Como roçam na vaga as andorinhas . . . ’
. []
Donde vem? onde vai? Das naus errantes
Quem sabe o rumo se é tão grande o espaço?
Neste saara os corcéis o pó levantam,
Galopam, voam, mas não deixam traço.
.
Bem feliz quem ali pode nest’hora
Sentir deste painel a majestade!
Embaixo—o mar em cima—o ﬁrmamento . . .
E no mar e no céu—a imensidade!
.
Oh! que doce harmonia traz-me a brisa!
Que música suave ao longe soa!
Meu Deus! como é sublime um canto ardente
Pelas vagas sem ﬁm boiando à toa!
.
Homens do mar! ó rudes marinheiros,
Tostados pelo sol dos quatro mundos!
Crianças que a procela acalentara
No berço destes pélagos profundos!
Brazilian Portuguese rhotics in poem reciting


.
Esperai! esperai! deixai que eu beba
Esta selvagem, livre poesia
Orquestra—é o mar, que ruge pela proa,
E o vento, que nas cordas assobia . . .
. []
Por que foges assim, barco ligeiro?
Por que foges do pávido poeta?
Oh! quem me dera acompanhar-te a esteira
Que semelha no mar—doudo cometa!
. []
Albatroz! Albatroz! águia do oceano,
Tu que dormes das nuvens entre as gazas,
Sacode as penas, Leviathan do espaço,
Albatroz! Albatroz! dá-me estas asas.
Part II
.
Que importa do nauta o berço,
Donde é ﬁlho, qual seu lar?
Ama a cadência do verso
Que lhe ensina o velho mar!
Cantai! que a morte é divina!
Resvala o brigue à bolina
Como golﬁnho veloz.
Presa ao mastro da mezena
Saudosa bandeira acena
As vagas que deixa após.
.
Do Espanhol as cantilenas
Requebradas de langor,
Lembram as moças morenas,
As andaluzas em ﬂor!
Da Itália o ﬁlho indolente
Canta Veneza dormente,
—Terra de amor e traição,
Ou do golfo no regaço
Relembra os versos de Tasso,
Junto às lavas do vulcão!
.
O Inglês—marinheiro frio,
Que ao nascer no mar se achou,
(Porque a Inglaterra é um navio,
Que Deus na Mancha ancorou),
Rijo entoa pátrias glórias,
Lembrando, orgulhoso, histórias
De Nelson e de Aboukir . . .
O Francês—predestinado—
Canta os louros do passado
E os loureiros do porvir!

Sandra Madureira

.
Os marinheiros Helenos,
Que a vaga jônia criou,
Belos piratas morenos
Do mar que Ulisses cortou,
Homens que Fídias talhara,
Vão cantando em noite clara
Versos que Homero gemeu . . .
Nautas de todas as plagas,
Vós sabeis achar nas vagas
As melodias do céu! . . .
Part III
. []
Desce do espaço imenso, ó águia do oceano!
Desce mais . . . inda mais . . . não pode olhar humano
Como o teu mergulhar no brigue voador!
Mas que vejo eu aí . . . Que quadro d’amarguras!
É canto funeral! . . . Que tétricas ﬁguras! . . .
Que cena infame e vil . . . Meu Deus! Meu Deus! Que horror!
Part IV
. []
Era um sonho dantesco . . . o tombadilho
Que das luzernas avermelha o brilho.
Em sangue a se banhar.
Tinir de ferros . . . estalar de açoite . . .
Legiões de homens negros como a noite,
Horrendos a dançar . . .
. []
Negras mulheres, suspendendo às tetas
Magras crianças, cujas bocas pretas
Rega o sangue das mães:
Outras moças, mas nuas e espantadas,
No turbilhão de espectros arrastadas,
Em ânsia e mágoa vãs!
. []
E ri-se a orquestra irônica, estridente . . .
E da ronda fantástica a serpente
Faz doudas espirais . . .
Se o velho arqueja, se no chão resvala,
Ouvem-se gritos . . . o chicote estala.
E voam mais e mais . . .
. []
Presa nos elos de uma só cadeia,
A multidão faminta cambaleia,
E chora e dança ali!
Um de raiva delira, outro enlouquece,
Outro, que martírios embrutece,
Cantando, geme e ri!
Brazilian Portuguese rhotics in poem reciting


. []
No entanto o capitão manda a manobra,
E após ﬁtando o céu que se desdobra,
Tão puro sobre o mar,
Diz do fumo entre os densos nevoeiros:
“Vibrai rijo o chicote, marinheiros!
Fazei-os mais dançar! . . . ”
. []
E ri-se a orquestra irônica, estridente . . .
E da ronda fantástica a serpente
Faz doudas espirais . . .
Qual um sonho dantesco as sombras voam! . . .
Gritos, ais, maldições, preces ressoam!
E ri-se Satanás! . . .
Part V
. []
Senhor Deus dos desgraçados!
Dizei-me vós, Senhor Deus!
Se é loucura . . . se é verdade
Tanto horror perante os céus?!
Ó mar, por que não apagas
Co’a esponja de tuas vagas
De teu manto este borrão? . . .
Astros! noites! tempestades!
Rolai das imensidades!
Varrei os mares, tufão!
. []
Quem são estes desgraçados
Que não encontram em vós
Mais que o rir calmo da turba
Que excita a fúria do algoz?
Quem são? Se a estrela se cala,
Se a vaga à pressa resvala
Como um cúmplice fugaz,
Perante a noite confusa . . .
Dize-o tu, severa Musa,
Musa libérrima, audaz! . . .
. []
São os ﬁlhos do deserto,
Onde a terra esposa a luz.
Onde vive em campo aberto
A tribo dos homens nus . . .
São os guerreiros ousados
Que com os tigres mosqueados
Combatem na solidão.
Ontem simples, fortes, bravos.
Hoje míseros escravos,
Sem luz, sem ar, sem razão . . .

Sandra Madureira

.
São mulheres desgraçadas,
Como Agar o foi também.
Que sedentas, alquebradas,
De longe . . . bem longe vêm . . .
Trazendo com tíbios passos,
Filhos e algemas nos braços,
N’alma—lágrimas e fel . . .
Como Agar sofrendo tanto,
Que nem o leite de pranto
Têm que dar para Ismael.
.
Lá nas areias inﬁndas,
Das palmeiras no país,
Nasceram crianças lindas,
Viveram moças gentis . . .
Passa um dia a caravana,
Quando a virgem na cabana
Cisma da noite nos véus . . .
. . . Adeus, ó choça do monte,
. . . Adeus, palmeiras da fonte! . . .
. . . Adeus, amores . . . adeus! . . .
.
Depois, o areal extenso . . .
Depois, o oceano de pó.
Depois no horizonte imenso
Desertos . . . desertos só . . .
E a fome, o cansaço, a sede . . .
Ai! quanto infeliz que cede,
E cai p’ra não mais s’erguer! . . .
Vaga um lugar na cadeia,
Mas o chacal sobre a areia
Acha um corpo que roer.
. []
Ontem a Serra Leoa,
A guerra, a caça ao leão,
O sono dormido à toa
Sob as tendas d’amplidão!
Hoje . . . o porão negro, fundo,
Infecto, apertado, imundo,
Tendo a peste por jaguar . . .
E o sono sempre cortado
Pelo arranco de um ﬁnado,
E o baque de um corpo ao mar . . .
. []
Ontem plena liberdade,
A vontade por poder . . .
Hoje . . . cúm’lo de maldade,
Brazilian Portuguese rhotics in poem reciting


Nem são livres p’ra morrer. . . .
Prende-os a mesma corrente
—Férrea, lúgubre serpente—
Nas roscas da escravidão.
E assim zombando da morte,
Dança a lúgubre coorte
Ao som do açoute . . . Irrisão! . . .
. []
Senhor Deus dos desgraçados!
Dizei-me vós, Senhor Deus,
Se eu deliro . . . ou se é verdade
Tanto horror perante os céus?! . . .
Ó mar, por que não apagas
Co’a esponja de tuas vagas
Do teu manto este borrão?
Astros! noites! tempestades!
Rolai das imensidades!
Varrei os mares, tufão! . . .
Part VI
. []
Existe um povo que a bandeira empresta
P’ra cobrir tanta infâmia e cobardia! . . .
E deixa-a transformar-se nessa festa
Em manto impuro de bacante fria! . . .
Meu Deus! meu Deus! mas que bandeira é esta,
Que impudente na gávea tripudia?
Silêncio. Musa . . . chora, e chora tanto
Que o pavilhão se lave no teu pranto! . . .
. []
Auriverde pendão de minha terra,
Que a brisa do Brasil beija e balança,
Estandarte que a luz do sol encerra
E as promessas divinas da esperança . . .
Tu que, da liberdade após a guerra,
Foste hasteado dos heróis na lança
Antes te houvessem roto na batalha,
Que servires a um povo de mortalha! . . .
. []
Fatalidade atroz que a mente esmaga!
Extingue nesta hora o brigue imundo
O trilho que Colombo abriu nas vagas,
Como um íris no pélago profundo!
Mas é infâmia demais! . . . Da etérea plaga
Levantai-vos, heróis do Novo Mundo!
Andrada! arranca esse pendão dos ares!
Colombo! fecha a porta dos teus mares!
Source: http://www.luso-poemas.net/modules/
news/work.php?storyid=© Luso-Poemas

Sandra Madureira

Acknowledgments
My thanks to Mario A. S. Fontes and Yara Castro for statistical analysis assistance, to Mario
M. Fontes and Jayme Preto for their help with table preparation, to the anonymous reviewers
for pertinent suggestions, to the editors for helpful comments, and to Plinio A. Barbosa for his
contribution to the study of speech expressivity and for kindly providing the Praat script used
in this research. A grant from the CNPq (/-) is also acknowledged.
Brazilian Portuguese rhotics in poem reciting


13
Perceived phrasing in French
A survey of some sentence structures
CAROLINE L. SMITH
Studies of French prosodic structure have tended to concentrate on production, and
analyze how speakers convey phrasal organization and accentuation. But it is also
essential to know how listeners are interpreting these productions. Although there is
broad agreement about the prosodic structure for relatively simple sentence struc-
tures, despite varying terminology, there is still considerable debate about a number
of structures that are more complex, or whose interpretation may be more situation-
dependent. Here some speciﬁc structures are examined that have been discussed in
the literature, with the goal of seeing whether naive listeners’ perceptions align with
the prosodic structures that have been proposed. The aspects of perception being
investigated are the perception of phrasal boundaries and the perception of prom-
inence. The chapter begins with a very brief survey of the three phrasal units that are
discussed in analyses of French prosody; following that, a listening experiment is
described that investigates how the proposed types of phrases relate to French
listeners’ perception of prosodic organization.
.Background
Descriptions of French prosody generally agree that prominence and phrasal struc-
ture are tightly linked; prominence derives from the position of a syllable or word in
the phrasal organization (Di Cristo ; Vaissière ), not from any inherent
property of the syllable or word. This is in contrast to Spanish and several other
Romance languages, for example, where syllables are prominent because of lexical
stress (Hualde ), and most content words receive prominence in the form of a
pitch accent (Beckman, Díaz-Campos, McGory, and Morgan ; Ladd ). The
smallest phrasal unit of French, which will be referred to as an Accentual Phrase
(following Delais-Roussarie et al. ), ends with a prominent syllable. Authors
agree on this regardless of whether their deﬁnition of this phrase is largely rhythmic
(e.g., Pasdeloup ), or more strictly tonal (e.g., Jun and Fougeron ; Post ).
Romance Phonetics and Phonology. First edition. Mark Gibson and Juana Gil (eds.)
This chapter © Caroline L. Smith . First published by Oxford University Press.

An Accentual Phrase (AP) consists of a lexical word and the function words
preceding it, and optionally a following adjective that has been incorporated into the
same phrase (Post ). The prominence of the ﬁnal syllable is marked by lengthening
as well as, in most cases, a high tone. It is also widely agreed that APs may optionally
have an additional prominent syllable, at or near the beginning of the phrase. This
prominence is referred to as the initial accent or prominence (e.g., Hirst and Di
Cristo ; Astésano ; Astésano, Bard, and Turk ), although its high tone
is most often associated with the ﬁrst or second syllable of the lexical word, not
necessarily the ﬁrst syllable of the AP (Welby ; Portes, D’Imperio, and Lancia
). In summary, a minimum level of prominence can be expected at least once on
every lexical word, and possibly more than once, if the AP is long enough (Jun and
Fougeron ).
The other, higher level of phrasal structure in French that is broadly accepted in
the literature is the Intonational Phrase (sometimes under different names: Verluyten
; Mertens ; Jun and Fougeron ; Di Cristo ; Delais-Roussarie et al.
). As in other languages, the factors determining Intonational Phrase (IP)
structure are numerous, encompassing at least syntactic, semantic, pragmatic, and
rhythmic constraints (D’Imperio, Elordieta, Frota, Prieto, and Vigário ; D’Im-
perio, Bertrand, Di Cristo, and Portes ; Nespor and Vogel ). In the experi-
ment described in this chapter, the stimuli were single sentences, and in many cases,
these would be expected to be parsed as a single IP. A grammatical sentence may,
however, contain more than one IP, and some of the structures investigated here are
among those that have been discussed as possibly triggering a sentence-internal IP
boundary. Intonational Phrases contain a nuclear pitch accent (D’Imperio, Bertrand,
Di Cristo, and Portes ; Beyssade, Hemforth, Marandin, and Portes ), which
would presumably be perceived by listeners as more prominent than the prominent
syllable of an AP.
There is less agreement in the literature about the third phrasal unit proposed for
French, the intermediate phrase (ip). This unit was originally proposed to account for
some speciﬁc structures that are difﬁcult to account for using APs and IPs alone (Jun
and Fougeron ), and for groups of words delimited by boundaries that listeners
perceive as stronger than AP boundaries (Michelas and D’Imperio ; D’Imperio
and Michelas ). Like the AP, the ip is marked both tonally by a phrase tone
(Delais-Roussarie et al. ), and by lengthening of its ﬁnal syllable, with an ip-ﬁnal
syllable receiving greater lengthening than a syllable that is ﬁnal in an AP only
(Michelas and D’Imperio ).
One important difference between the work presented here and other work on
French prosody is that the unit of analysis here is the word, rather than the syllable.
This is not to disagree with the universal assumption that prominence associated
with the different phrasal units is associated with the last non-schwa syllable in the
phrase (with the obvious exception of the AP-initial accent); research on prominence
perception in French has treated the syllable as the unit of perception (Avanzi,
Gendrot, and Lacheret-Dujour ; Lacheret, Simon, Goldman, and Avanzi
). The reasons for using the word as the unit of analysis here are practical. For
one thing, while Poiré (), Lacheret et al. (), and others have elicited prosodic
Perceived phrasing in French


annotation from expert or trained coders, this study asked naive listeners for their
reactions. Working at word level is likely to be a simpler task for untrained listeners.
In addition, the methodology used here (explained in more detail in Section .)
tests listeners’ perception in real time. Speech simply passes by too rapidly to mark
individual syllables. For these reasons, the analysis is framed in terms of words
receiving prominence, while acknowledging that this is a consequence of a speciﬁc
syllable being prominent. As will become apparent from the listeners’ rate of
responding (Section ..), they identiﬁed prominent words relatively infrequently,
suggesting that these may be words receiving prominence owing to their position in
the ip or IP, not the much smaller AP (Smith ).
.Examined structures
This chapter surveys three types of sentence structure that have received some
attention in the prosodic literature (i.e., dislocations, statements with focus, and
long-subject noun phrases), because their phrasing may be difﬁcult to account for,
or because it seems to vary depending on context. It seems worthwhile, therefore, to
examine how listeners perceive these structures. The drawback, of course, is that in
an experimental situation listeners hear the sentences devoid of context, but this can
nonetheless provide baseline data for what is likely to be a neutral interpretation of
the prosody.
..Dislocations
Constituents may be dislocated to the left, occurring at the beginning of a sentence,
or the right, occurring at the end of the sentence, as in examples () and ()
respectively. These are taken from the Nijmegen Corpus of Casual French (NCCF)
(Torreira, Adda-Decker, and Ernestus ), which was used as a source of spon-
taneous speech recordings in the present study. The code numbers for the source ﬁles
are given at right.
()
Notre prof de maths, il a fait cours vendredi de la grève.
(--_)
‘Our math professor, he taught class Friday during the strike.’
()
Je l’adore, cette prof.
(--_)
‘I love her, that professor.’
A classiﬁed inventory of possible types of left dislocations is given in Astésano,
Espesser, and Rossi-Gensane (); Avanzi () gives many examples of several
types of left and right dislocation.
The primary question here is the presence or absence of a boundary between the
dislocation and the main clause of the sentence. This is of interest in part because of
the frequency with which these structures occur in spoken French, and in the case of
left dislocations, their relation to grammatical changes in progress (Culbertson ).
Left dislocations have been described as followed by a “major boundary,” with
stress on the dislocation-ﬁnal word (Mertens : ). Others have suggested that
this boundary might be the end of an intermediate phrase (Jun and Fougeron );

Caroline L. Smith

evidence for this would help justify the relevance of the intermediate phrase
for French.
Previous studies of dislocations have given somewhat varied results. In some
cases the divergence of results may be accounted for by differences among authors
who analyzed sentences read aloud, compared to those working with spontaneously
produced speech. Some research using read sentences has found that left disloca-
tions end with prominent, lengthened syllables with an f₀ rise (Doetjes, Delais-
Roussarie, and Sleeman ) or that at least the f₀ rise is a robust cue (de Cat ).
Others have reported little or no phonetic marking of left dislocations (Astésano,
Espesser, and Rossi-Gensane , and for corpus data, Avanzi, Gendrot, and
Lacheret-Dujour ). In an extensive corpus-based analysis of left dislocations,
Avanzi () observed boundaries equivalent to an IP (“syntagme intonatif”) in
% of cases (), as classiﬁed by the Analor tool, an automatized prosodic
measurement system. In general, these previous results suggest that boundary and
prominence marking for left dislocations is more reliable in read sentences than in
spontaneous speech.
For right dislocations, previous ﬁndings are again somewhat equivocal, and there
is less information than for left dislocations. The range of f₀ values appears to be
reduced in them compared to the preceding clause (Ashby ), although de Cat
() found somewhat variable pitch patterns in the sample of spontaneous utter-
ances that she examined. She describes the right dislocations as “destressed” (: ),
and ﬁnds that they have lower amplitude than the main clause of the sentence. De Cat
() also observes that a pause is not obligatory preceding a right dislocation,
although Avanzi () ﬁnds that the majority (%) of right dislocations in his data
are phrased as distinct IPs. None of these authors provide data on how listeners
interpret these acoustic patterns, although they seem to agree that right dislocations
are less prominent than a sentence’s main clause.
..Statements with focus
Research on the prosodic characteristics of focus in French is extensive, although
much of it concentrates on giving a phonological interpretation for relatively small
sets of production data. Since there seems to be a lack of research into how listeners
interpret different productions, the present study aims to begin to ﬁll that gap.
A thorough review of the very considerable literature on French focus is not possible;
a few references are given here that might suggest what listening results should be
expected in the present study.
The deﬁnition of focus is a source of much debate. The data discussed here belong
to a particular type that has been discussed quite widely, focus as the answer to a
question. This is consistent with, for example, Beyssade et al. (: ), who say
that “I[nformation] F[ocus] is the part of the content of answers that resolves the
question.” Ladd (: ) says that in many cases, “individual words are high-
lighted both phonetically and pragmatically,” although he is clear that this is not
always the case. In this study, speakers read pairs of questions and answers such that
in one member of the pair, the entire answer was a response to the question, and in
the other member of the pair, some words in the answer gave new information
Perceived phrasing in French


responding to the question, while other words were repeated from the question. An
example is given in ().
()
(a) Qu’est-ce qu’elle a fait hier?—Elle a lu un roman en arabe.
‘What did she do yesterday?—She read a novel in Arabic.’
(b) Qu’est-ce qu’elle a lu hier?—Elle a lu un roman en arabe.
‘What did she read yesterday?—She read a novel in Arabic.’
In (a), the entire verb phrase contains new information that answers the question.
This condition will be referred to as broad focus; it is also sometimes called all focus,
but could equally well be termed no focus because there is no speciﬁc part of the
sentence that is more novel than the rest (except that the subject elle is repeated from
the question). In contrast, (b) questions just the object of the verb, while the verb
itself is repeated in the response. This will be referred to as narrow focus; only the
object (un roman en arabe) is new information that was not contained in the
question. This new information will be referred to as the focus phrase; the analysis
in Section ...concentrates on this part of the sentence, comparing listeners’
perceptions of it under the two focus conditions. The broad-focus condition essen-
tially serves as a control, since in this condition, the production of the focus phrase is
expected to be unmarked. There are many types of focus (for example, Gussenhoven
identiﬁes seven for English); other authors studying focus in French have
analyzed different types than the one investigated here.
One description for the tonal organization of focus phrases is that they have both
an initial and a ﬁnal f₀ rise, which gives the perception of two accents (e.g., Di Cristo
; Féry ; Delais-Roussarie, Rialland, Doetjes, and Marandon ; Beys-
sade et al. ; Delais-Roussarie, Yoo, and Post ; Turco, Dimroth, and Brau
). There is more divergence as to whether the focus phrase has characteristics
of an AP (Turco, Dimroth, and Brau ) or an IP (Delais-Roussarie et al. );
many authors note that the size of the focused constituent plays a role in deter-
mining phrasing. Among these are German and D’Imperio () who found that
while the initial rise is deﬁnitely involved in cueing focus, most likely listeners
integrate multiple cues in a probabilistic fashion in order to determine if a con-
stituent is focused or not. These cues presumably set off a focus phrase as distinct
from the rest of the sentence, so listeners are predicted to perceive at least a weak
boundary before and after the focus phrase in the narrow-focus condition, but not
in the broad-focus condition.
..Long-subject noun phrases
The third structure studied here is explored by Michelas (), Michelas and
D’Imperio (), and D’Imperio and Michelas (). The default prosodic structure
of a single-clause declarative sentence is for each content word to end an AP. Under
this view, the boundary between the subject and verb is just an AP boundary. These
authors propose that there may instead be an ip at this location, at least when the
subject noun phrase reaches a certain length. Example () illustrates this structure.

Caroline L. Smith

()
[Les parents d’Emilie]ip vont en vacances en novembre.
‘Emilie’s parents go on vacation in November.’
D’Imperio and Michelas () observed lengthening of the syllable preceding this
boundary that is intermediate between what was observed for AP boundaries and
what they found at IP boundaries. This result, coupled with pitch reset at the same
location, leads them to propose that there is an ip boundary at this location, marked
by a high phrase tone. The proposal is that the i p boundary is possible if the subject
noun phrase is composed of at least two APs. Short subjects, each consisting of a
single AP, are separated from the following verb by just the expected AP boundary.
A very small data set is tested here to examine whether listeners’ perceptions coincide
with the ﬁndings from production.
..Summary of hypotheses
i. Listeners will perceive a boundary between dislocated constituents and the
main clause.
ii. The ﬁnal content word in left dislocations will be perceived as prominent by
more listeners than the average for words in the main clause.
iii. The words in a right dislocation will not be perceived as prominent.
iv. A boundary will be perceived before and after the focus phrase in the narrow-
focus condition.
v. Words in the focus phrase in the narrow-focus condition will be perceived as
prominent by more listeners than words in the focus phrase in the broad-focus
condition.
vi. More listeners will perceive a boundary after a long-subject noun phrase than
after a short-subject noun phrase.
.Method
The approach used here is Rapid Prosody Transcription (RPT), which has been
used recently in several studies investigating the perception of prosody in various
languages (e.g., Smith ; Cole, Mo, and Hasegawa-Johnson ; Mizuguchi,
Cole, Pinter, Tateishi, and Mahrt ). Rapid Prosody Transcription is a codiﬁ-
cation of a basic approach that has been used by many researchers over many years
(e.g., French, Pagel, et al. ; Portes ): participants are asked to listen to
recorded speech material and indicate their perception of either prominent words
or phrasal boundaries.
..Speech materials
Unlike previous work that has used RPT for a broad investigation of prosodic
structure in spontaneous speech, in this study it was used to test hypotheses about
speciﬁc sentence structures. Participants listened to individual sentences, or to
extracts of spontaneous speech that corresponded roughly to grammatical sentences.
Perceived phrasing in French


These utterances were chosen to illustrate the structures being studied, namely,
dislocations, focus, and long- vs. short-subject noun phrases.
As mentioned in Section .., the Nijmegen Corpus of Casual French was the
source of spontaneous speech utterances containing left and right dislocations.
Examples of dislocations that were retained for use in the listening experiment had
to meet several criteria: they had to be reasonably comprehensible out of context,
they could not contain any very strange voice quality or extreme intonation (e.g.,
falsetto), and they had to be produced reasonably ﬂuently, that is, with no extremely
long pauses. The samples chosen were extracted from the conversations; in most
cases the portion selected was not a complete conversational turn, but did constitute
a grammatically complete sentence. Twenty left dislocations and ten right disloca-
tions were selected. These will be referred to as the spontaneous dislocations.
In addition to these spontaneous productions, recordings of sentences read aloud
were also prepared for use in the listening experiment. These sentences included
both dislocations and other structures. A subset of the spontaneous dislocations
(ten left, three right) used in the experiment was transcribed and included in the
recording script. These sentences thus occurred twice in the listening experiment,
once in their spontaneous version and once in a recording of a reading. In addition,
a number of sentences were constructed to contain various syntactic structures.
Four of these sentences had left dislocations and four had right dislocations. This
brought the total number of dislocations, both spontaneous and read, that were
included in the listening study, to thirty-four left dislocations and seventeen right
dislocations. Four pairs of sentences were created in order to compare the phrasing
of short- and long-subject noun phrases (NPs). These were modeled on the sen-
tences used by D’Imperio and Michelas (). Finally, ten question–answer pairs
were created to compare broad- and narrow-focus conditions. In these pairs, the
answers were identical in both cases, but the questions differed. In the broad-focus
item, the question was very general, which was expected to elicit a reading of the
answer sentence where the whole sentence was interpreted as answering the ques-
tion. In the narrow-focus item, the question asked about a speciﬁc element; these
were expected to elicit a reading where just a few words of the answer sentence were
interpreted as being the answer to the question. The complete set of sentences is
listed in the Appendix.
Six native speakers (three male, three female) of French read the script aloud one
at a time, in a quiet room in the Laboratoire Dynamique du Langage in Lyon, France,
where all of them were staff or students. Each speaker recorded three repetitions
of the script; a different random order of the sentences was used for each speaker.
This gave a total of eighteen readings of each sentence; one reading of each sentence
was selected for use in the listening experiment. The choice of which recording to use
for each sentence was partly random but the selection ensured that equal numbers of
sentences were chosen from each speaker, which also meant equal numbers from
male and female speakers. Another criterion for selecting the recordings was that the
production be fully ﬂuent. Pairs of sentences that were identical except for the type of
focus were chosen from different speakers.

Caroline L. Smith

..Listening experiment
The experiment reported here used purpose-designed software known as Language
Markup and Experimental Design Software (LMEDS, version .) (Mahrt S¹),
which makes it possible to administer RPT experiments on a website that records
subject responses. An LMEDS experiment appears as follows to participants: They
are directed to view the appropriate web page, where they ﬁrst read several screens of
introductory explanation and instructions. This includes the text of a standard
consent form; they click to give or refuse their consent to continue. The introductory
pages tell them that they will be hearing recorded speech while reading on the screen
the text corresponding to that speech. They are asked to click on the words in the text
to indicate their responses. The ﬁrst task that listeners perform is to indicate phrasal
boundaries; in this task they are instructed to click on a word after which they
perceive a break, and a vertical bar | appears on the screen between that word and the
next. The instructions asked them to listen for words followed by ‘a rupture or
discontinuity in the ﬂow of speech’.² The second task is to click on words that they
perceive as prominent; the words then turn red on the screen. The instructions
for this task told them to listen for words that ‘stand out from the ﬂow of speech
because they are louder, longer, or articulated more carefully than other words in the
same utterance’.³ Since this study forms part of a larger crosslinguistic project,
these instructions were translated from those used in English and Spanish by Hualde,
Cole, Smith, Eager, Mahrt, and Napoleão de Souza (), in order to facilitate
comparison between languages. Participants can click a second time to remove
their marking. Responses are stored and exported to a spreadsheet. Two practice
sentences were presented to listeners before they began the actual experiment; they
were instructed to respond to these practice sentences as if doing the experiment, but
their responses were not analyzed.
Participants were recruited by making announcements in classes at universities in
Lyon and Paris; students interested in participating were asked to email the experi-
menter. The link to the experiment web page was then sent to them, after checking
that they were native speakers of French. They did the experiment over the Internet
at home. A total of twenty-eight participants completed the experiment, of whom ﬁve
were male. Each participant was paid ten euros.
The experimental website began with a page of instructions asking participants
to do the experiment in a quiet environment, using headphones, and without
interruption. While it is impossible to verify the extent to which these directions
were followed, other research (Cole, Mahrt, and Roy ) has determined that
¹ http://prosody.beckman.illinois.edu/lmeds.html. The software can be downloaded from https://
github.com/timmahrt/LMEDS.
² “une rupture ou une discontinuité dans le ﬂux de la parole”.
³ “qui se détachent du ﬂux de parole parce qu’ils sont plus forts, plus longs, articulés plus soigneusement
que les autres mots dans le même énoncé”.
Perceived phrasing in French


participants in an RPT experiment conducted remotely using Amazon Mechanical
Turk⁴ gave results comparable to those obtained in a laboratory setting.
..Scoring
The basic data for the listening experiment is provided by the number of listeners
who marked each word in each sentence as prominent, or as followed by a boundary.
In all, there were words in the sentences. A boundary score (b-score) was
calculated for each word equal to the proportion of the listeners who marked that
word as being followed by a boundary. Thus b-scores can potentially range from 
(no listeners marked it) to (all twenty-eight listeners marked it); the b-scores
obtained in this experiment covered the full range from to . Correspondingly,
p-scores were calculated as the proportion of listeners who marked an individual
word as prominent. These can also range from to , but in this experiment, no word
was marked as prominent by all listeners. The maximum was a p-score of ., which
occurred for four words, corresponding to twenty-seven listeners marking them.
A higher b-score or p-score means that more listeners marked that word; it does not
necessarily mean that the word was more prominent or preceded a more major
boundary. However, more listeners marking a word may indicate that there were
more robust acoustic cues to prominence or to the presence of a boundary; this issue
is being pursued in ongoing work.
..Analysis
In order to test predictions about speciﬁc structures, the words that occurred in key
structural positions in the sentences were manually tagged to identify those positions.
These are listed in Table ., along with the codes used to abbreviate them. The
analyses concentrate on these words, which have been predicted as falling at a
boundary of some kind, or as having greater prominence than words around them.
Words that did not occur at one of these key positions were left untagged.
Most analyses were done in Excel. Statistical tests were either calculated in Excel
(Fleiss’s kappa, t-tests) or using an online calculator (Mann–Whitney tests). The
nonparametric Mann–Whitney tests were used in cases where the sample sizes
differed greatly for the sets of sentences being compared, as when comparing the
words in one of the special positions listed in Table .with untagged words.
.Results
The analysis ﬁrst examines the overall patterns of listener responses, and then the
patterns observed for each sentence structure under examination.
..Agreement among listeners
Good agreement among listeners suggests that their responses correspond to genuine
patterns in the language, rather than idiosyncratic reactions. Fleiss’s kappa (Fleiss
⁴ https://www.mturk.com/mturk/welcome.

Caroline L. Smith

) was used to measure listener agreement in this study; this measure corrects for
the degree of agreement expected by chance. The kappa value for the boundary
labeling was ., z=., and for prominence labeling was ., z=.. Although
these values are only in the range that Landis and Koch () characterize as “fair”
agreement, their z-scores show that they are highly signiﬁcant. The kappa values are
also within the range of those obtained in other studies using the RPT methodology,
such as Cole, Mo, and Hasegawa-Johnson (). One difference between this study
and previous ones using RPT is that in other studies the kappa values for boundary
labeling are noticeably higher than those for prominence labeling, even in French,
where one might expect the two to be similar (Smith ). In this study there was
virtually no difference between the two tasks.
T.Positions of words identiﬁed for analysis, with number of
words analyzed in each position and abbreviation codes
Code
Count
Description
e-LD

last word of left dislocation
Notre prof de maths, il a fait cours vendredi de la grève.
b-RD

last word before right dislocation
Je l’adore, cette prof.
e-RD

last word of right dislocation (sentence-ﬁnal)
Je l’adore, cette prof.
e-longNP

end of long-subject noun phrase
Les parents d’Emilie vont en vacances en novembre.
e-shortNP

end of short-subject noun phrase
Laurent démêlait le nœud sans problème.
b-NF

before-focus phrase in narrow focus
Elle a lu un roman en arabe.
i-NF

initial-in-focus phrase in narrow focus
Elle a lu un roman en arabe.
m-NF

medial-in-focus phrase in narrow focus
Elle a lu un roman en arabe.
e-NF

end-of-focus phrase in narrow focus
Elle a lu un roman en arabe.
b-BF

before-focus phrase in broad focus
(same as for narrow focus)
i-BF

in-focus phrase in broad focus
m-BF

medial-in-focus phrase in broad focus
e-BF

end-of-focus phrase in broad focus

none of the above, untagged
The word identiﬁed by a code is in boldface in the example sentence in the row underneath the
description of that code.
Perceived phrasing in French


..Overall response rates
Individual listeners varied considerably as to how frequently they chose to mark a
boundary or a prominent word. The average number of markings per listener was
boundary locations (s.d. ) and prominent words (s.d. ), out of a total
of words. The larger number of prominences marked means that on average,
p-scores tend to be higher than b-scores. This pattern held for almost all subsets of
the data, as will be seen when the different structures are discussed in the next
sections. Individual listeners’ rates of marking boundaries and prominences had a
correlation of .(p<.).
Only four of the twenty-eight listeners marked more boundaries than promin-
ences. This means that twenty-four of the twenty-eight marked more than one word
as prominent for each stretch of words that they delimited with a boundary.
Accentual Phrases end with a prominence immediately preceding the phrasal bound-
ary (with the possible exception of a nonprominent syllable with schwa as its
nucleus). If listeners are marking AP boundaries, and choosing AP-ﬁnal words as
prominent, the simplest prediction is that there should be equal numbers of prom-
inences and boundaries. But this was not the case. The possibility of initial promin-
ences would add to the number of possible prominences relative to boundaries, but
on average listeners responded less often than once per AP. Thus the distribution of
their responses must be accounted for in a more complex way than simply assuming
they responded to every word that contained an accented syllable.
The text transcripts for this experiment were presented on the screen without
punctuation. For the constructed sentences, the readers treated them all as complete
utterances and produced intonation appropriate to that; it was expected that
listeners would also interpret them as ending with a boundary. In contrast, some of
the extracts from the NCCF had been cut out from a continuous stream of speech,
and in some cases the speaker continued to talk after the excised portion. For these it
was less clear that listeners would interpret the end of the extract that they heard as
being terminated by a boundary. Both the spontaneous utterances and constructed
sentences will be referred to as sentences in this chapter except where necessary to
distinguish the two.
The frequency of boundary marking differed considerably depending on the
word’s position in the sentence. As expected, most words in initial or medial position
in the sentence were perceived as not followed by a boundary: the number of words
receiving no boundary marking by any listener () exceeded those marked by one
or more listeners (). Individual words in initial or medial position had b-scores
ranging from to . The range was more limited for words in ﬁnal position. The b-
scores for these words ranged only from .to .. That is to say, the fact that a
word appeared at the end of the sentence did not reliably cause listeners to mark it as
followed by a boundary.
Most individual listeners adopted a consistent strategy for boundary marking of
the words in ﬁnal position, choosing to mark none (ﬁve listeners), almost none
(seven others marked fewer than ten), or almost all (eight listeners marked seventy or
more out of seventy-nine). That leaves only eight listeners who varied much in

Caroline L. Smith

marking the sentence-ﬁnal words. This distribution suggests that for these words in
ﬁnal position, the number of listeners who marked them cannot be taken as a reliable
indicator of the strength of the boundary in that position. For this reason, the
remaining analyses report on words in ﬁnal position separately from words in initial
and medial position.
..Listener responses to different structures
...Dislocations
The left dislocations studied here consist of an NP at the
beginning of the sentence, which is referenced again by a pronoun in the main clause.
Here the ﬁnal word of the dislocation is examined (coded e-LD), since it is predicted
to be followed by a phrasal break before the main clause. Listeners are expected to
judge that the e-LD word is prominent, as left dislocations are often described as
giving the topic of the sentence. These predictions are supported by the listener
responses: the average b-score was .and the average p-score was .for the
words coded e-LD in the thirty-four left dislocations tested. These values are very
much greater than the average scores for the untagged words, which were .
(b-score) and .(p-score). The e-LD words had signiﬁcantly higher scores than the
untagged words overall, according to a Mann–Whitney test (b-scores: U = ,
p < ., p-scores: U = , p < .).
The right dislocations consist of a noun phrase at the end of the sentence, which is
coreferential with a pronoun in the main clause. In these, the ﬁnal word of the main
clause preceding the dislocation (b-RD) is predicted to be followed by a phrasal
break, and as a preboundary word, is also expected to be prominent. These b-RD
words had average b-scores of .and p-scores of ., very comparable to the
values for the e-LD words.
Words that were ﬁnal in the right dislocations (e-RD) were also examined, as these
are described as having different pragmatic status than left dislocations (Ashby
). (The ﬁnal words in the right dislocations were chosen because they were all
nouns in dislocated noun phrases.) Note that the e-RD words are sentence-ﬁnal, and
as noted in Section .., some listeners seem to have consistently not marked
sentence-ﬁnal words. The e-RD words had an average b-score of .and p-score
of ., close to the overall mean for sentence-ﬁnal (b-score: ., p-score: .),
but signiﬁcantly lower than the scores for the b-RD words (b-scores: t = ., p < .;
p-scores: t = ., p<.). Interpreting these scores is problematic because of listen-
ers’ variable treatment of sentence-ﬁnal words, but the p-score difference suggests
that the e-RD words may be perceived as less prominent than the b-RD words. This
is consistent with descriptions of right dislocation as having “weaker” intonation (Le
Gac ) and a “lower acoustic proﬁle” (Ashby : ).
The set of dislocations included some produced in spontaneous utterances and
others that were in read sentences. Figure .shows the e-LD words (preceding the
putative phrase boundaries at the end of the left dislocations) and the b-RD words
before the right dislocations, as well as the means for all words that were initial and
medial in the sentences (nonﬁnal words). The graph suggests that the e-LD words
were perceived by more listeners as preceding a phrase break and prominent in the
Perceived phrasing in French


read sentences than in the spontaneous examples. There appears to be little differ-
ence between read and spontaneous in the right dislocations or for the average over
all the nonﬁnal words.
For a subset of the dislocations (ten left and three right), the experiment included
pairs of identical utterances in read and spontaneous versions. Examination of
listener responses for these utterances gives a controlled comparison of the differ-
ences between spontaneous and read speech. Scores for the two speech styles were
compared in a two-tailed paired t-test: the b-scores of the words in the read versions
(.) were signiﬁcantly higher than those for the spontaneous versions (.),
(t=., df=, p<.), but the p-scores of the two versions did not differ
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
Final words in left dislocations
read
spontaneous
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
All non-final words
read
spontaneous
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
Words preceding right dislocations
read
spontaneous
b-score
p-score
F.Comparison of b-scores and p-scores for read and spontaneous dislocations

Caroline L. Smith

statistically (read: .; spontaneous: ., t=., df=, p>.). Although these
results reﬂect only a small amount of data, the small but signiﬁcant difference in
b-scores suggests that the listeners may have detected more overt indications of
boundaries in the read-aloud sentences. In a separate study, acoustic analysis of
these utterances found that there was more f₀ movement and longer durations in the
read sentences for the e-LD and e-RD words that occur immediately before the
putative boundaries (Smith and Napoleão de Souza ). The lack of a signiﬁcant
difference in the p-scores suggests that these acoustic differences did not also trigger
more perception of prominence (although note that the t-tests compared all words in
these utterances, not just those immediately preceding the putative boundaries,
which were analyzed acoustically).
...Statements with and without focus phrases
Ten pairs of sentences were
compared that contain the same words but were produced as responses to questions
intended to elicit either a broad-focus or a narrow-focus interpretation (see
Section ..). Examples of these are shown in Figures .and ..
A subset of the words in these sentences were selected for analysis, as listed in
Table .. In four of these pairs of sentences, the word at the end of the focus
phrase, coded as e-NF or e-BF, was also at the end of the sentence. Because of the
need to treat sentence-ﬁnal words separately (see Section ..), the analysis in this
section includes only six pairs of words tagged as e-NF or e-BF, whereas there are ten
pairs of words that are initial or medial in the focus phrase. Only seven pairs of words
were identiﬁed as medial in a focus phrase, because several of these consisted of just
two words. Figure .shows the b- and p-scores of these words, compared to the
words in the read sentences that were not tagged as having any special status.
Little difference is apparent between the broad- and narrow-focus conditions.
Paired t-tests were run to compare the matching words in different positions under
the two conditions, but none were signiﬁcant (p>.for all tests). A Mann–Whitney
test compared the words that were immediately before the focus phrases (broad and
narrow focus combined, n=) to the untagged words (n=); a signiﬁcant differ-
ence (U=, p<.) between the b-scores of these two sets of words suggests
that a boundary was perceived before the focus phrases. A similar comparison was
300
Hz
50
1.537
0
elle
a
lu
un
roman
en
arabe
Time (s)
F.A sentence (‘She read a novel in Arabic.’) produced in broad-focus condition by
a female speaker, showing the waveform (above) and f₀ trace
Perceived phrasing in French



being compared here is very small, this further supports the notion that sentence-ﬁnal
words were less likely to be marked than sentence-medial ones in similar contexts.
...Long-subject noun phrases
Four pairs of sentences tested one ﬁnal struc-
ture of interest (Figure .), the consequences of variation in the length of a subject
noun phrase (NPs). In these, the word that was examined was the last word in the
subject, for example Manon in Les amis de Manon viennent souvent le mercredi
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
Words  ending focus phrases
sent-medial
broad focus
sent-final
narrow focus
sent-final
broad focus
sent-medial
narrow focus
avg b-score
avg p-score
F.Scores for words ending focus phrases, comparing those that are sentence-
medial to those that are sentence-ﬁnal
0.00
long NP
short NP
Subject NPs
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
avg b-score
avg p-score
F.Comparison of the scores for the ﬁnal word in long- or short-subject noun
phrases (NPs)
Perceived phrasing in French


(‘Manon’s friends often come on Wednesday’). The long noun phrases were pro-
duced with either ﬁve or seven syllables, since in some cases the word de was
pronounced without a vowel. The short noun phrases consisted of two or three
syllables; three of them contained only one word (a proper name).
The difference between the boundary scores was close to signiﬁcance in a two-
tailed t-test (p=., t=., df=); it is expected that more data would give a
signiﬁcant result. The prominence scores did not differ at all (t=). The trend toward
more listeners perceiving a boundary at the end of long subjects is consistent with
Michelas and D’Imperio’s () suggestion that a longer-subject noun phrase is
likely to end with an intermediate phrase boundary, if it is the case that higher-level
phrases are more salient to listeners (and thus more likely to be marked). Interest-
ingly, the p-scores were not affected by the length of the noun phrase, suggesting that
the more robustly perceived boundary is not necessarily accompanied by a more
reliable perception of prominence.
.Discussion
As expected, prominence and boundaries to a large extent patterned together.
Words that were perceived as preceding a boundary also tended to be perceived as
prominent, although the reverse was not equally true, since on average more words
were marked as prominent. Twenty-four out of twenty-eight listeners conformed to
the pattern of marking more words as prominent than as preboundary. They marked
boundaries after fewer words than there were lexical words in the sentences, meaning
that listener-perceived boundaries were less frequent than APs. This could mean that
listeners only perceived a subset of APs as having sufﬁciently strong boundaries to
merit marking, or that the boundaries they marked correspond to larger units, either
intermediate or IPs.
With respect to the hypotheses from Section .., these were generally sup-
ported by the results for the dislocations and the long-subject noun phrases, but not
for the focus sentences. Listeners perceived both left and right dislocations as
demarcated by boundaries, and these were perceived more strongly in the read
sentences than in the spontaneous productions, as expected on the basis of previous
acoustic measurements of these sentences (Smith and Napoleão de Souza ). The
factors that trigger listeners’ perception of these boundaries remain to be explored,
however. Expectations by listeners on the basis of the syntax can play as big a role as,
or bigger than, the acoustic properties of the words (Cole, Mo, and Baek ). Given
the lack of acoustic indicators of boundaries in these data, it seems likely that the
listeners were responding largely on the basis of their understanding of the sentences,
even though they had been instructed to attend to the sounds.
Previous research suggested that words in left dislocations would be perceived as
prominent, and words in right dislocations as less prominent. A direct comparison
between these two contexts was not made, but there was little difference between their
p-scores. Both were substantially higher (.for left, .for right) than the average for
untagged words (.). Analysis of the right dislocations was problematic, because
listeners seemed to treat sentence-ﬁnal words (which included many of those that
ended the right dislocations) differently from other words.

Caroline L. Smith

Results for the focus sentences were not consistent with the hypotheses; no signiﬁcant
difference was found between the broad- and narrow-focus conditions. It seems likely
that the speakers did not distinguish the two conditions, so there may have been nothing
to cue the listeners that some of the sentences had been produced in response to more
narrowly directed questions. A recent study of focus in French and English found that
French speakers distinguish focus prosodically in fewer contexts than English speakers
(Vander Klok, Goad, and Wagner ); the stimuli in the present experiment do not ﬁt
the “corrective” focus that Vander Klok, Goad, and Wagner () found to be most
reliably marked in French. Furthermore, these sentences were read in an experimental
situation and thus lack a robust context that might encourage speakers to mark focus
acoustically. Further work is underway to examine focus in ordinary conversation,
where acoustic marking of focused words might be more robust.
Finally, a very small set of data was examined to test the hypothesized presence of an
intermediate phrase boundary at the end of longer-subject noun phrases. While these
results must be treated with extreme caution, the markedly larger number of listeners
perceiving a boundary after the longer-subject phrases is consistent with previous
ﬁndings from production data (D’Imperio and Michelas ), although the data
here cannot speak directly to the nature of the prosodic units to which perceived
boundaries might correspond. The b-scores obtained for these long-subject noun
phrases were slightly higher than those obtained for dislocations, suggesting that the
boundaries after the long-subject noun phrases may be perceived more reliably than
boundaries adjacent to dislocations. If so, it would be interesting to explore whether the
dislocation boundaries are comparable in production to the boundaries ending the
long-subject noun phrases, or whether they are in fact weaker. (So far no single study
seems to have rigorously compared these two different structures.)
Analyses of the perception of these prosodic structures can help us to understand
how listeners interpret them, which seems to result from a complex of interacting
inﬂuences that are probably impossible to measure in production. Combining the
results of both production and perception studies will produce the most progress toward
understanding how language users exploit these structures in order to communicate.
.Appendix
Sentences used in the listening experiment. Those marked “both” were extracted
from the Nijmegen Corpus of Casual French (Torreira, Adda-Decker, and Ernestus
) and were also recorded in Lyon. The ones marked as “spontaneous” were
extracted from this same corpus, and the “constructed” ones were created for the
present experiment (see Section ..).
Left dislocations
.
Jacques Chirac il
aimait bien l’art contemporain.
both
‘Jacques Chirac, he loved contemporary art’.
.
Julie elle était super
contente.
both
‘Julie, she was super happy’.
Perceived phrasing in French


.
Virgin et la FNAC ils
le faisaient tous les deux.
both
‘Virgin and FNAC, they both did it’.
.
Ludivine elle vient
pas en cours là depuis une semaine.
both
‘Ludivine, she hasn’t been to class in a week’.
.
Le jonglage c’est un
sport en soi.
both
‘Juggling, it’s a sport in itself’.
.
Ces chaussures elles
me font puer des pieds.
both
‘These shoes, they make my feet smell’.
.
Notre prof de maths il
a fait cours vendredi de la grève
both
‘Our math teacher, he taught class on Friday
during the strike’.
.
Le père il a pas trop
envie de voir sa ﬁlle grandir.
both
‘A father, he doesn’t really want to see his
daughter grow up’.
.
Mon grand frère il a
pas du tout été élevé pareil que moi.
both
‘My older brother, he wasn’t brought up the
same way as me at all’.
.
Rouen c’est pas
vraiment la Normandie.
both
‘Rouen, it’s not really Normandy’.
.
Émilie elle était avec
nous quand on est allé au cinéma.
constructed
‘Émilie, she was with us when we went to
the movies’.
.
Les ragoûts c’est un
des plats les plus faciles à préparer.
constructed
‘Stew, that’s one of the easiest dishes to make’.
.
Les amis ils m’ont
bien fait plaisir ce soir-là.
constructed
‘My friends, they really amused me that night’.
.
Mes étudiants ils
reportent les devoirs au plus tard possible.
constructed
‘My students, they put off their assignments as long
as possible’.
. Tolbiac c’est pas considéré comme une annexe mais
presque quoi
spontaneous
‘Tolbiac, it’s not considered an annex but it almost is’
. Tolbiac c’est une annexe de la Sorbonne
spontaneous
‘Tolbiac, it’s an annex of the Sorbonne’

Caroline L. Smith

. Censier ça peut aussi être considéré comme une
annexe de la Sorbonne non
spontaneous
‘Censier, it could also be considered an annex of the
Sorbonne, couldn’t it?’
. Donc Paris III ça a été créé en soixante-neuf
spontaneous
‘so Paris III it was created in ’’
. Ben l’environnement il aurait peut-être pas pris une
aussi grande place dans la société quoi
spontaneous
‘well, the environment, it might not have had such
importance in society, might it’
. Ce côté sexe il est pas spécial à la naissance quoi
spontaneous
‘this sex aspect, it’s not just at birth, is it’
. Charles il a passé je sais pas combien d’heures là-bas
spontaneous
‘Charles, he spent I don’t know how many hours over
there’
. Non mais de toute façon l’Eurostar ça marche pas
spontaneous
‘no but anyhow Eurostar, it doesn’t work’
. Ah si Vanessa elle le sait
spontaneous
‘oh yes Vanessa she knows it’
. Et après les meufs elles rencontrent le grand amour en
fait
spontaneous
‘and then, chicks, they do ﬁnd true love in fact’
Right dislocations
. Elle est trop marrante Bérénice.
both
‘She’s just so funny, Bérénice’.
. Il nous cache quelque chose Étienne.
both
‘He’s hiding something from us, Étienne’.
. Il était mimi le gars en face.
both
‘He was cute, that boy sitting across from me’.
. Je ne les aime pas trop les aubergines.
constructed
‘I don’t really like them, eggplants’.
. On peut les acheter pas cher ces voitures.
constructed
‘We can buy them very cheap, those cars’.
. Elle est vraiment jolie cette maison.
constructed
‘It’s really pretty, this house’.
. Ils sont tout simplement exquis ces desserts.
constructed
‘They’re simply wonderful, these desserts’.
. Je l’adore cette prof.
spontaneous
‘I love her, this professor’.
. Il ne faisait pas partie du club d’hachisch Apollinaire.
spontaneous
‘He wasn’t part of the hashish club, Apollinaire’.
. Enﬁn moi je l’aime bien Fabien.
spontaneous
‘Well me, I really like him, Fabien’.
. Mais moi je la vois bien avec un garçon Marion.
spontaneous
‘But me, I can easily see her with a guy, Marion’.
Perceived phrasing in French


. Enﬁn moi elle avait vraiment mis de la mauvaise volonté au
départ ma directrice.
spontaneous
‘Well for me, she really showed ill will at the start, my adviser’.
. Il a un secret Étienne.
spontaneous
‘He has a secret, Étienne’.
. Elles sont géniales les colos de l’armée.
spontaneous
‘they’re great, the army’s colonial troops’.
Focus question–answer pairs
(Only the answers were analyzed; the questions are listed here to show the contexts
for the two focus conditions.)
. To elicit broad focus: Comment est-ce que je fais pour aller d’ici à la gare?
‘What do I do to get from here to the train station?’
Toelicitnarrowfocus:Quelmétroest-cequejeprendspouralleràlagarePartDieu?
‘Which metro do I take to go to the Part Dieu train station?’
Il faut prendre la ligne B jusqu’à la Part Dieu.
‘You should take line B to Part-Dieu’.
. Broad focus: Qu’est-ce que papa va faire demain?
‘What’s Dad going to do tomorrow?’
Narrow focus: Qu’est-ce que papa va vendre demain?
‘What’s Dad going to sell tomorrow?’
Il va vendre ton vieux vélo demain.
‘He’s going to sell your old bike tomorrow’.
. Broad focus: Qu’est-ce qu’il a fait?
‘What did he do?’
Narrow focus: Qu’est-ce qu’il lui a offert comme cadeau d’anniversaire?
‘What did he give her for a birthday present?’
Il lui a offert un livre comme cadeau d’anniversaire.
‘He gave her a book for a birthday present’.
. Broad focus: Qu’est-ce que vous avez pris comme petit déjeuner?
‘What did you have for breakfast?’
Narrow focus: Quel est votre parfum de yaourt préféré?
‘What’s your favorite ﬂavor of yoghurt?’
J’ai mangé un yaourt aux mûres ce matin.
‘I ate a blackberry yoghurt this morning’.
. Broad focus: Pourquoi est-ce qu’ils viennent à Lyon?
‘Why are they coming to Lyon?’
Narrow focus: Qui est-ce qu’ils viennent rejoindre à Lyon?‘
Who are they coming to meet in Lyon?’
Ils viennent rejoindre leurs amis.
‘They’re coming to meet their friends’.
. Broad focus: Qu’est-ce qu’il a fait?
‘What did he do?’
Narrow focus: Qu’est-ce qu’il lui a offert comme cadeau d’anniversaire?

Caroline L. Smith

‘What did he give her as a birthday present?’
Elles aiment boire du Beaujolais nouveau en novembre.
‘They love drinking the Beaujolais nouveau in November’.
. Broad focus: Qu’est-ce qui est écrit sur l’afﬁche au bord du quai?
‘What’s written on the sign by the quay?’
Narrow focus: Combien coûte la promenade en bateau sur le Rhône?
‘How much does the boat ride on the Rhone cost?’
La promenade en bateau coûte douze euros.
‘The boat ride costs twelve euros’.
. Broad focus: Quelle activité de détente l’attire surtout?‘
What’s his favorite leisure activity?’
Narrow focus: A quoi est-ce qu’il joue tous les jours?
‘What does he play every day?’
Il joue au golf presque tous les jours.
‘He plays golf almost every day’.
. Broad focus: Qu’est-ce qu’elle a fait hier?
‘What did she do yesterday?’
Narrow focus: Qu’est-ce qu’elle a lu hier ?
‘What did she read yesterday?’
Elle a lu un roman en arabe.
‘She read a novel in Arabic’.
. Broad focus: Pourquoi as-tu laissé tomber le russe?
‘Why did you drop Russian?’
Narrow focus: Qu’est-ce que tu as trouvé le plus difﬁcile en russe?
‘What did you ﬁnd the most difﬁcult in Russian?’
J’avais du mal à conjuguer les verbes.
‘I had trouble with verb conjugations’.
Short-/Long-subject noun phrases
. Long: Les amis de Manon viennent souvent le mercredi.
‘Manon’s friends often come on Wednesdays’.
Short: Ses amis demandaient un rendez-vous.
‘Her friends wanted to meet with her’.
. Long: La mamie de Valérie arrive mardi prochain.
‘Valérie’s grandma arrives next Tuesday’.
Short: Rémi devine la réponse tout d’un coup.
‘Rémi guesses the answer right away’.
. Long: Les parents d’Émilie vont en vacances en novembre.
‘Émilie’s parents are going on vacation in November’.
Short: Laurent démêlait le nœud sans problème.
‘Laurent was able to untangle the knot quite easily’.
. Long: Le congé de Manu était moins long que prévu.
‘Manu’s leave was not as long as anticipated’.
Short: Roger demande un prêt immobilier.
‘Roger is applying for a home loan’.
Perceived phrasing in French


Acknowledgments
This work was made possible by ﬁnancial support from NSF BCS-. Many thanks to
Ricardo Napoleão de Souza for various forms of assistance with this research. Un grand merci
to the speakers and listeners who participated in the experiment, to the instructors who
permitted me to recruit students in their classes, and to the Laboratoire Dynamique du
Langage, Lyon, for hosting me during visits.

Caroline L. Smith

Part IV
Phonological Issues


14
Modeling assimilation
The case of sibilant voicing in Spanish
REBEKA CAMPOS-ASTORKIZA
.Introduction
The study of different phonological processes from a laboratory or experimental
perspective has signiﬁcantly advanced our understanding of the mechanisms and
formal models that best capture and explain speech production patterns. One type of
process that has greatly beneﬁted from this approach is assimilation. This chapter,
focusing on voicing assimilation, discusses the main recent developments in the
study of this process as manifested in Spanish preconsonantal sibilants. It uses
experimental results to develop a model that captures the observed patterns and
make predictions about the behavior of voicing assimilation in this language. The
central argument is that voicing assimilation in Spanish is the result of gestural
blending at the laryngeal level and can be couched within the framework of
Articulatory Phonology (Browman and Goldstein ). The details of the gestural
blending model are discussed, together with some of the major predictions that
stem from it. The main evidence for the gestural blending account comes from a
review of the data available on the topic and more precisely, by the reanalysis of the
data from two experiments (Campos-Astorkiza , ) that provide us with
acoustic data to substantiate our claims. Furthermore, these experiments allow us
to evaluate some of the challenges of working with acoustic data when analyzing
voicing assimilation and suggest ways to make the results more robust by utilizing
the most appropriate statistical treatments. Overall, this chapter gives a critical
review of the current state of affairs in relation to our understanding of sibilant
voicing assimilation in Spanish in light of recent experimental results. It argues that
the ﬁndings allow us to go beyond a mere description of the facts and hypothesizes
that gestural blending is the mechanism responsible for the process. It also suggests
directions for future research that stem from the conclusions reached here.
The process under study is the voicing assimilation that Spanish /s/ undergoes
before a voiced consonant, both within and across words as illustrated in (a). This
Romance Phonetics and Phonology. First edition. Mark Gibson and Juana Gil (eds.)
This chapter © Rebeka Campos-Astorkiza . First published by Oxford University Press.

sibilant is usually described as voiceless when preceding a voiceless consonant, a
vowel, and before a pause, as can be seen in (b).¹ Impressionistic descriptions of the
assimilatory process describe it as gradient and variable, subject to stylistic variation
(Navarro Tomás ; Torreblanca ; Hualde ). According to these descrip-
tions, complete voicing assimilation is more likely at higher speech rates and with less
formal styles. The crucial observation is that the assimilation is not categorical, but
rather variable and consequently, dependent upon factors that condition the degree
of resulting voicing. In fact, this observation has been recently corroborated by
evidence from several laboratory studies that explore the nature of this assimilatory
phenomenon in Spanish (see Section .).
()
a. [ˈizla] ‘island’
[ˈmizmo] ‘same’
[ˈdezðe] ‘from’
[laz#ˈlanas] ‘the yarns’
[laz#ˈmetas] ‘the goals’
[loz#ˈβaɾkos] ‘the boats’
b. [ˈkasko] ‘helmet’
[las#ˈpekas] ‘the freckles’
[ˈmasa] ‘dough’
[ˈsapo] ‘toad’
[mes] ‘month’
[awtoˈβus] ‘bus’
.Assimilation as gestural blending: model and predictions
Previous studies have analyzed gradient assimilation processes in different languages
as the result of increased gestural overlap, i.e., temporal co-occurrence of different
articulatory gestures. According to these studies, gradient assimilatory effects derive
from changes in gestural magnitude and timing that lead to greater overlap among
adjacent gestures (Browman and Goldstein ). This approach to assimilation is
couched within the framework of Articulatory Phonology (Browman and Goldstein
), which postulates that articulatory gestures are phonological units that unfold
in time and space. Fowler and Saltzman () note that the amount of assimilation
or co-production depends on the extent to which the overlapping gestures share the
same articulators, so that there will be greater production variability due to assimi-
lation if a given pair of overlapping gestures share all articulators. In this case, when
overlapping gestures share one or more articulators, the relevant gestures blend their
inﬂuence on the articulator or articulators they have in common. However, it is
important to make a distinction between two cases of overlapping gestures with
shared articulator(s). The overlapping gestures may impose conﬂicting demands on
the shared articulator, for example in the case of overlap between a glottal abduction
gesture and a voicing gesture, which, as it is argued here, results in voicing assimi-
lation in sequences of a voiceless sibilant and a voiced consonant in Spanish.
Saltzman and Munhall () argue that the outcome of “gestural conﬂict” is the
blend of the conﬂicting gestures, and the resulting impact on the coarticulatory
variability depends on how one overlapping gesture blends its inﬂuence on the
¹ Intervocalic /s/ voicing, especially across words, has been found in Highland Ecuadorian Spanish,
Central Peninsular Spanish, and Catalan Spanish (Robinson ; Lipski ; Torreblanca ; Chappell
; McKinnon ; Torreira and Ernestus ; C. García ). This type of voicing is beyond the
scope of this chapter, although it could also lend itself to a gestural blending account (see C. García ).

Rebeka Campos-Astorkiza

shared articulator with that of the other overlapping gesture. Gestural blending is
thus a process that averages the spatial target values for the two overlapping gestures,
resulting in one single gesture that presents the characteristics of this averaging
(Saltzman and Munhall ; Munhall and Löfqvist ; Byrd ). Blending
can be seen as the result of extreme overlap due to which the single gestures are
combined into a composite gesture. Fowler and Saltzman () refer to blending
strength to account for the fact that different gestures seem to be stronger or weaker
when it comes to coarticulatory effect (see also Recasens, Pallarès, and Fontdevilla
). Consequently, the outcome of the overlap depends on the blending strength of
the gestures involved. Stronger gestures tend to mask the effect of weaker gestures,
but when both gestures have similar strengths, there is an averaging of the two.
Arguably the blending strength of a gesture may be affected also by its duration and
magnitude, and we would expect shorter gestures to be more easily masked by longer
gestures. This observation, as proposed later in this section, will play an important
role in the model for voicing assimilation developed here and in the evaluation of
its predictions.
Under this approach, gradient voicing assimilation stems from the blending of
two temporally overlapping laryngeal gestures, and some studies have presented
articulatory data to support this view. Munhall and Löqvist () examine the
blending of identical laryngeal gestures in English voiceless obstruents across
words. Using transillumination, they observe two laryngeal gestures at slow speech
rates but when the rate increases, they ﬁnd a single laryngeal gesture. The authors
argue that this is the result of extreme overlap between the two gestures, and show
that the resulting gesture is an aggregation of two single ones in that it has greater
magnitude and duration.
More relevant to the present study, Romero () analyzes sibilant voicing
assimilation in one speaker of Castilian Spanish using articulatory data from elec-
tromagnetic articulometry (EMA) (for the oral articulators) and transillumination
(for vocal fold activity). The author reports results regarding the magnitude of the
laryngeal gesture, which corresponds with the degree of voicing, and the timing
between the laryngeal and the oral gesture for single voiced and voiceless consonants,
and for sequences of /s/ and a voiceless or voiced consonant. The ﬁrst important
ﬁnding is that Romero observes one single laryngeal gesture for both single conson-
ants and consonant sequences. Secondly, he ﬁnds that the magnitude of the laryngeal
gesture for sequences of /s/ and a voiced consonant is between that for single voiced
consonants and that for sequences of /s/ and a voiceless consonant. This suggests,
according to Romero, that voicing assimilation is not categorical. As for the timing of
the laryngeal and oral gestures, the author ﬁnds that the laryngeal gesture peak in
sequences of /s/ and a voiced consonant occurs between the oral gesture peaks for /s/
and the following consonant, rather than being synchronized with the oral gesture of
/s/ as it is in single consonants. Romero argues that this indicates a mutual inﬂuence
between the two consonants, which results in gestural blending in the laryngeal
conﬁguration. This study, despite its limitations, provides a foundation for the
model developed here and lends evidence to the argument that Spanish sibilant
voicing assimilation is the result of gestural blending.
Modeling assimilation


In a nutshell, following the gestural blending model, voicing assimilation consists
in a single laryngeal gesture that blends the antagonistic requirements of two
overlapping voiced and voiceless gestures. The characteristics (magnitude, duration,
etc.) of this resulting laryngeal gesture depend on the strength of each single gesture
and on the degree of overlap. In the case of Spanish sibilant assimilation,
I hypothesize that the laryngeal gesture for the voiceless /s/ is weaker, i.e., more
reduced, than the laryngeal gesture for a following voiced consonant, and conse-
quently, the resulting blended gesture corresponds to a voiced gesture of greater or
lesser magnitude depending on the context. This means that even though the
resulting gesture is voiced, its actual manifestation will be affected by contextual
factors that affect voicing in general. For instance, voicing is harder to maintain
during consonants that require a close oral constriction (Ohala ; Westbury and
Keating ), and in these contexts the magnitude of a voiced laryngeal gesture
might be decreased. In acoustic terms, this dampening of the voiced gesture could
be manifested as discontinuous voicing in the middle of the sound. Furthermore, the
resulting gestural blending should be directly correlated with the magnitude and
the timing between the laryngeal gestures involved, and changes to these parameters
should entail differences in the degree of assimilation, i.e., the consonant that
undergoes assimilation may display more or less voicing. Therefore, factors that
have been shown to affect gestural magnitude and coordination may condition the
outcome of voicing assimilation. The gestural blending approach allows us to make
predictions in relation to the conditionings on gradient assimilation.
In what follows, I explore the role of stress and prosodic boundaries and their
modeling within Articulatory Phonology. Articulatory gestures in stressed positions
have been shown to display greater magnitude than in other positions, as well as
longer duration and faster speed, suggesting that gestures under stress are more
forceful (Cooper ; Beckman, Edwards, and Fletcher ; Pierrehumbert and
Talkin, ; Cho ). The increase in gestural magnitude of stressed elements
has two important effects in relation to the gestural blending model of assimilation.
First, increased magnitude leads to a greater blending strength, as explained
earlier in this section, and those gestures would be more likely to mask the effects
of weaker gestures in the resulting blending. Second, greater magnitude affects
the degree of overlap with adjacent (unstressed) elements. Given that larger,
lengthened gestures temporally coincide longer with surrounding gestures, greater
magnitude results in more overlap with them. Accordingly, we would expect
more assimilation to be triggered by stressed than by unstressed consonants.
More precisely, in the case of Spanish sibilant voicing assimilation, I predict that
more voicing assimilation will take place when the triggering voiced consonant is
in a stressed syllable than when it is in an unstressed one. Conversely, a sibilant in
a stressed syllable, with a greater, stronger laryngeal gesture, is expected to be
subject to less assimilation.
On the other hand, gestural magnitude has been shown to be reduced in
unstressed positions, with the highest amount of reduction occurring in those
unstressed positions that follow a stressed syllable, i.e., post-stress positions. Several
studies have reported more reduction is post-stress positions than in pre-stress ones

Rebeka Campos-Astorkiza

(Dauer ; Arvaniti ; de Jong ). For Spanish, Cole, Hualde, and Iskarous
() found more weakening of stops (spirantization) in post-stress than in pre-
stress positions, lending further support to the observation that gestural magnitude
can be highly reduced in post-stress locations. Furthermore, elements in unstressed
positions present more coarticulatory effects, i.e., more overlap, from surrounding
elements than do those in stressed locations (Fowler ). Summarizing, lesser-
magnitude, i.e., shorter gestures, in unstressed positions would result in a greater
degree of overlap from adjacent gestures, leading to more assimilation. Conse-
quently, it is predicted that the highest degree of voicing will be observed when the
sibilant occurs in post-stress position.
As for the inﬂuence of prosodic boundaries on gestural organization, several
studies have reported less temporal overlap among gestures separated by, or adjacent
to, a prosodic boundary (e.g., Byrd and Saltzman ; Byrd, Kaun, Narayanan, and
Saltzman ; Tabain and Perrier ; Byrd and Choi ). Furthermore,
prosodic boundaries of different strengths display differences in the magnitude of
their effects, with degree of overlap decreasing as we move into higher prosodic
boundaries (Byrd and Salzman ; Parrell, Lee, and Byrd ). Earlier studies
claimed that major prosodic boundaries could prevent processes from taking place
in a categorical manner, and this block could help detect the occurrence of such
boundaries (Selkirk ; Nespor and Vogel ; Hayes and Lahiri ; Jun
). However, a number of more recent studies have shown that boundary effects
are in fact gradient. Their presence reduces or limits the magnitude of the process
but does not completely block it in a categorical manner (e.g., Holst and Nolan
; Jun ; Zsiga ; Byrd and Saltzman ). These noncategorical effects
have been modeled within Articulatory Phonology, where prosodic boundaries
have been deﬁned as elastic phenomena that affect segmental structure in a gradient
manner (Byrd et al. ; Byrd and Saltzman ). This approach, referred to as
the π-gesture model of phrasal structure in speech production, argues that phrase
boundaries can be understood as a local slowing down of the articulation, which
results in longer and less overlapped gestures. More precisely, prosodic boundaries
are represented as π-gestures, that is, prosodic gestures; the amount of slowing
down depends on the strength of the π-gesture, with stronger prosodic boundaries
associated with a stronger activation for the π-gesture; also, its effects increase as the
phrase edge approaches and decrease as the edge recedes (Byrd, Lee, and Campos-
Astorkiza ; Parrell, Lee, and Byrd ).
Under the π-gesture model, the effect of prosodic boundaries on segmental
phenomena such as voicing assimilation is gradient in nature, and their presence is
cued by the degree or amount of assimilation, rather than its presence or absence. In
line with previous ﬁndings, I expect the amount of /s/ voicing assimilation to be
affected by the presence of prosodic boundaries; more precisely, a decrease in voicing
is predicted as we move to higher prosodic boundaries. In addition, the presence of a
major phrase boundary, such as an intonational phrase (IP) boundary, is predicted to
not block assimilation completely but rather limit the amount of voicing. The crucial
hypothesis behind these predictions is that blending of the laryngeal gestures will be
less when the elements involved, i.e., the sibilant and a following voiced consonant,
Modeling assimilation


are separated by a strong prosodic boundary. In fact, there is evidence that such
boundaries can pull oral gestures apart and result in gestural “de-aggregation” of
otherwise blended gestures (Byrd et al. ).
.Previous studies on sibilant voicing assimilation in Spanish
Preconsonantal sibilant voicing assimilation is a well-established phenomenon in
Spanish and is oftentimes referred to in the literature, from descriptions of the
language’s phonological system (e.g., Hualde ) to manuals of Spanish pronunci-
ation (e.g., Morgan ). Despite this, it has only recently attracted attention from a
laboratory phonology approach. There is now a handful of instrumental studies that
has allowed us to build a more detailed picture of the process based on acoustic data
(see Romero discussed in Section .for an articulatory approach). As argued
in Section ., sibilant voicing assimilation in Spanish can be modeled within the
gestural blending model, presenting a fruitful venue to test the model’s predictions. For
this reason, here I review and evaluate previous ﬁndings from acoustic studies in relation
to these predictions and to the understanding of gradient assimilation within a gestural-
based approach. In discussing these studies, I focus on their conclusions with respect to
the gradient and/or variable nature of the process and the factors that condition its degree
or strength. All in all, these studies provide an excellent point of departure to understand
the motivation behind the experiments discussed in Section ..
Schmidt and Willis () present acoustic data from Mexican Spanish regarding
the degree of preconsonantal sibilant voicing assimilation within the same word and
conclude that the process is not categorical in this dialect. Analyzing voicing assimi-
lation as a binary categorical variable (voiced vs. voiceless), the authors ﬁnd an
absence of voicing in thirty-seven percent of the contexts they consider. They also
treat voicing as a continuous variable, i.e., percent voicing during the sibilant, and
ﬁnd an average of seventy-one percent voicing before a voiced consonant. These
results substantiate earlier reports about the gradient nature of this assimilatory
process. Furthermore, Schmidt and Willis observe some general tendencies, most
notably that when the target word occurs at the end of the utterance the amount of
voicing assimilation is lower than when it occurs utterance medially. This ﬁnding can
be interpreted within the π-gesture model according to which gestural overlap
diminishes in the vicinity of a prosodic boundary. This model explains the decrease
in voicing observed by the authors when the relevant context is right next to an
utterance boundary. In sum, Schmidt and Willis’ results for the effect of phrase
position on voicing assimilation support the gestural blending account and can be
couched within the gestural model of prosodic structure espoused here.
Strycharczuk () and Strycharczuk, van’t Veer, Bruil, and Linke ()² use
acoustic analysis to explore /s/ voicing in Quito Spanish in prevocalic and pre-
sonorant contexts. They also include cases where the sibilant occurs before a voiced
² Both studies present exactly the same data and analysis. Strycharczuk () is part of a bigger project
on pre-sonorant voicing, while Strycharczuk et al. () focuses only on Quito Spanish voicing.

Rebeka Campos-Astorkiza

or a voiceless stop. The authors’ main goal is to establish whether prevocalic and pre-
sonorant sibilant voicing in this dialect is optional or not, and whether it is gradient
or categorical. By exploring the effects of speech rate on the amount of voicing,
Strycharczuk and her colleagues conclude that the assimilation is optional, but
categorical for half of their speakers, and gradient for the rest. Beyond this main ﬁnding,
the authors do not elaborate on any other possible determining factors for those cases
where the assimilation is gradient and for those where it is optional. However, they do
mention a difference between pre-sonorant and pre-obstruent sibilant voicing, which
is of interest to us here. More precisely, their results show that the amount of sibilant
voicing is greater before a voiced obstruent than before a sonorant. Given the goal
of the study, Strycharczuk and her colleagues do not give any more details about
this, but we can take it as a suggestive ﬁnding that points to an asymmetry between
voiced obstruents and sonorants as triggers of the voicing assimilation.
In fact, Bárkányi () further explores this asymmetry with acoustic data from
Oviedo, Spain, and ﬁnds less voicing before sonorants than before voiced obstruents,
replicating the ﬁndings of Strycharczuk et al. ().³ This asymmetry is pertinent to
the present study and will be further evaluated and explored in Section .. Based on
the distribution of her data, Bárkányi concludes that voicing is categorical before a
voiced obstruent but optional before a sonorant. The author identiﬁes speaker as
one of the factors conditioning this optionality, i.e., the process is optional only for
some speakers. This conclusion is in line with Strycharczuk et al. (), although
Bárkányi interprets her results as offering a more homogenous situation across
speakers since she does not consider any possible gradience of the process, while
Strycharczuk and her colleagues conclude that the assimilation is gradient for almost
half of their speakers.
The gradient vs. categorical issue is also addressed in A. García’s () study of
/s/ voicing assimilation in preconsonantal positions. The author analyzes the role of
speech rate and formality on the assimilation, and ﬁnds that the degree of voicing is
highly variable and inﬂuenced by speech rate but not by speech formality. García
does not discuss any other possible factors inﬂuencing the degree of voicing, although
she leaves the door open to that possibility. The author combines together data from
speakers of different dialects for her analysis, which is problematic since voicing
assimilation displays dialectal differences. However, she presents a table with the
percentage of sibilant voicing by speech rate for each speaker individually, allowing
us to evaluate interspeaker variability. From this table and the author’s comments, it
becomes clear that, even though all speakers do not show exactly the same amount of
voicing, they all display speech-rate effects and voicing gradience. A. García argues
that her ﬁndings lend support to a blending account of preconsonantal sibilant
voicing assimilation in Spanish.
³ This asymmetry between sonorants and voiced obstruents is also reported in Muñiz Cachón and
Cuevas Alonso (–) and Lewis and Boomershine (). These two studies analyze not acoustic data,
but rather a binary distinction between a voiced variant and a voiceless variant of /s/, and for this reason
they are not fully discussed here.
Modeling assimilation


Overall, these recent studies offer much welcome data in relation to preconso-
nantal sibilant voicing assimilation and advance our understanding of the process.
For the present study, the main points of interest of these studies are that sibilant
voicing assimilation is subject to dialectal variation (and interspeaker variability),
with some dialects voicing much more than others, but with all of them showing
some degree of variation; and that the manner of articulation of the voiced consonant
triggering the assimilation plays a role in conditioning the degree of assimilation, with
sonorants leading to less voicing than voiced obstruents. Based on these previous
ﬁndings and the predictions made by the gestural blending model (see Section .),
I extend the study of sibilant voicing assimilation in Spanish to examine the effect of
factors such as stress and prosodic structure. The experiments reported in Section .
develop the study of sibilant voicing assimilation along these lines. More precisely, these
experiments present acoustic evidence to support the articulatory model espoused here,
adopting a well-established approach to the study of articulatory models through
acoustic measures (e.g., Zsiga , ; Parrell ). Articulatory data, such as that
in Romero (), would add further evidence to the conclusions based on acoustic data
and future studies might prove crucial in this respect.
Furthermore, the studies discussed above show some methodological similarities
and differences that highlight the challenges that working with voicing assimilation
and acoustic data pose for researchers. Let us evaluate these challenges and how
researchers have tried to overcome them, offering a critical view of the best methods
by which to approach the acoustic study of voicing. First, although some authors use
more than one, the main acoustic cue to voicing considered by previous authors is
percent voicing, i.e., the amount of voicing as a proportion of the fricative duration.
Arguably, this is the most relevant and signiﬁcant acoustic measurement of voicing
and it includes some normalization to control for possible differences in speech rate.
The analysis of this measurement could be complemented by considering the
behavior of other durational cues that have been shown to strongly correlate with
voicing in sibilants, namely fricative duration and preceding vowel duration (Stevens,
Blumstein, Glicksman, Burton, and Kurowski ). Second, the distribution of the
percent voicing for the sibilant before a voiced consonant is expected to be not
normally distributed, although this is not mentioned by all the authors, and this
feature should be taken into account in the statistical treatment of the data.
.New light on acoustic data for voicing assimilation
Considering what has been elaborated in the previous sections, I discuss the meth-
odology and results from two experiments designed to test some of the predictions of
the gestural blending model and to evaluate in a systematic manner the role of stress
and prosodic structure on the process. More precisely, the questions addressed are
the nature of the sibilant voicing assimilation (gradience, categoricity, interspeaker
variability), the role of different stress patterns on the amount of voicing, the effect of
the manner of articulation of the triggering voicing consonant, and the result of
having different prosodic boundaries in the assimilatory context. These two experi-
ments have been described separately elsewhere (Experiment in Campos-Astorkiza

Rebeka Campos-Astorkiza

, Experiment in Campos-Astorkiza ) but here, they are presented side by
side, emphasizing that their results should be interpreted together. Furthermore, the
statistical treatment of the data has been revised and improved, and some of the
results present differences from the earlier conclusions. All in all, the data from these
two experiments are presented together to shed new light on a range of research
questions that stem from a review of the literature and a critical approach to the
gestural blending model.
..Experiment 
Experiment was designed to explore the nature of sibilant voicing assimilation and
the role of stress and prosodic boundaries on the process. More precisely, it tests the
hypotheses that a stressed triggering voiced consonant will lead to more assimilation
than an unstressed one, and that the amount of voicing will decrease across prosodic
boundaries of greater strength. These hypotheses stem from the gestural blending
model discussed in Section ..
...Experimental materials and participants
Three sets of stimuli were created
according to three conditions. The ﬁrst corresponds to the voicing condition and
includes words that contain /s/ before a voiced or a voiceless obstruent, as the
examples in (a) show. This set is used to establish the threshold of the unvoiced
category (see Section ...) and allows us to examine the role of different acoustic
cues in signaling the difference between assimilated (/s/+voiced obstruent) and non-
assimilated sibilants (/s/+voiceless obstruent). The second set, stress condition,
includes minimal pairs of words that include /s/ before a voiced consonant, but
differ in the location of their stress. The examples in (b) show that the stress can fall
either on the syllable that contains /s/ (e.g., /ˈsesɡe/ unstressed) or on the syllable that
contains the triggering voiced consonant (e.g., /sesˈɡe/ stressed). This second set
allows us to test the hypothesis that the degree of assimilation will be greater when
the stress falls on the triggering consonant rather than on the sibilant. The third and
ﬁnal set of stimuli corresponds to the prosodic boundary condition. As can be seen
in (c), this group includes sequences of /s/ followed by a voiced consonant within a
word, across words, and across an IP boundary (# indicates a word boundary; ##
signals an IP boundary). These stimuli allow for a comparison of the degree of sibilant
voicing when different boundaries occur between the triggering voiced consonant and
the target /s/. Intonational phrase boundaries are marked with a comma in the
orthography and display a falling pitch contour in the speakers’ production.
()
Sample experimental materials
a. Voicing condition:
/ˈsesɡe/ vs. /ˈpeske/ ‘I should slant’ vs. ‘I should ﬁsh’
b. Stress condition:
/ˈsesɡe/ vs. /sesˈɡe/
‘I should slant’ vs. ‘I slanted’
c. Prosodic boundary condition:
/atisˈbamos/ vs. /mis#ˈbotas/ vs. /ˈkambjalas##ˈbotas/
‘we look’ vs. ‘my boots’ vs. ‘change them, boots’
Modeling assimilation


All target words were inserted in carrier sentences, which varied in content but had
comparable structure and length for each condition, resulting in twenty-two stimulus
sentences (three of them are common for two conditions). These can be found in
Appendix A, together with their translations. Six female speakers of Northern
Peninsular Spanish read the sentences ﬁve times in random order, resulting in 
tokens per subject. The participants were recorded using a head-mount microphone
(with an internal USB sound card) and a laptop computer as they read the sentences
from a computer screen. Northern Peninsular Spanish was chosen because this
dialect is characterized by a lack of /s/ weakening and this fricative does not undergo
aspiration or deletion (Hualde ). In addition to having the same dialect, the six
participants form a relatively homogenous group. They are all between and 
years of age, live in the same area of Northern Spain (Bilbao region), have some
education past high school, either at university level or with some professional
degree, and are monolingual speakers of Spanish with some Lknowledge of Basque
and English. We cannot discard the possibility that sibilant voicing assimilation may
display variation based on any of these social factors and for this reason, they were
controlled for. Testing their relevance is not within the scope of this project, which
focuses only on potential linguistic conditionings on the assimilation.
...Data analysis
Previous studies have shown that several cues can function
as acoustic correlates to fricative voicing, including the duration of the vowel
preceding /s/ and of the fricative, and the amount of voicing during the frication
(e.g., Stevens et al. ). Accordingly, in order to quantify the degree of voicing
assimilation, I measured these three cues making use of synchronized waveforms and
spectrograms in Wavesurfer (v. ..) (Sjölander and Beskow ). Vowel duration
was measured from the beginning of the vocalic formant structure to the beginning of
the frication noise as seen in the spectrogram, paying especial attention to changes in
intensity of Fwhen the vowel was preceded by a sonorant or approximant. The
fricative duration was taken from when the frication noise started as shown in the
spectrogram until it receded. Finally, the duration of any glottal pulses during the
fricative was taken by observing the presence of a voicing bar in the spectrogram and
periodicity in the waveform. The spectrogram and waveform in Figure .illustrate
these three measurements.
voicing during
fricative
vowel
fricative
F.Spectrogram and waveform illustrating the three acoustic measurements, i.e.,
vowel duration, voicing during the fricative, and fricative duration for the word /atisˈbe/

Rebeka Campos-Astorkiza

Using these acoustic measurements, four dependent variables were calculated:
vowel duration, fricative duration, percent voicing during fricative, and voicing
category. The vowel and fricative duration variables were directly taken from the
measurements. The voicing duration was used to calculate the percent voicing during
the fricative. In line with Recasens and Mira (), this measurement (voicing
percentage) is preferred, since it allows for some normalization across different
speakers and speech rates, and thus provides a value that is relativized to the duration
of the fricative. Finally, following Smith (), the voicing category for each /s/ was
coded as unvoiced, partially voiced, or fully voiced, based on the percent voicing, that
is, less than %, between % and %, and over %, respectively. The % threshold
for the unvoiced category is based on the distribution of the percent voicing for the
voiceless sequences, i.e., tokens with /s/ followed by a voiceless consonant (see Cuartero
Torres ). Figure .illustrates this distribution and includes the threshold of
%, below which most of these voiceless sequences fall.
Accordingly, there were four dependent variables, three continuous (vowel dur-
ation, fricative duration, and percent voicing) and one categorical (voicing category),
that were submitted to the statistical analysis in R (R Development Core Team ,
version ..), using the packages lme4 (version .-; Bates, Maechler, Bolker, and
Walker ), lmerTest (version .-; Kuznetsova, Brockhoff, and Christensen
), and nnet (Venables and Ripley ). For the continuous variables, a series
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Number of tokens
% Voicing
F.Distribution of the percent voicing for tokens with voiceless sequences, i.e., /s/
followed by a voiceless consonant (Experiment )
The % line marks the threshold for the unvoiced tokens.
Modeling assimilation


of mixed-effect linear-regression models were ﬁtted to the data in each set or
condition in order to test the effect of the relevant ﬁxed factors (and their interaction
where relevant): voicing of the following consonant (voiced, voiceless) for the ﬁrst set
(a); stress (stressed, unstressed) and manner of the following consonant (open,
closed) for the second set (b); and prosodic boundary type (within word, across
words, across IPs) for the third set (c). In order to take into account any variability
that might stem from individual speakers and different items, Speaker and Item were
included as random effects in the models. Overall signiﬁcance of the ﬁxed factors and
interaction terms was established by performing likelihood ratio tests using the
anova( ) function, following a stepwise model selection procedure. The vowel and
fricative durations presented a normal distribution, however, the percent voicing
did not. For this reason, this continuous variable was subjected to a logit transform-
ation with a correction, and the result, i.e., the log of the percent voicing, was used as
the response variable in the mixed-effect models for each condition. Furthermore,
qq-plots of the residuals for each model were checked in order to evaluate the normal
distribution of the data. The use of a mixed-effect model together with the trans-
formation of the percent voicing allows us to obtain more robust statistical results for
this variable given its lack of normal distribution. Previous treatments of this variable
did not take this into account (e.g., Campos-Astorkiza ). As for the categorical
variable, i.e., Voicing Category (unvoiced, partially voiced, fully voiced), multinomial
logistic regression models were ﬁtted for each data set according to condition. The
signiﬁcance level for all statistical analysis was set at . The results for each condition
are discussed in Section ....
...Results
....Voicing condition
The voicing condition compares words containing sequences of /s/ followed by a
voiced obstruent and a voiceless one (see (a)), and allows us to evaluate the role of
the voicing of the following obstruent in the amount of sibilant voicing as manifested
in the different acoustic cues, more precisely the duration of the preceding vowel and
the fricative, and the percent voicing during /s/. The results from the models with
voicing of the following obstruent as the ﬁxed factor on each dependent variable
indicate that this factor has a signiﬁcant effect on the duration of both the preceding
vowel and /s/ and on the elog of percent voicing during /s/ (χ²()¼., p < .;
χ²()¼., p < .; χ²()¼., p < .). Table .shows the means and
standard deviations for these three variables. These results are in the expected
direction: the vowel is longer when the obstruent is voiced, /s/ is longer when the
T.Means (ms) for preceding vowel duration, fricative duration, and
percent voicing, with standard deviations in parentheses
Voicing of following obstruent
Vowel duration
Fricative duration
Percent voicing
voiced
()
()
()
voiceless
()
()
()

Rebeka Campos-Astorkiza

following obstruent is voiceless, and there is a higher percent voicing during /s/
before a voiced obstruent.
The results from the multinomial analysis indicate that the voicing of the follow-
ing obstruent has a signiﬁcant effect on the voicing category. Table .includes the
distribution of the three voicing categories (unvoiced, partially voiced, and fully
voiced) depending on the following consonant’s voicing.
Releveling of the voicing category within the multinomial model indicates that the
differences in distribution among voicing categories depending on the following
obstruent’s voicing are signiﬁcant. Furthermore, the distribution of the voicing
categories reveals that there is variation in the degree of voicing assimilation of /s/.
As Table .shows, most tokens are unvoiced when the following obstruent is
voiceless, as expected. However, when the following obstruent is voiced, only a
third of the tokens are fully voiced; the rest are either unvoiced or partially voiced,
i.e., most of the tokens are not completely voiced. Figure .shows that all speakers
show this variation in the degree of voicing assimilation, although we ﬁnd some
individual differences. For example, Speaker uttered mainly unvoiced tokens before
a voiced obstruent, while Speaker uttered either partially or fully voiced tokens but
not unvoiced ones. Note that all speakers, except Speaker , display a higher, or
comparable, number of partially voiced tokens than of fully voiced ones.
....Stress condition and manner of articulation
The stress condition (b) tests the hypothesis that voicing assimilation will be greater
when the triggering voiced consonant is in a stressed syllable. Campos-Astorkiza
() reported that this factor was not signiﬁcant and discussed how a new inde-
pendent variable became relevant for this data set, namely the manner of articulation
of the following consonant. In an effort to improve the statistical treatment employed
in the earlier analysis, here I adopt a different approach not only in terms of which
models I use (see description at the end of Section ...), but also in the way the ﬁxed
factors are considered.
After careful observation of the data in set (b) during the acoustic analysis, it
became apparent that another possible condition on the amount of voicing assimi-
lation seemed to be playing a role. This new factor is the manner of articulation of the
T.Distribution of voicing categories depending on the
voicing of the following obstruent
Voicing category
Following voiced
Following voiceless
Unvoiced
.% ()
% ()
Partially voiced
.% ()
% ()
Fully voiced
% ()
% ()
total
% ()
% ()
Token counts are given in parentheses.
Modeling assimilation


triggering voiced obstruent. All target sequences with a voiced obstruent were
produced as /s/ followed by a lenited obstruent, on account of the Spanish process
of spirantization, by which voiced stops undergo lenition to approximants after a
continuant segment (Hualde ). Martínez Celdrán (, ) identiﬁes two
types of Spanish approximants: a close approximant, with a period of lack of energy,
except for some voicing bar in the low frequencies, but without an explosion bar, and
an open approximant, with continuous formant structure of decreased amplitude.
Following this two-way distinction for approximants, I recoded the data from the
stress condition (data set b) according to whether the obstruent following /s/ was
produced as an open or a close approximant. Figure .shows the acoustic charac-
teristics of these two types of approximants with two tokens from our data set
produced by the same speaker.
Summarizing, the stress-condition data set now includes two independent vari-
ables: stress and following consonant manner. In previous analyses, these two factors
1
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2
Number of tokens
3
4
5
6
unvoiced
partially voiced
fully voiced
Speakers
F.Distribution of the voicing categories of /s/ before a voiced obstruent for each
speaker

Rebeka Campos-Astorkiza


which were compared in a stepwise fashion using the anova( ) function. For vowel
duration and fricative duration, only stress has a signiﬁcant effect (χ²()¼.,
p¼.; χ²()¼., p < .) with longer durations in stressed tokens than
in unstressed ones (e.g., /rasˈɡo/). These durational patterns are surprising because
both the vowel and /s/ are longer when they form part of the unstressed syllable,
contradicting claims that stress has a lengthening effect on syllabic elements. However,
Borzone de Manrique and Massone () found a pattern similar to the current
results for intervocalic fricatives in Argentine Spanish. In addition, according to our
hypothesis, we would expect more voicing when stress follows /s/, i.e., when /s/ is
unstressed, resulting in shorter /s/ duration and longer vowel duration. We ﬁnd,
however, that only the vowel conforms to this prediction. A possible explanation
could be that the fricative is being lengthened by a following stress and that the
durational results derive from the interaction between the durational requirements for
voicing and those for stress, more precisely, from opposing durational requirements.
As for the elog of the percent voicing, both stress and following consonant manner,
but not their interaction, have a signiﬁcant effect on this variable (χ²()¼.,
p < .).⁴ We observe a greater percent voicing with a following open approximant
and in stressed tokens (e.g., /rasˈɡo/). Table .summarizes the percent voicing
means and standard deviation by stress and following consonant manner. These
results, together with the distribution of stress by following consonant manner
shown in Table ., show that these two factors inﬂuence percent voicing independ-
ently of each other. Unstressed tokens favor open approximants much more than
stressed ones (see Table .). However, in terms of percent voicing, stressed tokens
and open approximants go hand in hand in that they favor greater voicing.
The results from multinomial analyses on the voicing category including stress,
following consonant manner, and their interaction indicate that only the manner of
the following consonant plays a signiﬁcant role in the distribution of the categories
(i.e., unvoiced, partially voiced, and fully voiced). After releveling of the voicing
category, we observe that all the differences in distribution among voicing categories
signiﬁcantly vary depending on the following consonant manner. As Table .
shows, there are more unvoiced tokens with a following close approximant and
T.Distribution of following consonant manner
as a function of stress
Following consonant manner
Unstressed
Stressed
Closed approximant
.% ()
% ()
Open approximant
.% ()
% ()
Token counts are given in parentheses.
⁴ This is the main substantial difference between previous results, where the percent voicing was not
subject to an elog transformation and the current treatment. In Campos-Astorkiza () stress was not
found to be signiﬁcant; however, here we observe that this factor does indeed play a signiﬁcant role.

Rebeka Campos-Astorkiza

more fully voiced ones with a following open approximant, mirroring the results for
percent voicing.
....Prosodic boundary condition
The prosodic boundary condition tests whether the presence (or absence) of different
prosodic boundaries between /s/ and the triggering consonant inﬂuences the degree
of voicing assimilation of /s/. It compares the absence of a boundary (word-internal
position), the presence of a word boundary, and the presence of an IP boundary (see c).
The statistical results for fricative duration with prosodic boundary type as ﬁxed
factor show that this has a signiﬁcant effect on the dependent variable (χ²()=.,
p < .). After releveling of prosodic boundary within the model, we ﬁnd that
the difference between all the boundary types is signiﬁcant. Fricative duration is the
longest when it occurs at the end of an IP, as can be seen in Table .. This effect is
most likely due to the fact that segments are lengthened when they occur in the
vicinity of a major prosodic phrase (Beckman and Edwards ; Wightman,
Shattuck-Hufnagel, Ostendorf, and Price ; Rao , among many others) and
not due to an effect of voicing. Comparing fricative duration word-internally and
across words, we ﬁnd that the fricative is longer in the former prosodic condition.
A longer fricative correlates with voicelessness, suggesting that the degree of voicing
is less when appearing word-internally, which runs counter to our prediction.
However, it should be noted that the statistical robustness of this difference is
weak, with a p-value of ..
As for the duration of the vowel preceding /s/, the results indicate that boundary
type is a signiﬁcant predictor (χ²()=., p < .) and the difference between
the three boundary types is signiﬁcant. As can be seen in Table ., vowels are
longest next to an IP boundary, most likely due to phrase-ﬁnal lengthening and
T.Mean and standard deviation (in parentheses) for the percent voicing
as a function of stress and manner of the following consonant
Stressed
Unstressed
Open approximant
Close approximant
% ()
% ()
% ()
% ()
T.Distribution of voicing categories
by following approximant type
Voicing category
Close
Open
Unvoiced
% ()
% ()
Partially voiced
% ()
% ()
Fully voiced
% ()
% ()
Total
% ()
% ()
Token counts are given in parentheses.
Modeling assimilation


independent of voicing assimilation. As for the other two boundary types, vowel
duration is greater word-internally than when a word boundary is present. This
seems to be in line with the expected results: longer vowels are associated with more
voicing, so a longer vowel word-internally would correlate with more /s/ voicing in
that context. However, if we take into account the results for fricative duration, it
becomes clear that the tendency is for segments, both the vowel and the fricative,
to be longer within words than across words and this pattern seems not related to
voicing assimilation but rather to word structure.
The statistical treatment for the elog of percent voicing shows that boundary type
has a signiﬁcant effect on the response variable (χ²()¼., p < .). More
precisely, percent voicing is signiﬁcantly lesser when there is an IP boundary and
the difference between across words and within-word is not signiﬁcant. Note that
even though the mean percent voicing when there is an IP boundary is %, and this
falls below the % threshold of voicing (see Section ...), the histogram in
Figure .shows that there is variation for this boundary type and we can ﬁnd fully
voiced as well as partially voiced tokens, indicating that the assimilation is not
categorically blocked by the presence of this boundary. This becomes even clearer
when we consider the results and distribution for the voicing categories.
The results from the multinomial analysis show that boundary type has a signiﬁ-
cant effect on the distribution of the voicing categories. However, after the compari-
son of the different boundary levels, only the difference between IP and the other two
boundary types is signiﬁcant. Table .includes the distribution of the voicing
categories by prosodic boundary type. A relevant observation from Table .is
that there are partially and fully voiced tokens in the presence of an IP boundary, in
line with what was discussed for the percent voicing and illustrated in Figure ..
This indicates that the presence of a major prosodic boundary does not rule out the
occurrence of some degree of assimilation.
....Summary of results
The results from the statistical analysis of the data show that sibilant voicing
assimilation in this Spanish variety is gradient, and this is the case for all the speakers.
All three acoustic cues, vowel and fricative duration and percent of voicing, seem to
be affected by the assimilation in the expected direction, suggesting that the effects of
the process go beyond the assimilated sibilant and also affect the preceding vowel.
T.Mean vowel and fricative duration (ms) and percent voicing for each
boundary type
Boundary type
Vowel duration
Fricative duration
Percent voicing
Within words
()
()
()
Across words
()
()
()
Intonational phrase
()
()
()
Standard deviations are given in parentheses.

Rebeka Campos-Astorkiza

With respect to the role of stress, this factor was considered as a simple dichotomy
between stressed and unstressed /s/, and it showed an effect on the percent of voicing
such that the degree of voicing is higher when stress falls on the following syllable
rather than on the syllable containing the sibilant. The manner of articulation of the
following consonant also proved to be a signiﬁcant factor, with a following open or
more lenited approximant triggering more assimilation than a close or less lenited
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
Frequency
% Voicing
F.Histogram for the distribution of percent voicing in the intonational phrase
boundary condition
T.Distribution of voicing categories by prosodic boundary type
Voicing category
Within word
Across words
Intonational phrase
Unvoiced
% ()
% ()
% ()
Partially voiced
% ()
% ()
% ()
Fully voiced
% ()
% ()
% ()
Total
% ()
% ()
% ()
Token counts are given in parentheses.
Modeling assimilation


one. It was also established that the effects of stress and manner are independent of
each other despite their relationship (unstressed contexts favors open realizations).
On the other hand, there was no effect of word boundaries, that is, the same amount
of voicing could be observed within and across words. However, the presence of an IP
boundary had a signiﬁcant effect on the degree of voicing limiting the assimilation
and in this context: the rate of assimilation was much lower, although it was not
categorically blocked. These results will be discussed in Section .within the
gestural blending model.
..Experiment 
In light of the results from the ﬁrst experiment, Experiment was designed to further
explore the linguistic factors that condition sibilant voicing assimilation. As men-
tioned at the end of Section ., this experiment has been described in Campos-
Astorkiza () but here, the results from this experiment are presented together
with those from Experiment to obtain a more comprehensive picture of the process
under study. More importantly, the statistical analysis of the data has been consid-
erably improved, and consequently, some of the results are different from earlier
conclusions. Thus, in Experiment , ﬁrst, the role of stress is further tested utilizing a
more reﬁned classiﬁcation of stress patterns, including pre-stress vs. post-stress
positions and stressed vs. unstressed. Based on the gestural blending model, the
relevant hypothesis is that /s/ will show the highest degree of voicing when it occurs
in a post-stress position, given that these are the weakest positions in articulatory
terms (see Section .). Second, I examine the effect of other manners of articulation
of the triggering consonant, expanding to obstruents vs. sonorants. Given previous
ﬁndings reviewed in Section ., sonorants are expected to trigger less voicing
assimilation than obstruents.
...Experimental materials and data analysis
Three sets of stimuli were cre-
ated according to three conditions. First, the voicing condition (a) included words
with /s/ preceding a voiced or voiceless obstruent and was used to establish the
threshold of the unvoiced category.⁵ The second set (b) corresponded to the
following consonant manner condition, which was used to explore the role of different
types of manner of articulation, including nasal, lateral, and obstruent, within and
across words.
()
Sample experimental materials
a. Voicing condition:
/ˈsesɡe/ vs. /ˈpeske/
‘I should slant’ vs. ‘I should ﬁsh’
⁵ The data set for the voicing condition will not be further discussed. The behavior of the four
dependent variables within this set mirrors what was found for the comparable set (a) in the ﬁrst
experiment (see Section ....). More precisely, differences between sibilants followed by voiceless
and voiced obstruents are manifested in the preceding vowel and fricative duration, the percent of voicing,
and the voicing category, as expected.

Rebeka Campos-Astorkiza

b. Following consonant manner condition:
/ˈmismo/ vs. /ˈisla/ vs. /ˈsesɡe/
‘same’ vs. ‘island’ vs. ‘I should slant’
/los#ˈmotes/ vs. /los#ˈlotes/ vs. /los#ˈbotos/
‘the nicknames’ vs. ‘the lots’ vs. ‘the votes’
The third and ﬁnal set (c, which is shown in Table .) relates to the stress
pattern condition, which includes four stress patterns, with either a sonorant (a
lateral) or an obstruent as the triggering consonant. In order to get four stress
patterns, the relevant sequences, i.e., /s/ + voiced consonant, were placed across
words, allowing us to modify the stress location with respect to the target /s/ and
the triggering consonant. The word containing /s/ could be stressed on the syllable
containing /s/ or on the preceding syllable, and the following word could be
stressed on the ﬁrst (which contains the triggering consonant) or on the second
syllable. This gives us the four patterns shown in Table .. The labels used to
refer to these patterns are post-stress, pre-stress, stressed only, and stressed–pre-
stress. Note that the post-stress pattern (e.g., /ˈtapas duˈɾitas/) is where /s/ is the
furthest away from the stress, and this would be the weakest position in articu-
latory terms, as described in Section .. The pre-stress pattern (e.g., /ˈtapas
ˈduɾas/) also includes /s/ in a post-stress location, i.e., the syllable containing /s/
follows a stressed syllable and precedes a stressed one; however, we expect this
position to be less weak than the pattern labeled post-stress, because of the stress
on the triggering consonant.
All target words were inserted in similar positions within carrier sentences of
comparable structure and length. There were thirty-six stimulus sentences in
total (four of them are common for two conditions), which can be found in
Appendix B. Eight native speakers of Northern Peninsular Spanish (six females
T.Sample stimuli for the stress-pattern condition (c)
Following obstruent
Following sonorant
Unstressed /s/
post-stress
/ˈtapas duˈɾitas/
‘hardish covers’
/ˈtapas loˈkales/
‘local tapas’
pre-stress
/ˈtapas ˈduɾas/
‘hard covers’
/ˈtapas ˈlokas/
‘crazy tapas’
Stressed /s/
stressed only
/paˈpas duˈɾitos/
‘strictish parents’
/paˈpas loˈkwelos/
‘crazyish parents’
stressed–pre-stress
/paˈpas ˈduɾos/
‘strict parents’
/paˈpas ˈlokos/
‘crazy parents’
Modeling assimilation


and two males⁶) were recorded reading the stimulus sentences. Each sentence was
repeated ﬁve times in random order, giving tokens per speaker, and all
repetitions were analyzed. The participants form a homogenous group, very
similar to the participants in Experiment , and the recording procedure was
exactly the same.
The data analysis replicated that in Experiment : duration of vowel, duration of
fricative, and voicing were measured, and the percent voicing was calculated. The
voicing categories, that is, unvoiced, partially voiced, and fully voiced, were estab-
lished in the same manner, except that the threshold for voiced tokens was set at
twenty-ﬁve percent since, as can be seen in Figure ., most of the tokens with
voiceless sequences for this second group of speakers fall below twenty-ﬁve percent of
voicing. The statistical treatment is the same as in the previous experiment.
Mixed-effect models were used for the three continuous variables, i.e., vowel
duration, fricative duration, and percent voicing, which were corrected for their
lack of normal distribution through a logit transformation (elog). The relevant
ﬁxed factors and interaction terms depended on the data set under analysis: following
consonant manner (obstruent, lateral, nasal) and word boundary (within word, across
words) for the second set (b), and stress pattern (post-stress, pre-stress, stressed only,
⁶ Even though gender is not one of the factors considered in this study, I compared female vs. male
participants and they behave in the same manner. The potential role of gender on the degree of voicing falls
beyond the scope of this study but should be taken into account in future investigations, especially given
the crosslinguistic ﬁnding that males tend to voice more than females owing to anatomical differences
(Jessen : ). Thus, we could expect males to show a higher degree of percent voicing. However, the
linguistic conditioning factors are predicted to remain constant across genders.
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
0
50
100
150
% of voicing
Number of tokens
F.Distributionofthepercentvoicingfortokenswithvoicelesssequences(Experiment)
The % line marks the threshold for the unvoiced tokens.

Rebeka Campos-Astorkiza

and stressed–pre-stress) and following consonant manner (obstruent, lateral) for the
third set (c, in Table .). Speaker and Item were included as random effects. As in
Experiment , a stepwise model selection procedure, using the anova( ) function, was
employed to test overall signiﬁcance of the ﬁxed factors and interaction terms. As for the
categorical variable, i.e., Voicing category (unvoiced, partially voiced, fully voiced),
multinomial logistic regression was employed for each data set.
...Results
....Following consonant manner condition
The statistical results for vowel duration, evaluating the effect of following-consonant
manner (obstruent, nasal, lateral), word boundary, and their interaction for data set
(b) show that neither the ﬁxed factors nor their interaction is signiﬁcant. However,
the results for fricative duration show that both factors, but not their interaction,
signiﬁcantly affect the duration of the sibilant (χ²()=., p < .). We observe
longer fricative duration across words than within word for all manners. This
replicates the results found in Experiment , where segmental duration (vowel and
fricative) was longer within than across words and I concluded that this effect was
most likely not due to voicing assimilation. As for the effect of following-consonant
manner, the sibilant is the longest with a following lateral and the shortest with a
following nasal. This would suggest that a following nasal triggers the lowest amount
of voicing, since the fricative duration is shorter. However, this conclusion should be
further substantiated by looking at the behavior of the percent voicing.
The statistical results for the elog of the percent voicing show that only the
following-consonant manner is signiﬁcant (χ²()=., p=.). The fact that
word boundary is not signiﬁcant is expected given the results of Experiment . As for
the effect of manner, releveling shows that only the difference between a following
obstruent and a following nasal or lateral is signiﬁcant. The percent voicing of /s/ is
higher when the triggering consonant is a voiced obstruent with seventy-one percent
voicing. The sonorant consonants, lateral and nasal, pattern together in terms of how
much voicing assimilation they trigger, with ﬁfty-seven percent and ﬁfty-ﬁve percent
voicing respectively. The distribution of the voicing categories according to the
following-consonant manner is given in Table .. The results from the multinomial
analysis indicate that all the differences in their distribution by manner are signiﬁ-
cant, except the difference for unvoiced between a following lateral and an obstruent
and that for fully voiced between a following lateral and a nasal. Consequently, we
ﬁnd that a following obstruent is associated with a higher rate of fully voiced tokens
of /s/ than the sonorants. Furthermore, a following nasal correlates with a higher
rate of unvoiced tokens than a lateral. This seems to be a difference between laterals
and nasals as triggers of voicing assimilation, a difference that was not captured by
the analysis of percent voicing.
....Stress pattern condition
This condition tests the role of four different stress patterns, i.e., post-stress (e.g.,
tápas durítas), pre-stress (e.g., tápas dúras), stressed only (e.g., papás durítos), and
stressed–pre-stress (e.g., papás dúros) (see Table .), with a following obstruent or
Modeling assimilation


sonorant, in order to observe whether the stress-pattern effect varies depending on
the manner of the following consonant. Accordingly, stress pattern and following-
manner consonant, as well as their interaction, were included as ﬁxed factors in the
models. The results for vowel duration show that both stress pattern and manner
have an effect on this dependent variable, but not their interaction (χ²()=.,
p < .). More precisely, vowels are longer with a following obstruent than with a
following sonorant (ms vs. ms), suggesting that there is more assimilation with
a triggering obstruent. As for the stress patterns, all levels were different from one
another and vowel duration displayed the ranking illustrated in () according to
stress pattern. The shortest vowel duration occurs with the post-stress pattern and
the longest with the stressed–pre-stress one (see Table .). The results for stress
seem to show the effect of stress on vowel duration rather than on the amount of
voicing: the presence of stress lengthens the sounds, i.e., the vowel.
()
Ranking for vowel duration (from longer to shorter) according to stress pattern
Stressed–pre-stress > stressed only > pre-stress > post-stress
As for fricative duration, both manner and stress pattern, as well as their interaction,
have a signiﬁcant effect on this variable (χ²()=., p < .). Fricative duration
is shorter with a following obstruent than with a following sonorant, indicating that
there is more assimilation with a triggering obstruent. In terms of stress patterns,
only some of the differences among the stress levels are signiﬁcant and fricative
T.Distribution of voicing categories of /s/ following consonant manner
Voicing category
Following nasal
Following lateral
Following obstruent
Unvoiced
% ()
% ()
% ()
Partially voiced
% ()
% ()
% ()
Fully voiced
% ()
% ()
% ()
Total



Token counts are given in parentheses.
T.Mean vowel duration (ms) according to stress pattern
Stress pattern
Sample token
Vowel duration
Stressed–pre-stress
papás dúros
()
Stressed only
papás durítos
()
Pre-stress
tápas dúras
()
Post-stress
tápas durítas
()
Standard deviations are given in parentheses.

Rebeka Campos-Astorkiza

duration follows the ranking in (), where the nonsigniﬁcant differences are marked
with an equals symbol.
()
Ranking for fricative duration (from longer to shorter) according to stress
pattern
Stressed–pre-stress = pre-stress > stressed only = post-stress
Similarly to vowel duration, fricative duration is the longest with the stressed–pre-stress
pattern and the shortest with the post-stress one. However, in the case of fricative
duration, the direction of the difference between stressed only and pre-stress has been
reversed: the fricative is longer in stressed positions than in pre-stress, while the opposite
was the case for vowel duration. This could suggest that the consonant duration is more
affected, i.e., lengthened, by a following stress than by the stress in the syllable it belongs
to. The opposite would be the case for the vowel, which would be more affected or
lengthened when the stress falls in the syllable containing it than in the syllable following
it. As I suggested earlier in Section ...., these results do not seem related to
assimilation but rather reﬂect the effect of stress on segmental duration.
Exploring the signiﬁcant interaction between manner and stress pattern, the effect
of the latter factor is only apparent with a following sonorant, as can be seen in
Table .. When looking at each manner separately, all the differences between
stress patterns are signiﬁcant for a following sonorant (p < .), except that between
pre-stressed and stressed only. On the other hand, with a following obstruent pre-
stress and stressed, pre-stress shows the same results but both of them are different
from stressed only and post-stress, which in turn are not different from each other.
The relevant durations can be seen in Table .. It seems that the fricative-duration
differences are attenuated with a following obstruent, which could suggest that the
effects of assimilation are stronger with a following obstruent and these override any
possible effect that stress pattern might have. Note that the duration requirements on
fricative duration from stress and voicing assimilation are the opposite, which would
explain why these tend to cancel off each other, resulting in more similar fricative
durations overall when there is a following obstruent. This argument is further
supported by the results for the percent voicing.
The statistical treatment of the elog of the percent voicing shows that following
consonant manner is a signiﬁcant factor (χ²()= ., p < .), while the overall
T.Mean fricative duration (ms) by stress pattern and following
consonant manner
Stress pattern
Sample token
Following obstruent Following sonorant
Post-stress
tápas durítas
()
()
Pre-stress
tápas dúras
()
()
Stressed only
papás durítos
()
()
Stressed–pre-stress
papás dúros
()
()
Standard deviations are given in parentheses.
Modeling assimilation


effect of stress pattern is not. Furthermore, adding the interaction between manner
and stress pattern improves the model (χ²()¼., p¼.). percent voicing is
higher with a following obstruent (%) than a sonorant (%), replicating the
results obtained for the data set discussed in Section ..... As for the interaction,
the indication is that the effect of stress is different depending on the following-
consonant manner. In fact, the results from a mixed-effect model with stress pattern
as ﬁxed factor for each type of manner show that stress pattern is not signiﬁcant
with a following obstruent. However, the picture is different with a following
sonorant, where there are some signiﬁcant differences in percent voicing, depend-
ing on the stress pattern. More precisely, the difference between post-stress and
stressed–pre-stress is signiﬁcant (β¼., SEβ¼., t¼., p=.), as
well as the difference between stressed only and stressed–pre-stress (β¼.,
SEβ¼., t¼., p¼.). These results, combined with the means
reported in Table ., show that the post-stress location displays the highest
percent voicing, signiﬁcantly higher than the stressed–pre-stress pattern, which has
the lowest percentage. These results suggest that a sibilant in a post-stress location
position undergoes the highest degree of assimilation indicating that this articu-
latorily weak position undergoes more assimilation than stronger ones, supporting
the prediction made in Section ..
Finally, the multinomial analysis for the distribution of the voicing categories
shows that there are no signiﬁcant differences among stress patterns when both
manners are considered together. However, when the interaction between manner
and stress pattern is considered, some differences emerge. The distribution of the
voicing categories by stress pattern with a following sonorant and a following
obstruent can be found in Table .. One relevant difference is that a following
sonorant correlates with a higher rate of unvoiced tokens than a following obstruent,
lending further support to the ﬁnding that obstruents lead to more voicing assimi-
lation than sonorants.
With respect to differences due to stress pattern, we observe that for a following
sonorant, the post-stress pattern shows more fully voiced tokens than the other
patterns, and this difference is signiﬁcant when compared with stressed only and
stressed–pre-stress. This goes in line with the prediction that the weakest articulatory
T.Mean percent voicing by stress pattern and following consonant
manner
Stress pattern
Sample token
Following obstruent Following sonorant
Post-stress
tápas durítas
()
()
Pre-stress
tápas dúras
()
()
Stressed only
papás durítos
()
()
Stressed–pre-stress
papás dúros
()
()
Standard deviations are given in parentheses.

Rebeka Campos-Astorkiza

position, in this case post-stress, would display a higher degree of voicing. In the
case of a following obstruent, the most relevant result is that the distribution of
the voicing categories in the post-stress pattern is not signiﬁcantly different from
the pre-stress and stressed–pre-stress ones. The only signiﬁcant difference taking
post-stress as the reference pattern is that of the distribution of partially and fully
voiced tokens in this reference pattern and in the stressed-only one, where post-
stress correlates with an even distribution of fully and partially voiced but stressed-
only displays a higher rate of fully than of partially voiced tokens.
....Summary of results
Experiment replicates some of the ﬁndings from Experiment . First, it lends
further support to the gradient nature of sibilant voicing assimilation in the variety
of Spanish under study and to the fact that the three acoustic cues investigated
(i.e., vowel duration, fricative duration, and percent voicing) are inﬂuenced by the
voicing. Second, it ﬁnds no effect of word boundary on the degree of voicing
assimilation.
However, this experiment also brings some new results in relation to the con-
ditionings on the degree of voicing. The manner of articulation of the following
voiced consonant proves to be an important factor, with obstruents triggering a
higher degree of assimilation than sonorants. With respect to stress, post-stress
positions display the highest rate of voicing, as predicted, but only with a following
sonorant. When the triggering consonant is an obstruent, the different stress patterns
do not seem to be relevant in conditioning the assimilation. Section .discusses
these results within the gestural blending model and places them in connection with
the previous ﬁndings by other authors, discussed in Section ..
T.Distribution of voicing categories according to stress pattern with a
following obstruent (top) and a following sonorant (bottom)
Following obstruent
Voicing category
Pre-stress
Post-stress
Stressed only
Stressed–pre-stress
Unvoiced
8% (6)
12% (9)
13% (10)
8% (6)
Partially voiced
50% (39)
43% (34)
28% (21)
39% (30)
Fully voiced
42% (33)
45% (35)
59% (45)
53% (41)
Following sonorant
Voicing category
Pre-stress
Post-stress
Stressed only
Stressed–pre-stress
Unvoiced
56% (44)
47.5% (38)
47% (37)
59% (45)
Partially voiced
21% (17)
22% (20)
35% (27)
22% (17)
Fully voiced
23% (18)
27.5% (22)
18% (14)
18% (14)
Token counts are given in parentheses.
Modeling assimilation


.Discussion: experimental ﬁndings and their implications
The combined results from both experiments clearly show that sibilant voicing
assimilation in the dialect under study is not a categorical process, but rather gradient
and incomplete in many cases. This is in agreement with earlier impressionistic
observations and more recent instrumental ﬁndings discussed in Section .(Romero
) and Section .(Schmidt and Willis ; A. García ). A closer look at the
distribution of the percent voicing makes this conclusion even clearer, as the histograms
in Figure .show. In these, we can see the percent voicing from the voicing condition
in both experiments, where the sibilant occurs before a voiced obstruent. Despite the
presence of a high number of tokens with % voicing, there are a considerable
number of realizations that go from % voicing to being almost fully voiced. Note
that these two histograms also illustrate the lack of normal distribution of the percent
voicing and justify the statistical treatment adopted in the two experiments reported in
Section .. Moreover, all speakers show this gradience, as can be seen in Figure .,
where the distribution of the voicing categories by speakers is illustrated. Despite
individual differences, all speakers display variation in the degree of voicing assimila-
tion, in the sense that all participants produce tokens from the three different categories:
unvoiced, partially voiced, and fully voiced.
The gradience of the process ﬁts with the gestural blending model adopted and
developed in Section .. According to this model, increased gestural overlap
between two adjacent and contradictory laryngeal gestures results in gestural blend-
ing and, consequently, gradient surface assimilation, which could result in any degree
of voicing from none at all to %, as we observe in the data. An important
difference between our approach and more traditional phonological accounts based
on features is that gestural blending captures the variability of the process, including
cases when there is no voicing at all (apparent lack of application of the assimilation)
or those with % voicing (apparent categorical or complete application of the
0
20
40
60
80
100
% voicing
Frequency
0
20
40
60
0
20
40
% voicing
0
10
20
Frequency
30
40
60
80
100
F.Histogram for the distribution of percent voicing before a voiced obstruent in the
voicing condition in Experiment (left) and Experiment (right)

Rebeka Campos-Astorkiza

assimilation). Thus, the question is not whether assimilation takes place or not, but
rather to what extent the involved laryngeal gestures overlap—since there could be
no, or minimal, overlap, or total overlap—and what is their blending strength.
It is important to understand that these two elements, overlap and blending
strength, are subject to inﬂuence from different factors. This means that the result
of gestural blending is conditioned by factors that affect speech production in
general, such as stress and prosodic boundaries, and interacts with potential restric-
tions on gestural coordination and magnitude. This is an integral component of the
model and a crucial aspect to our analysis of voicing assimilation, and it will allows us
to frame and explain the results regarding the factors that constrain the voicing.
Manner of articulation of the following consonant emerges as a relevant condi-
tioning on the degree of voicing assimilation. The results from the two experiments
indicate that a following voiced obstruent triggers more voicing than a following
sonorant, in accordance with previous studies (see Section .). Furthermore, a
more open or lenited obstruent correlates with more voicing than a less lenited one.
This ranking of strengths of the manner of articulation of the triggering consonant
can be explained within a gestural approach to speech production, the framework
within which gestural blending model is couched. The effect of degree of constriction
among obstruents can be motivated by the aerodynamics of voicing and obstruent
production. Voicing is harder to maintain during a closer oral constriction than
during a more open one. This results in weaker voicing amplitude or devoicing
during closer constrictions, unless certain adjustments are performed in order to keep
full voicing (Westbury and Keating ). From a gestural perspective, the laryngeal
gesture has a lower magnitude and less duration during closer constrictions. Then,
in relation to open vs. close approximants, voicing is harder to maintain during the
0
0
1
5
10
15
2
4
6
8
10
12
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
Speakers
Number of tokens
Speakers
EXPERIMENT 1
EXPERIMENT 2
Number of tokens
5
6
7
8
unvoiced
partially voiced
fully voiced
F.Distribution of the voicing categories by speaker for the voicing condition in
Experiment (left) and Experiment (right)
Modeling assimilation


latter than the former, and an open approximant would have a greater laryngeal
gesture, which would in turn result in greater overlap with adjacent gestures and a
greater blending strength. Within this model of assimilation, this difference in gestural
conﬁguration, that is, in greater overlap and blending strength, would derive in more
voicing during the sibilant when overlapping with an open constriction. Furthermore,
the resulting blended voiced gesture might be dampened by a closer constriction and
be realized as discontinuous voicing, as explained in Section ..
Campos-Astorkiza () argued that a prediction from the previous explanation
is that sonorants should trigger a greater degree of voicing assimilation than obstru-
ents, on the assumption that sonorants present a smaller constriction degree. How-
ever, this prediction did not take into account that other production factors might
affect the interaction between a sonorant and a preceding sibilant. In fact, the
experimental results presented in this chapter clearly show that the degree of voicing
is much lower with a following sonorant, suggesting that something is constraining
the blending between the two laryngeal gestures. Relatedly, Recasens and Mira
(), analyzing a similar process of voicing assimilation in Catalan, also found
that sonorants trigger less assimilation than obstruents, even though they also
predicted the opposite effect. The authors argue that these unexpected results can
be understood by taking into account the aerodynamic and articulatory requirements
for nasals, laterals, and fricatives, which make extreme gestural overlap between these
sonorants and a sibilant highly disfavored (Recasens and Mira : ). In the case
of nasals, the conditions required to achieve pressure differences across the oral
constriction for frication may be hindered by a nasal opening. In the case of laterals,
the same conditions for the pressure differences required for a fricative may not be
achieved owing to an increase in the intraoral pressure during the formation of the
central closure for /l/.
Extending Recasens and Mira’s () explanation for the Spanish data analyzed
here, these conﬂicting demands for nasals and laterals vs. /s/ explain the low degree of
voicing assimilation with a following nasal or lateral, as suggested in Campos-
Astorkiza (). In the case of sonorants, the communicative factor of producing
and transmitting a clear nasal, lateral, or sibilant limits the amount of gestural overlap
by minimizing it. In the case of open obstruents, where this factor does not play a role,
given that the sibilant and obstruents do not display conﬂicting demands, overlap can
be greater, resulting in more voicing assimilation. In fact, our data present some
evidence to support the explanation proposed here, that sonorants and /s/ tend to
incur minimal overlap and stay away from each other. Several of our tokens con-
taining a sequence of /s/ followed by a nasal or lateral display a delay in the beginning
of the sonorant consonants, manifested as a gap in the acoustic representation. This
pattern is observed for several speakers and indicates a tendency to separate the two
sounds in their production. Note that this delay is not found for any of the sequences
with a following obstruent. Summarizing, the behavior of sonorants illustrates a case
where gestural blending is being constrained by a production restriction. As
explained earlier, the current gestural model is capable of accommodating these
effects, and thus, the asymmetry between obstruents and sonorants cannot necessar-
ily be taken as evidence against the gestural blending model.

Rebeka Campos-Astorkiza

As discussed in Section ., factors that affect gestural coordination and magni-
tude are expected to inﬂuence the degree of voicing assimilation. Stress is one such
factor and the experimental results show that in fact the degree of voicing is
conditioned by the stress pattern. Experiment shows that there is more voicing,
as manifested in percent voicing, when the following consonant falls in a stressed
syllable than when the stress falls on a syllable containing the sibilant (e.g., /rasˈge/ vs.
/ˈrasge/), conﬁrming our hypothesis. The gestural model predicts that stressed
elements display greater magnitude and in turn, greater overlap with adjacent
gestures. In the case of voicing assimilation, the laryngeal gesture of the triggering
consonant increases its overlap and blending strength resulting in a greater amount
of voicing during the sibilant. On the other hand, when the sibilant is stressed and the
following consonant is unstressed, the expected outcome is the opposite.
Experiment explores the role of stress by going beyond a binary treatment of this
factor and considering different patterns based on the stress of the preceding and
following context. More precisely, four different stress patterns are evaluated in order
to test the hypothesis that post-stress locations should display the highest degree of
voicing assimilation. The results show that this is the case and that voicing is
inﬂuenced by the location of stress in relation to /s/. More precisely, we observe
that post-stress positions, i.e., those with a preceding stressed syllable and a following
unstressed syllable (e.g., tápas durítas), show the highest degree of voicing. Framing
these results within the gestural blending model, the effect of stress stems from the
fact that post-stress positions are the weakest positions in articulatory terms, with
correspondingly shorter gestures and the greatest degree of gestural reduction.
Consequently, they are prone to greater overlap from adjacent gestures and their
blending strength is much reduced. One interesting feature of the stress effect found
in Experiment is that it is more robust with a following sonorant than an obstruent
(it must be recalled that obstruents lead to a higher degree of voicing). These two
observations taken together seem to suggest that conditioning factors have a stronger
effect on those cases where the voicing is lesser, while cases where the voicing is
greater are less conditioned. This can be interpreted as stemming from a kind of
ceiling effect of obstruents. This type of consonant tends to lead to a high degree of
voicing, disallowing the observation of possible constraints, such as an effect of stress.
In order to further elucidate these ﬁndings, a more thorough investigation of the
interaction between stress and following consonant manner, including open and
close approximants, would be necessary. Overall, expanding the study of stress in
relation to assimilation will help us advance our understanding and modeling of this
prosodic feature in Spanish.
As for the effect of prosodic boundaries, word boundaries do not affect the degree
of assimilation and the rate of voicing is the same within and across words. On the
other hand, the presence of an IP boundary has a great inﬂuence on the degree of
assimilation. As expected, less voicing is observed across than within an IP boundary
(see also Schmidt and Willis , discussed in Section .). But the main contri-
bution comes from the ﬁnding that the presence of this type of boundary does not
categorically block the voicing assimilation. Rather, it reduces the amount of voicing,
but some voicing assimilation still occurs across the intonational boundary. These
Modeling assimilation


results ﬁt with the treatment of IP boundaries within Articulatory Phonology, where
they have been deﬁned as elastic phenomena that affect segmental structure in a
gradient manner in the π-gesture model (see Section .; Byrd and Saltzman ).
This view goes hand in hand with the articulatory framework adopted here and the
theoretical goal of capturing and modeling gradient voicing. The gradient effect of
prosodic boundaries suggests that degree, rather than presence or absence, of assimi-
lation may function as a cue to the occurrence of an IP boundary and be of relevance,
for example, where there is no pause between the two phrases. Furthermore, given
the π-gesture model we expect different prosodic boundaries to have gradual effects
on the amount of voicing, according to their strength. This is in fact a fruitful
direction for future research, since exploring the interaction between prosodic
boundaries and voicing assimilation will allow us not only to reﬁne our understand-
ing of the process but also to better characterize prosodic structure in Spanish (see,
for example, Polo Cano ).
To conclude, this chapter presents a review of what we know about preconson-
antal sibilant voicing assimilation in Spanish, focusing on the contributions from
instrumental studies. This process is an exciting new area that researchers have
only recently begun to experimentally explore. However, we already have some
important ﬁndings that allow us to start the development of models to account for
it. Here, I argue that the gestural blending model is able to accommodate the
behavior of voicing assimilation in Spanish and lets us make testable predictions.
A critical review of the model brings to the forefront two main elements: gestural
overlap and blending strength. In the two experiments reported in Section .,
factors that affect these two elements are evaluated in relation to voicing assimila-
tion. In a nutshell, stress, manner of the following consonant, and prosodic
boundaries are relevant when explaining the variability in the amount of /s/
voicing. Beyond offering a description of the voicing patterns, the gestural blending
model is developed to capture the gradient but conditioned nature of the process in
a principled way.
.Appendix A
Sentences used in experiment with their translations
a. Voicing condition
Dice que sesgue todo
‘He says I should slant everything’
Dice que pesque todo
‘He says I should ﬁsh everything’
Dice que rasgue todo
‘He says I should tear everything’
Dice que rasque todo
‘He says I should scratch everything’
Dice que musgo no hay
‘He says there is no moss’
Dice que busco mucho
‘He says I look for a lot’
Dice que desde ayer no
sabe nada
‘He says since yesterday he doesn’t know anything’
Dice que peste no hay
‘He says that there is no bad smell’

Rebeka Campos-Astorkiza

b. Stress condition
Dice que rasgue todo
‘He says I should tear everything’
Dice que rasgué todo
‘He says I tore everything’
Dice que sesgue todo
‘He says I should slant everything’
Dice que sesgué todo
‘He says I slanted everything’
Dice que atisbe todo por ahí
‘He says I should look at everything
around there’
Dice que atisbé todo por ahí
‘He says I looked at everything around
there’
Dice que desde ayer no sabe nada
‘He says since yesterday he doesn’t know
anything’
Dice que su desdén le molesta
‘He says that her disdain bothers him’
c. Prosodic boundary condition
Siempre atisbamos barcos de vela
desde aquí
‘We always see sail boats from here’
Siempre desdeña a sus superiores
en el trabajo
‘She always disdains her superiors at
work’
Siempre rasgamos las telas en esta
tienda
‘We always tear the fabrics in this store’
Me compré las botas verdes
‘I bought the green boots’
Me dejó los dedos sucios
‘It left my ﬁngers dirty’
Me trajo las gomas nuevas
‘She brought me the new erasers’
Por favor cámbialas, botas rojas no
quiero
‘Please return them, I don’t want red
boots’
Por favor límpialos, dedos sucios no
quiero
‘Please wash them, I don’t want dirty
ﬁngers’
Por favor búscalas, gomas rotas no
quiero
‘Please look for them, I don’t want broken
erasers’
.Appendix B
Sentences used in experiment by set with their translations
a. Voicing condition
Dice que sesgue todo.
‘He says I should slant everything.’
Dice que pesque todo.
‘He says I should ﬁsh everything.’
Dice que rasgue todo.
‘He says I should tear everything.’
Dice que rasque todo.
‘He says I should scratch everything.’
Dice que musgo no hay.
‘He says there is no moss.’
Dice que busco mucho.
‘He says I look for a lot.’
Dice que desde ayer no sabe nada.
‘He says since yesterday he doesn’t know
anything.’
Dice que peste no hay.
‘He says that there is no bad smell.’
Modeling assimilation


b. Following consonant manner condition
Dice que sesgue todo.
‘He says I should slant everything.’
Dice que rasgue todo.
‘He says I should tear everything.’
Dice que musgo no hay.
‘He says there is no moss.’
Me gustaría ver los goles que marcó
ayer.
‘I’d like to see the goals he scored
yesterday.’
Creo que recibió los votos de apoyo
necesarios.
‘I think he received the necessary votes
of support.’
Dice que desde ayer no sabe nada.
‘He says since yesterday he doesn’t
know anything.’
Quiero ver los dones especiales que
tienes.
‘I want to see the special talents you
have.’
Me gustaría visitar Oslo de vacaciones.
‘I’d like to visit Oslo on vacation.’
Vive en una isla del Pacíﬁco.
‘He lives on an island in the Paciﬁc.’
Quiero ver los lotes que llegaron ayer.
‘I want to see the lots that arrived
yesterday.’
Me dijo lo mismo que a ti.
‘He told me the same as to you.’
Quiero saber los motes que tienes.
‘I want to know the nicknames you
have.’
Siempre está hablando del cosmos
y las estrellas.
‘He is always talking about the cosmos
and the stars.’
Conocí a un chico bosnio en Londres.
‘I met a Bosnian guy in London.’
Nunca he visto un cisne negro.
‘I have never seen a black swan.’
Quiero ver las notas que le dieron.
‘I want to see the grades they gave him.’
c. Stress pattern condition
Quiero un libro de tapas duras.
‘I want a book with hard covers.’
Preﬁero gafas duras.
‘I prefer hard glasses.’
Quiero un libro con tapas duritas.
‘I want a book with hardish covers.’
Preﬁero gafas durillas.
‘I prefer hardish glasses.’
No me gustan los papás duros.
‘I don’t like strict parents.’
No me gusta los sofás duros.
‘I don’t like hard sofas.’
No me gustan los papás duritos.
‘I don’t like strictish parents.’
No me gustan los sofás duritos.
‘I don’t like hardish sofas.’
Quiero probar tapas locas, con sabores raros.
‘I want to try crazy tapas, with weird ﬂavors.’
Busco gafas locas, con muchos colores.
‘I’m looking for crazy glasses, with lots of colors.’
Quiero gafas loquitas, con lunares o de rayas.
‘I want crazyish glasses, with spots or stripy.’
Quiero probar tapas locales, típicas de esta zona.
‘I want to try local tapas, typical of this area.’

Rebeka Campos-Astorkiza

Tiene papás locos, muy inusuales.
‘He has crazy parents, very unusual.’
Me gustan los sofás locos, con muchos colores chillones.
‘I like crazy sofas, with bright colors.’
Tiene papás locuelos, casi irresponsables.
‘He has crazyish parents, almost irresponsible.’
Quiero comprar sofás locales, hechos en esta región.
‘I want to buy local sofas, made in this region.’
Modeling assimilation


15
Adjusting to the syllable margins
Glides in Catalan and Spanish
JESÚS JIMÉNEZ, MARIA-ROSA LLORET,
AND CLÀUDIA PONS-MOLL
.Introduction
The asymmetric behavior of the two syllable margins (i.e., onset and coda) is usually
accounted for by means of intrasyllabic sonority conditions: less sonorant segments
are preferred in simplex onsets, because they are more distant in terms of sonority
from the following nucleus (typically, a vowel) and hence better enhance the prop-
erties of the nucleus; more sonorant segments are instead preferred in simplex
codas, because they are closer in sonority to the previous nucleus and hence reduce
the syllabic complexity by minimizing the contrast with it (with no elements in the
coda at all being the preferred structure; see Vennemann ; Clements ;
Baertsch ; Prince and Smolensky ; Smith ). Owing to these tendencies,
many modiﬁcations affecting onsets are strengthening phenomena, whereas modiﬁ-
cations affecting codas are usually of the weakening type. These generalizations,
though, have to coexist with other preferences that languages show, which in some
cases may conﬂict with one another. For example, in contrast to the tendency to
strengthen onsets, other contextual markedness conditions favor alternative options,
as is the case for intervocalic position, where less constricted onsets are preferred in
order to achieve a more homogeneous sonority proﬁle with the surrounding vowels
(see, e.g., Kirchner , ; Uffmann ).
The modiﬁcations that glides undergo in onsets and their preservation in codas
in Catalan and Spanish illustrate the intermingling of the tendencies just mentioned.
The variation that glides present thus offers an ideal scenario in which to evaluate
which factors trigger the changes and how they interact to yield apparently contra-
dictory results. It also offers good grounds for testing the adequacy of Optimality
Theory (OT; Prince and Smolensky ) to deal with the typology of strategies
attested in languages to adjust their shape to phonological requirements. Here, we
do not offer a description of all the phenomena affecting glides in Catalan and
Romance Phonetics and Phonology. First edition. Mark Gibson and Juana Gil (eds.)
This chapter © Jesús Jiménez, Maria-Rosa Lloret, and Clàudia Pons-Moll . First published by
Oxford University Press.

Spanish, but just make use of speciﬁc cases that exemplify the range of repair
strategies in which the two glides, /j/ and /w/, are involved.¹ The chapter is
organized as follows. We begin with the description of the behavior of glides in
some varieties of Spanish (Section .) and Catalan (Section .); we then present
and discuss an OT analysis of these facts (Section .), and we end with some ﬁnal
conclusions (Section .).
.The behavior of glides in Spanish
The two glides of Spanish (i.e., /j/ and /w/) follow the general tendency of strength-
ening in onsets, while remaining weak in codas (see, e.g., Aguilar ). However, the
degree of constriction that they tolerate is not always the same, because speciﬁc
contexts may activate alternative adjustments. The data we are going to discuss come
mainly from Castilian Spanish, drawn from the Atlas lingüístico etnográﬁco de
Castilla-La Mancha (ALeCMan; García Mouton and Moreno Fernández ),
which is a representative sample of Eastern Castilian Spanish.
..The labiovelar glide
In the second position of a complex onset (as in dueño ‘owner’) and in coda
position (as in jaula ‘cage’), the labiovelar glide (/w/) is maintained unchanged
([ˈdwe.ɲo], [ˈ xaw.la] in ALeCMan: maps FON-and FON-, respectively). In
contrast, in simplex onsets, /w/ shows different degrees of strengthening depending
on the context in which it occurs. In absolute word-initial position, the realizations
include preservation of the glide (as in huelo [ˈwe.lo] ‘I smell’) as well as reinforce-
ments through the presence of an additional preceding velar obstruent ([ˈɡwe.lo])
or, less commonly, of an additional labial obstruent ([ˈbwe.lo]). For example, in
ALeCMan, for the word huelo (map GRA-; see Figure .) there are four
instances of [w] preservation, eight with labial reinforcement, and with velar
reinforcement. The realization of the additional velar consonant in huelo is regularly
a stop ([ˈɡwe.lo], cases) and very occasionally a spirant consonant ([ˈɣwe.lo],
one case).²
¹ Since the aim of this work is not to discuss the phonemic status of the nonsyllabic realization of the
two high vocoids, we assume for convenience that [j] and [w] derive from /j/ and /w/ when they do not
alternate with their vocalic counterparts, including, for the former, cases historically derived from the
delateralization of /ʎ/, present in both languages. We do not further examine the delateralization phe-
nomenon here, nor do we deal with examples that involve /i/ or /u/ gliding.
² In Spanish, as well as in Catalan, [β], [ð], and [ɣ] phonetically show a lesser degree of stricture than is
usually regarded as characteristic of fricatives. This is especially noticeable in the lack of acoustic
turbulence (see, e.g., Martínez Celdrán a, , and RAE–ASALE : –for Spanish; Recasens
, for Catalan). Because of this, they are sometimes referred to as approximants (and are
accurately represented as [β̞], [ð̞], and [ɣ̞]),or more precisely as spirant approximants to differentiate
them from other approximants such as glides, laterals, and rhotics (see, e.g., Martínez Celdrán ;
Figueroa Candia ). Phonologically, however, these sounds behave as obstruents, because they mor-
phophonemically alternate with their stop counterparts; hence, for our purposes we refer to them as spirant
fricatives (see more arguments, e.g., in Wheeler : ).
Adjusting to the syllable margins


In the patrimonial lexicon, all words affected by this word-initial reinforcement
begin with <hue> (huelo, hueco ‘hollow’, huella ‘trace’, huerto ‘orchard’, hueso ‘bone’,
huésped ‘guest’, huevo ‘egg’ . . . ) and the variability of the reported pronunciations is
considered to be a case of free variation (RAE–ASALE : ). Strengthening
through the realization of an additional preceding velar obstruent is an old solution.
It is responsible for orthographic duplets such as huero ~ güero ‘empty’, or for duplets
in the adaptation of loans from Nahuatl (e.g., huipil ~ güipil ‘a kind of blouse’)
and Quechua (e.g., huiro ~ güiro ‘stalk of green corn’, guaca ~ huaca ‘old grave’)
(RAE–ASALE : ), and also for the adaptation of the loan from English
güisqui ‘whisky’. More recent loans show the same degree of variability as patrimo-
nial words: e.g., waterpolo, web (RAE–ASALE : ), wasapear ~ guasapear ‘to
whatsapp’, western (ﬁlm) or wiﬁ.³
In intervocalic position, there are reinforcements with realization of an additional
velar spirant fricative (as in cacahuete [ka.kaˈɣwe.te] ‘peanut’, ahuecar [aˈɣwe.kaɾ] ‘to
hollow out’) and, less frequently, just maintenance of the glide ([ka.kaˈwe.te], [a.we
ˈkaɾ]). These variants are also documented for loans, as in kiwi. Despite the variety of
reported pronunciations (see, e.g., RAE–ASALE : –), in ALeCMan
almost all realizations of the word cacahuete (map QII-; see Figure .) are
transcribed with a preceding spirant fricative (cases out of ; the other case
has a velar stop [ɡ]). This homogeneity agrees with Hualde’s (: ) suggestion
that intervocalically there is no contrast between [w] and [ɣw] in standard Castilian,
regardless of their orthographic representation as <hu> (as in cacahuete or vihuela
200
150
100
50
0
Count
Word
huelo
cacahuete
/w/
variants
[w]
[βw]
[ɣw]
[bw]
[ɡw]
F.Realization of /w/ in huelo and cacahuete in Castilian Spanish
Variants for huelo: [w], cases; [ɣw], case; [bw], cases; [ɡw], cases. Variants for cacahuete: [ɣw], cases; [ɡw], case
Data from maps GRA-and QII-from ALeCMan
³ Gothic names, as well as loans taken from German and a few other cases with orthographic <w>, were
phonetically adapted with /b/ (<v> or <w> in Spanish), as in Wamba, Wagner, wolframio or volframio
‘wolfram’, vals ‘waltz’, and vagón (from the English word wagon) (RAE–ASALE : ).

J. Jiménez, M.-R. Lloret, and C. Pons-Moll

‘vihuela’) or <gu> (as in cigüeña ‘stork’). The realization of an additional obstruent
gives rise to onsets that maximize the contrast with the nucleus, whereas the
preservation of the glide—not attested in ALeCMan—minimizes the sonority dis-
tance (and thus the articulatory effort) from the surrounding vowels. The possibility
of deleting the original labiovelar glide (i.e., *[ka.kaˈe.te]) to reduce the consonantal
transition to the minimum does not exist in Spanish.
Figure .illustrates the incidence of the outcomes found in ALeCMan for /w/ in
huelo and cacahuete. (We only consider variants containing the glide [w], and so
ignore geosynonyms such as cacao [kaˈka.o] or cacagué [ka.kaˈɣe] for cacahuete).
..The palatal glide
Like the labiovelar glide, the palatal glide (/j/) also tends to adjust to the context in
which it appears, but the adaptation is usually accomplished through changes in the
degree of constriction of the glide rather than by the realization of an additional
preceding consonant. Another important difference with respect to /w/ is that the
outcomes of /j/ display a signiﬁcantly greater degree of geographical variation.
In absolute word-initial onset position (as in yerno ‘son-in-law’ or yugo ‘yoke’),⁴
the emergence of the glide [j] is very rare (e.g., [ˈjeɾ.no], [ˈju.ɣo]). The most common
alternatives include strengthening through a ﬁrst degree of constriction with the
result of a fricative, either nonsibilant ([ˈʝeɾ.no], [ˈʝu.ɣo]) or sibilant ([ˈʒeɾ.no], [ˈʒu.
ɣo]), or a further degree of constriction with the result of an affricate, either non-
sibilant ([ˈd͡ʝeɾ.no], [ˈd͡ʝu.ɣo]) or sibilant ([ˈd͡ʒeɾ.no], [ˈd͡ʒu.ɣo]). The nonsibilant
(fricative and affricate) reinforcements are very frequently documented in ALeCMan,
though the sibilant variants are also sporadically reported, especially in the Western
part of this region (i.e., Toledo and Ciudad Real). The sibilant variants are more
common in parts of Andalusia and Extremadura, and also in different regions of
America, such as Argentina or parts of Mexico (see, e.g., Hualde : ).⁵
As with /w/, strengthening through consonantization of /j/ gives rise to ortho-
graphic duplets such as hierba ~ yerba ‘grass’ or hiedra ~ yedra ‘ivy’. Sporadically in
the literature we have reviewed, and especially in the province of Cuenca, words that
begin with /je/- have developed a further variant with the glide reinforced by a velar
stop (as in yerno [ˈɡjeɾ.no], hierba [ˈɡjeɾ.βa]), or even sporadically by a palatal
fricative (as in [ˈʝjeɾ.no], [ˈʝjeɾ.βa]).⁶ The reinforcement as [ɡje] is most probably
due to the analogical inﬂuence of the parallel /we/- words, which, as noted in
⁴ In ALeCMan the word yerno is elicited after a lateral (el yerno, map FON-), which is a context usually
regarded as equivalent to the absolute word-initial position in the literature (see, e.g., Hualde : ).
⁵ The virtual nonexistence of [j] realizations in simplex onsets (both word-initially and word-internally)
has led some authors to assume that the phonological system of Spanish displays /ʝ/ (or /ʒ/, /d͡ʒ/ in certain
varieties) instead of /j/ (see, e.g., RAE–ASALE : –, –). For our present purposes we can
disregard this issue.
⁶ The exceptional emergence of a velar obstruent in [ɡje]- is documented in ALeCMan in the province
of Cuenca mainly, as in (el) yerno (map FON-) and hierba ‘grass’ (FON-). It is also documented in
the Atlas Lingüístico de la Península Ibérica (ALPI) for the Spanish spoken in the neighboring region of
Valencia (see Garcia Perales : iii, QI-CAST-for yerno and QI-CAST-for hierba).
Adjusting to the syllable margins


Section .., tend to strengthen the onset with an additional velar obstruent
(cf. huelo [ˈɡwe.lo]) (Jiménez ; Hualde ; Brazeal ).
In intervocalic onset position, the same reinforced variants as in word-initial
position are attested, except for the absence of additional velar or palatal obstruents
(e.g., mayo *[ˈma.ɣjo], *[ˈma.ʝjo] ‘May’). As above, the nonsibilant ([ˈma.ʝo])
and sibilant ([ˈma.ʒo]) fricative variants as well as the nonsibilant affricate variant
([ˈma.d͡ʝo]) are documented in ALeCMan. Unlike the case in word-initial position,
intervocalically the maintenance of the glide variant—without any reinforcement—is
relatively more frequent ([ˈma.jo]), especially in the Eastern part of this region (i.e.,
Cuenca and Albacete).⁷
Figure .illustrates the incidence of the outcomes found in ALeCMan for /j/ in
yugo (map CAM-), (el) yerno (map FON-), and mayo (map FON-). The
notations [ʝ/j] and [ʝ/ʒ] indicate, respectively, an open central palatal, close to a glide,
and a fronted central fricative palatal. (Geosynonyms for yugo without any sound
related to the initial glide /j/, such as troza [ˈtɾo.θa] or ubio [ˈu.βjo], are not counted.)
Finally, in the syllabic positions where more sonorous segments are optimal
margins (i.e., in codas and in the second position of complex onsets), the glide
realization is the usual pronunciation in all varieties: for instance, in rey [ˈrej]
‘king’ or pie [ˈpje] ‘foot’ (see ALeCMan: maps FON-and FON-, respectively).
200
150
100
50
0
Count
Word
yugo
el yerno
mayo
/j/
variants
[j]
[ʝ/j]
[ʝ]
[ʝ/ʒ]
[ʒ]
[dʝ]
[ʝj]
[ɡj]
F.Realization of /j/ in yugo, (el) yerno, and mayo in Castilian Spanish
Variants for yugo: [ʝ], cases; [ʝ/ʒ], cases; [ʒ], case; [d͡ʝ], cases. Variants for (el) yerno: [j], cases; [ʝ/j], cases; [ʝ],
cases; [ʝ/ʒ], cases; [ʒ], cases; [ʝj], cases; [d͡ʝ], cases; [ɡj], cases. Variants for mayo: [j], cases; [ʝ/j], cases;
[ʝ], cases; [ʝ/ʒ], cases; [ʒ], cases; [d͡ʝ], cases
Data from maps CAM-, FON-, and FON-from ALeCMan
⁷ The glide may be completely deleted in certain Spanish varieties, especially when adjacent to a front
vowel (e.g., cayendo [kaˈen̪.do] ‘falling down’, creyó [kɾeˈo] ‘he believed’ in Chilean Spanish; RAE–ASALE
: ).

J. Jiménez, M.-R. Lloret, and C. Pons-Moll

.The behavior of glides in Catalan
The two glides of Catalan (i.e., /j/ and /w/) also show instances of strengthening in
onsets, but to a much lesser extent than in Spanish. Another important difference
is that, in some Catalan varieties, intervocalic onset glides display radical weaken-
ing processes, a phenomenon that is almost unknown in Castilian Spanish. Here,
we mainly contrast data from Central Eastern Catalan with data from the Valen-
cian variety and especially with data from the Balearic variety, because of its
singularity.
..The labiovelar glide
In Catalan, the general tendency of /w/ is to be maintained as a glide in all syllable
margins. An important phonotactic characteristic of Catalan is that it has a limited set
of words beginning with a /w/, which are generally loans: e.g., walkman, web, western
(ﬁlm), whisky (Lloret : ); whatsapp, Wi-Fi. Though these words sporadically
show occurrences of reinforcements via velar obstruent addition (e.g., [ɡw]eb, [ɡw]isky),
the most common pronunciation is with maintenance of the glide (e.g., [w]eb, [w]isky).⁸
Valencian shows the peculiarity of displaying a few patrimonial words with a
word-initial labiovelar glide, which are regularly pronounced without strengthening:
hui [ˈwi] ‘today’ (avui in other dialects, cf. [əˈβuj] in Central Eastern Catalan); huit
[ˈwit] ‘eight’ (vuit in other dialects; cf. [ˈbujt] in Central Eastern Catalan). The
tendency not to reinforce the initial labiovelar glide in Valencian is so strong that
in many varieties it attracts the sequence /ɡw/, which is simpliﬁed as [w], as in guapo
[ˈwa.po] ‘handsome’ (Garcia Perales : iii, QI-VAL-); the reduction of /ɡw/ is
even more frequent in intervocalic onsets, as in egua [ˈe.wa] ‘mare’ (Garcia Perales
: iii, QI-VAL-; Atles lingüístic del domini català [ALDC], Veny and Pons i
Griera –: vi, map ) or aigua [ajˈwa] ~ [awˈja] ‘water’ (ALDC: ii, map
).⁹ Nonetheless, there are also some Valencian varieties that reinforce word-initial
labiovelar glides with [ɡ], both in loans ([ɡw]isky) and in the patrimonial words
mentioned (hui [ˈɡwi]; Garcia Perales : iii, QI-VAL-).
In intervocalic onset position, in addition to the maintenance of the glide (e.g., diuen
[ˈdi.wən] ‘they say’, cacauets [kə.kəˈwɛt͡s] ‘peanuts’ in Central Eastern Catalan) and
optional simpliﬁcation in [wu] sequences (e.g., creuo [ˈkɾɛ.wu] ~ [ˈkɾɛ.u] ‘I cross’ in
Central Eastern Catalan), alternative local pronunciations are reported in the literature,
which adapt to the surrounding environment in two opposite ways. On the one hand,
the tendency to avoid glides in onsets generally leads Majorcan Balearic varieties to
strengthen /w/ by turning it into the labiodental fricative [v], as in diuen [ˈdi.vən], bouet
⁸ As in Spanish, there are also adaptations with /b/ (or /v/ in dialects that distinguish the labial stop from
the labial fricative), as in Wagner, vagón, and vals (see fn. ). In Majorcan Balearic, the adaptation of initial
/w/ as [v] in more recent loans is characteristic of elderly people (e.g., [v]atsapp ‘WhatsApp’), which thus
follow the regular pattern of /w/ in intervocalic position (see Figure .).
⁹ The weakening of /ɡw/ as [w], already noted by Barnils (: §) with respect to Southern
Valencian, is also reported by Colomina Castanyer ; Sancho Cremades ; Segura i Llopes ;
and Giner Monfort .
Adjusting to the syllable margins


[boˈvət] ‘little ox’ (cf. diu [ˈdiw] ‘he says’, bou [ˈbɔw] ‘ox’), and cacauets [kə.kəˈvet͡s] or
[ko.koˈvet͡s] ‘peanuts’, also documented as [ka.kaˈwet͡s] in the Diccionari català-valen-
cià-balear (DCVB; Alcover and Moll –).¹⁰ Figure .illustrates the incidence of
the outcomes found in Perea () for the word diuen in Majorcan Catalan.
On the other hand, in other Majorcan varieties and less frequently in some areas of
Southern Valencian, a root-ﬁnal labiovelar glide sited after a labial vowel can dis-
appear before a vowel-initial afﬁx, thus minimizing the articulatory effort in the
transition between the remaining vowels at the expense of eventually displaying a
hiatus, as in bouet [boˈət] (Majorcan), [boˈət] (Southern Valencian) (see Bibiloni 
and Dols , for Balearic; Colomina Castanyer ; Beltran Calvo ; Beltran
Calvo and Herrero Lloret a, b and Giner Monfort , for Valencian). In words
such as bouet, the reinforcement of /w/ as [v] and its reduction to zero are mutually
exclusive strategies in the Majorcan varieties (Dols : ).
Finally, in coda position maintenance of the glide is almost the only possible
outcome in Catalan, as it is in Spanish: e.g., di[w], bo[w]. The same happens with
the second position of complex onsets (e.g., q[w]estió ‘question’); although if [wu]
sequences are involved, simpliﬁcation to [u] is also possible (e.g., adequo [əˈðɛ.kwu] ~
[əˈðɛ.ku] ‘I accommodate’; see, e.g., Wheeler : ). Other less systematic simpli-
ﬁcations occur in sequences where the labiovelar glide is preceded by a velar obstruent
and followed by a. For instance, in unstressed position the glide can fuse with the
following vowel, as in Quaresma ‘Lent’, attested as [kuˈɾɛz.mə] in Central Eastern
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Count
di[v]en
di[v]en ~ di[w]en
Labiovelar /w/, intervocalic position
F.Realization of /w/ in diuen in Majorcan Catalan
Cases with [v], ; cases with [v] ~ [w], 
Perea (: )
¹⁰ Fricativization of intervocalic /w/ is also documented in the adaptation of some recent loans such as
kiwi [ˈki.vi] ([ˈki.wi] ~ [ˈki.βi] in the Central Eastern varieties, where /v/ merged to /b/) (see also fn. ). An
alternative reinforced variant of /w/, with an added velar spirant fricative, is sporadically found in
Valencian, as in meua [ˈme.ɣwa] ‘mine (feminine)’ (Colomina Castanyer ; Saborit ).

J. Jiménez, M.-R. Lloret, and C. Pons-Moll

Catalan, [koˈɾez.ma] in Valencian and other Western varieties, and [koˈɾə.mə] or
[kuˈɾə.mə] in Balearic, where the phenomenon is more general (ALDC: iii, map ).
In unstressed word-ﬁnal position, though, the glide most typically deletes in some
Eastern non-Balearic varieties, as in aigua [ˈaj.ɣə], Pasqua [ˈpas.kə] ‘Easter’ (cf. [ˈaj.ɣo]
or [ˈaj.ɣu], [ˈpas.ko] or [ˈpas.ku] in Balearic; ALDC: ii, and iii, maps , respect-
ively). In stressed syllables, the glide and the vowel are maintained (e.g., guants
[ˈɡwans] ‘gloves’, quan [ˈkwan] ‘when’), although sporadic instances of fusion are
also reported for Balearic (e.g., qualque [ˈkwal.kə] or [ˈkɔl.kə] ‘some’ in Majorca; see
Bibiloni ; Veny , ; Dols ).
..The palatal glide
Unlike Spanish, in Catalan /j/ tends to be realized as a glide in all contexts. As expected,
there are no changes of constriction in the prosodic positions where the glides are
optimal margins, i.e., in the second position of complex onsets (e.g., miss[j]ó ‘mission’)
or in codas (e.g., re[j] ‘king’) , except for the simpliﬁcation of [ij] sequences (e.g., in
Majorcan Catalan ﬁll [ˈﬁj] ~ [ˈﬁ] ‘son’, derived from /ﬁj/ owing to /ʎ/-delateralization,
vs. ﬁï [ˈﬁ.i], *[ˈﬁj], *[ˈﬁ] ‘he trust (subjunctive)’, derived from /ﬁ+ i/).
As with the labiovelar glide, there are few words beginning with /j/, most of which
descend from loans (e.g., iogurt ‘yogurt’, iot ‘yacht’, ien ‘yen’) and learned words (e.g.,
hiat ‘hiatus’, iode ‘iodine’). There are also the patrimonial words jo [ˈjɔ] ‘I’ and ja [ˈja]
‘already’ (/ʒɔ/, [ˈʒɔ] and /ʒa/, [ˈʒa], in other varieties).¹¹ In general, word-initial /j/
onsets are realized as glides (e.g., [j]ogurt, jo [ˈjɔ], ja [ˈja]). Instances of reinforcement via
fricativization resulting in a sibilant are reported for Majorcan Catalan (e.g., [ʒ]ogurt)
and via sibilant affrication for varieties of Valencian (as in the delateralized pronunci-
ations of the words llet [ˈd͡ʒet] ‘milk’ and llengua [ˈd͡ʒeŋ.ɡwa] ‘tongue’; see Segura i
Llopes , , ; Zaragozà ; Saborit ; Moratal Canales ).
In intervocalic-onset position, Catalan preserves the palatal glide (e.g., feia [ˈfɛ.jə]
‘I did’, deia [ˈdɛ.jə] ‘I said’), but [ji] sequences simplify to [i] (e.g., desmaï [dəzˈma.i]
‘he faint (subjunctive)’, from /dəzmaj+i/; Wheeler : ). In this position,
Majorcan Catalan tends to weaken the articulation of the palatal glide, which either
is realized as a slightly more centralized and open glide (represented here as [e̯]) or is
completely deleted at the expense of creating a hiatus (especially in contact with a
nonlabial vowel), as in feia [ˈfə.e̯ə] ~ [ˈfə.ə], deia [ˈdə.e̯ə] ~ [ˈdə.ə] (see Mascaró and
Rafel ; Bibiloni ; Veny ; Dols ; Recasens and Espinosa ).
Intervocalic palatal-glide deletion is occasionally attested in Valencian as well; the
phenomenon is quite widespread in the case of certain verbal forms (e.g., feia [ˈfe.a];
see Garcia Perales : iii, QI-VAL-) and extends to other words in parts
of Southern Valencian, as in palaia [paˈla] ‘plaice’ (Colomina Castanyer ;
Beltran Calvo ; Beltran Calvo and Herrero Lloret a; Giner Monfort ).
¹¹ There also exist the fossilized verbal forms hi ha [ˈja] ‘there is’, hi havia [jəˈβi.ə] ‘there was’, etc., where
the glide derives from the locative clitic hi /i/ ‘there’ (cf. hi compra [iˈkom.pɾə] ‘he buys there’, but hi agafa
[jəˈɣa.fə] ‘he takes there’), with the proclitic reinforced form [əj] in Majorcan (cf. hi ha [əˈja] or [əˈe̯a], as in
hi compra [əjˈkom.pɾə]).
Adjusting to the syllable margins


Figure .shows the outcomes found in Perea () for the realizations of
intervocalic /j/ in the word deia in Majorcan Catalan.
.An OT analysis
..Sonority-adjusting triggers and faithfulness: the basic constraint set
Our account of the adjustments that glides undergo in Spanish and Catalan basically
builds on the interaction between two families of markedness constraints targeting
the glides within the syllable and across syllables. The constraints focusing on each
syllable by itself without considering the surrounding context are taken from the
split-margin hierarchy developed by Baertsch (), which augments Prince and
Smolensky’s (: ) margin hierarchy so as to distinguish the structural posi-
tions that promote low-sonority segments from those that promote high-sonority
ones. Segments with low sonority are favored in simplex onsets and in the ﬁrst
position of a complex onset (merged into Margin , M), as established in the
ranking in () (see also Smith ).¹² In contrast to the Mposition, both in
codas and in the second position of complex onsets (merged into Margin , M)
segments of high sonority are preferred ().¹³
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Count
de[j]a
de[j]a ~ de[Ø]a
de[Ø]a
Palatal /j/, intervocalic position
F.Realization of /j/ in deia in Majorcan
Cases with [j], ; cases with [j] ~ [Ø], ; cases with [Ø], 
Perea (: )
¹² Prince and Smolensky’s () margin hierarchy gives preference to segments of low sonority as well,
but applies only to singleton onsets.
¹³ The assumed sonority scale for consonants in () through () is the following: Glides[–HI] > Glides[+HI] >
Liquids > Nasals > Fricatives > Stops, where spirant and nonspirant fricatives are subsumed under
Fricatives, and stops and affricates under Stops. Moreover, we replace the ranking between [+high] and
[+low] vocalic margins proposed in Baertsch (2002) with a distinction between [+high] and [–high] glide
margins, a division which, as we will show next, is crucial to understanding the behavior of intervocalic
palatal glides in Majorcan Catalan.

J. Jiménez, M.-R. Lloret, and C. Pons-Moll

()
Constraint hierarchy for M(*M/λ) (where less sonorous segments are
preferred):
*M/GLIDE[–HI]  *M1/GLIDE[+HI]  *M1/LIQUID  *M1/NASAL 
*M/FRICATIVE  *M/STOP
()
Constraint hierarchy for M(*M/λ) (where more sonorous segments are
preferred):
*M/STOP  *M/FRICATIVE  *M/NASAL  *M/LIQUID  *M/GLIDE[+HI] 
*M/GLIDE[–HI]
On the other hand, if the environment surrounding each syllable is considered,
segments of high sonority are also preferred in the leftmost position of intervocalic
onsets, as established by the constraint hierarchy in (). This context-dependent
ranking favors consonants with less constriction in intervocalic Mpositions, thus
promoting a smoother vowel-to-vowel transition as far as sonority is concerned. That
is, in opposition to the *M/λ hierarchy in (), which favors maximum contrast
between the peak and the leftmost element in the onset, the VλM1V constraints
promote gestural uniformity beyond syllable boundaries (see, e.g., Kirchner 1998,
2004; Uffmann 2007). This type of constraint was originally conceived for transitions
with a consonant surrounded by vowels; however, given the similarities between
vowels and glides, we extend the hierarchy to vowel-consonant-glide-vowel
sequences through reference to the M1 position.
()
Constraint hierarchy for Min intervocalic position (*VλM1V) (where more
sonorous segments are preferred):
*VSTOPM1V  *VFRICATIVEM1V  *VNASALM1V  *VLIQUIDM1V 
*VGLIDE[+HI], M1V  *VGLIDE[–HI],M1V
So far, we have only introduced markedness constraints deﬁning—sometimes in
opposite directions—the conﬁgurations that ﬁt best in each syllabic position. How-
ever, the adaptation of glides to the environment driven by these markedness
constraints may lead to the violation of some faithfulness constraints. This is the case,
for instance, of the faithfulness constraint INTEGRITY (), which bans the presence of
multiple-output correspondents for a single-input segment, like the ones found in the
/w/-reinforcement through the realization of an additional consonant in Castilian
Spanish: huelo [ˈɡwe.lo] (see Section ..). Namely, an output such as [ˈɡwe.lo] is
penalized by INTEGRITY because, along with the splitting theory of consonant epen-
thesis that we adopt (Staroverov ; see also Yip ; Baković ; Krämer
), it is analyzed as the result of a process whereby /w/ splits into a velar stop
followed by a labiovelar glide: /w¹elo/, [ˈɡ¹w¹e.lo].¹⁴
()
INTEGRITY: Assign one violation mark for every input segment that has more
than one output segment correspondent. (See McCarthy and Prince .)
¹⁴ Whenever relevant, we use indices to designate input and output segments that stand in a corres-
pondence relation.
Adjusting to the syllable margins


The interpretation of the sequence [ɡw] as the result of a splitting process, rather
than as the outcome of an insertion process, straightforwardly predicts the quality
of the additional consonant: since the surface split velar consonant is in corres-
pondence with /w/, featural faithfulness constraints require it to be as similar as
possible to the input segment.¹⁵ Therefore, the two segments derived from the
process of splitting (e.g., /w¹elo/ [ˈɡ¹w¹e.lo])—as well as the ones found in sheer
strengthened outcomes (e.g., /j¹uɡo/ [ˈd͡ʝ¹u.ɣo])—are crucially evaluated by another
set of faithfulness constraints: those that belong to the IDENT family and that
control featural changes. On the one hand, the manner features of the output
are regulated by the constraint ID-GLIDE—in both its standard (a) and its exist-
ential versions (b).
()
a. ID-GLIDE: Assign one violation mark for every input glide when some of its
output correspondents is not a glide. (Adapted from McCarthy and Prince
)
b. ID-GLIDEEXISTENTIAL: Assign one violation mark for every input glide when none
of its output correspondents is a glide. (Adapted from de Lacy and Struijke
2000, and Struijke 2002)
These two kinds of IDENT faithfulness constraints differ in their degree of strictness
regarding the featural identity between the input segment and its output correspond-
ents: standard IDENT faithfulness constraints demand that every output segment
preserves the underlying featural speciﬁcation, whereas EXISTENTIAL-IDENT faithful-
ness constraints demand that at least some output correspondent preserves the
featural speciﬁcation of the input segment. If the reinforcement is accomplished
only through changes in constriction (as in /j¹uɡo/ [ˈd͡ʝ¹u.ɣo]), both versions of
ID-GLIDE are violated, because there is no glide corresponding to the original /j/. By
contrast, split outcomes (as in /w¹elo/ [ˈɡ¹w¹e.lo]) violate ID-GLIDE because one
correspondent of /w/ is not a glide, but satisfy ID-GLIDEEX because the glide character
is at least preserved in one of the two output correspondents.
On the other hand, the segments that are in correspondence with the glide seek to
replicate its input place features as well. As a result, the outcomes of the labiovelar
glide are expected to have Labial and Velar speciﬁcations (due to ID-[LAB] and
ID-[VEL], respectively), whereas the correspondents of the palatal glide are expected
to have the Palatal speciﬁcation (due to ID-[PAL]).¹⁶ However, total replication of
the place features of the input glide in split segments is ruled out by the version
of the Obligatory Contour Principle (OCP) disallowing continuous adjacent
¹⁵ Alternatively, we could treat the velar consonant as an epenthetic segment: /w¹elo/ [ˈɡ²w¹e.lo]. In this
approach, we would need other faithfulness constraints penalizing feature insertion (e.g., DEP[VEL]; see
Jiménez and Lloret 2013). For simplicity, we do not consider candidates with epenthesis; we are aware,
though, that this is a case of structural ambiguity.
¹⁶ Although the existential versions of these constraints were also considered to test the ranking
arguments through OT-Soft, in the chapter we just include the ones that are essential for the analysis.

J. Jiménez, M.-R. Lloret, and C. Pons-Moll

consonants with the same place speciﬁcations; hence, it rules outmappings such as
[ˈd͡ʝ¹j¹u.ɣo] from /j¹uɡo/.¹⁷
Given the complexity and variability of the data reported in Sections .–., in
the following sections we concentrate on the most common outcomes for Castilian
Spanish (Section ..), Central Eastern Catalan (Section ..), and Majorcan
Catalan (Section ..).
..A one-way adjusting variety: Castilian Spanish
As shown in Section ., in most Castilian Spanish varieties the glides /w/ and /j/
remain unaltered both in coda position (ja[w]la, re[j]) and as a second element of a
complex onset (d[w]eño, p[j]e). These are the optimal outcomes (as they are in
Catalan as well; see Sections ..–..), captured in the analysis through the
low ranking of the constraints referring to the glides in the *M/λ hierarchy pre-
sented in ().
When placed in onset position, /w/ undergoes a process of strengthening that
typically involves the realization of an additional consonant, either in word-initial
position (huelo [ˈɡwe.lo]) or in word-internal position (cacahuete [ka.kaˈɣwe.te]).¹⁸
Both reinforcements reveal that in Castilian Spanish a glide is not allowed as the ﬁrst
element of an onset, as a result of the pressure exerted by *M/GLIDE at the top of the
ranking. The ranking of the relevant constraints we are using to account for the facts
of Castilian Spanish is presented in ().¹⁹
()
Constraint ranking for Castilian Spanish:
*M/GLIDE, *VSTOPM1V, ID-[VEL], ID-[PAL], OCP  *M1/FRIC, *VFRICM1V,
ID-[LAB],ID-GLIDE, ID-GLIDEEx  INTEGRITY
As illustrated in () with the results for initial /w/, in the varieties under analysis
*M/GLIDE outranks INTEGRITY. This ranking rules out the selection of the fully
faithful candidate, with a labiovelar glide in onset position (a). Regarding the output
place features, ID-[VEL] ensures the selection of a candidate with a velar stop as the
ﬁrst element in the onset (M) and rules out other possible candidates, with a dental
stop as M, (f), or with a labial stop as M, (c) and (e). Candidate (e) is in fact the
¹⁷ The OCP constraint is also responsible for the absence of /wu/ and /ji/ sequences in the patrimonial
lexicon of Spanish as well as for the simpliﬁcation of these sequences in Central Eastern Catalan (cf. creuo
[ˈkɾɛ.wu] ~ [ˈkɾɛ.u], from /kɾɛw+u/, Section ..; desmaï [dəzˈma.i], from /dəzmaj+i/, Section ..).
¹⁸ In some varieties in our corpus, the voiced velar stop ([ɡ]) can also appear in related forms such as
olemos [oˈle.mos] ~ [ɡoˈle.mos] ‘we smell’ (ALeCMan: map GRA-), in which the glide is absent and
thus the velar segment is not explained by markedness. Most probably, in these cases the velar consonant
reinforcing the glide has been incorporated into the underlying representation via lexical diffusion.
However, considering Richness of the Base and the behavior of loans (in which the process is still
productive), the ranking must still account for the general absence of [w] in Mposition.
¹⁹ Neither Castilian Spanish nor Central Eastern Catalan show any empirical evidence for distinguish-
ing between [+high] and [–high] glides. Therefore, we use generic constraints such as *M/GLIDE to refer to
both categories in their rankings; see Section ..for a different treatment of [+high] and [–high] glides
in Majorcan Catalan.
Adjusting to the syllable margins


winner in some varieties; instead, in the variety analyzed in () the ranking of ID-[VEL]
over ID-[LAB] explains why the competition between the winning candidate (i.e.,
[ˈɡwe.]lo in (d), where the velar character is preserved in both split segments) and
the candidate (e) (i.e., [ˈbwe.]lo, where the labial character is instead preserved in
both split segments) is resolved in favor of the former.²⁰ Note that ID-[VEL] is satisﬁed
by the winning candidate, (d), but also by the candidate with strengthening to a
voiced velar stop (b). Candidate (b), though, incurs a fatal violation of ID-GLIDEEX,
whereas (7d) satisﬁes this constraint because the glide character is preserved in at
least one of the two split segments.²¹
()
/w1e/lo
*M1/Glide
*!
a. [ˈw1e.]
b. [ˈɡ1e.]
c. [ˈb1e.]
Word-initial splitting: huelo [ˈɡwe.lo]
☞ d. [ˈɡ1w1e.]
e. [ˈb1w1e.]
Id-[VEL]
Id-[LAB]
Id-Glide
Id-GlideEX
Integrity
*!
*!
*!
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*!
f. [ˈd1w1e.]
The constraints regarding Min intervocalic position (see ()) come into play in
cases with splitting inside the word (cacahuete [ka.kaˈɣwe.te]). Hence, in the tableau
in (), we include *VSTOPM1V ranked at the ﬁrst stratum and we analyze the same
candidates as in the previous tableau, but with the fricative versions of the voiced
stops (except for (8g)). This is why we have also added, in a lower position, the
constraints *M1/FRICATIVE and *VFRICATIVEM1V, targeting fricatives in the suitable
sites. The competition between the candidate with splitting to a velar stop as M1 (8g)
and the candidate with a velar spirant fricative as M1 (8d) is solved by *VSTOPM1V,
which favors the latter. Note, ﬁnally, that the arguments adduced to explain the
exclusion of other candidates in word-initial position (see (7)) also apply here.
²⁰ In the varieties in which [ˈbwe.lo] is selected, the opposite ranking (i.e., ID-[LAB]  ID-[VEL]) applies.
²¹ Throughout the chapter, we disregard reinforcements with a voiceless obstruent, as in [ˈk¹w¹e.lo],
which would always be ruled out by the faithfulness constraint ID-[VOICE] in favor of their voiced
counterparts. Neither do we consider candidates with consonants that are absent in the inventory of
each language, owing to structural constraints. For instance, a candidate with strengthening to a labio-
dental fricative ([ˈv¹e.lo]) is ruled out by the constraint *V, highly ranked in Castilian Spanish.

J. Jiménez, M.-R. Lloret, and C. Pons-Moll

()
cac/aw1e/te
*M1/Glide
*!
a. [a.ˈw1e.]
b. [a.ˈɣ1e.]
c. [a.ˈβ1e.]
Word-internal splitting: cacahuete [ka.kaˈɣwe.te]
☞ d. [a.ˈɣ1w1e.]
e. [a.ˈβ1w1e.]
g. [a.ˈɡ1w1e.]
*VStopM1V
Id-[VEL]
*M1/Fric
*VFricM1V
Id-[LAB]
Id-Glide
Id-GlideEX
Integrity
f. [a.ˈð1w1e.]
*!
*!
*!
*!
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*!
Like the labiovelar glide, /j/ is not allowed in Mposition. However, the repair
strategy triggered in this case is not a splitting operation, but the reinforcement of
the glide, usually via affrication in absolute word-initial position (yugo [ˈd͡ʝu.ɣo])
and via fricativization in intervocalic position (mayo [ˈma.ʝo]). The tableau in ()
illustrates the behavior of palatal glides at the beginning of the word. As shown,
the constraint ID-[PAL] is crucial to prevent not only splitting (f–g), but also other
strategies, such as strengthening to a coronal stop (d). A candidate with splitting
to an affricate followed by a palatal glide (e), which is more harmonic than the
winning candidate in terms of faithfulness, is ruled out by the OCP constraint.
Note, ﬁnally, the tight competition between the winning candidate (c), with
affrication, and the candidate (b), with only fricativization, which is in fact
an alternative realization in some varieties. In our analysis, (b) is ruled out
because it incurs an extra violation of *M/FRICATIVE. As said above, considering
each syllable by itself, in Mposition the lower the sonority, the better; so an
affricate (to which we assign the same sonority as to stops) is more harmonic than
a fricative.²²
²² If we assumed that the fricative part of affricates is salient enough to classify them as fricatives in the
sonority scale, candidate (c) would incur a violation of *M/FRIC as well, predicting the usual pattern of
variation between [ˈd͡ʝu.ɣo] and [ˈʝu.ɣo]. But then, we would expect a similar pattern in intervocalic
position, which is not so common. Formalizing variable cases like these would require the application of
a stochastic OT model of some kind to the data, which is beyond the scope of the chapter.
Adjusting to the syllable margins


()
/j1u/go
*M1/Glide
*!
a. [ˈj1u.]
b. [ˈʝ1u.]
☞ c. [ˈdʝ1u.]
Word-initial affrication: yugo [ˈdʝu.ɣo]
d. [ˈd1u.]
e. [ˈdʝ1j1u.]
Id-[PAL]
OCP
*M1/Fric
Id-Glide
Id-GlideEX
Integrity
f. [ˈɡ1j1u.]
*!
*!
*!
*!
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
͡
͡
͡
*!
g. [ˈd1j1u.]
When the glide appears in word-internal position preceded by a vowel, the marked-
ness constraints *VSTOPM1V and *VFRICATIVEM1V become relevant again. For the
sake of illustration, the tableau in (10) takes into account candidates with fricatives
rather than with stops. In this case, the competition between (10d), with affrication,
and (10b), with fricativization, is solved in favor of the latter, because the intervocalic
position favors elements with less constriction.²³
()
m/aj1o/
*M1/Glide
*!
a. [a.j1o]
☞  b. [a.ʝ1o]
c. [a.ð1o]
Word-internal fricativization: mayo [ˈma.ʝo]
d. [a.dʝ1o]
e. [a.ʝ1j1o]
g. [a.ð1j1o]
*VStopM1V
Id-[PAL]
OCP 
*M1/Fric
*VFricM1V
Id-Glide
Id-GlideEX
Integrity
f. [a.ɣ1j1o]
*!
*!
*!
*!
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*!
͡
²³ A similar approach, based on *ONSET/GLIDE, is found in Colina (: –), who focuses only on
intervocalic sequences with a palatal segment. An important difference with respect to our view is that she
does not distinguish between Mand Mmargins, so postconsonantal glides followed by a vowel (Min
our account) must be incorporated into the nucleus in order to satisfy *ONSET/GLIDE.

J. Jiménez, M.-R. Lloret, and C. Pons-Moll

The Eastern varieties of La Mancha reported in ALeCMan deserve special attention,
because in word-initial position they exhibit splitting into a velar consonant not
only with the labiovelar glide (huelo [ˈɡwe.lo]) but also with the palatal glide (yerno
[ˈɡjeɾ.no]). In Section ..we mentioned that the reinforcement in [ɡje] is
probably due to the analogical inﬂuence of words with initial /we/, with the result
that the velar consonant is added instead of the usual /j/ strengthening to an
affricate or a fricative. In fact, although the consonant [ɡ] is not a prototypical
correspondent of /j/, it preserves the Dorsal feature of the palatal glide. Hence, the
analogical effect can be considered as the promotion of a less likely—but still
natural—reinforcement (on the articulatory basis of this interpretation, see Reca-
sens : –).
..A non-adjusting variety: Central Eastern Catalan
As in Castilian Spanish, preservation without changes is the regular outcome for
glides in codas (di[w], re[j]) and in the second position of onsets (q[w]estió, miss
[j]ó), owing to the limited weight of *M/GLIDE in the ranking. The main difference
with respect to Spanish is that, in Central Eastern Catalan, both /w/ and /j/ tend to
be maintained in simplex onsets as well ([w]eb, di[w]en; [j]ogurt, fe[j]a). Central
Eastern Catalan is, in this respect, a faithful variety in which the markedness
constraint *M/GLIDE is consistently outranked by the faithfulness constraints
INTEGRITY and ID-GLIDE.
The tableaux in () and () illustrate the effects of this ranking for /w/ in
word-initial and in intervocalic position, respectively. Candidates with strength-
ening to a labiodental fricative (see (b) and (b)), which maintain the
underlying labial speciﬁcation, have no chance of winning, because they incur
a violation of ID-GLIDE. The same argument applies to candidates with strength-
ening to a bilabial stop and its fricative counterpart, which also preserve the
underlying labial speciﬁcation (see (c) and (c)), and candidates with
strengthening to a velar stop and its fricative counterpart (see (d) and (d)),
which are faithful to the velar speciﬁcation. Candidates with splitting (see (e)
and (e)) are even less harmonic because they violate INTEGRITY, in addition
to ID-GLIDE.²⁴
²⁴ From a diachronic point of view it makes perfect sense that splitting is not an available strategy in
Catalan. Indeed, although words with stop–glide complex onsets are fully documented in Catalan, in many
varieties, including Central Eastern Catalan and Majorcan Catalan, they have undergone fusion processes,
as in Quaresma (see Section ..). Fusion is the opposite of splitting; therefore, the emergence of these
structures is congruently blocked in the language.
Adjusting to the syllable margins


()
/w1ε/b
*M1/Glide
Integrity
ID-GLIDE
*!
*!
*!
*
Preservation of /w/ in word-initial position
☞ a. [ˈw1ε]
b. [ˈv1ε]
c. [ˈb1ε]
d. [ˈɡ1ε]
*!
e. [ˈɡ1w1ε]
*
()
d/iw1 + ə/n
*M1/Glide
Integrity
ID-GLIDE
*!
*!
*!
*
Preservation of /w/ in intervocalic position
☞ a. [i.w1ə]
b. [i.v1ə]
c. [i.β1ə]
d. [i.ɣ1ə]
*!
*
e. [i.ɣ1w1ə]
The palatal glide exhibits a parallel behavior to the labiovelar glide, with steady
preservation in all simplex onsets. As shown in the tableaux in () and (), the
aforementioned ranking accounts for the fully faithful mapping to [j] word-initially
and intervocalically. In this case we have considered candidates with strengthening
to palatal fricatives (see (b–c) and (b–c)) and to an affricate (see (d) and
(d)), which fatally violate ID-GLIDE. Alternative candidates with splitting (see
(e–f) and (e–f)) are not possible either, because they violate INTEGRITY in
addition to ID-GLIDE.
()
/j1u/gurt
*M1/Glide
Integrity
ID-GLIDE
*!
*!
*!
*
Preservation of /j/ in word-initial position
☞ a. [j1u.]
b. [ʝ1u.]
c. [ʒ1u.]
d. [dʒ1u.]
*!
*
*!
*
e. [ʒ1j1u.]
͡
f. [dʒ1j1u.]
͡

J. Jiménez, M.-R. Lloret, and C. Pons-Moll

()
f/εj1 + ə/
*M1/Glide
Integrity
ID-GLIDE
*!
*!
*!
*
Preservation of /j/ in intervocalic position
☞ a. [ε.j1ə]
b. [ε.ʝ1ə]
c. [ε.ʒ1ə]
d. [ε.dʒ1ə]
*!
*
*!
*
e. [ε.ʒ1j1ə]
͡
f. [ε.dʒ1j1ə]
͡
..A two-way adjusting variety: Majorcan Catalan
Majorcan Catalan does not differ from Central Eastern Catalan in the treatment of
glides in codas and in the second position of onsets, where they are also regularly
preserved (di[w], re[j]; q[w]estió, miss[j]ó). Regarding simplex onsets, however,
Majorcan Catalan imposes much stronger requirements on glides than Central
Eastern Catalan, but only when they are placed in intervocalic position. Indeed,
while in word-initial position the two glides tend to remain unchanged ([j]ogurt, [w]
eb), in intervocalic position they present two opposite fates: the labiovelar glide
generally shifts into a labiodental fricative (di[v]en), whereas the palatal glide weak-
ens to a slightly more centralized and open glide (fe[e̯]a), which may even undergo
complete deletion in some varieties. In () we present the basic ranking of con-
straints for Majorcan. Since different outcomes for glides are now possible, the
constraint set we take into account is larger than the one posited for Central Eastern
Catalan. Furthermore, we have added ONSET to the ranking and we have introduced
the distinction between [+high] and [–high] glides ([j] and [w] are [+high]; [e̯] and
[o̯] are [–high]; see Section .., fn. ), which becomes crucial for the changes that
the palatal glide undergoes intervocalically.
()
Constraint ranking for Majorcan Catalan:
*VSTOPM1V  *VFRICATIVEM1V *VGL[+HI], M1V, INTEGRITY, ID-[LAB], ID-[PAL],
ID-GLIDE, ONSET  *M/GLIDE[–HI], *VGL[–HI], M1V  *M1/GLIDE[+HI]
For the labiovelar glide, the tableau in () shows how the ranking of ID-GLIDE above
*M/GLIDE[+HI] makes the selection of forms with strengthening strategies in word-
initial position impossible (16c–e). Candidates with strengthening to a bilabial stop
(16d) or to a labiodental fricative (16c), which is the actual outcome in intervocalic
position, are directly ruled out by the constraint ID-GLIDE, although they satisfy the
remaining constraints. Neither is the reinforcement as a velar stop (16e) possible,
because of the pressure of both ID-GLIDE and ID-[LAB]. The same ranking, along with
the activity of INTEGRITY, is responsible for the exclusion of candidates with splitting
(16f–g). Finally, the ranking of *M1/GLIDE[–HI] above *M1/GLIDE[+HI] explains why
Adjusting to the syllable margins


the candidate with a [+high] glide (16a), which is less sonorous than its [–high]
counterpart (16b) and thus ﬁts better in M1, emerges as optimal.
()
/w1e/b
*M1/Glide
[–HI]
☞ a. [ˈw1e]
b. [ˈoˆ1e]
c. [ˈv1e]
Preservation of /w/ in word-initial position
d. [ˈb1e]
e. [ˈɡ1e]
Id-[LAB]
Id-Glide
*M1/Glide
[+HI]
Integrity
f. [ˈv1w1e]
*!
*!
*!
*!
*!
*
*
*
*
*
g. [ˈɡ1w1e]
*!
Almost the same scenario is found for the palatal glide in word-initial position, although
in this case the relevant faithfulness constraint for place is ID-[PAL]. Note how the
massive ranking of the faithfulness constraints above the markedness constraints
enforces the selection of the fully faithful candidate as optimal again (a).
()
/j1o/gurt
*M1/Glide
[–HI]
☞ a. [j1o.]
b. [eˆ1o.]
c. [ʝ1o.]
Preservation of /j/ in word-initial position
d. [ʒ1o.]
e. [dʒ1o.]
Id-[pal]
Id-Glide
*M1/Glide
[+HI]
Integrity
f. [d1o.]
*!
*!
*!
*!
*!
*!
*
*!
*
*
*
*
g. [dʒ1j1o.]
h. [d1j1o.]
͡
͡
In intervocalic position, the analysis is a challenge, because, as we have said, two
contradictory outcomes are found: strengthening and weakening. For expository
reasons, we start the analysis with the intervocalic palatal glide. As shown in (),
the relevant competition is established here between the fully faithful candidate (a)
and the candidate with weakening to a slightly more centralized and open glide, that
is, to a glide speciﬁed as [–high] (b). As placed in an intervocalic onset, where more
sonorous segments are preferred, low-ranked *VGL[+HI],M1V solves the tie by rejecting

J. Jiménez, M.-R. Lloret, and C. Pons-Moll

the candidate with the less open version of the glide (18a).²⁵ Additionally, a candidate
with total deletion, (i), is ruled out by ONSET, crucially ranked above *M/GLIDE[–HI]
and *VGL[–HI], M1V. An opposite ranking of these constraints would predict the choice
of the candidate with deletion instead. As shown in Section 15.3.2, /j/-deletion is in
fact an attested solution in Majorcan Catalan, which Recasens and Espinosa (2005:
26–9) associate precisely with the particularly low variants of the intervocalic palatal
glide.²⁶ Finally, the tableau also illustrates how the high ranking of the constraints
*VSTOPM1V and *VFRICATIVEM1V rules out strengthening strategies involving fricati-
vization or affrication, which are the usual outcomes in Castilian Spanish.
()
f/əj1 + ə/
*VStopM1V
*!
a. [ə.j1ə]
☞ b. [ə.eˆ1ə]
c. [ə.ʝ1ə]
Weakening of /j/ in word-internal position 
d. [ə.ʒ1ə]
e. [ə.ð1ə]
g. [ə.d1ə]
h. [ə.ʒ1j1ə]
i. [ə.ə]
*VFricativeM1V
*VGl[+HI], M1V
Integrity
Id-[PAL]
Id-Glide
Onset
*M1/Glide[–HI]
*VGl[–HI], M1V
*M1/Glide[+HI]
f. [ə.dʒ1ə]
*!
*!
*
*!
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*!
*!
*!
*!
͡
The ranking established for the palatal glide in () has undesirable consequences for
the labiovelar glide in intervocalic position, since a parallel form with a [–high] glide
(e.g., diuen [ˈdi.o̯ən]) would indefectibly enter the competition and be erroneously
selected as optimal. Interestingly enough, the deletion of /w/ is documented in the
Majorcan varieties that do not show strengthening to [v] when root-ﬁnal labiovelar
²⁵ The selection of (b) indicates that *VGL[+HI], M1V dominates the faithfulness constraint prohibiting
changes in height for glides, ID-[HI]. Inversely, the general maintenance of high glide variants in codas and
in the second position of onsets (i.e., in M2), where less constricted segments are also favored, shows that
ID-[HI] is above the constraint banning [+high] glides in M2 position, *M2/GLIDE[+HI] (see (20)).
²⁶ In postlexical sequences, word-initial /j/ is realized as [j] when appearing in intervocalic position: e.g.,
menja [j]ogurt ‘he eats yogurt’, whereas word-ﬁnal /j/ is lowered when preceding a vowel-initial word: e.g.,
ma[e̯] umpl ‘I never ﬁll’ (Dols : ). Whatever formalization we adopt to justify the maintenance of
word-initial [j], its preservation must be related to the special salience of the left margin of the word (see,
e.g., Barnes ).
Adjusting to the syllable margins


glides are preceded by a labial vowel and followed by a vowel-initial afﬁx, where the
labial feature of /w/ is still preserved in the previous vowel (e.g., bouet [boˈət]; see
Section ..). Thus, if we presume that these deletions follow a previous stage with
lowering of the labiovelar glide, we can draw a parallelism between the behavior of
the palatal glide and that of the labiovelar glide in intervocalic onsets, resulting from
the same ranking in ().
However, as stated in Section .., the most common realization of diuen is
[ˈdi.vən], with a labiodental fricative.²⁷ This outcome runs into problems with the
ranking proposed to account for the weakening of the palatal glide. The presence of
*VFRICATIVEM1V above *VGL[+HI], M1V, and thus outranking *VGL[–HI], M1V, would
enforce the selection of a candidate with a [–high] labiovelar glide. To deal with this
issue, we assume that the underlying representation of forms showing the alternation
[w] ~ [v] (as di[w] ~ di[v]en) displays two allomorphs, one with the labiovelar glide
and the other with the labiodental fricative. Moreover, we presume that the two
allomorphs appear with the lexical precedence ‘fricative>glide’, as in {/div/>/diw/}
for the root of diuen (on lexically ordered allomorphs, see Bonet, Lloret, and
Mascaró 2007, and Mascaró 2007). There are some empirical arguments that
support this allomorphic approach. First, the strengthening of the labiovelar
glide in intervocalic position is a dubiously productive process, since loans or
learned words such as Hawaii, Power, or PowerPoint are realized with [w]. Second,
this strengthening is not common in word-initial position, where it would be
more justiﬁable (see (16)) because the affected segment is not preceded by a
vowel. There is also an independent argument for giving precedence to the
fricative: the labiodental fricative is the variant appearing in onset position,
which, as known, is a neutral position that favors faithfulness and thus avoids
alterations (Beckman 1999).
In the grammar of these varieties, the preference for the dominant allomorph is
ensured by the PRIORITY constraint: “Respect lexical priority (ordering) of allomorphs”
(Bonet, Lloret, and Mascaró : ; Mascaró : ). In () we analyze the
results for diuen /{/div/¹> /diw/²}+ən/. For simplicity, we present the candidates
containing an intervocalic [w] or an even smoother transition between the adjacent
vowels as derived from the second-choice allomorph (i.e., /diw/²; see (c–d)), and
the candidate containing the labiodental fricative [v] as derived from the ﬁrst allo-
morph (i.e., /div/¹; see (a)). Candidates with a glide are faithful to the second
allomorph (b–c), but are discarded in favor of the candidate derived from the
ﬁrst allomorph (a), which satisﬁes PRIORITY. This constraint rules out a candidate
with deletion as well, because this candidate is assumed to derive from the intervocalic
weakening of the glide present in the second input allomorph (d).²⁸
²⁷ Recall from Section ..that, in the varieties that present [v] in diuen (i.e., [ˈdi.vən]), the
intervocalic segment in words as bouet is regularly realized as a labiodental fricative as well (i.e., [boˈvət]).
²⁸ Other mappings that are superﬁcially identical to the candidates in () are also correctly rejected by
the grammar. For instance, the mapping [ˈdi.vən]², phonetically identical to (a) but with reinforcement
of the glide from the second allomorph, is ruled out by PRIORITY. On the other hand, mappings related to
/div/¹ in which /v/ undergoes a reduction in constriction (i.e., [ˈdi.wən]¹, [ˈdi.o̯ən]¹) or is completely

J. Jiménez, M.-R. Lloret, and C. Pons-Moll

()
/{div1 > diw2} + ən/
PRIORITY
*!
*!
☞ a. [ˈdi.vən]1
b. [ˈdi.wən]2
c. [ˈdi.oˆən]2
Selection of a labial fricative [v] in intervocalic position 
Onset
Id-Glide
*
*
*
*
*
*
*VFricativeM1V
*VGl[+HI], M1V
*M1/Glide[–HI]
*VGl[–HI], M1V
d. [ˈdi.ən]2
*!
*M1/Glide[+HI]
In coda position, instead, segments of higher sonority are strongly preferred,
owing to the pressure of the *M/λ hierarchy. If we assume that *M/FRICATIVE
has a prominent position in the ranking, just above PRIORITY, the faithful mapping
of the ﬁrst allomorph /div/¹
(a) is ruled out.²⁹ The best coda in terms of
sonority, i.e., the nonhigh glide in (c), is ruled out because it changes the high
speciﬁcation of the second allomorph, an outcome excluded by the position of ID-
[HI] above *M/GLIDE[+HI] in the ranking. Therefore, the fully faithful mapping of
the second allomorph is chosen because it yields the least marked coda still
available (20b).³⁰
deleted (i.e., [ˈdi.ən]¹) could never win, because the unaltered outcome of roots with /v/ located inter-
vocalically (e.g., rovell [roˈvəj] ‘yolk’) reveals that /v/ is never weakened in that position. (The maintenance
of intervocalic /v/ is most likely due to the action of faithfulness constraints demanding the preservation of
the labiodental consonant and its fricative character crucially ranked above *VFRICATIVEM1V.)
²⁹ As in (), we present only candidates containing [w] or a segment of higher sonority derived from
/diw/², and the candidate containing the labiodental fricative [v] derived from /div/¹.
³⁰ Dols () suggests that roots displaying the alternation [v] ~ [w] contain a /V/ archiphoneme
(speciﬁed as Labial, [+voice], [+continuant]), which is realized either as [v] (in onsets) or as [w] (in codas).
In our analysis, though, if [v] ~ [w] were equally faithful mappings of /V/, the reluctance to having
fricatives in intervocalic onsets (owing to *VFRICATIVEM1V; see (19)) and in codas (owing to *M2/FRICATIVE;
see (20)) would lead to the systematic selection of the least constricted variant of the underspeciﬁed
segment (namely, [w]). Alternatively, we might consider that the underlying representation for these forms
is /v/ (as proposed by Wheeler 2005), and derive the weakening to [w] in coda position from the *M2/λ
hierarchy (i.e., from *M2/FRICATIVE). This analysis is not supported by the behavior of /v/ in verbs such as
llevar ‘to take away’, cavar ‘to dig’, or provar ‘to prove’, in which [v] in intervocalic onsets (cf. lle[v]ar, ca[v]
ar, pro[v]ar) alternates in most varieties with the voiceless fricative counterpart in word-ﬁnal position, as in
the ﬁrst singular present indicative forms lle[f], ca[f], pro[f] (see Bibiloni 1983). In our proposal, these
verbal forms need only a single stem-allomorph, with ﬁnal /v/, which is either mapped faithfully in onsets
or devoiced, just like the other obstruents, in ﬁnal codas.
Adjusting to the syllable margins


()
/{div1 > diw2}/
*M2/Fricative
a. [ˈdiv]1
☞ b. [ˈdiw]2
Selection of the labiovelar glide [w] in coda position 
Id-[HI]
Id-Glide
*
*
*
*
Priority
*M2/Glide[–HI]
*M2/Glide[+HI]
*!
*!
c. [ˈdioˆ]2
.Conclusion
In this chapter we bring together data from several varieties of Catalan and Spanish
to investigate the divergent behavior of glides in onsets and codas. Our account of the
data gives support to the distinction proposed by Baertsch () between elements
that are parsed as the leftmost element in the onset (M) and elements that are
syllabiﬁed as codas or as the second element in the onset (M). Additionally, we
demonstrate that glide phonotactics requires, in addition to the reference to inde-
pendent syllables that Baertsch’s () split-margin hierarchy provides, the consid-
eration of segmental strings so as to incorporate the effects of the surrounding
context into the analysis. A broader implication of the study is that glides constitute
an important testing ground for the evaluation of competing tendencies appearing in
languages to adjust markedness sonority requirements to faithfulness conditions.
Finally, the Optimality-Theoretic approach presented here illustrates how the model
is capable of deriving the whole typology of outcomes from the same constraint set,
even when enriched multi-input representations are needed (as in the case of ordered
allomorphs in Majorcan Catalan).
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Spanish Agencia Estatal de Investigación and the
FEDER, EU (research projects FFI--C--P and FFI--C--P: http://
www.ub.edu/GEVAD) and by the Catalan Government (research group SGR).
Previous insights on this topic were presented at the X Congreso Internacional de Lingüística
General, Zaragoza , and at the XXVI Col·loqui Internacional de l’Associació de Llengua i
Literatura Catalanes, Salamanca (see Jiménez and Lloret and , respectively).
We thank Javier Caro and the anonymous reviewers for their useful comments.

J. Jiménez, M.-R. Lloret, and C. Pons-Moll

16
Galician mid-vowel reduction
A Stratal Optimality Theory account
FERNANDO MARTÍNEZ-GIL
.Introduction
A commonly observed phenomenon across languages is the asymmetry between
stressed and unstressed vowels and the occurrence of certain phonological properties.
Thus, in many languages only vowels of a certain quality may occur in unstressed
syllables, a property often referred to as vowel reduction (see Rietveld and Koopmans-
van Beinum ; Anderson ; Crosswhite , ; Flemming ; John
Harris ; Warner , among others). Within the Iberian Peninsula there are
two well-known cases of unstressed vowel reduction: Portuguese (Mateus ;
Barbosa ; Carvalho ; Mateus and d’Andrade ; Vigário ), and
Catalan (Wheeler , ; Hualde ; Mascaró ).
The present study deals with upper vs. lower mid-vowel contrasts and the reduc-
tion of such contrasts in unstressed positions in Galician. This language exhibits a
phonemic distinction between the mid-high (close) vowels and their mid-low (open)
counterparts, which will be characterized phonologically in this chapter in terms of
tongue-root advancement by the feature [ATR] (Advanced Tongue Root): /e, o/ are
[+ATR], and /ɛ, ɔ/ are [ATR].¹ In all varieties of Galician, without any exceptions,
such [ATR]-based mid-vowel contrasts are neutralized and realized as [+ATR], in
post-tonic position (quite generally, the word-ﬁnal vowel in paroxytones, and the last
two vowels in proparoxytones, a comparatively much rarer type of prosodic word in
¹ Traditionally, this vowel height contrast among mid vowels has often been described with the terms
tense vs. lax mid vowels. It is likely that the upper ~ close vs. lower ~ open-mid-vowel distinction in
Galician does not ﬁt the tense vs. lax feature characterization as used, for example, to describe vowel
harmony processes in Western African languages (see Ladefoged and Maddieson : –for the
shortcomings of attempts to apply the feature [tense] to the analysis of vowel systems in European
languages). With this caveat in mind, for the sake of convenience in this chapter I will use indistinctly
the terms upper ~ close and lower ~ open in order to refer to the Galician mid-vowel /e, o/ and /ɛ, ɔ/
contrasts respectively.
Romance Phonetics and Phonology. First edition. Mark Gibson and Juana Gil (eds.)
This chapter © Fernando Martínez-Gil . First published by Oxford University Press.

Galician). In addition, in the most conservative varieties of Galician, which for
convenience I will label conservative Galician (or CGal, for short), the open-/close-
mid-vowel opposition is also neutralized in pretonic position; as a consequence, close
vs. open contrasts are restricted to stressed syllables, the only position in which open
vowels are allowed, and neutralized in unstressed ones. I will refer to this phenom-
enon as mid-vowel reduction, and abbreviate it hereafter as MVR. The neutralization
of lower mid vowels in CGal is generally carried over to morphologically complex
words (cf. Veiga Arias , , ; Couceiro : –; Regueira Fernández
: –), with a set of three notable exceptions where the underlying open quality
of mid vowels is preserved: a) productive evaluative sufﬁxation (i.e., diminutives,
augmentatives, etc.); b) ‑ˈmente ‘-ly’ adverbs; and c) compounding.² In other varieties
of Galician, which I dub innovative Galician (IGal), MVR is systematic in post-tonic
mid vowels, as in CGal. However, in contrast to CGal, MVR fails to apply to pretonic
lower mid vowels in IGal in two main instances. First, in derivational morphology:
whenever the root morpheme of a given base contains an underlying lower mid
vowel, its quality is faithfully preserved in derived words and compounds, independ-
ently of afﬁx type or morphological operation, even though the vowel in question no
longer bears primary stress. Many Galician varieties conform to this pattern (see Porto
Dapena : –; Carballo Calero : ; Taboada : ff.; Hualde and
Martínez-Gil ; Freixeiro Mato : –, among others).
Second, open vowels in IGal often appear, subject to some restrictions to which
I will return in Section .., on the initial (and sometimes also the peninitial)
unstressed syllable of loanwords and neologisms introduced to the language in recent
centuries, a large majority of which have been borrowed from Spanish or, in
statistically lower numbers, from languages such as French and English. It is not
clear why IGal speakers resort to this peculiar [ATR] marking of pretonic mid
vowels in neologism and loanword adaptation. In particular, Spanish, the main
source of the overwhelming majority of neologisms adopted in Galician in the course
of the last few centuries, lacks such a phonemic contrast.
The use of the term reduction in this chapter in order to characterize the neutraliza-
tion of the open-/close-mid-vowel distinctions in unstressed positions is justiﬁed on the
following grounds. First, phonemic neutralization phenomena determined by accentual
prominence have traditionally been characterized as manifestations of the reductive
type, as explicitly formulated in Veiga (, : –).³ Second, several authors have
pointed out that in comparison with their stressed counterparts, unstressed vowels in
many varieties of modern spoken Galician take on a less than clear quality, as they
² For a detailed description of Galician derivational afﬁxation, see, e.g., González Fernández () and
Álvarez Blanco, Monteagudo, and Regueira Fernández (: chapter ).
³ Regueira Fernández (), following Mateus and d’Andrade’s () analysis of Portuguese, suggests
that pretonic MVR ought to be considered a vowel-raising process, instead of a vowel reduction one (see
also Regueira Fernández ). Both interpretations, however, are convergent. Raising and centralization
happen to be the two main ways the quality of unstressed vowels may undergo reduction, but the two
are not mutually exclusive; they combine, for example, in unstressed vowel reduction in languages
such as Portuguese or Catalan. As for Galician, one can readily categorize MVR as a vowel-raising type
of reduction.

Fernando Martínez-Gil

usually undergo raising and centralization. Some authors transcribe them with the
open high vowel symbols [ɪ, ʊ], and even with the close ones [i, u] (see, e.g., Enríquez
: –; Porto Dapena : ; Regueira Fernández : , , , ,
, , : –; Álvarez Blanco ; Vidal Figueiroa ; Dubert García
; Kabatek : ff.; Molinos Castro ).⁴
To my knowledge, the only available attempt to provide a formal analysis of MVR
in these two varieties of Galician mid vowels is Hualde and Martínez-Gil (), who,
following Wetzels’ () analysis of similar data in Brazilian Portuguese, crucially
rely on the assumption of two lexical strata and cyclic stress assignment. The main
purpose of this chapter is to present a formal account of the open-/close-mid-vowel
distribution in Galician, with special focus on the properties of MVR in the two
varieties of Galician under study, within the version of Optimality Theory (OT)
known as Stratal OT, a modular approach to the phonology–morphology interaction
that follows the general assumptions held by the earlier rule-based Lexical Phonology
and Morphology model (e.g., Kiparsky a, b, ; Kaisse and Shaw ;
Mohanan ; Hargus and Kaisse ). My primary objective is to present a formal
account of both MVR and the failure of this process to apply in certain types of
morphological operations within Stratal OT, and ultimately to contribute to the
advancement of our understanding of the two patterns of dialectal variation that
arise in the treatment of pretonic mid vowels in Galician.
The remainder of this chapter is organized as follows. Section .discusses the
vowel system of Galician. After a characterization of mid-vowel height contrasts in
terms of the feature [ATR], it is shown that the analysis of such phonemic contrasts,
as well as the presence of post-tonic MVR in CGal vs. its absence in IGal, can be
handled in a straightforward manner within a parallel OT approach when we
consider underived lexical items. The realization of pretonic mid vowels in morpho-
logically complex non-verb forms is taken on in Section .. The rule-based
approach advocated in Hualde and Martínez-Gil (), which crucially appeals to
cyclic stress assignment and extrinsic ordering, can be shown to fall short of
achieving a satisfactory explanation of the counterfeeding opacity exhibited by the
⁴ In my own Moañés dialect (spoken in the town of Moaña, located in the northern shore of the Bay of
Vigo, with a population of approximately ,), underlying close-mid vowels are reduced to high when
unstressed (whether pretonic or post-tonic), a trait immediately recognized by speakers from neighboring
areas: pequeno [piˈkenu] ‘small’, estrume [isˈtɾumi] ‘brushwood’. In my (impressionistic) observation
unstressed close-mid vowel raising is determined by both stylistic and sociolinguistic factors. Thus, it is
more common in fast, informal registers, in older and less educated speakers who acquired Galician as their
ﬁrst language. By contrast, unstressed /ɛ, ɔ/ may be optionally raised to [e, o], seemingly as an instance of
optional MVR, but generally not raised: certeza [sɛɾˈtesa]/[seɾˈtesa] ‘certainty’, not *[siɾˈtesa] (cf. certo
[ˈsɛɾto] ‘certain’), quentamos [kɛņˈtamus]/ [keņˈtamus] ‘we heat up’, not *[kiņˈtamus] (cf. quento [ˈkɛņtu]
‘I heat (up’)), mortal [mɔɾˈtal]/[moɾˈtal] ‘deadly’ not [*muɾˈtal] (cf. morte [ˈmɔɾte] ‘death’). Unstressed /ɛ,
ɔ/ may be raised to high in some speciﬁc words, especially in those whose meaning has been lexicalized:
porteiro [puɾˈtejru] ‘goalkeeper’(cf. porta [ˈpɔɾta] ‘door’), cordel [kuɾˈdɛl] ‘string’ (cf. corda [ˈkɔɾda] ‘rope’;
see also Section .for unstressed mid-vowel raising in Moañés ﬁrst conjugation verbs). Such data
undoubtedly reﬂect a process of vowel reduction. Mid-vowel raising has been reported in other Galician
varieties (see, e.g., Regueira Fernández : ). It should be noted here that Moañés is an IGal-type of
dialect. Throughout this chapter the data on Moañés are based on my personal observations, as well as my
own intuitions as a native speaker of this variety of Galician.
Galician mid-vowel reduction


CGal data. Opaque interactions, on the other hand, typically present intractable
problems for parallel OT approaches, since they require two contradictory constraint
rankings: the domination of [ATR] markedness over [ATR] faithfulness, responsible
for CGal pretonic MVR in most derived forms, must be reversed in order to account
for derivational and compounding operations in which MVR fails to obtain.
An alternative approach within Output-to-Output Correspondence, a version of OT
that attempts to capture phonological similarities between morphologically related
words, similarly proves insufﬁcient to adequately handle the data from the two
Galician varieties. It is suggested that counterfeeding opacity in CGal can be handled
in a simple manner within Stratal OT, which posits two distinct lexical modules, the
stem and the word, each with its own independent constraint ranking. In the proposed
account, underived lexical items and most types of morphological derivation in CGal
are processed at the Stem-level, where markedness constraints restricting the feature
[ATR] to stressed mid vowels outrank faithfulness to the quality of a base’s mid
vowel, thereby accounting for pretonic MVR. The small class of morphological
processes that constitute apparent exceptions to MVR are explained on the assumption
that such operations are processed under the constraint ranking prevailing at the
Word-level, where faithfulness to an underlying mid vowel’s [ATR] value overrides
[ATR] markedness constraints. This analysis is carried over to the distribution of the
feature [ATR] and the operation of MVR in verb forms in Section .. Section .
considers the historical emergence of pretonic MVR and explores some of the factors
that may have contributed to the CGal vs. IGal split. Finally, Section .offers some
concluding remarks.
.Contrastive mid-vowel height
Galician exhibits a seven-member underlying vowel inventory commonly found in
other Romance languages, with two sets of mid vowels and four degrees of vowel
height, as shown in (). Some representative minimal pairs illustrating the close/open
phonemic contrast among stressed mid vowels in proparoxytonic words that end in
an open syllable are provided in ().⁵
⁵ In () and thereafter: a) unless explicitly stated otherwise, all examples are given in standard
orthography, except for the mid-vowel upper vs. lower mid distinction, which is shown in phonetic
characters. For clarity, primary stress is indicated for all forms with a stress bar, both in phonemic-
phonetic representations and in orthographic forms (in order to avoid unnecessary clutter, orthographic
accents are not indicated). I will not be concerned here with the issue of how lexical stress is assigned to
surface forms in Galician; for the sake of expedience, underlying forms will be provided with lexical stress.
Whenever no information is available in the relevant literature regarding the open/close quality of mid
vowels in particular lexical items or set of data, I have resorted to my own intuitions, as a native speaker of
Moañés. Mid-vowel quality in Galician is subject to a certain amount of dialectal variation (see Fernández
Rei : –), and for speciﬁc lexical items the underlying close/open value of a stressed vowel in Moañés
may differ from other other Galician dialects. For example, while the stressed vowels in Moañés are closed
in ˈleite ‘milk’, aˈquela ‘that one- FEM’, ˈollo ‘eye’, ˈnoite ‘night’, etc., they are transcribed as open for the
northwestern variety spoken in the Ferrol region by Porto Dapena (: , –): ˈlɛite, aˈquɛla, ˈɔllo,
ˈnɔite. The empirical evidence used here attempts to reﬂect all the relevant aspects of MVR, or lack thereof,
in morphologically simplex vs. derived words.

Fernando Martínez-Gil

()
Underlying vowel inventory of contemporary Galician
front
unrounded
central back
rounded
high
i
u
close/upper mid
e
o
open/lower mid
ɛ
ɔ
low
a
()
/e, o/:
/ɛ, ɔ/:
ˈpeso
‘weight’
ˈpɛso
‘I weigh’
ˈven
‘Come!’
ˈbɛn6
‘well’
ˈpelo
‘hair’
ˈpɛlo
‘I peel’
ˈbola
‘loaf of bread’
ˈbɔla
‘ball’
ˈoso
‘bear’
ˈɔso
‘bone’
ˈfora
‘I/(s) he had been’
ˈfɔra
‘out(side)’
As indicated, a massive number Spanish borrowings entered the Galician lexicon
throughout the centuries. Owing to the aforementioned IGal practice of marking mid
vowels as open in loanword adaptation (see Section .), in some instances new
minimal pairs have arisen that did not exist in earlier stages of the language. They
include pairs involving stressed mid vowels, as in ˈfɛcha ‘date’ vs. ˈfecha ‘sip’, or ˈcɔrte
‘cut’ vs. ˈcorte ‘stall, cowshed’ (Taboada : ), as well as unstressed ones, rɛnˈtiña
‘very close’ vs. renˈtiña ‘rent-DIM’, vɔˈtar ‘to vote’ vs. boˈtar ‘to throw, cast’, rɔˈdar ‘to
roll, wheel along’ vs. roˈdar ‘to cut with a hoe’, etc. (Taboada : ). In addition, in
a number of neologisms the quality of a loanword’s stressed mid vowel is subject to
dialectal variation: ˈsesos ~ ˈsɛsos ‘brain’, proˈblema ~ proˈblɛma ‘problem’, ˈostra ~ ˈɔstra
‘oyster’, Seˈgovia ~ Seˈgɔvia (name), etc.
I assume that the open/close distinction among mid vowels in Galician is to be
expressed by means of the feature [ATR]. The open-mid vowels are [ATR], and
their close counterparts are [+ATR]. In this and the following sections I analyze the
relevant facts related to the distribution of the feature [ATR] in Galician within
the Optimality-Theoretic framework. In OT, Universal Grammar provides a set of
universal constraints, which may be violable. The different language-particular and
dialect-speciﬁc rankings of such universal constraints account for both crosslinguis-
tic and dialectal variation respectively. The phonology of a language essentially
consists of a constraint hierarchy that stipulates speciﬁc dominance relations
among the universal constraints. The optimal form (the observed output) is one
that either violates the least number of lower ranked constraints or violates them to a
lesser extent than the competing forms.⁷
⁶ The graphemes b and v both represent the phoneme /b/ in Galician.
⁷ A minimal familiarity is assumed with the OT framework, as formulated in McCarthy and Prince
(), Prince and Smolensky ([] ), and in much subsequent work. The reader may also consult
standard OT treatises, such as Archangeli and Langendoen (), Kager (), and McCarthy (,
). Correspondence Theory in OT was developed in McCarthy and Prince (, ) and has been
widely used since in OT work.
Galician mid-vowel reduction


The most basic type of constraint interaction in OT is one in which the surface
realization of some structural property speciﬁed at the underlying level (faithfulness)
is in conﬂict with some principle that disfavors that property (markedness). Avoid-
ance of markedness compels the violation of faithfulness; and conversely, preserva-
tion of underlying contrasts results in the surface realization of marked structure.
In general, the preservation of featural contrasts in surface forms in OT is compelled
by a constraint ranking in which constraints enforcing faithfulness to the underlying
(input) feature speciﬁcations dominate markedness constraints that prohibit some
feature combination in phonetic representations (the output). Starting with the
[ATR]-based phonemic distinctions among mid vowels in (), the relevant constraints
for our present purposes are IO-IDENT-[ATR], which demands output faithfulness to
the input (input–output correspondence) for the feature [ATR], and *[low, ATR],
which bans the speciﬁcation [ATR] in the class of non-low vowels, as formulated in
() and () respectively.⁸
()
Input–Output Identity of the feature [ATR] (IO-IDENT-[ATR]):
Correspondent segments in input and output have identical values for the
feature [ATR]
()
*[low, ATR]: non-low vowels are not [ATR]
Recall that Galician systematically disallows open-mid vowels in post-tonic position
(see Section .). No exceptions are known.⁹ This property results from obligatory
MVR in post-tonic position, and can be viewed as reﬂecting the undominated status
of the constraint in (), whereby only the vowel heading the prosodic word’s metrical
foot may bear the speciﬁcation [ATR]:¹⁰
()
[ATR]FOOT: Within the metrical foot only the head may bear the feature [ATR]
The underlying [ATR] distinction among the mid vowels, as well as post-tonic MVR,
are compelled under the constraint ranking in (). As proposed later in Section .,
this is precisely the ranking that holds in Galician at the word stratum, independently
of particular dialect. A sample derivation involving the evaluation of some likely
⁸ The *[low, ATR] constraint in () expresses the widely recognized fact that [+ATR] is the default
or universally unmarked value for high and mid vowels, while [ATR] is the marked one (see Wetzels
: ).
⁹ In enclitic constructions consisting of the third person singular of transitive ﬁrst conjugation verbs,
like leˈvar ‘to take, carry’ followed by an enclitic masculine pronoun o (s) ‘it (them)’, it is quite common in
colloquial Galician for the verb’s theme vowel /a/ to coalesce with the pronoun, resulting in a long
unstressed ﬁnal open round vowel (e.g., ˈlɛva-o (s) ‘take it (them)- MASC’ that is realized as [ˈlɛvɔː(s)]
(Freixeiro Mato : , ), but this is clearly a phrase-level phenomenon, not a word-level one.
Interestingly, in dialects like Moañés, stress shifts onto the coalesced vocoid: [lɛˈvɔː(s)].
¹⁰ The metrical foot has often been observed to serve as the prosodic domain of feature co-occurrence
restrictions. Two well-known examples of vowel harmony circumscribed to the foot domain are found in
Andalusian Spanish (Lloret and Jiménez ) and in the Asturian and Cantabrian dialects in northern
Spain (Hualde b).

Fernando Martínez-Gil

candidates for the minimal pair ˈpɛso ‘I weigh’ ~ ˈpeso ‘weight’ in () is shown in
tableaux ()–():
()
Constraint ranking: [ATR]FOOT  IO-IDENT-[ATR]  *[low, ATR]
()
Input: /ˈpεso/ ‘I weigh’
Candidates
[−ATR]foot
IO-Ident-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a. ☞ˈpεso
*
b.
ˈpeso
*!
c.
ˈpesɔ
*!
*
*
d.
ˈpεsɔ
*!
*
**
()
Input: /ˈpeso/ ‘weight’
Candidates
[−ATR]foot
IO-Ident-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a. ☞ˈpeso
*
b.
ˈpεso
*!
c.
ˈpesɔ
*!
*
*
d.
ˈpεsɔ
*!
**
**
As shown in ()–() candidates (c–d) are immediately ruled out because they violate
the undominated constraint [ATR]FOOT. The high rank of [ATR]FOOT in the
constraint hierarchy of Galician captures the compulsory nature of post-tonic
MVR by ensuring that a lower mid vowel will never surface in post-tonic position.
The choice between candidates (a) and (b) in both cases is thus left to the higher-
ranking constraint IO-IDENT-[ATR], which demands faithfulness to the input vowel.
The faithful candidates, (a) and (a) in each case, satisfy this constraint, and thus
emerge as winners, while their remaining competitors, (b) and (b), violate it. The
underlying contrast between lower mid and upper mid vowels is thereby preserved in
phonetic form.
The three constraints proposed so far and their particular ranking in () must also
work to ensure that hypothetical input forms containing underlying post-tonic lower
mid vowels will inevitably undergo post-tonic MVR, as illustrated in ()–():
()
Hypothetical input: /ˈpεsɔ/; output: ˈpεso ‘I weigh’
Candidates
[−ATR]foot
IO-Ident-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a. ☞ˈpεso
b.
ˈpeso
**!
c.
ˈpesɔ
*!
*
*
*
*
d.
ˈpεsɔ
*!
**
Galician mid-vowel reduction


()
Candidates
[−ATR]foot
IO-Ident-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a. ☞ˈpeso
b.
ˈpεso
*
c.
ˈpesɔ
*!
*!
*
*
d.
Hypothetical input: /ˈpesɔ/; output: ˈpeso ‘I weight’
ˈpεsɔ
*!
*
**
Although the [ATR]-markedness constraint *[low, ATR] ranks the lowest rank
in the partial constraint hierarchy (), it still plays a crucial role in selecting candidate
(a) over (b), both of which satisfy [ATR]FOOT and tie in one [ATR] faithfulness
violation apiece. This is a typical manifestation of the property known in OT as the
emergence of the unmarked (McCarthy and Prince ). For the sake of simplicity,
from this point onward I will omit any reference to [ATR]FOOT in subsequent
candidate evaluation, with the understanding that owing to its undominated status
in the hierarchy no optimal candidate will ever be selected that contains an open-mid
vowel that occupies a post-tonic position.
The analysis in () –(), i.e., one in which [ATR] faithfulness outranks [ATR]
markedness works as desired for IGal, but presents a problem for CGal when we
consider words with at least a pretonic mid vowel, such as eˈnɔrme ‘enormous’.
Namely, as shown in (), such a ranking will select the correct output when the
input pretonic mid vowel is close. However, by giving priority to [ATR] faithfulness
over [ATR] markedness this ranking would fail to accomplish pretonic MVR in a
hypothetical input that contains a pretonic open-mid vowel, as illustrated in ()
(here and in subsequent tableaux, the symbol ‘✖’ is used to point to a wrong
candidate selected as winner; the sad face ‘☹’ points at the intended one).
()
Candidates
IO-Ident-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a. ☞ eˈnɔrme
b.
eˈnorme
*!
c.
εˈnɔrme
*!
**
d.
*
Input: /eˈnɔɾme/; output: eˈnɔrme ‘enormous’
εˈnorme
**!
*
()
Candidates
IO-Ident-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a. ✖ ɛˈnɔrme
b.
 eˈnɔrme
*!
c.
ɛˈnorme
*!
*
d.
**
*
Hypothetical input: /ɛˈnɔɾme/; output: *ɛˈnɔrme ‘enormous’
eˈnorme
**!

Fernando Martínez-Gil

In short, the candidate selected by the assumed ranking would be perfectly
well-formed in IGal, but would run counter to pretonic MVR in CGal. Suppose
that in an attempt to attain the desired outcome in CGal we reverse the ranking so
that [ATR] markedness dominates [ATR] faithfulness, as in ():
()
Constraint ranking: *[low, ATR]  IO-IDENT-[ATR]
Clearly, this move is still insufﬁcient, since MVR would now apply across the board,
thereby ruling out entirely output open-mid vowels, including the stressed one, as
shown in ():
()
Candidates
IO-Ident-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a. ✖ eˈnorme
b.
 eˈnɔrme
*!
c.
εˈnorme
*!
**
d.
*
Input: /eˈnɔɾme/; output: eˈnɔrme ‘enormous’
εˈnɔrme
**!
*
A solution to this problem, however, is well within reach. Namely, in order to protect
the [ATR] speciﬁcation of the stressed vowel we need to bring into our analysis an
undominated context-sensitive constraint that demands faithfulness to the input
[ATR] value of the stressed vowel, as in (), which under the constraint ranking
in () would readily produce the desired results, as shown in ().
()
IO-IDENT-ˈσ-[ATR]: in a stressed syllable output segments and their input
correspondents must have identical speciﬁcations for the feature [ATR]
(Beckman : ; see also McCarthy and Prince ; Beckman ;
Alderete ).
()
Constraint ranking (CGal): IO-IDENT-ˈσ-[ATR]  *[low, ATR] 
O-IDENT-[ATR]
()
Candidates
IO-Ident-[ATR]
IO-Ident-ˈσ-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a.
b.
**!
c.
*!
*
*
*
d.
Input (CGal): / eˈnɔɾme/; output: eˈnɔrme ‘enormous’
☞ eˈnɔrme
εˈnɔrme
eˈnorme
εˈnorme
*!
*
*
A hypothetical input with an open pretonic vowel in CGal can be readily dealt with
by enforcing pretonic MVR, which in the analysis put forth in this chapter can be
made to follow directly from the domination of [ATR] markedness over [ATR]
faithfulness, as illustrated in ():
Galician mid-vowel reduction


()
Candidates
IO-Ident-[ATR]
IO-Ident-ˈσ-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a.
b.
**!
c.
*!
*
**
*
**
d.
Hypothetical input (CGal): /εˈnɔɾme/
☞ eˈnɔrme
εˈnɔrme
eˈnorme
*!
*
**
εˈnorme
It turns out that the input for ‘enormous’ in () is not hypothetical at all; in fact, it
occurs in IGal, where it underlies the fully faithful surface form ɛˈnɔrme. A simple
way to capture the fact that MVR does not apply in pretonic position is to propose a
constraint ranking for IGal in which IO-IDENT-[ATR] dominates *[low, ATR], as
illustrated in ():
()
Candidates
IO-Ident-[ATR]
IO-Ident-ˈσ-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a.
b.
*!
c.
*!
*
**
**
d.
☞ εˈnɔrme
eˈnɔrme
eˈnorme
Input (IGal): /εˈnɔɾme/; output: εˈnɔrme ‘enormous’
*
εˈnorme
*!
*
The question naturally arises whether the presence vs. absence of pretonic MVR in
modern Galician derives from different constraint rankings (i.e., two distinct gram-
mars, in OT terms, in accordance with the notion of factorial typology) in the two
dialectal varieties; namely, one in which [ATR] markedness dominates [ATR] faith-
fulness, as required for CGal, and the opposite ranking needed to account for IGal.
In this view, the phonological grammars of the two varieties share the undominated
ranking of [ATR]FOOT, thus accounting for post-tonic MVR, but differ in their
treatment of pretonic /ɛ, ɔ/ as a result of the opposite ranking adopted by the MVR-
promoting markedness constraint *[low, ATR] and the [ATR]-preserving constraint
IO-IDENT-[ATR] in their respective constraint hierarchy. However, this cannot be the full
story, since it so happens that both constraint ranking combinations are needed in CGal
in order to account for a class of morphological operations in which pretonic [ATR]
faithfulness is enforced, as shown in Section ..
.The distribution of mid-vowel height in morphologically
complex nominals
..Pretonic MVR vs. [ATR] faithfulness in conservative
and innovative Galician
This section surveys the distribution of mid-vowel height in pretonic position in
Galician word formation. Quite generally, as a result of MVR, underived lexical

Fernando Martínez-Gil

items in CGal may contain only one open vowel, and this vowel is necessarily the
primary stress-bearer (Hualde and Martínez-Gil ), as shown by the representa-
tive sample in ():¹¹
()
a. goˈbɛrno
‘government’ (cf. *gɔˈbɛrno, *gɔˈbɛrnɔ, *goˈbɛrnɔ, *goˈbernɔ,
*gɔˈbernɔ)
deˈsɛrto
‘desert’ (cf. *dɛˈsɛrto, *dɛˈsɛrtɔ, *dɛˈsertɔ,* deˈsertɔ,*dɛˈserto)
b. eˈnɔrme
‘huge’ (cf. *ɛˈnɔrmɛ, *eˈnɔrmɛ, *ɛˈnormɛ, *eˈnormɛ, *ɛˈnɔrme12
esˈtɔmago
‘stomach’ (cf. *ɛsˈtɔmago, *ɛsˈtɔmagɔ, *esˈtomagɔ,*ɛsˈtomagɔ,
*ɛsˈtomago)
MVR applies in CGal to words created by morphological operations involving the
addition of certain stress-attracting sufﬁxes, such as -ˈeiro, -ˈento, -ˈaxe, -ˈuxe, -ˈade,
etc., which can be readily identiﬁed as the Class , namely, the type of sufﬁxes
generally associated with the ﬁrst lexical stratum in the classic Lexical Phonology
and Morphology framework. A representative sample is given in ():¹³
()
Pretonic MVR in CGal:
a. ˈf ɛrr-o ‘iron’:
feˈrr-eiro ‘blacksmith’, ferr-aˈdura ‘horseshoe’, feˈrr-uxe ‘rust’,
ferr-uˈxento ‘rusty’, feˈrr-oso ‘ferrous’, feˈrr-udo ‘iron-strong per-
son’, ferr-aˈmenta ‘(iron) tools’, ferr-eˈria ‘blacksmith’s forge’
ˈfɛsta ‘party’:
fesˈt-eiro ‘party lover, festive’, fest-eˈxar ‘to celebrate’, fesˈt-in
‘feast’, fest-iˈval ‘festival’, fesˈt-ivo ‘festive’, fest-iviˈdade ‘festivity’
ˈcɛrt-o ‘certain’: cerˈt-eiro
‘sure,
well-aimed’,
cerˈt-eza
‘certainty’,
cert-iˈdume
‘certainty’
ˈcɛg-o ‘blind’:
ceˈgu-eira ‘blindness’, ceg-aˈdor ‘blinding’, ceˈg-ar ‘to blind’, ceg-
aˈrato ‘poor-sighted’, ceg-aˈmento ‘blinding, obfuscation’
b. ˈpɔrt-a ‘door’:
porˈt-al ‘entrance hall’, porˈt-eiro ‘doorman, goalkeeper’, porˈt-ɛla
‘postern gate’, porˈt-ada ‘facade, frontage’
ˈrɔd-a ‘wheel’:
roˈd-eira ‘(wheel tracks in a) cattle road’, roˈd-ɛlo ‘roller’, roˈd-ar
‘to roll’, roˈd-axe ‘act of rolling a car’s wheels’, roˈd-icio ‘water
wheel’
¹¹ MVR is violated in CGal in two verbs, quɛnˈtar ‘to heat up’ and quɛˈ(n)cer ‘to warm up’, whose
underlying open-mid root vowel is unexpectedly preserved in unstressed positions: quɛntaˈron ‘they heat up,
quɛnˈcin ‘I warmed up’, etc.; see Santamarina : –, –. This outcome is generally attributed to the
historical coalescence */a/+/e/ > /ɛ/: *CA(L)ENˈTARE > *caenˈtar > quɛnˈtar , CAˈ(L)ESCERE> *caeˈcere > quɛˈ(n)cer ;
cf. Ferreiro : .
¹² Monomorphemic forms with an open pretonic vowel like ɛˈnɔrme do occur in IGal dialects, as
already stated in Section .(cf. Regueira Fernández , s.v. enorme); see also Section ..
¹³ As in Spanish (cf. Harris , ; Ambadiang ; Bermúdez-Otero ), derived nominals in
Galician consist of a derivational stem (coextensive with the root in underived words) plus an inﬂexional
vowel (also known as gender marker, class marker, word marker, terminal element, stem formative,
inﬂexional desinence, etc.). Thus, derivational sufﬁxes are attached to the stem, not the whole word;
since the gender marker must invariably be placed at the rightmost edge of a word, they never appear
before a derivational sufﬁx: ˈf ɛrr-o ‘iron’ ! feˈrr-eiro ‘blacksmith’ (cf. (a)), not * ferr-o-ˈeiro. Xosé Luis
Regueira Fernández (pers. comm.) points out that some of the forms in () may have undergone
lexicalization, and thus for many speakers their morphological structure may no longer be analyzable as
derived from the corresponding basic forms.
Galician mid-vowel reduction


ˈpɔrc-o ‘pig’:
porˈqu-eiro ‘swineherd, pig dealer’, porqu-eˈria ‘junk, rubbish’,
porc-aˈllan, porc-aˈlleiro ‘hog, swine’, porˈqu-eira ‘pigsty’, porc-
aˈllada ‘ﬁlth, dirt’
ˈɔs-o ‘bone’:
oˈs-udo ‘bony’, os-aˈmenta, oˈs-eira ‘skeleton’, oˈs-ario ‘ossuary’, os-
iﬁˈcar ‘to become bone(-like)’
The pretonic MVR process exempliﬁed in () is quite similar to the pattern of vowel
reduction reported for modern Portuguese (cf. Mateus ; Mateus and d’Andrade
for Iberian Portuguese; and Wetzels , , for Brazilian varieties).
As in Portuguese, there are some systematic exceptions to MVR in CGal. They
comprise three of the most productive word-formation processes in the language,
illustrated in (). Namely, MVR fails to obtain in CGal in morphologically complex
words in which stress is placed either on a sufﬁx-initial vowel, as in productive
evaluative sufﬁxation (a) and ‑ˈmente ‘-ly’ adverbs (b), or on the second member
of verb+noun/adjective exocentric compounds (c) (some authors consider ‑ˈmente
adverb formation as a special type of compounding), whereby the stressed open-mid
vowel in the basic word, or the ﬁrst member in a compound, is rendered pretonic in
the derived/compound form. These are precisely the kinds of morphological oper-
ations associated with the second (word-level) stratum in the theory of Lexical
Phonology: Class afﬁxation and compounding.¹⁴
()
a. base forms
diminutives/augmentatives
ˈpɛdr-a
‘stone’
pɛˈdr-iña
‘stone-DIM’ / pɛˈdr-olo ‘stone-AUG’
ˈfɛst-a
‘party’
fɛsˈt-iña
‘party-DIM’ / fɛsˈt-on
‘party-AUG’
ˈpɔrt-a
‘door’
pɔrˈt-iña
‘door-DIM’ / pɔrˈt-on ‘door-AUG’
ˈrɔd-a
‘wheel’
rɔˈd-iña
‘wheel-DIM’ / rɔˈd-aza ‘wheel-AUG’
b. feminine adjectival bases
‑ˈmente adverbs
ˈcɛrta ‘certain-FEM’
cɛrta‑ˈmente
‘certainly’
ˈfɛra
‘ﬁerce-FEM’
fɛra‑ˈmente
‘ﬁercely’
ˈnɔva
‘new-FEM’
nɔva‑ˈmente
‘again, anew’
ˈdɔcil ‘docile-FEM’
dɔcil-ˈmente
‘in a docile way’
c. compounds
bɛnˈvido
‘welcome’
(ˈbɛn ‘well’ + ˈvido ‘come’)
cɛmˈpɛs
‘centipede’
(ˈcɛn ‘(a) hundred’ + ˈpɛs ‘feet’)
fɛrrocaˈrril
‘railway’
(ˈfɛrro ‘iron’ + caˈrril ‘path, lane’)
tɔcaˈdiscos
‘record player’ (ˈtɔca ‘plays’ + ˈdiscos ‘records’)
Preﬁxes present a special case, since they do not generally carry primary stress in
Galician, and therefore the stressed open-mid vowel of the base to which they are
¹⁴ The distinction between Class afﬁxes on one hand, and Class afﬁxation and compounding on the
other, is reminiscent of—and essentially analogous to—the two lexical strata proposed in a number of
analyses of the phonology–morphology interface in Spanish within the Lexical Phonology framework, as in
Wong-Opasi (), Hualde (a), or Dunlap (). In addition, the absence of pretonic MVR in (b)
is undoubtedly favored by the fact that the stressed open-mid vowel of the base preserves some degree of
prominence in ‑ˈmente adverb formation, where it is known to bear secondary stress.

Fernando Martínez-Gil

attached is invariably maintained in preﬁxed forms, wherein preﬁxation renders the
preﬁxes pretonic, as illustrated in (). Thus, the absence of MVR in preﬁxed forms
is, for the most part, entirely predictable.
()
base forms
preﬁxed forms
ˈcɛrto
‘certain’
in-ˈcɛrto
‘uncertain’
ˈtɛrra
‘(home) land’
des-ˈtɛrro
‘exile’
ˈguɛrra
‘war’
pos(t) -ˈguɛrra
‘postwar’
ˈbɔte
‘bounce’
re-ˈbɔte
‘rebound’
ˈɔrde
‘order’
deˈs-ɔrde
‘disorder’
However, there is one speciﬁc type of data in which a preﬁxed form seemingly may
end up with a pretonic open-mid vowel in all dialects of Galician. When a preﬁx
contains a mid vowel, in general this vowel is close underlyingly (e.g., es-/ex-/e-, de-,
des-, re-, com-/con-, pos-/post-, pro-, sobre-, etc.), which trivially complies with
MVR. However, there is a handful of (generally learned) preﬁxes/preﬁxoids in the
language that contain an underlying open-mid vowel, as is the case in the sɛmi-,
tɛrmo-, ɔ/ɔb-, ɔrto-, etc., thereby producing forms with pretonic open vowels, as in
(). As far as I have been able to determine, mid-vowel height is preserved in such
preﬁxes in CGal varieties. If this is indeed the case, it would constitute yet another
exception to pretonic MVR.
()
a. sɛmiconduˈtor
‘semiconductor’
b. ɔpreˈsion
‘oppression’
sɛmiˈeixe
‘semiaxis’
ɔbxeˈcion
‘objection’
tɛrmonucleˈar
‘thermonuclear’
ɔbsˈtaculo
‘obstacle’
tɛrˈmɔmetro
‘thermometer’
ɔrtoˈpɛdico
‘orthopedic’
Such persistent faithfulness to the underlying vowel is also shared by sufﬁxes. Thus
the underlying initial vowel is close in stressed sufﬁxes like -ˈeiro (e.g., cabaˈl-eiro
‘horse rider, gentleman’; cf. caˈbalo ‘horse’), -ˈoso (e.g., chuˈvi-oso ‘rainy’; cf. ˈchuv(i)
-a ‘rain’), -ˈolo (e.g., peˈdr-olo ‘large uncut stone’; cf. ˈpɛdr-a ‘stone’), but open in -ˈɛlo
(e.g., fonˈt-ɛla ‘small fountain’; cf. ˈfont-e ‘fountain’), -ˈɛgo (e.g., mulleˈr-ɛgo ‘fond of
women’; cf. muˈllɛr ‘woman’), -ˈɔsa (e.g., xeiˈt-ɔsa ‘crafty-FEM’; cf. ˈxeit-o ‘(proper)
manner, way’), -ˈɔte (e.g., riˈll-ɔte ‘unripe, hard to gnaw (fruit)’; cf. riˈll-ar ‘to gnaw’).¹⁵
A sufﬁx’s underlying open-mid vowel is faithfully maintained, apparently also
in CGal, when a given sufﬁxed form becomes the base for further derivation,
even when it is rendered post-tonic: fonˈt-ɛla ! fontɛˈl-iña ‘small fountain-DIM’,
xeiˈt-ɔsa ! xeitɔsa‑ˈmente ‘craftily’. Preservation of the underlying quality of a preﬁx
or sufﬁx can be easily formalized in OT as a consequence of the undominated status
¹⁵ For some preﬁxes there is interdialectal variation between a close and an open vowel, such as is the
case of retro - in many dialects (cf. Regueira Fernández , s.v. retro- . . . ), but rɛtro - in other varieties
(e.g., Moañés). In addition, in a number of Western Galician dialects, including Moañés, the initial open-
mid vowel of the feminine sufﬁx - ˈɔsa alternates with a close vowel, due to a process of metaphony
(discussed in Section ...) in the corresponding masculine - ˈoso (cf. xeiˈt-ɔsa ‘crafty- FEM’ vs. xeiˈt-oso
‘crafty- MASC’). In other varieties, especially those that lack the metaphonic process of Western Galician
varieties, the vowel in question is consistently close, independently of gender.
Galician mid-vowel reduction


of the faithfulness constraint IO-IDENT-[ATR]AFFIX, which enforces faithfulness to the
underlying value of the [ATR] speciﬁcation of afﬁxes.
It is important to note here that Class sufﬁxation in CGal requires that the vowel
of the derivational stem, and not necessarily the underlying vowel, be faithfully
preserved in the diminutive, as shown in (). Thus, just as underlying /ɛ, ɔ/ in the
stem in the underived bases in (a) is replicated in diminutive formation, the close-
mid vowel of the derivational stems in (b), created by MVR in Class sufﬁxation,
is also preserved in the corresponding diminutive forms.
()
a. Underived base diminutive
b. (derived) base
diminutive
ˈnɛv-e ‘snow’
nɛˈv-iña
neˈveir-a ‘fridge’
neveiˈr-iña
ˈpɔrt-a ‘door’
pɔrˈt-iña
porˈteir-o ‘doorman’
porteiˈr-iño
Turning now to IGal, the open vowel of a base invariably preserves its quality in all
derivational morphology, regardless of afﬁx type, as well as in compounding. This
means that no clear demarcation can be established in IGal between Class and Class
sufﬁxes: vowel quality is preserved not only in the morphological classes illustrated
in (), as in CGal, but also in Class sufﬁxes, as shown in () (for purposes of
comparison, the examples given earlier in () Class sufﬁxes in CGal are repeated
in () with the corresponding surface realizations in IGal):
()
Absence of pretonic MVR in IGal:
a. ˈfɛrr-o ‘iron’:
fɛˈrr-eiro ‘blacksmith’, fɛˈrr-adura ‘horseshoe’, fɛˈrr-uxe ‘rust’,
fɛrr-uˈxento ‘rusty’, fɛˈrr-oso ‘ferrous’, fɛˈrr-udo ‘(ﬁg.) iron-strong
person’, fɛrr-aˈmenta ‘(iron) tools’, fɛrr-eˈria ‘blacksmith’s forge’.
ˈfɛsta ‘party’:
fɛsˈt-eiro ‘party lover, festive’, fɛst-eˈxar ‘to celebrate’, fɛsˈt-in
‘feast’, fɛst-iˈval ‘festival’, fɛsˈt-ivo ‘festive’, fɛst-iviˈdade ‘festivity’
ˈcɛrt-o ‘certain’: cɛrˈt-eiro ‘sure, well-aimed’, cɛrˈt-eza ‘certainty’, cɛrt-iˈdume ‘certainty’
ˈcɛg-o ‘blind’:
ceˈgu-eira ‘blindness’, cɛg-aˈdor ‘blinding’, cɛˈg-ar ‘to blind’, cɛg-
aˈrato ‘poor-sighted’, ceg-aˈmento ‘blinding, obfuscation’
b. ˈpɔrt-a ‘door’:
pɔrˈt-al ‘entrance hall’, pɔrˈt-eiro ‘doorman, goalkeeper’, pɔrˈt-ɛla
‘postern gate’, pɔrˈt-ada ‘facade, frontage’
rˈɔd-a ‘wheel’:
rɔˈd-eira ‘(wheel tracks in a) cattle road’, rɔˈd-ɛlo ‘roller’, rɔˈd-ar ‘to
roll’, rɔˈd-axe ‘act of rolling a car’s wheels’, rɔˈd-icio ‘water wheel’
ˈpɔrc-o ‘pig’:
pɔrˈqu-eiro ‘swineherd, pig dealer’, pɔrqu-eˈria ‘junk, rubbish’,
pɔrc-aˈllan, pɔrc-aˈlleiro ‘hog, swine’, pɔrˈqu-eira ‘pigsty’, pɔrc-
aˈllada ‘ﬁlth, dirt’
ˈɔs-o ‘bone’:
ɔˈs-udo ‘bony’, ɔs-aˈmenta, ɔˈs-eira ‘skeleton’, ɔˈs-ario ‘ossuary’,
ɔs-iﬁˈcar ‘to become bone(-like)’
The failure of open vowels to undergo MVR in Class sufﬁxation in CGal is a typical
case of opacity by underapplication (see McCarthy ), which in serial derivations
is generally engendered by an extrinsic rule ordering of the counterfeeding type.
Namely, in a rule-based approach stress assignment in monomorphemic words and
Class sufﬁxes in CGal must precede (and therefore feed) the Lax-to-Stress Condi-
tion (LSC) (see Section ..); the absence of MVR in () can be accounted for

Fernando Martínez-Gil

only if assignment of primary stress to the sufﬁx vowel is ordered before the LSC. In
other words, MVR should have applied in () but, unexpectedly, has not, hence the
opaque interaction. Thus, in spite of the surface evidence for MVR in both underived
lexical items and in Class sufﬁxation in CGal, the process fails to apply in the
complementary set of morphologically derived forms and in compounding.
..The cyclic account of MVR in Hualde and Martínez-Gil (1994)
A typical account of the Galician data described in ()–() within serial phon-
ology would appeal to the “transformational cycle” whereby the phonological prop-
erties of simplex words are carried over to derived ones, from smaller to larger
morphological domains. This is essentially the approach taken in Hualde and Martí-
nez-Gil (), whose analysis rests on two critical assumptions: a) the primary
stress rule in Galician applies cyclically; and b) MVR results from the well-
formedness condition () on open vowels, which we may dub here the Lax-to-
Stress Condition (LSC):¹⁶
()
LSC: [ATR] can be associated to a mid vowel only if it bears primary stress.
Any violation of the LSC () triggers rule (a), which disassociates the feature
[ATR] from an unstressed non-low vowel, an operation followed by the universal
redundancy rule (b), whereby unspeciﬁed non-low vowels are assigned the feature
[+ATR] by default, thus accounting for MVR:
()
a.
V̆ (V̆ = an unstressed V)
b. [low]
! [+ATR]
[low]
[ATR]
Notice that even in the hypothetical case in which a monomorphemic form contains
more than one open vowel, the LSC ensures that only the stressed one survives in
surface representations, as shown in the derivation of a hypothetical base morpheme
containing two underlying open vowels in () (UR = underlying representation;
irrelevant structure is omitted):
()
UR
stress
LSC
surface
/ ɡ ɔ b ɛ ɾ n + o /
ɡ ɔ ˈb ɛ ɾ n o
(28a)
ɡ ɔ ˈb ɛ ɾ n o
(28b)
[ɡ o ˈb ɛ ɾ n o]
[ATR]
[
ATR]
[ATR]
[+ATR] [ATR]
Typical derivations are given in () for three forms in the two dialectal variants,
representative of Class and Class sufﬁxation, and underived lexical items respect-
ively. Thus in Hualde and Martínez-Gil’s proposed analysis, the LSC is crucially
ordered after stress assignment in Level , but gets turned off in Level . In CGal
(cf. (a)), Class sufﬁxes are attached in Level , while Class afﬁxation (preﬁxation
and sufﬁxation), as well as compounding take place at Level . (Pretonic) MVR does
¹⁶ Hualde and Martínez-Gil characterize the close/open distinction in Galician by means of the feature
[tense]; I have innocuously reformulated this condition in () by replacing the feature [tense] with [ATR].
Galician mid-vowel reduction


not apply in IGal on the other hand, because in this variety all types of afﬁxation and
compounding operations apply in Level (cf. (b)).¹⁷
()
a. CGal
‘blacksmith’
‘door-DIM’
‘government’
underlying forms:
/fɛr+eiɾo/
/pɔɾt+iɲa/
/ɡobɛɾno/
LEVEL 
Class Sufﬁxation:
fɛr+eiɾo
—
—
stress assignment:
fɛr +ˈeiɾo
pˈɔɾt
ɡobˈɛɾno
LSC () + rules in ():
ferˈeiɾo
—
—
LEVEL 
Class sufﬁxation:
—
pˈɔɾt+iɲa
—
stress assignment:
—
pˈɔɾtˈiɲa
—
leftmost stress erasure:18
—
pɔɾtˈiɲa
—
other rules:
ferˈejɾo
—
ɡoβˈɛɾno
output forms:
feˈrejɾo
pɔɾˈtiɲa
ɡoˈβɛɾno
b. IGal
underlying forms:
/fɛr+eiɾo/
/pɔɾt+iɲa/
/ɡobɛɾno/
LEVEL 
Class sufﬁxation:
—
—
—
stress assignment:
f ˈɛr
pˈɔɾt
ɡobˈɛɾno
LSC () + rules in ():
—
—
—
LEVEL 
Class sufﬁxation:
f ˈɛr+eiɾo
pˈɔɾt+iɲa
—
stress assignment:
f ˈɛrˈeiɾo
pˈɔɾtˈiɲa
—
leftmost stress erasure:
fɛrˈeiɾo
pɔɾtˈiɲa
—
other rules:
fɛrˈejɾo
—
ɡoβˈɛɾno
output forms:
fɛˈrejɾo
pɔɾˈtiɲa
ɡoˈβɛɾno
As shown in (a) for the derivation of pɔrˈtiña in CGal, stress is assigned to the
open-mid vowel of the root morpheme in Level , the outcome of which satisﬁes the
LSC, applicable within this stratum. Stress is assigned to the sufﬁx vowel in Level ,
and the root open vowel is subsequently destressed by (leftmost) stress erasure. Since
the LSC no longer holds in Level , the open root vowel survives in output forms. By
contrast, in feˈrreiro sufﬁxation takes place in Level , and stress is placed on the
sufﬁx initial vowel. Since at this point the root open vowel violates the LSC, it
becomes close (i.e., it undergoes MVR) by application of the rules in (). In IGal
(b), all sufﬁxation takes place in Level ; stress is placed on the root vowel in Level
, and therefore it eludes the purview of the LSC. In Level , stress is assigned again,
now to the sufﬁx-initial vowel, but since the LSC no longer applies, the root open
vowel in the two items that have undergone sufﬁxation in Level is able to preserve
its underlying open quality in surface representations.
Three objections can be raised against the account in (). First, the complexity of
the derivations raises the issue of language acquisition, as it does the fact that it
¹⁷ Instead of levels, Hualde and Martínez-Gil’s analysis appeals to two derivational cycles; for all
practical purposes, an account in terms of two Lexical Phonology strata, such as (), would be entirely
analogous to their two-cycle derivations.
¹⁸ Stress erasure is a convention that ensures that all occurrences of non-rightmost primary stress
created in earlier levels are erased at the end of a derivation (see Harris , , and much related work).

Fernando Martínez-Gil

resorts to extrinsic ordering by positing a counterfeeding relationship between stress
assignment in Level and the LSC, a source of phonological opacity. Second, it allows
for intermediate representations that contain two primary stresses, a malformed
metrical conﬁguration in Galician (or crosslinguistically, for that matter). Finally,
its most serious shortcoming lies in the fact that the LSC is at best a descriptive
restatement of the observed fact that only stressed vowels bear the [ATR] speciﬁ-
cation, and at worst a mere brute force stipulation that does not follow from any
principle invoked in this analysis, and that lacks explanatory power. In spite of these
ﬂaws, the cyclic analysis contains a crucial insight regarding the phonology–
morphology interface, recast in the Stratal OT account proposed in Section ..:
the two-level derivations in () essentially reﬂect the lexical domains of Stratal OT:
the stem and word strata.
..MVR and [ATR] faithfulness in a parallel OT analysis
In Section .I introduced the three basic constraints that preserve lexical contrast.
First, the undominated status of the positional faithfulness constraint IO-IDENT-
ˈσ-[ATR], which demands faithfulness to the [ATR] value of the vowel heading a
word’s metrical foot, ensures that MVR will never apply to stressed lax vowels.
Second, *[low, ATR], which compels MVR by banning this feature combination.
And third, the [ATR]-faithfulness constraint IO-IDENT-[ATR]. We saw earlier that
pretonic MVR is effectively achieved by the subordination of IO-IDENT-[ATR] to
*[low, ATR]. It should be recalled that post-tonic MVR is systematically
enforced in both CGal and IGal by the undominated constraint [ATR]FOOT,
formulated in (), while pretonic MVR is found only in CGal. As demonstrated
in Section ., while post-tonic MVR in CGal cannot be accounted for simply from
the domination of [ATR] markedness over [ATR] faithfulness, pretonic MVR can
be made to follow from such ranking, formulated in (), and repeated here for
convenience as (). The proposed constraint ranking would invariably select as
optimal a candidate that preserves the quality of the stressed vowel in the input
while at the same time enforcing pretonic MVR in CGal, as illustrated with an
underived lexical item in ().
()
Constraint ranking (CGal): IO-IDENT-ˈσ-[ATR]  *[low, ATR] 
IO-IDENT-[ATR]
()
Candidates
IO-Ident-[ATR]
IO-Ident-ˈσ-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a.
b.
*!
c.
*!
*
*
**
d.
☞ goˈbεrno
gɔˈbεrno
gɔˈberno
Input (CGal): /ɡoˈbεɾno/; output: goˈbεrno ‘government’ 
goˈberno
*!
*
Galician mid-vowel reduction


For simplicity, reference to the constraint IO-IDENT-ˈσ-[ATR] will be omitted in
subsequent tableaux in the remainder of this section, with the understanding that it
would unfailingly rule out any candidates in which the output [ATR] value is
unfaithful to its corresponding input; thus only candidates that do not violate the
undominated constraints [ATR]FOOT and IO-IDENT-ˈσ-[ATR] will be considered.
The derivation of pretonic MVR in lexical items derived by Class sufﬁxation in
CGal is shown in ():
()
Candidates
IO-Ident-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a. ☞ feˈrreiro
b.
fεˈrreiro
*!
*
Input (CGal): /fεˈr + eiɾo/; output: feˈrreiro ‘blacksmith’ (cf. ˈfεrro ‘iron’)
The intractable problem that arises in strictly parallel OT becomes apparent when we
apply this approach to the open–close distribution in morphologically derived words.
Namely, while an analysis that simply relies on the constraint ranking () succeeds
in producing pretonic MVR in Class afﬁxation, it fails to block the process in their
Class counterparts, as shown in ().
()
Candidates
IO-Ident-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a. ✖ feˈrriño
b.
*
Input (CGal): /fεr + ˈiɲo/; output: fεˈrriño ‘iron-DIM’ (cf. ˈfεrro)
fεˈrriño
*!
Crucially, such constraint ranking cannot be applied to derived items in IGal dialects,
since it wrongly predicts pretonic MVR across the board, independently of type of
morphological derivation, as shown in (), where the two types of afﬁxation are
evaluated in the same tableau:
()
Candidates
IO-Ident-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a. ✖ feˈrreiro
b.
 fεˈrreiro
*!
c. ✖ feˈrriño
*!
*
d.
fεˈrriño
*
Inputs (IGal): /fεˈr + eiɾo/, /fεˈr + iɲo/; outputs:  fεˈrreiro,  fεˈrriño (cf. ˈfεrro)
In fact, the IGal data obviously requires a reversal of the constraint ranking in (),
namely, one in which IO-IDENT-[ATR] dominates *[low, ATR], as in () (that is,

Fernando Martínez-Gil

the same as ()), since in these varieties the underlying /ɛ, ɔ/ of the base surfaces in
both Class and Class afﬁxation (cf. ()):
()
Constraint ranking (IGal): IO-IDENT-[ATR] >> *[low, ATR]
()
Candidates
IO-Ident-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a. ☞ fεˈrreiro
b.
 feˈrreiro
*!
c. ☞ fεˈrriño
*
d.
*
Inputs (IGal): /fεˈr + eiɾo/, /fεˈr + iɲo/; outputs:  fεˈrreiro,  fεˈrriño (cf. ˈfεrro)
feˈrriño
*!
The constraint ranking in () would also be required in CGal in order to faithfully
preserve a base’s open-mid vowel in Class afﬁxation, but this option is clearly
untenable since it would have the undesired consequence of excluding MVR
altogether in CGal Class afﬁxation, as shown in ():
()
Candidates
IO-Ident-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a.
 feˈrreiro
b. ✖ fεˈrreiro
*!
c. ☞ fεˈrriño
*
d.
*
Inputs (CGal): /fεˈr + eiɾo/, /fεˈr + iɲo/; outputs: feˈrreiro, fεˈrriño(cf. ˈfεrro)
feˈrriño
*!
At this point, one might attempt to incorporate some special mechanism into a
parallel OT approach such that lexical items created by Class afﬁxation are evaluated
according the constraint ranking in (), i.e., one in which [ATR] markedness
dominates [ATR] faithfulness, while those derived by Class afﬁxation are subject
to just the opposite ranking in (). In fact, this would essentially be the outcome
achieved by Benua’s () inﬂuential theory of Transderivational Correspondence, in
which phonological similarities between morphologically related words are evaluated
by comparing the identity of two output forms: a base and a derived word. Thus, in
addition to Input-to-Output (IO) correspondence, Benua’s theory resorts to Output-
to-Output (OO) correspondence: a derived word is evaluated not only for faithfulness
to its input, but also to the surface form of its base. OO-constraints militate primarily
against allomorphic variation, by requiring that a morphologically derived word be
faithful to its base. The general idea is that correspondence relations hold not only
between an input and its output, but also between a base’s output and a word derived
from that base, as shown schematically in () for a root and an afﬁxed root, where the
vertical arrows signal IO-Faith(fulness), and the horizontal arrow points at faithful-
ness between the surface form of the base morpheme and that of the derived word
Galician mid-vowel reduction


(OO-Faith) (see Benua : ). The general formulation of an OO-constraint
requiring featural faithfulness is given in ():¹⁹
()
Transderivational Correspondence (see Benua 2000: 29): 
/root/
[rooti]     ➔    [rooti + affix]
/rooti + affix/
IO-Faith     
➔
  
➔
         IO-Faith
OO-Faith
()
Output-to-Output Identity (OO-IDENT): the output of a root in a morpho-
logically derived word must be identical to the output of its base.
Benua (: –) observes that there are two major class of English sufﬁxes,
ClassandClass,thatexhibitverydifferentphonologicalproperties.Forexample,Class
sufﬁxes, such as -ˈation, affect the placement of stress (cf. dˈamn  damn-ˈation),
while Class afﬁxes such as -ing are stress-neutral (cf. dˈamn  dˈamn-ing). In
addition, words derived by Class afﬁxation are generally faithful to the base’s input
(cf. /dˈæmn/  [dæmnˈejʃən]), whereas Class are faithful to its output (cf. [dˈæm] 
[dˈæmiŋ], with n-deletion). In Benuas’s proposal OO-Correspondence relations are split
in two distinct identity relations, thus reﬂecting the different behavior of the two mayor
sufﬁx classes: Class sufﬁxes are subcategorized for OO₁-Identity, and the Class 
paradigm is subcategorized for by OO₂-Identity, as shown schematically in ():
()
a. Class 1 suffixes such as -ˈation trigger OO1-Identity:
/ˈdæmn/
[ˈdæmn]     ➔     [dæmˈnej∫ən]
/dæmn +ˈej∫ən/
IO-Ident  
➔
  
➔
  IO-Ident
OO1-Ident
b. Class 2 suffixes such as -ing trigger OO2-Identity:
/ˈdæmn/
[ˈdæm]      ➔     [ˈdæmiŋ]
/ˈdæmiŋɡ/
IO-Ident   
➔
  
➔
  IO-Ident
OO2-Ident
The divergent behavior of the two major sufﬁx classes in Benua’s analysis is captured
by a different ranking of the two types of OO-constraints in the grammar of English,
namely OO₂  IO-FAITH  OO₁. The proposal works as follows. For the base, the
¹⁹ An alternative way of compelling OO-identity in morphologically related words that produces similar
results is Kenstowicz’s (: ) Uniform Exponence, which requires that a lexical item (stem, afﬁx, word)
have the same realization for a given property P in its various contexts of occurrence.

Fernando Martínez-Gil

mapping /ˈdæmn/ ! [ˈdæm] is derived by a high ranking of the phonotactic
constraint *COMPLEX CODA over IO-FAITH, thus favoring the deletion of the second
in a sequence of two word-ﬁnal nasals in the output. The ranking of OO₂ over
IO-FAITH enforces the preservation of the base [ˈdæm] in the Class -derived word
[ˈdæmiŋ], whereas the ranking of IO-FAITH over OO₁ ensures that the second nasal in
input of the base /ˈdæmn/ fails to undergo deletion in [dæmˈnejʃən], the form derived
by Class afﬁxation.
Following Benua’s proposals in (), a straightforward solution could be advanced
that accounts for the data in the two Galician varieties under consideration. Namely,
as shown in scheme () (see Section ..), sufﬁxes such as -ˈeiro, -ˈado, -ˈal, -ˈario,
etc. in CGal would appear to behave in a manner that resembles Class sufﬁxes in
English, in that words derived with such sufﬁxes are unfaithful to their bases, owing
to pretonic MVR (cf. ˈfɛrro  feˈrreiro); therefore they would be subcategorized for
OO₁-Identity. On the other hand, evaluative sufﬁxation, ‑ˈmente adverbs, and com-
pounds behave much like English Class , since they faithfully reproduce their bases
(cf. ˈfɛrro  fɛˈrriño), and thus would be evaluated by OO₂-Identity.
()
IO-and OO-Identity relations in CGal:
a. Suffixes such as -ˈeiro are evaluated by OO1-IDENT:
/ˈfεr + o/
[ˈfεro]           ➔           [feˈreiɾo]
/fεr + ˈeiɾo/
IO-Ident-[ATR]  
➔
  
➔
  IO-Ident-[ATR]
OO1-Ident-[ATR]
OO2-Ident-[ATR]
b. Suffixes such as -ˈiño are evaluated by OO2-Identity:
/ˈfεr + o/
[ˈfεro]           ➔          [feˈriɲo]
/fεr + ˈiɲo/
IO-Ident-[ATR]  
➔
  
➔
  IO-Ident-[ATR]
By contrast, in IGal no distinction would be made for purposes of OO-Identity
between sufﬁx classes, as shown schematically in (); in this variety OO-Identity is
simply undominated. The grammars of the two dialects are thus claimed to differ
crucially in just this respect.
()
Identity relations in IGal:
/ˈfεr + o/
[ˈfεro]    ➔   [fεˈriɲo]
/fεr + ˈiɲo/
IO-Ident-[ATR]  
➔
  
➔
  IO-Ident-[ATR]
OO-Ident-[ATR]
For our present purposes, the relevant Output-to-Output constraint is formulated in ():
Galician mid-vowel reduction


()
Output-to-Output Identity of [ATR] (OO-IDENT-[ATR]): Corresponding
segments in a base and a derived form have the same value for [ATR].
The assumed constraint ranking for the two Galician varieties is given in ():
()
Constraint ranking:²⁰
a. CGal: OO₂-IDENT-[ATR]  *[low, ATR]  IO-IDENT-[ATR] 
OO₁-IDENT-[ATR]
b. IGal: OO-IDENT-[ATR]  IO-IDENT-[ATR]  *[low, ATR]
As shown in ()–(), the assumptions in ()–() allow us to account for the data
in both dialects in a rather straightforward manner. In CGal the sufﬁx -ˈeiro is
subcategorized for OO₁-IDENT-[ATR]; therefore, both candidates bypass the purview
of undominated OO₂-IDENT; the optimal candidate (a) violates both OO₁-IDENT-
[ATR] and IO-IDENT-[ATR], but it manages to prevail over its competitor (b)
because the latter violates the higher ranked *[low, ATR]. On the other hand,
(d) infringes the undominated OO₂-IDENT-[ATR], which demands that the
[ATR] vowel of the base be maintained in words derived with Class sufﬁxes
such as diminutive -ˈiño; (c) is optimal because it faithfully reproduces the base’s
mid-vowel quality, even though it violates [ATR]-markedness.
()
Candidates
OO2-Ident-[ATR]
OO1-Ident-[ATR]
IO-Ident-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a. ☞ feˈrreiro
b.
 fεˈrreiro
c. ☞ fεˈrriño
*
*
*
d.
*!
Inputs (CGal): /fεˈr + eiɾo/, /fεˈr + iɲo/; outputs:  feˈrreiro,  fεˈrriño & base ˈfεrro
feˈrriño
*!
*
In IGal, OO-Identity is undominated, ensuring that a [ATR] mid vowel in the base
morpheme will be preserved in the derived word, independently of morphological
class (see ()):
()
Candidates
IO-Ident-[ATR]
OO-Ident-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a.
b.
*
c.
*!
*
*
d.
☞ fεˈrreiro
feˈrreiro
 ☞ fεˈrriño
Inputs (IGal): /fεˈr + eiɾo/, /fεˈr + iɲo/; outputs:  fεˈrreiro,  fεˈrriño & base
ˈfεrro
feˈrriño
*!
*
²⁰ I will continue to assume the ranking IO-IDENT-[ATR]  [low, ATR] for IGal, as warranted by
the lack of MVR in this variety, although for evaluation purposes their ranking order is irrelevant, since
they are both dominated by OO-IDENT-[ATR].

Fernando Martínez-Gil

In addition, as already discussed earlier in () in Section .., the reduced vowel of
a derivational stem created by pretonic MVR in Class afﬁxation in CGal is
reproduced whenever the stem in question serves as the base for Class sufﬁxation,
as shown in () (by contrast, in IGal all words derived by Class and Class 
sufﬁxation in () preserve the open-mid vowel of the base).
()
Underived bases:
Class afﬁxation:
Class afﬁxation:
a. f ˈɛrr-o ‘iron’
feˈrr-eiro
‘blacksmith’
ferreiˈr-iño ‘blacksmith-DIM’
cɛl-o
‘jealousy’ ceˈl-oso
‘jealous’
celosa-ˈmente
‘jealously’
ˈcɛrt-o ‘certain’
cerˈt-eiro
‘accurate’
certeira-ˈmente
‘accurately’
b. ˈpɔrt-a ‘door’
porˈt-al
‘entrance hall’ portaˈl-on ‘entrance hall-AUG’
ˈtɔrt-o ‘twisted’
tort-uˈoso ‘tortuous’
tortuosa-ˈmente ‘tortuously’
ˈsɔ
‘alone’
so-iˈdoso
‘lonely’
soidoˈs-iño
‘lonely-DIM’
The analysis just outlined can also handle these cases in a straightforward manner, as
illustrated in the tableau () for Class -derived words in ():
()
Candidates
OO2-Ident-[ATR]
OO1-Ident-[ATR]
IO-Ident-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a. ☞ ferreiˈriño
b.
*
Input (CGal): /fεreiˈɾ + iɲo/; output:  ferrei ˈriño ‘blacksmith-dim’ & base = feˈrreiro
‘blacksmith’
fεrreiˈriño 
*!
*
Although the approach to the Galician data based on OO-constraints may seem
appealing at ﬁrst sight, it can be shown to be less than unsatisfactory, for the
following reasons. First, an OO-constraints type of analysis works for CGal only if
OO-constraints are split in two types determined by afﬁx class membership. In
practical terms, this creates a paradox, in that an identity constraint is ranked
simultaneously before and after *[low, ATR] (before because *[low, ATR] is
outranked by OO₁-IDENT-[ATR]; after because it dominates IO-Identity; cf. (c–d)).
Such a split between OO-constraints appears to be little more than a crafty intro-
duction of two distinct constraint orderings: one in which MVR-inducing *[low,
ATR] dominates IO-Identity, as a result of the inapplicability OO₂-IDENT to items
derived by Class sufﬁxation; and another in which domination of OO₂-IDENT over *
[low, ATR] compels underapplication of MVR in Class sufﬁxation. Such a
seemingly ad hoc mechanism becomes entirely superﬂuous once major morpho-
logical categories such as Stem and Word are recognized as deﬁning autonomous
phonological domains in the lexicon, as in Stratal OT. Secondly, there is a crucial
difference between the English and Galician examples just discussed. Namely, in
English the output of the base [ˈdæm] is unfaithful to its input /ˈdæmn/, as a result of
nasal deletion. In all varieties of Galician, however, the base’s output ˈfɛrro ‘iron’ is
fully faithful to its input /ˈfɛro/. The problem here is that in an OO-type of account
the effect of the OO₂ constraint demanding [ATR] identity for the Class type of
derived words in CGal and all derived words in IGal is indistinguishable from that of
IO-IDENT-[ATR], which requires faithfulness to the input. Because the base’s input
Galician mid-vowel reduction


and output are in complete correspondence, it is impossible to determine in principle
whether faithfulness to the base in words derived by Class sufﬁxes in CGal, as
well as all morphological derivation in IGal, results from OO-Identity or from
IO-Identity: the output realization of the Class -derived word (fɛˈrr-iño) is fully
faithful to both the input and output of the base ˈfɛrr-o. Quite generally, OO-
constraints duplicate IO-identity whenever the output of a basic form is fully faithful
to its input. This is a serious shortcoming, since there is no obvious way of estab-
lishing whether faithfulness to [ATR] results from constraints demanding that the
output of a base be replicated in a derived word rather than from the requirement
that it be faithful to its input representation, and therefore a linguistically signiﬁcant
generalization in Galician cannot be adequately captured. And thirdly, there is
evidence that OO-constraints are not active in IGal after all, thus greatly undermin-
ing the feasibility of the OO-analysis in (b). This is signiﬁcant, since from a
historical point of view, the innovation of IGal with respect to its CGal counterpart
is the loss of pretonic MVR. In short, the phonological grammar of the IGal variety in
all relevant respects (i.e., those related to the pretonic distribution of the feature
[ATR]) is essentially that of CGal minus pretonic MVR. If it can be shown that
OO-constraints are inactive in IGal, then there is a distinct possibility that they are
inoperative in CGal as well, given the direct line between the two. The evidence
against OO-constraints in IGal derives from a synchronic process of nominal
metaphony. In Western Galician dialects, which belong to the IGal variety for the
most part, the (word-ﬁnal) masculine marker -o triggers a process of metaphony
whereby stressed open vowels /ɛ, ɔ/ in a stem are raised to [e, o] in a sizeable number
of lexical items, giving rise to the close-/open-mid-vowel alternations illustrated in
() (see Porto Dapena : –; Carballo Calero : –; Álvarez Blanco,
Monteagudo, and Regueira Fernández, : –; Álvarez Blanco ; Regueira
Fernández : -, : ; Fernández Rei : –; Hualde and Martínez-
Gil ; Freixeiro Mato : –, among many others):²¹
()
masc.
fem.
a. caˈdelo
caˈdɛla
‘small dog’ / ‘bitch, female dog’
ˈrego
ˈrɛga
‘furrow, groove’ / ‘brook, stream’
manˈtelo
manˈtɛla
‘(type of) veil’
aˈquelo
aˈquɛla
‘that one’
ˈel
ˈɛla
‘he’ / ‘she’
²¹ Other items illustrating nominal metaphony include ˈtesto ‘lid’ ~ ˈtɛsta ‘head’, ˈporto ‘harbor’ ~ ˈpɔrta
‘door’, ˈtorto ~ ˈtɔrta ‘twisted, crooked’, ˈhorto ‘garden’ ~ ˈhɔrta ‘orchard’, ˈforˈmoso ~ forˈmɔsa ‘pretty,
beautiful’, ˈLolo ~ ˈLɔla (name), ˈbolo ‘(round) bread bun’ ~ ˈbɔla ‘ball’, and ˈrodo ‘small rack, hatchel’~
ˈrɔda ‘wheel’. In some of the pairs subject to metaphony the meaning of one of the members of the pair has
been lexicalized, as in ˈchoco ‘rotten egg’ ~ ˈchɔca ‘brood hen’, and thus speakers may no longer be able to
establish the morphosemantic connection between masculine and feminine. The metaphony process illus-
trated in () should be kept apart from a similar vowel-raising process that applied historically to a number of
lexical items in several Galician dialects in the context of either word-ﬁnal -o or a following yod. In such
instances, lower mid vowels /ɛ, ɔ/ (derived from Latin short mid vowels) were conceivably reanalyzed as upper
mid ones /e, o/, failing to yield any alternations: ˈMĔTU > ˈmedo ‘fear’, ˈSPĔC(U)LU > espˈello ‘mirror’, ˈŎC(U)LU >
ˈollo‘eye’, ˈPŎS(I)TU > ˈposto ‘post, position’, etc. (see Ferreiro : –a).

Fernando Martínez-Gil

b. ˈnovo
ˈnɔva
‘new’
ˈsogro
ˈsɔgra
‘father -in-law’ / ‘mother-in-law’
ˈmorto
ˈmɔrta
‘dead’
faˈmoso
faˈmɔsa
‘new’
xeiˈtoso
xeiˈtɔsa
‘skillful, good looking’
It is apparent that nominal metaphony is lexically conditioned, since in a large number
of nominal forms the stressed open vowel in the masculine form fails to undergo raising,
as illustrated in (), even though the conditions of metaphony are apparently met.
()
a. masc.
fem.
b. masc.
fem.
ˈvɛllo
ˈvɛlla
‘old’
ˈnɔso
ˈnɔsa
‘our(s)’
ˈcɛgo
ˈcɛga
‘blind’
ˈpɔrco
ˈpɔrca
‘pig, swine’
ˈnɛto
ˈnɛta
‘grandchild’
ˈsɔ
ˈsɔ(l)a
‘lonely, alone’
ˈcɛrto
ˈcɛrta
‘certain’
ˈcɔrto
ˈcɔrta
‘short’
Interestingly, the stem vowel in the diminutive of the masculine forms in () is
faithful to the input open vowel, not the raised vowel of the masculine base, thus
patterning with the feminine forms, rather than the surface realization of the
masculine base, as shown in ():²²
()
a. masc.
fem.
dim. masc. dim. fem.
caˈdel-o
caˈdɛl-a
cadɛˈl-iño
cadɛˈl-iña
‘small male dog / female dog’
ˈreg-o
ˈrɛg-a
rɛˈgu-iño
rɛˈgu-iña
‘furrow, groove’ / ‘brook, stream’
manˈtel-o manˈtɛl-a mantɛˈl-iño mantɛˈl-iña ‘(type of ) veil’
b. ˈnov-o
ˈnɔv-a
nɔˈv-iño
nɔˈv-iña
‘new’
xeiˈtos-o xeiˈtɔs-a xeitɔˈs-iño xeitɔˈs-iña ‘crafty’
faˈmoso
faˈmɔsa
famɔˈs-iño famɔˈs-iña ‘famous’
An analysis that relies on OO-constraints and the constraint ranking in (b)
obviously produces the wrong results when applied to the IGal. masculine diminutive
forms in () as reﬂected in ():
()
Candidates
IO-Ident-[ATR]
OO-Ident-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a.
b.
*
✖ noˈviño
Input: /nɔb +ˈiɲo/; output: nɔˈviño ‘iron-dim & base = ˈnovo ‘new’
nɔˈviño
*!
*
As argued in Section .., the Stratal OT account adopted in this chapter not only
avoids the pitfalls inherent in an OO-constraints type of account, but also, and most
signiﬁcantly, provides a simpler analysis of the [ATR] distribution found in the
relations between a base and its morphologically complex related words in the two
Galician varieties under consideration.
²² The data in () reﬂect how diminutive formation is subject to metaphony in my own Moañés dialect.
Galician mid-vowel reduction


A ﬁnal issue that arises with an approach that resorts to OO-constraints is the often
noted difﬁculty in deﬁning the concept of a base or basic form that serves to establish
correspondence relations on derived word outputs, which renders problematic the
whole enterprise of OO-Correspondence. CGal provides an instructive example. As
discussed in Section ., verb forms in CGal are also subject to MVR. The problem that
an OO-constraints type of approach faces here is that there is no obvious sense in which
one given verb form can be taken as more basic that any other.
..A Stratal OT approach to the [ATR] mid-vowel distribution
in Galician derivational morphology
A simple and direct treatment of underapplication opacity found in Galician MVR can be
readily achieved within the serial version of OT known as Stratal OT, a modular
constraint-based approach to the phonology–morphology interaction modeled after
the theory of Lexical Phonology and Morphology (Kiparsky a, b, ; Moha-
nan ; Hargus and Kaisse ; and much related work); hence, the term Lexical
Phonology and Morphology OT used in Kiparsky (: ). In Stratal OT the phono-
logical system of a language consists of separate ordered domains (or strata), correlated
with morphological categories (Stem, Word), and/or morphosyntactic ones (word vs.
phrase domains), as depicted schematically in () (based on Bermúdez-Otero ,
, forthcoming). Accordingly, only three levels are countenanced, namely, the Stem,
the Word, and the Phrase strata. Each stratum is an OT grammar with its own constraint
ranking, and the output of each stratum constitutes the input of the next stratum:²³
()
The Stratal OT model:
Input
Stem-level phonology
(stem-level constraint ranking)
Word-level phonology
(word-level constraint ranking)
Phrase-level phonology
(phrase-level constraint ranking) 
Output
²³ Work in Stratal OT includes Kiparsky , , ; Ito and Mester a, b, , ;
Blumenfeld ; Rubach ; Hyman and Orgun ; Anttila ; Bermúdez-Otero , , ,
, , forthcoming; Bermúdez-Otero and McMahon ; Orgun and Dolbey ; Collie ;
Lesley-Neuman ; Anttila, Fong, Beňuš, and Nycz ; Marston , and much related work. For
recent work detracting Stratal OT, see, e.g., McCarthy (: –), Wolf () and references therein.

Fernando Martínez-Gil

As demonstrated by recent work in Stratal OT, competing approaches couched in a
strictly parallel OT model, such as OO-Correspondence, Local Constraint Conjunction,
Sympathy Theory, and Comparative Markedness, cannot adequately account for a
number of phonological opacity effects found in natural language. A major reason for
the meager success of such alternative approaches in dealing with opacity lies in their
failure to incorporate a modular organization of the interaction of phonology with
morphology. A fundamental claim of Stratal OT is that opaque interactions are gener-
ated at the interface of phonology and morphology under the intrinsic ordering inherent
to the organization of the three modules in (): Stem, Word, and Phrase (see Kiparsky
, ; Bermúdez-Otero, , , forthcoming). Moreover, Stratal OT differs
crucially from other competing monostratal OT approaches to phonological opacity,
such as Harmonic Serialism (McCarthy , , ) or Candidate Chains
(McCarthy ), in that in the latter theories morphological structure is not directly
integrated into phonological computation. As a result, in monostratal theories of OT the
fact that Class sufﬁxes, for example, cannot appear inside words derived by Class 
sufﬁxation has to be explained by resorting to some additional mechanism. By contrast,
the ordered-layer arrangement of morphological constituents follows directly from the
modular arquitecture of Stratal OT, as was also the case with its forerunner, the Lexical
Phonology and Morphology framework. Because Level afﬁxation (i.e., Stem-level
morphology) takes precedence over Level afﬁxation and compounding (i.e., Word-
level morphology), the natural prediction is that Class sufﬁxes, such as -ˈeiro, -ˈal, will
be able to serve as bases for further word formation with Class sufﬁxes, such as the
diminutive-ˈiño, or the augmentative -ˈon, asillustrated by CGalˈfɛrr-o ‘iron’! feˈrr-eiro
‘goldsmith’ (Stem-level)! ferr-eiˈr-iño ‘goldsmith-DIM’ (Word-level), or ˈpɔrt-a ‘door’!
porˈt-al ‘entrance hall’ (Stem-level) ! port-aˈl-on ‘entrance hall-AUG’(Word-level), but
the converse order is unequivocally ungrammatical: *ferr-iˈñ-eiro, *port-oˈn-al.
Stratal OT can model the diverging behavior of pretonic mid vowels in Galician
word formation in a simple and direct manner under the constraint rankings for the
Stem- and Word-levels in ():
()
Stem-level and Word-level constraint rankings (CGal):
a. Stem-level:
*[low, ATR]  IO-IDENT-[ ATR] (as in () above)
b. Word-level:
IO-IDENT-[ATR]  *[low, ATR] (as in () above)
Namely, MVR in CGal results when [ATR]-markedness dominates IO-[ATR] faith-
fulness at the Stem-level (a). The opposite ranking (b) leads to input–output
faithfulness at the Word-level.
The enforcement of pretonic MVR is enforced in the underived lexical item go
ˈbɛrn-o ‘government’, and in Stem-level sufﬁxation for the CGal items feˈrr-eiro
‘blacksmith’ (cf. ˈfɛrr-o ‘iron’), and pɔrˈt-al ‘entrance hall’ (cf. ˈpɔrt-a ‘door’) is
illustrated in tableaux () and () respectively:
()
Candidates
IO-Ident-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a. ☞ goˈbεrno
b.
Input (CGal): /ɡoˈbεɾno/; output: goˈbεrno
gɔˈbεrno
*!
*
Galician mid-vowel reduction


()
Candidates
IO-Ident-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a. ☞ feˈrreiro, porˈtal
b.
*
Inputs (CGal): /fεˈr + eiɾo/, /pɔɾˈt + al/; outputs: feˈrreiro, pɔrˈtal24
fεˈrreiro, pɔrˈtal
*!
The Word-level constraint ranking (b), on the other hand, derives faithfulness to
the input open-mid vowel of a base, as illustrated for the items formed by evaluative
sufﬁxation fɛˈrr-iño ‘iron-DIM’ and pɔrˈt-on ‘door-AUG’ in tableau ():
()
Candidates
IO-Ident-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a. ☞ fεˈrriño, pɔrˈton
b.
feˈrriño, porˈton
*!
*
Inputs (CGal): /fεˈr + iɲo/, /pɔɾˈt + on/; outputs: fεˈrriño, pɔrˈton
In IGal, underived lexical items and all morphological operations (i.e., afﬁxation and
compounding) are subject to the constraint ranking (), i.e., the ranking found at
the Word-level in CGal.
()
Constraint ranking in IGal:
Stem and Word-levels: IO-IDENT-[ ATR]  *[low, ATR]
In other words, in contrast to the system of CGal, the Word-level constraint ranking
in IGal has simply been generalized to the Stem-level. As a consequence, the opaque
generalization instantiated by pretonic MVR in CGal has been eradicated in IGal,
where the domination of IO-faithfulness over [ATR]-markedness is now transparent,
ensuring that input /ɛ, ɔ/ will be preserved in phonetic form. This is illustrated in
tableau () for the monomorphemic lexical item ɛˈnɔrme ‘enormous’ (cf. ()), and
in () for the items created by both Class and Class sufﬁxation fɛˈrr-eiro, pɔrˈt-al
(Class ), and fɛˈrr-iño, pɔrˈt-on (Class ) respectively (cf. ˈf ɛrr-o, ˈpɔrt-a).
()
Candidates
IO-Ident-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a. ☞ εˈnɔrme
b.
eˈnɔrme
*!
*
**
Input (IGal): /εˈnɔɾme/; output: εˈnɔrme ‘enormous’25
²⁴ When two or more inputs are simultaneously evaluated, as in (), the number of asterisks reﬂects
only constraint violations for each individual item.
²⁵ Although not shown in (), we are still assuming that any change to [−ATR] value of the stressed
vowel is barred by the undominated status of the constraint IO-IDENT-ˈσ-[ATR] () in Galician.

Fernando Martínez-Gil

()
Candidates
IO-Ident-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a. ☞ fεˈrreiro, pɔrˈtal
b.
 feˈrreiro, porˈtal
*!
c. ☞ fεˈrriño, pɔrˈton
*
d.
*
Inputs (IGal): /fεˈr + eiɾo/, /pɔɾˈt + al/; outputs:  fεˈrreiro, pɔrˈtal
feˈrriño, porˈton
*!
Recall that according to the modular organization of Stratal OT the output of the
Stem-level becomes the input to the Word domain. Therefore, sufﬁxed forms derived
at the Stem-level can potentially feed further derivation in the Word-level. As we saw
earlier, CGal sufﬁxed forms derived under the Stem-level constraint ranking, in
which the pretonic open-mid vowel has undergone MVR, such as feˈrr-eiro, porˈt-
al (cf. ()), can themselves serve as bases for Class sufﬁxation at the Word-level.
Stratal OT thus predicts that the reduced vowel should be carried over from the Stem
to the Word domain. This prediction is fully borne out, as illustrated by the
derivation of doubly afﬁxed words, such as ferr-eiˈr-iño ‘blacksmith-DIM’ or port-aˈl-on
‘entrance hall-AUG’ in (), which stand out in sharp contrast with underapplication of
MVR in Word-level evaluative forms, such as fɛˈrr-iño, pɔrˈt-on (cf. ()):
()
Candidates
IO-Ident-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a. ☞ ferreiˈriño, portaˈlon
b.
Inputs (CGal): /fereiˈɾ + iɲo/, /poɾtaˈl + on/ (Stem-level output and
Word-level input); outputs:  ferrei ˈriño, porta ˈlon 
fεrreiˈriño, pɔrtaˈlon
*!
*
On the other hand, because in IGal all morphologically complex words are processed
under the same constraint ranking (), faithfulness to an input [ATR] in doubly
afﬁxed constructions is pervasive, as shown in (), just as in single-afﬁx construc-
tions examined earlier (cf. () –() in Section ..).
()
Candidates
IO-Ident-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a. ☞ fεrreiˈriño, pɔrtaˈlon
b.
Inputs (IGal): /fεreiˈɾ + iɲo/, /pɔɾtaˈl + on/; outputs: fεrreiˈriño, pɔrtaˈlon
ferreiˈriño, portaˈlon
*!
*
Finally, Stratal OT can readily account for the data in (), in which a set of
masculine forms in some IGal dialects, including Moañés, undergoes a metaphony
process that raises an underlying lower mid vowel to upper mid, triggered by
assimilation to the [+ATR] value of the masculine gender marker -o. We saw in
Section ..that such metaphonized masculine forms do not serve as bases for
Galician mid-vowel reduction


evaluative sufﬁxation; instead, the root vowel in the corresponding masculine
diminutives remains faithful to its [ATR] input value, thus ruling out an OO-type
of analysis: cf. caˈdel-o ‘small male dog’ vs. cadɛˈl-iño ‘small male dog-DIM’, ˈnovo ‘new’
vs. nɔˈviño ‘new-DIM’, etc., in (). I assume that forms subject to nominal metaphony
are lexically marked to undergo the process, since many nominals meet the structural
description of metaphony, and yet fail to undergo metaphony. Since metaphonic
raising is triggered by the masculine desinence -o, it must take place at the Word-
level, the domain in which the morphological exponents of inﬂectional markers are
speciﬁed with phonological spellout (cf. Harris ; Bermúdez-Otero , ).
In addition, metaphony changes an input [ATR] stressed vowel to [+ATR],
and so it must outrank the positional faithfulness constraint IO-IDENT-ˈσ-[ATR].
The relevant constraint ranking for these IGal dialects is given in () (the cover term
METAPH is used here for whatever constraint(s) are responsible for metaphony in
these varieties):
()
METAPH  IO- IDENT-ˈσ-[ATR]  IO-IDENT-[ ATR]  *[low, ATR]
As shown in () for the items caˈdel-o ‘small male dog’ and ˈnov-o ‘new’, two
members of the class lexically marked to undergo metaphony, the optimal candidates
(a) are unfaithful to their respective inputs in order to satisfy metaphony (the input
forms carry a subscripted ‘M’ for ‘metaphony’):
()
Inputs (Moañés): /kadˈεl + o/M, /nˈɔb + o/M; outputs: caˈdelo, ˈnovo
Candidates
Metaph
IO-Ident-[ATR]
IO-Ident-ˈσ-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a. ☞ caˈdelo, ˈnovo
b.
*
*!
*!
*
 caˈdεlo, ˈnɔvo
Because both metaphony and evaluative sufﬁxation are generated at the Word-level,
the output of metaphony (a) cannot possibly provide the input to evaluative
sufﬁxation. As shown in (), the diminutives of the masculine forms in () must
comply with the Word-level constraint ranking and thus be faithful to the underlying
[ATR] value of the root vowel, rather than the metaphonized output of the base
forms.
()
Candidates
IO-Ident-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a. ☞ cadεˈliño, nɔˈviño 
b.
cadeˈliño, noˈviño
*!
*
Inputs (Moañés): /kadεˈl + iɲo/, /nɔˈb + iɲo/; outputs: cadεˈliño, nɔˈviño
In sum, in this section we have shown that Stratal OT provides the formal
mechanisms necessary to capture the different behavior of pretonic mid vowels,
namely pretonic MVR vs. absence thereof in the two main Galician varieties under
consideration. The following section is devoted to applying the Stratal OT analysis
to provide an account for pretonic MVR in Galician verb inﬂection.

Fernando Martínez-Gil

.The open-/close-mid-vowel distribution in Galician verbs
As in Spanish and Portuguese, the morphological structure of the Galician verb
comprises a stem, formed with the verb root and a theme vowel (TV), followed by the
tense-mood-aspect and the person-number inﬂectional desinences, as illustrated in
() with the ﬁrst person plural of the imperfect indicative ﬁrst conjugation form fala
ˈbamos ‘we were speaking.’ Either the TV or the inﬂectional markers may be absent
in certain verb forms. The TV marks the conjugational class: /a/ for the ﬁrst
conjugation, /e/ for the second, and /i/ for the third. The ﬁrst is the only productive
conjugation. Perhaps not surprisingly, mid-vowel height contrasts in Galician are
found exclusively in this class. In the second and third conjugations, mid-vowel
height is entirely predictable on morpholexical grounds.²⁶
()
[Root
+
TV]STEM
+ Tense-Mood-Aspect
+ Person-Number
fal
+
a
+
ˈba
+
mos
Generally speaking, stress in Galician verbs falls on the root vowel (or the last root
vowel, if there is more than one) in the present tense, both indicative and subjunctive
(the rhizotonic forms); otherwise it falls on either the TV or the vowel of an inﬂectional
desinence (the arrhizotonic forms). Open-/close-mid-vowel alternations in verbal roots
are found primarily in the present indicative; they are determined by whether the root
vowel is stressed or unstressed. The root vowel of the present subjunctive is based on the
root of the ﬁrst person singular of the present indicative, and thus exhibits a uniform
quality in all present subjective forms, independently of stress.
We will be concerned ﬁrst with the root mid-vowel alternations in the present
indicative of the second and third conjugations, illustrated in () for second
conjugation verbs (verb forms containing an open-mid root vowel are shown in a
box for visual clarity in this and subsequent examples):
()
Second-conjugation verbs that contain a root mid vowel
ˈferv-o
ˈfεrv-e-s 
ˈfεrv-e 
ferˈv-e-mos 
enˈch-e-mos
moˈv-e-mos
coˈll-e-mos
coˈll-e-des
moˈv-e-des
enˈch-e-des
ferˈv-e-des
ˈench-o
ˈεnch-e-s
ˈεnch-e
ˈmov-o
ˈmɔv-e-s
ˈmɔv-e
ˈcoll-o
ˈcɔll-e-s
ˈcɔll-e
fer ˈv-e-r ‘to boil’ en ˈch-e-r ‘to fill’ mo ˈv-e-r ‘to move’ co ˈller ‘to catch, seize’
1sg
2sg
3sg
1pl
2pl
ˈmɔv-e-n
ˈcɔll-e-n
ˈεnch-e-n
ˈfεrv-e-n
3pl
²⁶ The most comprehensive survey of Galician verbs to date is the monographic study of Santamarina
(), whose data are based on a variety of Galician spoken in the Suarna Valley, located in the central
easternmost region of Lugo province, just across from the Asturian border. Other detailed accounts, both
prescriptive and descriptive, can be found in Carballo Calero (: chapter , §); Real Academia Galega/
Instituto da Lingua Galega (: chapter ); Álvarez, Monteagudo, and Regueira Fernández (:
chapter ); Costa Casas et al. (: chapters –); and Freixeiro Mato (: chapter ), among others.
Galician mid-vowel reduction


As shown in (), stress in the present indicative is rhizotonic in all persons except the
PL and PL, where it falls on the TV. Root mid vowels are open in the rhizotonic forms,
except SG, and close in the arrhizotonic ones. The close vowel in the SG resulted
historically from a metaphony process triggered by a (nonsyllabic) high TV (a yod) in
the following syllable, which was subsequently lost. For many speakers of Moañés in
informal or fast registers, the familiar rising of unstressed mid vowels to high ones
takes place in arrhizotonic forms (cf. inﬁnitive ﬁrˈver, inˈcher, muˈver, cuˈller; PL ﬁr
ˈvemus, inˈchemus, muˈvemus, cuˈllemus; PL ﬁrˈvedes, inˈchedis, muˈvedis, cuˈlledis).
The pattern of open-/close-mid-vowel alternations in () is almost systematic.
Only two exceptions are known. First, in the SG form of the present indicative of two
verbs, queˈrer ‘to want’, and poˈder ‘can, to be able’, the root vowel is also open:
ˈquɛro, ˈpɔdo, respectively, against the general pattern. In addition, the already-
mentioned verb quɛnˈcer ‘to warm up’ (see fn. ) exhibits an open-mid vowel
throughout its paradigm, including all arrhizotonic forms. Second, in three other
second-conjugation verbs, ˈver ‘to see’, ˈcrer ‘to believe’, and ˈler ‘to read’, all present
indicative forms with a close vowel, including the rhizotonic ones. In some dialects
(but not in Moañés) a handful of verbs also follow this pattern, including deˈber
‘must’, pareˈcer ‘to seem’, and a few others (Santamarina : –). Beyond such
exceptional cases the second-conjugation present indicative paradigm in () is
remarkably stable in all Galician varieties.
Turning now to the third conjugation, we see that a large number of verbs (those
with an underlying high root vowel, for the most part) exhibit no root-vowel
alternations in modern standard Galician. Among those that do alternate, the three
types in () are classiﬁed according to alternation pattern (the /i/~/e/ alternation in
the TV need not concern us here). In Type I, roots exhibit a three-way alternation: a
high vowel in the SG, an open-mid vowel in the other rhizotonic forms (SG, SG, and
PL), and a close mid in the arrhizotonic forms (the inﬁnitive, PL, and PL). The other
two types exhibit two sets of alternants, depending on whether they are front or back-
round. In Type II, the front root vowel is high in the rhizotonic forms, and close mid
in the arrhizotonic ones (the inﬁnitive, PL, PL).
Finally, in Type III, the back-round root vowel is high in the SG and in the
arrhizotonic forms (the inﬁnitive, PL, and PL), and open mid in the remaining
rhizotonic ones.
()
Alternating root vowels in Standard Galician third-conjugation verbs
Type I (/i/~/e/~/ε/; /u/~/o/~/ɔ/)
ˈfir-o
ˈfεr-e-s 
ˈfεr-e 
feˈr-i-mos 
dorˈm-i-mos 
meˈd-i-mos
fuˈx-i-mos
fuˈx-i-des
meˈd-i-des
dorˈm-i-des
feˈr-i-des
ˈdurm-o
ˈdɔrm-e-s 
ˈdɔrm-e
ˈmid-o
ˈmid-e-s
ˈmid-e
ˈfux-o
ˈfɔx-e-s
ˈfɔx-e
Type II (/i/~/e/)
Type III (/u/~/ɔ/)
feˈr-i-r ‘to wound’ dorˈm-i-r ‘to sleep’ meˈd-i-r ‘to measure’ fuˈx-i-r ‘to flee’
1sg
2sg
3sg
1pl
2pl
ˈmid-e-n
ˈfɔx-e-n
ˈdɔrm-e-n
ˈfεr-e-n
3pl

Fernando Martínez-Gil

Notice that the pattern of root alternations in Type I is identical to that of second-
conjugation verbs, except for the high vowel in the SG, which is widely believed to
have come about from a second metaphonic process in Old Galician-Portuguese
(Williams , : –). In fact, until the Middle Ages, the root-alternation
pattern of third conjugation verbs was identical to that of the second conjugation
(Ferreiro : ). Moreover, Types II and III are known to have derived histor-
ically from Type I; namely, at some stage before the transition to the modern period,
a number of Type I verbs underwent partial analogical leveling: the open-mid root
vowel became high, following the pattern of the SG (Santamarina : ff.; Ferreiro
: –). Leveling, however, was asymmetric; it affected the rhizotonic forms
when the root vowel was front (/ˈɛ/ > /ˈi/), but the arrhizotonic ones when it was back-
round (/o/ > /u/), thereby resulting in Types II and III respectively. Finally, a number
of varieties of contemporary nonstandard Galician have reached a stage of complete
analogical leveling, whereby a high vowel has been generalized to all forms of the
present indicative (cf. Santamarina : –; Álvarez Blanco, Monteagudo, and
Regueira Fernández : –), as illustrated by present-day Moañés in ():²⁷
()
Root vowel leveling in third conjugation verbs in Moañés
ﬁˈr-i-r ‘to wound’ ‘to sleep’ durˈm-i-r meˈd-i-r ‘to measure’ fuˈx-i-r ‘to ﬂee’
SG
ˈﬁr-o
ˈdurm-o
ˈmid-o
ˈfux-o
SG
ˈﬁr-e-s
ˈdurm-e-s
ˈmid-e-s
ˈfux-e-s
SG
ˈﬁr-e
ˈdurm-e
ˈmid-e
ˈfux-e
PL
ﬁˈr-i-mos
durˈm-i-mos
miˈd-i-mos
fuˈx-i-mos
PL
ﬁˈr-i-des
durˈm-i-des
miˈd-i-des
fuˈx-i-des
PL
ˈﬁr-e-n
ˈdurm-e-n
ˈmid-e-n
ˈfux-e-n
For convenience, the non-low root-vowel patterns of the present indicative of the
second and third conjugations in present-day Galician are summarized schematically
in (). Shown in parenthesis are the historical analogical developments that gave rise
to Types II and III.
²⁷ According to my own (impressionistic) observation, when the root vowel is round, the two systems in
() occur in variation for older Moañés speakers, but this is restricted to some verbs, as ˈdorˈmir (cf. SG
ˈdɔrmes/ˈdurmes, SG ˈdɔrme /ˈdurme, PL ˈdɔrmen/ˈdurmen); the fuˈxir paradigm, for example, has been
leveled throughout with root /u/. As for verbs with front root vowels, such as feˈrir, the leveled paradigm
with root /i/ is the norm in Moañés. It should be noted that not all IGal varieties have been subject to the
Moañés-type of root-vowel leveling illustrated in (). The evidence collected in surveys of IGal varieties
suggests that such varieties still preserve the Standard Galician types in (), or some version thereof. One
is thus led to speculate that Moañés may well be nearing the end of a transitional period in which, departing
from the third-conjugation types in (), it is now approaching a stage of complete paradigm leveling.
While there is some evidence that other IGal dialects may well be at various points in a similar evolutionary
trend, there is no compelling reason to conclude that IGal is coextensive with paradigm leveling, and CGal
with the preservation of the root-vowel alternating patterns in (). The details regarding dialectal
variation in third conjugation verbs in present-day Galician are rather complex and they cannot be
adequately addressed in this chapter.
Galician mid-vowel reduction


()
nd conj.
rd conj. (Std. Galician)
Moañés
Type I
Type II
Type III
person
root vowel
root vowel
root vowel
root vowel
root vowel
SG
ˈe, o
ˈi, ˈu
ˈi
ˈu
ˈi, ˈu
SG
ˈɛ, ɔ
ˈɛ, ˈɔ
(ˈɛ >) ˈi
ˈɔ
ˈi, ˈu
SG
ˈɛ, ɔ
ˈɛ, ˈɔ
(ˈɛ >) ˈi
ˈɔ
ˈi, ˈu
PL
e, o
e, o
e
(o >) u
i, u
PL
e, o
e, o
e
(o >) u
i, u
PL
ˈɛ, ˈɔ
ˈɛ, ˈɔ
(ˈɛ >) ˈi
ˈɔ
ˈi, ˈu
For our present purposes, the issue raised by the data in () and () is whether the close-
mid root vowels found in the arrhizotonic forms (inﬁnitive, PL, and PL) of both second-
conjugation and Type I of the third-conjugation verbs are an instantiation of pretonic
MVR applying within these two verb classes. Suppose we postulate that the roots of
second-conjugation verbs, as well as in third-conjugation Type I, contain the underlying
open-mid vowels /ɛ, ɔ/, as claimed in the phonological solution advanced in standard
generative accounts of an analogous pattern of root-vowel alternations in the Portuguese
second and third conjugation verbs (cf. Harris ; Mateus ; Redenbarger ;
Wetzels ; Mateus and d’Andrade , among others). In such an analysis: a) the
surface vowel quality in the SG is derived by a metaphony rule that assimilates the open
root vowel to the [+ATR] speciﬁcation of TV /e/ in the second conjugation, and to the
heightoftheTV/i/inthethird(theTVissubsequentlydeletedbyatruncationrule);andb)
theclose-midvowelsinthearrhizotonicformsarisebyaneutralizationrulewhoseeffective
outcome is pretonic MVR. Formulated in terms of the Stratal OT approach put forth in
this chapter, such an analysis would simply require that verb inﬂection be processed at
the Stem-level, where *[low, ATR] outranks IO-IDENT-[ATR], as illustrated in ()
with the arrhizotonic PL forms of the Standard Galician second conjugation verbs fer
ˈver ‘to boil’, moˈver ‘to move’ (cf. ), and the third conjugation Type I verbs feˈrir ‘to
wound’anddorˈmir‘tosleep’(cf.,TypeI).Ontheotherhand,asshownin()forthe
SG forms of the same verbs, the undominated status of the positional faithfulness
constraint IO-IDENT-ˈσ-[ATR], invoked in Section .for non-verb forms, would duly
protect the stressed vowel of rhizotonic forms from the MVR inducing constraint
ranking. Obviously, in order to compel metaphony in this analysis, the SG forms
would still have to be accounted for by some undominated vowel-raising constraint.
()
Inputs (Std. Gal.):
/fεɾˈb + e + mos/, /mɔˈb + e + mos/; outputs: ferˈvemos, moˈvemos (2nd conj.)
/fεˈɾ + i + mos/, /dɔɾˈm + i + mos/; outputs: feˈrimos, dorˈmimos (3rd conj.,
Type I) 
Candidates
IO-Ident-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a. ☞ ferˈvemos, moˈvemos 
b.
fεrˈvemos, mɔˈvemos
*!
c. ☞ feˈrimos, dorˈmimos
*
d.
*
fεˈrimos, dɔrˈmimos
*!

Fernando Martínez-Gil

()
Candidates
IO-Ident-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a.
b.
*
c.
*!
*
d.
☞ ˈfεrves, ˈmɔves 
ˈferves, ˈmoves
 ☞ ˈfεres, ˈdɔrmes 
IO-Ident-ˈσ-[ATR]
Inputs (Std. Gal.): /ˈfεɾbes/, /ˈmɔbes/; outputs: ˈfεrves, ˈmɔves (2nd conj.)
/ˈfεɾes/, /ˈdɔɾmes/; outputs: ˈfεres, ˈdɔrmes (3rd conj.,
Type I)   
ˈferes, ˈdormes
*!
*
Several factors, however, cast serious doubt on the hypothesis that root mid vowels in
the second and Type-I third conjugation verbs are open at the underlying level. First,
mid-vowel height is not contrastive in these two conjugational classes; the open-mid
quality of vowel in the root is entirely predictable on the basis of stress and
grammatical person.²⁸ Secondly, the vowel-raising process needed for the SG is
opaque: it is conditioned by the TV (/e/ in the second conjugation and /i/ in the
third), but this vowel never surfaces in the SG and thus it raises the question of how it
is learned in language acquisition. Furthermore, in such an approach, an additional
mechanism would be needed in order to raise an input root /ɔ/ to /u/ in the
arrhizotonic forms of Type III (cf. ), since MVR turns lower mid vowels into
upper mid, not high. And it is not obvious either how to characterize the underlying
quality of the root vowel of Type II, where a close-mid vowel in arrhizotonic forms—
the supposedly reduced version of the input vowel—alternates exclusively with a high
vowel in the rhizotonic ones.
There is, however, an alternative morphophonological hypothesis, which claims
that the phonological features of vowel height are used as morphological markers of
grammatical person: in conjunction with inﬂectional endings, they serve to distin-
guish the SG from the other rhizotonic forms in the present indicative, and the
rhizotonic forms (SG, SG, and PL) from the arrhizotonic ones (PL and PL), as
suggested by Mattoso Câmara Jr. (: –) for analogous second- and third-
conjugation patterns in Portuguese.²⁹ In this account, the open-mid root vowel in
verb forms such as ˈfɛrves, ˈmɔves combines with the inﬂectional ending -s to signal
SG, just as the conjunction of the close-mid root vowel and the ending -mos mark the
PL in ferˈvemos, moˈvemos, and so on. Of course, the same account can be applied,
mutatis mutandis, to the alternating forms of third-conjugation verbs. In such an
analysis, the close-mid root vowels of the arrhizotonic forms of the present indicative
²⁸ The apparent contrast that emerges between the SG and the imperative SG of second-conjugation
verbs, and third-conjugation verbs with open/close alternations, illustrated by minimal pairs such as ˈfɛrve
‘(S)he boils’ vs. ˈferve ‘Boil!’ or ˈdɔrme ‘(S)he sleeps’ vs. ˈdorme ‘Sleep!’ respectively, also constitutes a fully
predictable property of Galician verb morphology.
²⁹ Thus Mattoso Câmara (: –) states that the root-vowel alternation in second- and third-
conjugation Portuguese verbs: “[é] un mecanismo puramente morfológico, que intensiﬁca a indicação de
pessoa gramatical em redundância com a desinencia” (“is a purely morphological mechanism that adds a
redundant complementary marking of grammatical person to that already provided by desinences” [my
translation; FM-G]).
Galician mid-vowel reduction


of the second and third conjugations are implicitly claimed to bear no relationship
whatsoever to pretonic MVR.
Two compelling arguments support the morphophonological solution vis-à-vis the
strictly phonological approach. First, there is a co-occurrence restriction in Galician,
explainable on historical grounds, that requires mid vowels to be close when followed by
a (root-ﬁnal) palatal consonant (Carballo Calero : ; Freixeiro Mato : ),
with few exceptions, almost all of them associated with nonvernacular vocabulary,
including ˈfɛch-a ‘date’ (ch = [t͡ʃ]; cf. native ˈfech-a ‘sip’), ˈcɔch-e ‘car’ (cf. native ˈcocho
‘swine’), and a few more. This restriction is most visible in the ﬁrst conjugation
(see ()–()), the only productive verb class, where mid-vowel height is otherwise
contrastive. Within this class, however, only close-mid vowels occur before root-ﬁnal
palatal consonants. In contrast, such restriction is absent in the second- and third-
conjugational classes; cf. the rhizotonic forms of second-conjugation verbs reˈxer
(x = [ʃ]) ‘to rule’ or coˈller ‘to catch, seize’: SG ˈrɛxes, ˈcɔlles; SG ˈrɛxe, ˈcɔlle, and PL
ˈrɛxen, ˈcɔllen), or those of the Type-III third conjugation, fuˈxir ‘to ﬂee’ in (): ˈfɔxes,
ˈfɔxe, ˈf ɔxen. The different behavior can be easily accounted for on the assumption that
marking of grammatical person on the root vowel by the feature [ATR] in the present
indicative of second- and third-conjugation verbs simply overrides (i.e., takes prece-
dence over) the restriction against open-mid vowels followed by a root-ﬁnal palatal
consonant, but becomes rather mysterious under the traditional generative analysis that
posits underlying open-mid vowels at the underlying level in the second- and third-
conjugational classes, since they freely violate the phonotactic restriction against root-
ﬁnal sequences of open-mid vowel plus palatal consonant. The second argument stems
from the different phonological behavior of root mid vowels in arrhizotonic forms
between the second and the ﬁrst conjugations in varieties in which, like Moañés,
unstressed mid vowels are raised to high under the appropriate stylistic and/or socio-
linguistic conditions (see fn. ). Thus, in Moañés, the root mid vowel of second-
conjugation verbs, alleged to be underlyingly open in the phonological approach, can
surface as high in the arrhizotonic forms, as also can post-tonic (quite generally, word-
ﬁnal) vowels, without any restrictions whatsoever. For example, the second conjugation
verbs forms ferˈver, enˈcher, moˈver, coˈller in () may be variably realized in informal
Moañés as: inf. ﬁrˈver, inˈcher, muˈver, cuˈller; PL ﬁrˈvemus, inˈchemus, muˈvemus, cu
ˈllemus; and PL ﬁrˈvedis, inˈchedis, muˈvedis, cuˈlledis. Mid-to-high raising is also
unrestricted, given the appropriate conditions, in ﬁrst-conjugation verb roots that
contain a close-mid vowel. However, within ﬁrst-conjugation verbs that unequivocally
have an open-mid vowel in the root (because it invariably surfaces as such in all the
rhizotonic forms; see ()), raising may apply, apparently on a lexically selective basis, to
the arrhizotonic forms of some such verbs but, crucially, not to others. Thus, the root
mid vowel in the arrhizotonic forms of leˈvar ‘to carry’ or xoˈgar ‘to play’ can be subject
to raising: inf. liˈvar, xuˈgar; PL liˈvamus, xuˈgamus; PL liˈvadis, xuˈgadis (cf. the
rhizotonic forms lSG ˈlɛvo, ˈxɔgo, SG ˈlɛvas, ˈxɔgas, etc.), but the corresponding forms
of quɛnˈtar ‘to heat up’ or boˈrrar ‘to erase’, can be realized only as mid (with pretonic
MVR applying optionally): inf. cɛˈrrar/ceˈrrar, bɔˈrrar/boˈrrar, not *ciˈrrar, *buˈrrar; PL
cɛˈrramus/ceˈrramos, bɔˈrramus/boˈrramus, not *ciˈrramus, *buˈrramus); PL cɛˈrradis/ce
ˈrradis, bɔˈrradis/boˈrradis, not *ciˈrradis, *buˈrradis (cf. the rhizotonic forms: lSG

Fernando Martínez-Gil

ˈquɛnto, ˈbɔrro, SG ˈquɛntas, ˈbɔrras, etc.). In the morphophonological approach to the
second-conjugation verbs, such asymmetrical behavior can be easily explained,
since the closed quality of the root vowel in the arrhizotonic forms is controlled
by morphological marking. By contrast, in the phonological account, some ad hoc
distinction must be stipulated between the (allegedly underlying) open root mid
vowels of the second-conjugation arrhizotonic forms, which may uniformly allow
mid-to-high raising, and the set of ﬁrst-conjugation verbs, which disallow the
raising process. The phonological approach, on the other hand, has a distinct
advantage over the morphophonological one in that the close-mid vowel found
in the arrhizotonic forms of the second conjugation (see ()), as well as those of
Type I of the third (see ()), can be directly related to pretonic MVR, as well as to
the close-mid vowel also found in the arrhizotonic forms of the ﬁrst conjugation, to
which we will turn next. In the morphophonological account, however, this con-
nection between the arrhizotonic forms in the second- and third-conjugational
classes and the ﬁrst is inevitably lost.
As stated, mid-vowel height is contrastive in the ﬁrst conjugation. As shown in
()–(), the underlying quality of root mid vowels invariably surfaces in the
rhizotonic forms, and the contrast is neutralized in the arrhizotonic ones, where a
root underlying open-mid vowel is realized as close, arguably owing to pretonic MRV
(see Santamarina : –; Real Academia Galega/Instituto da Lingua Galega
: –; Álvarez Blanco, Monteagudo, and Regueira Fernández : ;
Costa Casas, González Refoxo, Morán Fraga, and Rábade Castiñeira : –;
Freixeiro Mato : ).
()
First-conjugation verb roots containing the underlying open-mid vowels /ε, ɔ/
leˈν-a-r
ˈlεv-o
ˈlεv-a-s
ˈlεv-a
leˈv-a-mos
senˈt-a-mos
xoˈg-a-mos
choˈr-a-mos
choˈr-a-des
xoˈg-a-des
senˈt-a-des
leˈv-a-des
ˈsεnt-o
ˈsεnt-a-s
ˈsεnt-a
ˈxɔg-o
ˈxɔg-a-s
ˈxɔg-a
ˈchɔr-o
ˈchɔr-a-s
ˈchɔr-a
senˈt-a-r(se)
xoˈg-a-r
choˈr-a-r
‘to carry’
‘to sit down’
‘to play’
‘to cry, weep’
1sg
2sg
3sg
1pl
2pl
ˈxɔg-a-n
ˈchɔr-a-n
ˈsεnt-a-n
ˈlεv-a-n
3pl
()
First-conjugation verb roots containing the underlying close-mid vowels /e, o/
queˈd-a-r
‘to stay’
lemˈbr-a-r
‘to remember’
boˈt-a-r
‘to throw, cast’
vo-ˈa-r
‘to ﬂy’
SG
ˈqued-o
ˈlembr-o
ˈbot-o
ˈvo-o
SG
ˈqued-a-s
ˈlembr-a-s
ˈbot-a-s
ˈvo-a-s
SG
ˈqued-a
ˈlembr-a
ˈbot-a
ˈvo-a
PL
queˈd-a-mos
lemˈbr-a-mos
boˈt-a-mos
vo-ˈa-mos
PL
queˈd-a-des
lemˈbr-a-des
boˈt-a-des
vo-ˈa-des
PL
ˈqued-a-n
ˈlembr-a-n
ˈbot-a-n
ˈvo-a-n
Galician mid-vowel reduction


Several clariﬁcations must be made in regard to () and (). First, the underlying
quality of mid vowels in many ﬁrst-conjugation Galician verbs is subject to some
degree of dialectal variation. For example, in standard varieties the root vowel of che
ˈgar ‘to arrive’ has an underlying close-mid vowel, as it shows up in the rhizotonic
forms of the present indicative (and therefore also the present subjunctive): SG
ˈchego, SG ˈchegas, SG ˈchega, PL ˈchegan (Costa Casas et al. : ), while in
other varieties, including Moañés, such forms exhibit instead an open-mid vowel
throughout, even in arrhizotonic forms: inf. chɛˈgar, SG ˈchɛgo, SG ˈchɛgas, SG
ˈchɛga; PL chɛˈgamos, PL chɛˈgades, PL ˈchɛgan. This dialect-bound type of variation
can be found in many other verbs, including ceˈrrar/cɛˈrrar ‘to close’, ceˈnar/cɛˈnar ‘to
dine’, corˈtar/cɔrˈtar ‘to cut’, and many more.³⁰ And second, there are three instances
in which root mid-vowel height is not contrastive; in both cases, mid vowels are
uniformly close. The ﬁrst case involves a mid vowel followed by a root-ﬁnal palatal
consonant, as discussed earlier in this section. Thus, we ﬁnd feˈchar ‘to lock’, moˈllar ‘to
wet, drench’ (hence, SG ˈfecho/ˈmollo, SG ˈfechas/ˈmollas, SG ˈfecha/ˈmolla, PL ˈfechan/
ˈmollan),butahypotheticalparadigmsuch asSG*ˈfɛcho/ˈmɔllo, SG*ˈfɛchas/ˈmɔllas,SG
*ˈfɛcha/ˈmɔlla, PL *ˈfɛchan/ˈmɔllan) does not occur, as far as I have been able to
determine. A second case includes roots that contain a falling diphthong, such as /ej/, /
ow/ (e.g., ˈcheirar ‘to smell, to stink’, pouˈsar ‘to lay down, to rest’), for which the mid
nuclear vowel is invariably close throughout the paradigm (cf. SG ˈcheiro/ˈpouso, SG
ˈcheiras/ˈpousas, SG ˈcheira/ˈpousa, PL ˈcheiran/ˈpousan). Other verbs included in this
class are deiˈtar(se) ‘to lay down, to go to bed’, beiˈxar ‘to kiss’, queiˈmar ‘to burn’, deiˈxar
‘to allow, to leave’, qeiˈxar ‘to complain’, ouˈsar ‘to dare’, douˈrar ‘to gild’, rouˈbar ‘to
steal’, endeuˈsar ‘to deify, to become conceited’, escoiˈtar ‘to listen’, and many others.
Here, the close quality ofthe nuclearvowel follows from a general lexicalconstraint in all
that prohibits open-mid vowels as the nucleus of a falling diphthong (this applies to
vernacular forms, but there are a number of lexical exceptions; see Freixeiro Mato :
). Here again a hypothetical paradigm such as SG *ˈchɛiro/ˈpɔuso, SG *ˈchɛiras/
ˈpɔusas, SG *ˈchɛira/ˈpɔusa, PL *SG *ˈchɛiran/ˈpɔusan, is ruled out.³¹ The third case in
which only a close-mid vowel appears throughout the present paradigm involves the
root-ﬁnal /e/-increment used to form productive denominal or deadjectival ﬁrst-
conjugation verbs in -eˈar: nomeˈar ‘to name, to appoint’, rodeˈar ‘to encircle, to sur-
round’, branqueˈar ‘to whiten, to bleach’, toleˈar ‘to go mad’, mareˈar ‘to get seasick’,
bombeˈar ‘to pump’, toureˈar ‘to ﬁght a bull’, and many others.
³⁰ In fact, in Moañés there is a notorious tendency in many ﬁrst-conjugation verbs for an underlying
root mid vowel to be where a close form is exhibited in standard varieties. In addition, several authors have
noted that a few relatively recent verbal neologisms have been introduced with an open-mid vowel that
shows up in both rhizotonic and arrhizotonic forms, sometimes giving rise to new minimal pairs in the
language, such as vernacular boˈtar ‘to throw, cast’ vs. neological vɔˈtar ‘to vote’ (cf. SG ˈboto ~ ˈvɔto, SG
ˈbotas ~ ˈvɔtas . . . PL boˈtamos ~ vɔˈtamos, PL boˈtades ~ vɔˈtades . . . , etc.; see Santamarina : –;
Porto Dapena : –; Taboada : –; Regueira Fernández : , among others).
³¹ Not all Galician dialects are subject to this constraint, at least not uniformly. Thus, in certain varieties,
the nuclear vowel in such diphthongs is open (Porto Dapena : ). Mixed systems are also attested, as
in the Verín Valley region described by Taboada (: ), where the nuclear vowel is open in the
diphthongs /ɛj/, /ɛw/, /ɔj/, but close in /ow/.

Fernando Martínez-Gil

For the purposes of this chapter, the crucial issue now is how CGal differs from
IGal with respect to pretonic MVR in the class of ﬁrst-conjugation verbs with roots
that contain an underlying open-mid vowel, as in (). We should indicate at this
point that the standard Galician paradigms in () and () are typically maintained
in CGal. Thus, pretonic MVR in the arrhizotonic forms in both standard Galician
and CGal follows directly from the assumption that verbs are processed at the Stem-
level. As exempliﬁed earlier in this section for second- and third-conjugation verbs,
in rhizotonic forms the constraint IO-IDENT-ˈσ-[ATR] protects the stressed open-mid
root-vowel rhizotonic forms from MVR, as shown in () for the SG of the verbs le
ˈvar ‘to take, to carry’, and xoˈgar ‘to play’ (cf. ()).
()
Candidates
IO-Ident-[ATR]
IO-IDENT-ˈσ-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a.
b.
*
*!
*
☞ ˈlεvo, ˈxɔgo
ˈlevo, ˈxogo
Inputs (CGal): /ˈlεb + o/, /ˈʃɔɡ + o/; outputs: ˈlεvo, ˈxɔgo
By contrast, given the Stem-level domination of *[low, ATR] over IDENT-[ATR],
pretonic MVR is instantiated in the arrhizotonic forms, as expected, since now stress
falls on the TV, and the purview of IO-IDENT-ˈσ-[ATR] no longer extends over the
(unstressed) root vowel, as illustrated in () for the PL forms of the same two
sample verbs:
()
Candidates
IO-Ident-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a. ☞ leˈvamos, xoˈgamos
b.
*
Inputs (CGal): /lεˈb + a + mos/, /ʃɔˈɡ + a + mos/; outputs: leˈvamos, xoˈgamos
lεˈvamos, xɔˈgamos
*!
In IGal varieties, such as Moañés, the underlying root mid vowel may be faithfully
preserved in arrhizotonic forms (in variation with outputs subject to MVR in (a),
an issue I will discuss next). Thus, for the verbs in () we ﬁnd precisely the type of
arrhizotonic forms ruled out in CGal in (), namely, inf. lɛˈvar, xɔˈgar, PL lɛˈvamos,
xɔˈgamos, and PL lɛˈvades, xɔˈgades. This result can be made to follow in a straight-
forward manner and without any stipulations if we assume that verb forms in such
IGal varieties are processed at the Word-level, where IO-faithfulness dominates
[ATR] markedness, as shown for the same two forms in ():³²
³² On the basis of the empirical evidence from ﬁrst-conjugation verbs that exhibit the behavior
illustrated in () in the dialect spoken in the Suarna Valley area (see fn. ), Santamarina (: )
points to the emergence of a new (i.e., an IGal) system in which open-mid root vowels surface as such in the
arrhizotonic forms.
Galician mid-vowel reduction


()
Candidates
IO-Ident-[ATR]
*[−low, −ATR]
a. ☞ lεˈvamos, xɔˈgamos
b.
*
Inputs (IGal): /lεˈb + a + mos/, /ʃɔˈɡ + a + mos/; outputs: leˈvamos, xoˈgamos
leˈvamos, xoˈgamos
*!
An interesting issue arises in Moañés, where both output forms in ()–() can
surface in all ﬁrst-conjugation verbs with roots containing an underlying open-mid
vowel, as mentioned earlier. Namely, in this variety MVR may optionally apply or
underapply to an underlying /ɛ, ɔ/ root vowel of arrhizotonic forms, as shown in ()
for the arrhizotonic forms of the four sample verbs in (), where the selection of one
or another variant may readily be attributed to a variation in processing within the
Stem-level vs. the Word-level constraint ranking respectively.³³
()
Inf:
leˈvar/lɛˈvar
senˈtar/sɛntˈar
xoˈgar/xɔˈgar
choˈrar/chɔˈrar
PL:
leˈvamos/lɛˈvamos senˈtamos/sɛntˈamos xoˈgamos/xɔˈgamos
choˈramos/chɔˈramos
PL:
leˈvades/lɛˈvades
senˈtades/sɛnˈtades
xoˈgades/xɔˈgades
choˈrades/chɔˈrades
In the absence of a comprehensive sociolinguistic survey of the topic in Moañés, I can
only offer my own impression, namely, that both variants of the arrhizotonic forms in
() may not have the same status for all speakers: the IGal paradigm illustrated in (),
produced by processing at the Word-level, appears to be more commonly found
among younger speakers, while among older ones the tendency is to adhere to the
Stem-level constraint ranking that effectively induces pretonic MVR. The variation in
ﬁrst-conjugation roots with underlying /ɛ, ɔ/ in Moañés, however, is not limited to the
two variants in (). As mentioned, there the root vowel of arrhizotonic forms in a
number of verbs of this type exhibits a third variable realization, involving a more
extreme MVR, whereby the mid vowel in question is raised a step further, surfacing as
high. As illustrated in (), out of the four verbs in () and (), three allow such
raising, namely, leˈvar, xoˈgar, and choˈrar, whereas senˈtar, on the other hand, does
not:
()
Inf
liˈvar
senˈtar/sɛnˈtar (*sinˈtar)
xuˈgar
chuˈrar
PL
liˈvamus
senˈtamus/sɛnˈtamus (*sinˈtamus)
xuˈgamus
chuˈradis
PL
liˈvades
senˈtadis/sɛnˈtadis (*sinˈtadis)
xuˈgadis
chuˈradis
Rising appears to be determined solely based on lexical selection, but the factors that
determine such selection are far from clear (word frequency may conceivably play a
role). The following is just a sample of other ﬁrst-conjugation verbs that preclude
raising of (variably) unstressed open-mid root vowels in Moañés: cɛˈrrar ‘to close’,
³³ The ﬁnal unstressed syllable in the PL and PL forms in () may be optionally raised to high in this
dialect (cf. fn. ). The Moañés facts presented here regarding ﬁrst-conjugation verbs are drawn from my
impressionistic observations and from my personal intuitions as a native speaker of this variety.

Fernando Martínez-Gil

pɛsˈcar ‘to ﬁsh’, mɛˈdrar ‘to grow (taller)’, nɛˈgar ‘to deny’, sɛˈcar ‘to dry’, rɛˈzar ‘to
pray’, cɛˈar ‘to retreat, to row backward’, bɔˈrrar ‘to erase’, rˈɔgar ‘to beg, to plead’, rɔ
ˈdar ‘to roll’, prɔˈbar ‘to try, to taste’, chɔˈcar ‘to crash, to clash’, pɔˈdar ‘to prune’, and
drɔˈgar ‘to drug, to dope’. Thus, we ﬁnd inﬁnitive cɛˈrrar/ceˈrrar, bɔˈrrar/boˈrrar, etc.
(but not *ciˈrrar, *buˈrrar, respectively). Similar considerations apply to PL cɛˈrramus/
ceˈrramus, bɔˈrramus/boˈrramus, etc., and PL cɛˈrradis/ ceˈrradis, bɔˈrradis/ boˈrradis,
etc. (with the typical raising of the post-tonic ﬁnal vowel in Moañés), but potential
forms in which the input root vowels /ɛ, ɔ/ have been raised to high, such as PL *ci
ˈrramus, *buˈrramus, etc., or PL*ciˈrradis, *buˈrradis, etc., are excluded. Mid-to-
high vowel raising can be analyzed as resulting from the constraint *[high,
low] dominating faithfulness to mid-vowel height, thus compelling the realiza-
tion of atonic mid vowels as [+high], whether close or open (the latter, only in a
lexically determined class), but still be subordinate to the positional faithfulness
constraint IO-IDENT-ˈσ-[ATR], thus ensuring the enforcement of faithfulness to a
stressed mid vowel. ***A sample evaluation of likely output candidates for input /
ɛ, ɔ/ root vowels within the constraint ranking that yields mid-to-high raising is
given in (), for both rhizotonic (a–c) and arrhizotonic forms (d–f):
()
Candidates
IO-Ident-
[ATR]
IO-Ident-
[high]
IO-Ident-
ˈσ-[ATR]
*[−high,
−low]
*[−low, −ATR]
a. ☞ ˈlεvu, ˈxɔgu
b.
ˈlεvo, ˈxɔgo
ˈlivu, ˈxugu
c.
☞ liˈvamus, xuˈgamus
*!
**!
**!
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
d.
e.
lεˈvamos, xɔˈgamos
f.
Inputs: /ˈlεb + o/, /ˈʃɔɡ + o/ vs. /lεˈb + a + mos/, /ʃɔˈɡ + a + mos/; outputs: ˈlεvu,
ˈxɔgu vs. liˈvamus, xuˈgamus 
leˈvamos, xoˈgamos
**!
*
To sum up, the output realization of input /ɛ, ɔ/ in the arrhizotonic forms of the ﬁrst-
conjugation class in Moañés exhibits three distinct systems, resulting from three
different constraint rankings, in apparent free variation. First, they may undergo
pretonic MVR, a clear indication that the Stem-level constraint ranking of CGal still
remains as an option in this variety of IGal for deriving the arrhizotonic verb
paradigm. In the second system, unstressed open-mid root vowels are processed by
the Word-level constraint ranking, which demands faithfulness to the input [ATR]
speciﬁcation, thus adhering to the familiar IGal treatment of pretonic vowels in
nonverbal derivation and compounding surveyed in Sections .and .. And
third, we ﬁnd an extreme type of atonic MVR that arises from the domination of a
vowel-reduction constraint in which open-mid root vowels are raised to high in a
select class of ﬁrst-conjugation verbs.
Galician mid-vowel reduction


To conclude this section, one may compare the Stratal OT account of CGal vowel-
height alternations in the ﬁrst-conjugation verbs with the OO-constraint treatment
outlined in Section ... The feasibility of an OO-constraint type of analysis is
inherently predicated on the premise that a basic output verb form can be established
and that other less basic forms can be compared with for purposes of evaluating OO-
correspondence. The question that immediately arises, however, is: how do we
determine what the base form is for a given verb? It is difﬁcult ﬁnd an obvious
answer to this question: all verb forms surveyed in this section have the same
structural makeup, namely, a root morpheme, followed by a TV, followed, in turn,
by the inﬂectional desinences. It is precisely in the absence of any compelling reason
to regard any particular verb form as more basic than any other that an overall
account in terms of OO-correspondence analysis runs into serious difﬁculties.
.Conservative vs. innovative Galician: a historical
and synchronic perspective
..The emergence of IGal
The main focus of the preceding sections has been to provide a Stratal OT account
of two major varieties of Galician on the basis of open-mid-vowel behavior in
nominal derivation and verb inﬂection. We have argued (see Section ..) that
CGal exhibits two lexical-constraint rankings. The Stem-level ranking gives pref-
erence to [ATR] markedness over [ATR] faithfulness, thus inducing pretonic
MRV; at the Word-level, pretonic MVR is precluded by the priority of faithfulness
to the input open-mid vowels over [ATR] markedness. It has been suggested that
the constraint hierarchy in IGal has undergone re-ranking, so that for the most
part it has become identical to that of the Word-level, thereby effectively preclud-
ing pretonic MVR in underived lexical items and in all word-formation processes:
all afﬁxation, ‑ˈmente adverbs, and compounding (with some exceptions, such
as the variation found in ﬁrst-conjugation arrhizotonic verb forms in dialects
such as Moañés).
A number of studies on Galician phonetics, phonology, and dialectology in the last
few decades have called attention to two distinct treatments of pretonic open-mid
vowels. The ﬁrst explicit reference to the contrast between an older (CGal) system
with pretonic MVR and a newer one (IGal) in which the underlying open-vowel
quality is preserved in the ﬁrst-conjugation arrhizotonic forms is attributed to
Santamarina (: ), which describes the split between the two varieties as
follows:
In any event there are some verbs in which the root vowel always stays open, even when it is
not stressed . . . The explanation for this variation stems from the existence of two phonological
systems for unstressed vowels: an older one, in which neutralization always applied; and a
modern one, in which neutralization no longer occurs due to the analogical pressure towards
generalizing the quality of the root vowel, independently of stress. Which verbs follow the
traditional system and which adhere to the new one is just a question of norm. In general,
whenever deverbal derived words and frequently used verb forms exhibit a stressed open root

Fernando Martínez-Gil

vowel . . . its open quality is carried over onto those forms in which, due to verbal inﬂexion, the
vowel is no longer stressed. [My translation and emphasis, FM-G]³⁴
Taboada (: ) also points to two different phonological subsystems in modern
Galician in regard to unstressed vowels: one is unreduced, i.e., one in which the
quality of the stressed system is preserved in pretonic position under derivation, and
a second reduced one in post-tonic position. Regueira Fernández (: –)
further elaborates on the two treatments of pretonic vowel as follows:
In studies of Galician phonetics, as well as in monographs on Galician dialectal varieties,
different systems have been proposed for pretonic vowels. Thus, A. Veiga, J. L. Couceiro,
J. R. Fernández, M. C. Enríquez, C. Muñiz, among others, justify a system of ﬁve vowels . . . with
the neutralization of the vowel phonemes /ɛ/ and /e/, /ɔ/ and /o/ into the archiphonemes /E/
and /O/, which represent the mid front and mid back vowels respectively. By contrast,
J. A. Porto Dapena believes that the opposition in question has been reinstated, although its
productivity remains quite low. Taboada argues along the same lines, when he alludes to a
“reactivation of vowel quality” . . . [My translation, FM-G]³⁵
From a historical point of view, it is not clear precisely when and how the CGal Stem-
level underwent the process of constraint re-ranking, the phonological change that
caused it to merge with Word-level strata, leading to the almost complete eradication
of pretonic MVR in IGal. From the data available in the literature on Galician
dialectology, and in the absence of a comprehensive survey on the topic, one is led
to estimate that the loss of pretonic MVR in nominal derivation and compounding of
IGal is quite widespread in Western and Central Galician and, although to a lesser
extent, it has also made inroads into Eastern Galician varieties.³⁶ Beyond geograph-
ical location, age appears to be another important factor. In his study of the Northern
Terra Cha region (interior of northern Lugo province), Regueira Fernández (:
) notes that the system used by older speakers of the variety considered in his
³⁴ “Hay de todos modos algunos verbos que mantienen la vocal de radical siempre abierta, aún en
aquellos casos en que es átona . . . . La explicación de esta diversidad radica en la existencia de dos sistemas
fonológicos para las vocales átonas: uno antiguo, en el que se operaba la neutralización; otro moderno, en el
cual la neutralización ya no opera debido a una tendencia analógica que generaliza un radical uniforme
independientemente de que sea tónico o átono. Qué verbos siguen el sistema tradicional y cuáles el nuevo
es únicamente una cuestión de norma. En general cuando hay un derivado posverbal o un primitivo de uso
frecuente que tenga vocal radical abierta tónica . . . esta se propaga a los casos en que, por la ﬂexión verbal,
tal vocal pasa a átona.”
³⁵ “Nos estudios de fonética galega, así como nas monografías sobre variedades dialectales do galego,
véñense propoñendo sistemas diferentes para as vocais pretónicas. Así, A. Veiga, J. L. Couceiro,
J. R. Fenández, M. C. Enríquez, C. Muñiz, entre outros, xustiﬁcan un sistema de cinco vocais . . . coa
neutralización dos fonemas vocálicos /ɛ/ e /e/, /ɔ/ e /o/ nos arquifonemas /E/ e /O/, que representan as
vocais de abertura media anterior e posterior, respectivamente. Pola contra, J. A. Porto Dapena opina que
esa oposición foi restituida, aínda que mantén un rendimento moi baixo. Na mesma liña argumenta
M. Taboada, que fala duha ‘reactivación de timbre’ . . . ”
³⁶ If we judge by descriptions of dialectal studies carried out in the ﬁve last decades or so, it seems
apparent that the geographical area covered by CGal has been progressively dwindling in recent times. On
the other hand, pretonic MVR in verbal inﬂection appears to be more resilient than in nominal derivation,
and it is commonly adopted as the standard in Galician grammars (see, e.g., Álvarez, Monteagudo, and
Regueira Fernández : –; Costa Casas et al. : –; Freixeiro Mato : ).
Galician mid-vowel reduction


study, one in which mid-vowel height is neutralized in unstressed position (i.e.,
CGal), is in competition with the non-neutralizing system of younger generations
(i.e., IGal), which preserves the seven underlying vowels in pretonic position (see also
Regueira Fernández : ):
Even from a synchronic point of view it is apparent that we are facing two competing
systems . . . Among the selected informants, almost all of them middle-aged and seniors, we
still ﬁnd a system in which mid vowels are neutralized in pretonic position; however, if we take
into account the volume of new words recently introduced in the language (many of them with
open pretonic mid vowels), as well as the trend observed among younger speakers, who
pronounce with an open quality certain atonic vowels in Castilian borrowings and in learned
words . . . one is led to conclude that the dominant tendency nowadays is toward establishing
a pretonic system of seven vowels, as pointed out by M. Taboada and J. A. Porto Dapena.
[My emphasis and translation, FM-G]³⁷
On the other hand, pretonic MVR appears to be well-established in certain Galician
varieties, such as the one spoken in Vegadeo, Asturias, about two miles across the
border from the northeastern Galician province of Lugo, described by Fernández
Vior (), considered by some to be a transitional dialect between Galician and
Asturian (eonaviego or galego-asturiano). According to Fernández Vior, the reduc-
tion of open-mid vowels /ɛ, ɔ/ in this variety to close ones [e, o] is almost completely
general in words derived by the type of sufﬁxes identiﬁed in this chapter (see
Section ..) as Stem-level (: ). Thus, regarding the pretonic MVR of
underlying /ɛ/ to [e], this author further states (: ):
In a large area of Galicia the open variant occurs also in unstressed position in derived words
and compounds whose base contains a stressed e [sic]: nèto ‘grandson’ > nètín ‘grandson-DIM’
[è = [ɛ]]; by contrast, in our district, with the exception of some western towns where this trend
is observed . . . the shift of stress in derived words carries along a closing of the mid vowel, now
rendered unstressed . . . , not just in lexical items like the one just mentioned . . . , but also in
[derived] words like pèste ‘stench’! apestar ‘to stink’ [e = [e]], fèrro ‘iron’! ferreiro ‘black-
smith’, mèdo ‘fear’! medoso ‘fearful, cowardly’. [My translation, FM-G]³⁸
In most relevant respects, CGal has preserved the proto-Hispano-Romance distri-
bution of mid vowels, one in which the contrast between /ɛ, ɔ/ (derived from the
Latin short vowels /e, o/) and /e, o/ (from the Latin long counterparts /eː, oː/) was
found only in stressed position; in unstressed syllables, the contrast was neutralized
³⁷ “Aínda desde un punto de vista sincrónico pode verse que estamos ante dous sistemas en pugna. . . Nos
informantes escollidos, casi todos da segunda e tercera idade, aínda encontrámo-lo sistema en que se
neutralizan a vocáis medias en posición pretónica; pero se temos en conta o caudal de voces de entrada
recente no idioma (moitas con vocal pretónica aberta), así como a tendencia observada na xente nova de
pronunciar con timbre aberto certas vocáis átonas nos castelanismos e nos cultismos. . . hai que pensar que a
tendencia dominante hoxe en día vai cara ó establecemento dun sistema pretónico de sete vocáis, como
advirten M. Taboada e J. A. Porto Dapena”.
³⁸ “En una gran parte de Galicia aparece la variante abierta también en posición átona en aquellas
palabras compuestas o derivadas que tenían una e tónica en las palabras primitivas: nèto > nètín; en
cambio, en nuestro concejo, si se exceptúan algunos pueblos occidentales donde comprobamos esta
tendencia . . . , el cambio de posición del acento supone un cierre de la vocal media que ha quedado en
posición átona . . . , y no sólo en vocablos como éste . . . , sino también en palabras como pèste > apestar,
fèrro ! ferreiro, mèdo ! medoso.”

Fernando Martínez-Gil

in favor of /e, o/. A comparison with Spanish may shed some light on the possible
paths taken by the loss of pretonic MVR in the transition from CGal into CGal. As in
proto-Galician, the reﬂexes of the Latin short mid vowels in proto-Spanish exhibited
alternations in between stressed [ɛ, ɔ] and unstressed [e, o]. In Spanish, stressed /ɛ, ɔ/
subsequently developed into raising the diphthongs /je, we/. As illustrated in (), the
mid vowel/diphthong alternations in modern Spanish occur across all lexical cat-
egories, both in non-verb forms (a–b), and in verbal inﬂection (d). The presence
of MVR in Stem-level derivation in CGal and its absence in Word-level morpho-
logical processes must undoubtedly go back to a relatively early period of Galician,
since an almost identical state of affairs can be found in Spanish, as pointed out by
Carballo Calero : , fn. ). Namely, a base’s diphthong in Spanish (column A)
is subject to pretonic monophthongization in Stem-level nominal derivation (column
B in a–b) and verb inﬂection (c–d), whereas in Word-level morphology unstressed
diphthongs surface in pretonic position, as shown in column C of (a–b), with
some representative examples of evaluative sufﬁxation (diminutives, augmenta-
tives), superlatives formed with the intensifying sufﬁx ‑ˈisimo, adverb formation
with ‑ˈmente, parasynthetic verb creation, and compounding (see Bermúdez-Otero
for insightful discussion).
()
A
B
C
a. ˈcieg-o
‘blind’
ceˈg-uera
‘blindness’
cieˈg-uito
‘blind-DIM’
ˈfiest-a
‘party’
fesˈt-ivo
‘festive’
fiesˈt-aza
‘party-AUG’
ˈviej-o
‘old’
veˈj-ez
‘old age’
vieˈj-isimo
‘very old’
ˈciert-o
‘certain’
cerˈt-eza
‘certainty’
ciert-a-ˈmente ‘certainly’
ˈdiestr-o
‘skillful’
desˈtr-eza
‘skill’
a-diesˈtr-ar
‘to train’
ˈciel-o
‘sky’
ceˈl-este
‘sky-blue’
ciel-o-ˈrraso
‘ceiling’
b. ˈnuev-o
‘new’
noˈv-ato
‘novice, rookie’ nuev-eˈcito
‘new-DIM’
ˈpuebl-o
‘village, town’ pobl-aˈcion ‘town, city’
pueˈbl-ucho
‘ugly little
town’
ˈbuen-o
‘good’
bon-ˈdad
‘goodness’
bueˈn-isimo
‘very good’
ˈfuert-e
‘strong’
fort-aˈleza
‘strength’
fuert-e-ˈmente ‘strongly’
ˈmuebl-es ‘furniture’
moˈbl-aje
‘furniture’
a-mueˈb-lar
‘to furnish’
ˈcuell-o
‘neck’
coˈll-ar
‘necklace’
cuell-i-ˈlargo
‘long-necked’
c. ˈpiens-o
‘I think’
~
penˈs-ar
‘to think’
ˈnieg-a
‘he denies’
~
neˈg-amos
‘we deny’
ˈquier-en ‘they want’
~
queˈr-eis
‘you-PL want’
ˈhier-es
‘you wound’
~
heˈr-ir
‘to wound’
ˈmient-e
‘he lies’
~
menˈt-imos
‘we lie’
d. ˈcuent-o
‘I tell’
~
conˈt-ar
‘to tell’
ˈpued-en ‘they can’
~
poˈd-emos
‘we are able’
ˈvuelv-es ‘you return’
~
volˈv-er
‘to return’
ˈduerm-e ‘he sleeps’
~
dorˈm-is
‘you-PL sleep’
ˈprueb-a
‘he proves’
~
proˈb-ar
‘to prove’
Galician mid-vowel reduction


Instructively, in contemporary Spanish we ﬁnd two types of evidence that appear to
indicate the shift from Stem-level to Word-level derivation. The ﬁrst type of evidence
involves a sizeable number of Stem-based sufﬁxes that may apply at the Stem-level or
at the Word-level constraint ranking, whereby the interstratal transfer has targeted
certain derived words but not others. As illustrated with a representative sample in
(), the same sufﬁx can be processed at the Stem-level, and the root of the base word
surfaces with a pretonic mid vowel, or at the Word-level, where the root diphthong is
preserved in pretonic position:³⁹
()
a. -ˈista:
ˈdient-e ‘tooth’ ! denˈt-ista ‘dentist’, conˈciert-o ‘concert’! concer-
ˈt-ista ‘concert player’ vs. ˈcuent-o ‘story, tale’ ! cuenˈt-ista ‘story-
teller’, ˈhuelg-a ‘strike’ ! huelˈg-uista ‘striker’
b. -ˈoso:
miel ‘honey’! meˈl-oso ‘honey-like, sweet’, fueg-o ‘ﬁre’! foˈg-oso
‘ﬁery’, vs. ˈmied-o ‘fear’! mieˈd-oso ‘fearful’, ˈcien-o ‘mud’! cieˈn-
oso ‘muddy’
c. -ˈero:
ˈtiend-a ‘shop’ ! tenˈd-ero ‘shopkeeper’, ˈpuert-a ‘door’! porˈt-
ero ‘doorkeeper’ vs. ˈhuev-o ‘egg’! hueˈv-era ‘eggcup’, ˈnuez
‘nut’! nueˈc-ero ‘nut holder’
d. -ˈeza:
ˈdiestr-o ‘skillful’ ! desˈtr-eza ‘skill’, ˈtiern-o ‘tender’! terˈn-eza
‘tenderness’ vs. ˈfier-o ‘ﬁerce’! fieˈr-eza ‘ferocity’
e. -ˈudo:
ˈdient-e ‘tooth’! denˈt-udo ‘with long teeth’, ˈcuern-o ‘horn’!
corˈn-udo ‘horned, cuckold’ vs. ˈpiern-a ‘leg’ ! pierˈn-udo ‘thick-
legged’, ˈhues-o ‘bone’! hueˈs-udo ‘bony’
Second, the apparent shift from Stem-level to Word-level in Spanish has become
optional in a small set of lexical items derived by evaluative sufﬁxation, such as those
containing the superlative sufﬁx -ˈisimo illustrated in (), where the two alternants
are generated depending on whether sufﬁxation applies at the Stem-level, thereby
generating the familiar diphthong/mid-vowel alternantions, or is Word-based, lead-
ing to the preservation of the base’s diphthong in the sufﬁxed form. In general, the
monophthongal alternant tends to be perceived as a more archaic or unproductive
(lexicalized) type of superlative, while the diphthongal commonly represents a more
innovative and productive counterpart, as suggested by the fact that many superla-
tives with diphthongal roots do not allow for the monophthongal variant (cf. ˈviejo
‘old’ ! vieˈjisimo, not *veˈjisimo, ˈciego ‘blind’ ! cieˈguisimo, not *ceˈguisimo, etc.),
but the converse is much rarer, if it ever occurs. It is thus likely that, at some stage in
the history of Spanish superlative sufﬁxation, it was stem-based (and perhaps this
was also true of all evaluative sufﬁxation), but the most productive trend in the
modern language is to process superlatives at the Word-level.
³⁹ In some cases, a Stem-level afﬁx may coexist with a Word-level alternant, and so both the monoph-
thongal and the diphthongal versions of a derived word are available: mo ˈbl-aje ~ mue ˈbl-aje ‘furniture’.

Fernando Martínez-Gil

()
base
superlative
caˈlient-e
‘hot’
calenˈt-isimo
~ calienˈt-isimo
reˈcient-e
‘recent’
recenˈt-isimo
~ recienˈt-isimo
ferˈvient-e
‘fervent’
fervenˈt-isimo
~ fervienˈt-isimo
ˈciert-o
‘certain’
cerˈt-isimo
~ cierˈt-isimo
ˈfuert-e
‘strong’
forˈt-isimo
~ fuerˈt-isimo
ˈnuev-o
‘new’
noˈv-isimo
~ nueˈv-isimo
ˈgrues-o
‘thick’
groˈs-isimo
~ grueˈs-isimo
ˈbueno
‘good’
boˈn-isimo
~ bueˈn-isimo
An intriguing question that immediately arises is whether the historical development
of IGal from its MVR CGal counterpart may have taken a path that resembles any of
the Spanish examples in ()–(). Unfortunately, the available literature does not
provide an informed answer to this question, and I will not speculate here on this
issue any further.
..Pretonic open-mid vowels in IGal neologism and loanword adaptation
It is conceivable that the generalization of the Word-level constraint ranking to all
morphological derivation in IGal, with the ensuing loss of pretonic MVR in derived
words, may have provided a model for the already-mentioned peculiar IGal pattern
of rendering pretonic mid vowels open in a number of contexts when adaptating
neologisms and loanwords, even when such vowels are close in the source language,
or when the source language simply lacks mid-vowel height distinctions, as is the case
in Spanish. Regarding the adaptation of loanwords with mid vowels, Taboada (:
) states: “When new terms or loanwords are introduced . . . Galician speakers
attempt to adapt them following their equivalent formal patterns. In general, loan-
words are introduced with an open quality . . . ” [my translation, FM-G].⁴⁰ While
some strong tendencies can be readily identiﬁed, an adequate formal characterization
of the precise contexts in which mid-vowel lowering takes place in loanword adap-
tation has proven extremely challenging. Regueira Fernández (: ) thus notes:
In learned words, the stressed and pretonic vowels represented by the <e, o> graphemes are
adapted with either lower or higher mid vowels according to complex patterns that can be
described to a large extent, although we have not always been able to ascertain the phonological
rules that underlie such behavior. [My translation, FM-G]⁴¹
In the absence of a comprehensive corpus of neologisms and loanword adaptation
in Galician varieties, the data examined in the remainder of this section comes
mainly from my own (IGal) Moañés dialect, and illustrates some of the contexts in
which pretonic mid vowels take on a predictable quality when new words have been
⁴⁰ “En la introducción de términos nuevos o préstamos . . . el hablante gallego trata de adaptarlos a sus
equivalentes formales propios. Los vocablos importados son introducidos, en general, con timbre
abierto . . . ”
⁴¹ “Nos cultismos, as vogais tónicas ou pretónicas grafadas <e, o> son adaptadas con vogais medias-
baixas ou medias-altas seguindo pautas complexas, que podemos describir en gran medida, aínda que non
sempre teñamos coñecemento das regras fonolóxicas que subxacen nese comportamento.”
Galician mid-vowel reduction


introduced into the Galician vocabulary in relatively recent times, mainly through
Spanish. I have checked my intuitions with the entries recorded in Regueira Fernández’s
() splendid Galician pronunciation dictionary.⁴² While there are some minor
discrepancies, indicating a certain degree of interdialectal variation, overall the Moañés
data can reasonably be taken as representative of IGal varieties. The following are some
relatively steadfast generalizations.
As illustrated in (), there is a strong tendency for mid vowels to adopt an open
quality in the word-initial open syllable of neologisms and loanwords (cf. Regueira
Fernández : ), except when the ﬁrst syllable embodies a preﬁx such as de-, pre-
co-, etc., whose mid vowel is underlyingly close (see ()–()):⁴³
()
a. crɛˈtino
‘imbecile’
xɛnˈtil
‘kind, polite’
vɛrtiˈcal
‘vertical’
xɛmiˈnada
‘geminate’
tɛˈrror
‘terror’
pɛcuˈliar
‘peculiar’
lɛˈvita
‘frock coat’
bɛlixeˈrante ‘belligerent’
quɛroˈseno ‘kerosene’
sɛˈmiɔtica
‘semiotics’
hɛˈleno
‘Hellenic, Greek’ xɛnuˈino
‘genuine’
b. cɔrˈdial
‘cordial’
dɔmiˈnɔ
‘dominoes’
bɔˈbina
‘spool, reel’
cɔliˈseo
‘coliseum’
cɔˈriandro
‘coriander’
trɔˈfeo
‘trophy’
dɔcuˈmento ‘document’
mɔˈqueta
‘carpet’
dɔmiˈcilio ‘residence’
rɔcanˈrɔl
‘rock and roll’ rɔˈtundo
‘categorical’
chɔˈfɛr
‘chauffeur’
Such conditions, however, are far from categorical, since pretonic open-mid vowels
can also be found occasionally in closed word-initial syllables: bɛrˈlina ‘sedan’,
mɛnˈdigo ‘beggar’, nɔrˈmando ‘Norman’, vɛrˈsatil ‘versatile’, etc. There is a subcase
of neologisms and loanwords (), namely, words that begin with an onsetless word-
initial, as in (), in which pretonic mid-vowel lowering in neologisms tends to be
notably stronger, reaching a close-to-systematic status, unlike what happens within
the vernacular Galician vocabulary.
()
a. ɛ-:
ɛˈnɔrme ‘enormous’, ɛˈquipo ‘team’, ɛcuaˈdor ‘equator’, ɛˈlɛctrico ‘elec-
tric’, ɛˈcuɛstre ‘equestrian’, ɛduˈcar ‘to educate’, ɛˈﬁmero ‘ephemeral’,
ɛdiˈﬁcio ‘building’, ɛﬁˈcaz ‘effective’, ɛlɔˈcuente ‘eloquent’, ɛnɛrˈxia
‘energy’, ɛxɛcuˈtar ‘to execute’, ɛmiˈgrante ‘migrant’, ɛlɛˈfante ‘ele-
phant’, ɛˈnigma ‘enigma’, ɛclɔˈsion ‘emergence’, ɛˈfɛcto ‘effect’, ɛgoˈista
‘selﬁsh’, ɛˈclipse ‘eclipse’, ɛrɔˈsion ‘erosion’, etc.
⁴² Regueira Fernández’s dictionary represents an effort to record the pronunciation of both CGgal and IGal,
often providing the reduced and unreduced variants of pretonic mid vowels in morphologically complex
words of vernacular lexical items. As for the phonetic transcription of neologisms and loanwords, however, the
dictionary entries conspicuously reﬂect the IGal pattern of phonological adaptation, a noteworthy recognition
of the steady advance of the IGal norm in loanword adaptation amid Galician speakers, one in which mid
vowels are lowered in pretonic position unless a direct phonological relationship can be established to an
existing vernacular pretonic pattern containing a closed vowel (see, e.g., (a)).
⁴³ Most of the data in () are either underived or not readily analyzable as derived from a more basic
lexical item. I have attempted to exclude any potential examples that can be easily recognized as derived
from bases whose roots contain underlying open-mid vowels.

Fernando Martínez-Gil

b. ɔ-:
ɔˈasis ‘oasis’, hɔˈtɛl ‘hotel’, ɔˈzono ‘ozone’, ɔˈliva ‘olive’, ɔpriˈmir ‘to
(o) ppress’, hɔmeˈnaxe ‘homage’, ɔˈﬁcio ‘occupation, job’, ɔˈlimpico ‘olym-
pic’, ɔfenˈder ‘to offend’, ɔˈceano ‘ocean’, ɔpoˈñer(se) ‘to oppose’, ɔporˈtuno
‘timely, opportune’, ɔˈbeso ‘obese’, ɔˈrixe ‘origin’, ɔˈcaso ‘demise’, ɔˈpaco
‘opaque’, ɔmiˈtir ‘to omit’, ɔˈblicuo ‘oblique’, ɔvaˈcion ‘ovation’, etc.
As can be seen in (), open-mid vowels are also quite common in this class in
pretonic peninitial (or even pre-peninitial) position, although their occurrence is far
from systematic (cf., e.g., ɛˈnɔrme, ɛclɔˈsion, ɛnɛrˈxia, etc., with ɔˈzono, ɔfenˈder, ɔpor
ˈtuno, etc.). By contrast, in native words that start with preﬁxes that exhibit under-
lying closed mid vowels, such as de-, pre-, co-, etc., or in those beginning with a
syllable (with or without onset) containing a front mid vowel followed by a tauto-
syllabic nasal or /s/, such as en- (em-), es-, des-, etc., whether preﬁxal or not, the mid
vowel is systematically close. When new words with similar initial syllables enter the
Galician lexicon, they invariably adapt to this pattern, as illustrated in () with
examples from the vernacular vocabulary (a) and neologisms (b), both mor-
phologically derived and underived (cf. Regueira Fernández : –):
()
a. empuˈxar ‘to push’, enˈtroido ‘carnival’, esˈpello ‘mirror’, esqueˈ(n)cer ‘to
forget’, enˈxebre ‘genuine’, enchouˈchar ‘to cajole’, ensiˈnar ‘to teach’, es
ˈtruga ‘nettle’, esˈtrela ‘star’, esˈcɔla ‘school’, esˈcuro ‘dark’, esˈtralo ‘explo-
sion’, deˈreito ‘straight’, de(s) ˈpois, demˈpois ‘afterwards’, deˈtra(i)s ‘behind’,
derraˈdeiro ‘last (in a series)’, desfaˈcer ‘to undo’, desˈpeito ‘spite, displeas-
ure’, descoñeˈcer ‘not to know’, descuˈbɛrto ‘uncovered’, descoiˈdar ‘to neg-
lect’, desˈculpa ‘apology’, deˈmentres ‘meanwhile’, etc.
b. embriˈon ‘embrio’, enˈfoque ‘focus’, entoˈmɔlogo ‘entomologist’, emˈpresa
‘enterprise’,
esˈcandalo
‘scandal’,
depuˈtado
‘congressman’,
esˈmalte
‘enamel’, enˈdɛmico ‘endemic’, entreˈvista ‘interview’, estraˈtexia ‘strategy’,
desˈden ‘disdain’, deˈpɔrte ‘sport’, depriˈmir ‘to depress’, deˈrrɔta ‘defeat’,
derraˈpar ‘to skid’, desafˈio ‘challenge’, desagraˈdar ‘to dislike’, depaˈrar ‘to
provide’, desanˈgrar ‘to bleed’, desbanˈcar ‘to replace’, desˈconto ‘discount’,
etc., descomuˈnal ‘enormous’, etc.
As an instructive example of some of the difﬁculties presented by the data, we only
need to compare the adaptation of neologisms that begin with an onsetless syllable
headed by a front mid vowel, as in (), with those that start with a similar onsetless
syllable headed by a round mid vowel, as those illustrated in (), statistically much
less common than the former, where there is a strong tendency for such a vowel to be
open, even when it is followed by a tautosyllabic consonant (but there are some
exceptions, such as ordenaˈdor ‘computer’, ostraˈcismo ‘ostracism’, or ostroˈgodo
‘Ostrogoth’):
()
ɔrtoˈdɔxo ‘orthodox’, ɔrˈtɔgono ‘orthogon’, ɔrˈchata ‘orgeat’, ɔrˈgullo ‘pride’,
ɔrˈgasmo ‘orgasm’, ɔrˈquidea ‘orchid’, ɔrˈquɛsta ‘orchestra’, ɔrdiˈnario ‘ordin-
ary’, ɔstenˈtar ‘to boast, show off, ɔsˈtil ‘hostile’, hɔspiˈtal ‘hospital’, ɔsciˈlar ‘to
oscillate’, ɔlˈfa(c)to ‘sense of smell’, ɔstenˈsible ‘obvious’, etc.
Galician mid-vowel reduction


Because of the familiar tendency to lower pretonic mid vowels in neologisms and
loanwords, it is not uncommon to ﬁnd alternations in mid-vowel height between
morphologically and semantically related vernacular and neological forms: cf. (vern.)
ˈler ‘to read’ vs. (neol.) lɛcˈtura ‘reading’, (vern.) ˈxente ‘people’ vs. (neol.) xɛnˈtil
‘kind, polite’, (vern.) ˈcrer ‘to believe’ vs. (neol.) crɛdibiliˈdade ‘credibility’, (vern.)
ˈpeito ‘chest’ vs. (neol.) pɛctoˈral ‘pectoral’, (vern.) seˈgundo ‘second’ vs. (neol.) sɛcun
ˈdario ‘secondary’, (vern.) ˈpobo ‘people’ vs. (neol.) pɔpuˈlar ‘popular’, ˈnoite ‘night’
vs. (neol.) nɔcˈturno ‘nocturnal’, ˈnovo ‘new’ (in dialects with metaphony) vs. (neol.)
nɔˈvato ‘novice, freshman’, (vern.) doˈmingo ‘Sunday’, dominˈgueiro ‘Sunday driver’
vs. (neol.) dɔminiˈcal ‘pertaining to Sunday’, dɔmiˈnico ‘of the Dominican order’,
República Dɔminiˈcana ‘Dominican Republic’, etc.
Finally, there is another context in which pretonic mid vowels of neologisms
extracted from the learned stock (cultismos) surface as open, namely, when they head
a syllable closed by one underlying tautosyllabic oral stop (cf. Regueira Fernández :
), as illustrated in ():
()
a. acɛp.ˈtar
‘to accept’
ɛ[k.s]iˈbir
‘to exhibit’
ɛ[k.ˈs]ilio
‘exile’
pɛc.ˈtina
‘pectin’
inspɛc.ˈtor
‘inspector’
ɛ[k.ˈs]ame
‘exam’
ɛ[k.s]isˈtir
‘to exist’
ɛ[k.ˈs]ento
‘exempt’
ɛ[k.ˈs]ɔtico
‘exotic’
b. ɔb.ˈxɛcto
‘object’
nɔc.ˈturno
‘nocturnal’
tɔ[k.ˈs]ina
‘toxin’
ɔb.serˈvar
‘to observe’
ɔb.ˈter
‘to obtain’
ɔb.sɛsˈion
‘obsession’
ɔp.ˈtar
‘to opt’
ɔc.ciˈdente
‘west’
ɔ[k.ˈs]ixeno
‘oxygen’
Mid-vowel lowering before a single oral stop is not restricted to pretonic vowels; it
also occurs in stressed ones (cf. conˈcɛpto ‘concept’, diaˈlɛcto, ‘dialect’, ˈsɛcta ‘sect’,
ˈdɔgma ‘dogma’, etc.). The lowering effect before a tautosyllabic oral stop can be fully
appreciated when we compare neological nɔcˈturno ‘nocturnal’ with vernacular ˈnoite
‘night’, or ɔcˈtavo ‘eighth’ with vernacular oiˈtavo (cf. ˈoito ‘eight’). Interestingly, the
mid vowel of the preﬁx ex- (x = [ks]) exhibits an open/close alternation. When the
consonant cluster is heterosyllabic, because the preﬁx-ﬁnal /s/ is parsed as the onset
of the following syllable, the preﬁx’ vowel is open ([ɛk.s-]), since it is in a syllable
closed by a stop, as in the relevant examples in (a). However, when the preﬁx is
attached to a consonant-initial stem, the consonant sequence is tautosyllabic; here,
the preﬁx-initial mid vowel heads a syllable closed by two consonants, in which case
it is invariably realized as close [eks-]: ex.ˈcɛlso ‘sublime’, ex.ˈcɛntrico ‘eccentric’,
ex.panˈsion ‘expansion’, ex.tɛˈrior ‘exterior’, etc. (thus, cf. the relevant items in
(a), with examples such as ex.ceˈlente ‘excellent, ex.cepˈcion ‘exception’, ex.ˈceso
‘excess’, ex.traˈer ‘to extract, ex.tenˈsion ‘extension’, ex.ˈcentrico ‘eccentric’, etc., as
well as words derived with the preﬁx ex.tra-: ex.traordiˈnario ‘extraordinary, extra
viˈar ‘to get lost’, extraoﬁcˈial ‘unofﬁcial’, etc.). In spite of its obvious interest and
potential implications for the study of contemporary Galician phonology, an
adequate OT account of mid-vowel lowering neologisms and loanword adaptation
in IGal falls beyond the scope of this chapter, and thus the topic must be left up for
future research.

Fernando Martínez-Gil

.Summary and conclusion
This chapter’s main focus has been the split between conservative and innovative
Galician regarding the treatment of pretonic mid vowels in morphologically complex
words. The neutralizing reduction of vowel-height distinctions in unstressed position
found in CGal can be traced back to the proto-Hispano-Romance stage. However, a
clear morphologically based asymmetry can be found in CGal regarding the behavior
of pretonic mid vowels. In lexical items created by Level sufﬁxation, [ATR]
contrasts undergo neutralization, and pretonic open-mid vowels are reduced to
close ones. The main interest of the CGal data stems from the fact that MVR is
suspended in a select group of processes commonly associated with Level morph-
ology, including preﬁxation, evaluative derivation, and compounding, a typical
instantiation of counterfeeding opacity: in spite of the evidence for pretonic reduc-
tion in CGal, a class of morphologically complex forms unexpectedly fails to comply
with such generalization.
Pretonic MVR is absent in IGal varieties, and thus an open-mid vowel in the base
forms is maintained in all morphological derivation and compounding. The innova-
tive character or IGal stems from the fact that the open quality of a base’s underlying
mid vowel is consistently preserved when it becomes pretonic in morphologically
derived lexical items, independent of particular word-formation processes, setting
the stage for the historical demise of pretonic MVR in this variety, and this historical
event may well have been critical in creating the peculiar IGal pattern of adaptation
of neologism and loanword adaptation with pretonic open-mid vowels. The precise
stage at which IGal split from CGal by generalizing the Word-level constraint
ranking to all word-formation processes is still to be determined. However, dialectal
studies provide some robust evidence that for some varieties the split has taken place
in the recent past, perhaps within one or two generations (see Santamarina : ,
Regueira Fernández : , and footnotes and , repectively).
This chapter presents a formal account of pretonic mid-vowel height distribution
in both CGal and IGal within the framework of Stratal OT, a modular approach to
the phonology–morphology interaction. It is shown that Stratal OT allows for a
simple and straightforward treatment of mid-vowel height in pretonic position by
appealing to the two distinct lexical modules of Stratal OT: the Stem and the Word
domains. In conservative Galician, simplex words, and all derivational morphology
except the aforementioned exceptions, operate in the Stem-stratum, while preﬁxation,
appreciative/‑ˈmente sufﬁxation, and compounding are processed at the Word-level.
The analysis of pretonic MVR appeals to three basic constraints: a) the markedness
constraint *[low, ATR] disfavors non-low [ATR] vowels; b) the faithfulness
constraint Ident-[ATR] demands that the input [ATR] value be realized in the output;
and c) the undominated contextual faithfulness constraint Ident-ˈσ-[ATR] ensures that
input and output [ATR] values coincide in the stressed vowel. Unstressed MVR follows
directly from a ranking at the Stem-Level in which [ATR] faithfulness dominates [ATR]
markedness: *[low, ATR]  Ident-[ATR]. MVR-blocking in the Word-stratum is
Galician mid-vowel reduction


accomplished by just the opposite ranking: Ident-[ATR]  *[low, ATR]. In IGal the
CGal Word-Level ranking has been generalized for all morphological operations.
Parallel OT is unable to capture the asymmetric behavior of MVR in conservative
dialects, since whatever constraints and constraint ranking are needed to account for
MVR at the Stem-Level in most cases will wrongly enforce reduction at the Word-Level,
where MVR is inactive. The proposed Stratal OT account is shown to enjoy a number of
signiﬁcant advantages over an Output-to-Output Correspondence approach, an inﬂu-
ential version of OT that deals primarily with the phonology–morphology interface.
Acknowledgments
A shorter version of the present work was presented at the st Linguistic Symposium on
Romance Languages, held at the University of Ottawa, Canada, on May –, . I am
thankful to an anonymous reviewer and, most specially, to Professor Xosé Luis Regueira
Fernández at the Instituto da Lingua Galega, whose insightful comments on the data and
analysis contained in this chapter have greatly helped to improve it. I would also like to thank
Juana and Mark for their kind invitation to contribute to this volume and for their splendid
editing work. All errors and shortcomings are exclusively my own.

Fernando Martínez-Gil

Part V
Studies in Acquisition


17
Language proximity and speech
perception in young bilinguals
Revisiting the trajectory of infants from
Spanish–Catalan contexts
LAURA BOSCH
.Introduction
Infants growing up in bilingual families, acquiring two languages simultaneously
from birth, and becoming native speakers of those two languages, have been the focus
of research in recent years. Numerous studies speciﬁcally addressing the very early
steps in bilingual ﬁrst-language acquisition (BFLA) centered on the ﬁrst year of life
offer a general perspective on the speech-perception processes leading to the building
of infants’ ﬁrst dual-receptive vocabulary. Among these processes, early language
differentiation, language-speciﬁc phonetic categorization, and word-form segmenta-
tion stand as three crucial achievements preceding further gains in bilingual dual-
language acquisition. The main aim of these studies has been to compare bilingual
and monolingual populations, and although some differences have been identiﬁed,
similarities in the learning processes of these two populations have also been high-
lighted, contributing to the broadly accepted idea that bilingual exposure does not
put infants at risk for language delays, nor does it represent a cognitive disadvantage
for the learner (for a general overview see Werker and Byers-Heinlein ).
In spite of the learning similarities, simultaneous bilingual infants not only are
exposed to a more complex input than are their monolingual counterparts, but they
have to face the challenge of building language-speciﬁc phonetic and phonological
categories, eventually characterizing words in their dual early lexicons. So, differences
in the microstructure of language acquisition are likely to be present, considered as
adaptive processes to the complex and richer nature of the bilingual input. Some of
these differences have already begun to be described in the literature (Werker, Byers-
Heinlein, and Fenell ). For instance, slower responses in a native-language
recognition behavioral task have been reported in studies involving very young
Romance Phonetics and Phonology. First edition. Mark Gibson and Juana Gil (eds.)
This chapter © Laura Bosch . First published by Oxford University Press.

bilingual infants (Bosch and Sebastián-Gallés ). From the second year of life,
differences in time taken to reach stable phonological representations for words have
also been observed in bilingual toddlers (Fennell, Byers-Heinlein, and Werker ).
These differences should be viewed as the result of the interaction between the
processing mechanisms available to the young infant and the speciﬁc nature of the
input languages in bilingual contexts. The latter factor represents an important
source of variability within bilingual populations that has not received sufﬁcient
attention in the bilingual acquisition literature. Effectively, input languages can show
different levels of proximity relative not only to the broad rhythmic typology they
belong to (Ramus, Nespor, and Mehler ), but also to the properties of their
phonetic, phonological, and lexical structures. So beyond a monolingual–bilingual
comparison, a pending question to be fully answered in BFLA is the following: Does
language proximity (related to speciﬁc properties of the input languages) modulate
the perceptual processes involved in early language differentiation, perceptual nar-
rowing, word-form segmentation, and phonological representation of words in the
bilingual’s ﬁrst dual vocabulary? Although studies on bilingual infants’ speech-
perception abilities and early lexical development are still relatively scarce, a review
of the extant literature on the performance of bilingual infants, tested in a range of
speech-perception tasks, reveals the existence of two subsets of studies: those dealing
with infants exposed to a bilingual input involving close languages (e.g., the Romance
pair Spanish and Catalan) and those centered on infants acquiring more distant
languages (e.g., mostly English and a rhythmically different language such as French,
Spanish, or even one of a variety of Asian languages). In this chapter, data relative to
early language differentiation skills, phonetic perception, and word segmentation
abilities from infants growing up in Catalan–Spanish contexts will be reviewed and
contrasted with available data from bilingual infants exposed to more distant lan-
guage pairs, with a focus on the identiﬁcation of similarities and differences in
infants’ early trajectories. In contrast to studies highlighting the effects that different
amounts of exposure to each of the input languages can have on bilingual infants’
phonetic discrimination abilities (Garcia-Sierra, Rivera-Gaxiola, Percaccio, Conboy,
Romo, Klarman, Ortiz, and Kuhl ) or on their later language outcomes based on
grammatical and vocabulary measures (Place and Hoff ), the role of language
proximity in bilingual infant studies has seldom been the focus of speciﬁc research
(but see Havy, Bouchon, and Nazzi for an exception relative to the learning of
minimal pair words in the second year of life). Here, it is argued that the language
proximity factor might be responsible for nontrivial differences in the trajectories of
different groups of bilingual infants. Exposure to a close pair of languages can
determine speciﬁc perceptual adjustments, as well as either facilitating or hindering
certain processes in the young bilingual learners on their way to becoming efﬁcient
perceivers of both their input languages.
..Conceptualizing language proximity
Language proximity is a relevant variable in bilingual and second-language acquisi-
tion studies. For instance, cross-language inﬂuence patterns in second (L) and third
(L) language learning indirectly reveal the perceived distance between languages

Laura Bosch

that can modulate language transfer at the lexical or morphosyntactic domains
(see Cenoz ). At the phonetic level, crosslinguistic acoustic properties based
on the perceptual proximity between native and Lsounds can predict discrimin-
ation and learnability (Best and Tyler ; Elvin, Escudero, and Vaisliev ).
However, ﬁnding robust quantitative metrics to rank language proximity from a
more general perspective proves to be a complex endeavor (see Chiswick and Miller
for an attempt centered on English from an adult-learner perspective; also
Schepens, Dijkstra, and Grootjen for a language distance measure based on
cross-language orthographic similarity). From a dual language learning perspective, a
broad classiﬁcation based on language typologies (e.g., Romance versus Germanic
languages) does not capture the full complexity behind a characterization of language
proximity from the perceiver point of view. Several interconnected factors along a
rhythm–phonetic–phonotactic–phonological–lexical axis need to be carefully taken
into account, accurately weighted at each developmental stage, to gain a better
understanding of the role language proximity might play in BFLA.
Early in infancy, proximity (or distance) perceived by the naive language learner
can only be linked to the global sound pattern of the language, mainly prosodic
information deriving from rhythm and intonation characteristics.¹ Thus, attempts at
measuring language proximity from this surface auditory pattern are likely to rely on
gross rhythm properties as a ﬁrst approach to establishing how close or distant
languages can be in the bilingual input to the infant. From this rhythm perspective,
languages have traditionally been grouped in three main categories, namely stress-
timed, syllable-timed, and mora-timed, from metrics based on the distribution and
duration of vowel and consonantal intervals in the speech utterances (Ramus,
Nespor, and Mehler ). Even though languages are probably better conceptual-
ized as falling along a rhythm continuum than as grouped into neatly distinct
categories (Grabe and Low ), this rhythmic typology classiﬁcation has proved
to be useful in infancy research. Language typologies support the rhythm-class
hypothesis, from which different predictions on early differentiation can be derived.
According to this hypothesis, syllable-timed languages, such as Italian and Spanish,
would be rhythmically closer than, say, Spanish and English, the latter a stress-timed
language. Rhythm proximity would severely constrain very early language discrim-
ination, a prediction that was conﬁrmed in studies with newborns, in which parti-
cipants were found to be failing to differentiate utterances belonging to languages
¹ From a phonetic perspective, languages have also been considered to differ in their global pronunci-
ation tendencies, also called phonetic or articulatory settings, linked to the language-speciﬁc habitual
conﬁguration of the vocal apparatus (Laver ). The articulatory setting has audiovisual manifestations
that possibly begin to be acquired as native language properties very early in development. The contribu-
tion of articulatory setting properties as cues supporting native language recognition and discrimination
abilities by young infants has been barely explored, although recent approaches using audiovisual speech
information are certainly setting the ground for promising analyses in this domain. In bilingual contexts,
establishing the magnitude and the stability of the difference between the language-speciﬁc habitual
articulatory settings for each language in the input adds complexity to the identiﬁcation of these vocal
apparatus global conﬁguration properties.
Language proximity and speech perception . . .


of the same rhythm class (Mehler, Jusczyk, Lambertz, Halsted, Bertoncini, and
Amiel-Tison ; Nazzi, Bertoncini, and Mehler ).
Beyond language-rhythm typologies, but highly connected to them, phonetic,
phonotactic, and lexical properties are also factors contributing to the perception
of language proximity. From a cross-language comparison approach, languages can
fundamentally differ in a number of dimensions: in phonetic or articulatory settings
(language-speciﬁc habitual conﬁguration of the vocal apparatus), phonetic inventor-
ies (overall size, distribution of vowels and consonants), allowed combinations or
sound sequences and syllabic structures in word forms, the type of lexical stress
patterns and their variability, as well as in the presence of cognates, that is, words
from each language showing a similar form and conveying the same meaning. All
these language dimensions play a role in the early processes of bilinguals’ vocabulary
building and can be viewed as proximity or distance factors when the two languages
in the input to the bilingual infant are compared. Overall language distance cannot be
based on a single feature, but on the presence of a constellation of features, usually
interrelated, contributing to rhythm, intonation, and also to differences in the
frequency and distribution of syllabic and segmental elements forming word units.
As an example, Catalan and Spanish, grossly classiﬁed as syllable-timed languages,
have rather similar size-segmental inventories; both have variable lexical stress and
share a high number of cognate words, suggesting a high level of language proximity
(Bosch and Ramon-Casas ). However, differences relative to the composition of
fricative and vowel categories, and more speciﬁcally, the presence of vowel reduction
and complex codas only in Catalan, signal perceptual differences,² both at the
suprasegmental and at the segmental level, capable of supporting an early differen-
tiation (see Bosch and Sebastián-Gallés a for a short summary of the main
differential features). These differences are, however, limited compared to the super-
ior number of cues that would distinguish languages belonging to a different rhythm
class, usually showing notable differences in phonetic inventory sizes, word forma-
tion rules, lexical stress patterns, and with limited numbers of cognate words (i.e.,
similar-sounding translational equivalents). From this perspective, bilingual infants
exposed to rhythmically and phonologically close languages would have to face a ﬁrst
challenge in reaching a stable and consistent differentiation of the input languages, a
challenge minimized in different language-class bilinguals. But language differenti-
ation is not just an initial problem to be solved. Keeping languages apart is needed in
order to build language-speciﬁc phonetic and phonological categories, characterizing
the dual lexicons of the bilingual. Thus, trajectories in reaching the crucial milestones
in speech perception and early word learning during the ﬁrst year of life and even
beyond might slightly differ among different bilingual populations, depending on
language proximity factors and the interaction between speciﬁc properties of the
input languages. In the following sections, a review of bilingual data on early
language differentiation skills (Section .), phonetic categorization and perceptual
² Compared to Spanish, these differential properties of Catalan (i.e., vowel reduction and complex
codas) actually increase the rhythm distance between these languages, broadly categorized as belonging to
the syllable-timed class (see Nespor ).

Laura Bosch

narrowing (Section .), and word-form segmentation (Section .) will be offered,
and the role of language proximity/distance factors will be discussed.
.Early language differentiation
A ﬁrst, necessary step in BFLA is related to the ability to differentiate between the
input languages, as bilinguals will have to gradually tune their perception to each
language to become proﬁcient (native) perceivers and speakers of both languages.
First studies with infants exposed to a single language (i.e., monolingual infants)
conﬁrmed that discrimination between their native language and a nonfamiliar one
from the same rhythm typology was not available at birth, but after a few months of
exposure to the native input (Nazzi, Bertoncini, and Mehler ; Nazzi, Jusckzyk,
and Johnson ; Nazzi and Ramus ). Studies with bilingual populations,
although still limited, are congruent with what would be expected from the rhythm
hypothesis. Differentiation is present immediately after birth for Tagalog–English
bilinguals, prenatally exposed to both a syllable-timed and a stress-timed language
(Byers-Heinlein, Burns, and Werker ), but only around three to four months of
age for bilinguals exposed to same-class languages such as Catalan and Spanish
(Bosch and Sebastián-Gallés a) or Spanish and Basque³ (Molnar, Gervain, and
Carreiras ). Emphasis has been put on the fact that bilinguals, no matter how
great the proximity between their two languages, manage to segregate them before six
months of age, when attunement toward native phonetic categories is expected to
begin. However, the question remains whether this early temporal difference in
reaching language differentiation could have any consequences or somehow modu-
late subsequent gains in bilingual ﬁrst-language acquisition. For instance, would an
earlier and more robust language segregation, as predicted for distant languages,
immediately favor mechanisms of consistent language tagging or sorting that might
facilitate the learning of contrastive phonetic categories in each language and reduce
interference or interaction between both phonetic systems? (See Section ., and
also Sundara and Scutellaro , for an instance of this possibility.)
On the other hand, might language proximity enhance infants’ sensitivities toward
the differential properties of the input languages, while challenging the perceptual
system in search of more subtle cues for differentiation? Actually, increased attention
to speech has been hypothesized to be a characteristic of bilinguals in speech-
perception tasks (see, for instance, work with adults and toddlers by Kuipers and
Thierry , ). Here it is suggested that attention behavior might be further
modulated depending on the speciﬁc properties of the language pairs in the input to
the bilingual child. In other words, bilinguals from similar and distant languages
could be expected to differ in their attention responses observed in language-
discrimination or language-recognition tasks.
³ Although Basque and Spanish differ at the level of phrasal prosody, general rhythm has been found to
be similar (Molnar, Carreiras, and Gervain ).
Language proximity and speech perception . . .


Indeed, an intriguing response pattern was obtained from Catalan–Spanish
bilinguals at four, and also at six months of age when tested on a native language
recognition task involving different utterances from one of their native input lan-
guages and from a nonfamiliar language (Bosch and Sebastián-Gallés ; Bosch
and Sebastián-Gallés b). At both ages, bilingual infants responded to the native-
language utterances with slower orientation latencies, which were critically slower
than latencies to orient to the utterances from a nonfamiliar, easier to distinguish
language (English). It was not an overall slower reaction to the auditory stimuli, but
rather a slowed-down response that was speciﬁcally triggered by the processing of the
utterances in one of the familiar languages. In this context, it seems as if the
recognition of this familiarity had a processing cost. Using a different experimental
procedure, Basque–Spanish three-and-a-half-month-old bilinguals were also found
to exhibit signiﬁcantly longer looking times at test toward utterances in both their
native languages, when compared to their monolingual counterparts (Molnar et al.
). This difference in attention could be the result of the higher demands that
discrimination/recognition of utterances from languages belonging to the same
rhythm typology places on the young bilingual learner.
In line with the above-mentioned studies, results from recent research using an
audiovisual (AV) task have also reported a differential feature between bilingual and
monolingual infants in their attention distribution to the eyes and mouth of a
speaker, the former ﬁxating earlier and for a longer developmental period on the
mouth of the speaker (Pons, Bosch, and Lewkowicz a).
Linking together all these separate pieces of evidence, it could be argued that the
bilinguals’ behavior is triggered by the need to ﬁnd more ﬁne-grained cues to support
language differentiation. In the absence of redundant AV information, native-
language recognition might become less direct, which would explain why slower
orientation latencies have been observed. Again, a relevant question that remains to
be answered is whether bilinguals acquiring more distant languages would differ
from Catalan–Spanish bilingual groups tested with the AV material. In other words,
while several attention-to-language measures, in the auditory-only or AV domains,
may capture differences and distinguish bilinguals from monolinguals, no studies
have thoroughly explored the generality of this response pattern by comparing the
behavior of bilinguals exposed to similar versus more distant language pairs on the
same tasks. Ongoing research in the infant lab of the University of Barcelona has just
begun to address this issue. Signiﬁcant differences have been observed between
Spanish–Catalan bilinguals and Spanish–other language ﬁfteen-month-old bilinguals
(a heterogeneous group) with regard to attention to the mouth of a talking face using
one of the bilingual’s native languages, namely Spanish (Pons, Bosch, and Lewkowicz
b). If conﬁrmed with an extended sample of participants, these data would seem
to suggest that the bilingual attention pattern could actually be modulated by
language proximity factors. Close-language bilinguals at the tested age are still paying
more attention to the redundant AV speech cues from the mouth of the speaker than
monolinguals and, crucially, more than distant-language bilinguals. Thus, attention
patterns to AV language stimuli seem to differ when bilinguals exposed to close or
more distant languages are compared. As attention patterns are probably driven by

Laura Bosch

the need to satisfactorily disentangle the sound patterns of the input languages, the
language-segregation challenge surfaces as a processing cost that bilinguals from
more distant languages might not experience; or they might, but to a lesser degree.
But is there any advantage in these enhanced attention-to-language patterns
(auditory, gestural, or both) that bilinguals seem to develop from the ﬁrst months
of life? Recall that studies using silent movies, showing talking faces speaking in
foreign languages (non-native to the bilinguals under study), and registering atten-
tion measures to explore visual language discrimination skills have shown that by
eight months of age bilinguals are still successful at visually discriminating those
languages, while monolinguals no longer retain this ability (Weikum, Vouloumanos,
Navarra,
Soto-Faraco,
Sebastián-Gallés,
and
Werker
;
Sebastián-Gallés,
Albareda-Castellot, Weikum, and Werker ). In these studies, bilinguals exposed
to more similar or to more distant languages do not seem to differ. It remains to be
shown though whether bilinguals from distant languages would be as successful as
bilinguals from close languages at visually discriminating languages from the same
rhythm typology. To put it another way, is bilingual experience per se enhancing
these attention patterns to visual cues for language discrimination, or would this
effect be maximal only for groups of bilinguals exposed to close languages, such as
Catalan and Spanish? If differences were found between bilingual groups, it would
indicate that the demands of disentangling close languages in the bilingual input are
driving their increased attention to AV speech in search of more reliable cues useful
for language processing (see also Ayneto and Sebastián-Gallés , for data on
young Catalan–Spanish bilinguals’ showing a mouth bias for faces even in the absence
of linguistic information).
In sum, early language differentiation in bilinguals is a prerequisite for successful
language acquisition. Building separate language ﬁles from the start would facilitate
the building of two distinct, although interconnected, sound systems. The research
just reviewed points to the notion that this task can be more challenging when
languages are close and possibly intermixed in the environment. But further research
is certainly needed to support this hypothesis. Behavioral as well as electrophysio-
logical measures can complement each other and contribute to the achievement of a
better understanding of language proximity/distance effects. Studies involving lan-
guage pairs with different degrees of proximity, also including dialects as examples of
maximal proximity, would certainly provide crucial information in this domain.
.Phonetic categorization and perceptual narrowing processes
How easy or difﬁcult early language differentiation might be for the young bilingual
learner can have some impact on other speech perception milestones in the second
half of the ﬁrst year of life. Growing up in a bilingual environment involving either
more similar or more distant language pairs might differentially affect subsequent
perceptual processes such as the ones related to language-speciﬁc phonetic categor-
ization and perceptual narrowing. Even if language differentiation, as assessed in a
laboratory setting, has certainly been achieved by six months of age, separately
tracking sound distributions for each of the two languages in the bilingual input
Language proximity and speech perception . . .


might be harder or require additional processing for bilinguals exposed to close
language pairs. As a consequence, perceptual narrowing processes might follow
slightly different time courses.
Phonetic attunement to the sounds of the native language(s), or perceptual
narrowing, is best characterized as a two-way process involving both a sensitivity
loss for non-native (non-experienced) sounds and sensitivity enhancement for native
ones (Kuhl, Stevens, Hayashi, Deguchi, Kiritani, and Iverson ; see also Tsuji and
Cristia for a review and meta-analysis on vowel studies). This experience-driven
phenomenon, supported by an implicit learning mechanism, and fostered through
social interaction, has been repeatedly attested for different aspects of language (as
well as for other stimuli, such as faces and voices) not only in infants growing up in
monolingual contexts (Maurer and Werker for a review) but also for those
simultaneously exposed to two languages (Byers-Heinlein and Fennell for a
review). Characterizing and fully understanding perceptual narrowing processes in
bilingual infants remains a complex task, as different factors may hinder or contrib-
ute to blurring a neat distinction between the input languages over which the
perceptual tuning is expected to take place. For example, the division of languages
in the environment can often be less than perfect, with language mixing being
recurrent, or with input containing accented speech. On the other hand, the speciﬁc
segmental inventories (vowels and consonants) in each of the languages can show
partially overlapping distributions, some differences being contrastive in just one
language, or some common contrasts showing acoustic–phonetic boundary differ-
ences, thus adding complexity to the building of language-speciﬁc phonetic categor-
ies. On top of these factors, language proximity (at this stage mainly based on
rhythm–phonetic–phonotactic dimensions of the input languages) has not yet
received detailed attention within the perceptual narrowing literature in bilinguals.
A closer look at the language pairs in the bilingual contexts most frequently
studied in this domain reveals that it is usually English and another language (either
French, Spanish, or a variety of Asian languages, that is, rather distant languages in
terms of their phonetic–phonological properties) what characterizes the bilingual
input of participants in these studies, very often involving non-homogeneous groups.
Only a few studies have dealt with infants growing up in bilingual contexts where the
input consists of rhythmically close languages, speciﬁcally Spanish and Catalan. The
global picture emerging from these studies is that overall there are no major differ-
ences in the time required by bilinguals and monolinguals to establish their phonetic
inventories (Costa and Sebastián-Gallés ). It has been generally accepted that by
the end of the ﬁrst year of life bilinguals, no matter what languages they are being
exposed to, are able to discriminate many phonetic distinctions from their native
languages as monolinguals of those languages do (Werker, Byers-Heinlein, and
Fennell ). However, a careful look at the still limited range of literature imme-
diately reveals a few interesting differences among bilinguals exposed to different
language pairs.
In what follows I will separately review phonetic attunement research, centered
ﬁrst on the sensitivity toward native sound categories and then on the temporal
course of sensitivity loss for non-native contrasts.

Laura Bosch

..Native phonetic categorization
Regarding vowel segments, studies addressing native vowel discrimination in
Catalan–Spanish bilingual infants tested at four, eight, and twelve months of age
have revealed an unexpected and unique U-shaped trajectory for two pairs of
contrasts (/e/–/ɛ/, a Catalan-only contrast; and /o/–/u/, a contrast common to Catalan
and Spanish), challenging the perspective of a uniform trend in perceptual narrowing
processes for the young bilingual learner (Bosch and Sebastián-Gallés a; Sebastián-
Gallés and Bosch ). Different interpretations been proposed for this pattern of
reduced sensitivity to the tested contrasts by eight months of age have. Bosch and
Sebastián-Gallés (a) ﬁrst argued that the temporary decrease in sensitivity might
be the result of the large overlap between the frequent Spanish /e/ vowel (single
category) and the less frequent mid-front Catalan vowels. However, Sebastián-Gallés
and Bosch () went a step further in their interpretation of the temporary decrease
in sensitivity for a Spanish and Catalan common vowel contrast. It was argued that
although the misalignment of /o/ and /u/ vowels apparent when Catalan and Spanish
categories are compared could be a contributing factor, the phonological–lexical
proximity of this pair of languages, involving a high number of cognate words that
may differ only in their vowel components, seemed to have played a more deter-
minant role, compromising bilinguals’ successful categorization of that contrast
(although for more distant contrastive categories in the vowel space, discrimin-
ation was maintained from four to twelve months, with no temporary decline).
Supporting the present interpretation, research undertaken with English–Spanish
bilinguals exposed to more distant languages and tested on the English native /e/–/ε/
contrast revealed that the target contrast was not affected by any decline in
perception between four and eight months of age (Sundara and Scutellaro ).
The hypothesis put forward was that earlier and easier differentiation of the input
languages due to their different rhythm typology could favor keeping the languages
apart, thus facilitating the building of separate language-speciﬁc categories from
the start.
As for native consonant discrimination, Catalan–Spanish bilinguals were found to
show a similar U-shaped pattern, delayed in time, for the Catalan-only voicing
fricative contrast /s/–/z/, where /s/ is a very frequent sound in both languages and
/z/ is present only in Catalan and overall less frequent (Bosch and Sebastián-Gallés
b). To the best of my knowledge, no other studies with bilingual infants exposed
to different language pairs, with different phonetic properties, have explored fricative
discrimination. It remains an open question whether this U-shaped pattern derives
from the speciﬁc nature of the sounds under study (here a fricative voicing contrast)
or from their distribution in the input languages. The generality of this temporary
decline in discrimination and the factors constraining it or modulating its manifest-
ation still deserve further analysis.
Moving to stop consonant discrimination, research on English–French bilingual
infants (exposed to a distant-language pair) tested on a native voice onset time
(VOT) distinction (a very frequent contrast in each input language) reported no
evidence of a decline in discrimination by ten to twelve months of age, although a
perceptual realignment of the English VOT boundary had taken place after six to
Language proximity and speech perception . . .


eight months of age (Burns, Yoshida, Hill, and Werker ). In a different study,
using an event-related brain potentials (ERPs) methodology and exploring a different
VOT contrast, Spanish–English bilinguals differed from monolinguals and showed
no neural responses to either the Spanish or the English contrast by six to nine
months of age, although discrimination for both native contrasts was attained by ten
to twelve months of age (Garcia-Sierra, Rivera-Gaxiola, Percaccio, Conboy, Romo,
Klarman, Ortiz and Kuhl ). These data can be taken to indicate that the
bilingual’s time course for the phonetic categorization process can slightly differ
from the one observed in monolinguals, with increasing age (or language exposure)
needed to attain similar categorization levels. This effect, though, does not seem to be
driven by a language proximity factor, as it can be accounted for by language
dominance or language experience factors. More recent neuroimaging research
points in the same direction, with results suggesting a general slower transition
from acoustic perception (language general) to language-speciﬁc phonetic perception
in bilinguals, not speciﬁcally linked to language proximity factors but to the demands
of encoding two sets of contrastive categories in parallel (Ferjan Ramírez, Ramírez,
Clarke, Taulu, and Kuhl ).
The bilingual literature on phonetic discrimination and sound categorization in
infancy has been recently extended with research involving heterogeneous groups of
bilinguals (Dutch–other languages). These studies have shown differences between
bilingual and monolingual groups, leading to an overall more complex picture of
phonetic categorization processes, but where determinant factors are more difﬁcult
to identify owing to the diversity of the languages involved. Regarding vowel dis-
crimination, a perceptual advantage has been reported (Liu and Kager ), but in
the case of native VOT consonant contrasts, a stage of perceptual turbulence has been
described around eight to nine months of age, observed to no longer be present from
eleven months on (Liu and Kager ). While interesting in revealing variation in
native phonetic-category building, the heterogeneity of the bilingual groups in the
Dutch studies precludes any interpretation based on language proximity factors.
..Non-native phonetic contrasts
As stated early in this section, perceptual narrowing is best characterized as a two-
way process involving both an increase in sensitivity to native sounds and a loss of it
for non-native contrasts. Very limited research has been devoted to the analysis of
bilinguals’ responses toward non-native contrasts and the time course of the expected
sensitivity loss. Byers-Heinlein and Fennell () offered many reasons for which
bilinguals would be likely to take an extended period for perceptual narrowing,
keeping their sensitivities to non-native contrasts for a longer time. Among these
reasons, the simplest one is to consider that because a bilingual input usually implies
less frequent exposure to each language, narrowing will take longer to occur. Another
factor, more directly related to the speciﬁc phonetic properties of the languages,
refers to bilinguals’ being overall exposed to a greater number of contrasts, some of
them more difﬁcult to establish (e.g., misaligned, partially overlapping, more subject
to variability) and, as a consequence, the perceptual system needs to remain open for a
longer time. Whether bilinguals from different language pairs would show differences

Laura Bosch

in the time course of this narrowing process still remains an open question. However,
very recent data from samples of Catalan–Spanish bilinguals have shown that,
compared to monolinguals, bilingual infants maintain the capacity to discriminate
non-native consonant contrasts (Hindi dental and retroﬂex /t/) for a more extended
period of time, not reaching a response compatible with narrowing until the age of
eighteen months (Pi Casaus ). Neural and behavioral responses to a similar
non-native Hindi contrast have also been shown to be present in a sample of hetero-
geneous English-French, Spanish, and Chinese bilinguals at an age (twelve months)
when they are no longer present in monolinguals (Petitto, Berens, Kovelman, Dubins,
Jasińska, and Shalinsky ). Whether exposure to a close pair of languages, such
as Spanish and Catalan, is a determinant factor in the longer maintenance of sensitivity
to non-native contrasts requires more thorough exploration. Once again, using homo-
geneous groups for crosslinguistic comparisons in bilingual studies becomes a neces-
sary condition.
To sum up, the picture emerging from phonetic categorization studies in bilin-
guals is complex. Variability in their input is certainly responsible for the sometimes
divergent responses found in behavioral studies and, not surprisingly, the perceptual
system ﬁnds adaptive ways to cope with this variability inherent in bilingual contexts.
Temporary declines in discrimination or slower transitions from acoustic to phonetic
perception could be examples of such adaptive processes. In our review of the
literature, bilinguals exposed to a close pair of languages seem to contrast with
other bilingual groups by either revealing temporary declines in discrimination for
some native contrasts or by showing a protracted narrowing process for non-native
contrasts. However, the disparity of the results from the still limited set of available
data seems to suggest that rather than a general language proximity factor, the
speciﬁc properties of the phonetic inventories for each of the input languages
might better account for any possible differences between bilinguals exposed to
different language pairs.
.Word-form segmentation
The ability to extract word forms from ﬂuent speech is a crucial milestone in early
language learning, as words in the input to the child are rarely produced in isolation
(Brent and Siskind ). Infants’ ability to segment word forms from natural
language passages was ﬁrst attested in seven-and-a-half-month-old monolingual
English-learning infants, acquiring a stress-timed language where a metrical segmen-
tation strategy based on the distribution of stressed syllables in connected speech can
support word segmentation (Jusczyk and Aslin ; see also Jusczyk ). Infants
exposed to syllable-timed languages have also been shown to successfully segment
monosyllabic items, matching the rhythm unit in these languages by six months of
age (see Bosch, Figueras, Teixidó, and Ramon-Casas for Catalan and Spanish;
Nishibayashi, Goyet, and Nazzi for French).
Monolingual infants have also been reported to successfully segment a non-native
language if it belongs to the same rhythm typology as the native one (e.g., Dutch and
English, both stress-timed languages, in Houston, Jusczyk, Kuijpers, Coolen, and
Language proximity and speech perception . . .


Cutler ), but not when the non-native language belongs to a different rhythm
typology (from English to French, or vice versa, in Polka and Sundara ), thus
revealing the relevant role that native-language prosody plays as a robust cue to
segmentation. From these monolingual data, it can easily be predicted that bilingual
infants exposed to close language pairs in terms of rhythm typology will succeed at
word segmentation at the same age and in a similar way to monolinguals. On the
other hand, bilinguals exposed to more distant languages, involving different rhythm
units for segmentation, are more likely to be affected by this rhythm mismatch taxing
their word-segmentation skills in one or both of their input languages.
Literature on segmentation abilities from bilingual infants is still rather scarce,
but, in this case, research has mainly been undertaken with homogeneous groups
of bilinguals, thus favoring a more clear interpretation of the comparison data. This
raises the question whether there is any evidence of a facilitation effect in word
segmentation for close-language bilinguals.
Spanish–Catalan bilinguals exposed to syllable-timed languages show exactly the
same pattern of responses, and at a similar age, as monolinguals of each of these two
languages in a monosyllabic word segmentation task (Bosch, Figueras, Teixidó, and
Ramon-Casas ). Research on disyllabic word segmentation has begun to be
addressed in the infant lab of the University of Barcelona, regarding CVC.CV
trochaic words. No major differences between monolingual and bilingual groups
(involving three different age groups tested from six and a half to nine and a half
months) are evident (Teixidó ). As found in our previous study on monosyllabic
word segmentation, monolingual and bilingual infants seem to follow an overall
similar process, with a reversal of the direction of the preference pattern with age and
segmentation expertise. That is, in a procedure that familiarizes the infant with
natural-language passages containing repetitions of two target words and then tests
them on four different word lists (two familiar and two novel), younger age groups
show a familiarity preference, while older ones show a novelty preference, a pattern
that can be expected when, for instance, task demands are reduced (Hunter and
Ames ). Critically, positive evidence of successful word segmentation is already
present by six and a half months of age, suggesting that bilinguals exposed to close
languages might beneﬁt from this proximity and possibly transfer some segmenta-
tion cues from one language to the other.
Comparing these data with those from a recent study involving French–English
bilinguals reveals interesting differences in the emergence of disyllabic word seg-
mentation skills in these dual language learners (Polka, Orena, Sundara, and Worrall
). When eight-month-old infants were tested in their ability to segment words in
each of their native languages, segmentation was only evident in French and only if
this language was tested in the ﬁrst place. When the experimental procedure was
modiﬁed, familiarizing ﬁrst with words and testing on passages while at the same
time extending the exposure to the test language, only then did bilinguals eventually
succeed.
In spite of some differences in the testing paradigms used in these studies, the
comparison between data from Catalan–Spanish and French–English bilinguals
offers a clear indication that speciﬁc properties of the languages in the input, here

Laura Bosch

whether they are close or distant in prosodic terms, modulate the segmentation
ability. The need for longer exposure to the test language and the difﬁculty of
switching from one segmentation strategy to the other when a language change is
introduced in the task reﬂect the higher demands that segmentation places on the
distant-language bilingual.
Finally, it could be argued that Catalan–Spanish bilinguals have never been tested
in both their native languages, but evidence of successful segmentation obtained in
spite of nontrivial differences in their language dominance seems to suggest that
similar results would be obtained independently of the test language.
Overall, in contrast to data offered in the previous sections of this chapter,
Catalan–Spanish bilinguals exposed to close languages do not show here any negative
effect of this proximity factor. On the contrary, congruency between segmentation
cues and broad word-form similarity (cognate words) between languages converge to
facilitate word segmentation.
.Summary and ﬁnal comments
In this chapter, infant bilingual data relative to the early stages of BFLA have been
reviewed from a language proximity perspective. In the absence of precise, ﬁne-
grained, and uncontroversial language proximity metrics, adequate to compare any
pair of input languages, and to clearly establish the interplay of factors that can lead
to perceived proximity at different stages in development, a number of language
dimensions must be carefully considered when comparing bilinguals from different
linguistic environments. It is suggested that early in development these dimensions
are initially centered on prosody (global rhythm and intonation properties) and
segmental inventories, but immediately followed by phonotactic rules, phonemic
(contrastive) values, and auditory word forms (relative presence of cognates), as soon
as the infant begins the building of a receptive vocabulary. These dimensions could
be placed along a proximity axis, from the most general (global rhythm) to the most
speciﬁc (word-form similarity), each of them contributing to perceived proximity
and overall offering a more nuanced perspective on language proximity effects in
speech perception and language processing.
From this perspective, Catalan and Spanish stand out as close languages, thus
possibly representing different demands for the young bilingual learner relative to
early differentiation, the establishment of language-speciﬁc phonetic categories,
word-form identiﬁcation, and phonological representation, as compared to the
demands experienced by infants exposed to more distant language pairs.
To explore the effects of language proximity on bilinguals’ trajectories, a compari-
son has been undertaken between available data from Spanish–Catalan learning
infants and data from infants exposed to more distant languages. Emphasis has
been placed on studies involving homogeneous groups of bilingual infants, as they
can offer more precise information on the role played by speciﬁc language proximity
factors in modulating the acquisition process.
The studies reviewed in this chapter have revealed that Spanish–Catalan bilinguals
differ from bilinguals exposed to more distant languages in their later ability to
Language proximity and speech perception . . .


differentiate between the input languages and also in their time course of phonetic
categorization affecting speciﬁc sound categories and in their perceptual narrowing
processes. Proximity in this case seems to penalize close-language bilinguals. On the
other hand, a crucial skill related to vocabulary building, such as word extraction, is
not taxed, probably owing to the convergence of cues supporting this ability and their
easy transfer from one language to the other. Infants’ speech-perception trajectories
are thus modulated by language proximity factors, a perspective that has not received
full consideration in previous bilingual research.
Although the available processing mechanisms are the same for all infants,
whether monolingual or bilingual, the demands imposed by the complex and more
variable nature of the bilingual input may determine differences, not only between
monolingual and bilingual infants, but also between groups of bilinguals differing in
the typology of their input languages. The compare-contrast mechanism as described
in the expanded PRIMIR framework (Processing Rich Information from Multidi-
mensional Interactive Representations; Werker and Curtin ), adapted to address
bilingual situations (Curtin, Byers-Heinlein, and Werker ), is a basic tool to
differentiate languages and keep them apart by independently computing the statistic
for each language. The effect that language proximity can have on these computa-
tions and the role played by additional cues (for instance, indexical information) in
supporting an early and robust differentiation of close language pairs, sufﬁcient to
start forming multiple representations over each input language, are but some
elements that deserve further analysis.
Rather than viewing bilingual ﬁrst-language acquisition exclusively from a delay/
acceleration perspective, the interest of future crosslinguistic research involving
different bilingual populations lies in the identiﬁcation of factors modulating the
processes behind language differentiation and the constraints on the computations
that need to be undertaken on each language system.
In this chapter exploring language proximity effects, the focus has been placed on
three speciﬁc skills that constitute important milestones in the ﬁrst year of life. Other
language-processing skills have not been discussed, but it is relevant to address them
too from a language proximity perspective: among them, the acquisition of phono-
tactic rules, lexical stress perception, phonological representation of words in the
dual lexicon, and mutual exclusivity linked to word learning, to mention but a few.
Extending the range of bilingual populations to be studied and focusing on a narrow
comparison between close- and more distant-language bilinguals will certainly con-
tribute to gaining a better understanding of the modulator role that language
proximity can play in these early stages of bilingual ﬁrst-language acquisition.
Acknowledgments
The preparation of this chapter has been supported by a grant from the Spanish Ministerio de
Economía y Competitividad (MINECO, project PSI--P).

Laura Bosch

18
Production and perception in
the acquisition of Spanish and
Portuguese
JAYDENE ELVIN, POLINA VASILIEV,
AND PAOLA ESCUDERO
.Introduction
Foreign-accented speech is often a concern for many adult second-language (L)
learners. Even when surrounded by the L, native-like proﬁciency in the attainment
of the perception and production of Lsounds is rather difﬁcult. This difﬁculty is
often attributed to native-language inﬂuence. That is, the ﬁrst language (L) inﬂu-
ences how the learner perceives, understands, and produces the sounds and words of
the L(Best ; Flege ; Escudero , , ). Research relating to
Spanish and Portuguese learners’ acquisition of Lvowels, particularly those of L
English, is abundant (e.g., Flege and Bohn ; Levey ; Levey and Cruz ;
Pérez ; Escudero and Cládková ; Boomershine ). However, much less is
known about the opposite scenario, namely the acquisition of Spanish and Portuguese
as the L, particularly by native speakers of English.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a critical review of the available literature
in the area of perception and production in the acquisition of Spanish and Portuguese.
We ﬁrst introduce some general facts relating to non-native and Lspeech produc-
tion and perception, as well as the theoretical models that aim at explaining these
phenomena. We then present a review of the empirical ﬁndings for speech produc-
tion and perception in Spanish and Portuguese as non-native languages and how
these two abilities relate in the process of acquiring Spanish and Portuguese sounds.
Since consonants have been studied more than vowels, this chapter focuses on
exploring vowel production and perception in LSpanish and Portuguese, a much
less studied subﬁeld. We conclude by offering some suggestions for future research,
particularly in relation to the need for future investigations of the interrelation
Romance Phonetics and Phonology. First edition. Mark Gibson and Juana Gil (eds.)
This chapter © Jaydene Elvin, Polina Vasiliev, and Paola Escudero . First published by Oxford
University Press.

between perception, production, and word recognition for learners of Spanish
and Portuguese.
..Non-native and cross-language speech production and perception
Non-native speakers are often identiﬁable by their foreign-accented speech. Many
studies attribute this to the age of onset of learning (see Piske, MacKay, and Flege
for a review). That is, adults seem to have much stronger foreign accents than
speakers who acquired their Lin early childhood (e.g., Flege , ; Johnson
and Newport ; Flege, Munro, and Mackay ; Piske, MacKay, and Flege ).
However, the degree of foreign accent has also been attributed to the amount of L
use, in that both early and late bilinguals who continue to use a large amount of the
Lin their daily lives are perceived to have stronger foreign accents than those who
limited their use of the L(Piske, MacKay, and Flege ). Language experience
(i.e., length of exposure to the L) has also been shown to affect the degree of foreign
accent. However, empirically, conﬂicting results have been found: some studies have
shown an association between language experience and the degree of foreign accent
(e.g., Bohn and Flege , ; Flege ; Troﬁmovich and Baker ) while
others have not (e.g., Flege ; Moyer ). Although the effect of language
experience on foreign accent has not yet been determined, the native language clearly
inﬂuences foreign-accented speech. In particular, it seems that accuracy in produc-
tion seems to be reﬂective of the learner’s accuracy in perception (Flege ) as
many non-native and Lspeakers produce target language sounds in the same way
that they would produce their own native Lsounds.
Given that perception largely inﬂuences learners’ production of a target language,
it is important to understand the role of the Lin crosslinguistic speech perception,
e.g., across native and unfamiliar or foreign languages. Non-native and Lspeech
perception is how we perceive the sounds of an unfamiliar or second language.
Languages differ on both a phonetic and a phonological level (Best, Hallé, Bohn,
and Faber ). Phonologically, differences in the type and number of phonemes
(both consonants and vowels) affect how the learner perceives and produces non-
native or Lsounds. As a result of differing phonemic inventories across languages,
crosslinguistic difﬁculty is not uniform. Some listeners may ﬁnd some phonemic
contrasts particularly difﬁcult, whereas others may ﬁnd them fairly easy. For
example, many studies have shown that Spanish learners of English struggle to
perceive and produce the English /i–ɪ/ contrast (Flege, Bohn, and Jang ; Escudero
, ; Morrison , ) as their vowel inventory does not contain /ɪ/, making
it difﬁcult for these learners to distinguish between the two sounds. In contrast,
German learners, who have the same contrast in their Lvowel inventory, have less
difﬁculty in perceiving the same English contrast than Spanish learners (Bohn and
Flege , ; Flege, Bohn, and Jang ; Iverson and Evans ).
..Review of theoretical models
A number of theoretical models have been developed to describe and account for issues
in Lphonological development. For example, the Speech Learning Model (SLM; Flege
, ), the Perceptual Assimilation Model (PAM; Best ) and PAM-L(Best

J. Elvin, P. Vasiliev, and P. Escudero

and Tyler ), and the Second Language Linguistic Perception model (LLP;
Escudero , , ), all claim that the similarity and dissimilarity between
native and target language sounds is predictive of how accurately target sounds will be
perceived, however, they all differ in how they account for these difﬁculties.
For example, the Speech Learning Model (SLM; Flege , ) was developed
as a means of accounting for the limitations of a learner’s ability to produce native-
like sounds due to experience and age-related limitations. Originally designed to
address production, the model predicts the learner’s ease or difﬁculty in learning new
Lsounds by comparing where they are produced in the acoustic space. The Speech
Learning Model hypothesizes that learners have the ability to establish new L
phonetic categories if there is a substantial difference, as measured by statistical
analysis of acoustic values, between the phonetic properties of the target Lsound
and the closest phone in the learner’s Linventory. In other words, the greater the
perceived phonetic distance between the Lsound and the closest Lsound, the more
likely the learner is to detect a phonetic difference and establish a new category for
it, resulting in more native-like perception and production (Flege ; Guion,
Flege, Akahane-Yamada, and Pruitt ; Best, McRoberts, and Goodell ;
Strange ). However, when a new Lsound is very similar to an existing L
sound, the learner will assimilate the Lcategory to the Lcategory, resulting in
lower perceptual accuracy (Flege ). This means that if the learner has not
successfully formed a new category for the new Lsound they will then produce it
according to the acoustic properties of the closest Lsound (Flege , ). In
sum, SLM posits that sounds that are similar in the Lto an existing Lcategory
should be more difﬁcult to acquire than those in which new categories are formed
that do not closely resemble any Lcategory (Flege ; Colantoni, Steele, and
Escudero ).
The Perceptual Assimilation Model (PAM; Best ) was designed to address
non-native perception. Unlike SLM, which focuses on individual phonemes in the
target language (Colantoni, Steele, and Escudero ), PAM investigates naive
listeners’ ability to discriminate non-native phonological contrasts as inﬂuenced by
their L(Best and Tyler ). PAM claims that a non-native learner’s perception of
the target language is strongly inﬂuenced by their Land that Lphonological
contrasts will be assimilated according to the categories that already exist in the L.
This model was extended to PAM-L(Best and Tyler ) in order to incorporate
Ldevelopment. PAM-Lpredicts that perceptual learning is inﬂuenced by the
individual’s entire language-learning experience (Bundgaard-Nielsen, Best, and
Tyler ). PAM and PAM-Lposit three main patterns of assimilation of L
phonemes by listeners. The ﬁrst pattern of assimilation consists in the Lphoneme
being categorized as a native phoneme, with its goodness of ﬁt ranging from
excellent to poor. The second pattern of assimilation involves the Lphoneme
being an uncategorized sound that falls somewhere between native phonemes. The
third pattern occurs when the sound is categorized as nonspeech, namely, a
phoneme that cannot be assimilated because it bears no similarity to any native
phoneme (Best , ). Furthermore, within the ﬁrst pattern of assimilation,
whereby the Lphoneme is categorized, three assimilation types can be identiﬁed,
Production and perception in the acquisition


namely Single Category, Category Goodness, and Two Category. Single-Category
Assimilation (SCA) denotes a situation in which two non-native sounds are
classiﬁed as a good example of one single Lcategory and is predicted to lead to
poor discrimination of the non-native contrast (Best ). Category Goodness
(CG) occurs when two non-native phones are assimilated to the same native
category, where one phoneme is considered to be more acceptable than the other,
more deviant phoneme. Discrimination is predicted to be moderate to very good,
depending on the level of difference in category goodness for each of the non-native
sounds (Best ). In contrast, Two-Category Assimilation (TCA) denotes a
pattern in which two non-native sounds are perceived as two different native
phonemes, leading to good to excellent discrimination of non-native sounds
(Best ).
The Second Language Linguistic Perception model (LLP; Escudero , ,
) is the most recent model to explain crosslinguistic speech perception and
accounts for learners from all stages of learning. That is, the model explains L
perception from initial contact with the Luntil ultimate attainment (Colantoni,
Steele, and Escudero ). The model explains and predicts Ldifﬁculty through
comprehensive acoustic comparisons of listeners’ native Lsound categories and the
sound categories of the target language (Colantoni, Steele, and Escudero ). It
further posits that in the initial stage, learners will initially perceive (and produce) the
sounds of the Lin the same way that they perceive (and produce) the sounds in their
L(Escudero , , ). This can therefore lead to difﬁculties in Llearning,
as learners whose native language has fewer sounds than the target language must
learn new sounds (Escudero and Chládková ) and learners with more sounds
than the target must learn that some sounds in their native language do not exist in
the L(Escudero and Boersma ). The LLP model predicts similar patterns of
assimilation as do SLM and PAM. For example, when two non-native sounds are
perceived as a single native sound, known as the new scenario, LLP predicts
difﬁculty in discrimination. When two non-native sounds are perceived as two
separate native categories, LLP refers to this as the similar scenario, and discrimin-
ation is predicted to be easier in this scenario. Additionally, adopting the terminology
of PAM, LLP suggests another scenario, multiple-category assimilation (MCA),
which occurs when the two sounds in a non-native contrast are perceived as more
than two native categories; (Escudero and Boersma () explain that this pattern
has been neglected in the literature because it does not seem to pose any perceptual
problems for Llearners, other than those resembling SCA. However, the authors
suggest that this pattern can become problematic when a subset problem is identiﬁed.
The subset problem occurs when a learner must realize that certain features or
sounds in the target language do not exist and that they cannot process them in
the same manner as in their L, a task that may pose considerable difﬁculty
(Escudero and Boersma ; Elvin, Escudero, and Vasiliev ). Studies have
also demonstrated the problematic nature of MCA as a result of a perceptual or
acoustic overlap, whereby each Lsound in the target contrast is assimilated to the
same multiple categories, resulting in discrimination difﬁculty (Vasiliev ; Elvin,
Escudero, and Vasiliev ). Table .summarizes the main characteristics of the
aforementioned models.

J. Elvin, P. Vasiliev, and P. Escudero

.Empirical ﬁndings in the acquisition of Spanish and Portuguese
The perception and production of English vowels by Spanish and Portuguese learn-
ers is a commonly studied scenario in Lvowel acquisition. This is mainly because
learning to perceive and produce novel vowel contrasts has been demonstrated to be
very difﬁcult for Llearners (e.g., Flege, Bohn, and Jang ), and since both
Spanish and Portuguese have fewer vowels than English, many English vowel
T.SLM, PAM and PAM-L, and LLP models’ focus and predictions for
Lsuccess
Model
Population
covered
Aspects of
Lspeech
How it
describes
Lspeech
Manner of
predicting
difﬁculty
Predictions
SLM
Experienced
learners
Production
and
perception
Acoustic
properties
Acoustic
comparisons:
comparing vowel
inventories (using
acoustics and not
IPA symbols)
Similar sounds:
difﬁcult to
discriminate
Dissimilar sounds:
easy to
discriminate
PAM
and
PAM-L
Non-native
Llearners
Perception
Articulation Perceptual
assimilation
patterns
SC: poor
discrimination
CG: moderate–
very good
discrimination
TC: good–
excellent
discrimination
UC: good or poor
discrimination
depending on
uncategorized
type
LLP
Learners
from the
initial to the
ﬁnal states
Perception,
word
recognition,
and
production
Acoustic
properties
Detailed acoustic
comparisons of
listeners’ own
vowel
productions and
those of the L
NEW: poor
discrimination
SIMILAR: good–
excellent
discrimination
SUBSET: good
discrimination or
poor
discrimination
depending on
whether or not a
subset problem is
identiﬁed
Production and perception in the acquisition


contrasts tend to be novel for these learners. However, much less is known about the
opposite scenario, namely learning a target language with a smaller vowel inventory
than that of the native language, as would be the learning scenario for English
learners of either Spanish or Portuguese. This is perhaps due to the fact that it is
often thought that the availability of more vowel categories than the target language
will facilitate language learning (Iverson and Evans , ). In this section we
provide a review of the available literature relating to the production and perception
of Spanish and Portuguese as second languages. We also present a brief review of the
literature regarding the interrelation of these two abilities.
..Production and perception in LSpanish
...Vowel production
Vowel systems with fewer than ﬁve vowels are not
typologically common (e.g., Maddieson ), yet one such case is that of Quichua
(Ecuadorian Quechua), whose vowel system consists of three vowels, /ɪ, a, ʊ/. Guion
() investigated the vowel productions of ﬁve Spanish monolingual speakers and
Quichua–Spanish speakers who were divided into four groups: simultaneous,
early, mid, and late bilinguals. An acoustic analysis of the bilingual speakers’ Spanish
vowel production showed that only simultaneous bilinguals were able to consistently
produce all of the ﬁve Spanish vowels with monolingual-like F/Fvalues. Some early
and mid bilinguals also acquired native-like pronunciation, whereas late bilinguals
did not, demonstrating that age of onset of learning was a determining factor in
successful acquisition. Furthermore, only some simultaneous and early bilinguals
produced their Quichua /ɪ/ with values different from their Spanish /i/ or /e/, and
apparently none of the bilinguals were able to acquire the two Spanish back vowels
/o/ and /u/ and at the same time maintain a third separate Quichua vowel /ʊ/.
Following Flege’s SLM (Flege ), Guion hypothesizes that these bilinguals per-
ceptually equate their Quichua /ɪ/ to Spanish /i/ and their Quichua /ʊ/ to either
Spanish /u/ or /o/, but no perception study has yet conﬁrmed this hypothesis.
LEnglish is perhaps one of the only Lpopulations whose production of L
Spanish vowels has been studied more extensively. The Spanish ﬁve-vowel system
has been considered relatively stable with little dialectal variation (e.g., Hualde ;
Díaz-Campos ; but see Chládková, Escudero, and Boersma ), whereas
English has more dialectal variation (for a recent review see Williams and Escudero
for British English, and Clopper and Pisoni for North American English).
For LEnglish learners of LSpanish vowels, the main difﬁculties that have been
documented in production are diphthongization of /e/ and /o/, pronounced as
American English /e͡ɪ/ and /o͡ʊ/, reduction of unstressed vowels, production of
Spanish /a/ as /æ/ (Hammerly ), and vowel lengthening, all phenomena that
improved little with training according to Elliot ().
In one acoustic study, Menke () examined the pronunciation of vowels in a
group of LEnglish learners of Spanish in an immersion program. The results
demonstrated that the Llearners’ vowel space was larger based on F/Fmeasures in
their production of Spanish vowels, compared to that of native Spanish speakers. In a
cross-sectional study of the Spanish vowel productions of adult second-language
learners, Menke and Face () found that learners in the early stages of learning

J. Elvin, P. Vasiliev, and P. Escudero

struggle to produce vowels in a native-like way, but the vowels of more advanced
learners are similar to those of native speakers. Furthermore, the authors found that
the unstressed vowels of all learners were produced with some degree of central-
ization, suggesting an inﬂuence of LEnglish on Spanish vowel production. Aldrich
() further found evidence of language transfer as the results revealed central-
ization in the production of the Spanish /a/ by learners who had spent a signiﬁcant
amount of time in Spanish-speaking environments as well as those who had spent
little time in a Spanish-speaking country. Finally, Cobb and Simonet () exam-
ined the productions of the Spanish monophthongs by native English intermediate
and advanced learners of Spanish. The study found that in their productions of the
Spanish /u/ in both stressed and unstressed positions, the intermediate learners
produced a more fronted vowel in comparison to the native control, whereas the
advanced learners’ productions were located further back in the vowel space. The
authors suggest that this fronting of the Spanish /u/ by the intermediate speakers
may be a result of a transfer effect from their own native English. In sum, Lvowel
production by English learners’ of Spanish has been examined mostly in terms of
phonological transfer of LEnglish vowel characteristics.
...Vowel perception
English learners’ perception of LSpanish vowels has
received much less attention than production, mainly because it is believed that no
major perceptual difﬁculties should be expected because in phonological terms,
Spanish vowels are a subset of the English vowel inventory (e.g., Simonet ).
Thus, English speakers should be able to reuse the ﬁve English vowels that are
phonemically equivalent to the ﬁve Spanish vowels or at the most make some
minor adjustments in category boundaries for their Lvowel system (as suggested
in Escudero ). Researchers instead focus on other areas of Spanish acquisition
that pose more difﬁculties for Llearners (e.g., stress perception: Ortega-Llebaria,
Gu, and Fan ; and Romanelli and Menegotto ).
One study that has investigated the effect of Lvowel inventory size on non-native
vowel perception is Bradlow (), who presented American English listeners with
synthetic vowel tokens along the Spanish /i/–/e/ and /o/–/u/ continua and asked them
to identify the vowels using orthographic labels corresponding to English /i/ and /e/ or
/o/ and /u/. The results demonstrated that listeners’ categorization of the stimuli was
strongly affected by the presence of the extra AE phonological categories /ɪ/ and /ʊ/.
Speciﬁcally, the Spanish-like tokens located in areas of the acoustic space occupied by
these listeners’ native /ɪ/ and /ʊ/ categories corresponded to the highest uncertainty
regions, with less than eighty percent consistency in labeling. More evidence for non-
native perception of Spanish vowels comes from Fox, Flege, and Munro (), who
found that monolingual English listeners used different dimensions to perceive
Spanish-like vowel stimuli than native Spanish listeners. Thus, both Bradlow ()
and Fox, Flege, and Munro () suggest that having more categories and perceptual
dimensions in the Lmay affect listeners’ identiﬁcation of Spanish vowels.
However, the ﬁrst study to directly demonstrate the problematic nature of the
subset scenario was Escudero and Boersma (), who presented naturally produced
tokens of Spanish /i/ and /e/ to LDutch monolinguals and to Dutch learners of
Production and perception in the acquisition


LSpanish and found that inexperienced Dutch listeners confused the Spanish /e/
with /i/ up to sixty-seven percent of the time. Interestingly, the same listeners
performed a perceptual assimilation task with the same Spanish /e/ and /i/ tokens
and mapped them to three different Dutch vowels, namely /i/, /ɪ/, and /ɛ/. The
authors demonstrated that MCA, i.e., the mapping of two vowels onto more than
two native categories (see Section ..), seemed to be the cause of Dutch listeners’
errors in Spanish vowel identiﬁcation. Crucially, identiﬁcation errors decreased with
LSpanish experience, and this improvement was correlated with a reduction in
the use of the extra category /ɪ/ in a Spanish–Dutch labeling task, in which listeners
classiﬁed Spanish vowels again using Dutch vowel labels, but this time they were
made aware that the stimuli were Spanish vowels. Thus Dutch learners of Spanish
exhibited perceptual learning: more experienced learners were able to eliminate
the extraneous category from their perceptual grammars as well as to achieve the
necessary category boundary shift to perceive the Spanish /e/–/i/ contrast in a
native-like manner.
Other studies investigating the subset scenario with LEnglish learners of Spanish,
however, found evidence for MCA, yet very few problems in Spanish vowel identi-
ﬁcation, compared to the dramatic case of the Dutch learners of Spanish. For
example, Morrison () found many cases of MCA in Canadian English learners
of LSpanish, but there were no signiﬁcant inaccuracies in their vowel identiﬁcation,
thirteen percent being the highest error rate for Spanish /o/ mislabeled as /a/, with the
other four vowels identiﬁed even more accurately. García Bayonas () also found
that American English learners of Spanish were over ninety-four percent accurate in
their identiﬁcation of the ﬁve Spanish vowels with natural stimuli and were native-
like in their perception of synthetic Spanish vowels. Following Escudero and Boersma’s
() experimental design, Gordon (, ) found MCA in American English
learners of Spanish for the front vowels /e/ and /i/, but over ninety percent accuracy
in identifying the ﬁve Spanish vowels. Thus, it is not yet clear whether MCA presents
any real perceptual difﬁculties for English learners of LSpanish.
It is important to point out that studies like Escudero and Boersma (),
Morrison (), and Gordon (, ) used orthographic labels to assess L
learners’ perceptual proﬁciency with Spanish vowels, which may constitute a con-
founding factor (see Escudero and Wanrooij for previous evidence of the effect
of Land Lgrapheme–phoneme correspondences on non-native segmental per-
ception). To investigate whether MCA occurs in Californian English listeners with
Spanish vowels, Vasiliev () tested eighteen monolingual speakers of American
English in a native-language vowel identiﬁcation task, in which the participants
listened to isolated Spanish vowel stimuli and labeled each as one of ten AE vowel
phonemes represented orthographically in words. Vasiliev () found that these
listeners mapped every Spanish vowel to more than one native category, thus
exhibiting MCA. In order to investigate the possible effect of MCA on Spanish
vowel identiﬁcation without the use of orthographic labels, the same participants
completed a discrimination task in XAB format: they listened to a sequence of three
sounds and had to decide whether the ﬁrst (X) was like the second (A) or the third
(B), where X was a naturally produced Spanish vowel and A and B were synthetic

J. Elvin, P. Vasiliev, and P. Escudero

vowels with values of typical Spanish vowels. The results demonstrated that Californian
English listeners had ninety percent or higher accuracy in discriminating between
adjacent vowels in Spanish, suggesting that MCA does not necessarily predict
problems in the auditory discrimination of Spanish vowel contrasts.
To summarize, while several production difﬁculties with the ﬁve Spanish vowels
have been identiﬁed for English learners, in perception no dramatic inaccuracy in
Spanish vowel identiﬁcation has been found. In the next section we will return to the
examination of a different instance of the subset scenario in the acquisition of a L
vowel inventory, namely that of the seven-vowel system of Portuguese for LEnglish
learners.
..Production and perception in Portuguese
Far less is known regarding the acquisition of LPortuguese phonology than the
acquisition of LSpanish phonology. In this section we thus review the main ﬁndings
of the few studies dealing with non-native and Lproduction and perception of
Portuguese.
...Production in L2 and L3 Portuguese
Very few studies look at the acquisi-
tion of production in Land LPortuguese. Of the few studies available, Muller and
Muller () investigated the interference of orthography on Lpronunciation for
native English learners of Portuguese divided into two groups, where one of those
groups was withheld from written instruction in Portuguese during the ﬁrst four
weeks. Following the four-week instruction period, participants were tested on their
pronunciation, and a comparison of the two groups revealed that greater difﬁculties
in pronunciation were present for those in the group who had received language
training with written instructions. Another study by Barkley () investigated the
acquisition of the Orthographic–Phonological correspondence rules in Land L
Portuguese and found that target L/Lproduction increased over the course of a
semester as the interference from the L/Ldecreased. Of the studies that directly
relate to the acquisition of Portuguese vowels, Oliveira () investigated the
acquisition of the European Portuguese oral stressed and unstressed vowel systems
by Llearners of Portuguese from various linguistic backgrounds. The authors
conﬁrmed their predictions that, in the acquisition of European Portuguese as a
foreign language, the stressed vowel system stabilizes before the unstressed system,
which is subject to vowel reduction. Furthermore, ﬁndings indicated that the reduc-
tion process is activated more frequently for speakers with higher proﬁciency levels
and also speakers who were exposed to the input for longer periods of time.
Furthermore, Kendall () tested the production and perception of the Portu-
guese mid vowels by beginner and advanced North American learners of Brazilian
Portuguese. Informants were asked to read sentences that contained the target mid
vowels. The results indicated that both groups of learners had difﬁculty producing
the LPortuguese mid vowels. In particular, the study found that advanced learners
had lower production scores for the closed mid vowels. Kendall () attributed this
ﬁnding to a phenomenon of hypercorrection, whereby advanced learners, upon
learning that open vowels exist in Portuguese, tend to produce them sporadically
Production and perception in the acquisition


in their speech. The author suggests this ﬁnding is particularly important for the
teaching of LPortuguese, as learners need to be aware of when to appropriately use
the open and closed mid-vowel sounds.
Perhaps the most comprehensive investigation of Portuguese vowels is that of
Díaz Granado (), who used crosslinguistic acoustic comparisons to predict the
production patterns for English Land Llearners of Brazilian Portuguese, wherein
the Lgroup had Spanish as their L. For the most part, these acoustic predictions
were only partially fulﬁlled. For example, the Lgroup showed signs of phonetic
category assimilation in their productions of Portuguese /u/, while the Lgroup
showed signs of category dissimilation as predicted. In the case of Portuguese /a/, the
acoustic comparisons successfully predicted that both groups would produce a single
Portuguese /a/ in the vowel space located between the two English low vowels,
namely /æ/ and /ɑ/. Both groups were expected to produce the Portuguese low
vowel with a wider distribution than native speakers as a result of MCA. However,
this prediction was only partially borne out, as the Lgroup was able to produce a
low Portuguese vowel that did not differ from the native speakers’ productions in
terms of the width of distribution.
The predictions for both the mid-front and the mid-back Portuguese vowels were
also not conﬁrmed. For the Portuguese contrast /o/–/ɔ/, learners were expected to
produce a single vowel category for both vowels; however, they produced two distinct
mid-back vowels that differed in height, even though these productions were not
native-like. In the case of Portuguese /e/–/ɛ/, contrary to predictions, learners created
a single new phonetic category. However, the production of this new category was
different acoustically from both the target Portuguese vowels and the two native
English mid-front vowels. Finally, in relation to the comparison of the two learner
groups, the study concluded that the longer a learner is exposed to a particular sound,
regardless of whether it be in their L, L, or L, the more likely the learner is to
produce native-like pronunciation of the target sound. In particular, the Lgroup’s
production of the Portuguese /u/ was more advanced than that of the Lgroup,
owing to the fact that they had been exposed to this sound since the onset of learning
Spanish.
...Perception in Portuguese
Although the aforementioned study by Díaz
Granado () was predominantly focused on the production of Portuguese vowels
by Land Llearners, a perceptual component was also considered. In particular,
Díaz Granado found that both Land Llearners did not produce the vowels in the
Portuguese /e/–/ɛ/ contrast in a similar manner to the target vowels or to their own
native mid-front vowels, which motivated the investigation of these learners’ assimi-
lation and discrimination patterns of the Brazilian Portuguese /e/–/ɛ/. Listeners ﬁrst
completed a category assimilation task in which they were asked to listen to Portuguese
mid-front vowel tokens (/e/ and /ɛ/) and make a decision as to whether the token
they heard was more similar to the vowel sound in the English “bet” or “bait,”
corresponding to English /ɛ/ and /e/ respectively. The results indicated that learners
were able to assimilate Portuguese /e/ and /ɛ/ to two different native categories but
not equally well, as Portuguese /ɛ/ was a better ﬁt to English /ɛ/ than was Portuguese

J. Elvin, P. Vasiliev, and P. Escudero

/e/ to English /e/. Furthermore, learners were better able to distinguish between the
two vowels in the contrast than the monolingual group, suggesting that perception
improves with learning. These learners’ crosslinguistic perceptual discrimination
of English, Portuguese, and Spanish mid-front vowels was then tested in a ‘four-
item oddity’ task. Findings suggested that discriminability decreased as perceptual
similarity increased (Díaz Granado ). Furthermore, the results showed that
learners who spoke more than one language performed better than monolinguals.
Consequently, Díaz Granado suggests that the more varied one’s linguistic back-
ground, the more sensitivity one is likely to possess toward variation in speech signals.
The study by Kendall () also included a perceptual component, with the study
focusing on the relationship between perception and production in LPortuguese. In
particular, participants were required to discriminate between the Portuguese mid-
vowel contrasts /e/–/ɛ/ and /o/–/ɔ/. Results indicate that the mid-vowel contrasts were
difﬁcult for both beginner and advanced learners of Portuguese with a combined score
of sixty-nine percent for beginners and seventy-eight percent for advanced learners.
The study further found a correlation between perception and production for begin-
ner learners. In particular, correlation results suggest that the beginner learners who
had higher perception scores for the mid vowels had a greater probability of produ-
cing these vowels correctly. However, the results were not consistent for advanced
learners as no perception–production correlation was identiﬁed.
While Díaz Granado () and Kendall () focused solely on the perception
of Portuguese mid-front vowels by participants who were learning Portuguese as
their Lor L, Vasiliev () tested native Californian English (CE) listeners’
perception of the Brazilian Portuguese (BP) stressed oral vowel inventory, which
represents another case of the subset scenario as Portuguese has only seven oral
vowels while Californian English has at least nine. As with Spanish, CE listeners
perceived all BP contrasts via MCA, except for /o/–/u/, which was mapped predom-
inately to English /o/ and /u/, thus producing a similar scenario. While MCA was not
a predictor of the CE listeners’ lower accuracy scores in the discrimination of Spanish
vowel contrasts, MCA was found to be a predictor of lower accuracy in Portuguese
vowel discrimination, but only when the MCA patterns resulted in a perceptual
overlap. That is, when the two vowels in the Lcontrast were perceived as two or
more of the same native vowel categories, difﬁculties in discrimination were found.
Following on from Vasiliev’s () study, Elvin, Escudero, and Vasiliev ()
tested the role of vowel inventory size versus acoustic similarity as predictors of naive
Australian English (AusE) and Iberian Spanish (IS) listeners’ discrimination of the
same BP stimuli used in Vasiliev (). Results were in line with predictions made
based on acoustic similarity between native and non-native vowels as measured by
Euclidean Distances (ED) whereby the predicted overall higher accuracy for IS
listeners was explained by the fact that the IS vowels are acoustically closer to the
BP vowels than AusE vowels. Furthermore, the EDs successfully predicted the lower
discrimination scores for BP /i/–/e/ and /o/–/u/ in both listener groups. In the case of
IS the authors explain that SCA is a likely cause of the lower discrimination accuracy,
owing to the fact that IS /i/ was acoustically close to both BP /i/ and /e/ and IS /u/ was
acoustically close to both BP /o/ and /u/. For AusE, the lower discrimination was
Production and perception in the acquisition


successfully predicted to be a result of the neutralization of the Lcontrast caused by
MCA. That is, both AusE /ʊ/ and /oː/ were acoustically close to both BP /o/ and /u/,
resulting in a total acoustic overlap. And in the case of BP /i/–/e/, AusE /ɪ/ was
acoustically the second closest vowel to both BP /i/ and /e/, resulting in a partial
acoustic overlap, which, owingto its close acoustic proximity, is a likely competing
attractor for BP /i/ and /e/, resulting in lower discrimination accuracy. The fact that
both Vasiliev () and Elvin, Escudero, and Vasiliev () found MCA to be
related to lower discrimination accuracy as a result of acoustic or perceptual overlap
suggests that MCA in languages with a larger vowel inventory is only problematic
when these multiple categories are acoustically close to both vowels in the Lcontrast.
..The link between Lperception and Lproduction
As Lpronunciation problems are thought to be the result of difﬁculty in perceiv-
ing and discriminating the sounds of the new language, a link or interrelation between
perception and production may exist. In other words, an interrelation between per-
ception and production would mean that development and success in one ability
leads to development and success in the other. A number of studies have identiﬁed a
link between perception and production (e.g., Flege, Bohn, and Jang ; Morrison
, ; Kendall ; Rauber, Escudero, Bion, and Baptista ; Levy and Law
; Rallo Fabra and Romero ) and suggest that native language perceptual
patterns seem to inﬂuence Lproduction patterns (e.g., Llisterri ; Morrison
; Levy and Law ). For example, Morrison () tested Canadian English
learners’ perception and production of Spanish vowels and found that learners
substituted the Spanish vowels for the same English vowel categories in which
they were assimilated.
However, the speciﬁc link between perception and production is still a matter of
debate (Levy and Law ), as not all studies have shown a direct link within L
development between these two abilities. For example, Zampini () explored the
relationship between perception and production of LSpanish stops (/p/ and /b/), yet
did not ﬁnd a strong correlation between the two. In particular the correlation results
for Spanish /p/ provided some evidence that accurate production precedes accurate
perception in Lacquisition, while this was not the case for Spanish /b/ as the data
did not show any evidence that production precedes perception or vice versa.
Likewise, Chládková and Escudero () compared between-variety differences in
vowel perception and production in Spanish and Portuguese for both the European
and Latin American dialects. Results showed correspondence between the produced
Fand perceived vowel height but not for the produced Fand perceived vowel
backness. Levy and Law () attribute the problematic nature of identifying the
link between perception and production to methodological reasons. In particular,
most studies use different techniques for assessing perception and production, with
different task demands. Furthermore, data analyses have been conducted on groups
rather than individual learners. Thus, in order to bridge the gap between the results
found for each of these two abilities, the ﬁeld crucially needs analyses of individual
performance in both abilities with comparable and controlled methodology.

J. Elvin, P. Vasiliev, and P. Escudero

.Summary and future directions
The purpose of this chapter was to provide a critical review of the available literature
relating to perception and production in the acquisition of Spanish and Portuguese as
Lor foreign languages. Our review of the empirical data has shown that while there
is a large amount of available information relating to the acquisition of other
languages by Spanish and Portuguese speakers, relatively little is known about
how speakers of other languages acquire Spanish and Portuguese. Furthermore,
our review has highlighted the need for more studies investigating the acquisition
of Portuguese as a second language, owing to the limited quantity of available
literature in comparison to what is available in Spanish. Future research investigating
the acquisition of perception and production for both Spanish and Portuguese is
desirable, with a particular emphasis on building up our knowledge of acquisition of
the Portuguese sound system.
Our review has also highlighted a link between perception and production in L.
However, this interrelation between the two abilities is still a matter of debate, as not
all studies have shown a direct link between non-native performance and Ldevel-
opment in these two abilities (e.g., Zampini ; Chládková and Escudero ) and
it is still unclear whether perceptual development precedes similar development in
production or vice versa (Zampini ; Levy and Law ).
It is worth mentioning here that difﬁculties in the perception of Lcontrasts have
also been linked to difﬁculties in word recognition (e.g., Escudero , ;
Escudero, Hayes-Harb, and Mitterer ; Escudero and Wanrooij ; Escudero,
Broersma, and Simon ; Escudero, Simon, and Mulak ). A number of studies
have found that when word pairings contain difﬁcult minimal pairs (i.e., the difﬁcult
contrasts identiﬁed in perception), there is an increase in word-recognition difﬁculty
for Llearners (Pallier, Colomé, and Sebastián-Gallés ; Broersma ; Weber
and Cutler ; Escudero, Hayes-Harb, and Mitterer ; Escudero, Broersma, and
Simon ). An example of this is L-dominant Spanish–Catalan bilinguals, whose
results from a word recognition task indicated that they processed words containing
minimal pairs as homophones, which provided direct evidence that word recognition
uses language-speciﬁc phonological representations (Pallier, Colomé, and Sebastián-
Gallés ). Given the fact that the LLP model posits that in Llearning perception
must be in place before production development can occur, the case for word
recognition may be similar.
Given the fact that the current evidence within Land Lphonological acquisition
shows a link between perception and production and between perception and word
recognition, it may be the case that there is a speciﬁc link or interrelation between all
three abilities (perception, production, and word recognition). Perhaps development
in Lcomprehension occurs prior to Lproduction development or vice versa, or
perhaps the two abilities are developed simultaneously. This line of research is yet to
be undertaken. This may be due to the fact that, as previously mentioned, the
exploration of such a link tends to be rather problematic owing to methodological
constraints. If we are to begin to unravel the interrelation among the three abilities
Production and perception in the acquisition


involved in Lphonological acquisition, future research is required that strictly
manipulates and controls the methodologies used to measure performance in all
three abilities. To this end, we are currently in the process of collecting data
investigating native Australian English and Iberian Spanish listeners’ perception,
word recognition, and production of Brazilian Portuguese (Elvin ; Elvin, Escudero,
Williams, and Best ; Elvin, Williams, and Escudero ). The primary object-
ive of these series of studies is to determine whether or not there is a link between
the three abilities at the onset of Llearning and to test whether the LLP model
can be used to explain the difﬁculties for both groups (despite their differing vowel
inventory sizes) across all three abilities.
In conclusion, in this chapter we have provided a review of the literature pertain-
ing to the perception and production of Spanish and Portuguese as non-native
languages, with a particular emphasis on the acquisition of the vowel systems. We
have explored the relationship between perception and production but are unable to
determine how strong the link is, neither with our current knowledge can we
ascertain whether perception precedes production in Ldevelopment or vice versa.
We have also highlighted the fact that while we have plenty of studies that explore the
acquisition of LEnglish, it is also important to understand how English speakers
learn other languages. The fact that there are so few studies on the Lacquisition of
Spanish and, in particular, of Portuguese phonology suggests that there is indeed a
need for future research into the acquisition of the sound systems of these two
languages.

J. Elvin, P. Vasiliev, and P. Escudero

19
Production of French close rounded
vowels by Spanish learners
A corpus-based study
ISABELLE RACINE AND SYLVAIN DETEY
.Introduction
In the ﬁeld of French phonology, a signiﬁcant methodological shift occurred in
France in the late s when three French phonologists launched what would
become a worldwide corpus for reference use by all linguists working on French
phonology and phonetics: the Phonologie du Français Contemporain: usages, variétés
et structure corpus (PFC) (phonology of contemporary French: usage, varieties, and
structure). Jacques Durand (University of Toulouse) and Chantal Lyche (University
of Oslo), immediately joined by Bernard Laks (University of Paris-Ouest-Nanterre-
La Défense), all well-established linguists in modern phonology (Durand ; Lyche
; Laks ), realized that French phonology could not rely on second-hand
limited sets of data anymore, and that it was time for intuition-based armchair
phonology to follow the development of corpus linguistics. Inspired by the pioneer-
ing work of William Labov, they designed a sociophonological survey protocol that
could be used to describe the pronunciation of French worldwide: tackling variation
was actually a key aspect of the whole project (Durand, Laks, and Lyche , ).
Thanks to the help of more than a hundred collaborators over the years, the PFC
corpus extended its scope from Southern France to numerous survey points in the
French-speaking world across continents (Gess, Lyche, and Meisenburg ; Detey,
Durand, Laks, and Lyche ) and developed into a full-ﬂedged online searchable
database.¹ Given the plurilingual proﬁle of several of the populations under survey
(in Canada, Louisiana, Africa . . . ), it was just a matter of time before a similar project
was launched for speakers of French as a second, or rather foreign, language (Detey
and Kawaguchi ), in tune with the rise of variationist research programs
¹ http://www.projet-pfc.net.
Romance Phonetics and Phonology. First edition. Mark Gibson and Juana Gil (eds.)
This chapter © Isabelle Racine and Sylvain Detey . First published by Oxford University Press.

bridging the gap between native and non-native varieties of the languages under
scrutiny (see, e.g., Mukherjee and Hundt ): the InterPhonologie du Français
Contemporain (IPFC) (interphonology of contemporary French) project was born, a
ﬁrst-timer in the ﬁeld of French phonology.²
This chapter therefore introduces the corpus-based LFrench phonology research
program InterPhonologie du Français Contemporain (Detey and Racine ; Racine
and Detey ) and provides an illustration of its methodological approach with a
population of Spanish university students learning French as an L(Racine ).
For these learners, among several typical acquisition problems, the phonemic con-
trast between the two close rounded French vowels /y/ and /u/ is known to be difﬁcult
to acquire, but most studies in the past relied only on acoustic analyses of laboratory
speech data elicited from rather few subjects and mostly with a single task. Within
the IPFC framework, on the basis of an identical multitask survey protocol for all
populations of learners of LFrench to ensure data comparability (Racine, Detey,
Zay, and Kawaguchi ), data processing is carried out with an ad hoc auditory
coding procedure that integrates contextual information and target-likeness assess-
ment (Detey ). In this chapter we compare the results of three different
approaches to processing the /y/–/u/ Spanish production data: non-expert native
perceptual evaluation (Racine ; Racine, Detey, and Kawaguchi ), acoustic
analyses, and IPFC coding procedure (Detey, Racine, Kawaguchi, and Zay ). The
convergence of the results among the three approaches supports the methodological
choices made in the IPFC project, bridging the gap between perceptual dialectology
and Lphonology studies.
.The pronunciation of French by Spanish learners examined
through the IPFC protocol
The IPFC recording protocol, designed after the original PFC protocol, is made up of
six tasks: ) Repetition of a speciﬁc word list; ) Reading of a generic word list; )
Reading of the speciﬁc word list repeated in the ﬁrst task; ) Reading of a generic text;
) Formal interaction between a learner and a native speaker; ) Semi-constrained
interaction between two learners. The generic word list (task ) and text (task ) are
the ones used in the native PFC protocol to ensure data comparability between the
non-native speakers of the IPFC corpus and the native speakers of the PFC database.
They cover all the main features of French phonology, at least at the segmental level
(with a focus on schwa and liaison in the text). The speciﬁc word list (tasks and ),
on the other hand, has been speciﬁcally designed for the IPFC protocol and is made
up of two parts. The ﬁrst one includes segmental structures that are known to be
difﬁcult to acquire for all learners of French (e.g., nasal vowels, rounded vowels).
The other half varies with each L-speciﬁc survey (e.g., ﬁnal voiced consonants for
Germanic surveys, contrast between /b/ and /v/ for the Japanese survey). Since the
² Subsequently followed by two other projects, COREIL (Delais-Roussarie and Yoo ) and PhoDiﬂe
(Landron, Paillereau, Nawaﬂeh, Exare, Ando, and Gao ), while the term ‘interphonologie’ itself was
quasi-absent from the relevant literature in French at the time (Detey ).

Isabelle Racine and Sylvain Detey

importance of orthography as a potentially very inﬂuential external factor on the
acquisition of an Lphonological system has been increasingly documented over the
past ten years (Detey ; Bassetti ; Detey and Nespoulous ; Bassetti,
Escudero, and Hayes-Harb ; Colantoni, Steele, and Escudero ), the inclu-
sion of a repetition task for the same speciﬁc word list was part of the strategy to
document the learner’s interphonological system with a multi-task protocol. It allows
us to compare the production of the same words with and without the written form.
In the case of Spanish-speaking learners of French, taking into account the
characteristics of the Spanish phonetic-phonological system and the difﬁculties
commonly encountered by French learners, the IPFC-Spanish protocol includes
vocalic (/y/–/u/, /ø/–/o/, /œ/–/ɔ/, /ə/–/e/, /ɑ̃/–/ɛ̃/, /ɑ̃/–/ɔ̃/) and consonantal (/b/–/v/,
/s/–/z/, /j/–/ʒ/) contrasts, as well as difﬁculties related to phonotactics (plosive +
liquid groups, voiced plosives in initial, intervocalic, and ﬁnal positions) or to
orthography (letter <x>). The IPFC-Spanish corpus, collected between and
, is made up of two groups of Spanish students who learned French in two
different contexts. In the ﬁrst group, twenty-two Spanish learners were recorded. All
were studying French—or in French—in a French-speaking environment (Geneva,
Switzerland). In the other group, eighteen students were recorded. All were studying
French in a Spanish-speaking environment (Madrid, Spain). Most of the learners
come from central Spain and are advanced learners of French: B–Clevel, according
to the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages (CEFRL).
Once the recordings were complete, the audio ﬁles were orthographically tran-
scribed with minimal adjustments (Racine, Zay, Detey, and Kawaguchi ) in
Textgrid ﬁles with sound-to-text alignment using Praat (version ..). In order to
process as automatically as possible a large quantity of data for descriptive purposes,
in line with a coding system developed in the original PFC project for the analysis of
schwa and liaison among native speakers, an extended coding system has been
designed in the IPFC project, with an ad hoc decoding program: the Dolmen platform
developed by Julien Eychenne (Eychenne and Paternostro ). The IPFC coding
procedure is presented more in detail in Section ... Several aspects of the French–
Spanish interphonology systems have already been studied within the framework of
IPFC, both on the segmental (Racine, Detey, Bühler, Schwab, Zay, and Kagawuchi
; Racine, Detey, and Kawaguchi ; Racine , ) and the suprasegmen-
tal (Schwab , ; Barquero, Racine, Baqué, and Schwab ) levels. In what
follows, we focus on the /y/–/u/ contrast and use it to illustrate the methodological
choices made in the IPFC project to provide a ﬁrst data-processing stage to ﬁt with
some of its overall perspectives, that is, to provide data and metadata that can be
readily used for applied linguistic purposes (e.g., teaching design, automatic speech
assessment, etc.).
.Analyzing the production of French close rounded vowels
by Spanish learners: comparing three approaches
The mastery of the vocalic system is, most of the time, one of the biggest challenges
that learners of French must face. The French system contains at least thirteen
Production of French close rounded vowels . . .


vowels, depending on the geographical variety we refer to.³ For Spanish learners, the
French vocalic system is particularly difﬁcult since their Lhas a relatively sparse
vocalic inventory with only ﬁve vowels: /i/, /e/, /a/, /o/, and /u/ (Quilis ). For
them, learning French therefore implies the acquisition of at least eight additional
vowels and, among them, a series of three nasal (/ɛ̃/, /ɑ̃/, /ɔ̃/) and three front rounded
vowels (/y/, /ø/ and /œ/).
If we compare the systems of oral vowels in French and Spanish, we notice that
the three French front rounded vowels (/y/, /ø/, /œ/) differ from each other on the
basis of degree of aperture (or height) and from other vowels in terms of front/back
(e.g., /ø/ vs. /o/) and rounding distinctions (e.g., /ø/ vs. /e/). Although Spanish
speakers are familiar with these characteristics because they use them to differentiate
the vowels in their L, they do not use them in the same way. The Spanish vocalic
system has only three grades of aperture (versus four in French) and rounding and
backness are never used separately. The two Spanish rounded vowels are also all back
vowels, while the three unrounded vowels are also front vowels. In addition, according
to Meunier, Frenck-Mestre, Lelekov-Boissard, and Le Besnerais (), the French
system appears to be globally more closed and more posterior than the Spanish one.
One of the consequences is that the dispersion area for Spanish /e/, which is larger
than in French (Magnen ), covers the areas of both /e/ and /ɛ/ in French. In
addition to mastering a division of the vocalic space in four grades of aperture, the
Spanish learners of French must also face a gap in the vowels they know, since French
/i/ and /u/ are more closed and more posterior than their Spanish counterparts.
In what follows, we focus on the acquisition of the two French close rounded
vowels /y/ and /u/. Phonemically, /u/ is an existing category in the Lsystem of the
Spanish learners, but phonetically, its realization is not the same in both languages.
As for /y/, since front rounded vowels do not exist in Spanish, it must be considered
as a new category for Spanish learners (Flege , ). Also, when interpreting
our results, it is important not to overlook the orthographic factor: it is particularly
relevant for these two vowels because in French the grapheme <u> does not corres-
pond to /u/ but to /y/, whereas in Spanish—as in many other languages—, it
corresponds to /u/.
In order to assess the realization of both /u/ and /y/ by Spanish learners, several
approaches are possible. In the ﬁeld of Lspeech assessment, according to Munro
(: ), there are basically three types of procedures to evaluate non-native
productions: (i) non-expert native perceptual evaluation; (ii) expert native perceptual
evaluation; (iii) acoustic analyses. In what follows, we present the assessment pro-
cedures we have applied to the production of words containing the French close
rounded vowels /y/ and /u/ by Spanish learners: the ﬁrst two correspond to (i) and
(iii); the last one can be presented as being in between (i) and (ii) but with a speciﬁc
format tailored to conform with the IPFC’s needs.
³ The commonly described varieties of French have a vowel system containing between thirteen and
sixteen elements. Two vowels in particular do not exist in all varieties: /ɑ/ and the nasal /œ̃/. In addition, the
phonemic status of schwa (/ə/) remains controversial (see Lyche for a complete review).

Isabelle Racine and Sylvain Detey

..Non-expert perceptual judgments
To start with, we decided to examine the productions of Spanish learners through a
perceptual assessment test performed by French native listeners, because our priority
was to determine which aspects in their production were problematic for a native
and also a non-expert ear. At ﬁrst, we wanted to know whether the productions
of both vowels were easily identiﬁed by French listeners. Our second research
question was about the task effect, to examine whether the task used to induce
our learners’ production had an impact on the assessment carried out by the
native listeners. Finally, our last focus was on the population effect: was there
any assessment difference between the productions of learners who were living
in a French-speaking environment and those of learners who were living in a
Spanish-speaking environment?
In order to answer these questions, we carried out an experiment⁴ in which thirty
non-expert native listeners had to identify the vowel of four monosyllables (i.e., with
/u/: bout ‘end’, boule ‘ball’; with /y/: bu ‘drink PAST-PART-MASC’, bulle ‘bubble’)
produced by three populations (ﬁve native French speakers, ﬁve Spanish learners
living in a French-speaking environment, and ﬁve Spanish learners living in a
Spanish-speaking environment) in a repetition and a reading task (from the Spanish
IPFC protocol). The experiment was carried out via an Internet platform⁵ (Ménétrey
and Schwab ). Listeners were instructed to listen carefully to the productions,
and then told to decide which vowel (/y/ or /u/) they perceived by clicking on the
appropriate button.
A mixed-effect model⁶ was run with the response (correct vs. incorrect) as the
dependent variable, and with groups of speakers (native, Spanish Geneva, and
Spanish Madrid), vowel (/u/ and /y/), and task (repetition and reading) as the ﬁxed
factors. Results show three main effects. First, a group effect (F (, ) = .,
p < .), with a higher correct identiﬁcation rate for the French speakers (.%)
than for both groups of learners (Spanish Geneva = .%, β = ., z = .,
p < ., and Spanish Madrid = .%, β = ., z = ., p < .). Surprisingly,
the correct identiﬁcation rate was lower for Spanish learners from Geneva than
for Spanish learners from Madrid (Spanish Madrid = .%, Spanish Geneva
= .%, β = , z = ., p < .). Second, results showed a vowel effect
(F (, ) = ., p < .) with globally a lower correct identiﬁcation rate for /y/
than for /u/ (respectively .% vs. .%); third, there was also a task effect
(F (, ) = ., p < .) with a higher correct identiﬁcation rate for the
words produced in the repetition task (.%) than for those produced in the
reading task (.%). As vowels signiﬁcantly interacted with the two other variables
(with group: F (, ) = ., p < .; with task: F (, ) = ., p < .),
we ran two separate models for each of the vowels (/y/ and /u/), with the response
⁴ For more details about the methodology and the results of this experiment, see Racine ().
⁵ http://www.labguistic.com.
⁶ Data were analyzed by means of mixed-effect regression models (e.g., Baayen, Davidson, and Bates
), in which the participants and stimuli were entered as random effects.
Production of French close rounded vowels . . .


(correct vs. incorrect) as the dependent variables and with group and task as ﬁxed
factors.
For /u/, the results show two main effects. First, a group effect (F (, ) = .,
p < .), with a higher correct identiﬁcation rate for the native speakers (.%)
than for both groups of learners (Spanish Geneva = .%, β = ., z = .,
p < .; Spanish Madrid = .%, β = ., z = ., p < .). The two groups
of learners were not statistically different (β = ., z = ., ns). Second, a
task effect (F (, ) = ., p<.) with a lower identiﬁcation rate for the words
produced in the repetition task (.%) than for those produced in the reading
task (.%). No interaction between the group and the task (F (, ) = .,
ns) was found, indicating that for the three groups, the impact of the task was
similar.
For /y/, the pattern is quite different. The analyses also reveal two main effects.
First, a group effect (F (, ) = ., p < .), with better performance for
native speakers (.%) than for both groups of Spanish learners (Spanish
Geneva = .%, β = ., z = ., p < .; Spanish Madrid = .%:
β = ., z = ., p < .); but this time with a difference between the two groups
of Spanish learners, with a lower correct identiﬁcation rate for Spanish learners
from Geneva than for Spanish learners from Madrid, with respectively .% and
.% (β = ., z = ., p < .). Second, a task effect (F (, ) = .,
p < .), with a lower identiﬁcation rate for the words produced in the reading
task (.%) than for those produced in the repetition task (.%). We also
found a clear interaction between group and task (F (, ) = ., p < .),
indicating that the impact of the task was different for each of the three groups.
Unsurprisingly, the type task made no difference for native speakers (Repeti-
tion = .%, Reading = .%, β = ., z = ., ns). On the other hand,
the pattern of results was identical for both groups of Spanish learners, with lower
performance for the words produced in the reading task than for those produced in
the repetition task (for Spanish Geneva: reading = .%, repetition = .%,
β = ., z = ., p < .; for Spanish Madrid: reading = .%, repetition = .%,
β = ., z = ., p < .).
To sum up, the native perceptual assessment we carried out on the production of
/u/ and /y/ did not lead to the same results, with a better identiﬁcation for /u/, which
is a phonemically existing vowel in Spanish, than for /y/, which is a new vowel
according to Flege (, ). The task also seems to play a role, with an opposite
effect for /u/ and for /y/. For the former, our results show a better performance for the
words produced in the reading task, whereas the repetition task seems to induce
more correct /y/ vowels than the reading task. Finally, our results show for both
vowels a better performance for the native speakers than for the two groups of
Spanish learners. Moreover, for /u/, the learning context (Geneva vs. Madrid) does
not seem to play a role. Surprisingly, for /y/, the results reveal a poorer performance
from the Spanish learners who were living in a French-speaking environment
than from the learners who were living in a Spanish-speaking environment. We
then carried out acoustic analyses on the same stimuli. Results are presented in the
next section.

Isabelle Racine and Sylvain Detey

..Acoustic analyses
For acoustic analyses, we used a Praat script⁷ to calculate a mean value for each
formant (F, F, and F), on the stable part of the formant, which represents % of
the vowel duration. The transition parts (% at the beginning and % at the end of
the vowel) were not taken into account.⁸ For each vowel (/u/ and /y/), a mixed-effect
model was run separately for each formant, with the mean value as the dependent
variable, and with groups of speakers (native, Spanish Geneva, and Spanish Madrid)
and task (repetition and reading) as the ﬁxed factors.
For /u/ productions, results showed a group effect for F(F (, ) = .,
p < .), with lower values for learners from Madrid than for the two others groups
(native speakers, t () = ., p < ., and learners from Geneva, t () = .,
p < .), with no difference between the native speakers and the learners from
Geneva (t () = ., ns). There was no task effect (F (, ) = ., ns) and no
interaction between group and task (F (, ) = ., ns). Statistical analyses showed
no effect of group, task, or interaction for Fand F. These results show that learners
from Madrid produce globally more closed /u/, i.e., with lower Fvalues, than the
two other groups, the native speakers and the learners from Geneva, with no
distinction between the two tasks.
For /y/ productions, results also showed a group effect for F(F (, ) = .,
p < .), again with lower values for learners from Madrid than for the two other
groups (native speakers, t () = ., p < ., and learners from Geneva, t () =
., p < .), with no difference between the native speakers and the learners
from Geneva (t () = ., ns). Again, there was no effect of the task (F (, ) = .,
ns) and no interaction between group and task (F (, ) = ., ns). For F, results
revealed a group effect (F (, ) = ., p < .), with lower values for the two
groups of learners than for native speakers (learners from Geneva: t () = .,
p < .; learners from Madrid: t () = ., p < .), with no difference between
the learners from Geneva and the learners from Madrid (t () = ., ns). There
was also a task effect (F (, ) = ., p < .), with globally lower values for the
reading task than for the repetition task (t () = ., p < .). The interaction
between group and task (F (, ) = ., p < .) shows that the behavior of the
three groups differs as a function of the task (repetition vs. reading). In the repetition
task, there was no difference between the three groups, while in the reading task, the
Fvalues are lower for the two groups of learners than for native speakers (learners
from Geneva: t () = ., p < .; learners from Madrid: t () = .,
p < .), with no difference between the two groups of learners (t () = ., ns).
Results for Fshowed no effect of group (F (, ) = ., ns), task (F (, ) = .,
ns), or interaction (F (, ) = ., ns). As in the case of /u/ productions, these results
show that the Spanish learners from Madrid produce globally more closed /y/,
i.e., with lower Fvalues, than the two other groups, with no distinction between
⁷ We would like to thank Sylvain Didelot, who designed the Praat script we used.
⁸ We compared this analysis (% of vowel duration) with a more classical analysis (mean formant
value calculated on the value at /, /, and /of the vowel duration). Results were similar but the ﬁrst
measure allows us to avoid odd values on one of the three points and seems thus more reliable.
Production of French close rounded vowels . . .


the two tasks. In addition, in the reading task, both groups of Spanish learners seem
to produce /y/ vowels with more backness, i.e., with lower Fvalues, than the native
speakers. In the next section, we present the third analysis that we carried out on the
same stimuli, i.e., the coding approach. We then compare the results of the three
analyses.
..IPFC coding system
Following the PFC system designed for schwa and liaison (see Section .), we have
designed L-speciﬁc alphanumeric codes, manually inserted on the basis of auditory
evaluation in the orthographic transcription on separates tiers. If the code varies
slightly depending on the structure under study (e.g., nasal vowels, oral vowels,
consonants, liaison, etc.), the general framework is the same: one ﬁeld to code the
target French unit, two ﬁelds to code the left and right target phonological contexts,
and the remaining ﬁelds to encode the perceptual assessment of particular features of
the structure being coded. In the case of oral vowels (and consonants), we assess a
global quality of realization (target-like vs. partially target-like vs. nontarget-like with
vocalic index vs. deleted), with the possibility of adding extra information about the
perceived phonetic quality of the productions.
Thus, if the word bulle in the word list is perceived by the coder as [bul] (instead
of [byl]), the inserted code will be ‘bu_P_L_’: ‘’ encodes the target segment
[y]; ‘P’ encodes the target left context (here a consonant, , more speciﬁcally a
plosive, P); ‘L’ encodes the target right context (here a consonant, , more specif-
ically a liquid, L); and ‘’ encodes the assessment of the production, namely a
nontarget-like realization () perceptually categorized as [u] (). This coding pro-
cedure can be applied to words produced in isolation (word lists) as well as to
continuous speech (text and conversations), as illustrated in Figure ..
Thus, the word s’assure (‘make sure’) is coded with the value ‘’ at the end,
which means that the coder perceived a realization of the /y/ vowel as a [u]. On the
other hand, both tout (‘everything’) and pour (‘to’) are coded with the value ‘’ at
the end, which means that the realization of the [u] vowel (written with the digraph
<ou>) was perceived as target-like.
The same eighty productions of the four monosyllabic words (i.e., with /u/: bout
‘end’, boule ‘ball’; with /y/: bu ‘drink PAST-PART-MASC’, bulle ‘bubble’) produced by the
two groups of learners (ﬁve Spanish learners from the Geneva corpus and ﬁve
Spanish learners from the Madrid corpus) in two tasks (repetition and reading
task) have been coded by a native speaker of French.⁹ The three main effects
(vowel, group, and task) we found in the non-expert perceptual evaluation also
⁹ The productions have also been coded by a second native speaker, with only % of disagreement in the
quality ﬁeld. Three realizations of the /y/ vowel have been evaluated as a [u] by the second coder, while they
were target-like for the ﬁrst coder. One realization of the /u/ vowel has been perceived as an [o] for the
second coder, while it was target-like for the ﬁrst coder. With this small percentage of disagreement, we
thus decided to present only the results for the ﬁrst coder.

Isabelle Racine and Sylvain Detey


seem to appear in the results of the coding procedure.¹⁰ We ﬁrst observe better
productions for the /u/ vowel, with % perceived as target-like, than for the /y/
vowel, with % (= twenty productions out of forty) evaluated as nontarget-like
(nineteen productions out of twenty perceived as /u/, and one as /ø/). Then, our
results show that the Spanish learners from Madrid globally performed slightly
better than the learners from Geneva, with respectively .% of the productions
(thirty-one out of forty) vs. .% (twenty-nine out of forty) evaluated as target-
like. At last, with .% of the productions evaluated as target-like (thirty-one out
of forty), the repetition task yielded better results than the reading task, with only
.% (twenty-three out of forty).
A closer look at the results for each vowel separately reveals the same tendencies as
those we found for the non-expert perceptual evaluation. For /u/, with % of the
productions (n = ) evaluated as target-like, there was no difference between the two
groups of learners or between the two tasks.¹¹ For /y/, the Spanish learners from
Madrid, with % of target-like productions, seemed to perform better than the
group from Geneva, with only % of target-like productions. The results for the
repetition task were also much better than those for the reading task, with respect-
ively % vs. % of target-like productions. Again, the pattern of results was
identical for both groups of learners, with lower performance for the words produced
in the reading task than for those produced in the repetition task (for Spanish
Geneva: reading = %, repetition = %; for Spanish Madrid: reading = %,
repetition = %).
..Comparison of the three approaches
In this section, our results will be discussed from two different perspectives. First,
they will be interpreted from a phonological point of view, i.e., what they imply for
the phonological acquisition of French by Spanish learners, and second, from a
methodological perspective, i.e., what can be learned from the comparison of the
three different analyses (non-expert perceptual evaluation, acoustic analyses, and
coding procedure).
From an Lphonological-acquisition point of view, the non-expert perceptual
evaluation¹² and the coding procedure present consistent results, which are strength-
ened by the results of the acoustic analyses. First, the /y/ vowel, which can be
considered as a new vowel for the Spanish learners, seems more difﬁcult to produce
than /u/, which is a phonemically existing vowel in Spanish. This ﬁnding is consistent
with the Contrastive Analysis Hypothesis (CAH, Lado ), which postulates that
aspects of the Lsound system that are different from those of the Lsystem will be
more difﬁcult to acquire. However, the task seems to play a role, with much poorer
¹⁰ Owing to the small number of items for each vowel (n = ), we do not carry out statistical analyses
on the coding procedure. Results are presented with percentages.
¹¹ Let us remember that the non-expert evaluation revealed a task effect for /u/, but with an identiﬁ-
cation rate of .% for the repetition vs. .% for the reading task, i.e., a really small difference.
¹² For a more detailed discussion of the results of the non-expert perceptual evaluation, see Racine
().

Isabelle Racine and Sylvain Detey

performance for the /y/ produced in the reading task than that produced in the
repetition task. Since the grapheme <u> corresponds to /u/ in Spanish but to /y/
in French, it is plausible that the reading task could be less favorable to input
faithfulness than the repetition task. In this case, the orthographic input would
play a negative role, inducing automatic graphophonemic activation (Dijkstra,
Frauenfelder, and Schreuder ) that is relevant for the Lsystem (such as between
<u> and /u/) but not for the L. The results of the acoustic analyses are consistent
with the two other procedures, showing that in the reading task, both groups of
Spanish learners seem to produce /y/ vowels with more backness, i.e., with lower F
values, than the native speakers.
For /u/ productions, as shown in Flege’s () and Kamiyama and Vaissière’s
() studies on the French /u/ pronounced by English and Japanese learners
respectively, a similar Lphone that has a phonemic equivalent but that is phonet-
ically different might be difﬁcult to produce accurately. The results of the coding
procedure revealed that, phonemically, the /u/ vowels produced by the Spanish
learners are part of the French /u/ category from a native point of view, but the
signiﬁcant difference shown in the non-expert evaluation between the native group
and the two groups of learners might reﬂect the difﬁculty encountered by the learners
in producing a similar Lsound. The acoustic analyses brought new information,
showing that the learning context seems to play a role, with globally more closed /u/,
i.e., with lower Fvalues, produced by the Spanish learners from Madrid than for the
two other groups, with no distinction between the tasks. The results showed the same
pattern for /y/, again with globally more closed /y/, i.e., with lower Fvalues, for
Spanish learners from Madrid than for the two other groups, again with no distinc-
tion between the two tasks. If we take into account that the French system appears to
be globally closer than the Spanish one (Meunier et al. ), we can hypothesize
that the Spanish learners from Madrid have understood that, in order to produce
French vowels, they have to shift all the phonemically similar vowels to a closer
system, which they do but with a tendency to exaggerate (i.e., some form of
hypercorrection). This tendency could disappear with increased experience with
French sounds, which could explain why it did not appear with the Spanish learners
living in a French-speaking environment (Geneva). This conclusion is contradict-
ory to the group effect observed in the non-expert evaluation and the coding
procedure for the /y/ productions, with a poorer performance for the Spanish
learners from Geneva than for the learners from Madrid. However, a closer look
at the individual results reveals that the differences between the two groups mostly
reﬂect individual variation, in particular in the age of acquisition (Ioup ),
rather than the learning context.¹³
From a methodological perspective, the comparison of the two evaluation pro-
cedures, i.e., the non-expert perceptual judgments and the coding system, revealed
consistent results, which allows us to validate the coding approach we developed for
¹³ See Racine (: –) for a more detailed presentation and discussion of the individual differences
observed in the results of the non-expert evaluation.
Production of French close rounded vowels . . .


the analysis of the learners’ productions in the IPFC framework. This coding
procedure has two major beneﬁts: ﬁrst, it allows a perceptual assessment that is
much simpler to set up than a non-expert perceptual evaluation, in terms of
participants and procedure, and also to take into account different factors such as
the task, the group of speakers, the phonological context, etc. Second, it can be
applied to continuous speech, which is not possible (or at least is difﬁcult) with the
non-expert perceptual evaluation. Even though the analysis we present here is based
on the output of a single coder, we resort as much as possible to at least a double-
blind assessment by two trained coders, with an inter-coder agreement comparison.
The number of coders can be increased according to the complexity of the elements
under scrutiny, e.g., the nasal vowels. We consider this coding procedure to be an
intermediate stage between ﬁne-grained acoustic analyses and coarse-grained phono-
logical categorization (Detey ). Acoustic analyses can thus be carried out on the
basis of assessments with the coding procedure, in order to investigate further some
results. In our study, the results from the coding procedure showed that the realiza-
tions of /u/ vowels were considered as phonemically correct from a native point of
view. The acoustic analysis showed that the Spanish learners from Madrid produced
globally more closed vowels. Acoustic analyses therefore provide extra information,
showing that the /u/ realizations produced by one group of learners differ acoustic-
ally from those of the two other groups (native speakers and Spanish learners from
Geneva). The distinction highlighted by these two different approaches is crucial
from a pedagogical point of view. Since the aim of pronunciation training is now
commonly considered to be intelligibility rather than native-like phonetic accuracy
(Derwing and Munro ), phonological problems must be solved as a priority: it
is therefore crucial to be able to distinguish phonemic from phonetic difﬁculties in
this perspective.
For /y/ productions, the coding procedure revealed poorer performance for the
two groups of Spanish learners, especially for the words produced in the reading task,
with a high rate of /y/ realizations perceived as /u/. The acoustic analyses also reﬂect
this tendency but the results have to be carefully examined. If we look at the mean
value for Fcalculated on the productions of the /y/ vowel (with no distinction
between the tasks), we notice that, for both groups of learners, it corresponds to a
vowel located between /y/ and /u/ in the vocalic space, in terms of front/back
distinction, with a mean Fvalue of Hz for both groups of learners vs. 
Hz for the native speakers. By contrast, the mean Fvalue given by Gendrot and
Adda-Decker () is Hz for native /y/ and for native /u/. Therefore, the
mean Fvalue in the analysis we present here may give a false idea of what the
learners really produced. They did not actually produce vowels that are between /y/
and /u/ in terms of front/back distinction but nineteen /y/ vowels (out of forty)
perceived as /u/, with a higher rate in the reading task than in the repetition task
(sixteen out of nineteen in the reading task). Thus, to have a closer look at the
distribution of each production in the vocalic space seems to be necessary. The
coding procedure can also offer an alternative. It can be carried out ﬁrst and acoustic
analyses could then be performed, just on the productions that have been assessed as
problematic by the coders.

Isabelle Racine and Sylvain Detey

.Conclusion
In this chapter, we have introduced the InterPhonologie du Français Contemporain
(IPFC) project, an innovative corpus-based LFrench phonology research program
using a single-survey protocol to study non-native French pronunciation. This
protocol is currently shared by sixteen teams worldwide for learners whose mother
tongues are Alemannic, Arabic, Danish, Dutch, English, German, Greek, Italian,
Japanese, Korean, Norwegian, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, and Turkish.¹⁴
One key feature of this project is its coding procedure, i.e., the use of an alphanumeric
code manually inserted in the orthographic transcription to encode the perceptual
assessment of the non-native productions in terms of target-likeness. Using the
productions of the French close rounded vowels /y/ and /u/ by Spanish learners
of French as an illustrative case, we compared three approaches to analyze our
data: (a) a collective non-expert native perceptual evaluation, (b) expert acoustic
analyses, and (c) a semi-expert single-coder native perceptual evaluation (i.e., IPFC
coding procedure).
From a methodological point of view, the consistency of the results of the two
evaluation procedures, i.e., non-expert assessment and coding procedure, allows us to
validate the coding procedure we developed in the framework of IPFC. In addition,
the comparison of the three approaches showed that the results of the acoustic
analyses, which were consistent with the two other procedures, have to be endorsed
with caution, since we must also take into account the distribution of each value in
the vocalic space, and not just the global mean formant value.
From a pedagogical point of view, the assessment of the /u/ vowels produced by
advanced Spanish learners of French highlights the importance of distinguishing
between phonemic and phonetic difﬁculties, in order to decide what aspect of training
should be prioritized to improve intelligibility. Second, the task effect brought to light
in the case of /y/ productions points to the necessity of simultaneously training—in a
well-balanced and coordinated mode—the phonetic-phonological and graphophone-
mic skills of the learners (Detey ).
In sum, the IPFC project has been designed to stand as an original endeavor
to tackle the study of Lspeech acquisition, not just from one methodological
(e.g., acoustic vs. perceptual) or disciplinary (e.g., phonetics vs. second-language
education) perspective, but rather as a corpus-oriented basis for further work
toward a ﬁne-grained phonetic, phonological, or educational approach of the
acquisition of French as a non-native language among different populations of
learners. In spite of the unavoidable weaknesses of such an ambitious program, we
hope that it can contribute to the ﬁeld of LFrench phonology acquisition, both
from a scientiﬁc and from a pedagogical viewpoint (e.g., Detey, Racine, Kawaguchi,
and Eychenne ).
¹⁴ For more details, see the website of the project: http://cblle.tufs.ac.jp/ipfc/.
Production of French close rounded vowels . . .


Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Juana Gil Fernández and Mark Gibson for their help and their patience
with a ﬁrst version of this manuscript. We are also grateful to Marion Didelot for her help with
the statistical analyses. The IPFC-Spanish project has been supported by grants from the Swiss
National Science Foundation (_and _), from the Academic
Society of Geneva, and from the University of Geneva.

Isabelle Racine and Sylvain Detey

20
Phonetic behavior in proﬁcient
bilinguals
Insights from the Catalan–Spanish
contact situation
MIQUEL SIMONET
.Introduction
Second-language learners tend to retain a foreign accent even after many years of
experience with the language, and it appears that the later in life one is exposed to a
second language the stronger the accent in that language one retains (Oyama ;
Flege, Yeni-Komshian, and Liu ). A possible explanation for this recurrent
ﬁnding is that the sounds of the ﬁrst language interfere with those of the second,
making it difﬁcult for a learner to acquire the language in a manner indistinguishable
from that of a monolingual speaker. This view was articulated as early as by
Trubetzkoy, who claimed that bilinguals’ difﬁculties are due to their “incorrect
evaluations” of the second-language sounds, which in turn are caused by “the
differences between the phonological structure of the foreign language and the
mother tongue of the speaker” (Trubetzkoy [] : ).
Today much experimental evidence has conﬁrmed that bilinguals and second-
language learners develop links or connections between sounds across their two (or
more) languages. The two languages interact during processing, and they share a
single representational network. These connections are generally revealed by cross-
language assimilations (Flege ), but they could be revealed by other phenomena.
A cross-language assimilation takes place when a bilingual has developed a connec-
tion between sounds belonging to different languages, making them more similar to
each other in his or her speech than they are when produced (or perceived) by
monolingual speakers of the languages involved.
In some cases, a second-language learner develops connections between one native
sound category and two contrastive second-language sounds. These cases, which are
rather common, hinder the acquisition of a second-language contrast, thus having
Romance Phonetics and Phonology. First edition. Mark Gibson and Juana Gil (eds.)
This chapter © Miquel Simonet . First published by Oxford University Press.

phonological, rather than merely phonetic, consequences (Escudero ; Best and
Tyler ). A well-known example is that of the confusion of the English /ɻ/–/l/
contrast, such as in the words rock and lock, by second-language learners whose ﬁrst
language is Japanese. Evidently, both English sounds are assimilated to Japanese /ɾ/,
albeit poorly, which triggers this difﬁcult learning scenario (Aoyama, Flege, Guion,
Akahane-Yamada, and Yamada ). Another well-known example is that of the
difﬁculties with the Catalan /e/–/ɛ/ contrast faced by Catalan speakers whose ﬁrst (or
dominant) language is Spanish. A number of studies discussed in the present chapter
suggest that the persistent difﬁculties these bilinguals face with this contrast are due
to the fact that they have assimilated both Catalan /e/ and /ɛ/ to the closest available
Spanish vowel, /e/. Catalan has seven phonemic vowels, /i, e, ɛ, a, ɔ, o, u/ (Majorcan
Catalan adds /ə/ to this list of phonemes). Spanish has ﬁve, /i, e, a, o, u/. Catalan /ɛ/
and /ɔ/ have no direct counterpart in Spanish, hence the difﬁculty of Spanish
speakers with these vowels. It appears that /ɛ/ is assimilated to Spanish /e/ and /ɔ/
is assimilated to Spanish /o/. Thus, because they have developed connections between
Catalan and Spanish vowel categories, Catalan–Spanish bilinguals who are dominant
in Spanish have reason to coalesce Catalan /e/ and /ɛ/ into a single mid-front vowel
and Catalan /o/ and /ɔ/ into a single mid-back vowel.
The studies discussed in the present chapter, which focuses on Catalan–Spanish
bilingualism, provide insights into the nature of phonetic performance and phono-
logical representation in bilingualism in general. Some of the questions addressed are
as follows: What is the effect of linguistic experience on phonetic performance in
bilinguals? What are the linguistic experiences that hinder native-like phonetic
performance in a second language? Are the ﬁrst years of life special in any way, so
that only people who have been exposed to a language during their ﬁrst years of life
will be equipped to learn it natively? Are there other factors affecting phonetic
behavior, such as usage patterns in adulthood, social networks, the structure of the
lexicon, or the nature of the speciﬁc communicative situation in which a conversa-
tion takes place? By addressing these (and other questions) with a single bilingual
speech community (the Catalan–Spanish community), and a single phonological
scenario (the Catalan /e/–/ɛ/ and /o/–/ɔ/ contrasts), researchers have been able to
address many questions in a controlled and careful manner.
Most of the studies I have selected for the present discussion were conducted in
Barcelona or its vicinity, but some have been conducted on the island of Majorca.
Both regions are bilingual, which means that the large majority of the population
understands and is able to speak both languages, and that the languages now enjoy
co-ofﬁcial status.¹ Sufﬁce it to say that a large bilingual speech community such as
this one allows for the testing of many hypotheses about bilingualism because it is
likely to grant access to individuals who exemplify almost any desired combination of
¹ Numerous studies have been conducted on the sociolinguistic situation of Catalonia and the Balearic
Islands, but this topic will not be discussed in the present chapter. The reader is referred to Boix and Vila
; Blas-Arroyo ; and the journal Treballs de Sociolingüística Catalana [http://revistes.iec.cat/index.
php/TSC].

Miquel Simonet

the variables considered crucial in a particular study while keeping the language
pairing and the linguistic phenomenon constant. Nevertheless, the present chapter
will show that most research studies have compared two particular populations, that
is, individuals who learned Catalan before they learned Spanish and individuals who
learned Spanish before they learned Catalan. The question that has received the most
conscientious attention is this one: What is the role of sequential language learning—
having been exposed to one language prior to another one—on bilingual speech
behavior? This brings us back to the question I raised at the outset of this chapter:
Why do second-language learners retain a foreign accent even after many years of
exposure to the second language and, most intriguingly, even when they learned their
second language during childhood?
.Perception
The foundational study on the effects of sequential language learning in the Catalan–
Spanish contact community is that of Pallier, Bosch, and Sebastián-Gallés () (see
also Bosch, Costa, and Sebastián-Gallés ). The thesis of the authors is that
linguistic experience (its presence or absence) with Catalan during the ﬁrst years of
life has carry-over effects into adulthood. These effects reﬂect limitations in neural
plasticity after the end of a sensitive period for language learning, which for phonetics
occurs extremely early—i.e., within the ﬁrst year of life. In a nutshell, the thesis is this:
If an individual has not been exposed to a language during the ﬁrst year(s) of life, he
or she will not be able to process (or even represent) some of the grammatical
structures (such as phonemic contrasts) of the language in the same way assomeone
who has been exposed to the language early on.
According to Pallier, Bosch, and Sebastián-Gallés (), the Catalan–Spanish
contact community lends itself to the testing of this hypothesis better than other
communities that had been examined to this end in the past, most of them being
groups of adult second-language learners in classroom settings or individuals recruited
from immigrant communities. There are many adult proﬁcient Catalan–Spanish
bilinguals who were exposed exclusively to one of the two languages in their family
environment while growing up, thus being quasi-monolingual in the ﬁrst (few) year(s)
of their life. Importantly, however, the social situation is such that exposure to (and
learning of) the other language necessarily occurs during childhood, at age six at the
latest, when mandatory schooling begins, but much earlier in most cases. Crucially,
these bilinguals also live in a language contact community that allows (or even
requires) them to use (and be exposed to) both languages daily throughout their
lives. Unlike immigrant communities that ﬁnd themselves in the position of a minority
group, in the Catalan–Spanish contact society it is not obvious that there is a minority
language. A societal language contact situation also presents a language-learning
scenario different from that of a second-language classroom, one that leads to natural
exposure and constant native input.
Pallier, Bosch, and Sebastián-Gallés () recruited two groups of participants.
One of the groups consisted of individuals who had learned Catalan at home, and thus
were exposed to Catalan before they were exposed to Spanish (“Catalan-dominant”);
Phonetic behavior in proﬁcient bilinguals


and the other group consisted of individuals who had learned Spanish at home, and
thus were exposed to Catalan only after they had been exposed to Spanish (“Spanish-
dominant”). For one experiment, Pallier, Bosch, and Sebastián-Gallés () created
a synthetic continuum from [e] to [ɛ] with seven equidistant steps. The synthetic,
isolated vowels were played multiple times in random order to the participants, who
were asked to indicate whether the vowel token they heard sounded more like the one
in pera /ˈpɛɾə/ ‘pear’ or the one in Pere /ˈpeɾə/ ‘Peter’. While the Catalan-dominant
bilinguals demonstrated that they perceived the acoustic continuum in terms of two
categories, the Spanish-dominant bilinguals did not. In an experimental design such
as this one, researchers plot the percentage of times a participant group (or an
individual) selects one of the members of the pair—one of the two possible
responses—as a function of the step in the continuum. The Catalan-dominant
bilinguals selected pera most of the time in one extreme of the continuum and Pere
in the other extreme of the continuum, thus showing that the continuum end points
were indeed perceived as two different categories. Interestingly, the steps in the
middle of the continuum yielded an S-shaped response function rather than a
straight-line incline. This suggests that the Catalan-dominant participants hit a wall
as the acoustic continuum progressed in which they stopped hearing mostly pera and
started hearing mostly Pere. The crucial ﬁnding was that the Spanish-dominant
bilinguals did not display an S-shape when their results were plotted. The two extremes
of the continuum did not lead to different categories in this group either—the partici-
pants seemed to respond almost randomly throughout the continuum.
In a second experiment the participants heard pairs of sounds in randomly
presented trials. The pairs in the trials were either separated by one step (i.e., they
were different) or they were identical, and the participants were asked to indicate
whether the sounds were the same or not. In an experiment such as this one, the
researcher counts the number of times a participant group (or an individual)
responds ‘different’ when the sounds in the trial are indeed different. It is usually
found that listeners who perceive an acoustic continuum in terms of two categories
show a peak in accuracy in the middle of the continuum. This is precisely what was
found in the case of the Catalan-dominant listeners, and precisely what was not found
in the case of the Spanish-dominant ones. Accuracy rates were relatively low through-
out the continuum for the Spanish-dominant listeners. This ﬁnding conﬁrmed that
the Catalan-dominant bilinguals, unlike the Spanish-dominant ones, perceived the
[e]–[ɛ] acoustic continuum in terms of two categories. This was a straightforward
piece of evidence that suggested that even bilingual individuals who learned their
second language very early in life and use it every day in naturalistic settings—i.e., the
Spanish-dominant bilinguals—are not able to process the sounds of that language in
the same way that someone who was exposed to that language in the ﬁrst (few) year(s)
of life. By hypothesis, this processing difference is triggered by a difference in
phonological representation; that is, in this speciﬁc case, Spanish-dominant
Catalan–Spanish bilinguals seem to lack /ɛ/ in their system. The conclusion of the
authors was that sequential learning—the lack of an early experience with a language
due to exposure to a prior language—leads to insurmountable limitations in the
endeavor of learning a second language.

Miquel Simonet

The ﬁndings in Pallier, Bosch, and Sebastián-Gallés () are very compelling,
but they have not remained unchallenged. Amengual () recently replicated
the ﬁrst two experiments in Pallier, Bosch, and Sebastián-Gallés’ () study with
a similar but not identical population, Catalan–Spanish early proﬁcient bilinguals
from Majorca. Amengual found that his Spanish-dominant bilinguals were able to
perceive a resynthesized [e]–[ɛ] continuum in terms of two sound categories. It is
unclear what the reasons for the difference between these two studies might be.
A possibility, which Amengual himself mentions, is that the acoustic distance
between /e/ and /ɛ/ is larger in Majorcan Catalan than it is in Central Catalan,
which is the dialect investigated in Pallier, Bosch, and Sebastián-Gallés ().
Central Catalan and Majorcan Catalan /ɛ/ are not acoustically identical. If this was
to explain the difference between Pallier, Bosch, and Sebastián-Gallés () and
Amengual () in terms of their ﬁndings, we would need to amend the inference of
Pallier, Bosch, and Sebastián-Gallés (). Perhaps the behavioral limitations trig-
gered by sequential learning become observable only when the acoustic distance
between the members of a second-language contrast is especially small or occurs
under some phonological conditions yet to be understood—see Mora and Nadeu
() on the low functional load of the /e/–/ɛ/ contrast in Barcelona in particular.
Another possible explanation is pointed out in Sebastián-Gallés and Soto-Faraco
() and shown in no uncertain terms in the phonological-encoding study
reported in Simonet (). In the latter, Catalan- and Spanish-dominant bilinguals
born and raised on Majorca were asked to listen to trials consisting of three-word
tokens (triads) involving the /o/–/ɔ/ contrast, dónes [ˈdonəs] ‘(you) give’ and dones
[ˈdɔnəs] ‘women’. The participants were asked to indicate which of the members of
the triad, if any, was (lexically) different from the other two. The participants were
expected to detect the odd-item-out in the triads that involved a different member
and to respond ‘same’ when they heard triads consisting of three tokens of the same
word. The ﬁndings were as follows: (i) all of the Catalan-dominant bilinguals were
accurate around % of the time, and (ii), on average, the Spanish-dominant
bilinguals were accurate only around % of the time. The crucial ﬁnding was that,
when the individual results were examined, it was found that the Spanish-dominant
subjects differed widely from each other in terms of their accuracy rates. While some
reached accuracy rates as high as the Catalan-dominant ones (% or above), the
accuracy rates of others were not much better than what mere chance would allow
(%). Thus, even though dominance in Spanish does not seem to predict failure in
the phonological encoding of a Catalan-speciﬁc contrast, dominance in Catalan does
predict success. This is a nuanced view of the proposition put forward in Pallier,
Bosch, and Sebastián-Gallés () but it preserves its spirit.
Sebastián-Gallés and Soto-Faraco () used an adaptation of the gating task
that involved a two-alternative forced-choice experiment (AFC). In a gating task,
participants listen to a brief portion of a sound (or a sequence of sounds), as brief as
a few milliseconds, and they are asked to report whether they heard option A or
option B. (In this case, A and B were the members of Catalan phonological contrasts,
such as /e/–/ɛ/, /o/–/ɔ/, /s/–/z/, and /s/–/ʃ/, B having no obvious Spanish counterpart.)
Participants then listen to progressively longer portions of the sound, which should
Phonetic behavior in proﬁcient bilinguals


make the task easier. Researchers analyze how long the portion needs to be for
participants to make accurate identiﬁcations. The ﬁndings in Sebastián-Gallés and
Soto-Faraco () were extremely revealing. Catalan-dominant bilinguals were able
to make accurate selections with smaller portions than those needed by Spanish-
dominant bilinguals. It turned out that even Spanish-dominant listeners who could
identify /e/–/ɛ/ categorically needed longer portions to do so than Catalan-dominant
listeners did. This presumably indicates that experimental tasks that look closely into
the processing of the phonological system of a second language are able to reveal
small (but signiﬁcant) processing differences between ﬁrst- and second-language
speakers that might go unnoticed in coarse-grained tasks such as identiﬁcation and
discrimination tasks.
A second example of an online task that set out to examine the processing
differences between Catalan- and Spanish-dominant bilinguals was reported in
Navarra, Sebastián-Gallés, and Soto-Faraco (). In this study, Catalan–Spanish
bilinguals, as well as a group of Spanish-speaking monolinguals from outside of
Catalonia, were asked to listen to a list of trials that consisted of nonword items
such as /tike/ and /puke/ and classify them as a function of their ﬁrst syllable, /ti-/ or
/pu-/. Both Catalan and Spanish speakers should ﬁnd this easy to do, as /ti-/ and /pu-/
are contrastive in both languages. The crucial manipulation of the study was that /ti-/
and /pu-/ could be followed by /-ke/ or /kɛ/. The trials were presented in three blocks.
In one block the target syllables were always followed by /-ke/, forming /tike/
and /puke/. In a second block they were always followed by /-kɛ/, forming /tikɛ/
and /pukɛ/. In a third block they were followed randomly by either /-ke/ or /-kɛ/. Prior
research had shown that variability in task-irrelevant materials tends to slow down
responses in task-relevant materials—this is known as the Garner effect. Relative to
their behavior in the homogeneous blocks (the blocks with the nonce words that
always ended in /-ke/ or /-kɛ/), Catalan-dominant bilinguals were slowed down in
their decisions in the heterogeneous block. They were distracted by the variability in
the second syllable, although this variability was irrelevant to the performance of this
task. Neither the Spanish-dominant bilinguals nor the Spanish-speaking monolin-
guals showed such asymmetry. This suggests, once again, that Catalan-dominant
bilinguals perceive and process the /e/–/ɛ/ contrast categorically, unlike early proﬁ-
cient Spanish-dominant bilinguals. Since the Spanish-dominant bilinguals did not
reﬂect a Garner effect in this task, there was no evidence to hypothesize that they
encoded the /e/–/ɛ/ contrast in two different categories.
As explained above, the bulk of the perception research on Catalan–Spanish
bilingualism has been dedicated to addressing the following question: What is the
effect of early language experience—or sequential learning—on the acquisition,
representation, and processing of second-language sound categories? The great
majority of studies support the following conclusion: Lack of early language experi-
ence leads to severe limitations in the malleability of the phonological system of
language learners. In other words, if a second-language learner is not massively
exposed to a second language during the ﬁrst year(s) of life, he or she is unlikely to
learn the language natively. This, obviously, does not mean that learning a language
in adulthood is impossible, but the evidence suggests that a learner is unlikely to

Miquel Simonet

develop grammatical representations (and/or processing mechanisms) identical to
those of a monolingual or native speaker. While this inference has not remained
unchallenged, much evidence to date seems to support it.
.Production
Production studies on Catalan–Spanish bilingualism are more recent than compar-
able perception studies. Some of these studies have been designed as follow-up
studies of those of Pallier, Bosch, and Sebastián-Gallés () and Sebastián-Gallés
and Soto-Faraco () in the sense that their main goal is to assess whether early
experience (or lack of it) with a language determines phonetic behavior into adult-
hood. While these studies tend to make the point, following Pallier, Bosch, and
Sebastián-Gallés () and Sebastián-Gallés and Soto-Faraco (), that early
experience is the key factor explaining their ﬁndings, they cannot really identify
this factor as the crucial one as opposed to other factors, such as language usage or
linguistic ideology. The basic ﬁndings of the production literature come to corrob-
orate what the perception literature had shown, but, not unlike the case of the
perception literature, some production studies report ﬁndings that cannot easily be
reconciled with simplistic portraits of the facts.
Two production studies recently conducted on the island of Majorca come to
conﬁrm the thesis of Pallier, Bosch, and Sebastián-Gallés () and Sebastián-Gallés
and Soto-Faraco (). The ﬁrst, of these studies was concerned with the alveolar
lateral /l/. Crosslinguistically, alveolar laterals differ with regard to their degree of
darkness (Sproat and Fujimura ; Recasens ). Sproat and Fujimura ()
show, for instance, that dark and light—as they are commonly known—positional
variants of American English /l/ differ in that dark /l/ has a greater degree of tongue
dorsum retraction and raising, and of tongue body lowering, than light /l/ does.
Importantly, regardless of their prosodic position, Spanish has a light /l/ variant, and
Catalan—at least some dialects of the language, including Majorcan Catalan—has a
dark variant (Recasens ). Simonet () investigated the production of /l/ by
two groups of Catalan–Spanish bilinguals born, raised, and residing on the island of
Majorca. The informants, although early and proﬁcient bilinguals, had been raised in
monolingual family environments. As adults they continued to use their family
language more frequently than their second language. The bilinguals were asked to
read aloud sentences in their ﬁrst language and then in their second one in two
separate blocks taking place in one experimental session. The acoustic analysis found
that Catalan /l/ was indeed darker in the speech of the Catalan-dominant bilinguals
than in that of the Spanish dominant ones, and it also found that Spanish /l/ was
lighter in the productions of the Spanish-dominant speakers than in those of the
Catalan-dominant ones. Thus, the bilinguals seemed to be transferring the phonetic
category, whether light or dark /l/, of their ﬁrst language into their second one.
Contrary to what the previous analysis would suggest, a subsequent analysis showed
that the bilinguals had indeed established a new category for their second-language
/l/, just not one that was identical to the one produced by the other group. This
conﬁrmed the initial hypothesis that sequential learning affects phonetic production
Phonetic behavior in proﬁcient bilinguals


and limits behavioral plasticity in bilinguals. New-category formation, however, had
not been blocked altogether: The bilinguals were able to manage two language-
speciﬁc phonetic categories—one for each language—but their new categories were
not like those of native speakers.
In Simonet (), which examined the same two populations, the materials
consisted of Catalan target words with either /o/ or /ɔ/ in their stressed syllable and
of their Spanish cognates, all of which had /o/. An acoustic analysis found that
Catalan-dominant speakers produced an acoustic difference between Catalan /o/
and /ɔ/, as expected. Spanish-dominant bilinguals, on the other hand, had merged
Catalan /o/ and /ɔ/ into a single phonetic category. This ﬁnding conﬁrmed the
hypothesis that a reduced experience with Catalan during the ﬁrst year(s) of life
had consequences even for adult-proﬁcient bilinguals. Vowel contrasts speciﬁc to
the second language could prove difﬁcult to master even with long and intensive
experience with the second language. This is the mirror image, with production
data, of what was found in Pallier, Bosch, and Sebastián-Gallés (). All in all,
what this study suggested was that sequential learning affected vowel production even
in proﬁcient, early bilingualism, as the perception studies in Pallier, Bosch, and
Sebastián-Gallés () and Sebastián-Gallés and Soto-Faraco () had suggested
might be the case.
The articles reviewed in this section have so far presented evidence in support of
the thesis that linguistic experience in the ﬁrst year(s) of a person’s life can trigger
insurmountable limitations for ultimate attainment in second-language speech
acquisition. At least one recent study has challenged this ﬁnding. Amengual ()
discusses the results of an acoustic study of the mid vowels—both /e/–/ɛ/ and
/o/–/ɔ/—as produced by two groups of Catalan–Spanish bilinguals from Majorca.
The participants were placed into two groups (Catalan- vs. Spanish-dominant) with
the help of a language proﬁle questionnaire, the Bilingual Language Proﬁle (Gertken,
Amengual, and Birdsong ), which took into account more factors than the ones
used by prior research. The questionnaire used by Amengual included questions, for
instance, about language history and current use as well as about language attitudes
and self-assessed linguistic proﬁciency. The groups were formed by individuals who
(i) had been raised in monolingual home environments (Catalan or Spanish),
(ii) continued to use their family language more frequently than their nonfamily
language in their adult lives in many different settings, (iii) rated themselves as very
proﬁcient in both languages but slightly more so in their family language than in the
other one, and (iv) had positive attitudes toward both languages but slightly more
toward their family language than toward the other one. The use of this questionnaire
allows us to raise an important point. A number of factors that could potentially
cause the ﬁndings in Pallier, Bosch, and Sebastián-Gallés (), Sebastián-Gallés
and Soto-Faraco (), for perception, and Simonet (, ), for production—
among others—seem to be correlated. That is, people who were raised in a Catalan-
speaking home are likely, in this population, to continue to use Catalan more
frequently than Spanish in their daily lives as adults, and they are likely to consider
themselves very proﬁcient in Catalan and to value Catalan as their native language.
This means that it is extremely difﬁcult to isolate the effects of early life experience
(or sequential learning per se) from the potential effects of other factors.

Miquel Simonet

Most interesting was the fact that Amengual () found that both Catalan- and
Spanish-dominant bilinguals were successful in producing a robust acoustic differ-
ence between the mid-low, /ɛ/ and /ɔ/, and the mid-high vowels, /e/ and /o/. These
ﬁndings contrasted with those in Simonet (). Amengual went on to measure the
acoustic distance between the two phonetic categories on a speaker-by-speaker basis;
this was done by calculating the Euclidean distance, on the F Fspace, between
the acoustic centroids of each of the phonological categories. Even though none
of the speaker groups showed a merger, the Spanish-dominant speakers showed a
reduced acoustic distance between the two members of the contrast relative to that
displayed by the Catalan-dominant speakers. Therefore, some tenuous effects of
sequential learning were still detected in this study. A crucial ﬁnding we wish to
highlight here, however, is that there was no evidence of a merger between the mid-
low and the mid-high vowels in the speech of the Spanish-dominant bilinguals,
unlike in Simonet (). Why would that be so?
A number of potential explanations suggest themselves. Firstly, perhaps the group
of Spanish-dominant bilinguals in Simonet () was more dominant in Spanish—
or less proﬁcient in Catalan—than the corresponding group in Amengual (). If
this was true one could conclude that, in order for sequential learning to have a long-
lasting effect, language dominance asymmetry needs to reach a certain threshold. If
this were the case, it would potentially mean that the absence (vs. the presence) of a
language in the ﬁrst year(s) of a person’s life would not be the sole predictor of
phonetic behavior in bilingualism: other factors could play an important role. This
remains to be investigated in depth, but some ﬁndings suggest indeed that the
stronger the asymmetry in language dominance, the stronger the effects of the
dominant language on the second—see Mora and Nadeu (), as well as Simonet
() and Amengual ().
A second explanation lies in the nature of the tasks that Simonet () and
Amengual () used to gather their data. Simonet () asked his participants to
read a list of sentences out loud; Amengual () asked his to utter the names of
objects represented in a series of pictures. Reading could be more inﬂuenced by
orthography than picture naming, and one must recall that in Catalan /o/ and /ɔ/ are
represented by the same grapheme, <o>, as are /e/ and /ɛ/, by <e>. To delve deeper
into the potential effects of experimental tasks, consider the results in Simonet
(). For this study, the participants were asked to listen to and then repeat out
loud a list of sentences recorded by Catalan-dominant talkers. The results were
similar to those reported in Amengual (), and thus different from those in
Simonet (). None of the speakers, not even the Spanish-dominant ones, merged
/o/ and /ɔ/ into a single acoustic distribution. (The acoustic difference between the
two vowels, however, was larger for the Catalan- than for the Spanish-dominant
bilinguals.) While the participants in the study read out loud a list of sentences,
those in the study imitated the productions of a group of Catalan-dominant
talkers. Unlike the former, the latter task provided the participants with an immedi-
ate acoustic model for the words they produced. Perhaps the two studies tapped into
different types of linguistic knowledge. I will discuss this below.
Bosch and Ramon-Casas () measured the acoustics of the two Catalan mid-
front vowels, /e/ and /ɛ/, produced by a group of Catalan–Spanish bilingual mothers.
Phonetic behavior in proﬁcient bilinguals


The focus of this study was to ﬁnd out more about the phonetic input children
receive from their mothers in Catalonia. Thus, the adult speakers in this study were
the mothers of children whose perceptual behavior had been investigated elsewhere.
Spanish-dominant mothers were found to produce a merged mid-front vowel rather
than two acoustic distributions for the two Catalan phonemes, while Catalan-
dominant mothers produced both vowel phonemes in different acoustic distribu-
tions. These ﬁndings mirror those in Simonet (). In a subsequent analysis it was
found that a phonetically trained native speaker of Catalan could classify the vowels
produced by the Spanish-dominant mothers in terms of two categories, [e] and [ɛ];
that is, the vowels had been produced as [e] and [ɛ] categories and not as an
intermediate category. When these vowel realizations were acoustically compared
following this phonetic (auditory) rather than the assumed phonological (lexical,
etymological, preconceived) classiﬁcation, two statistical distributions arose. This
suggests that the Spanish-dominant mothers had not failed to establish separate
phonetic categories for [e] and [ɛ], but that they had failed to associate these with the
same words with which the Catalan-dominant mothers associated these sounds.
Perhaps what they lacked were stable lexical representations of these sounds. While
some tasks, such as acoustic shadowing, tap into phonetic knowledge (i.e., has the
bilingual established two phonetic categories for the sounds involved in a second-
language contrast? What is the phonetic nature of these sounds?), others, like reading
out loud, may additionally tap into phono-lexical knowledge (i.e., has the bilingual
learned which words have which sound category?). One lesson is that, in investiga-
tions into bilingual speech production, one must be careful to include a range of
tasks, as different tasks are likely to yield different results, perhaps because they reveal
different levels of linguistic representation.
The studies reviewed so far in this section show that an individual’s language
history, particularly whether he or she was raised in a predominantly Catalan-
or predominantly Spanish-speaking home, is a strong predictor of phonetic behavior.
It has been mentioned above, however, that most of the production studies,
including Simonet (, , ) and Amengual (), cannot really conﬁrm
that linguistic experience during the ﬁrst years of a person’s life is the strongest
predictor of phonetic behavior in bilingualism. Note that these studies compare
Catalan- and Spanish-dominant bilinguals who were raised in monolingual family
environments and continued to use their family language more frequently than their
other language as adults. The problem is that, in the majority of these studies, all the
potential predictors of phonetic behavior—language history, language use, language
attitudes, and language proﬁciency—are correlated with one another. Is the family
environment the crucial factor? Is the asymmetry in language usage in adulthood
what matters? Are issues of identity and linguistic ideology responsible?
These questions have been addressed from more than one standpoint using
different bilingual populations, but at least one study has used bilingual Catalan–
Spanish data to address it. Mora and Nadeu () examined the production of /e/-
and /ɛ/-words by Catalan–Spanish bilinguals who were raised by monolingual
Catalan-speaking families. Thus, all of the participants in this study had presumably
been exposed to Catalan during the ﬁrst years of their life, and only later to Spanish.

Miquel Simonet

The bilinguals in this study were also dominant in Catalan as adults—they continued
to use Catalan very frequently, more so than Spanish. The authors classiﬁed the
bilinguals in two groups: One group used Catalan around % of the time (on
average) in their daily lives, another group used Catalan around % of the time
(also on average). The groups, therefore, differed in their amount of exposure to (and
use of) Spanish as adults, although they had all been raised in monolingual Catalan
environments. Firstly, it was found that all of the bilingual groups maintained
different acoustic distributions for /e/ and /ɛ/, as one would expect from Catalan-
dominant bilinguals. Interestingly, however, the group with the lower level of use of
Catalan produced /e/ and /ɛ/ vowels that were acoustically closer to each other than
the group with the higher level of use of Catalan. Thus, a decrease in the use of
Catalan, even by a native speaker of Catalan, leads to a less robust /e/–/ɛ/ contrast.
(Recall that experience with Catalan in the family environment ensures the absence
of a merger.)
.Conclusions
Firstly, let us summarize the points discussed in Section .. It was shown that,
unlike Catalan-dominant ones, Spanish-dominant Catalan–Spanish bilinguals do
not seem to perceive the Catalan /e/–/ɛ/ (and /o/–/ɔ/) contrast in terms of two
distinct sound categories (Pallier, Bosch, and Sebastián-Gallés ). The Spanish-
dominant bilinguals who do perceive this contrast categorically, however, seem to
require more processing time—or more evidence (a longer acoustic stretch)—than
the Catalan-dominant bilinguals (Sebastián-Gallés and Soto-Faraco ). Experi-
ments that demand a more taxing use of memory, such as categorical discrimination
tasks with triads (Simonet ) and Garner-effect-based tasks (Navarra, Sebastián-
Gallés, and Soto-Faraco ), suggest that the Spanish-dominant bilinguals’ repre-
sentation of Catalan /ɛ/ (and /ɔ/) is either fuzzy or indistinguishable from that of /e/
(or /o/). Most of the studies in this body of literature show that Spanish-dominant
bilinguals differ discretely, qualitatively from Catalan-dominant ones in their pro-
cessing of Catalan-speciﬁc contrasts.
The claim is generally made that Spanish-dominant bilinguals differ from
Catalan-dominant bilinguals because they did not have as intensive an exposure to
Catalan during their ﬁrst years of life. Therefore, the conclusion is usually that the
ﬁrst few years of life—the input received during those years—is somewhat special,
and no subsequent experience with the language may overcome this limitation. Two
studies, however, would suggest that the difference is quantitative (one of degree
rather than of category). Amengual () reported that Spanish-dominant bilin-
guals on Majorca, as a group, tend to perceive the /e/–/ɛ/ and /o/–/ɔ/ contrasts in
terms of independent categories, thus contradicting the results in Pallier, Bosch, and
Sebastián-Gallés (). Mora and Nadeu () found that, for Catalan–Spanish
bilinguals in Catalonia, patterns of language usage in adulthood—even for bilinguals
who were exposed only to Catalan as children, in their home environment—affect
these individuals’ perceptions of the Catalan mid vowel contrasts. These studies raise
two important points: (i) one cannot predict with any degree of certainty that a
Phonetic behavior in proﬁcient bilinguals


bilingual individual who learned the second language after he or she learned the ﬁrst
one will not be able to master its phonology—there seems to be a lot of individual
variation—and (ii) experience with a second language can impact the ﬁrst language
to some extent, which means that we might need to rethink the idea that the ﬁrst years
of life are special—but much more evidence is needed before we fully rethink this.
Secondly, we shall summarize the points discussed in Section .. First, it was
shown that Catalan–Spanish bilinguals tend to transfer the phonetics of their ﬁrst-
language categories to their second language, and that this is true of both Spanish-
and Catalan-dominant bilinguals (Simonet ). Secondly, in their production of
Catalan vowels, Spanish-dominant bilinguals may merge the mid-back vowel con-
trast present in Catalan, perhaps due to an inﬂuence of Spanish, which has only one
mid-back vowel (Bosch and Ramon-Casas ; Simonet ). Other studies, on
the other hand, have shown that the effects of Spanish on Catalan in the productions
of Spanish-dominant bilinguals may be very subtle and may lead, not necessarily to
vowel mergers, but to a reduction in the size of the acoustic difference between the
vowels involved in the contrast (Mora and Nadeu ; Amengual ; Simonet
). Importantly, beyond the bilingual’s having been raised in a monolingual
language environment during the ﬁrst years of life, other factors seem to affect the
inﬂuence of the phonetics of one language on the other, including how much an
individual continues to use his or her family language as an adult (Mora and Nadeu
), whether a word has cognate status or not (Mora and Nadeu ), the
particularities of the speciﬁc communicative event in which a bilingual ﬁnds himself
or herself (Simonet ), and perhaps even the neighborhood in which he or she
resides (Lleó, Cortés, and Benet ; Cortés, Lleó, and Benet ).
While not all researchers would agree with me, I believe that the bulk of the
research on Catalan–Spanish bilingual speech behavior supports the view that Cata-
lan- and Spanish-dominant bilinguals are qualitatively, discretely different. This does
not mean that every experimental task will capture such a difference. In some cases
one would need to move beyond ofﬂine perception tasks and examine production,
spoken-word recognition, or online implicit measures that tap into phonological
processing, in order for this difference to come to light. What is less clear to me is
whether the body of literature reviewed here is able to conﬁrm the claim that Catalan-
and Spanish-dominant bilinguals differ solely because the former have been exposed
to Catalan since birth and the latter have not. Note that most research studies have
classiﬁed participants into two groups using a series of attributes that could result in
confounding factors. In these studies, the Catalan-dominant bilinguals do not differ
from the Spanish-dominant ones exclusively on the basis of their linguistic input
during their ﬁrst few years of life, but also on the basis of their patterns of language
usage as adults, their linguistic ideologies, etc. In order to understand the relative role
of these factors, and thus that of sequential learning per se, one needs to manipulate
them orthogonally, independently. Although some studies have begun to do this
(Mora and Nadeu ), a systematic orthogonal manipulation of these predictors
remains to be undertaken.

Miquel Simonet

References
Abelin, Åsa (). Studies in Sound Symbolism. Doctoral dissertation. Gothenburg: Göteborg
University.
Abercrombie, David (). Elements of General Phonetics. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
Press.
Adank, Patti, Roel Smits, and Roeland van Hout (). ‘A comparison of vowel normalization
procedures for language variation research’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
/: –.
Adda-Decker, Martine, Philippe Boula de Mareüil, Gilles Adda, and Lori Lamel ().
‘Investigating syllabic structures and their variation in spontaneous French’, Speech Com-
munication /: –.
Aguilar, Lourdes (). De la vocal a la consonante. Santiago de Compostela: Universidade de
Santiago de Compostela.
Alarcos Llorach, Emilio (, th rev. and enl. edn). Fonología española. Madrid: Gredos.
Alarcos Llorach, Emilio (). ‘Fonología y fonética: a propósito de las vocales andaluzas’,
Archivum : –.
Albano, Eleonora (). ‘Fazendo sentido do som’, Ilha do Desterro. A Journal of English
Language, Literatures in English and Cultural Studies : –.
Albano, Eleonora C., Agnaldo A. Moreira, Patricia A. Aquino, Adelaide H. P. Silva, and Regis
K. Kakinohana (). ‘Segment frequency and word structure in Brazilian Portuguese’,
Proceedings of the th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences, Stockholm, –.
ALDC = Veny, Joan, and Lídia Pons i Griera (–). Atles lingüístic del domini català, vols.
[Online version]. Barcelona: Institut d’Estudis Catalans. Available at http://aldc.espais.iec.cat/.
Alderete, John (). ‘Faithfulness to prosodic heads’, in Ben Hermans and Marc von
Oostendorp (eds), The Derivational Residue in Phonological Optimality Theory. Philadelphia,
PA: John Benjamins, –.
Aldrich, Alexander Charles (). Acquisition of LPhonology: an Acoustic Analysis of the
Centralization of LSpanish /a/ in Adult LEnglish-Speaking Learners. MA dissertation.
Brigham Young University.
ALeCMan = García Mouton, Pilar and Francisco Moreno Fernández (dirs) (). Atlas
lingüístico (y etnográﬁco) de Castilla-La Mancha [Online]. Universidad de Alcalá. Available
at http://www.linguas.net/alecman/.
Alencar, M. S. M. de (). Aspectos Sócio-Dialetais da Língua Falada em Fortaleza: As
Realizações dos Fonemas/r/e/R/. PhD thesis. Fortaleza: Universidade Federal do Ceará.
ALGa = Instituto da Lingua Galega (). Atlas Lingüístico Galego, Volume III: Fonética.
A Coruña: Fundación Pedro Barrié de la Maza.
ALiR = Contini, Michel (dir.) et al. (–). Atlas Linguistique Roman (ALiR). Rome:
Istituto Poligraﬁco e Zecca dello Stato.
Alkire, Ti and Carol Rosen (). Romance Languages. A Historical Introduction. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Alonso, Dámaso (). ‘Vocales andaluzas. Contribución al estudio de la fonología peninsular’,
Nueva Revista de Filología Hispánica /: –.
Alvar, Manuel ([] ). ‘Sevilla, macrocosmos lingüísticos. Fonética y fonología
según el Atlas Lingüístico de Andalucía’, in Manuel Alvar (ed.), Norma lingüística
sevillana y español de América. Madrid: Ediciones de Cultura Hispánica. ICI, V Centenario,
–.
Álvarez Blanco, Rosario (). ‘Consideracions sobre a metafonía nominal galega’, in Dieter
Kremer (ed.), Homenagem a Joseph M. Piel por ocasião do seu º aniversário. Tübingen:
Max Niemeyer, –.
Álvarez Blanco, Rosario (). ‘O sistema fonolóxico do galego. Comparación co do portu-
gués’, in Dieter Kremer (ed.), Actes du XVIIIe Congrès International de Linguistique et de
Philologie Romanes (Université de Trier, ). Tübingen: Max Niemeyer, –.
Álvarez Blanco, Rosario and Xosé Xove (). Gramática da lingua galega. Vigo: Galaxia.
Álvarez Blanco, Rosario, Henrique Monteagudo, and Xosé Luis Regueira Fernández ().
Gramática galega. Vigo: Galaxia.
Álvarez Pérez, Xosé Afonso (). ‘E os da banda d’alá son máis estranxeiros ca os de Madrí?
Estudo contrastivo de designacións galegas e portuguesas no campo semántico da gandaría’,
Verba : –.
Álvarez Pérez, Xosé Afonso (). ‘European Portuguese dialectal features: a comparison with
Cintra’s proposal’, Journal of Portuguese Linguistics /: –.
Álvarez Pérez, Xosé Afonso (). ‘Isoglossas portuguesas nos materiais do Atlas Lingüístico
de la Península Ibérica: análise crítica da Nova Proposta de Lindley Cintra’, Zeitschrift für
romanische Philologie /: –.
Alves, Helena, Juana Gil, Carolina Pérez, and Eugenia San Segundo (). ‘La cualidad
individual de la voz y la identiﬁcación del locutor: el proyecto CIVIL’, in Yolanda Congosto,
María Luisa Montero and Antonio Salvador (eds), Fonética experimental, educación super-
ior e investigación, Madrid: Arco/Libros, –.
Ambadiang, Théophile (). ‘Algunas observaciones sobre las llamadas “marcas de palabra”
y el género en español’, Cuadernos de Lingüística del Instituto Universitario Ortega y Gasset
: –.
Amengual, Mark (). ‘The perception and production of language-speciﬁc mid-vowel
contrasts: shifting the focus to the bilingual individual in early language input conditions’,
International Journal of Bilingualism /[ﬁrst published August , ]; –.
Anderson, John (). ‘The representation of vowel reduction: non-speciﬁcation and reduc-
tion in Old English and Bulgarian’, Studia Linguistica /: –.
Andrade, Amália and Janet Slifka (). A phonetic study of sibilants produced by speakers
of a northern Portuguese dialect [paper]. XXI Encontro Nacional da Associação Portuguesa
de Linguística, Porto, September –, .
Anttila, Arto (). ‘Variation and Opacity’, Natural Language & Linguistic Theory :
–.
Anttila, Arto, Vivienne Fong, Štefan Beňuš, and Jennifer Nycz (). ‘Variation and opacity in
Singapore English consonant clusters’, Phonology /: –.
Aoyama, Katsura, James Emil Flege, Susan G. Guion, Reiko Akahane-Yamada, and Tsuneo
Yamada (). ‘Perceived phonetic dissimilarity and Lspeech learning: the case of
Japanese /r/ and English /l/ and /r/’, Journal of Phonetics /: –.

References

Apfelbaum, Keith S., Natasha Bullock-Rest, Ariane E. Rhone, Allard Jongman, and Bob
McMurray (). ‘Contingent categorisation in speech perception’, Language, Cognition
and Neuroscience /: –.
Archangeli, Diana and Terence Langendoen (eds) (). Optimality Theory: an Overview.
Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Argüello, Fanny Mercedes (). The žeísta Dialect of Spanish Spoken in Ecuador: a Phonetic
and Phonological Study. PhD dissertation. The Pennsylvania State University.
Arvaniti, Amalia (). The Phonetics of Modern Greek Rhythm and its Phonological Impli-
cations. PhD thesis. University of Cambridge.
Ashby, William J. (). ‘An acoustic proﬁle of right-dislocations in French’, Journal of
French Language Studies /: –.
Astésano, Corine (). Rythme et Accentuation en Français: Invariance et Variabilité
Stylistique. Paris: L’Harmattan.
Astésano, Corine, Ellen Gurman Bard, and Alice Turk (). ‘Structural inﬂuences on initial
accent placement in French’, Language and Speech /: –.
Astésano, Corine, Robert Espesser, and Nathalie Rossi-Gensane (). ‘Quelques cas parti-
culiers de détachements à gauche – ou la prosodie à l’aide de la syntaxe’, Actes des èmes
Journées d’Études sur la Parole, Avignon.
Avanzi, Mathieu (). L’interface Prosodie/Syntaxe en Français. Dislocations, Incises et
Asyndètes. Brussels: Peter Lang.
Avanzi, Mathieu, Cédric Gendrot, and Anne Lacheret-Dujour (). ‘Is there a prosodic
difference between left-dislocated and heavy subjects? Evidence from spontaneous French’,
Proceedings of Speech Prosody , : –.
Ayneto, Alba and Núria Sebastián-Gallés (). ‘The inﬂuence of bilingualism on the preference
for the mouth region of dynamic faces’, Developmental Science /[sp. issue].
Baayen, Rolf H., Doug J. Davidson, and Douglas M. Bates (). ‘Mixed-effects modeling with
crossed random effects for subjects and items’, Journal of Memory and Language /:
–.
Baertsch, Karen S. (). An Optimality Theoretic Approach to Syllable Structure: the Split
Margin Hierarchy. PhD dissertation. Indiana University.
Baker, Adam, Jeff Mielke, and Diana Archangeli (). ‘More velar than /g/: consonant
coarticulation as a cause of diphthongization’, in Charles B. Chang and Hannah J. Haynie
(eds), Proceedings of the th West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics. Somerville, MA:
Cascadilla Proceedings Project, –.
Baković, Eric (). ‘Deletion, insertion, and symmetrical identity’, in Bert Vaux and Susumu
Kuno (eds), Harvard Working Papers in Linguistics . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University,
–.
Baltazani, Mary and Katerina Nicolaidis (). ‘The many faces of /r/’, in Lorenzo Spreaﬁco
and Alessandro Vietti (eds), Rhotics: New Data and Perspectives. Bolzano: Bolzano Univer-
sity Press, –.
Barbato, Marcello (). ‘Anafonesi Latina e anafonesi romanza’, in Michèle Fruyt, Gerd
V. M. Haverling, and Rosanna Sornicola (eds), Actes du e Congrès International de
Linguistique et Philologie Romanes, Nancy, July th–th, .
Barbosa, Jorge Morais (, nd edn). Études de phonologie portugaise. Évora: Universidade
de Évora, Divisão de Línguas e Literatura.
References


Barbosa, Jorge Morais (). Introdução ao estudo da fonologia e morfologia do português.
Coimbra: Almedina.
Barbosa, Plínio A. (). ‘Detecting changes in speech expressiveness in participants of a
radio program’, Proceedings of the th Annual Conference of the International Speech
Communication Association (Interspeech ). Brighton, –.
Barbosa, Plínio A. and Eleonora Albano (). ‘Brazilian Portuguese. Illustrations of the IPA’,
Journal of the International Phonetic Association /: –.
Barbosa, Plínio A. and Sandra Madureira (). Manual de Fonética Acústica Experimental:
Aplicações a Dados do Português. São Paulo: Cortez.
Bárkányi, Zsuzsanna (). ‘Reﬂexiones sobre la asimilación de sonoridad de la /s/’, in
Zsuzsanna Fábián, Ildikó Szijj, Imre Szilágyi, and Bálazs Déri (eds), Köszöntő kötet Giampaolo
Salvi . születésnapjára. Saggi di linguistica neolatina per i anni di Giampaolo Salvi.
Budapest: Eötvös Loránd Tudományegyetem, –.
Barkley, Sharon (). The Acquisition of Orthographic-Phonological Correspondence Rules in
Land LPortuguese: Error Resolution, Interference, and Generalizability. PhD dissertation.
University of Florida.
Barlaz, Marissa, Maojing Fu, Zhi-Pei Liang, Ryan Shosted, and Brad Sutton (). ‘The
emergence of nasal velar codas in Brazilian Portuguese: an rt-MRI study’, Proceedings
of the th Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication Association
(Interspeech ). Dresden, –.
Barnes, Jonathan (). Positional Neutralization: a Phonologization Approach to Typological
Patterns. PhD dissertation. University of Berkeley.
Barnes, Jonathan (). Strength and Weakness at the Interface: Positional Neutralization in
Phonetics and Phonology. Berlin: de Gruyter Mouton.
Barnils, Pere (). Die Mundart von Alacant. Beitrag zur Kenntnis des Valencianischen.
Barcelona: Institut d’Estudis Catalans.
Barquero, María Ángeles, Isabelle Racine, Lorraine Baqué, and Sandra Schwab (). ‘La
estructuración acentual: estudio comparativo de la interlengua español-francés. Caso de la
lectura’, in Yolanda Congosto Martín, María Luisa Montero Curiel, and Antonio Salvador
Plans (eds), Fonética Experimental, Espacio Europeo, Educación Superior e Investigación.
Universidad de Cáceres y Universidad de Sevilla, –.
Bassetti, Benedetta (). ‘Orthographic input and phonological representations in learners of
Chinese as a foreign language’, Written Language and Literacy /: –.
Bassetti, Benedetta, Paola Escudero, and Rachel Hayes-Harb (eds) (). ‘Second language
phonology at the interface between acoustic and orthographic input’, Applied Psycholin-
guistics /: –.
Bates, Douglas (). lme: Mixed-effects Modeling with R. New York: Springer.
Bates, Douglas, Martin Maechler, Ben Bolker, and Steven Walker (). ‘lme: linear mixed-
effects models using “Eigen” and S’ (version .–) [R package].
Bates, Douglas, Martin Maechler, Ben Bolker, and Steven Walker (). ‘lme: linear mixed-
effects models using “Eigen” and S’ (version .–) [R package].
Beckman, Jill (). ‘Positional faithfulness, positional neutralisation and Shona height
harmony’, Phonology /: –.
Beckman, Jill (). Positional Faithfulness: an Optimality Theoretic Treatment of Phono-
logical Asymmetries. New York: Garland.

References

Beckman, Mary (). Stress and Non-Stress Accent. Dordrecht: Foris.
Beckman, Mary and Jan Edwards (). ‘Lengthenings and shortenings and the nature of
prosodic constituency’, in John Kingston and Mary Beckman (eds), Papers in Laboratory
Phonology I: Between the Grammar and Physics of Speech. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, –.
Beckman, Mary, Jan Edwards, and Janet Fletcher (). ‘Prosodic structure and tempo in a
sonority model of articulatory dynamics’, in Gerard J. Docherty and D. Robert Ladd (eds),
Papers in Laboratory Phonology II: Gesture, Segment, Prosody. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, –.
Beckman, Mary, Manuel Díaz-Campos, Julia Tevis McGory, and Terrell A. Morgan
(). ‘Intonation across Spanish, in the Tones and Break Indices framework’, Probus
: –.
Beddor, Patrice S. (). Phonological and Phonetic Effects of Nasalisation on Vowel Height.
PhD dissertation, University of Minnesota (). Reproduced by Indiana University
Linguistics Club ().
Beddor, Patrice S. (). ‘A coarticulatory path to sound change’, Language /: –.
Beller, Grégory (). ‘Transformation of expressivity in speech’, in Sylvie Hancil (ed.), The
Role of Prosody in Affective Speech. Bern: Peter Lang, –.
Beltran Calvo, Vicent (). Estudi geolingüístic dels parlars de la Marina Alta: L’empremta
mallorquina. Ondara/Pedreguer: MACMA–IECMA.
Beltran Calvo, Vicent and Teresa Herrero Lloret (a). Estudi geolingüístic dels parlars de la
Marina Baixa. Ondara/Pedreguer: MACMA–IECMA.
Beltran Calvo, Vicent and Teresa Herrero Lloret (b). Atles lingüístic de la Marina
(ALMAR). Ondara/Pedreguer: MACMA–IECMA.
Benua, Laura (). Phonological Relations between Words. New York: Garland.
Bermúdez-Otero, Ricardo (). ‘The acquisition of phonological opacity’, in Jennifer
Spenader, Anders Eriksson, and Östen Dahl (eds), Variation within Optimality Theory:
Proceedings of the Stockholm Workshop on ‘Variation in Optimality Theory’. Stockholm:
Department of Linguistics, Stockholm University, –.
Bermúdez-Otero, Ricardo (). ‘Morphological structure and phonological domains in
Spanish denominal derivation’, in Fernando Martínez-Gil and Sonia Colina (eds),
Optimality-Theoretic Studies in Spanish Phonology. Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins,
–.
Bermúdez-Otero, Ricardo (). ‘Diachronic phonology’, in Paul de Lacy (ed.), The Cambridge
Handbook of Phonology. New York: Cambridge University Press, –.
Bermúdez-Otero, Ricardo (). ‘Cyclicity’, in Marc van Oostendorp, Colin J. Ewen, Elizabeth
Hume, and Keren Rice (eds), The Blackwell Companion to Phonology, Vol. : Phonological
Interfaces. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, –.
Bermúdez-Otero, Ricardo (). ‘The architecture of grammar and the division of labor in
exponence’, in Jochen Trommer (ed.), The Morphology and Phonology of Exponence.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, –.
Bermúdez-Otero, Ricardo (). ‘Stratal Phonology’, in S. J. Hannahs and Anna R. K. Bosch
(eds), The Routledge Handbook of Phonological Theory. Abingdon: Routledge.
Bermúdez-Otero, Ricardo (forthcoming). Stratal Optimality Theory. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
References


Bermúdez-Otero, Ricardo and April McMahon (). ‘English phonology and morphology’,
in Bas Aarts and April McMahon (eds), The Handbook of English Linguistics. Oxford:
Blackwell, –.
Bertinetto, Pier Marco, Cristina Burani, Alessandro Laudanna, Lucia Marconi, Daniela Ratti,
Claudia Rolando, and Anna Maria Thornton (). Corpus e Lessico di Frequenza dell’I-
taliano Scritto (CoLFIS).
Bertinetto, Pier Marco and Michele Loporcaro (). ‘The sound pattern of Standard Italian,
as compared with the varieties spoken in Florence, Milan and Rome’, Journal of the
International Phonetic Association /: –.
Bertoncini, Josiane and Jacques Mehler (). ‘Syllables as units in infant perception’, Infant
Behavior and Development /: –.
Best, Catherine T. (). ‘The emergence of native-language phonological inﬂuences in
infants:
a
perceptual
assimilation
model’,
in
Judith
C.
Goodman
and
Howard
C. Nausbaum (eds), The Development of Speech Perception: the Transition from Speech
Sounds to Spoken Words. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, –.
Best, Catherine T. (). ‘A direct realist perspective of cross-language speech perception’, in
Winifred Strange (ed.), Speech Perception and Linguistic Experience: Issues in Cross-
Language Research. Timonium, MD: York Press, –.
Best, Catherine T. and Michael D. Tyler (). ‘Nonnative and second-language speech
perception: commonalities and complementarities’, in Ocke-Schwen Bohn and Murray
J. Munró (eds), Language Experience in Second Language Speech Learning: in Honor of
James Emil Flege. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, –.
Best, Catherine T., Gerald W. McRoberts, and Elizabeth Goodell (). ‘Discrimination of
non-native consonant contrasts varying in perceptual assimilation to the listener’s native
phonological system’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, /: –.
Best, Catherine T., Pierre Hallé, Ocke-Schwen Bohn, and Alice Faber (). ‘Cross-language
perception of nonnative vowels: phonological and phonetic effects of listeners’ native
languages’, in Maria-Josep Solé, Daniel Recasens, and Joaquín Romero (eds), Proceedings
of the th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences. Barcelona: Causal Productions,
–.
Beyssade, Claire, Barbara Hemforth, Jean-Marie Marandin, and Cristel Portes (). ‘Pros-
odic markings of information focus in French’, in Hi-Yoon Yoo and Elisabeth Delais-
Roussarie (eds), Actes d’IDP . Paris, –.
Bibiloni, Gabriel (). La llengua dels mallorquins: anàlisi sociolingüística. PhD dissertation.
Universitat de Barcelona.
Billières, Michel (). ‘Crible phonique, crible psychologique et intégration phonétique en
langue seconde’, Travaux de didactique du Français Langue Étrangère : –.
Blas-Arroyo, José Luis (). ‘Spanish and Catalan in the Balearic Islands’, International
Journal of the Sociology of Language : –.
Blecua, Beatriz (). Las vibrantes del español: manifestaciones acústicas y procesos fonéticos.
PhD dissertation. Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona.
Blecua, Beatriz (). ‘Estudio acústico de la vibrante en posición implosiva’, in Filología y
lingüística. Estudios ofrecidos a Antonio Quilis, Madrid: CSIC, UNED y Universidad de
Valladolid, –.

References

Blecua, Beatriz, Jordi Cicres, and Juana Gil (). ‘Variación en las róticas del español y su
implicación en la identiﬁcación del locutor’, Revista de Filología Románica [sp. issue] : –.
Blevins, Juliette (). Evolutionary Phonology: the Emergence of Sound Patterns. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Blevins, Juliette (ed.) (). Phonology . . Thematic issue. Synchrony and Diachrony in
Phonology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Blumenfeld, Lev (). ‘Russian palatalization in stratal OT: Morphology and [back]’, in
Wayles Browne, Ji-yung Kim, Barbara H. Partee, and Robert A. Rothstein (eds), Annual
Workshop on Formal Approaches to Slavic Linguistics: The Amherst Meeting . Ann
Arbor, MI: Michigan Slavic Publications, –.
Boersma, Paul (). ‘Praat, a system for doing phonetics by computer’, Glott International
/–: –.
Bohn, Ocke-Schwen and James Emil Flege (). ‘Interlingual identiﬁcation and the role of
foreign language experience in Lvowel perception’, Applied Psycholinguistics /: –.
Bohn, Ocke-Schwen and James Emil Flege (). ‘The production of new and similar vowels
by adult German learners of English’, Studies in Second Language Acquisition /: –.
Boix, Emili and Francesc Xavier Vila (). Sociolingüística de la llengua catalana. Barcelona:
Ariel.
Bolinger, Dwight (). Intonation and its Parts: Melody in Spoken English. London: Edward
Arnold.
Bombien, Lasse, Christine Mooshammer, and Philip Hoole (). ‘Articulatory coordination
in word-initial clusters of German’, Journal of Phonetics /: –.
Bonet, Eulàlia, Maria-Rosa Lloret, and Joan Mascaró (). ‘Allomorph selection and lexical
preferences: two case studies’, Lingua /: –.
Boomershine, Amanda (). ‘The perception of English vowels by monolingual, bilingual,
and heritage speakers of Spanish and English’, in Chad Howe, Sarah E. Blackwell, and
Margaret Lubbers Quesada (eds), Selected Proceedings of the th Hispanic Linguistics
Symposium. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Proceedings Project, –.
Borrell, André and Jeanne Salsignac (). ‘Importance de la prosodie en didactique des
langues (application au FLE)’, in Raymond Renard (ed.), Apprentissage d’une langue
étrangère/seconde. . La phonétique verbo-tonale. Brussels: De Boeck Université, –.
Borzone de Manrique, Ana María, and María Ignacia Massone (). ‘Acoustic analysis and
perception of Spanish fricative consonants’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America :
–.
Bosch, Laura and Marta Ramon-Casas (). ‘Variability in vowel production by bilingual
speakers: can input properties hinder the early stabilization of contrastive categories?’,
Journal of Phonetics /: –.
Bosch, Laura and Marta Ramon-Casas (). ‘First translation equivalents in bilingual
toddlers’ expressive vocabulary: does form similarity matter?’, International Journal of
Behavioral Development /: –.
Bosch, Laura and Núria Sebastián-Gallés (). ‘Native-language recognition abilities in
-month-old infants from monolingual and bilingual environments’, Cognition /: –.
Bosch, Laura and Núria Sebastián-Gallés (a). ‘Evidence of early language discrimination
abilities in infants from bilingual environments’, Infancy /: –.
References


Bosch, Laura and Núria Sebastián-Gallés (b). ‘Early language differentiation in bilingual
infants’, in Jasone Cenoz and Fred Genesee (eds), Trends in Bilingual Acquisition. Amsterdam:
John Benjamins, –.
Bosch, Laura and Núria Sebastián-Gallés (a). ‘Simultaneous bilingualism and the
perception of a language-speciﬁc vowel contrast in the ﬁrst year of life’, Language and
Speech /–: –.
Bosch, Laura and Núria Sebastián-Gallés (b). ‘Language experience and the perception of
a voicing contrast in fricatives: infant and adult data’, in Maria-Josep Solé, Daniel Recasens,
and Joaquín Romero (eds), Proceedings of the th International Congress of Phonetic
Sciences. Barcelona: Causal Productions, –.
Bosch, Laura, Albert Costa, and Núria Sebastián-Gallés (). ‘First and second language
vowel perception in early bilinguals’, European Journal of Cognitive Psychology /:
–.
Bosch, Laura, Melània Figueras, Maria Teixidó, and Marta Ramon-Casas (). ‘Rapid gains
in segmenting ﬂuent speech when words match the rhythmic unit: evidence from infants
acquiring syllable-timed languages’, Frontiers in Psychology :.
Bradley, Travis G. (). ‘Gestural timing and rhotic variation in Spanish codas’, in Timothy
L. Face (ed.), Laboratory Approaches to Spanish Phonology. Berlin: de Gruyter Mouton,
–.
Bradley, Travis G. (in press). ‘Consonantes róticas: descripción fonética’, in Juana Gil Fernán-
dez and Joaquim Llisterri (eds), Fonética y fonología descriptivas de la lengua española.
Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientíﬁcas, chapter .
Bradley, Travis G. and Erik W. Willis (). ‘Rhotic variation and contrast in Veracruz
Mexican Spanish’, Estudios de Fonética Experimental : –.
Bradlow, Ann R. (). ‘A perceptual comparison of the /i/–/e/ and /u/–/o/ contrasts in
English and in Spanish: universal and language-speciﬁc aspects’, Phonetica /–: –.
Bradlow, Ann R., Gina M. Torretta, and David B. Pisoni (). ‘Intelligibility of normal
speech I: global and ﬁne grained acoustic-phonetic talker characteristics’, Speech Commu-
nication /–: –.
Brazeal, Jason (). Onset Fortition in Pinarejo Spanish. MA thesis. University of Texas.
Brent, Michael R. and Jeffrey M. Siskind (). ‘The role of exposure to isolated words in early
vocabulary development’, Cognition /: B–B.
Brescancini, Claudia and Valéria N. O. Monaretto (). ‘Os róticos no sul do Brasil:
panorama e generalizações’, Signum: Estudos Linguísticos /: –.
Broersma, Mirjam (). ‘Comprehension of non-native speech: inaccurate phoneme pro-
cessing and activation of lexical competitors’, in Proceedings of the th International
Conference on Spoken Language Processing. Boulder, CO: Center for Spoken Language
Research, –.
Browman, Catherine P. and Louis Goldstein (). ‘Dynamic modeling of phonetic structure’,
in Victoria A. Fromkin (ed.), Phonetic Linguistics: Essays in Honor of Peter Ladefoged. New
York: Academic Press, –.
Browman, Catherine P. and Louis Goldstein (). ‘Some notes on syllable structure in
articulatory phonology’, Phonetica : –.
Browman, Catherine P. and Louis Goldstein (). ‘Articulatory gestures as phonological
units’, Phonology /: –.

References

Browman, Catherine P. and Louis Goldstein (). ‘Tiers in Articulatory Phonology, with
some implications for casual speech’, in John Kingston and Mary Beckman (eds), Papers in
Laboratory Phonology I: Between the Grammar and Physics of Speech. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, –.
Browman, Catherine P. and Louis Goldstein (). ‘Competing constraints on intergestural
coordination and self-organization of phonological structures’, Bulletin de la Communication
Parlée : –.
Bundgaard-Nielsen, Rikke L., Catherine T. Best, and Michael D. Tyler (). ‘Vocabulary size
matters: the assimilation of second-language Australian English vowels to ﬁrst-language
Japanese vowel categories’, Applied Psycholinguistics /: –.
Burns, Tracey C., Katherine A. Yoshida, Karen Hill, and Janet F. Werker (). ‘The
development of phonetic representation in bilingual and monolingual infants’, Applied
Psycholinguistics /: –.
Byers-Heinlein, Krista and Christopher C. Fennell (). ‘Perceptual narrowing in the context
of increased variation: insights from bilingual infants’, Developmental Psychobiology /:
–.
Byers-Heinlein, Krista, Tracey C. Burns, and Janet F. Werker (). ‘The roots of bilingualism
in newborns’, Psychological Science /: –.
Byrd, Dani (). ‘Articulatory characteristics of single and blended lingual gestures’, in Kjell
Elenius and Peter Branderud (eds), Proceedings of the th International Congress of
Phonetic Sciences, Stockholm, –.
Byrd, Dani and Susie Choi (). ‘At the junction of prosody, phonology, and phonetics: the
interaction of phrasal and syllable structure in shaping the timing of consonant gestures’, in
Cécile Fougeron, Barbara Kühnert, Mariapaola D’Imperio, and Nathalie Vallée (eds),
Laboratory Phonology . Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton, –.
Byrd, Dani and Elliot Saltzman (). ‘Intragestural dynamics of multiple prosodic bound-
aries’, Journal of Phonetics /: –.
Byrd, Dani and Elliot Saltzman (). ‘The elastic phrase: modeling the dynamics of
boundary-adjacent lengthening’, Journal of Phonetics /: –.
Byrd, Dani, Sungbok Lee, and Rebeka Campos-Astorkiza (). ‘Phrase boundary effects on
the temporal kinematics of sequential tongue tip consonants’, Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America : –.
Byrd, Dani, Abigail Kaun, Shrikanth S. Narayanan, and Elliot Saltzman (). ‘Phrasal signa-
tures in articulation’, in Michael B. Broe and Janet Pierrehumbert (eds), Papers in Laboratory
Phonology V: Acquisition and the Lexicon. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, –.
Cagliari, Luiz Carlos (). Elementos de fonética do Português Brasileiro. Free-docency thesis.
Campinas: UNICAMP.
Calamai, Silvia (). ‘Tuscan between standard and vernacular: a sociophonetic perspective’,
in Massimo Cerruti, Claudia Crocco, and Stefania Marzo (eds), Towards a New Standard:
Theoretical and Empirical Studies on the Restandardization of Italian. Berlin: De Gruyter
Mouton, –.
Calamai, Silvia and Chiara Celata (). ‘Velar nasals in sound change. On the phonetic
origin of Florentine anaphonesis’, in Daniel Recasens and Fernando Sànchez Miret (eds),
Production and Perception Mechanisms of Sound Change. Munich: LINCOM Europa,
–.
References


Callou, Dinah (). Variação e Distribuição da Vibrante na Fala Urbana Culta do Rio de
Janeiro. Rio de Janeiro: UFRJ/PROED.
Callou, Dinah, Yonne Leite, and João Moraes (). ‘Apagamento do “R” ﬁnal no dialeto
carioca: um estudo em tempo aparente e em tempo real’, DELTA: Documentação de Estudos
em Lingüística Teórica e Aplicada [sp. issue]: –.
Callou, Dinah, Yonne Leite, and João Moraes (a). ‘Processo(s) de enfraquecimento
consonantal no português do Brasil’, in Maria B. C. Abaurre and Angela Rodrigues (orgs),
Gramática do Português Falado VIII: Novos Estudos Descritivos. Campinas: UNICAMP/
FAPERSP, –.
Callou, Dinah, Yonne Leite, and João Moraes (b). ‘Variação e diferenciação dialetal: a
pronúncia do /R/ no Português do Brasil’, in Ingedore G. Villaça Koch (ed.), Gramática
do Português Falado VI: Desenvolvimentos. Campinas: UNICAMP, –.
Callou, Dinah, João Moraes, and Yonne Leite (). ‘Para Uma Nova Dialectologia:
A Realizacao do -S e do -R Pós-vocálicos no Português do Brasil’, Anais do Congresso
Internacional sobre o Português, –.
Callou, Dinah, Carolina Serra, and Claudia Cunha (). ‘Mudança em curso no Português
Brasileiro’, Revista da ABRALIN, /: –.
Câmara Jr, J. M. (, rd edn). Estrutura da Língua Portuguesa. Petrópolis: Vozes.
Campos-Astorkiza, Rebeka (). ‘Sibilant voicing assimilation in Peninsular Spanish as
gestural blending’, in Marie-Hélène Côte and E. Mathieu (eds), Variation within and across
Romance Languages; Selected Papers from the st Linguistic Symposium on Romance
Languages (LSRL). Ottawa, -May . John Benjamins, –.
Campos-Astorkiza, Rebeka (). ‘Segmental and prosodic conditionings on gradient voicing
assimilation in Spanish’, in Rachel Klassen, Juana M. Liceras, and Elena Valenzuela (eds),
Hispanic Linguistics at the Crossroads: Theoretical Linguistics, Language Acquisition and
Language Contact. Proceedings of the Hispanic Linguistics Symposium . John Benjamins,
–.
Canellada, María Josefa and John Kuhlman-Madsen (). Pronunciación del español: lengua
hablada y literaria. Madrid: Castalia.
Canepari, Luciano (). Italiano standard e pronunce regionali. Padova: CLEUP.
Canepari, Luciano (). Il MaPi: manuale di pronuncia italiana. Bologna: Zanichelli.
Canﬁeld, D. Lincoln (). Observaciones sobre el español salvadoreño. Buenos Aires: Uni-
versidad de Buenos Aires.
Canﬁeld, D. Lincoln (). Spanish Pronunciation in the Americas. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Carballo Calero, Ricardo (, th edn). Gramática elemental del gallego común. Vigo:
Galaxia.
Cardeira, Esperança (). ‘Alguns dados sobre o sistema de sibilantes do português’, in Ivo
Castro e Inês Duarte (eds), Razões e emoção. Miscelânea de estudos oferecida a Maria Helena
Mateus. Lisbon: Imprensa Nacional–Casa da Moeda, –.
Carlisle, Robert S. (). ‘The inﬂuence of environment on vowel epenthesis in Spanish/
English interphonology’, Applied Linguistics /: –.
Carlisle, Robert S. (). ‘Environment and markedness as interacting constraints on vowel
epenthesis’, in Jonathan Leather and Allan James (eds), New Sounds . Proceedings of the

References

Amsterdam Symposium on the Acquisition of Second-language Speech. Amsterdam:
University of Amsterdam Press, –.
Carlisle, Robert S. (). ‘Markedness and environment as internal constraints in the vari-
ability of interlanguage phonology’, in Mehmet S. Yavaş (ed.), First and Second Language
Phonology. San Diego, CA: Singular, –.
Carlisle, Robert S. (). ‘The acquisition of onsets in a markedness relationship: a longitu-
dinal study’, Studies in Second Language Acquisition /: –.
Carton, Fernand (). Introduction à la phonétique du français. Paris: Bordas.
Carvalho, Joaquim Brandão de (). ‘Nasalité et structure syllabique en portugais et en
galicien: approche non linéaire et panchronique d’un problème phonologique’, Verba
: –.
Castellani, Arrigo (ed.) (). Nuovi testi ﬁorentini del Dugento. Florence: Sansoni.
Castellani, Arrigo ([] ). ‘Sulla formazione del tipo fonetico italiano’, in Saggi di
linguistica e ﬁlologia italiana e romanza –. Rome: Salerno, –.
Castellani, Arrigo (). Grammatica storica della lingua italiana I: Introduzione. Bologna:
Il Mulino.
Celata, Chiara (). ‘Per una sociofonetica sperimentale delle lingue romanze: la variabile (r)
a Modica’, in Francesco Paolo Macaluso (ed.), La lingua variabile nei testi letterari, artistici e
funzionali contemporanei: analisi, interpretazione, traduzione. Atti del XIII Congresso della
SILFI. Palermo: CSFLS, –.
Celata, Chiara and Silvia Calamai (). ‘Timing in Italian VNC sequences at different speech
rates’, in Proceedings of the th Annual Conference of the International Speech Communi-
cation Association (Interspeech ). Florence, –.
Celata, Chiara and Lidia Costamagna (). ‘Geminate timing in the speech of Estonian L
learners of Italian’, in Anna De Meo and Massimo Pettorino (eds), Prosodic and Rhythmic
Aspects of LAcquisition: the Case of Italian. Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars,
–.
Celata, Chiara, Chiara Meluzzi, and Irene Ricci (). ‘The sociophonetics of rhotic variation
in Sicilian dialects and Sicilian Italian: Corpus, methodology and ﬁrst results’, Loquens ()
doi: http://dx.doi.org/./loquens..
Cenoz, Jasone (). ‘The effect of linguistic distance, Lstatus and age on cross-linguistic
inﬂuence in third language acquisition’, in Jasone Cenoz, Britta Hufeisen, and Ulrike Jessner
(eds), Cross-linguistic Inﬂuence in Third Language Acquisition: Psycholinguistic Perspectives.
Clevedon: Multilingual Matters, –.
Chafcouloff, Michel and Alain Marchal (). ‘Velopharyngeal coarticulation’, in William
J. Hardcastle and Nigel Hewlett (eds), Coarticulation: Theory, Data and Techniques. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, –.
Chappell, Whitney (). ‘The intervocalic voicing of /s/ in Ecuadorian Spanish’, in Jim
Michnowicz and Robin Dodsworth (eds), Selected Proceedings of the th Workshop on
Spanish Sociolinguistics. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Proceedings, –.
Chela-Flores, Bertha (). Functional Unity of Phonological Rules in Venezuelan Spanish.
Unpublished Ms. Thesis. University of York.
Chen, Cheng, Chiara Celata, and Irene Ricci (). ‘An EPG + UTI study of syllable onset and
coda coordination and coarticulation in Italian’, in Chiara Bertini, Chiara Celata, Giovanna
References


Lenoci, Chiara Meluzzi, and Irene Ricci (eds), Fattori sociali e biologici nella variazione
fonetica—Social and biological factors in speech variation. Milano: Ofﬁcinaventuno. –.
Chiswick, Barry R. and Paul W. Miller (). ‘Linguistic distance: a quantitative measure of
the distance between English and other languages’, Journal of Multilingual and Multicul-
tural Development /: –.
Chitoran, Ioana (). The Phonology of Romanian: a Constraint-based Approach. Berlin: de
Gruyter Mouton.
Chitoran, Ioana (a). ‘The phonology and morphology of Romanian diphthongization’,
Probus /: –.
Chitoran, Ioana (b). ‘A perception-production study of Romanian diphthongs and glide-
vowel sequences’, Journal of the International Phonetic Association /: –.
Chitoran, Ioana and José Ignacio Hualde (). ‘From hiatus to diphthong: the evolution of
vowel sequences in Romance’, Phonology /: –.
Chládková, Kateřina and Paola Escudero (). ‘Comparing vowel perception and produc-
tion in Spanish and Portuguese: European versus Latin American dialects’, Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America /: EL–EL.
Chládková, Kateřina, Paola Escudero, and Paul Boersma (). ‘Context-speciﬁc acoustic
differences between Peruvian and Iberian Spanish vowels’, Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America /: –.
Cho, Taehong (). ‘Manifestation of prosodic structure in articulation: evidence from lip
kinematics in English’, in Louis Goldstein, Douglas H. Whalen, and Catherine T. Best (eds),
Laboratory Phonology . Berlin: de Gruyter Mouton, –.
Cho, Taehong, Sun-Ah Jun, and Peter Ladefoged (). ‘Acoustic and aerodynamic correlates
of Korean stops and fricatives’, Journal of Phonetics /: –.
Cicres, Jordi and Beatriz Blecua (). ‘Caracterización acústica de las róticas fricativas
prepausales en español peninsular’, Loquens /, e.
Cintra, Luís F. Lindley (). ‘Nova proposta de classiﬁcação dos dialectos galego-
portugueses’, Boletim de Filologia : –.
Ciocca, Valter and Tara L. Whitehill (). ‘The acoustic measurement of vowels’, in Martin
J. Ball and Fiona E. Gibbon (eds), Handbook of Vowels and Vowel Disorders. New York:
Psychology Press, Taylor & Francis Group, –.
Cirigliano, Ricardo J. R., Clarisse Monteiro, Filipe Leandro de F. Barbosa, Fernando
G. V. Resende Jr, Letícia R. Couto, and João A. Moraes (). ‘Um conjunto de 
frases foneticamente balanceadas para o Português Brasileiro obtido utilizando a abordagem
de algoritmos genéticos’, in Anais do XXII Simpósio Brasileiro de Telecomunicações. Cam-
pinas: Sociedade Brasileira de Telecomunicações, –.
Clackson, James, and Geoffrey Horrocks (). The Blackwell History of the Latin Language.
Oxford: Wiley Blackwell.
Clemente, Felipe C. (). Retroﬂexão gradiente nos róticos em coda no PB de Curitiba. MA
thesis. Universidade Federal do Paraná.
Clements, George Nick (). ‘The role of the sonority cycle in core syllabiﬁcation’, in John
Kingston and Mary Beckman (eds), Papers in Laboratory Phonology : Between the Grammar
and Physics of Speech. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, –.
Clifford, Brian R. (). ‘Voice identiﬁcation by human listeners: on earwitness reliability’,
Law and Human Behavior /: –.

References

Clopper, Cynthia G. and David B. Pisoni (). ‘Some acoustic cues for the perceptual
categorization of American English regional dialects’, Journal of Phonetics /: –.
Cobb, Katherine and Miquel Simonet (). ‘Adult second language learning of Spanish
vowels’, Hispania /: –.
Colantoni, Laura, Jeffrey Steele, and Paola Escudero (). Second Language Speech: Theory
and Practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cole, Jennifer, José Ignacio Hualde, and Khalil Iskarous (). ‘Effects of prosodic
and segmental context on /g/-lenition in Spanish’, in Osamu Fujimura, Brian D. Joseph,
and Bohumil Palek (eds), Proceedings of the Fourth International Linguistics and Phon-
etics Conference. Item Order in Language and Speech. Prague: The Karolinum Press,
–.
Cole, Jennifer, Timothy Mahrt, and Joseph Roy (). New methods of crowd-sourcing for
prosodic annotation: inter-annotator agreement, individual differences, and sources of
variation [paper]. Experimental and Theoretical Advances in Prosody (ETAP) , University
of Illinois, May –, .
Cole, Jennifer, Yoonsook Mo, and Soondo Baek (). ‘The role of syntactic structure in
guiding prosody perception with ordinary listeners and everyday speech’, Language and
Cognitive Processes /–: –.
Cole, Jennifer, Yoonsook Mo, and Mark Hasegawa-Johnson (). ‘Signal-based and
expectation-based factors in the perception of prosodic prominence’, Laboratory Phonology
/: –.
Colina, Sonia (). ‘Epenthesis and deletion in Galician: an optimality–theoretic approach’,
in Fernando Martínez-Gil and Alfonso Morales-Front (eds), Issues in the Phonology and
Morphology of the Major Iberian Languages. Washington, DC: Georgetown University
Press, –.
Colina, Sonia (). Spanish Phonology. A Syllabic Perspective. Washington, DC: Georgetown
University Press.
Collie, Sarah (). English Stress Preservation and Stratal Optimality Theory. Doctoral thesis.
University of Edinburgh.
Colomina Castanyer, Jordi (). L’alacantí. Un estudi sobre la variació lingüística. Alicante:
Institut d’Estudis ‘Juan Gil-Albert’–Diputació Provincial d’Alacant.
Colomina Castanyer, Jordi (). El valencià de la Marina Baixa. Valencia: Conselleria de
Cultura, Educació i Ciència.
Contini, Michel and Silvia Gally (). Special session: R sounds in linguistic atlases. The role
of rhotics in the deﬁnition of dialectal areas [talk]. ’R-atics: Fourth International Symposium
on Rhotics, Bernin (Grenoble), –October .
Contini, Michel, Ana Maria Martins, Olga Proﬁli, João Saramago, and Gabriela Vitorino
(). ‘L’analyse phonologique des parlers romans dans le cadre de l’A.L.I.R.’, Géolinguis-
tique : –.
Contreras Jurado, A. (). ‘Vocales abiertas del plural en andaluz oriental ¿fonemas o
prosodemas?’, Yelmo : –.
Cooper, Andre M. (). An Articulatory Account of Aspiration in English. PhD dissertation.
Yale University.
Cortés, Susana, Conxita Lleó, and Ariadna Benet (). ‘Gradient merging of vowels in
Barcelona Catalan under the inﬂuence of Spanish’, in Kurt Braunmüller and Juliane
References


House (eds), Convergence and Divergence in Language Contact Situations. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins, –.
Costa, Albert and Núria Sebastián-Gallés (). ‘How does the bilingual experience sculpt the
brain?’, Nature Reviews Neuroscience /: –.
Costa Casas, Xoán Xosé, María dos Anxos González Refoxo, César Carlos Morán Fraga, and
Xoán Carlos Rábade Castiñeira (). Nova gramática para a aprendizaxe da língua.
A Coruña: Vía Láctea.
Couceiro, Xosé Luis (). El habla de Feás. Anexo de Verba. Santiago de Compostela:
Universidade de Santiago de Compostela.
Cressey, William W. (). Spanish Phonology and Morphology: a Generative View. Wash-
ington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Crosswhite, Katherine (). Vowel Reduction in Optimality Theory. New York: Routledge.
Crosswhite, Katherine M. (). ‘Vowel reduction’, in Bruce Hayes, Robert Kirchner, and
Donca Steriade (eds), Phonetically Based Phonology. New York: Cambridge University
Press, –.
Crowther, Court S. and Virginia Mann (). ‘Native language factors affecting use of vocalic
cues to ﬁnal consonant voicing in English’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
: –.
Cuartero Torres, Néstor (). Voicing Assimilation in Catalan and English. PhD dissertation.
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona.
Culbertson, Jennifer (). ‘Convergent evidence for categorial change in French: from
subject clitic to agreement marker’, Language /: –.
Cunha, Conceição (). Die Organisation von Konsonantenclustern und CVC-Sequenzen in
zwei portugiesischen Varietäten. PhD dissertation. Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität.
Curtin, Suzanne, Krista Byers-Heinlein, and Janet F. Werker (). ‘Bilingual beginnings as a
lens for theory development: PRIMIR in focus’, Journal of Phonetics /: –.
D’Achille, Paolo (). ‘Il Lazio’, in Manlio Cortelazzo, Carla Marcato, Nicola De Blasi, and
Gianrenzo P. Clivio (eds), I dialetti italiani. Storia, struttura, uso. Turin: UTET, –.
d’Andrade, Ernesto, and Maria Celeste Rodrigues (). ‘Das escolas e das culturas: história
de uma sequência consonântica’, in Ana Cristina Macário Lopes and Cristina Martins (eds),
Actas do XIV Encontro Nacional da Associação Portuguesa de Linguística, Braga: Associação
Portuguesa de Linguística, –.
D’Angelis, Wilmar R. (). ‘Sistema fonológico do Português: rediscutindo o consenso’,
DELTA: Documentação de Estudos em Lingüística Teórica e Aplicada /: –.
D’Imperio, Mariapaola and Amandine Michelas (). ‘Pitch scaling and the internal struc-
turing of the Intonation Phrase in French’, Phonology /: –.
D’Imperio, Mariapaola, Roxane Bertrand, Albert Di Cristo, and Cristel Portes (). ‘The
phonology and phonetics of prenuclear and nuclear accents in French’, in Antonis Botinis
(ed.), Proceedings of ISCA Tutorial and Research Workshop on Experimental Linguistics.
Athens, –.
D’Imperio, Mariapaola, Roxane Bertrand, Albert Di Cristo, and Cristel Portes (). ‘Inves-
tigating phrasing levels in French: is there a difference between nuclear and prenuclear
accents?’, in José Camacho, Nydia Flores-Ferrán, Liliana Sánchez, Viviane Déprez, and
María José Cabrera, Romance Linguistics . Selected Papers From The th Linguistic
Symposium On Romance Languages (LSRL). New Brunswick: John Benjamins, –.

References

D’Imperio, Mariapaola, Gorka Elordieta, Sónia Frota, Pilar Prieto, and Marina Vigário ().
‘Intonational phrasing in Romance: the role of syntactic and prosodic structure’, in Sónia
Frota, Marina Vigário, and Maria João Freitas (eds), Prosodies. With Special Reference to
Iberian Languages. Berlin: de Gruyter Mouton, –.
Darias Concepción, José Luis, María Del Carmen Ruisánchez Regalado, and Puica Dohotaru
(). ‘El proceso de la velarización del fonema nasal distensivo en el español de Pinar del
Río-Enfoque sociolingüístico’, Romanistisches Jahrbuch /: –.
Dart, Sarah N. (). ‘Comparing French and English coronal consonant articulation’,
Journal of Phonetics /: –.
Dauer, Rebecca M. (). Stress and Rhythm in Modern Greek. PhD thesis. University of
Edinburgh.
Davidson, Lisa (). ‘Comparing tongue shapes from ultrasound imagining using smoothing
spline analysis of variance’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America /: –.
Davidson, Lisa and Maureen Stone (). ‘Epenthesis versus gestural mistiming in consonant
cluster production: an ultrasound study’, in Gina Garding and Mimu Tsujimura (eds),
Proceedings of the nd West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics. Somerville, MA:
Cascadilla Press, –.
DCVB = Alcover, Antoni Maria, and Francesc de Borja Moll (–). Diccionari català-
valencià-balear, vols. [Online version]. Palma de Mallorca: Imprenta de Mn. Alcover–
Gràﬁques Miramar. Available at http://dcvb.iecat.net.
de Cat, Cécile (). French Dislocation. Interpretation, Syntax, Acquisition. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
de Jong, Kenneth (). ‘Stress-related variation in the articulation of coda alveolar stops:
ﬂapping revisited’, Journal of Phonetics /: –.
de Lacy, Paul and Caro Struijke (). Explaining overkill in dissimilation [paper]. North-
Eastern Linguistics Society Conference , Georgetown University, Washington, DC,
October –, .
Dehaene-Lambertz, Ghislaine, Emmanuel Dupoux, and A. Gout (). ‘Electrophysiological
correlates of phonological processing: a cross-linguistic study’, Journal of Cognitive Neuro-
science /: –.
Delais-Roussarie, Elisabeth (). ‘Vers une nouvelle approche de la structure prosodique’,
Langue Française : –.
Delais-Roussarie, Elisabeth and Hi-Yon Yoo (). ‘The COREIL corpus: a learner corpus
designed for studying phrasal phonology and intonation’, in Katarzyna Dziubalska-
Kołaczyk, Magdalena Wrembel, and Małgorzata Kul (eds), Proceedings of the Sixth
International Symposium on the Acquisition of Second Language Speech, New Sounds
. Poznań: Adam Mickiewicz University, –.
Delais-Roussarie, Elisabeth, Hiyon Yoo, and Brechtje Post (). ‘Quand frontières prosodi-
ques et frontières syntaxiques se rencontrent’, Langue Française [Unités Syntaxiques et
Unités Prosodiques], /: –.
Delais-Roussarie, Elisabeth, Annie Rialland, Jenny Doetjes, and Jean-Marie Marandin ().
‘The prosody of post-focus sequences in French’, Proceedings of Speech Prosody .
Aix-en-Provence, –.
Delais-Roussarie, Elisabeth, Brechtje Post, Mathieu Avanzi, Carolin Buthke, Albert Di Cristo,
Ingo Feldhausen, Sun-Ah Jun, Philippe Martin, Trudel Meisenburg, Annie Rialland, Rafèu
References


Sichel-Bazin, and Hiyon Yoo (). ‘Intonational phonology of French: developing a ToBI
system for French’, in Sónia Frota and Pilar Prieto (eds), Intonation in Romance. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, –.
Delattre, Pierre (). ‘An acoustic and articulatory study of vowel reduction in four
languages’, International Review of Applied Linguistics in Language Teaching /: –.
Deller, John R., John G. Proakis, and John H. L. Hansen (). Discrete-Time Processing of
Speech Signals. New York: Macmillan.
Derwing, Tracey M., and Murray J. Munro (). Pronunciation fundamentals. Evidence-based
Perspectives for LTeaching and Research. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Detey, Sylvain (). Interphonologie et représentations orthographiques. Du rôle de l’écrit
dans l’enseignement/apprentissage du français oral chez des étudiants japonais. PhD Disser-
tation. University of Toulouse Le Mirail.
Detey, Sylvain (). ‘Coding an Lphonological corpus: from perceptual assessment to
non-native speech models–an illustration with French nasal vowels’, in Yukio Tono, Yuji
Kawaguchi, and Makoto Minegishi (eds), Developmental and Crosslinguistic Perspectives in
Learner Corpus Research. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, –.
Detey, Sylvain and Yuji Kawaguchi (). Interphonologie du Français Contemporain
(IPFC): récolte automatisée des données et apprenants japonais. Journées PFC: Phonologie
du français contemporain: variation, interfaces, cognition. Paris, December th–th, .
Detey, Sylvain and Jean-Luc Nespoulous (). ‘Can orthography inﬂuence second language
syllabic segmentation? Japanese epenthetic vowels and French consonantal clusters’, Lingua.
International Review of General Linguistics /: –.
Detey, Sylvain and Isabelle Racine (). ‘The Interphonology of Contemporary French
(IPFC): an international corpus-based Lphonology research programme’, in J. Trouvain,
F. Mitterer, M. Gósy, and A. Bonneau (eds), Book of Extended Abstracts–Satellite Workshop
of ICPhS on Phonetic Learner Corpora, Glasgow, August th, , –.
Detey, Sylvain, Jacques Durand, Bernard Laks, and Chantal Lyche (eds) (). Varieties of
Spoken French. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Detey, Sylvain, Isabelle Racine, Yuji Kawaguchi, and Julien Eychenne (eds) (). La pro-
nonciation du français dans le monde: du natif à l’apprenant. Paris: CLE international.
Detey, Sylvain, Isabelle Racine, Yuji Kawaguchi, and Françoise Zay (). ‘Variation among
non-native speakers: the InterPhonology of Contemporary French’, in Sylvain Detey,
Jacques Durand, Bernard Laks, and Chantal Lyche (eds), Varieties of Spoken French. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, –.
Díaz-Campos, Manuel (). ‘Segmental phonology in second language Spanish’, in Kimberly
L. Geeslin (ed.), Handbook of Spanish Second Language Acquisition. Boston, MA: Wiley-
Blackwell, –.
Díaz Granado, Miriam (). Land LAcquisition of the Portuguese Stressed Vowel
Inventory by Native Speakers of English. PhD dissertation. University of Arizona.
Di Cristo, Albert (). ‘Intonation in French’, in Daniel Hirst and Albert Di Cristo (eds),
Intonation Systems: a Survey of Twenty Languages. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
–.
Di Cristo, Albert (a). ‘Le cadre accentuel du français contemporain: essai de modélisation.
Première partie’, Langues /: –.

References

Di Cristo, Albert (b). ‘Le cadre accentuel du français contemporain: essai de modélisation.
Seconde partie’, Langues /: –.
Di Cristo, Albert (). ‘Vers une modélisation de l’accentuation en Français (seconde
partie)’, Journal of French Language Studies /: –.
Di Cristo, Albert (). ‘Une approche intégrative des relations de l’accentuation au phrasé
prosodique du français’, Journal of French Language Studies /: –.
Dijkstra, Ton, Ulrich Hans Frauenfelder, and Robert Schreuder (). ‘Bidirectional
grapheme–phoneme activation in a bimodal detection task’, Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance /: –.
Dingemanse, M., Damián E. Blasi, Gary Lupyan, Morten H. Christiansen, and Padraic
Monaghan (). ‘Arbitrariness, iconicity and systematicity in language’, Trends in Cognitive
Sciences /: –.
Doetjes, Jenny, Elisabeth Delais-Roussarie, and Petra Sleeman (). ‘The prosody of left
detached constituents in French’, Proceedings of Speech Prosody . Aix-en-Provence,
France, –.
Dolbec, Jean and Serge Santi (). ‘Effets du ﬁltre linguistique sur la perception de l’accent:
étude exploratoire’, TIPA, Travaux Interdisciplinaires du Laboratoire Parole et Langage
d’Aix-en-Provence : –.
Dols, Nicolau (). Teoria fonològica i sil·labiﬁcació. El cas del català de Mallorca. PhD
dissertation. Universitat de les Illes Balears.
Dubert García, Francisco (). Aspectos do galego de Santiago de Compostela. Anexo de
Verba. Santiago de Compostela: Universidade de Santiago de Compostela.
Dubert García, Francisco and Xulio Sousa Fernández (). ‘Áreas lexicais galegas e portu-
guesas. A proposta de Cintra aplicada ao galego’, in Rosario Álvarez, Francisco Dubert
García, and Xulio Sousa Fernández (eds), Dialectoloxía e léxico. Santiago de Compostela:
Consello da Cultura Galega/Instituto da Lingua Galega, –.
Dunlap, Elaine (). Issues in the Moraic Structure of Spanish: a Dissertation. Doctoral
dissertation, University of Massachusetts at Amherst. [Distributed by GLSA, Amherst,
Massachusetts.]
Dunn, Margaret H. (). The Phonetics and Phonology of Geminate Consonants: a Produc-
tion Study. Unpublished PhD dissertation. Yale University.
Dupoux, Emmanuel, Sharon Peperkamp, and Núria Sebastián-Gallés (). ‘A robust
method to study stress “deafness”’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America /:
–.
Dupoux, Emmanuel, Christophe Pallier, Núria Sebastián-Gallés, and Jacques Mehler ().
‘A destressing “deafness” in French?’, Journal of Memory and Language /: –.
Dupoux, Emmanuel, Núria Sebastián-Gallés, Eduardo Navarrete, and Sharon Peperkamp
(). ‘Persistent stress “deafness”: the case of French learners of Spanish’, Cognition
/: –.
Dupoux, Emmanuel, Yuki Hirose, Kazuhiko Kakehi, Christophe Pallier, and Jacques Mehler
(). ‘Epenthetic vowels in Japanese: a perceptual illusion?’, Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance /: –.
Durand, Jacques (). Generative and Non-Linear Phonology. London: Longman Linguistics
Library.
References


Durand, Jacques, Bernard Laks, and Chantal Lyche (). ‘La phonologie du français con-
temporain : usages, variétés et structure’, in Claus D. Pusch and Wolfgang Raible (eds),
Romanistische
Korpuslinguistic—Korpora
und
gesprochene
Sprache/Romance
Corpus
Linguistics—Corpora and Spoken Language. Tübingen: Gunter Narr, –.
Durand, Jacques, Bernard Laks, and Chantal Lyche (). ‘Le projet PFC (Phonologie du
Français Contemporain) : une source de données primaires structurées’, in Jacques Durand,
Bernard Laks, and Chantal Lyche (eds), Phonologie, variation et accents du français. Paris:
Hermès, –.
Dyson, Freeman J. (). TheSun, the Genome, and the Internet. Oxford: OxfordUniversity Press.
Eckman, Fred R. and Gregory K. Iverson (). ‘Sonority and markedness among onset
clusters in the interlanguage of ESL learners’, Second Language Research /: –.
Elliot, A. Raymond (). ‘On the teaching and acquisition of pronunciation within a
communicative approach’, Hispania /: –.
Elvin, Jaydene (). The Role of the Native Language in Non-native Perception and Spoken
Word Recognition: English vs. Spanish Learners of Portuguese. PhD dissertation. Western
Sydney University.
Elvin, Jaydene, Paola Escudero, and Polina Vasiliev (). ‘Spanish is better than English for
discriminating Portuguese vowels: acoustic similarity versus vowel inventory size’, Frontiers
in Psychology : .
Elvin, Jaydene, Daniel Williams, and Paola Escudero (). ‘The relationship between
perception and production of Brazilian Portuguese vowels in European Spanish monolin-
guals’, Loquens, (), e. doi: http://oadoi.org/./loquens...
Elvin, Jaydene, Paola Escudero, Daniel Williams, and Catherine T. Best, (). ‘The relation-
ship between Australian English speakers’ non-native perception and production of Brazil-
ian Portuguese vowels’ in Proceedings of the th Australasian International Conference on
Speech Science and Technology, Sydney, Australia.
Emiliano, António (). Fonética do português europeu: descrição e transcrição. Lisbon:
Guimarães.
Enríquez, Emilia, Celia Casado, and Andrés Santos (). ‘La percepción del acento en
español’, Lingüística Española Actual /: –.
Enríquez, María del Carmen (). ‘Fonética y fonología del gallego de O Grove’, Verba :
–.
Escudero, Paola (). Developmental Patterns in the Adult LAcquisition of New Contrasts:
the Acoustic Cue Weighting in the Perception of Scottish Tense/Lax Vowels by Spanish
Speakers. Unpublished M.Sc. thesis. University of Edinburgh.
Escudero, Paola (). Linguistic Perception and Second Language Acquisition: Explaining the
Attainment of Optimal Phonological Categorization. PhD dissertation. Utrecht University:
LOT Dissertation Series .
Escudero, Paola (). ‘Second language phonology: the role of perception’, in Martha
C. Pennington (ed.), Phonology in Context. London: Palgrave Macmillan UK, –.
Escudero, Paola (). ‘The linguistic perception of SIMILAR Lsounds’, in Paul Boersma and Silke
Hamann (eds), Phonology in Perception. Amsterdam: de Gruyter Mouton, –.
Escudero, Paola (). ‘Speech processing in bilingual and multilingual listeners: the inter-
relation between sound perception and word recognition’, in Abigail C. Cohn, Cécile
Fougeron, and Marie K. Huffman (eds), Oxford Handbook of Laboratory Phonology.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, –.

References

Escudero, Paola and Paul Boersma (). ‘The subset problem in Lperceptual development:
multiple-category assimilation by Dutch learners of Spanish’, in Barbora Skarabela, Sarah
Fish, and Anna H.-J. Do (eds), Proceedings of the th Annual Boston University Conference
on Language Development. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla, –.
Escudero, Paola and Kateřina Chládková (). ‘Spanish listeners’ perception of American
and Southern British English vowels’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America /:
EL–EL.
Escudero, Paola and Karin Wanrooij (). ‘The effect of Lorthography on non-native
vowel perception’, Language and Speech : –.
Escudero, Paola, Mirjam Broersma, and Ellen Simon (). ‘Learning words in a third
language: effects of vowel inventory and language proﬁciency’, Language and Cognitive
Processes /: –.
Escudero, Paola, Rachel Hayes-Harb, and Holger Mitterer (). ‘Novel second-language
words and asymmetric lexical access’, Journal of Phonetics /: –.
Escudero, Paola, Ellen Simon, and Karen E. Mulak (). ‘Learning words in a new language:
orthography doesn’t always help’, Bilingualism: Language and Cognition /: –.
Esposito, Anna and Maria Gabriella Di Benedetto (). ‘Acoustical and perceptual study
of gemination in Italian stops’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America /:
–.
Eychenne, Julien and Roberto Paternostro (). ‘Analyzing transcribed speech with
Dolmen’, in Sylvain Detey, Jacques Durand, Bernard Laks, and Chantal Lyche (eds),
Varieties of Spoken French. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Available at http://www.oup.
co.uk/companion/spoken_french, [D–D].
Fant, Gunnar (). ‘Fonetics and phonology in the last years’, in From Sound to Sense:
+ Years of Discoveries in Speech Communication, MIT, Boston, June –, , –.
Retrieved from http://www.rle.mit.edu/soundtosense/ Boston, MA: MIT.
Farnetani, Edda (). ‘V-C-V lingual coarticulation and its spatiotemporal domain’, in
William J. Hardcastle and Alain Marchal (eds), Speech Production and Speech Modelling.
Dordrecht: Kluwer, –.
Fava, Elisabetta and Emanuela Magno Caldognetto (). ‘Studio sperimentale delle caratter-
istiche elettroacustiche delle vocali toniche e atone in bisillabi italiani’, in Raffaele Simone,
Ugo Vignuzzi, and Giulianella Ruggiero (eds), Studi di Fonetica e Fonologia: Atti del
Convegno Internazionale di studi della SLI (Padova, e Ottobre ), Rome: Bulzoni,
–.
Federico, Antonio, Laura Mori, and Andrea Paoloni (). ‘La velocità di articolazione come
parametro identiﬁcativo: potenzialità e limiti per la caratterizzacione del parlante’, in Piero
Cosi (ed.), AISV . La misura dei parametri. Aspetti tecnologici ed implicazioni nei
modelli linguistici. Brescia: EDK, –.
Fennell, Christopher T., Krista Byers-Heinlein, and Janet F. Werker (). ‘Using speech
sounds to guide word learning: the case of bilingual infants’, Child Development /:
–.
Ferjan Ramírez, Naja, Rey R. Ramírez, Maggie Clarke, Samu Taulu, and Patricia K. Kuhl
(). ‘Speech discrimination in -month-old bilingual and monolingual infants: a
magnetoencephalography study’, Developmental Science [special issue].
Fernández González, José Ramón (). Gramática histórica provenzal. Oviedo: Universidad
de Oviedo.
References


Fernández Rei, Elisa (coord.) (). FOLERPA: Ferramenta On-Line para ExpeRimentación
PerceptivA. Santiago de Compostela: Instituto da Lingua Galega.
Fernández Rei, Elisa, Lurdes de Castro Moutinho, and Rosa Lídia Coimbra (). ‘As
entoacións galega e portuguesa: a fronteira á luz da dialectometría e da percepción’, in
Xulio Sousa, Marta Negro Romero, and Rosario Álvarez (eds), Lingua e identidade na
fronteira galego-portuguesa. Santiago de Compostela: Instituto da Lingua Galega/Consello
da Cultura Galega, –.
Fernández Rei, Francisco (). Dialectoloxía da lingua galega. Vigo: Xerais.
Fernández Rei, Francisco (, nd edn). Dialectoloxía da lingua galega. Vigo: Xerais de Galicia.
Fernández Trinidad, Marianela, Patricia Infante, and Helena Alves (). Falsetto as a
disguise method in male voices [paper]. st International Conference AESLA (Asociación
Española de Lingüística Aplicada), San Cristóbal de la Laguna: Universidad de La Laguna.
Fernández Trinidad, Marianela, Juana Gil Fernández, Patricia Infante, and José María Lahoz-
Bengoechea (): El falsetto como procedimiento de disimulo de la voz: rasgos alterables y
rasgos permanentes [paper]. IV Congreso Internacional de Fonética Experimental, Valencia,
November th–th, .
Fernández Vior, José Antonio (). El habla de Vegadeo (A Veiga y su concejo). Oviedo:
Academia de la Llingua Asturiana, Llibrería Llingüística.
Ferreiro, Manuel (, th edn). Gramática histórica galega. I: Fonética e morfosintaxe.
Santiago de Compostela: Laiovento.
Féry, Caroline (). ‘Focus and phrasing in French’, in Caroline Féry Caroline and Wolfgang
Sternefeld (eds), Audiatur Vox Sapientiae. A Festschrift for Arnim von Stechow. Berlin:
Akademie, –.
Figueroa Candia, Mauricio A. (). Consideraciones para el estudio de las consonantes
aproximantes del castellano de Chile. MA thesis. Universidad Católica Pontiﬁcia de Chile.
Fikkert, Paula and Maria João Freitas (). ‘The role of language-speciﬁc phonotactics in the
acquisition of onset clusters’, in Leonie Cornips and Jenny Doetjes (eds), Linguistics in the
Netherlands . Amsterdam: John Benjamins, –.
Flege, James Emil (). ‘The production of “new” and “similar” phones in a foreign language:
evidence for the effect of equivalence classiﬁcation’, Journal of Phonetics : –.
Flege, James Emil (). ‘Factors affecting degree of perceived foreign accent in English
sentences’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America /: –.
Flege, James Emil (). ‘Age of learning affects the authenticity of voice-onset time (VOT) in
stop consonants produced in a second language’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
/: –.
Flege, James Emil (). ‘Second language speech learning: theory, ﬁndings, and problems’, in
Winifred Strange (ed.), Speech Perception and Linguistic Experience: Issues in Cross-
Language Research. Timonium, MD: York Press, –.
Flege, James Emil (). ‘Assessing constraints on second-language segmental production
and perception’, in Antje S. Meyer and Neils O. Schiller (eds), Phonetics and Phonology in
Language Comprehension and Production: Differences and Similarities. Berlin: de Gruyter
Mouton, –.
Flege, James Emil (). ‘Language contact in bilingualism: phonetic system interactions’, in
Jennifer Cole and José Ignacio Hualde (eds), Laboratory Phonology . Berlin: de Gruyter
Mouton, –.

References

Flege, James Emil and Ocke-Schwen Bohn (). ‘An instrumental study of vowel reduction
and stress placement in Spanish-accented English’, Studies in Second Language Acquisition
/: –.
Flege, James Emil, Ocke-Schwen Bohn, and Sunyoung Jang (). ‘Effects of experience
on non-native subjects’ production and perception of English vowels’, Journal of Phonetics
/: –.
Flege, James Emil, Murray J. Munro, and Ian R. A. Mackay (). ‘Factors affecting strength
of perceived foreign accent in a second language’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America /: –.
Flege, James Emil, Grace H. Yeni-Komshian, and Serena Liu (). ‘Age constraints on
second-language acquisition’, Journal of Memory and Language : –.
Fleiss, Joseph L. (). ‘Measuring nominal scale agreement among many raters’, Psycho-
logical Bulletin /: –.
Flemming, Edward (). ‘A phonetically-based model of phonological vowel reduction’.
[Online.] MIT. Available at https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org//ebcdee-
abfbebfad.pdf.
Fónagy, Iván (). La vive voix: Essais de psycho-phonétique. Paris: Payot.
Fónagy, Iván (). Languages within Language: an Evolutive Approach. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Fontdevila, Jorge, Maria Dolors Pallarès, and Daniel Recasens (). ‘The contact index
method of electropalatographic data reduction’, Journal of Phonetics : –.
Formoso Gosende, Valentina (). ‘Análise acústica das sibilantes de dúas parroquias no
concello de Outes’, Cadernos de Lingua : –.
Forrest, Karen, Gary Weismer, Paul Milenkovic, and Ronald L. Dougall (). ‘Statistical
analysis of word initial voiceless obstruents: preliminary data’, Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America /: –.
Fowler, Carol (). ‘Production and perception of coarticulation among stressed and
unstressed vowels’, Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research : –.
Fowler, Carol A. and Elliot Saltzman (). ‘Coordination and coarticulation in speech
production’, Language and Speech /–: –.
Fox, John and Sandford Weisberg (, nd edn). An R Companion to Applied Regression.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Fox, Robert Allen, James Emil Flege, and Murray J. Munro (). ‘The perception of English
and Spanish vowels by native English and Spanish listeners: a multidimensional scaling
analysis’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America /: –.
Freitas, Maria João, and Maria Celeste Rodrigues (). ‘On the nature of sC-clusters in
European Portuguese’, Journal of Portuguese Linguistics /: –.
Freixeiro Mato, Xosé Ramón (). Gramática da lingua galega, I: Fonética e Fonoloxía. Vigo:
A Nosa Terra.
Freixeiro Mato, Xosé Ramón (). Gramática da lingua galega, II: Morfosintaxe. Vigo:
A Nosa Terra.
Frost, Dan (). ‘La surdité accentuelle: d’où vient-elle et comment la guérir?’, Cahiers de
l’APLIUT /: –.
Frota, Sónia, Mariapaola D’Imperio, Gorka Elordieta, Pilar Prieto, and Marina Vigário ().
‘The phonetics and phonology of intonational phrasing in Romance’, in Pilar Prieto, Joan
References


Mascaró, and Maria-Josep Solé (eds), Segmental and Prosodic Issues in Romance Phonology.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins, –.
Fuchs, Susanne and Martine Toda (). ‘Do differences in male versus female /s/ reﬂect
biological or sociophonetic factors?’, in Susanne Fuchs, Martine Toda, and Marzena Żygis
(eds), Turbulent Sounds: an Interdisciplinary Guide. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton, –.
Gafos, Adamantios I. (). ‘A grammar of gestural coordination’, Natural Language &
Linguistic Theory /: –.
Gahl, Susanne, and Alan C. L. Yu (). ‘Introduction to the special issue on exemplar-based
models in linguistics’, The Linguistic Review /: –.
García, Alison (). Allophonic Variation in the Spanish Sibilant Fricative. PhD dissertation.
University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee.
García, Christina (). Production and Perception of Intervocalic Sibilant Voicing in High-
land Ecuadorian Spanish. PhD dissertation. The Ohio State University.
García Antuña, María (). Análisis acústico-sonográﬁco de las consonantes róticas (/r/ y /ɾ/)
para su aplicación en entornos de estudios forenses. Unpublished MA dissertation. Instituto
Universitario de Investigación en Ciencias Policiales, Facultad de Derecho, Universidad de
Alcalá de Henares.
García Bayonas, Mariche (). The Acquisition of Vowels in Spanish and English as a Second
Language. Munich: LINCOM Europa.
Garcia Perales, Vicent-Ferran (). Atlas Lingüístico de la Península Ibérica (ALPI): Edició i
estudi del País Valencià, vols. PhD dissertation. Universitat de València.
Garcia-Sierra, Adrian, Maritza Rivera-Gaxiola, Cherrie R. Percaccio, Barbara T. Conboy,
Harriett Romo, Lindsay Klarman, Sophia Ortiz, and Patricia Kuhl (). ‘Bilingual lan-
guage learning: an ERP study relating early brain responses to speech, language input, and
later word production’, Journal of Phonetics /: –.
Garde, Paul (). L’accent. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
Garrido, Juan María, Joaquim Llisterri, Carme de la Mota, and Antonio Ríos (). ‘Prosodic
differences in reading style: isolated vs. contextualized sentences’, in Proceedings of the rd
European Conference on Speech Communication and Technology (Eurospeech ). Berlin,
–.
Gauvain, Jean-Luc, Lori Lamel, and Gilles Adda (). ‘The LIMSI Broadcast News tran-
scription system’, Speech Communication /–: –.
Gendrot, Cédric and Martine Adda-Decker (). ‘Impact of duration on F/Fformant
values of oral vowels: an automatic analysis of large broadcast news corpora in French and
German’, in Proceedings of the th Annual Conference of the International Speech Commu-
nication Association (Interspeech ). Lisbon, –.
Gendrot, Cédric and Martine Adda-Decker (). ‘Impact of duration and vowel inventory
size on formant values of oral vowels: an automated formant analysis from eight languages’,
in Proceedings of the th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences. Saarbrücken, –.
Gendrot, Cédric, Martine Adda-Decker, and Jacqueline Vaissière (). ‘Les voyelles /i/ et /y/
du français: focalisation et variations formantiques’, in Proceedings of the ème Journée
d’Etude de la Parole. Avignon, –.
Gendrot, Cédric, Kim Gerdes, and Martine Adda-Decker (). ‘Impact of prosodic position
on vocalic space in German and French’, in Proceedings of the th International Congress of
Phonetic Sciences. Hong Kong, –.

References

Gerfen, Chip (). ‘Andalusian codas’, Probus /: –.
German, James Sneed and Mariapaola D’Imperio (). ‘The status of the initial rise as a
marker of focus in French’, Language and Speech /: –.
Gertken, Libby M., Mark Amengual, and David Birdsong (). ‘Assessing language domin-
ance with the Bilingual Language Proﬁle’, in Pascale Leclercq, Amanda Edmonds, and
Heather Hilton (eds), Measuring LProﬁciency: Perspectives from SLA. Clevedon: Multilin-
gual Matters, –.
Gess, Randall, Chantal Lyche, and Trudel Meisenburg (eds) (). Phonological Variation in
French: Illustrations from Three Continents. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Giannelli, Luciano ([] new, augm. edn ). Toscana. Proﬁlo dei dialetti italiani, . Pisa:
Pacini.
Giannelli, Luciano (). ‘Considerazioni sullo stato del rotacismo di “l” preconsonantica
nell’Italia centrale’, Quaderni dell’Istituto di Linguistica dell’Università di Urbino : –.
Giannelli, Luciano (). ‘Areallinguistik VI. Toskana’, in Günter Holtus, Michael Metzeltin,
and Christian Schmitt (eds), Lexikon der Romanistischen Linguistik. IV. Italienisch, Kor-
sisch, Sardisch. Tübingen: Niemeyer, –.
Gibson, Mark (a). ‘A gestural-based analysis of /e/ prosthesis in word-initial /sC/ loan-
words in Spanish’, Ianua. Revista Philologica Romanica : –.
Gibson, Mark (b). ‘Perception-based vowel insertion by native Spanish-speaking
learners of English’, TIPA. Travaux Interdisciplinaires sur la Parole et le Langage :
–.
Gibson, Mark (). ‘A stochastic approach to rhotic variation in Spanish codas’, Loquens /,
e.
Gigli, Girolamo ([] ). Vocabolario cateriniano, ed. Giada Mattarucco. Florence:
Accademia della Crusca.
Gili Gaya, Samuel (). ‘La “r” simple en la pronunciación española’, Revista de Filología
Española : –.
Giner Monfort, Joan (). El valencià de la Valldigna. Valencia: Universitat de València–
Mancomunitat de la Valldigna.
Gliem, Joseph A. and Rosemary R. Gliem (). ‘Calculating, interpreting, and reporting
Cronbach’s alpha reliability coefﬁcient for Likert-type scales’, in Proceedings of the 
Midwest Research to Practice Conference in Adult, Continuing, and Community Education.
Columbus: The Ohio State University, –.
Gobl, Christer and Ailbhe Ní Chasaide (). ‘The role of voice quality in communicating
emotion, mood and attitude’, Speech Communication /–: –.
Godino-Llorente, Juan Ignacio, Pedro Gómez-Vilda, and Manuel Blanco-Velasco ().
‘Dimensionality reduction of a pathological voice quality assessment system based on
Gaussian mixture models and short-term cepstral parameters’, IEEE Transactions on
Biomedical Engineering /: –.
Goldman, Jean-Philippe (). ‘EasyAlign: an automatic phonetic alignment tool under
Praat’, in Proceedings of the th Annual Conference of the International Speech Communi-
cation Association (Interspeech ). Florence, –.
Goldstein, Louis and Marianne Pouplier (). ‘The temporal organization of speech’, in
Matthew Goldrick, Victor S. Ferreira, and Michelle Miozzo (eds), The Oxford Handbook of
Language Production. Oxford: Oxford University Press, –.
References


Goldstein, Louis, Dani Byrd, and Elliot Saltzman (). ‘The role of vocal tract gestural action
units in understanding the evolution of phonology’, in Michael A. Arbib (ed.), Action to
Language via the Mirror Neuron System. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, –.
Goldstein, Louis, Ioana Chitoran, and Elizabeth Selkirk (). ‘Syllable structure as coupled
oscillator modes: evidence from Georgian vs. Tashlhiyt Berber’, in Jürgen Trouvain and
William J. Barry (eds), Proceedings of the th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences.
Saarbrücken, –.
Gómez-Vilda, Pedro, Victoria Rodellar, Víctor Nieto, Rafael Martínez, Agustín Álvarez,
Bartolomé Scola, Carlos Ramírez, Daniel Poletti, and Mario Fernández (). ‘BioMet®-
Phon: a system to monitor phonation quality in the clinics’, Proceedings of eTELEMED :
The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, –.
Gómez-Vilda, Pedro, Agustín Álvarez-Marquina, Athanasios Tsanas, Carlos Alfredo Lázaro-
Carrascosa, Victoria Rodellar-Biarge, Víctor Nieto-Lluis, and Rafael Martínez Olalla ().
‘Phonation biomechanics in quantifying Parkinson’s disease symptom severity’, in Anna
Esposito, Marcos Faundez-Zanuy, Antonietta M. Esposito, Gennaro Cordasco, Thomas
Drugman, Jordi Solé-Casas, and Francesco Carlo Morabito (eds), Recent Advances in Non-
linear Speech Processing. Basel: Springer International, –.
Gómez-Vilda, Pedro, Roberto Fernández-Baillo, Victoria Rodellar-Biarge, Vícto Nieto Lluis,
Agustín Álvarez-Marquina, Luis Miguel Mazaira-Fernández, Rafael Martínez Olalla, and
Juan Ignacio Godino-Llorente (). ‘Glottal Source biometrical signature for voice path-
ology detection’, Speech Communication /: –.
González Fernández, Isabel (). Suﬁjos nominales en el gallego actual. Anexo de Verba.
Santiago de Compostela: Universidade de Santiago de Compostela.
González González, Manuel (). ‘Subsistemas de sibilantes do galego actual’, in Dieter
Kremer (ed.), Actes du XVIIIe Congrès International de Linguistique et de Philologie
Romanes (Université de Trier, ), –.
Gordon, Leslie S. (). Factors Affecting English Speakers’ Perception of LSpanish Vowels.
PhD dissertation. Georgetown University.
Gordon, Leslie S. (). ‘English speakers’ perception of Spanish vowels: evidence for
Multiple-Category Assimilation’, in Cristina Sanz and Ronald P. Leow (eds), Implicit and
Explicit Language Learning: Conditions, Processes, and Knowledge in SLA and Bilingualism.
Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press, –.
Gordon, Matthew, Paul Barthmaier, and Kathy Sands (). ‘A cross-linguistic acoustic study
of voiceless fricatives’, Journal of the International Phonetic Association /: –.
Grabe, Esther and Ee Ling Low (). ‘Durational variability in speech and the rhythm class
hypothesis’, in Carlos Gussenhoven and Natasha Warner (eds), Laboratory Phonology .
Berlin: de Gruyter Mouton, –.
Graur, Alexandru and Alexandru Rosetti (). ‘Esquisse d’une phonologie du roumain’,
Bulletin Linguistique : –.
Green, Jordan R., Ignatius S. B. Nip, Erin M. Wilson, Antje S. Mefferd, and Yana Yunusova
(). ‘Lip movement exaggerations during infant-directed speech’, Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research : –.
Greenacre, Michael J. (). Correspondence Analysis in Practice. London: Chapman and
Hall/CRC Press.
Gregio, Fabiana Nogueira (). ‘Variantes do “r” em posição de coda silábica: um estudo
fonético-acústico’, Intercâmbio : –.

References

Gross, Juergen and Uwe Ligges (). ‘nortest: tests for Normality’ (version .-) [R package].
Guion, Susan G. (). ‘The vowel systems of Quichua–Spanish bilinguals: age of acquisition
effects on the mutual inﬂuence of the ﬁrst and second languages’, Phonetica /: –.
Guion, Susan G., James Emil Flege, Reiko Akahane-Yamada, and Jessica C. Pruitt (). ‘An
investigation of current models of second language speech perception: the case of Japanese
adults’ perception of English consonants’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
/(): –.
Gussenhoven, Carlos (). ‘Types of focus in English’, in Chungmin Lee, Matthew Gordon,
and Daniel Büring (eds), Topic and Focus: Cross-linguistic Perspectives on Meaning and
Intonation. Heidelberg: Springer, –.
Gut, Ulrike (). ‘Corpus phonology and second language acquisition’, in Jacques Durand,
Ulrike Gut, and Gjert Kristoffersen (eds), The Oxford Handbook of Corpus Phonology.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, –.
Hajek, John (). ‘Old French nasalisation and universals of sound change’, Journal of
French Language Studies /: –.
Hajek, John (). Universals of Sound Change in Nasalisation. Oxford: Wiley Blackwell.
Hajek, John and Shinji Maeda (). ‘Investigating universals of sound change: the effect of
vowel height and duration on the development of distinctive nasalization’, in Michael
B. Broe and Janet Pierrehumbert (eds), Papers in Laboratory Phonology V: Acquisition
and the Lexicon. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, –.
Halle, Mark and Charles Reiss (). The Phonological Enterprise. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Hallé, Pierre A., Juan Segui, Uli Frauenfelder, and Christine Meunier (). ‘Processing of
illegal consonant clusters: a case of perceptual assimilation?’, Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance /: –.
Hammerly, Hector (). ‘Contrastive phonology and error analysis’, International Review of
Applied Linguistics in Language Teaching /: –.
Hardcastle, William J., Fiona Gibbon, and Katerina Nicolaidis (). ‘EPG data reduction
methods and their implications for studies of lingual coarticulation’, Journal of Phonetics :
–.
Hargus, Sharon and Ellen M. Kaisse (). Studies in Lexical Phonology. San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Harrington, Jonathan (a). ‘The coarticulatory basis of diachronic high back vowel front-
ing’, in Maria-Josep Solé and Daniel Recasens (eds), The Initiation of Sound Change.
Perception, Production, and Social Factors. Amsterdam: Benjamins, –.
Harrington, Jonathan (b). ‘The relationship between synchronic variation and diachronic
change’, in Abigail C. Cohn, Cécile Fougeron, and Marie K. Huffman (eds), The Oxford
Handbook of Laboratory Phonology. Oxford: Oxford University Press, –.
Harris, James W. (). Spanish Phonology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Harris, James W. (). ‘Evidence from Portuguese for the “Elsewhere Condition” in Phonology’,
Linguistic Inquiry /: –.
Harris, James W. (). ‘Non-concatenative phonology and Spanish plurals’, Journal of
Linguistic Research : –.
Harris, James W. (). Syllable Structure and Stress in Spanish: a Nonlinear Analysis.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Harris, James W. (). ‘The exponence of gender in Spanish’, Linguistic Inquiry /: –.
References


Harris, James W. (). ‘The form classes of Spanish substantives’, in Geert Booij and Jaap
van Marle (eds), Yearbook of Morphology . Dordrecht: Kluwer, –.
Harris, John (). ‘Vowel reduction as information loss’, in Philip Carr, Jacques Durand, and
Colin J. Ewen (eds), Headhood, Elements, Speciﬁcation and Contrastivity: Phonological
Papers in Honour of John Anderson. Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins, –.
Harris, Martin and Nigel Vincent (eds) (). The Romance Languages. London: Routledge.
Havelock, Eric A. (). ‘Orality and literacy: an overview’, Language and Communication /
–: –.
Havy, Mélanie, Camillia Bouchon, and Thierry Nazzi (). ‘Phonetic processing when
learning words: the case of bilingual infants’, International Journal of Behavioral Develop-
ment /: –.
Hawkins, Sarah (). ‘Roles and representations of systematic ﬁne phonetic detail in speech
understanding’, Journal of Phonetics /–: –.
Hawkins, Sarah (). ‘Puzzles and patterns in years of research on speech perception’,
in + Years of Discoveries in Speech Communication, MIT, Boston, June –, , B-
–B-. Retrieved from http://www.rle.mit.edu/soundtosense/.
Hawkins, Sarah (). ‘Phonetic variation as communicative system: perception of the
particular and the abstract’, in Cécile Fougeron, Barbara Kühnert, Mariapaola D’Imperio,
and Nathalie Vallée (eds), Laboratory Phonology . Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton, –.
Hayes, Bruce and Aditi Lahiri (). ‘Bengali intonational phonology’, Natural Language &
Linguistic Theory /: –.
Heinz, John M. and Kenneth N. Stevens (). ‘On the properties of voiceless fricative
consonants’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America /: –.
Henrich, Natalie (). ‘Mirroring the voice from Garcia to the present day: some insights
into singing voice registers’, Logopedics Phoniatrics Vocology /: –.
Henrich, Nathalie, Christophe d’Alessandro, Boris Doval, and Michèlle Castellengo ().
‘Glottal open quotient in singing: measurements and correlation with laryngeal mechan-
isms, vocal intensity, and fundamental frequency’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America /: –.
Henriksen, Nicholas C. and Erik W. Willis (). ‘Acoustic characterization of phonemic trill
production in Jerezano Andalusian Spanish’, in Marta Ortega-Llebaria (ed.), Selected Pro-
ceedings of the th Conference on Laboratory Approaches to Spanish Phonology. Somerville,
MA: Cascadilla Proceedings Project, –.
Henriques, Isabel (). ‘The production and the syllabic nature of word initial sC- clusters in
European Portuguese speakers’, Corela : –.
Hermes, Anne, Doris Mücke, and Martine Grice (). ‘Gestural coordination of Italian
word-initial clusters: the case of “impure s”’, Phonology /: –.
Hermes, Anne, Martine Grice, Doris Mücke, and Henrik Niemann (). ‘Articulatory
coordination and the syllabiﬁcation of word initial consonant clusters in Italian’, in Philip
Hoole, Lasse Bombien, M. Pouplier, Christine Mooshammer, and Barbara Kühnert (eds),
Consonant Clusters and Structural Complexity. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton, –.
Hermes, Anne, Rachid Ridouane, Doris Mücke, and Martine Grice (). ‘Kinematics of
syllable structure in Tashlhiyt Berber: the case of vocalic and consonantal nuclei’, in Shari
Baum, Lucie Ménard, and Vincent Gracco (eds), Proceedings of the th International
Seminar on Speech Production. Montreal, –.

References

Hillenbrand, James (). ‘Speech perception by infants: categorization based on nasal
consonant place of articulation’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America /: –.
Hinton, Leane, Johanna Nichols, and John J. Ohala (eds) (). Sound Symbolism. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hirano, Minoru (). ‘The role of the layer structure of the vocal fold in register control’, in
P. Hurme (ed.), Vox Humana. Jyväskylä: University of Jyväskylä, –.
Hirson, Allen and Martin Duckworth (). ‘Glottal fry and voice disguise: a case study in
forensic phonetics’, Journal of Biomedical Engineering /: –.
Hirst, Daniel and Albert Di Cristo (). ‘French intonation: a parametric approach’, Die
Neueren Sprachen : –.
Hollien, Harry (). ‘On vocal registers’, Journal of Phonetics : –.
Hollien, Harry, Wojciech Majewski, and E. Thomas Doherty (). ‘Perceptual identiﬁcation
of voices under normal, stress and disguise speaking conditions’, Journal of Phonetics ,
–.
Holst, Tara and Francis Nolan (). ‘The inﬂuence of syntactic structure on [s] to [ʃ]
assimilation’, in Bruce Connell and Amalia Arvaniti (eds), Papers in Laboratory Phonology
IV: Phonology and Phonetic Evidence. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, –.
Honikman, Beatrice (). ‘Articulatory settings’, in David Abercrombie, Dennis B. Fry, Peter
A. D. MacCarthy, N. C. Scott, and John L. M. Trim (eds), In Honour of Daniel Jones.
London: Longmans, Green & Co., –.
Hoole, Philip and Andreas Zierdt (). ‘Five-dimensional articulography’, in Ben Maassen
and Pascal H. H. M. van Lieshout (eds), Speech Motor Control: New Developments in Basic
and Applied Research. Oxford: Oxford University Press, –.
Hoole, Philip, Marianne Pouplier, Štefan Beňuš, and Lasse Bombien (). ‘Articulatory
coordination in obstruent–sonorant clusters and syllabic consonants: data and modelling’,
in Lorenzo Spreaﬁco and Alessandro Vietti (eds), Rhotics: New Data and Perspectives.
Bolzano: Bolzano University Press, –.
Hothorn, Torsten, Frank Bretz, and Peter Westfall (). ‘Simultaneous inference in general
parametric models’, Biomedical Journal /: –.
Houston, Derek M., Peter W. Jusczyk, Cecile Kuijpers, Riet Coolen, and Anne Cutler ().
‘Cross-language word segmentation by -month-olds’, Psychonomic Bulletin and Review
/: –.
Hualde, José Ignacio (a). ‘Autosegmental and metrical spreading in the vowel-harmony
systems of northwestern Spain’, Linguistics /: –.
Hualde, José Ignacio (b). ‘Silabeo y estructura morfémica en español’, Hispania /:
–.
Hualde, José Ignacio (). Catalan. New York: Routledge.
Hualde, José Ignacio (). ‘Spanish /i/ and related sounds: an exercise in phonemic analysis’.
Studies in the Linguistic Sciences. Illinois Working Papers /: –.
Hualde, José Ignacio (). The Sounds of Spanish. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hualde, José Ignacio (). ‘Unstressed words in Spanish’, Language Sciences /–:
–.
Hualde, José Ignacio (). ‘Stress and rhythm’, in José Ignacio Hualde, Antxon Olarrea, and
Erin O’Rourke (eds), The Handbook of Hispanic Linguistics. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell,
–.
References


Hualde, José Ignacio and Fernando Martínez-Gil (). ‘Un análisis autosegmental de ciertas
alternancias vocálicas en el gallego moderno’, in Ramón Lorenzo Vázquez (dir.), Actas do
XIX Congreso Internacional de Lingüística e Filoloxía Románicas, vi. A Coruña: Fundación
Barrié de la Maza, –.
Hualde, José Ignacio and Pilar Prieto (). ‘Intonational variation in Spanish: European and
American varieties’, in Sónia Frota and Pilar Prieto (eds), Intonation in Romance. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, –.
Hualde, José Ignacio, Jennifer Cole, Caroline L. Smith, Christopher Eager, Timothy Mahrt, and
Ricardo Napoleão de Souza (). ‘The perception of phrasal prominence in English,
Spanish and French conversational speech’, Proceedings of Speech Prosody . Boston,
–.
Hughes, George W. and Morris Halle (). ‘Spectral properties of fricative consonants’,
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America /: –.
Hume, Elizabeth and Keith Johnson (eds) (). The Role of Speech Perception in Phonology.
San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Hunter, Michael A. and Elinor W. Ames (). ‘A multifactor model of infant preferences for
novel and familiar stimuli’, in Carolyn Rovee-Collier and Lewis P. Lipsitt (eds), Advances in
Infancy Research. Norwood, NJ: Ablex, –.
Husson, François, Sébastien Lê, and Jérôme Pagès (). Exploratory Multivariate Analysis by
Example Using R. London: Chapman and Hall/CRC Press.
Husson, François, Julie Josse, Sébastien Lê, and Jeremy Mazet (). ‘FactoMineR: Multivari-
ate Exploratory Data Analysis and Data Mining with R’ (version .) [R package].
Hyman, Larry (). ‘The limits of phonetic determinism in phonology: *NC revisited’, in
Elizabeth Hume and Keith Johnson (eds), The Role of Speech Perception in Phonology. San
Diego, CA: Academic Press, –.
Hyman, Larry (). ‘Word-prosodic typology’, Phonology /: –.
Hyman, Larry and Cemil Orhan Orgun (). ‘Endocyclicity and paradigm nonuniformity’,
in Cemil Orhan Orgun and Peter Sells (eds), Morphology and the Web of Grammar: Essays
in Memory of Steven G. Lapointe. Stanford, CA: CSLI, –.
Ioup, Georgette (). ‘Exploring the role of age in the acquisition of a second language
phonology’, in Jette G. Hansen Edwards and Mary L. Zampini (eds), Phonology and Second
Language Acquisition. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, –.
Iskarous, Khalil, Christine H. Shadle, and Michael Proctor (). ‘Evidence for the dynamic
nature of fricative production: American English /s/’, in Rudolph Sock, Susanne Fuchs, and
Yves Laprie (eds), Proceedings of the th International Seminar on Speech Production.
Strasbourg: INRIA, –.
Iskarous, Khalil, Christine H. Shadle, and Michael I. Proctor (). ‘Articulatory–acoustic
kinematics: the production of American English /s/’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America /: –.
Ito, Junko and Armin Mester (a). ‘Covert generalizations in Optimality Theory: the role of
stratal faithfulness constraints’, Studies in Phonetics, Phonology and Morphology : –.
Ito, Junko and Armin Mester (b). ‘Structure preservation and stratal opacity in German’,
in Linda Lombardi (ed.), Segmental Phonology in Optimality Theory: Constraints and
Representations. New York: Cambridge University Press, –.

References

Ito, Junko and Armin Mester (). ‘Lexical and postlexical phonology in Optimality Theory:
evidence from Japanese’, in Gisbert Fanselow and Caroline Féry (eds), Resolving Conﬂicts in
Grammars: Optimality Theory in Syntax, Morphology, and Phonology. Hamburg: Buske,
–.
Ito, Junko and Armin Mester (). ‘On the sources of opacity in OT: coda processes in
German’, in Caroline Féry and Ruben van de Vijver (eds), The Syllable in Optimality Theory.
New York: Cambridge University Press, –.
Iverson, Paul and Bronwen G. Ewans (). ‘Learning English vowels with different ﬁrst-
language vowel systems: perception of formant targets, formant movement, and duration’,
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America /: –.
Iverson, Paul and Bronwen G. Evans (). ‘Learning English vowels with different ﬁrst-
language vowel systems II: auditory training for native Spanish and German speakers’,
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America /: –.
Jessen, Michael (). ‘Instability in the production and perception of intervocalic closure
voicing as a cue to “bdg” vs. “ptk” in German’, Folia Linguistica /–: –.
Jesus, Luis M. T. and Christine H. Shadle (). ‘A parametric study of the spectral charac-
teristics of European Portuguese fricatives’, Journal of Phonetics /: –.
Jiménez, Jesús (). Reforzamiento de diptongos en hablas manchegas [paper]. XI Congreso
Internacional de la ALFAL. Encuentro de Investigadores en Fonología. Las Palmas de Gran
Canaria.
Jiménez, Jesús and Maria-Rosa Lloret (). ‘Sonicidad y tipología de los márgenes silábicos
en español’, in José Francisco Val Álvaro et al. (eds), De la unidad del lenguaje a la
diversidad de las lenguas. Actas del .º Congreso Internacional de Lingüística General
[CD-ROM]. Universidad de Zaragoza, –.
Jiménez, Jesús and Maria-Rosa Lloret (). ‘Semivocals en la cruïlla: enfortiment i lenició en
els marges sil·làbics’, in Fernando Sánchez Miret, Àlex Martín, and Adolf Piquer (eds), Actes
del Setzè Col·loqui Internacional de Llengua i Literatura Catalanes. Salamanca, .
Barcelona: Publicacions de l’Abadia de Montserrat, –.
Johnson, Charles C., Harry Hollien, and James W. Hicks, Jr (). ‘Speaker identiﬁcation
utilizing selected temporal speech features’, Journal of Phonetics : –.
Johnson, Jacqueline S. and Elissa L. Newport (). ‘Critical period effects on universal
properties of language: the status of subjacency in the acquisition of a second language’,
Cognition /: –.
Johnstone, Tom and Klaus R. Scherer (). ‘The effects of emotions on voice quality’, in
Proceedings of the th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences. San Francisco, CA:
University of California, –.
Johnstone, Tom and Klaus R. Scherer (). ‘Vocal communication of emotion’, in Michael
Lewis and Jeannette M. Haviland-Jones (eds), Handbook of Emotions. New York: Guilford
Press, –.
Jones, Mark J. and Francis J. Nolan (). ‘An acoustic study of North Welsh voiceless
fricatives’, in Proceedings of the th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences. Saar-
brücken, –.
Jongman, Allard, Ratree Wayland, and Serena Wong (). ‘Acoustic characteristics of
English fricatives’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America /: –.
References


Jun, Jongho (). ‘Place assimilation’, in Bruce Hayes, Robert Kirchner, and Donca Steriade
(eds), The Phonetic Bases of Markedness. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, –.
Jun, Sun-Ah (). The Phonetics and Phonology of Korean Prosody. PhD dissertation. The
Ohio State University.
Jun, Sun-Ah (). ‘Asymmetrical prosodic effects on the laryngeal gesture in Korean’, in
Bruce Connell and Amalia Arvaniti (eds), Papers in Laboratory Phonology IV: Phonology
and Phonetic Evidence. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, –.
Jun, Sun-Ah and Cécile Fougeron (). ‘A phonological model of French intonation’, in
Antonis Botinis (ed.), Intonation: Analysis, Modelling and Technology. Dordrecht: Kluwer
Academic, –.
Jun, Sun-Ah and Cécile Fougeron (). ‘Realizations of accentual phrase in French inton-
ation’, Probus /: –.
Jusczyk, Peter W. (). ‘How infants begin to extract words from speech’, Trends in
Cognitive Sciences /: –.
Jusczyk, Peter W. and Richard N. Aslin (). ‘Infants’ detection of the sound patterns of
words in ﬂuent speech’, Cognitive Psychology /: –.
Jusczyk, Peter W., Angela D. Friederici, Jeanine M. I. Wessels, Vigdis Y. Svenkerud, and Anne
Marie Jusczyk (). ‘Infants’ sensitivity to the sound patterns of native language words’,
Journal of Memory and Language /: –.
Kabak, Baris and William Idsardi (). ‘Syllabically conditioned perceptual epenthesis’, in
Pawel M. Nowak, Corey Yoquelet, and David Mortensen (eds), Proceedings of the th
Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society. General Session and Parasession on
Phonetic Sources of Phonological Patterns: Synchronic and Diacronic Explanations. Berkeley,
CA: Berkeley Linguistics Society, –.
Kabatek, Johannes (). Os falantes como lingüistas. Tradición, innovación e interferencias
no galego actual. Vigo: Xerais [Ger. orig. Die Sprecher als Linguisten. Interferenz- und
Sprachwandelphänomene dargestellt am Galicischen der Gegenwart. Tübingen: Max
Niemeyer, ].
Kager, René (). Optimality Theory. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kaisse, Ellen M. and Patricia A. Shaw (). ‘On the theory of Lexical Phonology’. Phonology
/: –.
Kaland Constantijn, Vincenzo Galatà, Lorenzo Spreaﬁco, and Alessandro Vietti (). ‘Which
language R you speaking? /r/ as a language marker in Tyrolean and Italian bilinguals’, Language
and Speech. Available at: https://doi.org/./.
Kamiyama, Takeki and Jacqueline Vaissière (). ‘Perception and production of French
close and close-mid rounded vowels by Japanese-speaking learners’, Revue AILE-LIA
(Acquisition et Interaction en Langue Étrangère), ed. Jean-Yves Dommergues : –.
Keating, Patricia, Taheong Cho, Cécile Fougeron, and Chai-shune Hsu (). ‘Domain-initial
articulatory strengthening in four languages’, in John Local, Richard Ogden, and Rosalind
Temple (eds), Phonetic Interpretation. Papers in Laboratory Phonology VI. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, –.
Kehrein, Roland (). ‘The prosody of authentic emotions’, in Proceedings of the Speech
Prosody Conference, –. Aix-en-Provence: Laboratoire Parole et Langage.
Kendall, Richard Ryan (). The Perception and Production of Portuguese Mid-Vowels by
Native Speakers of American English. MA thesis. Brigham Young University.

References

Kenstowicz, Michael (). ‘Base-identity and uniform exponence: alternatives to cyclicity’, in
Jacques Durand and Bernard Laks (eds), Current Trends in Phonology: Models and Methods.
Salford: University of Salford Publications, –.
Kiparsky, Paul (a). ‘From cyclic phonology to lexical phonology’, in Harry van der Hust
and Norval Smith (eds), The Structure of Phonological Representations, Dordrecht: Foris,
–.
Kiparsky, Paul (b). ‘Lexical phonology and morphology’, in Linguistics in the Morning
Calm: Selected Papers from SICOL-. Seoul: Hanshin, –.
Kiparsky, Paul (). ‘Some consequences of lexical phonology’, Phonology /: –.
Kiparsky, Paul (). ‘Opacity and cyclicity’, The Linguistic Review /–: –.
Kiparsky, Paul (). ‘Fenno-Swedish quantity: contrast in stratal OT’, in Bert Vaux and
Andrew Nevins (eds), Rules, Constraints, and Phonological Phenomena. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, –.
Kiparsky, Paul (). ‘Reduplication in Stratal OT’, in Linda Uyechi and Lian–Hee Wee (eds),
Reality, Exploration and Discovery: Pattern Interaction in Language and Life. Stanford, CA:
CSLI Publications, –.
Kirchner, Robert (). An Effort-Based Approach to Consonant Lenition. PhD dissertation.
UCLA.
Kirchner, Robert (). ‘Consonant lenition’, in Bruce Hayes, Donca Steriade, and Robert
Kirchner (eds), Phonetically Based Phonology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, –.
Kochetov, Alexei and Laura Colantoni (). ‘Coronal place contrasts in Argentine and
Cuban Spanish: an electropalatographic study’, Journal of the International Phonetic Asso-
ciation /: –.
Kondaurova, Maria V. and Alexander L. Francis (). ‘The role of selective attention in the
acquisition of English tense and lax vowels by native Spanish listeners: comparison of three
training methods’, Journal of Phonetics /: –.
Krämer, Martin (). ‘English schwa insertion before liquids and phonological opacity’, in
Proceedings of the Chicago Linguistic Society , i. Chicago Linguistic Society, –.
Kreiman, Jody (). ‘Listening to voices. Theory and practice in voice perception research’,
in Keith Johnson and John Mullenix (eds), Talker Variability in Speech Processing. San
Diego, CA: Academic Press, –.
Kreiman, Jody and Diana Sidtis (). Foundations of Voice Studies. Chichester: Wiley-
Blackwell.
Kreiman, Jody, Diana Sidtis, and Bruce R. Gerrat (). ‘Pereption of Voice Quality’, in David
B. Pisoni and Robert E. Remez (eds) The Handbook of Speech Perception. Malden, MA:
Blackwell Publishing, –.
Kreiman, Jody, Bruce R. Gerratt, Marc Garellek, Robin Samlan, and Zhang Zhaoyan ().
Toward a uniﬁed theory of voice production and perception. Loquens /e. doi: http://
dx.doi.org/./loquens...
Kuhl, Patricia K., Erica Stevens, Akiko Hayashi, Toshisada Deguchi, Shigeru Kiritani, and Paul
Iverson (). ‘Infants show a facilitation effect for native language phonetic perception
between and months’, Developmental Science /: F–F.
Kuipers, Jan Rouke and Gillaume Thierry (). ‘Event-related potential correlates of lan-
guage change detection in bilingual toddlers’, Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience /:
–.
References


Kuipers, Jan Rouke and Gillaume Thierry (). ‘Bilingualism and increased attention to
speech: evidence from event-related potentials’, Brain and Language : –.
Künzel, Hermann J. (). ‘Some general phonetic and forensic aspects of speaking tempo’,
Forensic Linguistics /: –.
Künzel, Hermann J. (). ‘Effects of voice disguise on speaking fundamental frequency’,
Forensic Linguistics /: –.
Kuznetsova, Alexandra, Per Bruun Brockhoff, and Rune Haubo Bojesen Christensen ().
‘lmerTest: tests in linear mixed effects models’ (version .–) [R package].
Kuznetsova, Alexandra, Per Bruun Brockhoff, and Rune Haubo Bojesen Christensen ().
‘lmertest’ (version .–) [R package].
Labraña Barrero, Sabela (). Estudio acústico das consoantes fricativas do galego. PhD
dissertation. Universitat de Barcelona.
Labraña Barrero, Sabela (). ‘Las consonantes fricativas de la lengua gallega’, Estudios de
Fonética Experimental : –.
Labraña Barrero, Sabela (). ‘Parámetros acústicos dos sons fricativos da lingua galega’,
Estudios de Fonética Experimental : –.
Lacerda, Francisco (). ‘Acoustic perceptual study of the Portuguese voiceless fricatives’,
Journal of Phonetics : –.
Lacheret, Anne, Anne Catherine Simon, Jean-Philippe Goldman, and Mathieu Avanzi ().
‘Prominence perception and accent detection in French: from phonetic processing to
grammatical analysis’, Language Sciences , –.
Ladd, D. Robert (, nd edn). Intonational Phonology. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Ladefoged, Peter (, rd edn). A Course in Phonetics. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Ladefoged, Peter and Ian Maddieson (). The Sounds of the World’s Languages. Cambridge,
MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Lado, Robert (). Linguistics Across Cultures. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Laks, Bernard (ed.) (). ‘Nouvelles phonologies’, Langages /: –.
Landis, J. Richard and Gary G. Koch (). ‘The measurement of observer agreement for
categorical data’, Biometrics : –.
Landron, Simon, Nikola Paillereau, Ahmad Nawaﬂeh, Christelle Exare, Hirofumi Ando, and
Jiayin Gao (). ‘Le corpus PhoDiFLE : un corpus commun de français langue étrangère
pour une étude phonétique des productions de locuteurs de langues maternelles plurielles’,
Cahiers de Praxématique –: –.
Larson, Pär (). ‘Fonologia’, in Giampaolo Salvi and Lorenzo Renzi (eds), Grammatica
dell’italiano antico. Bologna: Il Mulino, –.
Lausberg, Heinrich (, rd edn). Romanische Sprachwissenschaft, Band : Einleitung und
Vokalismus. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Laver, John (). The Phonetic Description of Voice Quality. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Laver, John (). Principles of Phonetics. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Laver, John (). ‘Phonetic evaluation of voice quality’, in Raymond D. Kent and Martin
J. Ball (eds), Voice Quality Measurement. San Diego, CA: Singular, –.
Laver, John and Janet Mackenzie-Beck (). Vocal Proﬁle Analysis Scheme–VPAS [handout].
Edinburgh: Queen Margaret University College, Research Centre.

References

Laver, John, Sheila Wirz, Janet Mackenzie Beck, and Stephen M. Hiller (). ‘A perceptual
protocol for the analysis of vocal proﬁles’, Edinburgh: University of Edinburgh Department
of Linguistics, Work in Progress : –.
Lê, Sebastien, Julie Josse, and François Husson (). ‘FactoMineR. An R Package for
Multivariate Analysis’, Journal of Statistical Software /: –.
Leemann, Adrian, Maria-José Kolly, and Volker Dellwo (). ‘Speaker-individuality in
suprasegmental temporal features: implications for forensic voice comparison’, Forensic
Science International : –.
Le Gac, David (). ‘The intonation of right-dislocated constituents in French’, in The
Scottish Consortium for ICPhS (ed.), Proceedings of the th International Congress of
Phonetic Sciences. The University of Glasgow, paper no. .
Leite, Cândida Mara Britto (). O/R/em Posição de Coda Silábica no Falar Campineiro.
Doctoral dissertation. UNICAMP.
Lenz, Rodolfo (). ‘Chilenische Studien’, Phonetische Studien : –.
Léon, Pierre R. (, th edn). Phonétisme et prononciations du français. Avec travaux
pratiques d’application et corrigés. Paris: Armand Colin.
Léon, Pierre R. and Philippe Martin (). ‘Prosodie et technologie’, in Élisabeth Guimbretière
(ed.), Apprendre, enseigner, acquérir: la prosodie au coeur du débat. Rouen: Publications de
l’Université de Rouen, –.
Lesley-Neuman, Diane (). ATR Harmony in Karimojong: Justiﬁcation for a Stratal
Optimality Theory. MA thesis. University of Colorado.
Levey, Sandra (). Discrimination and production of English vowels by bilingual speakers
of Spanish and English. Perceptual and Motor Skills /: –.
Levey, Sandra and Denise Cruz (). ‘The discrimination of English vowels by bilingual
Spanish/English and monolingual English speaker’, Contemporary Issues in Communication
Science and Disorders : –.
Levy, Erika S. and Franzo F. Law II (). ‘Production of French vowels by American-English
learners of French: language experience, consonantal context, and the perception–
production relationship’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America /: –.
Lewis, Greg and Amanda Boomershine (). ‘The realization of word-ﬁnal, preconsonantal
/s/ in the Spanish of Mexico City’, Studies in Hispanic and Lusophone Linguistics /:
–.
Lima, Maria Fabiana Bonﬁm, Luiz Carlos Rusilo, and Zuleica Camargo (). ‘Avaliação da
qualidade vocal: abordagem metodológica para análise de dados de grupos de juízes’, Revista
da Sociedade Brasileira de Fonoaudiologia [supplement]. Brasília: Sociedade Brasileira de
Fonoaudiologia, .
Lindau, Mona (). ‘The story of /r/’, in Victoria A. Fromkin (ed.), Phonetic Linguistics.
Essays in Honour of Peter Ladefoged. Orlando, FL: Academic Press, –.
Lindblom, Björn (). ‘Spectrographic study of vowel reduction’, Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America : –.
Lipski, John (). ‘Reducción de /s/ en el español de Honduras’, Nueva Revista de Filología
Hispánica /: –.
Lipski, John (). ‘/s/ in the Spanish of Nicaragua’, Orbis /–: –.
Lipski, John (). ‘Instability and reduction of /s/ in the Spanish of Honduras’, Revista
Canadiense de Estudios Hispánicos /: –.
References


Lipski, John (). ‘Inestabilidad y reducción de /s/ en el español de Honduras’, in Humberto
López Morales and María Vaquero (eds), Actas del I Congreso Internacional sobre el Español de
América. San Juan: Academia Puertorriqueña de la Lengua Española, –.
Lipski, John (). ‘/s/-voicing in Ecuadoran Spanish: patterns and principles of consonantal
modiﬁcation’, Lingua : –.
Lipski, John (). ‘Spanish taps and trills: phonological structure of an isolated position’,
Folia Linguistica /–: –.
Lipski, John (). Latin American Spanish. London: Longman.
Lipski, John (). ‘The many faces of Spanish /s/-weakening: (re)alignment and ambisylla-
bicity’, in Javier Gutiérrez-Rexach and Fernando Martínez-Gil (eds), Advances in Hispanic
Linguistics. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press, –.
Liu, Liquan and René Kager (). ‘Bilingual exposure inﬂuences infant VOT perception’,
Infant Behavior and Development : –.
Liu, Liquan and René Kager (). ‘Perception of a native vowel contrast by Dutch monolingual
and bilingual infants: a bilingual perceptual lead’, International Journal of Bilingualism
/: –.
Lleó, Conxita, Susana Cortés, and Ariadna Benet (). ‘Contact-induced phonological
changes in the Catalan spoken in Barcelona’, in Peter Siemund and Noemi Kintana (eds),
Language Contact and Contact Languages. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, –.
Llisterri, Joaquim (). ‘Relationships between speech production and speech perception in
a second language’, in Kjell Elenius and Peter Branderud (eds), Proceedings of the th
International Congress of Phonetic Sciences, iv. Stockholm: –.
Llisterri, Joaquim, María Jesús Machuca, Carme de la Mota, Montserrat Riera, and Antonio
Ríos (). ‘The perception of lexical stress in Spanish’, in Maria-Josep Solé, Daniel
Recasens, and Joaquín Romero (eds), Proceedings of the th International Congress of
Phonetic Sciences. Barcelona: Causal Productions, –.
Llisterri, Joaquim, María Jesús Machuca, Carme de la Mota, Montserrat Riera, and Antonio
Ríos (). ‘La percepción del acento léxico en español’, in Filología y lingüística. Estudios
ofrecidos a Antonio Quilis. Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientíﬁcas-
Universidad Nacional de Educación a Distancia-Universidad de Valladolid, –.
Lloret, Maria-Rosa (). ‘Estructura sil·làbica’, in Joan Solà, Maria-Rosa Lloret, Joan Mas-
caró, and Manuel Pérez Saldanya (eds), Gramàtica del català contemporani, Barcelona:
Empúries, –.
Lloret, María-Rosa and Jesús Jiménez (). ‘Un análisis “óptimo” de la armonía vocálica del
andaluz’, Verba : –.
Lobanov, Boris M. (). ‘Classiﬁcation of Russian vowels spoken by different speakers’,
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America /B: –.
Local, John (). ‘Phonetic detail and the organization of talk-in-interaction’, in Proceedings
of the th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences. Saarbrücken, –.
López Morales, Humberto (). ‘Velarization of -/n/ in Puerto Rican Spanish’, in David
Sankoff and Henrietta Cedergreen (eds), Variation Omnibus. Edmonton: Linguistic
Research, –.
Loporcaro, Michele (a). ‘Phonological processes’, in Martin Maiden, John Charles Smith,
and Adam Ledgeway (eds), The Cambridge History of the Romance Languages, Vol. :
Structures. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, –.

References

Loporcaro, Michele (b). ‘Syllable, segment and prosody’, in Martin Maiden, John Charles
Smith, and Adam Ledgeway (eds.), The Cambridge History of the Romance Languages, Vol.
: Structures. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, –.
Lorenzo, Ramón (). ‘Algúns datos sobre a evolución das sibilantes medievais’, in Cilene da
Cunha de Pereira and Paulo Roberto Dias Pereira (eds), Miscelânea de estudos linguísticos,
ﬁlológicos e literários in memoriam Celso Cunha. Rio de Janeiro: Nova Fronteira, –.
Lyche, Chantal (ed.) (). French Generative Phonology: Retrospective and Perspectives.
Saltford: Association for French Language Studies.
Lyche, Chantal (). ‘Le français de référence: éléments de synthèse’, in Sylvain Detey,
Jacques Durand, Bernard Laks, and Chantal Lyche (eds), Les variétés du français parlé
dans l’espace francophone: ressources pour l’enseignement. Paris: Ophrys, –.
Mackenzie Beck, Janet (). ‘Perceptual analysis of voice quality: the place of the Vocal
Proﬁle Analysis’, in William. J. Hardcastle and Janet Mackenzie-Beck (eds), A Figure of
Speech: a Festschrift for John Laver. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, –.
Maddieson, Ian (). Patterns of Sounds. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Madureira, Sandra (). ‘Reciting a sonnet: production strategies and perceptual effects’, in
Plinio A. Barbosa, Sandra Madureira, and César Reis (eds), Proceedings of the th Conference
on Speech Prosody (Speech Prosody ). São Paulo: RG, –.
Madureira, Sandra and Zuleica Antonia de Camargo (). ‘Exploring sound symbolism in
the investigation of speech expressivity’, in Antonis Botinis (ed.), Proceedings of the rd
ISCA Tutorial and Research Workshop on Experimental Linguistics (ExLing ). Athens:
ISCA and University of Athens, –.
Magnen, Cynthia (). Approche dynamique de la perception de la parole: catégorisation de la
substance et de la variabilité phonétique en langue maternelle par les francophones et en
langue étrangère pour les hispanophones. PhD dissertation. University of Toulouse Le Mirail.
Mahrt, Timothy (). LMEDS Language Markup and Experimental Design Software [soft-
ware program].
Maiden, Martin (). A Linguistic History of Italian. London: Longman.
Maiden, Martin and Mair Parry (eds) (). The Dialects of Italy. London: Routledge.
Major, Roy C. (). ‘English voiceless stop production by speakers of Brazilian Portuguese’,
Journal of Phonetics : –.
Malmberg, Bertil (). ‘Los grupos de consonantes en español’, in Estudios de fonética
hispánica: Collectanea Phonetica. Madrid: CSIC, –.
Maniwa, Kazumi, Allard Jongman, and Travis Wade (). ‘Acoustic characteristics of clearly
spoken English fricatives’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America /: –.
Marin, Stefania (). ‘The temporal organization of complex onsets and codas in Romanian:
a gestural approach’, Journal of Phonetics /–: –.
Marin, Stefania (). ‘Romanian diphthongs /ea/ and /oa/: an articulatory comparison
with /ja/ – /wa/ and with hiatus sequences’. Revista de Filología Románica [sp. issue] :
–.
Marin, Stefania and Marianne Pouplier (). ‘Temporal organization of complex onsets and
codas in American English: testing the predictions of a gestural coupling model’, Motor
Control /: –.
Marin, Stefania and Marianne Pouplier (). ‘Articulatory synergies in the temporal organ-
ization of liquid clusters in Romanian’, Journal of Phonetics : –.
References


Marotta, Giovanna (). ‘Il consonantismo romano. Processi fonologici e aspetti acustici’, in
Federico Albano Leoni and Rosa Giordano (eds), Italiano parlato. Analisi di un dialogo.
Naples: Liguori, –.
Marston, Lisa (). A Stratal OT Analysis of the Sanskrit Nominal Accent Paradigm. MA
thesis. California State University.
Martin, Philippe (). ‘Sentence intonation in four Romance languages’, in Antonis Botinis
(ed.), Intonation: Theory, Models and Applications. Proceedings of an ESCA Workshop.
Athens: –.
Martínez Celdrán, Eugenio (a). ‘Cantidad e intensidad en los sonidos obstruyentes del
castellano: hacia una caracterización acústica de los sonidos aproximantes’, Estudios de
Fonética Experimental : –.
Martínez Celdrán, Eugenio (b). Fonética. Barcelona: Teide.
Martínez Celdrán, Eugenio (). ‘Sobre la naturaleza fonética de los alófonos de /b, d, g/ en
español y sus distintas denominaciones’, Verba : –.
Martínez Celdrán, Eugenio (). ‘Problems in the classiﬁcations of approximants’, Journal of
the International Phonetic Association /: –.
Martínez Celdrán, Eugenio (). ‘Some chimeras of traditional Spanish phonetics’, in Laura
Colantoni and Jeffrey Steele (eds), Selected Proceedings of the rd Conference on Laboratory
Approaches to Spanish Phonology. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Proceedings Project, –.
Martínez Celdrán, Eugenio and Ana M. Fernández Planas (). Manual de fonética espa-
ñola. Articulaciones y sonidos del español. Barcelona: Ariel.
Martínez Celdrán, Eugenio and Lucrecia Rallo (). ‘[ɾ-r]: ¿Dos clases de sonidos?’, Estudios
de Fonética Experimental : –.
Martínez-Gil, Fernando (). ‘El principio de la distancia mínima de sonoridad y el
problema de la vocalización consonántica en el español dialectal de Chile’, Hispanic
Linguistics : –.
Martínez-Gil, Fernando (). ‘Obstruent vocalization in Chilean Spanish: a serial versus a
constraint-based approach’, Probus /: –.
Martínez Mayo, Concepción (). ‘Descrición acústica de tres fricativas galegas [s̺] [θ] [ʃ]’,
Cadernos de Lingua : –.
Martins, Ana Maria and João Saramago (). ‘As sibilantes em português. Um estudo de
geograﬁa linguística e de fonética experimental’, in Ramón Lorenzo (ed.), Actas do XIX
Congreso Internacional de Lingüística e Filoloxía Románicas, iv. A Coruña: Fundación Pedro
Barrié de la Maza, –.
Mascaró, Joan (). ‘El sistema vocàlic. Reducció vocàlica’, in Joan Solà, Maria-Rosa Lloret,
Joan Mascaró, and Manuel Pérez Saldanya (eds), Gramàtica del català contemporani. Volum
. Introducció. Fonètica i fonologia. Morfologia. Barcelona: Empúries, –.
Mascaró, Joan (). ‘External allomorphy and lexical representation’. Linguistic Inquiry
/: –.
Mascaró, Joan and Joaquim Rafel (). ‘La “e̯” intervocàlica baleàrica’, Randa : –.
Massone, María Ignacia (). ‘Estudio acústico y perceptivo de las consonantes nasales y
líquidas del español’, Estudios de Fonética Experimental : –.
Masthoff, Herbert R. (). ‘A report on a voice disguise experiment’, Forensic Linguistics /:
–.
Matos, Denilson (). Língua Portuguesa II: Morfologia I. Curitiba: IESDE Brasil.

References

Mattoso Câmara Jr, Joaquim (). História e estructura da língua portuguesa. Rio de Janeiro:
Padrão-Livraria.
Maurer, Daphne, and Janet F. Werker (). ‘Perceptual narrowing during infancy: a
comparison of language and faces’, Developmental Psychobiology /: –.
McCarthy, John J. (). ‘Harmonic serialism and parallelism’, in Masako Hirotani, Andries
Coetzee, Nancy Hall, and Ji-Yung Kim (eds), Proceedings of the North East Linguistics
Society . Amherst, MA: Graduate Linguistic Student Association, Rutgers University,
–. Retrieved from http://works.bepress.com/john_j_mccarthy/.
McCarthy, John J. (). A Thematic Guide to Optimality Theory. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
McCarthy, John J. (). Hidden Generalizations: Phonological Opacity in Optimality Theory.
London: Equinox.
McCarthy, John J. (). Doing Optimality Theory: Applying Theory to Data. Malden, MA:
Blackwell.
McCarthy, John J. (). ‘An introduction to Harmonic Serialism’, Language and Linguistics
Compass /: –. Retrieved from http://works.bepress.com/john_j_mccarthy//.
McCarthy, John J. (). ‘Perceptually grounded faithfulness in Harmonic Serialism’, Linguistic
Inquiry /: –. Retrieved from http://works.bepress.com/john_j_mccarthy//.
McCarthy, John J. and Alan Prince (). ‘Prosodic Morphology I: Constraint Interaction and
Satisfaction’ [technical report no. ]. Rutgers University Center for Cognitive Science.
Retrieved from http://works.bepress.com/john_j_mccarthy/.
McCarthy, John J. and Alan Prince (). ‘The emergence of the unmarked: Optimality in
prosodic morphology’, in Mercè Gonzàlez (ed.), NELS : Proceedings of the North East
Linguistics Society. Amherst, MA: Graduate Linguistic Student Association, –.
McCarthy, John J. and Alan Prince (). ‘Faithfulness and reduplicative identity’, in Jill
Beckman, Laura Walsh Dickey, and Suzanne Urbanczyk (eds), University of Massachusetts
Occasional Papers in Linguistics . Amherst, MA: GLSA, –.
McCarthy, John J. and Alan Prince (). ‘Faithfulness and identity in Prosodic Morphology’,
in René Kager, Harry van der Hulst, and Wim Zonneveld (eds), The Prosody–Morphology
Interface. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, –.
McGuire, Grant (). ‘A brief primer on experimental designs for speech perception
research’. The University of California Santa Cruz (UCSC) Linguistics Research Center
Laboratory Report, –.
McKinnon, Sean (). Intervocalic/s/Voicing in Catalonian Spanish. Honors thesis. The
Ohio State University.
Mehler, Jacques, Peter Jusczyk, Ghislaine Lambertz, Nilofar Halsted, Josiane Bertoncini, and
Claudine Amiel-Tison (). ‘A precursor of language acquisition in young infants’,
Cognition /: –.
Ménétrey, Pierre and Sandra Schwab (). ‘Labguistic: a web platform to design and run
speech perception experiments’, in Yolanda Congosto Martín, María Luisa Montero
Curiel, and Antonio Salvador Plans (eds), Fonética Experimental, Espacio Europeo,
Educación Superior e Investigación. Universidad de Cáceres y Universidad de Sevilla,
–.
Menke, Mandy R. (). The Acquisition of Spanish Vowels by Native English-Speaking
Students in Spanish Immersion Programs. PhD dissertation. University of Minnesota.
References


Menke, Mandy R. and Timothy Face (). ‘Second language Spanish vowel production: an
acoustic analysis’, Studies in Hispanic and Lusophone Linguistics : –.
Mertens, Piet (). ‘Intonational grouping, boundaries, and syntactic structure in French’, in
David House and Paul Touati (eds), Proceedings of ESCA Workshop on Prosody. Lund,
–.
Mertens, Piet (). ‘A predictive approach to the analysis of intonation in discourse in
French’, in Yuji Kawaguchi, Ivan Fónagy, and Tsunekazu Moriguchi (eds), Prosody and
Syntax. Crosslinguistic Perspectives. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, –.
Meunier, Christine, Cheryl Frenck-Mestre, Taïssia Lelekov-Boissard, and Martine Le Besnerais
(). ‘Production and perception of foreign vowels: does the density of the system play a
role?’, Proceedings of the th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences. Barcelona: Causal
Productions, –.
Meyer, David, Evgenia Dimitriadou, Kurt Hornik, Andreas Weingessel, and Friedrich Leisch
(). ‘e’ (version .–) [R package].
Michelas, Amandine (). Caractérisation Phonétique et Phonologique du Syntagme Intermé-
diaire en Français: de la Production à la Perception. PhD dissertation. Aix-Marseille Université.
Michelas, Amandine and Mariapaola D’Imperio (). ‘Where syntax meets prosody: tonal
and duration variability in French Accentual Phrases’, Journal of Phonetics /: –.
Miguel, Maria Augusta Cavaco (). Os Padrões das Alternâncias Vocálicas e da Vogal Zero
na Fonologia Portuguesa. PhD dissertation. Universidade dos Açores.
Mira Mateus, Maria Helena (). Aspectos da fonologia portuguesa. Lisbon: Centro de
Linguística da Universidade de Lisboa.
Mira Mateus, Maria Helena and Ernesto d’Andrade (). The Phonology of Portuguese.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mizuguchi, Shinobu, Jennifer Cole, Gabor Pinter, Koichi Tateishi, and Tim Mahrt ().
‘Natural speech perception by Land Lspeakers of English’ [poster]. Experimental and
Theoretical Advances in Prosody (ETAP) , University of Illinois, May th–th, .
Mohanan, Karuvannur Puthanveettil (). The Theory of Lexical Phonology. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Molinos Castro, Rita (). ‘As vocáis átonas ﬁnais en galego: estudio acústico’, Cadernos de
Lingua : –.
Molnar, Monika, Manuel Carreiras, and Judit Gervain (). ‘Language dominance shapes
non-linguistic rhythmic grouping in bilinguals’, Cognition : –.
Molnar, Monika, Judit Gervain, and Manuel Carreiras (). ‘Within-rhythm class native
language discrimination abilities of Basque-Spanish monolingual and bilingual infants at .
months of age’, Infancy /: –.
Monaretto, Valéria N. O. (). ‘O apagamento da vibrante pós-vocálica nas capitais do sul
do Brasil’, Letras de Hoje /: –.
Monaretto, Valéria (). ‘Descrição da vibrante no português do sul do Brasil’, in Leda Bisol
and Gisela Collischnonn (orgs), Português do Sul do Brasil: Variação Fonológica. Porto
Alegre: PUCRS, –.
Mondéjar, José (). El verbo andaluz: formas y estructuras. Madrid: Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Cientíﬁcas.
Mora, Elsa, Fabienne Courtois, and Christian Cavé (). ‘Étude comparative de la perception
par des sujets francophones et hispanophones de l’accent lexical en espagnol’, Revue Parole
: –.

References

Mora, Joan Carles and Marianna Nadeu (). ‘Leffects on the perception and production
of a native vowel contrast in early bilinguals’, International Journal of Bilingualism /:
–.
Moratal Canales, Vicente (). Estudio sincrónico y contrastivo sobre el yeísmo en Gandía.
MA thesis. UNED.
Morgan, Terrell A. (). Sonidos en contexto: una introducción a la fonética del español con
especial referencia a la vida real. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Morrison, Geoffrey Stewart (). ‘Perception and production of Spanish vowels by English
speakers’, in Maria-Josep Solé, Daniel Recasens, and Joaquín Romero (eds), Proceedings of
the th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences. Barcelona: Causal Productions:
–.
Morrison, Geoffrey Stewart (). L& LProduction and Perception of English and Spanish
Vowels: A Statistical Modelling Approach. PhD dissertation. University of Alberta.
Morrison, Geoffrey Stewart (). ‘L-Spanish speakers’ acquisition of the English/i/–/ɪ/
contrast: duration-based perception is not the initial developmental stage’, Language and
Speech /: –.
Morrison, Geoffrey Stewart (). ‘L-Spanish speakers’ acquisition of the English/i/–/ɪ/con-
trast II: perception of vowel inherent spectral change’, Language and Speech /: –.
Moutinho, Lurdes de Castro, Rosa Lídia Coimbra, and Elisa Fernández Rei (). ‘Novos
contributos para o estudo da fronteira prosódica entre o galego e o português europeu’,
Cadernos de Letras da UFF : –.
Moyer, Alene (). ‘Ultimate attainment in Lphonology: the critical factors of age,
motivation, and instruction’, Studies in Second Language Acquisition /: –.
Mukherjee, Joybrato, and Marianne Hundt (eds) (). Exploring Second-Language Varieties
of English and Learner Englishes: Bridging a Paradigm Gap. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Muller, Daniel H. and Trinidad V. Muller (). ‘The problem of interference in beginning
Portuguese’, The Modern Language Journal /: –.
Munhall, Kevin and Anders Löfqvist (). ‘Gestural aggregation in speech: laryngeal ges-
tures’, Journal of Phonetics : –.
Muñiz Cachón, Carmen and Miguel Cuevas Alonso (–). ‘Grados de sonorización de la
consonante /s/ en el español de Asturias’, Revista de Filoloxía Asturiana –: –.
Muñoz García, Margarita (). La perception et la production de l’accent lexical de l’espagnol
par des francophones: aspects phonétiques et psycholinguistiques. PhD dissertation. Univer-
sité de Toulouse Le Mirail—Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona.
Muñoz García, Margarita, Nathalie Panissal, Michel Billières, and Lorraine Baqué (). ‘¿La
metáfora de la criba fonológica se puede aplicar a la percepción del acento léxico
español? Estudio experimental con estudiantes francófonos’, in Carmen M. Bretones Call-
ejas et al. (eds), La Lingüística Aplicada Actual: Comprendiendo el lenguaje y la mente.
Almería: Universidad de Almería-Asociación Española de Lingüística Aplicada (AESLA),
–.
Munro, Murray J. (). ‘Foreign accent and speech intelligibility’, in Jette G. Hansen
Edwards and Mary L. Zampini (eds), Phonology and Second Language Acquisition. Amster-
dam: John Benjamins, –.
Munson, Benjamin (). ‘A method for studying variability in fricatives using dynamic
measures of spectral mean’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America /: –.
References


Munson, Benjamin, Elizabeth C. McDonald, Nancy L. DeBoe, and Aubrey R. White ().
‘The acoustic and perceptual bases of judgments of women and men’s sexual orientation
from read speech’, Journal of Phonetics /: –.
Nam, Hosung, Louis Goldstein, and Elliot Saltzman (). ‘Self-organization of syllable
structure: a coupled oscillator model’, in François Pellegrino, Egidio Marsico, Ioana Chit-
oran, and Christophe Coupé (eds), Approaches to Phonological Complexity. De Gruyter
Mouton, –.
Navarra, Jordi, Núria Sebastián-Gallés, and Salvador Soto-Faraco (). ‘The perception of
second language sounds in early bilinguals: new evidence from an implicit measure’, Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance /: –.
Navarro Tomás, Tomás (). Manual de entonación española. New York: Hispanic Institute
in the United States.
Navarro Tomás, Tomás (, th edn). Manual de pronunciación española. Madrid: Centro
Superior de Investigaciones Cientíﬁcas.
Navarro Tomás, Tomás (, nd edn). Manual de pronunciación española. Madrid: Centro
Superior de Investigaciones Cientíﬁcas.
Nazzi, Thierry and Franck Ramus (). ‘Perception and acquisition of linguistic rhythm by
infants’, Speech Communication /: –.
Nazzi, Thierry, Josiane Bertoncini, and Jacques Mehler (). ‘Language discrimination by
newborns: toward an understanding of the role of rhythm’, Journal of Experimental Psych-
ology: Human Perception and Performance /: –.
Nazzi, Thierry, Peter W. Jusczyk, and Elisabeth K. Johnson (). ‘Language discrimination
by English-learning -month-olds: effects of rhythm and familiarity’, Journal of Memory
and Language /: –.
Nespor, Marina (). ‘On the rhythm parameter in phonology’, in Iggy M. Roca (ed.),
Logical Issues in Language Acquisition. Dordrecht: Foris Publications, –.
Nespor, Marina and Irene Vogel (). Prosodic Phonology. Dordrecht: Foris.
Nespor, Marina and Irene Vogel (). Prosodic Phonology: with a New Foreword. Berlin: De
Gruyter Mouton.
Newmeyer, Frederick J. (). ‘Why typology doesn’t matter to grammatical theory’, in Grant
Goodall, Martha Schulte-Nafeh, and Vida Samiian (eds), Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth
Meeting of the Western Conference on Linguistics. Fresno: Department of Linguistics,
California State University at Fresno, –.
Nguyen, Noël (). ‘Representations of speech sound patterns in the speaker’s brain: insights
from perception studies’, in Abigail C. Cohn, Cécile Fougeron, and Marie K. Huffman (eds),
Handbook of Laboratory Phonology. Oxford: Oxford University Press, –.
Ní Chasaide, Ailbhe, and Christer Gobl (). ‘Voice source variation’, in William
J. Hardcastle and John Laver, J. (eds), The Handbook of Phonetic Sciences. Oxford: Blackwell,
–.
Niebuhr, Oliver and Christine Meunier (). ‘The phonetic manifestation of French /s#ʃ/
and /ʃ#s/ sequences in different vowel contexts: on the occurrence and the domain of sibilant
assimilation’, Phonetica : –.
Niebuhr, Oliver, Meghan Clayards, Christine Meunier, and Leonardo Lancia (). ‘On place
assimilation in sibilant sequences /sʃ/–Comparing French and English’, Journal of Phonetics
/: –.

References

Nirgianaki, Elina (). ‘Acoustic characteristics of Greek fricatives’, Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America /: –.
Nishibayashi, Léo-Lyuki, Louise Goyet, and Thierry Nazzi (). ‘Early speech segmentation
in French-learning infants: monosyllabic words versus embedded syllables’, Language and
Speech /: –.
Nishida, Gustavo (). Análise Acústica do ‘Tap’ em Grupos no PB. Undergraduate disser-
tation. Universidade Federal do Paraná.
Nittrouer, Susan, Michael Studdert-Kennedy, and Richard S. McGowan (). ‘The emer-
gence of phonetic segments: evidence from the spectral structure of fricative-vowel syllables
spoken by children and adults’, Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research :
–.
Nocentini, Alberto (). Proﬁlo del dialetto aretino, in Alberto Nocentini (ed.), Il vocabolario
aretino di Francesco Redi. Florence: Elite, –.
Nolan, Francis, Tara Holst, and Barbara Kühnert (). ‘Modelling [s] to [ʃ] accommodation
in English’, Journal of Phonetics /: –.
Núñez, Faustino (). ‘Fisiología de la fonación’, in Ignacio Cobeta, Faustino Núñez, and
Secundino Fernández, Patología de la voz, Barcelona: Marge Medica Books, –.
Ogden, Richard (). ‘Turn-transition, creak and glottal stop in Finnish talk-in-interaction’,
Journal of the International Phonetic Association /: –.
Ogden, Richard (). ‘Creaky voice and turn-taking in Finnish’, in Proceedings of BAAP,
Newcastle, March –. Retrieved from http://www-users.york.ac.uk/~rao/BAAP.hand
out.pdf.
Ohala John J. (). ‘Experimental historical phonology’, in John M. Anderson and Charles
Jones (eds), Historical Linguistics. Vol. . Proceedings of the First International Conference on
Historical Linguistics, Edinburgh, nd–th September . Amsterdam: North-Holland,
–.
Ohala, John J. (). ‘The origin of sound patterns in vocal tract constraints’, in Peter
F. MacNeilage (ed.), The Production of Speech. New York: Springer, –.
Ohala, John J. (). ‘The phonetics and phonology of aspects of assimilation’, in John
Kingston and Mary Beckman (eds), Papers in Laboratory Phonology I: Between the Gram-
mar and Physics of Speech. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, –.
Ohala, John J. (). ‘Alternatives to the sonority hierarchy for explaining segmental sequen-
tial constraints’, Papers from the Parasession on the Syllable. Chicago, IL: Chicago Linguistic
Society, –.
Ohala, John J. (). ‘The phonetics of sound change’, in Charles Jones (ed.), Historical
Linguistics: Problems and Perspectives. London: Longman, –.
Ohala, John J. (). ‘Sound symbolism’, in Proceedings of the th Seoul International
Conference on Linguistics (SICOL). Seoul: Linguistic Society of Korea, –.
Oliveira, Inês Gomes (). A aquisição do sistema vocálico por falantes de português europeu
como língua não materna. PhD dissertation. Universidade de Lisboa.
O’Neill, Paul (). ‘Utterance ﬁnal /S/ in Andalusian Spanish. The phonetic neutralization of
a phonological contrast’, Language Design : –.
Orgun, C. Orhan and Andrew Dolbey (). ‘Phonology–morphology interaction in
constraint-based framework’, in Gillian Ramchand and Charles Reiss (eds), The Oxford
Handbook of Linguistic Interfaces. Oxford: Oxford University Press, –.
References


Ortega-Llebaria, Marta and Pilar Prieto (). ‘Disentangling stress from accent in Spanish:
production patterns of the stress contrast in de-accented syllables’, in Pilar Prieto, Joan
Masacaró, and Maria-Josep Solé (eds), Segmental and Prosodic Issues in Romance Phon-
ology. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, –.
Ortega-Llebaria, Marta, Hong Gu, and Jieyu Fan (). ‘English speakers’ perception of
Spanish lexical stress: context-driven Lstress perception’, Journal of Phonetics /–:
–.
Osgood, Charles Egerton, George J. Suci, and Percy H. Tannenbaum (). The Measurement
of Meaning. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.
Oyama, Susan (). ‘A sensitive period for the acquisition of a nonnative phonological
system’, Journal of Psycholinguistic Research /: –.
Pagel, Vincent, Noël Carbonell, Yves Laprie, and Jacqueline Vaissière (). ‘Spotting prosodic
boundaries in continuous speech in French’, in Kjell Elenius and Peter Branderud (eds),
Proceedings of the th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences, iv. Stockholm, –.
Paggini, Valentina and Silvia Calamai (). ‘L’anafonesi in Toscana. Il contributo degli
archivi sonori del passato’, in Mario Vayra, Cinzia Avesani, and Fabio Tamburini (eds), Il
farsi e il disfarsi del linguaggio: acquisizione, mutamento e destrutturazione della struttura
sonora del linguaggio. Milan: Ofﬁcinaventuno, –.
Palacios Alonso, Daniel (). Contribución al Estudio de Selección de Parámetros para
Identiﬁcación de Estrés en la Voz. PhD dissertation, Madrid: Escuela Técnica Superior de
Ingenieros Informáticos.
Pallier, Christophe (). Rôle de la syllabe dans la perception de la parole: études attention-
nelles. PhD dissertation. Paris: École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales.
Pallier, Christophe, Laura Bosch, and Núria Sebastián-Gallés (). ‘A limit on behavioral
plasticity in speech perception’, Cognition /: B–B.
Pallier, Christophe, Angels Colomé, and Núria Sebastián-Gallés (). ‘The inﬂuence of
native-language phonology on lexical access: exemplar-based versus abstract lexical entries’,
Psychological Science /: –.
Parker, Stephen G. (). Quantifying the Sonority Hierarchy. PhD dissertation. University of
Massachusetts Amherst.
Parrell, Benjamin (). ‘The role of gestural phasing in Western Andalusian Spanish
aspiration’, Journal of Phonetics /: –.
Parrell, Benjamin, Sungbok Lee, and Dani Byrd (). ‘Evaluation of prosodic juncture
strength using functional data analysis’, Journal of Phonetics /: –.
Pasdeloup, Valérie (). Modèle de règles rythmiques du Français appliqué à la synthèse de la
parole. Phd dissertation. Université de Provence.
Pastätter, Manfred and Marianne Pouplier (). ‘The temporal coordination of Polish onset
and coda clusters containing sibilants’, in Proceedings of the th International Seminar on
Speech Production (ISSP). Cologne, –.
Pastätter, Manfred and Marianne Pouplier (). ‘Onset-vowel timing as a function of
coarticulation resistance: evidence from articulatory data’, in Proceedings of the th Inter-
national Congress of Phonetic Sciences. The University of Glasgow, paper no. .
Patota, Giuseppe (). Lineamenti di grammatica storica dell’italiano. Bologna: Il Mulino.
Payne, Elinor M. (). ‘Phonetic variation in Italian consonant gemination’, Journal of the
International Phonetic Association /: –.

References

Payne, Elinor M. (a). ‘Non-durational indices in Italian geminate consonants’, Journal of
the International Phonetic Association /: –.
Payne, Elinor (b). ‘Phonetic motifs and the formation of sound structure’, UCL Working
Papers in Linguistics : –.
Penny, Ralph (). Variation and Change in Spanish. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Peperkamp, Sharon and Emmanuel Dupoux (). ‘A typological study of stress “deafness”’,
in Carlos Gussenhoven and Natasha Warner (eds), Laboratory Phonology . Berlin: de
Gruyter Mouton, –.
Perea, Maria-Pilar (ed.) (). Compleció i ordenació de ‘La ﬂexió verbal en els dialectes
catalans’ d’A. M. Alcover i F. de B. Moll, Barcelona: Institut d’Estudis Catalans.
Pérez, Grisel María García (). ‘Perception of English vowels by native speakers of Spanish
in a regular classroom setting’, Revista Virtual de Estudos da Linguagem–ReVEL /: –.
Pérez Sanz, Carolina (). Ajustes laríngeos y estilos de fonación en radio y TV. PhD
dissertation, Madrid: Universidad Complutense de Madrid—Instituto Universitario de
Investigación Ortega y Gasset.
Petitto, Laura-Ann, Melody S. Berens, Ioulia Kovelman, Matthew H. Dubins, Kaja K. Jasińska,
and Mark H. Shalinsky (). ‘The “Perceptual Wedge Hypothesis” as the basis for
bilingual babies’ phonetic processing advantage: new insights from fNIRS brain imaging’,
Brain and Language /: –.
Petitto, Gisela (). The Role of Experience in Perceptual Reorganization. The Case of
Bilingual Infants. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Universitat Pompeu Fabra.
Pickett, Emily R., Sheila E. Blumstein, and Marta W. Burton (). ‘Effects of speaking rate on
the singleton/geminate consonant contrast in Italian’, Phonetica : –.
Pieri, Silvio (–). ‘Fonetica del dialetto lucchese’, Archivio Glottologico Italiano : –.
Pierrehumbert, Janet(). ‘Word-speciﬁc phonetics’, in Carlos Gussenhoven and Natasha
Warner (eds), Laboratory Phonology . Berlin: de Gruyter Mouton, –.
Pierrehumbert, Janet and David Talkin (). ‘Lenition of /h/ and glottal stop’, in Gerard
J. Docherty and D. Robert Ladd (eds), Papers in Laboratory Phonology II: Gesture, Segment,
Prosody. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, –.
Pini, Alessia, Lorenzo Spreaﬁco, Simone Vantini, and Alessandro Vietti (a). ‘Differential
Interval-wise testing for local inference in Sobolev spaces’, in Enea Germán Aneiros, Giulia
Bongiorno, Ricardo Cao, and Philippe Vieu (eds), Functional Statistics and Related Fields.
Springer, –.
Pini, Alessia, Lorenzo Spreaﬁco, Simone Vantini, and Alessandro Vietti (b). ‘Permutation
methods for multi-aspect local inference on functional data’. MOX-Report . [Online.]
Available at: https://moxreports.com/.
Piske, Thorsten, Ian R. A. MacKay, and James Emil Flege (). ‘Factors affecting degree of
foreign accent in an L: a review’, Journal of Phonetics /: –.
Place, Silvia and Erika Hoff (). ‘Properties of dual language exposure that inﬂuence -year-
olds’ bilingual proﬁciency’, Child Development /: –.
Podesva, Robert J. (). ‘Phonation type as a stylistic variable: the use of falsetto in
constructing a persona’, Journal of Sociolinguistics /: –.
Poiré, François (). ‘La perception des proéminences et le codage prosodique’, Bulletin PFC
: –.
References


Polivanov, Evgenij (). ‘La perception des sons d’une langue étrangère’, Travaux du Cercle
Linguistique de Prague, : Réunion phonologique internationale tenue à Prague (–/XII
), –.
Polka, Linda and Megha Sundara (). ‘Word segmentation in monolingual infants acquir-
ing Canadian English and Canadian French: native language, cross-dialect, and cross-
language comparisons’, Infancy /: –.
Polka, Linda, Adriel John Orena, Megha Sundara, and Jennifer Worrall (). ‘Segmenting
words from ﬂuent speech during infancy–Challenges and opportunities in a bilingual
context’, Developmental Science /: e.
Polo Cano, Nuria (). Límites segmentales del sintagma prosódico en español. MA thesis.
Master in Phonetics and Phonology, Postgraduate Programme. Madrid: Universidad Inter-
nacional Menéndez Pelayo-Centro Superior de Investigaciones Cientíﬁcas.
Pons, Ferran, Laura Bosch, and David J. Lewkowicz (a). ‘Bilingualism modulates infants’
selective attention to the mouth of a talking face’, Psychological Science /: –.
Pons, Ferran, Laura Bosch, and David J. Lewkowicz (b). Bilingual infants’ attention to the
mouth and eyes of a talking person: the role of language proximity [poster]. Society for
Research in Child Development Biennial Meeting, Philadelphia, March th–st.
Portes, Cristel (). Approche du Rôle de la Prosodie dans la Structuration du Discours Oral
en Français. DEA thesis. Université De Provence.
Portes, Cristel, Mariapaola D’Imperio, and Leonardo Lancia (). ‘Positional constraints on
the initial rise in French’, in Qiuwu Ma, Hongwei Ding, and Daniel Hirst (eds), Proceedings
of the th International Conference on Speech Prosody. Shanghai: Tongji University Press,
–.
Porto Dapena, J. Álvaro (). El gallego hablado en la comarca ferrolana. Anexo de Verba.
Santiago de Compostela: Universidade de Santiago de Compostela.
Post, Brechtje (). A Phonological Analysis of French Intonation. MA thesis. University of
Nijmegen.
Post, Brechtje (). ‘Restructured phonological phrases in French: evidence from clash
resolution’, Linguistics /: –.
Post, Brechtje (). Tonal and Phrasal Structures in French Intonation. Phd Dissertation.
Nijmegen: Katholieke Universiteit. The Hague: Thesus.
Pouplier, Marianne (). ‘The atoms of phonological representations’, in Mark van
Oostendorp, Colin J. Ewen, Elizabeth Hume, and Keren Rice (eds), The Blackwell
Companion to Phonology. Volume I: General Issues and Segmental Phonology. Malden,
MA: Wiley-Blackwell, –.
Pouplier, Marianne (). ‘The gestural approach to syllable structure: universal, language-
and cluster-speciﬁc aspects’, in Susanne Fuchs, Melanie Weirich, Daniel Pape, and Pascal
Perrier (eds), Speech Planning and Dynamics. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang, –.
Pouplier, Marianne and Štefan Beňuš (). ‘On the phonetics status of syllabic consonants:
evidence from Slovak’, Laboratory Phonology x: –.
Pouplier, Marianne, Philip Hoole, and James M. Scobbie (). ‘Investigating the asymmetry
of English sibilant assimilation: acoustic and EPG data’, Laboratory Phonology : –.
Poyatos, Fernando (). Paralanguage: A Linguistic and Interdisciplinary Approach to
Interactive Speech and Sounds (Current Issues in Linguistic Theory ). Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.

References

Poyatos, Fernando (). Nonverbal Communication across Disciplines: Volume : Paralan-
guage, kinesics, silence, personal and environmental interaction. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Prieto, Pilar (). ‘Phonological phrasing in Spanish’, in Fernando Martínez-Gil and Sonia
Colina (eds), Optimality-Theoretic Studies in Spanish Phonology. Amsterdam: John Benja-
mins, –.
Prieto, Pilar, Joan Mascaró, and Maria-Josep Solé (eds) (). Segmental and Prosodic Issues
in Romance Phonology. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Prieto, Pilar, Jan van Santen, and Julia Hirschberg (). ‘Tonal alignment patterns in
Spanish’, Journal of Phonetics /: –.
Prince, Alan and Paul Smolensky ([] ). Optimality Theory: Constraint Interaction in
Generative Grammar. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Prince, Alan and Paul Smolensky (). Optimality Theory. Constraint Interaction in
Generative Grammar. Oxford: Blackwell.
Quilis, Antonio (). ‘El elemento esvarabático en los grupos [pr, br, tr...]’, Phonétique et
linguistique romanes: Mélanges offerts à M. Georges Straka, Lyon-Strasbourg: Societé de
Linguistique Romane, –.
Quilis, Antonio (). ‘Caracterización fonética del acento español’. Travaux de Linguistique
et de Littérature : –.
Quilis, Antonio (). Fonética acústica de la lengua española. Madrid: Gredos.
Quilis, Antonio (). Tratado de fonética y fonología españolas. Madrid: Gredos.
Quilis, Antonio and Manuel Esgueva (). ‘Realización de los fonemas vocálicos españoles
en posición fonética normal’, in Manuel Esgueva and Margarita Cantarero (eds), Estudios de
fonética I. Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientíﬁcas, –.
Racine, Isabelle (). ‘Spanish learners’ productions of French close rounded vowels: a
corpus-based perceptual study’, in Yukio Tono, Yuji Kawaguchi, and Makoto Minegishi
(eds), Developmental and Crosslinguistic Perspectives in Learner Corpus Research. Amsterdam:
John Benjamins, –.
Racine, Isabelle (). ‘Une approche par corpus de la liaison chez les apprenants hispano-
phones de français langue étrangère: quelles conséquences pour l’enseignement du FLE?’,
Flambeau : –.
Racine, Isabelle (). ‘La liaison chez les apprenants hispanophones avancés de FLE’, Bulletin
VALS-ASLA : –.
Racine, Isabelle (). ‘Les hispanophones’, in Sylvain Detey, Isabelle Racine, Yuji Kawaguchi,
and Julien Eychenne (eds), La prononciation du français dans le monde: du natif à l’appre-
nant. Paris: CLE International, –.
Racine, Isabelle and Sylvain Detey (). ‘La liaison dans un corpus d’apprenants: le projet
“InterPhonologie du Français Contemporain” (IPFC)’, Corpus [sp. issue]: –.
Racine, Isabelle, Sylvain Detey, and Yuji Kawaguchi (). ‘Les voyelles /y-u/ dans IPFC :
évaluation perceptive de productions natives, hispanophones et japonophones’, in Laurent
Besacier, Benjamin Lecouteux, and Gilles Sérasset (eds), Actes de la conférence conjointe JEP-
TALN-RECITAL , volume : JEP. Grenoble: ATALA and AFCP, –.
Racine, Isabelle, Sylvain Detey, Françoise Zay, and Yuji Kawaguchi (). ‘Des atouts d’un
corpus multitâches pour l’étude de la phonologie en L: l’exemple du projet «Interphono-
logie du français contemporain» (IPFC)’, in Alain Kamber and Carine Skupien Dekens
(eds), Recherches récentes en FLE. Bern: Peter Lang, –.
References


Racine, Isabelle, Françoise Zay, Sylvain Detey, and Yuji Kawaguchi (). ‘De la transcription
de corpus à l’analyse interphonologique: enjeux méthodologiques en FLE’, in Gilles Col and
Sylvester N. Osu (eds), Transcrire, écrire, Formaliser (). Rennes: PUR. Travaux Linguis-
tiques du CerLiCO : –.
Racine, Isabelle, Sylvain Detey, Nathalie Bühler, Sandra Schwab, Françoise Zay, and Yuji
Kawaguchi (). ‘The production of French nasal vowels by advanced Japanese and
Spanish learners of French: a corpus-based evaluation study’, in Katarzyna Dziubalska-
Kołaczyk, Magdalena Wrembel, and Małgorzata Kul (eds), Proceedings of the Sixth Inter-
national Symposium on the Acquisition of Second Language Speech, New Sounds .
Poznań: Adam Mickiewicz University, –.
RAE-ASALE = Real Academia Española y Asociación de Academias de la Lengua Española
(). Nueva gramática de la lengua española. Vol. : fonética y fonología. Madrid: Espasa.
Rallo Fabra, Lucrecia and Joaquín Romero (). ‘Native Catalan learners’ perception and
production of English vowels’, Journal of Phonetics /: –.
Ramus, Franck, Marina Nespor, and Jacques Mehler (). ‘Correlates of linguistic rhythm in
the speech signal’, Cognition /: –.
Rao, Rajiv (). ‘Final lengthening and pause duration in three dialects of Spanish’, in Marta
Ortega-Llebaria (ed.), Selected Proceedings of the th Conference on Laboratory Approaches to
Spanish Phonology. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Proceedings Project, –.
Rauber, Andréia S., Paola Escudero, Ricardo A. H. Bion, and Barbara O. Baptista (). ‘The
interrelation between the perception and production of English vowels by native speakers of
Brazilian Portuguese’, in Proceedings of the th Annual Conference of the International
Speech Communication Association (Interspeech ). Lisbon, –.
R Core Team (). R: a Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. Vienna:
R Foundation for Statistical Computing.
R Core Team (). R: a Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. Vienna:
R Foundation for Statistical Computing.
Real Academia Galega/Instituto da Lingua Galega (, th edn). Normas ortográﬁcas e
morfolóxicas do idioma galego. Vigo: Real Academia Galega/Instituto da Lingua Galega.
Recasens, Daniel (). ‘An acoustic analysis of V-to-C and V-to-V coarticulatory effects in
Catalan and Spanish VCV sequences’, Journal of Phonetics : –.
Recasens, Daniel (a). Fonètica descriptiva del català: assaig de caracterització de la
pronúncia del vocalisme i consonantisme del català al segle XX. Barcelona: Institut d’Estudis
Catalans.
Recasens, Daniel (b). ‘On the production characteristics of apicoalveolar taps and trills’,
Journal of Phonetics : –.
Recasens, Daniel (). Fonètica i fonologia. Barcelona: Enciclopèdia Catalana.
Recasens, Daniel (). ‘Darkness in [l] as a scalar phonetic property: implications for
phonology and articulatory control’, Clinical Linguistics and Phonetics /–: –.
Recasens, Daniel (). ‘Differences in base of articulation for consonants among Catalan
dialects’, Phonetica : –.
Recasens, Daniel (). ‘A cross-language acoustic study of initial and ﬁnal allophones of /l/’,
Speech Communication /: –.
Recasens, Daniel (). Coarticulation and Sound Change in Romance. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.

References

Recasens, Daniel and Aina Espinosa (). ‘The role of contextual and prosodic factors on
consonantal lenition and elision. The case of intervocalic [j] in Majorcan Catalan’, Journal of
Portuguese Linguistics /: –.
Recasens, Daniel and Aina Espinosa (a). ‘An electropalatographic and acoustic study of
affricates and fricatives in two Catalan dialects’, Journal of the International Phonetic
Association /: –.
Recasens, Daniel and Aina Espinosa (b). ‘Phonetic typology and positional allophones for
alveolar rhotics in Catalan’, Phonetica : –.
Recasens, Daniel and Aina Espinosa (). ‘An articulatory investigation of lingual coarticu-
latory resistance and aggressiveness for consonants and vowels in Catalan’, Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America : –.
Recasens, Daniel and Meritxell Mira (). ‘Voicing assimilation in Catalan two-consonant
clusters’, Journal of Phonetics /: –.
Recasens, Daniel and Meritxell Mira (). ‘An articulatory and acoustic study of the fricative
clusters /sʃ/ and /ʃs/ in Catalan’, Phonetica : –.
Recasens, Daniel and Maria Dolors Pallarès (). ‘A study of /ɾ/ and /r/ in the light of the
“DAC” coarticulation model’, Journal of Phonetics /: –.
Recasens, Daniel, Maria Dolors Pallarès, and Jordi Fontdevila (). ‘A model of lingual
coarticulation based on articulatory constraints’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
: –.
Redenbarger, Wayne J. (). Articulator Features and Portuguese Vowel Height. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University.
Regueira Fernández, Xosé Luís (). ‘Modelos fonéticos e autenticidade lingüística’, Cader-
nos de Lingua : –.
Regueira Fernández, Xosé Luís (coord.) (). Os sons da lingua. Vigo: Xerais.
Regueira Fernández, Xosé Luís (). ‘A sílaba en galego: lingua, estándar e ideoloxía’, in
Ramón Lorenzo (ed.), Homenaxe a Fernando R. Tato Plaza. Santiago de Compostela:
Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, –.
Regueira Fernández, Xosé Luís (). ‘Vocais ﬁnais en galego e en portugués: un estudio
acústico’, in Helena González Fernández and María Xesús Lama López (eds): Actas do VII
Congreso Internacional de Estudos Galegos. Sada/Barcelona: O Castro/AIEG/Universitat de
Barcelona, –.
Regueira Fernández, Xosé Luís (). ‘Cambios fonéticos e fonolóxicos no galego contem-
poráneo’, Estudos de Lingüística Galega : –.
Regueira Fernández, Xosé Luís (). ‘Nasalización en gallego y en portugués’, Estudios de
Fonética Experimental : –.
Regueira Fernández, Xosé Luís (). ‘Mantenimiento y cambio lingüístico: fricativas sibi-
lantes en gallego’, Revista de Filología Románica [sp. issue]: –.
Regueira Fernández, Xosé Luís (). ‘Factores internos e externos nos cambios fonolóxicos
no galego actual’, in Jean-Paul Chauveau, Marcello Barbato, and Inés Fernández-Ordóñez
(eds), Actes du XXVIIe Congrès international de linguistique et de philologie romanes.
Section : Linguistique variationnelle, dialectologie et sociolinguistique. Nancy: ATILF,
–.
Regueira Fernández, Xosé Luís (). A fala do norte da Terra Cha: estudio descritivo.
Doctoral dissertation. Universidade de Santiago de Compostela.
References


Regueira Fernández, Xosé Luís (). ‘Elementos para a deﬁnición dun modelo fonético
estándar da lingua galega’, in Benigno Fernández Salgado (ed.), Proceedings of the th
International Conference on Galician Studies (Univ. of Oxford, ), i. Oxford: Center for
Galician Studies, –.
Regueira Fernández, Xosé Luís (). ‘Estándar oral e variación social da lingua galega’, in
Rosario Álvarez Blanco and Dolores Vilavedra Fernández (eds), Cinguidos por unha arela
común: homenaxe ó profesor Xesús Alonso Montero, Santiago de Compostela: Universidade
de Santiago de Compostela, –.
Regueira Fernández, Xosé Luís (). ‘Cambios fonolóxicos no galego actual’, in Mercedes
Brea, Francisco Fernández Rei, and Xosé Luís Regueira Fernández (eds), Cada palabra
pesaba, cada palabra medía. Homenaxe ao profesor Antón Santamarina. Santiago de
Compostela: Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, –.
Regueira Fernández, Xosé Luis (). Dicionario de pronuncia da lingua galega. A Coruña,
Spain: Real Academia Galega. Dictionary search available online at: http://ilg.usc.es/
pronuncia/; Introduction available online at: http://ilg.usc.es/pronuncia/dicionario_
fonetico_introducion.pdf.
Reich, Alan R. and James E. Duke (). ‘Effects of selected vocal disguises upon speaker
identiﬁcation by listening’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America /: –.
Renwick, Margaret E. L. (). Vowels of Romanian: Historical, Phonological and Phonetic
Studies. PhD dissertation. Cornell University.
Renwick, Margaret E. L. (). The Phonetics and Phonology of Contrast: The Case of the
Romanian Vowel System. Berlin: de Gruyter Mouton.
Renzi, Lorenzo (). ‘Da dove viene l’articolo il’, in Johannes Kramer and Guntram
A. Plangg (eds), Verbum Romanicum: Festschrift für Maria Iliescu. Hamburg: Helmut
Buske, –.
Repetti, Lori (). ‘Consonant-ﬁnal loanwords and epenthetic vowels in Italian’, Catalan
Journal of Linguistics : –.
Rietveld, A. C. M. and F. J. Koopmans-van Beinum (). ‘Vowel reduction and stress’,
Speech Communication /: –.
Rigault, André (). ‘Rôle de la fréquence, de l’intensité et de la durée vocalique dans la
perception de l’accent en français’, in Antti Sovijärvi and Pentti Aalto (eds), Proceedings of
the th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences. The Hague: Mouton, –.
Rizzo, Maria L. and Gabor J. Szekely (). ‘energy: E-statistics’ (version ..) [R package].
Robinson, Kimball L. (). ‘On the voicing of intervocalic “s” in the Ecuadorian Highlands’,
Romance Philology /: –.
Rocha Filho, Zaldo A. B. (). A narração de futebol no Brasil: um estudo fonético-estilístico.
Doctoral dissertation. UNICAMP.
Rodman, Robert D. (). Speaker recognition of disguised voices: A program for research. In
Proceedings of the th COST workshop, Ankara: «Speaker identiﬁcation by man and by
machine: Directions for forensic applications, –.
Rodríguez Álvarez, Xosé Antonio (). ‘Descrición acústica das sibilantes no concello de
Cangas do Morrazo’, Cadernos de Lingua : –.
Rohlfs, Gerhard ([] ). Grammatica storica della lingua italiana e dei suoi dialetti.
Fonetica. Turin: Einaudi (orig. edn Historische Grammatik der Italienischen Sprache und
ihrer Mundarten—Lautlehre. Bern: Francke, ).

References

Rojo, Guillermo (). ‘Aguja de navegar corpus’, in Víctor M. Castel and Liliana Cubo de
Severino (eds), La renovación de la palabra en el bicentenario de la Argentina. Los colores de
la mirada lingüística. Mendoza: Editorial FFyL, UNCuyo, –.
Romanelli, Soﬁa and Andrea Cecilia Menegotto (). ‘English speakers learning Spanish:
perception issues regarding vowels and stress’, Journal of Teaching and Research /: –.
Romano, Antonio (). ‘A preliminary contribution to the study of phonetic variation of /r/
in Italian and Italo-Romance’, in Lorenzo Spreaﬁco and Alessandro Vietti (eds), Rhotics:
New Data and Perspectives. Bolzano: Bolzano University Press, –.
Romero, Joaquín (). Gestural Coordination in Spanish. An Experimental Study of Spir-
antization and Aspiration. PhD dissertation. University of Connecticut.
Romero, Joaquín (). ‘The effect of voicing assimilation on gestural coordination’, in John
J. Ohala, Yoko Hasegawa, Manjari Ohala, Daniel Granville, and Ashlee C. Bailey (eds),
Proceedings of the th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences. San Francisco, CA,
–.
Romero, Joaquín (). ‘Gestural timing in the perception of Spanish r+C clusters’, in Laura
Colantoni and Jeffrey Steel (eds), Selected Proceedings of the rd Conference on Laboratory
Approaches to Spanish Phonology. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Proceedings Project, –.
Romito, Luciano, Vincenzo Galatà, and Rosita Lio (). ‘Fluency articulation and speech rate
as new parameters in the speaker recognition’, in Actas del III Congreso de Fonética
Experimental. Santiago de Compostela: Xunta de Galicia, –.
Romito, Luciano, Rosita Lio, Pier Francesco Ferri, and Sabrina Giordano (). ‘Stabilità dei
parametri nello “speaker recognition”. La variabilità intra e inter parlatore: F, durata e
“articulation rate”’, in Stephan Schmid, Michael Schwarzenbach, and Dieter Studer-Joho
(eds), La dimensione temporale del parlato. Atti del  Convegno AISV. Torriana: EDK,
–.
Rossi, Albertina A. (). ‘Variação da “vibrante múltipla” no interior da palavra lexical na
fala de descendentes italianos das cidades sulinas Chapecó/SC e Flores da Cunha/RS’,
Working Papers em Lingüística : –.
Rossi, Mario (). ‘Le français, langue sans accent?’, Studia Phonetica : –.
Roubeau, Bernard (). Mécanismes vibratoires laryngés et contrôle neuro-musculaire de la
fréquence fondamentale. PhD thesis. Université Paris-Orsay.
Roubeau, Bernard, Henrich, Nathalie, and Castellengo, Michèle (). ‘Laryngeal vibratory
mechanisms: the notion of vocal register revisited’, Journal of Voice /: –.
Rubach, Jerzy (). ‘Duke-of-York derivations in Polish’, Linguistic Inquiry /: –.
Saborit, Josep (). Millorem la pronúncia. Valencia: Acadèmia Valenciana de la Llengua.
Salsignac, Jeanne (). ‘Perception de l’accent primaire de langues étrangères: présentation
d’une étude expérimentale’, La Linguistique /: –.
Saltzman, Ellliot L. and Kevin G. Munhall (). ‘A dynamical approach to gestural pattern-
ing in speech production’, Ecological Psychology /: –.
Salvador, Gregorio (). ‘El habla de Cúllar-Baza. Contribución al estudio de la frontera del
andaluz’, Revista de Filologia Española /–: –.
Salvador, Gregorio (). ‘Unidades fonológicas vocálicas en andaluz oriental’, Revista de la
Sociedad Española de Lingüistica /: –.
Sampson, Geoffrey (). ‘The empirical trend: ten years on’, International Journal of Corpus
Linguistics /: –.
References


Sampson, Rodney (). Nasal Vowel Evolution in Romance. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Sampson, Rodney (). ‘L’évolution de la voyelle accentuée des formes tinto, pinta, punto,
unto, etc. en castillan’, Revue de Linguistique Romane /: –.
Sampson, Rodney (). Vowel Prosthesis in Romance: a Diachronic Study. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Sancho Cremades, Pelegrí (). El valencià col·loquial de la vila de Canals. Canals: Ajunta-
ment de Canals.
San Segundo, Eugenia, Helena Alves, and Marianela Fernández Trinidad (). ‘CIVIL
corpus: voice quality for speaker forensic comparison’, Selected Papers from the th Inter-
national Conference on Corpus Linguistics (CILC), Procedia—Social and Behavioral
Sciences , –.
Santamarina, Antonio (). El verbo gallego. Anexo de Verba. Santiago de Compostela:
Universidade de Santiago de Compostela.
Savu, Carmen-Florina (). ‘Another look at the structure of [ɾ]: constricted intervals and
vocalic elements’, in Lorenzo Spreaﬁco and Alessandro Vietti (eds), Rhotics: New Data and
Perspectives. Bolzano: Bolzano University Press, –.
Schepens, Job, Ton Dijkstra, and Franc Grootjen (). ‘Distributions of cognates in Europe
as based on Levenshtein distance’, Bilingualism: Language and Cognition /: –.
Scherer, Klaus R. (). ‘The nature and study of appraisal: a review of the issues’, in Klaus
R. Scherer, Angela Schorr, and Tom Johnstone (eds), Appraisal Processes in Emotion:
Theory, Methods, Research. New York: Oxford University Press, –.
Scherer, Klaus R. (). ‘What are emotions? And how can they be measured?’, Social Science
Information /: –.
Scherer, Klaus R. (). ‘The dynamic architecture of emotion: evidence for the component
process model’, Cognition & Emotion /: –.
Scherer, Klaus R., Johan Sundberg, Lucas Tamarit, and Gláucia L. Salomão (). ‘Comparing
the expression of emotion in the speaking and the singing voice’, Computer Speech &
Language /: –.
Schlosberg, Harold (). ‘Three dimensions of emotion’, Psychological Review /: –.
Schmeiser, Bradley (). ‘An acoustic analysis of intrusive vowels in Guatemalan Spanish
/ɾC/ clusters’, The University of Pennsylvania Working Papers in Linguistics /: –.
Schmidt, Lauren B. and Erik W. Willis (). ‘Systematic investigation of voicing assimilation
of Spanish /s/ in Mexico City’, in Scott M. Alvord (ed.), Selected Proceedings of the th
Conference on Laboratory Approaches to Romance Phonology. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla
Proceedings Project, –.
Schwab, Sandra (). ‘Do native Spanish speakers transfer accentual acoustic properties
from Spanish to French L?’, in Qiuwu Ma, Hongwei Ding, and Daniel Hirst (eds),
Proceedings of the th International Conference on Speech Prosody, Shanghai: Tongji Uni-
versity Press, –.
Schwab, Sandra (). ‘Apprenants hispanophones de FLE et accentuation en français’,
Travaux neuchâtelois de linguistique : –.
Schwab, Sandra and Joaquim Llisterri (). ‘La perception de l’accent lexical espagnol par
des apprenants francophones’, in Lorraine Baqué and Marta Estrada (eds), La langue et l’être
communiquant. Hommage à Julio Murillo. Mons: CIPA, –.

References

Schwab, Sandra and Joaquim Llisterri (a). ‘Are French speakers able to learn to perceive
lexical stress contrasts?’, in Wai-Sum Lee and Eric Zee (eds), Proceedings of the th
International Congress of Phonetic Sciences. Hong Kong, –.
Schwab, Sandra and Joaquim Llisterri (b). ‘The perception of Spanish lexical stress by
French speakers: stress identiﬁcation and time cost’, in Magdalena Wrembel, Małgorzata
Kul, and Katarzyna Dziubalska-Kołaczyk, (eds), Achievements and Perspectives in SLA of
Speech: New Sounds . Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang, –.
Schwab, Sandra and Joaquim Llisterri (). ‘The role of acoustic correlates of stress in the
perception of Spanish accentual contrasts by French speakers’, in Qiuwu Ma, Hongwei Ding
and Daniel Hirst (eds), Proceedings of the th International Conference on Speech Prosody.
Shanghai: Tongji University Press, –.
Schwab, Sandra and Joaquim Llisterri (). ‘Does training make French speakers more able to
identify lexical stress?’, Concordia Working Papers in Applied Linguistics : –.
Schwab, Sandra and Joaquim Llisterri (). ‘The discrimination of Spanish lexical stress
contrasts by French-speaking listeners’, in Elena Babatsouli and David Ingram (eds),
Proceedings of the International Symposium on Monolingual and Bilingual Speech .
Chania: Institute of Monolingual and Bilingual Speech, –.
Schwartz, Jean-Luc, Louis-Jean Boë, Nathalie Vallée, and Christian Abry (). ‘The
dispersion-focalization theory of vowel systems’, Journal of Phonetics /: –.
Schwartz, Martin F. (). ‘Identiﬁcation of speaker sex from isolated, voiceless fricatives’,
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America /: –.
Scobbie, James M. (). ‘The phonetics-phonology overlap’, Queen Mary University College
Speech Science Research Centre Working Paper WP-. [Online.] Available at http://www.
qmuc.ac.uk/ssrc.
Scobbie, James M. (, nd edn). ‘(R) as a variable’, in Keith Brown (ed.), Encyclopedia of
Language and Linguistics. Oxford: Elsevier, –.
Scobbie, James M., Reenu Punnoose, and Ghada Khattab (). ‘Articulating ﬁve liquids: a
single speaker ultrasound study of Malayalam’, in Lorenzo Spreaﬁco and Alessandro
Vietti (eds), Rhotics: New Data and Perspectives. Bolzano: Bolzano University Press,
–.
Sebastián-Gallés, Núria and Laura Bosch (). ‘Developmental shift in the discrimination of
vowel contrasts in bilingual infants: is the distributional account all there is to it?’, Devel-
opmental Science /: –.
Sebastián-Gallés, Núria and Salvador Soto-Faraco (). ‘Online processing of native and
non-native phonemic contrasts in early bilinguals’, Cognition : –.
Sebastián-Gallés, Núria, Bàrbara Albareda-Castellot, Whitney M. Weikum, and Janet
F. Werker (). ‘A bilingual advantage in visual language discrimination in infancy’,
Psychological Science /: –.
Segura i Llopes, Carles (). Estudi lingüístic del parlar d’Alacant. Alicante: Generalitat
Valenciana/Institut d’Estudis ‘Juan Gil-Albert’.
Segura i Llopes, Carles (). El parlar d’Elx a estudi: aproximació a una descripció. Elche:
Ajuntament d’Elx.
Segura i Llopes, Carles (). Una cruïlla lingüística. Caracterització del parlar del Baix
Vinalopó. Alicante: Universitat d’Alacant-Departament de Filologia Catalana/Instituto
Municipal de Cultura de l’Ajuntament d’Elx.
References


Selkirk, Elizabeth (). On Prosodic Structure and its Relation to Syntactic Structure. PhD
dissertation. Indiana University.
Shadle, Christine H. and Sheila J. Mair (). ‘Quantifying spectral characteristics of frica-
tives’, in ICSLP : Proceedings of the th International Conference on Spoken Language
Processing. Philadelphia, PA, –.
Shaw, Jason, Adamantios I. Gafos, Philip Hoole, and Chakir Zeroual (). ‘Syllabiﬁcation in
Moroccan Arabic: evidence from patterns of temporal stability in articulation’, Phonology
/: –.
Shaw, Jason, Adamantios I. Gafos, Philip Hoole, and Chakir Zeroual (). ‘Dynamic
invariance in the phonetic expression of syllable structure: a case study of Moroccan Arabic
consonant clusters’, Phonology /: –.
Silva, Adelaide H. P. (). ‘Para a descrição fonético-acústica das líquidas no Português
brasileiro: dados de um informante paulistano’, Sínteses : –.
Silva, Adelaide H. P. (a). ‘Caracterização acústica de [R], [ɾ], [L] e [ʎ] nos dados de um
informante paulistano’, Cadernos de Estudos Linguísticos : –.
Silva, Adelaide H. P. (b). ‘Pistas para o condicionamento prosódico sobre a variabilidade
de produção de /r/’, Estudos Linguísticos : –.
Silva, Adelaide H. P. (). ‘Proposta de representação dinâmica para os róticos iniciais do
PB’, Língua Viva : –.
Silva, Adelaide H. P., Felipe Costa Clemente, and Gustavo Nishida (). ‘Para a representa-
ção dinâmica do tap em grupos e codas: evidências acústicas’, Revista Virtual de Estudos da
Linguagem—ReVEL /: –.
Silva, Audinéia Ferreira da (). Estudo das características acústicas das fricativas do
Portugês do Brasil. MA thesis. Universidade Estadual Paulista, Faculdade de Ciências e
Letras de Araraquara.
Simonet, Miquel (). ‘Dark and clear laterals in Catalan and Spanish: interaction of
phonetic categories in early bilinguals’, Journal of Phonetics /: –.
Simonet, Miquel (). ‘Production of a Catalan-speciﬁc vowel contrast by early Catalan-
Spanish bilinguals’, Phonetica /–: –.
Simonet, Miquel (). ‘The Lacquisition of Spanish phonetics and phonology’, in José
Ignacio Hualde, Antxon Olarrea, and Erin O’Rourke (eds), The Handbook of Hispanic
Linguistics. Boston, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, –.
Simonet, Miquel (). ‘Phonetic consequences of dynamic cross-linguistic interference in
proﬁcient bilinguals’, Journal of Phonetics : –.
Sjölander, Kåre and Jonas Beskow (). Wavesurfer (version ..) [Computer program].
Smith, Caroline L. (). The Temporal Organization of Vowels and Consonants. Unpub-
lished PhD dissertation. Yale University.
Smith, Caroline L. (). ‘The devoicing of /z/ in American English: effects of local and
prosodic context’, Journal of Phonetics /: –.
Smith, Caroline L. (). ‘Naïve listeners’ perceptions of French prosody compared to the
predictions of theoretical models’, in Hi-Yoon Yoo and Elisabeth Delais-Roussarie (eds),
Actes d’IDP . Paris, –.
Smith, Caroline L. and Ricardo Napoleão de Souza (). ‘The phrasing of dislocations in
French: comparing spontaneous speech and reading’, The Scottish Consortium for ICPhS

References

(ed.), Proceedings of the th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences. The Univer-
sity of Glasgow, paper no. .
Smith, Jennifer L. (). Phonological Augmentation in Prominent Positions. New York: Routledge.
Solé, Maria-Josep (). ‘Aerodynamic characteristics of trills and phonological patterning’,
Journal of Phonetics /: –.
Sosa, Juan Manuel (). La entonación del español. Su estructura fónica, variabilidad y
dialectología. Madrid: Cátedra.
Spreaﬁco, Lorenzo and Alessandro Vietti (). ‘Sistemi fonetici in contatto: la variabilità di/
r/nell’italiano di tedescofoni altoatesini’, in Massimo Pettorino, Antonella Giannini, and
Francesca M. Dovetto (eds), La comunicazione parlata , volume II. Atti del terzo congresso
internazionale del Gruppo di Studio sulla Comunicazione Parlata. Naples: OPAR, –.
Spreaﬁco, Lorenzo and Alessandro Vietti (). ‘/R/ in un parlante bilingue: un`indagine
articolatoria basata su dati ecograﬁci’, in Barbara Gili Favela and Mirko Grimaldi (eds),
Contesto comunicativo e variabilità nella produzione e percezione della lingua. Atti del 
convegno AISV. Roma: Bulzoni, –.
Spreaﬁco, Lorenzo and Alessandro Vietti (eds) (). Rhotics: New Data and Perspectives.
Bolzano: Bolzano University Press.
Spreaﬁco, Lorenzo and Alessandro Vietti (). ‘The sociophonetics of /R/ in Bolzano:
Modelling linguistic and social variation’, International Journal of Linguistics, /: –.
Spreaﬁco, Lorenzo, Chiara Celata, Alessandro Vietti, Chiara Bertini, and Irene Ricci ().
‘An EPG+UTI study of Italian /r/’, in The Scottish Consortium for ICPhS (ed.),
Proceedings of the th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences. The University of
Glasgow, paper no. .
Sproat, Richard and Osamu Fujimura (). ‘Allophonic variation in English /l/ and its
implications for phonetic implementation’, Journal of Phonetics /: –.
Staroverov, Petr (). Splitting Theory and Consonant Epenthesis. PhD dissertation. Rutgers
University.
Stevens, Kenneth N. (). ‘The quantal nature of speech: evidence from articulatory-acoustic
data’, in Edward E. David and Peter B. Denes (eds), Human Communication: a Uniﬁed
View. New York: McGraw-Hill, –.
Stevens, Kenneth N. (). ‘Articulatory–acoustic–auditory relationships’, in William
J. Hardcastle and John Laver (eds), The Handbook of Phonetic Sciences. Oxford: Blackwell,
–.
Stevens, Kenneth N. (). Acoustic Phonetics. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Stevens, Kenneth N., Sheila E. Blumstein, Laura Glicksman, Martha Burton, and Kathleen
Kurowski (). ‘Acoustic and perceptual characteristics of voicing in fricatives and
fricative clusters’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America : –.
Strange, Winifred (). ‘Cross-language phonetic similarity of vowels’, in Ocke-Schwen
Bohn and Murray J. Munro (eds), Language Experience in Second Language Speech Learning:
in Honor of James Emil Flege. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, –.
Struijke, Caro (). Existential Faithfulness: a Study of Reduplicative TETU, Feature Movement,
and Dissimilation. New York: Routledge.
Strycharczuk, Patrycja (). Phonetics–Phonology Interactions in Pre-sonorant Voicing. PhD
thesis. University of Manchester.
References


Strycharczuk, Patrycja, Marijn van’t Veer, Martine Bruil, and Kathrin Linke (). ‘Phonetic
evidence on phonology–morphosyntax interactions: sibilant voicing in Quito Spanish’,
Journal of Linguistics /: –.
Sundara, Megha and Adrienne Scutellaro (). ‘Rhythmic distance between languages affects
the development of speech perception in bilingual infants’, Journal of Phonetics /:
–.
Sundberg, Johan and Carl Högset (). ‘Voice source differences between falsetto and modal
registers in counter tenors, tenors and baritones’, Logopedics Phoniatrics Vocology, /:
–.
Tabain, Marija and Pascal Perrier (). ‘Articulation and acoustics of /i/ in preboundary
position in French’, Journal of Phonetics /: –.
Taboada, Manuel (). El habla de Verín. Anexo de Verba. Santiago de Compostela:
Universidade de Santiago de Compostela.
Teixidó, Maria (). Constraints on Early Word Segmentation and Mapping. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation. University of Barcelona.
Teixidó, Maria and Laura Bosch (). Disyllabic word segmentation in bilingual infants
acquiring phonologically close languages [poster]. Society for Research in Child Devel-
opment Biennial Meeting, Philadelphia, March th–st. Terrell, Tracy D. (). ‘Final /s/
in Cuban Spanish’, Hispania /: –.
Titze, Ingo R. (). Principles of Voice Production. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Toda, Martine, Shinji Maeda, and Koyishi Honda (). ‘Formant-cavity afﬁliation in sibilant
fricatives’, in Susanne Fuchs, Martine Toda, and Marzena Żygis (eds), Turbulent Sounds: an
Interdisciplinary Guide. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton, –.
Tolkmitt, Frank J., and Klaus R. Scherer (). ‘Effects of experimentally induced stress on
vocal parameters’, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance
/: –.
Torreblanca, Máximo (). ‘El fonema /s/ en la lengua española’, Hispania /: –.
Torreira, Francisco and Mirjam Ernestus (). ‘Weakening of intervocalic /s/ in the
Nijmegen Corpus of Casual Spanish’, Phonetica /: –.
Torreira, Francisco, Martine Adda-Decker, and Mirjam Ernestus (). ‘The Nijmegen
Corpus of Casual French’, Speech Communication /: –.
Troﬁmovich, Pavel and Wendy Baker (). ‘Learning second language suprasegmentals:
effect of Lexperience on prosody and ﬂuency characteristics of Lspeech’, Studies in
Second Language Acquisition /: –.
Trubetzkoy, Nikolai S. (). ‘Grundzüge der Phonologie’, Travaux du Cercle Linguistique de
Prague . Prague: Cercle Linguistique de Prague.
Trubetzkoy, Nikolai S. (). Principes de phonologie. Paris: Klincksieck.
Trubetzkoy, Nikolai S. (). Principles of Phonology, trans. Christiane Baltaxe [Ger. orig.
Grundzüge der Phonologie, Travaux du Cercle Linguistique de Prague ()]. Berkeley,
CA: University of California Press.
Tsuji, Sho and Alejandrina Cristia (). ‘Perceptual attunement in vowels: a meta-analysis’,
Developmental Psychobiology /: –.
Tsur, Reuven (). What Makes Sound Patterns Expressive? The Poetic Mode of Speech
Perception. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

References

Turco, Giuseppina, Christine Dimroth, and Bettina Braun (). ‘Intonational means to mark
Verum Focus in German and French’, in Language and Speech /: –.
Tuttle, Edward F. (). ‘Nasalisation in Northern Italy: syllabic constraints and strength
scales as developmental parameters’, Rivista di Linguistica : –.
Uffmann, Christian (). ‘Intrusive [r] and optimal epenthetic consonants’, Language
Sciences : –.
Vaissière, Jacqueline (). ‘Rhythm, accentuation and ﬁnal lengthening in French’, in Johan
Sundberg, Lennart Nord, and Rolf Carlson (eds), Music, Language, Speech and Brain:
Proceedings of an International Symposium at the Wenn-Gren Center, Stockholm, –
September . Basingstoke: Macmillan, –.
Vaissière, Jacqueline (). ‘Cross-linguistic prosodic transcription: French versus English’, in
Nina B. Volskaya, Natalia D. Svetozarova, and Pavel A. Skrelin (eds), Problems and Methods
in Experimental Phonetics. In Honour of the th Anniversary of Prof. L.V. Bondarko. Saint
Petersburg: Saint Petersburg State University, –.
van Bezooijen, Renée (). Characteristics and Recognizability of Vocal Expressions of
Emotion. Dordrecht: Foris.
van den Berg, J. (). ‘Mechanism of the larynx and the laryngeal vibrations’, in Bertil
Malmberg (ed.), Manual of Phonetics. London: North-Holland, –.
Vander Klok, Jozina, Heather Goad, and Michael Wagner (). ‘Prosodic focus in English vs.
French: a scope account’. Unpublished manuscript. University of British Columbia and
McGill University.
van Dommelen, Wim A. (). ‘Acoustic parameters in human speaker recognition’, Language
and Speech /: –.
van Hout, Roeland and Hans Van de Velde (). ‘Patterns of /r/ variation’, in Hans Van de
Velde and Roeland van Hout (eds), ‘r-atics: Sociolinguistic, Phonetic and Phonological
Characteristics of/r/. Etudes and Travaux [sp. issue]: –.
van Leussen, Jan-Willem and Paola Escudero (). ‘Learning to perceive and recognize a
second language: the LLP model revised’, Frontiers of Psychology : .
Vasiliev, Polina (). The Initial State for Californian English Learners of Spanish and
Portuguese Vowels. PhD dissertation. University of California.
Veiga Arias, Amable (). ‘Fonología gallega: fonemática. El sistema vocálico’, Grial :
–.
Veiga Arias, Amable (). ‘Fonología gallega: fonemática. Más sobre las vocales’, Grial :
–.
Veiga Arias, Amable (). Fonología gallega. Valencia: Bello.
Venables, W. N. and Ripley, B. D. (). Modern Applied Statistics with R. New York: Springer.
Vennemann, Theo (). Preference Laws for Syllable Structure. Berlin: de Gruyter Mouton.
Veny, Joan (, th edn). Els parlars catalans: síntesi de dialectologia. Palma de Mallorca:
Moll.
Veny, Joan (). Aproximació al dialecte eivissenc. Palma de Mallorca: Moll.
Verluyten, Sylvain Paul Marcel (). Investigations on French Prosodics and Metrics. PhD
dissertation. University of Antwerp.
Vidal Figueiroa, Tiago (). ‘Proposta descritiva das consoantes fricativas alveolodentais dos
dialectos galegos’, Cadernos de Lingua : –.
References


Vidal Figueiroa, Tiago (). ‘Estructuras fonéticas de tres dialectos de Vigo’, Verba :
–.
Vieira, Celso de Oliveira (). Crátilo, ou sobre a correção dos nomes. São Paulo: Paulus.
Vietti, Alessandro and Lorenzo Spreaﬁco (). ‘Lo strano caso di /R/ a Bolzano: problemi di
interfaccia’, in Annibale Elia, Claudio Iacobini, and Miriam Voghera (eds), Livelli di analisi e
interfaccia. Roma: Bulzoni: –.
Vietti, Alessandro and Lorenzo Spreaﬁco (). ‘Sprachkontakt in der Phonologie bilingualer
Sprecher des Tirolischen’, in Stefan Rabanus (ed.), Deutsch als Minderheitsprache in Italien.
Germanistische Linguistik -. Hildesheim: Olms Weidmann, –.
Vietti, Alessandro, Antonio Romano, and Lorenzo Spreaﬁco (). ‘Tempi e modi di con-
servazione delle R italiane nei frigoriferi CLIPS’, in Stephan Schmid, Michael Schwarzen-
bach, and Dieter Studer (eds), La dimensione temporale del parlato. Atti del ° Convegno
AISV. Torriana: EDK, –.
Vigário, Marina (). The Prosodic Word in European Portuguese. New York: De Gruyter
Mouton.
Viola, Izabel Cristina (). ‘Efeito expressivo das variantes estilísticas do /r/’, Intercâmbio :
–.
Wagner, Isolde and Olaf Köster (). ‘Perceptual recognition of familiar voices using falsetto
as a type of voice disguise’, in Proceedings of the th International Congress of Phonetic
Sciences. San Francisco, –.
Waltl, Susanne and Stefania Marin (). Temporal organization of three-consonant onset
clusters in American English [poster]. th Conference on Laboratory Phonology (LabPhon
), Albuquerque, NM, July th–th, .
Warner, Natasha (). ‘Reduction’, in Marc van Oostendorp, Colin J. Ewen, Elizabeth
Hume, and Keren Rice (eds), The Blackwell Companion to Phonology, Vol. : Phonological
Processes. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, –.
Weber, Andrea and Anne Cutler (). ‘Lexical competition in non-native spoken-word
recognition’, Journal of Memory and Language : –.
Weikum, Whitney M., Athena Vouloumanos, Jordi Navarra, Salvador Soto-Faraco, Núria
Sebastián-Gallés, and Janet F. Werker (). ‘Visual language discrimination in infancy’,
Science /: .
Welby, Pauline (). ‘French intonational structure: evidence from tonal alignment’, Journal
of Phonetics /: –.
Werker, Janet F. and Krista Byers-Heinlein (). ‘Bilingualism in infancy: ﬁrst steps in
perception and comprehension’, Trends in Cognitive Sciences /: –.
Werker, Janet F. and Suzanne Curtin (). ‘PRIMIR: a developmental framework of infant
speech processing’, Language Learning and Development /: –.
Werker, Janet F. and Richard C. Tees (). ‘Cross-language speech perception: evidence for
perceptual reorganization during the ﬁrst year of life’, Infant Behavior and Development /:
–.
Werker, Janet F., Krista Byers-Heinlein, and Christopher T. Fennell (). ‘Bilingual begin-
nings to learning words’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B:
Biological Sciences /: –.
Westbury, John R. and Patricia A. Keating (). ‘On the naturalness of stop consonant
voicing’, Journal of Linguistics /: –.

References

Wetzels, Leo W. (). ‘Contrastive and allophonic properties of Brazilian Portuguese
vowels’, in Dieter Wanner and Douglas A. Kibbee (eds), New Analyses in Romance Linguis-
tics. Selected Papers from the Linguistic Symposium on Roman Languages XVIII, Philadel-
phia, PA: John Benjamins, –.
Wetzels, Leo W. (). ‘Mid-vowel neutralization in Brazilian Portuguese’, Cadernos de
Estudos Linguísticos : –.
Wetzels, Leo W. (). ‘Mid-vowel alternations in the Brazilian Portuguese verb’, Phonology
/: –.
Wheeler, Max W. (). Phonology of Catalan. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Wheeler, Max W. (). The Phonology of Catalan. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wiese, Richard (). ‘The representation of rhotics’, in Mark van Oostendorp, Colin J. Ewen,
Elisabeth Hume, and Keren Rice (eds), The Blackwell Companion to Phonology. Malden,
MA: Wiley-Blackwell, –.
Wightman, Colin W., Stefanie Shattuck-Hufnagel, Mari Ostendorf, and Patti J. Price ().
‘Segmental durations in the vicinity of prosodic phrase boundaries’, Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America : –.
Williams, Daniel and Paola Escudero (). ‘A cross-dialectal acoustic comparison of vowels
in Northern and Southern British English’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America /
: –.
Williams, Edwin B. (). ‘Radical-changing verbs in Portuguese’, Language /: –.
Williams, Edwin B. (). From Latin to Portuguese: Historical Phonology and Morphology of
the Portuguese Language. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Wireback, Kenneth (). ‘On the word-internal velarization of /n/ in Cuban radio broad-
casting’, in Javier Gutiérrez-Rexach and Fernando Martínez-Gil (eds), Advances in Hispanic
Linguistics: Papers from the nd Hispanic Symposium, Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press,
pp. –.
Wolf, Matthew Adam (). Optimal Interleaving: Serial Phonology–Morphology Interaction
in a Constraint-Based Model. Doctoral dissertation. University of Massachusets at Amherst.
Wong-Opasi, Uthaiwan (). Lexical Phonology and the Spanish Lexicon. Doctoral disser-
tation. University of Illinois at Urbana-Champain (Reproduced by the Indiana University
Linguistics Club, Bloomington, IN, ).
Wright, John (). ‘The behavior of nasalized vowels in the perceptual vowel space’, in
Report of the Phonology Laboratory . Berkeley, CA: University of California, –.
Wright, Richard (). ‘A review of perceptual cues and cue robustness’, in Bruce Hayes,
Robert Kirchner, and Donca Steriade (eds), Phonetically Based Phonology. Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press, –.
Yip, Moira (). ‘Phonological constraints, optimality, and phonetic realization in Canton-
ese’, in Brian Agbayani, Kazue Takeda, and Sze-Wing Tang (eds), UCI Working Papers in
Linguistics . Irvine, CA: Irvine Linguistics Students Association, University of California,
–.
Yusunova, Yana, Jordan R. Green, and Antje Mefferd (). ‘Accuracy assessment for AG,
Electromagnetic Articulograph’, Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research /:
–.
Zampini, Mary L. (). ‘The relationship between the production and perception of L
Spanish stops’, Texas Papers in Foreign Language Education : –.
References


Zaragozà, Marina (). ‘Estudi fonètic del parlar de Silla’, Algudor. Revista del Centre
d’Estudis Locals de Silla : –.
Zeller, Jan Patrick (). ‘Variation of sibilants in Belarusian-Russian mixed speech’, in Peter
Auer, Javier Caro Reina, and Göz Kaufmann (eds), Language Variation: European Perspec-
tives IV. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, –.
Zmarich, Claudio, Barbara Gili Fivela, Pascal Perrier, Cristophe Savariaux, and Graziano
Tisato (). ‘Consonanti scempie e geminate in italiano: studio acustico e cinematico
dell’articolazione linguale e bilabiale’, in Veronica Giordani, Valentina Bruseghini, and
Piero Cosi (eds), Atti del  convegno AISV. Torriana: EDK, –.
Zmarich, Claudio, Barbara Gili Fivela, Pascal Perrier, Cristophe Savariaux, and Graziano
Tisato (). ‘Speech timing organization for the phonological length contrast in Italian
consonants’ in Proceedings of the th Annual Conference of the International Speech
Communication Association (Interspeech ). Red Hook, NY: Curran Associates, –.
Zsiga, Elizabeth C. (). ‘Acoustic evidence for gestural overlap in consonant sequences’,
Journal of Phonetics : –.
Zsiga, Elizabeth C. (). ‘An acoustic and electropalatographic study of lexical and post-
lexical palatalization in American English’, in Bruce Cornell and Amalia Arvaniti (eds),
Papers in Laboratory Phonology IV: Phonology and Phonetic Evidence. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, –.
Zsiga, Elizabeth C. (). ‘Phonetic alignment constraints: consonant overlap and palataliza-
tion in English and Russian’, Journal of Phonetics /: –.
Żygis, Marzena (). ‘On changes in Slavic sibilant systems and their perceptual motivation’,
in Daniel Recasens, Fernando Sánchez Miret, and Kenneth J. Wireback (eds), Experimental
Phonetics and Sound Change. Munich: LINCOM, –.

References

Index
accent , , , , , :
accented vowels 
accentedness –, –
accentual clash 
accentual difference 
accentual ﬁlter –
accentual information –, –, 
accentual phrase , , –, 
accentual prominences , 
accentual systems , –
deaccented contexts 
foreign accent , , :
foreign-accented speech –
non-accented language 
northeastern Brazilian accents 
nuclear pitch accent 
phrasal accents :
phrasal accentuation 
unaccented vowels –
acoustics:
acoustic analyses –, , , –, , ,
, , , , , , ,
, , , , , –,
–, –
acoustic center –
acoustic centroids 
acoustic COG values , , 
acoustic consequences , , , , 
acoustic continuum 
acoustic cues –, , , , ,
, –, , 
acoustic data , , –, , –, , ,
, , , , , , ,
–, , , –, ,
–, 
acoustic dimensions , , , 
acoustic dispersion , –
acoustic distance , , , 
acoustic parameters –, –
acoustic perception 
acoustic realization –, –, –,
, , –, , 
acoustic space/distance , –, , –,
, , , 
acoustic stretch 
acoustic traits 
acoustic-perceptual level 
prosodic acoustic analysis 
single acoustic distribution 
acquisition:
acquisition system , , 
bilingualism:
bilingual exposure 
bilingual input –, –, , 
bilingual language acquisition –,
, , –, –, –,
–:
advanced learners –, , ,
, , 
age of onset of learning , 
bilingual ﬁrst-language
acquisition , , 
bilingual setting , , 
early bilinguals , , 
late bilinguals , 
mid bilinguals , 
proﬁcient , , , –
second language –, –,
–:
contrastive second-language
sounds 
second-language learners , –
second-language speech
acquisition 
simultaneous bilinguals 
single bilingual speech community 
bilinguals’ difﬁculties 
Bilingual Language Proﬁle 
bilingual speech behavior , 
bilingual speech production 
different language-class bilinguals 
distance effects :
distant language pairs , –, 
dual language learning 
dual-receptive vocabulary 
early language differentiation , , ,
, 
general language acquisition , , –,
, , –:
early lexicon , 
monolingual setting , 
language microstructure acquisition 
lexical stress perception acquisition 
monolingual populations 

acquisition: (cont.)
newborns 
phonotactic rules acquisition 
quasi-monolingual 
sequential language learning 
adductive tension 
aerodynamic factors 
afﬁxes:
afﬁx type , 
afﬁxation , –, –,
–, 
afﬁxed root 
affricates , , , 
airﬂow interruption 
allomorphs , 
allophones :
allophonic realizations , 
allophonic variants , 
unmarked allophones 
alveolars:
alveolar approximants 
alveolar fricative , , 
alveolar place of articulation 
alveolar ridge 
alveolar taps 
alveolar trills 
postalveolar fricative , 
anaphonesis –, –
aperiodic noise , 
aperture distinction 
apical:
apical alveolar trill 
apico-alveolar realization 
apico-alveolar sibilant pronunciations
, 
apico-postalveolar fricative 
apico-postalveolar realization , 
back apical articulation 
approximant –, –, –, –,
–, , –, –, :
alveolar approximants 
approximant fricative , , 
approximant period 
approximant vocalic element 
close approximant –
lenited approximant 
open approximant , –, 
postapproximantized tap 
retroﬂex approximants 
arrhizotonic forms , , , –
articulation:
alveolar place of articulation 
articulation of vowels 
articulators , , , , , –, ,
–:
dependent articulators :
back 
tongue tip 
independent articulators :
lips 
tongue tip 
articulatory accuracy 
articulatory action , , , 
articulatory gestures , , , , , ,
–, , –, –
articulatory movement –, 
articulatory organs , 
articulatory patterns 
articulatory phases , –, 
articulatory reduction 
articulatory settings , , , , 
articulatory structures 
articulatory symmetry , –, –,
–:
articulatory symmetry effect 
articulatory target , :
achievement of target 
target release 
articulatory tenseness , 
articulatory variables :
constriction length 
sublingual cavity –, 
articulatory vowel-to-vowel timing –,
, 
back apical articulation 
coarticulation , , –, , , ,
–, , , , , –,
, –, –:
coarticulatory activity 
coarticulatory effects 
coarticulatory resistance , –
hyperarticulation 
manner of articulation , –
open articulatory transition 
place of articulation –, 
sibilant articulation 
stop place of articulation 
velar (more posterior) articulation 
arytenoids 
aspiration , , 
assibilation , , :
assibilated fricative 
assibilated rhotics , 
assimilation:
gradient assimilation , , :
gradient voicing assimilation 

Index

preconsonantal sibilant voicing
assimilation –, 
progressive assimilation 
progressive assimilatory processes 
regressive assimilation , , –,
–
Two-Category Assimilation 
voicing assimilation , –, ,
–, , , –
Atlas lingüístico etnográﬁco de Castilla-La
Mancha 
Atlas Linguistique Roman 
attention distribution 
attunement , 
auditory cues 
auditory misparsing 
backness , , , , , , , 
base stimulus 
Big Data 
biomechanical behavior of the vocal
folds :
biomechanical content 
body :
deep lamina propia 
intermediate lamina propia 
thyroarytenoid muscle/vocalis
muscle 
cover :
epithelium 
superﬁcial lamina propria 
blending , , , –, –, –,
, –:
blending strength –, –
gestural blending model –, , ,
–, , –
boundary:
boundary score/b-scores , –,
–
boundary tones 
intonational phrase boundary 
preboundary , 
prosodic boundaries –, –, ,
, –:
prosodic boundaries on gestural
organization 
prosodic boundary condition , 
CAa index 
candidate chains 
carrier sentences , 
Cartesian plane 
category boundary shift 
cavities:
front oral cavity 
sublingual cavity –, 
c-center organization –, –, –
ceiling effect 
center-of-gravity –, , –
centralization –, , , 
centroid effect 
Chomskyan modularity 
chunks 
climax effect 
clitics –
clusters –, , , , , , , –,
–, , –, , –,
–:
alveolar clusters –
cluster complexity 
coarticulation resistance 
global intra-cluster reorganization 
heterosyllabic clusters 
nasal clusters , –, 
rhotic-lateral clusters 
tautosyllabic clusters 
three-consonant clusters –, –
two-consonant clusters , –, ,
–
velar clusters –, –
velar nasal clusters –, 
coda –, –, –, , , –, ,
, , , , , :
coda position –, , , , –,
–, , , , , 
simplex codas 
COG:
acoustic COG values , , 
COG trajectories –, 
COG values –
cross-speaker COG values 
temporal COG trajectories 
cognates , –, , , 
cognitive constructs 
cognitive domains 
Common European Framework of Reference
for Languages 
communication roles 
communicative exchanges 
Comparative Markedness 
compensatory effect 
compound adverbs 
compounding , , , –, –,
–, , 
computational methods 
computational system –
Index


consonants:
anchor consonant 
coarticulation-resistant vowel-adjacent
consonants 
consonant epenthesis 
consonant manner , 
consonant production 
consonant sequences in speech 
consonant-initial stem 
consonantal anchor points 
consonantal context , 
coronal consonants , 
dento-alveolar consonants 
ﬁnal consonant lenition –
fricative consonants , 
homorganic consonants 
labial consonants , 
leftmost (vowel-remote) consonant , 
nasal consonants , , 
oral consonants 
palatal consonant , , , :
palato-alveolar consonant 
postnasal consonant , –:
postnasal consonant voicing –
rightmost (vowel-adjacent)
consonant , , –
root-ﬁnal palatal consonant , 
spirant consonant 
target consonants 
tautosyllabic consonant 
voiced consonants –, , , 
voiced postnasal consonant , –
voiceless consonants , 
vowel anchor points 
word-ﬁnal consonant , , , 
constraint rankings , , , –
constriction:
close oral constriction 
closure phase 
constricted variants , , –
constriction degree , , –, ,
, , , , 
constriction interval , 
constriction phase , , , , , ,
–, , , , :
offset of constriction phase , –
onset of constriction phase , –
labial constriction 
lingual constrictions 
pharyngeal constriction 
postdorsal velar constriction 
contact community 
contextual information 
coronal:
coronal consonants , 
coronal stop 
corpus , , , , –
counterfeeding –, , , 
C-V transition 
dark lateral , , 
degree of darkness 
deletion , , , , –, –, 
deviant phoneme 
diachrony , :
diachronic changes –, , 
dialects –, , –, , , , , , ,
–, , , –, , ,
, , , –, , ,
, , , , , :
dialect-dependent differences –, –
dialectal varieties , , 
traditional dialectology 
differentiation , , –, , , ,
–, –
dimensional approaches 
diphthongization –, :
base’s diphthong –
falling diphthong 
high diphthongs 
historical diphthongs 
mid diphthongs 
monophthongs , 
Romanian diphthongs , –
Dolmen platform 
dorsal , , , :
dorso-palatal contact pattern 
dorsopalatal contact size 
educational approach 
electrodes , –
electromagnetic articulography , , 
electropalatography , 
elision , –, –, 
elog , –, , –, 
emergence of the unmarked 
emotions:
emotion dimensions :
activation , –, –, , :
primitive activation , 
dominance , 
involvement , 
valence 
emotion primitives 
emotional states 
emotional substance 

Index

Euclidean distance –, , , 
event-related brain potentials
methodology 
explosion bar , 
ExpressionEvaluator , :
ExpressionEvaluator Script :
fundamental frequency –, , ,
, :
fundamental frequency
derivative 
intensity measures 
faithfulness , –, :
positional faithfulness constraint , ,
, 
ﬁnal lengthening , :
phrase-ﬁnal lengthening 
word-ﬁnal lengthening , , 
focus:
all focus 
broad focus 
focus phrase 
focus-phrase-initial words 
narrow focus , –
no focus 
wide focus 
formants , , , , –, , , , ,
, –, –, , –, ,
–, , , , 
fortition 
Fourier transform 
frication , , , , , –, ,
, :
frication noise –, , , , 
frication onset 
fricative , , –, –, –, –,
–, –, –, –,
–, , , , ,
–, , –, :
alveolo-palatal fricatives 
apico-postalveolar fricative 
English fricatives , 
fricative cognates 
fricative duration –, –, –
fricative rhotics , , 
fricative sequences , –, –
fricative sibilants :
voiceless fricative sibilants , , ,
, , , 
fricative variants 
fricative vocalic element 
Galician fricatives 
glottal fricative –, , 
labial fricative , 
labiodental fricative , , , –
lamino-alveolar fricatives 
lamino-dental fricative 
lamino-postalveolar fricative 
lingual fricatives , , , , , 
nonrhotic fricatives 
occlusion fricative 
palato-alveolar fricative , , 
plosive fricative 
postalveolar fricative , 
spirant fricative , , 
unvoiced glottal fricatives 
unvoiced uvular fricatives 
unvoiced velar fricatives 
velar fricative –
velar spirant fricative , 
voiced glottal fricatives 
voiced uvular fricatives 
voiced velar fricatives 
voiceless fricative , 
voiceless fricative trill 
voiceless glottal fricative 
fricativization –, –, 
front–back asymmetry –, 
Garner effect :
Garner-effect-based tasks 
geminates –, , , –:
degemination –, 
geminate rhotics , , , 
geminate variants 
singleton–geminate distinction –, ,
, , –
gestures:
adjacent gestures , , –
articulatory gestures , , , , , ,
–, , –, –
composite gesture 
conﬂicting gestures 
consonantal gesture , , 
constriction gesture , –, , 
ﬁnal nasal gesture 
Gestural Blending model –, , ,
–, , –
gestural conﬂict 
gestural coordination , 
gestural de-aggregation 
gestural magnitude , –
gestural mistiming , –
Gestural OT 
gestural overlap , , , , , 
gestural parses 
Index


gestures: (cont.)
gestural timing –, 
gestural undershoot , 
laminal gesture 
laryngeal gesture –, –:
laryngeal gesture peak 
lingual gestures 
oral gesture 
overlapping gestures –:
overlapping voiced gestures 
overlapping voiceless gestures 
prosodic gestures 
single gestures 
tongue tip gesture , , , –,
π-gestures :
π-gesture model –, 
glides , –, , –, , , ,
, –, :
glide phonotactics 
labiovelar glide , , –, –
nonhigh glide 
palatal glide , , , , –
root-ﬁnal labiovelar glide 
word-initial labiovelar glide 
glissando 
glottis –, :
glottal activity 
glottal parameters:
biomechanical parameters , 
cepstral parameters –, :
mel-cepstrum implementation 
glottal gap parameters , 
parameter variation , 
perturbation parameters 
spectral parameters :
power spectral density 
tremor parameters , :
neuromotor system 
supraglottal cavities 
grammatical representations 
grapheme , , , :
automatic graphophonemic
activation 
graphophonemic skills 
harmonics –:
Harmonic Serialism 
hearing problems , 
heterorganic consonant clusters 
hiatus , –, –
historical analogical developments 
hold period 
hypercorrection , 
idiosyncratic reactions 
incisors , 
indexical information 
input:
input vowel , 
Input-to-Output 
multi-input representations 
insertion process 
instrumental studies , 
intelligibility –, , , 
intensity , , , , , , , –,
, –, , 
intermediate phrase , , , , –,
–
InterPhonologie du Français
Contemporain , , 
Interrater reliability 
intersegmental adaptation 
interstimulus interval , 
intertrial interval 
intonation , , , , , , ,
–, –, :
intonation groups 
intonational phenomenon 
intonational phrase , , , , , ,
, , , 
IPFC project , –, –:
IPFC coding procedure –, 
Italian dental stops 
kinematics:
kinematic data , , , , 
kinematic events , 
kinematic signals , 
labials:
labial and velar speciﬁcations 
labial consonants , 
labial fricative , 
labial obstruent 
labial stop , 
labial vowel , 
labiodental fricative , , , –
lambdacism phenomena –
languages (see also Romance languages):
Alemannic 
Arabic , , , , , 
Basque , –
Belarusian , –
Chinese –, 
co-ofﬁcial languages 
cross-language assimilation 
Danish 

Index

dominant language –
Dutch –, –, 
English , , , , –, , –,
–, –, , , , ,
, , , , –, ,
–, –, –, –,
, , :
American English , 
Australian English , 
Californian English 
Canadian English 
German , –, , ,
, 
Greek , , , 
Hindi 
input languages , –:
complex input 
Japanese , , , 
Korean 
language attitudes , 
language discrimination/recognition ,
, , :
fricative discrimination 
vowel discrimination –, 
language experience , , :
language-learning experience 
language problems , 
language proximity –
language typologies 
language usage , –
language-segregation challenge 
minority language , 
Nahuatl 
Norwegian 
Polish , –, , 
Quichua 
Russian , , , 
sequential language learning 
Slavic languages 
Swedish 
Tagalog 
Turkish , 
Welsh 
larynx , , :
laryngeal conﬁguration , 
laryngeal features , 
laryngeal gesture –, –:
laryngeal gesture peak 
laryngeal tenseness 
laryngeal vocal tract cavities 
supralaryngeal properties 
supralaryngeal tenseness 
supralaryngeal vocal tract cavities 
lateral , –, , , , , , ,
–, , , 
learned stock 
lenition –, , :
lenited approximant 
lenition continuum 
strengthening–lenition continuum 
lexical:
Delexicalization 
ﬁrst lexical stratum 
lexical form 
lexical priority 
lexical representations , 
lexical strata 
liaison –, 
light lateral 
linguistics:
crosslinguistic acoustic comparisons 
crosslinguistic acoustic properties 
crosslinguistic speech perception , 
crosslinguistic variability 
intralinguistic variation 
linguistic competence , , 
linguistic experience , –,
, 
linguistic ideology , 
linguistic isolation 
linguistic knowledge , 
linguistic performance , 
Second Language Linguistic Perception
model –
self-assessed linguistic proﬁciency 
lip aperture 
lip radiation effect 
liquid type 
listener-oriented perspective 
Lobanov normalization procedure 
Local Constraint Conjunction 
lower gums , 
LPC , , 
magnetic resonance imaging 
main clause –, , 
Manipulated stimuli , –, , 
markedness , –, –, , ,
, , , –, , ,
, –, , , 
maximal contact placement 
meaning:
extralinguistic meaning 
form-to-meaning correspondences 
paralinguistic information , 
medial compression 
Index


metaphony , , –, –, , :
metaphonic raising 
metaphonized output 
minimal pairs , , –, , 
monomorphemic form 
morphology:
Lexical Morphology , , , –
morpholexical grounds 
morphological constituents 
morphological derivation , , ,
, 
morphological operations , –,
, 
morphologically complex words , ,
, , 
morphophonological hypothesis 
mother tongue 
movement:
head movement , 
jaw movement , 
upper-lip movement 
nasals:
contextual (allophonic) nasalization 
denasalized setting 
nasal clusters , –, 
nasal consonants , , 
nasal coupling 
nasal elimination 
nasal murmur 
nasal opening 
nasal place of articulation 
nasal setting 
nasal spectral peaks 
nasal vowel evolution 
nasality –, , , 
nasalization of oral vowels 
nasalization on vowel systems 
nasalized vowels 
noncontextual (phonemic)
nasalization :
phonemic vowel nasalization 
unvoiced postnasal , , 
velar nasal clusters –, 
voiced postnasal consonant , –
native/non-native:
constant native input 
expert native perceptual evaluation 
native consonant discrimination 
native language , , , ,
–, , –, , , ,
, 
native phonetic-category building 
native sound category 
native voice onset time distinction 
native-language recognition 
native-like phonetic accuracy 
native-like phonetic performance in a
second language 
non-expert native perceptual
evaluation , , 
non-native controls –
non-native phonological contrasts 
non-native productions , 
non-native speakers , 
phonetically trained native speaker 
natural exposure 
neural plasticity 
neuroimaging research 
neutralization:
lower mid vowels 
reduction in unstressed position 
Nijmegen Corpus of Casual French ,
, 
non-abstractionist models 
nose bridge , 
Obligatory Contour Principle 
obstruents:
labial obstruent 
velar obstruent –
voiced obstruent , , –, ,
–
voiceless obstruent , 
occlusion –:
occlusal plane , 
onsets , , , –, –:
anti-phase onset consonants 
in-phase onset consonants 
onset complexity –, –, –
onset consonants 
onset of constriction phase , –
onset timing :
onset-to-vowel timing –, –,
–
onset-nucleus sequence , , 
sentence-initial CV syllable onset 
simplex onsets –, , –
singleton onsets , 
tautosyllabic onset-nucleus sequence 
three-consonant onsets 
two-consonant onsets 
word-initial CV syllable onset 
word-initial onsets , , , –
open central palatal 
opening phase –, , , 

Index

optimal margins , 
Optimality Theory –, , , –
orientation latencies 
orthography , , , , :
orthographic duplets –
orthographic transcriptions 
oscillators 
output:
basic output verb 
multiple-output correspondents 
Output-to-Output correspondence
, 
palate:
artiﬁcial palates , –
hard palate , , 
palate surface 
PAM-L₂ –
pauses –, , –, , , 
peak –, , , , :
amplitude peak values 
gesture peak 
maximum peak 
peak displacement 
spectral peak 
perception –, –, –, –,
–, –:
acoustic-perceptual level 
crosslinguistic speech perception , 
expert native perceptual evaluation 
language-speciﬁc phonetic perception 
naive listeners’ perceptions 
non-expert native perceptual
evaluation , , 
perception–production cycle 
perceptual accuracy 
Perceptual Assimilation Model –
perceptual capacity –
perceptual cues –
perceptual domain , 
perceptual evaluation of the activation 
perceptual narrowing , –, 
perceptual proﬁciency 
perceptual system , –
perceptual turbulence 
poetic mode of speech perception 
prosody perception :
prosodic perceptual analysis 
Second Language Linguistic Perception
model –
speech-perception processes 
phonetics:
ﬁne-grained phonetic approach 
forensic phonetics , 
International Phonetic Alphabet chart 
language-speciﬁc phonetic and
phonological categories , 
language-speciﬁc phonetic
categorization , 
language-speciﬁc phonetic perception 
native-like phonetic accuracy 
phonation , –, :
change in phonation 
phoneme , –, , , –, 
phonemic difﬁculties 
phonemic labeling 
phonemic vowels 
phonetic behavior –, , , –:
phonetic behavior in
bilingualism –
phonetic characteristics of the speech
segments :
key segments 
phonetic classiﬁcation :
auditory classiﬁcation 
phonetic context , , , , 
phonetic detail , –, , , , 
phonetic difﬁculties –
phonetic distance 
phonetic input , 
phonetic inventories , , :
distribution of consonants 
distribution of vowels 
overall size 
phonetic knowledge , 
phonetic performance 
phonetic properties , , , –,
–, –, 
phonetic reduction 
phonetic segments 
phonetic substance , , 
phonetic variants 
phonetic-phonological skills 
phonetically trained native speaker 
phonic matter –
phonic studies , , , 
phonotactic rules acquisition 
voice quality 
phonology:
Articulatory Phonology , , –, 
coarse-grained phonological
categorization 
Evolutionary Phonology 
language-speciﬁc phonetic and
phonological categories , 
learner’s interphonological system 
Index


phonology: (cont.)
Lexical Phonology , , , ,
, :
Lexical Phonology and Morphology
framework , 
Lexical Phonology and Morphology
model 
Orthographic–Phonological
correspondence rules 
phonatory noise source 
phonetic-phonological skills 
phono-lexical knowledge 
phonological approach –, 
phonological classiﬁcation :
etymological classiﬁcation 
lexical classiﬁcation 
preconceived classiﬁcation 
phonological conservatism 
phonological deafness :
stress “deafness” , , 
phonological entities 
phonological environment 
phonological grammar , 
phonological innovation , 
phonological labeling 
phonological length distinction , , :
durational cues , 
nondurational cues 
phonological opacity , 
phonological patterning , 
phonological phrases 
phonological representation , , ,
–, , 
phonological stress contrasts 
phonological system , , , ,
, , 
phonological-encoding 
phonology–morphology interaction ,
, 
phonotactic constraints , , 
single phonological scenario 
phrases:
intermediate phrase , , , ,
–, –
long noun phrases , , , , ,
, , 
phrasal organization 
phrase-ﬁnal lengthening 
pitch , , –, , , , –,
, , :
nuclear pitch accent 
pitch accent –, –:
ﬁnal pitch accent 
pitch excursion 
pitch movement 
plateau midpoint 
plosives , –, –, , , :
plosive component 
plosive fricative 
velar plosives palatalization 
voiced plosives 
plural deﬁnite marker 
plural indeﬁnite marker 
positions:
intervocalic position , , –, , ,
–, , , , , ,
–, –, –
metrical positions 
neutral position 
onset-syllable position 
position of stress in oxytone stimuli 
positional faithfulness constraint , ,
, 
postconsonantal position , , , 
post-tonic position , –, 
preconsonantal position , , , ,
–, , 
prepausal position , –, , , –,
, 
pretonic position , , –, , 
syllabic position , , , , , 
tongue position , , , –
Prague Linguistic Circle 
preﬁxes/preﬁxoids –, 
pretonic:
open pretonic vowel 
pretonic distribution 
pretonic mid vowels –, , , ,
, –
pretonic monophthongization 
pretonic position , , –, , 
principle of compatibility 
principle of susceptibility 
processing cost –
processing mechanisms , , 
production –, , –, –,
–:
production studies , 
prominence , , –, –,
–, , 
promptness 
pronunciation , , –, –, , ,
, –, –, –,
–:
apico-alveolar sibilant pronunciations
, 

Index

lamino-dental pronunciations 
pronunciation dictionary 
proparoxytones , , , , 
prosody , –, –:
dislocations , –, –, –,
–, :
dislocated constituents 
dislocation-ﬁnal word 
left dislocations –, –, –,
–
right dislocations/destressed
dislocations , ,
–, 
spontaneous dislocations , 
long-subject noun phrases , , ,
–
prosodic acoustic analysis 
prosodic boundaries –, –, ,
, –:
prosodic boundaries on gestural
organization 
prosodic boundary condition , 
prosodic constituents 
prosodic factors 
prosodic gestures 
prosodic hierarchy –, 
prosodic perceptual analysis 
prosodic phrasing –
prosodic position , 
prosodic strengthening
(articulation) –
prosodic structure , , –, ,
, , 
prosodic words , , 
Rapid Prosody Transcription 
statements with focus –
prosthesis –, 
rating scale 
realization:
acoustic realization –, –, –,
, , –, , :
acoustic realization of vowels 
allophonic realizations , 
apico-alveolar realization 
apico-postalveolar realization , 
front sibilant realizations , 
lamino-dental realizations , 
nontarget-like realization , 
quality of realization 
realization of vowels :
acoustic realization of vowels 
spectral realization of vowels 
rhotic realization , 
two-target realization 
regions:
alveolar region , 
dento-alveolar region , 
lamino-alveolar region 
predorso-alveolar region 
predorsum region 
register –:
adjacent register 
creak/pulse register 
falsetto –, 
tempo according to register –
release burst , , –
residual values , , , 
rhizotonic forms –
rhotics , –, –, –:
assibilated rhotics , 
Brazilian Portuguese rhotics –
Caipira rhotic 
component rhotics , , , , 
fricative rhotics , , 
geminate rhotics , , , 
intervocalic rhotics (see also trills) , 
multiple-phase rhotics , , 
noncontrastive rhotics 
nondistinct rhotics 
polymorphism 
postvocalic rhotics 
preconsonantal rhotics , 
prepausal rhotics , 
rhotic consonants –, –, , 
rhotic degemination process 
rhotic formation 
rhotic phonemes :
strong /R/ 
weak /r/ 
rhotic phonetic properties 
rhotic production , –, , , 
rhotic segment , , , , :
approximant –, –, –,
–, –, , –,
–, 
fricative , , –, –, –,
–, –, –, –, –,
–, , , , ,
–, , –, 
multiple-phase rhotic segments 
single-phase segment 
tap –, , –, , –,
, , –, –
trill see trills
rhotic systemic behavior 
Index


rhotics (cont.)
rhotic variants , –, , , , –,
–, 
rhotic-lateral clusters 
single-component rhotics , , 
single-constriction rhotics , , , ,
, 
single-phase rhotics , 
singleton rhotics , 
Spanish rhotics , –
syllable-ﬁnal rhotic , 
Tuscan Italian rhotics –
two-component rhotics 
two-constriction rhotics 
two-contact rhotics 
rhythm , –, –:
eurhythmic metrical patterns 
rhythm continuum 
rhythm perspective :
mora-timed language 
stress-timed language , , 
syllable-timed language 
rhythm proximity 
rhythmic pattern 
rhythmic typology –
Romance languages:
Catalan –, –, , , , –,
, , –, , –,
, –:
Balearic Catalan 
Eastern Catalan –, –, ,
, , :
Central Eastern Catalan , ,
, 
Majorcan Catalan , , , –,
, , , , , , 
Valencian Catalan , , –,
–:
Southern Valencian –
Western Catalan –, , ,
–
French –, , , , –, ,
–, , –, –,
, –, –, –
French prosody , –, 
Galician , , , –, –:
Central Galician 
conservative Galician , 
Eastern Galician 
innovative Galician , , , 
Standard Galician , –, , –
Western Galician 
Gascon 
Italian , , , , –, –, –,
–, , –, , –,
–, , , , :
Marche Italian 
Neapolitan 
Northern Italian dialects , , :
Arezzo dialect 
Florentine dialect , , 
Tuscan , , –, , –, ,
–:
Liguria Italian 
Pisa Italian –, 
Rome Italian 
Standard Italian , –
Umbria Italian 
Latin , –, , , , , ,
–, :
Late Latin 
Popular Latin 
Pre-Classical Latin 
Portuguese , , , , –, , –,
, , , , , , ,
–, 
Brazilian Portuguese , , , ,
–, , , –
European Portuguese –, , –,
, , , 
Provençal 
Romanian , –:
Romanian diphthongs , –
Sardinian , 
Spanish –, –, –, –,
–, –, –,
–:
Andalusian Spanish , 
Castilian Spanish , , –,
–, , –, , , :
Eastern Castilian Spanish 
Hispanic American dialects 
Iberian Spanish , 
Peninsular Spanish –, , , , ,
, :
Northern Peninsular Spanish , 
Veracruz Mexican Spanish 
schwa , , –, 
segments:
illusory segment 
segmental composition 
segmental level , , 
segmental strings 
single-input segment 
sense , , , –, 

Index

sequences:
cross-word sequence , , –
cross-word vowel sequences , 
glide-vowel sequences , 
heterosyllabic hiatus sequence 
hiatus sequences , –
onset-nucleus sequence , , 
sequence recall task 
tautosyllabic onset-nucleus sequence 
vowel–vowel sequences 
within-word hiatus sequences 
settings:
laboratory setting , 
neutral setting 
sibilants , –, –, –,
–:
fricative sibilants 
front sibilant realizations , 
front sibilants –, :
alveolar sibilants , –
dento-alveolar sibilants 
lamino-alveolar sibilants 
lamino-dental sibilant 
nonsibilant reinforcements :
affricate reinforcements 
fricative reinforcements 
postalveolar sibilants , :
postalveolar ﬁnal sibilants 
preconsonantal sibilants , 
sibilant articulation 
sibilant system –:
seseo –, :
alveolar seseo –
dental seseo 
laminal seseo 
lamino-alveolar seseo –
sibilant variants 
sibilant voicing , –, –, ,
, , –, 
voiced apico-alveolar sibilants 
voiceless apico-alveolar sibilants 
voiceless fricative sibilants , , , ,
, , 
sieve 
single complex nucleus 
single oral stop 
skewness , , 
sociophonetic factors 
sonograms 
sonorants , –, , , –,
, 
sonority distance , 
sonority hierarchy , –, –
sounds:
contrastive second-language sounds 
human speech sounds –, 
intrasyllabic sonority conditions 
sonority-adjusting triggers 
sound categories , , , ,
, :
native sound category 
sound change , , , , 
sound discrimination , , , –:
multiple-category assimilation 
subset problem –
sound symbolism –, 
sound system , , , , , 
target language sounds –
spectra –, :
noise spectral values 
spectral contrast 
spectral moments:
ﬁrst moment: center of gravity 
second moment: variance 
third moment: skewness 
fourth moment: kurtosis 
spectral realization of vowels 
spectral reduction 
spectral slope , 
spectral tilt 
spectrogram , –, , –, 
speech:
casual speech , 
clear speech (see also prepared speech) :
broadcast speech 
political speech 
contingent categorization in speech
perception 
continuous speech , , , ,
, 
foreign-accented speech –
formal speech 
laboratory speech , , 
multidimensional analysis of speech
expression 
phenomenological theories of speech 
phrasal structure in speech
production 
poetic mode of speech perception 
prepared speech 
read speech , , , , 
scripted speech 
second-language speech acquisition 
single bilingual speech community 
speech chain 
speech encoding 
Index


speech: (cont.)
Speech Learning Model –
speech problems 
speech processing , 
speech production , –, , , ,
, , , , , 
speech rate , , –, , , ,
–, –
speech signal , 
speech style , , , , , 
speech-expressivity perspective 
spontaneous speech –, , , –, ,
, , , –, , , –,
–
transcription and alignment system 
unscripted speech 
vernacular speech :
Arezzo vernacular speech , , 
Florentine vernacular speech , , 
split-margin hierarchy , 
splitting process 
statistical analyses:
ANOVA test , , , , , ,
, 
chi-square test , :
chi-square log-likelihood ratio test
, 
Cochran test 
contrastive analysis hypothesis 
correlation analysis 
Cronbach’s alpha coefﬁcient 
linear mixed effects models –,
, 
mixed-effect linear-regression models 
multinomial analysis , , , :
multinomial logistic regression
, 
multiple regression analysis 
nonparametric Mann–Whitney test 
Pearson log coefﬁcient 
principal component analysis , 
Snedecor test 
Tukey HSD test , , 
two-tailed student t-test , 
voice proﬁle analysis scheme :
muscular-tension features 
phonatory features 
prosodic features 
temporal organization , –, ,
, , , , 
vocal tract features 
z-score , 
stem , , , , , , –:
stem-level , –, , –,
–
stem-level nominal derivation 
stem-stratum 
Stratal Optimality Theory , 
stress –, , , , , , , , ,
–, , , , , , ,
, , , , , –,
, –, –, , ,
, , :
contrastive stress –
cyclic stress :
demarcating stress 
distinctive stress , 
ﬁnal stress 
ﬁnal stressed syllables 
ﬁxed stress , –:
ﬁxed-stress language –, 
free stress –, , :
free-stress language –, 
initial unstressed syllables 
intended stress-shifted pseudoword 
lax-to-stress condition –
lexical stress , –, , , –,
, , , , :
lexical stress perception acquisition 
lexical stress patterns 
metrical stress 
obligatory ﬁnal stress 
phonological stress contrasts 
post-stress position –, –, 
pre-stress position , –
prevocalic position 
primary stress , , , , , ,
, , –
secondary stress 
stress condition , –:
stress pattern condition , 
stress deafness , , , 
stress identiﬁcation task –, –
stress location , :
post-stress 
pre-stress 
stress shift –, , , 
stress-attracting sufﬁxes 
stress-timed language , , 
stressed position , , , , , 
stressed syllable , , –, , ,
, –, , , , ,
, 
unstressed positions , , –,
–, 
unstressed root vowels –

Index

unstressed syllable , , , ,
, 
unstressed tokens –
word-ﬁnal unstressed position 
word-initial stressed position 
sufﬁxation , , –, , , ,
–, –, :
evaluative sufﬁxation , , , ,
–
sufﬁx-initial vowel , 
superlative sufﬁxation 
suprasegmental level , , 
surface auditory pattern 
syllables:
antepenultimate syllable , , 
closed syllable 
CV syllables , , , , 
disyllabic , –, , :
disyllabic word segmentation 
ﬁnal stressed syllables 
independent syllables 
initial unstressed syllables 
intrasyllabic sonority conditions 
last non-schwa syllable 
onsetless syllable 
open syllable , , 
pre-pretonic syllable 
pretonic syllable 
prominent syllable , –
stressed syllable , , –, , ,
, –, , , , ,
, 
syllabic nucleus , , 
syllabic position , , , ,
, 
syllabiﬁcation 
syllable afﬁliation , , , 
syllable margins , :
coda 
onset 
syllable organization , , , 
target syllables 
tautosyllabic consonant 
trisyllabic words , –
underlying tautosyllabic oral stop 
unstressed syllable , , , ,
, 
vowels in word-ﬁnal syllables 
vowels in word-initial syllables 
Sympathy Theory 
synchrony , , :
synchronic perceptual behavior 
syntagme intonatif 
tangential velocity proﬁle 
tap (see also trill) –, , –, ,
–, , , –, –:
alveolar taps 
postapproximantized tap 
retroﬂex taps 
tap closure durations 
target:
spatial target values 
target language sounds –
target-likeness , 
target-likeness assessment 
two-target realization 
tasks:
ABX discrimination task 
categorical discrimination tasks 
coarse-grained tasks 
cognitively demanding tasks 
gating task 
lexical decision task 
online task 
reading task –
repetition task –
same–different discrimination task 
sequence recall task 
shape–pseudoword matching task ,
–
stress identiﬁcation task –, –
task-irrelevant materials 
task-relevant materials 
tempo:
global tempo –
variable tempo 
temporal midpoints 
timbre , 
timing:
articulatory vowel-to-vowel timing –,
, 
intra-cluster timing –, , –,
–
nonlocal timing effects , 
onset timing :
onset-to-vowel timing –, –, –
timing change , 
timing lags –, , , –, 
vowel-to-vowel timing –, 
tonal organization 
tongue:
advanced tongue root 
linguo-palatal contact , , , , ,
–, , , –
midsagittal plane , :
midsagittal tongue proﬁle 
Index


tongue: (cont.)
sublingual cavity size 
tongue back retraction 
tongue blade (see also tongue tip) , 
tongue body movement , , –:
vertical tongue body movement 
tongue body sensor –, 
tongue dorsum , , , , ,
, , , :
tongue anterodorsum raising 
tongue dorsum retraction 
tongue postdorsum 
tongue posterodorsum 
vertical tongue dorsum movement 
tongue position , , , –
tongue root , , , 
tongue tip –, , , , , 
tongue tip movement , , –, ,
–:
vertical tongue tip movement 
tongue tip sensor , 
ultrasound tongue imaging , , ,
, 
transformational cycle 
transillumination 
trill (see also tap) –, , –, –,
, , –, –, :
alveolar trill 
apical alveolar trill 
spirantized trill –
trill closure duration 
uvular trill 
voiceless fricative trill 
typological asymmetries 
typological symmetries –
ultrasound tongue imaging , , ,
, 
underapplication , , , 
Universal Grammar 
untrained listeners 
upper gums/maxilla , , 
utterance , –, –, , 
variants , , , , , , , , –,
–, , , , :
allophonic variants , 
anterior variants 
articulatory variations 
component variants , , 
constricted variants , , –
contact variants 
cross-individual variability 
crosslinguistic variability 
cross-subject variation 
diachronic variation , 
free variation , , 
fricative variants 
geminate variants 
intralinguistic variation 
intraspeaker variability , , , 
loudness variation 
nontrilled variants 
occurring variants 
phase variants 
phonetic variants 
positional variants 
residual variance 
rhotic variants , , , –, 
sibilant variants 
single-component variants , , 
speech variation 
synchronic variation 
syntagmatic variation 
trilled variants , , 
variation of duration 
vector space –
velars:
labial and velar speciﬁcations 
velar articulation 
velar fricative –:
velar spirant fricative , 
velar nasal , , , –
velar obstruent –
velar sensor 
velarization 
velum , 
verbs:
basic output verb 
conjugations , , 
productive deadjectival ﬁrst-conjugation
verbs 
productive denominal ﬁrst-conjugation
verbs 
verb inﬂection , , , 
vernacular vocabulary 
vibration , , , –, –, 
vocal folds –, –:
vocal fold abduction/adduction 
vocal tract , , , , , , , , ,
–:
laryngeal vocal tract cavities 
vocal quality setting 
vocal tract settings 
vocalic element , –, , , , –:
approximant vocalic element 

Index

fricative vocalic element 
occlusion vocalic element 
vocal dynamics 
voice:
creaky-voice phonatory setting 
modal voice –, , , –, 
nondisguised voice , 
normophonic male voice 
voice bar 
voice identiﬁcation system 
voice production , 
voice quality –, –, , –,
–, –, , , :
voice quality tense settings 
voice recognition system , 
voice switches 
voice training 
voice-quality perception 
voluntary distortion of voice 
voiced:
overlapping voiced gestures 
voiced apico-alveolar sibilants 
voiced consonants –, , , 
voiced glottal fricatives 
voiced obstruent , , –, ,
–
voiced plosives 
voiced postnasal consonant , –
voiced stops , 
voiced uvular fricatives 
voiced velar fricatives 
voiceless/unvoiced:
overlapping voiceless gestures 
unvoiced glottal fricatives 
unvoiced uvular fricatives 
unvoiced velar fricatives 
voiceless apico-alveolar sibilants 
voiceless consonants , 
voiceless fricative sibilants , , , ,
, , 
voiceless fricative trill 
voiceless glottal fricative 
voicing:
devoicing of vowels 
discontinuous voicing , 
percent voicing , , –, –,
–, –, 
postnasal consonant voicing –
pre-obstruent sibilant voicing 
sibilant voicing , –, –, ,
, , –, 
voicing assimilation , –, ,
–, , , –
voicing category :
fully voiced 
partially voiced 
unvoiced 
voicing condition , , , –
vowels:
/a/ –, , , , , , ,
, :
Portuguese /a/ 
Spanish /a/ –
/e/ , , , , , –, , ,
, , , , , –,
, , :
American English /e/ 
Catalan /e/ 
Portuguese /e/ 
Spanish /e/ , , 
/i/ , , , –, , , –,
–, –, , , ,
, , , , –, :
English /i/ 
Spanish /i/ –
/o/ , , , , , , –,
–, :
Catalan /o/ , 
English /o/ 
Spanish /o/ 
/u/ , , –, , –, , , ,
, , , , –:
Portuguese /u/ 
Spanish /u/ –
back vowel :
mid-back vowel , 
cardinal vowels 
central mid vowel 
close-mid root vowel 
close-mid-vowel distribution , 
control single vowels 
derived word –, :
basic forms 
derivational stem , 
desinence –
hypothetical base morpheme 
inﬂectional endings 
nominal derivation –, 
parasynthetic verb creation 
root morpheme , , 
Transderivational
Correspondence –
underived lexical item , 
devoicing of vowels 
epenthetic vowel , , 
ﬁnal prepausal vowels , 
Index


vowels: (cont.)
front vowel , , , , , 
high vocalic elements 
hypoarticulation vowel phenomena 
input vowel , 
intervocalic context , –
labial vowel , 
low central vowel 
low mid vowel , , , 
lower mid vowel contrast , –, ,
, 
mid back contextual nasal vowel
raising 
mid back contextual nasal vowels 
mid front contextual nasal vowel
raising 
mid front contextual nasal vowels 
mid-vocalic elements 
mid-vowel height –, , , ,
–, , , , –:
mid-vowel height distinctions 
mid-vowel lowering –, 
mid-vowel reduction , 
non-low root-vowel patterns 
nonperipheral vowel 
open pretonic vowel 
open-mid-vowel distribution , 
oral vowels , , , 
peripheral vowels –
phonological vowels , 
prepausal vowels , 
short vowels , , , 
spectral realization of vowels 
stressed vowel , , , , , ,
–, , , , 
svarabhakti , , , , , , ,
, 
synthetic isolated vowels 
synthetic vowel tokens 
theme vowel 
unaccented vowels –
unstressed ﬁnal vowels 
unstressed open-mid root vowels
–
upper mid-vowel contrast , –,
, 
vocalic space , –, , –
vowel acoustic reduction 
vowel anchor points 
vowel aperture 
vowel backness , , 
vowel centralization 
vowel context , –, , , 
vowel duration , , , –, , ,
, –, , –, 
vowel formants , , , 
vowel height , –, , , ,
, 
vowel identiﬁcation errors –
vowel insertion –, 
vowel inventory size , 
vowel length 
vowel mergers 
vowel nasality , 
vowel nasalization , , –
vowel overlap 
vowel plateau 
vowel quality , , , , , ,
, , –
vowel prosthesis , , 
vowel reduction , , , , –,
, , , , –,
, –, , ,
, , –, , ,
–, 
vowel-initial afﬁx , 
vowels in word-ﬁnal syllables 
vowels in word-initial syllables 
word:
base word 
borrowings , , 
content words , 
loanwords , –, , , ,
–, :
loanword adaptation , , ,
–
native words 
neologisms , , –
nonce words 
oxytonic words 
paroxytone words 
patrimonial words , , 
proparoxytone words 
prosodic words , , 
sentence-medial words 
spoken-word recognition 
standard word pronunciations 
trisyllabic words , –
trochaic words 
word boundary 
word domain , 
word frequency , , , 
word identiﬁcation 
word recognition , , , ,
, 

Index

word-ﬁnal unstressed position 
word-form segmentation –, , 
word-initial CV syllable onset 
word-initial onsets , , , –
word-initial stressed position 
word-initial vowel epenthesis , , 
word-learning-linked mutual
exclusivity 
Index



