
THE ROUTLEDGE COMPANION TO 
EPISTEMOLOGY
Epistemology, the philosophy of knowledge, is at the core of many of the central debates 
and issues in philosophy, interrogating the notions of truth, objectivity, trust, belief, and 
perception. The Routledge Companion to Epistemology provides a comprehensive and up-to-
date survey of epistemology, charting its history, providing a thorough account of its key 
thinkers and movements, and addressing enduring questions and contemporary research in 
the field. Organized thematically, the Companion is divided into ten sections:
• 
Foundational Concepts
• 
The Analysis of Knowledge
• 
The Structure of Knowledge
• 
Kinds of Knowledge
• 
Skepticism
• 
Responses to Skepticism
• 
Knowledge and Knowledge Attributions
• 
Formal Epistemology
• 
The History of Epistemology
• 
Metaepistemological Issues
Seventy-eight original chapters, each between 5000 and 7000 words and written by a 
leading epistemologist, provide students with an outstanding and accessible guide to the 
field. Designed to fit the most comprehensive syllabus in the discipline, this text will be 
an indispensable resource for anyone interested in this central area of philosophy.
The Routledge Companion to Epistemology is essential reading for students of philosophy.
Sven Bernecker is Professor of Philosophy at the University of California, Irvine. His 
main areas of research are epistemology, metaphysics, and philosophy of mind. He is the 
author of Reading Epistemology (2006), The Metaphysics of Memory (2008), and Memory: 
A Philosophical Study (2010); and editor, with Fred Dretske, of Knowledge: Readings in 
Contemporary Epistemology (2000). 
Duncan Pritchard is Professor at the School of Philosophy, Psychology, and Language 
Sciences at the University of Edinburgh. His main area of research is epistemology, and he 
has published widely in this area. In particular, he is the author of Epistemic Luck (2005), 
Epistemology A-Z (with M. Blaauw, 2005), Knowledge (2009), What is this Thing Called 
Knowledge? (Second Edition, Routledge, 2010), and The Nature and Value of Knowledge 
(with Adrian Haddock and Alan Millar, 2010).

Routledge Philosophy Companions
Routledge Philosophy Companions offer thorough, high quality surveys and assessments of 
the major topics and periods in philosophy. Covering key problems, themes and think-
ers, all entries are specially commissioned for each volume and written by leading schol-
ars in the field. Clear, accessible and carefully edited and organized, Routledge Philosophy 
Companions are indispensable for anyone coming to a major topic or period in philoso-
phy for the first time, as well as for the more advanced reader.
The Routledge Companion to Aesthetics, Second Edition
Edited by Berys Gaut and Dominic Lopes
The Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Religion
Edited by Chad Meister and Paul Copan
The Routledge Companion to the Philosophy of Science
Edited by Stathis Psillos and Martin Curd
The Routledge Companion to Twentieth Century Philosophy
Edited by Dermot Moran
The Routledge Companion to Philosophy and Film
Edited by Paisley Livingston and Carl Plantinga
The Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Psychology
Edited by John Symons and Paco Calvo
The Routledge Companion to Metaphysics
Edited by Robin Le Poidevin, Peter Simons, Andrew McGonigal, and Ross Cameron
The Routledge Companion to Nineteenth Century Philosophy
Edited by Dean Moyar
The Routledge Companion to Ethics
Edited by John Skorupski
The Routledge Companion to Epistemology
Edited by Sven Bernecker and Duncan Pritchard
Forthcoming:
The Routledge Companion to Philosophy and Music
Edited by Andrew Kania and Theodore Gracyk
The Routledge Companion to Seventeenth Century Philosophy
Edited by Dan Kaufman
The Routledge Companion to Eighteenth Century Philosophy
Edited by Aaron Garrett
The Routledge Companion to Phenomenology
Edited by Søren Overgaard and Sebastian Luft
The Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Mental Disorder
Edited by Jakob Hohwy and Philip Gerrans

The Routledge Companion to Social and Political Philosophy
Edited by Gerald Gaus and Fred D’Agostino
The Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Language
Edited by Gillian Russell and Delia Graff Fara
The Routledge Companion to Theism
Edited by Charles Taliaferro, Victoria Harrison, and Stewart Goetz
The Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Law
Edited by Andrei Marmor
The Routledge Companion to Islamic Philosophy
Edited by Richard C. Taylor and Luis Xavier López-Farjeat
The Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Literature
Edited by Noël Carroll and John Gibson

PRAISE FOR THE SERIES
The Routledge Companion to Aesthetics
“This is an immensely useful book that belongs in every college library and on the book-
shelves of all serious students of aesthetics.”—Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism
“The succinctness and clarity of the essays will make this a source that individuals not 
familiar with aesthetics will find extremely helpful.”—The Philosophical Quarterly
“An outstanding resource in aesthetics . . . this text will not only serve as a handy refer-
ence source for students and faculty alike, but it could also be used as a text for a course 
in the philosophy of art.”—Australasian Journal of Philosophy
“Attests to the richness of modern aesthetics . . . the essays in central topics—many of 
which are written by well-known figures—succeed in being informative, balanced and 
intelligent without being too difficult.”—British Journal of Aesthetics
“This handsome reference volume . . . belongs in every library.”—Choice
“The Routledge Companions to philosophy have proved to be a useful series of high qual-
ity surveys of major philosophical topics and this volume is worthy enough to sit with 
the others on a reference library shelf.”—Philosophy and Religion
The Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Religion
“. . . a very valuable resource for libraries and serious scholars.”—Choice
“The work is sure to be an academic standard for years to come . . . I shall heartily recom-
mend The Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Religion to my students and colleagues 
and hope that libraries around the country add it to their collections.”—Philosophia 
Christi
The Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Science
“With a distinguished list of internationally renowned contributors, an excellent choice 
of topics in the field, and well-written, well-edited essays throughout, this compendium 
is an excellent resource. Highly recommended.”—Choice
“Highly recommended for history of science and philosophy collections.”—Library 
Journal

“This well conceived companion, which brings together an impressive collection of 
distinguished authors, will be invaluable to novices and experienced readers alike.”
—Metascience
The Routledge Companion to Twentieth Century Philosophy
“To describe this volume as ambitious would be a serious understatement. . . . full of 
scholarly rigor, including detailed notes and bibliographies of interest to professional 
philosophers. . . . Summing up: essential.”—Choice
The Routledge Companion to Philosophy and Film
“A fascinating, rich volume offering dazzling insights and incisive commentary on every 
page . . . Every serious student of film will want this book . . . Summing up: highly recom-
mended.”—Choice
The Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Psychology
“This work should serve as the standard reference for those interested in gaining a reli-
able overview of the burgeoning field of philosophical psychology. Summing up: essen-
tial.”—Choice
The Routledge Companion to Metaphysics
“The Routledge Philosophy Companions series has a deserved reputation for impressive 
scope and scholarly value. This volume is no exception . . . Summing up: highly recom-
mended.”—Choice


THE 
ROUTLEDGE COMPANION 
TO EPISTEMOLOGY
Edited by 
Sven Bernecker and Duncan Pritchard

First published 2011 by Routledge
270 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016
Simultaneously published in the UK
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2011 Taylor & Francis
The right of Sven Bernecker, Duncan Pritchard and the contributors to be 
identified as the authors of this work has been asserted by them in accordance 
with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilized in any form or by any 
electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and 
recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, 
and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
The Routledge companion to epistemology/ edited by Sven Bernecker, Duncan Pritchard.
p. cm.—(Routledge philosophy companions)
Includes bibliographical references.
I. Knowledge, Theory of. I. Bernecker, Sven. II. Pritchard, Duncan. III. Title: Companion to epistemology.
BD161.R69 2011
121—dc22
2010020537
ISBN13: 978–0–415–96219–3 (hbk)
ISBN13: 978–0–203–83906–5 (ebk)
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2011.
To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s
collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.
ISBN 0-203-83906-4 Master e-book ISBN

CONTENTS
Notes on Contributors 
xv
Preface 
xxv
PART I
Foundational Concepts 
1
 1 Truth 
3
 
MICHAEL P. LYNCH
 2 Belief 
14
 
ERIC SCHWITZGEBEL
 3 Epistemic Justification 
25
 
JONATHAN L. KVANVIG
 4 Epistemic Rationality 
37
 
RICHARD FOLEY
 5 Epistemic Norms 
47
 
PASCAL ENGEL
 6 Evidence 
58
 
TIMOTHY MCGREW
 7 Disagreement 
68
 
BRYAN FRANCES
 8 Epistemic Relativism 
75
 
PAUL BOGHOSSIAN
 9 Understanding 
84
 
STEPHEN R. GRIMM
10 Wisdom 
95
 
DENNIS WHITCOMB

x
PART II
The Analysis of Knowledge 
107
11 The Basing Relation 
109
 
RAM NETA
12 The Gettier Problem 
119
 
STEPHEN HETHERINGTON
13 Fallibilism 
131
 
TRENT DOUGHERTY
14 Externalism/Internalism 
144
 
HAMID VAHID
15 Defeasibility Theory 
156
 
THOMAS GRUNDMANN
16 Evidentialism 
167
 
DANIEL M. MITTAG
17 Reliabilism 
176
 
JUAN COMESAÑA
18 Modal and Anti-Luck Epistemology 
187
 
TIM BLACK
19 Virtue Epistemology 
199
 
JONATHAN L. KVANVIG
20 Knowledge First Epistemology 
208
 
TIMOTHY WILLIAMSON
21 The Value Problem 
219
 
JOHN GRECO
PART III
The Structure of Knowledge 
233
22 Foundationalism 
235
 
MICHAEL DEPAUL
23 Infinitism 
245
 
PETER D. KLEIN
24 Coherentism 
257
 
ERIK J. OLSSON
CONTENTS

xi
PART IV
Kinds of Knowledge 
269
25 Inductive Knowledge 
271
 
ALEXANDER BIRD
26 A Priori Knowledge 
283
 
LAURENCE BONJOUR
27 Perceptual Knowledge 
294
 
DAVID SOSA
28 Self-Knowledge 
305
 
SANFORD GOLDBERG
29 Testimonial Knowledge 
316
 
JENNIFER LACKEY
30 Memory Knowledge 
326
 
SVEN BERNECKER
31 Semantic Knowledge 
335
 
PETER LUDLOW
32 Scientific Knowledge 
346
 
PETER ACHINSTEIN
33 Logical and Mathematical Knowledge 
358
 
OTÁVIO BUENO
34 Aesthetic Knowledge 
369
 
MATTHEW KIERAN
35 Moral Knowledge 
380
 
ROBERT AUDI
36 Religious Knowledge 
393
 
LINDA ZAGZEBSKI
PART V
Skepticism 
401
37 Pyrrhonian Skepticism 
403
 
RICHARD BETT
38 Cartesian Skepticism 
414
 
STEVEN LUPER
CONTENTS

39 Skeptical Doubts about Self-Knowledge 
425
 
FRED DRETSKE
40 Skepticism about Knowledge of Other Minds 
433
 
ANITA AVRAMIDES
41 Skepticism about Inductive Knowledge 
445
 
JOE MORRISON
42 Rule-Following Skepticism 
454
 
ALEXANDER MILLER
43 Moral Skepticism 
464
 
GEOFFREY SAYRE-MCCORD
PART VI
Responses to Skepticism 
475
44 Skepticism and Anti-Realism 
477
 
RICHARD SCHANTZ
45 Skepticism and Epistemic Externalism 
488
 
RICHARD FUMERTON
46 Skepticism and Semantic Externalism 
500
 
ANTHONY BRUECKNER
PART VII
Knowledge and Knowledge Attributions 
511
47 Contrastivism 
513
 
ADAM MORTON
48 Contextualism 
523
 
PATRICK RYSIEW
49 Relativism and Knowledge Attributions 
536
 
JOHN MACFARLANE
50 Epistemic Modals 
545
 
JOSH DEVER
51 Pragmatic Encroachment 
558
 
JEREMY FANTL AND MATTHEW MCGRATH
CONTENTS
xii

xiii
PART VIII
Formal Epistemology 
569
52 Logic and Formal Semantics for Epistemology 
571
 
JOHN SYMONS
53 Second-Order Knowledge 
586
 
CHRISTOPH KELP AND NIKOLAJ J.L.L. PEDERSEN
54 Epistemic Closure 
597
 
PETER BAUMANN
55 Bayesian Epistemology 
609
 
STEPHAN HARTMANN AND JAN SPRENGER
56 Theories of Belief Change 
621
 
ANDRÉ FUHRMANN
57 The Knowability Paradox 
639
 
JOE SALERNO
PART IX
The History of Epistemology 
653
58 Plato 
655
 
TIMOTHY CHAPPELL
59 Aristotle 
666
 
RICHARD PATTERSON
60 René Descartes 
678
 
STEPHEN GAUKROGER
61 John Locke 
687
 
E. J. LOWE
62 Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz 
697
 
NICHOLAS JOLLEY
63 George Berkeley 
707
 
GEORGE PAPPAS
64 Thomas Reid 
717
 
RYAN NICHOLS
65 David Hume 
730
 
HELEN BEEBEE
CONTENTS

xiv
66 Immanuel Kant 
741
 
ECKART FÖRSTER
67 Bertrand Russell 
750
 
WILLIAM DEMOPOULOS
68 Ludwig Wittgenstein 
763
 
MARIE MCGINN
69 Rudolf Carnap 
774
 
THOMAS UEBEL
70 Willard van Orman Quine 
786
 
RICHARD CREATH
71 John Langshaw Austin 
798
 
MARK KAPLAN
PART X
Metaepistemological Issues 
811
72 Epistemology and the Role of Intuitions 
813
 
WILLIAM G. LYCAN
73 Experimental Epistemology 
823
 
JONATHAN M. WEINBERG
74 Naturalistic Epistemology 
836
 
KLEMENS KAPPEL
75 Evolutionary Epistemology 
848
 
MICHAEL BRADIE
76 Pragmatist Epistemology 
861
 
CHERYL MISAK
77 Social Epistemology 
873
 
MARTIN KUSCH
78 Feminist Epistemology 
885
 
ALESSANDRA TANESINI
Index 
897
CONTENTS

NOTES ON 
CONTRIBUTORS
Peter Achinstein is Schottenstein Professor of Philosophy at Yeshiva University, and 
Professor of Philosophy at Johns Hopkins University. He is the author of numerous 
articles and books in the philosophy of science, among them Particles and Waves 
(1991), which received a Lakatos Award in 1993, and The Book of Evidence (2001).
Robert Audi is John A. O’Brien Professor of Philosophy at the University of Notre 
Dame. He writes in epistemology, philosophy of action, and philosophy of religion as 
well as in moral and political philosophy. His recent books include The Architecture 
of Reason (2001), The Good in the Right (2004), Practical Reasoning and Ethical Decision 
(Routledge, 2006). Epistemology: A Contemporary Introduction to the Theory of 
Knowledge (Routledge, 1998, 2003, 2011), and (as Editor) The Cambridge Dictionary 
of Philosophy (1995, 1999).
Anita Avramides is Reader in the Philosophy of Mind and Southover Manor Trust Fellow 
in Philosophy at St Hilda’s College, Oxford. She is the author of Meaning and Mind: 
An Examination of a Gricean Account of Language and Other Minds (Routledge).
Peter Baumann is Professor of Philosophy at Swarthmore College. He received his 
degrees at the University of Göttingen. Peter also worked at universities in Britain, 
Germany, and the USA. He is interested in questions concerning knowledge, 
rationality and related issues.
Helen Beebee is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Birmingham, UK. Her 
publications include “Seeing Causing” (Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 103, 
2003), Hume on Causation (Routledge, 2006), and The Oxford Handbook of Causation 
(co-edited with Christopher Hitchock and Peter Menzies, 2009).
Sven Bernecker is Professor of Philosophy at the University of California, Irvine. His 
main areas of research are epistemology, metaphysics and philosophy of mind. He is 
the author of Reading Epistemology (2006), The Metaphysics of Memory (2008), and 
Memory: A Philosophical Study (2010); and editor, with Fred Dretske, of Knowledge: 
Readings in Contemporary Epistemology (2000).
Richard Bett Professor of Philosophy and Classics, Johns Hopkins University. He is 
the author of Pyrrho, his Antecedents and his Legacy (2000), and of translations of 

NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS
xvi
Sextus Empiricus, Against the Ethicists (1997, with Introduction and Commentary) 
and Against the Logicians (2005, with Introduction and Notes).
Alexander Bird is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Bristol. He is the author 
of Philosophy of Science (1998), and two other books and numerous articles in the 
epistemology and metaphysics of science.
Tim Black is Associate Professor of Philosophy at California State University, 
Northridge. He works mainly in epistemology, history of modern philosophy, and 
philosophy of mind.
Paul Boghossian is Silver Professor of Philosophy at New York University. He works 
primarily in epistemology and the philosophy of mind, although he has also written 
about the aesthetics of music and the concept of genocide. He is the author of Fear of 
Knowledge: Against Relativism and Constructivism (2007) and Content and Justification: 
Philosophical Papers (2008); and editor, with Christopher Peacocke, of New Essays on 
the A Priori (2000).
Laurence BonJour is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Washington. He is 
the author of In Defense of Pure Reason (a defense of epistemological rationalism) and 
of many other books and papers in epistemology and related areas.
Michael Bradie is Professor of Philosophy at Bowling Green State University. His 
research interests include the philosophy of biology, the role of metaphors in science, 
and the role of evolutionary thinking on reshaping our understanding of traditional 
philosophical problems.
Anthony Brueckner is Professor of Philosophy at the University of California, Santa 
Barbara. He has written papers in epistemology, philosophy of mind, metaphysics, 
and philosophy of language.
Otávio Bueno is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Miami. His work focuses on 
the philosophies of mathematics, of logic, and of science. He has published articles, 
e.g., in Noûs, Mind, Journal of Philosophical Logic, Synthese, Philosophia Mathematica, 
and Philosophy of Science. He edited, with Øystein Linnebo, New Waves in Philosophy 
of Mathematics.
Timothy Chappell is Professor of Philosophy at the Open University, Milton Keynes, 
UK, and author of books including The Plato Reader (1996), Reading Plato’s Theaetetus 
(2004), and The Inescapable Self (2005).
Juan Comesaña is Associate Professor of Philosophy at the University of Arizona. He 
works mainly in epistemology, and has published widely in this area.
Richard Creath is Professor of Philosophy and of Life Sciences at Arizona State 
University. He has numerous publications on Carnap and Quine. He edited Dear 
Carnap, Dear Van and is the General Editor of the forthcoming Collected Works of 
Rudolf Carnap.

NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS
xvii
William Demopoulos is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Western Ontario. 
He works on the philosophy of science, philosophy of mathematics, and the history 
of analytic philosophy, and he has published widely in these areas.
Michael DePaul is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Notre Dame. Formal 
citations in the article aside, he picked up what he knows about foundationalism 
from listening to teachers—K. Sayre, G. Pappas, M. Swain, W. Lycan, E. Sosa and 
most especially R. Chisholm—and talking with colleagues—R. Foley, R. Audi, and 
A. Plantinga.
Josh Dever is Associate Professor of Philosophy at the University of Texas at Austin. He 
works primarily in philosophy of language and philosophical logic.
Trent Dougherty teaches at Baylor University. He is a graduate of the University of 
Missouri and the University of Rochester. He works in traditional, formal, and virtue 
epistemology as well as Philosophy of Religion. His favorite activity is camping and 
mountain biking with his family.
Fred Dretske is Professor Emeritus at both the University of Wisconsin and Stanford 
University. Presently he is a Senior Research Scholar at Duke University. His books 
include Seeing and Knowing (1969), Knowledge and the Flow of Information (1981), 
Explaining Behavior (1988), and Naturalizing the Mind (1995). His current interests are 
consciousness and self-knowledge.
Pascal Engel is Professor of Modern and Contemporary Philosophy at the University 
of Geneva. Previously, he was Professor of Logic, Language and Knowledge at the 
University of Paris IV Sorbonne. His books include The Norm of Truth (1991), Truth 
(2002) and Ramsey, Truth and Success (with Jerome Dokic, Routledge, 2002).
Jeremy Fantl is Associate Professor of Philosophy at the University of Calgary. He works 
mainly on epistemology and metaphysics and is the author, with Matthew McGrath, 
of Knowledge in an Uncertain World (2009).
Richard Foley is Professor of Philosophy and Dean of the Faculty of Arts and Science 
at New York University. His main research interests focus on epistemology and 
epistemological issues in related fields. He is currently at work on a book titled 
Knowledge as Sufficient Information.
Eckart Förster is Professor of Philosophy, German, and the Humanities at the Johns 
Hopkins University, Baltimore, and Honorary Professor of Philosophy at the 
Humboldt University Berlin, Germany.
Bryan Frances is Associate Professor of Philosophy at Fordham University. He works 
mainly on epistemology and metaphysics, and is the author of Scepticism Comes Alive 
(2005).
André Fuhrmann is Professor of Logic and Philosophy of Science in the Department of 
Philosophy at Goethe University in Frankfurt am Main, Germany. He is the author 

NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS
xviii
of An Essay on Contraction (1995) and numerous articles in philosophy and logic. He 
is presently working on a book on the justification of belief changes.
Richard Fumerton is F. Wendell Miller Professor of Philosophy at the University of Iowa. 
He has wide-ranging research interests, taking in epistemology, history of philosophy, 
metaphysics, and ethics. He is the author of a number of books, including Realism 
and the Correspondence Theory of Truth (2002) and Metaepistemology and Skepticism 
(1996).
Stephen Gaukroger is Professor of History of Philosophy and History of Science at the 
University of Sydney, and Professor of Philosophy at the University of Aberdeen. 
His is author of several books on Descartes and, most recently, The Emergence of a 
Scientific Culture (2006).
Sanford Goldberg is Professor of Philosophy at Northwestern University. He works 
in the areas of epistemology and the philosophy of mind and language. He is the 
author of Anti-Individualism: Mind and Language, Knowledge and Justification (2007), 
and Relying on Others: An Essay in Epistemology (2010).
John Greco is the Leonard and Elizabeth Eslick Chair in Philosophy at Saint Louis 
University. He received his Ph.D. from Brown University in 1989. His publications 
include: Achieving Knowledge (2009); The Oxford Handbook of Skepticism, ed. (2008); 
Sosa and his Critics, ed. (2004); and Putting Skeptics in Their Place: The Nature of 
Skeptical Arguments and Their Role in Philosophical Inquiry (2000).
Stephen R. Grimm is Assistant Professor of Philosophy at Fordham University. His 
main areas of research are epistemology, the philosophy of science, and value theory.
Thomas Grundmann is Professor of Philosophy at Cologne University, Germany. He 
has published several articles on epistemology and philosophy of mind. Among his 
books are Analytische Einführung in die Erkenntnistheorie (2008) and Der Wahrheit 
auf der Spur (2003). In his current research he is working on a priori knowledge, 
intuitions, thought-experiments and experimental philosophy. He is the co-editor 
of an upcoming two-volume special issue of Philosophical Psychology on experimental 
philosophy.
Stephan Hartmann (Ph.D. (Philosophy) at the University of Giessen, 1995) is Chair of 
Epistemology and Philosophy of Science at Tilburg University and founding director 
of the Tilburg Center for Logic and Philosophy of Science (since 2007). Stephan 
has published extensively on philosophy of science and the use of formal methods in 
epistemology.
Stephen Hetherington is Professor of Philosophy at the University of New South Wales, 
in Sydney, Australia. He has written several books, including Good Knowledge, Bad 
Knowledge (2001) and Self-Knowledge (2007). He has edited two books, including 
Epistemology Futures (2006).
Nicholas Jolley is Emeritus Professor of Philosophy, University of California, Irvine. He 
is the author of Leibniz and Locke: A Study of the New Essays on Human Understanding 

NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS
xix
(1984), The Light of the Soul: Theories of Ideas in Leibniz, Malebranche, and Descartes 
(1990), Locke: His Philosophical Thought (1999), and Leibniz (Routledge, 2005). He 
is also the editor of the Cambridge Companion to Leibniz (1995) and, with translator 
David Scott, of Nicolas Malebranche: Dialogues on Metaphysics (1997).
Mark Kaplan is is Professor of Philosophy at Indiana University. He is the author of 
Decision Theory as Philosophy, as well as articles and book chapters on epistemology, 
on decision theory, and on the philosophy of J.L. Austin.
Klemens Kappel is Associate Professor of Philosophy at the University of Copenhagen. 
His research interests are in epistemology, in particular social epistemology, but he 
has also published in ethics and metaethics.
Christoph Kelp is currently working as a Postdoctoral Reseach Fellow at the University 
of Leuven, Belgium. His research focuses on a variety of issues in epistemology and 
his publications include papers on virtue epistemology (Synthese), contrastivism 
(Philosophical Studies), and the knowability paradox.
Matthew Kieran is Professor of Philosophy and the Arts at the University of Leeds. 
He is the author of Revealing Art (2005) and currently researches on issues at the 
intersection of aesthetics, epistemology, and ethics, especially concerning aesthetic 
virtues and vices.
Peter D. Klein is Professor of Philosophy at Rutgers University. He was one of the 
developers of the defeasibility theory of knowledge and he argued that it provides an 
adequate response to some forms of skepticism. Recently, he has defended infinitism 
as the correct response to the epistemic regress problem.
Martin Kusch is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Vienna. Prior to taking 
up this appointment he was Professor of Philosophy and Sociology of Science at the 
Department of History and Philosophy of Science at Cambridge University. He has 
wide-ranging research interests, including epistemology, philosophy of language and 
philosophy of the social sciences. His books include Knowledge by Agreement (2002) 
and A Sceptical Guide to Meaning and Rules (2006).
Jonathan L. Kvanvig is Distinguished Professor of Philosophy at Baylor University, 
with prior appointments at the University of Missouri and Texas A&M University. 
He works on metaphysics, epistemology, philosophy of religion, and philosophy of 
logic and language. He is the General Editor of the Oxford Studies in Philosophy of 
Religion series and his recent books include The Knowability Paradox (2006) and The 
Value of Knowledge and the Pursuit of Understanding (2003).
Jennifer Lackey is Associate Professor of Philosophy at Northwestern University. She 
is the author of Learning from Words: Testimony as a Source of Knowledge (2006) and 
her current research focuses on disagreement, norms of assertion, and the value of 
knowledge.
E. J. Lowe is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Durham. He works mainly 
on metaphysics, the philosophy of mind and action, the philosophy of logic, the 

NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS
xx
philosophy of language, and early modern philosophy, and he has published widely 
in these areas. His recent books include The Four-Category Ontology (2006) and 
Personal Agency (2008). He is a General Editor of the Cambridge Studies in Philosophy 
monograph series.
Peter Ludlow is Professor of Philosophy at the Northwestern University. Before moving 
to Northwestern, Ludlow taught at the University of Toronto, the the University 
of Michigan, the State University of New York at Stony Brook and was Visiting 
Professor of Philosophy at Syracuse University and Cornell University. He has done 
interdisciplinary work on the interface of linguistics and philosophy, and has extended 
that work to topics in metaphysics (e.g., the philosophy of time) and epistemology 
(e.g. contextualism).
Steven Luper is Professor and Chair of the Department of Philosophy at Trinity 
University. His main research areas are epistemology and the philosophy of death, 
and he has published widely in these fields.
William G. Lycan is William Rand Kenan, Jr. Professor of Philosophy at the University 
of North Carolina. He is author of eight books, including Logical Form in Natural 
Language (1984), Knowing Who (with Steven Boër, 1986), Consciousness (1987), 
Judgement and Justification (1988), and Real Conditionals (2001).
Michael P. Lynch is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Connecticut. He is 
the author of Truth in Context (1998), True to Life (2004), and Truth as One and Many 
(2009).
John MacFarlane is Associate Professor of Philosophy at the University of California, 
Berkeley. He has written extensively on the philosophy of logic and the philosophy of 
language, and is currently working on a book on relative truth and its applications.
Marie McGinn is Professor of Philosophy at the University of East Anglia, UK, 
and Professor Emeritus of Philosophy at the University of York. She works on 
Wittgenstein, epistemology, philosophy of mind, early analytic philosophy and early 
modern philosophy. Her books include Sense and Certainty (1989) and Elucidating the 
Tractatus (2006).
Matthew McGrath is Associate Professor of Philosophy at the University of Missouri-
Columbia. He works mainly on epistemology and metaphysics and is the author (with 
Jeremy Fantl) of Knowledge in an Uncertain World (2009).
Timothy McGrew is Professor of Philosophy at Western Michigan University. His 
research interests include the history and philosophy of science, probability, and 
epistemology. He is the author of The Foundations of Knowledge (1995) and co-author 
of Internalism and Epistemology (Routledge, 2007) and The Philosophy of Science: An 
Historical Anthology (2009) as well as numerous articles in Mind, The Monist, Analysis, 
Erkenntnis, British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, and other journals.
Alexander Miller is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Birmingham, UK. 
He works mainly in the areas of philosophy of language and mind, metaethics, and 
metaphysics and has published widely on these topics.

NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS
xxi
Cheryl Misak is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Toronto, where she also 
holds the position of Vice-President and Provost. Her primary research interests are 
in pragmatism, epistemology, and moral philosophy. Her books include Truth, Politics, 
Morality (Routledge, 2000) and Truth and the End of Inquiry (1990).
Daniel M. Mittag is Assistant Professor of Philosophy at Albion College in Albion, MI. 
He works in the areas of epistemology and the philosophy of mind.
Joe Morrison works on epistemological issues associated with W.V. Quine, particularly 
Quine’s holism and naturalism. Joe got his Ph.D. in Philosophy from the University 
of Sheffield in 2008. He taught at the University of Aberdeen for nearly two years, 
and is currently a Teaching Fellow at the University of Birmingham.
Adam Morton is Canada Research Chair in Epistemology and Decision Theory at 
the University of Alberta. His two most recent books are The Importance of Being 
Understood (Routledge, 2002) and On Evil (Routledge, 2004). He is currently 
working on a book on the intellectual virtues of limitation-management which has 
the working title Of Human Boundedness.
Ram Neta is Associate Professor of Philosophy at the University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill. He specializes in epistemology and is currently at work on a book on the 
nature of knowledge.
Ryan Nichols, Visiting Associate Professor at University of Kansas, is a specialist in 
Early Modern Philosophy with an emphasis on the Scottish Enlightenment. He 
recently published two books, Thomas Reid’s Theory of Perception (2007) and Philosophy 
Through Science Fiction (Routledge, 2008).
Erik J. Olsson occupies the Chair in Theoretical Philosophy at Lund University, 
Sweden. His main published areas of research are epistemology and philosophy of 
science, but he has also written on metaphilosophy, metaphysics, philosophical logic, 
and the history of logic.
George Pappas is Professor of Philosophy, emeritus, at Ohio State University. He is the 
author of Berkeley’s Thought (2000), and of numerous articles on Berkeley, Locke, 
Hume, and Reid.
Richard Patterson is Professor of Philosophy at Emory University. He is the author of 
Image and Reality in Plato’s Metaphysics (1985) and Aristotle’s Modal Logic (1995), and 
a variety of articles in Ancient Philosophy. His commentary on Plato’s Parmenides is 
forthcoming as part of the Archelogos Project.
Nikolaj J.L.L. Pedersen is a Research Fellow in the Department of Philosophy at 
UCLA and at the Social Epistemology Research Group (SERG) at the University 
of Copenhagen. His main research areas are epistemology, metaphysics, truth, and 
the philosophy of logic and mathematics. He is the editor, with Cory D. Wright, of 
Truth and Pluralism: Current Debates (2010) and New Waves in the Philosophy of Truth 
(2010).

NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS
xxii
Patrick Rysiew is Associate Professor of Philosophy at the University of Victoria. His 
primary research interests are in epistemology, including its points of intersection 
with certain issues in philosophy of language and psychology.
Joe Salerno is Associate Professor of Philosophy at Saint Louis University, and Research 
Fellow at Australian National University. He works on epistemology, metaphysics, 
and philosophy of language and logic, and has published widely in these areas.
Geoffrey Sayre-McCord is the Morehead Alumni Distinguished Professor of Philosophy 
at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, where he has taught since 1985. 
His research interests include metaethics, moral theory, epistemology, and the his-
tory of philosophy. He has published extensively on moral theory, epistemology, and 
modern philosophy, and has edited Essays on Moral Realism (1998) and Hume: Moral 
Philosophy (2006).
Richard Schantz is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Siegen, Germany. He is 
working in epistemology, in the philosophy of language and mind, and in metaphysics. 
He is author of Der sinnliche Gehalt der Wahrnehmung and of Wahrheit, Referenz und 
Realismus. He is editor of What is Truth? and of The Externalist Challenge.
Eric Schwitzgebel (Ph.D., Philosophy, U.C. Berkeley, 1997) is currently Associate 
Professor of Philosophy at University of California, Riverside. His primary current 
research interests are belief (including “in-between” cases of believing), consciousness 
(including the inaccuracy of introspective reports), and moral psychology (including 
the moral behavior of ethics professors).
David Sosa is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Texas at Austin.
Jan Sprenger (Ph.D. (Philosophy) at the University of Bonn, 2008) is Assistant Professor 
of Philosophy at Tilburg University (since 2008). Jan’s work focuses on philosophy 
of statistics, philosophy of probability, decision theory, and formal modeling in social 
epistemology.
John Symons is Associate Professor of Philosophy at the University of Texas at El Paso. 
His work spans logic, philosophy of mind, epistemology, and metaphysics but focuses 
on the problem of emergence. In addition to numerous articles and chapters he is the 
author or editor of eight books including On Dennett (2002), The Routledge Companion 
to Philosophy of Psychology (2009), Logic Epistemology and the Unity of Science (2004). 
Since 2002 he has been editor of Synthese.
Alessandra Tanesini is Reader in Philosophy at Cardiff University. Her research 
interests include epistemology, feminism, philosophy of mind and language, and 
Wittgenstein. She is the author of An Introduction to Feminist Epistemologies (1999) 
and of Wittgenstein: A Feminist Introduction (2004).
Thomas Uebel is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Manchester, England. 
His research concerns the history of analytical philosophy with particular attention 

NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS
xxiii
to philosophy of science and epistemology and he has published widely on these 
subjects.
Jonathan M. Weinberg is Associate Professor of Philosophy and a member of the 
Cognitive Science Program at Indiana University, Bloomington. He received his Ph.D. 
in Philosophy from Rutgers University in 2002, and has published on epistemology, 
the philosophy of cognitive science, aesthetics, and experimental philosophy.
Dennis Whitcomb is Assistant Professor of Philosophy at Western Washington 
University. He works primarily on epistemic value and has recently published in 
Philosophical Studies, Pacific Philosophical Quarterly, Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research, and other venues.
Timothy Williamson is Wykeham Professor of Logic at Oxford University, a Fellow 
of New College, Oxford, a Fellow of the British Academy and Honorary Foreign 
Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. He has published Identity 
and Discrimination (1990), Vagueness (1994), Knowledge and its Limits (2000), The 
Philosophy of Philosophy (2007) and over 120 articles.
Hamid Vahid is Professor of Philosophy and the Head of the Analytic Philosophy 
Faculty at the Institute for Fundamental Sciences in Tehran, Iran.
Linda Zagzebski is Kingfisher College Chair of the Philosophy of Religion and Ethics 
and George Lynn Cross Research Professor at Oklahoma University. She works mainly 
in the philosophy of religion, epistemology, and virtue ethics, with a particular focus 
on the intersection of epistemology and ethical theory. She is the author of a number 
of books, including Virtues of the Mind (1996), and is currently writing a book on 
epistemic authority.


PREFACE
Epistemology has always been one of the most central and important areas of philoso-
phy, one which overlaps and intersects with all the different regions of our ancient 
discipline. More recently, however, epistemology has gone from being a solid mainstay 
of the philosophical landscape to being right at the forefront of contemporary debate. 
Accordingly, while this volume has been designed to offer the reader a sense of the 
history of epistemology and of those topics which have always been a constant fixture 
of epistemological discussion (such as the problem of skepticism), at the same time we 
have also ensured that it provides an overview of the main cutting-edge issues in the 
contemporary literature too (such as the problem of disagreement, or experimental epis-
temology). The result is more than 75 articles, organized within 10 sub-topics and all 
written by experts in the relevant field, which comprehensively explore both familiar 
and new topics in epistemology.
Assembling a body of articles of this size is, of course, a substantial undertaking, and 
we would like to take this opportunity to thank Andrew Beck and Michael Andrews at 
Routledge, our copy-editor Rachel Hutchings, and Colin Morgan of Swales & Willis 
who assisted us throughout this process. We are also grateful for the numerous anony-
mous referees who helped improve the quality of the entries. Last but not least, we 
would like to thank the contributors to this volume for the care and dedication that 
they devoted to their entries.
Sven Bernecker & Duncan Pritchard
Irvine, California & Edinburgh, Scotland
May 2010


Part I
FOUNDATIONAL 
CONCEPTS


1
TRUTH
Michael P. Lynch
Philosophical work on truth tends to cluster around three broad and interrelated ques-
tions: Does truth have a nature? What sort of nature does it have? And, how—in the 
harsh light of the semantic paradoxes—can we formally account for the logical behavior 
of truth?
This essay will be concerned with the metaphysics of truth—in short, the first two 
questions. It will survey some traditional theories that think truth is worthy of deep 
metaphysical investigation, some deflationary accounts that disagree, and some more 
recent accounts which offer a more pluralist perspective.
Correspondence and Representation
Truth is a famously perplexing idea, but most of us share some common assumptions 
about it. One such truth about truth is that it is objective. To speak truly is to “say of 
what is, that it is,” as Aristotle put it (1993). Alternatively:
Objectivity: The belief that p is true if, and only if, with respect to the belief that 
p, things are as they are believed to be.
The most venerable theory of truth, the correspondence theory, uses the Objectivity 
intuition as a starting point. But like the other traditional theories we’ll discuss, it isn’t 
content to end there. It aims to explain the Objectivity truism by giving a general 
account of the nature of truth. According to that account, beliefs are true just when 
they correspond to reality. In the early twentieth century, for example, Wittgenstein 
(1922) and Russell (1966) developed a version of the correspondence theory of truth 
according to which beliefs (or their propositional contents) were true in virtue of shar-
ing a common structure with the facts. According to this view, beliefs such as the cat 
is on the mat exhibit a certain form; and objects (cats, mats) and relations (being on) 
compose basic facts that also exhibit a logical form or configuration. Thus a belief cor-
responds as a whole to a fact just when they share the same form or structure.
While this sort of view seems to explain the truth of simple beliefs about cats and 
mats well enough, it faces problems with other sorts of facts. Consider the truth that 
there are no unicorns. Is there a negative fact that makes this true? It is unclear whether 
there are any such facts. Moreover, many philosophers have wondered about the nature 
of facts themselves. It seems that facts are either constituted by objects and properties 
(and relations) or they are not. If they are, then for reasons of ontological parsimony, 
we must be given a serious motivation for taking them to be distinct entities over and 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
4
above that which composes them. It is difficult to see what really compelling motiva-
tion could be supplied. If they are not constituted by objects and their properties, then 
what is their nature exactly? As Strawson (1950) pointed out, they begin to look suspi-
ciously like the mere shadows of statements.
Partly because of these worries, contemporary theoretical descendents of the tradi-
tional correspondence idea express its central truism slightly differently. First, the truth 
of a belief is defined in terms of the representational features of its component concepts 
(what I will here call “denotation”). Thus in the case of a belief whose content has the 
simple predicational structure a is F, we get:
REPRESENT: The belief that a is F is true if and only if the object denoted by 
<a> has the property denoted by <F>.
The basic thought is that beliefs are true because their components stand in certain 
representational relations to reality and that reality is a certain way (Devitt, 1997). 
Adopting machinery made familiar with Tarski (1944; see also Field, 1972) the repre-
sentationalist then applies this insight to beliefs with more complicated structures. The 
result is a view according to which the truth of complex beliefs is recursively defined 
in terms of the truth of simpler beliefs and the rules for logical connectives, while less 
complex beliefs “correspond to reality” in the sense that their component parts—con-
cepts—themselves represent objects and properties.
The second part of any representational view of truth is a theory of how concepts 
denote objects and properties. A toy example would be:
CAUSAL: <cat> denotes cats = cats, cause, under appropriate conditions, 
mental tokenings of <cat>.
In short, truth is defined in terms of representation, representation is defined in terms of 
denotation, and denotation is defined as a property that either is, or supervenes on natu-
ral relations like those specified in CAUSAL. Thus, if we say that an object or property, 
which, under appropriate conditions, causes (or its instances cause) mental tokenings 
of some concept “causally maps” that concept:
CC (Causal-correspondence): The belief that a is F is true if and only if the 
object causally mapped by <a> has the property causally mapped by <F>.
There are various objections and challenges one might raise against any particular 
representational theory of truth. But over and above these theory-specific problems, 
representational theories all face a problem of scope. This is because such theories have 
metaphysical implications. Take (CC). It is committed to the idea that the object and 
properties represented are capable of entering into at least indirect causal interaction 
with our minds. This sounds reasonable when we concentrate on examples involving 
ordinary objects like cats and cars. But it is highly implausible as a global principle. 
Consider propositions such as two and two are four or torture is wrong. Under the assump-
tion that truth is always and everywhere causal correspondence, it is a vexing question 
how these true thoughts can be true. That two and two are four is unimpeachable, but 
even granting that numbers are objects, how can any thought of mine be in causal 
contact with something like a number? Numbers, whatever else they turn out to be, are 

TRUTH
5
presumably not objects with which we can causally interact. Moral propositions repre-
sent a slightly different puzzle: torture is certainly wrong, but it is difficult to know how 
wrongness—even if we grant that it is a property—can be a natural property with which 
we can causally interact.
A representationalist can try to avoid the scope problem by watering down his theory 
of course: “a belief corresponds to reality just when things are as they are believed to be” 
would be one example. But that just restates Objectivity, it doesn’t explain it. The more 
substantive the correspondence theory becomes—as when it is seen as part of a larger 
theory of representation—the more it is vulnerable to the scope problem, and the less 
plausible it is as a universal theory of the underlying nature of truth.
Pragmatism and Superwarrant
A second familiar truth about truth is that it is the aim, or end, of inquiry. By “inquiry” I 
mean simply the process of asking and answering questions. Truth—in the sense of true 
beliefs and judgments—is clearly a goal of this process: unless the situation is highly 
atypical, when I ask you where my car keys are I want to know where they are—I want 
the truth. In pursuing inquiry of course, we pursue truth only indirectly by explicitly 
pursuing reasons and evidence. But we care about giving reasons, supplying justification 
for our beliefs, because beliefs which are so justified are more likely to be true, even if 
they aren’t guaranteed to be such. And this fact explains why, when we don’t know what 
is true, we steer by the evidence, even if evidence sometimes steers us wrong. That is,
End of Inquiry: Other things being equal, true beliefs are a goal of inquiry.
Where correspondence theories give pride of place to Objectivity, their historical 
rivals, the coherence and pragmatist accounts of truth, privilege End of Inquiry. Indeed, 
one of the most well-known versions of the theory, Peirce’s pragmatist view of truth, 
simply identifies truth with that end: “The opinion which is fated to be ultimately 
agreed to by all who investigate is what we mean by truth” (Peirce, 1878/2001: 206). 
Rather than saying that we agree on what is true because it is true, Peirce’s thought is 
that what is true is so because we agree on it. No mention is made of our thought’s hav-
ing to represent or correspond to some independent world of objects. There may be such 
a world, but if so, truth is shorn free of it on this account.
One obvious problem with Peirce’s view is that it holds truth hostage to the existence 
of an actual end of inquiry—a time when all questions are presumably settled. It seems 
highly unlikely, to put it mildly, that there will be such a time. Hilary Putnam (1981 and 
1990) modified the account to avoid this point:
(PT): The proposition that p is true if and only if the proposition that p would 
be warranted to believe in ideal epistemic circumstances for assessing the prop-
osition that p.
This is a significant improvement over Peirce’s view. It isn’t committed to the actual-
ity of ideal epistemic circumstances; and it treats such circumstances as tailor-made 
for each individual belief. But Putnam’s view notoriously faces its own problems. One 
such problem is that the view founders on the so-called conditional fallacy (Plantinga, 
1982; Wright, 2001). This is a problem that can plague attempts to define a categorical 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
6
statement in terms of a subjunctive conditional. How the problem applies here can be 
brought out if we take the proposition in question in (PT) to be
(not-I): Ideal epistemic circumstances for assessing this proposition will never 
obtain.
Substituting (not-I) in for “p” in (PT), we arrive at the conclusion that (not-I) is true 
if and only if it would be warranted in ideal circumstances for assessing (not-I). But if it 
were warranted in such circumstances it would be false. So, intuitively, (not-I) can only 
be true if it is false, if (PT) is our theory of truth.
How might such problems be avoided? One reasonable idea, developed by Crispin 
Wright (1992) is to define a true proposition not as one that would be warranted to 
believe in ideal conditions, but as one that is warranted to believe in the ordinary sense 
and remains warranted no matter how our information is expanded or improved. Call 
this superwarrant. To be superwarranted is to be continually warranted without defeat. 
Note that the idea of superwarrant does not require an idealized “end of inquiry.” A 
superwarranted belief is one that is warranted by some state of information available to 
ordinary inquirers, which, in fact, would never be defeated or undermined by subsequent 
increases of information also available to ordinary inquirers. Moreover, superwarrant is 
a stable property: if a belief is superwarranted, then it is superwarranted at any stage of 
inquiry. Thus, a friend of the original pragmatist insight might suggest:
(SW): A belief is true if and only if it is superwarranted.
Like its rival the correspondence theory, (SW) faces a problem of scope. (SW) implies 
that it must be feasible to have warrant for any true proposition. If we were to focus on 
only some kinds of truths, this consequence may not seem too bad. Consider, truths 
about what is or isn’t funny. It is odd to think that a joke is funny even if no one will 
ever have warrant in believing that it is—in other words, even if nobody ever laughs. 
Likewise for legal truths. It is difficult to see how a proposition of law might be true even 
if no evidence is ever available for (or against) it—even in principle. For otherwise, it 
would be possible for there to be a true proposition of the form “x is illegal” even if no 
one would ever be warranted in believing that it is, or is not legal. And that in turn 
means that there could be unknowably illegal actions—actions I might even be doing 
right now. But that seems absurd.
So an epistemic constraint seems plausible in the case of some normative truths at 
least. But it seems false when applied across the board. Consider propositions such as 
the number of stars in the universe right now is even; or it rained 15,000 years ago on this 
spot. Surely there could not be evidence for or against such propositions. Yet they might 
be true. Humility in the face of the size of the universe seems to demand that. And yet 
(SW) would seem to require us to deny that such propositions can be true.
The basic problem can again be put in terms of a dilemma: Either the pragmatist 
admits that her theory has an absurd consequence—in this case, the consequence that 
all truths are at some point warranted—or admits that her view has limited scope.
Deflationary Theories
Traditional accounts such as the correspondence and pragmatist theories take very dif-
ferent truisms about truth as their starting point. But they share a methodology. Both 

TRUTH
7
assume that truth’s real essence underlies these truisms and explains them. They both 
try to reduce truth to some other property—such as causal mapping, or superwarrant—
thought to constitute truth’s real essence.
Many philosophers have come to think that the idea that truth has a real essence is 
misguided. Deflationary views are so-called because they deflate the pretensions of the 
more traditional theories. They differ widely in their details, but most share at least two 
key tenets. First, deflationists hold that the concept of truth is merely a logical device. 
They generally base this claim on the fact that we are inclined to a priori infer the 
proposition that snow is white from the proposition that it is true that snow is white and 
vice versa. As a reflection of this fact, deflationists typically give pride of place in their 
account of truth to some form of the equivalence or T-schema:
TS: <p> is true if and only if p.
Thus Paul Horwich (1998) for example, holds that our grasp of the concept of truth 
consists in our inclination to accept the instances of TS. Yet the concept one so grasps, 
Horwich thinks, is merely a device for generalization; it allows us to generalize over 
potentially infinite strings of claims. Instead of saying that Tom says that grass is green 
and grass is green; and Tom says that roses are red and roses are red … and so on for 
everything Tom says, I can employ the concept of truth and simply point out that every-
thing Tom says is true. If I had a mind big enough to encompass infinite conjunctions, 
I wouldn’t need the concept of truth. But being human, I do. The truth concept is an 
instrument that allows us to overcome our natural cognitive shortcomings. And that is 
all that it is.
So our concept of truth is a logical device; our grasp of that concept is revealed in 
our grasp of the instances of the T-schema. From this, the deflationist concludes that 
TS and its instances are the only facts about truth one needs to know in order to under-
stand what truth is. Any other fact about truth can be deduced from them together with 
relevant non truth-theoretical facts. No further metaphysical investigation is needed to 
tell us anything about the property.
Deflationists often put this point by saying that the role of the truth concept is 
expressive not explanatory. Truth does not play a significant explanatory role. By a “sig-
nificant” explanatory role, I mean that truth doesn’t figure in any explanations except 
in its role as a useful generalization device. This is not to deny that the truth concept 
can’t figure in explanations at all. It can, just so long as the concept in question is the 
deflationary one—that is, its role is limited to acting as a device for making generaliza-
tions over potentially infinite strings of propositions. But for deflationists, the fact that a 
proposition has the property of truth can’t be an essential, primitive part of an explana-
tion for some other phenomena. If it was, we would have reason, pace deflationism, to 
think that it is worthy of substantive investigation.
These two points—that the concept of truth is a mere logical device and that truth 
plays no significant explanatory role—jointly constitute the core of the deflationary 
position. Beyond this point, differences between various deflationary views emerge. 
Some views, for example, scorn propositions, preferring to talk about sentence truth, 
while others prefer utterances (Field, 1986; Quine, 1990). Deflationists also differ over 
how to justify our commitment to the instances of TS. Thus some deflationary views 
take it that TS and its instances are simply the consequence of the fact that the concept 
of truth is strongly semantically transparent: <p> and <<p> is true> are, in non-opaque 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
8
contexts, synonymous, intersubstitutable or “cognitively equivalent” (Beall, 2005; Field, 
1986; Ramsey, 2001). Others deny that the instances of TS need justification (Horwich, 
1998). They instead claim that the non-paradoxical instances of TS are themselves 
epistemically and explanatorily basic, and our grasp of the concept of truth is contained 
in our implicit acceptance of the non-paradoxical instances.
Whatever its specific form, deflationism is a very attractive view. Its most obvious 
benefit is its relative ontological simplicity. Since truth is metaphysically transparent, 
there is one less property we need to have a theory of. It captures the semantic appear-
ances, as it were, without positing any mysterious relation like “correspondence” or 
“superwarrant.” And thus it completely avoids the scope problem. The scope problem 
only arises for views which specify some property P that all and only true propositions 
have which makes them true. Deflationists deny there is any such property; or if they do 
allow there is such a property, it will not be a property that will rule out any particular 
type of proposition from being true. They allow that any proposition that is fit to figure 
in an instance of TS can be true.
These are significant benefits. But deflationist theories also have considerable costs. 
Some of these costs concern problems associated with particular versions of deflationism. 
Some of these concern how best to state some deflationists’ views, or even whether you 
can coherently state them all (David, 1994); others are about whether some deflation-
ists can account for generalizations about truth and involving truth (Gupta, 1993).
Over and above specific worries about particular deflationary views, however, there 
are at least two objections to the overall approach worth thinking about. First, there 
is the question of whether deflationism can account for all the common truths about 
truth. One such common truism is that truth is normative of belief. That is,
Norm of belief (NB): It is prima facie correct to believe <p> if and only if <p> 
is true.
Normative facts are those that are “fraught with ought” in Sellars’ phrase. And, argu-
ably, any fact that implies ought-involving facts is a normative fact. It is trivial that, 
other things being equal, I ought to believe what is correct, and thus by (NB), other 
things being equal, I ought to believe what is true. Since any claim that implies oughts 
in this way is presumably normative, (NB) is a normative fact about truth.
Deflationists sometimes respond that Norm of Belief is not really about truth at all 
(Horwich, 2001). Their argument is that one can derive (NB) from instances of TS 
together with instances of the premise that
(B) It is prima facie correct to believe <p> if and only if p.
Thus, it is claimed, (NB) doesn’t really display a normative fact about truth. Rather, it 
simply illustrates how the concept of truth can be used as a logical device—in order to 
generalize over the instances of schemas like (B) for example.
It should be noted that in order for this point to be persuasive, it must be convincing 
that instances of (B) are not about truth. But why think they aren’t? It isn’t sufficient to 
claim that (B) or its instances do not mention the word “true.” Indeed, if (B) were said 
to be a good paraphrase of (NB), then we would have just as much reason to think (B) 
was about truth as we do for thinking (NB) is about truth. Good paraphrases carry their 
ontological commitments with them (otherwise they wouldn’t be good paraphrases). 

TRUTH
9
Moreover, it isn’t plausible to simply claim that (B) or (NB) is about belief and not 
about truth. Belief and truth are interrelated concepts—thus it is more plausible to say 
that (NB) or (B) tell us something about truth and belief. They tell us that belief’s stan-
dard of correctness is truth and that truth is the standard of correctness of belief.
Even putting the above point aside, it is difficult to see why we would accept instances 
of (B) in the absence of already being committed to (NB). For the list of (B)’s instances 
is an infinite list of normative prescriptions; a list of little belief norms as it were: it is 
correct to believe snow is white iff snow is white, correct to believe roses are red iff roses 
are red and so on. Why should we accept each of these individual norms? Individual 
normative prescriptions are justified by general normative principles. Consider promis-
ing: it is correct to keep your promise to Tom for the same reason that it is correct to 
keep your promise to Bridget; because it is correct, other things being equal, to keep 
your promises. So, too, with truth: it is prima facie correct to believe that grass is green 
for the same reason it is correct to believe that snow is white; because it is prima facie 
correct to believe what is true. The general normative principle—(NB) in this case—is in 
the epistemic driver’s seat. Consequently we are justified in accepting instances of (B) 
only in virtue of accepting instances of (NB). So even if—as I just argued was implau-
sible—(B) isn’t about truth, it can’t be used to derive (NB). And, given the close tie 
previously noted between (NB) and the truism that truth is a worthy goal of inquiry, 
it seems equally dubious that that normative principle could also be derived from TS 
alone. And this should hardly be surprising: the normative character of a complex con-
cept like truth is usually thought to be irreducible to its purely descriptive character (see 
Lynch, 2004).
So one concern we should have about deflationism is whether it can fully account for 
all our common truths about truth. A less direct but possibly more fundamental worry 
is this. Deflationists of all varieties must remove truth from the philosopher’s toolbox. 
They must convince us to give up truth as an explanatory notion, by which to explain 
the nature of meaning, or knowledge, or the success of our actions. They must do so 
because, as noted above, it is sufficient for P to be a real and distinct property if P is part 
of a significant and informative explanation for some phenomenon Q. When it is, we 
can say that P is an explanatory property. The thought is a familiar one: something is 
real if we need to postulate it in order to make sense of something else that is real. Thus, 
if truth were part of an informative, substantive explanation of some other phenom-
enon of interest, we’d have good reason to think that there is more to say about it than 
the deflationist wishes to admit.
This point also bears on one of deflationism’s benefits—ontological simplicity. A fact 
about theory building is that simplifying a theory in one way tends to complicate it in 
others. That is so here. To mention just one example: while deflationists (may) have a 
simpler ontology of truth, they do so at the cost of having a more complex theory of the 
nature of meaning and mental content, or no such theory at all. In particular, as several 
prominent deflationists have highlighted themselves (Brandom, 2001; Horwich, 1998) 
they are barred from giving a truth-conditional account of the underlying nature of 
meaning and content. That is not a problem if a truth-conditional account is mistaken. 
But it is very much an open issue. And it seems that we should not prejudge a significant 
issue in linguistics by way of adopting a particular theory of truth.
The fact that deflationists must remove truth from our explanatory toolbox is a 
significant price to pay for deflationism. Yet the view has significant benefits—chief 
among them being that it avoids the problems of traditional theories. It would be good, 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
10
therefore, if we could find a theory that had this benefit but allowed us to retain truth 
as an explanatory tool.
Functionalism and Pluralism about Truth
Traditional theories get into trouble, recall, because they try to reduce truth to some 
other property, such as correspondence, which allegedly explains why it is objective, 
the end of inquiry, and the norm of belief. But such views all end up facing the scope 
problem. It seems as if, for any given property alleged to be identical with truth, there 
are propositions we believe are true (or capable of being so) but which lack that prop-
erty.
In the face of these problems, one thought is to abandon a reductive analysis of truth 
in favor of a broadly functionalist account, according to which the secret to what truth 
is lies with what it does. Instead of trying to explain truisms such as Objectivity or 
End of Inquiry in terms of something more fundamental, the functionalist suggests that 
we understand them as revealing an aspect of truth’s functional role. Roughly speaking, 
“portraying things as they are” and “being the end of inquiry” are part of the truth-role. 
They are part of what beliefs which have the property of truth do. Likewise with Norm 
of Belief: making a proposition correct to believe is just part of truth’s job. In short, the 
thought is that the truisms tell us that true propositions are those that have a property 
that has a certain function in our cognitive economy.
Playing a functional role amounts to satisfying a description, one that picks out cer-
tain features possessed by anything that plays the role. Such descriptions are like job 
descriptions. Writing a job description involves listing the tasks anyone who has that 
job must do, and specifying how that job relates to others in the immediate economic 
vicinity. We define the job in terms of its place in a larger network of jobs, all of which 
are understood in relation to each other, and by weighting some aspects of the job as 
more important or crucial than others. In the philosophy of mind, where functionalist 
analyses are commonplace, so-called “analytic” functionalists take job-descriptions for 
mental properties to be given by our implicit folk beliefs about those properties. In the 
case of a property like pain, these include truisms like “the threat of pain causes fear” 
and “if you are in pain, you may say ‘ouch’” and “if you are hit in the head, you will prob-
ably be in pain” and so on. These platitudes tell us that a property plays the pain-role 
when it is related to certain other mental, behavioral and experiential properties of an 
organism.
Likewise, we can take the truth-role to be carved out by our common truths about 
truth. These truisms form a theoretical structure of sorts—one which illustrates the 
relationships between true propositions and propositions with various other properties 
such as warrant, belief, correctness, and so on. These features, as in the parallel case of 
functional properties in the philosophy of mind, will not be primarily causal in nature, 
but quasi-logical and explanatory. But the basic suggestion in both cases is the same: the 
unique relations that truth bears to other properties nonetheless suffice to pin it down 
by jointly specifying the truth-role.
This allows us to give truth-conditions for the application of the truth concept itself 
as follows:
(F) For every x, x is true if, and only if, x has a property that plays the truth-
role.

TRUTH
11
Moreover, the functionalist can implicitly define the truth-role itself in terms of those 
relational features—call them the truish features—picked out by our common truths 
about truth. Thus they can say, for example, that
T that plays the truth-role if, and only if: P is T if and only if, where P is 
believed, things are as they are believed to be; other things being equal, it is a 
worthy goal of inquiry to believe P if P is T; it is correct to believe P if and only 
if P is T.
One of the chief benefits of a functionalist analysis of the concept of truth is that it 
opens up a new way of understanding the metaphysics of truth. We saw above that prop-
erties like correspondence or superwarrant aren’t plausible candidates for the essence of 
truth. But they may well be excellent candidates to play the truth-role. Perhaps some-
thing like (CC) plays the truth-role for our beliefs about physical objects and their 
properties; perhaps something like superwarrant plays it for our normative beliefs. In 
short, functionalism makes room for a form of alethic pluralism, or the idea that different 
kinds of beliefs might be true—in a certain sense—in different ways.
A pluralist metaphysic of truth has significant implications. One such implication is 
that it would make room for the anti-deflationary idea that an appeal to truth—and its 
realizing properties—may be explanatorily useful. One obvious example is the nature of 
knowledge. If there is more than one property that can play the truth-role, then this fact 
might help to explain how and why moral knowledge differs in kind from knowledge 
about the things such as cats and cars.
The functionalist view just described is more a theoretical framework than a full-
fledged theory of truth. Individual advocates of the general approach can and do differ 
over how to fill in the details.
One thing they can differ over is the content of the common truths or platitudes that 
define the truth-role. Wright, an early advocate of this general approach, for example, 
has argued that equally or more fundamental than the truisms we’ve so far canvassed are 
platitudes linking truth with assertion and negation (Wright, 1992). Others (Cotnoir, 
2009) have suggested that the number of platitudes required to demarcate the role is 
smaller, not larger, suggesting a view closer in spirit to some deflationary accounts.
Another area of significant disagreement concerns what to say about the nature of 
the truth property itself. Wright’s more recent work, for example, can be read as imply-
ing that truth is whatever property happens to play the truth-role (Wright, 2001). Thus, 
if where that role is played by correspondence, truth is correspondence, where it is 
played by superwarrant, truth is superwarrant. But such a view seems to face significant 
problems. One such problem concerns its implication for our understanding of validity. 
According to the standard definition valid inferences preserve a single property—truth. 
But now consider an inference like:
Murder is wrong or two and two is five; two and two is not five. Therefore, 
murder is wrong.
Suppose that (a) “truth” denotes any given property that plays the truth-role and (b) 
that the truth-role is played by different properties in the moral and mathematical 
domains. If so, then the above argument does not preserve a single property (Tappolet, 
1997), contra our ordinary definition of validity.

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
12
So it seems that we should not identify truth with the properties that realize the 
truth-role. Another suggestion (Lynch, 2001) takes “truth” to denote a higher-order 
property—the property of having a property that plays the truth-role. This suggestion 
avoids the problem with mixed inferences—since “truth” would now denote a single 
property in all domains. But it comes at a price. For the point of the functionalist analy-
sis was to define truth by way of a description of its functional role. That description 
implies that truth itself is a property that has the features described by our common 
truths about truth. But the property of having a property that has those features does not 
itself seem to have those features, contra our original analysis.
One possible way out of this difficulty would be to say that truth just is the property 
that has the truish features essentially, but to allow that this property is itself immanent 
in its realizing properties (Lynch, 2009). Let us say that where property F is immanent 
in a property M, it is a priori that F’s essential features are a subset of M’s features. Since 
it is a priori that every property’s essential features are a subset of its own features, every 
property is immanent in itself. So immanence, like identity, is reflexive and transitive. 
But unlike identity, it is non-symmetric. Where M and F are ontologically distinct prop-
erties—individuated by non-identical sets of essential features and relations—and F is 
immanent in M, M is not thereby immanent in F.
There is more to say about immanence, but even so briefly described it seems that it 
might allow the functionalist what she wants. Should a property of a belief such as cor-
responding to reality manifest truth, it will be a priori that the truish features are a subset 
of that property’s features. Roughly put: corresponding to reality is what makes some 
beliefs true because being true is just part of what it is for some beliefs to correspond to 
reality.
It remains to be seen whether the functionalist proposal is ultimately successful. But 
it is promising. By leaving room for pluralism about the properties that play the truth-
role, it avoids the scope problem plaguing traditional theories of truth. But by allowing 
that there is more to say about truth and its realizers than the deflationist allows, it 
suggests that understanding the metaphysics of truth can shed light on other issues of 
philosophical interest, such as the nature of knowledge.
References
Aristotle (1993) Metaphysics, trans. C. Kirwan, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Beall, Jc (2005) “Transparent Disquotationalism,” in Jc Beall and B. Armour-Garb (eds.) Deflationism and 
Paradox, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Brandom, Robert (2001) “Explanatory vs. Expressive Deflationism about Truth,” in R. Schantz (ed). What 
is Truth?, Berlin: Walter De Gruyter, pp. 103–19.
Cotnoir, A. (2009). “Generic Truth and Mixed Conjunctions: Some Alternatives,” Analysis 69(2): 473–9.
David, Marian (1994) Correspondence and Disquotation, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Devitt, Michael (1997) Realism and Truth, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University.
Field, Hartry (1972) “Tarski’s Theory of Truth,” Journal of Philosophy, 69: 347–75.
—— (1986) “The Deflationary Conception of Truth,” in G. MacDonald and C. Wright (eds.) Fact, Science 
and Morality, Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 55–117.
Gupta, Anil (1993) “A Critique of Deflationism,” Philosophical Topics, 21: 57–81.
Horwich, Paul (2001) “Norms of Truth and Meaning,” in Richard Schantz (ed.) What is Truth?, Berlin: 
Walter DeGruyter, pp. 133–45.
—— (1998) Truth, 2nd edn, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lynch, Michael P. (2001) “A Functionalist Theory of Truth,” in M. Lynch (ed.) The Nature of Truth, 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
—— (2004) “Minimalism and the Value of Truth,” Philosophical Quarterly, 54: 497–517.

TRUTH
13
—— (2009) Truth as One and Many, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Peirce, Charles (1878) “How to Make our Ideas Clear,” Popular Science Monthly 12: 286–302; citation here 
refers to reprint in M. P. Lynch (ed.) The Nature of Truth, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001: 193–210.
Plantinga, Alvin (1982) “How to be an Anti-Realist,” Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical 
Association, 56: 37–50.
Putnam, Hilary (1990) Realism with a Human Face, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
—— (1981) Reason, Truth and History, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Quine, W. V. O. (1990) The Pursuit of Truth, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Ramsey, F. P. (2001) “The Nature of Truth,” in M. P. Lynch (ed.) The Nature of Truth, Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, pp. 433–46.
Russell, Bertrand (1966) “On the Nature of Truth and Falsehood,” in his Philosophical Essays, London: 
George Allen & Unwin, pp. 147–59.
Strawson, P. F. (1950) “Truth,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, supp. vol. 24: 129–56.
Tappolet, Christine (1997) “Mixed Inferences: A Problem for Pluralism about Truth Predicates,” Analysis, 
57: 209–11.
Tarski, Alfred (1944) “The Semantic Conception of Truth and the Foundations of Semantics,” Philosophy 
and Phenomenological Research, 4: 343–75.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig (1922) Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, trans. C. K. Ogden, London: Kegan Paul.
Wright, Crispin (1992) Truth and Objectivity, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
—— (2001) “Minimalism, Deflationism, Pragmatism, Pluralism,” in M. P. Lynch (ed.) The Nature of Truth, 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 751–88.
Further Reading
Beall, Jc, B. Armour-Garb, and G. Priest (2004) New Essays on Non-Contradiction, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Field, Hartry (2001) Truth and the Absence of Fact, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
James, W. (1942) Pragmatism and the Meaning of Truth, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Künne, W. (2003) Conceptions of Truth, Oxford: Oxford University Press. (The best overview of theories of 
truth available.)
Lynch, Michael P. (1998) Truth in Context, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

2
BELIEF
Eric Schwitzgebel
To believe something, as contemporary analytic philosophers generally use the term 
“belief,” is to take it to be the case or regard it as true. In this sense, many of our beliefs 
are quite mundane: I believe that Aristotle is dead, that there’s tea in my mug, that 
I have two arms. To qualify as believing these things, I needn’t have given them any 
extended thought or attention, nor need I be particularly or deeply committed to them, 
as is sometimes suggested by the ordinary English use of the word belief (as in the phrase 
“these are my beliefs: . . .”). To be a human thinker or rational agent is, in part, to regard 
the world and the things in it as having certain features. Believing is just this aspect of 
being a thinker or agent.
Belief is thus a central concept in epistemology. Standard epistemological accounts 
of knowledge treat knowledge as a species of belief—justified true beliefs, perhaps, or 
justified true beliefs that meet some further conditions. Also, epistemic justification, 
or its absence, is typically regarded as a property, first and foremost, of beliefs. It should 
be unsurprising if not all accounts of belief advanced by philosophers of mind cohere 
equally well with the different accounts of knowledge and justification advanced by 
epistemologists.
Contemporary philosophers generally regard belief as a “propositional attitude,” 
where a “proposition” is just whatever it is that sentences express, such that two sen-
tences that have the same meaning express the same proposition (e.g., “tigers are 
dangerous” in English and “los tigres son peligrosos” in Spanish) and sentences with dif-
ferent meanings express different propositions (setting aside some complications about 
indexical terms such as “I” and “today”). Propositional attitudes are just the types of 
mental states that possess the following canonical formal structure: S A that P, where S 
refers to the subject or individual who has the attitude, A refers to the attitude, and P 
refers to a proposition canonically expressible as a full sentence (though often in ordi-
nary English abbreviated to a phrase with an implied subject). For example: Davy [the 
subject] believes [the attitude] that Mars is red [the proposition]; Gerardo [the subject] 
fears [the attitude] that inflation will spiral out of control [the proposition]; Jieying [the 
subject] desires [the attitude] that the server brings her piece of pie soon [the proposi-
tion]. Of course, what one person believes another may only hope for and a third may 
intend—different attitudes all toward the same proposition. Discussions of the nature 
of belief are often embedded in more general discussions of the propositional attitudes, 
with belief typically serving as the central example.

BELIEF
15
1. Representational Approaches to Belief
Probably the majority of contemporary philosophers of mind adhere to some form of 
representationalism about belief—they hold that believing P involves having in one’s 
brain or mind a representation with the content P (at least in central, canonical cases 
of belief; see the discussion of explicit and implicit belief below). This view can be 
developed in various ways.
1.1. Fodor’s Representationalism
Jerry Fodor (1975, 1981, 1987, 1990), for example, regards mental representations as 
sentences in an internal “language of thought”—an innate language (not learned, like 
English) in which cognition transpires. Consider “machine language” as an analogy. 
One (simplified) way of thinking about what a word-processing program does is this: 
When I open a new document and start typing on my keyboard, it transforms those key-
board inputs into a language-like machine code of sequentially ordered representations 
or representational tokens. For example, position 1 might contain a machine-language 
token for “B,” position 2 a machine-language token for “e,” etc. The computer gener-
ates screen displays and printer outputs based on the application of pre-programmed 
output rules (also in machine language) applied to these stored representations. On 
some visions of the future of artificial intelligence, we might design intelligent robots 
that operate in essentially the same way—by the storage of representations in machine 
language and the manipulation of those representations according to (possibly evolv-
ing) machine-language rules.
On Fodor’s view, human beings are essentially machines of this sort—with the rules 
and representations underwriting their behavior not encoded in machine language, of 
course, but in an innate species-wide language of thought. To represent P is to have 
present in one’s mind a sentence in the language of thought with the content P. To 
believe that P is to have such a representation in mind in such a way that it is poised to 
play a “belief-like” role in cognition (as opposed to, say, a desire-like role or an imagina-
tion-like role). A representation plays a belief-like role if it is apt to be combined with 
other belief-like representations in the course of inference (e.g., the representation P 
might combine with that of “if P then Q” to generate a new representation Q, also held 
in a belief-like way), in the deliberation over means to obtaining desired ends, etc.
1.2. Dretske’s Representationalism
Fred Dretske’s representationalism (1988; cf. Millikan 1984, 1993) starts with a consid-
eration of very simple representational systems, such as marine “magnetosome” bacteria. 
Magnetosome bacteria contain magnets that align with Earth’s magnetic field. In the 
Northern Hemisphere, geomagnetic north is downward and, guided by their magnets, 
these bacteria propel themselves down into deeper water and sediment and away from 
the (to them) toxic oxygen near the surface of the ocean. It is easy to imagine how such 
a system might have evolved. The magnetic system of the magnetosome bacteria, on 
Dretske’s view, represents magnetic north, or down, or the direction of oxygen-free envi-
ronments, because it has the evolved function of indicating one or more of those things. 
(Which exactly of these things it represents, Dretske regards as indeterminate due to the 
simplicity of the organism.) Organisms, especially mobile ones, need to keep track of 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
16
their environments. Consequently, they evolve systems whose function is to covary with 
features of their environment—that is, representational systems. On Dretske’s view, an 
organism represents P just in case it contains a system one of whose functions it is to 
enter state A only if P holds, and that subsystem is in state A. As organisms grow more 
complex, they develop multiple overlapping and competing representational systems, 
and they develop the capacity to learn new representational structures. To have beliefs, 
on Dretske’s view, is just to have a sophisticated network of such representational sys-
tems, some acquired through associative learning, poised to guide behavior.
1.3. Language-Like vs. Map-Like Representations
Another representational view, developed by David Lewis (1994) and David Braddon-
Mitchell and Frank Jackson (1996) characterizes representation as map-like rather than 
language-like. For epistemologists, there are two key differences between maps and sen-
tences as representational structures.
First, when maps represent something, they generally represent it with a determinate 
content and in determinate relationships to all the other elements represented. If a to-
scale map represents a mountain peak, for instance, it must generally represent it as being 
in a fairly specific place (to whatever level of precision the mapping system allows) and at 
various specific distances and directions from all the other map elements. In contrast, lin-
guistic representation much more naturally accommodates high levels of indeterminacy: 
A language-of-thought sentence might contain the content (“the mountain is north of 
the river”) without specifying in any way how far north or in exactly what direction, even 
if other related elements of the scene are more precisely known.
Second, language-like representation leaves room at least in principle for incon-
sistencies or even bald contradictions among representations, while maps cannot (or 
cannot easily) be self-inconsistent. One might store the sentences “The mountain is 
10 km north of the river” and “The river is 15 km south of the mountain,” but there 
is no straightforward way to convey this sort of inconsistency in a map-like structure. 
Consequently, whenever one changes one aspect of a map, every related aspect changes 
effortlessly and simultaneously to render the new picture consistent: If one learns that 
the well is actually 2 km east of the mountain, not 5 km, correcting the position of the 
well with respect to the mountain in itself constitutes a correction of the position of the 
well with respect to every other map element also (for example, now the well must be 
8 km and not 5 km west of the shore, unless the shoreline is also redrawn). In contrast, 
changing the sentence “The well is 5 km east of the mountain” to “The well is 2 km east 
of the mountain” in a language-like system of representation does not automatically 
change the represented distance between the well and the shore.
1.4. Implicit and Explicit Belief
I believe that the number of planets is less than nine. I also, seemingly, believe that it 
is less than 10. And less than 11. And less than 137. And less than 2,653,665,401. If I 
do believe all these things, and if a crude language-like representational view is correct, 
then I must have a vast, perhaps infinite, number of stored representations concerning 
the number of planets. And obviously the problem generalizes. Since surely we are not 
cluttering our minds with so many redundant representations, a crude language-like 
representational view is unsustainable.

BELIEF
17
On a map-like view, there is no problem here. A single simple map of the solar system 
simultaneously specifies, without consuming vast cognitive resources, that the number 
of planets is less than 9, 10, 11, 137, etc. In contrast, a representationalist with a lan-
guage-like view may be forced to distinguish between what is sometimes called explicit 
and implicit belief (Field 1978; Lycan 1986; Dennett 1987; Fodor 1987). On this view, 
only explicit beliefs require stored representations. We implicitly believe something 
(that the number of planets is less than 137, say) when we can swiftly derive it from 
what we explicitly believe. Or, alternatively, one might say that we simply do not believe 
that the number of planets is less than 137 (explicitly or implicitly), prior to explicitly 
entertaining that thought, but are merely disposed to form that belief (Audi 1994). Such 
views would seem to predict a sharp and substantial cognitive difference between those 
beliefs with explicitly coded representations and those without explicitly coded repre-
sentations, an issue that would appear open to empirical investigation.
2. Dispositional and Interpretational Approaches to Belief
Dispositional and interpretational approaches to belief treat believing not principally as 
a matter of internal cognitive structure but rather as a matter of an individual’s patterns 
of behavior (or in the case of “liberal dispositionism” something broader than behav-
ior). It may help to gain a sense of the difference between these two classes of views to 
consider the possibility of a being of unknown origin and structure (Rudolfo, say) who 
comes to Earth and integrates seamlessly into society, behaving in all respects as an 
ordinary person does—becoming, say, a lawyer and baseball fan. Is the fact that Rudolfo 
outwardly behaves just as does an ordinary person by itself sufficient to guarantee that 
it’s accurate to describe him as believing that the Supreme Court has nine members and 
that the Kansas City Royals may never again make the playoffs? Or do certain facts also 
have to be true about Rudolfo’s internal structure? Is it conceptually possible, even if 
physically impossible, that Rudolfo be made entirely of undifferentiated balsa wood? Or 
consider a case like that of Lewis’s “mad pain” (1980), but adapted for belief. Consider, 
that is, a being (Susan) who possesses a representation that, if it were possessed by a nor-
mal person, we would describe as having the content “there’s a beer in the fridge”; and 
imagine (if it’s possible) that that representation is stored in a belief-like way, but due 
either to an unusual constitution or damage to other functional systems within Susan, 
it is never caused by things like seeing beer in the fridge or hearing someone say that 
there’s beer in the fridge and is not at all apt to be deployed in inferences, means-to-end 
reasoning, etc. In cases like that of Rudolfo and Susan, where patterns of behavior and 
internal representational structure come apart, advocates of dispositional and interpre-
tational approaches will privilege behavior in the ascription of belief, while advocates 
of representational approaches will privilege internal structure.
2.1. Dispositional Approaches
Traditional dispositional approaches to belief hold that to believe some particular 
proposition is to have a certain set of behavioral dispositions. For example, on Ruth 
Marcus’s (1990) view, to believe that P is just to be disposed to act, in appropriate 
circumstances, as if P were the case. A standard objection to accounts of this sort is 
that it seems to posit too tight a connection between belief and action—for example, 
if a person is paralyzed or determined to hide her real opinion. While this objection 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
18
might be avoided in the case of views like Marcus’s by working with the “in appropriate 
circumstances” condition, most contemporary philosophers attracted to approaches of 
this general sort address the objection by adopting either liberal dispositionalism or inter-
pretationism. Liberal dispositionalists about belief (e.g., Price 1969; Schwitzgebel 2002) 
hold that believing is a matter of having not just outward behavioral dispositions but 
also some non-behavioral dispositions, such as phenomenal dispositions (dispositions to 
enter certain conscious or “phenomenal” states such as feeling surprise or entertaining 
visual or verbal imagery) and/or cognitive dispositions (dispositions to enter other sorts 
of possibly nonconscious mental states such as making assumptions or drawing implicit 
conclusions). Although Gilbert Ryle (1949) is widely read as a leading exemplar of tra-
ditional behaviorist dispositionalism, on a close reading his view appears to be at least 
somewhat more liberal than that.
2.2. Interpretational Approaches
Interpretational approaches to belief are similar in spirit to traditional dispositional 
views, in that what matters in the ascription of belief are patterns of behavior rather 
than internal structure. On an interpretational view, an individual believes that P just 
in case the best way to make rational sense of her overall pattern of behavior would 
involve ascribing to her the belief that P. Daniel Dennett (1978, 1987) and Donald 
Davidson (1984) are the most prominent advocates of interpretational approaches.
Dennett invites us to imagine the difference between three different ways to predict 
or explain the behavior of a being. We can take the “physical stance,” which involves 
predicting the being’s behavior using the laws of physics—for example, that a diver 
will trace a roughly parabolic arc to the water. We can take the “design stance,” which 
involves predicting that the being will function as it was designed (possibly by evolu-
tion) to function—for example, that a person will begin to sweat as her body tem-
perature rises due to exertion. Or we can take the “intentional stance,” which involves 
predicting that the being will behave rationally given certain beliefs and desires. To be 
a believer, on Dennett’s view, is to be a being for which an interpreter who took merely 
a physical or design stance to explaining her behavior would be involved either in 
great complexity or massive error, while taking the intentional stance would yield fairly 
simple and accurate predictions.
Davidson invites us to imagine encountering a being with a wholly unfamiliar lan-
guage and then attempting the task of “radical interpretation”—the task of attempting 
to determine what his words mean. To succeed in such a task would also necessarily, 
Davidson argues, involve ascribing beliefs and desires in light of which his words make 
sense. On Davidson’s view, to be a believer is to be a being that emits behavior that can 
be productively interpreted as linguistic, rational, and expressive of beliefs and desires. 
Both Davidson and Dennett allow that there might be indeterminacy in belief in cases 
where no single best interpretation is possible: If there are two equally good interpreta-
tions, one of which ascribes the belief that P and one of which does not, there is no fact 
of the matter whether the being believes that P.
Interpretational (and dispositional) approaches need not reject the importance of 
underlying representations. Dennett (1987), for example, suggests that the reason we 
may be productively interpretable as having beliefs and desires is precisely because our 
psychology operates through the manipulation of representations. However, he remains 
an interpretationist because he treats interpretability, rather than internal structure, as 

BELIEF
19
what is most fundamental in ascription of belief. The manipulation of representations is 
simply the means by which we come to be interpretable.
3. Functionalism
Functionalism has been an influential position in the philosophy of mind since the 
1960s, and most of the philosophers described in Sections 1 and 2 are, in a broad sense, 
functionalists about belief. To be a functionalist about a particular mental state is to 
hold that possession of that state is possession of a state that plays a particular functional 
or causal role, where functional or causal role is defined in terms of typical (or normal 
or actual) causes and effects. So, for example, a simple functional analysis of pain might 
be as the state, whatever it is, that is apt to be caused by such things as tissue damage 
and tissue stress and is apt, in turn, to cause such things as avoidance, wincing, and 
utterance of the phrase “I’m in pain” (in appropriate conditions). A functional analysis 
of belief that P might be as the state, whatever it is, apt to be produced by such things 
as perception of P, inference from premises that jointly imply P, and hearing testimony 
as to the truth of P and that, in turn, is apt to produce such things as inference to Q if 
P (perhaps together with other believed propositions) straightforwardly implies Q, and 
performance of action A if P implies that A would achieve a much-desired end and no 
contrary desires recommend against A. We might distinguish between token function-
alism (like Putnam’s (1975)) from type functionalism (like Lewis’s (1980)): On token 
functionalism the relevant state must itself have been caused in the right sort of way 
and must be apt to produce the right sorts of effects. On type functionalism, the state 
must be of the type that is apt to be caused in a certain way and to have certain effects, 
even if that particular instance of the type is not so caused and not prone to have such 
effects. One might think here of the difference between actual memories and merely 
apparent memories. To be an actual memory of storming the Bastille, a mental state 
must have been caused (in part) by one’s having stormed the Bastille. To be a merely 
apparent memory of storming the Bastille, it is sufficient if the mental state is of the 
same type that is normally caused by storming the Bastille even if it, itself, was not so 
caused: If functionalism is true of genuine memories, it must be token functionalism (at 
least on the what-it-was-caused-by side), though perhaps type functionalism will suffice 
for apparent memories.
Dispositional views are a special case of token functional views, according to which 
the causes of the mental state in question are not at all constitutive of the state. 
Davidson’s example of “Swampman” (2001)—a being molecule-for-molecule identical 
to Davidson himself and who arises from a swamp through quantum accident when the 
swamp is struck by lightning—can help distinguish between token functional views 
that are also dispositional and those that are more broadly functional. Swampman can-
not genuinely remember storming the Bastille. His apparent memory was not caused 
in the right way. On a dispositionalist view, however, he can have beliefs—at least 
those beliefs that do not constitutively depend on dispositional manifestations that 
essentially invoke the past (such as, for example, the disposition to rightly say, “This is 
the same thing I did two weeks ago”). Interpretational views also fit nicely with token 
functionalism, though unlike dispositional views they more readily accommodate the 
constitutive importance of causes.
Representational views tend to be type functional: Representational states are gen-
erally viewed as states of the sort typically caused in such-and-such a way and that 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
20
typically produce such-and-such effects, even if particular tokenings of those states are 
not caused in the right way and/or are not apt to produce the right effects.
4. Eliminativism
Eliminativism about belief is the view that, literally speaking, people have no beliefs. 
Just as we now think that the sun does not literally rise up over the horizon (though we 
still find it convenient to talk that way) and just as we now think that there is no such 
thing as phlogiston (despite the predictive successes of early chemical theories invok-
ing phlogiston), so also when science is far enough advanced we will come to think of 
belief as a flawed folk-theoretical term despite the convenience of the term for current 
practical purposes.
Arguments for eliminativism include Paul and Patricia Churchland’s argument that 
neuroscience has much better long-run promise for predicting and explaining human 
behavior than does ordinary folk psychology and seems to have no room for concepts 
like that of belief (P.M. Churchland 1981; P.S. Churchland 1986); Stephen Stich’s 
argument that folk psychology individuates belief states in ways that match poorly with 
the real causal powers of cognitive states and thus that a mature computational cogni-
tive science will use different mental state individuation principles (Stich 1983; but see 
Stich 1996 for a partial retraction); and William Ramsey, Stich, and Joseph Garron’s 
(1991) argument that if the mind is built upon a roughly “connectionist” architecture, 
involving the massive and widely distributed interaction of subsemantic neuron-like 
nodes, then folk psychological states like belief cannot exist, for they are too discrete in 
their architecture to play a causal role in such a system.
5. Internalism and Externalism
An internalist about a mental state holds that whether a being possesses that mental state 
constitutively depends entirely on facts internal to that being and not at all on facts about 
the outside world, such that two beings who are internally identical necessarily do not 
differ with regard to possession of that state. (Of course, the state may causally depend 
on facts about the outside world.) An externalist about a mental state holds, in contrast, 
that two internally identical beings could differ with respect to the state in question. A 
version of the brain-in-a-vat thought experiment can help distinguish internalist from 
externalist views: Imagine a brain exactly identical to yours, created and sustained in a 
vat, with its inputs manipulated to exactly mimic the inputs your brain receives—inputs 
that will of course be conditioned in part on the output signals from the brain, so that 
over time your and the brain-in-a-vat’s internally-defined brain states remain exactly 
identical. You and the brain in a vat will share all internally defined mental states and 
differ in most or all externally defined mental states. Question: Does the brain in the vat 
have beliefs? If it does, does it have exactly the same beliefs you do?
Externalism is often supported by the Twin Earth thought experiment, due to Hilary 
Putnam (1975; originally intended primarily as a thought experiment about linguistic 
meaning). Imagine that in another part of the universe there exists a planet molecule-
for-molecule identical to Earth, with one exception: Where Earth has water (H2O), this 
other planet, Twin Earth, has a chemical (XYZ) that behaves outwardly virtually identi-
cally to water. It fills the rivers and oceans, is clear and potable, freezes and boils at the 
same temperature, etc. In 1750, no chemical test is available that can distinguish these 

BELIEF
21
substances. Wayne on Earth believes that there is a glass of water in front of him. Twin 
Wayne is molecule-for-molecule identical to Wayne (except that he has XYZ rather 
than water in him, but this point is inessential as can be seen by reflecting on parallel 
examples involving chemicals not present in the human body). He is also looking at a 
glass of clear, potable liquid and is disposed to utter a sentence that sounds like “There’s 
a glass of water in front of me.” The majority (but not unanimous) view in contempo-
rary philosophy is that Wayne’s and Twin Wayne’s beliefs differ in their content: One 
is about water (H2O), the other about twin water (XYZ). For example, if Wayne were 
teleported to Twin Earth without his knowledge and uttered the sentence “That’s a glass 
of water” while looking at twin water, his sentence and his corresponding belief would 
be false, while Twin Wayne’s identical sentence and corresponding belief would be true. 
(For a rather different but equally influential example see Burge 1979.)
6. Atomism vs. Holism
Alan says that redwoods are trees. He also says that saguaro cactuses are trees. Gincy 
says that redwoods are trees, but would not say that saguaro cactuses are. Although Alan 
and Gincy both have beliefs about redwoods that they would express with the sentence 
“Redwoods are trees,” do they really believe exactly the same thing about redwoods? Or 
does the fact that they differ about the status of saguaros imply that they have slightly 
different concepts of “tree” and so slightly different beliefs about redwoods? Holists say 
that the content of any belief depends on the contents of many nearby beliefs so that 
people who disagree have for the most part slightly different beliefs even on the topics 
about which it might seem outwardly that they agree. Atomists, in contrast, say that 
the content of our beliefs is generally not interrelated in that way. For the atomist, the 
content of a belief may be constitutively related to the content of a few others—for 
example, the content of the belief expressed by the sentence “Redwoods are trees” may 
differ between people who would give radically different definitions of “tree”—but gen-
erally, normal fluent speakers inclined to endorse the same sentence share exactly the 
same belief and not slightly different beliefs.
Among the leading atomists are Fodor and Ernest Lepore (1992), who appeal among 
other things to the intuition that people saying the same sentence are generally express-
ing the same belief. Atomism also fits nicely with the view (Section 1.1) that belief 
involves discrete representations in an innate language of thought, where the contents 
of representational elements are shared between members of the same species. It also 
fits nicely with “externalist” views according to which belief contents or concepts are 
largely fixed by physical or social context shared among speakers (see Section 5 above). 
Among the leading holists are W.V.O. Quine (1951), Davidson (1984), and Dennett 
(1987). If believing, at root, is a matter of exhibiting complex and intertwining patterns 
of behavior (as these three hold), subtly different patterns in behavioral dispositions 
may constitute slightly different belief states even if our belief-ascribing language is too 
coarse-grained a tool ordinarily to capture those differences in short and convenient 
sentences.
7. De Re and De Dicto Belief Ascriptions
Kyle sees a shadowy figure walking quickly through the factory late one night and con-
cludes that that person is a thief. Unbeknownst to him, that shadowy figure is the plant 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
22
manager, a woman of unquestionably upright character, and Kyle would disagree with 
anyone who asserted that the plant manager is a thief. Does Kyle believe that the plant 
manager is a thief? It seems that there’s a sense in which he does and a sense in which 
he does not. Philosophers sometimes express this ambiguity by saying that Kyle believes, 
de re, of the plant manager that she is a thief but does not believe, de dicto, that the 
plant manager is a thief (Quine 1956).
A usage of a term is referentially transparent if coreferential terms can be substituted 
into the sentence in which it occurs without changing the truth value of the sentence. 
For example, in the sentence “Cati punched the cashier” the term “cashier” would nor-
mally be interpreted as referentially transparent. If it is true that Cati punched the 
cashier, and if the cashier is also (though Cati doesn’t know it) the only guy in town 
born on July 8, 1962, then it’s also true that Cati punched the only guy in town born on 
July 8, 1962. A usage of a term is referentially opaque if the substitution of coreferential 
terms is not guaranteed to preserve the truth value of the sentence. Belief ascriptions are 
often interpreted as referentially opaque: We might want to say that Cati believes she 
punched the cashier but does not believe that she punched the only guy in town born 
on July 8, 1962—for example, if she’s inclined to assert the first and deny the second. 
De re belief attributions are those with some referentially transparent terms. De dicto 
belief attributions have no referentially transparent terms.
8. Future Directions
Two emerging issues in the literature on belief which as yet lack a settled canon are the 
following:
8.1. Self-Knowledge
It seems that we typically know what we believe. How is this possible? One possibil-
ity is that we have some sort of self-scanning or self-monitoring device by means of 
which we detect our beliefs (Armstrong 1968; Nichols and Stich 2003; with qualifica-
tions, Goldman 2006). Another possibility is that, on the basis of our knowledge of 
such things as outward behavior and non-belief-like mental states such as images, we 
theorize or interpret ourselves as believing (Gopnik 1993; Carruthers 2009). Another 
possibility is that the self-attribution of beliefs is simply expressive, like the utterance of 
“ow!” when one feels pain, not requiring introspective or epistemic access to the belief 
states self-attributed (Bar-On 2004; see Wittgenstein 1953 for the pain example). Or, 
compatible with the previous view but also separable from it, we might attribute beliefs 
on the basis of a process that involves considering or detecting facts about the outside 
world while not considering or detecting facts about our mental states. For example, we 
might think only about the external matter of whether there will be a third world war 
in answering the question of whether we believe there will be a third world war (Evans 
1982; Moran 2001; Byrne 2005; Gordon 2007).
8.2. Dissociations Between Implicit Reactions and Explicit Endorsements
A person might sincerely (or for all she can tell sincerely) affirm the proposition “all 
the races are intellectually equal” and yet show persistent racist bias in her everyday 
implicit reactions. Another person might in some sense be well aware that she moved 

BELIEF
23
her kitchen trashcan from one location to another and yet still find herself going to 
the old location to dispose of trash (Zimmerman 2007). Another person might walk 
out onto a glass skywalk above the Grand Canyon, saying “I know it’s perfectly safe” 
yet trembling with fear (Gendler 2008a). In these sorts of cases, the subject’s explicit 
endorsements conform with one proposition (P, let’s call it) and her implicit reactions 
seem to conform with its negation (not-P). What should we say about the subject’s 
belief?
In recent articles dealing with cases of this sort (though the authors’ examples vary 
in important ways), Zimmerman (2007) and Gendler (2008a, 2008b) have suggested 
that the subject believes P (that the races are intellectually equal, that the trashcan is 
in its new location, that the skywalk is safe) and does not believe not-P; Gendler calls 
the subject’s attitude toward not-P “alief.” Zimmerman and Gendler stress the extent 
to which belief is the sort of thing responsive to evidence and open to rational revision. 
In contrast, Hunter (manuscript), emphasizing everyday patterns of action and reac-
tion, suggests that for at least some such cases the subject believes not-P and does not 
believe P. Gertler (forthcoming), allowing more than one set of sufficient conditions for 
believing, suggests that the subject believes P (on one set of sufficient conditions) and 
also believes not-P (on a different set). Schwitzgebel (2001, manuscript), stressing the 
mixed overall dispositional patterns in many such cases, suggests that such subjects are 
generally “in-between” believing P and failing to believe it.
References
Armstrong, D.M. (1968) A Materialist Theory of the Mind, New York: Routledge.
Audi, R. (1994) “Dispositional Beliefs and Dispositions to Believe,” Noûs, 28: 419–34.
Bar-On, D. (2004) Speaking My Mind, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Braddon-Mitchell, D. and Jackson, F. (1996) The Philosophy of Mind and Cognition, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Burge, T. (1979) “Individualism and the Mental,” in P.A. French, T.E. Uehling, and H.K. Wettstein (eds.), 
Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 4: 73–121.
Byrne, A. (2005) “Introspection,” Philosophical Topics, 33 (no. 1): 79–104.
Carruthers, P. (2009) “How We Know Our Own Minds: The Relationship Between Mindreading and 
Metacognition,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 32: 121–38.
Churchland, P.M. (1981) “Eliminative Materialism and the Propositional Attitudes,” Journal of Philosophy, 
78: 67–90.
Churchland, P.S. (1986) Neurophilosophy, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Davidson, D. (1984) Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation, Oxford: Clarendon.
—— (2001) Subjective, Intersubjective, Objective, Oxford: Clarendon.
Dennett, D.C. (1978) Brainstorms, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
—— (1987) The Intentional Stance, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dretske, F. (1988) Explaining Behavior, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Evans, G. (1982) Varieties of Reference, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Field, H.H. (1978) “Mental Representation,” Erkenntnis, 13: 9–61.
Fodor, J.A. (1975) The Language of Thought, New York: Crowell.
—— (1981) Representations, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
—— (1987) Psychosemantics, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
—— (1990) A Theory of Content, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
—— and Lepore, E. (1992) Holism, Cambridge: Blackwell.
Gendler, T.S. (2008a) “Alief and Belief,” Journal of Philosophy, 105: 634–63.
—— (2008b) “Alief in Action (and Reaction),” Mind & Language, 23: 552–85.
Gertler, B. (forthcoming) “Self-Knowledge and the Transparency of Belief,” in A. Hatzimoysis (ed.) Self-
Knowledge, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Goldman, A.I. (2006) Simulating Minds, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
24
Gopnik, A. (1993) “How We Know Our Own Minds: The Illusion of First-Person Knowledge of 
Intentionality,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16: 1–14.
Gordon, R.M. (1995) “Simulation Without Introspection or Inference from Me to You,” in M. Davies and 
T. Stone (eds.) Mental Simulation, Oxford: Blackwell.
—— (2007) “Ascent Routines for Propositional Attitudes,” Synthese, 159: 151–65.
Hunter, D. (manuscript) “Belief, Alienation, and Intention.”
Lewis, D. (1980) “Mad Pain and Martian Pain,” in N. Block (ed.) Readings in the Philosophy of Psychology, vol. 
1, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
—— (1994) “Lewis, David: Reduction of Mind,” in S. Guttenplan (ed.) A Companion to the Philosophy of 
Mind, Oxford: Blackwell.
Lycan, W.G. (1986) “Tacit Belief,” in R.J. Bogdan (ed.) Belief: Form, Content, and Function, Oxford: 
Clarendon.
Marcus, R.B. (1990) “Some Revisionary Proposals about Belief and Believing,” Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research, 50: 132–53.
Millikan, R.G. (1984) Language, Thought, and Other Biological Categories, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
—— (1993) White Queen Psychology and Other Essays for Alice, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Moran, R. (2001) Authority and Estrangement, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Nichols, S. and Stich, S.P. (2003) Mindreading, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Price, H.H. (1969) Belief, London: Allen & Unwin.
Putnam, H. (1975) Mind, Language, and Reality, London: Cambridge.
Quine, W.V.O. (1951) “Two Dogmas of Empiricism,” The Philosophical Review, 60: 20–43.
—— (1956) “Quantifiers and Propositional Attitudes,” Journal of Philosophy, 53: 177–86.
Ramsey, W., Stich, S., and Garon, J. (1991) “Connectionism, Eliminativism, and the Future of Folk 
Psychology,” in J.D. Greenwood (ed.) The Future of Folk Psychology, Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Ryle, G. (1949) The Concept of Mind, New York: Barnes & Noble.
Schwitzgebel, E. (2001) “In-Between Believing,” Philosophical Quarterly, 51: 76–82.
—— (2002) “A Phenomenal, Dispositional Account of Belief,” Nous, 36: 249–75.
—— (manuscript) “Acting Contrary to Our Professed Beliefs, or the Gulf Between Occurrent Judgment and 
Dispositional Belief.”
Stich, S. (1983) From Folk Psychology to Cognitive Science, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
—— (1996) Deconstructing the Mind, New York: Oxford University Press.
Wittgenstein, L. (1953) Philosophical Investigations, trans. G.E.M. Anscombe, New York: Macmillan.
Zimmerman, A. (2007) “The Nature of Belief,” Journal of Consciousness Studies, 14 (no. 11): 61–82.

3
EPISTEMIC
JUSTIFICATION
Jonathan L. Kvanvig
The term ‘justification’ and its cognates are terms of art in contemporary epistemology, 
falling on the normative side of the distinction between normative and descriptive 
aspects of the world. Other terms of this sort within contemporary epistemology are 
terms such as ‘rational,’ ‘warranted,’ ‘entitled,’ and ‘reasonable.’ Some theorists treat 
some of these normative terms as synonymous, while others draw various distinctions 
among them. All such terms, however, have broader application in ordinary language 
than just to items of epistemic appraisal, such as beliefs. Affective states, such as hopes 
and fears, can be rational or irrational; items from the practical sphere, including 
actions and the intentions that sometimes underlie them, can be warranted or not. 
Epistemologists typically distinguish the epistemic uses by tying the notions in question 
to knowledge or in terms of means appropriate to the goal of getting to the truth and 
avoiding error.
Historically, the most important controversy has been between foundationalist and 
coherentist responses to the regress argument. The regress argument purports to show 
that justified beliefs are impossible, and foundationalists block the claim that further 
reasons must always be available by insisting that justification has a tiered structure, with 
a foundation of self-justifying beliefs which support the remaining beliefs. Coherentists 
deny the existence of such self-justifying beliefs, maintaining that justification is a mat-
ter of coherence with an appropriate system of information available to the individual 
in question.
Common to both positions, historically, is an internalist assumption, that justification 
is a feature of a belief that depends on features internal to the believer and is typically 
accessible by reflection to the individual holding the belief. In recent times, various ver-
sions of externalism have arisen in contrast to such an internalism. The most popular 
has been reliabilism, which can also be seen as a less radical approach to naturalizing 
epistemology, an approach recommending less a priori theorizing in epistemology and 
more concern for scientific inquiry relevant to epistemological questions and issues. 
The most radical forms of naturalized epistemology recommend replacing traditional 
epistemological questions with related empirical questions that can be addressed by sci-
entific inquiry alone. Other new approaches to justification also fall under the general 
externalist umbrella, including forms of modal and virtue epistemology, as well as forms 
of social epistemology that view internalism as too committed to an individualistic 
picture of our cognitive lives.

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
26
I. The Concept of the Epistemic
The language of justification is widespread in ordinary thought and language, applying 
to plans, decisions, actions, hopes, wishes, fears, policies, judgments in a court of law, 
and many other things. The primary epistemological interest in the language of justi-
fication is as it applies to beliefs (or degrees of belief), but not just any reason for belief 
counts toward the epistemic justification of that belief. For example, the offer of money 
in exchange for belief will give one a reason to hold that belief, but it is not an epistemic 
reason to hold the belief. The usual approach to explaining why such a reason is not 
an epistemic reason is to clarify epistemic reasons in terms of means appropriate to the 
intellectual goal of getting to the truth and avoiding error.
Such reasons are assumed to be doubly defeasible: they can be overridden by non-
epistemic concerns and also by acquiring further information. First, a situation might 
arise in which a catastrophe can only be avoided by holding a belief for which one has 
no evidence at all. In such a situation, the preponderance of reasons favors holding such 
a belief, even though such a belief would be epistemically unjustified. Second, one can 
have epistemic reasons for belief that are undermined by further learning. Statistical 
reasoning provides examples of such: a given sample, properly obtained, may give one 
evidence that most people in a given locale will vote for candidate X, and an enlarge-
ment of the sample might undermine this conclusion.
II. Skepticism, Foundationalism, and Coherentism
The standard approach to theorizing about justification begins with responses to the 
regress argument for skepticism. When we are justified in taking some cognitive attitude 
toward a given claim, we are often so justified by basing that attitude on some other 
attitude. For example, we might base our belief that Obama won the election in 2008 
on our belief that the New York Times reported this result and that it is a trustworthy 
source of information about such matters. In order for this supporting belief to provide 
an adequate basis for the supported belief, however, it cannot itself be baseless, arbitrary, 
or unjustified. Once such a requirement is noted, a regress threatens. It appears that 
an attitude cannot support another attitude in the way required for justification unless 
the supporting attitude is itself justified. If its justification requires support from some 
further attitude, regress ensues.
The standard metatheory concerning justification focuses on two primary responses 
to this regress argument. A foundationalist response attempts to find legitimate stop-
ping points for the regress, and coherentists resist the urge for such legitimate stopping 
points. Coherentists, however, are not the only theorists who try to resist foundational-
ist stopping points. Skeptics endorse the conclusion that no attitudes are ever justified, 
whether by being based on other attitudes or in terms of foundationalist stopping points. 
Infinitists insist that the regress cannot be stopped, but that the regress isn’t vicious and 
hence doesn’t block beliefs from being justified. A further option is that stopping points 
are needed, but can be arbitrary.
Of these options, the last is the road least traveled. If justification can be stopped at 
arbitrary points, it is hard to see why we see the need for defenses of any sort regarding 
the cognitive attitudes that we take (a classic source of such a view is Wittgenstein 
(1969), where the notion of a “hinge proposition” plays the crucial theoretical role). 
The infinitist response is usually rejected just as quickly, but it has seen a substantial 

EPISTEMIC JUSTIFICATION
27
defense by Peter Klein in recent years (see Klein 1999). From a historical perspective, 
however, most attempts to evade the skeptical conclusion of the regress argument 
have been in the form of defending some form of foundationalism. From Aristotle to 
Descartes and the empiricists, the most common view has been that we can trace the 
roots of any justified attitude to a legitimate stopping point, either in deliverances of 
reason or deliverances of the senses.
Foundationalists disagree among themselves, however, about the two crucial aspects 
of the view. The first is the nature of foundational attitudes themselves. The strongest 
versions of foundationalism require that the foundations be infallible or metaphysically 
certain. Weaker versions require something less, perhaps as weak as only having some 
degree of justification not derived from relationships to other beliefs or cognitive atti-
tudes. Variation occurs as well regarding the connection between the foundations and 
attitudes supported by the foundations. Strong foundationalists require truth-preserv-
ing inferential links between the foundations and what the foundations support, while 
weaker versions allow weaker connections, such as inductive support or inference to the 
best explanation or probabilistic support (see Alston 1989). Some versions of founda-
tionalism even embrace coherentist elements, requiring or allowing the support relation 
to include coherence itself as a justification-enhancing feature (see Chisholm 1966).
From Aristotle to major figures in modern philosophy (Descartes, Locke, Hume, and 
Berkeley) and the first half of the twentieth century (Russell, Ayers, Carnap), the stan-
dard non-skeptical view in epistemology has been foundationalism. At the middle of 
the twentieth century, however, foundationalism came under severe attack. The criti-
cisms of foundationalism by Wilfrid Sellars are especially important in this regard, who 
argued against what he called “the myth of the given,” insisting that the only thing 
that can justify a belief is another belief (see Sellars 1963). Over the next 25 years or 
so, foundationalism had all but disappeared as a theory endorsed by leading epistemolo-
gists, with Roderick Chisholm an important and notable exception to this trend (see 
Chisholm 1966). Instead, the fashionable position was coherentism, the primary alter-
native to foundationalism.
Coherentism can be understood in terms of a desire to avoid foundationalism. Given 
the dissatisfaction in the history of epistemology with the arbitrary stopping points and 
with infinitism, coherentism might appear to require the possibility of justification aris-
ing from circular reasoning. Such a view would count as a version of coherentism, but 
there are no defenders of such a view. Instead, coherentists are better understood as 
objecting to the regress argument at a different point, the point at which it is assumed 
that justification involves linear relationships between individual propositional con-
tents. They view justification in a holistic fashion, holding that justification is a matter 
of fit between an individual belief or attitude and an entire system of beliefs or informa-
tion. Beliefs are thus not justified by anything comparable to inferential connections 
that play a central role in the psychology of belief formation, but rather by overall com-
parative fit with an entire picture of the world. So, whereas foundationalists endorse the 
assumption of the regress argument that justification requires a chain of reasons of some 
sort, coherentists resist commitment to any such requirement on justification.
Coherentism incurs two important burdens here. The most obvious is the need to 
say what the relation of coherence involves, and the second is the need to address the 
problem of the basing relation. The latter problem arises because of the distinction 
between holding a belief for which one has good evidence and believing on the basis 
of, or because of, the evidence for it. For example, one might believe that Bush is a 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
28
terrible President because of the evidence for it (e.g., facts about the war in Iraq and 
lack of respect for the Constitution) or because one hates Texans. In the former case, 
the believing itself is justified, and in the latter case only the content of the belief is 
justified; in the former case, it is said, doxastic justification is present and in the latter 
case only propositional justification is present.
By endorsing the idea that justification should be understood in terms of chains of 
reasons, the foundationalist can understand both propositional justification and doxas-
tic justification in terms of the same chain of reasons. One such account understands 
propositional justification in terms of existence of an adequate chain of reasons, termi-
nating in foundational stopping points, and doxastic justification in terms of proposi-
tional justification plus causation, so that the believing itself is produced or sustained by 
the very chain of reasons in question.
Holistic coherentists, however, cannot endorse this account of basing, since they 
refuse to endorse the idea that justification can be defined in terms of chains of reasons. 
One alternative here is to distinguish between that which justifies the content of the 
belief (the system in question) and central parts of the system that are not themselves 
sufficient for the justification of the belief but still play an essential and non-redundant 
role in the story of why the belief in question is justified by the system in question. If 
we refer to the first category in terms of conferrers of justification and the second in 
terms of enablers of justification, coherentists can understand proper basing in terms of 
enablers of justification, rather than in terms of conferrers of justification (see Kvanvig 
1995).
The other major difficulty facing coherentism is the burden of saying precisely what 
it is for a belief or attitude to cohere with a system of beliefs or information. A variety 
of suggestions can be found among coherentists on this point. F.H. Bradley, for example, 
claimed that a coherent system was one characterized by mutual entailment between all 
the elements of the system, but recent coherentists such as Laurence BonJour propose 
less stringent (and much more plausible) requirements, claiming that coherence comes 
in degrees, where the number of inferential connections within the system enhances 
degree of coherence and the number and variety of unexplained anomalies diminishes 
the degree of coherence in the system. BonJour admits, however, that his account of 
coherence is not fully precise. Others inclined toward coherentism think of its central 
notion in terms of inference to the best explanation (Harman 1973), but this notion is 
itself in need of clarification.
One promising approach to this difficulty of explaining the nature of coherence is 
probabilism. Probabilists take the primary item of epistemic evaluation to be degrees of 
belief rather than beliefs themselves, and by identifying degrees of belief with subjective 
probabilities, an elegant account of coherence can be developed in terms of satisfying 
the axioms of the probability calculus. On this account of coherence, a given degree of 
belief is justified only if it is part of a system of degrees of belief with which it is proba-
bilistically coherent.
Consider some simple examples. According to the probability calculus, a given claim 
cannot be more probable than any claim it entails. So, if Joe’s subjective probability 
(degree of belief) in “Billy is a bachelor” is .9, and his subjective probability in “Billy is 
unmarried” is .95, Joe’s degrees of belief are incoherent and thus unjustified. Similarly, if 
two claims cannot both be true, then the probability calculus tells us that the probabil-
ity of the disjunction of two such claims is the sum of their individual probabilities. So 
if Mary’s probability for “God exists” is .3, and her probability for “God does not exist” 

EPISTEMIC JUSTIFICATION
29
is .7, and yet she is uncertain to some degree about the claim that either God exists or 
doesn’t, Mary’s attitudes are probabilistically incoherent and thus unjustified.
One quite popular version of probabilism is a variant of Bayesianism, derived by sup-
plementing this synchronic requirement of probabilistic consistency with a diachronic 
requirement concerning how one’s degrees of belief change over time in order to be 
justified. This version of Bayesianism requires updating of probabilities in a way tied 
to Bayes’ theorem, using one’s prior conditional probabilities to determine one’s new 
unconditional probabilities based on further learning. So, for example, if your new evi-
dence is (only) e, and your conditional probability for p on e was some number n yes-
terday, then your new probability for p, after learning (just) e, must be n in order to be 
justified. This updating rule is called “conditionalization.”
Besides the attractive formal nature of these probabilistic characterizations of coher-
ence, such views offer some promise of avoiding some epistemic paradoxes. In the lottery 
paradox, one has sufficient evidence to conclude that one’s lottery ticket is a loser, but 
this same evidence justifies a similar conclusion about each other ticket as well. It thus 
appears that one is in a position to conclude that no ticket will win, in spite of knowing 
full well that the lottery is fair and that a winner will soon be announced. The preface 
paradox begins with a book you’ve written, one that is long and involved, but where 
you are justified in believing that each claim made is true. Since the book is complex, 
however, you are also justified when you caution in the preface that you are confident 
errors remain in spite of your best efforts. Once again, contradiction looms, since one’s 
information puts one in a position to deduce that the book contains no errors, while 
being justified in believing the warning of the preface that errors remain.
Probabilist accounts offer some hope here by focusing on degrees of belief and their 
probabilistic coherence rather than on beliefs themselves. The fundamental reality, 
according to probabilists, is degree of belief, and if a cognizer in the lottery situation 
assigns a subjective winning probability of 1/n to each ticket in an n-ticket fair lottery, 
those probabilities are consistent. If we try to use this information to conclude that no 
ticket will win, we will have to combine these probabilities in some way, perhaps by 
conjoining each of the claims in question to form the large conjunction ticket 1 will not 
win & ticket 2 will not win & . . . . & ticket n will not win. Such a conjunction, however, 
will have quite low probability, perhaps blocking the inference to the conclusion that 
no ticket will win.
The popularity of holistic coherentism played a crucial role in enlarging the space 
of possibilities explored by epistemologists over the past half century. If a fundamental 
presupposition of the regress argument can be legitimately questioned, perhaps other 
presuppositions shared by both coherentists and foundationalists are equally question-
able. One source of such questioning was the Gettier problem, which came to be seen 
by many as a problem in the theory of knowledge calling for more careful scrutiny of 
assumptions both about the nature of knowledge and about the nature of justification. 
(The Gettier problem involves counterexamples to the claim that knowledge is justified 
true belief, and the usual approaches to the problem attempted to find some fourth con-
dition to add to justification, belief, and truth that would fully account for the nature 
of knowledge.) In particular, a standard assumption shared by both foundationalists and 
coherentists is that justification should be understood in terms of information that is 
internal to the cognizer in question.
Recognition of this internalist presupposition involved in the most common responses 
to the regress argument combined with a growing interest in developing epistemologies 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
30
that fit well with a naturalistic metaphysics, leading to an interest in naturalized episte-
mology (see Quine 1969, 1990) and various forms of externalist alternatives to such inter-
nalism. Most notable among these externalist alternatives is reliabilism (see Goldman 
1986), which has become the most popular theory in recent approaches to the nature 
of justification and knowledge. The rise of holistic coherentism thus led not only to the 
waning of foundationalism in epistemology, but also to the rise of an alternative metathe-
ory concerning the nature of justification, a metatheory focusing on the distinction 
between theories that clarify justification in terms of elements internal to the cognizer in 
question, and those that clarify justification in terms of elements external to the cognizer 
in question.
III. Internalism and Externalism
Initial discussion of the distinction between internalist and externalist theories of jus-
tification focused on two aspects that continue to have strong influences on current 
philosophical inquiry. These two aspects are (i) the question of whether internalism 
requires reflective access to the features that generate justification, and (ii) the question 
of how the normative aspects of justification ultimately trace to, or supervene on, non-
normative dimensions of reality.
As noted already, the idea that things that generate justification are things to which 
we have access by reflection was presupposed in nearly all the debates over foundation-
alism and coherentism until the middle part of the twentieth century. A major historical 
source questioning this presupposition is found in the work of W.V.O. Quine. Quine’s 
attack on standard empiricism involved not only the well-known attack on the ana-
lytic/synthetic distinction in the philosophy of language, but also an attack on the idea 
that the epistemological project could be carried out by rationally reconstructing our 
conception of the world, without concern for the actual psychological realities involved 
in generating that picture. In his most trenchant moments, Quine recommended turn-
ing epistemology into a subdiscipline of psychology, treating questions about reasons 
for belief in terms of empirical questions about the causal and explanatory relationship 
between sensory stimuli and the views that result (Quine 1969).
Such strong proposals threaten to eliminate rather than explain epistemic norma-
tivity, but as Goldman (1986) points out, there is a more moderate way to embrace 
the Quinean concerns about rational reconstruction. Instead of eliminating questions 
about justification in favor of psychological questions, one may attempt to explain this 
normative concept in terms of the non-normative features of the world on which the 
normative supervenes or depends. According to reliabilists such as Goldman, epistemic 
justification is a matter of holding beliefs produced or sustained by processes or meth-
ods that are reliable in terms of getting one to the truth and avoiding error. Such an 
approach does not substitute some rational reconstruction of our beliefs for an accurate 
description of how they are produced and sustained, and it does so without eliminating 
the epistemological project of assessing which ways of forming and holding beliefs are 
preferable from a purely epistemic point of view.
Such approaches break with the internalist tradition found in the debates between 
foundationalists and coherentists. In that debate, many theorists (including Descartes, 
Locke, Chisholm, and BonJour) endorsed the idea that we have a cognitive duty to hold 
justified beliefs, that we are epistemically blameworthy when we hold beliefs without 
adequate justification. Such deontology provides a strong motivation for the idea that 

EPISTEMIC JUSTIFICATION
31
whether or not a belief is justified must itself be accessible to the person holding the 
belief, since it is difficult to defend the idea that we can legitimately be blamed for not 
restricting our beliefs on the basis of an undetectable feature of the belief.
The difficulty for such strong versions of internalism, called “access internalism,” is 
that the theorists who favor such versions typically offer accounts of justification that 
involve such complicated features that it is implausible to maintain that we can always 
ascertain by introspection alone whether these features obtain. In the face of such con-
cerns, many adopted a weaker form of internalism, called “mentalism,” on which the 
features on which justification supervenes must themselves be psychological features of 
the individual in question (Feldman and Conee 2004).
Reliabilists and other externalists disagree with both forms of internalism. Reliabilists, 
for example, argue that the reliability of a process or method is the central factor in 
determining epistemic status, and that such reliability is neither introspectively acces-
sible nor a psychological feature of the individual in question. Other recent forms of 
externalism join reliabilism in objecting to internalism. Virtue epistemologies (Sosa 
1991; Zagzebski 1996) argue that the normativity involved in the nature of knowledge 
involves excellences or virtues of the intellect that are neither psychological states nor 
introspectively accessible, and modal epistemologies, which appeal to either safety or 
sensitivity counterfactuals in clarifying the nature of knowledge (where a safety coun-
terfactual is of the form “whenever you would hold the belief, you would not easily be 
mistaken,” and a sensitivity counterfactual is of the form “if the claim in question were 
false, you wouldn’t believe it”). Proper functionalist viewpoints, the most influential 
proponent of which is Alvin Plantinga (Plantinga 1993), share this rejection of inter-
nalism as well.
Here there is a danger of terminological dispute, however. Versions of externalism 
tend to offer conditions relevant to an account of knowledge, and thus assume that if 
these conditions can be used to clarify the nature of epistemic justification, that epis-
temic justification is the kind of thing needed for a belief to be a serious candidate for 
knowledge. The simplest way to endorse such an idea is to think of epistemic justifica-
tion as that which turns true belief into knowledge, but ever since Gettier’s counter-
examples to the claim that knowledge is justified true belief, weaker proposals are the 
norm. On weaker proposals, epistemic justification is often thought of as one of two 
conditions which are jointly sufficient to turn true belief into knowledge. Externalists 
typically offer theories of justification on which justification turns true belief into a seri-
ous candidate for knowledge in this way (Zagzebski (1996) is an exception here), but 
internalists do not always think of justification in such terms. Foley (1993) is explicit in 
this regard, distancing himself from the idea that justification is needed for knowledge. 
This difference in assumptions about the target of theorizing may be some evidence that 
certain disputes between internalists and externalists are merely terminological.
It would be a mistake, however, to try to explain away the entire debate in terms 
of terminological differences. A more accurate understanding of the dispute can be 
traced to two different historical traditions underlying current interest in the nature 
of justification. One source is the ancient tradition tracing to Plato which attempts to 
understand the difference between knowledge and true belief in terms of some norma-
tive notion that can be expressed using the language of justification. The other source 
is the pragmatist tradition that focuses on a fundamental notion of propriety in belief 
and action in contrast to the endless disputes over the status of academic skepticism, a 
notion of propriety that can also be expressed using the language of justification. The 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
32
differences between the camps are deep and broad, with one camp favoring accounts 
of justification that center on notions such as responsible and blameless belief, and 
the other camp favoring accounts that generate objective ties to the way the world is, 
independently of how we think about it. It is rare, however, to find members of either 
camp who find no appeal whatsoever in the guiding platitudes and underlying presup-
positions of the other camp, and the differences between differing platitudes and pre-
suppositions play out in important ways when considering skeptical scenarios, scenarios 
in which nearly all of our beliefs are false, as occurs in evil demon worlds, and certain 
brain-in-the-vat hypotheses. Consideration of such scenarios focuses our attention on 
the important divide between externalists and internalists on the proper account of the 
connection between justification and truth. Externalists tend to favor accounts of the 
interdependence of these notions that yield quite strong claims about the objectivity of 
any view of the world that is justified, whereas internalists are less sanguine about such 
claims to objectivity for justification. This problem of the truth connection crystallizes 
in the form of the new evil demon objection to strongly objective externalist theories. 
That objection claims that strongly objective externalist theories mistakenly classify 
most beliefs of denizens of Descartes’ evil demon world as unjustified. Such a classifica-
tion is a mistake according to many internalists since, after all, these denizens could be 
us, and it is a mistake to think that all or most of our beliefs are unjustified.
IV. Recent Developments
These differences between externalists and internalists on the connection between 
justification and knowledge and between justification and truth raise anew a central 
concern found in the pragmatic heritage from which the present interest in justification 
derives. While academic skepticism dominates much of the history of epistemology, a 
pragmatic concern about what to do and what to believe leads directly to concern about 
the nature of justification and to less concern about the intricacies of arguments for and 
against academic skepticism. The distance between these two approaches is highlighted 
in the recent developments of “knowledge-first” epistemology, as championed in the 
enormously influential book by Williamson, Knowledge and its Limits (2000), and the 
value-driven conception of epistemological theorizing. The former approach clarifies 
the crucial notions of justification and evidence in terms of a prior notion of knowledge, 
thus illustrating the approach to justification that stresses its connection to knowledge 
and skepticism. Value-driven approaches have developed in several ways. One way is 
in terms of a heightened interest in virtue epistemologies (Sosa 1991; Zagzebski 1996; 
Greco 2000), in part because of the hope that in such epistemologies can be found a 
good answer to the question first raised by Socrates in the Meno as to why knowledge 
is better than mere true opinion (see Kvanvig 2003). Such a value-driven approach to 
epistemological theorizing raises difficult questions for many approaches to the nature 
of justification, especially typical externalist ones. Once we assume that a belief is true, 
the Socratic concerns from the Meno should make us wonder what additional value 
justification adds, especially for theories that focus on identifying the property of jus-
tification with something like objective likelihood of truth. The difficulty here is the 
swamping problem; that once truth is in the picture, it appears that any value deriv-
ing from likelihood of truth is swamped by the value of truth itself. Justification, on 
such conceptions, thus threatens to add no value to a belief in the presence of truth. 
Responses to this swamping problem range from denials of the idea that truth is the 

EPISTEMIC JUSTIFICATION
33
only intrinsic epistemic value (perhaps justification is itself intrinsically valuable) to 
attempts to defend a preferred conception of justification in a way that makes its value 
additive even in the presence of true belief.
The pragmatic source of interest in the theory of justification has led in recent years 
to a heightened interest in the degree to which justification itself might be affected 
by practical concerns. This interest comes into the theory of justification through the 
debate at the intersection of the theory of knowledge and the philosophy of language 
between contextualists and invariantists regarding the truth conditions for knowledge 
attributions. Early investigation of such attributions suggested that the word ‘knows’ 
functions in English in a contextual way, perhaps in the way deictic items such as ‘I,’ and 
‘now’ function. In this way, contextualism arose in epistemology, according to which 
the proposition expressed by an epistemic sentence varies depending on the epistemic 
standards that are conversationally relevant in the speaker’s context. Opposed to con-
textualism is invariantism, which claims that regardless of conversational context, epis-
temic vocabulary invariantly yields the same propositional content.
The debate between contextualists and invariantists, itself, may be only indirectly 
relevant to the theory of justification, but the data involved in the debate impinges 
directly on the fundamental issue of the connection between justification and truth. 
Among the mechanisms that affect whether speakers assent to a claim of knowledge 
seems to be what is at stake if one is wrong. Thus, even when speakers acknowledge 
that total evidence is unchanged, it is claimed that speakers assent to a knowledge claim 
when nothing of practical significance is at stake, but resist a knowledge claim when 
the stakes increase. For example, if getting to the bank to deposit a check doesn’t much 
matter, speakers agree, it is claimed, with a knowledge attribution: “Sue knows that the 
bank will be open tomorrow.” But if the stakes increase—say, a check will bounce if the 
bank isn’t open tomorrow, and that will prompt a foreclosure on one’s property—then, 
it is claimed, people resist. Typical contextualists and invariantists agree that such prag-
matic encroachment into matters epistemic is commonplace (see Cohen 1999; DeRose 
1992; Hawthorne 2004; Stanley 2005; and Fantl and McGrath 2002). If they are cor-
rect, and if there is a connection between such patterns of assent and the nature of 
knowledge and justification, then the connection between justification and truth is 
more complicated than any of the approaches common in the literature. A concern to 
answer the skeptic can lead one to adopt a view on which justification requires truth-
guaranteeing evidence. The value-driven, pragmatic source of concern about the nature 
of justification eschews such a strong connection to truth, but not in favor of the radi-
cal break envisaged by those who think justification comes and goes depending on the 
practical stakes. Externalists typically want an objective likelihood connection between 
justification and truth, and typical internalists usually endorse the idea that justification 
is what results from following means appropriate to the goal of getting to the truth and 
avoiding error. The connection between justified belief and rational action is present 
for such theorists, to be sure, but in a way akin to the connection in standard decision 
theory: the practical stakes play a role in the story of rational action since the latter is a 
function of the former plus the relevant probabilities—the very probabilities that have 
something to do with epistemic justification. Those defending pragmatic encroachment 
hold something stronger. Instead of endorsing the traditional idea that the justifica-
tion of action is directly affected by the practical stakes involved, pragmatic encroach-
ment theorists hold that both the justification of action and the justification of the 
beliefs relevant to that action are lost when the stakes are raised. One way to express the 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
34
difference in perspective here on pragmatic encroachment is as follows. Both approaches 
can grant that rational action is a function of what is at stake and what you know or 
reasonably believe. Traditional approaches that eschew pragmatic encroachment agree 
that in cases like the bank case above, the change in practical rationality regarding what 
is rational to do traces back to a change in the practical stakes involved, and this change 
is all that needs to be noted to explain the variation in practical rationality. Those argu-
ing for pragmatic encroachment into the epistemic domain of justified belief hold that 
a change in practical rationality in cases such as the bank case reveals a change both 
in the practical stakes and in the epistemic condition underlying practical rationality 
as well.
Such a conclusion in the theory of justification requires significant methodological 
commitments, however—commitments tying the theory of justification to the concept 
of justification and thus to the meaning of the term ‘justified’ (or some related term 
such as ‘rational’ or ‘reasonable’ or ‘warranted’), and then tying the meaning in ques-
tion to what ordinary people would assent to when prompted appropriately. Theorists 
working under the remaining influence of the traditions of logical positivism and logical 
empiricism may find these commitments congenial, but more traditional approaches 
to epistemology will find many opportunities to avoid pragmatic encroachment should 
they wish to do so. Within the tradition of logical positivism and logical empiricism, 
appropriate philosophical methodology is tied to concept clarification and meaning 
explication, and by adopting this perspective on philosophical theorizing, the adequacy 
of a given epistemology could be tested by eliciting linguistic intuitions about the con-
ditions under which assent or dissent occurs to sentences involving terms involved in 
that theory. The theory of knowledge could thus be informed by considering whether 
sentences of the form “S knows that p” would be judged true by ordinary speakers of the 
language across some range of scenarios, and to the extent that justification is related to 
knowledge, such results would have implications for the theory of justification as well. 
The underlying assumptions here have led to two additional recent developments in 
epistemology and philosophy more generally. First, there is a large and growing interest 
in experimental philosophy, since, to the degree that a philosophical or epistemological 
theory depends on linguistic data, one should expect the need for empirical data-gather-
ing as part of the theoretical enterprise. Second, the issue of the role of intuitions and 
their epistemic standing, whether linguistic intuitions or other kinds of intuitions, has 
become a focus of continued research over the past couple of decades, whether in sup-
port of the conception of philosophy just outlined or in terms of a contrasting account 
of it (see Williamson 2007).
This issue of the connection between justification and truth, and the degree to 
which pragmatic factors encroach into this arena, is thus deeply involved in fundamen-
tal questions concerning appropriate methods in philosophy. The appeal of pragmatic 
encroachment theories is much less for those who reject the philosophical methodol-
ogy described above, but the issues involved hark back to the original source of interest 
in the theory of justification, since the source of interest in the theory of justification 
within epistemology traces to a pragmatic concern to address questions of what to do 
and what to think that go beyond disputes about academic skepticism. Given such a 
source, some tension should be expected between assumptions about the purely intel-
lectual relationship between truth and key epistemic notions such as knowledge and 
justification and the pragmatic elements that lead to theorizing about the notion of 
justification in the first place.

EPISTEMIC JUSTIFICATION
35
The dispute between internalists and externalists has led to another new direction 
of theorizing in addition to the value-driven approach. Once internalist assumptions 
are questioned, it is natural to notice the way in which our understanding of the world 
is deeply social. Most of what we know is not learned by first-hand experience, but by 
testimony, and once the questioning of internalist assumptions began, theorists began 
to wonder whether the social dimension of knowledge and justification, both in terms 
of the epistemic significance of disagreement between intellectual peers and in terms 
of whether this dimension is, itself, properly understood on the individualistic assump-
tions built into internalist conceptions of justification. The historically important con-
ception of testimonial, associated with Hume and on which we learn from testimony 
on an inductive basis that warrants trusting our sources, is difficult to maintain in the 
face of the obvious fact that we learn as children from our parents and other teachers 
long before any such inductive basis is available. In response, one might adopt the view 
of Thomas Reid that default credulity is warranted in the absence of specific reasons to 
doubt the word of others. Other theorists, however, view these alternatives as too indi-
vidualistic and that social conditions enter into the story of justification in a more fun-
damental way than either of these approaches allows. Wittgenstein and Rorty hold such 
views, for example, and one type of position along these lines would limit justification 
to beliefs arrived at in ways found acceptable within one’s social community. Even more 
radical approaches recommend beginning with social knowledge and socially justified 
attitudes and positions, treating individual justification and knowledge as derivative 
from, and dependent on, the social realities in question.
References
Alston, W. (1989) Epistemic Justification, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Chisholm, R. (1966) The Theory of Knowledge, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 3rd edn, 1989.
Cohen, S. (1999) “Contextualism, Skepticism, and the Structure of Reasons,” Philosophical Perspectives 13, 
Epistemology, pp. 57–89.
DeRose, K. (1992) “Contextualism and Knowledge Attributions,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 
52, pp. 913–29.
Fantl, J. and McGrath, M. (2002) “Evidence, Pragmatics, and Justification,” The Philosophical Review 111, 
pp. 67–94.
Feldman, R. and Conee, E. (2004) Evidentialism, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Foley, R. (1993) Working Without a Net, New York: Oxford University Press.
Goldman, A. (1986) Epistemology and Cognition, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Greco, J. (2000) Putting Skeptics in Their Place, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hawthorne, J. (2004) Knowledge and Lotteries, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Klein, P. (1999) “Human Knowledge and the Infinite Regress of Reasons,” Philosophical Perspectives 13, 
J. Tomberlin (ed.), pp. 297–325.
Kornblith, H. (ed.) (1994) Naturalizing Epistemology, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kvanvig, J. (1995) “Coherentists’ Distractions,” Philosophical Topics 23, pp. 257–75.
Kvanvig, J. (2003) The Value of Knowledge and the Pursuit of Understanding, New York: Cambridge University 
Press.
Plantinga, A. (1993) Warrant and Proper Function, New York: Oxford University Press.
Quine, W.V.O. (1969) “Epistemology Naturalized,” in Ontological Relativity and Other Essays, New York: 
Columbia University Press.
Quine, W.V.O. (1990) “Norms and Aims,” in The Pursuit of Truth, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Schmitt, F. (ed.) (1994) Socializing Epistemology, London: Rowman & Littlefield.
Sellars, W. (1963) Science, Perception, and Reality, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Sosa, E. (1991) Knowledge in Perspective, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stanley, J. (2005) Knowledge and Practical Interests, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
36
Williamson, T. (2000) Knowledge and Its Limits, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Williamson, T. (2007) The Philosophy of Philosophy, Oxford: Blackwell.
Wittgenstein, L. (1969) On Certainty, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Zagzebski, L. (1996) Virtues of the Mind, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

4
EPISTEMIC RATIONALITY
Richard Foley
One way to delineate the concept of epistemically rational belief is to locate it in rela-
tion to other core concepts of epistemology, especially those of knowledge and justified 
belief. Another is to position the concept within a general theory of rationality, which 
addresses the rationality of actions, decisions, intentions, plans, and strategies as well as 
beliefs. The two approaches need not be competitors. They can and should complement 
one another.
Epistemically Rational Belief, Justified Belief and Knowledge
There is no generally agreed way of understanding the relationships among these three 
core concepts of epistemology. Some epistemologists use the concepts of justified and 
epistemically rational belief interchangeably and insist as well that there is a necessary 
connection between them and the concept of knowledge, whereas others distinguish 
them and don’t insist on a necessary link with knowledge.
The best way to make one’s way through these complications is to begin with Edmund 
Gettier’s seminal article, “Is Justified True Belief Knowledge?” (Gettier 1963: 121–3). 
Gettier assumed that justified belief is one of the necessary conditions of knowledge and 
then went on to devise a pair of counterexamples to show that knowledge cannot be 
adequately conceived as justified true belief.
Gettier’s article marked the beginning of a search for a fourth condition that could be 
added to justification, truth, and belief to produce an adequate account of knowledge. 
Some epistemologists suggested that a special kind of justification is needed. The justi-
fication has to be non-defective, in the sense that it does not also justify any falsehood 
(Chisholm 1977: 102–18; Sosa 1979: 79–92; Sosa 1991: 19–34), or it has to be indefea-
sible, in the sense it cannot be defeated by the addition of any truth (Audi 1993; Klein 
1981; Lehrer 1974; Pollock 1986; Swain 1981).
Others, however, began to wonder whether something less intellectual than justifica-
tion, traditionally understood, is better suited for understanding knowledge. Justification 
is traditionally associated with being in a position to generate a defense of one’s belief, 
but in many instances, for example, simple perceptual knowledge, people seem not to be 
in a position to offer anything resembling a defense of what they know.
An early proposal was that knowledge requires there to be an appropriate causal 
connection between the fact making a belief true and the person’s having that belief 
(Armstrong 1973; Goldman 1967: 357–72) but this proposal encountered a number 
of problems, for example, problems accounting for knowledge of mathematics, general 
facts, and the future.

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
38
Nevertheless, in the eyes of many, the causal theory at least had the advantage of 
shifting the focus away from questions of being able to defend one’s beliefs intellectually 
and towards questions of being in an appropriate relation with one’s environment. If a 
simple causal connection between the fact that makes a belief true and the belief itself 
wouldn’t do, some other relation needed to be found.
One suggestion was that for a true belief to count as knowledge, it must be reliably 
generated (Goldman 1986). A second idea was that in close counterfactual situations 
the subject’s beliefs about the matter in question must track the truth (Nozick 1981). A 
third was that the belief must be the product of properly functioning cognitive faculties 
(Plantinga 1993). There have been important variants of each of these proposals as well 
(Dretske 1981; Sosa 1991).
These new accounts of knowledge led in turn to new accounts of justification, spe-
cifically, externalist ones. For example, Alvin Goldman, who had already argued that 
knowledge is reliably produced true belief, used the assumption that justification is a 
necessary condition of knowledge to argue that epistemic justification must also be 
essentially a matter of one’s beliefs having been produced and sustained by reliable 
cognitive processes (Goldman 1986). Because a cognitive process is reliable only if it is 
well suited to produce true beliefs in the external environment in which it is operating, 
this is an externalist account of justification. By contrast, most foundationalists and 
coherentists are internalists, whose accounts of justification emphasize the ability of 
individuals to mount defenses of their beliefs.
There is a large literature on the relative advantages and disadvantages of external-
ism and internalism in epistemology (Alston 1989; Audi 1988: 1–29; Bonjour 1980: 
53–71; Fumerton 1988; Goldman 1988; Sosa 1991: 225–44). Much of the literature 
presupposes that externalists and internalists are defending rival theories, but a more 
interesting reading of the dispute is that they are not, strictly speaking, competitors at 
all. They are, rather, principally concerned with different issues.
Externalists are primarily interested in explicating knowledge, but along the way they 
see themselves as proposing an account of justification, because justification, they stipu-
late, is that which has to be added to true belief in order to get a serious candidate for 
knowledge.
Internalists, by contrast, are primarily interested in explicating a sense of justification 
that captures what is involved in having beliefs that are internally defensible, but along 
the way they see themselves as also assembling the materials for an adequate account 
of knowledge, because they too assume that, by definition, justification is one of the 
necessary conditions of knowledge.
There are, then, these very different ways of thinking about justified belief. Despite 
their differences, they are easy to conflate, especially since some of the most influential 
figures in the history of epistemology have thought that internally defensible beliefs 
guarantee knowledge. Descartes, for example, recommended that one should believe 
only that which is altogether impossible to doubt, in other words, only that which is 
internally beyond the possibility of criticism. However, he also thought that by doing so 
one could be altogether assured of having knowledge.
Descartes’ search for an internal procedure that guarantees knowledge proved not 
to be feasible. The lesson, however, is not that either the internal or external aspect of 
the Cartesian project has to be abandoned but, rather, that there are different, equally 
legitimate projects for epistemologists to pursue. One project, expressed figuratively, is 
that of exploring what is required for one to put one’s own intellectual house in proper 

EPISTEMIC RATIONALITY
39
order, whereas another project is that of exploring what is required for one to stand in a 
relation of knowledge to one’s environment.
It is not unusual for the results of both kinds of projects to be reported using the 
language of rationality and justification, but the terms have different senses within the 
contexts of these two projects.
It is thus important for epistemologists to be self-conscious about how they are using 
the terms epistemically rational belief and justified belief. It is not realistic to expect univer-
sal consistency in usage, but there are constraints. If one insists on stipulating, as some 
do, that justification is, by definition, a necessary condition of knowledge, it becomes 
all the more critical to distinguish epistemically rational belief from justified belief, for 
it should not be assumed that an epistemically rational belief, when true, is necessarily 
a good candidate for knowledge.
Relaxing the tie between knowledge and epistemic rational belief frees the theory of 
knowledge from overly intellectual conceptions of knowledge, thus smoothing the way 
for treatments that acknowledge that most people cannot marshal strong epistemic rea-
sons in defense of some things they know. It likewise frees the theory of epistemic ratio-
nality from a preoccupation with the prerequisites of knowledge, which in turn creates 
a space for questions about the rationality of beliefs to be treated similarly to questions 
about the rationality of other phenomena. The concept of rational belief ought not to 
be cordoned off from other notions of rationality as if the conditions that make a belief 
rational have little to do with the conditions that make a decision, strategy, action, or 
plan rational.
The General Theory of Rationality
A first step towards locating the concept of epistemically rational belief within a general 
theory of rationality is to appreciate that rationality is a goal-oriented notion. Whether 
the question is one of the rationality of beliefs, decisions, intentions, plans, or strategies, 
what is at issue is the effective pursuit of goals. Questions about the rationality of a deci-
sion, for example, are in the first instance questions about how effectively the decision 
seems to accomplish the decision maker’s goals.
The qualifier seems is needed, because it is too stringent to insist that a decision is 
rational only if it actually obtains the goals in question. Rational decisions can turn out 
badly. Similarly, it is too stringent to insist that a decision is rational only if it is prob-
able that it will achieve the goals in question, since it is sometimes the case that no one 
could be reasonably expected to see that the decision was likely to have unwelcome 
consequences. Considerations such as these suggest that a decision (or plan, action, 
strategy, belief) is rational for an individual if it is rational for the individual to believe 
that it will satisfy her goals.
An obvious drawback is that this schema makes use of the notion of rational belief, 
thus leaving one within the circle of notions one wishes to understand. Before address-
ing this issue, consider a couple of preliminary points.
The first is that reasonability admits of degrees whereas rationality does not. In par-
ticular, reasonability varies with the strengths of one’s reasons, while the rational is that 
which is sufficiently reasonable. It is thus possible for more than one of the available 
options in a situation to be rational for an individual even though there are reasons to 
prefer some of the options to the others. A decision (plan, strategy, etc.) is rational if 
it is rational to believe that it will do an acceptably good job of achieving the goals in 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
40
question. To say that it will do an acceptably good job is to say its estimated desirability 
is sufficiently high, where “estimated desirability” is a matter of what it is rational to 
believe about its probable effectiveness in promoting the goals and the relative value of 
these goals (Jeffrey 1983).
A second key point is that when making assessments about the rationality of an indi-
vidual’s decisions (plans, strategies, etc.), the set of goals taken into account can vary. 
We are sometimes interested in evaluating what it is rational for an individual to do all 
things considered, and we thus take into consideration all her goals. In other contexts, 
however, we restrict ourselves to a subset. We might want to evaluate a decision, for 
example, with respect to only those goals that concern her economic wellbeing. If it is 
rational for her to believe that A would be an effective means of promoting this subset 
of goals, we can say that A is rational in an economic sense for her. We can say this even 
if, with respect to all of her goals, both economic and non-economic, it is not rational 
to decide in favor of A.
Thus, a more precise way of expressing general schema of rationality is as follows: 
a decision (plan, strategy, etc.) is rational in sense X for an individual if it is rational 
for her to believe that the plan will do an acceptably good job of satisfying her goals 
of type X.
Epistemic vs. Non-epistemic Reasons for Belief
The distinction among different kinds of rationality corresponding to different kinds 
of goals is especially important in epistemology. In assessing the rationality of beliefs, 
epistemologists have traditionally been interested in a specific intellectual goal, that of 
now having true beliefs and not having false beliefs.
This goal has two aspects, either of which could be championed more easily on its 
own than in tandem with the other. If the goal were only not to have false beliefs, the 
strategy would be to believe relatively little (so as to avoid acquiring any falsehoods), 
whereas if the goal were only to have true beliefs, the strategy would be to believe a great 
deal (so as to avoid missing any truths). The challenge is to balance appropriately the 
values of accuracy and comprehensiveness.
Note that the goal is not to have accurate and comprehensive beliefs at some future 
time but, rather, to have them now. To understand the significance of characterizing 
the goal in this way, imagine that my prospects for having accurate and comprehensive 
beliefs a year from now would be enhanced by now believing something for which I lack 
adequate evidence. Suppose, for example, that P involves a more favorable assessment 
of my intellectual talents than the evidence warrants, but believing P would make me 
more intellectually confident, which would make me a more dedicated inquirer, which 
in turn would enhance my long-term prospects of having accurate and comprehensive 
beliefs. Despite these long-term benefits, there is an important sense of rational belief, 
indeed the very sense that traditionally has been of interest to epistemologists, in which 
it is not rational for me to believe P. A way of making this distinction is to say that it is 
not rational in a purely epistemic sense for me to believe P, where this purely epistemic 
sense is to be understood in terms of the goal of now having accurate and comprehen-
sive beliefs.
Foundationalists, coherentists, virtue theorists, and others propose accounts of 
what properties a belief must have in order to be rational in this sense, but despite 
their differences, they all accept the constraint that their accounts should not make 

EPISTEMIC RATIONALITY
41
reference to any other notion of rationality. Foundationalists, for example, propose 
that epistemic rationality is to be understood in terms of basic beliefs and a set of 
deductive and inductive relations by which other beliefs are supported by the basic 
ones, and they would view it as a defect if they had to make reference to some other 
notion of rationality or one of its cognates in characterizing basicality or the support 
relations. By contrast, coherentists explicate epistemic rationality in terms of a set 
of deductive and probabilistic relations among beliefs and a set of properties such as 
conservativeness and explanatory power, but they too would view it a defect if their 
explication smuggled in any reference to any other notion of rationality. This is simi-
larly the case for other theories of epistemic rational belief.
This characteristic of epistemically rational belief makes it suitable for addressing 
the principal drawback of the general schema of rationality cited above, namely, that 
it leaves us within the circle of notions we wish to understand. Because an account of 
epistemically rational belief does not make use of any other notion of rationality or any 
of its close cognates, it can provide the schema with an escape route from this circle.
In particular, with an account of epistemically rational belief in hand, the general 
schema of rationality can be further refined: a decision (plan, action, strategy, etc.) is 
rational in sense X for an individual just in case it is epistemically rational for the indi-
vidual to believe that the decision (plan, action, strategy, etc.) will do an acceptably 
good job of satisfying her goals of kind X.
Other kinds of rationality are thus understood in terms of epistemic rationality whereas 
epistemic rationality does not presuppose any other kind of rationality. Epistemic ratio-
nality serves as an anchor for other kinds of rationality.
This schema is perfectly general. It applies to all phenomena (decisions, plans, strate-
gies, etc.) and to all forms of rationality for these phenomena (economic rationality, 
rationality of all things considered, and so on). Note, however, that the schema implies 
that beliefs, like decisions, strategies, plans, and intentions, can in principle be assessed 
in terms of how well they promote other goals. The schema suggests, for example, that 
if it is epistemically rational for an individual to believe that believing a proposition 
P would effectively promote her overall constellation of goals, it is rational for her to 
believe P all things considered.
There is nothing improper about evaluating beliefs in terms of how well they promote 
the total set of one’s goals, and yet we in fact rarely do so. Why is this? Answering this 
question requires an understanding of the different roles that epistemic and pragmatic 
reasons for belief play in our intellectual lives.
Discussions and debates about what it is rational to believe often take place in a con-
text of trying to convince someone to believe something. In an effort to persuade, we 
point out the reasons there are for believing the proposition in question, but insofar as 
our aim is to get someone to believe something that she does not now believe, the cit-
ing of pragmatic reasons is ordinarily ineffective. Even if we convince her that she has 
good pragmatic reasons to believe a proposition, this is usually not enough to generate 
belief.
Beliefs are psychological states that purport to represent the world accurately (Searle 
1983; Williams 1973). Beliefs that are accurate tend also to be useful, but usefulness is 
a secondary characteristic. The primary function of beliefs is to represent accurately. 
Pragmatic reasons for belief reverse this order. They are directed first and foremost at 
producing a state that is useful, not one that accurately represents. Such reasons, cor-
respondingly, are normally not effective at producing belief. At best they motivate the 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
42
person to get herself into an evidential situation in which belief eventually will be 
possible. Think of agnostics who are convinced by Pascal’s argument that they have 
pragmatic reasons to believe in God, since if God does exist, their chances for eternal 
salvation may be enhanced by such a belief. They thereby resolve to attend church 
regularly, surround themselves with believers, and read religious tracts in an effort to 
alter their outlook in such a way that belief in God will become possible for them.
Thus, insofar as our concern is to persuade someone to believe a proposition P, the 
explanation for why we do not tend to be interested in the pragmatic reasons she has 
to believe P is straightforward, namely, it is generally pointless to cite such reasons, 
because they are usually not the kind of reasons that generate belief. Similarly, in our 
own deliberations about a claim, we ordinarily do not consider what pragmatic reasons 
we might have for believing it, and the explanation is the same; pragmatic reasons for 
belief are ordinarily inefficacious, and thus our general practice is to ignore them.
A second reinforcing explanation as to why we ordinarily do not deliberate about 
pragmatic reasons for belief is that such deliberations are usually redundant. Although 
in principle there can be pragmatic reasons as well as epistemic reasons for belief, ordi-
narily our overriding pragmatic reason with respect to beliefs is to have and maintain an 
accurate and comprehensive stock of beliefs.
We are continually faced with an enormous range of decisions, and because we usu-
ally do not know in advance what decisions we will need to make, we usually do not 
know in advance what information will be required to make them well. This might 
not be important were it not for the fact that a large number of these decisions need to 
be made quickly, without the opportunity for deliberation or investigation. In making 
these decisions, we thus need to draw upon our existing stock of beliefs, and if that stock 
is either small or inaccurate, we increase the likelihood that our decisions will not be 
good ones.
So ordinarily, the system of beliefs that is likely to do the best overall job of promoting 
our total constellation of goals is one that is both comprehensive and accurate. Since 
epistemically rational beliefs are, by definition, ones that are rational for us insofar 
as our goal is to have accurate and comprehensive beliefs, it is ordinarily rational, all 
things considered, that is, when all of our goals are taken into account, to believe those 
propositions that are epistemically rational for us. Thus, for all practical purposes, tak-
ing this phrase literally, we can usually safely ignore pragmatic reasons in our delibera-
tions about what to believe.
To be sure, there are conceivable situations in which our epistemic reasons and our 
overall reasons for belief are pulled apart. If someone credibly threatens to harm my 
children unless I come to believe P, then it may be rational for me, all things considered, 
to find some way of getting myself to believe P whatever my epistemic reasons are. In 
the vast majority of cases, however, there are pressures that keep what it is rational to 
believe, all things considered, from being in conflict with what it is epistemically ratio-
nal to believe.
Beliefs, Degrees of Belief, and the Lottery
Consider two questions. What propositions are epistemically rational to believe? And, 
with what confidence is it epistemically rational to believe a proposition?
Answering the first of these questions requires an epistemology of belief. Answering 
the second requires an epistemology of degrees of belief. The two kinds of accounts 

EPISTEMIC RATIONALITY
43
would seem to be closely related. The first merely classifies belief-like attitudes into a 
threefold schema (believing, disbelieving, and withholding judgment), whereas the sec-
ond introduces as many distinctions as are needed to talk about the levels of confidence 
one has in various propositions, that is, one’s degrees of belief in them.
A simple thesis would seem to link the two, namely, it is epistemically rational for S 
to believe P just in case it is epistemically rational for S to have a degree of confidence 
in P that is sufficient for belief.
This thesis invites a follow-up question, what degree of confidence is sufficient for 
belief? The vagueness of belief talk makes it difficult to give a definitive answer to this 
question, but in other cases we deal with vagueness by stipulation. Indeed, it might not 
even matter much where we set the threshold as long as we are clear about what we are 
doing.
On the other hand, some have thought that there are paradoxes lurking here, the 
most well known of which is the lottery. Two assumptions about epistemically rational 
belief lead to these worries.
The first is non-contradiction: if it is epistemically rational for S to believe P, it can-
not be epistemically rational for S to believe not-P. The second assumption is that epis-
temically rational belief is governed by a conjunction rule: if it is epistemically rational 
for S to believe P and epistemically rational for S to believe Q, it is also epistemically 
rational for S to believe their conjunction (P & Q). If both these assumptions are made, 
the above linking thesis does lead to paradox.
The argument is relatively simple. Suppose that degrees of belief can be measured on 
a scale from 0 to 1, with 1 representing subjective certainty. Let the threshold x required 
for belief be any real number less than 1. For example, let x = 0.99. Now imagine a lot-
tery with 100 tickets, and suppose that it is epistemically rational for you to believe that 
the lottery is fair and that as such there will be only one winning ticket. More exactly, 
assume that it is epistemically rational for you to believe that (either ticket #1 will win 
or ticket #2 will win . . . or ticket #100 will win). This proposition is logically equivalent 
to the proposition that it’s not the case that (ticket #1 will not win and ticket #2 will not 
win . . . and ticket #100 will not win). Assume you are aware of the equivalence and, as 
a result, it is also epistemically rational for you to believe this proposition.
Suppose, finally, that you have no reason to distinguish among the tickets concerning 
their chances of winning. So, it is epistemically rational for you to have 0.99 confidence 
that ticket #1 will not win, 0.99 confidence that ticket #2 will not win, and so on for 
each of the other tickets. Then, according to the above linking thesis, it is epistemi-
cally rational for you to believe each of these propositions, since it is rational for you to 
have a degree of confidence in each that is sufficient for belief. But if a conjunction rule 
governs epistemically rational belief, it is also epistemically rational for you to believe 
the conjunctive proposition that (ticket #1 will not win and ticket #2 will not win . . . 
and ticket #100 will not win). However, we have already assumed that it is epistemically 
rational for you to believe the denial of this proposition, since it is rational for you to 
believe that the lottery is fair. But according to the assumption of non-contradiction, 
it is impossible for contradictory propositions to be epistemically rational for you. So, 
contrary to the initial hypothesis, x cannot be 0.99.
A little reflection indicates that x cannot be anything other than 1, since the same 
problem can arise with respect to a lottery of any size whatsoever. On the other hand, 
it cannot be a requirement that x be 1, since subjective certainty is not required for 
belief.

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
44
The lottery problem thus seems to show that the problem for the linking thesis has 
nothing to do with the vagueness of belief. If that were the only problem, it could be 
dealt with by stipulating some degree of belief as the threshold. The problem, rather, is 
that there doesn’t seem to be any threshold that can be sensibly stipulated.
One’s way of dealing with this problem shapes one’s epistemology.
One diagnosis is that the problem constitutes a reductio against doing epistemology 
in terms of beliefs simpliciter as opposed to degrees of belief. If we were to abandon the 
epistemology of belief and were content with an epistemology of degrees of belief, the 
problems of the lottery would be avoided. We simply observe that it is epistemically 
rational for you to have a high degree of confidence in the relevant individual proposi-
tions (the proposition that ticket #1 will lose, that ticket #2 will lose, and so on) but a 
low degree of confidence in their conjunctions, and leave the matter at that, without 
trying to decide whether it is epistemically rational to believe simpliciter any of these 
propositions. According to this way of viewing the matter, we shouldn’t try to stipulate a 
threshold of belief. Rather, we should quit talking about what it is rational to believe.
A less desperate approach to the problem, however, is to turn the above argument 
on its head. Begin with the presumption that the project of formulating an epistemol-
ogy of belief, at least on the face of it, is a legitimate project. The second premise is the 
same as above, namely, any theory of epistemically rational belief must either reject 
the conjunction rule or face absurd consequences. The conclusion, then, is to reject 
the conjunction rule, which in any event is not very plausible. After all, a conjunction 
can be no more probable than its individual conjuncts, and often it is considerably less 
probable.
There are worries associated with denying the conjunction rule, however, the most 
serious of which is that if we are not required on pains of irrationality to believe the con-
junction of propositions that we rationally believe, we might seem to lose some of our 
most powerful argumentative and deliberative tools. Deductive reasoning in particular 
might seem to lose much of its force, because without a conjunction rule, one might 
seem to be at liberty to accept each of the premises of an argument, accept also that the 
argument is deductively valid, and yet nonetheless deny that one is rationally commit-
ted to believing the conclusion.
But this worry is misplaced. Some sort of conjunction rule is indeed essential for deduc-
tive argumentation and deliberation, but the relevant rule is one governing such attitudes 
as presuming, positing, and hypothesizing as opposed to believing. Each of these attitudes 
is a form of commitment that, unlike belief, is context-relative. One doesn’t believe a 
proposition relative to certain purposes but not believe it relative to others. One either 
believes it or one doesn’t. Presuming, positing, and hypothesizing, by contrast, are not 
like this. Having such attitudes toward a proposition is a matter of one’s being prepared 
to regard the proposition as true for a certain range of purposes or situations. Moreover, 
relative to these purposes or situations, the attitudes are conjunctive. If for the purposes 
of a discussion one assumes (supposes, hypothesizes) P and if for that same discussion one 
also assumes (supposes, hypothesizes) Q, one is committed within that context to their 
conjunction, and committed as well to anything their conjunction implies.
Once a conjunction rule for belief is abandoned, the way is open for dealing with the 
problems of the lottery without paradox and without abandoning the epistemology of 
belief. In particular, the proper conclusion about the lottery is that it can be rational for 
one to believe of each ticket that it will lose without thereby being also committed, on 
pains of irrationality, to believing that no ticket will win.

EPISTEMIC RATIONALITY
45
Still, it might be asked, why have two theories, an epistemology of belief and an 
epistemology of degrees of belief, when one might do just as well? The quick answer is 
that one won’t do just as well. In a wide range of informative, argumentative, and deci-
sion-making activities, we want others to report what they think is true or false about 
the issues at hand. We don’t want them to qualify every assertion, much less indicate 
their exact degree of confidence in each assertion that they make. We want views to be 
more economically delivered than this.
In expository books and articles, department reports, financial statements, documen-
taries, and most other material designed to transfer information, we want and need to 
be given a black-and-white picture of at least some of the issues. This, of course, is not 
always feasible. Sometimes the evidence is not sufficiently strong one way or the other 
to allow the author to take a definite stand, in which case we tolerate a straddling of the 
fence, that is, a withholding of judgment.
Even so, the overall pattern is clear. If all of the information provided to us by others 
were finely qualified with respect to the provider’s degree of confidence in it, we would 
soon be overwhelmed. And it is no different with our private deliberations. We don’t 
have finely qualified degrees of confidence for every proposition we consider, but even 
if we did, we would soon find ourselves overwhelmed if we tried to deliberate about 
complicated issues on the basis of them (Harman 1988).
Of course, sometimes we want and need probabilities, but even here, we arrive at 
these probabilities against a backdrop of black-and-white assumptions, that is, against 
a backdrop of belief. I calculate what to bet before I draw my final card, and I note to 
myself that the probability of the drawn card’s being a heart, given the cards in my hand 
and the exposed cards of my opponents, is 0.25. Or I note that the probability of the die 
coming up six is 0.16667, or that the probability of an American male’s dying of a heart 
attack prior to age forty is 0.05. The assignment of each of these probabilities depends 
on antecedent black-and-white beliefs. I believe that the deck of cards is a standard 
deck, that the die isn’t weighted, and that the statistics on heart attacks were reliably 
gathered. It might be objected that these background beliefs are so close to certain that 
we ignore their probabilities, but this is just the point. In most situations, there are so 
many potentially distorting factors that we ignore most of them. We couldn’t possibly 
keep track of all of them, much less have them explicitly enter into our deliberations.
Taking stands is an inescapable part of our intellectual lives, and the epistemology of 
belief is the study of such stands. The range of options is restricted to just three: to say 
yes to a proposition, to say no to it, or to remain neutral on it. The project is then to 
describe what is a reasonable combination of yes, no, and neutral elements for one to 
adopt, not for all time but for now.
References
Alston, W. (1989) Epistemic Justification, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Armstrong, D.M. (1973) Belief, Truth, and Knowledge, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Audi, R. (1988) “Justification, Truth and Reliability,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 49.
Audi, R. (1993) The Structure of Justification, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bonjour, L. (1980) “Externalist Theories of Empirical Knowledge,” in P. French, T. Uehling, H. Wettstein 
(eds.), Midwest Studies in Philosophy, Vol. V, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Chisholm, R. (1977) Theory of Knowledge, 2nd edn, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Dretske, F. (1981) Knowledge and the Flow of Information, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fumerton, R. (1988) “The Internalism-Externalism Controversy,” in J. Tomberlin (ed.) Philosophical 
Perspectives, Vol. 2, Atascadero, CA: Ridgeview.

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
46
Gettier, E. (1963) “Is Justified True Belief Knowledge?” Analysis XXV, 121–3.
Goldman, A. (1967) “A Causal Theory of Knowing,” The Journal of Philosophy 64, 335–72.
Goldman, A. (1986) Epistemology and Cognition, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Goldman, A. (1988) “Strong and Weak Justification,” in J. Tomberlin (ed.) Philosophical Perspectives, Vol. 2, 
Atascadero, CA: Ridgeview Publishing Company.
Harman, G. (1988) Change in View, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jeffrey, R. (1983) The Logic of Decision, 2nd edn, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Klein, P. (1981) Certainty: A Refutation of Scepticism, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Lehrer, K. (1974) Knowledge, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nozick, R. (1981) Philosophical Explanations, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Plantinga, A. (1993) Warrant: The Current Debate, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pollock, J. (1986) Contemporary Theories of Knowledge, Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littlefield.
Searle, J. (1983) Intentionality, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Sosa, E. (1979) “Epistemic Presupposition,” in G. Pappas (ed.) Justification and Knowledge, Dordrecht: 
Reidel.
—— (1991) Knowledge in Perspective, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Swain, M. (1981) Reasons and Knowledge, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Williams, B. (1973) “Deciding to Believe,” in Problems of the Self, New York: Cambridge University Press.

5
EPISTEMIC NORMS
Pascal Engel
1. Epistemic Normativity
When we evaluate our beliefs and our reasonings as justified or unjustified, as good or 
bad, or as rational or irrational, we make, in a broad sense of the term, normative judg-
ments about them. It is often said that justification itself is a normative notion, and 
that epistemology is a normative discipline. But the nature of epistemic normativity is 
elusive, and there are several strands in these debates, many of which are common to 
the domain of practical or ethical normativity and to the domain of epistemic or cogni-
tive normativity.
 (i) Norms and values. It is common to distinguish two kinds of normative notions, 
those which are deontic, formulated in terms of oughts, right or wrong, prescriptions 
and permissions, and those which are teleological or axiological, formulated in 
terms of good, bad, valuable, virtuous or defective. There are important differences 
between these two kinds of normative properties. The former in general call for 
actions, can give rise to sanctions, and do not admit degrees, whereas the latter 
are more a matter of possession by the agent of a certain kind of sensitivity, call 
for praise or blame, and are comparative. Deontic notions are often associated to 
“thin” properties, whereas axiological ones are often “thick” properties. One main 
problem about epistemic normativity is whether it should be formulated in terms 
of epistemic norms in the deontic sense or in terms of value-based notions and 
whether one has priority over the other.
 (ii) Norms, rationality, and reasons. The notion of norm is commonly associated with 
the notion of rationality, both because norms concern what one ideally ought to 
do or to think, and because rationality seems to be normative in the sense that it 
prescribes a certain kind of conduct. But it is not clear in what sense rationality 
is normative rather than descriptive of agents or believers. There is an important 
sense in which what rationality requires normatively differs from what one has a 
reason to do or to think. Some think the latter has priority over the former. The 
“buck passing” account of values in the ethical domain (Scanlon 1998; Skorupski 
2010) according to which all normative concepts (including the teleological 
ones) should be formulated in terms of reasons also concerns epistemic reasons 
and whether these have priorities over values.
 (iii) Normative regulation. A normative statement is usually supposed to govern or 
to guide the actions of those who are subject to it. What kind of guidance or 
regulation does a norm imply? Mere permissions and recommendations, or strict 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
48
prescriptions? And to what extent is the agent who obeys a norm supposed to be 
aware that he is subject to it? To what extent does ought imply can and, if it does, 
what is the nature of the normative can? This depends in part on whether the 
normative ought is considered as categorical (prescribing regardless of any goal) 
or hypothetical (relative to a goal for which a prescription is instrumental).
 (iv) Normative objectivity. Are norms more like rules or conventions, which depend 
upon human decisions, or more like universal principles governing the whole 
domain of thought and action? Are they necessarily plural or can they be uni-
fied or ranked along a hierarchy? Are there some basic norms which rule a whole 
domain? This is closely related to the question of the objectivity of norms and to 
their ontological status: are there genuine normative facts and properties which 
make our normative statements true or false or are normative statements mere 
expressions of our attitudes? Should one be a cognitivist (Wedgwood 2007) or an 
expressivist (Gibbard 2008) about them? Epistemology itself can be understood as 
a meta-normative discipline: it not only deals with epistemic norms and values, 
but it also has, at a meta-level, to evaluate the appropriateness and objectivity of 
these norms. Are there standards to evaluate our standards, meta-norms about 
which norms we should adopt? And if there are such meta-norms, how to choose 
between them? If epistemic norms and values are objective, some must be such 
that they cannot be evaluated further.
 (v) Naturalization. Do norms supervene on natural facts? Can they be reduced to these? 
Unless one adopts a form of non-factualism (Field 2009) or a form of eliminativism 
(Weinberg et al. 2001), to the effect that the apparent objectivity of normative 
discourse is illusory and that norms can be reduced to descriptive facts, one has to 
address the question of the relationship between the normative and the descrip-
tive. The epistemological counterpart of this question concerns how much empiri-
cal matters count in epistemology and how much it can depend upon psychology 
or biology (Kornblith 1982).
Questions (i)–(v) all arise for the practical or ethical domain and one can expect 
that they can be transposed to the epistemic domain. But there are important asym-
metries. In particular there are epistemic norms in the deontic sense, and if they entail 
specific duties to believe, it is not clear that what we ought to believe or not to believe 
must issue in actions, for believings are not, in general, things that we do. Moreover, 
if there are epistemic obligations or duties about beliefs, we must be able to conform 
to them and to perform certain kinds of actions (ought normally implies can); but if, as 
many philosophers think, beliefs are not actions and are not under the control of the 
will, we cannot conform to such obligations, and their existence is dubious. So it is not 
clear that responsibility for belief, or the capacity to be subject to praise or blame in the 
epistemic domain, must rest upon the existence of epistemic duties. These questions lie 
at the heart of the “ethics of belief” debate (Clifford 1879; James 1905; Feldman 2000). 
Another reason to deny the parallelism between the practical and the epistemic case is 
that although the idea of a plurality of ethical values, reasons or norms makes sense in 
the former, it does not make sense in the latter: there may be many kinds of good rea-
sons for which one does something, but normally a belief is justified only by one kind of 
reason—its being true or its being supported by evidence. One can believe for practical, 
rather than for epistemic reasons. But the former are, in comparison to the latter, the 
wrong kind of reasons. Wishful thinking is a normatively incorrect kind of believing, 

EPISTEMIC NORMS
49
although it can be correct in the practical domain (if I am indifferent in my choice 
between A and B, I can choose either, but if I have equal evidence for believing p or q, 
I must suspend judgment). In spite of important structural analogies between practical 
and theoretical reasoning (Audi 2000; Kelly 2003), there are important disanalogies. 
Pragmatism is, in general, the view that practical values and norms can be compared 
to—and sometimes can override—epistemic norms. But if the normative landscape dif-
fers from the practical to the theoretical realm, pragmatism is less plausible.
Because they do not give the same kind of answers to questions (i)–(v), not all epis-
temologists believe in the existence of epistemic norms. Some think that they reduce to 
epistemic values and favor a teleological or value-based account of epistemic normativ-
ity. Others reduce it to the normativity of rationality or to the normativity of reasons. 
Yet others reject the very idea of normative authority in the epistemic domain, because 
they consider that epistemology has to be naturalized, although they do not reject the 
existence of epistemic values altogether.
2. Norms of Rationality
If there are epistemic norms, what are they? One can understand these, in the first place, 
as general requirements of rationality flowing from the very nature of belief and of the 
mental. For instance, two main requirements of rationality are those of coherence and 
deductive closure:
(a) One ought not to believe p and not p.
(b) One ought to believe that q if one believes that p and that p entails q.
But what is the nature of this ought? One can take it as a constraint on rational belief or 
as a general principle for the interpretation of any believer as a rational being (Davidson 
1980; Millar 2006). In this sense the principles of logic, or those of probability theory, 
are the most general norms for belief, and no subject can be said to have a belief unless 
these norms can be applied (Davidson 2004). The problem with such very high-profile 
norms is that they do not seem to be normative at all. For a principle to be genuinely 
normative, it must have normative force and be able to actually regulate belief. It must 
also have normative freedom, in the sense that one must have the possibility of violat-
ing it. But general or abstract norms of rationality like (a) and (b) have neither of these 
properties, since they are idealized descriptions of a rational believer: at best they tell 
us what the constitutive properties of rational belief are, but they offer us no guidance 
(Railton 2000). Perhaps normative statements like (a) or (b) apply to what it is to have 
a mind or being interpretable as a thinking being, but they do not prescribe (Schröder 
2003; Engel 2008).
Nevertheless ideals of reason or normative requirements like (a) and (b) can be vio-
lated: one can certainly have contradictory beliefs or fail to draw a conclusion from 
one’s other beliefs. Moreover, one can appreciate the force of the ideal and yet fail to 
conform to it. If one believes that p, and believes that p entails q, one can fail to infer q, 
if one has a reason not to believe q. For instance, if you believe that the earth was cre-
ated in less than a week, and believe that if the earth was created in less than a week, 
you are rationally required, or committed to believing that the earth was created in less 
than a week, but certainly you ought not to believe this, since it is false, and you have 
good reason or justification to believe that it is false. The difference between this latter 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
50
ought and the one which figures in the rational requirement (b) is often expressed in 
terms of the idea that rational requirements take wide scope:
(a′) You ought (if you believe that p, and that p implies p, believe p).
From (a′) one cannot detach the conclusion ‘q’, whereas inferences like the above about 
the origin of the earth take narrow scope:
(a″) If you believe that p, and that if p then q, then you ought to believe that 
q.
which is invalid. On one conception (Broome 2000) what it takes to be rational always 
involves wide scope normative requirements, on another (Kolodny 2005) to be rational 
always implies having a reason and so rationality is only a matter of narrow scope.
Non-detachment is a symptom of the difficulty of applying the ideals of reason to 
particular cases. We need to know how ideal rational norms like (a) and (b) regulate 
the epistemic attitudes of agents. Because we are not frictionless beings and can be irra-
tional sometimes, some conclude that rational requirements, in so far as they express 
the norms of logic, are impotent and that logic has no relevance to actual psychological 
reasoning (Harman 1986). But still, one can learn logic, and it can improve our reason-
ing ability, just as one can learn epistemic rules. The problem is how to implement them 
so that they actually guide our epistemic practices.
3. Epistemic Norms and Epistemic Concepts
Epistemic norms can be formulated as correctness conditions relating a kind of epis-
temic state with an objective condition (Mulligan 2008), and the relation between 
these is plausibly understood as a necessary and sufficient condition:
S judges (believes) correctly that p 
iff the proposition that p is true
S conjectures correctly that p 
iff it is probable that p
S has a correct interrogative attitude 
iff it is questionable whether p
towards p
S doubts correctly whether p 
iff it is doubtful whether p
S is correctly certain that p 
iff if is certain that p
Alternatively we may think of them as “possession conditions” for various kinds of 
concepts (Peacocke 1992), which are typically associated to the kind of epistemic justi-
fication which they provide. Thus perceptual concepts obey different kinds of “norma-
tive liaisons” from judgmental concepts or from logical concepts. But such a scheme is 
bound to be abstract unless one tries to spell out the relation between the correctness 
condition and the believer (doubter, interrogator). The more plausible proposal is that 
epistemic norms are conditions of “epistemic permissibility” for beliefs, which issue mays 
rather than oughts depending on the kind of epistemic state (Pollock and Cruz 1999):
(c) If it perceptually seems to you that p, then you are prima facie rationally permitted 
to believe that p (perception).
(d) If you are permitted to believe that p and that if p then q, then you are prima facie 
rationally permitted to believe q (deduction).

EPISTEMIC NORMS
51
(e) If you have observed n As and they have been discovered to be Gs, then you are 
prima facie rationally permitted to believe q (induction).
(f) If someone testifies to you that p, then you are prima facie rationally permitted to 
believe p.
Such norms of permission are relative to each kind of epistemic domain (reasoning, per-
ception, testimony, and so forth), they spell out specific epistemic rights or permissions 
to believe, which are rational and prima facie. Let us suppose that they are correctness 
norms. These raise several kinds of questions.
First, what is the nature of the kind of justification that these norms codify? For (c) at 
least it is not clear that it is a kind of propositional justification, licensed by a transition 
from beliefs to belief, since the inputs of perceptual beliefs need not, at least on many 
views of perception, trade in propositional contents. The relation of prima facie rational 
permission is often called “entitlement” (Burge 1993; Peacocke 2004), and it is meant 
to capture a kind of default justification. But the exact nature of this entitlement is a 
matter of controversy.
Second, if we understand (c)–(f) (but (a)–(b) as well) as rules specifying the kinds 
of circumstances in which an agent is licensed to believe, how do they regulate? If we 
understand them on the model of rules (such as rules of chess), we can construe these in 
two ways (Boghossian 2008a): as a conditional proposition specifying a permission (or 
an obligation) of the form:
If condition C obtains, you may (must) ϕ.
or (for requirements of the form (a) or (b)) as an imperative of the form
If C, do ϕ!
The imperative construal does not seem appropriate, since a mere imperative does 
not wear its normative status on its sleeves: it is only an instruction, and it does not tell 
us what kind of normative requirement is at issue (permission or obligation? of a practi-
cal or of an epistemic kind?). The propositional reading is better in this respect, but it 
seems overly intellectualistic: in order to obey a norm do we have to believe a proposi-
tion which expresses it (one follows, as Wittgenstein says, the rule “blindly”)? In addi-
tion it faces easily the kind of regress made famous by Lewis Carroll’s tortoise (Carroll 
1895): for if I need a second propositional norm to obey a norm, I need another to obey 
the second, etc. Perhaps, as Pollock and Cruz (1999) suggest, the kind of knowledge 
that we have of epistemic norms is procedural, rather than declarative knowledge of a 
propositional form.
A further problem which the present proposal faces is that of its common association 
with the deontological conception of epistemic justification (Chisholm 1977; Alston 
1989; Steup 2000). It seems to imply it: a belief is justified if and only if it is held in 
accordance with correct epistemic norms, and if it respects epistemic obligations. But it 
is not clear that the existence of epistemic norms entails the deontological conception of 
justification. The norms could be necessary although insufficient conditions for justifica-
tion. And in the entitlement sense, they typically do not entail obligations or oughts.
For similar reasons, the notion of epistemic norm is often associated to a kind of inter-
nalism in epistemology, and to the idea that the subject must have an internal access 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
52
to his reasons or justifications. But in so far as the norms of kind (a)–(f) are concerned, 
this need not be the case. Perceptual norms of kind (c) and the entitlement to which 
they give rise need not, and generally do not, entail the existence of a conscious access 
of the agent to them. Moreover, the norms can be understood in externalist fashion of 
the general form:
If p is generated by a reliable cognitive process it is permissible to believe p
(perhaps along the lines of the “J-rules” of justification proposed by Goldman 1986), 
where the agent need not know about the existence of the reliable process. Nevertheless 
it becomes hard to say, in this externalist construal of rules and norms, that they can act 
as reasons to believe.
4. The Ur-Norm of Truth
Are epistemic norms diverse, in the way rules, maxims, recipes, or heuristics can be? 
Even when we conceive them as rules for inquiry, such as Descartes’ rules for the direc-
tion of the mind, they have a certain systematicity (Descartes’ rules are guided by a 
certain conception of intuition as the basic source of knowledge). But can’t we say that 
there is a hierarchy and that some norms enjoy more prominence than others? These, 
in order to have the proper kind of generality, have to be categorical and expressed in 
terms of oughts rather than in terms of permissions or entitlements, and which we can 
formulate as above in the manner of correctness conditions. There are three obvious 
candidates.
The first, along the lines of (a) above is the rationality norm:
(NR) For any p, a belief that p is correct if and only if it is rational
or in categorical terms:
(NR0) One ought to be rational in one’s beliefs.
The second one is the norm that evidentialists like Clifford (1879) likes so much, 
that we ought to believe on the basis of sufficient evidence:
(NE) A belief is correct if and only if it is based on appropriate evidence.
None of these is unproblematic. There are several criteria of rationality. The minimal 
one is logical coherence or non-contradiction, which can also, if one admits degrees of 
belief, be expressed through some form of probabilistic coherence. There are also several 
kinds of concepts of evidence, and the amount of “sufficient” evidence that a subject 
needs to have is left undetermined by the statement of (NE) (Owens 2000).
A more obvious candidate for the role of general norm for beliefs is the so-called 
norm of truth for beliefs (Wedgwood 2007; Boghossian 2008b; Shah 2003; Engel 2007) 
which is usually considered as the best expression of the familiar metaphor that belief 
has an “aim,” which is truth:
(NT) For any p, a belief that p is correct if and only if p is true.

EPISTEMIC NORMS
53
It is natural to interpret this in terms of an ought rather than in terms of a may state-
ment:
(NTO) For any p, one ought to believe that p if and only if p
which, given that it is a biconditional can be broken into two parts:
(NTOa) For any p, if p one ought to believe that p
(NTOb) For any p, one ought to believe that p only if p
which, respectively, seem to capture what James (1905) calls “the two ways of looking 
at our duty in matters of opinion: knowing the truth and avoiding error.”
(NTB) seems more fundamental than (NR) and (NE). For it seems that when we 
look for rational beliefs or for belief supported by evidence, it is because these properties 
enhance their chance of being true. A set of beliefs that would be rational but false would 
be of little help to an inquirer, and evidence is evidence for truth. In addition, if belief 
plausibly is taken, among all propositional attitudes, as the central one (Boghossian 
2008a), (NT) seems to enjoy a kind of priority. But even if we grant that (NT) is the 
Ur-Norm, (NTB) and (NT) in both formulations raise several problems.
In the first place, (NT), like the correctness conditions set up at the beginning of §3 
above, seems more or less trivial. Does it say more that to believe that p is to believe 
that p is true? If so how can it have normative force and a power of prescription? So the 
objection that a mere analytic principle of rationality cannot create a genuine norm 
reproduces.
In the second place (NTO) seems clearly wrong. It says that for any proposition 
which is true, one ought to believe it. But certainly no one is under the obligation, 
if only under the rational requirement, of believing any true proposition whatsoever. 
There are too many trivial, uninteresting, or useless propositions which no one cares to 
believe.
In the third place, even if one takes (NTO) in the second, more plausible, formula-
tion (NTOb), which says that if one ought to believe that p, then p is true, nothing 
seems to follow, since the first member of the conditional can be either true or false; if it 
is true, nothing follows about what the subject ought to believe, and if it is false, it just 
says that the subject lacks an obligation to believing something, which is not the same 
as a positive obligation to believe (Hattiangadi 2005).
These difficulties illustrate the regulation problem: how can the mere (proposi-
tional) statement of a norm wear on its face, as it were, the way in which it should be 
obeyed? If (NT) is understood in the intellectualist sense as prescribing, on the part of 
every believer, an intention or goal to accept a belief if and only if it reaches the truth 
(Velleman 2000), the proposal is too intellectualistic to be convincing: not only does 
the norm (NT) not need to be explicitly present to the mind of the believer, but it need 
not be present at all, even tacitly, for there are too many cases where one believes that p 
without believing it for the sake of truth, but from a desire for it to be true.
A more promising solution to the regulation problem exploits one important feature 
of ascriptions of belief (Moran 2000; Shah 2003): when one deliberates about whether 
to believe that p, the best way to do so consists in asking oneself whether p, and a posi-
tive answer settles the question. In other words, belief is “transparent” to the truth of the 
proposition believed. This holds only for conscious, deliberate belief, but it also seems 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
54
to belong to the very concept of belief. Possessing the concept of belief and understand-
ing what it means to possess it entail obeying what the norm of truth prescribes. This 
feature may bridge the gap between the abstract statement of the norm (NT) and its 
realization within a believer’s psychology, for a belief may be regulated for truth without 
being explicitly attended in a deliberation about whether to believe that p (Shah and 
Velleman 2005; Engel 2007).
5. The Evidential Norm
A more common objection to the truth norm, which is implicit in most attempts to 
resist the idea that it can have normative force, is based on the suspicion that it presup-
poses a form of evidentialism, the view according to which one ought to believe that p 
only for evidential reasons, pertaining to the kind of evidence that one has for p’s being 
true. There are a number of formulations of the evidentialist norm, including (NE) 
above, Clifford’s maxim, and its explicit association with a certain theory of justifica-
tion according to which a belief that p is epistemically justified if and only if it fits the 
evidence that one has of p at a given moment (Conee and Feldman 2005).
Whatever its proper formulation can be, evidentialism faces, at least since Pascal’s 
famous wager argument and James’ will to believe objection to Clifford, the following 
challenge: given that our reasons to believe—at least in the sense of our motivating 
reasons—fall short of being our exclusive reasons, it seems perfectly correct to believe 
that p for (normative) reasons other than truth and evidence, in particular pragmatic or 
prudential reasons. In this sense, certain kinds of belief behaviors described currently as 
self-deceptive or irrational can be rational in the practical sense. A wife’s observation of 
lipstick on a husband’s collar is an evidential reason for her to believe that the husband 
is unfaithful but it can coexist with a practical reason to believe that—contrary to evi-
dence—the husband is faithful. More importantly there can be a possibility of weighing 
epistemic and practical considerations for believing, for instance if the benefit of a not 
too well evidentially supported belief (say, that one will recover from cancer) outweighs 
the benefit of believing the contrary (that one’s life is threatened). On this view epis-
temic reasons to believe are only contingently normative, and they can be overridden 
by reasons to desire to believe; hence the so-called constitutive norms of truth (NT) 
or of evidence (NE) are not constitutive at all. Where the evidentialist claims that the 
only permissible attitude towards a proposition p is the attitude that one has towards 
its truth or its evidence (namely, belief that p), the pragmatist claims that the contrary 
attitude (belief that not p) or another attitude (say, accepting that not p, or taking a 
certain prudential stance towards it) is licensed, if a certain goal of the agent favors its 
being rational (Foley 1993). If so the permissibility norms above become, indeed, very 
permissive, to the point of being only relative and purely contextual (White 2005).
The trouble with this line of thought, however, is that it is hard to conciliate not 
only with the existence of asymmetries between epistemic reasons and practical reasons 
mentioned above (§1), but also that it implies, most implausibly, that many prudential 
or pragmatic beliefs are under the kind of “manipulative” or “managerial” control which 
a subject can have when he manages to cause himself or herself to believe something 
for the sake of a certain practical goal (as, for instance when, knowing that I am prone 
to be late and forgetful about the time of an important meeting, I set my watch 10 
minutes ahead of the actual time, in order to create in myself, when the time arrives 
and when I look at my watch, the belief that my meeting is forthcoming). But such a 

EPISTEMIC NORMS
55
kind of managerial control is necessarily indirect, and unable to answer the constitutive 
reasons for belief by definition. One way or another, pragmatic reasons to believe seem 
perfectly extrinsic, and the idea that belief has an aim cannot simply be reduced to the 
idea that it has one purpose or other (Owens 2003; Ryan 2003). The pragmatist, in 
order to defend the view that there is nothing intrinsic in epistemic norms and reasons 
for believing, needs to deny the transparency feature of the regulation of belief (Shah 
2003; Hieronymi 2005).
6. Epistemic Norms and Epistemic Values
The pragmatist’s challenge to the truth and to the evidentialist norms is the strongest 
form of a worry that epistemic norms might not trade in oughts, but in goals, or in ends, 
and that they owe their force not to some categorical imperative or even permission, 
but to the existence of certain epistemic objectives. The most extreme view of this sort 
would simply be a kind of relativism, according to which there is nothing more in epis-
temic norms than certain kinds of policies, which one may adopt in one circumstance 
required by inquiry, but that one may withdraw in another circumstance (Field 2009). 
A less relativistic view would claim that the oughts of thought and reason are not as 
general and context independent as rationality principles or Ur-epistemic norms, but 
can be, in some sense, specialized. Some oughts might relate to a kind of function that a 
given role enjoys, such as professional oughts: just as the role of a teacher is to teach, or 
of a lawyer is to defend his clients, the oughts of belief might be so specialized (Feldman 
2000). And given that there is an obvious connexion between normativity and the 
performance of a function, which has been exploited by many philosophers who hope to 
reduce norms to biological functions (Millikan 1996; Papineau 2003) it might promise 
a short way to naturalistic reduction.
In a different spirit some theorists hold that norms are related to social functions, 
or to various commitments implicit in human discourse, which are ultimately social 
(Brandom 1994; Chrisman 2008). But going too much in that direction is unpromis-
ing if it is supposed to explain epistemic normativity in expressivist terms. We have 
a sense, which the cognitivist conception of normativity captures better (Wedgwood 
2007; Cuneo 2008), that the oughts of belief are more general, and that what thought 
requires outpasses what the expressivist conception can capture. One way to defend 
this view consists in reflecting upon the intimate relation that belief has to knowledge. 
Whether or not one accepts the strong kind of externalism according to which knowl-
edge is a primitive mental state distinct from belief, it makes sense to suggest that the 
aim of belief is knowledge, and that it is knowledge which gives to epistemic norms their 
intrinsicness (Williamson 2000). In this sense, it may be that the norm of belief, both in 
the constitutive sense and in the regulative sense, is a norm for knowledge.
This still does not solve the ontological issue associated to questions (i) and (v) of 
§1 above. The generality of epistemic norms can be captured through the idea that 
they are, in some sense, related to values, and one may think that the truth and the 
evidentialist norm can be translated into the idea that the ultimate aim of belief is truth, 
because truth is the ultimate cognitive value (Lynch 2005). Although the pragmatist 
will here agree that the normative concepts are better captured in teleological terms, 
this need not detract from the irreducibility of the truth goal. Space is then left to 
understand the normativity of epistemic norms in terms of this goal, and to understand 
normativity as related to features of our capacities to reach “aptly” the truth goal (Sosa 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
56
2007), whatever it is, or to understand it, in a more full-blooded Aristotelian sense, as 
the achievements of a virtuous agent, in the way a virtue epistemology does (Zagzebski 
1996; Hookway 2000). Space is left, too, to the debate between the monist about the 
cognitive goal, who believes that epistemic achievement is related to only one kind of 
objective, truth, and the pluralist who allows others goals, like understanding (Kvanvig 
2003). There are, indeed, a number of conceptions of epistemic value, which are all 
candidates at accounting epistemic normativity in teleological terms (Pritchard 2007; 
Grimm 2009; Haddock et al. 2009, 2010).
But whether or not these teleological accounts are correct, they will have to make 
sense of two facts: that the evidentialist norms are, in some sense which is yet to be 
spelled out but which all friends of the idea of an epistemic norm grant, constitutive 
of the epistemic domain, and that they can guide or regulate inquiry. But it is not clear 
that the constitutivity claim amounts to the same as the goal claim, and that they 
can, in either way, be reduced to each other. For it is perfectly possible to accept that 
the truth and evidentialist norms set general conditions on belief in general, whereas 
the considerations pertaining to the value of a given belief in various circumstances 
pertain to inquiry, or the process of formation and acquisition of beliefs. In order to 
understand the concept of a belief and of an epistemic state in general, one needs to 
understand the first, but the second, which is relevant to inquiry, need not coincide 
with the constitutive norms for belief and knowledge. On this view there would be 
two different kinds of epistemic norms: those which are attached to a believer’s under-
standing of the very concept of belief on the one hand, and those which apply to the 
exercise of belief in inquiry, on the other hand. The norms for belief apply categori-
cally to any believer, whereas the inquirer attends to a goal and to the complex ways 
of achieving it. The former may be more normative in the constitutive sense, whereas 
the latter may be more instrumental and teleological. But it has yet to be spelled out in 
what sense they are related.
References
Alston, W. P. 1989 Epistemic Justification, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Audi, R. 2000 The Architecture of Reason, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Boghossian, P. 2008a “Epistemic Rules,” Journal of Philosophy 105(9): 472–500.
—— 2008b Content and Justification, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Brandom, R. 1994 Making it Explicit, Harvard, MA: Harvard University Press.
Broome, J. 2000 “Normative Requirements,” in Dancy, J. (ed.) Normativity, Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 78–99.
Burge, T. 1993 “Content Preservation,” The Philosophical Review 102(4): 457–488.
Carroll, L. 1895 “What the Tortoise said to Achilles,” Mind (new series) 4: 278–80.
Chisholm, R. 1977 Theory of Knowledge, 2nd edn, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Clifford, W. K. 1879 “The Ethics of Belief,” in his Lectures and Essays, London: Macmillan.
Chrisman, M. 2008 “Ought to Believe,” Journal of Philosophy 105(7): 346–70.
Conee E. and Feldman, R. 2005 Evidentialism, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cuneo, T. 2008 The Normative Web, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Davidson, D. 1980 Essay on Actions and Events, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—— 2004 Problems of Rationality, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Engel, P. 2007 “Belief and Normativity,” Disputatio, II, 23: 179–205.
—— 2008 “Davidson on Epistemic Norms,” in C. Amoretti and N. Vassalo (eds.) Davidson, Truth, Language 
and Interpretation, Munich: Ontos Verlag, pp. 123–146.
Feldman, R. 2000 “The Ethics of Belief,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 60: 667–695. 
Reprinted in Conee and Feldman 2005.
Field, H. 2009 “Epistemology without Metaphysics,” Philosophical Studies 143: 249–90.

EPISTEMIC NORMS
57
Foley, R. 1993 Working Without a Net, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gibbard, A. (2008) “Rational Credence and the Value of Truth,” in T. Gendler and J. Hawthorne (eds.) 
Oxford Studies in Epistemology 3, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Goldman, A. 1986 Epistemology and Cognition, Harvard, MA: Harvard University Press.
Grimm, S. 2009 “Epistemic Normativity,” in Haddock, A., Millar, A., and Pritchard, D. H. (eds.) Epistemic 
Value, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 243–64.
Haddock, A., Millar, A., and Pritchard, D. H. (eds.) Epistemic Value, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—— 2010 The Nature and Value of Knowledge: Three Investigations, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Harman, G. 1986 Change in View, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hattiangadi, A. 2005 Oughts and Thoughts, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hieronymi, P. 2005 “The Wrong Kind of Reason,” The Journal of Philosophy 102(9): 437–57.
Hookway, C. 2000 “Epistemic Norms and Theoretical Deliberation,” in Dancy, J. (ed.) Normativity, Oxford: 
Blackwell, pp. 60–77.
James, W. 1905 “The Will to Believe,” in The Will to Believe and Other Essays in Popular Philosophy and Human 
Immortality, New York: Dover (1956), pp. 1–31.
Kelly, T. 2003 “Epistemic Rationality and Instrumental Rationality: A Critique,” Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research 66(3), May: 612–40.
Kolodny, N. 2005 “Why be Rational?,” Mind 114(455): 509–63.
Kornblith, H. 1982 “Epistemic Normativity,” Synthese 94: 357–76.
Kvanvig, J. 2003 The Value of Knowledge and the Pursuit of Understanding, Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Lynch, M. 2005 The Value of Truth, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Millar, A. 2006 Understanding People, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Millikan, R. G. 1996 White Queen Psychology, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Moran, R. 2000 Authority and Estrangement, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Mulligan, K. 2008 “Intentionality, Knowledge and Formal Objects,” Disputatio II, 23: 205–28.
Owens, D. 2000 Reason without Freedom, London: Routledge.
—— 2003 “Does Belief have an Aim?,” Philosophical Studies 115(3): 283–305.
Papineau, D. 2003 The Roots of Normativity, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Peacocke, C. 1992 A Study of Concepts, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
—— 2004 The Realm of Reason, Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Pollock, J. and Cruz, J. 1999 Contemporary Theories of Knowledge, Tottowa, NJ: Rowman and Littlefield.
Pritchard, D. H. 2007 “Recent Work on Epistemic Value,” American Philosophical Quarterly 44: 85–110.
Railton, P. 2000 “Normative Force and Normative Freedom,” in Dancy, J. (ed.) Normativity, Oxford: 
Blackwell (2000).
—— 2003 Facts Values and Norms, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ryan, S. 2003 “Doxastic Compatibilism and the Ethics of Belief,” Philosophical Studies, 114: 47–79.
Scanlon, T. 1998 What We Owe to Each Other, Harvard: Harvard University Press.
Schröder, T. 2003 “Davidson’s Theory of Mind is Non-normative,” Philosopher’s Imprint, 2, 1. http://hdl.
handle.net/2027/spo.3521354.0003.001.
Shah, N. 2003 “How Truth Regulates Belief,” The Philosophical Review 112: 447–82.
—— and Velleman, D. 2005 “Doxastic Deliberation,” The Philosophical Review 114(4): 497–534.
Skorupski, J. 2010 The Domain of Reasons, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sosa, E. 2007 A Virtue Epistemology, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Steglich-Petersen, A. 2006 “The Aim of Belief: No Norm Needed,” Philosophical Quarterly 56(225): 500–
16.
Steup, M. 2000 “Doxastic Voluntarism and Epistemic Deontology,” Acta Analytica 15: 25–56.
Velleman, D. 2000 “The Aim of Belief,” in The Possibility of Practical Reason, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Wedgwood, R. 2007 The Nature of Normativity, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Weinberg, J., Nichols, S., and Stich, S. 2001 “Normativity and Epistemic Intuitions,” Philosophical Topics 
29: 429–60.
White, R. 2005 “Epistemic Permissiveness,” Philosophical Perspectives 19: 445–59.
Williamson, T. 2000 Knowledge and its Limits, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Zagzebski, L. 1996 Virtues of the Mind, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

6
EVIDENCE
Timothy McGrew
The concept of evidence pervades our lives. In science, history, law, medicine, and 
innumerable other areas, evidence plays a central, indispensable role. Yet both the ana-
lysis of the concept of evidence and the characterization of its role in our cognitive lives 
are matters of lively philosophical controversy. To understand how these philosophical 
controversies have arisen, it is helpful to start from non-philosophical concepts and uses 
of evidence and explore the questions they raise.
Some Characteristics of Evidence
In the common sense of the term, evidence may come in a wide variety of forms. In a 
case at law, evidence might include a fingerprint, bloodstains, testimony, or a will. In 
science the paradigm case of evidence is a set of experimental data, but sometimes (as in 
astronomy or paleontology) the principal data are not directly amenable to experimen-
tal manipulation, so observation plays the central role. In history, evidence typically 
comes in the form of narrative documents, but it might also take the form of a coin, 
some scraps of papyrus, or a few bits of pottery. In medicine it could consist of anything 
from an X-ray or a test result to a subjective experience of a certain sort of pain. In a trip 
to the grocery store it might consist in the redness of a watermelon or the softness and 
smell of a peach.
Although the examples from these different fields are diverse, they have certain com-
mon characteristics. First, evidence is always evidence for (or against) something: the 
guilt of the defendant, the truth of a hypothesis, the correctness of a particular historical 
claim, the presence of a certain disease, or the ripeness and sweetness of a piece of fruit. 
Second, it comes in a range of strengths. Sometimes we are in a position to compare 
evidence, to say that some piece of evidence is better evidence for a hypothesis than 
some other piece is, or that a piece of evidence is better evidence for one hypothesis 
than it is for some alternative hypothesis. Third, and relatedly, evidence may be more 
or less direct. Testimony that the defendant expressed dislike of the victim is indirect; 
eyewitness testimony that the defendant assaulted the victim is more direct, and all else 
being equal we are inclined to take the latter more seriously. Fourth, small things may 
give us strong evidence for surprising, antecedently improbable facts. When Robinson 
Crusoe had spent over twenty years as a castaway without seeing any signs of another 
human being, he had excellent reason to believe that he was alone on his island; but the 
sight of a single footprint overturned all of his evidence to the contrary. Fifth, pieces of 
evidence can typically be combined or opposed. A clinical diagnosis may be confirmed 
or disconfirmed by a histopathological examination; a will may be called into question 

EVIDENCE
59
by the presentation of written documents apparently revoking it. This is closely related 
to a sixth point. Pieces of evidence may be weakened in several distinct ways: by being 
opposed by contrary evidence (a second will), by being undermined (documents revo-
king the will), or by the introduction of new relevant alternatives. In Charles Dickens’s 
novel A Tale of Two Cities, for example, Charles Darnay is falsely accused of treason on 
the testimony of a witness. The defense attorney’s assistant, Sydney Carton, stands up 
and removes his wig, revealing that he and Darnay are strikingly similar in appearance; 
the witness’s certainty that it was Darnay he saw is shaken by the sudden introduction 
of the possibility that he actually saw someone else of similar appearance.
Propositional Evidence, Internalism, and Foundationalism
Each of these characteristics gives rise to certain interesting philosophical questions 
and issues. Take the fact that evidence is always evidence for or against something. 
How can a fingerprint or a bloodstain be evidence for something? The question is more 
tricky than it looks. After all, fingerprints by themselves do not say anything, and the 
sense in which a bloodstain can be said to accuse the defendant is clearly metaphorical. 
Trying to parse this out, some philosophers have been attracted to the view that, strictly 
speaking, what counts as evidence is not a set of physical objects or even experiences, 
but rather a set of believed propositions; the bloodstains, wills, and pains are relevant 
because somehow they underwrite or legitimate our belief in the relevant propositions 
that this smudge is a bloodstain, or that the document is the will of the deceased, or even, in the 
first person case, that I am experiencing thus.
The position that evidence is, in the strict sense, always propositional, has many 
attractions. Propositions can be believed or disbelieved, but fingerprints cannot; to say 
that one disbelieves a fingerprint seems to be a shorthand for saying that one does 
not believe that the fact that this fingerprint is present (a proposition) indicates that the 
defendant is guilty (another proposition). Propositions can stand in logical relations to 
one another, can entail each other, can be negated, conjoined, and otherwise logically 
manipulated. But we can no more create a disjunction between a proposition and a 
fingerprint than we can divide the number seven by a banana. Treating evidence as pro-
positional provides us with a natural way to discuss the combination of evidence, which 
we noted above as one of the common features of evidence. And there are tremendous 
systematic advantages to treating the whole system of our beliefs as a set of propositions, 
particularly if we want to make use of the machinery of Bayesian probability; for to do 
this, we must generate a probability distribution across all of the propositions in ques-
tion. Fingerprints need not apply.
The relationship between evidence and probability is a particularly interesting one. 
The second feature of evidence we noted at the outset was that it comes in differing 
strengths. We have various options for representing evidential strength: positive (E is 
evidence for H), comparative (E1 is stronger evidence for H than E2), and numerical 
(the probability of H, given E, is .95, which would typically be written P(H|E) = .95). 
The numerical representation gives us some simple and intuitive ways of capturing the 
comparative assessment (P(H|E1) > P(H|E2)) and the positive assessment (P(H|E) 
> P(H)). These advantages come at a price, since the representation of our beliefs as 
a massive set of conjunctions, disjunctions, and negations of simple propositions, and 
of our degrees of rational credibility as a probability distribution of infinitely precise 
numerical values across that set, cannot be perfectly squared either with introspection 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
60
or with experimental evidence on human rationality (Kahneman et al. 1982). But there 
are various devices (e.g. probability intervals) that the devotee of probabilistic accounts 
of evidence can employ to lessen these difficulties; and just as in logic, some degree of 
idealization is to be expected in any normative formal reconstruction of our epistemic 
practices and concepts (see “Bayesian Epistemology,” Chapter 55 in this volume).
It might seem that philosophers who take evidence to be propositional have just 
traded one problem for another. If a bloodstain cannot serve as evidence but the pro-
position this is a bloodstain can, then what serves as evidence for the belief about the 
bloodstain? If it must always be another proposition, we seem doomed to an infinite 
regress that never makes contact with experience. But if the bloodstain itself, or even 
the experience one would describe as one’s seeing the bloodstain, can serve to justify the 
proposition this is a bloodstain, then why be squeamish at the outset? Why not admit the 
stain, or the experience, as evidence in its own right?
One way of addressing this problem is to embrace a form of foundationalism in which 
certain beliefs, typically beliefs about one’s present experiential states, are justified in 
virtue of the manner in which they are connected with one’s experience. The idea of 
direct acquaintance plays a vital role here: on some current conceptions (BonJour 2002; 
Fumerton 2005; McGrew 1995, 1998), one’s foundational beliefs are justified because 
they express one’s acquaintance with aspects of one’s experience, and the acquaintance 
relation brings with it some high epistemic standing. The experience one has on the 
occasion of seeing the bloodstain provides a significant part of one’s justification for the 
belief that there is a bloodstain. In ordinary language we would go further and say that 
the experience was evidence. But given the theoretical payoff involved in treating evi-
dence as propositional, it may be worth the small divergence from common usage (see 
“Foundationalism,” Chapter 22 in this volume).
This form of foundationalism is highly controversial, both with respect to the stan-
ding of the foundations (do we have such beliefs? do they play the evidential role foun-
dationalists say they do?) and with respect to the support they are supposed to give (can 
such foundations really give us justification for the wide range of our further beliefs?). 
It also raises several deep questions about the level of awareness required for something 
to count as one’s evidence, since awareness comes in degrees but the status of a belief 
as evidence, as opposed to the weight of that evidence, does not appear to be a mat-
ter of degree. It resolves the question of whether false propositions, or beliefs in false 
propositions, can count as evidence (on this conception they cannot); but since this 
resolution is somewhat controversial, it may be taken either as a merit or as a drawback 
to acquaintance foundationalism, though it is interesting to note that the requirement 
that knowledge not be crucially based on a false premise—clearly a related, though not 
an equivalent, notion—is one of the major ways of addressing the Gettier problem. In 
any event, these are serious questions that cannot be made to disappear by rejecting 
foundationalism: the question of the relationship between experience and experiential 
beliefs remains, for example, regardless of one’s stance on the propositional question or 
one’s preferred answer to the epistemic regress problem. And this form of foundationa-
lism has the attraction of isolating and attempting to meet head-on questions about the 
structure of our knowledge and the justification for our epistemic starting points while 
preserving a role for experience.
Acquaintance foundationalism is a form of epistemic internalism, and the notion of 
evidence generally plays a much more significant role in internalist epistemologies than 
it does in various forms of externalism. It would be overstatement to say that evidence 

EVIDENCE
61
plays no role in externalism, but the role is very different, in part because evidence itself 
is understood differently by externalists than by internalists. In Timothy Williamson’s 
form of “knowledge first” externalism, for example, one’s evidence is simply equated 
with the set of things one knows, where the concept of knowledge is taken to be pri-
mitive rather than analyzed into more fundamental concepts (see “Knowledge First 
Epistemology,” Chapter 20 in this volume). In some forms of reliabilism, sensitivity to 
the evidence (not necessarily propositionally construed) is a means of being justified or 
warranted. The converse does not generally hold; on some externalist views, one may be 
justified or warranted without being (in any sense that an internalist would recognize) 
sensitive to evidence (see “Externalism/Internalism,” Chapter 14 in this volume).
Evidentialism and the Objectivity Constraint
A position often espoused by those sympathetic to acquaintance foundationalism, 
though distinct from it, is known as evidentialism: it is the position that the epistemic 
status of a belief depends wholly on the evidence possessed by the believer. Just what 
this amounts to depends on the notion of evidence being employed, and accordingly 
evidentialism comes in both narrow and wide forms depending on whether evidence is 
taken to consist only of propositions or of a wider range of items. According to a recent 
version of wide evidentialism, evidence for a belief consists in the internal features of 
the believer exemplified at the time the belief is held (Conee and Feldman 2004). But 
the internal features, in this version, are not restricted to beliefs.
One interesting feature of evidentialism, whether wide or narrow, is that it entails a 
strong objectivity constraint on rational belief, which at a first approximation runs like 
this:
Disagreements regarding the epistemic evaluation of any proposition are in 
principle traceable either to differences in the relevant evidence available 
to the disagreeing parties or to irrationality on the part of at least one of the 
disputants.
It might seem at first that this is overly stringent. In everyday life, and even in disci-
plines such as science and history, reasonable and well-informed people often disagree. 
Here, however, we have an example of the distance between common and philosophi-
cal use of terms like “reasonable” and “well-informed.” A defender of the objectivity 
constraint will reply that someone might be reasonable in an everyday sense but fall far 
short of the ideal of rationality suggested by the constraint, just as someone can be a 
fine mathematician without being mathematically omniscient. Similarly, for two peo-
ple to be “well informed” is not the same thing as for them to possess precisely the same 
evidence. Yet in some cases of disagreement among experts we at least approximate this 
situation. It is interesting to note that in those cases, the experts themselves are often 
more than willing to accuse each other of irrationality, which suggests that they are at 
least tacitly invoking something like the objectivity constraint (see “Disagreement,” 
Chapter 7 in this volume).
Another objection to the objectivity constraint arises from the suggestion that the 
facts about what it is rational to believe given one’s available evidence might not be 
perfectly sharp. Here we run into wider issues about the nature of epistemology. On a 
traditional view, the relationship between one’s high-level beliefs and one’s evidence 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
62
is both necessary and a priori in a strong sense: roughly, the evidence logically deter-
mines a unique rational response, and that rational response is, in principle, discovera-
ble by reflection alone. There are, of course, cases where the evidence does not specify a 
numerically precise rational stance. On the basis of the fact (true but somewhat vaguely 
stated) that more than half of all humans born live are male, and in the absence of any 
further information bearing on the matter, it would be unreasonable to assign any sharp 
probability to the gender of some particular child about to be born. But here one may 
well retain the objectivity constraint and argue that the proper rational response is 
simply to take a stance that goes no further than the evidence—to expect a male child 
more strongly than a female, but to remain uncommitted to any more precise position. 
The vagueness of the evidence will be reflected in the relative lack of detail in the com-
mitment, but it does not follow that there is any vagueness in the connection between 
the evidence and that commitment.
One’s position on the objectivity constraint determines a great deal about one’s ove-
rall epistemology. But there is still room for philosophers who give lip service to the 
constraint to talk past one another if they are not in agreement regarding the concept 
of evidence being invoked.
The objectivity constraint leaves open the possibility that two people may possess 
nearly the same evidence, reason unimpeachably from it, and yet arrive at widely differ-
ing conclusions. One of the attractions of modeling evidence in probabilistic terms is 
that we can give models, in probability, of cases where this happens. Since the beliefs 
we take as unproblematic provide the background in terms of which we make judgments 
of relevance and independence, it is quite possible for there to be situations where Jack 
and Jill both learn that E, Jack’s probability for H goes up, and Jill’s goes down. Even 
more common is a case where one person does not see any significant relevance of E 
to H, while another, with a different base of evidence, takes E as highly relevant to H. 
Looking across the history of science, we see this quite often. The famous Michelson-
Morley experiment revealed that, so far as optical experimentation is concerned, the 
motion of the earth in its revolution around the sun is undetectable. Had the opponents 
of Galileo been informed of this, they would no doubt have taken it to be highly rele-
vant to the question of the motion of the earth, since the result is exactly what would be 
predicted if the earth is motionless. By the time the experiment was actually performed 
in the late nineteenth century, however, a stationary earth was no longer a live option. 
The immediate impact of the evidence was on the dispute between two types of ether 
theory, and a few decades later it came to be seen as evidence for Einstein’s theory of 
special relativity. An even more striking case is that of Hanno the Navigator (c. 450 
bc), who reported that in his travels to the south he reached a point where the sun 
seemed to rise and set to the north. Subsequent historians, situated comfortably in the 
northern hemisphere and generalizing their experience, dismissed his account as impos-
sible. Today that very fact, so implausible that it was unlikely to be invented, is our best 
piece of evidence that Hanno’s report was truthful. But this is because we understand 
what happens when one crosses the equator.
The example of look-alikes from A Tale of Two Cities raises an additional question 
for the objectivity constraint: does the sudden realization of a heretofore unrecognized 
possibility count as evidence? No new fact need be introduced for a possibility to be 
recalled; even Sydney Carton’s dramatic gesture merely draws the attention of the court 
to the fact that sometimes different people resemble each other strikingly, which surely 
no one would deny. (It is not seriously entertained that the witness might have seen 

EVIDENCE
63
Carton rather than Darnay, though that suggestion is the means by which the witness’s 
testimony is undermined.) In the history of science it has often happened that the reali-
zation of a new possibility radically alters our estimate of the weight of evidence for and 
against various theories. But the very language we use here—that it alters our estimate 
of the weight of evidence—suggests that we are pre-reflectively inclined to count the rea-
lization of a mere possibility not as evidence but, rather, as something that influences 
our evaluation of the evidence. In that case, however, we might need to interpret the 
objectivity constraint in such a way that “irrationality” could include the failure to 
recognize alternative possibilities.
Evidence and Interpretation
The prevalence of disagreement among experts suggests that a great deal depends not 
simply on one’s evidence but on one’s interpretation of that evidence. In most circums-
tances it is fairly clear what counts as evidence and what counts as interpretation, though 
this distinction, like everything else in philosophy, has been challenged. Questions of 
interpretation of the evidence are closely linked to questions of inference, and these are 
among the most difficult and interesting problems in all of philosophy. If one adopts 
an internalist, foundationalist position, then one is bound to admit that a great deal of 
interpretation and/or inference goes on below the level of explicit consciousness. This 
involves some extension of the ordinary meanings of these terms, since interpretation 
and inference are, in the first instance, self-conscious processes.
In the case of scientific evidence, it is important to remember that inference is almost 
always accompanied by a certain amount of interpretation. The case of Boyle’s Law 
illustrates this well. By pouring measured amounts of mercury into a J-shaped tube, 
Boyle was able to obtain data on the compression of the air trapped in the short end. 
From his data, he concluded that the pressure and the volume vary inversely, that is to 
say, that P and 1/V are in a linear relationship. But Boyle’s data points, if plotted with 
P and 1/V for axes, do not fall on this line: a dot-to-dot connection of the points looks 
a bit like the Mississippi River. Boyle was aware of this and dismissed the variations 
between his measurements and the theoretical values as the product of error. Today, 
using regression analysis, we can vindicate his judgment (within bounds—when the 
pressure is great enough to liquefy the air, the relationship between P and 1/V ceases to 
be even approximately linear); but the fact remains that the data do not quite speak for 
themselves. This point tells against a naive form of falsificationism according to which 
even the slightest mismatch between theory and evidence suffices to overturn a theory. 
But it is a grave exaggeration to claim, as some social constructivists have done, that the 
existence of an interpretive dimension to scientific inference undermines the objecti-
vity of science (Bloor and Edge 1998).
One popular and plausible way to characterize a wide range of inferential practices 
is that we are attempting to infer the best explanation of the evidence (Lipton 2004). 
Some philosophers have gone so far as to suggest that inference to the best explanation 
is the only primitive rational form of non-deductive inference (Harman 1973; Foster 
1985, p. 227). Sir Arthur Conan Doyle’s Sherlock Holmes stories are full of ingenious 
applications of such reasoning, and they are the more interesting since they were expli-
citly modeled on the real-life abilities of Dr Joseph Bell, an Edinburgh physician who 
pioneered forensic pathology and played a critical role in the trial and conviction of the 
notorious wife-murderer Eugene Chantrell in 1878 (Liebow 1982).

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
64
Even granting that subconscious interpretation and inference take place, there is a 
significant problem of characterizing these activities. Philosophers, who cannot agree 
even on the outlines of a solution to the problem of induction, are nowhere close to a 
consensus on more complex and less easily codified forms of thought such as explana-
tory inference and analogical reasoning. Yet these forms of reasoning are pervasive; and 
it would help a great deal to clarify, and perhaps sometimes to resolve, our disputes if we 
could at least begin to analyze them in terms of more general forms of non-demonstra-
tive reasoning. Most of the current work in this direction makes use of the probability 
calculus (Hellman 1997; McGrew 2003, 2005), but the project is relatively new, and 
there is a great deal more to be done.
It is a curious fact that in other disciplines we manage to get along at least tolerably 
well without paying terribly close attention to various formulations that the philoso-
phers have proposed. In law, for example, there are established canons of evidence, 
such as the ancient rule that conviction in a criminal case should be made only on the 
evidence of at least two independent witnesses; in history, a canon often observed (but 
perhaps just as often flouted) is that in the absence of direct evidence to the contrary, 
a historical document deserves the benefit of the doubt with respect to matters of fact 
it affirms that cannot be independently verified. The two witness rule is sometimes 
justified by the observation that the testimony of one witness and that of the defendant 
cancel each other out (Franklin 2001), though by itself this leaves it unclear how many 
additional witnesses should be required and whether they should all have equal credit. 
A substantial body of legal theory is devoted to the question of the admissibility and 
credibility of testimony and documentary evidence. No absolutely rigorous argument is 
available for such canons, but they are often reasonable rules of thumb, representing a 
distillation of much experience and providing a hedge against abuses that might other-
wise have dire consequences. One need only recall the case of the chemist Antoine 
Lavoisier, who was executed during the reign of terror upon his denunciation by an 
academic rival, to realize that there are both prudential and epistemic reasons to require 
more than the word of one accuser.
Absence of Evidence and Arguments from Silence
Some slogans regarding evidence are not restricted to particular disciplines but crop up 
in conversation and sometimes in written discussions on a wide variety of issues. One 
of these comes in two incompatible forms: Absence of evidence is not evidence of absence 
(a statement made popular by Carl Sagan) and Absence of evidence is evidence of absence. 
The first (negative) form is more common, and it is sometimes used in criticism of an 
argument from ignorance to the effect that one should believe a proposition because its 
denial has not been proved. It is doubtful whether anyone capable of being swayed by 
this crude argument could be helped by the slogan. But it is an interesting exercise to 
determine when the slogan is applicable. The answer appears to be that each version, 
positive and negative, applies under certain conditions. At a first approximation, we 
can take the absence of evidence to be evidence of absence—or more broadly and less 
memorably, we can take the lack of positive evidence for some hypothesis to be evi-
dence against the hypothesis—just in case we have good reason to believe that if the 
hypothesis were true, we would have positive evidence. In one of Sir Arthur Conan 
Doyle’s stories, Sherlock Holmes finds the key to a mysterious theft in the fact that a 
dog did nothing in the night, from which he infers that the thief cannot have been a 

EVIDENCE
65
stranger; for if he had been a stranger, the dog would have been expected to bark during 
the intrusion. On the other hand, in some cases we would not expect to have positive 
evidence regardless of whether the hypothesis is true or false. Spontaneous proton decay, 
if it takes place at all, is an event so rare that our expectation of catching it happening 
is nearly zero. Consequently, our failure thus far to detect it does not give us much in 
the way of a reason to reject the theoretical possibility. One advantage of looking at 
the slogan in probabilistic terms is that the first approximation can be sharpened: ~E is 
evidence for ~H just in case P(E|H)/P(E|~H) > 1; and the stronger the inequality, the 
better the evidence. This formulation has the merit of drawing attention to the fact that 
E may be strong evidence for H, even when both P(E|H) and P(E|~H) are quite small 
in absolute terms, provided that their ratio is very large.
Related questions about absence of evidence crop up in law and in history. In legal 
contexts, the question has to do with the weight of negative evidence—testimony from 
a witness that he did not notice something, by contrast with the positive evidence of a 
witness who testifies to what he did see or hear. In history, the question has to do with the 
weight of the argument from silence, particularly when a writer fails to mention a putative 
event or fact that should have been known to him. Such arguments from silence are, as 
a rule, quite weak; there are many examples where reasoning from silence would lead us 
astray. Marco Polo, who traveled across China and kept an extensive journal of his travels, 
never mentions the Great Wall of China, or tea, or printed books. Pliny the Younger, who 
in two of his letters gives a detailed account of the eruption of Vesuvius in ad 79, does not 
mention that the eruption destroyed the populous towns of Pompeii and Herculaneum. 
In light of such examples, we should not be too quick to assume that we know what an 
ancient author would have mentioned had he been aware of it.
Extraordinary Claims and Extraordinary Evidence
Another common slogan, also popularized by Sagan, is that Extraordinary claims require 
extraordinary evidence. Much depends, of course, on what counts as extraordinary, both 
in a claim and in evidence. It cannot be simply that a claim is unprecedented. At a 
certain level of detail, almost any claim is unprecedented; but this does not necessarily 
mean that it requires evidence out of the ordinary to establish it. Consider this claim: 
“Aunt Matilda won a game of Scrabble Thursday night with a score of 438 while sip-
ping a cup of mint tea.” Each successive modifying phrase renders the claim less likely 
to have occurred before; yet there is nothing particularly unbelievable about the claim, 
and the evidence of a single credible eyewitness might well persuade us that it is true.
The case is more difficult with respect to types of events that are deemed to be impro-
bable or rare in principle, such as miracles. It is generally agreed in such discussions that 
such events cannot be common and that it requires more evidence to render them cre-
dible than is required in ordinary cases (Sherlock 1769). David Hume famously advan-
ced the maxim that No testimony is sufficient to establish a miracle, unless the testimony be 
of such a kind, that its falsehood would be more miraculous, than the fact, which it endeavours 
to establish (Beauchamp 2000, p. 87), which might have been the original inspiration for 
the slogan about extraordinary evidence. The proper interpretation of Hume’s maxim 
has been a source of some debate among Hume scholars, but one plausible formulation 
in probabilistic terms is that
P(M|T) > P(~M|T) only if P(M) > P(T|~M),

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
66
where M is the proposition that a miracle has occurred and T is the proposition des-
cribing testimonial evidence that it has occurred. This conditional statement is not a 
consequence of Bayes’s Theorem, but the terms of the latter inequality are good approxi-
mations for the terms of the exact inequality
P(M) P(T|M) > P(~M) P(T|~M)
when both P(~M) and P(T|M) are close to 1. There is, then, a plausible Bayesian ratio-
nale for Hume’s maxim so long as we understand it to be an approximation.
It does not follow that the maxim will do the work that Hume (arguably) and many 
of his followers (unquestionably) have hoped it would. Hume appears to have thought 
that his maxim would place certain antecedently very improbable events beyond the 
reach of evidence. But as John Earman has argued (Earman 2000), an event that is 
antecedently extremely improbable, and in this sense extraordinary, may be rendered 
probable under the right evidential circumstances, since it is possible in principle that
P(T|M)/P(T|~M) > P(~M)/P(M),
a condition sufficient to satisfy the rigorous condition underlying Hume’s maxim and 
the slogan about extraordinary events. The maxim is therefore less useful as a dialectical 
weapon than is often supposed. It may help to focus disagreements over extraordinary 
events, but it cannot resolve them.
Testimonial Evidence and Independence
Discussions of Hume often segue into discussions of the evidential status of testimony. 
A repeated theme in the voluminous literature is the value of independent testimony, 
which is indeed remarkable. The testimony of a number of independent witnesses, none 
of them particularly reliable, who give substantially the same account of some event, 
may provide a very strong argument in its favor. Independence is, however, often diffi-
cult to establish: it is not sufficient (though it is generally necessary) that the witnesses 
have not conspired to give the same account. Minor discrepancies of detail are often, 
and reasonably, taken to establish that witnesses are not simply retailing agreed-upon 
talking points. Of course, the wider the discrepancies, the less we are able to credit all of 
the witnesses. But if they agree on the main points, those may be taken to be well esta-
blished notwithstanding their differences on subsidiary points (Starkie 1876, p. 831).
There is also a substantial philosophical debate on the question of whether testimony 
provides an independent source of evidence or whether its value should be analyzed in 
terms of some other form of evidence, such as the perceived correspondence between 
the testifier’s previous statements and the facts. Hume’s position is reductive: he insists 
that the credibility of a testifier is a matter of proportion of truths to total testimonies. 
It may well be doubted whether this approach could provide a sufficient ground for 
the reasonable confidence we repose in testimony. The reductive view is more plau-
sible when the set of possible forms of argument to justify reliance on testimony is 
widened to include explanatory inferences. Whether this move suffices to save the 
reductive approach to testimonial evidence is still a matter of debate (see “Testimonial 
Knowledge,” Chapter 29 in this volume).

EVIDENCE
67
References
Tom Beauchamp, ed. An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding: A Critical Edition (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2000)
D. Bloor and D. Edge, “Knowing Reality through Knowing Society,” Physics World 11 (1998): 23
Laurence BonJour, Epistemology: Classic Problems and Contemporary Responses (Lanham, MD: Rowman and 
Littlefield, 2002)
Earl Conee and Richard Feldman, Evidentialism (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004)
John Earman, Hume’s Abject Failure (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000)
John Foster, A. J. Ayer (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1985)
James Franklin, The Science of Conjecture (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2001)
Richard Fumerton, Epistemology (New York: Blackwell, 2005)
Gilbert Harman, Thought (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1973)
Geoffrey Hellman, “Bayes and Beyond,” Philosophy of Science 64 (1997): 191–221
Daniel Kahneman, Amos Tversky, and Slovic, P., Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982)
Ely Liebow, Dr. Joe Bell: Model for Sherlock Holmes (Bowling Green, OH: Bowling Green University Popular 
Press, 1982)
Peter Lipton, Inference to the Best Explanation, 2nd edn (New York: Routledge, 2004)
Tim McGrew, The Foundations of Knowledge (Lanham, MD: Littlefield Adams, 1995)
—— “A Defense of Strong Foundationalism,” in Pojman (1998)
—— “Confirmation, Heuristics, and Explanatory Reasoning,” British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 54 
(2003): 553–67
—— “Toward a Rational Reconstruction of Design Reasoning,” Philosophia Christi 7 (2005): 253–98
Louis Pojman, The Theory of Knowledge: Classical and Contemporary Readings, 2nd edn (New York: Wadsworth, 
1998)
Thomas Sherlock, The Trial of the Witnesses of the Resurrection of Jesus (Edinburgh: J. Robertson, 1769)
Thomas Starkie, A Practical Treatise of the Law of Evidence, 10th edn (Philadelphia: T. & J. W. Johnson & 
Co., 1876)

7
DISAGREEMENT
Bryan Frances
What should you do when you discover that someone firmly disagrees with you on some 
claim P? Suppose you know that someone has seen all your evidence and you have seen 
all hers. Suppose further that you know that both of you have evaluated that common 
body of evidence for about the same length of time and with the same care. You also 
know that she is about as clever, thorough, and open-minded as you are, both generally 
and with respect to the issues at hand. You know that you have about the same relevant 
biases. At this point, before you find out her opinion on P, you fully admit that you 
cannot think of any epistemic advantage you have over her when it comes to the topic 
in question; you admit that she is just as likely to get P’s truth-value right as you are. Let 
us say that under these conditions she is your recognized epistemic peer with regard to P 
(I will relax some of these conditions below). And then after learning all this about her 
you find out that she thinks P is false, whereas you had already concluded to yourself 
that P is true.
Two conflicting responses immediately suggest themselves. First, there is the thou-
ght that respectful disagreement is common and should be expected among intelligent, 
reflective people. We all know that everyone makes many mistakes, so there is nothing 
at all odd in thinking that the one who disagrees with you has just made a mistake this 
time around. But second, why should you think that your cranium is any more accurate 
than another’s—especially since you just admitted that you have no epistemic advan-
tage over her, that she is just as likely as you to get P’s truth-value right (on trust see Foley 
2001)? When you take a “third-person view” of the matter, all you see are two people 
who are equally placed to determine P’s truth-value, and so you should see no reason to 
think that one of them (viz. you) are the one who got things right this time around.
Here is another interesting case. I initially believe P but then learn about the famous 
Smith. I fully admit that she is a genius and knows much more than I do about the issues 
relevant to P. I know that she has all my evidence if not much more. I also know that 
she is smarter than I am and has thought about and investigated P much more than I 
have. I know full well that when it comes to the topics germane to P she is not my peer 
but significantly exceeds me. Prior to finding out her opinion on P, I would have insisted 
that she is much more likely than I am to get P’s truth-value right. Let us say that under 
these conditions she is my recognized epistemic superior with regard to P. Then I find out 
that she firmly believes ~P. In this case, it seems as though you would be pretty foolish 
to not significantly diminish your confidence in P’s truth.
And yet, if this reasoning were right could we have any epistemically responsible yet 
even slightly controversial beliefs? The application to philosophical belief is particu-
larly interesting (see Goldberg 2009; Frances 2010, Forthcoming A; Fumerton 2010; 

DISAGREEMENT
69
Kornblith 2010). There are many philosophers who are genuine experts on material 
composition who flatly deny that baseballs and other ordinary composite things exist. 
Other philosophers truly believe that there are no beliefs. Some believe that nothing is 
morally wrong (or right). Many think that fire engines aren’t red (or any other color). 
Some of these philosophers are the best in the world. They look at the evidence as care-
fully and expertly and competently as anyone, and then with full sobriety contravene 
common sense. And often enough their claims are based on mostly a posteriori evidence 
and even have the endorsement of some expert scientists (e.g., error theories about 
color or character traits). So when faced with their opinion are we supposed to suspend 
judgment on the claims that fire engines are red—or even that they exist?
I have described just two kinds of disagreement cases: the recognized extreme peer 
one and the recognized superior genius one. But there is a whole range of philosophi-
cally interesting cases of disagreement, which can be introduced in the following illumi-
nating way. I say to myself that P is true, where P might concern any subject matter. In 
case 1, my five-year-old daughter says ~P. I’m not too worried that I might be mistaken. 
The fact that she disagrees with me gives me no good reason to doubt my belief. In case 
2, a sharp undergraduate who majors in the relevant subject matter says ~P. Provided I 
know that I know the subject matter significantly better than undergraduates I’m still 
not too worried that my belief in P is mistaken. In case 3, I discover that one of my 
colleagues says ~P—but I don’t know any details regarding what evidence she has seen 
or how long she has investigated the matter; all I know is that she is generally about as 
sharp and careful as I am. This discovery might give me some pause. In case 4, I discover 
that one of my recognized epistemic peers regarding P and the topics surrounding P says 
that ~P. Now I’m more worried but not mortified. In case 5, a large group of people I 
recognize to be genii on the topic all announce that they firmly believe ~P for a variety 
of reasons and have done so for many years. Now I’m feeling pretty insecure in my belief 
in P. In case 6, I die, knowingly come face to face with the infallible and truth-telling 
God, and He says that the truth is definitely ~P. At this point only an idiot would retain 
his belief in P. Surely at this point I have to admit I was wrong—or at least withhold 
judgment! It seems that there is a scale of degree of blameworthiness. In the situation 
with the five-year-old, I’m not blameworthy in persisting with my belief (degree zero); 
in the situation with God I’m an idiot if I retain my belief (just about the highest degree 
of blameworthiness); these claims are hard to contest. Our issue is whether people in the 
various “middle” situations, cases 2–5 as well as similar ones, are in a bad enough position 
among this scale to be blameworthy.
Epistemologists have just begun to thoroughly explore these and similar cases, with 
the main works on the topic published quite recently (on the epistemic peer cases, see 
Christensen 2007, 2009, Forthcoming; Elga 2007; Feldman 2005, 2006, 2007; Feldman 
and Warfield 2010; Kelly 2006, 2008; on the epistemic superior cases, see Frances 2010, 
Forthcoming A, Forthcoming B). Often the best way to introduce a new topic is to arti-
culate what one takes to be some of the central questions concerning that topic. That 
is the approach I’ll take here, focusing primarily on recognized peers and recognized 
superiors.
1. In what situations, if any, in which I have discovered a disagreement with a reco-
gnized epistemic peer or superior (or one of the other “middle” situations) am I 
epistemically permitted to not at all alter my confidence in my belief in P? Under 
what conditions can I “stick to my guns”?

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
70
2. When I am not epistemically permitted to retain my confidence level in P, how is 
my confidence level supposed to change in response to the discovery of disagree-
ment? (Note that disagreement isn’t always one person believing P while another 
believes ~P: all we need are different levels of confidence in P’s truth.) For instance, 
do I have to suspend judgment on P entirely or can I merely lower my confidence in 
P a bit? If the latter, what factors dictate what my new level of confidence in P must 
be? Moreover, consider two cases. In each I’m fairly confident in P but not certain. 
In the first case the person who disagrees with me says that she is about as confident 
in P’s falsehood as I am in its truth. In the second case everything is as it was in the 
first case except she says she is completely certain that P is false. If I am required 
in the first case to lower my confidence in P, am I required to lower my confidence 
even more in the second case? And how does the level of expertise of the ~P pro-
ponent figure in to what I’m supposed to do (e.g., I know that she’s a peer, I know 
that she’s a genius, etc.)? Generally speaking, will there be mathematical epistemic 
principles governing how my confidence levels should change (see White 2005 for 
discussion)?
3. When I am epistemically required to alter my confidence in P, what has happened 
to the epistemic characteristics of my belief that makes this alteration required? For 
instance, when I learn that the peer or superior disagrees with me, has my level of 
overall warrant decreased enough that I am no longer warranted to have my pre-
vious confidence level—where warrant is what needs to be added to true belief in 
order for it to become knowledge? Or is it that my level of justification was lowered 
enough that my previous confidence level would be unjustified—where justifica-
tion is the thing that is present in Gettier cases but insufficient for true belief to 
amount to knowledge? Or do I have to lower my confidence level for some other 
reason entirely?
4. Does it matter who was on the right track in the first place? For instance, suppose I 
have made some epistemological blunder in coming to believe P, whereas my oppo-
nent has made no blunder in coming to believe ~P (whether or not P happens to be 
true). Do these facts regarding the epistemic statuses of our past matter to what we 
are supposed to do in reacting to the present discovery of the disagreement?
5. When I am epistemically required to alter my confidence in P, am I also required to 
alter the way I behave regarding whether P is true? For instance, can I still act on 
the assumption that P is true or must I do something different? And might moral 
principles come into play here? For instance, if I’m epistemically permitted to not 
alter my confidence in P, might I nevertheless have a moral obligation to act diffe-
rently regarding P—perhaps due to a moral obligation to respect others and, if the 
conditions are right, their opinions? In fact, might I have a moral obligation to not 
just act differently but alter my confidence in P—so a moral obligation gives birth 
to an epistemological one?
6. Does it matter what topics the disagreement is about? For instance, are the prin-
ciples governing how we need to react to disagreements in science different from 
those regarding morals, religion, philosophy, or art (for the case of religion see van 
Inwagen 1996, Feldman 2007, and McKim 2001)? Or is it rather that different data 
gets plugged into the same disagreement principles? Furthermore, will it matter how 
difficult or simple the question, ‘Is P true?’ is (e.g., ‘Is there dark matter?’ vs. ‘What 
is 56 × 7?’)? Finally, what about disagreements concerning how we should respond 
to disagreement itself? Will plausible principles regarding how we should respond 

DISAGREEMENT
71
to disagreement generate paradoxical results when applied to disagreements among 
epistemologists over those principles themselves (think of the analogous trouble 
from “revenge sentences” concerning the liar paradox or verificationist principles 
about meaning applied to themselves)?
7. In the recognized peer case I started out with the view that my peer was just as likely 
as me to get P’s truth-value right. I also began with the idea that we had seen the 
same evidence, we had gone over it just as carefully as one another, and she was 
about as intelligent and intellectually careful as me in general. After learning of 
the disagreement, in what situations am I epistemically permitted to retain those 
beliefs (so set aside what I’m supposed to do with my belief in P)? For instance, if I 
am epistemically permitted to retain my confidence level in P upon discovering the 
disagreement with the peer, then am I required to lower my confidence level in my 
beliefs about my peer’s knowledge regarding the topics germane to P’s truth—since 
it looks like I’m now accusing her of definitely making a mistake? And how do we 
answer these questions in the epistemic superior case?
8. How often do the various cases philosophers consider actually show up in practice? 
For instance, much of the literature seems to address the case in which we start out 
believing P but not knowing what others think about P. And then the focus is on 
what we are supposed to do when we actually encounter someone who believes 
~P. But in many real cases we start knowing, at least dispositionally, that there are 
dozens if not thousands of intelligent people who will believe ~P. In such cases it 
isn’t clear what role the actual encounter with the disagreeing person will play (see 
discussion below).
Those who have published on the topic of disagreement have spent most of their 
energies on (1)–(4) and, to a lesser extent, (7). Furthermore, they have focused almost 
exclusively on the “recognized peer” case described at the beginning of this essay.
If the proponent of ~P is known by you to be the infallible and truth-telling God, 
then you should not only cease believing P but start to believe ~P—even if you have 
no hint of why P is false. More realistically, if I start out believing P and not knowing 
what anyone else thinks about P, I then find out that there are 2,000 experts on the 
topics relevant to P all of whom I fully admit are my epistemic superiors on P and are 
much more likely than I am to get P’s truth-value right, then I probably should give up 
my belief in P upon later discovery that 95 percent of them firmly believe ~P in mostly 
mutual independence from one another. So, in some cases we seem forced to signifi-
cantly alter our opinions in response to the discovery of disagreement.
However, even in the latter case matters are complicated by the details. For ins-
tance, what if P was some bit of fundamental philosophy, such as ‘There are non-tem-
poral, non-spatial objects’ or ‘Moral statements have truth-value’? One might think 
that even though Fred is aware that expert opinion is firmly against him on P, Fred is 
epistemically a-okay in sticking with his guns because the epistemic weight attached 
to relative expertise runs out in some sense when it comes to the truly fundamental 
claims that are beyond the reach of empirical investigation. Or suppose that P is the 
claim that 1 + 1 = 2: in such a case one should perhaps not lower one’s opinion that P 
is true but instead either give up one’s belief that the superiors are really superiors or 
give up the belief that they really believe that 1 + 1 ≠ 2. (However, even this can be 
challenged: what if the experts who deny that 1 + 1 = 2 are all the best philosophers 
of mathematics who have sophisticated error theories that attempt to account for the 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
72
usefulness of arithmetic while holding that its positive claims are false?) Or suppose 
that the 5 percent of experts who don’t believe ~P all believe P and are generally consi-
dered the epistemic superiors of the 95 percent who do believe ~P. In such a case it is 
hardly obvious that when apprised of all those facts I should give up my belief in P.
It might be wise to separate the question Q1, ‘After discovering the disagreement 
what should his confidence level be?’ from the question Q2, ‘Given that he has just 
discovered a recognized epistemic peer/superior who disagrees with him, how should 
his confidence level change in response to that discovery alone?’ Here’s an argument 
why. Suppose that before the discovery of the disagreement he has credence in P of 
0.85 (roughly, credence x = 0 when one is perfectly certain P is false, x = 1 when one 
is perfectly certain P is true, and x = 0.5 when one thinks there is a 50/50 chance P is 
true). Suppose further that the evidence he had at that time, the evidence he based his 
credence on, was so weak that he should have had a credence of just 0.65. Also suppose 
that P is fairly theoretical in the sense that his credence is fixed by his evidence alone 
(and not other epistemic factors). Finally, suppose that principles regarding disagree-
ment discovery dictate that he should lower his credence by 0.20 upon discovery of the 
disagreement with the recognized peer or superior. The answer to Q1 might be, ‘His 
credence should have been 0.65 to begin with; upon disagreement discovery it should 
have dropped by 0.20; so he should end up at 0.45.’ The answer to Q2 might be, ‘He 
started with credence 0.85 and upon disagreement discovery it should have dropped by 
0.20; so he should end up at 0.65.’ In any case, one must be careful in formulating the 
question one is trying to answer.
Three relatively straightforward views address what we are supposed to do upon the 
discovery of disagreement with a single recognized peer (see Christensen 2007, 2009; Elga 
2007; Feldman 2005, 2006, 2007; Feldman and Warfield 2010; Frances Forthcoming B; 
Kelly 2006, 2008; Lackey 2010a, 2010b; White 2005):
(a) Always suspend judgment regarding P’s truth-value.
(b) Always stick to your guns, not altering your view one bit.
(c) Always “split the difference” in the sense that if I actually gave P credence x before 
the discovery of disagreement and I know that my peer gave it y before the disco-
very, then I should change my credence to the average of x and y.
There is reason to think (b) is incorrect. You start out believing P but not knowing 
what anyone else thinks about P. If you then encounter 100 recognized peers in succes-
sion, each of whom firmly believes that P is false, then if (b) were correct you would be 
epistemically permitted to stick to your guns even while accumulating the knowledge 
that 100 out of 100 of your recognized peers think ~P. It would seem that in almost all 
realistic cases this is the wrong result.
A similar yet weaker argument goes against (a). Suppose I encounter 10 recognized 
peers in succession each of whom firmly agrees with me that P is true. Then the very 
next recognized peer, the 11th, is discovered to think P is false. If (a) is true then I’m 
supposed to suspend judgment upon encountering the 11th peer—despite the fact that 
I’ve learned that 10 out of 11 of my peers agree with me. Once again, it is hard to ima-
gine a scenario in which this holds.
However, that argument ignores some important wrinkles that are important when 
working on the topic of disagreement. Consider my position after I have encountered 
the first 10 recognized peers who agree with me. Next I meet Fred, whom I recognize as 

DISAGREEMENT
73
the 11th peer regarding P. In order for me to recognize him as what might be called an 
extreme peer, I have to know that we have all the same evidence concerning P. But part 
of my evidence concerning P is that 10 of my recognized peers agree with P. (You might 
think it isn’t strong evidence, but it does appear to be evidence and the person who 
advocates (a) will think it’s evidence.) Thus, Fred has to be aware of that fact. That is, 
he has to know, at that moment just before we tell each other our opinions on P, that 10 
out of 10 of his recognized epistemic peers think P is true. Furthermore, he can’t have 
any evidence I lack. So the only thing he knows about peoples’ opinions regarding P 
is what I know: 10 out of 10 of his (and my) peers think P is true. So how on earth can 
Fred be reasonable in retaining his belief in ~P? Keep in mind that he cannot think, 
for instance, that he has some stunning new evidence that the 10 others have not seen: 
since these 10 people who disagree with him are his recognized peers, he knows that 
they have seen all his evidence. After I learn of his opinion regarding P I will probably 
conclude that Fred has not fully appreciated the consequences of the fact that 10 out of 
10 of his peers disagree with him. I am free to hold that he is still my peer with respect 
to the issues surrounding P, but I will conclude that he has made two errors: first, he got 
P’s truth-value wrong; second, he did not adequately follow up on the epistemic conse-
quences of the facts of disagreement. I seem epistemically permitted to retain my belief 
in P, thereby falsifying (a). And if he isn’t my extreme peer but is a moderate peer—so 
he has all the evidence I have with the exception of the knowledge of the 10 out of 10 
peers who believe P—then it still seems clear that I need not suspend judgment.
Option (c), “always split the difference,” appears more reasonable than the extreme 
(a) and (b). Even so, there is an argument against it. As indicated above, in many cases 
when I come to believe P I am not thinking about what anyone else thinks about P 
but I am disposed to admit that there are many people who will disagree with me on 
P—people who are my peers and superiors concerning the relevant topics. I don’t have 
any dispositions regarding any percentages of them who endorse or reject P. If you had 
asked me, right then while I was coming to accept P, ‘Do you think there are other intel-
ligent people who will disagree with you on this issue—people you are happy to admit 
know about as much or even more than you do on the relevant topics?,’ I would have 
responded affirmatively.
If that’s the situation I was in, then when I actually encounter Tom who I judge to be 
a peer or superior and then discover that he disagrees with me on P, I will probably not 
feel too much pressure to alter my view. After all, I already knew that there were loads 
of such people. This fact had not explicitly crossed my mind, but I knew it all along in 
a dispositional way. So, bumping into one of the intelligent disagreeing folks doesn’t 
really change anything for me. Under these conditions, which I suspect are common, 
there doesn’t seem to be much reason for me to change my view when I encounter Tom. 
If that is right, then (c) is false.
Of course, when I encounter Tom I might become a little reflective. I might think 
to myself ‘Come to think of it, I know perfectly well that there must be loads of people 
smarter than I am who think ~P. Why on earth should I think someone like me has 
got things right this time around?’ If I have become that reflective, then suspending 
judgment looks reasonable if not required. But if this encounter with Tom means that I 
have to suspend judgment, it won’t be because of the fact that Tom disagrees with me. 
Instead, it will be due to the fact that I’ve reflected on how there must be many people 
who disagree with me—people I would admit are my approximate peers and even supe-
riors. Tom is fully dispensable: all I really needed in order for the epistemic challenge of 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
74
recognized disagreement to arise was the reflection Tom happened to cause. In any case, 
I won’t be adjusting my opinion based on the confidence level Tom happens to have; 
so (c) looks false.
If one has never put a moment’s thought into these matters then it is hard to see how 
one is under any epistemic obligation to go against one’s strong natural propensity to 
follow one’s own inclinations. The problem of disagreement doesn’t arise unless one is 
both significantly reflective and respectful of the epistemic abilities and performances 
of others. But what if you have put some thought into these matters—like you are doing 
right now? What is stopping you from suspending judgment on P even when practical 
matters often force you to choose to act on either P or ~P? Are you so weak-willed that 
you have to put an irrational trust in the inclinations you find in your own head?
References
Christensen, David. Forthcoming. “Disagreement, Question-begging and Epistemic Self-criticism.” 
Philosopher’s Imprint.
Christensen, David. 2009. “Disagreement as Evidence: The Epistemology of Controversy.” Philosophy 
Compass 4: 756–67.
Christensen, David. 2007. “Epistemology of Disagreement: the Good News.” The Philosophical Review 116: 
187–217.
Elga, Adam. 2007. “Reflection and Disagreement.” Noûs 41: 478–502.
Feldman, Richard. 2007. “Reasonable Religious Disagreements.” In Louise Antony (ed.), Philosophers 
Without Gods: Meditations on Atheism and the Secular Life. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Feldman, Richard. 2006. “Epistemological Puzzles About Disagreement.” In Stephen Hetherington (ed.), 
Epistemology Futures. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Feldman, Richard. 2005. “Respecting the Evidence.” Philosophical Perspectives 19: 95–119.
Feldman, Richard and Ted Warfield (eds.). 2010. Disagreement. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Foley, Richard. 2001. Intellectual Trust in Oneself and Others. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Frances, Bryan. Forthcoming A. “Philosophy Sabotages Knowledge.” In an as yet untitled OUP volume on 
Disagreement edited by Jennifer Lackey and David Christensen.
Frances, Bryan. Forthcoming B. “Discovering Disagreeing Epistemic Peers and Superiors.” International 
Journal of Philosophical Studies.
Frances, Bryan. 2010. “The Reflective Epistemic Renegade.” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research.
Frances, Bryan. 2005. Scepticism Comes Alive. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fumerton, Richard. 2010. “You Can’t Trust a Philosopher.” In R. Feldman and T. Warfield (eds.), Disagreement. 
Oxford University Press.
Goldberg, Sandy. 2009. “Reliabilism in Philosophy.” Philosophical Studies 124: 105–17.
Kelly, Thomas. 2008. “Disagreement, Dogmatism, and Belief Polarization.” Journal of Philosophy 105: 611–
33.
Kelly, Thomas. 2006. “The Epistemic Significance of Disagreement.” In John Hawthorne and Tamar Gendler 
Szabo (eds.), Oxford Studies in Epistemology, 1. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kornblith, Hilary. 2010. “Belief in the Face of Controversy.” In R. Feldman and T. Warfield (eds.), 
Disagreement. Oxford University Press.
Lackey, Jennifer. 2010a. “A Justificationist View of Disagreement’s Epistemic Significance.” In Adrian 
Haddock, Alan Millar, and Duncan Pritchard (eds.), Social Epistemology. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Lackey, Jennifer. 2010b. “What Should We Do When We Disagree?” In Tamar Szabó Gendler and John 
Hawthorne (eds.), Oxford Studies in Epistemology, vol. 3. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
McKim, Robert. 2001. Religious Ambiguity and Religious Diversity. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
van Inwagen, Peter. 1996. “Is It Wrong, Everywhere, Always, and for Anyone to Believe Anything on 
Insufficient Evidence?” In Jeff Jordan and Daniel Howard-Snyder (eds.), Faith, Freedom, and Rationality. 
Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
White, Roger. 2005. “Epistemic Permissiveness.” Philosophical Perspectives 19: 445–59.

8
EPISTEMIC RELATIVISM
Paul Boghossian
This essay is about epistemic relativism, relativism about the epistemic domain. Since 
different views have gone by the name “relativism,” epistemic relativism is not a single 
view, but a family of views. What unites these various views is that, in one way or ano-
ther, the fact that some item of evidence justifies a given belief is said to be relative to 
the value of some further parameter. Typically, this further parameter is held to be either 
the believer’s or the assessor’s epistemic system or framework. (Compare moral relati-
vism: the fact that some act is wrong is said to be relative to the agent’s (or assessor’s) 
moral code or framework.)
In order to focus on the issues that concern us, we will need to make certain assump-
tions about what epistemic facts are like. Given the state of epistemology these days, 
most any such assumption is likely to be controversial. However, once we get clear 
about the relevant issues, it is likely that we will be able to restate our discussion using 
alternative assumptions.
I will assume that a canonical epistemic sentence is a sentence of the form:
(1) S’s belief that p is justified iff (a) S bases his belief that p on his (overall) evi-
dence E and (b) E justifies the proposition that p.
I will concentrate on the propositional component:
(2) S’s overall evidence E justifies the proposition that p.
 
I will assume that the notion of justification is a normative notion; that when we say 
that E justifies p we are positively evaluating believing p, given E.
Let us take a particular example. Most of us tend to think of the following epistemic 
sentence as true:
(3) Its visually seeming to S that there is a cat in front of him, along with S’s not 
possessing any background information that counts against that being the case, 
justifies the proposition that there is a cat in front of S.
At least on the surface, then, our epistemic discourse suggests that whether a proposi-
tion is justified is relative to a thinker’s overall evidence and to nothing else.
One type of epistemic relativist thinks that this is wrong, that there is a further para-
meter involved. He might think that this further dependence is already anticipated by 
our discourse in a way that might not be apparent on the surface but which would be 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
76
revealed by a deeper semantical analysis. Or he may think that our discourse is in error 
on this point and needs to be replaced by a discourse that overtly acknowledges this fur-
ther dependence. (On the latter view, the epistemic relativist’s thought would be akin 
to Einstein’s view that we were wrong to think that two events could simply be simulta-
neous with one another, independently of a spatio-temporal frame of reference.)
Either way, the epistemic relativist thinks that we should affirm the following two 
claims (see Boghossian 2007):
(4) There are no facts of the form ‘E justifies p,’ but only facts of the form ‘E justifies 
p relative to the epistemic system, C, accepted by a given person or commu-
nity.’ (Epistemic Relationism)
(5) There are several mutually incompatible epistemic systems, but no facts by 
virtue of which one of these is more correct than any of the others. (Epistemic 
Pluralism)
The Epistemic Pluralism clause is needed because without it Epistemic Relationism 
could not be guaranteed to have captured a relativistic view (suppose one of these epis-
temic systems were held to be privileged, the uniquely correct epistemic system relative 
to which epistemic claims should be assessed). It is possible to see something like this 
view in the work of Richard Rorty and others (see Rorty 1980; Barnes and Bloor 1982; 
Lennon 1997).
What motivates this type of relativist? The most important of these motivations can 
be summarized as follows (for more detailed discussion see Boghossian 2007):
A. How can it just be a fact about the world that such and such information episte-
mically justifies a given belief? Epistemic facts, if there are any, are normative facts. 
And there is a general puzzle making sense of absolute normative facts, facts that are 
binding on anyone whether or not they are aware of them or accept them.
B. If there were absolute normative facts, there would be a big puzzle explaining 
how we could know about them. Any attempt to know anything relies upon some 
epistemic system or other—some sort of system of general rules that tells us what 
justifies what. But it is not possible to justify a view about which epistemic rule is 
correct by relying on that very rule.
C. History and anthropology teach us that different people have subscribed to dif-
ferent and mutually incompatible epistemic systems. Yet, for the reasons mentioned 
above under B, it would be impossible to rationally resolve a dispute between these 
systems.
The proponent of (4) owes us answers to three questions:
(a) What is an epistemic system?
(b) What is it for E’s justifying p to obtain relative to such a system?
and
(c) What is it for a person to accept a given epistemic system?
And the most natural package of answers to these questions begins with an answer to 
(a) that has it that an epistemic system consists of general propositions of the form:

EPISTEMIC RELATIVISM
77
(6) For all e, h: e justifies h iff f(e, h).
The relativist can then say, in answer to (b), that a particular statement of the form ‘e 
justifies h’ (e.g., S’s seeming to see a cat justifies his believing that he sees one) obtains 
relative to such a system just in case that system, along with the epistemic facts, entails ‘e 
justifies h.’ And he can also say, in answer to (c), that to accept an epistemic system is to 
believe that its ingredient epistemic principles are true. However, this natural package 
of answers won’t do: it does not lead to a reflectively tenable position.
One problem is that propositions of the form (6) seem to be complete truth-evaluable 
propositions that state the conditions under which a belief would be absolutely justified. 
It is, therefore, not open to the relativist to say that he believes these propositions to be 
true, since it is a non-negotiable part of his view that no absolute epistemic principle is 
ever simply true.
A second problem is that, if the only facts there are are relational facts of the form
E justifies p relative to epistemic system C
then it looks as though the consistent relativist should never assert propositions of the 
form
(7) E justifies p
but only propositions of the form
(8) E justifies p relative to the system, C, that I accept. 
But the trouble is that while (7) is a properly normative proposition, (8) is just a logical 
remark about what the epistemic system in question does or does not claim, with no 
normative force whatsoever. Even someone who wholeheartedly disagreed with system 
C could agree that, according to C, E justifies p. So, at least on this construal of epis-
temic relativism, the whole subject of epistemic justification will have been lost, and 
not just a universalist construal of it. We need to be able to retain genuine normative 
disagreements in the epistemic domain, if we are not to lose the subject matter. We may 
call this the Normativity Problem.
Finally, there is a problem making sense of the Pluralist clause. Here, the epistemic 
relativist’s thought is that there are many possible mutually conflicting epistemic sys-
tems, but no facts by virtue of which one of them is more correct than any of the others. 
But there is a serious puzzle seeing how any such claim could be true.
An epistemic system consists of a set of general normative propositions that specify 
under what conditions beliefs are and are not justified. So, we will have one system, C1, 
which says that:
If E, then p is justified
and we will have another system, C2, which contradicts it and says:
It is not the case that if E, then p is justified. 
In such a circumstance, however, it is very hard to see how the Pluralist clause, which 
says that all epistemic systems are on a par as far as their correctness is concerned, could 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
78
be true. For, presumably, either it is the case that E is sufficient for p to be justified, or it 
is not. If we say, with the relativist, that E is not sufficient for p to be justified, because 
there are no absolute facts about justification, then C1 makes a false assertion; but C2, 
which denies that E is sufficient for p’s justification, then says something true. How, 
then, could it possibly be right to say that there can be no fact by virtue of which some 
of these systems are more correct than any of the others?
Alethic Relativism for Epistemic Sentences
Recent analytic philosophy has seen a great deal of interest in formulations of relativism 
that emphasize the relativity of the truth of propositions of a given domain (Kölbel 2002; 
MacFarlane 2007; Richard 2008). Applied to our case, the idea would be to accommo-
date the claim that there are only relational facts about epistemic justification not by 
saying that we should assert only claims of the form (8), which, when true would be 
absolutely true, but rather by saying that such non-relativized claims as
(7) E justifies p
have only relative truth-values and no absolute ones. In the case of such contents, fixing 
the facts is not enough to fix a truth-value; in addition, the thinker’s or assessor’s episte-
mic system (depending on the details of one’s view) must also be specified.
This proposal looks as though it has a shot at solving the Normativity Problem for it 
allows us to continue judging claims that look normative. But even if it did solve that 
problem, it would still leave the other two problems untouched. And, it’s worth empha-
sizing, it does not really solve the Normativity Problem either. There are several big 
problems only two of which can be outlined here (for further discussion see Boghossian 
forthcoming and Wright 2008).
First, the proposal requires a new notion of propositional content—of a complete 
judgeable claim—one that, unlike Frege’s or Russell’s, doesn’t have its truth value either 
essentially or intrinsically. One and the same judgeable content will have different 
truth-values depending on the context (according to some views, the context of the 
judgment, and according to others, the context in which the judgment is assessed). But 
it is unclear that we can make sense of such a notion of a judgeable content.
Suppose I come across a token of “It was hot” written on a blackboard. Should I 
accept this sentence or reject it? Surely, there is nothing specific enough either to accept 
or reject. We need to know which place and time were being referred to so that we can 
attach some determinate truth conditions to the sentence and come up with a view as 
to whether they were or were not satisfied.
The alethic relativist’s proposal is similarly puzzling—perhaps even more so, since as 
most of its proponents insist, the contents in question are to be assessed relative to the 
assessor’s epistemic system rather than the original judger’s (see Zimmerman 2007).
Second, if when I judge, “S ought to f” I am judging something that is true relative to 
my standards and if when you judge “S ought not to f” you are judging something that 
is true relative to your (different) standards, then we are clearly not disagreeing in any 
interesting sense.
This should be obvious, but is occasionally denied. Suppose we adopt a relativistic 
treatment of “It is hot,” so that the content I express by “It is not hot” is the negation of 
the content that you express by “It is hot.” Still if I uttered my token in NYC referring 

EPISTEMIC RELATIVISM
79
to the weather in NYC and you uttered yours in Chicago referring to the weather in 
Chicago, then no matter how much our semantics allows us to say that my content is 
the negation of yours, we are clearly not disagreeing in any interesting sense.
However, if you and I can’t disagree by my saying “S ought to f” and by your saying “S 
ought not to f,” how can we claim to have captured the normative content of normative 
judgments?
Absolutist Relativism
We have been trying to make sense of the idea that there are no absolute facts about 
epistemic justification. And we have not succeeded in getting very far.
In examining epistemic relativism, we have been guided by a conception of relati-
vism according to which to be a relativist about a given domain is to hold that there are 
no absolute facts in that domain. To be a relativist about morality is to hold that there 
are no absolute facts of the form
Act A is morally bad
but only such absolute facts as
Act A is morally bad relative to a particular moral framework. 
To be a relativist about epistemic justification is to hold that there are no absolute facts 
of the form
e justifies h
but only ones of the form
e justifies h relative to epistemic system C. 
This does seem like a very natural construal of relativism and it conforms extremely 
well to the only uncontroversial cases of relativism that we know of—namely, the cases 
of motion, mass, and time order that are familiar from physics (see Boghossian 2007).
Traditionally, however, a rather different idea has also gone under the banner of rela-
tivism and we should look at that idea as it might be applied to the domain of epistemo-
logy. According to this idea, it’s not that there are no absolute facts in a given domain; 
it’s rather that such absolute facts as there are call for different and incompatible actions 
under different circumstances, where those circumstances are themselves permissible 
from the standpoint of the domain in question. That’s rather abstract, so to illustrate 
what I have in mind here, let me discuss the case of etiquette.
We are all familiar with the idea that different cultures have different practices when 
it comes, say, to eating. For example, in the West it is considered impolite to noisily 
slurp one’s noodles, while in Japan it can be considered impolite not to, the noisy slur-
ping being a sign of the eater’s satisfaction with the dish before him. How should we 
understand such a case?
Well, in the first instance the judgments we make are of the form
(R) It is rude to slurp one’s noodles in (our) community C.

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
80
The relativization is made explicit.
But how do we now explain how a statement like (R) has normative force? It looks as 
though it is just a sociological remark about how things are done around here, one with 
which anyone could agree, even someone who belonged to a culture in which it is not 
rude to slurp one’s noodles. Yet, if I say (R) to someone, a child, for example, I intend 
my remark to have normative force, to give him or her a reason to stop slurping his or 
her noodles.
The answer is that we all subscribe to some non-relative, universal moral norm, one 
that we typically express by saying
When in Rome do as the Romans do! 
or, perhaps more precisely,
(Etiquette) With respect to certain behaviors, one ought to behave as the 
members of the community one finds oneself in find it natural to behave.
This normative principle is a non-relative, universally binding principle. Nevertheless, 
it prescribes acting in different ways depending on one’s cultural location. It is our 
acceptance of this principle that explains how remarks like (R) can have normative 
force even as it accommodates our tolerance for alternative practices.
We may call this a species of Absolutist relativism, to contrast it with the sort of 
Thoroughgoing relativism that we have been discussing thus far. And we can imagine 
generating a version of epistemic relativism that conforms to it. Indeed, one of the most 
influential versions of epistemic relativism in the contemporary literature is an example 
of absolutist rather than thoroughgoing relativism.
The case I have in mind is that of Subjective Bayesianism. Bayes’ rule (or theorem) 
prescribes how a thinker ought to update his beliefs in response to incoming evidence. 
Where P(A) is the prior probability of A and P(A/B) is the conditional probability of 
A, given B, Bayes’ rule states that
P(A/B) = P(B/A). P(A) 
 
P(B)
This rule, then, can be used to update one’s belief in A given that one has observed B 
and Bayesianism is the view that doing so is the properly rational way to update one’s 
beliefs.
Any such view has to face the question of how to assign the prior probabilities since 
Bayes’ rule is useless without such an assignment and is itself silent about how that is 
rationally to be done.
A radical view in this connection has it that you are rationally permitted to assign 
whatever priors you find it natural to assign.
(Subjective Priors) For any contingent proposition p and credence value X, 
there exists a probability function f that assigns X to p, and S is rationally per-
mitted to have that function as his initial credence function.
Subjective Bayesianism is a perfect example of what I have been calling Absolutist 
relativism. Both Bayes’ rule and the doctrine I have labeled Subjective Priors are put 
forward as absolute non-relative norms that govern rational belief.

EPISTEMIC RELATIVISM
81
But Subjective Bayesianism has what can be thought of as a relativistic upshot. It 
allows two thinkers to have mutually incompatible views about whether e justifies p, 
if they have started out with sufficiently different prior assignments to p. And, yet, 
the view seems untouched by all the arguments that were directed at thoroughgoing 
versions of relativism (see MacFarlane 2008). So, can’t the major controversies about 
relativism now proceed in this form?
In a sense, this is right. I don’t think there is anything straightforwardly incoherent 
about absolutist versions of relativism per se. But what we should recognize is that the 
aspiring relativist now has a much harder hand to play.
One of the normative relativist’s strongest cards, as noted above, is that it is very 
hard to see where absolute normative facts could come from. It is very hard to see how 
such facts could be built into the fabric of the world. His other strong card is that it is 
also hard to see how one could know anything about such facts, even if we could make 
sense of their existence. These powerful considerations give very strong support for the 
claim that launches a relativistic outlook, namely, that there are no absolute facts in the 
relevant normative domain, but only relative ones.
However, on the absolutist way of formulating relativism, where what underlies the 
relativism is some universally binding non-relative normative principle of some sort, 
both of these cards are taken away from the relativist. Having committed himself to 
knowing of the existence of at least one non-relative normative principle, he can no 
longer avail himself of those powerful considerations.
Instead, he will have to find some way of arguing that, although there are non-
relative normative principles and although we are able to know what they are, still there 
are only the sorts of spare principles that govern etiquette.
This, however, will be a difficult trick to pull off. Once it has been admitted that there 
are at least some non-relative moral principles in a given domain, it’s hard to see how to 
stop short of the conclusion that there are as many such principles as there intuitively 
seem to be in that domain. It’s morally plausible that you should conform your table 
manners (and not even all of those) to whatever the local practice is; it’s not plausible 
that you should so conform your views on the treatment of children or the sick.
Once we have admitted that we know of some absolute normative principles, ordinary 
normative reasoning kicks in to tell us exactly what such principles there are. Viewed in 
that light, any attempt to assimilate morality to etiquette will seem normatively implau-
sible. What makes the Rome dictum the only dictum you need for etiquette is that it 
is morally plausible that when it comes to such matters as whether or not to slurp one’s 
noodles, all that really matters is what the local conventions are. But it is not similarly 
plausible that that is all that matters when it comes to the question whether it is alright 
to cleanse a region of a particular ethnic minority. Once we allow that there are some 
absolute moral facts, our usual procedures for determining what such facts there are kick 
in. And it is very implausible that these procedures will yield the result that what it is 
morally correct to do in a given situation will depend on which norms are accepted in 
that situation, or what the agent’s inclinations happen to be.
Similar remarks apply to the case of Subjective Bayesianism. The idea that you are 
rationally permitted to assign whatever priors you please is extremely implausible. It 
leads to the craziest beliefs counting as justified. It conflicts with whatever hold we have 
on the intuitive extension of ‘justified.’
It’s a good question what story the Bayesian could tell about what could rationally 
constrain the assignment of priors, but that’s his problem. Just as it would be implausible 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
82
to maintain that people are morally permitted to adopt whatever moral rules they find it 
most natural to adopt, so it is implausible to maintain that they are rationally permitted 
to adopt whatever initial credence function they find it most natural to adopt.
Epistemic Permissiveness
The tendency of our reflections has been to cast doubt both on thoroughgoing versions 
of epistemic relativism and on extreme versions of Absolutist relativism. But there is a 
more subtle position—one we might call, following Roger White, “epistemic permissi-
veness”—that is not so easily dispatched and that calls for considerably more work (see 
White 2005).
Even if we agree that there are perfectly absolute, universally binding epistemic norms 
governing the rationality of our beliefs, we face the question whether those norms imply 
Uniqueness:
(Uniqueness) Given one’s total evidence, there is a unique rational doxastic 
attitude that one can take to any proposition.
And here an interesting puzzle arises. On the one hand, Uniqueness seems too strong. 
Intuitively, as Gideon Rosen has put it (Rosen 2001: 71),
[i]t should be obvious that reasonable people can disagree, even when confron-
ted with the same body of evidence. When a jury or a court is divided in a 
difficult case, the mere fact of disagreement does not mean that someone is 
being unreasonable.
This seems right. To take just a humdrum sort of case: we are familiar with the fact that 
one person can be more cautious than another in reaching conclusions on the basis of 
evidence. Of course, extreme caution, as exemplified by the Pyrrhonists, for example, 
might be thought to be a form of irrationality. But some small variation in caution seems 
to be permitted by the norms of rationality.
This, however, immediately leads to the conclusion that one person can be rational 
in concluding p on the basis of evidence e and another rational in suspending judgment 
on whether p, or perhaps even, under the right circumstances, concluding that not-p. If 
Marco requires evidence of strength a to believe that p and Paolo requires evidence of 
strength a´ (a´ > a) to believe that p, and both values of the caution parameter are ratio-
nally permissible, and the evidence is of strength a but not a´, then it looks as though 
Marco is rational in believing that p and Paolo is rational in withholding belief. This is 
puzzling, however, for it suggests that Marco himself could be rational in withholding 
belief, even after he has seen the relevant evidence and concluded that p, if he adjusts 
his caution parameter upwards, so that the belief that p is no longer justified. After all, 
since by hypothesis both values of the caution parameter are rationally permissible, they 
are permissible for either thinker.
We will need to think further about this kind of case before it will be clear what we 
should say about it.

EPISTEMIC RELATIVISM
83
References
Barnes, B. and Bloor, D. (1982) “Relativism, Rationalism and the Sociology of Knowledge,” in Hollis, M. 
and Lukes, S. Rationality and Relativism, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Boghossian, P. (forthcoming) “Relativism: New and Old.”
Boghossian, P. (2007) Fear of Knowledge, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kölbel, M. (2002) Truth Without Objectivity, London: Routledge.
Lennon, K. (1997) “Feminist Epistemology as Local Epistemology,” in Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 
71: 37–54.
MacFarlane, J. (2008) “Boghossian, Bellarmine, and Bayes,” Philosophical Studies, 141: 391–98.
MacFarlane, J. (2007) “Relativism and Disagreement,” Philosophical Studies, 132: 17–31.
Richard, M. (2008) When Truth Gives Out, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rorty, R. (1980) Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Rosen, G. (2001) “Nominalism, Naturalism, Epistemic Relativism,” Philosophical Perspectives, 15: 69–91.
White, R. (2005) “Epistemic Permissiveness,” Philosophical Perspectives, 19(1): 445–59.
Wright, C. (2008) “Fear of Relativism?” Philosophical Studies, 141: 5–16.
Zimmerman, A. (2007) “Against Relativism,” Philosophical Studies, 133: 313–48.

9
UNDERSTANDING
Stephen R. Grimm
Understanding comes in a variety of forms, and many of its forms are highly prized. 
According to many philosophers of science, for example, understanding is the good at 
which scientific inquiry aims (e.g., Salmon 1998; Lipton 2004; Strevens 2006). On this 
way of looking at things, what scientists want, when they begin their inquiries, is not 
just to acquire a range of true beliefs about the world; rather, their goal is to understand 
the world (or at least some part of it), where understanding the world involves some-
thing more than the acquisition of true beliefs. More generally, understanding is often 
said to be one of the great goods that makes life worth living. Thus according to value 
theorists such as James Griffin (1986, ch. 4), understanding stands as one of the few 
goods that deserves to be thought of as an intrinsic good.
Although questions concerning the value of understanding have recently gained atten-
tion (e.g., Elgin 1996; Zagzebski 2001; Kvanvig 2003), in this entry I will mainly focus on 
the nature of understanding rather than its value. What’s more, although the concept of 
understanding covers a vast amount of ground, in this entry I will focus almost entirely on 
our understanding of the natural world (broadly understood), and little will be said about 
how—if at all—the approaches on offer here might relate, for example, to the kind of 
linguistic understanding we have of concepts or meanings. Likewise, very little will be said 
about the sort of understanding that we can acquire of human actions—or, more generally, 
of the products of human actions such as works of art. Although these presumably qualify 
as part of the natural world in some sense, the way in which we achieve understanding in 
these areas seems different enough that it deserves to be dealt with separately.
I will approach the nature of understanding in three main steps. First I will ask about 
the object of understanding, second about the psychology of understanding, and third 
about the sort of normativity that is constitutive of understanding. Along the way, I will 
also regularly ask how understanding compares with knowledge in all of these respects. 
According to some philosophers, for example, understanding differs from knowledge on 
virtually every point: it has different objects, incorporates a different psychology, and 
has different normative requirements. Whether these differences are as clear as has been 
suggested, however, is something I will question as we proceed.
1. Objects of Understanding
As we consider the object of understanding, the first thing to notice is that understan-
ding can apparently take a variety of objects, corresponding to the variety of gramma-
tical complements that are available to the verb “understands.” Consider, for example, 
the following sentences:

UNDERSTANDING
85
(1) Mary understands that her class starts in an hour.
(2) Mary understands the New York City subway system.
(3) Mary understands why the coffee spilled.
With examples along the lines of (1), where “understands” takes a that-clause as its 
complement, it is commonly thought that the object of understanding is something like 
a Fregean proposition. As several authors have noted, moreover, ascriptions of unders-
tanding along the lines of (1) seem to be more or less synonymous with corresponding 
ascriptions of knowledge (Brogaard 2008; Kvanvig 2009; Pritchard 2009). Thus on 
most occasions it seems that we can substitute “S knows that p” for “S understands that 
p” with little loss of meaning; or, if there is a difference in meaning, it seems to derive 
from the fact that “understands” has more of a hedging connotation, one that suggests 
an openness to correction.
As we turn to examples such as (2), however, complications arise, and the compari-
sons with knowledge become less clear. Consider, for example, what a parallel sentence 
about knowledge might look like:
(4) Mary knows the New York City subway system.
As Brogaard (2009) and others have pointed out, (4) requires some care because it is 
ambiguous. Depending on context, at least three different senses of “knows” might be 
expressed.
First, the claim might be read so that the object of knowledge is the subway system 
itself, the concrete thing. In this sense, the claim would express some sort of relationship 
of acquaintance between Mary and the subway system. (Or at least some part of it. 
This qualification should be understood in what follows. If one wanted to substitute 
the subway system for an object that is more easily taken in or apprehended, one could 
substitute a different object, such as (say) one’s desktop printer.)
Second, it might be read so that the object of knowledge is a group of propositions. In 
this sense, (4) would express a relationship of knowledge between Mary and a group of 
propositions about the subway system. Thus someone who has never even laid eyes on 
the subway system might nonetheless know a great deal about it; its history, its routes, 
and so on.
For our purposes, however, the most interesting way in which (4) might be read, and 
the one which helps to shed light on what seems distinctive about the sort of understan-
ding we find in (2), is in yet a third sense. It is this third sense that would be operative, 
for example, if someone were to say, “Well, Paul (as opposed to Mary) might know a lot 
about the system, but he doesn’t really know the system.” In this sense, when we say that 
someone knows a lot about X but he doesn’t really know X, we are not claiming that the 
person does not stand in a relationship of acquaintance (or the like) to X. Instead, what 
we are claiming is that while the person may know a lot about X, nonetheless he doesn’t 
really know how X works. That is to say, he doesn’t really know how the different parts 
or elements of X are related to, and depend upon, one another. Thus we might likewise 
say, for example, “Well, Paul might know a lot about Congress, but he doesn’t really 
know Congress.” Or: “Paul might know a lot about hydrodynamics, but he doesn’t really 
know hydrodynamics.”
For the time being, let us think of this sort of knowledge as a kind of know-how—that 
is, knowledge that consists in knowing how a thing works, or how the various parts of a 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
86
thing relate to and depend upon one another. Now, it might be thought that this sort of 
knowledge can in fact be reduced to a special kind of propositional knowledge: perhaps, 
propositions about how a thing works. (For proponents of reduction, see Stanley and 
Williamson 2001; for criticism, see Schaffer 2007). I will have more to say about (and 
against) this sort of reduction below, but for the moment it will help to explore a diffe-
rent idea, one that draws inspiration from the following sort of question: namely, what 
is it that might make things as diverse as the New York City subway system, Congress, 
and hydrodynamics the proper objects of know-how? And the key thing to appreciate 
here, plausibly, is that if know-how implies an apprehension of how a thing works, then 
it seems to follow that the object of the know-how must be constituted by a structure 
that can be worked—that is, that can be worked to determine how the various elements 
of the thing relate to, and depend upon, one another. At first blush, then, it seems 
plausible to think of the object of this third sort of knowledge as a structure or system of 
some kind; at any rate, the sort of thing with “moving parts”—that is, parts or elements 
that are open to taking on different values and hence of being worked.
So much for these different ways in which claims along the lines of (4) might be 
understood. How does this shed light on claims about understanding such as (2)? One 
promising thought is that the object of understanding in (2) can profitably be viewed 
along the lines of the object of know-how just described (cf. Zagzebski 2001 and Chang 
2009). In other words, the thought is that the object of understanding in (2) can pro-
fitably be viewed as a kind of system or structure—something, that is, that has parts or 
elements that depend upon one another in various ways.
But what sort of structure best fits the bill here? It seems we have at least three possi-
bilities. First, we might say that the object is the actual, concrete structure that makes 
up something like the subway system: the tracks, cars, switch boxes, and all the rest. 
Second, we might say that the object here is an abstract representation of the system—
perhaps in the sense of a model of the system, or perhaps in the sense of structural 
equations that encode information about how the various aspects (or properties) of the 
system depend upon one another. Finally, we might say that understanding can take 
a variety of objects, both concrete and abstract; this would be a pluralist view of the 
object of understanding.
Although we do not need to try to settle the matter here, it is worth pointing out 
that the “abstract” view seems to have at least two points in its favor. First, thinking of 
the object of understanding in cases such as (2) as an abstract representation helps to 
make sense of the kind of understanding we can enjoy of things that presumably lack 
a concrete basis. Thus on this way of looking at things we can make ready sense of the 
claim, for example, that “Bullfinch understands Greek Mythology,” or that “Priestly 
understands phlogiston theory”; on the “concrete” view, it is not at all clear what the 
object of understanding might be in these cases. Second, the “abstract” view seems to 
provide us with ready truth-evaluable content, of the sort that our talk about unders-
tanding seems to require. Thus we commonly say, for example, that someone’s unders-
tanding was inaccurate, or flawed, and so on. But it hardly makes sense to speak of 
something like the subway system itself (the concrete thing) as inaccurate, so this too 
suggests that the object is not concrete but abstract—a representation of the system, 
rather than the system itself.
As we turn now to examples such as (3), where someone understands why such-and-
such occurred, identifying the object of understanding is again not straightforward. It 
will help to start, at any rate, with a specific example.

UNDERSTANDING
87
Suppose, then, that you are settling into a seat at your local coffee shop. As you turn 
to look at the table next to you, you notice a woman sitting with a hot cup of coffee. 
Seconds later, moreover, you see her knee accidentally jostle her table, leading to a 
messy spill. Without going into the details just yet, suppose for the moment that you 
now understand why your neighbor’s coffee spilled, and that your understanding has 
something crucially to do with your ability to identify the jostling as the cause of the 
spill. But what exactly is the object of your understanding here?
The basic problem with trying to answer this question is that while from a gramma-
tical point of view it seems clear that the complement of “understands” is an indirect 
question, from a metaphysical point of view things get murky. For one thing, it is not 
clear that questions (indirect or otherwise) even have metaphysical correlates. For ano-
ther, and even supposing they do, it is not clear what such correlates might be.
Perhaps motivated by concerns along these lines, some philosophers have argued that 
cases of “understanding why” such as (3) can and should be reduced to cases of “unders-
tanding that” (e.g., Kvanvig 2003 and 2009). More exactly, the claim is that ascriptions 
along the lines of “S understands why such-and-such” in fact express propositions of the 
form S understands that p, where p represents a correct answer to the indirect question 
embedded in the ascription of understanding. (Alternatively, and perhaps more natu-
rally, one might say not that cases of understanding why can be reduced to cases of unders-
tanding that but rather to cases of knowledge that.) On such a reductive analysis, then,
 (i) Mary understands why the coffee spilled
just in case
 (ii) Mary understands (or knows) that p, where p is a correct answer to the 
question “Why did the coffee spill?”
One benefit of this proposal is that we now have a natural object for instances of unders-
tanding why such as (3): namely, the proposition p, where we can suppose that p is 
something like that the coffee spilled because of the jostling.
But is this really a satisfying reduction? Does (ii) really capture what we find in (i)? To 
see why these questions should give us pause, note first that it seems we can know a pro-
position of the sort we find in (ii) in a very ordinary sense of “know” while nonetheless 
falling short of the sort of accomplishment that we naturally associate with understan-
ding why (cf. Grimm 2009 and de Regt and Dieks 2005). For instance, on the basis of 
your reliable testimony I might come to believe, and hence know, that the coffee spilled 
because of the jostling. But possessing this knowledge, it seems, is compatible with a 
general inability to answer a wide range of questions that intuitively go along with the 
state of understanding why. Suppose, for example, you ask me whether a more forceful 
strike by the woman’s knee would likewise have led to a spill. Or whether a spill would 
have occurred had there been no jostle of any kind. Although the achievement we asso-
ciate with understanding why seems to bring with it the ability to answer questions of 
this sort, strictly speaking it seems one can have knowledge of the cause—again, based 
on reliable testimony—without possessing these additional abilities at all.
The “strictly speaking” qualification is important, for the thought here is not that, as 
a matter of fact, coming to believe a claim along these lines is usually accompanied by 
an inability to answer questions of this sort. The claim is only that it might be accom-
panied by such an inability. Moreover, the thought is that when an ability to answer 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
88
questions of this sort is present, this seems to be the result of some sort of additional 
cognitive work—work that goes above and beyond the sort of work that goes into acqui-
ring knowledge by testimony, for example.
The next section will consider just what sort of additional cognitive work needs to 
be done here, exactly. In bringing this section to a close, however, we can make one 
final point: namely, that it is now possible to see ways in which cases of understanding 
along the lines (2) share certain important, and often ignored, similarities with cases 
of understanding along the lines of (3). In particular, we can now see that the object of 
understanding in both cases is more similar than we might have originally supposed.
For notice: if someone understands why the cup spilled rather than remained upright, 
then presumably she in some way “grasps” or “sees” what it is that makes the difference 
between these alternatives. In other words, she in some way “grasps” or “sees” what the 
difference between these alternatives depends on. But if that is the case, then interes-
ting parallels with cases of understanding along the lines of (2) begin to emerge. For 
just as cases of understanding such as (2) involve “grasping” how the various parts of a 
system depend upon one another, so too with cases such as (3) we find that understan-
ding arises from “grasping” or “seeing” what the difference between certain alternatives 
depends upon. Plausibly, then, we might think of the object of understanding in cases 
such as (3) as a kind of “mini” representational structure, where the structure encodes 
information about how the various elements of the target system depend upon one ano-
ther. (For highly worked out versions of this general idea, see Pearl 2000, Spirtes et al.  
2001, and Woodward 2003).
In both cases such as (2) and cases such as (3), accordingly, the common hallmarks of 
system or structure seem to be present in the object of understanding, despite the diffe-
rences in surface grammar. As we turn to the psychological element of understanding, 
our main concern will be to try to flesh out the notions of “grasping” and “seeing” that 
have played a recurring role in the discussion so far.
2. Psychology
The psychology of understanding is multi-layered. On the one hand, there is clearly 
something like an attitude of belief or assent involved. The sort of abstract structures 
that (at least sometimes) appear to be the object of understanding, after all, presuma-
bly represent the world as being a certain way, and if we take the representation to be 
accurate, we are in some sense assenting to these structures or saying Yes to them—just 
as when we take a proposition to be true we are in some sense assenting to or saying 
Yes to it. On the other hand, we have also seen reason to think that an element of 
belief or assent cannot be all there is to understanding. We can take it to be the case, 
for example, that a model is accurate—we can assent to it in that sense—and yet we 
might nonetheless not “grasp” or “see” how the various parts of the model relate to 
one another, where the element of grasping or seeing seems to involve an additional 
psychological ability.
Further complications arise, moreover, when we remember that many representa-
tions are highly idealized. On the ideal gas model that is typically used to explain Boyle’s 
Law, for example, gas molecules are (inaccurately) represented as point particles, and 
the long range attractive forces between molecules are ignored. In this case, assenting to 
the model—in the sense of taking it to be an accurate representation of the world—will 
often involve subtle qualifications on the part of the assenter.

UNDERSTANDING
89
I will touch on a few of these complications as we proceed, but for the most part in 
this section I will focus on the element of “grasping” or “seeing” that seems to be so inte-
gral to understanding in all its forms. And the main thing I would like to try to do here 
is to move our understanding of these expressions beyond the level of mere metaphor, 
in order to try to get a better sense of the sort of psychological ability that lies behind, 
or perhaps constitutes, the graspings and seeings.
Now, in their primary (non-metaphorical) senses “grasping” is something that hands 
do, and “seeing” is something for eyes. We speak of manually grasping something, moreo-
ver, in at least two different ways: on the one hand to grasp a thing is to seize or take hold 
of it, as when we grasp (say) a baseball; on the other hand we speak of grasping a thing 
when we are able to manipulate or tinker with a thing, as when we grasp (say) a simple 
lever system by manually switching the lever from one position to another. Indeed, in 
this second, manipulationist sense the notions of (manually) grasping and (visually) 
seeing go together very naturally: if the system is simple enough, when one grasps or 
manipulates one part of the system one can then literally “see” the way in which the 
manipulation influences (or fails to influence) other parts of the system.
Given these two senses in which we might manually grasp a thing, moreover, even 
though the first sense is perhaps the more common one, it seems that the psychological 
act of grasping that is of interest to us here can most usefully be thought of along the 
second, manipulationist lines. In this sense, mentally to grasp how the different aspects 
of a system depend upon one another is to be able to anticipate how changes in one 
part of the system will lead (or fail to lead) to changes in another part. To “grasp” the 
way in which something like the spilling of the cup depends on the jostling of the knee 
in this sense is thus to have an ability to anticipate or “see” what things would have 
been like, had the knee bump not occurred, or had the bump been less forceful, or had 
it been a fist bump instead, and so on. (Ceteris paribus, etc. James Woodward’s (2003) 
idea that understanding should be unpacked in terms of having an ability to answer 
“What if things had been different?” questions is another way to construe this thought.) 
“Grasping” a structure would therefore seem to bring into play something like a modal 
sense or ability—that is, an ability not just to register how things are, but also to anti-
cipate how certain elements of the system would behave, were other elements different 
in one way or another.
We noted at the beginning of this section, however, that the act of grasping or 
seeing cannot be all there is to understanding. For we might grasp a representation in 
a straightforwardly assenting way, as when we take the representation to be the sober 
truth about the system it represents. But we might also grasp the representation in a 
qualified or non-straightforward way. This sort of qualified assent seems to be at play, for 
example, when we say things such as “for Priestly, the lighting of the tinder was due to 
the presence of phlogiston”; or perhaps: “supposing that Priestly was right, the lighting 
of the tinder was due to the presence of phlogiston”; and so on. Similar qualifications 
are typically in place when we grasp something like the ideal gas model, or when we 
learn to apply this model to Boyle’s Law. Thus we learn to say: supposing that the gases 
were point particles, or supposing that no intermolecular forces were present, then this is 
how the system would behave. In these cases, we seem to assent to a representation only 
with certain qualifications in place, or with certain presuppositions in mind.
Of course, this leaves us with a variety of interesting questions (for example, how does 
our grasp of how the target system would behave, if certain properties were otherwise, 
help us to understand the system as it actually is?), but these will have to be set aside 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
90
here as we turn instead to ask about the last element of understanding identified at the 
outset: namely, the sort of normativity that is constitutive of understanding. (For more 
on the notion of “grasping” see Grimm 2009.)
3. Normativity
As we consider the sort of normativity that is constitutive of understanding, it will help 
to look again to accounts of knowledge as a kind of template.
When we are evaluating whether a belief amounts to knowledge, we can ask two 
different sorts of normative questions. On the one hand, we can ask whether the belief 
is subjectively appropriate, where subjective appropriateness has to do, roughly, with 
whether the belief “fits” with the rest of the person’s evidence (where “evidence” can 
be construed broadly to include the person’s experiences as well as his or her beliefs). 
On the other hand, we can ask whether someone’s belief is objectively appropriate, where 
objective appropriateness has to do, roughly, with whether the belief is, as a matter of 
fact, reliably oriented to the truth. (Fogelin 1994 and Greco 2000 helpfully emphasize 
these two different types of evaluations.)
On the standard way of looking at things, moreover, both sorts of appropriateness are 
required for a belief to amount to knowledge. When it comes to understanding, howe-
ver, opinions differ. According to some theorists, for example, while there are objec-
tive appropriateness conditions on understanding, they are noticeably different—and 
apparently less strict—than the conditions on knowledge (e.g., Elgin 2004 and 2009). 
According to others, only subjective appropriateness really matters to understanding—
a view which makes the achievement of understanding almost entirely an “internal 
affair.”
To see why one might think that only subjective appropriateness really matters to 
understanding, consider the following variation on our earlier coffee shop case. Suppose 
that while you are watching your neighbor spill her coffee, a visiting shaman is sitting 
in another corner of the shop, taking the whole scene in. He notices the jostling, sees 
the cup spill, and all the rest. From his point of view, however, it was not the jostling 
that caused the spill but, rather, the fact that he willed the cup to spill seconds before 
(perhaps he thinks he has powers of telekinesis or something comparable).
Suppose moreover that the shaman has good, albeit misleading, reasons to believe he 
has such powers (perhaps people have always humored him in the past). In that case, it 
seems that it will be subjectively appropriate for him to believe that it was his powers 
that made the difference to the spill. We can also imagine that he not only assents to 
this claim but that he “grasps” how the spill depended on his powers in the way sketched 
above. For example, he will “grasp” or “see” that, in the absence of his willing the spill 
would not have occurred (ceteris paribus). But now: what should we say about the sha-
man? Does he understand or fail to understand why the cup spilled?
Although I take it that in one sense it seems obvious he does not understand why the 
cup spilled, it is worth noting that there is at least some conceptual pressure to think 
otherwise. Consider, for example, Lynne Rudder Baker’s suggestion that: “Understanding 
is more comprehensive than knowledge. To understand something is to know what it is 
and to make reasonable sense of it” (Baker 2003, p. 186). If Baker is right, and unders-
tanding something amounts to knowing what is the case (this way of putting things 
changes Baker’s “knowing what a thing is” formula slightly, but seems to be the same 
idea) and to making reasonable sense of what is the case, then it would seem to follow 

UNDERSTANDING
91
that the shaman does understand. Again, we can suppose that the shaman’s story about 
the spill makes excellent sense to him, in light of the rest of what he believes; alternati-
vely, it “fits” with the rest of what he believes, and so on. Looked at charitably, we can 
even recognize the shaman’s achievement as a genuine cognitive accomplishment. The 
various kinds of “seeing” or “grasping” we have just described do not come for free, after 
all, and someone who has made reasonable sense of a thing, given the rest of what he 
believes, has indeed accomplished something. And what kind of name do we have for 
this sort of “seeing” or “grasping”-based accomplishment if not understanding?
Rather than try to downplay or ignore this sort of accomplishment, however, following 
Wesley Salmon we might instead try to introduce a distinction. (Here, I am indebted 
in particular to Salmon’s 1998 distinction between “cosmological” and “mechanical” 
understanding.) Let us think of subjective understanding as the kind of understanding one 
achieves by grasping a representation of the world (a model, perhaps, or an explanatory 
story of some kind) that fits or coheres with one’s “world picture.” On the other hand, 
let us think of objective understanding as the kind of understanding that comes not just 
from grasping a representation of the world that fits with one’s world picture, but also 
from grasping a (more or less) correct representation of the world. Objective understan-
ding therefore entails subjective understanding but goes beyond it, requiring that the 
grasped representation in fact obtains.
This therefore suggests that there are at least two normative conditions on objective 
understanding. First, that the representation of the world that is grasped be correct 
(more or less). And second, that the attitude of assent or grasping be subjectively appro-
priate, given the rest of the person’s evidence.
But are there other normative conditions on objective understanding? As noted 
earlier, when we look at knowledge we find that believing the truth with subjective 
appropriateness is not enough; in addition, the belief must be securely connected to the 
truth in some way. We might think of this as the “anti-luck” condition on knowledge. 
According to Jonathan Kvanvig (2003, 2009) and Duncan Pritchard (2009), however, 
understanding is compatible with luck in a way that knowledge is not. For both, then, 
the objective appropriateness conditions on understanding are different than the objec-
tive appropriateness conditions on knowledge.
Kvanvig first argued for this claim by means of the following example. (See Kvanvig 
2003, pp. 197–98; for another example along these lines, where we have a case of for-
tunate dyslexia, see Kvanvig 2009, p. 8, typescript.) Suppose you come across a book 
detailing the Comanche dominance of the southern plains of North America from 
the seventeenth to the nineteenth centuries (Kvanvig 2003, p. 197). But suppose as 
well that while all of the contents of the book are true they are only “accidentally” 
so. Perhaps, for example, the book was put together as a joke by someone who did no 
research at all, but just happened to get everything right.
Now suppose you read the book carefully and come to grasp (in an assenting way) the 
central explanations offered by the book: for example, suppose you come to grasp that 
the Comanches dominated in part because of their superior horsemanship. According 
to Kvanvig, what we have here is a “grasp” that genuinely amounts to a case of unders-
tanding, even though one would fail to know the corresponding propositions. (Where 
the corresponding propositions would apparently include things like: that the Comanches 
dominated because of their superior horsemanship.) One would not know these proposi-
tions, according to Kvanvig, because it would be a mere matter of luck that an accurate 
book landed in your hands, and luck rules out knowledge.

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
92
According to Pritchard, however, while Kvanvig is right to claim that there can 
be lucky understanding, Kvanvig overstates the case because he fails to distinguish 
between two different types of epistemic luck: on the one hand, what Pritchard calls 
“Gettier-style” epistemic luck, and on the other hand what he calls “environmental 
luck.” On Pritchard’s view, Gettier-style epistemic luck occurs when something inter-
venes “betwixt belief and fact,” as when your belief that there is a sheep in the field 
turns out to be right, but only because you happened to be looking at a sheep-like dog, 
rather than the (hidden-from-view) sheep itself. With environmental luck, by contrast, 
although nothing comes between belief and fact, the environment itself conspires to 
take away knowledge. The barn façade case is the classic example of this sort of luck—
one in which there is a direct causal path between one’s belief that there is a barn nearby 
and the corresponding fact, but where the presence of nearby fake barns makes the fact 
that one believed the truth seem like a matter of luck.
On Pritchard’s view, moreover, while it is right to say that understanding is com-
patible with environmental epistemic luck, it is wrong to say that understanding is 
compatible with Gettier-style epistemic luck. Unlike Kvanvig, Pritchard takes it to be 
obvious that a bunch of made-up facts, even if they turn out to be accurate, cannot grant 
one a genuine understanding of how the world works. Nevertheless, Pritchard claims 
that objective understanding can survive environmental luck. Suppose, for example, that 
the history book you happen to consult is the product of rigorous scholarship, but that 
the majority of the books that you might easily have consulted are full of lies (perhaps 
you live in an Orwellian regime of some kind). In this case, Pritchard suggests, one can 
acquire genuine understanding from the book even while genuine knowledge is ruled 
out.
Despite their differences, one point on which Kvanvig and Pritchard therefore agree 
is that understanding is not a species of knowledge, because while luck is not compati-
ble with knowledge, it is compatible with understanding—either because, as Kvanvig 
has it, understanding is compatible with both Gettier-style and environmental luck, or 
because, as Pritchard claims, understanding is at least compatible with environmental 
luck. Put in terms of an objective normative condition: if Pritchard is right, then there 
needs to be at least a non-deviant connection between the grasping and the thing gras-
ped; if Kvanvig is right, the connection can be as deviant as one might like.
It is not entirely clear, however, that the cases proposed by Kvanvig and Pritchard 
really establish that understanding is not a species of knowledge. (See Grimm 2006 
and Brogaard 2008 for extended criticism.) For one thing, the claim that luck is not 
compatible with knowledge can be overstated. As Alvin Goldman (1999) and John 
Hawthorne (2004) have emphasized, in a “weak” sense of knowledge, all it takes to 
qualify as a knower with respect to some question is to believe the correct answer to 
the question; how the correct answer was arrived at seems irrelevant. Perhaps similarly, 
then, to qualify for a “weak” sense of understanding, all one needs to do is to be able 
to answer “why questions” successfully, where one might have come by this ability in a 
lucky way. In any case, it is unclear why, as Kvanvig seems to think, someone who can 
answer a broad range of “why questions” about a subject would count as understanding 
that subject while someone who is able to answer a similar range of questions would not 
qualify as a knower.
For another thing, the sort of know-how that we emphasized in Section 2—wherein 
someone “grasps” or “sees” how the various parts of a system depend upon one ano-
ther—might also be thought to be compatible with luck, a point which would further 

UNDERSTANDING
93
undercut the assumption that knowledge as a genus is inimical to luck. After all, and to 
adopt one of Kvanvig’s points, what we seem to “focus on,” when we evaluate whether 
someone has know-how, is whether the person in fact has the ability in question, not 
how he or she came by the ability. Thus I might be happy to grant, for example, that 
Paul knows how to fix my computer, even if I later come to learn that he came by this 
knowledge in a lucky way. But then if, when we think about understanding, we similarly 
focus not on the etiology of the ability but rather on the ability itself (the “grasping” or 
“seeing”), then this would not show that understanding is not a species of knowledge. 
Instead, it would only show that understanding is like know-how: that is, that it is a 
kind (or species) of knowledge where the focus is on the ability at issue rather than on 
the circumstances that gave rise to that ability.
Acknowledgments
Thanks to Daniel Breyer, Adam Carter, Catherine Elgin, Daniel Fogal, Bryan Frances, 
Georgi Gardner, Emma Gordon, Allan Hazlett, Guy Longworth, Daniel McKaughn, 
Mark Newman, Duncan Pritchard, Todd Stewart, and Linda Zagzebski.
References
Baker, Lynne Rudder. 2003. “Third Person Understanding.” In The Nature and Limits of Human Understanding. 
Ed. A. Sanford. London: Continuum.
Brogaard, Berit. 2008. “I Know. Therefore, I Understand.” Manuscript.
——. 2009. “What Mary Did Yesterday: Reflections on Knowledge-Wh.” Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research 78: 439–67.
Chang, Hasok. 2009. “Ontological Principles and the Intelligibility of Epistemic Activities.” In Scientific 
Understanding: Philosophical Perspectives. Eds. H. deRegt, S. Leonelli, and K. Eigner. Pittsburgh: Pittsburgh 
University Press.
De Regt, Henk, and Dennis Dieks. 2005. “A Contextual Approach to Scientific Understanding.” Synthese 
144: 137–70.
Elgin, Catherine. 1996. Considered Judgment. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
——. 2004. “True Enough.” Philosophical Issues 14: 113–31.
——. 2009. “Is Understanding Factive?” In Epistemic Value. Eds. A. Haddock, A. Millar, and D. Pritchard. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Fogelin, Robert. 1994. Pyrrhonian Reflections on Knowledge and Justification. NewYork: Oxford University 
Press.
Goldman, Alvin. 1999. Knowledge in a Social World. New York: Oxford University Press.
Greco, John. 2000. Putting Skeptics in Their Place. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Griffin, James. 1986. Well-Being. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Grimm, Stephen. 2006. “Is Understanding a Species of Knowledge?” British Journal for the Philosophy of 
Science 57: 515–35.
——.2009. “Reliability and the Sense of Understanding.” In Scientific Understanding: Philosophical Perspectives. 
Eds. H. de Regt, S. Leonelli, and K. Eigner. Pittsburgh: Pittsburgh University Press.
——. Forthcoming. “Understanding and the Goal of Explanation.” Studies in the History and Philosophy of 
Science.
Hawthorne, John. 2004. Knowledge and Lotteries. New York: Oxford University Press.
Kvanvig, Jonathan. 2003. The Value of Knowledge and the Pursuit of Understanding. New York: Cambridge 
University Press.
——. 2009. “The Value of Understanding.” In Epistemic Value. Eds. A. Haddock, A. Millar, and D. Pritchard. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Lipton, Peter. 2004. Inference to the Best Explanation. 2nd edn. New York: Routledge.
Pearl, Judea. 2000. Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Pritchard, Duncan. 2009. “Knowledge, Understanding and Epistemic Value.” In Epistemology. Ed. A. O’Hear. 
Royal Institute of Philosophy supp. 64. New York: Cambridge University Press.

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
94
Salmon, Wesley. 1998. “The Importance of Scientific Understanding.” In his Causality and Explanation. New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Schaffer, Jonathan. 2007. “Knowing the Answer.” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 75: 383–403.
Spirtes, Peter, Clark Glymour, and Richard Scheines. 2001. Causation, Prediction, and Search. 2nd edn. 
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Stanley, Jason and Timothy Williamson. 2001. “Knowing How.” Journal of Philosophy 98: 411–44.
Strevens, Michael. 2006. “Scientific Explanation.” In The Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 2nd edn. Ed. D. 
Borchert. New York: Macmillan.
Woodward, James. 2003. Making Things Happen. New York: Oxford University Press.
Zagzebski, Linda. 2001. “Recovering Understanding.” In Knowledge, Truth, and Duty. Ed. M. Steup. New 
York: Oxford University Press.

10
WISDOM
Dennis Whitcomb
Men, in whom the principal part is the mind, ought to make their principle care 
the search after wisdom, which is its true source of nourishment.
Descartes (in Haldane and Ross 1931: 205)
First of all: why wisdom? Why should epistemologists theorize about that? Well, there 
are several reasons. For one, people sometimes write about wisdom as if it were an episte-
mic good, and these people do not seem to be misguided. For instance, Wayne Riggs uses 
“wisdom” as a term of art for the highest epistemic good, whatever that good is (Riggs 
2003: 215). This use of “wisdom” is telling, because it is no random selection. It is not 
strange to use “wisdom” as a term of art for the highest epistemic good, whereas it would 
be strange to use e.g., “toothpaste” as a term of art for the highest epistemic good.
The second reason for epistemologists to theorize about wisdom derives from connec-
tions between epistemology and psychology. As several theorists have pointed out, 
some parts of psychology study epistemically valuable phenomena such as intelligence, 
creativity, and rationality (Goldman 1986; Bishop and Trout 2004). It would behoove 
us epistemologists to pay attention to this work, since it addresses some of the very same 
issues as our own work. And as it turns out, there is a body of psychological work on 
wisdom, and that work widely recognizes the standing of wisdom as a particularly high-
grade intellectual state (Sternberg and Jordan 2005). This body of work may well be on 
to something. That is the second reason why we epistemologists should theorize about 
wisdom.
The third reason is that the history of philosophy features rich veins of material that 
take wisdom to be a central epistemic achievement. This material includes work by 
Plato and Aristotle, their medieval followers, and the moderns who followed them in 
turn. Strangely, though, it seems to have petered out by the twentieth century. It is as if 
twentieth-century epistemologists inherited a big set of interconnected issues from the 
ancients and their followers, and arbitrarily chose to theorize about some of those issues 
much more than others. Wisdom falls into the neglected category, so our theorizing 
about it has some catching up to do.
The fourth reason for epistemologists to theorize about wisdom is that wisdom is 
connected to several issues in applied epistemology. For instance, it is connected to the 
design of educational curricula. In pursuing this connection, Goldman (1999) argues 
that educational curricula should be centered on the cultivation of true belief. But 
perhaps they should be centered on different epistemic aims instead, such as knowledge 
or understanding or wisdom (Norman 1996; Sternberg 2001). In trying to resolve this 
issue, it would be helpful to have at hand a theory of the nature of wisdom.

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
96
The fifth reason for epistemologists to theorize about wisdom has to do with certain 
large-scale debates about the structure of epistemic value. In Virtues of the Mind, Zagzebski 
claims that consequentialist accounts of epistemic value have difficulty making sense 
of the epistemic value of wisdom, and that her own virtue-theoretic theory does better 
at the task (Zagzebski 1996: 28–29, 50). It is worth getting straight on the merits of this 
claim, and theorizing about wisdom can help us do that.
For all of these reasons, epistemologists should theorize about wisdom. In this chapter 
I will do as much, first by critically surveying the extant work on the nature of wisdom, 
and then by arguing for a particular view on the matter.
The philosophical literature features three main sorts of views about the nature 
of wisdom. In the Apology Socrates seems to view wisdom as some sort of epistemic 
humility or accuracy. Aristotle (and many of his followers) take wisdom to come in 
two forms, the practical and the theoretical, the former of which is a capacity for good 
judgment about how to act and the latter of which is deep knowledge or understan-
ding. Others still follow Aristotle only part way, taking wisdom as a practical matter 
only. Let us call these three sorts of views Apologetic, Twofold, and Practical views. I’ll 
survey the central views of these three sorts; then I’ll argue for a particular version of 
the twofold view.
Apologetic Views
In Plato’s Apology the oracle says that Socrates is the wisest of all men; Socrates tests the 
prophecy; he finds his interlocutors deeply ignorant and unaware of that fact. Socrates 
alone knows he is ignorant—which shows, perhaps, that the oracle was right.
This story suggests that wisdom is some sort of epistemic humility or accuracy (Ryan 
2007). Pursuing the humility theme, perhaps one is wise to the extent that one knows 
the facts about what one fails to know. Pursuing the accuracy theme, perhaps one is wise 
to the extent that one knows both the facts about what one knows, and the facts about 
what one fails to know. (These themes aren’t restricted to ancient philosophy; varia-
tions on them sometimes arise in contemporary psychology. See Kitchener and Brenner 
1990 and Kunzmann and Baltes 2005.)
How plausible are these themes? Not very. Suppose that a being has vast amounts of 
knowledge, indeed God-like knowledge. Such a being would not be epistemically hum-
ble (at least not in the sense we’ve just identified), but might be wise nonetheless. Now 
suppose that a person knows very little—just enough to barely scrape by in life—plus 
many or all the facts about what she does and does not know. Despite being epistemi-
cally accurate, such a being needn’t be wise. Nor could we guarantee that she is wise by 
simply replacing her ignorance with knowledge. Suppose she knew a vast array of trivial 
facts, for instance the facts about the precise distances between each two grains of sand 
on the earth. She might know these trivial facts and additionally know the facts about 
what she does and does not know; but for all that, she might still be unwise. Wisdom is 
therefore neither epistemic humility, nor epistemic accuracy, nor even epistemic accu-
racy combined with large amounts of knowledge.
Practical Views
Lots of people have practical views about wisdom (Nozick 1989; Ryan 1996, 1999; 
Sternberg 1998). What makes these views practical views of wisdom is that they all 

WISDOM
97
take wisdom to be some sort of practical knowledge or ability. Let me clarify this by 
discussing some of the particular views.
Let’s start with Sharon Ryan’s views. In two illuminating papers she advocates one, 
and then later another, theory according to which wisdom is a compound state the 
most central aspect of which is knowing how to live well. In the first of these papers, 
she argues that to be wise is to (i) be a free agent who (ii) knows how to live well and 
(iii) does live well, whose (iv) living well is caused by her knowledge of how to live 
well.
In the second paper, she drops the first, third, and fourth of these conditions. There 
are good reasons for doing so. A wise and free agent who is suddenly metaphysically 
enslaved does not thereby cease to be wise; therefore, wise agents need not be free. Wise 
agents need not live well either: it may turn out that, through ceaseless bad luck, their 
wise choices always bring about tragedies. Alternatively, wise people may be akratic 
or evil, and on those grounds fail to live well despite their wisdom (I’ll say more about 
these possibilities momentarily).
So there are several ways in which wise people can fail to live well. And if wise people 
need not live well, then ipso facto they need not live well via their knowledge of how 
to live well. All that remains of Ryan’s original account, then, is the epistemic condi-
tion—the condition according to which wise people know how to live well.
Her second paper combines this condition with another, and argues for the view that 
to be wise is to (i) know how to live well, while also (ii) having an appreciation of the 
true value of living well. The latter condition—the “appreciation condition,” we’ll call 
it—seems to have it that being wise requires valuing or desiring the good life.
But why should we think this appreciation condition holds, i.e. that wisdom requires 
valuing or desiring the good life? Deeply depressed people may desire and value nothing 
other than sitting in dark rooms alone. But can’t they nonetheless be wise?
Consider a wise person who knows how to live well and values and desires the good 
life. Suppose that at some point in this person’s life, he is beset by a fit of deep depres-
sion due to a medication he had to take to cure an otherwise terminal illness. It seems 
unfair to this person to say that his medication destroys his wisdom. Isn’t his depression 
bad enough on its own? Can’t his doctor rightly avoid mentioning wisdom loss when 
discussing the medicine’s risks?
Our unfortunate medicine-taker could still retain all of his knowledge, including all 
of his knowledge of how to live well. People might still go to him for good advice; and 
with poking and prodding, they might even get it. He might even be a stereotypical 
wise sage, sitting on a mountain and extolling deep aphorisms. Should his visitors feel 
slighted because he is deeply depressed? Should they think that they have not found a 
wise man after all, despite the man’s knowledge and good advice?
I certainly wouldn’t think that. If I ran across such a person, I’d take his advice to 
heart, wish him a return to health, and leave the continuing search for sages to his less 
grateful advisees. And I would think he was wise despite his depression-induced failure 
to value or desire the good life. So I think that wisdom does not require valuing or desi-
ring the good life.
And just as this argument from depression sheds doubt on the appreciation condi-
tion, so too does a similar argument from evil. Consider Mephistopheles, that devil to 
whom Faust foolishly sells his soul. Mephistopheles knows what advice will bring Faust 
to lead a bad life, and that is precisely the advice that he gives him. But then, it stands 
to reason that Mephistopheles also knows what advice will bring Faust to lead a good 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
98
life. So, it stands to reason that Mephistopheles knows how to live well. Despite this 
knowledge, the life Mephistopheles lives is bad, and so is the life he brings Faust to live. 
Mephistopheles is sinister, fiendish, and wicked. But whatever he is, he is not a fool. He 
is, it seems, wise but evil.
If it helps, we can recall that the devil was once an angel (or so the legend goes, 
of course). Should we say that the devil was wise as an angel but, through no loss of 
knowledge, became unwise in his attempt to take over the throne and his subsequent 
fall? That seems no more plausible than the view that the depression-inducing medi-
cation destroys the sage’s wisdom, despite not destroying any of the sage’s knowledge. 
It seems, then, that wisdom can coexist both with depression and with evil, but that 
wise people who are depressed or evil do not meet Ryan’s appreciation condition. The 
compatibility of wisdom and depression, and of wisdom and evil, shows that the appre-
ciation condition does not hold.
Yet surely there is something right in the idea that wisdom requires some kind of 
practical knowledge, such as knowledge of how to live well. Thus we should consider 
views on which wisdom just amounts to as much, that is, on which wisdom is a kind of 
practical knowledge. One such view simply says that being wise is identical to knowing 
how to live well. Other such views theorize in terms of knowledge-that as opposed to 
knowledge-how. For example, some views might claim that to be wise is to know all the 
elements in some appropriate set of central moral and prudential truths. Other views 
still might claim that to be wise is to believe, or perhaps justifiedly believe, all of those 
same moral and prudential truths. And of course, some of these various views may be 
reducible to others, for instance if know-how is a species of knowledge-that (Stanley 
and Williamson 2001). But regardless of whether any of these views reduce to any of the 
others, it is worth inquiring into whether any of them are true.
Views in this neighborhood have been advocated by Robert Nozick and Richard 
Garrett. According to Nozick, wisdom is that “knowledge or understanding” which 
“you need . . . in order to live well and cope with the central problems and avoid the 
dangers in the predicament(s) human beings find themselves in” (Nozick 1989: 267–
268). Similarly, Garrett claims that “wisdom is that understanding and those justified 
beliefs which are essential to living the best life” (Garrett 1996: 230).
So Nozick and Garrett both take practical views of wisdom: they both take wisdom 
to consist in knowledge or justified belief, or understanding of one variety or another, 
or some combination of these things, where these things concern living well. But they 
both add an important twist: they take the relevant beliefs and understandings to be 
those beliefs and understandings that are essential to living well.
But plausibly, there are multiple sets of beliefs (or understandings etc.) such that 
possessing any one of those sets of beliefs (or understandings etc.) is sufficient for living 
well, given that all of the extra-doxastic conditions for living well are also met. And this 
entails that there is no set of beliefs (or understandings etc.) that is essential to living 
the best life. Nozick and Garrett’s views therefore render it impossible to be wise. The 
upshot is that the practical views we have considered thus far—Nozick’s, Garrett’s, and 
Ryan’s—are implausible.
Do any other practical views do better? Perhaps. If we drop the condition about 
essential-ness that plagues Nozick’s and Garrett’s views, and we also drop the appreciation 
condition that plagues Ryan’s view, then we are left with the view that wisdom is a kind of 
practical knowledge or belief: knowledge of how to live well, or perhaps some sort of moral 
or prudential propositional knowledge or belief. Such a view captures much of the spirit of 

WISDOM
99
the other practical views we have considered so far, and it does not have their problems. 
We can thus reasonably take it to be the best practical view of wisdom.
But despite being the best practical view, it is problematic. To see why, pick what 
you think is the best sort of knowledge to have, except the know-how or knowledge-
that featured in the best practical theory. This sort of knowledge may be fundamental 
metaphysical or epistemological knowledge; or it may be some more scientific sort of 
knowledge; or it may be any other sort of knowledge. Whatever it is, call it “the best 
non-practical knowledge.”
Now, consider two people, A and B, with equal amounts of the knowledge fea-
tured in the best practical view. Suppose that A has much more of the best non-
practical knowledge than does B. Suppose, even, that A has all of the best non-practical 
knowledge, and that B has very little or none of it. Is A wiser than B?
I would certainly say so. But if in this case A is wiser than B, then wisdom cannot just 
be practical knowledge. Hence the best practical view of wisdom is implausible; it runs 
aground on the fact that we can gain wisdom without gaining practical knowledge.
But now let us ask another question: is B more foolish than A? B does, after all, 
have just as much practical knowledge as A. Why should lacking the best non-practical 
knowledge, be it deep scientific or philosophical knowledge or anything else, render 
him foolish? Doesn’t everyone, or at least almost everyone, lack deep philosophical and 
scientific knowledge? And aren’t most people nonetheless not particularly foolish?
It does not seem right to call B more foolish than A. But this leaves us in a bind. For 
foolishness is in some sense the absence of wisdom. And if foolishness is the absence of 
wisdom, and foolishness is no more present in B than in A, then A is not wiser than B. 
Thus in taking B to be no more foolish than A, we ought to also take A to be no wiser 
than B.
But earlier, when we asked not about foolishness but about wisdom, we wanted to say 
that A is wiser than B. So it has turned out that different things happen when we ask 
different questions about the case of A and B. When we ask about “wisdom” we think 
that A is wiser than B, but when we ask about “foolishness” we think that A is not wiser 
than B. What is going on here? Is it that we tacitly hold contradictory beliefs about 
wisdom, or what?
The answer, I think, is that there are two kinds of wisdom, the practical and the 
theoretical. Theoretical wisdom is something like deep knowledge or understanding, 
and practical wisdom is something like knowledge of how to live well. Somehow, 
foolishness-talk in our case leads us to interpret “wisdom” as “practical wisdom,” 
whereas wisdom-talk in our case leads us to interpret “wisdom” as “theoretical wisdom.” 
Our responses to the case, then, are not so much contradictory as they are concerned 
with two different varieties of wisdom.
I’ll say more about these two varieties of wisdom later. But first I should point out 
that Aristotle took wisdom to come in both practical and theoretical varieties, and that 
many of his followers have done so as well. Maybe these theorists are on to something; 
let us examine their views.
Twofold Virtue Theories
Aristotle operated with at least two distinct concepts that are not unreasonable to 
express with the word “wisdom.” In several places (especially Book 6 of the Nicomachean 
Ethics), he discusses the intellectual virtues, two of which are “sophia” and “phronesis.” 

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
100
These terms are typically translated as “theoretical wisdom” and “practical wisdom,” 
respectively.
Aristotle views theoretical wisdom as the highest cognitive state or the best posi-
tion one can be in epistemically. It consists in “episteme,” or what most translators call 
“scientific knowledge,” that is properly grounded in “nous,” which is something like 
immediate comprehension of the most fundamental principles in virtue of which all 
other principles hold. It seems reasonable, then, to call sophia “theoretical wisdom.”
Phronesis is a faculty for good practical reasoning. The person with phronesis—that 
is practical wisdom—has the ability to make good judgments. He, therefore, has a gene-
ral knowledge not only of what ends are good for him, but also of what means are good 
for producing those ends. Phronesis is somewhat similar to knowledge of how to live 
well; and it seems to be quite reasonably translated as “practical wisdom.”
Zagzebski, following Aristotle, countenances something like phronesis as a faculty of 
good judgment and calls it “practical wisdom”; she also recognizes a more intellectualized 
form of wisdom, which she calls “theoretical wisdom.” She takes practical wisdom to be a 
virtue consisting in good judgment about what to do and what to believe. She takes theo-
retical wisdom to be a particularly high intellectual good, and to be quite distinct from 
practical wisdom. It is, she thinks, a species of the sort of understanding that has to do with 
unificatory insight. On her view, this sort of understanding is not propositional, i.e. it is not 
any sort of attitude directed at any sort of proposition or propositions. It is instead directed 
at non-propositional structures in reality such as paintings or domains of inquiry. She does 
not take theoretical wisdom to be identical to this sort of understanding. Rather, she takes 
it to be the species of this sort of understanding that “is a matter of grasping the whole 
structure of reality” (Zagzebski 1996: 49–50). Finally, she claims that virtue epistemologies 
are particularly well-positioned to make sense of the epistemic value of understanding 
and wisdom. Her basic reason for thinking as much seems to be that understanding and 
wisdom are literally properties of persons, not persons’ cognitive states, and that virtue 
theories take properties of persons as the primary objects of evaluation. Zagzebski thus uses 
her theory of wisdom, and theory of understanding in which it is embedded, to support a 
virtue theoretic approach to the whole domain of epistemic value.
But I don’t think it is true that virtue epistemologies are particularly well-positioned 
to theorize about wisdom. For, as we will see below, some theories of wisdom that are 
not virtue theoretic are superior to Aristotle’s and Zagzebski’s own theories. But before 
getting into that, it is worth exploring some of the details of Aristotle and Zagzebski’s 
own theories.
First, some remarks on Aristotle on theoretical wisdom. His sophia is a form of 
knowledge through deduction from first principles that one grasps via nous. This “gras-
ping” amounts to something like rational intuition. So for Aristotle, every theoretically 
wise person rationally intuits first principles. But that seems wrong. A person can be 
theoretically wise through deep empirical knowledge of physics. Such knowledge does 
not require rational intuition; hence we should reject Aristotle’s account of theoretical 
wisdom.
His account of practical wisdom does not fare any better. He takes it that people have 
practical wisdom if and only if those people are virtuous. And he takes it that akratic 
people are not virtuous. But consider the wise sage who is forced into heroin addiction. 
This sage’s practical wisdom is not destroyed by this addiction. But since addiction is a 
form of akrasia, Aristotle is committed to the view that this sage’s addiction does destroy 
his virtue, and therefore his practical wisdom as well. Thus we should reject Aristotle’s 

WISDOM
101
account of practical wisdom. (Of course, we could re-translate Aristotle’s terms “sophia” 
and “phronesis” instead of rejecting his theory. But I’ll leave that aside.)
In addition to rejecting Aristotle’s accounts of theoretical and practical wisdom, we 
should also reject Zagzebski’s account of practical wisdom. She thinks that all practi-
cally wise people make good choices most of the time. But the cases we discussed above 
concerning depression, evil, and addiction show that the choices of practically wise 
people needn’t be mostly good ones.
What about Zagzebski’s account of theoretical wisdom? About this account I have 
just two things to say. First, it would be nice to further develop her remarks about gras-
ping the structure of reality—those remarks seem to be on to something. Second and 
more critically, it is wrong to think that this account of theoretical wisdom is of parti-
cular help to virtue-theoretic approaches to epistemology. For, when we try to further 
develop Zagzebski’s account of theoretical wisdom, we end up with a theory that does 
just as well at serving the purposes of those of us who take epistemic value to have a 
consequentialist structure. Or so I’ll now argue.
Twofold Consequentialism
Virtue-theoretic accounts of wisdom entail that all practically wise people reliably act 
wisely. For if wisdom is a virtue, then no more could a wise person not reliably act wisely, 
than could a courageous person not reliably act courageously. In both instances, and 
with virtues generally, possessing the virtue guarantees reliably acting from it.
But, as I’ve argued, practically wise people need not reliably act wisely. Therefore, 
virtue-theoretic accounts of wisdom are mistaken. I’m going to try to replace them 
with a consequentialist twofold view. This view is consequentialist not in attempting to 
locate the epistemic value of wisdom in its consequences but, rather, in taking wisdom 
to be partly constitutive of the epistemically good consequences. Various phenomena 
such as evidence gathering, research program design, library book acquisition policy, 
and educational curricula can be epistemically evaluated according to the extent to 
which they produce the epistemically good ends, one of which is wisdom. Wisdom is an 
epistemic end. Now to the nature of this epistemic end.
Statement of the Theory
There are two kinds of wisdom: practical and theoretical. To be practically wise is to 
know how to live well. To be theoretically wise is to have deep understanding.
Knowing how to obtain one’s ends is not alone sufficient for practical wisdom, because 
if one can get whatever one wants but does not have any idea what to get in order to live 
well, then one does not know how to live well. Knowing what ends to obtain in order to 
live well is not sufficient for practical wisdom either. For even if one knows, of every set 
of ends the fulfilling of which is sufficient for living well, that its fulfilling is sufficient for 
living well, one may nonetheless not know how to fulfill any of those sets of ends. And, 
if one does not know how to fulfill any of those sets of ends, then one does not know 
how to live well. If one knows how to live well, then, one thereby knows both (a) of at 
least some of the sets of ends the fulfilling of which is sufficient for living well, that the 
fulfilling of those sets of ends is sufficient for living well, and (b) of at least some of the 
means sufficient for bringing about those sets of ends, that those means are sufficient for 
bringing about those sets of ends.

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
102
Theoretical wisdom is a form of understanding, and a particular form of it, namely 
deep understanding. Thus it is to be contrasted with understanding-that and also 
with unificatory-insight understanding of a shallow variety. It is a kind of explanatory 
knowledge, because it consists in knowledge of the principles that explain things in a 
relevant domain.
For instance, to have theoretical wisdom in chemistry is to have a systematic 
knowledge of the fundamental chemical structures, and of the laws governing their 
interaction. In virtue of having such knowledge, one is able to explain a wide variety 
of particular, token chemical phenomena that occur in labs and in the real world. One 
knows the fundamental chemical principles in virtue of which these token chemical 
phenomena obtain, and one cognitively subsumes these token phenomena, or at any 
rate can cognitively subsume these phenomena, under the fundamental principles that 
explain them. It is this fundamental knowledge and ability to subsume particular facts 
under it that constitutes unificatory insight. The more fundamental one’s explanatory 
knowledge in a domain is, then, the more theoretically wise one is with respect to that 
domain. (Here, I gloss over complicated literatures on explanation and understanding; 
see Pitt 1988, Strevens 2008, and Grimm forthcoming.)
That, at first pass at least, is what wisdom is. It is a twofold phenomenon concerning, 
on the one hand, knowledge of how to live well and, on the other hand, explana-
tory knowledge of the fundamental truths in a domain. Let us call this theory “twofold 
consequentialism.”
Argument for the Theory
In arguing for twofold consequentialism I’ll lay out some adequacy conditions on theo-
ries of wisdom, and I’ll make a case that twofold consequentialism does the best job of 
meeting those conditions, among the extant theories. The conditions are as follows:
1. Advice: Theories of wisdom should explain why wise people tend to be able to give 
good advice.
There is within popular culture an image of the wise man as the sage to whom we 
can go for deep insight about what we should do. The existence of this image suggests 
that wisdom and the ability to give good advice are importantly related. Furthermore, 
we generally think of wise people as good people to go to when we are in need of advice. 
So, the advice condition is a reasonable one.
And it is a condition that twofold consequentialism meets. If wisdom entails or is in 
some other significant way related to knowing how to live well, then it stands to reason 
that wise people are able to give good advice. For their knowledge of how to live well 
can, if combined with the right background information, bring them to know what their 
advisees should do.
Thus the view that wisdom features knowledge of how to live well explains why wise 
people are able to give good advice. And twofold consequentialism takes one kind of 
wisdom, practical wisdom, as identical to knowing how to live well. Therefore, twofold 
consequentialism explains why wise people—or better, practically wise people—can give 
good advice.
2. Anti-Wickedness. Theories of wisdom should explain why wise people tend to not be 
wicked.

WISDOM
103
Many theorists suggest that it is impossible for wise people to be wicked (Aristotle, 
Zagzebski 1996; Ryan 1996; Sternberg 2003: 88). The only argument for this view that 
I know of is the argument from the claim that wisdom is a virtue. According to that 
argument, virtues are reliably acted on by whomever possesses them, wisdom is a virtue 
by which one knows how to live well, and reliably acting so as to live well is incompa-
tible with being wicked; put together, these claims entail that wise people cannot be 
wicked.
As I argued above, this virtue-theoretic line of thought is not persuasive. The devil 
is evil but nonetheless wise. He was wise as an angel, and through no loss of knowledge 
but, rather, through some sort of affective restructuring tried and failed to take over the 
throne. And mere affective changes accompanied by no loss of knowledge should not 
remove one’s wisdom. So, wisdom and evil are compatible.
Nonetheless, every writer about wisdom that I know of subscribes to some sort of 
anti-wickedness condition, at least tacitly. Furthermore, it is hard to think of actual 
characters in the history of literature and film, or even in our own personal lives, who 
are both wise and wicked. Save sinister characters like Goethe’s Mephistopheles and 
perhaps Machiavelli, I can’t think of any such characters. I conclude from these obser-
vations that if one is wise, it is unlikely that one is also evil. Theories of wisdom should 
explain or at least be consistent with the fact that this relationship between wisdom 
and evil holds.
And twofold consequentialism does as much. For if one knows how to live well, then 
it stands to reason that one will live well, to the extent that one can. Of course, one may 
be so devilishly evil that one knows how to live well and quite purposely does not do it. 
But this case seems unlikely, in the same way that it seems unlikely that a person who 
knows how to walk well would, through strange desires, nonetheless walk badly. Given 
the view that wisdom somehow features knowledge of how to live well, then, it seems 
unlikely that a wise person—or better—a practically wise person—would be evil.
3. Anti-Foolishness. Theories of wisdom should explain why foolishness is in some sense 
the absence of wisdom.
Theorists talk all the time as if it were true that foolishness is the absence of wis-
dom (Ryan 1999; Sternberg 2003). Furthermore, foolish action can be characterized 
as action that is not informed by wisdom. The view that foolishness is the absence of 
wisdom goes some way towards explaining why this is so. The anti-foolishness condition 
is, therefore, a reasonable one.
And, twofold consequentialism meets it. This is because knowing how to live well 
makes it likely that one, in fact, does live well, at least to the extent that one can, given 
one’s circumstances. The view that wisdom, or practical wisdom, is knowledge of how to 
live well, therefore, explains why it is likely that wise people, in fact, live well. But the 
fool’s life is not a good life. Thus the view that wisdom, or practical wisdom, amounts to 
knowledge of how to live well would lead us to predict that practically wise people do 
not live foolishly. And that, in turn, would lead us to predict that practically wise people 
are not fools; which, itself, helps explain why foolishness is the absence of wisdom.
4. Difficulty. Theories of wisdom should explain why wisdom is hard to get.
We don’t think of ordinary people as particularly wise. Furthermore, there is empi-
rical evidence suggesting that high degrees of wisdom are, in fact, a rare phenomenon 
(Kunzmann and Baltes 2005). So the difficulty condition is a reasonable one.

FOUNDATIONAL CONCEPTS
104
And twofold consequentialism meets it. Deep knowledge is hard to get. Therefore, 
theoretical wisdom is hard to get. Furthermore, it is hard to know how to live well, or at 
least, hard to have high levels of knowledge of how to live well. So practical wisdom, at 
least in high levels, is also hard to get.
5. Explanation of other theories. Theories of wisdom should identify what is plausible 
about the theories with which they disagree.
The folks who have theorized about wisdom are all quite smart and well-informed. It 
would be strange for such people to be totally off the mark. They ought to get at least 
some things right. A proper theory of wisdom should identify these things.
Twofold consequentialism does as much: it can locate something right within apolo-
getic views, practical views, and twofold views of the virtue-theoretic variety. First of all, 
it is difficult for one to live well if one is bad at recognizing what one knows and what 
one does not know. People who are bad at recognizing these things are bad at decision 
making, which is itself an important aspect of living well. Twofold consequentialism, 
therefore, predicts that practically wise people should tend to be epistemically humble 
and accurate in the senses suggested in the Apology. Furthermore, twofold consequen-
tialism recognizes a certain kind of wisdom, practical wisdom, that is identical to the 
thing that according to practical theorists constitutes wisdom simpliciter. Practical theo-
ries are right in recognizing practical wisdom as a part of wisdom; where they go wrong is 
in thinking that it is all there is to wisdom. So twofold consequentialism identifies some-
thing right within practical views as well. Finally, twofold consequentialism explains 
what is right in virtue-theoretic twofold views. It does so by sharing their recognition 
of two sorts of wisdom, and by countenancing similar views about both of those sorts of 
wisdom.
6. Explanation of particular cases. Theories of wisdom should explain, for each case in 
which one is wise or not wise, why one is in that case wise or not wise.
It is, at least in part, through explaining the facts about particular cases that theories 
give us insight and understanding. And giving us insight and understanding are what 
theories are supposed to do; it is what they are for. Thus, in order to do what they are 
supposed to do, theories should explain particular cases. Theories of wisdom are no 
exception; they should explain why one is wise, when one is wise, and why one is not 
wise, when one is not wise.
Now, a theory can explain only what it is consistent with. And every theory other 
than twofold consequentialism is inconsistent with the facts about wisdom in at least 
some case or other. As a result, every theory other than twofold consequentialism fails 
to meet the explanation of particular cases condition.
Twofold consequentialism, however, is consistent with the facts about wisdom in 
particular cases, as far as I can tell. Moreover, twofold consequentialism explains the 
facts about particular cases, as far as I can tell. For instance, it explains the facts about 
the cases of A and B we discussed above. And it explains why the epistemically accurate 
person who knows trivialities need not be wise—for this person need not have deep 
understanding, and need not know how to live well. With these cases and the others 
we discussed throughout the chapter, twofold consequentialism explains why people are 
wise when they are wise, and why they are unwise when they are unwise. None of the 
other theories do as much. As a result of all this, twofold consequentialism meets the 
explanation of particular cases condition, and it is unique in doing as much.

WISDOM
105
What is more, twofold consequentialism does not do worse than any of the other 
extant theories on any of the other conditions I have outlined. Indeed, on some of those 
other conditions, including the anti-wickedness condition, it does even better than 
some of those other theories. On balance then, twofold consequentialism seems to be 
the best theory of wisdom we’ve got.
Acknowledgments
Thanks to Allan Hazlett, Dan Howard-Snyder, Peter Kivy, Ned Markosian, and Duncan 
Pritchard for helpful comments on drafts of this paper.
References
Bishop, Michael and J.D. Trout. 2004. Epistemology and the Psychology of Human Judgment. Oxford University 
Press.
DePaul, Michael and Linda Zagzebski (eds). 2003. Intellectual Virtue. Oxford University Press.
Garrett, Richard. 1996. “Three Definitions of Wisdom.” In Lehrer et al. 1996.
Goldman, Alvin I. 1986. Epistemology and Cognition. Harvard University Press.
——. Knowledge in a Social World. Oxford University Press.
Grimm, Stephen. Forthcoming. “Understanding.” In The Routledge Companion to Epistemology, ed. Bernecker 
and Pritchard.
Haldane, Elizabeth and G.R.T. Ross (eds.). 1931. The Philosophical Works of Descartes. Cambridge University 
Press.
Kitchener, Karen and Helene Brenner. 1990. “Wisdom and Reflective Judgment: Knowing in the Face of 
Uncertainty.” In Sternberg 1990.
Kunzmann, Ute and Paul Baltes. 2005. “The Psychology of Wisdom.” In Sternberg and Jordan 2005.
Lehrer, Keith, B. Lum, B.A. Slichta, and N.D. Smith (eds.). 1996. Knowledge, Teaching, and Wisdom. 
Kluwer.
Norman, Andrew. 1996. “Teaching Wisdom.” In Lehrer et al. 1996, pp. 253–265.
Nozick, Robert. 1989. The Examined Life. Touchstone Press.
Pitt, Joseph (ed.). 1988. Theories of Explanation. Oxford University Press.
Riggs, Wayne. 2003. “Understanding ‘Virtue’ and the Virtue of Understanding.” In Depaul and Zagzebski 
2003.
Ryan, Sharon. 1996. “Wisdom.” In Lehrer et al. 1996.
——. 1999. “What is Wisdom?” Philosophical Studies (93): 119–139.
——. 2007. “Wisdom.” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Stanley, Jason and Timothy Williamson. 2001. “Knowing How.” Journal of Philosophy 98 (8): 411–444.
Sternberg, Robert (ed.). 1990. Wisdom: Its Nature, Origins, and Development. Cambridge University Press.
——. 1998. “A Balance Theory of Wisdom.” Review of General Psychology 2: 347–365.
——. 2001. “Why Schools Should Teach for Wisdom: The Balance Theory of Wisdom in Educational 
Settings.” Educational Psychologist (36/4): 227–245.
——. 2003. Wisdom, Intelligence, and Creativity Synthesized. Cambridge University Press.
Sternberg, Robert and Jennifer Jordan (eds.). 2005. A Handbook of Wisdom: Psychological Perspectives. 
Cambridge University Press.
Strevens, Michael. 2008. Depth. Harvard University Press.
Zagzebski, Linda. 1996. Virtues of the Mind. Cambridge University Press.


Part II
THE ANALYSIS OF 
KNOWLEDGE 


11
THE BASING RELATION
Ram Neta
Sometimes, when you believe something, there are reasons for which you believe it, or 
equivalently, reasons on the basis of which you believe it. For instance, I believe that I 
should not buy oil futures, and the reason for which I believe it is that the recessionary 
downward pressures on global demand for oil are not going to be mitigated any time 
soon. I believe that Pluto is not a planet, and the reason for which I believe it is that I 
was so informed by widely respected science journalists (I can’t recall whether in print 
or on radio, or both). I believe that Tom Stoppard is still alive, and the reason for which 
I believe it is that I have heard nothing of his death, which I surely would have had he 
died.
When epistemologists today use the phrase “the basing relation,” they mean to denote 
a relation that obtains between a creature’s belief, on the one hand, and the reasons for 
which she holds that belief, on the other hand. Now, what I have just offered might fail 
to be a unique designation of the basing relation, since there might be lots of relations 
that obtain between a creature’s belief and the reasons for which she holds that belief. 
Which of these relations is the particular relation denoted by the phrase “the basing 
relation”? It is that relation the obtaining of which makes it the case that the reasons that 
stand on one side of the relation are the reasons for which the creature holds the belief 
that stands on the other side of the relation. In other words, the basing relation is that 
relation which is such that, when it obtains between a belief B and a reason R for which 
the belief is held, its obtaining is what makes it the case that R is the reason (or at least 
a reason) for which B is held. Epistemological theorizing about the basing relation is 
supposed to explain precisely what that particular relation is.
In theorizing about the basing relation, it is important to distinguish between some-
thing’s being a reason for which a creature believes something, and its being a reason 
why a creature believes something. It is plausible that every instance of the former is 
an instance of the latter, but not vice-versa. The reason why I believe the suspect to be 
guilty is that he reminds me of someone I intensely dislike. But this is not, we may sup-
pose, a reason for which I believe the suspect to be guilty (unless, of course, I happen to 
have reason to think that people who remind me of people that I intensely dislike are 
especially likely to be guilty of this particular crime).
Again, in theorizing about the basing relation, it is important to distinguish between 
something’s being a reason for which a creature believes something, and its being a rea-
son for the creature to believe something. It is plausible that there are instances of the 
former that are instances of the latter, and also vice-versa: sometimes, the reasons for 
which you believe something are also reasons for you to believe it, and sometimes, the 
reasons for you to believe something are also reasons for which you believe it. But it is 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
110
equally plausible that there are instances of the former that are not instances of the lat-
ter, and also vice-versa. The reason for which I believe the suspect to be guilty is that his 
fingerprints were all over the murder weapon. But this is not a reason for me to believe 
that the suspect is guilty, because the murder weapon was a metal doorknob that had 
just been removed from the front door of the suspect’s residence—a doorknob that the 
suspect would certainly have touched on many occasions whether or not he committed 
the crime. A reason for me to believe that the suspect is guilty is that his DNA was all 
over the victim. But this is not a reason for which I believe the suspect to be guilty, since 
(let us suppose) I have an irrational disregard for DNA evidence.
To sum up the points just made: a reason for which someone believes something is 
always a reason why she believes it, but not all reasons why someone believes something 
are reasons for which she believes it. A reason for which someone believes something 
is sometimes, but not always, a reason for her to believe it. And a reason for someone 
to believe something is sometimes, but not always, a reason for which she believes it. 
Together, these points place substantial constraints on any adequate theory of the bas-
ing relation: a creature’s belief B can stand in the basing relation to a reason R only if 
R is the reason why the creature holds B, and only if R is the right sort of thing to be a 
reason for a creature to hold B. We might put this same point by saying that B is based 
on R only if R does both of the following two things: (i) R rationally supports holding B 
and, (ii) R explains why B is held.
In theorizing about the basing relation, we want to get clear on what sorts of things 
can stand in that relation to each other. The basing relation is, we have said, a relation 
between a creature’s belief, on the one hand, and the reasons for which the creature 
holds the belief, on the other. To understand the basing relation fully, we must under-
stand each of these relata. What are beliefs? And what are reasons for which beliefs 
are held? While each of these two questions has generated many different responses, 
the controversy surrounding the second question has been particularly active in recent 
years. In particular, epistemologists have recently been concerned to say whether the 
reasons for which creatures hold beliefs are mental events or states (see Swain 1979; 
Pappas 1979; Davidson 1983; Pollock 1986; Bergmann 2007; Pryor 2007; Turri 2009), 
or whether they are instead (typically extra-mental) facts (see Unger 1975; McDowell 
1994; Collins 1997; Hyman 1999; and Dancy 2000). Ordinary language might seem to 
suggest the latter answer: I specify the reason for which I believe that I should not buy 
oil futures by specifying an extra-mental fact, namely, that the recessionary downward 
pressures on global demand for oil are not going to be mitigated any time soon. But, by 
itself, this ordinary language argument for the view that reasons are facts carries little 
weight. From the fact that I specify an extra-mental fact in stating the reason for which 
I believe that I should not buy oil futures, it doesn’t follow that I mean to offer that fact 
itself as identical to the reason for which I hold this belief. And second, even if I do 
mean to offer the fact itself as the reason for which I hold my belief, it doesn’t follow 
that I would be correct in so doing.
A full account of the basing relation would have to say something about the nature 
of its relata. But in what follows, I will avoid this topic to the extent that I can; I will 
discuss the theoretical options concerning the nature of the basing relation itself, paus-
ing only briefly to consider the interaction between our account of the basing relation, 
and our account of its relata.
I will organize the discussion that follows around four questions that are central 
to contemporary theorizing about the basing relation. Answering any one of these 

THE BASING RELATION
111
questions in the affirmative does not, by itself, commit one to answering any other in 
the affirmative (or the negative), nor does answering any one of them in the negative 
commit one to answering any other in the negative (or the affirmative).
I. Is the Basing Relation an Inferential Relation?
If you infer a conclusion q from a premise set P, then the basing relation obtains between 
your belief that q, and a reason for which you hold that belief. If someone were to ask 
you for what reason do you believe that q, you could truthfully reply by mentioning P. 
(Of course, from the fact that you could truthfully answer this question by mentioning 
P, it doesn’t follow that the premise set P is itself the reason, or even a reason, on which 
your belief that q is based. For all I’ve said, the reason on which your belief that q is 
based is your belief that all the elements of P are true. And for all I’ve said, the reason 
on which your belief that q is based is the fact described by the premise set P. As I said, 
I intend to avoid here the issue of the ontology of the reasons that stand on one side of 
the basing relation.) So inferring q from P is sufficient for there to be a basing relation 
between your belief that q, on the one hand, and your reason for holding that belief (a 
reason that you can specify by appeal to P), on the other hand.
But is inferring q from P a necessary condition for there to be such a basing relation? 
Most theorists of the basing relation would answer this question in the negative. But 
there are important exceptions. For instance, in discussing the epistemology of percep-
tual belief, Burge writes: “The normative transition from perception to belief is not a 
piece of reasoning. If perceptual representations were reasons for perceptual belief, such 
transitions should count as reasoning. But they do not” (Burge 2003: 528). Now, why 
does Burge think that “if perceptual representations were reasons for perceptual belief, 
such transitions [from perception to belief] should count as reasoning”? He does not say 
why he thinks this, but the only reason I can think of is that Burge is supposing that, 
for a belief to be based on a reason just is for the belief to be formed by inference from 
the reason. If that is indeed Burge’s view (and it is hard for me to see what else could 
account for his reasoning in the passage I’ve quoted above), then Burge, unlike most 
philosophers, thinks that inference is not merely sufficient for basing, but it is necessary 
as well.
II. Is the Basing Relation a Causal Relation?
If R is a reason for which you hold belief B, then it follows that R is a reason why you hold 
belief B. But must R also be a cause of your holding belief B? In other words, if the basing 
relation holds between R and B, must there also be a causal relation between R and B? 
Is the basing relation itself a causal relation?
Most contemporary theorists of the basing relation would answer both of the last 
two questions in the affirmative (see, e.g., Harman 1970; Goldman 1979; Swain 1979; 
Alston 1988; Moser 1989; Huemer 2001). They think that the basing relation is itself 
a causal relation; a fortiori, if the basing relation holds between R and B, then a causal 
relation holds between R and B.
Although this “causal view” (as I shall henceforth call it) of the basing relation is 
widely accepted today, it is seldom argued for. Perhaps this is because of the enormous 
influence exercised by the argument given in Davidson (1963). In that article, Davidson 
argues as follows. It is possible for someone to have a reason R for performing action A, 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
112
and to perform A for the reason R. But it is also possible for someone to have reason R 
for performing A, and to perform A without doing so for the reason that R. In both cases, 
the agent has R, and the agent performs A. The difference between the two cases is that, 
in one, the agent A’s for the reason R, and in the other, she doesn’t. But what could this 
distinction amount to? Davidson finds no answer to this question other than to say that, 
in the first case, R causes the agent to perform A. Thus, Davidson concludes, the reason 
for which someone acted is a cause of her action. Just as many contemporary philoso-
phers accept Davidson’s argument for this causal view about the relation between an 
action and the reason for which it is performed, it seems likely that many contemporary 
philosophers are inclined to accept an analogous argument in favor of a causal view of 
the epistemic basing relation. And perhaps it is the widespread contemporary appeal of 
this Davidsonian argument that accounts for the currently widespread popularity of a 
causal view of the basing relation.
But we should note that Davidson’s argument founders on the problem of the so-
called “deviant causal chain,” a problem that Davidson himself noted. The problem, so 
far as it concerns reasons for action, is this: it is possible for an agent to have a reason R 
for performing action A, and to perform A, and for R to cause their performance of A, 
without R being a reason for which the agent performed A. For example:
A climber might want to rid himself of the weight and danger of holding 
another man on a rope, and he might know that by loosening his hold on the 
rope he could rid himself of the weight and danger. The belief and want might 
so unnerve him as to cause him to loosen his hold, and yet it might be the case 
that he never chose to loosen his hold, nor did he do it intentionally.
(Davidson 1973)
According to Davidson’s discussion of the case, the climber has a reason to loosen his 
hold on the rope, and the reason causes him to loosen his hold on the rope, but it is 
nonetheless not the reason for which the climber loosens his hold on the rope. So it 
follows that, even when an agent has a reason R for performing action A, and R causes 
the agent to perform A, this is not sufficient for R to be a reason for which the agent 
performed A. But now notice that if this is true, then causation does not, after all, fully 
account for the difference between the two sorts of cases described above (one in which 
the agent performs A for the reason R, and the other in which the agent performs A, 
and has R, but does not perform A for the reason R). And if causation does not fully 
account for the difference between the two sorts of cases, then why should we believe 
that whatever it is that does fully account for the difference between the two sorts of 
cases will so much as involve causation? Just as this worry—popularly known as the 
problem of ruling out the “deviant causal chain”—confronts Davidson’s argument for 
a causal view of reasons for action, so too an analogous worry confronts the analogous 
argument for a causal view of the basing relation.
Now, none of this suggests that the causal view of the basing relation is false. As 
Huemer (2001) points out, most ordinary causal relations (e.g., breaking) are such that 
we do not know how to provide non-circular necessary and sufficient conditions for the 
obtaining of these relations, but of course it does not follow that these ordinary relations 
are not causal. So the considerations offered above do not show that the causal view of 
the basing relation is false. All that they show is that, unless it is supplemented with a 
solution to the problem of the deviant causal chain, the Davidson-style argument for 

THE BASING RELATION
113
the causal view of the basing relation is not a compelling argument. So the causal view 
of the basing relation may, for all we’ve said, be true, even if the Davidson-style argu-
ment for it mooted above does not show as much.
Some philosophers have attempted to supplement the Davidson-style argument for 
the causal view with a solution to the problem of the deviant causal chain. For instance, 
Schlosser (2007), in defending a causal view of reasons for action, attempts to solve the 
problem of the deviant causal chain by claiming that, when an agent performs A for 
the reason that R, the causal chain from R to A holds in virtue of R’s content. But it is 
not obvious just how this solves the problem: do not the climber’s beliefs and desires 
cause his nervousness, and hence his loosening of the rope, in virtue of their content? 
Wedgwood (2007), in defending a causal view of the basing relation that obtains in 
inference, attempts to solve the problem of the deviant causal chain by claiming that, 
when an agent infers a conclusion from a premise, the agent’s belief in the premise 
causes the agent to believe the conclusion by virtue of the epistemic support that the 
premise gives the conclusion. But this cannot explain what sort of causal connection 
obtains between an agent’s belief in the premise and in the conclusion of a bad inference 
(namely, one in which the premise does not actually lend support to the conclusion, but 
the agent infers the conclusion from the premise nonetheless). It is not yet clear, there-
fore, whether any solution to the problem of the deviant causal chain can be found. But, 
as mentioned above, this does not refute the causal view of the basing relation; it merely 
undermines one argument for that view.
Some philosophers (e.g., Jacobsen 1993; Korcz 2000; Lehrer 1971 and 2000; Kvanvig 
2003) have argued that the causal view of the basing relation is false. For instance, 
Kvanvig (2003) argues against a causal view of reasons for action, and then claims 
that we should expect a causal view of the basing relation to be false as well, on the 
grounds that we should expect there to be a unified theory of the relation that obtains 
between an action and the reasons for which it is done, and of the relation that obtains 
between a belief and the reasons for which it is held. And Lehrer (1971) argues against 
the causal view of the basing relation (specifically, as developed by Harman (1970), 
who takes basing to involve a causal-explanatory relation between one’s belief and the 
reasons for which it is held) by means of a now famous putative counterexample to that 
view, a counterexample generally known as the “Gypsy Lawyer” case, which goes as 
follows:
The example involves a lawyer who is defending a man accused of committing 
eight hideous murders. The murders are similar in character, in each case the 
victim is an Oxford philosophy student who has been choked to death with a 
copy of Philosophical Investigations. There is conclusive evidence that the law-
yer’s client is guilty of the first seven murders. Everyone, including the lawyer, 
is convinced that the man in question has committed all eight crimes, though 
the man himself says he is innocent of all.
 However, the lawyer is a gypsy with absolute faith in the cards. One evening 
he consults the cards about his case, and the cards tell him that his client is 
innocent of the eighth murder. He checks again, and the cards give the same 
answer. He becomes convinced that his client is innocent of one of the eight 
murders. As a result he studies the evidence with a different perspective as well 
as greater care, and he finds a very complicated though completely valid line of 
reasoning from the evidence to the conclusion that his client did not commit 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
114
the eighth murder. (He could not have obtained an eighth copy of Philosophical 
Investigations.) This reasoning gives the lawyer knowledge. . . .
 However, the emotional factors are so powerful and the reasoning so com-
plicated that no one else is convinced. They all have an overwhelming desire 
to believe that the murderer of all eight victims has been found. Indeed, and 
this is the crucial point, if it were not for his unshakable faith in the cards, the 
lawyer himself would be swayed by those emotional factors and would doubt 
that his client was innocent of the eighth murder. It is only because of his faith 
in the cards that the reasoning gives him knowledge.
(Lehrer 1971: 311–12)
What causes the lawyer to believe in his client’s innocence, according to Lehrer, is his 
faith in the cards, and not the complicated line of reasoning that the lawyer discovers 
upon reviewing the evidence. But the lawyer’s belief in his client’s innocence is based 
on the complicated line of reasoning, since it is that reasoning that gives the lawyer 
knowledge of his client’s innocence. Thus, Lehrer concludes, basing need not involve 
causation.
Lehrer’s example of the Gypsy Lawyer is intended to serve as a counterexample to 
the causal view of the basing relation. But it is controversial whether it is in fact a 
counterexample. Many philosophers (e.g., Goldman 1979; Audi 1983; Pollock 1986) 
do not share Lehrer’s intuitive judgment that the Gypsy Lawyer’s belief in his client’s 
innocence is based on the complicated line of reasoning that the lawyer discovers upon 
examining the evidence, and so do not regard the case of the Gypsy Lawyer as a case of 
basing without causation.
III. Is the Basing Relation a Relation of Counterfactual Dependence?
Though many philosophers have denied Lehrer’s claim that the Gypsy Lawyer case 
is a case of basing without causation, Marshall Swain has accepted Lehrer’s judgment 
that the Gypsy Lawyer case involves basing without causation. Consequently, Swain 
attempts to rescue what he takes to be the good idea lurking in the causal view of the 
basing relation by developing a theory of the basing relation according to which it is a 
kind of counterfactual dependence (where the counterfactual dependence in question 
can be, and typically is, realized by causation, but it can also be realized in some non-
causal way). According to Swain (1979), S’s belief that h is based upon the set of causal 
reasons R at a time t = df
1. S believes that h at t; and
2. for every member rj of R, there is some time tn (which may be identical with or 
earlier than t) such that
S has (or had) rj at tn; and either
  (b, i) there is a causal chain from S’s being in reason state rj at tn to S’s believing 
that h at t, or
 (b, ii) S’s being in reason state rj at tn is a genuine overdeterminant of S’s believing 
that h at t, or
(b, iii) S’s being in reason state rj at tn is a pseudo-overdeterminant of S’s believing 
that h at t.

THE BASING RELATION
115
Each of clauses (b, i), (b, ii), and (b, iii) requires clarification. What is it for there to 
be a “causal chain” from one thing to another thing, or for one thing to be a “genuine 
overdeterminant” of another thing, or for one thing to be “a pseudo-overdeterminant” 
of another thing? Here’s what Swain tells us:
(Causal chain) Where c, d1, d2, . . ., dn, e is a sequence of distinct occurrent events (but 
not necessarily a temporal sequence, and where c and e may be the only members), this 
sequence is a causal chain if and only if:
(a) if c had not occurred, d1 would not have occurred
(b) for each n, if dn−1 had not occurred, then dn would not have occurred, and
(c) if dn had not occurred, then e would not have occurred.
(Genuine overdeterminant) Where c and e are occurrent events, c is a genuine overde-
terminant of e if and only if: There is some set of occurrent events D = [d1, d2, . . ., dn] 
(possibly having only one member) such that:
(a′) if c had not occurred and if any member di of D had occurred, but no other members 
of D had occurred, and if e had occurred anyway, then there would have been a 
causal chain of distinct actually occurrent events from di to e; and
(b′) if no member of D had occurred, and if c and e had occurred anyway, then 
there would have been a causal chain of distinct actually occurrent events from 
c to e.
(Pseudo-overdeterminant) Where c and e are occurrent events, c is a pseudo-overdeter-
minant of e if and only if:
(a′′) there is no causal chain from c to e; and
(b′′) there is some set of occurrent events D = [d1, d2, . . ., dn] (possibly having only one 
member) such that there is a causal chain from each di in D to e, and if no member 
of D had occurred, but c and e had occurred anyway, then there would have been 
a causal chain from c to e.
To summarize Swain’s view: for S’s belief that h is based upon the set of causal rea-
sons R at a time t is for S’s belief to be counterfactually dependent upon R in any of 
the three ways detailed above: very roughly, for the belief to be caused by R, or for R 
to be one of its causal overdeterminants, or for it to be such that it would have been 
caused by R had the actual causal chain not obtained. Notice how this account of basing 
addresses Lehrer’s example of the Gypsy Lawyer. Although the Gypsy Lawyer’s belief in 
his client’s innocence is not caused by his discovery of the complicated line of reason-
ing made available by the evidence, his discovery of that line of reasoning nonetheless 
pseudo-overdetermines his belief: if the lawyer had not read the cards, but had nonethe-
less discovered the complicated line of reasoning and had also believed in his client’s 
innocence, then there would have been a causal chain from the lawyer’s discovery of 
the complicated line of reasoning to the lawyer’s belief in his client’s innocence. So, on 
Swain’s view, the Gypsy Lawyer case is one in which the lawyer’s belief in his client’s 
innocence is based on the complicated line of reasoning that the lawyer discovers, even 
if it is not caused by the lawyer’s discovery of that line of reasoning.

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
116
Swain’s theory of the basing relation has excited considerable controversy (see, e.g., 
Kvanvig 1985, 1987; Lemke 1986; Korcz 1997; and Lehrer 2000: 196–7). One worry 
about Swain’s theory of the basing relation should already be familiar from our discus-
sion of the causal view of basing: the existence of a causal chain from reason to belief 
does not suffice for the belief to be based on the reason, and that is because the causal 
chain may be deviant. But Tolliver (1982) raises a different sort of worry about Swain’s 
theory—a worry about whether satisfying the pseudo-overdetermination condition suf-
fices for basing. I will quote the clear summary description of the case in Korcz (2006):
Suppose a physics student has learned that from the period of a pendulum . . . 
one can calculate its length and vice versa. The student measures a particular 
pendulum and discovers that it has length L, and calculates that it must have 
period P. The student also has two general beliefs about pendulums, namely 
(1) that if x is a pendulum of period P, then x is a pendulum of length L, and 
(2) that if x is a pendulum of length L, then x is a pendulum of period P. 
We may suppose that it is clear in this case that the student’s belief about 
the period is based (at least in part) on her belief about its length, but her 
belief about its length is not based on her belief about the period. But . . . the 
student’s belief about the period pseudo-overdetermines her belief about the 
length of the pendulum, and hence gets counted, on Swain’s theory, as the 
basis of her belief about the length of the pendulum. This is so because . . . if 
the actual cause of the student’s belief about the length had not occurred, and 
if the student still had both her belief about the period and her belief about the 
length, then her belief about the period would have caused her belief about the 
length.
(Korcz 2006: section 2)
Tolliver’s example shows that pseudo-overdetermination, as defined by Swain, does not 
suffice for basing. It is an open question whether Swain could refine his definition of 
pseudo-overdetermination to accommodate examples of this kind.
IV. Is the Basing Relation a Relation That Obtains Only if the Agent Has 
Appropriate Beliefs About the Relation Between the Relata?
Tolliver is one of several philosophers (also see Longino 1978; Tolliver 1982; Audi 
1986) who take the basing relation to require the believer to have certain sorts of beliefs 
about the epistemic relations between her belief and the reasons upon which it is based. 
I will say that these philosophers hold a “doxastic view” of the basing relation. For 
instance, on Tolliver’s account,
S bases her belief that b on reason r at time t if and only if:
(i) S believes that b at t and S believes that r at t,
(ii) S believes that the truth of r is evidence for the truth of b, and
(iii) where S’s estimate of the likelihood of b equals h (0 < h < 1) at t, if S were to 
come to believe that r for the first time at t, then S’s estimate of the likelihood 
of the proposition “the likelihood of b is greater than or equal to h” would be 
greater at t then it was prior to t.

THE BASING RELATION
117
This particular account of basing is subject to a number of objections. For example, 
suppose that Jones has always believed that a particular analgesic is effective because it 
has always seemed to him to work whenever he took it. One day, he reads a scientific 
study that has shown both that this analgesic is effective, and that consumers of anal-
gesics are typically terrible judges of the effectiveness of the analgesics that they have 
taken. Jones continues to believe that the analgesic is effective, but now his belief is 
based not on its always having seemed to him to work whenever he took it (having 
read the scientific study, he now discounts his own introspective evidence concerning 
the effectiveness of the analgesic). Rather, his belief is based on the scientific study 
that purports to show that the analgesic is effective. But suppose that, before reading 
the scientific study, his estimate of the likelihood of the analgesic’s effectiveness was 
.95, whereas now, after reading the scientific study, his estimate of its likelihood is .85, 
and so naturally his estimate of the likelihood of the proposition “the likelihood of the 
analgesic’s being effective is greater than or equal to .85” is now lower than it was prior 
to his reading the scientific study. Thus, after he reads the scientific study, Jones’s belief 
that the analgesic is effective does not satisfy clause (iii) of Tolliver’s account of basing. 
Nonetheless, his belief in the analgesic’s effectiveness is based on the scientific study. 
This suffices to show that clause (iii) is too strong a requirement on basing.
We might think that a proponent of the doxastic view of basing might avoid these 
problems confronting Tolliver’s account by simply weakening, or perhaps simply drop-
ping, clause (iii) of the account. Unfortunately, clause (ii) itself has been subject to 
some prominent objections. Consider, for instance, the following objections that Alston 
(1988) poses to the doxastic view of basing defended in Audi (1986):
My belief that you are upset may be based on various aspects of the way you 
look and act without my consciously believing that these features provide ade-
quate support for that belief; in a typical case of this sort I have no such belief 
simply because I am not consciously aware of which features these are; I do not 
consciously discriminate them. And even where I am more explicitly aware of 
the ground, I may not consciously believe anything at all about support rela-
tions. It is very dubious that very small children, for example, ever have such 
support beliefs; and yet surely a small child’s belief that the kitten is sick can be 
based on her belief that the kitten is not running around as usual.
(Alston 1988)
Proponents of the doxastic view of basing might reply to these objections by claiming 
that the relevant meta-belief might somehow refer (de re) to an epistemic support rela-
tion without itself employing any epistemic concepts. Alternatively, they might say that 
the relevant meta-belief is one that the subject would hold under appropriate condi-
tions, whether or not she actually does hold it. (Lehrer (1965) develops a version of this 
latter view, according to which the reason for which one believes that p is the reason 
that one would give if asked to justify one’s belief that p.) But it remains to be seen 
whether such a proposal can be fleshed out.
Worries about the doxastic view of basing, and worries about the causal view, inspired 
Korcz (2000) to develop a view that effectively disjoins the two views: on Korcz’s theory, 
a creature’s belief can be based on a reason r either by being appropriately caused by r, 
or by virtue of the creature’s having the appropriate sorts of meta-beliefs. (Much of the 
detail in Korcz’s account goes into specifying what counts as an appropriate cause, or 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
118
an appropriate sort of meta-belief.) We cannot do justice to Korcz’s theory in the small 
space of this survey, but the theory itself is the most fully developed account of the bas-
ing relation published in the decade preceding this survey. Contemporary work on the 
basing relation must therefore grapple with it.
References
Alston, William. 1988. “An Internalist Externalism.” Synthese 74: 265–83.
Audi, Robert. 1983. “The Causal Structure of Indirect Justification.” Journal of Philosophy 80(7): 398–415.
——. 1986. “Belief, Reason and Inference.” Philosophical Topics 14: 27–65.
Bergmann, Michael. 2007. “Is Klein an Infinitist about Doxastic Justification?” Philosophical Studies 134: 
19–24.
Burge, Tyler. 2003. “Perceptual Entitlement.” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 67: 503–48.
Collins, Arthur. 1997. “The Psychological Reality of Reasons.” Ratio 10: 108–23.
Dancy, Jonathan. 2000. Practical Reality. Oxford University Press: Oxford.
Davidson, Donald. 1963. “Actions, Reasons, and Causes.” Journal of Philosophy 60: 685–700.
——. 1973. “Freedom to Act” in Honderich 1973.
——. 1983. “A Coherence Theory of Truth and Knowledge” in LePore 1983.
Goldman, Alvin. 1979. “What is Justified Belief?” in Pappas 1979b.
Harman, Gilbert. 1970. “Knowledge, Reasons, and Causes.” Journal of Philosophy 67: 841–55.
Honderich, Ted, ed. 1973. Essays on Freedom of Action. Routledge and Kegan Paul: London.
Huemer, Michael. 2001. Skepticism and the Veil of Perception. Rowman and Littlefield: Lanham, MD.
Hyman, John. 1999. “How Knowledge Works.” Philosophical Quarterly 49: 433–51.
Jacobson, Anne. 1993. “A Problem for Causal Theories of Reasons and Rationalizations.” Southern Journal 
of Philosophy 31: 307–21.
Korcz, Keith. 1997. “Recent Work on the Basing Relation.” American Philosophical Quarterly 34: 171–91.
——. 2000. “The Causal-Doxastic Theory of the Basing Relation.” Canadian Journal of Philosophy 30: 525–
50.
——. 2006. “The Epistemic Basing Relation” in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, http://www.science.
uva.nl/~seop/entries/basing-epistemic/
Kvanvig, Jonathan. 1985. “Swain on the Basing Relation.” Analysis 45: 153–8.
——. 1987. “On Lemke’s Defence of a Causal Basing Requirement.” Analysis 47: 162–7.
——. 2003. “Justification and Proper Basing” in Olsson 2003.
Lehrer, Keith. 1965. “Knowledge, Truth and Evidence.” Analysis 107: 168–75.
——. 1971. “How Reasons Give us Knowledge, or the Case of the Gypsy Lawyer.” Journal of Philosophy 68: 
311–13.
——. 2000. Theory of Knowledge. Westview Press: Boulder, CO.
Lemke, Lory. 1986. “Kvanvig and Swain on the Basing Relation.” Analysis 46: 138–44.
LePore, Ernest, ed. 1983. Truth and Interpretation: Perspectives on the Philosophy of Donald Davidson. Basil 
Blackwell: Oxford.
Longino, Helen. 1978. “Inferring.” Philosophy Research Archives 4: 19–26.
McDowell, John. 1994. Mind and World. Harvard University Press: Cambridge, MA.
Moser, Paul. 1989. Knowledge and Evidence. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.
Olsson, Erik. 2003. The Epistemology of Keith Lehrer. Kluwer Publishing Company: Dordrecht.
Pappas, George. 1979a. “Basing Relations” in Pappas 1979b.
——. 1979b. Justification and Knowledge. D. Reidel: Dordrecht.
Pollock, John. 1986. Contemporary Theories of Knowledge. Rowman and Littlefield: Savage, MD.
Pryor, James. 2007. “Reasons and That-Clauses.” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 106(3): 327–44.
Schlosser, Markus. 2007. “Basic Deviance Reconsidered.” Analysis 67: 186–94.
Swain, Marshall. 1979. “Justification and the Basis of Belief” in Pappas 1979b.
Tolliver, Joseph. 1982. “Basing Beliefs on Reasons.” Grazer Philosophische Studien 15: 149–61.
Turri, John. 2009. “The Ontology of Epistemic Reasons.” Noûs 43(3): 490–512.
Unger, Peter. 1975. Ignorance. Oxford University Press: Oxford.
Wedgwood, Ralph. 2007. “The Normative Force of Reasoning.” Noûs 40: 660–86.

12
THE GETTIER PROBLEM
Stephen Hetherington
1. Introduction
In 1963, Edmund Gettier published an article containing two brief fictional stories, 
each intended to disprove a well-entrenched philosophical definition of knowledge. 
His article had a striking impact among epistemologists: a subsequent plethora of 
articles and sections of books gave us the broader concept of a Gettier case. Philosophers 
became adept at describing such cases, deepening Gettier’s challenge. As there has 
been no general agreement on how to solve that challenge, epistemologists talk of the 
Gettier problem. Can we understand knowledge’s nature rigorously, in a “Gettier-proof” 
way?
2. The Justified-True-Belief Analysis of Knowledge
At stake is our understanding of propositional knowledge. This is knowledge of truths 
or facts—described by phrases of the form “knowledge that p,” with “p” replaced by an 
indicative sentence (such as “Kangaroos have no wings”). Usually, when epistemolo-
gists talk of knowledge they refer to propositional knowledge. And, prior to Gettier’s 
challenge, philosophers accepted or presumed some version of this three-part analysis 
of such knowledge:
The person has a more or less confident belief. The belief is true. It is well justi-
fied (for example, by being based upon good evidence, such as from observa-
tion, testimony, or reasoning).
This is generally called the justified-true-belief analysis of knowledge (for short: JTB). It 
requires each of those three conditions to be satisfied; and once all of them are satisfied 
together, the result is knowledge.
JTB aims to delineate a form of theory able to absorb comparatively specific analyses, 
either of all knowledge or of particular kinds of knowledge. Even analyses seemingly dif-
ferent to JTB could be instances of it. Most commonly, these incorporate further analy-
ses, of some or all of belief, truth, and justification. (Thus, some sections below discuss 
justification.) The goal is to understand every possible instance of knowledge. Gettier’s 
challenge spurred epistemologists to seek increasingly detailed accounts of knowledge. 
Chisholm (1966/1977/1989) was an influential exemplar of the post-1963 tendency; 
Ayer (1956: ch. 1) exemplified the pre-1963 approach.

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
120
3. Three Gettier Cases
This section presents three representative Gettier cases, including Gettier’s own two.
(i) The job/coins (Gettier 1963). Smith and Jones have applied for a particular job. But 
Smith has been told by the company president that Jones will be hired. Smith com-
bines that testimony with his observational evidence of there being ten coins in Jones’s 
pocket. (He had counted them—an odd but imaginable circumstance.) He infers the 
belief that whoever will get the job has ten coins in their pocket. For convenience, call 
that belief b. It enjoys a reasonable amount of evidential support—from some testimony, 
observation, and reasoning. Belief b is also true—yet not in the way Smith was expect-
ing it to be true. For he will get the job, and he has ten coins in his pocket. (Neither of 
those circumstances was known by Smith.) Does he thereby fail to know that the person 
who will get the job has ten coins in his pocket? Surely so (thought Gettier): belief b 
is true and justified—but not knowledge. Hence, JTB is false: this case establishes that 
being true and justified is not sufficient for being knowledge.
But if JTB is false, with what should it be replaced? (Gettier himself made no sug-
gestions.) Epistemologists generally accept JTB’s three conditions as being individually 
necessary to knowing, even if not jointly sufficient. What is overlooked by JTB? Which 
feature of the job/coins case prevents belief b from being knowledge? What smallest 
imaginable alteration to the case would allow belief b to become knowledge?
Those questions also arise for other Gettier cases, such as the following two. 
Epistemologists try to understand the lack of knowledge common to all possible such 
cases. (Sections 7 through 11 will present some attempts at this understanding.)
(ii) The lucky disjunction (Gettier 1963). Smith possesses good evidence that Jones owns 
a Ford. Smith also has a friend, Brown. Where is Brown? Smith does not know. Still, on 
the basis of accepting that Jones owns a Ford, Smith infers—and accepts—these three 
propositions:
Either Jones owns a Ford, or Brown is in Boston.
Either Jones owns a Ford, or Brown is in Barcelona.
Either Jones owns a Ford, or Brown is in Brest-Litovsk.
No insight into Jones’s location guides Smith’s reasoning. Realizing that he has good 
evidence for the first disjunct (regarding Jones) in each of those three disjunctions, he 
treats this evidence as supporting each disjunction as a whole. Seemingly, he is right 
about that. (These are inclusive disjunctions, not exclusive: each can accommodate the 
truth of both its disjuncts.) Moreover, one of these disjunctions is true. The second is 
true because, as good luck would have it, Brown is in Barcelona—even though, as bad 
luck would have it, Jones does not own a Ford. (The evidence for his doing so, although 
good, was misleading.) Accordingly, Smith’s belief that either Jones owns a Ford or 
Brown is in Barcelona is true. And good evidence supports it. But is it knowledge?
(iii) The fake barns (Goldman 1976). Henry is driving in the countryside, looking at 
objects in fields. He sees what looks like a barn. So, he believes—correctly—that he 
is seeing a barn. Yet he does not realize that the neighborhood contains many fake 
barns—mere barn façades, looking like real barns when viewed from the road. If Henry 

THE GETTIER PROBLEM
121
had been looking at one of these, he would have been deceived into believing that he 
was seeing a barn. He was not doing this. Consequently, his belief is justified and true. 
But is it knowledge?
In none of those cases (or in any relevantly similar ones), say almost all epistemolo-
gists, is the belief knowledge. (Note that some epistemologists do not regard the fake-
barns case as a genuine Gettier case. There is some vagueness in the concept of a Gettier 
case. Section 13 will clarify this case.)
4. Two Categories of Gettier Case
Each Gettier case is either helpful or dangerous (Hetherington 1999; 2001: ch. 3). Helpful 
cases include Gettier’s own two. The fake-barns case is a dangerous one.
In any helpful Gettier case, the justified true belief is attained partly because of the 
case’s odd circumstance. The oddity helps to bring about the pleasing combination of 
truth, belief, and justification. Without quite that oddness, maybe that justified true 
belief would not have emerged. The person would not be even that close (however close 
it is) to having knowledge by having this combination.
Each dangerous Gettier case likewise includes an odd circumstance. This one, how-
ever, remains only a threat to the existence of the justified true belief (which combina-
tion comes about without the odd circumstance’s help). If that circumstance was not 
present, the belief would be justified and true in the way it is—but with all else being 
normal. As it is, the belief is only close to not being both true and justified in the way 
it is.
5. Two Basic Features of Gettier Cases
Some characteristics unite Gettier cases. Each contains a belief that is true and well 
justified without (according to most epistemologists) being knowledge. The following 
two features also help to constitute Gettier cases:
(1) Fallibility. The justificatory support is fallible. It indicates strongly—without proving 
conclusively—that the belief is true.
(2) Luck. Within each case, the well-but-fallibly justified belief is true.
Nevertheless, there is significant luck in how the belief combines being true with being 
justified.
In Gettier’s job/coins case, Smith’s evidence supports belief b well but fallibly. It can-
not entirely eliminate the possibility of b’s being mistaken. Actually, b is true—but due 
to good luck, not in a normal way. It is made true by circumstances—Smith getting the 
job; there being ten coins in his pocket—overlooked by his evidence.
6. The Generality of Gettier Cases
Because JTB aims to be true of any possible case of knowledge, it is false if there is even 
one possible Gettier situation empty of knowledge. Yet Gettier situations are rare: few 
actual beliefs are “Gettiered.” Did Gettier therefore show only that not all justified true 
beliefs are knowledge? Might JTB be almost correct—accurate about almost all possible 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
122
instances of knowledge? But epistemologists generally regard Gettier cases as showing 
that being justified and true is never enough to make a belief knowledge. Why?
It is because epistemologists wish to understand knowledge in all its possible manifes-
tations. JTB can be regarded as attempting to know knowledge’s inviolable essence—so 
that if JTB misdescribes even one instance’s inner nature it misdescribes every instance’s 
inner nature. What, exactly and deeply, distinguishes knowing from not knowing?
And so (we wonder) where, precisely and fundamentally, is the boundary between 
Gettier cases and other situations? We call various belief-forming situations “everyday” 
or “ordinary.” Accordingly, we might suggest that all “normally” justified true beliefs 
(unlike “Gettiered” ones) are instances of knowledge. Yet do we know what makes a 
situation ordinary? To the extent that we do not understand what makes something a 
Gettier situation, we do not understand what it takes for a situation to be normal—and 
thereby able to contain knowledge.
7. Attempted Solutions: Infallibility
Section 5 mentioned two key aspects—fallibility and luck—of Gettier situations. In 
this section and the next, we consider those aspects. Is knowing incompatible with fal-
libility (this section) or luck (section 8)?
There have long been philosophers who doubt that fallible justificatory support is 
enough to convert a true belief into knowledge. (“If you know it, there must have been 
no possibility of your being mistaken about it.”) Descartes (1641[1911]) most famously 
expressed that sort of doubt. Contemporary advocates have included Lehrer (1971), 
Unger (1971), and possibly Dretske (1971). The Infallibility Proposal would strengthen 
JTB by requiring infallibly strong justification within knowledge.
For instance, because (in the job/coins case) Smith’s justification supported belief b 
only fallibly, the possibility remained open of that belief’s being mistaken. Due to this 
possibility, the belief is not knowledge. As to the fake-barns case, an infallibilist will 
claim that the potential for mistake is particularly real, given the actual fake barns. 
Again there is a lack of knowledge, because fallible justification is being used.
That is the Infallibility Proposal. Yet throughout our lives we probably never possess 
infallible justificatory support. If so, the Infallibility Proposal implies us never being 
knowers. This is a skepticism about our ever having knowledge. But most epistemolo-
gists favor a non-skeptical conception of knowledge. Can they solve Gettier’s challenge 
without adopting the Infallibility Proposal?
8. Attempted Solutions: Eliminating Luck
Section 5 also highlighted the lucky way in which each Gettier case’s belief is both 
justified and true. Need this luck be eliminated if the belief is to be knowledge? The 
Eliminate Luck Proposal claims so.
It is common to call upon this idea when reacting initially to Gettier cases. Unger 
(1968) developed the idea somewhat: A belief is not knowledge if it is true courtesy of 
a relevant accident. Pritchard (2005: ch. 6) expands upon that idea: In too many similar 
possible situations with a particular Gettier case’s same belief, formed in the same way, 
that belief is false. Thus, the belief is true only luckily—and therefore not knowledge.
Care is needed here. If we seek to eliminate all luck from the production of a justi-
fied true belief, again we endorse infallibilism. If no luck remains open, the justification 

THE GETTIER PROBLEM
123
renders the belief’s truth inescapable; which makes the belief infallibly justified. And 
(as section 7 explained) few epistemologists will find this an illuminating response to 
Gettier cases.
Alternatively, we might say that such cases contain too much luck. (Pritchard would 
claim that there are too many similar possible situations where the actual belief is false 
in spite of resting upon the same evidence.) But how much luck is too much? There is 
scant epistemological commentary about what degree of luck precludes knowledge. A 
specter of irremediable vagueness haunts the Eliminate Luck Proposal.
Understandably, therefore, detailed analyses of knowledge focus less on delineat-
ing dangerous degrees of luck than on characterizing substantive kinds of luck that are 
claimed to drive away knowledge. Are Gettier situations structured in ways that amount 
to a kind of luck precluding knowledge’s presence? Most attempts to solve Gettier’s 
challenge pursue that idea indirectly. Sections 9 through 11 will discuss a few sugges-
tions. (Section 13 will return directly to the theme of luck. See also Tim Black’s “Modal 
and Anti-Luck Epistemology,” Chapter 18 in this volume.)
9. Attempted Solutions: Eliminating False Evidence
On the No False Evidence Proposal, the failing within Gettier cases is the evidence’s 
being partly mistaken. To the extent that falsity guides the person’s forming her belief, 
she will be lucky to derive one which is true. And (as section 8 indicated) some episte-
mologists regard a lucky derivation of a true belief as no way of knowing that truth.
In the job/coins case, Smith’s evidence includes the false belief that Jones will get 
the job. Without that evidence (and with nothing else changing within the case), pre-
sumably Smith would not have inferred belief b. He should have no belief about who 
would get the job (because he would have lacked all evidence on the matter). He would 
thereby have lacked the justified and true belief b which fails to be knowledge. Should 
JTB be modified, to say that knowledge is a justified true belief well supported by evi-
dence, none of which is false?
Epistemologists have noticed problems with that No False Evidence Proposal.
First, as Feldman (1974) explained, there seem to be Gettier cases where no false evi-
dence is used. Imagine Smith’s not believing, falsely, “Jones will get the job.” Imagine, 
instead, his believing, “The company president told me that Jones will get the job.” (He 
could have formed the first belief. He just happens not to do so.) This alternative belief 
is true. It also provides belief b with as much justification as the false belief provided. So 
(if all else remains constant within the case), again Smith has a true belief b which is 
well-although-fallibly justified, yet which might well not be knowledge.
Second, the No False Evidence Proposal could imply an unwelcome skepticism. 
Quite possibly, there is always some false evidence being relied upon, at least implicitly, 
as we form beliefs. If you do not wholly remove falsity (such as by isolating it from the 
evidence you are using), then—on the No False Evidence Proposal—there is a danger 
of that falsity preventing those other beliefs from being knowledge.
Unsurprisingly, therefore, some epistemologists, such as Lehrer (1965), offer a less 
demanding modification of JTB. Perhaps what is needed for knowing is an absence only 
of significant and ineliminable falsehoods from one’s evidence. (Here is what that means. 
False beliefs which you are—but need not have been—using as evidence are eliminable 
from your evidence. False beliefs whose absence would seriously weaken your evidence 
are significant within that evidence.) That turns the No False Evidence Proposal into the 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
124
No False Core Evidence Proposal. This says that if the only falsehoods in your evidence 
are ones you could discard without seriously weakening it, then (all else being equal) 
your justification is adequate for giving you knowledge. We might use the proposal to 
infer that the failing within each Gettier case is that some significant falsehood is essen-
tial to the case’s evidence.
In the same spirit, we might regard the failing as the falsehood’s functioning as an 
unstated lemma or assumption (rather than an explicit belief), underwriting or supple-
menting the overtly used evidence. This would give us a No False Core Assumption 
Proposal (Lycan 2006).
One problem for those proposals is their potential vagueness. How easy, precisely, 
must it be to eliminate the false evidence or assumption if knowledge is to be present? 
Just how weakened, exactly, can evidence or underlying assumptions become—through 
elimination of false elements—before the support being provided is too weak to be mak-
ing a true belief knowledge? No answer to these questions is manifest.
10. Attempted Solutions: Eliminating Defeat
Section 9 wondered whether the failing within Gettier cases is a matter of the evidence’s 
including or relying upon some core falsehood. Epistemologists also ask whether the fail-
ing is a matter of some pertinent truth being overlooked by the “Gettiered” evidence.
That idea is often called a defeasibility analysis of knowledge. It can also be termed 
the No Defeat Proposal. (For more on that, see “Defeasibility Theory,” by Thomas 
Grundmann, Chapter 15 in this volume.) The basic thought is that JTB should be 
modified thus: What is needed in knowing that p is an absence from the inquirer’s con-
text of defeaters of her evidence for p. What is a defeater? A truth t defeats evidence e, 
as support for a belief, if adding t to e would produce new evidence e+ which definitely 
does not justify that belief well enough to satisfy JTB’s justification condition.
But that proposal (like section 9’s No False Core Evidence—or Assumption—
Proposal) faces a fundamental problem of vagueness. Defeaters defeat by weakening 
evidence’s justificatory force: as more and stronger defeaters are overlooked by a body of 
evidence, that evidence is correlatively weakened. How weak, exactly, can justification 
for a belief become before it is too weak to sustain the belief’s being knowledge? This 
question (which, in some form, arises for all proposals allowing knowledge’s justificatory 
component to be satisfied by fallible support) is yet to be answered by epistemologists 
as a group. Applied to the No Defeat Proposal, it is the question, raised by Lehrer and 
Paxson (1969) and Lycan (1977), of how much of one’s environment needs to be noticed 
by one’s evidence if knowledge is to be present. How strict should we be about this?
11. Attempted Solutions: Eliminating Inappropriate Causality
Within Gettier situations, is the justified true belief caused—generated, brought about—
too oddly or abnormally to be knowledge? The Appropriate Causality Proposal claims so 
(Goldman 1967).
Consider simple “everyday” perceptual knowledge. Part of its being produced is a nor-
mal causal pattern’s generating a belief. If you use your eyes in a standard way, a belief 
might form in a standard way, reporting what you observed. That belief will thereby be 
justified standardly. And it will be true in a standard way—made true by the same aspect 
of the world causing it to exist.

THE GETTIER PROBLEM
125
Within the job/coins case, however, such normality is absent. Smith’s belief b is made 
true by the facts of his getting the job and of there being ten coins in his own pocket. 
But these do not help to cause b’s existence. (That belief is caused by Smith’s conversa-
tion with the mistaken company president and his observation of Jones’s coins.) Should 
JTB be modified, to say that a justified true belief is knowledge only if those aspects of 
the world making it true are appropriately involved in creating it?
Here are two worries about that Appropriate Causality Proposal.
First, some objects of knowledge might lack causal influence. Perhaps a truth about 
numbers, such as that 2 + 2 = 4, exerts no causal effect upon your believing that 2 + 2 
= 4—because numbers do not act causally. (Numerals, such as specific marks on paper 
being interpreted in actual minds, might do so. Yet these could merely be representations 
of numbers.) Consequently, the Appropriate Causality Proposal would explain, at most, 
empirical or observational knowledge.
Second, does the Appropriate Causality Proposal explain even empirical knowledge? 
Especially when reasoning is involved, indirectness is part of any causal process result-
ing in a belief. How much indirectness is too much, if the belief is to be knowledge?
Imagine that Smith’s being about to be offered the job is part of the causal explana-
tion of the company president’s telling him that Jones would get the job. The presi-
dent, with his mischievous sense of humor, wished to mislead Smith. Suppose also that 
Smith’s having ten coins in his own pocket made a jingling noise, subtly making him 
think of coins in pockets, leading him to investigate Jones’s pocket. Given all this, 
the facts (concerning Smith) which make belief b true are involved causally in creat-
ing b. Is the Appropriate Causality Proposal thereby satisfied—so that (in this altered 
job/coins case) belief b is now knowledge? Or is this still a Gettier case where b fails to 
be knowledge? If so, why is this new causal ancestry too inappropriate to allow b to be 
knowledge?
Often, philosophers talk of deviant causal chains. But how clear is that phrase? How 
deviant can a causal chain (resulting in belief-formation) become before it is too devi-
ant to be bringing knowledge into existence? As in sections 9 and 10, we encounter a 
conceptual problem of vagueness.
12. Attempted Dissolutions: Questioning Intuitions
Sections 9 through 11 described proposals for solving Gettier’s challenge directly. Each 
proposal modifies JTB, to explain knowledge’s not being present within Gettier cases. 
Why is it important to explain that? The standard epistemological answer is that every-
one has a strong intuition that knowledge is absent from each Gettier case. That intu-
ition reflects our shared concept of knowledge, accurately indicating pertinent details 
of that concept.
Yet some epistemologists prefer to dissolve the Gettier challenge. One such dissolu-
tion questions whether those intuitions about Gettier cases are so widespread. If they 
are not, reliance upon them might be more a choice than an obligation for epistemolo-
gists.
That possibility was made pressing by Weinberg et al. (2001). Their empirical 
research included asking a wider range of people—not only fellow philosophers and 
students—about Gettier cases. The ideas behind that research are discussed elsewhere 
in this volume. (See Jonathan Weinberg’s “Experimental Epistemology” (Chapter 73) 
and William Lycan’s “Epistemology and the Role of Intuitions” (Chapter 72).) The 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
126
resulting suggestion is that the usual epistemological reaction to Gettier situations 
(“Clearly, knowledge is absent!”) is not as widespread as epistemologists assume it is.
They might reply that those who do not regard knowledge as absent from Gettier 
cases are not evaluating the cases properly. But why would intuitions of epistemologists 
and their students be especially accurate? If it is because these people reflect more than 
others upon knowledge, their reactions might not, after all, be intuitions about Gettier 
cases. Comparatively reflective theories of knowledge could be guiding these reactions.
For example, maybe the usual epistemological interpretation manifests a commit-
ment to a technically demanding concept of knowledge (Kirkham 1984), one used 
especially by critically reflective philosophers. If that concept feels intuitive to them, 
this could reflect their professional training. If epistemologists continue insisting that 
knowledge must be “Gettier-proof,” possibly they are talking about something—knowl-
edge—which is unattainable for most inquirers. Kaplan (1985) argues that if knowledge 
must conform to the usual epistemological interpretation of Gettier cases, knowledge is 
also not something about which inquirers should care. He advocates seeking something 
less demanding than knowledge.
13. Attempted Dissolutions: Knowing Luckily
Here is an alternative possible reaction: Maybe knowledge itself could be less demand-
ing, even while remaining a worthy object of inquiry. Towards that end, we may conceive 
of knowledge by reinterpreting the luck within Gettier cases (Hetherington 1998). This 
Knowing Luckily Proposal would reinstate JTB’s sufficiency, dissolving Gettier’s chal-
lenge by regarding any “Gettiered” belief as an especially fallible—because interest-
ingly lucky—instance of knowledge. The proposal analyzes Gettier’s job/coins case, for 
instance, along the following lines.
In forming belief b, Smith is lucky to be gaining a belief which is true in the way it 
is (via features of Smith)—given how his evidence (entirely about Jones) indicates the 
belief’s being true. Because the evidence is misleading about the specific way b is true, 
there is luck (“Gettier-luck”) in that evidence’s leading Smith to form a belief b which 
is true at all, in some way. That luck is combinatorial—reflecting how the situation com-
bines (i) the belief b’s existing, with both (ii) b’s being true in the particular way it is (via 
Smith), and (iii) what the evidence (about Jones) implies about what is making b true. 
Nonetheless, even given what the evidence says about Jones, it is not misleading about 
the fact of b’s being true. Hence, the luck is not, as it happens, in the fact that b is true. 
The evidence misleads only about substantive details of how b is true. Could belief b be 
knowledge, albeit luckily so? Could Smith have knowledge luckily, by having a justified 
true belief luckily?
Here is how. We might allow a Gettiered belief to be knowledge that p without being 
knowledge of substantive details of how, in particular, it is that p. Philosophers will be 
loath to admit that knowledge can be like this, given their own quests always to know-
that-it-is by knowing-how-it-is. Yet much knowledge can arise in that “trusting” way, 
such as when learning that p from an expert without gleaning many, even any, details 
of how it is that p. Gettier cases slightly complicate that picture: “Gettier-luck” is (1) 
knowing that p without knowing substantive details of how it is that p, because (2) one 
is misled by one’s evidence as to substantive details of how it is that p. Because of (2), 
in Gettier cases at best one would know more “shallowly,” less understandingly, than if 
only (1) was satisfied. Still, although experts typically and helpfully give us (1) without 

THE GETTIER PROBLEM
127
(2), they could sometimes give us both—knowledge-that-p-is, while misleading us as 
to how-it-is-that-p-is. Imagine hearing a mathematician speaking on the radio, report-
ing a mathematical truth m; one that is new to you. She explains m via a simplified 
“proof” which is needed if a non-specialist (such as you) is even to understand m’s con-
tent—but which a specialist would find misleading in its analysis of the constitutive 
details of how it is that m. Accordingly, you remain somewhat mistaken as to precisely 
how it is that m obtains. We might regard this as your not understanding how m obtains: 
perhaps you could not construct or even comprehend a proof unveiling how m obtains 
(Welbourne 2001: 20–1). Possibly, nevertheless, you would now know simply that m 
obtains.
How does that suggestion apply to the fake-barns case? With an apt indeterminacy: 
As section 3 noted, this might not be a Gettier case. (a) It is not, if Henry’s evidence, 
being normal, does not mislead as to how it is true that he is seeing a barn. In that event, 
although he is lucky to have the knowledge (because he is lucky to have the evidence), 
the knowledge is normal in itself, once its constituents (such as the evidence) are pres-
ent. (b) If this is a Gettier case, that is because Henry’s evidence misleads by indicating 
implicitly that the neighborhood is normal and that his belief is true because, in part, of 
that normality. Even then, Henry’s belief could be knowledge—albeit luckily so, being 
made true by the smaller part of the neighborhood (the barn itself) explicitly noticed 
in his evidence.
In either (a) or (b), then, knowledge is possible—either normally or luckily. Naturally, 
many epistemologists find it puzzling to talk of knowing luckily. Presumably, little (if 
any) knowledge would be accepted as being lucky in that way—a belief’s being justified 
and true in a “Gettiered” way. And because we encounter little (if any) such knowledge, 
our lives leave us unused to thinking of knowledge as able to be constituted so luckily. 
Consequently, to the extent that the luck involved in such cases reflects the statistical 
unlikelihood of their occurring, we should expect little (if any) knowledge to be present 
in that lucky way. (Otherwise, this would be a normal way for knowledge to be present; 
the knowledge would not be present luckily.)
Nonetheless, some knowledge might be present luckily. Ordinarily, it seems, when 
good evidence for a belief accompanies its being true, this combination of good evi-
dence and true belief occurs (unlike in the job/coins case) without notable luck being 
needed for its occurring. Ordinary knowledge is thereby constituted, with that absence 
of notable luck being part of what supposedly makes ordinary knowledge ordinary. Again, 
though, is it impossible for knowledge ever to be constituted luckily? The Knowing 
Luckily Proposal claims that such knowledge is possible even if, at most, uncommon. 
The proposal distinguishes between knowing that p in a comparatively ordinary way 
and knowing that p in a comparatively lucky way. (And the proposal refines a concep-
tion of knowledge as able to be present fallibly-because-failably within Gettier cases: 
Hetherington 1999, 2001: ch. 3.)
We might also wonder whether knowledge that p which is only luckily present in that 
way has a comparatively poor quality or grade as knowledge that p. Normally, knowledge 
is of a higher quality or grade—being less flawed, by being less luckily present. But must 
all knowledge be of a normal quality as knowledge that p? Could we sometimes, even if 
rarely, know less well that p? The Knowing Luckily Proposal permits this interpretive 
possibility. Accordingly, we could embed that Proposal within a Gradualism Proposal, 
allowing that any particular p could be known more or less well (Hetherington 2001, 
2005, 2006a). Shades of luck might be one such dimension of epistemic gradability: 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
128
With all else being equal, an instance of knowledge that p would be better purely as 
knowledge that p when constituted less luckily.
Is that too odd a way to talk of knowledge? How are we to answer this question? 
With intuitions? Whose? Perhaps we should look beyond intuitions anyway, when seek-
ing what could well be a deeply theoretical understanding (Weatherson 2003). Thus, 
we meet anew section 12’s questions about methodologies for making epistemological 
progress.
For example, even in talking about luck in an epistemologically usual way, could we 
be applying a mistaken theory? Lackey (2008) questions existing analyses of the consti-
tutive nature of luck. Perhaps epistemologists should wonder whether they are reflect-
ing a real understanding of luck when claiming that knowledge is never constituted 
luckily. This section has gestured at how to begin conceiving of knowledge as able, at 
least occasionally, to be constituted luckily.
14. Gettier Cases and Analytic Epistemology
Since 1963, responding to Gettier cases has often been central within analytic episte-
mology. Partly, this reflects many epistemologists’ assumptions that the Gettier problem 
provides a paradigmatic test case of a method which has long been central to analytic 
philosophy. That method involves the considered manipulation and modification of 
definitional models or theories, reacting to clear counterexamples to those models or 
theories.
JTB purported to provide a definitional analysis of what it is to know. Then Gettier 
cases emerged, apparently as successful counterexamples to the sufficiency of JTB’s 
analysis. That interpretation of the cases rested upon epistemologists’ claims to have 
reflective-yet-intuitive insight into the absence of knowledge from Gettier situations. 
These claims of intuitive insight were treated as decisive data, akin to favored observa-
tions. The claims were respected accordingly. It was assumed that any modification of 
JTB needs to accommodate them. So, the entrenchment of Gettier’s challenge at the 
core of analytic epistemology hinged upon the following two assumptions: (1) JTB fails 
to accommodate the data of those intuitions; and (2) any analytical modification of JTB 
needs to rectify that failing. Epistemologists proceeded to apply that analytical method, 
vigorously and repeatedly.
Nevertheless, post-1963 analytic epistemology has contained expressions of frustra-
tion at seemingly insoluble difficulties accompanying the many responses to Gettier’s 
disarmingly simple paper. Precisely how should the theory JTB be revised, in accord with 
the relevant data? Exactly which data are relevant anyway? We have found room for 
dispute and uncertainty here. For example, we noticed a persistent problem of vagueness 
confronting attempts to revise JTB. We might therefore wonder whether a complete 
analytical definition of knowledge is possible (Hetherington 2006b: sections 1–6).
That possibility is especially pressing, given that philosophers are yet to agree on 
how to understand vagueness. On one approach, it is a matter of being unable to know 
where to draw a clearly accurate line between instances of X and instances of non-X 
(for a vague X, such as being bald or being tall). On that interpretation, a dividing line 
exists—but we remain ignorant of its location. To many philosophers, that idea sounds 
regrettably odd when the vague phenomenon is baldness, say. (“Really? You claim that 
there is an exact—yet unknowable—dividing line, in terms of the number of hairs on a 
person’s head, between being bald and not being bald?”)

THE GETTIER PROBLEM
129
However, should philosophers react with such incredulity when the phenomenon is 
that of knowing, and when the possibility of its vagueness is prompted by discussions of 
Gettier’s challenge? Most epistemologists remain convinced that their standard reac-
tion to Gettier cases reflects a definite difference between knowing and not knowing. 
Yet where exactly is that dividing line? As we have observed, epistemological answers 
to this question generally characterize that boundary in terms of degrees and kinds of 
justification. Accordingly, the threats of vagueness we noticed in some earlier sections 
might be a problem for many. In particular, those forms of vagueness could afflict our 
knowing that Gettier cases reveal a difference between knowledge and non-knowledge. 
Epistemologists continue regarding the cases in that way. But do they know what it is 
that Gettier cases show about knowledge?
The Gettier challenge has therefore become a test case for analytically inclined phi-
losophers. The following questions have become progressively more pressing with each 
failed attempt to convince epistemologists that (in a given article, talk, or book) the 
correct analysis of knowledge has been reached. Will an adequate understanding of 
knowledge ever emerge from an analytical balancing of theories of knowledge against 
relevant data such as intuitions? Must any theory of the nature of knowledge answer to 
intuitions prompted by Gettier cases? What conception of knowledge is at stake? What 
form should a theory of knowledge take? How precise should it be? Need an understand-
ing of knowledge be logically or conceptually exhaustive? (The methodological model of 
theory-being-tested-against-data suggests a scientific parallel. Yet need scientific under-
standing always be logically or conceptually exhaustive?) So, uncertainty continues as 
to whether Gettier’s challenge has been fully understood, let alone solved. Conceptual 
possibilities still abound—even the possibility that, really, there is no Gettier problem.
References
Ayer, A. J. (1956) The Problem of Knowledge, London: Macmillan.
Chisholm, R. M. (1966/1977/1989) Theory of Knowledge, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Descartes, R. (1641 [1911]) “Meditations on First Philosophy,” in E. S. Haldane and G. R. T. Ross (eds. and 
trans.), The Philosophical Works of Descartes, Vol. I, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dretske, F. (1971) “Conclusive Reasons,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 49: 1–22.
Feldman, R. (1974) “An Alleged Defect in Gettier Counterexamples,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 52: 
68–9. Reprinted in Moser (1986).
Gettier, E. L. (1963) “Is Justified True Belief Knowledge?” Analysis 23: 121–3. Reprinted in Roth and Galis 
(1970) and Moser (1986).
Goldman, A. I. (1967) “A Causal Theory of Knowing,” The Journal of Philosophy 64: 357–72. Reprinted, with 
revisions, in Roth and Galis (1970).
—— (1976) “Discrimination and Perceptual Knowledge,” The Journal of Philosophy 73: 771–91. Reprinted 
in Pappas and Swain (1978).
Hetherington, S. (1998) “Actually Knowing,” The Philosophical Quarterly 48: 453–69.
—— (1999) “Knowing Failably,” The Journal of Philosophy 96: 565–87.
—— (2001) Good Knowledge, Bad Knowledge: On Two Dogmas of Epistemology, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
—— (2005) “Knowing (How It Is) That P: Degrees and Qualities of Knowledge,” in C. de Almeida (ed.), 
Perspectives in Contemporary Epistemology, Veritas, 50: 129–52.
—— (2006a) “How To Know (That Knowledge-That Is Knowledge-How),” in S. Hetherington (ed.), 
Epistemology Futures, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
—— (2006b) “Introduction: The Art of Precise Epistemology,” in S. Hetherington (ed.), Aspects of Knowing: 
Epistemological Essays, Oxford: Elsevier.
Kaplan, M. (1985) “It’s Not What You Know That Counts,” The Journal of Philosophy 82: 350–63.
Kirkham, R. L. (1984) “Does the Gettier Problem Rest on a Mistake?” Mind 93: 501–13.
Lackey, J. (2008) “What Luck Is Not,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 86: 255–67.

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
130
Lehrer, K. (1965) “Knowledge, Truth and Evidence,” Analysis 25: 168–75. Reprinted in Roth and Galis 
(1970).
—— (1971) “Why Not Scepticism?” The Philosophical Forum 2: 283–98. Reprinted in Pappas and Swain 
(1978).
—— and Paxson, T. D. (1969) “Knowledge: Undefeated Justified True Belief,” The Journal of Philosophy 66: 
225–37. Reprinted in Pappas and Swain (1978).
Lycan, W. G. (1977) “Evidence One Does not Possess,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 55: 114–26.
—— (2006) “On the Gettier Problem problem,” in S. Hetherington (ed.), Epistemology Futures, Oxford: 
Clarendon Press.
Pritchard, D. (2005) Epistemic Luck, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Unger, P. (1968) “An Analysis of Factual Knowledge,” The Journal of Philosophy 65: 157–70. Reprinted in 
Roth and Galis (1970).
—— (1971) “A Defense of Skepticism,” The Philosophical Review 30: 198–218. Reprinted in Pappas and 
Swain (1978).
Weatherson, B. (2003) “What Good are Counterexamples?” Philosophical Studies 115: 1–31.
Weinberg, J., Nichols, S., and Stich, S. (2001) “Normativity and Epistemic Intuitions,” Philosophical Topics 
29: 429–60.
Welbourne, M. (2001) Knowledge, Montreal and Kingston: McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Further Reading
Hetherington, S. (1996a) Knowledge Puzzles: An Introduction to Epistemology, Boulder, CO: Westview Press. 
(Includes an introduction to JTB, plus several responses to Gettier’s challenge.)
—— (1996b) “Gettieristic Scepticism,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 74: 83–97. (How, as standardly 
interpreted, Gettier cases may be used skeptically.)
—— (forthcoming) How to Know: A Practicalist Conception of Knowledge, Wiley-Blackwell. (Chapter 3 
includes an expanded dissolution of the Gettier problem.)
Keefe, R. and Smith, P. (eds.) (1996) Vagueness: A Reader, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. (Historical and 
contemporary analyses of the nature and significance of vagueness.)
Moser, P. K. (ed.) (1986) Empirical Knowledge: Readings in Contemporary Epistemology, Totowa, NJ: Rowman 
& Littlefield. (Includes some influential papers on Gettier cases.)
Pappas, G. S. and Swain, M. (eds.) (1978) Essays on Knowledge and Justification, Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press. (Mainly on the Gettier Problem.)
Roth, M. D. and Galis, L. (eds.) (1970) Knowing: Essays in the Analysis of Knowledge, New York: Random 
House. (Includes some noteworthy papers on Gettier’s challenge.)
Shope, R. K. (1983) The Analysis of Knowing: A Decade of Research, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press. (Presents many Gettier cases; discusses several proposed analyses.)
Williamson, T. (2000) Knowledge and Its Limits, Oxford: Clarendon Press. (Includes arguments against 
responding to Gettier cases by analyzing knowledge: Introduction, ch. 1.)

13
FALLIBILISM
Trent Dougherty
There is a world of difference between fallible knowledge and no knowledge.
C.S. Peirce
Introduction
Fallibilism in epistemology is neither identical to nor unrelated to the ordinary notion 
of fallibility. In ordinary life we are forced to the conclusion that human beings are 
prone to error. The epistemological doctrine of fallibilism, though, is about the con-
sistency of holding that humans have knowledge while admitting certain limitations 
in human ways of knowing. As will be seen, making the content of the basic intuition 
more precise is both somewhat contentious and the key to an adequate definition of fal-
libilism. Before moving on to this project I will address a few preliminary issues. Then, 
after canvassing some prevailing views I will address two concerns. First, I will address 
the concern that prevailing views do not adequately take into account fallible knowl-
edge of necessary truths and are thus not fully general accounts of fallible knowledge. 
Second, I will address probabilistic accounts of fallibilism. I will suggest that a simple, 
adequate account of fallibilism is possible.
The Root Intuition
One might well wonder what the root cause of the need for a fallibilist doctrine is. It is 
we knowing agents which are fallible knowers. So the root need for fallibilism might seem 
to be some shortcoming in us mere mortals. But it’s not clear that this is the case. For it 
seems that any being which comes to know things the way we do—through experience, 
broadly construed to include what it’s like to have a rational insight—will be fallible 
knowers. So remove from a typical human what Russell called “medical limitations.” 
That is, idealize away the need for food, rest, (and any other such limitations) and grant 
logical omniscience. If they are perfectly rational agents—and they ought to be, we’ve 
idealized them in all respects relevant to rationality then doxastic voluntarism—the 
thesis that an agent can choose their beliefs—will be false for them. That is, they will 
always be compelled by their evidence. There is no reason to think that these beings 
are any less subject to Cartesian demon worries. They are no more capable of stepping 
outside their heads and examining the thought-to-world fit of their beliefs than we are. 
They will be fully aware that it is a genuine broadly logical possibility that they could 
have all the same experiences and yet be mistaken in this belief (we will discuss nec-
essary truths later). More generally, they are fully captive to the convincing power of their 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
132
experiences (what Plantinga (1993: 193) calls “impulsional evidence”). We can express 
this by saying that they have fallible reasons. As we will see shortly, this seems to be the 
core notion that theorists have been trying to explicate.
Cognates
Above, I used the terms “fallible knowledge,” “fallible knowers,” and “fallible reasons.” 
In light of the discussion just above, it seems best to take fallible reasons as the basic 
notion and define the others in terms of it. So fallible knowers are agents who know what 
they know on the basis of fallible reasons. Fallible knowledge will be knowledge on the 
basis of fallible reasons. Thinking of it this way will allow us to have maximum flex-
ibility of expression with minimum confusion. The most general schemas to be filled in 
below, then, will be as follows.
Fallibilism = df The thesis that all human knowledge is on the basis of fallible 
reasons.
S fallibly knows that p = df S knows that p on the basis of fallible reasons.
Knowledge and Justification
Above, I have spoken exclusively of knowledge. But of course there is a natural usage 
of “fallible justification” which mimics our use of “fallible knowledge.” In fact, as justi-
fication is the more basic notion, it might seem better to treat fallibilism as a doctrine 
about justification rather than knowledge. In principle I’d prefer it this way myself, but 
(i) it has historically been discussed in terms of knowledge, and (ii) the application to 
justification is straightforward.
JF Fallibilism about Justification = df The thesis that all human justification is 
on the basis of fallible reasons.
FJ S is fallibly justified in believing that p = df S is justified in believing that 
p on the basis of fallible reasons.
Thus, in characterizing fallibilism, I will speak of it in terms of knowledge and canvass 
the more concentrated reflections of the latter half of the twentieth century.
Characterizing Fallibilism
Traditional Accounts
Plausibly, fallibilism is as old as the Stoics. Sextus Empiricus records that Carneades 
held a kind of fallibilism (Outlines of Pyrrhonism and Against the Logicians). However, 
modern reflection began with Peirce. Peirce was concerned in the first instance with 
scientific knowledge but, clearly, was concerned with knowledge in general as well. 
Haack describes the lie of the land well:
It is clear from Peirce’s critique of Descartes’ epistemology, where falli-
bilism is introduced as the way to avoid both of the supposedly exhaustive 

FALLIBILISM
133
alternatives of Cartesian dogmatism, on the one hand, and outright skepticism, 
on the other, that he takes fallibilism to be an epistemological position inter-
mediate between dogmatism and skepticism.
(1979: 47)
Fallibilism is conceived here as a golden mean between two extremes. The skeptical 
extreme is not hard to characterize: knowledge is impossible for human beings. We 
might intuitively think of this as an extreme of “under-affirming” propositions. But 
there are also various ways of, as it were, “over-affirming.” This represents a family of 
“dogmatic” extremes. Dogmatism is variously conceived as insistence on certainty, 
indubitability, infallibility, incorrigibility, or ignoring skeptical arguments.
What I will do for now is display the definitions from the leading theorists of the 
latter half of the twentieth century (starting off thematically with Peirce) offering a few 
brief observations along the way. Later, I will defend a view that does justice to the best 
of them.
Peirce (c.1897): “We can never be absolutely sure of anything” (quoted in 
Haack 1979: 44).
Comments The OED credits Peirce with introducing the term, including a rather poetic 
statement. Here is the whole of the entry.
The principle that propositions concerning empirical knowledge cannot be 
proved c1897 C. S. PEIRCE Coll. Papers (1931) I. I. iii. 61 Fallibilism . . . only 
says that people cannot attain absolute certainty concerning questions of fact. 
Ibid. 70 Fallibilism is the doctrine that our knowledge is never absolute but 
always swims, as it were, in a continuum of uncertainty and of indeterminacy. 
1941 Mind L. 81 Fallibilism which denies intuitive or certain knowledge even 
of common-sense propositions.
Unlike most recent fallibilists, Peirce couched his view in terms of certainty. I will argue 
in the end that Peirce’s is the best characterization, and capable of explaining what is 
appealing about other plausible accounts.
Haack (1979: 52): “Every proposition is either such that believing it does not 
necessarily entail that it is true, or one might have believed otherwise.”
Comments She gives a formal account: (F*) ∀p(~(Bp ⊃ p) ∨ B~p). The defini-
tion needs to be somewhat complicated, because there are some odd propositions such 
as Someone believes something which are such that they could not be false if someone 
believed them. She takes dogmatism to be the view that there are some propositions 
which are both self-guaranteeing (Bp ⊃ p) as well was indubitable ~B~p. Thus (F*) is 
equivalent to the negation of the conjunction of those properties in an existential claim 
which she takes to be the core Cartesian content.
Mott (1980: 177ff.) points out that (F*) is logically equivalent to ∀pBp, and 
objects that “we must surely grant that fallibilism has more to say than that we are 
capable of believing anything” (179). But, as I will argue, this is remarkably close to the 
core notion of fallibilism, for Haack comments: “His [the fallibilist’s] point is, rather, 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
134
that our liability to believe a proposition doesn’t depend [logically] in any direct way on 
its truth-value” (1979: 50).
Feldman (1981): “(F) S can know that p even if it is possible that S is mis-
taken in believing that p” (266). “(F1) It is possible for S to know that p even 
if S does not have logically conclusive evidence to justify believing that p” 
(266). “What it amounts to is the claim that people can know things on the 
basis of nondeductive arguments. That is, they can know things on the basis 
of inductive, perceptual, or testimonial evidence that does not entail what it is 
evidence for” (267).
Comments Feldman sets aside his first definition as potentially misleading. The prob-
lem, he says, is that it is consistent with the interpretation that entails a denial of the 
factiveness (truth-entailingness) of knowledge or with the mere assertion that contin-
gent truths can be known. If we give at least a competent reading where both operators 
are alethic, then it merely says that it is possible to know a contingent proposition. 
However, if we take the modal as epistemic, then it might have a very plausible inter-
pretation. The epistemic modal couldn’t, of course, be given the standard interpreta-
tion—that p is epistemically possible iff its negation is not entailed by something in 
our corpus of knowledge. For consider the definition of epistemic possibility: e-p = df 
~∃q(Kq ∧ q → ~p). Now Feldman’s proposal on an epistemic reading is that fallibilism 
is the thesis that (Kp ∧ e-~p). So to get the full reading of it we need to substitute 
~p for p in the def of e- above. Doing so, we get e-~p iff ~∃q(Kq and q → ~~p). 
Then Feldman’s definition would look like this. (Kp ∧ ~∃q(Kq and q → ~~p). But 
clearly there is some q such that S knows it and it entails ~~p, namely p! Thus neither 
the reading of (F) with both modals as alethic, nor the reading with the latter with the 
standard interpretation of the epistemic modal gives an adequate account of fallibilism. 
In the final section on probability, we will consider another way of reading the epistemic 
modal which will make sense of (F) in a way that actually makes it superior to (F1).
Jeffrey (1985 (1992)): In “Probability and the Art of Judgment” (originally 
1985, reprinted in the 1992 book of the same name) Jeffrey describes a view 
called “radical probabilism” which asserts that knowledge is consistent with 
probability. He describes the view in the introduction to the book as follows: “it 
doesn’t insist that probabilities be based on certainties: it can be probabilities 
all the way down, to the roots” (1992: 11).
Comments Jeffrey laid the foundations for radical probabilism in his 1968 essay “Probable 
Knowledge” (also reprinted in his 1992) and Chapter 11 of his The Logic of Decision, 
originally published in 1965, second edn 1983, but the material derives from his 1957 
PhD dissertation at Princeton under Hempel. That it is a form of fallibilism in our sense 
is shown by the way he positions it between dogmatism and skepticism (1992: 44–48). 
I shall have more to say below about how Jeffery’s insights are key to the best unified 
account of fallibilism.
Cohen (1988): “A fallibilist theory allows that S can know q on the basis of r 
where r only makes q probable” (91). “Any theory of knowledge that endorses 
the principle that S knows q on the basis of reason r only if r entails q, is 

FALLIBILISM
135
doomed to a skeptical conclusion. Fallibilist theories reject this entailment 
principle thereby avoiding this immediate skeptical result” (91).
Comments Here we see the coming together of fallibilism as antiskeptical as in Peirce, 
and as having as its main content the possibility of knowledge with non-entailing or 
merely probabilifying support as in Feldman. Cohen points out that the fallibilist move 
to avoid a skepticism grounded in requiring entailing evidence for knowledge leads 
naturally to a new skeptical problem from closure. We’ll look at this more below in the 
section on closure.
Carrier (1993: 367, 370): There is no proposition such that S knows that they 
are not mistaken regarding p.
Comments Many of Carrier’s ideas are refuted in advance by Feldman. In the article, 
Carrier is defending his view from a threat posed by a closure principle on knowledge. 
He rejects closure (a) for reasons that confuse epistemic justification with practical 
rationality and (b) simply because to accept the closure principle, he thinks, would force 
a choice between skepticism and dogmatism. Cohen (1988) discusses the possibility 
of the fallibilist preserving closure by accepting a kind of contextualism about knowl-
edge.
David Lewis (1996) writes, concerning fallibilism: “If you claim that S knows 
that P, and yet you grant that S cannot eliminate a certain possibility in which 
not-P, it certainly seems as if you have granted that S does not after all know 
that P. To speak of fallible knowledge, of knowledge despite uneliminated pos-
sibility of error, just sounds contradictory” (549).
Comments With typical gusto, Lewis attempts to create in the reader a sense of despera-
tion for a solution he is prepared to offer and which might seem radical if times did 
not call for such desperate measures. Lewis’s solution is to “go contextual” and take 
knowledge to rule out all “relevant” possibilities. Lewis thinks that it is obvious that 
knowledge requires infallibility and that fallibilism is “mad” (550) but not quite as mad 
as skepticism. Lewis’s comments here have sparked much discussion. Rysiew (2001) 
argues that the problem is resolved through consideration of the pragmatics of lan-
guage. Stanley (2005) seeks to save fallibilism by urging that it is not committed to the 
rectitude of such utterances in the first place, criticizing Rysiew (2001). Dougherty and 
Rysiew (2009) defend fallible knowledge claims. Dodd (2009) favors Dougherty and 
Rysiew (2009) over Stanley (2005), but offers some challenges. Dougherty and Rysiew 
(2010) seek to meet these challenges.
Hetherington (1999: 566): General: “FailK1: one’s knowledge that p is failable, 
if and only if (1) one knows that p but (2) one might have failed to do so.”
Hetherington (1999: 567): Particular: “FailK2: a person x knows failably that p, 
if and only if (1) x knows that p, and (2) there is an accessible possible world 
where (i) p is false (but x believes that p, with the same good evidence for p he 
has here), or (ii), x fails to believe that p (even though p is true and he has the 
same good evidence for p as he has here), or (iii) x fails to have the same good 
evidence for p as he has here (but he still believes that p, and p is true).”

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
136
Comments Notice that as stated this is an account of “failable” knowledge, not “fallible” 
knowledge. The reason he introduces this terminology is that he thinks that philoso-
phers are too tied to using “fallibilism” for empirical propositions only, but the standard 
accounts don’t extend to necessary truths (since they are entailed by anything (even 
nothing)). However, I don’t think it wise to capitulate on this, so I include his failabilist 
theory here as a fallibilist one.
Reed (2002) thinks the cases where S doesn’t believe p are irrelevant (Reed 2002: 
147–148) because there is a class of cases where the reason I don’t believe has an intui-
tive connection not to fallibility, but rather, say, to stubbornness. It’s not clear that this 
isn’t intuitively connected to fallibilism since stubbornness is one of the ways we go 
wrong, but further discussion of the point would be laborious. He says essentially the 
same about clause (iii) of FailK2. He says “It simply is a different cognitive situation 
when S’s belief that p is not based on justification j and thus does not affect S’s knowl-
edge that p when the belief is in fact based on j” (Reed 2002: 155, n21). It’s not clear (a) 
what Reed means by “cognitive situation” or (b) why being in a different one makes the 
fact irrelevant. As will be seen shortly, Reed’s initial particular view is almost identical 
with Hetherington’s. Both Hetherington and Reed do a lot of work in their clarification 
and commentary on their principles.
Pryor (2000: 518): “A fallibilist is someone who believes that we can have 
knowledge on the basis of defeasible justification, justification that does not 
guarantee that our beliefs are correct.”
Pryor (2000: 520): The “fallibilist is only acknowledging that the consider-
ations which support our perceptual beliefs are defeasible and ampliative . . . 
they don’t entail that [say] there’s a hand . . .”
Comments I only want to note here that it’s clear that Pryor is squarely in the Feldman-
Cohen camp on the definition of fallibilism.
Reed (2002): General: “Fallibilism is the philosophical view that conjoins two 
apparently obvious claims. On one hand, we are fallible. We make mistakes—
sometimes even about the most evident things. But, on the other hand, we 
also have quite a bit of knowledge. Despite our tendency to get things wrong 
occasionally, we get it right much more of the time” (143).
Reed (2002): Particular A: (FK5) S fallibly knows that p = df (1) S knows that p 
on the basis of justification j and yet (2) S’s belief that p on the basis of j could 
have failed to be knowledge (149).
Reed (2002): Particular B: (FK6) S fallibly knows that p = df (1) S knows that p 
on the basis of justification j and yet (2) S’s belief that p on the basis of j could 
have been either (i) false or (ii) accidentally true.
Comments First, fallibilism should be, and clearly has historically been, a thesis about 
the compatibility of knowledge with some kind of fallibility thesis. That we have a lot of 
knowledge might be some kind of datum or constraint on philosophical theorizing, but 
it is no part of philosophy to assert such generalizations. Similar remarks apply to the 
statement that we do in fact make mistakes. All that’s needed to get skeptical worries 
going is that we could make mistakes, even under the best sorts of circumstances. This 
is why I preferred to take the root fallibilist notion as fallible reasons rather than fallible 

FALLIBILISM
137
people. People who managed to make no factual errors would still have fallible knowl-
edge if their reasons were fallible reasons.
As mentioned above, Reed’s first precisification—Particular A—is essentially the 
same as that of Hetherington (1999). The main difference with Particular B is that Reed 
focuses on possible Gettierization (broadly construed). Reed’s main purpose in revising 
the standard definition was that it apparently doesn’t capture the sense in which even 
correct beliefs regarding necessary truths might be fallible. His “or it could have been 
lucky” modification to Hetherington (1999) does capture a certain class of these cases, 
for we might make certain pairs of mistakes that “cancel out” to arrive at a true belief 
that some theorem is true (see Reed 2002: 149). This belief is a fallible one, though it 
couldn’t have been mistaken. How is it fallible? It was based on mistakes. (Note that 
this doesn’t require a luck-based account of Gettierization. It would work just as well on 
a no-essential-dependence on a falsehood account (see Feldman 2003: chapter 3).
Reed’s account just doesn’t smack of the kinds of worries that are at the root of the fal-
libilist’s concern. As I’ve stated above and will consider in greater detail below, the sorts 
of concerns fallibilists seem to be worried about are more standard threats to knowledge 
from evil demon type scenarios. Reed’s example is one in which our reasoning is flawed. 
Fallibilism has developed historically in concern over cases where our reasons are as 
good as they could be, the sorts of cases involved in Cartesian demon scenarios, not 
Gettier cases. In evil demon scenarios, the problem is with the way we know—being 
convinced by some kind of experience (and recall that each deductive proof consists of 
basic, intuitive steps). As a result, we could be convinced of anything under the right 
circumstances, including necessary falsehoods.
Stanley (2005): “Fallibilism is the doctrine that someone can know that p, 
even though their evidence for p is logically consistent with the truth of not-p” 
(127).
Comment Stanley is right in line with the Feldman-Cohen model of fallibility of reasons 
in terms of non-entailment. This leads back nicely to a consideration of some of the 
problems that arise for such fallibilists.
Closure, Skepticism, and Dogmatism(s)
From the beginning, there has been a tendency to treat fallibilism as an alternative to 
either dogmatism or skepticism. Recall Haack’s point earlier about Peirce seeing fallibil-
ism as a mean between the extremes of skepticism and dogmatism. Carrier (1993: 363) 
also thinks along these lines. But it is much better to think of fallibilism as consistent 
with either dogmatism or skepticism. The relationship between these views comes out 
best when considering the issue of closure.
I’ll consider the problem of necessary truths below, but there’s a clear consensus view 
that fallible knowledge is knowledge based on non-entailing reasons. To say that ϕ 
entails ψ is to say that it is not metaphysically possible for ϕ to be true and yet ψ not 
be true. The denial of entailment is to say that it is possible for ϕ to be true and yet ψ 
not be true, (ϕ ∧ ~ψ). So as soon as we allow that one might know p on the basis 
of evidence E even when it’s not the case that E entails p we are faced with the class 
of propositions which are consistent with the evidence but inconsistent with what we 
take the evidence to support. This class includes all sorts of skeptical hypotheses. If our 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
138
evidence E entailed p, then anything incompatible with p would be incompatible with 
E (via Modus Tollens). But once we become fallibilists we countenance non-entailing 
evidence. Some fallibilists will allow that I can know that I see a zebra on the basis 
of perceptual evidence alone. And yet the skeptical hypothesis that it’s really just a 
cleverly painted mule is consistent with my evidence and inconsistent with my com-
monsense belief. In this way, fallibilists face a closure-generated skeptical threat. It will 
be easy to show why this is the case by briefly considering the relationship between the 
three positions in a closure-based skeptical argument. It will be easiest to grasp the dia-
lectic by taking a particularized form of the closure argument rather than attempting a 
fully general statement. It’s not hard to see how the argument generalizes.
Closure-based Skeptical Argument
1. I know that’s a zebra.
2. I know that if that’s a zebra, it’s not a cleverly painted mule.
3. If 1 & 2, then I can know that’s not a cleverly painted mule.
4. But I can’t know it’s not a cleverly painted mule (how on Earth could I know 
that?!)
5. So I don’t know it’s a zebra after all (since the entailment is obvious to me).
In this way, it can be easy to talk oneself into a skeptical position. Premise 3 is stated in 
such a way to avoid detailed consideration of what a final closure principle would look 
like (but see David and Warfield 2008). The skeptic accepts this dialectic, the dogma-
tist insists that she does in fact know it’s not a cleverly disguised mule (without offering 
other considerations). This seems to leave the non-skeptical, non-dogmatic fallibilist 
in the position of choosing between contextualism and a denial of closure, neither of 
which are very attractive. Cohen (1988) argues, persuasively, that though fallibilism 
avoids certain kinds of skeptical arguments, it doesn’t by itself avoid the closure argu-
ment, and so he takes the contextualist route. Carrier (1993) takes the closure-denying 
route. Feldman (1981) seems to be a fallibilist dogmatist, and Pryor (2000) clearly is 
(Pryor attributes the position to Moore and the dishonorific term “dogmatism” seems to 
be warranted by the refusal to offer non-question-begging reasons against the skeptic, 
see also Carrier (1993: 367) and Haack (1979: 47).) Jeffrey (1992: 45) seems to see 
Descartes’ insistence on certainty as central to dogmatism. But one could be a fallibilist 
skeptic by arguing that closure holds, contextualism is false, and rejecting dogmatism.
A Fully General Fallibilism: The Ever-Present Possibility of Misleading, 
Compelling Experience
Sometimes, etymology is utterly misleading. In the present case, however, I think it is 
illuminating. The root for “fallible” doesn’t have as its immediate connotation “error” 
but, rather, “deceit” (that deceit entails error is not an objection). A common phrase 
used to illustrate it is “Nisi fallit me animus,” which means “Unless my mind deceives 
me.” Variations on the phrase in Latin have one’s senses deceiving one. But this leads 
to a fruitful play on words, for “animus” can also mean “spirit” as in “evil spirit” as in 
Cartesian demon! I mentioned in several places above the role Cartesian skeptical wor-
ries played in the formation of fallibilism. I now bring those considerations together into 
the following insight.

FALLIBILISM
139
Cartesian Insight Fallibilism arises out of three facts: (i) All our knowledge is 
ultimately grounded in our experiences, broadly construed to include what it’s 
like to have rational insights, (ii) our experiences generally compel belief, (iii) 
for any p, it is metaphysically possible that our experiences lead us to believe 
that p (a Cartesian demon could cause us to have experiences which would 
compel our assent to anything she chose), without regard for the truth of p or 
our ability to discriminate whether the experiences are veridical or not.
Hetherington comes very close to this when he says “That skeptical reasoning [the 
uneliminated possibility of deception by an evil demon] is meant to reveal a problem 
with the kind, not simply the amount, of fallibilist evidence that Descartes is purport-
edly using” (2002: 91). And remember that Hetherington and Reed are both animated 
by the desire to give an account of fallibilism that covers necessary truths, which it 
seems the traditional Feldman-Cohen account does not. Peirce also sees the possibility 
of deception as the root of fallibilism about necessary truths: “How does any individual 
here know but that I am a hypnotist, and that when he comes out of my influence he 
may see that twice two is four is merely his distorted idea?” (quoted in Haack 1979: 
44). So it’s plausible that even the fallibility of belief in necessary truths is captured by 
deception worries. It may not in fact be possible that I am mistaken, yet I still cannot be 
certain that any belief is true because I cannot discriminate between episodes of veridical 
experience and deceptive experience.
This shows what is right after all in Haack’s most general treatment of fallibilism 
when she says that the fallibilist’s point is “that our liability to believe a proposition 
doesn’t depend [logically] in any direct way upon its truth value” (1979: 50). Indeed, her 
penultimate candidate for a definition of fallibilism is (F4) ∀pBp, we might believe 
anything!
So I think there is considerable merit to the Cartesian insight concerning fallibilism. 
It remains, however, to distill the Cartesian insight into a particular account of fallible 
knowledge. I will now put forward the following suggestions for how to do that.
DFD S fallibly knows that p = df (i) S knows that p, but (ii) S cannot dis-
criminate between (1) a veridical experience caused in the right way by (or 
otherwise appropriately related to) the fact that p, (2) an altogether misleading 
experience, and (3) an experience deviantly caused by (or otherwise inappro-
priately related to) the fact that p (like a benevolent spirit causing in you the 
impression of a truth of a theorem for which you have no proof).
Or perhaps more simply:
DFC S fallibly knows that p = df (i) S knows that p, but (ii) S cannot be certain 
that p (if for no other reason than that S can’t tell for sure that she’s not being 
deceived).
My suggestions are not specifically intended to be original or distinct. My hope is just 
to take the family of ideas surrounding the Cartesian Insight and distill them into the 
simplest and most illuminating form. I said above that intuitive fallibilism was the thesis 
that all human knowledge is on the basis of fallible reasons. Then I offered the following 
definition.

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
140
S fallibly knows that p = df S knows that p on the basis of fallible reasons.
With the following connector,
S’s belief B that p is fallible knowledge iff S fallibly knows p.
fallibilism can be defined as follows:
Fallibilism = df The thesis that all human knowledge is fallible knowledge 
(knowledge based on fallible reasons).
Fallibilism could also be relativized to domains if one thought that some human knowl-
edge was possibly infallible. This definition could lead to skepticism, if knowledge 
entailed the ability to discriminate between veridical and deceptive experiences (the 
conditional implicit in the definition would then be trivially true), but non-skeptical 
fallibilism would be defined thus.
Non-skeptical Fallibilism = df The thesis that, possibly, there is some fallible 
knowledge.
A very sympathetic reading of Hetherington’s or Reed’s position can bring their 
accounts in line with the Cartesian Insight. Reed’s own example relies on an error that 
could easily have been avoided, whereas the Cartesian worry is about knowledge in 
cases where our reasons are as good as they could (humanly) possibly be. But if the lack 
of a proper connection between justification and truth is glossed in such a way as to 
focus on basic sources of belief, then there is something to the “it could have failed to be 
knowledge” account pioneered by Hetherington and pruned by Reed.
Probability
I think there is something to the Cartesian Insight concerning fallibilism and so I think 
there’s something to DFD and DFC. However, it would be nice to salvage the core of 
the Feldman-Cohen account adopted also by Pryor and Stanley and many others and 
even to wed it to the earliest accounts in Peirce—“We can never be absolutely sure of 
anything”—and that of Jeffrey’s probable knowledge. I think this can be done by appeal 
to the notion of epistemic probability.
As noted above, Cohen takes the non-entailing evidence account to be equivalent to 
some probability account. Here’s one reason to think the probabilistic account is more 
basic. Suppose you have E as evidence for p. Suppose further that E entails p. Still, your 
grip on E might be less than maximal, so the total probability of p might still be less than 
one, even though your evidence entails your conclusion. This point was driven home 
by Jeffrey (in all the works cited thus far). For example, suppose you see a man in a yel-
low hat down by the dock in the fog and thus acquire There was a man with a yellow hat 
on the dock as basic evidence. This entails that there was a man down by the dock and 
that there was a yellow-hatted person down by the dock. Yet because of the fog, you’re 
not certain it wasn’t a green hat, or a woman dressed as a man. Thus even though your 
evidence entails the latter propositions, they are not certain for you because they are 
not grounded in a simple, vivid sense impression. Eventually, justification bottoms out 

FALLIBILISM
141
in experiential grounds often unmediated by beliefs about the nature of your experience 
(and thus it would be wrong to say that my evidence consists in such propositions as I am 
appeard to yellow-hatted-manly or I’m having a foggy experience as of a man in a yellow hat. 
This is just the kind of mythical given Jeffrey opposed). In keeping with these themes 
I’ll shortly propose a very simple probabilistic account of fallibilism. First, though, I 
need to treat Reed’s attempt at a probabilistic account.
(FK7) S fallibly knows that p = df (1) S knows that p on the basis of justifica-
tion j where (2) j makes probable the belief that p in the sense that S’s belief 
belongs to the class of beliefs which have the same (type) j and most, but not 
all, of which are true.
There are too many questions about Reed’s proposal to consider in detail here, but here 
are some starters. 1. How does it not grossly succumb to the generality problem regard-
ing types of justification (he mentions bases as varied as “reason” and modus ponens)? 
2. What does it mean to have modus ponens as a justification? 3. How can this possibly 
work on a relative frequency model of probability which Reed endorses (think recently 
disenvatted brain)? Also, it wouldn’t capture the fact that we’re still fallible in those 
laudable worlds where we contingently get everything right, since all the frequencies 
of all the classes would be 1. Fortunately, there is a better way to give a probabilistic 
account of fallible knowledge.
Epistemic Probability and Necessary Truths
Help is to be found in turning to an intuitive notion of evidential probability. Plantinga 
(1993) contains many convincing arguments that epistemic probability comes apart 
from logical probability. That no exception has ever been found to Goldbach’s conjec-
ture clearly counts in favor of its being true. The fact that many great mathematicians 
think it must be true also counts in its favor. So in a very sensible sense, we have some 
limited but clearly inconclusive evidence for Goldbach’s conjecture. That its logical 
probability is 1 or 0 needn’t bother us, since in epistemic matters, the logical probability 
is not relevant unless it is known, just as that the physical probability of some empirical 
proposition is 1 is not relevant to epistemic probability unless that fact is known. Thus, 
we can sensibly say that the epistemic probability of Goldbach’s conjecture is greater 
than 0 but less than 1. Applying that notion, we have the following.
FP Fallibilism is the thesis that, necessarily, any belief we might have has an 
epistemic probability less than one.
Or alternatively,
FC Fallibilism is the thesis that we cannot be certain of anything.
Fallible knowledge would then be defined thus.
FKP S fallibly knows that p = df (i) S knows that p, but (ii) the evidential prob-
ability of p for S is less than 1.
FKC S fallibly knows that p = df (i) S knows that p, but (ii) S cannot be certain 
that p.

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
142
Finally, Dougherty and Rysiew (2009, 2010) give an alternative to the standard epis-
temic reading of “might.” They state that the right way to think of epistemic possibility 
is non-zero evidential probability. This makes FP equivalent to
FP* Fallibilism is the thesis that any of our beliefs might (epistemically) be 
false.
This would give, then, this final definition of fallible knowledge.
FK* S fallibly knows that p = df (i) S knows that p, but (ii) p might (epistemi-
cally) be false.
Ironically, this is Feldman’s (1981) original proposal (p. 266). I mentioned in my com-
ments on it that on an alternative epistemic reading of the modal it might prove satis-
factory after all. I think I’ve shown there’s a plausible case for that now. Note that it will 
ordinarily be conversationally inappropriate to say “I know that p, but p might be false” 
even if it’s true, since this would ordinarily mislead an interlocutor to infer that the 
possibility was an epistemically significant one; one that might constitute a knowledge 
defeater. This is also discussed in Dougherty and Rysiew (2009, 2010).
References
Carrier, L.S. (1993) “How to Define Nonskeptical Fallibilism,” Philosophia 22(3–4): 361–372.
Cohen, S. (1988) “How to Be a Fallibilist,” in J. Tomberlin (ed.), Philosophical Perspectives 2: Epistemology, 
Atascadero, CA: Ridgeview Publishing Co.
David, M. and T. Warfield. (2008) “Knowledge-Closure and Skepticism,” in Q. Smith (ed.), Epistemology: 
New Essays, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dodd, D. (2010) “Confusion about Concessive Knowledge Attributions,” Synthese 172(3): 381–396.
Dougherty, T. and P. Rysiew. (2009) “Fallibilism, Epistemic Possibility, and Concessive Knowledge 
Attributions,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research Vol. LXXVIII No. 1, January 2009.
——. (2010) “Clarity about Concessive Knowledge Attributions,” Synthese. Forthcoming.
Feldman, R. (1981) “Fallibilism and Knowing that One Knows,” The Philosophical Review, 90(2): 
266–282.
——. (2003) Epistemology, Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Jeffrey, R. (1992) Probability and the Art of Judgment, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——. (1985) “Probability and the Art of Judgment,” in P. Achinstein and O. Hannaway (eds), Observation, 
Experimentation, and Hypothesis in Modern Physical Science, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——. (1983 (orig. 1965)) The Logic of Decision, 2nd Edn, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Haack, S. (1979) “Fallibilism and Necessity,” Synthese, 41(1): 37–63.
Hetherington, S. (1999) “Knowing Failably,” Journal of Philosophy, 96: 565–587.
——. (2002) “Fallibilism and Knowing That One Is Not Dreaming.” Canadian Journal of Philosophy, 32: 
83–102.
Lewis, D. (1996) “Elusive Knowledge,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 74: 649–667.
Mott, P. (1980) “Haack on Fallibilism.” Analysis, 40(4) (Oct.): 177–183.
Plantinga, A. (1993) Warrant and Proper Function, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pryor, J. (2000) “The Skeptic and the Dogmatist,” Noûs (34)4: 517–549.
Reed, B. (2002) “How to Think About Fallibilism,” Philosophical Studies, 107: 143–157.
Rysiew, P. (2001) “The Context-Sensitivity of Knowledge Attributions,” Noûs 35(4): 477–514.
Sextus Empiricus. See Loeb Classical Library, Series No. 291, Against the Logicians, and Series no. 273, 
Outlines of Pyrrhonism.
Stanley, J. (2005) “Fallibilism and Concessive Knowledge Attributions,” Analysis 65(2): 126–131.

FALLIBILISM
143
Further Reading
Howard-Snyder, D., Howard-Snyder, F., and Feit, N. (2003) “Infallibilism and Gettier’s Legacy,” Philosophy 
and Phenomenological Research, 66(2): 304–327. (Connects the concept of fallibilism with a historically 
important aspect of epistemology.)
Kaplan, M. (2006) “If you know, you can’t be wrong,” in S. Hetherington (ed.), Epistemology Futures, Oxford 
University Press, 180–198. (Shows how disjunctivist theories are irrelevant to the issue and how an his-
torically important kind of thought stemming from Austin might impact reflection on fallibilism.)
Levi, I. (1980) The Enterprise of Knowledge: An Essay on Knowledge, Creedal Probability and Chance, Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press. (Gives a critique of Peirce and Jeffrey that distinguishes between different types of fal-
libilism with a focus on the distinction between belief measures and belief dynamics.)

144
14
EXTERNALISM/
INTERNALISM
Hamid Vahid
The externalism/internalism debate in contemporary epistemology arises out of concerns 
for a proper explication of the concept of epistemic justification. Internalists maintain 
that something can confer justification on an agent’s belief only if it falls within his 
or her perspective on the world. Different versions of internalism result from how the 
notion of perspective is to be understood. Externalism, by contrast, allows, at least, 
some justifying factors of a belief to be external to the agent’s cognitive perspective. 
The internalism/externalism question in epistemology should not be confused with 
an identically named dispute in the philosophy of mind where externalist theories of 
mental content, according to which the contents of an individual’s thoughts do not 
supervene on her intrinsic properties, currently enjoy something like the status of 
orthodoxy. This has led to an interesting question (which we shall not address here) as 
to whether content externalism favors any side of the internalism/externalism divide 
(Goldberg 2007).
The internalism/externalism controversy reflects fundamental intuitions at the heart 
of our pre-theoretic concept of justification. After identifying the two basic elements in 
an agent’s epistemic situation, the agent’s perspective and the objective circumstances, 
on which the questions of justification turn, I shall try to delineate the contours of 
internalism, examine its different varieties and review the main objections that have 
been leveled against it. Following this, a number of putative problems with externalism 
will be investigated. The distinction between internalism and externalism will then 
be glossed in the light of responses to the problem of skepticism. I will conclude by 
examining the possibility of hybrid positions within the debate.
1. Elements of a Theory of Justification and the 
Internalism/Externalism Divide
Although internalist and externalist accounts of both knowledge and justification 
have been proposed, it is the concept of justification that has been the main focus of 
the debate. Epistemic justification is usually thought of as that species of justification 
that (in conjunction with certain requirements to handle Gettier-type cases) turns a 
true belief into knowledge. It differs, however, from truth in being defeasible and a 
matter of degree, and in being a function of an agent’s perspective. Accordingly, at 
an intuitive level, every epistemic situation involving a cognizer forming a belief 

EXTERNALISM/INTERNALISM
145
can be diagnosed with regard to its perspectival and objective dimensions. The 
perspectival dimension is characterized in terms of the phenomenology of the 
cognizer’s epistemic situation, how things appear from his or her perspective and the 
epistemically relevant factors available to the agent. “Availability” is an epistemic 
notion suggesting cognitive accessibility. Equally relevant to the perspectival dimension 
of justification is how responsibly an agent behaves vis-à-vis the evidence available to 
her when forming a belief, that is, whether her beliefs are based on the total evidence 
she possesses.
The objective dimension, on other hand, is construed in terms of how things actually 
are independently of the cognizer. In evaluating an agent’s belief, we want to know if 
there is, so to speak, a “good fit” between her cognitive powers and the world so that 
her representations reliably match what they represent. This concern is what underlies 
our intuition that there is an intimate link between truth and justification (but see 
Ginet 1975; Pollock 1974). Indeed, it is widely believed that epistemic justification 
is distinct from other species of justification such as moral or pragmatic justification 
in that it is intended to serve the so-called “truth goal,” that is, the goal of believing 
truth and avoiding falsity. Commensurate with the two dimensions, justification will 
be both a function of how things appear from the cognizer’s perspective as well as how 
things in actual fact are. While the internalist view is naturally geared towards the 
perspectival character of epistemic justification, externalism seeks to highlight its 
objective dimension. On most internalist views, how things are need not play any role 
in the justification of one’s beliefs.
2. Internalism: Prospects and Problems
Given the preceding remarks, one can characterize internalism in general as claiming 
that only what is within an agent’s perspective can determine the justification of her 
beliefs. Depending on how the notion of “being within an agent’s perspective” is to be 
understood, the following versions of internalism can be identified.
A) Mentalism
The most natural interpretation of the general internalist thesis is, perhaps, one according 
to which only the internal states of an agent at a given time determine whether her 
beliefs are justified. These internal states are usually identified with the relevant mental 
states of the agent. Thus, the mentalist claims that one’s justification in holding a belief 
supervenes on one’s mental states so that no two people can be in identical mental 
states while one is, but the other is not, justified in holding a particular belief (Conee 
and Feldman 2001). An externalist, on this account, is someone who maintains that 
two people can be in the same present mental states while one has a justified belief and 
the other does not. Since mentalism remains neutral on the question whether these 
mental states need be accessible to an agent if they are to confer justification on her 
beliefs it does not seem to do justice to the intuitions that drive paradigm internalist 
positions. Consequently, many epistemologists are disinclined to view it as a genuine 
form of internalism (for another, non-standard, version of internalism see McDowell 
1995).

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
146
B) Access Internalism
While mentalism puts a metaphysical gloss on the notion of “being within an agent’s 
perspective,” it is possible to construe it epistemically and take the general internalist 
thesis as saying that only those factors to which an agent has some sort of unproblematic 
access, in the sense of falling within his sphere of awareness, can play the role of justifiers 
for his beliefs. Thus understood, internalism accords no special status to mental states 
as such. It so happens that many such states are those to which we have unproblematic 
access. It is important to note that the “access” of “access internalism” is not just any 
knowledge or justified belief but should, rather, be analyzed as involving direct or 
introspective knowledge (or justified belief).
Access internalism comes in different varieties or strengths depending on how one 
construes the type of access as well its objects. Starting with the former, a strong form 
of internalism emerges if an agent is required to be actually aware of the conditions that 
constitute justification. Weaker versions would result from loosening the accessibility 
condition requiring the cognizer only to be able to access the justifiers of his belief. So, 
while a strong version of internalism restricts the justifying factors to what an agent already 
knows or justifiably believes, weaker versions enlarge that to include what the cognizer can 
come to know on reflection. Different strengths of internalism also emerge if one focuses, 
not on the kind of access, but on the type of its objects, that is, the accessible items. These 
objects of awareness can be usefully divided into two distinct groups: (i) the justifying 
factors, and (ii) their epistemizing features, that is, the features in virtue of which they 
justify the beliefs in question.
A particularly strong form of access internalism (SAI) results if one requires that, for our 
beliefs to be justified, we should not only be aware of their justifying factors or grounds but 
also of their adequacy, that is, of how those factors support the justification of the beliefs in 
question. This is the version of internalism that most internalists have in mind when they 
insist that the cognitive accessibility requirement should enable an agent to find out, with 
regard to any possible belief he holds, whether the belief is justified (e.g., BonJour 1985: 
55). Some of these internalists uphold a truth-conducive conception of justification, and, 
thus, require that one should not only know (justifiably believe) what one’s reasons are but 
also why one’s beliefs are probable on one’s reasons (Bonjour 1985). Others, however, deny 
that epistemic justification is truth-conducive (Chisholm 1989: 76; Foley 1987).
Defenders of SAI take their analysis of justification to be in accord with the traditional 
epistemological quest for good (adequate) reasons for one’s beliefs. For what motivated the 
traditional concern to regard knowledge, as opposed to, say, lucky guessing, as epistemically 
valuable, was that, in addition to true belief, knowledge requires good reasons or evidence. 
The issue becomes particularly salient if one takes a first-person point of view and asks 
oneself whether one’s beliefs are justified. Insofar as one’s concern is to know whether one’s 
beliefs are more likely to be true, rather than being merely hunches, there does not seem 
to be any adequate way of figuring this out other than by asking oneself what reasons one 
has for the beliefs in question and how good they are.
To defend this claim, internalists often appeal to the following sort of scenarios (BonJour 
1985). Consider an agent, Norman, who is a reliable clairvoyant and spontaneously and 
forcefully finds himself with beliefs emanating from this source. He accepts these beliefs 
without bothering to find out if they are true and possesses no available evidence for 
or against the reliability of such power or for his possessing it. Now, from an objective 
point of view, Norman is a reliable register of information about his environment in just 

EXTERNALISM/INTERNALISM
147
the same way that a thermometer reliably registers information about its environmental 
climate. However, from Norman’s perspective his beliefs are no different from mere 
hunches or arbitrary convictions. They obtain purely as a result of some nomological 
relation between him and his environment. But why, says the internalist, should the 
holding of such a relation, entirely outside Norman’s ken, render his beliefs epistemically 
justified? Even though such beliefs are invariably true, from Norman’s subjective 
perspective, it is an accident that they are, which is why it would be irrational and 
irresponsible for Norman to decide to act on his clairvoyant beliefs. The moral of the 
story, which is what motivates SAI, is that it would be implausible to expect of reasons 
that fall outside the cognitive grasp of an agent to confer justification on his pertinent 
beliefs.
Before proceeding to examine SAI, it is worth considering a once popular argument 
according to which SAI follows directly from the requirements of a deontological 
conception of justification (e.g., BonJour 1985). On such an account of justification, 
to say that a belief is deontologically justified is to say that in holding that belief, the 
agent has flouted no (subjective) epistemic obligations, and is, thus, subject to no blame 
or disapproval. But, goes the argument, if it is freedom from blameworthiness that is 
supposed to constitute the justification of a belief, then this can only be the case if the 
agent knows or is aware of what his epistemic obligations are. One cannot be rightfully 
blamed for failing to take into account obligations that fall entirely outside one’s ken. 
This implies that the factors that form the bases of justified beliefs (justifiers) must 
be internal to the agent in the sense of being reflectively accessible to (knowable by) 
him.
This line of reasoning is, however, no longer popular. Laurence BonJour himself is now 
inclined to reject it on the ground that epistemic blameworthiness is neither necessary 
nor sufficient for epistemic justification. Following William Alston (1988a) he invokes, 
what he calls, epistemic poverty cases where, despite doing all that can be reasonably 
expected of agents, they form their beliefs on less than adequate evidence (BonJour and 
Sosa 2003). However, even setting aside this problem, it is far from clear that the above 
argument supports the internalist thesis. For all that it entails is that an agent must have 
some way of coming to know what the justifiers of his beliefs are (without specifying any 
particular mode of knowledge or access). Without further assumptions, it does not follow 
from this fact that the pertinent evidence for a belief should be reflectively accessible to 
a cognizer (Goldman 1999).
2.1. Access Internalism: Problems with Intension
Thus far, we have been trying to draw the contours of internalism and examine its 
motivations and rationales. But coming up with a definition is not the same thing as 
claiming that internalism is a defensible position. Indeed, reasons have been advanced 
to show that internalism is an untenable position.
A) A Sellarsian Dilemma
Let us recall that according to SAI an agent’s belief p is justified only if he justifiably 
believes that (i) the ground (e) of his belief obtains, and that (ii) e adequately supports 
p. However, as Alston (1986) and others have noted, the second requirement of SAI 
engenders an infinite regress. For if in order to be justified in believing that p, I must be 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
148
justified in believing that my evidence e adequately supports p, the justification of this 
latter (higher-order) belief would, in turn, require that it is based on further evidence e1 
and that I justifiably believe that that e1 adequately supports my belief that e adequately 
supports p and so on ad infinitum. The ensuing regress not only involves an infinite 
number of beliefs, but an infinite number of beliefs of ever-increasing complexity 
(Fumerton 1995: 89).
In the face of this problem, the only way out, it seems, is to follow Alston (1988b), 
drop the higher-order requirement and be content with a weak version of internalism 
that only requires an agent to be aware of the grounds of his beliefs and recognize them 
as such. But the resulting position is too weak to be regarded as a species of internalism. 
To avoid both the regress problem for internalism and its collapse into externalism, 
an internalist should find a different mode of access to the adequacy of his reasons 
that would allow him to avoid these pitfalls. Consider, as an example, the so-called 
relation of acquaintance that some internalists have claimed to be distinct from any 
intentional propositional attitude (Fumerton 1995). The idea is that an agent’s belief 
that p is justified if he is directly acquainted with his belief p, with the fact that p and 
with the correspondence holding between that belief and that fact. What is claimed 
to be distinctive about the relation of acquaintance is that one can be acquainted 
with a fact while lacking the conceptual resources to represent that fact in thought. 
Accordingly, being non-intentional and non-propositional, this mental act requires no 
further justification, thus, giving rise to no regress while satisfying the basic internalist 
requirement by allowing the character of an agent’s evidence, in virtue of which his 
belief is justified, to be cognitively given to him.
Setting aside worries about the viability of the idea of acquaintance itself, the latter 
part of this claim is questionable. For, as BonJour observes, if we are to think of the 
direct apprehension of evidence as being non-propositional and non-judgmental, then 
it would involve “no claim or assertion regarding [the] character [of the cognizer’s 
evidence], so that who thus has such an apprehension is apparently not thereby aware 
that it has such-and-such features, then in what way is his belief that he has [evidence] 
with those features justified by that apprehension?” (BonJour and Sosa 2003: 19). The 
thought is that this particular relation of direct acquaintance, thus understood, between 
an agent and the justification-conferring grounds of his beliefs provides no guarantee 
that the agent conceives of those grounds as being relevant to the justification of the 
beliefs in question.
The preceding remarks provide a dilemma for an internalist: Either the internalist 
requirement of access involves conceiving of the justifier of a belief as being relevant 
to its justification, in which case a vicious regress ensues, or it does not, in which 
case internalism would lose its motivation for imposing such a constraint as the 
agent’s epistemic situation would be no different from his position on an externalist 
view. BonJour (BonJour and Sosa 2003) traces the original source of this dilemma to 
Wilfred Sellars (1963) (cf. Bergmann 2006). Although BonJour himself defends 
SAI, he does not think that this makes him vulnerable to the regress charge (BonJour 
2006). He claims that although in addition to grasping one’s belief and its ground, 
one should also recognize the fit between the two, this recognition is not itself an 
independent judgment requiring further independent justification. As Bergmann 
(2006: 35–8) has argued, however, it is unclear whether BonJour succeeds in escaping 
the regress.

EXTERNALISM/INTERNALISM
149
B) Internalist Good Reasons
SAI theorists, as we saw, take the central rationale of their position to involve the idea of 
an agent having good reasons for thinking that his beliefs are true. For those internalists, 
such as BonJour, who advocate a truth-conducive conception of epistemic justification, 
these reasons must be both internal to the individual’s first-person perspective as well 
being objectively truth-conducive. The question is whether internalist reasons can 
combine these two features. For, recalling BonJour’s epistemic poverty cases, it seems 
that internalists want a sort of epistemic justification that is more objective than 
deontological justification and epistemic blamelessness. This means that the objective 
goodness of internalist reasons cannot be analyzed in terms of an agent blamelessly taking 
them to be good or adequate from his own perspective. After all, the agent might be in an 
epistemic poverty situation and could even be blamelessly unaware of his predicament. 
It follows from this that what determines the adequacy of an agent’s reasons might 
include factors that fall outside his reflective purview and might, thus, be external to 
him (BonJour and Sosa 2003: 164). Of course, as pointed out earlier, not all internalists 
commit themselves to the truth conducivity of epistemic justification. Richard Foley 
(1987), for example, has propounded an internalist and radically subjective account of 
justification (rationality) according to which it is egocentrically rational for an agent 
to believe a proposition only if he would think on deep reflection that believing it is 
conducive to having an accurate and comprehensive belief system.
2.2. Access Internalism: Problems with Extension
Thus far we have been concerned with the question whether a coherent and internally 
stable account of the intension of “internalism” can be provided. We shall now focus 
on the extension of this concept and investigate the scope of internalist knowledge and 
justified belief.
A) Unsophisticated Epistemic Agents
It is rather uncontroversial that young children and individuals with limited cognitive 
abilities do have knowledge and justified beliefs about the world and their environments. 
But, by hypothesis, they lack the resources (and might even lack the necessary concepts) 
to follow the type of arguments and complicated reasoning that the internalists take to 
constitute good reasons for the obtaining of such knowledge and beliefs. Internalists 
often concede that they are unable to account for this fact though they also deny that 
these individuals have knowledge and justified beliefs in an externalist sense (BonJour 
and Sosa 2003: 34).
B) Non-reflective Justification and Over-intellectualization
Where the previous objection is concerned with cognitively unsophisticated individuals, 
it is far from obvious that even ordinary cognizers are in possession of any acceptable 
internalist justification. Consider, for example, the case of our most basic beliefs about 
our environment. If any of our perceptual beliefs are to be justified, this will presumably 
be because they are grounded in our justified beliefs about how things appear to us 
in perception (and, on some views, grounded in our sensory experiences). On an 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
150
internalist account of justification, knowing how one is justified in holding such beliefs 
is tantamount to knowing the mechanism through which facts about the world can be 
derived from facts about perceptual appearances. This is a deep philosophical problem 
and there is hardly any consensus among epistemologists regarding its resolution. To 
expect ordinary cognizers to be in possession of such explanations seems gratuitous 
(BonJour and Sosa 2003: 34).
The root cause of the problem, I believe, is that the internalist approach in epistemology 
seems to suggest an over-intellectualized and deliberative picture of our belief-forming 
activities. We are led to think that, when forming a belief, we are in full control of 
the choices that we make vis-à-vis our epistemic resources; that, for example, we are free 
to decide which body of evidence to ignore and what grounds to take as justification-
conferring. But many of our beliefs are not formed in such a deliberative manner. Often 
we find ourselves holding beliefs that are involuntary and unreflective with some of them 
being justified.
3. Externalism: Some Varieties
Of the two dimensions of epistemic justification mentioned earlier, it is the objective 
dimension that externalism seeks to highlight. Thus, although externalist views have 
appeared in many forms, what they all have in common is the denial of the central thesis 
of internalism, namely, the view that we must be able to reflect on the justification-
conferring grounds of our beliefs and their adequacy if they are to be justified. On an 
externalist account, some (or perhaps all) of the factors contributing to the justification 
of an agent’s beliefs can fall outside his perspective and, thus, be unavailable to him on 
reflection.
The best way to get a feel for the externalist thesis is to review some of the earlier 
and later versions of externalist theories. Some of these theories are concerned with the 
explication of knowledge rather than justification like the causal theory of knowledge. 
In an early response to the Gettier problem, Alvin Goldman (1967) proposed a causal 
account of knowledge that did not involve a justification clause, but required rather that 
there be an appropriate causal relation between an agent’s belief and its truth maker. As 
long as the relation in question in fact obtains, the agent can be said to have knowledge, 
regardless of whether it is accessible to him on reflection. The causal theory soon fell out 
of favor, setting the stage for the introduction of a more interesting account of knowledge 
due to Robert Nozick (1981), which construed knowledge as belief that is counterfactually 
sensitive to its truth value, that is, tracks its truth. It is quite plausible to see the tracking 
theory as a direct descendent of the causal theory of knowledge, especially if one adopts a 
counterfactual analysis of causation.
The paradigm example of an externalist theory, however, is Goldman’s (1986) 
process reliabilism which seeks to provide an externalist account of both knowledge and 
justification. In its simplest form, process reliabilism is basically the view that justification 
(knowledge) arises from reliable cognitive processes. Another variant of reliabilism is 
the so-called reliable indicator theory according to which a belief is justified in case 
it is based on reasons that are reliable indicators of truth (Alston 1985). Dubbed by 
Goldman as a “historical” theory, process reliabilism makes the positive epistemic status 
of a belief a function of its history and of how it has been formed. It is, thus, an externalist 
theory par excellence as it does not require of a cognizer to know or be aware that his 
belief-forming processes are reliable. As long as a belief is formed by a reliable process it 

EXTERNALISM/INTERNALISM
151
is justified. A more recent version of externalism (which is actually a variation on the 
reliability theme) is Alvin Plantinga’s proper function theory (1993).
3.1. Problems with Externalism
Each of the preceding theories has been criticized on the basis of its particular features, 
but I shall concentrate on their externalist character, and, for the sake of concreteness, 
pick out the simple version of Goldman’s reliability theory as a paradigm externalist 
theory of epistemic justification.
A) Changing the Subject
Externalist theories of justification accommodate our intuitions regarding the objective 
character of epistemic justification, as justification, on such accounts, is clearly truth-
conducive. Goldman (1986), for example, presents his reliability theory in a framework 
of rules and says that a belief is justified if it is permitted by a right system of justification-
rules (J-rules). A system R of J-rules is said to be right if and only if R permits certain 
(basic) psychological processes whose instantiation would result in a truth-ratio of beliefs 
that meets some specified high threshold. The internalists, however, are unimpressed, 
for they think that this leaves out what is philosophically interesting about the concept 
of justification (as it is traditionally understood). For from a first-person perspective the 
justification of our beliefs is supposed to provide us with assurance for truth, whereas 
on an externalist account, all that matters for justification is the satisfaction of certain 
conditions that might not be accessible to us on reflection. Thus, possessing externalist 
knowledge (justification) does not seem to be relevant to our understanding of how 
we know the things we know and providing assurance for our beliefs (Fumerton 1995; 
Stroud 1989). By denying the accessibility requirement, the externalists have, in effect, 
changed the subject matter of epistemology.
B) The Internalist Character of “No-Defeater” Requirement
Consider the following version of BonJour’s clairvoyant example. Again, Norman is 
a reliable clairvoyant who has no reason available to him that his clairvoyant beliefs 
are reliably produced. But suppose he has strong reasons (say, scientific evidence) 
that such beliefs cannot be reliably produced under the circumstances in question. 
Norman’s beliefs, it seems, are intuitively unjustified despite being reliably produced. 
To accommodate such cases, reliabilists supplement the reliability requirement by a 
“no-defeater” condition so that a belief is said to be justified if (i) it is reliably produced, 
and (ii) the agent is not in possession of any negative reason against the reliability 
of the relevant cognitive process (Goldman 1986). Externalists are inclined to regard 
the added qualification as an intuitively obvious and natural reaction to cases typified 
by the Norman example (Bergmann 2006). Internalists, however, have been quick to 
highlight the internalist character of such negative no-defeater requirements, thereby 
denying that the qualified version of reliabilism is purely externalist. They claim that 
what lies behind the intuitive obviousness of the added clause is actually the internalist 
intuition that it is epistemically irrational and irresponsible to hold beliefs that are, from 
an agent’s perspective, unlikely to be true. So if the externalists are willing to incorporate 
a negative internalist requirement into their account of epistemic justification, there is 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
152
no reason why they should not let the same intuitions motivate positive internalist 
requirements (BonJour 2006).
C) Demon World Scenarios
A particularly acute problem for externalism concerns the epistemic status of beliefs in 
the so-called demon scenarios that are primarily intended to highlight the perspectival 
character of epistemic justification. Consider a possible world that is indistinguishable 
from the actual world as far as our experiences are concerned, but in which a demon 
has seen to it that our perceptual beliefs are invariably false. Since the demon world is 
indistinguishable from the actual world, perceptual beliefs in that world should enjoy as 
much justification as they do in the actual world. But these beliefs are, by hypothesis, 
not reliably formed, and are thus, according to the reliability theory, unjustified.
In an early response, referring to his notion of right J-rules, Goldman (1986) suggests 
that “rightness” is a rigid designator, but it is rigidified as a function of reliability in 
normal worlds, not reliability in the actual world. Normal worlds are those consistent 
with our general beliefs about the actual world. So, what matters about belief-producing 
processes in the demon world is whether they are reliable in normal worlds, which 
seems to be the case. However, Goldman (1988) goes on to abandon the normal worlds 
theory because of the problems that came to be associated with the very notion of 
“normal worlds.” Instead, he suggests a modified version of reliabilism by effectively 
bifurcating the sense of “justification” and recognizing two legitimate conceptions of 
justification, namely, “weak” and “strong” justification. On the strong conception, a 
justified belief is a well-formed belief, while, on the weak conception, a justified belief 
is a blameless, non-culpable though ill-formed belief. Given the above apparatus, one 
can say that since the beliefs in the demon world are unreliably produced, they are not 
strongly justified, but, being blameless and non-culpable, they are weakly justified.
Although Goldman rightly seeks to present a theory of justification that incorporates 
both the elements of truth conducivity as well as the subject’s perspective, there are 
internal problems with his account stemming mostly, I believe, from the fact that he 
also wants the emerging notions of justification to be opposing ones (Vahid 2005). 
Setting these problems aside, however, Goldman’s attempt to bifurcate justification 
into strong and weak senses, if not simply an ad-hoc maneuver, is at least a significant 
retreat from his pure externalist approach to justification. In fact Goldman’s wavering 
attitude in handling the internalist intuitions highlighted by the demon scenarios 
can only be matched by his volatile attitude towards the deontological theory. In his 
official statement of the pure reliability theory of justification, he presents it within a 
deontological framework characterizing “justifiedness . . . as a deontic notion” (Goldman 
1986: 25). But in his subsequent attempt to handle the problem of demon scenarios, 
when distinguishing between weak and strong senses of justification, he regards his 
weak, rather than strong, justification as a species of deontological justification 
(Goldman 1988: fn. 3). More recently, he has rejected the deontological conception of 
justification and described his strategy as simply exploring what an acceptance of this 
thesis entails (Goldman 1999: 211).
The problems become, if anything, more compounded when, in a more recent analysis 
of the demon scenarios, he seemingly abandons the strong/weak framework in favor of 
objective/subjective conceptions of justification (Goldman 2001). A belief, he says, 
is objectively justified if it results from appropriate processes (e.g., reliable processes). 

EXTERNALISM/INTERNALISM
153
This seems to correspond with his earlier strong justification. A belief is, on the other 
hand, subjectively justified if it is produced by, what the agent regards as, appropriate 
processes. This does not, however, seem to be equivalent to his weak notion of 
justification. And, indeed, he approvingly refers to Foley’s egocentric rationality as 
“[t]he most systematic development of a subjectivist account of justification” (Goldman 
2001: fn. 8). This all looks rather puzzling but, most of all, it highlights the unfeasibility 
of upholding a purely externalist account of epistemic justification (cf. BonJour and 
Sosa 2006: 156–70).
4. Internalism, Externalism and the Problem of Skepticism
Both the internalist and externalist responses to skepticism have been taken by their 
opponents as reductio ad absurdum of these positions. The internalist approach is 
claimed to be implausible because it sets itself such high standards for the possibility of 
knowledge that they can hardly be satisfied, thus, significantly narrowing the scope of 
knowledge and justified belief. The externalist response, on the other hand, is regarded 
as inadequate because, the internalists say, it makes the obtaining of knowledge and 
justified beliefs too easy (cf. Cohen 2002). A reliabilist, for example, would say that 
if my beliefs are in fact reliably produced, then I can have knowledge and justified 
beliefs regardless of whether I know that the pertinent cognitive processes are reliable. 
To internalists, this attitude looks more like a refusal to meet the skeptical challenge 
than an adequate response to it. For, if, as in an externalist account, the agent has 
no reason to think that his beliefs are true or reliable, how could he claim that these 
beliefs amount to knowledge? He cannot even explain how he knows that he is not in 
a skeptical situation. Rather, the internalists claim, to possess anti-skeptical potentials, 
an agent’s reasons must be such that he can always tell whether his beliefs are justified 
or not.
I think the attitudes of both the internalists and the externalists towards skepticism 
would be best understood against the backdrop of the much older debate between realists 
and idealists. Our commonsense conception of reality construes it as being wholly 
independent of our beliefs and thoughts, and thus as leaving a gap between those beliefs 
and the world. As these beliefs seem to transcend what is given to us in experience, 
however firmly we hold them and however coherently they stick to one another, there 
always remains the possibility of a mismatch between them and what they are supposed 
to represent. This makes it impossible to tell for sure whether our beliefs are true or false, 
or so the skeptic claims. It is precisely at this juncture that an idealist (phenomenalist) 
response presents itself as a viable alternative. If what lies at the root of our predicament 
is the gap between what appears to us in experience and a reality to which we have no 
independent access, then the easiest way to close the gap is to identify physical objects 
with the contents of our experiences, or, equivalently, reduce object statements to those 
about our experiences. Why bother about a reality that is forever beyond our reach? 
All that can be of (epistemic) significance is that to which we would have immediate 
cognitive access.
The gap between the contents of our beliefs and the world can be equally construed 
in terms of justification rather than truth. The idea being that however carefully we may 
have gone about forming our beliefs in the light of available experience or evidence, 
our impression of the epistemic status of those beliefs might be totally unlike what 
they in fact are. For example, despite all the evidence to the contrary, our beliefs might 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
154
have been formed or grounded in an entirely unreliable way due to the influence of a 
demon or super-scientist intent on deceiving us. This would deprive us of the ability to 
determine or to tell, at any time, whether our beliefs are justified or unjustified. One 
way (perhaps the only way) to block this possibility, and, thus, be able to tell, at any 
time, whether our beliefs are justified, would be to confine their grounds to those whose 
presence is detectable by the subject on reflection.
One can thus view the internalism/externalism controversy as resulting from the 
projection of the motivations behind the realism/idealism debate onto an epistemic 
plane, where it is now evidence and justifying grounds, rather than physical objects 
and facts, that become the appropriate objects of cognition and awareness. Just as 
the phenomenalists were willing to confer the status of an object on something only 
insofar as it was perceivable, the internalists are led to admit something as a 
justifying ground insofar as it is reflectively accessible to the cognizer. Just as, on 
the idealist picture, the inaccessible, external reality drops out as irrelevant, on the 
internalist account of justification the external and inaccessible grounds become 
epistemically obsolete.
5. Epistemic Pluralism: Resolving the Controversy?
In order to accommodate counterexamples to their theses, epistemologists of both 
the internalist and externalist stripes have been forced to propound mixed theories of 
epistemic justification. This was evident in Goldman’s attempt to bifurcate justification 
and the same holds in the case of Sosa’s (1991) theory of virtue perspectivism that is 
intended to improve on simple or pure reliabilism.
Sosa introduces a number of important distinctions to deal with various problems 
that his theory is designed to solve. One such distinction is that between “aptness” and 
“justification.” An apt belief is one that is produced by a reliable or virtuous faculty 
in the environment in which it is operating. A justified belief, on the other hand, is 
construed in terms of the notion of an “epistemic perspective” which is, in turn, cashed 
out as consisting of meta-beliefs concerning the faculty (responsible for producing 
the target belief) and its reliability. According to Sosa, it is in virtue of this epistemic 
perspective that a body of beliefs is rendered justified (rather than merely apt). This 
seems to suggest that justification is a matter of having reasons for one’s beliefs and an 
internal concept, and it can plausibly be seen as a way of accommodating internalist 
concerns. Commensurate with this distinction, Sosa makes another distinction between 
animal knowledge (which requires only apt belief) and reflective knowledge (requiring 
both apt and justified belief).
Given pluralistic frameworks like Goldman’s and Sosa’s, an internalist may have no 
qualms in regarding, say, unsophisticated epistemic agents as having either knowledge 
or justified belief or both in, say, an externalist “apt” sense while attributing the 
internalist reflective knowledge or justification to other agents with more sophisticated 
cognitive abilities. This is, in fact, the line that BonJour (BonJour and Sosa 2003: 35–
41) has been advocating in his recent writings. Whether this pluralistic approach is a 
genuine way of resolving the internalism/externalism dispute is moot. Nonetheless, the 
fact that the possibility of epistemic pluralism has been taken seriously speaks to our 
powerful intuitions regarding the perspectival and objective dimensions of epistemic 
justification.

EXTERNALISM/INTERNALISM
155
References
Alston, W. (1985) “Concepts of Epistemic Justification,” repr. in Alston (1989), pp. 81–115.
—— (1986) “Internalism and Externalism in Epistemology,” repr. in Alston (1989), pp. 185–226.
—— (1988a) “The Deontological Conception of Epistemic Justification,” repr. in Alston (1989), pp. 115–53.
—— (1988b) “An Internalist Externalism,” repr. in Alston (1989), pp. 227–45.
—— (1989) Epistemic Justification, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Bergmann, M. (2006) Justification without Awareness, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
BonJour, L. (1985) The Structure of Empirical Knowledge, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
—— (2006) “Replies,” Philosophical Studies 131: 743–59.
—— and Sosa, E. (2003) Epistemic Justification, Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Chisholm, R. (1989) Theory of Knowledge, 3rd edition, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Cohen, S. (2002) “Basic Knowledge and the Problem of Easy Knowledge,” Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research 65: 309–29.
Conee, E. and Feldman, R. (2001) “Internalism Defended,” repr. in Kornblith (2001).
Foley, R. (1987) The Theory of Epistemic Rationality, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Fumerton, R. (1995) Metaepistemology and Skepticism, Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Ginet, C. (1975) Knowledge, Perception, and Memory, Dordrecht, Holland: D. Reidel.
Goldberg, S. (2007) Internalism and Externalism in Semantics and Epistemology, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Goldman, A. (1967) “A Causal Theory of Knowing,” Journal of Philosophy 64: 355–72.
—— (1986) Epistemology and Cognition, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
—— (1988) “Strong and Weak Justification,” repr. in (1992) Liaisons, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
—— (1999) “Internalism Exposed,” Journal of Philosophy 96: 271–93.
—— (2001) “The Unity of Epistemic Virtues,” repr. in (2002) Pathways to Knowledge, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Kornblith, H. (ed.) (2001) Epistemology: Internalism and Externalism, Oxford: Blackwell.
McDowell, J. (1995) “Knowledge and the Internal,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 55: 877–93.
Nozick, R. (1981) Philosophical Explanations, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Plantinga, A. (1993) Warrant and Proper Function, New York: Oxford University Press.
Pollock, J. (1974) Knowledge and Justification, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Sellars, W. (1963) “Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind,” in Science, Perception and Reality, London: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Sosa, E. (1991) Knowledge in Perspective, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stroud, B. (1989) “Understanding Human Knowledge in General,” in Clay and Lehrer (eds.) Knowledge and 
Skepticism, Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Vahid, H. (2005) Epistemic Justification and the Skeptical Challenge, London: Palgrave Macmillan.

156
15
DEFEASIBILITY THEORY
Thomas Grundmann
Human reasons, methods and sources of belief-production are fallible. In many cases 
that is obviously true. Sense experience can be deceptive under adverse circumstances. 
Inductively supported predictions can fail. But Quine (1953) was the first to argue that 
this fallibility is a ubiquitous phenomenon. New information about the respective sub-
ject matter or about the relevant sources of beliefs facilitates an ongoing error correc-
tion. For this reason, the human cognitive system is open for such defeating information 
and usually adapts to it by revising its beliefs. This can happen by simply withholding 
a belief or by replacing it with a new belief that is incompatible with the former belief. 
Defeating information is itself fallible. Hence, there can be misleading defeaters, which 
might be revised in the light of further information. So, defeaters are themselves, in 
principle, defeasible. Defeaters have an effect on the epistemic status of a belief. They 
wholly or partly remove the rationality (i.e. the justification or warrant) that individual 
beliefs formerly did possess. Defeaters are thus local “removers of rationality.” It is nei-
ther sufficient nor necessary for defeaters to be psychologically effective (i.e. to bring 
about a belief revision). A belief can, on the one hand, be given up due to irrational 
factors (prejudice, affect), without its epistemic status having changed. On the other 
hand, a belief can lose its epistemic status due to counterevidence even if a subject dog-
matically continues to hold on to it. Defeaters determine how beliefs would change if 
their possessor were fully rational. Thus, they determine how the relevant beliefs should 
change.
What Is the Target of Defeaters?
When the epistemic status of some beliefs is challenged, the target is not the relevant 
beliefs simpliciter, but either their justification, or what turns a true belief into knowl-
edge (i.e. its warrant). Gettier (1963) made it evident that justification and warrant 
are not the same. There can be justified true beliefs that are not cases of knowledge 
because the connection between their justification and their truth is merely accidental. 
However, many epistemologists assume that warrant contains justification as a compo-
nent (but see Dretske 1991). If that is correct, it would follow from the defeasibility of 
justification that warrant is also defeasible.
However, there is also the view that warrant is defeasible in a completely different 
way (independently of the justification condition), namely by means of factive (also: 
external, propositional) defeaters (Plantinga 2000; Lackey 2008). This view is moti-
vated by the defeasibility theory of knowledge that was designed to solve the Gettier prob-
lem (Lehrer and Paxson 1969). Here is a typical Gettier case: Yesterday I saw someone 

DEFEASIBILITY THEORY
157
steal a book in the library who looked like Tom Grabit. Now, it really was Tom Grabit. 
So my respective belief is true and justified by perception. Let us further assume that 
Tom Grabit has an identical twin who is indistinguishable for me and who was in the 
library at the same time. In this case, it is very plausible to say that I do not know that 
Tom Grabit stole the book. The simple defeasibility theory now claims that I would 
only have knowledge if my justification were not defeated by any additional true pieces 
of information. This theory can easily explain why I have no knowledge in the Grabit 
case. If I were to find out that Tom Grabit has an indistinguishable twin brother who 
was in the library at the same time, I would no longer be justified in believing that Tom 
Grabit stole the book. From my perspective, my perception would simply leave it open 
whether it was Tom or his twin brother. But the simple defeasibility theory has a deci-
sive flaw. A variant of the Grabit case can demonstrate this. Assume that everything is 
as described in the above case, except that Tom Grabit’s identical twin does not exist. 
Moreover Tom Grabit’s mother comes up with the tall tale that Tom Grabit has a klep-
tomaniac twin brother and Tom, himself, was not even in town yesterday. If I were to 
get the true information that Tom’s mother testified this, the justification of my belief 
that Tom Grabit stole the book would then be defeated. But this potential defeater 
is misleading and cannot therefore override my actual knowledge. For this reason, 
advocates of the defeasibility theory have tried to exclude true pieces of information 
that are misleading defeaters. Only if true pieces of information are available which 
would be genuine defeaters, knowledge is prevented. Klein (1996) explains the differ-
ence as follows: Misleading defeaters are such that they only attain their power to defeat 
by motivating an inference to a false proposition, for example that Tom Grabit really 
does have a kleptomaniac twin brother. And it is this false proposition that actually 
brings about the effective defeat. According to the defeasibility theory, defeasibility 
by means of false additional information is, however, irrelevant to the presence of 
knowledge.
Even refined versions of the defeasibility theory pose various problems. To name just 
one: The conditions they specify are not always sufficient for knowledge. Let us con-
sider a typical lottery case. I believe I have drawn a blank. Suppose that this is true and 
I am also justified in believing it since the probability of drawing a blank is very high in 
regular lotteries. Knowing the exact probability, say 0.9999, is not a defeater for my jus-
tification, since this probability has a very high value of close to 1. And neither is there 
another fact on the horizon that—if I knew it—would challenge the justification of my 
belief. Nevertheless, we would not say that I know I have drawn a blank. A probability 
of less than 1 simply seems to be insufficient for knowledge.
At the end of the day, the defeasibility theory claims that knowledge is only present if 
there are no facts that—if they were known—would be genuine defeaters of the relevant 
justification. Some epistemologists (Plantinga 2000: 359; Lackey 2008) now go one step 
further and claim that these facts, even when they are unknown, constitute factive, 
warrant defeaters. They prevent (like the existence of Tom Grabit’s twin brother) the 
occurrence of knowledge that otherwise (without these facts) would have been pres-
ent. However, it isn’t unproblematic to speak of defeaters in such cases. Defeaters are 
facts that remove or neutralize an epistemic status which actually existed before. This 
diachronic condition is, however, not satisfied in the case of factive defeaters. They 
prevent the occurrence of knowledge without removing a previously existing epistemic 
status. So, there are no factive defeaters. Defeaters directly defeat justification and only 
indirectly defeat warrant (insofar as warrant includes justification).

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
158
How Do Defeaters Work?
The defeat of justification can come about in three different ways (Pollock 1986: 38f.; 
Bergman 2006: 159, fn. 12): 1. The justification of a belief can be neutralized when 
there is a rebutting defeater against the truth of the previously justified belief. 2. The jus-
tification of a belief can also be removed when there is an undercutting defeater against 
the justifying power of the evidence for the belief in question. 3. Finally, the justifica-
tion of a belief can be overridden when there is a reason-defeating defeater against the 
truth of the reason for the belief. The following example illustrates the difference: You 
travel through a particular country district and up to now you have only seen animals 
that you believe to be brown cows. That inductively justifies your belief that the cows 
belonging to your friend Jim, who lives in this district, are also brown. The justification 
of your belief can now be defeated in the following three different ways: 1. While you 
visit Jim at his farm it turns out that he does not possess brown cows, but only black 
and white ones (rebutting defeater). 2. On your further trips through this district you 
realize that your observations so far have not been representative. Many farmers in the 
district also possess black and white cows. For this reason, your observations no longer 
inductively justify the belief that Jim possesses brown cows (undercutting defeater). 3. 
You find out that your original perceptual beliefs were false. You haven’t seen any brown 
cows, only cleverly disguised black and white ones. Someone has played a joke on you. 
What you took for a reason turned out to be false (reason-defeating defeater).
What Is the Nature of Defeaters?
Apart from factive defeaters, which were rejected above as defeaters in the strict sense, 
it seems plausible that defeaters are mental states (experiences, beliefs), which are 
themselves justified or entitled and thus have a positive epistemic status, that is, count 
as evidence (Alston 2002). The epistemic status of pieces of evidence and defeaters 
(understood as counterevidence) should thus be symmetrical. If unjustified beliefs can-
not confer justification, then unjustified beliefs cannot remove or override any jus-
tification either (this argument is critically discussed by Bergmann 2006: 166). But 
that seems to be intuitively inadequate. Defeaters do not need to possess any positive 
epistemic status. There are, to wit, also purely doxastic defeaters (Plantinga 2000: Ch. 11; 
Bergmann 2006: Ch. 6; Lackey 2008: 44f.). On the other hand, there are also successful 
defeaters that do not even have to be believed, i.e. normative defeaters (Goldman 1979; 
Lackey 2008).
What is a doxastic defeater? If S has a belief that q that speaks for his belief that p 
being false or being based on an unreliable source, then the justification of S’s belief p 
is overridden even if q is in fact false or does not itself have a positive epistemic status 
(Lackey 2008: 44). Here is an example: John remembers reliably that he was the victim 
of a violent crime as a small boy. But to calm him down, his parents tell him the false 
story that he had a very vivid imagination as a child and so just imagined such things. 
If John believes what his parents tell him, then his belief that he was the victim of a 
violent crime is thereby automatically defeated and thus no longer justified. This seems 
to be a fairly intuitive claim.
Normative defeaters must be distinguished from doxastic defeaters. The former can be 
characterized as follows: If S—in the light of the available evidence—ought to acquire 
a belief that q that suggests that his belief that p is false or is based on an unreliable 

DEFEASIBILITY THEORY
159
source, then the justification of his belief that p is overridden (Lackey 2008: 45). A 
normative defeater is a reason that S has for adopting a belief that speaks against his 
belief that p. It might involve a psychological reason, but it need not. S’s reason might 
just as well be a fact. Here is an example of the former case: A detective believes that a 
female suspect whom he likes very much is innocent. Later, he acquires evidence that 
speaks for her guilt. But the detective ignores this evidence and continues to believe in 
the suspect’s innocence even without having arguments or further evidence to invali-
date the incriminating evidence. In this case, the justification of the detective’s belief in 
the innocence of the suspect is defeated by the evidence which he possesses. However, 
to be available in the relevant sense, it need not necessarily be evidence that is really 
contained in the cognitive perspective of the epistemic subject. It is presumably suf-
ficient (although the intuitions are not indisputable here) that the subject would have 
noticed this evidence if his cognitive capacities had been functioning properly (i.e. as 
they should function rationally). A further example can clarify this issue: Imagine that 
a head of government is assassinated. His ministers decide to pretend that the bullet 
killed someone else, in order to avoid a looming revolution. They have the news spread 
on TV that the attempt failed and that a secret agent was killed by mistake. However, 
a journalist manages to report accurately to his newspaper the actual events that he has 
witnessed, and his true story is then published in the newspaper. Jill reads this story in 
the newspaper and arrives at the true and justified belief that the head of government 
has been assassinated. However, Jill should have also paid attention to the news on 
TV. By not taking note of such easily available information, she is ignoring relevant, 
although in fact misleading, defeaters for her belief. For this reason, she is no longer jus-
tified in believing that the head of government has been assassinated (cf. Harman 1973: 
143f. who, however, cites the case as an example against knowledge and not against 
justification). The preceding examples suggest that both unjustified beliefs (as doxastic 
defeaters) and easily available evidence (normative defeaters) are sufficient, but in each 
case not necessary, for defeating justification.
No-Defeater Conditions
Conditions for justification are frequently given for prima facie justification only. Hence 
defeaters are thereby completely disregarded. However, if one has the intention to give 
necessary conditions that jointly suffice for justification, one must positively exclude 
defeaters. A belief is epistemically justified if and only if (i) it is adequately produced 
from an epistemic point of view (here the conditions can vary depending on the respec-
tive account of prima facie justification) and (ii) no (undefeated) defeaters are present. 
If one takes into account that there can be doxastic as well as normative defeaters, the 
fully explicit definition of justification reads as follows:
(J) A belief is epistemically justified if and only if (i) it is adequately produced 
from an epistemic point of view and (ii) neither (undefeated) doxastic nor 
(undefeated) normative defeaters are present.
However, this definition poses a problem. While doxastic defeaters can be explained 
simply in terms of the actual beliefs of the epistemic subject, and hence the concept 
of justification need not occur within the definiens, normative defeaters have to be 
understood as proper defeaters. At any rate, it is not enough to say that normative 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
160
defeaters are epistemically adequate mental states, for they could also be external facts. 
In addition, in all cases the condition must be added that there are no further defeater-
defeaters. If, however, justification were to be defined in terms of justified defeaters, 
then definition (J) would become circular. The justification of a belief would then be 
defined in terms of the concept of justification. This problem can only be avoided, it 
seems, if the presence of normative defeaters is understood as a malfunctioning of our 
cognitive capacities. In such cases, our cognitive capacities just did not function as they 
should. An example: Let us assume that I believe, on the basis of memory, that a certain 
book has a green cover. However, when I look at the book, it looks blue to me. If, in the 
face of perceptual evidence to the contrary, I stick to my belief, then its justification is 
defeated by a normative defeater. Now, this must not be understood to mean that the 
relevant perceptions have a special epistemic status that applies negatively to my belief. 
One might rather say that my belief-producing cognitive capacity should adjust my 
belief to the relevant perceptions. If it does not do that, it is malfunctioning. Plantinga 
(1993, 2000) was the first to claim that the proper functioning of cognitive capacities is 
a necessary condition for a positive epistemic status. He believes that normative func-
tions can in general only be explained by a divine design plan. However, there are also 
naturalistic accounts that explain normative functions reductively in terms of their 
evolutionary or learning history (Millikan 1993; Grundmann 2009). This teleologi-
cal approach can now be used to solve the above mentioned problem of the definition 
circle (cf. in this sense Bergman 2006: Ch. 6). The clause on normative defeaters in (J) 
can now be replaced by a clause on the proper functioning of our cognitive capacities. 
We then obtain:
(J*) A belief is epistemically justified if and only if (i) it is adequately produced 
from an epistemic point of view and (ii) no (undefeated) doxastic defeaters are 
present and (iii) no malfunctions have occurred in the belief-producing cogni-
tive capacities.
Defeaters and the Controversy between Internalists and Externalists
In epistemology, internalists roughly take the view that truths about justification depend 
solely on the (introspectively accessible) psychological perspective of the respective 
epistemic subject. In contrast, externalists take the view that justification also depends 
on facts outside of the subject’s perspective, i.e. on facts in the external world. The most 
common externalist position is reliabilism. According to this view, a belief is epistemi-
cally justified if and only if it has been produced by a reliable process that tends to pro-
duce more true than false beliefs. BonJour (1980) has pointed out very early on that an 
unmodified reliabilism does not accommodate defeaters, and surely there can be defeat-
ers against reliably produced beliefs. For this reason, reliability of belief-production is 
not sufficient for justification. According to BonJour, every modification of reliabilism 
that accommodates defeaters by adding further no-defeater conditions is purely ad hoc. 
It does not, from an externalist point of view, give a systematic explanation of why these 
conditions should be added. In his view, the existence of defeaters therefore decides the 
controversy in favor of internalism.
Why are internalism and defeaters such a good match? The examples discussed above 
clearly indicate that defeaters do not have to be reliably produced, but can depend on 
nothing more than the subjective perspective. It will suffice for the justification of my 

DEFEASIBILITY THEORY
161
belief m being defeated if I have other beliefs or experiences that speak against the truth 
or against the reliable production of my belief m. The internalist can easily explain why 
that is so. In her view, the justification of a belief solely depends on the fact that her sub-
jective perspective speaks in favor of the truth of the belief and, respectively, that her 
belief is internally rational. If her perspective is changed by the occurrence of defeaters 
in such a way that this perspective no longer speaks for the truth of the belief, then the 
belief is no longer justified from the internalist point of view.
However, the externalist can also explain the role of defeaters, for example when she 
advocates what is known as evidential reliabilism (Bergman 2006: 165; Hofmann 2009). 
According to this view, a belief is justified if and only if (i) it is generated by a reliable 
belief-producing mechanism and (ii) the perspective of the epistemic subject (her total 
evidence) speaks for the truth of this belief. Evidential reliabilism thus combines exter-
nalist and internalist aspects. As soon as the epistemic subject acquires defeaters, con-
dition (ii) is violated and the belief thereby loses its justification. However, evidential 
reliabilism raises a problem that similarly applies to the internalist approach. If there 
are external facts that have the status of normative defeaters (as the existence of TV 
reports in Harman’s example), then such external defeaters simply cannot be explained 
on this account. According to evidential reliabilism there is only one source of defeat-
ers, namely an internal lack of rationality.
However, externalist proper-function theories can solve even this problem. According 
to such theories (Plantinga 2000; Bergman 2006), a belief m is justified if and only 
if it is produced by cognitive capacities which (i) function properly, (ii) aim at truth 
and (iii) are reliable in the environment for which they are either designed or selected. 
On these accounts, the belief should be sensitive to internal defeaters (if there are 
beliefs or experiences that speak against the truth or reliability of the belief in ques-
tion) as well as external defeaters (if facts are available that speak against the truth or 
the reliability of the belief in question). If the cognitive system does not satisfy this 
condition, then it is no longer functioning properly and thus the relevant belief loses 
its justification.
Defeater-Defeaters
Defeaters are themselves never ultima facie justified, but always defeasible by further 
defeaters (defeater-defeaters). Therefore, misleading defeaters can at best be neutral-
ized, but at worst it is also possible that genuine error corrections in turn will be revised. 
The former case can be illustrated by a further development of the example of Tom 
Grabit and his mother. My true and justified belief that Tom Grabit stole a book from 
the library is defeated by his mother’s false testimony. However, this misleading defeater 
could in turn be neutralized by the additional information that Tom Grabit’s mother is 
a notorious liar. I would then have an undercutting defeater for my first-order defeater. 
Here is an example for the latter possibility: Harry took part in the Allied invasion of 
Normandy and remembers that he was there in October 1944 when a certain village 
on the western front was captured by the Allies. For this reason he justifiably believes 
that he captured this village in October 1944. In fact, Harry is wrong. The village was 
not captured until November. When Harry learns from a military book that the village 
was not captured until November, his false belief is corrected by means of a rebutting 
defeater. Later on, Harry reads in a journal that the author of the book is incompetent 
and notorious for faking historical facts. Thus, his first-order defeater is neutralized by a 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
162
second-order undercutting defeater, although the truth about the seizure of the village 
is actually in the book.
It is an interesting question with respect to defeater-defeaters whether the original 
justification of a belief can be regained through a successful defeat of a defeater (see 
Jäger 2005). In order to discuss this question, let us focus on an example from religious 
epistemology. Philosophers such as Alston and Plantinga assume that religious experi-
ence can provide us with basic justification (i.e. a justification that does not depend on 
other beliefs) of theistic beliefs about God’s existence. In an enlightened society such 
as ours this justification is challenged by a variety of defeaters, e.g. by arguments from 
natural evil which is supposed to be incompatible with the existence of an omniscient, 
omnipotent and benevolent God (rebutting defeater), or by projection theories that 
explain religious beliefs as products of unreliable psychological projections (undercut-
ting defeater). Now, if these defeaters against the justification of theistic beliefs were 
themselves successfully defeated, then the theistic beliefs would become once again 
justified. But would their regained justification depend on the epistemic status of the 
relevant defeater-defeaters? Or could the theistic beliefs once again count as basically 
justified after going through a process of criticism and criticism of that criticism? The 
correct answer seems to be the following: It depends on which kinds of defeaters and 
defeater-defeaters do the relevant epistemic work. More specifically, one must distin-
guish between two types of cases:
First case: If the basic justification of theistic beliefs is defeated by an argument from the 
natural evil, and if this challenge against the assumption of God’s existence is in turn 
defeated by a positive proof of God’s existence, then the theistic belief is, in the end, 
no longer basic, but justified by this very proof. More generally: If a rebutting defeater 
is neutralized by another rebutting defeater, the justification of the original belief now 
positively depends on the rebutting defeater-defeater.
Second case: As in the first case, the justification of the theistic belief is defeated by a 
rebutting defeater (an argument from the natural evil). But this time it is shown that 
the existence of natural evil is not sufficient evidence against the existence of God after 
all (undercutting defeater). In this case the defeater-defeater neutralizes the defeater of 
the theistic belief without speaking positively for the truth of this belief. Here, although 
the defeater-defeater facilitates the restoration of the theistic belief and is thereby caus-
ally enabling, the positive justification solely relies on the supposed original religious 
experience. It is only this religious experience that would speak for the truth of the 
theistic belief. So, it is perfectly possible that the source of the original basic justifica-
tion becomes effective again after the relevant defeater-defeaters have done their work 
(pace Jäger 2005).
The Significance of Indefeasible Justification
In the philosophical tradition (especially before Quine 1953), it was a widely held view 
that certain types of beliefs are absolutely indefeasibly justified. Above all, beliefs about 
one’s own current feelings (“Right now I have a feeling of type ϕ”), beliefs about simple 
mathematical facts (“3 + 2 = 5”), and beliefs about logical facts (“All Fs are F”) were 
taken to have this privileged epistemic status. But on closer scrutiny this view turns out 
to be an untenable dogma. To begin with, indefeasibility and infallibility are not the 

DEFEASIBILITY THEORY
163
same thing. Infallible reasons are such that beliefs on which they are based cannot be 
false. Now, even if there were infallible reasons, they would in principle still be defeasi-
ble by misleading defeaters. Conversely, infallibility does not follow from indefeasibility. 
For example, if we were permanently deceived by an evil demon or a mad neuroscientist 
then our beliefs would all be radically flawed and fallible. But the situation of deception 
would be so ingeniously constructed that we would never acquire defeaters to correct 
our false beliefs. Examples such as the following show that even beliefs about one’s own 
current feelings might be revised in the light of further information: In some American 
student fraternities there are isolated cases of rather martial practices. They include, 
for example, the custom of branding the Greek initials of the fraternity on newcom-
ers’ backsides with a branding iron. Such a newcomer expects this kind of procedure, 
pulls his trousers down and sees the glowing iron. But in fact, without him being able 
to see what is going on, the student is only patted with an ice-cold metal rod. 
Afterwards, he reports that he felt a terrible heat for a few seconds. In this case, his 
expectation has changed his belief about his own feeling. Such an error can easily 
be corrected in the light of further introspective and testimonial information. In the 
case of mathematical judgments, calculation errors can never be ruled out despite the 
utmost care. As soon as we notice them, we tend to correct our previous mathemati-
cal beliefs. Even in the case of logical facts our judgment is defeasible, as the following 
example shows (cf. Williamson 2007: 85–7): The statement “All bachelors are bach-
elors” has the logical form of “All Fs are F” and thus counts as logically true. But this 
judgment is defeasible by considerations of the following kind: Somebody could (mis-
takenly) believe that sentences of the type “All Fs are F” imply the existence claim 
“There is at least one F.” If, at the same time, she (mistakenly) believes that there are 
no bachelors, then she would have a doxastic defeater for her belief that “All bachelors 
are bachelors.”
Even if the absolute indefeasibility of beliefs cannot be sustained on any account, one 
could still plead for a somewhat weaker indefeasibility claim, namely that beliefs resting 
on certain sources cannot be defeated by information resting on a different source. In 
this case, these sources of justification would be negatively autonomous (Audi 2002). So 
one could hold the view that, for instance, introspective beliefs are only defeasible by 
further introspective beliefs or testimonial reports of introspective beliefs, but not by 
empirical information from a purely third-person perspective. Or one could hold the 
view that a priori beliefs are only defeasible by other a priori beliefs, but not by empiri-
cal information (Kitcher 2000). But even these weaker indefeasibility claims seem to 
be false. James believes that he has a slight headache. However, he has hypochondriac 
tendencies and often falsely believes that he has minor ailments when he actually has 
none. Let us further assume that a computer tomography of James’ relevant brain areas 
does not show the brain activity that is typical for pain. In this case, the doctor has a 
defeater from the third-person perspective for Jim’s introspective belief that he has a 
slight headache. Empirical defeaters are also conceivable in the case of a priori cal-
culations. Let us assume that you have calculated that 3 + 2 = 5. Just for the fun of it, 
you want to check the result empirically, so you put two things and then three things 
together and then count them. Let us assume that the result is always “six,” no mat-
ter how often you repeat the counting. Let us also assume that no one else arrives at a 
different result and that there are no discernible sources of error in play. Then, at the 
latest, the justification of your mathematical calculation would have been empirically 
defeated (Casullo 2003: 94f.).

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
164
Do any serious philosophical consequences arise out of the unlimited defeasibility 
of all beliefs? On the one hand, it has been claimed over and over again by certain 
philosophers that indefeasibility is constitutive of some sources of justification as, e.g. 
introspection or a priori justification. On the other hand, classic foundationalists typi-
cally assumed that basic beliefs are characterized by their indefeasibility. Yet both claims 
seem to be false. Introspective and a priori justification are not distinguished by their 
strength, but only by the peculiarity of their source (Casullo 2003). Moreover, foun-
dationalist theories of justification are entirely compatible with the defeasibility of all 
beliefs since foundationalism only claims that there are positively justified beliefs that 
do not depend for their justification on any other beliefs. But this does not imply that 
the independent justification must be indefeasible in the light of further information. 
Theories that combine basic justification with the defeasibility of this justification are 
thus referred to as moderate foundationalism.
Dialectical Defeaters
An isolated thinker acquires defeaters for the justification of her belief if this belief no 
longer rationally fits into her cognitive perspective, or if she does not sufficiently take 
into account available external evidence and in this respect does not behave cogni-
tively as she should. However, defeaters also play a central role in the debates about con-
troversial claims between different thinkers. In this case, dialectic defeaters constitute 
objections and counterobjections that one antagonist presents to the other. How does 
this dialectic role of defeaters fit in with what has been said so far? When the opponent 
in such a debate presents an objection to the proponent’s claim, this objection can 
affect the epistemic status of the proponent’s claim in three different ways. Either the 
proponent accepts the objection by believing it. Then the dialectic objection is trans-
formed into a doxastic defeater. Or the proponent simply ignores the objection. Then 
the proponent is behaving like a dogmatist who blinds himself to objections, and the 
objection becomes a normative defeater. Or the proponent rejects the objection on the 
basis of further considerations. In this case she is trying to neutralize the defeater with 
a defeater-defeater.
The Default and Challenge Model of Justification
Certain epistemic contextualists (Sellars 1956; Brandom 1995; Williams 2001: 36, 
150f.) emphasize the epistemic primacy of social and dialectic responsibilities. For 
them, a belief is epistemically justified by default as long as there are no undefeated nor-
mative dialectic defeaters (constituted by motivated challenges). The absence of cer-
tain dialectic defeaters would then already be sufficient for the justification. Thus, the 
epistemic subject must only adduce positive reasons for his belief when substantiated 
defeaters have been introduced into the debate. According to this view, positive reasons 
would then only be needed as defeater-defeaters. The Default and Challenge model of 
justification has the indubitable advantage of avoiding unrealistic constraints on justi-
fication. So, every claim does not first have to be defended by further reasons (which 
can quickly lead to a regress), and nor does the mere consideration of error possibilities 
(naked challenge) suffice to generate a genuine defeater. Therefore, real defeaters are 
only present when something makes the objections likely to be true. In other words, 
normative defeaters are required for the relevant dialectic challenges.

DEFEASIBILITY THEORY
165
But the Default and Challenge model operates with conditions that are obviously 
too weak for the status of positive justification. It does not follow from the fact that a 
belief is incontestable in certain social contexts (i.e. not challenged by anyone for good 
reasons) that these beliefs are actually justified. Otherwise, an unlimited form of relativ-
ism would threaten. For example, racist beliefs would then be justified in the context 
of the race biology of Nazi Germany. And in the context of astrology, the belief that 
the constellation of the stars influences our lives would also be justified. However, in 
other contexts these same beliefs would clearly not be justified. Williams circumvents 
this objection by adding a further (externalist) condition on the justification of a belief: 
it must also be based on an objectively reliable source. But even this quite substantial 
modification of the model does not yet suffice to establish adequate conditions for jus-
tified belief. That is to say, even when all normative defeaters are rejected for good 
reasons, a belief can still lose its justification when the subject has other (unjustified) 
beliefs that are incompatible with the truth or the reliability of the belief in question. 
In other words, there can still be doxastic defeaters. For this reason, a theory of justifica-
tion that crucially focuses on the social practice of asking for and giving of reasons is 
not fully adequate.
References
Alston, W. 2002: Plantinga, Naturalism, and Defeat, J. Beilby (ed.), Naturalism Defeated?, Ithaca/London, 
pp. 176–203.
Audi, R. 2002: The Sources of Knowledge, P. Moser (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Epistemology, Oxford, 
pp. 71–94.
Bergman, M. 2006: Justification without Awareness, Oxford.
BonJour, L. 1980: Externalist Theories of Empirical Knowledge, Midwest Studies in Philosophy 5, pp. 53–73.
Brandom, R. 1995: Knowledge and the Social Articulation of the Space of Reasons, Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research 55, pp. 895–908.
Casullo, A. 2003: A Priori Justification, Oxford.
Dretske, F. 1991: Two Conceptions of Knowledge, Grazer Philosophische Studien 40, pp. 15–30.
Gettier, E. 1963: Is Justified True Belief Knowledge?, Analysis 26, pp. 144–6.
Goldman, A. 1979: What is Justified Belief?, G. Pappas (ed.), Justification and Knowledge, Dordrecht, pp. 
1–23.
Grundmann, T. 2009: Reliabilism and the Problem of Defeaters, Grazer Philosophische Studien 79, pp. 65–
76.
Harman, G. 1973: Thought, Princeton.
Hofmann, F. 2009: Introspective Self-Knowledge of Experience and Evidence, Erkenntnis 71, pp. 19–34.
Jäger, C. 2005: Warrant, Defeaters, and the Epistemic Basis of Religious Belief, M. Parker and T. Schmidt 
(eds.), Science and Religion, Tübingen.
Kitcher, P. 2000: A Priori Knowledge Revisited, P. Boghossian and C. Peacocke (eds.), New Essays on the A 
Priori, Oxford, pp. 65–92.
Klein, P. 1996: Warrant, Proper Function, Reliabilism, and Defeasibility, Jonathan Kvanvig (ed.), Warrant in 
Contemporary Epistemology, Lanham, pp. 97–130.
Lackey, J. 2008: Learning from Words. Testimony as a Source of Knowledge, Oxford.
Lehrer, K. & Paxson, T. 1969: Knowledge: Undefeated Justified True Belief, Journal of Philosophy 66, pp. 
225–37.
Millikan, R.G. 1993: In Defense of Proper Functions, Millikan: White Queen Psychology and Other Essays for 
Alice, Cambridge, Mass., pp. 13–29.
Plantinga, A. 1993: Warrant and Proper Function, Oxford.
Plantinga, A. 2000: Warranted Christian Belief, Oxford.
Pollock, J.L. 1986: Contemporary Theories of Knowledge, London.
Quine, W.V. 1953: Two Dogmas of Empiricism, Quine, From a Logical Point of View, Cambridge, Mass., 
pp. 20–46.

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
166
Sellars, W. 1956: Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind, H. Feigl and M. Scriven (eds.), Minnesota Studies 
in the Philosophy of Science 1, Minneapolis.
Williams, M. 2001: Problems of Knowledge, Oxford.
Williamson, T. 2007: The Philosophy of Philosophy, Oxford.
Further Reading
Bergman, M. 2006: Justification without Awareness, Oxford, Ch. 6, pp. 153–77 (Very comprehensive presen-
tation and defense of doxastic defeaters.)
Lackey, J. 2008: Learning from Words. Testimony as a Source of Knowledge, Oxford, pp. 44–7, 251–77 (Very 
good on the demarcation of factive, doxastic and normative defeaters as well as on the role of defeaters in 
the generation of knowledge.)
Plantinga, A. 2000: Warranted Christian Belief, Oxford, ch. 11, pp. 357–73 (Defeaters from the viewpoint of 
proper function epistemology.)

16
EVIDENTIALISM
Daniel M. Mittag
Evidentialism holds that one’s evidence entirely determines what one is epistemically 
justified in believing. Advocates include John Locke, David Hume, W. K. Clifford, and 
Bertrand Russell, among others. Though evidentialism has therefore been historically 
prominent, much of the recent interest in evidentialism stems from the challenges 
posed to it by newer, competing theories of epistemic justification, such as reliabilism. 
Roughly, reliabilism understands epistemic justification to be determined not by one’s 
evidence but, rather, by the reliability of the cognitive process used to generate the 
belief. (See Reliabilism, Chapter 17 of this volume.) Given both its bearing on such com-
peting theories and its initial pretheoretical plausibility, evidentialism deserves close 
consideration.
Two leading contemporary advocates of evidentialism are Richard Feldman and Earl 
Conee. In their classic article “Evidentialism” they formulate evidentialism as a thesis 
concerning the justification of all of the doxastic attitudes. One is justified in taking a 
doxastic attitude towards some proposition at time t just in case it “fits” the total evi-
dence one has at t (Feldman and Conee 1985: 15). Whether one is epistemically justi-
fied in believing p, epistemically justified in disbelieving p, or epistemically justified in 
suspending judgment with respect to p is entirely a matter of the evidence one has at 
the time of evaluation.
It will help to simplify the discussion if we restrict Feldman and Conee’s explicit 
thesis to the justification of belief. Doing so gives us the following central evidentialist 
thesis.
A person S is epistemically justified in believing proposition p at time t if and 
only if believing p fits the total evidence S has at t.
Most treatments of evidentialism have focused on this narrower evidentialist commit-
ment. Since what we say concerning it can be extended naturally to all of the doxastic 
attitudes, nothing will be lost by taking it as our focus here.
Evidentialism invokes three key notions: what evidence is, what it is for one to have 
something as evidence, and what it is for believing a proposition to fit the evidence one 
has. A complete evidentialist theory will provide philosophically satisfactory accounts 
of each. By attending to them, one can formulate various, widely divergent versions of 
evidentialism. Moreover, in the absence of an account, it is unclear what implications 
evidentialism has concerning cases. It is therefore crucial for the evidentialist to provide 
at least partial analyses of its constituent notions.

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
168
Motivating Evidentialism
When we think about what it takes for one to believe reasonably or justifiably, we think 
that one has to have good reasons (or, more accurately, adequate reason for thinking 
the proposition in question is true). In addition, when one does have excellent reason 
to think p is true, we think that one is in a position to believe p justifiably. In short, 
reasons seem to be absolutely central to epistemic justification. This provides some ini-
tial, pretheoretical support for evidentialism since having evidence for p just is having 
reason to think p is true.
Of course this initial support can only take a theory so far. Ultimately, the theory 
needs to correctly explain individual cases and to withstand criticism. Conee and 
Feldman argue that evidentialism succeeds on both counts, citing the extent to which 
it succeeds as one of the main strengths of evidentialism (2004: 64).
Jonathan Adler (2002) presents a more ambitious argument for a version of eviden-
tialism. He argues that the requirement to believe only what one’s evidence supports 
is derived from the very concept of belief. Roughly, Adler argues that one cannot “in 
full awareness” believe p and I do not have adequate evidence for p (pp. 31–32). One must 
at least take oneself to have adequate evidence for believing p if one is “fully aware” of 
one’s belief that p. Furthermore, one must believe p if, “in full awareness,” one takes 
oneself to have adequate evidence for p. Adler argues that these restrictions are not 
due to mere psychological limitations. The necessity here is conceptual. According to 
him, this shows “that in first-person awareness we recognize the demands of belief” (p. 
52). So, the very concept of belief demands that one ought to believe p only if one has 
adequate evidence for p. (See Conee (2002) for critical discussion of this argument.)
Developing Evidentialism
A Preliminary Distinction
Note that believing p can fit your evidence even if you have never considered p and thus 
do not believe it. Evidentialism implies that you would be justified in believing p. As 
this makes clear, evidentialism is not a theory about when one’s believing is justified; it is 
a theory about what makes one justified in believing a proposition. As it is sometimes put, 
evidentialism is a thesis regarding propositional justification, not a thesis regarding doxastic 
justification. In order to be doxastically justified in believing p, believing p needs to fit 
one’s evidence, and one needs to believe p on the basis of that justifying evidence.
The following consideration illustrates that we need this distinction. Just as believ-
ing p might fit your evidence even though you do not believe p, you might believe the 
proposition your evidence supports, but you might believe it for bad reasons. You might 
believe it as a result of wishful thinking, for example. Here something is going wrong, 
and something is going right. You are believing in accordance with your evidence 
(p is propositionally justified for you), but you are believing for the wrong reasons (your 
belief that p is not doxastically justified).
Evidence
Ordinarily, we would take DNA left at the scene of a crime or fingerprints on a murder 
weapon to be evidence. We count these things as evidence because we take them to 
be relevant to the question of who committed the crime. However, the evidentialist 

EVIDENTIALISM
169
thesis does not pertain to these sorts of external states of affairs. The relevant sort of evi-
dence the thesis invokes is restricted to mental states or to propositions. (See Evidence, 
Chapter 6 of this volume, and Kelly 2006.) What sorts of mental states qualify as evi-
dential states capable of conferring justification (or which propositions count as evi-
dence one has) varies from account to account.
On the traditional coherentist view, only beliefs can justify. Accordingly, one possible 
view restricts evidence to beliefs (or the propositional contents of beliefs). Traditional 
coherence theories, however, seem unable to account for the role experience plays in 
justification (BonJour 1999: 124–130; Plantinga 1993: 82; Sosa 1991: 184–186). We 
take one’s experiences to provide one with reason to believe certain propositions. It 
is reasonable, after all, to think my present experience that is just like the experience 
of seeing a cat provides evidence for the current presence of a cat (perhaps only when 
combined with certain background information). Similarly, one might think an appar-
ent memory derives some degree of justification from its accompanying phenomenol-
ogy—i.e., its “seeming to be true.” If so, the accompanying phenomenology is evidence 
for the truth of that apparent memory. Similar reasoning can lead one to classify other 
mental states as evidence.
Timothy Williamson (2000) rejects the foregoing conceptions of evidence. He argues 
instead for the radical thesis that one’s evidence consists of all and only the proposi-
tions one knows. (See Knowledge First Epistemology, Chapter 20 of this volume.) Since 
considering the details of his careful arguments here would take us too far astray, see 
Brueckner (2005) and Hawthorne (2005) for discussion.
Having Evidence
Recall that the basic evidentialist thesis states that one is epistemically justified in 
believing p at t if and only if believing p fits the total evidence one has at t. This obvi-
ously entails that only one’s own evidence is relevant to determining what one is justi-
fied in believing. And we have seen from the previous section that only mental states 
or propositions count as evidence. Setting aside for ease of exposition in this section 
the view that evidence consists of propositions (e.g., the propositional contents of men-
tal states rather than the mental states themselves), these two restrictions suggest one 
available interpretation of having evidence. On this option the evidence one has at t 
includes all and only one’s (evidential) mental states at t. Both one’s occurrent (evi-
dential) mental states and one’s nonoccurrent (evidential) mental states will count as 
evidence one has on this account.
This understanding of having evidence is clearly inadequate, however. To see this, 
consider the following example. Joe loves diners and visits them frequently. He prefers 
to eat nowhere else. Over the years he has come to have overwhelming evidence that 
most diners serve eggs. It seems his belief is well justified. Yet when Joe was a child he 
visited a diner named Tillman’s Diner that did not serve eggs. (The chef and owner was 
vehemently against them.) He had tried to order eggs, only to be rudely directed to the 
sign on the wall stating ‘NO EGGS.’ This upset Joe, and the incident now lies deeply 
buried in his long-term memory. Though it is retrievable, it would take a prolonged, 
directed process (e.g., psychotherapy) for him to recall it. If a fellow diner fanatic were 
now casually to mention Tillman’s Diner to Joe and ask him whether it serves eggs, 
Joe might form the belief that Tillman’s Diner does serve eggs on the basis of his 
well-justified belief that most diners serve eggs.

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
170
It seems Joe’s occurrent belief that Tillman’s Diner serves eggs would be eminently 
reasonable. Yet the present account cannot deliver the result that his belief is justified. 
This is because his stored memory of the incident defeats his evidence for the belief, and 
the proposal counts that stored memory belief as evidence he has.
An alternative account holds that only one’s occurrent mental states count as evi-
dence one has. This nicely entails that Joe’s deeply hidden memory is irrelevant to the 
justification of his belief that Tillman’s Diner serves eggs. Yet the restriction to occur-
rent mental states seems to be too restrictive. After all, it entails that when Joe is not 
in a diner or entertaining any occurrent beliefs about diners, his (nonoccurrent) belief 
that most diners serve eggs is not justified. He would have no occurrent mental states 
that bear on the issue. If it is right that many nonoccurrent beliefs are well justified, 
then it seems any plausible account of having evidence must include some nonoccur-
rent mental states. Further, it seems that when I consciously entertain the belief that 
George Washington was the first President of the United States, that (occurrent) belief 
is justified, and its justification does not depend on my consciously recalling any sup-
porting evidence at all. If this is right, the present account of having evidence must be 
rejected. (See Feldman (1988), however, for a defense of the restriction to occurrent 
mental states.)
It is clear that the correct account of having evidence must lie somewhere between 
these two extremes. We want to count some, but not all, nonoccurrent mental states as 
evidence one has. For example, one might propose that the evidence one has includes 
just one’s occurrent mental states and those nonoccurrent mental states that are easily 
available to one upon reflection. It is unclear whether one can specify what is “easily” 
available in a plausible and principled way, and other proposals along these lines likely 
face similar difficulties. However, since ‘easily available’ is vague, it is worth emphasiz-
ing that mere vagueness in the account is not reason to reject it. ‘Justification’ itself is 
vague; so we should expect vagueness in its analysis.
Feldman (1988) argues the serious difficulty facing this conception of having evi-
dence is that the way in which one is prompted to recall an event affects how easily it is 
able to be recalled. He is careful to distinguish this objection from objections concern-
ing vagueness, and he provides the following example to illustrate the difficulty.
If I ask my childhood friend if he remembers the time we spray-painted 
my neighbor’s dog, I may get an embarrassed ‘Yes.’ If I ask him if he remembers 
any of our childhood pranks, this one may fail to come to mind. Is the fact 
that we spray-painted the dog easily accessible? There seems to be no clear 
answer.
(Feldman 1988: 94)
At the time Feldman took this to be sufficient reason to look elsewhere for an account 
of having evidence. But, again, it looks like the options at either extreme are unsatisfac-
tory; so it looks like the evidentialist somehow has to address the kinds of difficulties 
more moderate conceptions of having evidence face.
More recently, Conee and Feldman (2008: 88–89) have argued in favor of some 
moderate view that includes certain nonoccurrent mental states as evidence one has. 
They acknowledge the difficulty involved in providing a detailed account of having evi-
dence along these lines but argue that it does not provide reason to reject evidentialism. 
They state that it only “makes clear a way in which some familiar terms of epistemic 

EVIDENTIALISM
171
evaluation are vague or obscure” (89). As alluded to above, this is a promising position 
to take. Nevertheless, a more complete analysis of having evidence is desirable.
Evidential Support
Evidentialism is consistent with any theory of the structure of justification. So, for 
example, it is amenable to foundationalist, coherentist, and infinitist treatments. Here 
I set the disputes between these theories concerning the structure of justification aside 
in order to focus on a related issue concerning evidential support which all evidentialist 
theories face. This is the issue of what relation a proposition must bear to one’s evidence 
in order for that proposition to be justified by that evidence.
An evidentialist has available a variety of options for understanding this relation 
of evidential support. One available view holds that believing a proposition fits one’s 
evidence just in case that proposition is made objectively likely by that evidence. On 
this view, if one’s evidence entails (or makes highly probable) that some proposition is 
true, then one is justified in believing that proposition. However, this implies that one 
is justified in believing all of the logical consequences of one’s justified beliefs, even 
extremely complex propositions one cannot understand. This seems wrong. Moreover, 
some logical connections between propositions are too complex for one to grasp—those 
requiring a complex mathematical proof, for example. So while one might understand 
the proposition entailed by one’s evidence, one might have no idea how or why one’s 
evidence entails it. Again, this seems to imply one is not justified in believing the 
proposition in question on the basis of one’s evidence. (Goldman (1986: 89–93) and 
Boghossian (2003: 226–227) develop objections of this latter sort.)
These problems with a purely logical conception of evidential support motivate 
the inclusion of some subjective requirement. It is instructive to consider one flawed 
account that includes such a requirement. One might propose that believing p fits one’s 
evidence, e, just in case p is made objectively likely by e and one believes this is so. The 
problem concerns the requirement that one believe e makes probable p. The condition 
is at once both too weak and too strong. The condition is too weak because one may 
believe (truly) that e makes probable p for bad reasons. This shows that in order to 
confer justification the belief about one’s evidence would at least need to be justified, 
but this threatens a regress. Furthermore, if one believes for bad reasons that e makes 
probable p, one might not be appreciating the fact that e makes probable p, and this is 
the sort of thing the doxastic condition was supposed to capture.
The condition that one believes e makes probable p is too strong because it seems 
to over-intellectualize justification. Small children lack the concept of probability and 
thus are unable to form the belief. Yet it seems reasonable to think they do have many 
justified beliefs. More generally, nonreflective individuals can have many justified per-
ceptual beliefs even though they do not form beliefs about their experiences making 
probable those beliefs about the world. Some may not have any beliefs even approxi-
mating this content. For these reasons, one need not believe e makes probable p in order 
for believing p to fit e.
These difficulties with the above account of evidential support illustrate the chal-
lenges facing an account that retains the objective probabilistic requirement while 
imposing some additional subjective condition. If this kind of account is to succeed, it 
needs to relativize to the individual which propositions made probable by a body of evi-
dence one is justified in believing, and it needs to do so without over-intellectualizing 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
172
justification or requiring some additional mental state itself in need of justification. One 
might, then, require that one be reflectively able to grasp or appreciate the fact that one’s 
evidence makes probable the proposition. However, even if we understand this making 
probable relation broadly so as not to require one to possess the concept of probability, 
it is unclear whether this alternative will avoid all of the problems developed for the 
earlier account. In particular, it is unclear whether it will deliver the result that small 
children have many justified beliefs. Suffice it to say, developing a precise account of 
support that blends objective and subjective considerations is difficult.
Conee and Feldman (2008: 94–98) argue for a different, but related approach. They 
affirm the view that a proposition is supported by one’s evidence when it is part of the 
“best available explanation” of that evidence (98). Thus, for them evidential support is 
fundamentally a relation of best explanation, and the qualification that the explanation 
be available to one might help to relativize to the individual which propositions are part 
of the best explanation of a body of evidence. We have seen that this is desirable. An 
analysis of the relevant sense of availability has yet to be provided.
Objections
One Ought Not to Follow One’s Evidence
Sometimes we ought not to believe what our evidence supports. For example, a men-
tally fragile individual might have overwhelming evidence for the proposition that his 
lover has been cheating on him. But if he were to follow his evidence and believe this, 
he would murder his lover before killing himself. Clearly, he ought not to believe his 
spouse is cheating on him. He has overriding practical and moral considerations not to 
follow his evidence.
These sorts of cases do not conflict with evidentialism, as defined above. Evidentialism 
is not a thesis about what is in one’s interest to believe or what one has a moral duty 
to believe, even though W. K. Clifford’s evidentialism does have this moral dimension 
(Clifford 1879). Neither is evidentialism a thesis about what one ought to believe, all 
things considered. Evidentialism is merely a thesis about what one epistemically ought 
to believe. This example only illustrates how sometimes epistemic, practical, and moral 
considerations conflict (Feldman and Conee 1985: 22–23). The evidentialist appraisal 
of the case holds that he epistemically ought to believe his lover is cheating on him, not 
that he ought to believe this, all things considered.
Nishi Shah (2006) provides independent support for the view that the evidentialist 
has the correct position on this case. He argues on the basis of the transparency of belief 
that only evidence for the truth of p can be a reason for believing p. If this is right, then 
the practical and moral considerations, even if known, cannot be reasons for the subject 
not to believe his lover is cheating on him. Non-evidential considerations cannot be 
reasons for belief. (For a reply, see Steglich-Petersen (2008).)
An Evidence-Gathering Requirement
Evidentialism is a synchronic theory of epistemic justification. It claims epistemic justi-
fication concerns what one should now believe, given one’s present evidence. However, 
some argue that the justification of a belief depends, at least in part, on the inquiry 
that led to the belief. Even if one now has justifying evidence for p, if one should have 

EVIDENTIALISM
173
discovered (and could have very easily discovered) evidence that defeats one’s present 
justification for p, one ought not to believe p.
Evidentialists can allow that there is a sense in which this is true, but they have to 
deny that this ‘ought’ is an epistemic ought (or, perhaps, is the central epistemic ought 
to which epistemic justification is attuned). Feldman, for example, understands the 
“central” epistemological question to concern what one should believe in the interim, 
until one inquires further (2004: 188). He allows that there are other questions about 
when one ought to gather more evidence and, more generally, how one ought to go 
about evidence-gathering, but these further questions are decided by prudential or 
moral considerations rather than by epistemic considerations (2004: 189). They should 
be carefully distinguished from questions regarding epistemic justification (Feldman 
2003: 48). (However, see DeRose (2000) for critical discussion.)
Forgotten Evidence
A further objection stems from the widespread occurrence of one’s forgetting the evi-
dence that one once had for some proposition. The objection is best appreciated by con-
sidering two sorts of cases. According to the first, when one originally came to believe p 
one had good evidence for it, but one has since forgotten that supporting evidence. One 
might think one can nevertheless continue to believe justifiably, even without coming 
to possess any additional evidence. Evidentialism appears unable to account for this.
According to the second sort of case, when one originally came to believe p one did 
not have supporting evidence for p. One came to believe p for very bad reasons. At the 
time one formed the belief, therefore, it was neither propositionally nor doxastically 
justified. Yet suppose that one has since forgotten all of the evidence against p and also 
why one originally formed the belief. Since it doesn’t seem as though in the interim one 
has to have gained some additional evidence for p, one might think that the subject of 
the second case remains unjustified in believing p. The evidentialist might agree. But 
notice that the relevant beliefs in both cases appear to be on an evidential par; neither 
belief seems to be supported by adequate evidence. The objection is that a justificatory 
difference between the two cases nevertheless exists, and evidentialism is unable to 
account for this difference.
The details of the cases proposed along these lines are crucial. For example, we tend 
to have beliefs about the reliability of our memory beliefs, and, we think, reasonably 
so. If the subject has good reason to think her memory beliefs (of the relevant kind) 
are generally reliable, then she is justified in so believing. And if she believes that her 
memory beliefs (of the relevant kind) are generally reliable, she has evidence for p after 
all. In the absence of special reason to think the memory belief is mistaken, the memory 
belief will be justified. If, on the other hand, the subject lacks any beliefs about the reli-
ability of her memory beliefs (or does not have supporting evidence to believe that they 
are reliable), the stored memory belief could well be unjustified. If one genuinely has no 
evidence for p, it is hard to see why one would be justified in believing p, contrary to the 
objector’s claim regarding the first case.
If we restrict the discussion to retrieved memory beliefs that one comes to occur-
rently believe, evidentialists can handle the cases in a different way. One might think 
the phenomenology that often accompanies the retrieval of a memory belief is itself 
some evidence for its truth. In short, they seem to one to be true, and this can provide 
some degree of justification. If the phenomenology is present in both cases above (while 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
174
the subject does not have outweighing evidence against p), she is justified in believ-
ing p, after all. Importantly, however, she is only justified in believing p to the degree 
provided by that accompanying phenomenology. Whether this is enough to provide 
a complete explanation of particular cases will, again, depend on the details of those 
cases. Evidentialism at least has the resources to provide reasonable appraisals.
Conclusion
The fundamental idea that justification depends in some way on evidence or reasons is 
intuitively plausible and withstands objections. The hybrid theories recently proposed 
by Juan Comesaña (forthcoming) and Alvin Goldman (forthcoming) reflect this. Both 
theories blend elements of reliabilism and evidentialism, theories usually thought to be 
in conflict. What is important to emphasize about these theories here is that they both 
require that a belief fit one’s evidence in order to be justified, even if they depart from 
the strict evidentialist thesis that has been the subject of this chapter.
Of course, hybrids are motivated by claiming faults with pure versions of a view. 
This highlights the project facing evidentialists. Given that evidentialism is a broad 
thesis that can be developed in many ways, the task is to develop a specific, detailed 
interpretation of the central evidentialist thesis that retains its initial plausibility and 
withstands objections.
References
Adler, J. (2002) Belief’s Own Ethics, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Boghossian, P. (2003) “Blind reasoning,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Supplementary Volume, 77: 
225–248.
BonJour, L. (1999) “The dialectic of foundationalism and coherentism,” in J. Greco and E. Sosa (eds.) The 
Blackwell Guide to Epistemology, Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Brueckner, A. (2005) “Knowledge, evidence, and skepticism according to Williamson,” Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research, 70: 436–442.
Clifford, W. K. (1879) “The ethics of belief,” in L. Stephen and F. Pollack (eds.) Lectures and Essays, Vol. II, 
London: Macmillan and Co.
Comesaña, J. (forthcoming) “Evidentialist reliabilism,” Noûs.
Conee, E. (2002) “Review of Jonathan Adler, Belief’s Own Ethics,” Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews. Online. 
Available HTTP: <http://ndpr.nd.edu/review.cfm?id=1083> (accessed September 30, 2009).
—— and Feldman, R. (2004) Evidentialism: Essays in Epistemology, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—— and —— (2008) “Evidence,” in Q. Smith (ed.) Epistemology: New Essays, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
DeRose, K. (2000) “Ought we to follow our evidence?,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 60: 
697–706.
Feldman, R. (1988) “Having evidence,” in D. Austin (ed.) Philosophical Analysis, Dordrecht: Kluwer 
Academic Publishers.
—— (2003) Epistemology, Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
—— (2004) “The ethics of belief,” in E. Conee and R. Feldman Evidentialism: Essays in Epistemology, Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
—— and Conee, E. (1985) “Evidentialism,” Philosophical Studies, 48: 15–34.
Goldman, A. (1986) Epistemology and Cognition, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
—— (forthcoming) “Toward a synthesis of reliabilism and evidentialism? Or: evidentialism’s troubles, relia-
bilism’s rescue package,” in T. Dougherty (ed.) Evidentialism and Its Discontents, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Hawthorne, J. (2005) “Knowledge and evidence,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 70: 452–457.
Kelly, T. (2006) “Evidence,” in E. Zalta (ed.) The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Online. Available 
HTTP: <http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/evidence/> (accessed September 30, 2009).

EVIDENTIALISM
175
Plantinga, A. (1993) Warrant: The Current Debate, New York: Oxford University Press.
Shah, N. (2006) “A new argument for evidentialism,” The Philosophical Quarterly, 56: 481–498.
Sosa, E. (1991) Knowledge in Perspective, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Steglich-Petersen, A. (2008) “Does doxastic transparency support evidentialism?,” Dialectica, 62: 541–547.
Williamson, T. (2000) Knowledge and Its Limits, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

17
RELIABILISM
Juan Comesaña
1. Introduction
The reliabilist theory of epistemic justification is one of the most influential theories 
in recent epistemology. In this chapter I present reliabilism, starting with its origins 
as a theory of knowledge and considering the main problems that it faces, together 
with some of the main solutions to those problems that have been proposed in the 
literature.
2. A Brief History of Reliabilism
In a short note that didn’t attract much attention until after reliabilist theories were 
explicitly defended in the 1970s, Ramsey (1931) wrote:
I have always said that a belief was knowledge if it was (i) true, (ii) certain, (iii) 
obtained by a reliable process.
We can recognize here perhaps a version of the justified true belief account of knowl-
edge, except that Ramsey talks about the reliability of the process that produced the 
belief rather than about justification (although it may be that Ramsey is combining the 
belief and justification conditions in his (ii), and thus appealing to reliability in addi-
tion to appealing to justification). The next big moment in our brief history involves 
Edmund Gettier. After Gettier published his counterexamples to the justified true belief 
account of knowledge (Gettier 1963) many philosophers embarked in a search for a 
fourth condition which, added to the traditional three, was to be sufficient for knowl-
edge. The history of that search is well-known (see Shope 1983). But other philosophers 
took a different tack: instead of looking for a fourth condition to add to the justification 
condition, they examined the possibility of replacing the justification condition. What is 
missing in subjects in Gettier-style situations, these philosophers thought, is some con-
nection between the belief and the facts that make the belief true. If that connection 
is present, moreover, then the subject has knowledge, regardless of whether or not his 
belief is “justified” as that notion is traditionally understood. Thus, Armstrong (1973) 
proposed a theory according to which a non-inferential belief amounts to knowledge 
just in case it has some properties that are nomically connected to its truth. In a simi-
lar vein, Goldman (1967) proposed a causal theory of knowledge, according to which 
(very roughly) a belief constitutes knowledge just in case the fact that p is causally con-
nected (in the right way) with the belief that p. An interesting variant of these theories 

RELIABILISM
177
construes the relation in question not directly as a physical relation, but rather as a cer-
tain kind of modal correlation between the belief and the facts. For instance, Dretske 
(1971) anticipated Nozick (1981) in proposing that a crucial condition for a subject S 
to know that p is that, if p were true, S wouldn’t believe that p. Other proposals along 
these lines include Sosa (1999) and Williamson (2000) (for critical examination of 
these proposals, see Comesaña 2007).
As said above, what all these proposals have in common is that they jettison the 
justification condition in favor of a condition that requires that there be some kind of 
relation between belief and reality. Reliabilism as a theory of epistemic justification is 
born when that replacement thesis is abandoned in favor of an explanation thesis—when 
reliability is seen as what justification consists in, as opposed to a condition that is inde-
pendent of justification.
3. An Initial Formulation of Reliabilism About Justification
That change takes place in the seminal work on reliabilism as a theory of justification: 
Goldman (1979). In that work, Goldman proposes a recursive definition of justification 
along the following lines:
S is justified in believing that p at t if and only if:
(i) S’s belief that p at t results from a belief-independent cognitive belief-
forming process that is unconditionally reliable; or
(ii) S’s belief that p at t results from a belief-dependent cognitive belief-
forming process that is conditionally reliable and all the input-beliefs are 
justified.
To understand the definition we need to explain what Goldman means by a cognitive 
belief-forming process (simply “process” in what follows), what the distinction between 
belief-dependent and belief-independent processes amounts to, and what it is for a pro-
cess to be conditionally and unconditionally reliable.
A process is a psychological mechanism that produces beliefs under certain condi-
tions. A process can be represented by a function whose outputs are the propositions 
produced by the mechanism and whose inputs are the conditions under which the mech-
anism operates (we can, without fear of generating confusion, talk about the inputs and 
outputs of the processes themselves). Belief-dependent processes will include among 
its inputs other beliefs of the agent, whereas belief-independent processes will not. A 
process is unconditionally reliable if and only if it issues in mostly true beliefs, whereas 
a belief-dependent process is conditionally reliable if and only if it issues in mostly true 
beliefs if the input beliefs are true.
4. Problems and Refinements
4.1. Justification Without Reliability? The New Evil Demon Problem
Consider the Cartesian skeptical scenario according to which there is a powerful evil 
demon who is deceiving me with respect to most of the propositions that I believe. 
According to the traditional description of this skeptical scenario, what the demon 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
178
does is to arrange things so that the world appears to me to be exactly the same way that 
it would appear to me if all of my beliefs about the world were true, when they are in 
fact false. Thus, in the skeptical scenario I am not typing on a computer, but my total 
experience is still the same as it is right now, and so on and so forth for most of my other 
beliefs.
Philosophers disagree regarding whether the possibility of skeptical scenarios like 
these can form the basis for any powerful skeptical argument. But skepticism is not our 
concern right now. Consider not our epistemic predicament, but that of a victim of a 
skeptical scenario. Regardless of what we think about ourselves, such a victim of course 
lacks knowledge (if only because most of his beliefs are false, but not only because of 
that). But ask yourself not whether the victim has knowledge, but whether he has justi-
fied beliefs. The answer will depend, of course, on the particular epistemic nature of the 
victim in question. But if the victim is undergoing an experience just like mine right 
now and, on the basis of that experience, believes that he is typing on a computer, then 
surely at least that belief of him will be justified. In general, if the victim is a responsible 
epistemic agent (that is, if he doesn’t commit fallacies, takes experience at face value, 
etc.), then his beliefs will be just as justified as those of his non-victimized counterpart. 
This is not to say, of course, that there cannot be victims that are unjustified, but it is to 
say that the mere fact that they are the victims of a skeptical scenario doesn’t guarantee 
that they are unjustified.
So victims of a skeptical scenario may very well have justified beliefs. But those beliefs 
are, for the most part, false. It seems to follow that the processes that formed those 
beliefs were not reliable—they certainly didn’t tend to produce mostly true beliefs. If 
those processes are unreliable, then reliabilism has the consequence that those victims 
can never have justified beliefs, irrespective of the details of how they came to form 
those beliefs. This is what Sosa called the “new evil demon” problem. It’s new because 
the problem is not Descartes’ skeptical argument, but rather the apparent consequence 
of reliabilism that no victim of skeptical scenarios can ever be justified.
The new evil demon problem has been associated with Cohen (1984), and it has 
been repeatedly wielded as perhaps the main symptom of everything that’s wrong with 
reliabilism—see, for instance, Pollock (1984), Feldman (1995), and Foley (1985). For 
friends of reliabilism, the new evil demon problem has proven to be an important reason 
to modify their theory. Goldman himself, for instance, has reacted to the problem in no 
less than three different ways (to be considered below).
Sosa (1991) makes an important point in discussing the new evil demon problem. 
Victims of an evil demon live in worlds where the processes that we use to form our 
beliefs seem to be unreliable, and they have justified beliefs despite using those very same 
processes. But there might well be creatures who inhabit worlds where the only way to 
acquire information about the environment is to use processes that would be unreli-
able if used here (one could argue that the evil demon world is precisely one of those 
worlds). For instance, there are worlds where when things look round they are square. 
In those worlds, believing that there is a round thing in front of you whenever some-
thing appears round tends to produce false beliefs, while believing that there is a square 
thing in front of you when it appears round tends to produce true beliefs. Some phi-
losophers (including Sosa (1991) and Bergmann (2006)) think that subjects in those 
worlds whose beliefs are produced by processes like the latter do have justified beliefs. 
Some solutions to the new evil demon problem do not have this consequence. Let us 
now review some of those solutions.

RELIABILISM
179
Goldman (1979) actually considered a benevolent-demon world example which is 
similar in some respects to the kind of cases that Sosa urged us to consider alongside 
the new evil demon problem. The benevolent demon arranges things so that wishful 
thinking is reliable. What are we to say, then, of a subject who engages in wishful think-
ing in the benevolent demon world? Goldman was ambivalent. One possibility that he 
considered was that the wishful thinker was not justified, because the reliability of the 
process in question should be evaluated, not with respect to the world of the wishful 
thinker but, rather, with respect to the actual world. Given that wishful thinking is not 
actually reliable, the beliefs of the wishful thinker are not justified even if they are pro-
duced by processes that are reliable in his world. (Goldman considered that idea not as 
a theory of justification, but as a theory of justification-attributions. I ignore the compli-
cations that this difference raises.) Now, bracketing for the moment any concerns about 
the consequences that this theory has for the wishful thinker and similar cases, notice 
that it has the right consequence for the new evil demon problem. For the processes 
used by those victims of the evil demon that have justified beliefs are actually reliable 
(or, at least, the objection does not rely on their not being so), and so a theory according 
to which a belief is justified provided that it was produced by processes that are actually 
reliable will not succumb to the new evil demon problem.
But let us now go back to the wishful thinker and cases similar to his. Because of 
obfuscating connotations of wishful thinking, let us concentrate instead on the case 
of inhabitants of a world where, due to fundamental physical and physiological dif-
ferences, things that appear round are square (and, maybe, vice-versa). Inhabitants of 
this world are wired-up so that they believe that there is a square whenever something 
appears round to them. This appearance–belief transition is, for them, as basic as the 
usual transition is for us, and nothing in their other experiences or collective inquiries 
ever gives them (what would of course be misleading) reasons to think that there is any-
thing wrong with proceeding in this way. Let us also suppose that proceeding like this is 
the only way for them to know about real squares—if they instantiated instead our usual 
appearance to belief transitions, then nothing in their other experiences or collective 
inquiries will ever give them a clue that they are making a fundamental mistake. What 
are we to say about such creatures? If we insist that justification is proportional to the 
reliability of the process that produces the belief in the actual world, then we are bound 
to say that their beliefs are unjustified—but, as mentioned before, many epistemologists 
believe that there is at least some sense in which they are justified. Call this the “alien 
cognizers” problem for reliabilism (the name comes from Bergmann (2006)). If, on the 
other hand, we say that justification is proportional to the reliability of the process that 
produces the belief in whichever world that belief is held, then we are bound to say that 
the beliefs of any victim of an evil demon are unjustified. The new evil demon problem 
and the alien cognizers problem pull reliabilism in opposite directions. We’ll come back 
to this issue.
Goldman (1986) proposes a different solution to the new evil demon problem: the 
“normal worlds” approach (in that book Goldman also reconsiders and rejects the 
actual world proposal). According to this proposal, the reliability of a process should 
be evaluated with respect to neither the actual world nor the world where the belief is 
held but, rather, with respect to normal worlds, which are worlds that are, in their gen-
eral features, the way we take the actual world to be. This proposal solves the new evil 
demon problem insofar as we take the actual world to be one where the processes used 
by justified victims are reliable. But it does nothing to alleviate the doubts of friends of 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
180
the alien cognizers problem. And it also has more serious problems. It seems to offer a 
radically subjectivist account of justification, for the justificatory status of beliefs is, in 
effect, determined by our general beliefs about the world.
Goldman (1988) proposed to solve the new evil demon problem by positing an ambi-
guity in “justified.” In one sense of the word (the “strong” sense), justification answers 
to the original reliabilist definition in Goldman (1979), but in another, weak sense, a 
belief is justified just in case it is non-culpably held. The beliefs of victims of an evil 
demon can never be strongly justified, but they might well be weakly justified. As Sosa 
(1991) points out, however, this solution doesn’t distinguish between justified victims of 
an evil demon and those who have been brainwashed into holding preposterous beliefs. 
None of them are culpable in holding their beliefs, but justified victims of an evil demon 
are more than non-culpable: there is something epistemically positive about how they 
formed their beliefs, not merely the lack of something epistemically negative.
Elsewhere (Comesaña (2002), building on work by Sosa—Sosa (1993) and Sosa 
(2001)), I advanced a proposal that aims at taking care of both the new evil demon 
problem and the alien cognizers problem. Let us first note that, according to many, 
“actual” is a term whose proper semantics is two-dimensional—thus, to put it in termi-
nology that comes from Chalmers (1996), associated with the term “actual” there is a 
two-dimensional intension which can be thought of as a function from possible worlds 
to functions from possible worlds to truth-values. Associated with any utterance of “It 
is actually true that p” there is a primary intension, which determines a proposition 
that is true at a world w just in case p obtains in w, and a secondary intension, which 
determines a proposition which is true in a world w just in case p obtains in the world of 
utterance. So, for instance, the primary intension of “It is actually the case that Mount 
Everest is the mountain with the highest altitude in the world” determines a necessarily 
true proposition, but its secondary intension determines a contingently true proposi-
tion. According to my proposal, the reliability of a process should indeed be evaluated 
in the actual world, as the position that Goldman (1979) considered suggests, but bear-
ing in mind that “actual” must be given a two-dimensional semantics. Thus, there is a 
sense in which victims of an evil demon can be justified, although it is also true that, on 
this view, there is a sense in which they can never be (this captures the sense in which 
victims of an evil demon cannot have knowledge even if their justified beliefs are true). 
This view also takes care of the alien cognizers problem, insofar as it has the conse-
quence that there is a sense in which they can be justified (their beliefs may be arrived 
at by processes which are reliable in their world, and, thus, they can have knowledge), 
even though it is also true that there is a sense in which they are not justified (the sense 
in which victims of an evil demon and ourselves are). These two senses associated with 
“justification,” however, are not independent of each other (like Goldman’s weak and 
strong notions of justification), but, rather, are related to each other in the same way in 
which, following Kaplan (1989), we can say that the character of an indexical is related 
to its content.
4.2. Reliability Without Justification?
The new evil demon problem challenges the necessity of reliability for justification. 
An equally influential problem challenges the sufficiency of reliability for justification. 
The locus classicus for that challenge is BonJour (1980). In that paper, BonJour pres-
ents a number of cases involving subjects whose beliefs are formed by processes which, 

RELIABILISM
181
although actually unreliable, are stipulated to be reliable in the subject’s world (so far, 
this is just like the case of the alien cognizers, but we’ll see that there is a crucial differ-
ence). In some cases, the subjects in question have reason to believe that the processes 
that produce their beliefs are unreliable. BonJour’s most famous case, however, concerns 
a subject that is not like that. Here is BonJour’s description of the case:
Norman, under certain conditions that usually obtain, is a completely reliable 
clairvoyant with respect to certain kinds of subject matter. He possesses no 
evidence or reasons of any kind for or against the general possibility of such a 
cognitive power, or for or against the thesis that he possess it. One day Norman 
comes to believe that the President is in New York City, though he has no evi-
dence either for or against this belief. In fact, the belief is true and results from 
clairvoyant power, under circumstances in which it is completely reliable.
Goldman (1979) had already considered the problems raised by subjects who have 
reasons to believe that the processes that produced their beliefs are unjustified, and 
proposed to add a clause to the reliabilist definition of justification to take care of 
those problems. The proposed clause adds as a necessary condition for a subject being 
justified in believing that p that there be no reliable process available to the subject 
such that, if the subject were to use that process (in addition to the ones actually used), 
then he would no longer believe that p. In Goldman (1986) the analogous condition 
is added that the subject should not have a reason to think that his belief is unreliably 
caused.
The addition of a negative clause might help with the cases where the subjects have 
reasons to believe that the target belief was unreliably caused. But BonJour’s idea is that 
the case of Norman is not like this, for Norman does not have any reason to believe that 
his belief was unreliably caused. Indeed, BonJour explicitly says that Norman has no evi-
dence one way or the other regarding the reliability of clairvoyance, or even whether he 
is clairvoyant. Now, this claim by BonJour could well be challenged: after all, Norman 
suddenly finds himself believing that the President is in New York City, with no clue as 
to where the belief came from. Presumably, there are reasons to doubt that beliefs whose 
provenance is completely obscure to us were caused by reliable processes.
So it’s not entirely clear that Goldman’s original negative clause cannot take care of 
Norman’s case as well. But there is still reason to think that some other modification to 
reliabilism is needed. For, even if the fact (if it is indeed a fact) that Norman has reasons 
to believe that his belief about the President was not produced by a reliable process is 
one of the things that is epistemically wrong with Norman, it could well be that there is 
more than one thing that is epistemically wrong with Norman. Indeed, it is arguably the 
fact that the clairvoyantly produced beliefs just pop into Norman’s head that makes them 
unjustified (this is the crucial difference with the case of the alien cognizers). Elsewhere 
(Comesaña forthcoming) I have argued that the way to take care of BonJour’s objection 
to reliabilism (and to externalist theories more generally) is to combine reliabilism with 
evidentialism. Evidentialism, as defended by Earl Conee and Richard Feldman (see, 
for instance, Conee and Feldman 2004), is the thesis that adopting a doxastic attitude 
(for instance, belief) with respect to a proposition is justified for a subject at a time if 
and only if adopting that attitude fits the evidence that that subject has at that time. If 
evidentialism is left at that, however, it is a radically incomplete theory, for we would 
naturally want to know what makes it the case that adopting a certain attitude towards 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
182
a proposition fits a certain body of evidence. I suggest that we should adopt a reliabilist 
understanding of this notion of fit. The resulting theory looks like this:
S is justified in believing that p at t if and only if p was produced by a process R which 
includes some evidence e and:
 (i) e doesn’t include any beliefs of S and R is unconditionally reliable; or
(ii) e includes beliefs of S, all of these beliefs are justified, and R is condition-
ally reliable.
This version of reliabilism has the consequence that Norman’s beliefs are not justified, 
because they are produced by processes that don’t include any evidence. If what is moti-
vating the idea that Norman is not justified is the fact that the clairvoyant beliefs just 
pop into his head (and not just that Norman has reasons to believe that his clairvoyantly 
acquired beliefs are not justified), then this version of reliabilism takes care of that 
problem.
4.3. What is Reliability? The Generality Problem
Only types of processes can straightforwardly be said to have a meaningful reliability 
ratio associated with them. Token processes issue in only one belief. If the belief is true, 
then that token process is perfectly reliable, whereas if it is false, the token process is 
perfectly unreliable. A process-type, by contrast, can be more or less reliable depend-
ing on the ratio of true to false beliefs that all the tokens of that type produce (this 
assumes that we are taking a truth-ratio approach to reliability, as is standardly done in 
the literature, but see section 4.4 for a problem for this approach, as well as for a sug-
gested solution). When reliabilists say that the justificatory status of a belief depends, 
ultimately, on the reliability of the processes that led to that belief, therefore, they must 
mean to refer to process-types. But any token-process belongs to indefinitely many types of 
processes, each one of which may have a different reliability ratio. For instance, the process 
that created my belief that I am facing a computer screen belongs to all of these types: 
visual process, visual process while I am not using glasses, visual process while I am not 
using or needing glasses, perceptual process, process that issues in a true belief, process 
that occurs in Wisconsin, etc. The reliability problem for the reliabilist is best under-
stood as a challenge: the challenge of finding a principled way of selecting, for each 
token-process of belief formation, the type whose reliability ratio must be high enough 
in order for the belief to be justified. Goldman (1979) was aware of the problem, and it 
has been forcefully pushed by Conee and Feldman (1998).
Many different solutions have been proposed for the generality problem, which has 
proven to be resilient. Heller (1995) proposed a contextualist “dissolution” of the prob-
lem according to which reliabilists should resist trying to come up with a principled way 
of singling out one of the indefinitely many types as the one that has to be evaluated for 
reliability, for the context of attribution of justification takes care of that. Among the 
proposals that tackle the problem head on (as opposed to denying that there is one), 
one of the most influential ones has been that of Alston (1995). According to Alston, 
the type of process whose reliability determines whether the target belief is justified or 
not is the type describing the function that is actually operative in the formation of 
the belief. Thus, if the psychological process that created the belief is insensitive to the 

RELIABILISM
183
exact geographical location where the process takes place, then the reliability of the 
type that mentions that kind of information is irrelevant to the justificatory status of 
the belief. The main question that this proposal raises is whether it singles out a unique 
process-type or whether, as Conee and Feldman (1998) argue, it still leaves us with a 
multitude of types of differing reliability.
As I said, many other solutions have been proposed, but most of them share with 
Alston’s the characteristic of leaving it open that the strictures that they put in place fail 
to single out a unique process-type. I have argued (see Comesaña 2006) that any plau-
sible epistemological theory will face an analog of the generality problem. Therefore, 
either the problem is worse than we thought (because it shows not only that reliabi-
lism is an inappropriate epistemological theory but, more generally, that there are no 
appropriate epistemological theories) or there is a solution to the generality problem. In 
either case, there is no special problem for reliabilism.
Consider a theory that is usually presented as an internalist alternative to reliabilism: 
evidentialism. As Conee and Feldman (1985) present this theory, a subject S is justified 
in adopting doxastic attitude D towards proposition p at time t if and only if adopting D 
towards p fits the evidence that S has at t. Now, given this definition of justification, it 
could well happen that a subject has a justified true belief, is not in a Gettier-type situ-
ation and yet still fails to have knowledge—because, despite the fact that the evidence 
that he has justifies believing the proposition in question, he doesn’t believe it on the 
basis of that evidence but rather, say, out of wishful thinking. Conee and Feldman recog-
nize this, and add a definition of well-foundedness to their definition of justification:
S’s doxastic attitude D towards p at t is well-founded if and only if:
1. having D toward p is justified for S at t; and
2. S has D toward p on the basis of some body of evidence e, such that
(a) S has evidence e at t; and
(b) having D towards p fits e; and
(c) there is no more inclusive body of evidence e' had by S at t such that hav-
ing D toward p does not fit e'.
Now, once we recognize the necessity of relying on something like the notion of 
basing one’s belief on some evidence (as is done in the evidentialist definition of well-
foundedness) we can appeal to that very notion in solving the generality problem for 
reliabilism. Thus, incorporating the modifications made in sections 4.1 and 4.3, I pro-
pose the following as a reliabilist definition of justification that is able to deal with the 
generality problem (I called the resulting position “Evidentialist reliabilism”):
Evidentialist reliabilism: A belief that p by S is justified if and only if:
1. S has evidence e;
2. the belief that p by S is based on e; and either
(a) e doesn’t include any beliefs of the subject and the type producing a belief 
that p based on evidence e is actually reliable; or
(b) e includes other beliefs of S, all of those beliefs are justified and the type 
producing a belief that p based on evidence e is actually conditionally reliable.

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
184
Evidentialist reliabilism solves the generality problem insofar as it provides a process-
type whose reliability determines the justification of the belief produced by the token of 
that type that produced the belief in question. It remains to be seen, of course, whether 
the resulting theory is adequate in other respects, but objectors cannot now complain 
that no single type has been selected in a non-principled way.
4.4. What is Reliability? The Lottery Problem
Somewhat surprisingly, an issue that has not received much attention in the literature 
on reliabilism is the question of what it means, exactly, for a process to be reliable. 
Insofar as this question is taken up, a truth-ratio answer is generally given. More pre-
cisely, the following seems to be the characterization of reliability that most reliabilists 
take for granted:
A type T is reliable if and only if most of the actual and close counterfactual 
tokens of T produce true beliefs.
However, if that is what it takes for a type to be reliable, then there is a range of cases 
that would constitute counterexamples to reliabilism (Adler (2005) is dedicated to this 
problem, and it was raised also in Cohen (1988)). Suppose that both Smith and Jones 
have bought one ticket each in a large fair lottery. The day the result is announced, 
Smith believes that his ticket lost based solely on the basis that it is one ticket in, say, a 
million. Jones, on the other hand, believes that his ticket lost based on reading about the 
result in the newspaper. If we are going by the above definition of reliability, then the 
relevant type associated with Smith’s belief is more reliable than the relevant type associ-
ated with Jones’ belief (newspapers print typos more often than once in a million cases). 
It is not part of the official characterizations of reliabilism that we have offered so far that 
the higher the reliability of the relevant type the higher the justification of the belief, 
but this is a natural way for a reliabilist to deal with the fact that justification comes in 
degrees. But the problem is that we judge Jones to be the one that is better justified than 
Smith, not the other way around (indeed, some philosophers go as far as believing that 
Smith cannot know that his ticket lost based on the evidence on which he believes it).
If we adopt the modifications to reliabilism offered in the previous section, there is a 
different but natural way of explaining what it means for a type to be reliable, in terms 
of conditional probability (Alston (1998) proposed to understand reliability in terms of 
conditional probability, and Comesaña (2009) develops this idea):
A type of the form believing that p based on e is reliable if and only if the condi-
tional probability of p given e is sufficiently high.
Let s be the proposition that Smith’s ticket is a loser, j the proposition that Jones’ ticket 
is a loser, m the proposition that Smith’s ticket is one in a million in a fair lottery, and n 
the proposition that the newspaper announced that a ticket other than Jones’ won the 
lottery. It is easy to verify that (given plausible assumptions about the newspaper’s error 
rate) the conditional probability of j given n is higher than the conditional probability of 
s given m, which gives us the comparative result that we were looking for.
Conceiving of the relevant type as always including some evidence and of reliability 
as defined in terms of conditional probability also allows us to bypass the distinction 

RELIABILISM
185
between unconditional and conditional reliability that Goldman relied on in order to 
capture the difference between derived and basic beliefs. The reliabilist definition of 
justification that we arrive at is therefore the following:
S is justified in believing that p if and only if:
1. S has evidence e;
2. S bases his belief that p on e; and
3. the actual conditional reliability of p given e is high enough.
5. Conclusion
In this chapter we have presented a reliabilist theory of epistemic justification. We 
have also seen that such a theory is subject to some serious problems. But reliabilism is a 
resourceful theory, and plausible answers can be given to the most pressing problems.
References
Adler, J. (2005), “Reliabilist Justification (or Knowledge) as a Good Truth-Ratio,” Pacific Philosophical 
Quarterly 86(4), pp. 445–458.
Alston, W. (1988), “An Internalist Externalism,” Synthese 74, pp. 265–283.
Alston, W. (1995), “How to Think about Reliability,” Philosophical Topics 23, pp. 1–29.
Armstrong, D. (1973), Belief, Truth and Knowledge, Cambridge University Press.
Bergmann, M. (2006), Justification without Awareness, Oxford University Press.
BonJour, L. (1980), “Externalist Theories of Empirical Knowledge,” Midwest Studies in Philosophy V, pp. 
53–73.
Chalmers, D. (1996), The Conscious Mind, Oxford University Press.
Cohen, S. (1984), “Justification and Truth,” Philosophical Studies 46, pp. 279–295.
Cohen, S. (1988), “How to Be a Fallibilist,” Philosophical Perspectives (2), pp. 91–123.
Comesaña, J. (2002), “The Diagonal and the Demon,” Philosophical Studies 110, pp. 249–266.
Comesaña, J. (2006), “A Well-Founded Solution to the Generality Problem,” Philosophical Studies 129, pp. 
127–147.
Comesaña, J. (2007), “Knowledge and Subjunctive Conditionals,” Philosophy Compass 2(6), pp. 781–791.
Comesaña, J. (2009), “What Lottery Problem for Reliabilism?” Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 90(1), pp. 
1–20.
Comesaña, J. (forthcoming), “Evidentialist Reliabilism,” Noûs .
Conee, E. and Feldman, R. (1985), “Evidentialism,” Philosophical Studies 48, reprinted with an “Afterword” 
in Conee and Feldman (2004), pp. 83–107.
Conee, E. and Feldman, R. (1998), “The Generality Problem for Reliabilism,” Philosophical Studies (89), pp. 
1–29.
Conee, E. and Feldman, R. (2004), Evidentialism, Oxford University Press, New York.
Dretske, F. (1971), “Conclusive Reasons,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 49, pp. 1–22.
Feldman, R. (1995), “Reliability and Justification,” The Monist 68, pp. 159–174.
Foley, R. (1985), “What’s Wrong With Reliabilism?” The Monist 68, pp. 188–202.
Gettier, E. (1963), “Is Justified True Belief Knowledge?” Analysis 23, pp. 121–123.
Goldman, A. (1967), “A Causal Theory of Knowing,” Journal of Philosophy 64(12), pp. 357–372.
Goldman, A. (1979), “What is Justified Belief?” in G. Pappas (ed.), Justification and Knowledge, Reidel, 
Dordrecht, pp. 1–23.
Goldman, A. (1986), Epistemology and Cognition, Harvard University Press.
Goldman, A. (1988), “Strong and Weak Justification,” Philosophical Perspectives 2, pp. 51–69.
Heller, M. (1995), “The Simple Solution to the Generality Problem,” Noûs 29(4), pp. 501–515.
Kaplan, D. (1989), “Demonstratives,” in H. W. J. Almog and J. Perry (eds.), Themes from Kaplan, Oxford 
University Press.
Nozick, R. (1981), Philosophical Explanations, Harvard University Press.

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
186
Pollock, J. (1984), “Reliability and Justified Belief,” Canadian Journal of Philosophy 14, pp. 103–114.
Ramsey, F. (1931), “Knowledge,” in The Foundations of Mathematics and Other Logical Essays, Routledge & 
Kegan Paul.
Shope, R. (1983), The Analysis of Knowing, Princeton University Press.
Sosa, E. (1991), Knowledge in Perspective, Cambridge University Press.
Sosa, E. (1993), “Proper Functionalism and Virtue Epistemology,” Noûs 27(1), pp. 51–65.
Sosa, E. (1999), “How Must Knowledge Be Modally Related to What Is Known?” Philosophical Topics 26(1/2), 
pp. 373–384.
Sosa, E. (2001), “Goldman’s Reliabilism and Virtue Epistemology,” Philosophical Topics 29(1/2), pp. 383–
400.
Williamson, T. (2000), Knowledge and its Limits, Oxford University Press.

18
MODAL AND ANTI-LUCK 
EPISTEMOLOGY
Tim Black
1. Gettier Cases and Anti-Luck Epistemology
The influence of Edmund Gettier’s “Is Justified True Belief Knowledge?” (1963) seems 
to extend to every corner of epistemology. Gettier’s counterexamples to the tripartite 
account of knowledge, according to which to know is to have a justified true belief, 
involve epistemic agents whose beliefs are true simply as a matter of luck. These coun-
terexamples are widely, perhaps universally, taken to show that an epistemic agent can 
be justified in holding the true belief that p but nonetheless fail to know that p. It has 
thus become a tenet of orthodox epistemology that no belief, not even if it is true and 
we are justified in holding it, can amount to knowledge if it is true simply as a matter 
of luck.
In one of Gettier’s counterexamples, Smith is justified in believing both that Jones 
will get the job that both he and Smith have applied for and that Jones has ten coins in 
his pocket. From these two beliefs, Smith justifiedly infers that
(C) the man who will get the job has ten coins in his pocket.
Smith’s inferential belief, let us suppose, is true. Still, Smith’s belief does not count 
as knowledge: although Jones will not get the job, “by the sheerest coincidence, and 
entirely unknown to Smith,” he (Smith) will get the job, and he has ten coins in his 
pocket (Gettier 1963: 123). Although Smith comes to hold his belief that C in a way 
that is very reliable and which provides him with reasons that would in normal cir-
cumstances be identical to the reasons why his belief is true, his belief is based in this 
instance on reasons that are different from those that make it true. Smith’s inferen-
tial belief that C, then, is true simply as a matter of luck, and hence fails to count as 
knowledge.
Now, while it is helpful to think about Gettier cases in terms of luck, in that it helps 
us to understand what keeps their protagonists from knowing, it is less helpful than it 
might be. What exactly does it mean to say that Smith’s belief is true simply as a matter 
of luck? It seems that there are two ways in which one might respond to this question.
First, there is the thought that justification—that is, the kind of justification that 
Smith has for believing that C—matters epistemically. The thought, in other words, 
is that if S is to know that p, then her believing that p must represent an appropri-
ate response to the evidence. To respond appropriately, S must first avail herself of a 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
188
sufficient amount of the relevant evidence, which will somehow indicate which belief, 
if any, it supports. S must then respond doxastically in the way her evidence directs 
her to respond, and she must respond in this way because her evidence directs her to 
do so. Given that her evidence indicates that it supports the truth of p, and given that 
S believes that p because her evidence supports the truth of p, she is justified in believ-
ing that p. We can spell out this notion of justification as follows (cf. Kornblith 1983; 
BonJour 1985; Greco 1990; and Riggs 1998):
S is justified in believing that p if and only if (a) she avails herself of a sufficient 
amount of the relevant evidence, where the relevant evidence is any that bears 
on the truth or falsity of p, (b) she conducts a reasonably thorough reflective 
examination of her evidence, (c) her evidence, so far as she can tell on the basis 
of her reflective examination, is appropriately connected to the fact that p, and 
(d) S forms a belief that p on the basis of her evidence for p.
Corresponding to this conception of justification is a conception of luck:
S’s belief that p is true simply as a matter of luck if and only if (a) S is justified 
in believing that p, (b) her justification for p—that is, the evidence that figures 
into her being justified in believing that p—is not appropriately connected to 
the fact that p; but (c) p is nevertheless true.
One might hope to eliminate this sort of luck by making sure that one’s justification for 
p is appropriately connected to the fact that p. Yet it has proven notoriously difficult to 
do this. Indeed, some have been led to conclude that it cannot be done. Such a conclu-
sion appears attractive not only in the light of Gettier cases, where S’s belief is true for 
reasons that are different from those on which her belief is based, but also in the light of 
cases in which S’s belief is true for reasons that are quite closely related indeed to those 
on which her belief is based.
Suppose, then, that S holds a ticket in a fair lottery with a large number of partici-
pants and long odds. S forms the belief, on the basis of considerations involving the 
extremely low probability that her ticket is a winner, that her ticket is a loser. Suppose 
further that a winner has been selected and that S has not won; her ticket is in fact a 
loser. Here again, as in the Gettier case discussed above, S comes to believe that her 
ticket is a loser in a very reliable way. Yet, while Smith’s reasons in the Gettier case 
are different from those that make his belief true, S’s belief in the lottery case is based 
on reasons that are closely related to those that make it true: The fact that there’s an 
extremely low probability that S’s ticket is a winner not only serves as the basis of her 
belief, but it also has much to do with her belief being true. Even in this case, however, 
we are reluctant to say of S that she knows that her ticket is a loser. Her belief seems true 
simply as a matter of luck. It does seem difficult, then, to ensure that our justification is 
appropriately connected to the facts.
Some feel, however, that the sort of luck highlighted by Gettier cases and by lottery 
cases does not concern the connection between the facts and our beliefs’ justification. 
Rather, they concern the connection between the facts and our beliefs themselves. Thus, 
the protagonists in Gettier cases and in lottery cases fail to have knowledge because 
their beliefs are true simply as a matter of luck, where this means that their beliefs them-
selves are not appropriately connected to the facts.

MODAL AND ANTI-LUCK EPISTEMOLOGY
189
But how should we characterize this new conception of luck? Duncan Pritchard help-
fully suggests that our protagonists’ beliefs are true as a matter of veritic epistemic luck, 
which he characterizes in the following way: “It is a matter of luck that the agent’s belief 
is true,” where
this demands that the agent’s belief is true in the actual world, but that in a 
wide class of nearby possible worlds in which the relevant initial conditions are 
the same as in the actual world—and this will mean, in the basic case, that the 
agent at the very least forms the same belief in the same way as in the actual 
world [. . .]—the belief is false.
(Pritchard 2005: 146)
So, for example, Smith’s belief is veritically epistemically lucky because while it is true 
in the actual world, it is false in too many of the nearby possible worlds in which Smith 
forms the belief that C in the same way as in the actual world. To avoid being veritically 
epistemically lucky, Smith’s belief must be true not only in the actual world, but also in a 
sufficient proportion of the nearby possible worlds in which he forms the belief that C in 
the same way as in the actual world. Theories that address the issue of veritic epistemic 
luck are modal epistemologies, according to which a belief counts as knowledge only if 
there is a modal connection—that is to say, a connection not only in the actual world, 
but also in other non-actual possible worlds—between the belief and the facts of the 
matter. A bit more concretely, a modal epistemology might say that a belief counts as 
knowledge only if it is true not only in the actual world, but also in a certain proportion 
of worlds within a specified set or range of non-actual possible worlds.
The difficulty here, of course, is with “a sufficient proportion”: in order to eliminate 
veritic epistemic luck, in what proportion of the relevant nearby possible worlds must 
Smith’s belief that C be true? In trying to answer this question, epistemologists start 
from at least two places. Each of these two places corresponds to a distinct way of giving 
expression to the anti-luck intuition involved in this understanding of the problematic 
cases. First, to say that Smith’s belief is true simply as a matter of luck might be to say 
that there is nothing about Smith’s circumstances, in which his belief happens to be 
true, that ensures that he will believe that C—even if C had been false, Smith might 
nonetheless have believed that C. This way of giving expression to our anti-luck intu-
ition corresponds to epistemologies known as sensitivity theories, which we will consider 
in Section 2.
Next, to say that Smith’s belief is true simply as a matter of luck might be to say that 
there is nothing about that which led Smith to believe that C that ensures that C will 
be true—it might have been that Smith’s circumstances are just as they actually are, but 
that his belief that C is false. This way of giving expression to our anti-luck intuition 
corresponds to modal epistemologies known as safety theories, which we consider in 
Section 3.
2. Sensitivity Theories
Robert Nozick (1981) famously suggests that S knows that p only if S’s belief that p is 
sensitive to the truth, that is, only if S would not believe that p if p were false (cf. Dretske 
1971). In evaluating sensitivity’s counterfactual condition, we consider the nearest pos-
sible world in which p is false—that is, the state of affairs, or the world, in which p 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
190
is false, but that is otherwise as similar to the actual state of affairs as it can be—and 
then to determine whether, in that world, S believes that p. If S does believe that p 
in that world, then her belief that p is insensitive, and she does not know that p. If S 
does not believe that p in that world, her belief is sensitive, and she can therefore know 
that p.
As Nozick points out, sensitivity theories, unlike the tripartite account, allow us to 
get the right result in Gettier cases. According to sensitivity theories, Smith doesn’t 
know that C because his belief that C is true simply as a matter of luck: In the near-
est possible world in which the man who’ll get the job does not have ten coins in his 
pocket—which, let’s suppose, is a world in which Jones has ten coins in his pocket 
but Smith, who’ll get the job, has only nine coins in his pocket—Smith nonetheless 
believes that the man who’ll get the job does have ten coins in his pocket (see Nozick 
1981: 173).
Sensitivity theories also help with the lottery case, where the difficulty is to explain 
why we consider S’s belief to be true simply as a matter of luck even when it’s true for 
reasons that are closely related to those on which it is based. According to sensitivity 
accounts, we consider S’s belief to be true simply as a matter of luck, and thus as failing 
to count as knowledge, because in the nearest possible world in which S’s ticket is not a 
loser, she still believes that her ticket is a loser. Thus, in spite of the fact that S’s belief 
is based on strong probabilistic reasons, and in spite of the fact that her belief is true for 
reasons that are closely related to those on which it is based, her belief is nevertheless 
insensitive.
Sensitivity theories almost immediately face a problem, however, which arises from 
their treatment of a certain anti-skeptical argument:
1. I know that I have hands.
2. I know that my having hands entails that I’m not a handless brain-in-a-vat (that is, 
a handless brain floating in a vat of nutrients and electrochemically stimulated so 
as to generate perceptual experiences that are exactly similar to those that I am now 
having in what I take to be normal circumstances).
3. If I know both that I have hands and that my having hands entails that I’m not a 
handless brain-in-a-vat, then I know that I’m not a handless brain-in-a-vat.
4. Therefore, I know that I’m not a handless brain-in-a-vat.
Sensitivity theories have trouble with this argument in two ways. First, there is the 
complaint that while sensitivity theories allow us to say that (1) is true, they force 
us to deny (4). (1) is true because my belief that I have hands is both true and sensi-
tive—the nearest possible world in which I have no hands is a world in which, let’s say, 
I lost my hands in some unfortunate accident; but I do not believe in that world that I 
have hands, for I clearly see that I have no hands. (4) is false, however, because even 
if my belief that I’m not a handless brain-in-a-vat is true, it is insensitive—in the near-
est possible world in which I am a handless brain-in-a-vat, I still believe that I’m not a 
handless brain-in-a-vat, since in that world everything appears to me just as it does in 
this world.
Moreover, this sort of result suggests that sensitivity theorists will reject (3), which is 
an instance of a very plausible epistemic closure principle:
If S knows that p and that p entails q, then S knows that q.

MODAL AND ANTI-LUCK EPISTEMOLOGY
191
We feel the intuitive pull of this principle in cases like the present one. Surely, it seems, 
if I know that I have hands, I also know that certain incompatible skeptical hypotheses 
are false, hypotheses like the one according to which I am a handless brain-in-a-vat. So, 
since sensitivity theories seem both to lead to the rejection of a very plausible closure 
principle and to offer no direct response to the skeptic—that is, no response according 
to which we know that certain skeptical hypotheses are false—many epistemologists are 
reluctant to adopt them.
Yet this is not the end of the story, for Nozick revises his theory in order “to take 
explicit account of the ways and methods of arriving at belief” (1981: 179), where we 
can rely on a standard taxonomy of methods which includes perception, memory, testi-
mony, and intuition:
S knows that p if and only if
a. p is true;
b. S believes, via method or way of coming to believe M, that p;
c. if p weren’t true and S were to use M to arrive at a belief whether (or not) p, 
then S wouldn’t believe, via M, that p; and
d. if p were true and S were to use M to arrive at a belief whether (or not) p, then 
S would believe, via M, that p.
Nozick provides the following example in support of this revision: “A grandmother sees 
her grandson is well when he comes to visit; but if he were sick or dead, others would tell 
her he was well to spare her upset” (Nozick 1981: 179). When her grandson is well, the 
grandmother believes on the basis of seeing him that he is well. But if he were not well, 
she would use another method—Nozick stipulates that she would use testimony—in 
forming a belief as to whether her grandson was well. In that case, however, her belief 
would be false. Yet, as Nozick says, the fact that she would use another method “does 
not mean that she doesn’t know he is well (or at least ambulatory) when she sees him” 
(Nozick 1981: 179). This suggests that the only worlds that are relevant to S knowing 
that p are worlds in which, in arriving at the belief that p, she forms her belief in the 
same way as in the actual world.
Moreover, given Nozick’s revised sensitivity condition, although Nozick him-
self failed to notice this, worlds in which I am a handless brain-in-a-vat need not be 
relevant to whether I know that I’m not a handless brain-in-a-vat. In those worlds, 
one might argue, my belief is produced by a method that is different from the one 
that produces my belief in the actual world (see Black 2002). Thus, Nozick’s revised 
sensitivity condition gives us room to say that I know both that I have hands and 
that I’m not a handless brain-in-a-vat. Sensitivity theories, at least those willing to 
make the sort of revision recommended by Nozick, need neither embrace skepticism nor 
deny the epistemic closure principle. (Roush’s (2006) sensitivity-based theory, which 
utilizes a probabilistic interpretation of the counterfactuals in Nozick’s account, is also 
meant to allow for knowledge to be closed under known entailment.)
Yet there are cases that cause trouble even for Nozick’s revised theory. Keith DeRose 
provides two such cases. First, take my belief that
(F) I don’t falsely believe that I have hands.

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
192
It certainly seems that I know that F, yet my belief that F is insensitive, for I would hold 
that belief even if F were false (see DeRose 1999: 196–197). In DeRose’s second case, I 
believe that
(D) I’m not an intelligent dog who’s always incorrectly thinking that I have 
hands.
Here too, it seems that I know that D in spite of the fact that my belief that D is insensi-
tive (see DeRose 1999: 196–197).
In responding to these cases, DeRose says,
We don’t . . . judge ourselves ignorant of P where not-P implies something we 
take ourselves to know to be false, without providing an explanation of how we 
came to falsely believe this thing we think we know. Thus, I falsely believe that 
I have hands implies that I don’t have hands. Since I do take myself to know 
that I have hands (this belief isn’t insensitive), and since the above italicized 
proposition doesn’t explain how I went wrong with respect to my having hands, 
I’ll judge that I do know that proposition to be false.
(DeRose 1999: 197)
DeRose here suggests the following weakened sensitivity condition:
(WES) S knows that p only if either S sensitively believes that p or, where ~p 
implies some q and S knows that ~q, ~p fails to explain how S might come to 
hold the false belief that ~q.
Note that the second disjunct of (WES)’s consequent—call it (EXP)—has three com-
ponents:
(EXP)(i) ~p implies some q,
(ii) S knows (in the actual world) that ~q, and
(iii) ~p fails to explain how S might come to hold the false belief that ~q.
The introduction of (EXP) allows us to hand down the proper verdict in each of the 
two problematic cases. In the quoted passage, DeRose explains how (EXP) helps us to 
get the right result in the first case. (EXP) helps in the second case as well, for (i) I’m an 
intelligent dog who’s always incorrectly thinking that I have hands implies I don’t have hands, 
(ii) I know that I have hands, and (iii) my being such a dog fails to explain how I might 
come to hold the false belief that I have hands. (For an extended discussion of this sort 
of proposal, see Black and Murphy 2007.)
Still, there are objections. Juan Comesaña suggests that (WES) has trouble dealing 
with Ernest Sosa’s Garbage Chute Case:
I throw a trash bag down the garbage chute of my condo. Some moments later 
I believe, and know, that the trash bag is in the basement. If the trash bag were 
not in the basement, however, that would be because it is stuck somewhere in 
the chute, and I would still believe that it is in the basement.
(Comesaña 2007: 783, adapted from Sosa 2000)

MODAL AND ANTI-LUCK EPISTEMOLOGY
193
Comesaña maintains that (WES) has trouble dealing with this case when q is The trash 
bag is in the basement. The relevant instance of (EXP) is this:
 (i) The trash bag is not in the basement entails the trash bag is not in the base-
ment,
 (ii) I know that the trash bag is in the basement, and
(iii) The trash bag is not in the basement fails to explain how I might come to 
hold the false belief that the trash bag is in the basement.
Comesaña maintains that (iii) is false. He says that “the closest situation w[h]ere the 
trash bag is not in the basement is one that does explain why I would still falsely believe 
that it is in the basement (because it is a situation where the trash bag misleadingly 
appears to be in the basement)” (Comesaña 2007: 786). Given this, and given that 
I insensitively believe that the trash bag is in the basement, (WES) says that I fail to 
know that the trash bag is in the basement.
Yet (iii) is true in Comesaña’s case. Moreover, when (iii) is false, we do not know that 
the trash bag is in the basement. Either way, (WES) is in the clear. First, in Comesaña’s 
Garbage Chute Case, (iii) is true; that is, ~T, the trash bag is not in the basement, does fail 
to explain how I might come to hold the false belief that T, the trash bag is in the basement. 
Note that in the closest situations in which ~T, the fact that ~T occupies no position in 
the causal history of my belief that T, for I am in no way acquainted with the fact that 
~T. I neither see nor hear that the trash bag isn’t in the basement, and no one tells me 
(anything which would suggest) that it isn’t in the basement. In the closest situations 
in which ~T, I come to believe that T in spite of the fact that ~T, and so we shouldn’t 
say that ~T explains how I might come to hold the false belief that T. In this instance, 
then, (iii) is in fact true, which means that the Garbage Chute Case, at least when we 
configure that case as one in which q is The trash bag is in the basement, doesn’t count 
against (WES).
Next, consider a case in which (iii) is not true, that is, a case in which ~T does explain 
how I might come to hold the false belief that T. Suppose that the condo’s janitor likes 
to trick its tenants. When there’s a problem with the garbage chute, he says there isn’t 
a problem. When my trash bag fails to make it to the basement, he tells me that the 
garbage chute is unobstructed and working fine. The fact that my trash bag didn’t make 
it to the basement helps to explain how I come to hold the false belief that it did make 
it to the basement. In this case, though, (WES) renders the correct verdict: It says that 
I don’t know that the trash bag is in the basement. After all, if it weren’t in the base-
ment, the janitor would tell me that it was. (WES) is therefore in the clear both in the 
case Comesaña presents—since (iii) is true in that case—and in a case in which (iii) is 
false—since I fail in that case to know that T. (For an extended discussion of this sort of 
reply to Comesaña’s objection, see Murphy and Black 2007.)
3. Safety Theories
The anti-luck intuition that we have in response to Gettier cases and lottery cases might 
also take the following form: to say that S’s belief that p is true simply as a matter of luck 
is to say that there is nothing about that which led S to believe that p that ensures that 
p will be true—it might have been that S’s circumstances are just as they actually are, 
but that her belief that p is false. This way of giving expression to our anti-luck intuition 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
194
corresponds to modal epistemologies known as safety theories. Ernest Sosa, who intro-
duced a safety condition on knowledge, gives expression to such a condition as follows:
Call a belief by S that p “safe” iff: S would believe that p only if it were so that 
p. (Alternatively, a belief by S that p is “safe” iff: S would not believe that p 
without it being the case that p; or, better, iff: as a matter of fact, though per-
haps not as a matter of strict necessity, not easily would S believe that p without 
it being the case that p.)
(Sosa 1999: 142)
Pritchard, whose anti-luck epistemology revolves around a safety condition, provides 
some of the details that are left implicit in Sosa’s formulation: If S knows a contingent 
proposition, p, then in most nearby possible worlds, S believes that p only when p is 
true (see, for example, Pritchard 2005: 71). In evaluating S’s belief in accordance with 
a safety principle, we consider all of the nearby possible worlds in which S believes that 
p. If in most of those worlds p is true, then S’s belief that p is safe. If, on the other hand, 
S’s belief that p is false in too many of those worlds, S’s belief is not safe.
Like sensitivity accounts, safety accounts yield the right result in Gettier cases. 
Suppose once again that although Smith is justified in holding the true belief that C, 
he does not know that C. Smith’s belief is true simply as a matter of luck since “by the 
sheerest coincidence, and entirely unknown to Smith,” he (Smith) will get the job, and 
he has ten coins in his pocket (Gettier 1963: 123). The safety condition yields the right 
result here: Smith doesn’t know that C because C is false in too many nearby possible 
worlds in which he believes that C.
But there are cases which suggest that the safety condition, as it is formulated above, 
is inadequate.
FELON: A man has been accused of murder. The man’s mother holds the true belief that 
her son is innocent, and she holds this belief on the basis of excellent evidence in 
its favor, including reliable forensic evidence about the cause of the victim’s death. 
It seems, then, that the mother knows that her son is not the murderer.
 
Yet while her son is not in fact the murderer, he very nearly was—he intended to 
murder the victim but before he could act on his intention, the victim, let’s say, died 
of a heart attack. Moreover, in too many of the nearby worlds in which the man’s 
mother believes that he is not the murderer, he is the murderer and her belief that 
her son is innocent is generated simply by her intense love for her son.
(Pritchard 2005: 153; Armstrong (1973: 208–209) discusses a similar case, 
attributing it to Gregory O’Hair)
Again, our intuition here is that the mother knows that her son is innocent. After all, 
she is well aware of excellent forensic evidence in favor of the claim that he’s innocent. 
According to safety, however, at least as it’s formulated above, the mother does not know 
that her son is innocent, for in too many of the nearby possible worlds in which she 
believes that her son is innocent, her son did in fact murder the victim.
This sort of case highlights the need to make it more difficult for a world to count as 
one of the relevant nearby possible worlds. It suggests in particular that the safety con-
dition ought to make additional demands which concern the methods that epistemic 
agents use in forming their beliefs:

MODAL AND ANTI-LUCK EPISTEMOLOGY
195
(SAFETY II) If S knows a contingent proposition, p, then in most nearby possible worlds 
in which S forms her belief about p in the same way as she forms her belief in the 
actual world, S believes that p only when p is true.
Safety II handles Felon, for in most of the nearby possible worlds in which the mother 
forms her belief about her son’s innocence on the basis of excellent evidence in favor of that 
belief, her son did not murder the victim.
Yet Safety II faces difficulties of its own. Suppose once again that S holds a ticket in 
a fair lottery with a large number of participants. Of course, we are reluctant to say of S 
that she knows that her ticket is a loser. Nonetheless, S’s belief satisfies the conditions 
set out in Safety II—in most nearby possible worlds in which she believes that her ticket 
is a loser, and in which she forms her belief as she does in the actual world, namely, on 
the basis of her belief that it is highly likely that her ticket is a loser, her ticket is in fact 
a loser. “The problem,” Pritchard (2005: 163) says, “seems to be that the agent’s belief, 
whilst meeting [Safety II], is still veritically lucky since, given the nearness of the pos-
sible worlds in which the agent wins the lottery (and thus where forming her belief on 
the basis of the odds leads her astray), it is still a matter of luck that her belief happens 
to be true.”
What is required at this point, according to Pritchard, is a third, stronger version of 
the safety principle, one that increases the proportion of the relevant nearby possible 
worlds in which S’s belief must be true:
(SAFETY III) If S knows a contingent proposition, p, then in nearly all (if not all) nearby 
possible worlds in which S forms her belief about p in the same way as she 
forms her belief in the actual world, S believes that p only when p is true.
Safety III handles the lottery case. S fails to know that her ticket is a loser, according to 
Safety III, because in too many of the nearby possible worlds in which she believes that 
her ticket is a loser, and in which she forms her belief in the same way she does in the 
actual world, her ticket is not a loser.
Indeed, Pritchard’s main argument for Safety III—and for its “nearly all (if not all)” 
qualification—comes in terms of the lottery puzzle:
The agent who forms her belief that she has lost the lottery purely on the 
basis of the odds involved lacks knowledge because her belief, whilst true and 
matching the truth in most nearby possible worlds in which she forms her belief 
in the same way as in the actual world, does not match the truth in a small 
cluster of nearby possible worlds in which what she believes is false (i.e. where 
she wins the lottery).
(Pritchard 2005: 163, my emphasis)
But what if her belief fails to match the truth in an even smaller cluster of nearby possible 
worlds? In such a case, Safety III might count her as knowing that she has lost the lot-
tery. But this is counterintuitive, perhaps because we are reluctant to count the agent 
as knowing if there is even one nearby possible world in which her belief fails to match 
the truth.
Moreover, John Greco (2007: 301) maintains that Pritchard’s Safety III is ambiguous 
between strong safety—“In close worlds, always if S believes p then p is true. Alternatively, 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
196
in close worlds never does S believe p and p is false”—and weak safety—“In close worlds, 
usually if S believes p then p is true. Alternatively, in close worlds, almost never does S 
believe p and p is false.” Safety III says that S knows that she has lost the lottery when it 
is read as weak safety, but that S does not know that she’s lost the lottery when it’s read 
as strong safety.
All of this leads us away from Safety III, and to the final version of the safety principle 
that we will see in this entry, a revision which Pritchard calls SP**:
(SP**) S’s belief is safe if and only if in most nearby possible worlds in which S continues 
to form her belief about the target proposition in the same way as in the actual 
world, and in all very close nearby possible worlds in which S continues to form 
her belief about the target proposition in the same way as in the actual world, the 
belief continues to be true (see Pritchard 2007: 290–292).
SP** handles the lottery case in what seems to be a fairly unobjectionable way.
Still, some cases might weigh against SP**. Consider the following case:
EXPERIMENT: I am participating in a psychological experiment, in which I am to report 
the number of flashes I recall being shown. Before being shown the stimuli, I con-
sume a glass of liquid at the request of the experimenter. Unbeknownst to either 
of us, I have been randomly assigned to the control group, and the glass contains 
ordinary orange juice. Other experimental groups receive juice mixed with one of a 
variety of chemicals which hinder the functioning of memory without a detectable 
phenomenological difference. I am shown seven flashes and judge, truly and know-
ingly, that I have been shown seven flashes. Had I been a member of one of the 
experimental groups to which I was almost assigned, I would have been shown only 
six flashes but still believed that I had been shown seven flashes due to the effects of 
the drug. It seems that in the actual case I know that the number of flashes is seven 
despite the envisaged possibility of my being wrong. And yet these possibilities are 
as similar in other respects as they would have to be for the experiment to be well 
designed and properly executed.
(Neta and Rohrbaugh 2004: 400)
SP** seems to count my belief in Experiment as unsafe and thus as something other 
than knowledge.
Yet for this unacceptable result to hold up, the worlds in which I am assigned to a 
non-control group and in which I am impaired must be very close to the actual world. 
Safety theorists might be able convincingly to argue, however, that such worlds are not 
very close to the actual world. For one thing, the very fact that I am impaired in these 
worlds might make it the case that they are too far away from the actual world to count 
as being very close to it; safety theorists might argue that the only very close worlds in 
this case are worlds in which I am assigned to the control group and in which I drink 
ordinary orange juice. In worlds like that, though, it seems that my belief that I have 
been shown seven flashes continues to be true. If this sort of response to Experiment 
is effective, then my belief that I have been shown seven flashes can still count both as 
safe and as an instance of knowledge.
Incidentally, Experiment seems also to count against sensitivity theories—if I had 
not been shown seven flashes, if I had been shown only six flashes, I nevertheless would 

MODAL AND ANTI-LUCK EPISTEMOLOGY
197
have believed that I had been shown seven flashes. Yet sensitivity theorists, at least 
those who subscribe to a condition like (WES), can provide a response to Experiment 
that is similar to the one provided by safety theorists. Sensitivity theorists, like safety 
theorists, might argue that a world cannot count as being very close to the actual world 
unless it is a world in which I am assigned to the control group and drink ordinary 
orange juice. In this case, however, the hypothesis that I have been shown only six 
flashes fails to explain how in very close possible worlds, I might come to hold the false 
belief that I have been shown seven flashes. If this sort of response to Experiment is 
effective, my belief that I have been shown seven flashes can both satisfy the conditions 
set out in (WES) and count as an instance of knowledge.
4. Concluding Remarks
Modal epistemologies—sensitivity theories and safety theories—do much to let us know 
what it is for a belief to be true simply as a matter of luck, and thus what is required in 
order to eliminate this sort of luck. We have seen this demonstrated in the way that 
modal epistemologies handle Gettier cases, lottery cases, and cases of several other sorts. 
Perhaps, though, there are still other cases in which it seems that we hold beliefs that 
are true simply as a matter of luck. Yet rather than showing that modal epistemologies 
are on the wrong track, those cases might simply be suggesting ways in which such epis-
temologies might be improved or “highlight[ing] the vagueness inherent in the exten-
sion of philosophically interesting terms” (Pritchard 2007: 290). Modal epistemologies 
therefore seem quite promising—indeed, given that such epistemologies do an excel-
lent job of characterizing epistemic luck and of setting forth the conditions that must be 
met if such luck is to be eliminated, it rather seems that modal epistemologies represent 
the right approach to some central issues in the theory of knowledge.
References
Armstrong, D. M. (1973). Belief, Truth and Knowledge (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Black, Tim. (2002). “A Moorean Response to Brain-in-a-Vat Scepticism,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 
80: 148–163.
—— and Peter Murphy. (2007). “In Defense of Sensitivity,” Synthese 154: 53–71.
BonJour, Laurence. (1985). The Structure of Empirical Knowledge (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press).
Comesaña, Juan. (2007). “Knowledge and Subjunctive Conditionals,” Philosophy Compass 2: 781–791.
DeRose, Keith. (1999). “Solving the Skeptical Problem,” Skepticism: A Contemporary Reader, Keith DeRose 
& Ted A. Warfield, eds. (New York: Oxford University Press): 183–219.
Dretske, Fred (1971). “Conclusive Reasons,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 49: 1–22.
Gettier, Edmund. (1963). “Is Justified True Belief Knowledge?” Analysis 23: 121–123.
Greco, John. (1990). “Internalism and Epistemically Responsible Belief,” Synthese 85: 245–277.
——. (2007). “Worries about Pritchard’s safety,” Synthese 158: 299–302.
Kornblith, Hilary. (1983). “Justified Belief and Epistemically Responsible Action,” The Philosophical Review 
92: 33–48.
Murphy, Peter and Tim Black. (2007). “Comments on Juan Comesaña’s ‘Knowledge and Subjunctive 
Conditionals’,” On-Line Philosophy Conference 2, http://experimentalphilosophy.typepad.com/2nd_
annual_online_philoso/files/murphy_and_black_on_comesana.doc.
Neta, Ram and Guy Rohrbaugh. (2004). “Luminosity and the Safety of Knowledge,” Pacific Philosophical 
Quarterly 85: 396–406.
Nozick, Robert. (1981). Philosophical Explanations (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press).
Pritchard, Duncan. (2005). Epistemic Luck (Oxford: Clarendon).
——. (2007). “Anti-Luck Epistemology,” Synthese 158: 277–297.

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
198
Riggs, Wayne D. (1998). “What are the ‘Chances’ of Being Justified?” The Monist 81: 452–472.
Roush, Sherrilyn. (2006). Tracking Truth: Knowledge, Evidence, and Science (New York: Oxford).
Sosa, Ernest. (1999). “How to Defeat Opposition to Moore,” in James E. Tomberlin, ed., Philosophical 
Perspectives 13, Epistemology: 141–153.
——. (2000). “Skepticism and Contextualism,” Philosophical Issues 10: 1–18.

19
VIRTUE EPISTEMOLOGY
Jonathan L. Kvanvig
I. History
Virtue epistemology constitutes an approach to epistemological issues and problems 
that can be traced to Ernest Sosa’s seminal paper, “The Raft and the Pyramid” (Sosa 
1980). Sosa in turn credits the idea for a virtue epistemology to the rise of interest since 
the 1950s in virtue approaches to ethics, which have an Aristotelian source. Sosa’s ini-
tial idea was to use virtue notions to provide a unified account of knowledge, and this 
goal constrains what Sosa counts as an intellectual virtue. The central component in 
such approaches to virtue epistemology is that of a reliable cognitive faculty, and episte-
mologists who have followed Sosa’s lead here focus on faculties such as vision, reasoning 
powers, introspection, and memory as primary examples of intellectual virtues.
This approach contrasts with the approach taken by Linda Zagzebski (1996). The 
publication of her book is another major event in the history of virtue epistemology, 
and it favors a somewhat different conception of an intellectual virtue. Zagzebski argued 
that a truly Aristotelian understanding of the intellectual virtues focuses more on char-
acter traits such as openmindedness and intellectual courage. Such a conception of 
the intellectual virtues leads one away from the reliabilist notion adopted by Sosa, and 
makes it more difficult to use such a notion of an intellectual virtue in service of the 
standard epistemological project of clarifying the natures of knowledge and justifica-
tion (even though Zagzebski herself offers such a theory). (Note that while Zagzebski 
uses the language of reliability, it is not the truth-conducive notion central to reliabilist 
approaches to epistemological issues. It remains true, however, that character traits of 
interest in epistemology have something to do with the epistemic goal of getting to the 
truth and avoiding error, even if not truth-conducive in the sense required by Sosa and 
his followers.)
Thinking of the intellectual virtues in terms of character traits might lead one in 
different directions than those of traditional epistemology, and one of the results of 
thinking about the role of the virtues in intellectual life has been such a broadening 
of projects that are nonetheless within the scope of epistemological concern, echoing 
a criticism by Jonathan Kvanvig (1992) that prospects for virtue epistemology look 
much better outside the domain of traditional epistemological concerns than within it. 
Lorraine Code, for example, argues for orienting epistemology in terms of the concept of 
epistemic responsibility, and thus focuses more on the role of agency in inquiry and on 
the moral and social dimensions of intellectual life (Code 1987). James Montmarquet 
agrees that the distinctive notion in epistemology to which an understanding of the 
intellectual virtues is central is the notion of responsibility, and he models the notion of 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
200
doxastic responsibility on the notion of moral responsibility, conceiving the former as a 
particular kind of the latter (Montmarquet 1993). His primary interest is thus not with 
traditional epistemological positions and puzzles but, rather, with the project of attempt-
ing to ascertain the cognitive conditions that underlie morally responsible action itself. 
Roberts and Wood, for a third example, pursue the issue of the role of the virtues in 
the intellectual life as such, independently of any question concerning the nature of 
knowledge or justification or an attempt to solve the skeptical challenge (Roberts and 
Wood 2007). Thus, even though it is possible for the character trait conception of an 
intellectual virtue to be put in service of traditional epistemology, a primary effect of 
this conception of a virtue is an expansion of the issues and problems that become the 
targets of philosophical reflection of a particularly epistemological sort.
II. Traditional Epistemology and the Virtues
The leading figures in the attempt to employ virtue notions in service of traditional 
epistemology are Sosa, John Greco, and Zagzebski. Sosa views the value of appeals to 
virtue as a way of solving certain problems with traditional foundationalist and coher-
entist approaches to the nature of knowledge and justification. The central problem 
for such approaches is the Scatter Problem, the need for an ever-increasing body of 
epistemic principles to account for the justification of beliefs by subjects much different 
in kind from us. Aliens, for example, might have cognitive powers and abilities wholly 
different from our own, and yet use such capacities to acquire knowledge. A satisfying 
theory will need to explain the underlying unity here rather than rest content with mere 
proliferation of additional principles every time a new kind of being is considered, and 
Sosa maintains that the ability to provide such a unified explanation is a primary motive 
for virtue epistemology.
Sosa defines a virtue this way: “One has an intellectual virtue or faculty relative to 
an environment E if and only if one has an inner nature I in virtue of which one would 
mostly attain the truth and avoid error in a certain field of propositions F, when in cer-
tain conditions C” (1991: 284). In light of this conception of a virtue, Sosa holds that 
primary epistemic evaluation applies to aspects of inner natures as such, and secondary 
evaluation to the products of such virtues, thus identifying knowledge and justification 
with the products of such virtues.
Early criticism of Sosa’s proposal focused in the way in which it ignores the central 
notion of epistemic responsibility (Code 1987; Montmarquet 1993). Greco’s virtue the-
ory aims at remedying this difficulty without abandoning the general conception Sosa 
outlines. Greco identifies epistemically responsible belief with subjective justification, 
and argues that one and the same account of the virtues is capable of giving an account 
of both subjective justification and knowledge. Greco’s account of a virtue is quite simi-
lar to Sosa’s, holding that intellectual virtues are “innate faculties or acquired habits 
that enable a person to arrive at truth and avoid error in some relevant field” (2002: 
287). He maintains that knowledge requires subjective justification that gives rise to 
objectively reliable belief, and that such justification is present when the underlying 
character involves the virtues as understood above. Thus, knowledge is identified in 
terms of beliefs grounded in the intellectual virtues, and the result is a combination of 
reliable belief and epistemically responsible belief.
Zagzebski, however, rejects the account of the intellectual virtues employed by Sosa 
and Greco. She defines a virtue as “a deep and enduring acquired excellence of a person, 

VIRTUE EPISTEMOLOGY
201
involving a characteristic motivation to produce a certain desired end and reliable suc-
cess in bringing about that end” (1996: 137). Though she uses the language of reliability 
in this definition—a reliability that attaches to the motivation in question—careful 
reading of her claims about reliability require a weaker interpretation in terms of a role 
such character traits play in getting to the truth and avoiding error. She agrees with 
Montmarquet’s criticism, for example, that openmindedness is not truth-conducive, 
and hence not a character trait the underlying motivation of which guarantees any 
reliability for resulting beliefs. Nonetheless, she maintains that the concept of a virtue 
so defined can be used to clarify the nature of knowledge as well as that of justification. 
Knowledge, according to Zagzebski, is a belief arising out of an act of intellectual vir-
tue, and justification is a matter of avoiding in belief what a virtuous person wouldn’t 
believe in like circumstances (so that a justified belief is one that a virtuous person 
might believe in like circumstances).
III. Expanding Epistemology through the Virtues
The leading figures in the attempt to use virtue notions in addressing epistemological 
issues but without any explicit attempt to characterize their efforts in terms of the pri-
mary topics and issues of traditional epistemology are Code, Montmarquet, Kvanvig, 
and Roberts and Wood.
Kvanvig argues that traditional epistemological discussion is in the grips of a Cartesian 
perspective which focuses on synchronic and individualistic issues. He argues that given 
such a perspective, no interesting role will be found for the virtues in attempting to 
resolve traditional epistemological matters concerning the nature of knowledge and 
justification. He suggests, however, that the problem could be with the perspective itself 
rather than with the virtues, and that if a more social and diachronic perspective were 
taken, the virtues would become much more important to epistemological inquiry. The 
expanded perspective would involve the variety of factors that play a role in progress 
toward cognitive ideality, both for individuals and groups. An investigation of the path 
toward cognitive ideality would involve the role of cognitive exemplars in the ubiqui-
tous process of mimicry and imitation that plays as significant a role in cognitive life 
as it does in other aspects of life. In addition, a social perspective on cognitive matters 
will need to address questions concerning the epistemic superiority of certain corporate 
attempts to find the truth and avoid error over other such attempts, and there is no 
doubt that corporate attempts that attend to intellectual virtues in determining the 
various roles that individuals will play in the corporate scheme will be better epistemi-
cally than those that do not.
Code and Montmarquet focus more explicitly on the relationship between the vir-
tues and the concept of responsibility. Code identifies the virtue of being epistemically 
responsible as the chief cognitive virtue, and claims that the methods and approaches 
of traditional epistemology are unlikely to provide an adequate conception of the intel-
lectual life and the role of the virtues in it. She thus views traditional epistemology as 
too concerned with analyzing the concepts of justification and knowledge, and argues 
instead for an approach that focuses on cognitive character itself, the relationship 
between the normative dimensions in both ethics and epistemology, and the social and 
communal aspects of the intellectual life.
Montmarquet similarly focuses on the concept of responsibility and argues that 
an appeal to the virtues is necessary for a proper understanding of the way in which 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
202
epistemic matters affect morally responsible action. He thus generates an account of 
subjective justification that plays two roles. First, it is defined in terms of the intellectual 
virtues, especially the virtues of epistemic conscientiousness, impartiality, sobriety, and 
courage, and second, it yields a notion that is the distinctive epistemic component in 
an account of morally responsible action. Should it turn out that this notion of justifica-
tion is not the sort that traditional epistemologists are concerned with, this fact by itself 
need not be of special concern to Montmarquet, since the project isn’t oriented toward 
these traditional epistemological concerns. What is needed, rather, is an account of 
doxastic responsibility that plays the role an epistemic condition needs to play in an 
explanation of moral responsibility.
Roberts and Wood eschew traditional epistemological concerns as well. They view 
the concerns of traditional epistemology as unnecessarily abstract and argue instead for 
an approach to epistemology that is “regulative,” one that attempts to generate guid-
ance for epistemic practice and thus to “change the world.” The strategy for achieving 
such a goal is to characterize the habits of mind relevant to successful epistemic prac-
tice, and thus the central focus of their work is on characterizing the particular habits 
or virtues of successful cognizers, habits such as love of knowledge, firmness, courage 
and caution, humility, autonomy, generosity, and practical wisdom. Throughout these 
discussions, the goal aimed at is that of edifying the reader by instilling an interest in 
and admiration of the virtues in question.
Finally, a significant theme has emerged in the discussion of virtue epistemology 
questioning the focus of epistemology on the concept of knowledge and related con-
cepts. Though these concepts are still important, several have argued for a more central 
place for other cognitive achievements such as wisdom and understanding (Kvanvig 
1992, 2003b; Zagzebski 1996; Roberts and Wood 2007), with the idea that changing 
or expanding the focus of epistemology in this way will present a deeper appreciation 
of the theoretical significance of the intellectual virtues in our theories of cognitive 
achievements.
IV. Difficulties for Virtue Epistemology
The critical literature on virtue epistemology has focused primarily on those approaches 
that have attempted to address the issues of traditional epistemology rather than on the 
attempts to expand epistemological inquiry in a way that finds a central place for the 
virtues. This fact is not surprising, given the longer history of traditional approaches to 
the discipline and the way in which success at such projects is easier to assess. The diffi-
culties for virtue approaches to traditional epistemological concerns depend on whether 
the virtues are conceived as acquired character traits or as faculties or powers useful in 
the search for truth.
A. Knowledge, Justification and Acquired Character Traits
In the theory of justification, challenges to the necessity of virtues conceived in terms 
of acquired character traits arise first by noticing that individuals themselves can 
have justified beliefs even if they have acquired few to no virtues. Small children, for 
example, are justified in believing that Mommy is present on the basis of perceptual 
abilities alone, regardless of whether the child has had enough time and experience to 
develop character traits of the virtuous sort. In order to accommodate this point, virtue 

VIRTUE EPISTEMOLOGY
203
theories of the sort in question must resort to counterfactuals. In Zagzebski’s case, as 
noted already, the counterfactual concerns what a virtuous person might believe in like 
circumstances.
Counterfactual theories are pervasive in philosophy, but have an extensive track 
record of susceptibility to counterexamples. Shope (1978) names the mistake respon-
sible for such susceptibility “the conditional fallacy,” and though his characterization of 
the fallacy is very complex, the usual characterization of the fallacy is that one shouldn’t 
try to analyze anything in terms of counterfactuals. This lesson plays out in the lit-
erature on Zagzebski’s theory, since it is easy to imagine beliefs that a virtuous person 
simply wouldn’t have, but which less virtuous people can have adequate evidence to 
believe. For example, consider the claim that a novice in terms of virtue might reason-
ably believe: “I am a novice with no acquired character traits at this point that would 
count as virtues.” It is hard to see how an intellectually virtuous person could hold such 
a belief, given the complete lack of self-understanding that would be required for a vir-
tuous person to believe it (see Johnson 2003).
This counterexample is part and parcel of a more general problem for virtue theo-
ries, whether in epistemology or ethics. There are things appropriate to believe or do 
where the appropriateness in question must be explained in terms of defects of the 
person in question. Such difficulties lead in ethics to views that emphasize, not what 
a virtuous person would do in my circumstances, but what my better self would hold 
about the action performed or the belief held (see Smith 2004). But there is a version 
of this difficulty rooted in the conditional fallacy that even better-self theories cannot 
accommodate (see Kvanvig 1992, 2003a; Kvanvig and Menzel 1990). For justifica-
tion attaches both to beliefs as well as to propositions that one does not believe. For 
example, one can have adequate evidence for thinking that Bush is one of the worst 
Presidents in history, but be unable to form that opinion out of fear or desire to please 
one’s parents. Moreover, in the usual case of an irrational belief, the explanation for 
the irrationality in question adverts to the justification the person in question has for 
the denial of the claim that is believed. In some cases of having propositional justifica-
tion for something not believed, the justification in question would be destroyed by 
coming to believe the claim in question. For example, one might know that one has 
only squared single-digit numbers, and thus have adequate evidence for the claim that 
one has never considered the claim that twelve squared is one hundred forty-four. No 
one can believe such a claim, however, without destroying the evidence for the claim. 
The fact that justification attaches both to beliefs and to propositions thus threatens 
any virtue theory that attempts to characterize justification in terms of what a virtu-
ous person would or might believe and even what one’s better self holds about what 
one should believe, since any such believing would destroy any evidence in its favor. 
One’s better self can’t approve of believing the claim, since that would be to approve of 
adopting an attitude that would be unjustified. But if one’s better self doesn’t approve 
of holding the belief, we have no way to explain, on such a theory, how the claim in 
question is justified. One could revise the better-self theory so that it determines justi-
ficatory status in terms of an approving attitude toward one’s present lack of attitude, 
but that won’t distinguish between cases where the proposition is justified and cases 
in which the evidence is counterbalanced and no attitude toward the proposition is 
needed or important. That is, the improved better-self theory still won’t be able to 
distinguish between propositional justification and propositional neutrality in some 
cases, and so fails for that reason.

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
204
It is this problem of propositional justification that leads Zagzebski away from the 
traditional epistemological concern with the nature of justification toward a more 
expanded epistemological approach, one in which she claims that it is time to abandon 
the traditional project and to take a different approach (see Zagzebski 2000), one that 
will make room for a virtue theory of justification of the sort she proposes, even if it isn’t 
a theory of the sort of justification that has been the target of traditional epistemologi-
cal concern.
Difficulties have been noted as well for the attempt to characterize the nature of 
knowledge in terms of acquired virtues. The principal challenge is the same here as one 
already seen concerning justification. Small children and animals have knowledge, but 
it is difficult to account for this knowledge on the basis of acquired character traits (see 
Greco 2000). Moreover, ordinary perceptual beliefs, even in those epistemic sophisti-
cates with a full panoply of acquired character traits that count as virtues, do not appear 
to require or involve these acquired virtues. Such difficulties, just as those encountered 
in the theory of justification, create strong pressure for those who think of the virtues in 
terms of acquired character traits to focus on expanding the kinds of inquiry and proj-
ects beyond those of traditional epistemology.
B. Knowledge, Justification, and Faculties or Powers
Viewing the virtues in terms of faculties or powers successfully aimed at truth can help 
with some of these problems, but not with all of them. For example, this alternative 
view of the virtues certainly helps with the problem arising from the existence of indi-
viduals who have not yet acquired any useful character traits, and it also helps avoid the 
problem that arises from simple perceptual knowledge. In these cases, justification and 
knowledge are present, but without any need for acquired virtues. It is less problematic, 
however, to claim that such justification and knowledge depend on the presence of 
faculties or powers typically successful in getting one to the truth.
Even so, problems remain. Such virtue theories are versions of reliabilism, and all 
such theories are plagued by what Sosa calls the New Evil Demon Problem (Sosa 1980). 
Inhabitants of evil demon worlds have no faculties or powers that are typically success-
ful in getting them to the truth, but it is less plausible to hold that they have no justified 
beliefs. They don’t have knowledge, since that requires the truth of what they believe, 
but the fallibilist position that justified false beliefs are possible is just the sort of theo-
retical underpinning needed to insist that their beliefs are justified even though nearly 
always mistaken.
Moreover, conceiving of the virtues in terms of faculties or powers doesn’t help at all 
with the problem of accounting for propositional justification. Such positions begin by 
explaining the nature of a property that attaches to beliefs (one produced by virtuous 
faculties or powers), but something different must be said in order to account for that 
property that attaches to propositions that are not believed. One natural idea here is to 
turn to counterfactuals, claims concerning what beliefs would be justified if they were 
held. But this natural suggestion raises precisely the same problems we noted earlier 
concerning the attempt of those appealing to acquired character traits to explain propo-
sitional justification.
These difficulties in the theory of justification do not arise, however, when appealing 
to faculties or powers to explain the nature of knowledge. Hence, the most promising 
avenue for such a virtue theory is in the domain of knowledge. The challenges that 

VIRTUE EPISTEMOLOGY
205
arise here focus more on perceived inadequacies of any reliabilist account of knowledge, 
including problems of clairvoyance and other purported powers that one has good rea-
son to think do not exist. Such cases show that merely having a belief that results from 
a power or faculty that typically gets one to the truth is not sufficient for knowledge 
(when the belief in question is true) and thus threaten certain versions of virtue episte-
mology (e.g., Sosa 1991). But such problems do not threaten the view that the activity 
of the virtues is necessary for knowledge.
There is some pressure, however, to try to specify a role for the virtues that is both 
necessary and sufficient for knowledge. Noted as early as Plato’s Meno is the point that 
the value of knowledge exceeds that of true belief. Socrates and Meno discuss the value 
of a guide who knows the way when one’s goal is to get to Larissa, and Socrates points 
out that a guide with true opinion will do just as well. In response, Meno wonders why 
we prize knowledge over true opinion and, indeed, what the difference is (Meno, 97c-d). 
This conversation is instructive, for Meno is exactly right that we do prize knowledge 
over true opinion, and one of the virtues of virtue epistemology is found in the hope 
that such an approach can explain this value. To the extent, however, that the role the 
virtues play here is not sufficient to close the gap between true belief and knowledge, 
to that extent virtue epistemology fails to account for the difference in value. Hence, 
in recent literature, virtue theories have attempted to state a condition involving the 
virtues that is both necessary for knowledge and sufficient for it in the presence of true 
belief. Greco, for example, insists that the belief is true because it arises from the virtues, 
that the virtues not only produce the belief in question but are part of the explanation 
of why the belief is true (see Greco 2000); and Sosa’s more recent (2007) requires that 
a belief be true because competent (Sosa 2007: 23).
Such a view has a difficult time dealing with the variety of Gettier examples in the 
literature. Greco devotes considerable effort to attempting to show that it can account 
for the fake barn case (the case in which one doesn’t know that what one is looking at is 
a barn because it is the only real barn in an area littered with fake barns that one can’t 
discriminate from real barns). In such a case, one’s perceptual powers operate as they 
normally do, but do not generate knowledge. Greco’s explanation is that the belief in 
question isn’t true because of the faculty in question, but because of other factors (per-
haps because one happened not to select a fake barn for perceptual attention). While it 
is true that the complete explanation of why the belief is true can’t be given without ref-
erence to other factors, that is true as well in any case of ordinary perceptual knowledge. 
So it isn’t clear that ordinary judgments about causation and explanation are sufficient 
to underwrite the claim that the barn belief isn’t true because of the powers or abilities 
in question and yet that an ordinary belief that, for example, there is a car parked in my 
driveway, is true because of my perceptual abilities. 
Moreover, there are other Gettier cases that are much more difficult for virtue theo-
rists of this sort to handle. In the Tom Grabit case, you see Tom steal a book from the 
library. But you don’t know that Tom stole the book, because Tom’s mother tells the 
police investigating the crime that Tom was in Hawaii and it must have been his twin 
brother Buck who stole the book. You don’t know because of this defeating information 
(of which you are unaware). There are variations on this opening theme, variations that 
differ concerning this lack-of-knowledge verdict. In one version, the police don’t need 
to take the mother’s testimony seriously even for a moment. They’ve had long experi-
ence with her lying to protect Tom, and know that there is no twin. In such a case, 
the defeating information is misleading information, and doesn’t undermine your 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
206
knowledge (see Lehrer and Paxson 1969). In other cases, however, the police have 
to treat her remarks seriously, and might take months of investigation to determine 
whether the alibi stands, and in such cases, your knowledge is undermined by the tes-
timony of the mother. In all cases, however, you have a true belief, and the “because” 
relation between your perceptual powers and the truth of your belief is precisely the 
same in all these variants of the Tom/Buck case. And yet, in some cases you know and 
in some you don’t.
Besides having difficulty accounting for the nature of knowledge, faculty-based virtue 
approaches face problems accounting for the value of knowledge as well. A primary con-
cern here is the Swamping Problem (Zagzebski 1996; Kvanvig 1998, 2003a), accord-
ing to which the value of truth swamps the value of additional features added to true 
belief which have no value except value instrumentally related to truth. Just as a superb 
espresso is no better as an espresso because produced by a machine that usually produces 
superb espressos, so a true belief becomes no more valuable from a purely intellectual 
point of view by adding some feature that is merely instrumentally valuable in get-
ting one to the truth. Zagzebski argues, for example, that virtues qua faculties are only 
extrinsically valuable, by tending to generate true beliefs, whereas a more agent-based, 
motivational view of the virtues makes the value of the virtues intrinsic and fundamen-
tal, enhancing the value of the states that result from such motives.
The prospects, then, for a virtue explanation of the nature of knowledge that also 
completely explains the value of knowledge over that of true belief are not promis-
ing. Virtue accounts of knowledge might go some distance to explaining this distinc-
tive value of knowledge, but not the entire way (see Kvanvig 2003b). Even so, if the 
virtues are necessary for knowledge (in spite of being insufficient even in the pres-
ence of true belief), that result would be a major accomplishment on the part of virtue 
epistemology.
V. Future Prospects
Even if some contribution by virtue epistemology to traditional epistemological con-
cerns can be sustained through defenses of the necessity of the virtues for knowl-
edge, this contribution does not exhaust the prospects for further contributions. The 
expansion of legitimate epistemological inquiry beyond the topics prompted by the 
concerns of the skeptic—namely, those of knowledge and justification—brings with 
it the possibility and perhaps even plausibility of further contributions by virtue theo-
rists to our understanding of the intellectual life. It is, of course, not possible to evaluate 
in some generic way the prospects of such, for any evaluation will need to be project-
specific. It is fair to conclude, however, that we have not yet seen the full extent of 
the contributions to such understanding that appeals to the intellectual virtues can 
provide.
References
Code, Lorraine. 1987. Epistemic Responsibility. Hanover, NH: University Press of New England.
Greco, John. 2000. “Two Kinds of Intellectual Virtue,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 60: 
179–184.
——. 2002. “Virtues in Epistemology,” Oxford Handbook of Epistemology, ed. Paul Moser. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Johnson, Robert. 2003. “Virtue and Right,” Ethics 113.4: 810–834.

VIRTUE EPISTEMOLOGY
207
Kvanvig, Jonathan. 1992. The Intellectual Virtues and the Life of the Mind. Savage, MD: Rowman & 
Littlefield.
——. 1998. “Why Should Inquiring Minds Want to Know?” The Monist 81.3: 426–451.
——. 2003a. “Propositionalism and the Perspectival Character of Justification,” American Philosophical 
Quarterly 40.1: 3–18.
——. 2003b. The Value of Knowledge and the Pursuit of Understanding. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
—— and Christopher Menzel. 1990. “The Basic Notion of Justification,” Philosophical Studies 59: 235–261.
Lehrer, Keith and Thomas D. Paxson, Jr. 1969. “Knowledge: Undefeated Justified True Belief,” The Journal 
of Philosophy 66.8: 225–237.
Montmarquet, James. 1993. Epistemic Virtue and Doxastic Responsibility. Lanham, MD: Rowman & 
Littlefield.
Roberts, Robert C. and W. Jay Wood. 2007. Intellectual Virtues: An Essay in Regulative Epistemology. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Shope, Robert. 1978. “The Conditional Fallacy in Contemporary Philosophy.” Journal of Philosophy 75: 
397–413.
Smith, Michael. 2004. Ethics and the A Priori: Selected Essays on Moral Psychology and Meta-Ethics. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Sosa, Ernest. 1980. “The Raft and the Pyramid: Coherence versus Foundations in the Theory of Knowledge,” 
Midwest Studies in Philosophy V: 3–25.
——. 1991. Knowledge in Perspective. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——. 2007. A Virtue Epistemology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Steup, Matthias, ed. 2001. Knowledge, Truth, and Duty. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Zagzebski, Linda. 1996. Virtues of the Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——. 2000. “Responses,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 60.1: 207–219.

208
20
KNOWLEDGE FIRST 
EPISTEMOLOGY
Timothy Williamson
Introduction
“Knowledge first” is a slogan for epistemology that takes the distinction between knowl-
edge and ignorance as the starting point from which to explain other cognitive mat-
ters. It reverses the direction dominant in much twentieth-century epistemology, which 
treated belief as explanatorily prior to knowledge, attempting to analyze knowledge 
as belief that meets further conditions, such as truth and justification. By contrast, a 
knowledge first epistemologist might treat believing something as treating it as if one 
knew it.
The most striking difference between knowledge and belief is that knowledge entails 
truth while belief does not. There is false belief but no false knowledge. Some people 
believe that Africa is a single country, but since it is false that it is a single country, they 
do not know that it is a single country. They just believe falsely that they know that 
Africa is a single country. In this sense, all knowledge but not all belief is successful. 
Thus knowledge first epistemology gives explanatory priority to success. This does not 
mean that belief first epistemology gives priority to failure. Rather, it gives explanatory 
priority to conditions that are neutral between success and failure: some beliefs consti-
tute knowledge, others are false.
Most epistemologists agree that while knowing entails believing truly, believing truly 
does not entail knowing. Someone does not know something he believes truly on the 
say-so of his guru, who invents things to tell him at random without regard to their 
truth or falsity. Although merely believing truly involves a sort of success—getting the 
answer right—it also involves, unlike knowing, a sort of cognitive malfunction. Thus 
knowledge is a more full-blooded success condition than true belief. Knowledge first 
epistemology understands cases of cognitive malfunctioning in terms of their deviation 
from cases of cognitive functioning, as opposed to treating the two kinds of case more 
symmetrically.
Similar contrasts arise in the philosophy of action, where intentionally doing some-
thing is the full-blooded success condition. It stands to the world-to-mind direction of fit 
as knowing stands to the mind-to-world direction of fit. Believing corresponds to trying, 
the neutral condition that obtains in both cases of success and cases of failure. Falsely 
believing corresponds to trying and failing. Merely believing truly without knowing 
corresponds to trying and doing the intended thing but not as intended: for instance, 
you hit the intended target because your intention so agitated you that your trigger 

KNOWLEDGE FIRST EPISTEMOLOGY
209
finger slipped. Knowledge first epistemology corresponds to a philosophy of action that 
understands cases of trying to do something without intentionally doing it in terms of 
their deviation from cases of intentionally doing it, again as opposed to treating the two 
kinds of case more symmetrically.
We cannot reasonably expect to decide between the two directions of explanation 
on the basis just of such abstract characterizations of the difference. Rather, we must 
explore the strengths and weaknesses of each approach in application to more specific 
problems.
The Analysis of Knowledge
One traditional aim of epistemology was to provide an “analysis of knowledge.” 
Sometimes this meant analyzing the concept of knowledge, perhaps by providing a more 
complex sentence synonymous with “S knows that P” and thereby breaking the con-
cept down into its constituent concepts, expressed by the constituent phrases of the 
complex sentence. At other times what it meant was analyzing the underlying nature of 
knowledge, which might be done without providing such a synonym, since that nature 
might have to be discovered through arduous investigation, without having already 
been written into the structure of our concepts or the meanings of our words. Either 
way, an analysis of knowledge was supposed to provide a non-circular statement of nec-
essary and sufficient conditions for S to know that P. A paradigm candidate for such an 
analysis of knowledge is the once-popular “JTB” account, on which S knows that P if 
and only if S has a justified true belief that P.
Notoriously, the JTB analysis was refuted by Edmund Gettier, who gave examples 
to show that having a justified true belief is not sufficient for knowing. In the follow-
ing decades, many attempts were made to repair the JTB analysis, by adding further 
conditions or modifying the justification condition. In each case, most epistemologists 
regard the attempted repair as unsuccessful, because it falls to other counter-examples, 
although some proposed analyses still have supporters. One reaction to this depressing 
track record is that it only shows that we must go on looking; analyzing knowledge was 
never going to be an easy task. Another reaction is that the track record constitutes 
good inductive evidence that there is no such analysis to be found: knowledge is not a 
combination of belief and other conditions more basic than knowledge itself; belief is 
not prior to knowledge. To decide between these contrasting reactions, we must widen 
the terms of the debate.
Was there ever good reason to expect non-circular necessary and sufficient condi-
tions for knowledge? On some theories of concepts, all concepts are built up out of a 
small basic stock of simple concepts. A typical motivation for such a theory is empiri-
cist; the simple concepts are supposed to have a peculiarly direct relation to experi-
ence. The concept of knowledge is not a promising candidate to be one of those few 
simple building-blocks. However, such theories of concepts are very hard to sustain on 
current evidence; very few words in natural languages seem to have that sort of 
semantic complexity. Nor do epistemologists usually make explicit appeal to theories 
of concepts in defending the program of seeking analyses of the concept of knowl-
edge. Although very general presuppositions about the nature of concepts may have 
helped to motivate the idea that conceptual analysis is the goal of philosophy, they 
do not now provide good reason to expect a non-circular analysis of the concept of 
knowledge.

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
210
Another suggested reason is this. We already have some non-trivial necessary condi-
tions for knowledge, such as truth and belief. Why then can’t knowledge be analyzed 
as true belief plus whatever must be added to true belief to get knowledge? As it stands, 
“whatever must be added to true belief to get knowledge” is a circular specification, 
since it explicitly mentions knowledge; the problem is that we have been given no 
reason to expect that the circularity can be eliminated. The usual analogy here is with 
color concepts. Although being colored is a non-trivial necessary condition for being 
red, that gives us no reason to expect being red to have an analysis as being colored plus 
whatever must be added to being colored to get being red, under a different specification 
of the latter that does not mention red.
A third suggested reason is this. According to internalist theories of mind, a purely 
mental state has no necessary consequences for the world outside the mind: a brain in 
a vat can be in the same purely mental states as someone who is perceiving and acting 
on the environment in the normal way. On this view, knowing that it is snowing is not 
a purely mental state, because it has the non-mental necessary consequence that it is 
snowing. By contrast, believing that it is snowing has no obvious non-mental necessary 
consequences, and so might yet count as a purely mental state. One might therefore 
expect the hybrid, impurely mental state of knowing that it is snowing to be analyzable 
into purely mental components (such as believing that it is snowing) and purely non-
mental components (such as it being true that it is snowing). However, such internal-
ism about the mind is ill-supported. Many states that would ordinarily be regarded as 
mental have necessary consequences for the external world. For instance, loving Mary 
and hating Mary seem to be mental states, but being in those states has the necessary 
consequence that your apparently normal causal connections to Mary are not totally 
illusory. There are strong arguments for semantic externalism, on which the content of 
intentional states such as belief typically depends on causal connections between the 
thinker and the environment, so that those states have necessary consequences for the 
external world. For instance, if all the causal connections (direct and indirect) of one’s 
“snow” beliefs had been with masses of tiny flying moths that just look like snow, they 
would not really have been beliefs that it was snowing; they would have been beliefs in 
a different proposition about that other phenomenon instead.
Faced with such examples, internalists might retort that such states are not purely 
mental. Indeed, they might be forced to concede that hardly any of the mental states 
we explicitly attribute in natural language are purely mental. The purely mental states 
become hypothetical constructs. Even granted that someone who believes that it is 
snowing is also in various internal states without necessary consequences for the exter-
nal world, it is unclear why any of those internal states should count as mental. In saying 
what is peculiarly mental in the states of loving or hating Mary and of believing that it 
is snowing, it is natural to focus on their aboutness: loving or hating Mary is about Mary 
(she is the one on whom the requitedness or unrequitedness of the emotion depends); 
believing that it is snowing is about snow (it is the stuff on which the truth or falsity of 
the belief depends). That is the point of such states. Take away their aboutness and you 
take away what is most mental in them. Yet their necessary aboutness was what made 
them non-internal. Thus the internalist strategy of postulating internal states to be the 
underlying purely mental states treats as inessential exactly those features that seem 
central to the mentality of ordinary “impure” mental states.
Far from compromising “pure” mentality, semantic externalism arguably articulates 
a deep insight into the nature of mentality. But if mental states are typically ways of 
KNOWLEDGE FIRST EPISTEMOLOGY

KNOWLEDGE FIRST EPISTEMOLOGY
211
relating to one’s environment, the truth-entailing nature of knowledge is no obstacle to 
its being a mental state in a quite unstretched sense. Knowing that it is snowing essen-
tially involves awareness of one’s environment in a way that mere believing that it is 
snowing does not: but that enhanced awareness hardly makes knowing less mental than 
believing. On this view, knowing is just as mental a state as believing. Its mental conse-
quences are not exhausted by believing, or even by justified believing. Such externalism 
about mental attitudes themselves, not just their contents, is a natural development 
of knowledge first epistemology. If knowing is not an impure mental state, the argu-
ment lapses for expecting it to be analyzable into purely mental and purely non-mental 
components. Further challenges to the conception of knowing as a mental state will be 
discussed in later sections.
The arguments that knowledge must be analyzable all rest on highly contentious 
assumptions. Further inductive evidence for its unanalyzability comes from the track 
record of failure in programs for analyzing other philosophically central properties and 
relations, such as meaning and causation. Although such programs often give interest-
ing partial results, attempts to state strictly necessary and sufficient conditions in non-
circular terms typically lead to a regress of ever more complex analyses and ever more 
complex counter-examples. This further reduces the probability that knowledge has 
such an analysis in terms of belief. Of course, it also reduces the probability that belief 
has such an analysis in terms of knowledge.
Knowledge first epistemology challenges the project of analyzing knowledge in 
another way too. Analyses are supposed to be non-circular. In particular, the inclusion 
of the justification condition in analyses such as JTB presupposes that it is suitably inde-
pendent of knowledge itself. As will appear later, knowledge first epistemology ques-
tions that independence.
Problems of Access
A salient feature of the state of knowing is that one is not always in a position to know 
whether one is in it. For example, if you are a victim of a clever hoaxer who makes it 
appear to you to be raining when it isn’t, then, for all you are in a position to know, 
you know that it’s raining. Really, you don’t know that it’s raining, but you are not in 
a position to know that you don’t know that it’s raining. Arguably, one can also know 
without being in a position to know that one knows (see below). Whether one knows 
is not fully open to introspection. If core mental states such as believing, desiring and 
feeling sensations are fully open to introspection, that would be a new reason to deny 
that knowing is a “pure” mental state.
Our limited access to whether we know might be used as an objection to knowledge 
first epistemology in other ways too. Some want epistemology to be operational, in the 
sense of providing rules for rational inquiry such that one is always in a position to 
know whether one is complying with them. A classic example of a non-operational rule 
is the useless advice “Believe what is true!”; if you knew what was true, you wouldn’t 
need the advice. By contrast, the rule “Proportion your belief to the evidence!” sounds 
more useful; it seems to have a better chance of being operational. Non-operational 
epistemology has a third-personal aspect; it evaluates the agent’s epistemic status as it 
were from the standpoint of an external observer, with access to information unavail-
able to the agent. Operational epistemology is first-personal in a corresponding sense. 
Whether one knows is a question for non-operational epistemology, whereas questions 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
212
of rationality, justification and evidence seem to belong to operational epistemology. 
This suggests an objection to knowledge first epistemology: the inapplicable should not 
have priority over the applicable.
The reply on behalf of knowledge first epistemology is that states fully open to intro-
spection and fully operational rules are an illusion. Any non-trivial state is such that 
one can be in it without being in a position to know that one is in it. An argument for 
that conclusion goes like this. Call a state luminous if whenever one is in it one is in a 
position to know that one is in it. For any non-trivial state, one can change from being 
in it to not being in it through a very gradual process. Since our powers of discrimina-
tion are limited, in the last moments of the process at which one is still in the state, one 
cannot discriminate how one is (in the relevant respects) from how one is in the first 
moments at which one is no longer in the state. In the former moments, one is in the 
state without being in a position to know that one is in it. Consequently, the state is 
not luminous (this can all be made more precise). Thus any luminous state is trivial. In 
particular, states of believing, desiring, and feeling sensations are non-luminous because 
non-trivial. One can feel pain without being in a position to know that one feels pain. 
One can believe something without being in a position to know that one believes it. 
Equally, since knowing is a non-trivial state, one can know something without being in 
a position to know that one knows it.
In many cases, there are other independent arguments for the non-luminosity of those 
states. For instance, postulating unconscious beliefs and desires might help to explain 
someone’s actions. It is not even clear that one is always in at least as good a position 
to determine whether one believes something as to determine whether one knows it. 
For instance, someone who has just slowly and painfully lost her religious faith might 
be in a better position to know that she does not know that there is a god than she is to 
know that she does not believe that there is a god. Although one is often in a position 
to know without observing oneself “from the outside” whether one believes, desires or 
feels something, one is also often in a position to know without such further observation 
whether one knows something.
If no non-trivial mental states are fully open to introspection, then the fact that 
knowing is not fully open to introspection does not make it less mental than believing, 
desiring, and feeling sensations. Similarly, if one is always in a position to know whether 
one is complying with an operational rule, then the state of complying with that rule is 
luminous, and therefore trivial, in which case the rule itself must be trivial. Thus a fully 
operational epistemology is an impossible ideal. Even matters of rationality, justification 
and evidence are non-luminous.
The widespread temptation to conceive an agent’s evidence as consisting of their pres-
ent subjective states might, itself, result from the assumption that agents must always be 
in a position to know what evidence they have. If one rejects that assumption, one can 
take seriously a straightforward conception of agents’ total evidence as comprising the 
total content of their knowledge (E = K), a view much closer to the way scientists treat 
evidence—and a characteristic thesis of knowledge first epistemology.
The equation E = K has controversial implications for skepticism. Skeptics often 
argue that we cannot know whether we are in an everyday scenario or a corresponding 
skeptical scenario, because we have the same evidence in each. Even some anti-skep-
tics concede such sameness of evidence. But a defender of common sense can contest 
that assumption. In the everyday scenario, I know that I have hands. In the skeptical 
scenario, I lack hands and therefore do not know that I have them. Thus my knowledge 

KNOWLEDGE FIRST EPISTEMOLOGY
213
differs between the two scenarios. Given E = K, that difference in my knowledge consti-
tutes a difference in my evidence: the skeptical argument rests on a false premise. Part of 
my cognitive deprivation in the skeptical scenario is that I am not aware that I have less 
evidence than in the everyday scenario. Of course, that does not exhaust the skeptic’s 
resources. The skeptical argument can be reworked in various ways. Nevertheless, once 
one is alert to the way in which skeptical reasoning can conceal such unargued episte-
mological assumptions, one is better placed to dispute the reasoning.
Questions of justification and rationality concern doing the best one can on one’s 
limited evidence; given E = K, that means doing the best one can on one’s limited 
knowledge. If so, they are not prior to questions of knowledge. What you are justified or 
rational in believing depends on what you know. Thus the occurrence of a justification 
or rationality condition in an analysis of knowledge risks circularity.
Such externalism about evidence also has implications for the epistemology of phi-
losophy itself. Philosophers have implicitly tended to conduct their reasoning as though 
their evidence were restricted to data on which all the rival theories can agree. For 
example, if B denies that there are macroscopic physical objects, then A might cite as 
evidence not the “question-begging” non-psychological fact that there are rocks but 
only the psychological fact that we have an “intuition” that there are rocks. Of course, 
if A is trying to change B’s mind, it is normally pointless for A to cite as evidence facts 
that B denies. However, if A’s goal is to find the truth on some matter for herself, not to 
persuade B of it, why shouldn’t she use her knowledge that there are rocks, rather than 
just her knowledge that she has an intuition that there are rocks. The non-psychologi-
cal fact might be far more relevant than the psychological one to her question. That 
might sound like dogmatically rejecting B’s point of view. However, the alternative 
strategy of using only universally accepted evidence is hopeless, since there is virtu-
ally no such evidence. Some philosophers will deny that anyone has an intuition that 
there are rocks, perhaps because they are eliminativists about such mental states, while 
accepting that there are rocks. To engage in philosophy is to engage in controversy. Of 
course, that does not mean that there are no constraints. E=K says that your evidence 
comprises what you do know, not what you believe you know. That it is often hard to 
recognize the difference in practice might be an inescapable aspect of our cognitive 
predicament: even the epistemology of philosophy must be non-operational.
Reasons for Action
Here is yet another objection to knowledge’s being a mental state. Genuine mental 
states play a role in causal explanations of rational action. Such explanations cite the 
agent’s beliefs and desires. They do not cite the agent’s knowledge as such, for even if 
some of those beliefs do in fact constitute knowledge, that is irrelevant to their role in 
causing the action. If you want a drink of water and believe that your glass contains 
water, then other things being equal you will drink from your glass, whether or not you 
really know that it contains water. But if believing screens out knowing in the causal 
explanation of action, then knowing has no serious claim to be a mental state over and 
above believing.
One problem with that argument is its assumption that causal explanations of action 
are always of action “at the next instant.” If any time elapses from when the agent is 
in the original mental states of interest to when the action is completed, the differ-
ence between knowing and believing might matter causally. In the example above, if 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
214
a teetotaler falsely believes a glass of gin to contain water, he might spit the gin out as 
soon as he tastes it without drinking any; that is far less likely to happen if he knows the 
glass to contain water. Even true belief tends to be less persistent than knowledge, since 
true beliefs can depend on false ones in ways that knowledge cannot; the former are 
therefore more vulnerable than the latter to abandonment through discovery of such 
false assumptions before the action has been completed. Thus believing does not always 
screen out knowing in the causal explanation of action.
From a normative perspective, knowing is arguably more relevant to rational action 
than believing is. Suppose that, in deciding whether to take certain pills, I treat as a 
reason for taking them that they will alleviate my hay fever symptoms. If you point out 
that I don’t know whether they will alleviate my symptoms, you reveal a defect in my 
decision-making with respect to that premise. By contrast, if I do know that the pills 
will alleviate my symptoms, my decision-making is not defective with respect to that 
premise. Mere belief in the premise is not what matters, since that is consistent with the 
belief’s being both false and irrational. If I don’t know the premise but have strong evi-
dence that I do know it, that may be a good excuse for having treated it as a reason, but 
that does not make the decision-making non-defective, otherwise no excuse would be 
needed. In some cases of extreme urgency, I may rely on premises that I know myself not 
to know even though they are highly probable on my evidence. The urgency is another 
excuse for defective reasoning; it does not remove the defect. To do that, I might have to 
replace the premise that the medicine will alleviate my symptoms by the premise, which 
I might know, that it is highly probable on my evidence that the medicine will allevi-
ate my symptoms. Such a view of reasons for action is another natural development of 
knowledge first epistemology.
Belief and Assertion
If one was never willing to treat “P” as a reason for doing anything, even when one 
believed “If P, the house is on fire,” then one’s commitment to “P” would be too weak 
to count as belief. Given the connection between knowledge and reasons for action, it 
follows that if one believes that P, one is willing to make decisions in a way that is non-
defective only if one knows that P. This suggests a simpler cognitive norm: believe that 
P only if you know that P. Call that the knowledge rule for belief (KRB).
Versions of Moore’s paradox confirm KRB. Something is wrong with believing “It’s 
raining and I don’t know that it’s raining,” even though the belief could very easily be 
true. Although the two conjuncts are logically consistent with each other, the second 
undermines the first. KRB explains how. It tells me to believe the conjunction only if I 
know the conjunction. But I cannot know the conjunction, for to know it I must know 
the first conjunct (“It’s raining”), in which case the second conjunct is false, making the 
whole conjunction false and therefore unknown. Thus in believing “It’s raining and I 
don’t know that it’s raining,” one automatically violates KRB. If KRB is not in force, it 
is quite unclear what is wrong with believing such conjunctions.
If a justified belief is one that satisfies the norms for belief, then by KRB only knowl-
edge constitutes justified belief. In particular, there are no justified false beliefs. This 
might rescue the letter of the JTB account of knowledge from Gettier, since his counter-
examples rely on the assumption that there are justified false beliefs, which generate jus-
tified true beliefs because the deceived subject can competently deduce true conclusions 
from false premises and thereby extend his justification from the latter to the former. 

KNOWLEDGE FIRST EPISTEMOLOGY
215
However, KRB certainly does not rescue the spirit of JTB. Gettier treated the notion 
of justification as proponents of JTB had intended; they made truth an independent 
condition precisely because they did not think that it followed from the other two. KRB 
makes JTB effectively circular as an analysis of knowledge, since the relevant norm 
invokes knowledge. Given KRB, the sense of “justification” that Gettier shared with 
proponents of JTB seems to involve excuse as much as justification: a “justified” false 
belief is a belief for which the agent has a good excuse, which may consist in strong but 
misleading evidence that the belief constitutes knowledge.
In the sense in which only knowledge constitutes full justification, one can also define 
a graded sense of justification, using the equation E = K. For the probability of a propo-
sition on one’s evidence becomes its probability conditional on the total content of 
one’s knowledge. That probability can be interpreted as one’s degree of justification to 
believe the proposition. The structure of such evidential probabilities can be explored 
through mathematical models of epistemic logic, sometimes with unexpected results. 
For example, one can know something even if the probability on one’s own evidence 
that one knows it is close to zero.
Assertion is an analog for speech of belief. It has an analog of KRB, the knowledge 
rule for assertion (KRA): assert that P only if you know that P. Just as Moore-paradoxi-
cal beliefs provide evidence for KRB, so Moore-paradoxical assertions provide evidence 
for KRA. Moreover, KRA can be supported by a wide range of linguistic data. As with 
KRB, opponents of KRA tend to object that it sets an unrealistically high standard. For 
proponents of KRA, such objections, too, mistake excuses for justifications. If the anti-
luminosity argument is correct, one can violate any non-trivial norm for assertion or 
belief without being in a position to know that one is violating it.
Both KRA and KRB are natural developments of knowledge first epistemology, for 
they imply that even central non-truth-entailing cognitive attitudes such as asserting 
and believing depend normatively on knowing.
Perception and Memory
Knowing is not the only truth-entailing attitude. If one perceives that it is raining, it is 
raining. If it is not raining, one at most seems to oneself to perceive that it is raining. 
Similarly, if one remembers that it was raining, it was raining. If it was not raining, one 
at most seems to oneself to remember that it was raining. Perceiving and remembering 
are further instances of truth-entailing mental attitudes, if knowing is already one.
Arguably, perceiving and remembering entail not just truth but knowledge: if one 
perceives that it is raining, one knows that it is raining; if one remembers that it was 
raining, one knows that it was raining. Objections to these claims focus on cases in 
which one’s perceptual or memory apparatus is in fact functioning properly, but mislead-
ing evidence casts doubt on whether it is functioning properly. However, it is not clear 
in such cases that one perceives or remembers that P without knowing that P. One may 
perceive the rain without perceiving that it is raining, or remember the rain without 
remembering that it was raining, if one fails to recognize the rain as rain. Alternatively, 
if one does recognize the rain as rain, presumably one does know that it is or was raining. 
That the misleading evidence casts doubt on whether one knows does not mean that 
one does not know.
If perceiving and remembering are knowledge-entailing mental attitudes, a wider 
conjecture suggests itself: that knowing is the most general truth-entailing mental 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
216
attitude, the one you have to a proposition if and only if you have any truth-entailing 
mental attitude to it at all. The defense of such a conjecture requires interpreting “men-
tal attitude” appropriately: for example, having forgotten that P had better not count 
as a mental attitude towards the proposition that P. At least, very many truth-entailing 
attitudes are closely related to knowing. If you are conscious or aware that P, you know 
that P; if you learn, discover, or recognize that P, you come to know that P. These 
examples illustrate how hard it is to imagine a cognitive life in which knowing plays 
no part. It would be a life in which one was never conscious or aware that something 
was the case, and never perceived, remembered, learned, discovered, or recognized that 
something was the case.
Knowledge first epistemology has important similarities to disjunctivist accounts of 
perception, which are sophisticated modern versions of “naive realism.” Disjunctivists 
often explain failure (illusion, hallucination) in terms of its relation to success (genuine 
perception), rather than treating the two cases on a par. Typically, they also hold that 
there is a mental state (in an unstretched sense) that one is in when and only when 
one is genuinely perceiving: one takes in the world. Consequently, they deny that one’s 
mental state can be exactly the same in cases of failure as in cases of success, with the 
only difference consisting in external causal relations inessential to that state. They 
might well agree that one has more perceptual evidence in the good case than in the 
bad case: it is just that sometimes, when one is in the bad case, for all one knows one 
is in the good case. Furthermore, disjunctivists are often sympathetic to the claim that 
perceiving that P entails knowing that P. To a first approximation, therefore, disjunctiv-
ism about perception is simply knowledge first epistemology as applied to perception. 
However, some qualifications are needed.
First, disjunctivism is usually advanced as a theory about perception in its own right, 
without appeal to wider claims of knowledge first epistemology.
Second, disjunctivism takes its name from ideas like this: a state of having things per-
ceptually appear to one a certain way is a disjunction of two radically different disjuncts; 
either one is in the successful state or one is in the unsuccessful state. The impression is 
sometimes given that the two disjuncts are being characterized independently of each 
other, which would undermine the explanatory priority of the first disjunct over the 
second. However, there is little prospect of grouping together all instances of having 
it perceptually appear to one that P without perceiving that P except under such a 
negative characterization; the second disjunct is not really being characterized indepen-
dently of the first and the supposedly disjunctive state. The strictly disjunctive aspect of 
disjunctivism might be its least defensible feature. But even if the letter of disjunctivism 
is rejected, its spirit is retained in the idea that success in perception cannot be analyzed 
as a combination of success-neutral perceptual appearances with external causal percep-
tions inessential to the subject’s mental state.
Third, some disjunctivist accounts focus on object perception (seeing a tree) rather 
than fact perception (seeing that it is a tree). Object perception is less “epistemic” than 
fact perception. A cat can look at a king without knowing that he is a king. Here the 
relation to knowledge first epistemology is less direct. Nevertheless, the emphasis on 
the explanatory priority of successful cognitive engagement with the external world 
remains similar.
The extensive analogies between perception and memory raise the question of dis-
junctivism about memory. So far, such a view has been less fully explored.

KNOWLEDGE FIRST EPISTEMOLOGY
217
Further Themes
Knowledge first epistemology has many more applications. One issue is the nature of 
consciousness. While opponents often regard knowledge first epistemology as false to 
what conscious experience is like, as shown by arguments from illusion, proponents 
reply that many states of consciousness do seem essentially to involve external objects 
and facts; thus when those states are as they seem, they do essentially involve external 
objects and facts, just as states of conscious knowledge and perception do. In cases of 
illusion, even our states of consciousness are not always as they seem. That is just what 
the anti-luminosity argument predicts: conscious subjects are sometimes not in a posi-
tion to know what states of consciousness they are in.
Another application of knowledge first epistemology is to questions about what 
determines the content of mental attitudes: for instance, what constitutes mental refer-
ence to one object rather than another? A central role is often assigned to a principle 
of charity that prefers assignments of content that maximize the subject’s true beliefs. 
However, assigning true beliefs to a subject might not be an interpretive virtue when 
those beliefs do not constitute knowledge. This suggests using instead a principle of 
charity that maximizes the subject’s knowledge rather than true belief.
Knowledge first epistemology is still an alien way of thinking to many philosophers, 
despite its roots in naive realism and common sense. Much of its detailed working out 
has been very recent, and all the issues raised in this chapter require extensive further 
investigation. Knowledge first epistemology is contributing a further stage to the devel-
opment of externalist ideas over past decades. The process is likely to continue.
Further Reading
Austin, J.L. (1964) Sense and Sensibilia, Oxford: Oxford University Press. (Classic defense of common sense 
about perception and bridge between earlier and later versions of knowledge first epistemology.)
Gettier, E. (1963) “Is Justified True Belief Knowledge?” Analysis 23: 121–3. (The classic article.)
Gibbons, J. (2001) “Knowledge in Action,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 62: 579–600. (Defense 
of knowledge constraint on reasons for action.)
Greenough, P. and Pritchard, D. (eds) (2009) Williamson on Knowledge, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
(Extensive collection of critical essays on Knowledge and its Limits, with replies.)
Haddock, A. and Macpherson, F. (eds) (2008) Disjunctivism: Perception, Action, Knowledge, Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. (Large collection of papers for and against.)
Hawthorne, J. (2004) Knowledge and Lotteries, Oxford: Clarendon Press. (Examination of puzzles about 
chance and shifting standards, using knowledge first ideas.)
—— and Stanley, J. (2008) “Knowledge and Action,” Journal of Philosophy 105: 571–90. (Defense of knowl-
edge norm.)
Hinton, J.M. (1973) Experiences, Oxford: Clarendon Press. (Early version of disjunctivism about percep-
tion.)
Martin, M.G.F. (2002) “The Transparency of Experience,” Mind and Language 17: 376–425. (Disjunctivism 
about experience.)
—— (2004) “The Limits of Self-Awareness,” Philosophical Studies 120: 37–89. (Disjunctivism about percep-
tion.)
McDowell, J. (1998). Meaning, Knowledge and Reality, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 
(Collection of his papers, with many themes related to knowledge first epistemology, including disjunc-
tivism.)
Phillips Griffiths, A. (ed.) (1967) Knowledge and Belief, Oxford: Oxford University Press. (Anthology with 
pieces by John Cook Wilson and H.A. Prichard advocating an earlier form of knowledge first epistemol-
ogy.)
Snowdon, P. (1980–1) “Perception, Vision, and Causation,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society sup. vol. 81: 
175–92. (Disjunctivism about perception.)

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
218
Unger, P. (1975) Ignorance: A Case for Scepticism, Oxford: Oxford University Press. (Early source of linguistic 
evidence for knowledge first ideas.)
Williamson, T. (2000) Knowledge and its Limits, Oxford: Oxford University Press. (Development of a 
knowledge first epistemology along the lines presented here.)
—— (2007) The Philosophy of Philosophy, Oxford: Blackwell. (A knowledge first epistemology of philosophy, 
with discussion of knowledge maximization.)

219
21
THE VALUE PROBLEM
John Greco
The problem of explaining epistemic value (or explaining the value of knowledge) has 
been with us for a long time. It is one of the perennial problems of philosophy, going 
back at least as far as Plato’s Meno. Besides being important in its own right, the problem 
is related to other issues in epistemology (or the theory of knowledge).
For example, Jonathan Kvanvig has argued that the value problem is closely tied to 
another perennial problem in the theory of knowledge: that of explaining what knowl-
edge is. Specifically, if an answer to the question “What is knowledge?” makes it dif-
ficult to see why knowledge is valuable, then that very fact counts against that answer. 
On the other hand, if an answer to the “What is knowledge?” question makes it easy 
to see why we value knowledge, then that counts in favor of that answer. Ideally, an 
adequate account of knowledge will explain both what knowledge is and why knowledge is 
valuable (Kvanvig 2003). (Linda Zagzebski (1996) makes the point in even stronger 
terms, arguing that any adequate theory must explain the value of knowledge. In con-
trast, Duncan Pritchard (2007, 2008b) makes the point in weaker terms, arguing that an 
adequate theory must explain only the intuition that knowledge is valuable. Accordingly, 
Pritchard allows for “revisionary” answers to the value problem; i.e. answers that 
explain why we think knowledge is valuable, even if that thought ultimately harbors an 
illusion.)
Relatedly, Linda Zagzebski has argued that the value problem makes trouble for many 
contemporary theories of knowledge. She argues that, in principle, a popular version 
of externalism in epistemology cannot account for the value of knowledge. This is the 
so-called “Swamping Problem” for reliabilism (Kvanvig 2003; Zagzebski 1996). Duncan 
Pritchard has also argued that thinking about the value problem throws light on the 
internalism/externalism debate in epistemology, but in a different way. Specifically, 
Pritchard argues that externalist theories do not give knowledge the sort of value that 
internalists want knowledge to have. This explains internalist dissatisfaction with exter-
nalist theories, Pritchard argues, as well as the skeptical inclination of many internalist 
philosophers (Pritchard 2008a).
Some philosophers have argued that reflection on the value problem motivates a 
radical shift in the focus of epistemological theorizing. The thought here is that, prop-
erly understood, knowledge does not in fact have the special value that epistemologists 
presuppose. Thus Mark Kaplan argues that distinctive epistemic value resides in justifi-
cation rather than knowledge, and so epistemology ought to focus on the former rather 
than the latter (Kaplan 1985). In a similar vein, Kvanvig and Pritchard argue that 
understanding rather than knowledge has a distinctive epistemic value, and so the focus 
of epistemology ought to be understanding (Kvanvig 2003; Pritchard 2009).

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
220
Finally, Timothy Williamson suggests that reflection on epistemic value motivates 
a different sort of shift in epistemological theorizing. Since the advent of “Gettier 
problems,” which show that traditional accounts of knowledge are inadequate, epis-
temologists have offered more and more complicated analyses of what knowledge is. 
Williamson’s thought is that these complicated analyses can all be rejected, and pre-
cisely because they make it hard to see why knowledge should be valuable. The moral 
of post-Gettier epistemology, Williamson argues, is that we should give up trying to 
analyze knowledge at all. Better to take knowledge as a primitive of epistemological 
theorizing, and to explain other epistemic concepts, and presumably epistemic value, in 
terms of knowledge (Williamson 2000).
A Problem from Plato’s Meno
Recent controversies notwithstanding, there is a strong presumption among phi-
losophers and non-philosophers alike that knowledge is especially valuable. But why 
should that be? Why is knowledge valuable? According to a popular slogan, “Knowledge 
is power.” This slogan suggests that knowledge is valuable because it allows us to 
do things. For example, knowing “how the world works” allows us to manipulate things, 
or perhaps even to manipulate people. More generally, knowledge helps us to achieve 
our goals. The suggestion in the popular slogan, then, is that knowledge has practical 
value.
That much seems perfectly right, but it does not fully explain the value that we 
think knowledge has. One reason is that the slogan remains vague. Even if knowledge 
does have practical value, we want to know why and in what sense. We want to know 
the details. But a second reason the slogan falls short is that we think knowledge has 
value over and above the value of mere opinion, and even mere true opinion, which also 
have practical value. Plato makes this point in the Meno. The man who wants to go to 
Larissa, Plato tells us, gets there just as well by having a true opinion about which road 
to take as by having knowledge about which road to take. But we think that, even so, 
knowledge is more valuable than true opinion. But then why should that be so? Why 
should knowledge be more valuable than true opinion, if their practical value is the 
same? Again, we do not yet have a complete answer to our question about the value 
of knowledge. Put somewhat differently, we do not yet fully understand why we value 
knowledge in the way that we do.
This is “the Meno problem,” or the problem of explaining why knowledge is more 
valuable than mere true belief. We may also think of the problem as a kind of puzzle. 
The puzzle begins by noting three plausible thoughts (employed already above) that we 
have about knowledge:
1. The value of knowledge resides in its practical value: we value knowledge because 
it gives us power to do things.
2. But true opinion has all the practical value that knowledge has: believing the truth 
is just as good as knowing the truth, as far as getting things done is concerned.
3. And yet knowledge seems to be more valuable than true belief—we think that 
knowledge has value over and above the value of true opinion.
The puzzle is that not all three of these thoughts can be true: at least one thought needs 
to be revised, but it is not obvious which we should choose.

221
THE VALUE PROBLEM
Philosophers have endorsed each of the options available here. Denying (1), some 
philosophers have argued that knowledge has a non-practical value that mere true belief 
and other close relatives of knowledge lack (for example, Greco 2003, 2008, 2009; Riggs 
2002; Sosa 1991, 2007). We will look more closely at a version of this approach below, 
when we consider the position that knowledge is a kind of achievement, and that, as 
such, knowledge is “valuable for its own sake.”
Denying (2), some philosophers have argued that knowledge does, after all, have 
greater practical value than mere true opinion. This seems to be Socrates’ answer in 
the Meno, when he suggests that knowledge is “tethered” or “tied down” in a way that 
mere true opinion is not. A more recent defense of this position is found in Williamson, 
when he argues that knowledge is more stable than mere true belief. Consider again 
the man who wants to get to Larissa. If the man merely believes that a particular road 
will get him there, he might give up and turn around if things start to look otherwise. 
That is, even if his belief is true, he might give up on it if he gets misleading evidence 
that the road does not go to Larissa, for example if the road takes an unexpected turn. 
The man who knows, however, is less likely to be fooled by such misleading evidence 
(Williamson 2000).
Finally, other philosophers have denied that knowledge really is more valuable than 
mere true opinion (hence they deny (3)). Some who have taken this third option have 
argued that true opinion has all the value we want (Sartwell 1992). Others who have 
taken this third option have argued that something else, rather than knowledge, really 
does have special and greater value over both knowledge and true opinion. As we have 
already seen, Kvanvig and Pritchard take this option (e.g. Kvanvig 2003; Pritchard 
2009).
Refining the Meno Problem
Problems about epistemic value tend to multiply. In fact, we have already seen various 
versions of the problem and hinted at some others. Thus we may ask:
The General Value Problem: Why (how, in what way) is knowledge valuable?
The Meno Problem: Why is knowledge more valuable than true opinion?
The Secondary Value Problem: Why is knowledge more valuable than any of 
its proper parts? Why is knowledge more valuable than that which falls short 
of knowledge?
The Tertiary Value Problem: Why is knowledge distinctively valuable? That 
is, why does knowledge have a special value, over and above its practical 
value?
In addition to these, one might think that there is a fourth problem:
The Quaternary Value Problem: Why is knowledge more valuable than any-
thing in the neighborhood?
Notice that the different value problems above share a common structure. Each of them 
asks a question of the form:
Why is knowledge of greater value than non-knowledge of some sort?

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
222
Different versions of the value problem can be generated, then, by substituting different 
contrast classes into the above structure. Thus we have:
The General Value Problem: Why is knowledge more valuable than non-
knowledge in general?
The Meno Problem: Why is knowledge more valuable than true opinion?
The Secondary Value Problem: Why is knowledge more valuable than any of 
its proper parts?
The Quaternary Value Problem: Why is knowledge more valuable than 
anything in the neighborhood?
Further disambiguations of our questions are possible as well. Thus we can disambiguate 
along all of the following dimensions:
a. by contrast class (as above)
b. by quantity or quality:
Why is knowledge more valuable by degree than . . .?
Why is knowledge more valuable in kind than . . .? (this is the Tertiary 
Value Problem)
 Why is knowledge of more “over-all” value than . . .?
c. by quantifier:
Why is all knowledge more valuable than . . .?
Why is knowledge typically more valuable than . . .?
Why is some knowledge more valuable than . . .?
d. by distribution:
Why is knowledge as a class more valuable than non-knowledge of some 
sort as a class?
Why is knowledge that p more valuable than non-knowledge of some sort 
that p?
Finally, we might disambiguate our questions in yet another way: by interpreting 
the sort of “why question” that they are asking. Thus one kind of why question asks for 
what Aristotle called a “formal” cause. This sort of question asks about a thing’s nature 
or essence. A different sort of why question asks for what Aristotle called an “efficient” 
cause—it asks for how a thing is related to other things. Notice that the two kinds of 
“why question” ask for different kinds of explanation. Thus we have the following dis-
ambiguation:
e. by “why question”:
 
What sort of thing is knowledge, such that knowledge is of greater value than 
non-knowledge of some sort?
 
How is knowledge effectively related to other things, such that knowledge is of 
greater value than non-knowledge of some sort?

223
THE VALUE PROBLEM
Looking at these various ways in which we can disambiguate the value problem, we 
might note that there is both bad news and good news. The bad news is that our vari-
ous distinctions cut across each other, and so the value problem quickly multiplies into 
a fairly large number of distinct questions. But there is good news as well. First, the 
answers to some of our questions quite clearly depend on the answers to others. Perhaps 
most obviously, any answer that explains why all knowledge has value of a sort, will also 
explain why some knowledge has value of that sort. So not all of our distinctions gener-
ate distinct value problems in the sense that each requires a distinct solution.
Second, not all of the value problems that we have identified are equally compelling 
or pressing. For example, consider the question: Why does knowledge typically have 
a special value over and above that which falls short of knowledge? It seems that this 
question deserves an answer—that it is a compelling question in that sense. But this is 
not clearly the case for all of our questions. For example: Why are all cases of knowledge 
that p more practically valuable than all cases of non-knowledge that p? We might think 
that this question is not compelling at all, for we might think that it is not true that all 
cases of knowledge that p are more practically valuable than all cases of non-knowledge 
that p. For example, consider my recently acquired knowledge that the phrase “coffee 
shop” has ten letters. This knowledge is of little if any practical value, and so is plausibly 
not more practically valuable than a mere true belief that “coffee shop” has ten letters.
What makes a version of the value problem more or less compelling? Notice that 
each problem takes the form of a question, and that each question has a presupposition. 
For example, the question “Why is knowledge valuable?” carries the presupposition that 
knowledge is valuable. The question “Why is knowledge more valuable than any of its 
proper parts?” carries the presupposition that knowledge is more valuable than any of its 
proper parts. A version of the value problem will be more or less compelling, I want to 
suggest, depending on whether its presupposition is more or less plausible.
Consider now an interesting and potentially disturbing phenomenon: A person’s 
intuitions about how to answer the value problem might affect how he or she goes 
on to disambiguate the problem on further analysis. For example, suppose you think, 
pre-theoretically, that knowledge is more valuable than non-knowledge because it is of 
more practical value. In that case, you are likely to interpret relevant quantifiers as being 
about typical cases. Why so? Because it is implausible that every case of knowledge has 
more practical value than every case of non-knowledge, or that every case of knowledge 
that p has more practical value than every case of non-knowledge that p.
But suppose you think, pre-theoretically, that knowledge has some distinctive value 
that non-knowledge lacks. In that case, you are more likely to interpret the relevant 
quantifiers as universal. For it will be natural to think that distinctive value goes with 
knowledge as a kind. And if knowledge does have distinctive value as a kind, then it is 
at least plausible that every instance of its kind will have that value.
Here is another example of how initial judgments can affect subsequent theorizing. 
Suppose again that you think (pre-theoretically) that knowledge is more valuable than 
non-knowledge because it is of more practical value. In that case you are likely to inter-
pret the “why question” as asking for an efficient cause: How is knowledge effectively 
related to other things, such that knowledge is typically of greater practical value than 
non-knowledge? On the other hand, suppose you think (pre-theoretically) that knowl-
edge is more valuable in kind than non-knowledge? In that case you are likely to take 
the “why question” as asking for a formal cause: What sort of thing is knowledge, such that 
knowledge is more valuable in kind than non-knowledge?

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
224
Is this disturbing, implying that philosophers must inevitably talk past each other, 
depending on their original pre-theoretical intuitions about how to solve an ambigu-
ous problem? Or is this just one more instance (no more disturbing than any other) of 
a more general hermeneutic circle? In either case, it is mistaken to think that we are 
moving from less refined to more refined versions of the same question as we move, for 
example, from the General Value Problem to the Meno Problem, or from the Secondary 
Value Problem to the Tertiary Value Problem. Rather, we are at least sometimes shift-
ing questions, or asking different questions altogether. Perhaps a better understanding 
is this: There are many versions of the value problem, many of which are compelling 
enough to deserve an answer. A fully adequate answer to “the value problem” will have 
to say something about all of these.
A Virtue-Theoretic Solution to the Value Problems
We turn now to a recently popular solution to the value problem, or the problem of 
explaining the value of knowledge (e.g. Greco 2003, 2009; Riggs 2002; Sosa 1991, 
2007). The proposed solution employs two important ideas. The first is that knowledge 
is a kind of success from ability. Put differently, knowledge is a kind of achievement. 
Hence:
In cases of knowledge, S has a true belief because S’s belief is produced by 
ability.
Alternatively:
When S knows that p, S’s having a true belief that p (rather than a false belief 
or no belief at all) is to be explained by S’s cognitive abilities. More exactly, it 
is to be explained by the fact that S has exercised some cognitive ability, such 
as reliable perception, or reliable memory, or sound reasoning.
The second important idea is that, in general, success from ability is more valuable 
than lucky success. Put differently, we value achievements over lucky successes. What 
is more, we think that achievements have a distinctive value that mere lucky successes 
lack. Achievements have “final value,” meaning that they are valuable for their own sake.
Putting these two ideas together, we get elegant solutions to both the Meno Problem 
and the Tertiary Value Problem: Knowledge is more valuable than mere true belief, in 
that knowledge has a final value that mere true belief does not. Additionally, we get a 
solution to the Secondary Value Problem: Knowledge is more valuable than any of its 
proper parts, and even more value than the sum of its parts. This is because belief that is 
true and produced by ability is not as valuable as belief that is true because produced by 
ability. Only achievements (knowledge included) have this latter structure.
The proposed account has at least two major advantages. First, it is extremely elegant, 
both in the way that it explains the value of knowledge, and in the way that it explains 
the relationship between the value of knowledge and the nature of knowledge. In effect, 
the explanation is simply this:
1. Achievements are finally valuable.
2. Knowledge is a kind of achievement.

225
THE VALUE PROBLEM
Therefore,
3. Knowledge is finally valuable.
The second advantage of the account is that it places knowledge in a broader, familiar 
normative domain. In any arena in which human beings are capable of success from 
ability, we will find similar practices of crediting, criticizing, evaluating for success, etc. 
To the extent that we understand these broader practices, our account of knowledge and 
its value is thereby informed by that understanding.
Knowledge, Understanding and Wisdom
Is every case of knowledge more valuable than anything in the neighborhood? Intuitively, 
the answer is “No,” because understanding that p is more valuable than merely knowing 
that p. More generally, understanding is more valuable than knowledge and wisdom is 
more valuable than understanding.
We can accommodate these intuitions on the “Knowledge as Achievement” account 
by wedding it to a traditional (Aristotelian) account of understanding and wisdom. 
Specifically, understanding has been traditionally understood as knowledge of causes, 
or knowing the answer to “Why” and “How” questions. In this same tradition, wisdom 
is understood as understanding of the highest (or most important) things.
Wedding this tradition to the present account of the value of knowledge, we can say 
the following: Understanding and wisdom are also achievements, and therefore have 
final value. But wisdom has more final value than mere understanding and understand-
ing has more final value than mere knowledge. That is, in each case the former is more 
valuable for its own sake than the latter. Understanding and wisdom are greater achieve-
ments. We might still say, however, that some knowledge is more valuable than any-
thing in the neighborhood. That is, understanding and wisdom are.
Some Objections to the Knowledge as Achievement Account
Duncan Pritchard has raised the following objection to the proposed account of the 
value of knowledge.
[T]he real weak point for this proposal lies with the achievement thesis. In 
particular, on closer analysis it turns out that knowledge is not a cognitive 
achievement at all. This is because one can possess knowledge without exhib-
iting a cognitive achievement, and exhibit a cognitive achievement while 
lacking knowledge.
(Pritchard 2008a; see also Pritchard 2008b and 2009)
Some Cognitive Achievements Are Not Knowledge
The argument that some cognitive achievements are not knowledge comes in two steps. 
First, Pritchard asks us to consider the following case of Archie, who seems to exhibits 
a genuine achievement.
Archie . . . selects a target at random, skilfully fires at this target and successfully 
hits it because of his skill . . . Suppose, however, that unbeknownst to Archie 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
226
there is a forcefield around each of the other targets such that, had he aimed 
at one of these targets, he would have missed. It is thus a matter of luck 
that he is successful, in the sense that he could very easily have not been 
successful.
(Pritchard 2009)
According to Pritchard, Archie’s success in hitting the target is from ability, even if 
(unknown to him) he hits the one genuine target in the area.
The second step in Pritchard’s argument is to draw an analogy to standard Barn 
Façade cases. In those cases, epistemologists tend to agree, the person in question does 
not know that he sees a real barn. Thus consider the following Barn Façade case from 
Pritchard.
Barney forms a true belief that there is a barn in front of him by using his cogni-
tive abilities . . . The twist in the tale, however, is that, unbeknownst to Barney, 
he is in fact in “barn façade county” where all the other apparent barns are 
fakes. Intuitively, he does not have knowledge in this case because it is simply 
a matter of luck that his belief is true.
(Pritchard 2009)
Since the archery and barn façade cases are in all relevant respects analogous, Pritchard 
argues, we must allow that Barney’s success is from ability and that he exhibits a genuine 
achievement. But then, of course, Pritchard’s first conclusion follows: there are cases of 
cognitive achievement that are not cases of knowledge.
Some Cases of Knowledge Are Not Cases of Achievement
A number of philosophers have argued that some cases of knowledge are not cases 
of achievement. Here we may consider a case of testimonial knowledge from Jennifer 
Lackey.
Having just arrived at the train station in Chicago, Morris wishes to obtain 
directions to the Sears Tower. He looks around, randomly approaches the 
first passerby that he sees, and asks how to get to his desired destination. 
The passerby, who happens to be a Chicago resident who knows the city 
extraordinarily well, provides Morris with impeccable directions to the Sears 
Tower.
(Lackey 2007)
The argument is straightforward: Morris’s true belief in the Sears Tower case is best 
explained by the cognitive abilities of the testifier, and to that extent the achievement 
is his rather than Morris’s. Testimonial knowledge, then, gives us knowledge without 
achievement in the relevant sense.
Pritchard’s Anti-luck Virtue Epistemology
In the face of objections to the Knowledge as Achievement account, Pritchard offers an 
alternative explanation of the value of knowledge. On Pritchard’s account, knowledge 

227
THE VALUE PROBLEM
remains a kind of success from ability, but this does not have the result that knowledge 
is always an achievement or that knowledge is always valuable (see Pritchard 2008a and 
2009).
There are two elements to Pritchard’s account of knowledge: an anti-luck condition 
and an ability condition. We need the anti-luck component, Pritchard argues, in order 
to rule out the sort of luck that is present in standard Gettier cases and in Barn Façade 
cases. Once we have incorporated an appropriate anti-luck condition, however, we only 
need a modest ability condition. According to Pritchard, knowledge requires that true 
belief is “in substantial part due to ability” but not necessarily “because of ability.” The 
idea here is that ability must be involved in the production of true belief, but need not 
play the central role in explanation that the Knowledge as Achievement view requires. 
According to Pritchard, then, knowledge is non-lucky cognitive success that is in sub-
stantial part due to ability.
It should now be clear how Pritchard’s account handles the cases we saw in the previ-
ous section. Since the present account weakens the ability condition, it can allow that 
there is knowledge in the Sears Tower case and in many other cases of belief from testi-
mony. Since the account includes a separate anti-luck condition, it continues to handle 
standard Gettier cases and Barn Façade cases. Therefore, Pritchard argues, his account 
of knowledge solves both of the problems raised for the Knowledge as Achievement 
account. Moreover, Pritchard argues, this new account of knowledge yields a compel-
ling explanation of the value of knowledge. In short, we may reject the presupposition 
that all knowledge is valuable, and replace it with the idea that all cognitive achieve-
ment is valuable. Our pre-theoretical intuitions about the value of knowledge are thus 
explained but not preserved. That is, we have an explanation of why we might think all 
knowledge is valuable—we are apt to confuse knowledge with cognitive achievement. 
Closer consideration convinces us that not all knowledge is cognitive achievement and 
not all cognitive achievement is knowledge, although knowledge is typically a cognitive 
achievement, and therefore typically has the associated distinctive value. Moreover, 
Pritchard argues, there is something in the neighborhood—a species of understanding 
—that is a kind of cognitive achievement and therefore always has a distinctive value 
(Pritchard 2009).
Pritchard’s alternative account of knowledge and its value has much to recommend it. 
However, it does have a significant disadvantage when compared to the Knowledge as 
Achievement account. Namely, the account is less elegant in two ways. First, Anti-luck 
Virtue Epistemology invokes independent ability and anti-luck conditions. Moreover, 
within that account the two conditions lack any unifying theoretical motivation. 
Rather, they are proposed because they are needed to handle different kinds of cases. In 
that respect, the account is ad hoc. Second, Anti-luck Virtue Epistemology must adopt a 
revisionary solution to the value problem. That is, it requires that we explain away vari-
ous pre-theoretically plausible intuitions about the value of knowledge, including the 
intuition that all knowledge is distinctively valuable.
Neither of these liabilities constitutes an objection to Anti-luck Virtue Epistemology. 
Rather, they are theoretical costs that might or might not be offset by advantages else-
where.
In light of these costs, however, we should see what can be said for the Knowledge 
as Achievement account in response to the objections that were raised against it 
earlier.

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
228
Knowledge as Achievement Revisited
First, what can be said in face of the objection that some cases of knowledge are not 
cases of achievement? More specifically, what should we say about the Sears Tower case? 
Some philosophers have not found the case convincing, and in particular they have 
suggested that the case is under-described (for example, Greco 2009; Riggs 2009). Most 
significantly, are we to understand the case so that Morris is exercising his cognitive 
abilities in evaluating the testimony he receives? Or does Morris simply accept “willy-
nilly” whatever the testifier says? In either case, we seem not to have a counter-example 
to the Knowledge as Achievement thesis. More specifically, either Morris’s abilities 
regarding the evaluation of testimony are involved or they are not. If they are, then 
Morris’s true belief is from ability and constitutes an achievement on his part. If they are 
not, then we should reject the claim that Morris has knowledge in the case.
The preceding diagnosis of the Sears Tower case seems available but not demanded. 
But considering other cases of achievement supports the diagnosis made here. Thus 
consider the following case from soccer.
Ted receives a brilliant, almost impossible pass, and then scores an easy goal as a 
result. In the case we are imagining, it is the athletic abilities of the passer that 
stand out. The pass was brilliant, its reception easy.
Now compare this case with another:
Ted is playing in a soccer game, but not paying attention. Never seeing the ball, 
a brilliant pass bounces off his head and into the goal.
In the first case, we are happy to say that the goal constitutes an achievement on Ted’s 
part. Not so in the second case. Here Ted was involved in the goal in a way, but not 
in the right sort of way. The principled explanation is this: Credit for an achievement, 
gained in cooperation with others, is not swamped by the able performance of others. 
It is not even swamped by the outstanding performance of others. So long as one’s 
own efforts and abilities are appropriately involved, one gets credit for the achievement 
in question. And now the application to the testimony case is obvious: The fact that 
Morris’s true belief is produced in cooperation with the testifier should not undermine 
our judgment that Morris’s true belief is an achievement on his part. So long as Morris’s 
cognitive abilities are involved in the right sort of way, he gets credit for the achieve-
ment in question (Greco 2009).
In response to this sort of consideration, Pritchard offers a different analogy that he 
thinks is more apt: An expert archer puts his arms around the novice to help aim and 
shoot the arrow. In this sort of case, Pritchard argues, it is wrong to say that the novice 
gets credit for an achievement (Pritchard 2009). In response, I do not see how this 
analogy is more apt than the soccer analogy. But in any case, it is not obviously more 
apt. At the very least, a diagnosis of the various cases that preserves the Knowledge as 
Achievement account is available.
What about the claim that not all cognitive achievement amounts to knowledge? 
Strictly speaking, this claim is irrelevant, since the view only requires that knowledge 
is a kind of cognitive achievement. It would not matter that there are other cognitive 
achievements as well. Thus, consider again our explanation that all knowledge has final 
value:

229
THE VALUE PROBLEM
1. Achievements are finally valuable.
2. Knowledge is a kind of achievement.
Therefore,
3. Knowledge is finally valuable.
Premise 2 does not identify knowledge with cognitive achievement, but rather makes it 
an instance of that kind. Nevertheless, Pritchard claims that Barn Façade cases present 
examples where S exhibits a cognitive achievement that falls short of knowledge. If he 
is right, then the present account does not answer a version of the Tertiary Problem—it 
won’t be the case that knowledge has a distinctive value over anything that falls short 
of knowledge.
Several strategies for preserving the Knowledge as Achievement account remain 
available, however. First, one might adopt a revisionary strategy similar to Pritchard’s: 
Deny the presupposition that knowledge is always more valuable than that which falls 
short of knowledge, in favor of the presupposition that knowledge is typically more 
valuable than that which falls short of knowledge. Barn Façade cases could then be 
plausibly considered as atypical. Alternatively, one might admit that there is achieve-
ment and final value in the Barn Façade case, but insist that we value knowledge more 
for its own sake than we value cognitive achievement that falls short of knowledge for 
its own sake. Knowledge would then stand to true belief from ability as (a) understand-
ing stands to knowledge and (b) wisdom stands to understanding.
The strategy I prefer, however, is to insist on a disanalogy between the Archery case 
and the Barn Façade case. On this alternative, we deny that Barney’s success is from 
ability and that it thereby constitutes a genuine achievement.
But how can we plausibly deny the analogy between the two cases? The first step is 
to note that abilities are always understood as being relative to an environment. When 
we say that Jeter has the ability to hit baseballs, for example, we mean that he has this 
ability relative to environments typical for playing baseball. Presumably, Jeter lacks the 
ability to hit baseballs relative to some environments, such as in war zones where he 
would be too distracted. Once we are clear about this point, however, we might insist 
that, relative to Barn Façade County, Barney does not have the ability to perceptually 
discriminate barns from non-barns. And if he does not have the ability relative to that 
environment, then his success in that environment is not from ability.
The second step is to note that abilities are always understood in terms of the inter-
ests and purposes associated with the ability in question. For example, the ability to 
hit baseballs is understood in terms of the interests and purposes involved in playing 
baseball—the sorts of manifestation conditions that are relevant, and the sorts of results 
that are relevant, must be understood in those terms. But then there is a relevant differ-
ence between the Archie case and the Barney case: The interests and purposes at play 
in archery do not require the ability to discriminate between targets with forcefields and 
“genuine” targets. So long as you have the ability to hit the target you are aiming at, you 
have the relevant ability. But then Archie does have the relevant archery abilities, even 
relative to his odd environment. And so Archie’s success in hitting his target is success 
from ability.
By contrast, the interests and purposes associated with knowledge attribution do 
require that one be able to discriminate between cases that p and cases that not-p. But 

THE ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE
230
then Barney does not have the relevant cognitive ability, relative to his odd environ-
ment. And so Barney’s success in believing the truth is not success from ability.
Finally, consider a different sport, Archery*. In Archery* the goal of the contest is to 
first identify a good target and then shoot it. Suppose Archie lacks the first ability but 
picks out a good target by luck and shoots it with skill. In this case we would not credit 
him with an Archery* achievement, and precisely because he lacks the sort of ability 
we are interested in when evaluating for Archery* success. Or suppose he is properly 
skilled but running out of time. He randomly picks out a target, which lucky for him 
is a good one, and shoots it. Again, in this case we might properly withhold credit for 
an achievement, and precisely because he has not manifested the right sort of ability 
(Greco 2009).
Pritchard responds to this sort of consideration by, in effect, insisting that there will 
be cases of “lucky” achievement, and therefore cases of cognitive achievements that fall 
short of knowledge.
[W]hile it is undoubtedly true that abilities should be understood relative to 
suitable environments, however that point is to be understood it must be com-
patible with the fact that it can be a matter of luck that one is in a suitable 
environment to exercise one’s ability in the first place [my emphasis]. Critically, 
however, that is just to allow that the presence of environmental luck is com-
patible with one exercising one’s normal abilities . . . hence however one rela-
tivizes abilities to suitable conditions one must allow that environmental luck 
—and thus environmental epistemic luck—is compatible with the exercise of 
the target ability.
(Pritchard 2009)
But this last does not follow. From the premise that environmental luck is compatible 
with the exercise of cognitive ability, it does not follow that environmental epistemic 
luck is so compatible. That is, it does not follow that the sort of environmental luck 
that is compatible with the exercise of ability (i.e. luck that one is in a suitable environ-
ment to exercise one’s ability in the first place) will also be the sort of luck that excludes 
knowledge. In effect, this is just what the Knowledge as Achievement account denies, 
when it claims that the sense in which luck is incompatible with knowledge just is the 
sense in which, more generally, luck is incompatible with success from ability. More 
specifically, luck regarding what environment one is in, and whether that environment 
is suitable to the exercise of one’s ability, does not exclude achievement once in a suit-
able environment.
Do the replies to objections in this section make the Knowledge as Achievement 
account less elegant? No, because they do not add conditions to the previous, beauti-
fully elegant account. Rather, they merely explicate those conditions in independently 
motivated ways—ways that we would have to anyway to understand what it is to have 
an ability, and what it is for success to be from ability, more generally.
Accordingly, we may conclude that the Knowledge as Achievement account of the 
nature and value of knowledge remains viable. It has resources to plausibly address vari-
ous kinds of counter-example regarding the nature of knowledge, and can at the same 
time explain the value of knowledge in a non-revisionary way. It also remains the most 
elegant explanation of both the nature and value of knowledge, and of understanding 
and wisdom as well.

231
THE VALUE PROBLEM
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Duncan Pritchard and John Turri for their comments on earlier 
versions of the paper. Thanks also to Irem Kurtsal Steen, and to participants at the 
“Epistemic Goodness” conference, held at the University of Oklahoma in the spring of 
2009.
References
Greco, J. (2003) “Knowledge as Credit for True Belief” in M. DePaul and L. Zagzebski (eds.) Intellectual 
Virtue: Perspectives from Ethics and Epistemology, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Greco, J. (2008) “The Value Problem” in A. Haddock, A. Millar, & D. H. Pritchard (eds.) The Value of 
Knowledge, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Greco, J. (2009) Achieving Knowledge, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kaplan, M. (1985) “It’s Not What You Know That Counts”, Journal of Philosophy 82: 350–63.
Kvanvig, J. (2003) The Value of Knowledge and the Pursuit of Understanding, Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Lackey, J. (2007) “Why We Don’t Deserve Credit for Everything We Know”, Synthese 158: 345–61.
Pritchard, D. H. (2007) “Recent Work on Epistemic Value”, American Philosophical Quarterly 44: 85–110.
Pritchard, D. H. (2008a) “Radical Scepticism, Epistemic Luck and Epistemic Value”, Proceedings of the 
Aristotelian Society (Supplementary Volume) 82: 19–41.
Pritchard, D. H. (2008b) “The Value of Knowledge” in E. Zalta (ed.) The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
URL = http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2008/entries/knowledge-value/
Pritchard, D. H. (2009) The Value of Knowledge, manuscript.
Riggs, W. (2002) “Reliability and the Value of Knowledge”, Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 64: 
79–96.
Riggs, W. (2009) “Two Problems of Easy Credit”, Synthese 169: 201–16.
Sartwell, C. (1992) “Why Knowledge is Merely True Belief”, The Journal of Philosophy 89, 4: 167–80.
Sosa, E. (1991) Knowledge in Perspective: Selected Essays in Epistemology, Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Sosa, E. (2007) A Virtue Epistemology: Apt Belief and Reflective Knowledge, vol. 1, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Williamson, T. (2000) Knowledge and Its Limits, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Zagzebski, L. (1996) Virtues of the Mind: An Inquiry into the Nature of Virtue and the Ethical Foundations of 
Knowledge, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


Part III
THE STRUCTURE OF 
KNOWLEDGE


22
FOUNDATIONALISM
Michael DePaul
Epistemic foundationalism is a thesis about the structure of the beliefs having an epis-
temic property, such as being known, rational, or justified. The structure is indicated 
by the foundation metaphor. In a building constructed of blocks, many blocks are sup-
ported by other blocks, but some blocks are not supported by any other blocks. Blocks 
that are not supported by other blocks form the foundation, supporting the rest of the 
structure, i.e., all the superstructure blocks. Every block in the structure is either part of 
the foundation or part of the superstructure. Hence, the weight of every superstructure 
block is eventually carried by one or more foundation blocks.
Foundationalists about an epistemic property hold that the beliefs having that prop-
erty are structured like the blocks in a building. Thus, e.g., foundationalists regarding 
justification recognize that many of our justified beliefs depend for their justification on 
other justified beliefs we hold. But they also insist that some of our justified beliefs do 
not depend for their justification on any other justified beliefs. These beliefs are basic or 
foundational. Finally, such foundationalists hold that every one of our justified beliefs is 
either basic or part of the superstructure, with all superstructure beliefs eventually justi-
fied by one or more basic beliefs.
Epistemic properties are evaluative, involving assessment of beliefs from a distinc-
tive epistemic perspective marked by a concern for such epistemic goods as believing 
what is true and not believing what is false. Accordingly, we might roughly characterize 
knowledge as true belief that is not true by accident and rational belief as belief that 
seems—from the believer’s perspective—to have been formed in a way that is likely 
to yield true beliefs and not false beliefs. There is less agreement about the property of 
epistemic justification, but one major alternative conceives of it as fulfilling an intellec-
tual obligation to try to believe truths while avoiding falsehoods; according to another 
conception, justification is an historical property that beliefs have if they were produced 
by a cognitive process that reliably yields true beliefs.
Let’s now state more formally the three elements of epistemic foundationalism. First 
some handy abbreviations:
Let S be a person; B and B1, B2, B3, . . . be beliefs; P and P1, P2, P3, . . . be propo-
sitions, and BP be the belief that P, BP1 the belief that P1, etc. E stands for an 
epistemic property and SE shall be the set of all S’s beliefs that have E.
Here’s a definition of a concept that’s useful for defining foundationalism:

THE STRUCTURE OF KNOWLEDGE
236
Let T be the relation, or disjunction of relations, between beliefs that transmits 
E from one belief to another. (For example, T, or one disjunct of T, might be the 
relation of being-formed-as-a-result-of-being-deduced-from. Hence, according 
to the cogito, Descartes’ belief “I exist” stands in T to his belief “I think.”)
 T is transitive: if B1 stands in T to B2, and B2 stands in T to B3, then B1 stands 
in T to B3.
We can now formulate three theses that together constitute foundationalism regarding 
an epistemic property.
Foundations Thesis: Some of the beliefs in SE do not have E in virtue of standing 
in T to any other beliefs in SE. Such beliefs are basic (or foundational).
Dependence Thesis: Some of the beliefs in SE have E in virtue of standing in T to 
other beliefs in SE. Such beliefs are superstructure beliefs (or non-basic).
Closure Thesis: All of the superstructure beliefs in SE have E in virtue of stand-
ing in T to one or more basic beliefs in SE. (Compare Sosa 1980.)
Foundationalism regarding a specific epistemic property, E, can be fleshed out in vari-
ous ways. Foundationalists must explain which beliefs are basic and how these beliefs 
come to have E and also specify T and explain how it transmits E; different views about 
these matters are possible. We shouldn’t expect all versions of foundationalism regard-
ing E to be equally plausible. Moreover, as we’ve noted, there are a number of epistemic 
properties. We shouldn’t expect the most plausible version of foundationalism concern-
ing E to be analogous to the most plausible version for a different epistemic property. 
Maybe no version of foundationalism is plausible for some epistemic properties.
It’s important, therefore, to realize that foundationalism is not the name of one single 
epistemological theory. There are many distinct foundationalist views. One should be 
suspicious, then, of anyone who writes or speaks of foundationalism writ large, without 
specifying exactly the version of foundationalism at issue. I obviously cannot address all 
the possible versions of foundationalism regarding all the different epistemic properties. 
I’ll limit myself to some versions of foundationalism regarding epistemic justification. 
Henceforth, unless I indicate otherwise, by “foundationalism” I mean foundationalism 
regarding justification.
Before proceeding, let’s note one important non-epistemic form of foundationalism. 
Most of us have many beliefs we hold on the basis of other beliefs because we have 
inferred them from these other beliefs. But we also have beliefs not held on the basis of 
other beliefs. If you ask me my phone number, for example, I just form a belief that such 
and such is my phone number. No other belief serves as a reason, good or bad, for my 
belief about my phone number—the belief just pops into my head. One might conjec-
ture, then, that our beliefs have a foundational structure, with some being basic because 
they are not, as a matter of psychological fact, based upon other beliefs, while all other 
beliefs are eventually based on such psychologically basic beliefs. This view isn’t an epis-
temic foundationalism: no evaluative, epistemic properties are involved. The beliefs 
that are psychologically basic for a person might be utterly unjustified; indeed, they 
can be downright mad. The same holds for the “inferences” some benighted people 
make from their psychologically basic beliefs. It does not matter for the kind of foun-
dationalism we have just identified, since it only concerns the psychological relations 

FOUNDATIONALISM
237
structuring a person’s beliefs. I’ll follow philosophers who mark the distinction between 
psychological foundationalism and epistemic foundationalism by using the terms ‘basic’ 
and ‘properly basic’: the former indicates merely that a belief is basic within a person’s 
system of beliefs while the latter indicates the belief is justified but does not depend for 
its justification on any other belief.
Returning to epistemic foundationalism, the foundations and closure theses are 
clearly the most controversial parts. Why think some beliefs are justified on their own, 
independently of their relations to other justified beliefs? And why think that all justi-
fied beliefs must eventually derive their justification from properly basic beliefs? One 
historically significant answer is provided by the epistemic regress argument, which runs 
as follows. Begin with some belief, B1, that S is justified in holding. What justifies B1? 
In many cases there will be another belief or beliefs that justify B1, perhaps because S 
deduced B1 from them. Let’s assume the simple case, where B1 is justified by one other 
belief, B2. If B2 is not justified, it could hardly justify B1. So what justifies B2? Presumably 
S can provide some reason for B2 as well, some other belief or beliefs that justify it. 
Assume the simple case again: B2 is justified by B3. By now you can probably see where 
this is going. There are only three possible ways for the chain of justifying beliefs (or rea-
sons) to continue. First, it might go on forever. Second, it might loop back on itself, that 
is, S might use beliefs that have already appeared in the chain again. And finally, the 
chain might simply end. Those who accept that the series of justifying beliefs goes on 
forever are known as infinitists. (For a defense of infinitism see Klein 1999.) Coherentists 
hold that the chain loops back on itself. Foundationalists hold that the chain ends at 
some point, arguing that this is the only viable possibility for such a justificatory chain.
Why don’t foundationalists think the chain can go on forever? We are finite beings, 
so we clearly do not have infinitely many beliefs. Hence, we simply could not go on 
indefinitely justifying beliefs with different beliefs we already hold. Therefore the chain 
of reasons cannot be infinitely long.
Why don’t foundationalists think the chain can loop back on itself? S obviously can-
not justify B by citing that very same belief. The problem might not leap out as clearly 
in a case where S has cited some other beliefs in between, but the problem must remain. 
If S is justified in believing B1 by B2, and justified in believing B2 by B3, and justified in 
believing B3 by B4, but the justification S has for B4 is nothing but B1, then S doesn’t 
really have an adequate justification for B1. If B1 needs to be justified to begin with, then 
B1 can hardly supply that justification either at the first step or further down the line 
for the simple reason that it stands in need of justification itself! Or so the argument 
goes. Real coherentists complain that this misrepresents their view, arguing that they 
reject the “linear” conception of justification, which sees justification as transmitted 
from belief to belief via evidential relations. They instead conceive of justification as a 
property a whole system of beliefs has in virtue of the relations of mutual support inter-
connecting the beliefs that comprise the system (see Bonjour 1976: 285–86). But notice 
that, on this view, coherentism looks like a non standard version of foundationalism 
with no superstructure beliefs; all justified beliefs are properly basic since justification is 
not transferred to them from other justified beliefs. They are justified in virtue of their 
membership in a coherent system of beliefs (see Sosa 1980). Unfortunately I do not 
have space to say more about this issue.
Only foundationalism remains; the regress of justification must stop someplace. The 
beliefs that end the regress would, of course, have to be justified. If they were not, how 
could they possibly justify other beliefs? But these special beliefs must not derive their 

THE STRUCTURE OF KNOWLEDGE
238
justification from any other justified beliefs; otherwise we would be off again on the 
regress. So there must be some foundational beliefs and the chain of justification for any 
belief must eventually terminate in one or more of these special beliefs. This is the only 
viable possibility.
But you might already be having doubts about foundationalism. If B cannot be justi-
fied by B itself, how could B be justified on its own? Indeed, is there any substantial dif-
ference between claiming that B is justified by B and claiming that B is justified on its 
own? Such questions are encouraged by the characterization of properly basic beliefs as 
“self-justifying,” which one sometimes sees. The building metaphor suggests how foun-
dationalists should respond. Foundation blocks in a building are not supported by any 
other blocks, but they are neither un-supported nor self-supporting. They obviously are 
supported in virtue of something. Similarly, foundationalists who have their wits about 
them will claim that although properly basic beliefs are not justified by other beliefs, 
they are justified in virtue of something. Foundationalists don’t think that just any belief 
could be properly basic. These will be special beliefs. Consider the belief that everything 
is identical to itself, which is a likely candidate for being properly basic. It seems “self-
evident”; a person who understands it can see that it is true. Foundationalists could 
explain that it is justified in virtue of this special feature. As we will see, there are a 
number of other special features beliefs might have that foundationalists could cite to 
explain the justification of properly basic beliefs. They only deny that properly basic 
beliefs are justified by other justified beliefs.
Let’s now examine a specific example that illustrates how foundationalists think the 
regress plays out. I’ll take a very simple example and first describe a fairly traditional 
foundationalist account. I’ll then describe a couple of more contemporary, and I think 
more plausible, foundationalist accounts.
I look into my bedroom on a sunny afternoon. There is no philosopher’s funny busi-
ness going on. I clearly see Pingus, my cat, sitting on the windowsill, and form the belief 
that Pingus is on the windowsill. What justifies my belief? Here’s one traditional answer: 
My belief that Pingus is on the windowsill is justified by my belief that I see Pingus on 
the windowsill. Sounds promising. This much is certainly true: if I do see Pingus on the 
windowsill, then Pingus is on the windowsill. Seeing, like perceiving in general, is fac-
tive: One cannot see, or perceive, that P unless P is true. So my belief that I see Pingus 
on the windowsill could serve to justify my belief that Pingus is on the windowsill.
But what justifies my belief that I see Pingus on the windowsill? It’s natural to cite 
my sensory experience here. Visual sensation has its own peculiar character distinct 
from other kinds of conscious experience. We typically believe we are seeing something 
because of our visual sensations. We can distinguish among our visual sensations, and 
what we believe we see is determined by the specific character of our visual experience. 
Thus, I might say, what justifies my belief that I see Pingus on the windowsill is my belief 
that I have a visual sensation as of seeing Pingus on the windowsill. My belief that I 
have a “Pingus seeing” kind of experience may not guarantee that I see Pingus—I could 
be dreaming after all—but my belief about my visual sensation certainly seems relevant 
to the truth of my belief that I see Pingus. So, for now, let’s allow that my belief that I am 
having a Pingus seeing sort of visual sensation justifies my belief that I see Pingus.
What justifies my belief that I am having that particular kind of visual sensation? A 
typical foundationalist answer is that beliefs about our own current conscious experi-
ences, such as sensations, are properly basic. This answer immediately raises a question: 
in virtue of what are beliefs about our own current experiences justified if not their 

FOUNDATIONALISM
239
relations with other beliefs? One traditional response is that beliefs about our current 
experiences are justified because they are infallible, i.e., they cannot be mistaken. I 
might be mistaken that Pingus is on the windowsill—it might be my other tiger cat, 
Luigi, who looks much like Pingus. I might be mistaken that I am seeing anything at 
all because I am dreaming of Pingus or hallucinating. But many traditional founda-
tionalists hold my belief that I have a visual experience of the type I then actually 
have, specifically, the Pingus seeing type, simply can’t be mistaken. Other traditional 
foundationalists claim beliefs about our current conscious states are properly basic 
because they are indubitable (cannot be doubted), incorrigible (cannot be overturned 
by further information), or certain (no other belief is more reasonable). There are 
likely other possibilities. The basic idea shared by these traditional views is that we 
have some kind of privileged access to our own conscious experiences, and hence our 
beliefs about these experiences need no support from any other beliefs to be justified. 
Traditional foundationalists were likely mistaken in thinking our beliefs about our 
current conscious experiences are infallible or incorrigible or absolutely certain. It’s 
possible to imagine cases where we make mistakes about our own experiences (see 
Pollock 1986). Nevertheless, it still seems we have some sort of special access to our 
own conscious experiences. There is, so to speak, nothing between us and the experi-
ence, so we’re in an ideal position to form beliefs. Hence, the claim that such beliefs 
are properly basic retains considerable plausibility. So it’s plausible that my belief that 
I am having a Pingus seeing kind of experience is properly basic.
This traditional foundationalist account of how the regress ends is not beyond ques-
tion. But clearly it isn’t guilty of holding properly basic beliefs justify themselves or that 
they are justified, but not in virtue of anything at all. The account claims properly basic 
beliefs are justified because they have a very special, and very strong, justificatory status: 
they concern something to which we have a kind of special, privileged access.
Let’s now consider an objection to this foundationalist account. If foundational beliefs 
need to have such a strong positive epistemic status, aren’t equally strong connections 
between beliefs required for justification to be transmitted? If BP must be infallible, or 
nearly so, to be properly basic, must not the truth of P1 guarantee the truth of P2, or 
nearly guarantee it, for BP1 to justify BP2? Alternatively, if we need privileged access to P 
for BP to be properly basic, shouldn’t we have to “see” that P1 guarantees the truth of P2 
for BP2 to be justified by BP1? The problem is, if we set the requirements for justification 
and justification transmission this high, we might be able to identify some few properly 
basic beliefs and explain how they are justified independently of any other beliefs, but 
we will not be able to use those beliefs to justify many other beliefs. In fact, the account 
I sketched of the justification of my belief that Pingus is on the windowsill won’t even 
work: that I have an experience as of seeing Pingus obviously doesn’t guarantee that I’m 
in fact seeing Pingus.
This criticism doesn’t faze some foundationalists. They continue to hold the require-
ments for properly basic beliefs and justification transmission to be extremely high, 
and either accept the skeptical consequence that very few of our ordinary beliefs are 
justified or soldier on, attempting to find an argument that will forge a strong enough 
link between properly basic beliefs and our ordinary beliefs for the former to justify 
the latter (see, e.g., Fumerton 2000 and BonJour 2000). But few contemporary foun-
dationalists accept such extremely demanding versions of foundationalism. We’ll 
next examine some less demanding foundationalist positions. But I should first note 
that many critics seem to identify foundationalism with very demanding versions of 

THE STRUCTURE OF KNOWLEDGE
240
foundationalism (Rorty 1979 provides an influential example). Perhaps this identifica-
tion is understandable given the historical prominence of the demanding forms, begin-
ning at least with Descartes. These critics reject foundationalism on such grounds as 
that virtually no beliefs are infallible or that no beliefs are unrevisable in the light of 
further information or that foundationalism is ultimately a skeptical position because 
too few beliefs are properly basic to allow us to justify the things we ordinarily believe 
about the world. Such criticisms don’t impact most contemporary foundationalists, 
since they have modest views about what’s required for a belief to be properly basic and 
for the transmission of justification.
So how might a modest foundationalist account for the justification of my belief that 
Pingus is on the windowsill? Compared to the novella provided by more traditional 
foundationalists, this will be a short story. If we reflect on cases like the one where I 
look into the sunny bedroom and believe that Pingus is on the windowsill, it becomes 
apparent that the traditional foundationalist’s account is overly complicated. It does 
not correspond with the way we actually form such beliefs. When we look at an object 
in normal conditions, and form a belief about the thing or some perceptible quality it 
has, for example, a belief that there’s Pingus or that Pingus is a tabby, we typically don’t 
start with a belief about the nature of our visual experience, infer a belief that we are 
seeing something, and then infer the relevant belief about the thing we see. We just 
have a certain visual experience and form a belief. In fact, in the usual case, where we 
are not being extraordinarily reflective or introspective, we will not have any beliefs at 
all about the nature of our visual experience or that we are seeing this or that. Indeed, 
we all go for days at a time without forming any beliefs about the nature of our visual 
experiences or that we are seeing this or that—we are much too busy forming beliefs 
about the ordinary objects around us.
How are these observations relevant to the justification of my belief that Pingus is on 
the windowsill? Let’s begin by distinguishing between two ways in which we can think 
of a belief being justified. Suppose that I have impeccable evidence for P, and that this 
evidence is constituted by my belief B1. Suppose further that I do believe that P, but that 
as a matter of empirical fact, my belief that P in no way depends upon B1. I’ve never 
even considered how P relates to B1. Instead, I believe P because I had a drug induced 
hallucination in which an angel descended from the clouds and solemnly swore to me 
that P. In this case, there is one clear sense in which BP is not justified—it’s silly of me to 
believe something in the way I believe P. But there is another sense in which BP is justi-
fied—I do, after all, have good evidence for BP. The first sense of justification evaluates 
my holding some particular belief in the way I actually hold it. The second sense instead 
focuses on the proposition I believe and evaluates whether the evidence I have at my 
disposal supports that proposition. To avoid confusion, I will use ‘justified belief’ for the 
first type of justification and ‘justifiable belief’ for the second.
If we are concerned with justification rather than justifiability, the traditional foun-
dationalist account immediately appears problematic. How could my believing that 
Pingus is on the windowsill be justified in virtue of my belief that I have a Pingus seeing 
type of experience when I don’t actually believe I’m having such an experience? The 
belief that I have such an experience might be relevant to the justifiability of my belief 
that Pingus is on the windowsill, since, if challenged to justify the latter belief, I might 
eventually come to form the former belief and use it to answer the challenge in the 
traditional foundationalist way. But when it comes to justification it seems clear that 
the only things that could be relevant to the belief’s status as justified or unjustified are 

FOUNDATIONALISM
241
things that actually played an epistemically significant role in the formation or mainte-
nance of the belief. (I include maintenance because a belief might now be justified in 
virtue of now being based on reasons acquired after it was initially formed.)
If I believe that P1, infer P2 from P1, and come to believe P2 as a result, then BP2 will 
depend for its justification on BP1. But if I have some belief that was neither formed 
nor is sustained by any inference, then that belief cannot depend for its justification on 
any other belief, that is, it will have to be properly basic to be justified. In the example 
we’ve been considering I immediately formed the belief that Pingus is on the windowsill 
in response to my visual experience. I certainly did not infer it from any other beliefs I 
had, in particular, beliefs about what I was seeing or what sorts of visual experiences I 
was having. So according to the contemporary foundationalist account, my belief that 
Pingus is on the windowsill is properly basic. It is justified, but does not depend for its 
justification on any other belief that I hold. But what explains the justification of my 
basic belief that Pingus is on the windowsill? We might not form beliefs about our cur-
rent experiences very often, but when we do traditional foundationalists have a good 
story to tell about their justification. The beliefs about ordinary things that we form 
on the basis of perceptual experiences, which contemporary foundationalists regard as 
properly basic, lack the awe inspiring epistemic credentials traditional foundationalists 
claim for their foundations. We have no sort of privileged access to the ordinary things 
we perceive. In virtue of what, then, are our basic perceptual beliefs about these things 
justified?
Recall that a beliefs’ status as justified, as opposed to justifiable, depends upon the 
things that play an epistemically significant role in the formation or maintenance of 
that belief. For my belief that Pingus is on the windowsill, my visual experience is the 
most salient thing. I formed the belief because I was having a particular type of visual 
experience, a visual experience as of seeing Pingus on the windowsill. If I had been 
having a different type of visual experience, say an experience as of seeing an empty 
windowsill, I wouldn’t have been justified in believing Pingus is on the windowsill. This 
suggests one possible explanation contemporary foundationalists might give of why my 
belief is justified: it was formed in response to the appropriate sort of visual experience 
for that belief. The idea is not that the belief is justified by a belief about the nature of 
my experience. Rather, the belief is justified in virtue of its being formed in response 
to an experience of that nature. This account preserves the foundational status of the 
belief—it does not derive its justification from some other justified belief—, makes it 
clear that the belief is justified in virtue of something—so its epistemic status is not left 
mysterious—, and finally, explains the justification of the belief in terms of the way in 
which it was actually formed. We’ll call this view experiential foundationalism.
It would be irresponsible to go farther without at least mentioning an important 
objection to both experiential foundationalism and traditional versions of foundation-
alism. All these versions of foundationalism hold that some significant foundational 
beliefs are justified in virtue of the conscious experiences that lead the person to form 
the belief. Traditional foundationalists hold that our beliefs about our current sensory 
experiences are justified in virtue of our current sensory experiences. Experiential foun-
dationalists hold that our ordinary perceptual beliefs about ordinary things are justified 
in virtue of our current sensory experiences. These versions of foundationalism hold 
that beliefs about different things—experiences in the one case and ordinary objects 
in the other—are justified by these experiences, but they agree that the beliefs are jus-
tified in virtue of the experiences. They are able to maintain that these beliefs are, 

THE STRUCTURE OF KNOWLEDGE
242
nevertheless, properly basic because the beliefs are justified in virtue of their relations 
to experiences, not their relations to other justified beliefs. The objection comes in the 
form of a dilemma: If sensory experiences have content that is proposition like, then it 
is possible to see how they might stand in the sort of logical or evidential relation that 
is necessary to justify a belief. But if these experiences are proposition like, they repre-
sent the world as being one way rather than another. They might be mistaken. Hence, 
it would seem that these experiences themselves need to be justified, or something like 
it, before they could justify beliefs. But if the experiences need to be justified, we have 
not really reached the foundations. So suppose the content of sensory experience is not 
proposition like. Then these experiences are off the hook as far as needing justification 
is concerned. They are just brute states of awareness that it makes no sense to think of 
as justified or unjustified. Now the problem shifts to their relation to beliefs. They can-
not stand in anything like a logical or evidential relation to a belief. Experiences could, 
of course, stand in temporal or causal relations to beliefs, but it is difficult to see why a 
belief would be justified by a certain experience just because it followed or was caused 
by that experience. This is obviously a formidable objection to the versions of founda-
tionalism I’ve described so far. That does not mean it is decisive, but I do not have the 
space to consider possible foundationalist responses. I will, instead, move on to describe 
a different type of contemporary foundationalism. (The objection is found in Sellars 
1963. For a response see BonJour 2000.)
Here is a familiar story about the justification of my belief that Pingus is on the 
windowsill, which is a version of foundationalism although it usually is not presented 
as such. Rather than looking at the specific character of the sensory experience that 
led me to form the belief that Pingus is on the windowsill this account focuses on the 
reliability of the psychological process that was responsible for me having the sensory 
experience I had and then forming the belief I formed. In circumstances of the kind in 
which I actually formed my belief, this process would produce a very large proportion 
of true beliefs. The belief is justified because it was produced by a reliable belief-forming 
process. It is important that this account does not hold my belief to be justified by a 
belief that it was formed in a reliable way. If it held that, my belief that Pingus is on the 
windowsill would not be properly basic—its justification would depend upon another 
belief. Reliabilism entails that my belief about Pingus is foundational because this belief 
does not depend for its justification on any other belief; it is justified in virtue of being 
produced by a reliable belief-forming process. We’ll call this view reliabilist foundational-
ism (see Goldman 1979).
One advantage claimed for reliabilist foundationalism is that it would not hold our 
perceptual beliefs to be justified if the experiences that ground them did not reliably 
match reality. So suppose we have fallen into the clutches of a Cartesian demon or are 
brains in a vat. Experiential foundationalism entails that our perceptual beliefs are, 
nonetheless, justified since we would be forming beliefs about the world around us on 
the basis of the right kinds of sensory experiences—even though nearly all the beliefs 
so formed would be false! Reliabilist foundationalism can deny that these beliefs are 
justified because they are unreliable. Many see this as an advantage for reliabilism. 
Experiential foundationalists won’t agree. They think their account gives the intuitively 
correct answer about demon worlds and brain in vat scenarios, that is, that those living 
in such extraordinary circumstances are justified in believing the world is as it seems to 
them. Why think these beliefs are justified when they’re so massively mistaken? One 
answer is that our similar beliefs formed in the actual world are quite obviously justified, 

FOUNDATIONALISM
243
and the denizens of demon worlds and brain nourishing vats would be forming their 
beliefs on the basis of conscious experiences that are exactly the same as ours. This 
answer clearly proceeds from the experiential foundationalist’s basic presupposition that 
beliefs are justified or not in virtue of the conscious experiences of the believer. And this 
is not a presupposition shared by the reliabilist foundationalist. But that doesn’t show 
the presupposition is false, any more than the experiential foundationalist’s failure to 
share the reliabilist’s presuppositions shows that they are false. We’ve here reached a 
deep disagreement that may be irresolvable.
Let’s take stock. First, since I have been working with a perceptual belief as an exam-
ple for some time, it is important to recall that it is just an example. The three versions 
of foundationalism we’ve examined would want to say similar things about other kinds 
of beliefs. Thus, if we were talking about a memory belief I formed, for example, that I 
cleaned Pingus’ litter box this morning—yuck!—the traditional foundationalist would 
want to trace its justification back to a belief about the nature of the memory experience 
I was having, the experiential foundationalist would take my belief that I cleaned the 
litter box to be basic and justified directly in virtue of my having the particular kind of 
memory experience I was having, and the reliabilist foundationalist would cite the reli-
ability of the psychological process that produces my memory beliefs.
Second, our discussion of these three forms of foundationalism implicitly recognized 
that they (like other forms of foundationalism) range along two dimensions. The first 
has to do with how demanding the form of foundationalism is about the epistemic status 
of properly basic beliefs and what’s required for the transmission of justification. Some 
traditional forms of foundationalism are extremely demanding, requiring infallibility for 
foundations and a guarantee of truth for the transmission of justification. More contem-
porary versions of foundationalism tend to be less demanding. Reliabilist foundational-
ism can theoretically be demanding or lax depending upon how reliable the process that 
formed a belief must be for the belief to be justified. The second dimension along which 
the theories range is the degree of justification at issue. Strong versions of foundational-
ism are obviously concerned with a very high degree of justification, typically at least 
justification that is sufficient for knowledge. Given how demanding they are about the 
foundations and the transmission of justification, it is easy to see why traditional foun-
dationalists think they have shown our beliefs are so highly justified. Other forms of 
foundationalism tend to be more moderate or modest. Experiential foundationalists in 
particular are likely to claim properly basic beliefs have only some low level of justifica-
tion and then try to explain how these beliefs can acquire a higher level of justification 
if further conditions are met. Interestingly, some foundationalists hold that coherence 
can increase the level of justification had by basic beliefs that have a low level of justi-
fication on their own.
Third, many versions of traditional foundationalism tend to see the justificatory status 
of our beliefs as being determined strictly by our beliefs, while other versions of founda-
tionalism appeal to other things in their accounts. All versions of foundationalism obvi-
ously see the regress of justification tracing along beliefs and ending with foundational 
beliefs. The contrast emerges when you ask what justifies these beliefs. Many traditional 
foundationalists seek to explain why these beliefs are justified by citing some character-
istic of the beliefs themselves: a paradigm of this approach is provided by accounts that 
claim properly basic beliefs must be infallible, where what makes a belief infallible is the 
nature of the proposition believed. Belief about our own conscious experiences cannot 
be mistaken simply because they are beliefs about our conscious experiences—there is 

THE STRUCTURE OF KNOWLEDGE
244
no need to compare the belief with the experience. Contemporary versions of founda-
tionalism see things other than beliefs as being relevant. Experiential foundationalism 
holds foundational beliefs to be justified in virtue of their relation to the experiences 
in response to which they were formed. Reliabilist foundationalism holds them to be 
justified in virtue of the reliability of the psychological process that produced them. So 
while many traditional foundationalists think that if you had a complete list of all the 
propositions a person believes you could determine which of the person’s beliefs were 
justified (or perhaps justifiable), contemporary foundationalists hold that you need to 
know more—you need to know about the person’s experience or psychology—to deter-
mine which of the person’s beliefs are justified.
References
BonJour, L. (1976) “The Coherence Theory of Empirical Knowledge,” Philosophical Studies 30 281–312.
—— (2000) “Toward a Defense of Empirical Foundationalism,” in DePaul 2000.
DePaul, M. (ed.) (2000) Resurrecting Old-Fashioned Foundationalism, Lanham, MD: Rowman and 
Littlefield.
Fumerton, R. (2000) “Classical Foundationalism,” in DePaul 2000.
Goldman, A. (1979) “What is Justified Belief?” in G. Pappas (ed.) Justification and Knowledge, Dordrecht: 
Reidel.
Klein, P. (1999) “Human Knowledge and the Infinite Regress of Reasons,” Philosophical Perspectives 13: 
297–332.
Pollock, J. (1986) Contemporary Theories of Knowledge, Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littlefield.
Rorty, R. (1979) Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Sellars, W. (1963) “Empiricisim and the Philosophy of Mind,” in Science, Perception, and Reality, London: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Sosa, E. (1980) “The Foundations of Foundationalism,” Noûs 14: 547–64.
Further Reading
Audi, R. (1993) The Structure of Justification, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (An extended defense 
of a moderate version of foundationalism regarding justification.)
Chisholm, R. (1977) Theory of Knowledge, 2nd. edn., Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. (A classic state-
ment of a sophisticated version of foundationalism that includes coherentist elements and a number of 
different epistemic properties.)
Foley, R. (1987) The Theory of Epistemic Rationality, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. (An 
extended development of a subjective foundationalist theory of rationality conceived as distinct from 
justification.)
Sosa, E. “The Raft and the Pyramid: Coherence Versus Foundations in the Theory of Knowledge,” Midwest 
Studies in Philosophy 5: 3–25. (Compares and contrasts foundationalism and coherentism.)

23
INFINITISM
Peter D. Klein
Introduction
Infinitism, along with coherentism and foundationalism, is a view about the structure 
of reasons and reasoning that is designed to provide a solution to the epistemic regress 
problem. The regress problem can be put this way: Suppose we give a reason, r1, for 
holding one of our beliefs, b. Then, we are asked for our reason for holding r1, and we 
provide the reason, r2. Then, we are asked for our reason for r2, and we give r3. Now, 
either this process could go on indefinitely, which seems to suggest that nothing has 
been gained by providing a reason because there is always another one needed; or, if 
some reason repeats, it seems that we have argued in a circle and that no such argument 
could provide a good basis for accepting b; or, if at some point there is no further reason, 
it seems that the stopping point is arbitrarily held because there is no reasonable basis 
for holding it. The problem is that, contrary to strong pre-theoretical intuitions, there 
seems to be no point in giving reasons for our beliefs.
Infinitism holds that there is no reason that can be given for any belief which is so 
privileged that it is immune to further interrogation. There are circumstances in which 
even the most commonplace reasons require further reasons. Even so, knowledge based 
upon such reasoning is possible, and giving reasons does increase the warrant for our 
beliefs.
The primary purpose of this chapter is to sketch the case for infinitism. It has three 
main steps.
First, I will discuss the way in which the regress problem was originally conceived by 
the Pyrrhonians and Aristotelians. The upshot will be that given two presuppositions 
that underlie the regress problem as originally conceived, the Pyrrhonian response, 
namely that reasoning is unable to resolve disputes, is highly plausible.
Second, I will discuss three challenges to the Pyrrhonian response. The first chal-
lenge arises from various forms of foundationalism including what I call ‘austere reliabi-
lism’ and ‘embellished reliabilism.’ I will argue that these forms of foundationalism fail 
to adequately address the normative basis motivating the regress argument. The second 
challenge originates with contemporary coherentism. I will argue that contemporary 
coherentism is not a viable response because it is subject to the same objections that 
apply to foundationalism. That leaves infinitism, the third challenge, as the only viable, 
non-skeptical response.
Third, I will sketch infinitism, point to some of its advantages, and try to show that 
the primary objections to it miss the mark.

THE STRUCTURE OF KNOWLEDGE
246
1. The Traditional Problem
The traditional regress problem was known to Aristotle, who wrote this in the 
Metaphysics:
There are . . . some who raise a difficulty by asking, who is to be the judge of 
the healthy man, and in general who is likely to judge rightly on each class of 
questions. But such inquiries are like puzzling over the question whether we are 
now asleep or awake. And all such questions have the same meaning. These 
people demand that a reason shall be given for everything; for they seek a start-
ing point, and they seek to get this by demonstration, while it is obvious from 
their actions that they have no such conviction. But their mistake is what we 
have stated it to be; they seek a reason for things for which no reason can be 
given; for the starting point of demonstration is not demonstration.
(Aristotle 1941b: 1011a2–14)
Even though Aristotle is speaking about “demonstration,” and there is a special 
meaning that he would sometimes attach to that concept involving syllogistic reason-
ing from intuited first principles, his point here is that reasoning, in general, reaches an 
end because there are some privileged starting points “for which no reason can be given” 
because “the starting point of demonstration is not demonstration.” No reason can be 
given because reasoning presupposes something not inferred—namely the premisses 
that provide the basis for the reasoning.
This argument still motivates foundationalism. Here is a redacted paragraph from 
William Alston’s Epistemic Justification that faithfully renders his general point:
The argument [for foundationalism] is that the original belief [the one that 
requires justification] will be mediately justified only if every branch [of the 
justificatory tree] . . . terminates in an immediately justified belief. Positively, 
it is argued that on this condition the necessary conditions for the original 
belief’s being mediately justified are satisfied, and negatively it is argued that if 
any branch assumes any other form, they are not.
(Alston 1989: 54)
Alston goes on to say that this argument “gives stronger support to foundationalism 
than any other regress argument” (Alston 1989: 55).
The foundationalists’ response is an answer to the skeptics’ use of the regress argu-
ment whose classical formulation is due to Sextus Empiricus:
The later Skeptics hand down Five Modes leading to suspension, namely 
these: the first based on discrepancy, the second on the regress ad infinitum, 
the third on relativity, the fourth on hypothesis, the fifth on circular reason-
ing. That based on discrepancy leads us to find that with regard to the object 
presented there has arisen both amongst ordinary people and amongst the phi-
losophers an interminable conflict because of which we are unable either to 
choose a thing or reject it, and so fall back on suspension. The Mode based 
upon regress ad infinitum is that whereby we assert that the thing adduced as 
a proof of the matter proposed needs a further proof, and this again another, 

INFINITISM
247
and so on ad infinitum, so that the consequence is suspension [of assent], as we 
possess no starting-point for our argument. The Mode based upon relativity 
. . . is that whereby the object has such or such an appearance in relation to 
the subject judging and to the concomitant percepts, but as to its real nature 
we suspend judgment. We have the Mode based upon hypothesis when the 
Dogmatists, being forced to recede ad infinitum, take as their starting-point 
something which they do not establish but claim to assume as granted simply 
and without demonstration. The Mode of circular reasoning is the form used 
when the proof itself which ought to establish the matter of inquiry requires 
confirmation derived from the matter; in this case, being unable to assume 
either in order to establish the other, we suspend judgement about both.
(Empiricus 1976: I: 166–69)
There are five modes mentioned in the passage from Sextus Empiricus. The modes of 
relativity and discrepancy are crucial to understanding the reductio put forth by Sextus 
because those modes are designed to show that neither a judgment based on how things 
appear nor a judgment based upon what we collectively believe (either qua “philoso-
phers” or qua “ordinary” persons) is so privileged that it does not need to be supported 
by further reasoning. As we will see, considerations similar to those motivating the 
modes of relativity and discrepancy form part of the motivation for infinitism.
The foundationalists’ answer to the skeptical conclusion is that there must be some 
beliefs that cannot be justified by further reasoning because, as they see it, reasoning 
cannot create epistemic warrant, so warrant must be present in some basic beliefs. From 
the foundationalists’ perspective, the problem is typically not whether there is sufficient 
warrant for knowledge, it is, rather, how sufficient warrant arises and is transferred.
This is clear, for example, from Aristotle’s rather dismissive attitude towards skepti-
cism manifested in the citation above, and even in the carefully constructed answer in 
the Posterior Analytics designed to show that if some knowledge is the result of demon-
stration, then some knowledge must not be the result of demonstration. There he argues 
that either the series of demonstrations is finite or infinite. It must be finite because 
“one cannot traverse an infinite series” (Aristotle 1941a: 72b10). But if it terminates, 
it cannot terminate in another belief that requires a demonstration because the con-
clusion would not be “properly” known and “rests on the mere supposition that the 
premisses are true” (Aristotle 1941a: 72b14). It cannot be finite and circular because 
the premisses in a demonstration must be “prior to and better known than the conclu-
sion” and “the same things cannot be simultaneously both prior and posterior to one 
another” (Aristotle 1941a: 72b25–28). Thus, if there is demonstrative knowledge, then 
there must be non-demonstrative knowledge.
Near the end of the Posterior Analytics Aristotle does provide a sketch of how such 
non-demonstrative knowledge reliably originates with sensation and ends with rational 
insight. The details of Aristotle’s proto-reliabilist sketch are not important at this point, 
although I will return to it and a general discussion of reliabilism in section 2. What is 
important here is to understand how the foundationalists use the regress argument.
The Regress Argument as Used by Foundationalism
1. Reasoning has only three possible structures: it is finite and has a beginning point, 
it is circular, or it is infinite.

THE STRUCTURE OF KNOWLEDGE
248
2. Circular reasoning is not acceptable because a belief would have to be epistemically 
prior to itself.
3. Reasoning infinite in length could not be carried out by humans.
4. Thus, if there is knowledge that results from reasoning, the reasoning must be finite 
in length.
5. The beginning points of the reasoning must be known (otherwise it would be mere 
supposition).
6. Thus, if there is reasoning that results in knowledge, there must be some beliefs (the 
beginning points) that are known by some process other than reasoning.
The conclusion is the basic claim made by the foundationalist, namely, if there is some 
knowledge that is the result of reasoning, some knowledge is not the result of reasoning. 
Note the hypothetical nature of the conclusion. As mentioned above, although almost 
all foundationalists eschew skepticism, a foundationalist need not hold that there is 
knowledge in any specific area, or even in general. There can be and have been skepti-
cal foundationalists: Hume, for example. There can be non-skeptical foundationalists: 
Locke, and of course Aristotle, for example.
I think it is fair to say that there are two core presuppositions underlying the regress 
argument as put forth by foundationalists without which the argument could not 
succeed:
Non-Originating Principle: Reasoning, alone, cannot produce epistemic warrant.
Inheritance Principle: Reasoning can transmit the requisite epistemic warrant for 
knowledge from other beliefs.
For the sake of the discussion, the Pyrrhonians can accept the hypothetical in step 
6 (above) as well as the two principles, but they would invoke the modes of relativity 
and discrepancy in order to show that there are no legitimate firm beginning points. 
Aristotle might be right that in practice we do not push for reasons beyond those that 
are taken for granted by all of the participants in a discussion, but skeptics would argue 
that such contextually based agreements do not indicate the presence of a belief that 
has the requisite epistemic warrant because at other times and in other circumstances, 
different agreements are, or can be, made. In addition, skeptics would point out that 
beliefs based upon perception are person and circumstance relative. That’s not to say 
that reasons for holding such beliefs can’t be located; rather, it is to say that they are not 
privileged in the way required by foundationalism.
The skeptics would point out that the inheritance and non-originating principles 
are telling against infinitism and coherentism because if reasoning cannot originate 
epistemic warrant, then neither view can explain how warrant arises in the first place. 
Each belief in the potentially infinite reasoning process is warranted on the condition 
that the previous belief is warranted, but that previous belief is warranted only if the 
previous one is, etc. So, how does warrant originate? (see Dancy 1985: 55). Similarly, 
even if the beliefs in a set of coherent beliefs are mutually warranting—each increasing 
the warrant of the other—the question of how the beliefs obtain warrant to begin with 
still remains.
The upshot, from the Pyrrhonian point of view, is withholding beliefs. To them, what 
initially looked like a good argument for foundationalism, when examined more care-

INFINITISM
249
fully, actually provides a basis for a skeptical attitude towards beliefs because the origin 
of warrant remains mysterious.
2. Responses to the Skeptics’ Use of the Regress Argument
Aristotle was not content with his response to skepticism quoted in the previous sec-
tion (Aristotle 1941b: 1011a2–14). As mentioned earlier, in the Posterior Analytics he 
provides the sketch of another type of response, namely, one designed to provide a basis 
for explaining the origin of warrant. Here is a somewhat redacted and interpolated quo-
tation that remains true to the basic Aristotelian view. (I have indicated exact quotes 
with double quotation marks):
In order for us to acquire the basic beliefs “we must possess a capacity of some 
sort” which is “a characteristic of all animals, for they all possess a congenital 
discriminative capacity which is called sense perception. But though sense per-
ception is innate in all animals, in some the sense-impression comes to persist, 
in others, it does not.” In those animals in which sense perception persists, there 
“comes to be what we call memory, and out of frequently repeated memories of 
the same thing develop experience . . . [and] from experience . . . originate the 
skill of the craftsman and the knowledge of the man of science”.
(Aristotle 1941a: 99b33–100a8)
The essence of this form of foundationalism is what I call ‘austere reliabilism’ with 
regard to basic beliefs that acquire their warrant simply in virtue of having the right 
kind of causal history. What makes this form of reliabilism “austere” is that although 
reasoning can produce new knowledge, reasoning neither creates new types of epistemic 
warrant nor augments the amount of warrant, it merely transmits the warrant inherent 
in basic beliefs. (See Goldman 1979 for a contemporary form of austere reliabilism.)
‘Embellished reliabilism’ does not adhere strictly to the two principles mentioned in 
the previous section because it allows that reasoning can produce either a new type of 
epistemic warrant or augment the amount of epistemic warrant inherent in basic beliefs. 
Nevertheless, embellished reliabilism, like austere reliabilism, holds that some beliefs 
have a type of epistemic warrant that obtains because of the way in which such “basic” 
beliefs arise. But once the basic beliefs, or those inferred from them, become members 
of a set of beliefs that have been subjected to careful self-reflection—including reflec-
tion about the reliability of our (or, in a Cartesian mode, my) epistemic capacities—a 
different type of (or at least more) warrant can arise. Here is a passage from Ernest Sosa 
that makes that very point:
Admittedly, there is a sense in which even a supermarket door “knows” when 
someone approaches, and in which a heating system “knows” when the tem-
perature in a room rises above a certain setting. Such is “servo-mechanic” 
knowledge. And there is an immense variety of animal knowledge, instinc-
tive or learned, which facilitates survival and flourishing in an astonishingly 
rich diversity of modes and environments. Human knowledge is on a higher 
plane of sophistication, however, precisely because of its enhanced coherence 
and comprehensiveness and its capacity to satisfy self-reflective curiosity. Pure 
reliabilism is questionable as an adequate epistemology for such knowledge.
(Sosa 1991: 95)

THE STRUCTURE OF KNOWLEDGE
250
It is not my purpose here to examine either austere (“pure”) or embellished reliabi-
lism in detail and I grant that this taxonomy might be difficult to apply in some cases. 
Nevertheless, it should be clear that although the embellished form of reliabilism does 
recognize the normative imperative to provide reasons for some of our beliefs, both 
forms fail to fully recognize the fundamental intuition informing the regress—namely, 
that any belief for which one can produce reasons is better or differently warranted than 
a belief for which one cannot produce reasons.
If good reasoning cannot be circular, and if being able to provide reasons for our 
beliefs is importantly epistemically better than not being able to do so, then infinitism 
is the only solution to the regress argument—other than skepticism. To see that, take 
any proposed “basic” belief in the regress. Call it “E.” One can ask the following ques-
tion: In virtue of what is E a proper ending point? If no answer is forthcoming, then it 
clearly appears arbitrary to believe E without a reason because up to that point reasons 
were needed. Why should the regress end at E rather than at some earlier step or at some 
possible later step?
Suppose that the answer is that E is the appropriate ending belief in virtue of E’s hav-
ing some foundational property, F. Then, the next question becomes obvious: Does E’s 
possessing F make it more likely that E is true than it would be if E did not possess F?
The imperative to produce an answer strikes me as obvious. Consider what I have 
called elsewhere a “Wednesday Foundationalist” who holds that a belief formed by any 
person on Wednesday has the austere form of warrant (Klein 2007a: 15). No one is 
such a foundationalist because there is absolutely no reason to believe that Wednesday-
beliefs are any better than, say, Friday- or Sunday-beliefs. What foundationalists typi-
cally put forth as the F-property in virtue of which E beliefs are foundational is such that 
E’s possessing F readily provides a basis for believing that E is likely to be true.
Once the question is asked about whether E’s possessing F is truth conducive, there 
are four possible responses: It can be ignored, or “yes,” “no,” or “I don’t know.” I take it 
that ignoring the question is to fail to grasp the normative imperative underlying the 
regress argument, and the “no” and the “I don’t know” answers place S’s acceptance of 
E in jeopardy. Once the question is asked and understood, the only answer that at least 
preserves all of E’s warrant is “yes.” But, then, a reason for believing E has been given 
and the regress has continued.
Let me note in passing that this argument against foundationalism, if sound, works 
against the current forms of emergent coherentism as well—and emergent coherentism 
strikes me as the only plausible form. The other form—what I call transference coher-
entism—was probably never held since it takes individual beliefs to be the primary 
bearers of warrant and leads to circular reasoning. That logically possible but completely 
unsatisfying view was well disposed of by Aristotle and the Pyrrhonians.
Emergent coherentism is best exemplified by BonJour (BonJour 1985: 87–110). In 
this view, it is sets of beliefs that are the primary bearers of warrant. All beliefs in the 
appropriate type of coherent set are warranted simply in virtue of being members of 
that set. Thus, warrant is not transferred from one belief to another—rather, warrant 
emerges as a result of the mutual support provided by the beliefs in the set.
As Ernest Sosa has pointed out, this form of coherentism shares a formal structure 
with foundationalism (Sosa 1980). Using the terminology I am employing, the emer-
gent coherentist takes the foundational property F to be E’s being a member of a set 
of beliefs that is coherent (and perhaps has other features as well). In other words, 
emergent coherentism can be seen as one-step foundationalism because all beliefs are 

INFINITISM
251
foundational. (Perhaps some are relatively “more foundational” than others because 
they are more important to the coherence of the set. But they all gain their initial 
warrant because they are members of the appropriate type of set.) But once the foun-
dational property, F, is identified as “being a member of a set of coherent beliefs,” the 
question arises about whether E’s being a member of such a set is truth-conducive. 
Without a positive answer to that question, acceptance of the coherent set seems 
arbitrary. The regress has continued.
Now, it could be objected (1) that this very general argument against foundational-
ism (and emergent coherentism) conflates an important distinction between a belief 
itself being justified with the meta-belief that the belief is justified and (2) that knowl-
edge only requires that the belief be justified (see Alston 1976).
To assess the force of the objection, it is important to distinguish two senses of belief 
and the concomitant two senses in which a belief is justified. In one sense, “belief” 
refers to the propositional content of a belief as in “that belief is true” or “her belief was 
implied by what she said earlier.” In the other sense, “belief” can refer to the belief-state 
as in “she had that belief for many years” or “her belief was caused by a reliable process.” 
The concomitant distinction regarding “justified belief” is between the proposition 
being justified for someone, that is, propositional justification, and the believing (i.e., 
the state of believing) being justified, that is, doxastic justification (see Firth 1978).
The objection mentioned above would be valid only with regard to propositional 
justification. There is a clear distinction between a proposition, say p, being justified 
and the meta-proposition ‘p is justified’ being justified. Any argument that conflated 
the distinction is built upon a pun. I grant that in order for p to be justified for a person, 
it is not required that ‘p is justified’ is justified for that person.
Nevertheless, it is crucial to note that what is required for knowledge is that S’s 
believing that p be justified (even if the believing is only a dispositional state). For 
even if p is true, believed, and propositionally justified for S, S could fail to know that 
p because either S believed p for the wrong reasons or no reasons whatsoever (as in a 
guess). The regress argument and any possible responses are concerned with whether 
the belief that p is doxastically justified sufficiently for the belief to rise to the level of 
knowledge.
Once the question is raised concerning whether E’s possessing F makes it more likely 
that E is true than it would be if E did not possess F, it is S’s entitlement to continue to 
believe that p that is being questioned. If S is not able to defend the “yes” answer to the 
question, some adjustment of S’s entitlement to believe E and every belief that depends 
upon E is called for. It might not be required that S give up E because E (as opposed to 
any of the contraries of E) might possess the kind or amount of epistemic warrant that 
austere reliabilism would attribute to it, but those views that recognize the importance 
of having reasons for our beliefs when their epistemic credentials are challenged (i.e., 
embellished reliabilism, coherentism, and infinitism) would require some recalibration 
of S’s entitlement to believe that p.
In other words, the “meta-question” concerning whether E’s possessing F makes it 
more likely that E is true is directly relevant to determining whether S’s believing that 
E is warranted. It is only austere reliabilists who will not grant this point. For them, the 
belief that E is fully epistemically warranted just in case it is produced by an appropri-
ate process. As mentioned above, the normative force behind the regress argument is 
simply that having reasons for believing a proposition adds a type of epistemic war-
rant. Lacking a reason is problematic only when seen from the standpoint of normative 

THE STRUCTURE OF KNOWLEDGE
252
epistemology in which knowledge is taken to be the most highly prized form of true 
belief—where, of course, it is the believing that is prized, not the propositional content 
(see Plato 1980: 97a–98b).
3. Infinitism
Brief sketch
The upshot of the argument up to this point is that either we have to reduce what it 
takes to be the most highly prized form of true belief to something akin to austere relia-
bilism or it appears that there is no privileged belief which is immune to interrogation. 
The first alternative simply ignores the normative intuition underlying the regress. But 
a major obstacle to accepting infinitism remains. Recall the two principles that moti-
vated foundationalism: the Inheritance Principle and the Non-Originating Principle.
Together they rule out infinitism. For even if we had infinite time to produce rea-
sons, it still seems mysterious, if not downright impossible, that some belief could ever 
be warranted because reasoning alone cannot warrant a belief. Coupled with the fact 
that compared to an infinitely enduring being, we live but a nanosecond, the upshot 
seems to be that the Pyrrhonians were right after all. Suspension of belief is the only 
apt attitude.
The answer to these worries and the key to understanding infinitism is that neither 
of the principles, though they motivate and imply foundationalism, is required by all 
accounts of epistemic warrant. Having reasons for a belief does add a type of warrant 
for holding it. Indeed, having reasons for a belief is required for it to be the most highly 
prized form of true belief. In other words, although there is some type of epistemic war-
rant that a belief acquires in virtue of its etiology, having a reason for the belief provides 
a different type of warrant for believing it. I say “different type” of warrant rather than 
just “more warrant” because no matter how reliable the process is that produced the 
belief, the belief does not rise to the status of the most highly prized form of true belief 
unless there are good reasons for holding it. So, although there is one form of warrant 
that does not originate with reasoning, another form of warrant does. Thus, the Non-
Originating Principle is false. Having reasons for a belief provides it with a new type 
of warrant. In addition, the inheritance principle is, at best, misleading since it seems 
to imply that the warrant required for knowledge is transmitted by reasoning. But the 
reason, r, for a belief, b, can provide b with a type of warrant that r, as yet, does not pos-
sess because no reason for r has yet been given or located. So b could be known without 
r being known.
The infinitist will take the belief that p to be doxastically justified for S only if S 
has engaged in providing “enough” reasons along the path of reasons. S would be com-
pletely doxastically justified if every reason in the path were provided. But since it takes 
some time to discover and offer reasons, even though a proposition might be completely 
justified (if there is a suitable endless path of reasons), no belief could ever be completely 
doxastically justified. Nothing is ever completely settled in the sense that it is beyond 
interrogation, but as S engages in the process of providing more reasons for her beliefs 
they become better justified—not because S is getting closer to completing the task but, 
rather, because S has added some warrant for her belief. How far forward in providing 
reasons S needs to go in order to acquire knowledge seems to me to be a matter of the 
pragmatic features of the epistemic context—just as which beliefs are being questioned 

INFINITISM
253
and which can be taken as reasons is at least partially contextually determined (see 
Fantl 2003; Klein 2005a, 2005b, 2007a, 2007b).
Responses to Some Objections to Infinitism
Infinitism has not been taken as a serious contender among the answers to the regress 
problem because there seem to be obvious, clear objections. But I think these objections 
to infinitism miss the mark. Let us consider five of them:
1. The Finite Mind Objection
Aristotle correctly observed that beings with a finite mind cannot traverse an infinitely 
long inference path because each inference takes some time. But infinitism—or at least 
the kind that makes proper use of the distinction between propositional and doxastic 
justification—does not require that an infinite set of reasons be produced or located 
in order for a belief to rise to the level of the most highly prized form of true belief. 
Knowledge requires being able to provide enough reasons for our believing. It does not 
require completing a task with an infinite number of steps.
What constitutes “enough” reasons requires careful elaboration and I have not done 
that here. Such an elaboration would include a discussion of the role of the contex-
tual considerations that make further questioning either necessary because a legitimate 
question has been raised and understood or frivolous because the amount of added war-
rant that further investigation would produce is minuscule. Those issues are beyond the 
scope of this essay.
2. The No-Starting Point Objection
The Pyrrhonians said that the process of reasoning endorsed by infinitism could not 
succeed in justifying a belief sufficiently for us to adopt it because “we possess no start-
ing-point for our argument.” That objection has an intuitive tug only if we thought that 
knowledge could be produced by reasoning only if all of the positive epistemic proper-
ties required for belief rising to the level of knowledge had to be present in the reasons 
for the belief. But I hope I have dispelled their intuitive appeal by showing how reason-
ing can produce a new type of warrant that is not inherited from the offered reason.
3. Skepticism
Some philosophers have argued that knowledge entails certainty, where certainty 
includes at least having finally settled the matter. And they would point out that infinit-
ism makes that kind of certainty impossible and, thus, infinitism leads to skepticism. 
There are two replies to this objection.
First, as I mentioned earlier, there are both skeptical and non-skeptical forms of foun-
dationalism. There would be skeptical forms of coherentism if no belief set held by 
creatures like us could be sufficiently coherent to satisfy the requirements of knowledge. 
In a similar vein, there certainly could be skeptical forms of infinitism that held that 
the normative requirements of justification simply cannot be fulfilled. The fact that a 
theory of justification leads to skepticism might provide a basis for looking more care-
fully at whether the theory is correct, but that, alone, does not strike me as a sufficient 
reason for rejecting the theory.

THE STRUCTURE OF KNOWLEDGE
254
Second, the form of infinitism that I am defending does not lead to skepticism. It 
is a form of fallibilism that eschews certainty as a requirement for knowledge, where 
certainty is construed as requiring that the degree of epistemic warrant necessary for 
knowledge makes the belief immune to further interrogation. Indeed, I think this form 
of infinitism can explain why certainty is taken to be both a relative notion as when we 
say that one belief is more certain than another, and an absolute notion as when we say 
that a belief is certain only if there is no belief that is more certain. It can also explain 
why absolute certainty cannot be obtained because any belief can always be made a 
little more certain by producing more reasons along the path of reasons while at the 
same time it can explain how a belief can be certain enough to rise to the level required 
by knowledge (see Klein 2005c).
4. Infinitism Really Endorses a Form of Arbitrary Foundationalism
It has been claimed that (1) infinitism is really a form of an unjustified (arbitrary) foun-
dationalist view, and (2) that a “bad” reason, r, could justify a belief, b. (See Bergmann 
2007 for the objection and Klein 2007b for a full response.) That infinitism is not a form 
of foundationalism should be clear because it eschews the fundamental claim endorsed 
by foundationalists, namely, that there are some beliefs immune to further interroga-
tion.
The answer to (2) is more complex. There are several distinct factors that could make 
a reason, r, “bad” for believing b:
 (i) A reason, r, could be “bad” because it was not formed in a reliable manner. Such a 
bad reason could not transfer the kind of warrant required by the austere reliabilist 
to b by reasoning, and consequently, neither b nor r would be knowledge—even 
according to the infinitist. In other words, the infinitist can embrace the reliabi-
lists’ basic insight that a belief must be properly caused in order to be knowledge. 
So, in this sense r could not be “bad” and lead to knowledge.
 (ii) A reason, r, could be “bad” because there is no further reason for it. But note that 
in such a case, r couldn’t have been formed reliably because the belief that b was 
reliably formed is a good reason for thinking b is true. Hence, what was said with 
regard to (i) applies here as well.
 (iii) A reason, r, could be “bad” because S does not have available an answer to the 
question as to why she believes that r is likely to be true. In such a case, although 
b has gained some warrant because r was produced as a reason for believing b, b’s 
degree of warrant would diminish. That strikes me as just what a theory of justifi-
cation should dictate. We are a bit better off by possessing r as a reason for b than 
we would be if we had no reason for believing b, but we are not completely in the 
epistemic clear.
 (iv) A reason, r, could be “bad” because it is false or there is a defeater of the reason for 
r. If it is false, there is a defeater of the inference from the “bad” reason (namely, 
~r). Infinitism, per se, is an account of only the justification condition in knowl-
edge; an infinitist can include a no-defeater condition in the necessary conditions 
for knowledge. So, such a “bad” reason could not lead to knowledge.
(I should add parenthetically that I think on some occasions a false belief can lead 
to knowledge and, hence, such useful falsehoods are not “bad” reasons, but those 

INFINITISM
255
considerations are irrelevant here because those false beliefs could appear in chains of 
reasons endorsed by foundationalists (see Klein 2008).)
5. The Something from Nothing Objection
An anonymous reviewer of this chapter poses this question:
Q: Can a belief B be warranted (to at least some degree) by being based on a 
belief in reason R1 if both of the following are true: (i) the belief in reason R1 
is not reliably formed and (ii) the believer has no reason for thinking the belief 
in reason R1 is likely to be true?
The reviewer writes that a ‘yes’ answer “seems completely implausible” and that I seem 
committed to a “no” answer. I suppose that a ‘yes’ answer seems so implausible because 
if B can be warranted (at least partially) on the basis of R1, when R1 isn’t warranted at 
all, it seems that some warrant is originating from nothing. The reviewer’s point is that 
if the correct answer to Q is ‘no,’ then the Non-Originating Principle is true.
He/she writes:
Klein doesn’t directly answer Q in the paper, though he says that under these 
circumstances, a belief in R1 couldn’t transfer the kind of warrant required by 
the austere reliabilist and so B couldn’t amount to knowledge. So I think we 
should assume that Klein thinks that B couldn’t be warranted to any degree at 
all by being so based and that R1 couldn’t transfer any degree of warrant at all 
under conditions (i) and (ii).
I agree that R1 couldn’t transfer any degree of warrant under conditions (i) and (ii) 
because R1 has no warrant to transfer. But the reviewer is wrong in thinking that “B 
isn’t warranted at all by being so based.” To repeat, a basic claim of infinitism is that 
reasoning can originate warrant. When we locate a reason for a belief, we have provided 
that belief with some warrant which the reason might not (yet) possess. Warrant hasn’t 
originated from nothing. It has originated through the process of locating and citing the 
reason. Of course, B falls short of being knowledge because “R1 was not reliably formed” 
is a defeater of R1’s justification for B, and, as mentioned above, B lacks the kind of war-
rant that the reliabilists require of a belief.
Conclusion
I conclude that neither foundationalism nor coherentism provides an adequate non-
skeptical response to the epistemic regress problem. Only infinitism does.
References
Alston, W. (1976) “Two Types of Foundationalism,” Journal of Philosophy, 73: 165–85.
—— (1989) Epistemic Justification, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Aristotle (1941a) Posterior Analytics in McKeon, R. (ed.), The Basic Works of Aristotle, New York: Random 
House.
Aristotle (1941b) Metaphysics in McKeon, R. (ed.), The Basic Works of Aristotle, New York: Random 
House.

THE STRUCTURE OF KNOWLEDGE
256
Bergmann, M. (2007) “Is Klein an Infinitist About Doxastic Justification?” Philosophical Studies, 134(1): 
19–24.
BonJour, L. (1985) The Structure of Empirical Knowledge, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Dancy, J. (1985) Introduction to Contemporary Epistemology, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Empiricus, S. (1976) all citations are to Bury, R.G., Outlines of Pyrrhonism, Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Fantl, J. (2003) “Modest Infinitism,” Canadian Journal of Philosophy, 33(4): 537–62.
Firth, R. (1978) “Are Epistemic Concepts Reducible to Ethical Concepts?” in A. Goldman and J. Kim (eds) 
Values and Morals, Dordrecht: D. Reidel Publishing Co.
Goldman, A. (1979) “What is Justified Belief?” in G.S. Pappas (ed.) Justification and Knowledge, Dordrecht: 
D. Reidel Publishing Company, 1–23.
Klein, P.D. (2005a) “Infinitism Is the Solution to the Epistemic Regress Problem,” in M. Steup and E. Sosa 
(eds) Contemporary Debates in Philosophy, Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers, 131–40.
—— (2005b) “Reply to Ginet,” in M. Steup and E. Sosa (eds) Contemporary Debates in Philosophy, Malden, 
MA: Blackwell Publishers, 149–52.
—— (2005c) “Infinitism’s Take on Justification, Knowledge, Certainty and Skepticism,” Perspectives in 
Contemporary Epistemology, (a special edition of Veritas), 50(4): 153–172.
—— (2007a) “Human Knowledge and the Infinite Progress of Reasoning,” Philosophical Studies, 134(1): 
1–17.
—— (2007b) “How to Be an Infinitist about Doxastic Justification,” Philosophical Studies, 134(1): 25–29.
—— (2008) “Useful False Beliefs,” in Quentin Smith (ed.) Epistemology: New Essays, Oxford University 
Press, 25–61.
Plato (1980) Meno, translated by G. M. A. Grubbe, Indianapolis, IN: Hacket.
Sosa, E. (1980) “The Raft and the Pyramid: Coherence Versus Foundations in the Theory of Knowledge,” 
Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 5(1): 3–26.
—— (1991) Knowledge in Perspective, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Further Reading
Fumerton, R. (1995) Metaepistemology and Skepticism, Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Ginet, C. (2005a) “Infinitism is not the Solution to the Regress Problem,” in M. Steup and E. Sosa (eds) 
Contemporary Debates in Philosophy, Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers, 140–49.
—— (2005b) “Reply to Klein,” in M. Steup and E. Sosa (eds) Contemporary Debates in Philosophy, Malden, 
MA: Blackwell Publishers, 153–55.
Klein, P.D. (1998) “Foundationalism and the Infinite Regress of Reasons,” Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research, 58(4): 919–25.
—— (1999) “Human Knowledge and the Infinite Regress of Reasons,” Philosophical Perspectives, ed. J. 
Tomberlin, 13, 297–325.
—— (2000) “Why Not Infinitism?” in R. Cobb-Stevens (ed.) Epistemology: Proceedings of the Twentieth 
World Congress in Philosophy, Bowling Green: Philosophy Documentation Center, 5: 199–208.

24
COHERENTISM
Erik J. Olsson
1. The Regress Problem
Traditionally, a person cannot know something to be true without having good reasons 
for believing that thing to be true. If Karen knows that she will pass tomorrow’s exam, 
she must have good reasons for thinking that she will pass. But consider Karen’s reasons 
for thinking she will pass. They will presumably consist of other beliefs Karen has, for 
example, beliefs about her previous track-record, how well she has prepared herself this 
time, and so on. Surely, these other beliefs will also have to be items of knowledge in 
order for her belief that she will pass the exam to be such an item.
Why is that? Well, otherwise her knowledge that she will pass the exam will be based 
on something that falls short of being known. But things that fall short of being known 
are things of which we are ignorant, and knowledge, as Nicholas Rescher (1979: 76) has 
pointed out, cannot be based on ignorance. So, the reasons upon which Karen’s knowl-
edge that she will pass the exam is based must themselves be cases of knowledge. So, 
Karen must have good reasons for thinking those reasons true as well. Moreover, those 
reasons for her reasons must, by the same token, be items of knowledge, or they would 
be things of which Karen is ignorant, and so on.
The conclusion is that any knowledge claim requires a never-ending chain of reasons 
and reasons for reasons. This seems very strange indeed. One is inclined to think that 
such a chain of propositions that provide reasons for other propositions is somehow 
impossible. If so, knowledge is also impossible. But knowledge is possible, or so we think. 
So we have a contradiction. This is the infamous regress problem.
There are various ways to respond to the regress, the traditionally most popular one 
being some form of foundationalism. According to this proposal, the regress ends once 
we reach a privileged set of basic beliefs. Infinitism represents another approach to the 
regress. The infinitist strategy is to question the premise that an infinite chain of rea-
sons need to be epistemically defective. Our concern however will be with coherentist 
responses to the regress.
On one interpretation, the coherentist response to the regress involves licensing cir-
cular chains of reasons. On this picture, A can be a reason for B which is a reason for 
C which is a reason for A. If this is acceptable, what we have is a chain of reasons that 
is never-ending in the sense that for each belief in the chain there is a reason for that 
belief also in the chain. And yet there is obviously no problem of infinity, potential or 
actual. On one understanding of coherentism, this is the proper response to the regress 
problem.
Yet this response invites an immediate objection. While there are indeed kinds of 

THE STRUCTURE OF KNOWLEDGE
258
circularity that are non-vicious—recursive definitions in mathematics come to mind—
justificatory circles do not belong to those kinds. If someone claims C and is asked why 
she believes it, she might utter B as her reason. If asked why she believes B, she might 
assert A. But given a request to justify her belief in A, she might, at this point, not refer 
back to C which is still in doubt. If she did so nonetheless, her move would have no 
justificatory force whatsoever. Hence, the coherentist solution to the regress problem, 
thus construed, fails miserably.
Is this the end of coherentism as a solution to the regress problem? Not really. The 
coherentist might deny that she has ever intended to suggest that circular reasoning is 
legitimate. Her take on the regress is, rather, to question the premise that justification 
should proceed in a linear fashion where reasons are given for reasons, and so on. This 
assumption presupposes that what is, in a primary sense, justified are individual beliefs. 
This, says the coherentist, is simply wrong: what is primarily justified are not individual 
beliefs but total belief systems. Particular beliefs are justified in a secondary or derived 
sense, if they form part of a justified belief system. This is a coherence approach because 
what makes a belief system justified, on this view, is its coherence, i.e. the extent to 
which the member beliefs mutually support or agree with each other etc. A belief system 
is justified if it is coherent to a sufficiently high degree. This, in essence, is Laurence 
BonJour’s (1985) solution to the regress problem. In later works BonJour has distanced 
himself from the coherence theory altogether (see, for example, BonJour 1999).
This looks much more promising than the circularity theory. If epistemic justification 
is holistic in this sense, then a central assumption behind the regress is indeed false, and 
so the regress never gets started. The approach is interestingly related to Quine’s influ-
ential holism and web of belief metaphor (Quine and Ullian 1970). Even so, this holis-
tic approach raises many new questions that the coherentist will need to respond to.
First of all, the proposal that a singular belief is justified merely in virtue of being a 
member of a justified totality does not seem very plausible. Conceivably, a belief can be 
member of a sufficiently coherent system without itself adding to the coherence of that 
system. Surely, a belief will have to contribute to the coherence of the system in order to 
become justified by that system. A particular belief needs, in other words, to cohere with 
the system of which it is a member if that belief is to be considered justified. A detailed 
theory of coherence as a relation, i.e. of what it means for a given belief to cohere 
with a system of beliefs, can be found in Keith Lehrer’s epistemological work. (See, for 
instance, Lehrer 1990, 1997 and 2000, and Olsson 2003 for a discussion. For an alterna-
tive theory of relational coherence, see Olsson 1999.) Bender (1989) is a particularly 
useful critical review of BonJour’s and Lehrer’s coherence theories. Another obvious 
issue raised by this holistic response to the regress concerns the concept of coherence 
itself and what it involves. To this subject matter we now turn.
2. Defining Coherence
The purpose of this section is mainly to survey some of the classical definitions of coher-
ence and, in doing so, raise some general questions which any reasonably precise theory 
of coherence will need to answer in one way or the other. Finally, we will also look at 
some more recent attempts to explicate that elusive concept.
In his 1934 book on idealism, Cambridge philosopher A. C. Ewing put forward a 
much-cited definition of coherence. In his view, a coherent set is characterized partly 
by consistency and partly by the property that every belief in the set follows logically 

COHERENTISM
259
from the others taken together. On this picture, a set such as {p, q, p&q} would, if con-
sistent, be highly coherent, as each element follows by logical deduction from the rest 
in concert.
While Ewing should be credited for having provided a precise definition of an intan-
gible idea, his proposal must be rejected on the grounds that it defines coherence too 
narrowly. Few sets that occur naturally in everyday life satisfy the second part of his defi-
nition, that is, the requirement that each element follow logically from the rest when 
combined. Consider, for instance, the set consisting of proposition A, B and C, where:
A = “John was at the crime scene at the time of the robbery.”
B = “John owns a gun of the type used by the robber.”
C = “John deposited a large sum of money in his bank account the next day.”
Many of us would consider this set to be coherent, and yet it does not satisfy Ewing’s 
definition. A, for instance, does not follow logically from B and C taken together: that 
John owns a gun of the relevant type and deposited money in his bank the day after does 
not logically imply him being at the crime scene at the time of the crime.
From that perspective, C. I. Lewis’s definition of coherence is more promising. 
According to Lewis, whose proposal can be seen as a refinement of Ewing’s basic idea, a 
set is coherent just in case every element in the set is supported by all the other elements 
taken together, where “support” is understood in a weak probabilistic sense: A supports 
B if and only if the probability of B is raised on the assumption that A is true. It is easy 
to see that Lewis’s definition is wider than Ewing’s, so that more sets will turn out to be 
coherent on the former than on the latter. (There are some uninteresting limiting cases 
for which this is not true. For instance, a set of tautologies will be coherent in Ewing’s 
but not in Lewis’s sense.)
To illustrate, let us go back to the example with John. Here one could argue that A, 
while not being logically entailed by B and C, is nevertheless supported by those sen-
tences taken together. Assuming that John owns the relevant type of gun and deposited 
a large sum the next day serves to raise the probability that John did it and hence that 
he was at the crime scene when the robbery took place. Similarly, one could hold that 
each of B and C is supported, in the probabilistic sense, by the other elements of the 
set. If so, this set is not only coherent in an intuitive sense but also coherent according 
to Lewis’s definition.
Another proposal for how to say something more definite about coherence originates 
from Laurence BonJour (1985), whose account of coherence is considerably more com-
plex than earlier suggestions. While Ewing and Lewis each proposed to define coherence 
in terms of one single concept—logical consequence and probability, respectively—
BonJour thinks that coherence is a concept with a multitude of different aspects, cor-
responding to the following coherence criteria (ibid.: 97–99):
1. A system of beliefs is coherent only if it is logically consistent.
2. A system of beliefs is coherent in proportion to its degree of probabilistic 
consistency.
3. The coherence of a system of beliefs is increased by the presence of infer-
ential connections between its component beliefs and increased in propor-
tion to the number and strength of such connections.
4. The coherence of a system of beliefs is diminished to the extent to which 

THE STRUCTURE OF KNOWLEDGE
260
it is divided into subsystems of beliefs which are relatively unconnected to 
each other by inferential connections.
5. The coherence of a system of beliefs is decreased in proportion to the pres-
ence of unexplained anomalies in the believed content of the system.
A difficulty pertaining to theories of coherence that construe coherence as a multi-
faceted concept is to specify how the different aspects are to be amalgamated into one 
overall coherence judgment. It could well happen that one system S is more coherent 
than another system T in one respect, whereas T is more coherent than S in another. 
Perhaps S contains more inferential connections than T, which is less anomalous than 
S. If so, which system is more coherent in an overall sense? BonJour’s theory remains 
silent on this important point.
BonJour’s account also serves to illustrate another general difficulty. The third cri-
terion stipulates that the degree of coherence increases with the number of inferential 
connections between different parts of the system. As a system grows larger the prob-
ability is increased that there will be relatively many inferentially connected beliefs. For 
a smaller system, this is less likely. Hence, there will be a positive correlation between 
system size and the number of inferential connections. Taken literally, BonJour’s third 
criterion implies, therefore, that there will be a positive correlation between system size 
and degree of coherence. But this is not obviously correct.
The problem, if it is one, can be avoided by dividing the number of inferential con-
nections by the number of elements in the system:
(3′) The coherence of a system of beliefs is increased by the presence of infer-
ential connections between its component beliefs and increased in pro-
portion to the number and strength of such connections divided by the 
number of elements in the system.
On the proposal, it is the inferential density rather than the sheer number of inferential 
connections that is correlated with coherence.
Here is another general challenge for those wishing to give a clear-cut account of 
coherence. Suppose a number of eye-witnesses are being questioned separately con-
cerning a robbery that has recently taken place. The first two witnesses, Robert and 
Mary, give exactly the same detailed description of the robber as a red-headed man in 
his forties of normal height wearing a blue leather jacket and green shoes. The next 
two witnesses, Steve and Karen, also tell exactly the same story but only succeed in 
giving a very general description of the robber as a man wearing a blue leather jacket. 
So here we have two cases of exact agreement. In one case, the agreement concerns 
something very specific and detailed, while in the other case it concerns a more general 
proposition. This raises the question of which pair of reports is more coherent. Should 
we say that agreement on something specific gives rise to a higher degree of coherence, 
perhaps because such agreement seems more “striking”? Or should we, rather, main-
tain that the degree of coherence is the same, regardless of the specificity of the thing 
agreed upon?
To illustrate these points about size and specificity consider the following recently 
proposed coherence measures:

COHERENTISM
261
C1(A1, . . ., An) =     P(A1∧ . . . ∧An)
 
P(A1) × . . . × P(An)
C2(A1, . . ., An) =  P(A1∧ . . . ∧An)
 
P(A1 ∨ . . . ∨ An)
C1 was put forward in Shogenji (1999) and is discussed for instance in Olsson (2001). 
C2 was tentatively proposed in Olsson (2002) and, independently, in Glass (2002). 
Following Lewis both measures assign a degree of coherence to a set of propositions in 
probabilistic terms, but they do it in slightly different ways. I leave it to the reader to 
verify that C1 is sensitive to size as well as to specificity, while this is not so for C2. It 
has been suggested, therefore, that these two measures actually measure two different 
things. While C2 captures the degree of agreement of the proposition in a set, C1 is more 
plausible as a measure of how striking the agreement is (Olsson 2002; see also Bovens 
and Olsson (2000) for a discussion of agreement vs. striking agreement). Since these 
two proposals were made, a large number of other measures have been suggested, many 
of which are studied in Olsson and Schubert (2007).
3. Coherence and Truth
Let us move on to the question whether the coherence of a belief system implies the 
truth of its elements. Numerous objections have been leveled against the proposal that 
the relation between coherence and truth should be of this simple kind, the most impor-
tant and straightforward of which is based on the observation that a system can be 
as coherent as you wish without having anything whatsoever to do with reality. This 
objection is often referred to as the “isolation objection.” A dream, for instance, can be 
extremely coherent without thereby being true. The fact that Dr. Watson dreams that 
John was at the crime scene at the time of the crime, owns a weapon of the required sort 
and deposited large sums the day after does not make it true or even probable that all 
this actually happened. In spite of the coherence among the different parts of the dream 
we are reluctant, to say the least, to conclude that what was dreamt is really true.
The matter would be radically different had the same information been obtained 
from different witnesses in a trial; one witness saying that John was at the scene of the 
crime, the other that he owns the relevant type of gun, and so on. In that case, we would 
be disposed to accept the contents of the testimonies as true, or at least highly probable. 
What, then, is it that makes agreement significant in the witness scenario but is miss-
ing in the dream scenario? Surely, the difference does not lie in the extent to which the 
information coheres. If not, where does it lie?
The witness and dream settings are, in fact, disanalogous in two relevant respects. In 
the witness case we can, absent any reason to think otherwise, take it for granted that 
each witness is at least to some extent credible. There are, to be sure, witnesses who lie 
or for other reasons fail to tell the truth, but most witnesses are, after all, reasonably 
reliable. So, if a witness claims that John was at the crime scene at the relevant point in 
time, and we have no reasons to question the credibility of that witness, that is a reason 
for thinking that John was in fact there at that time. It is true, though, that there might 
not be much more to be said about the witness’s degree of credibility, unless we have 
more information at our disposal, e.g. from a character witness. It would, for example, 

THE STRUCTURE OF KNOWLEDGE
262
be naive to think of each witness as being absolutely reliable. At any rate, there is no 
corresponding reason to suppose that a given episode should become more plausible 
just because someone dreamt that it took place. For instance, the fact that Dr. Watson 
dreamt that John was at the crime scene at the relevant point in time is not a reason, 
however weak, for thinking that John actually was there at that time.
The second relevant disanalogy has to do with independence. When we are querying 
various witnesses, we may, absent reasons to think otherwise, reasonably assume that 
they are telling their stories independently. A paradigm case of independence would 
arise when the witnesses have not agreed beforehand to coordinate their testimonies, 
say, to the disadvantage of the accused. If they have so agreed, or in other relevant 
respects influenced each other, their testimonies would not be considered independent. 
Exactly how the concept of independence is to be understood is a complicated matter 
the more detailed coverage of which is beyond the scope of this chapter. Again, witness 
testimonies can usually be assumed to have been delivered independently. The same 
could not be said of the production of the different parts making up a dream. There is 
no reason to believe that the various components of Dr. Watson’s dream about John 
were in any interesting sense produced independently. Watson could well have dreamt 
that John went to the bank to deposit money because he had earlier dreamt that John 
was at the crime scene. In other words, the dream could very likely have created its own 
coherence.
We have succeeded in isolating two factors that seem to characterize the conditions 
under which coherence has a positive effect on the probability that the propositions 
in a system are true: the sources should be individually partially reliable and collec-
tively independent. The question, though, is whether both these conditions are needed. 
Perhaps it suffices that one of them holds.
Suppose, then, that the witnesses are partially reliable but that they are not deliver-
ing their reports independently. We would have such a situation if one of the witnesses, 
say Peter, is partially reliable and has, perhaps by threatening the other witnesses, made 
them give reports that coincide with his report. It is evident that in this case the collec-
tive impact of the testimonies does not exceed the singular impact of Peter’s testimony. 
If so, coherence has no confidence-boosting effect.
Suppose, by contrast, that the witnesses are collectively independent but that they 
are individually completely unreliable. We could for instance imagine a number of inde-
pendent witnesses who were located too far from the crime scene to get a clear picture of 
what was actually going on. Suppose that they nevertheless deliver completely agreeing 
testimonies: the robber was a blond man wearing a T-shirt, say. How would we react to 
this information? If it is, as we assume, completely clear that the witnesses really could 
not have seen anything of importance, we would probably judge their agreement as a 
sheer coincidence. The witnesses just happened to give the same reports. Hence, in this 
case, too, the high degree of coherence would not affect our assessment of the likelihood 
of what is being reported.
It should be added that the observation that the witnesses are saying the same thing 
independently despite the fact that they had been assumed to be completely unreliable 
would normally be considered an anomalous fact. That observation is, after all, very 
unlikely given that the witnesses are independent, yet completely unreliable. A sensible 
reaction would be to reconsider the assumptions that led to the anomaly. For instance, 
there might be reasons to question earlier information about the witnesses’ whereabouts 
at the time of the crime.

COHERENTISM
263
So, the fact that a set is coherent, in the agreement sense, is a reason for thinking that 
the propositions in the set are likely to be true provided that the sources are partially 
reliable and independent. Both conditions must be satisfied for coherence to boost con-
fidence (but see Shogenji (2005) for a diverging opinion). To the best of my knowledge, 
C. I. Lewis was the first to insist that both conditions are needed. The question remains, 
however, how high the probability gets as the effect of coherence given that these con-
ditions are satisfied. The answer is that a very high probability can be obtained in this 
way even if the sources are only slightly reliable in themselves. If a sufficient number of 
such sources report the same thing, this will result in a probability arbitrarily close to 1. 
This means that the “good reasons” that many hold are necessary for knowledge could 
very well be of a coherence character: a person’s main reasons for claiming knowledge 
might well be her observation that many sources have reported that thing to be true. 
This holds so long as we resist, as most contemporary epistemologists do, Descartes’ 
conviction that the reasons required for knowledge must necessitate that which they 
are reasons for.
It is worth noting that the exact probability that is attained for a system of reports 
depends on two things. First, it depends on how reliable the sources are individually. 
If the sources are relatively reliable, relatively few agreeing reports are needed in order 
to attain a sufficiently high probability. Second, it depends on how probable the thing 
that is reported was before the reports came in. If what is being reported was already 
relatively probable, relatively few agreeing reports are needed for a given probability to 
ensue. There is a complication, though: there are cases where a relatively low initial 
probability leads to a relatively high probability given that the agreement has been 
observed (see Olsson 2005a: chapter 3). What is generally true is the following: in 
order to be in a position to give a more precise probabilistic estimate given the reports, 
more is needed than just the information that the sources are relatively reliable and 
independent; what is required is additional information as to how reliable the sources 
are and how probable the things reported were to begin with. These observations will 
play a major role as we now proceed to consider anti-skeptical applications of coherence 
reasoning.
4. Skepticism
The sort of skepticism that shall interest us states that everything we can ever know has 
the character of reports about reality; we can never grasp reality itself. We can, in other 
words, know only that our senses, memories, and so on report that reality is such and 
such, without ever knowing that reality really is such and such. I can know that I seem 
to see John, that is, that my visual system reports that John is in front of me. I cannot 
know that John really is there. Similarly, I can know that I seem to remember getting 
a lot of presents at Christmas when I was a child; not that I really got a lot of presents. 
By the same token, all I can know is that I have these and these beliefs, that is, that my 
belief system reports that such and such is the case, not that the contents of my beliefs 
are really true.
The coherence proposal amounts to granting that no information sources, including 
our senses, memories, and beliefs, are sufficiently reliable in themselves for knowledge 
to ensue, while insisting that this does not mean that we cannot know interesting things 
about reality. We can know that what is reported is true provided that we have many 
reports whose contents are sufficiently coherent. This proposal goes back to the British 

THE STRUCTURE OF KNOWLEDGE
264
idealist tradition. A clear statement can be found in Bertrand Russell’s classical book 
The Problems of Philosophy (1912) in which Russell argues that beliefs that are, taken 
singly, mere probable opinions, can, if they are combined into a system, attain a very 
high probability on grounds of coherence. A detailed argument for this view was pro-
vided by Lewis in his 1946 book. We will return to Lewis’s theory in a moment.
To illustrate, suppose you seem to remember not only that you received a lot of 
Christmas gifts but also that the whole family used to gather at Christmas time. These 
two memories to some extent cohere: the more relatives, the more gifts a particular 
child is likely to get (if every relative gives each child a present). Let us, further, assume 
that many such memories mutually support each other in similar ways. That would, on 
the coherence proposal, make it highly likely that things happened as you remember 
them to have.
But here we must be very careful indeed. We concluded, in the previous section, 
that coherence has a positive effect on the probability of what coheres only if the two 
conditions of partial reliability and independence are satisfied. In order to conclude 
that our cohering memories are likely to record what actually happened, we must know 
in advance—that is, before coherence is invoked—that those memories are individu-
ally partially reliable and collectively independent. But whether or not our memories 
are partially reliable and independent is a substantial empirical question, and accord-
ing to the skeptic we cannot have any substantial empirical knowledge. We cannot 
have, therefore, any knowledge regarding the partial reliability and independence of our 
memories. So, even if we can reliably ascertain that our memories are highly coherent 
we won’t be in a position to tell whether that is a significant fact.
The only way out for the anti-skeptical coherence theorist would seem to be to argue 
that knowledge about the partial reliability and independence of our memories is not 
a posteriori but a priori, the hope being that statements about the partial reliability and 
independence of our memories belong to the realm of truths that we can grasp just by 
thinking hard enough about what they mean.
As for partial reliability, reason would, one could hold, break down in its absence. 
Unless we ascribe a minimum of reliability to our own memory, we would be paralyzed 
and unable to carry out even the simplest rational activity. So dependent are we on what 
we remember, or seem to remember, that it is difficult to even imagine what life would 
be without a firm trust in the credibility of what we clearly recall. This line of thought 
suggests that the relative reliability of our memory is a condition for the possibility of ratio-
nal thought and action. Arguments that propose to establish that a certain assumption is 
a condition for the possibility of something else are called, following Kant, transcen-
dental. A transcendental argument along these lines for the partial reliability (“relative 
unreliability”) of our memories was given by Lewis in his 1946 book. It is perhaps more 
difficult to establish that we, for the same reasons, must assume our memories to be, to a 
large extent, independent—more difficult but perhaps not impossible.
Yet, even if the anti-skeptic succeeds in carrying out these argumentative feats, two 
worrisome problems still remain unsolved. As Lewis was well aware, the transcendental 
argument can establish, at most, that the credibility of our memory is positive; it does 
not give any hint as to its specific degree. But we said, a moment ago, that in order to 
be in a position to say something more definite about the probability of the contents 
of our memories on the basis of coherence, we need to know the initial degree of cred-
ibility. Otherwise, we cannot ensure that the resulting probability is high enough for us 
to rely on the information. Furthermore, we need to have more definite information 

COHERENTISM
265
concerning the prior probability of the data, in this case the contents of our memories, 
before the coherence was observed. It is unfortunate for the coherentist approach to 
skepticism that these missing items of knowledge do not seem to be within reach. C. 
I. Lewis’s attempted coherence justification of memory is treated at length in Olsson 
(2002), Olsson and Shogenji (2004) and Olsson (2005a: chapter 3).
So far we have dealt rather extensively with the possibility of giving a coherence jus-
tification of the content of our memories. Philosophers have tried by similar reasoning 
to justify our beliefs (see, for example, BonJour 1985; Davidson 1986; and, for discus-
sions, Olsson 2005a: chapters 4 and 9) or our trust in the testimonies of others (see, for 
example, Coady 1992 and, for a discussion, Olsson 2005a: chapter 5). The problems 
that arise are essentially analogous.
In the light of these remarks, it is severely problematic to hold that the coherence 
theory provides the long sought-for answer to the problem of skepticism. This is so 
regardless of whether the skeptical doubts concern our memories, beliefs, or statements 
of others.
5. Recent Developments
Whether or not coherentism is the right answer to skepticism, the nature of coherence 
and its link to truth is a matter of independent philosophical interest. Recently, intense 
efforts have been made to secure a deeper understanding of these subjects. This devel-
opment was initiated independently by Peter Klein and Ted A. Warfield (1994, 1996) 
and Michael Huemer (1997). See Cross (1999) for a compelling critique of Klein and 
Warfield’s theory, and for a related reaction Bovens and Olsson (2002). These investi-
gations have led to a large number of formal results couched in probability theory. For 
instance, what has been said here about the role of partial reliability and independence 
is easily verified in that manner. At this moment, the probabilistic approach to coher-
ence stands out as the most fertile and productive research program in this area of epis-
temological research, although this assessment is not unanimously subscribed to. Paul 
Thagard is a prominent critic of the translation of coherence reasoning into probability 
calculus (see, for instance, Thagard 2000, 2005 and 2007). For a discussion, see section 
9.4 in Olsson (2005a). For other non-probabilistic versions of the coherence theory, see 
Rescher (1973) and Lehrer (1990) and (2000).
The most spectacular recent results about coherence and probability concern the pos-
sibility of finding a measure of coherence that is truth conducive in the following sense: 
if a set of beliefs A is more coherent than another set of beliefs B, then the probability 
of A is higher than the probability of B. Here it is assumed that the beliefs in question 
are partially reliable (to the same degree) and that they are independently held. Finding 
such a measure was first stated as an open problem in Olsson (2002). One would think 
that it wouldn’t be that hard to a find a measure of the required sort given the fortunate 
circumstances of partial reliability and independence. Alas, it is not only hard to find 
such a measure; it is impossible. An impossible result to that effect was first proved by 
Luc Bovens and Stephan Hartmann in their 2003 book. A different impossibility theo-
rem was proved in Olsson (2005a) (see Olsson (2005b) for a detailed discussion of that 
result, including a comparison with Bovens and Hartmann’s theorem).
These impossibility results give rise to a thought-provoking paradox. How can it be 
that we trust and rely on coherence reasoning, in everyday life and in science, when in 
fact coherence is not truth conducive? Since the impossibility results were published a 

THE STRUCTURE OF KNOWLEDGE
266
number of proposals have been made for how to avoid the anomaly they present us with. 
As Franz Dietrich and Luca Moretti (2005) prove, coherence in the sense of the C2-
measure is linked to the practice of indirect confirmation of scientific hypotheses. That 
measure turns out to be, as Moretti (2007) puts it, “confirmation conducive.” David H. 
Glass (2007) argues, similarly, that coherence can provide the key to a precise account 
of inference to the best explanation, the main idea being to use a coherence measure to 
rank competing hypotheses in terms of their coherence with a given piece of evidence. 
In a paper by Stefan Schubert and myself (Olsson and Schubert 2007) we observed that, 
while coherence falls short of being truth conducive, it can still be “reliability condu-
cive,” that is, more coherence, according to some measures, entails a higher probability 
that the sources are reliable, at least in a paradigmatic case. Staffan Angere (2007, 
2008) has argued, based on the results of extensive computer simulations, that the fact 
that coherence fails to be truth conducive in the sense just referred to does not prevent 
it from being connected with truth in a weaker, defeasible sense: almost all coherence 
measures that have an independent standing in the literature satisfy the condition that 
most cases of higher coherence are also cases of higher likelihood. For another reaction, 
see Huemer (2007). Olsson (2007) and (2008) contain overviews of the impossibility 
results and some ways of coming to grips with them. Finally, it has been noted that 
coherence plays an important negative role in our thinking. If our beliefs show signs of 
incoherence, this is often a good reason for contemplating a revision. See chapter 10 in 
Olsson (2005a) for an elaboration of this point.
Regardless of how the impossibility results are ultimately dealt with, there is no 
doubt that the marriage between coherence and probability has led to a tighter con-
nection between the theory of coherence and other areas of philosophy and science in 
which probability plays a major role. Besides Dietrich and Moretti (2005), several other 
authors have explored the rather obvious connection to confirmation theory, including 
Branden Fitelson (2003). For coherence and Bayesian networks, see Bovens and Olsson 
(2000). Another link to artificial intelligence is described in Glass (2006). The study of 
coherence, from being a fairly isolated part of epistemology, has developed into an inter-
disciplinary field of research with fertile connections to philosophy of science, cognitive 
psychology, artificial intelligence, and philosophy of law.
Acknowledgment
I am indebted to Stefan Schubert for his helpful comments on an earlier version of this 
chapter.
References
Angere, S. (2007). “The Defeasible Nature of Coherentist Justification,” Synthese 157 (3): 321–35.
—— (2008). “Coherence as a Heuristic,” Mind 117 (465): 1–26.
Bender, J. W. (1989). “Coherence, Justification, and Knowledge: The Current Debate,” in J. W. Bender (ed.) 
The Current State of the Coherence Theory, Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1–14.
BonJour, L. (1985). The Structure of Empirical Knowledge. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
—— (1999). “The Dialectics of Foundationalism and Coherentism,” in J. Greco and E. Sosa (eds.) The 
Blackwell Guide to Epistemology, Malden, Mass.: Blackwell, 117–42.
Bovens, L. and Hartmann, S. (2003). Bayesian Epistemology, Oxford: Clarendon.
—— and Olsson, E. J. (2000). “Coherentism, Reliability and Bayesian Networks,” Mind 109: 685–719.
—— (2002). “Believing More, Risking Less: On Coherence, Truth and Non-trivial Extensions,” Erkenntnis 
57: 137–50.

COHERENTISM
267
Coady, C. A. J. (1992). Testimony: A Philosophical Study, Oxford: Clarendon.
Cross, C. B. (1999). “Coherence and Truth Conducive Justification,” Analysis 59: 186–93.
Davidson, D. (1986). “A Coherence Theory of Knowledge and Truth,” in E. LePore (ed.) Truth and 
Interpretation, Oxford: Blackwell, 307–19.
Dietrich, F. and Moretti, L. (2005). “On Coherent Sets and the Transmission of Confirmation,” Philosophy 
of Science 72 (3): 403–24.
Ewing, A. C. (1934). Idealism: A Critical Survey, London: Methuen.
Glass, D. H. (2002). “Coherence, Explanation and Bayesian Networks,” in M. O’Neill and R. F. E. Sutcliffe 
et al. (eds.) Artificial Intelligence and Cognitive Science, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York: Springer Verlag, 
Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence 2464, 177–82.
—— (2006). “Coherence Measures and Their Relation to Fuzzy Similarity and Inconsistency in Knowledge 
Bases,” Artificial Intelligence Review 26 (3): 227–49.
—— (2007). “Coherence Measures and Inference to the Best Explanation,” Synthese 157 (3): 257–96.
Fitelson, B. (2003). “A Probabilistic Measure of Coherence,” Analysis 63: 194–99.
Huemer, M. (1997). “Probability and Coherence Justification,” Southern Journal of Philosophy 35: 463–72.
—— (2007). “Weak Bayesian Coherentism,” Synthese 157 (3): 337–46.
Klein, P. and Warfield, T. A. (1994). “What Price Coherence?” Analysis, 54: 129–32.
—— and —— (1996). “No Help for the Coherentist,” Analysis 56: 118–21.
Lehrer, K. (1990). Theory of Knowledge, First Edition, Boulder: Westview.
—— (1997). “Justification, Coherence and Knowledge,” Erkenntnis 50, 243–57.
—— (2000). Theory of Knowledge, Second Edition, Boulder: Westview.
Lewis, C. I. (1946). An Analysis of Knowledge and Valuation, LaSalle: Open Court.
Moretti, L. (2007). “Ways in which Coherence is Confirmation Conducive,” Synthese 157 (3): 309–19.
Olsson, E. J. (1999). “Cohering with,” Erkenntnis 50: 273–91.
—— (2001). “Why Coherence is Not Truth-Conducive,” Analysis 61: 236–41.
—— (2002). “What Is the Problem of Coherence and Truth?,” The Journal of Philosophy 99: 246–72.
—— (2003). “The Epistemology of Keith Lehrer,” in E. J. Olsson (ed.) The Epistemology of Keith Lehrer, 
Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1–20.
—— (2005a). Against Coherence: Truth, Probability, and Justification, Oxford University Press.
—— (2005b). “The Impossibility of Coherence,” Erkenntnis 63 (3): 387–412.
—— (2007). “Guest Editor’s Introduction,” Synthese 157 (3): 267–74.
—— (2008). “The Place of Coherence in Epistemology,” in V. F. Hendricks and D. Pritchard (eds.) New 
Waves in Epistemology, New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 192–214.
—— and Schubert, S. (2007). “Reliability Conducive Measures of Coherence,” Synthese 157 (3): 297–308.
Olsson, E. J. and Shogenji, T. (2004). “Can We Trust Our Memories? C. I. Lewis’s Coherence Argument,” 
Synthese 142 (1): 21–41.
Quine, W. V. O. and Ullian, J. S. (1970). The Web of Belief, New York.
Rescher, N. (1973). The Coherence Theory of Truth, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—— (1979). Cognitive Systematization, Oxford: Blackwell.
Russell, B. (1912). The Problems of Philosophy, Home University Library, Williams and Norgate.
Shogenji, T. (1999). “Is Coherence Truth-Conducive?,” Analysis 59: 338–45.
—— (2005). “Justification by Coherence from Scratch,” Philosophical Studies 125 (3): 305–25.
Thagard, P. (2000). Coherence in Thought and Action, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT.
—— (2005). “Testimony, Credibility, and Explanatory Coherence,” Erkenntnis 63 (3): 295–316.
—— (2007). “Coherence, Truth, and the Development of Scientific Knowledge,” Philosophy of Science 74 
(1): 28–47.


Part IV
KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE


25
INDUCTIVE KNOWLEDGE
Alexander Bird
1. Introduction
In this chapter I take a loose, functional approach to defining induction: Inductive 
forms of reasoning include those prima facie reasonable inference patterns that one 
finds in science and elsewhere that are not clearly deductive. Inductive inference is 
often taken to be reasoning from the observed to the unobserved. But that is incorrect, 
since the premises of inductive inferences can, themselves, be the results of prior induc-
tions. A broader conception of inductive inference regards any ampliative inference 
as inductive, where an ampliative inference is one where the conclusion ‘goes beyond’ 
the premises. ‘Goes beyond’ can mean: (i) ‘not deducible from,’ or (ii) ‘not entailed by.’ 
Both of these are problematic. Regarding (i), some forms of reasoning might have a 
claim to be called ‘inductive’ because of their role in science, yet turn out to be deduc-
tive after all—for example, eliminative induction (see below) or Aristotle’s ‘perfect 
induction’ which is an inference to a generalization from knowledge of every one of 
its instances. Interpretation (ii) requires that the conclusions of scientific reasoning 
are always contingent propositions, since necessary propositions are entailed by any 
premises. But there are good reasons from metaphysics for thinking that many general 
propositions of scientific interest and known by inductive inference (e.g. “all water is 
H2O”) are necessarily true. Finally, both (i) and (ii) fail to take account of the fact that 
there are many ampliative forms of inference one would not want to call inductive, such 
as counter-induction (exemplified by the ‘gambler’s fallacy’ that the longer a roulette 
wheel has come up red the more likely it is to come up black on the next roll). Brian 
Skyrms (1999) provides a useful survey of the issues involved in defining what is meant 
by ‘inductive argument’.
Inductive knowledge will be the outcome of a successful inductive inference. But 
much discussion of induction concerns the theory of confirmation, which seeks to 
answer the question, “when and to what degree does evidence support an hypothesis?” 
Usually, this is understood in an incremental sense and in a way that relates to the 
rational credibility of a hypothesis: “When and by how much does e add to the cred-
ibility of h?,” although ‘confirms’ is sometimes used in an absolute sense to indicate 
total support that exceeds some suitably high threshold. Important but largely unan-
swered questions relate these topics, for example, “does inductive inference corre-
spond to the case of absolute confirmation for some suitable threshold?” I shall discuss 
inference and confirmation together, though it should be noted that some approaches 
eschew inference altogether. For example, the Bayesian takes scientific reasoning to 
be a matter of adjusting credences in propositions in the light of evidence, and says 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
272
nothing about unqualified belief in a proposition. However, if we are interested in 
inductive knowledge then we must consider inference, since only then do we have a 
detached proposition that is the possible content of a mental state of knowing.
2. Enumerative Induction
The form of inference discussed above and sometimes called simply ‘induction’ is a mat-
ter of inferring from a sample to the whole of a population. In the paradigm of enumera-
tive induction one argues, as in the examples concerning planetary orbits, as follows:
(E1) all Fs in P′ ⊂ P are Gs
therefore
all Fs in P are Gs.
Where (E1) articulates a rule of inference, the corresponding notion of confirmation is 
Nicod’s criterion: an F in P that is also a G confirms the generalization that all Fs in P are 
Gs. My characterization of enumerative induction, as an inference from a sample to all 
of a population, is more general than (E1) in order that it should encompass also:
(E2) the proportion of Fs in P′ ⊂ P that are Gs is p
therefore
the proportion of Fs in P that are Gs is p.
(E1) is a special case of (E2) where p = 1, but (E2) cannot be considered as a matter 
of generalizing facts about individual members of P′. Rather, (E2) concerns population 
level facts.
(E1) is most familiar in the form (E1′) ‘all known Fs are Gs therefore all Fs are Gs.’ 
Another popular way of expressing enumerative induction is (E1″) ‘all known Fs are 
Gs therefore the next F to be examined will be G,’ which we can gain from (E1) by 
putting P′ = the known Fs, and P = the known Fs plus the next F to be examined. A 
generalization of (E1″) yields a familiar version of (E2), Reichenbach’s ‘straight rule’ of 
induction:
(E3) of n known Fs, m are G
therefore
the probability that some unknown F (e.g. the next F to be examined) 
is G is m/n.
Just as (E2) is a form of enumerative induction, although not a generalization of facts 
about individuals, we should consider as inductive in this sense various other statistical 
inferences such as:
(E4) the mean value of parameter L in P′ ⊂ P is µ
therefore
the mean value of parameter L in P is µ.
In general the various techniques of classical statistical inference should be seen as 
refined instances of enumerative induction; in particular classical statistical inference 

INDUCTIVE KNOWLEDGE
273
seeks to correct the defects of (E1), namely, that it (a) does not tell us how large P′ needs 
to be before we can make the inference concerning all of P, and (b) it does not tell us 
how confident we should be in the conclusion when we draw it.
The principal weakness of the various forms of enumerative induction is that their 
scope is severely limited. Note that the conclusions in (E1)–(E4) mention only proper-
ties and parameters already mentioned in their premises. Therefore enumerative induc-
tion is unable to yield knowledge concerning entities of a kind of which we do not 
already know. Yet this is a crucial part of science—witness our beliefs in subatomic enti-
ties and their properties, or in plate tectonics, or stellar evolution, and so forth.
As Reichenbach’s straight rule exemplifies, it is natural to seek to relate confirmation 
to probability. This thought lies behind Carnap’s inductive logic. According to Carnap, 
inductive logic should be seen as a generalization of deductive logic where the conclu-
sions are drawn only with a certain degree of probability. The degree to which evidence 
provides absolute confirmation for a hypothesis is the same as the probability of the 
hypothesis given that evidence: C(h, e) = P(h|e), where the conception of probability 
being used is a logical one. The latter operates as follows. Consider a language with 
predicates denoting properties and names denoting objects. One can construct a com-
plete ‘state description,’ a maximal description of a way things can be, by saying of each 
object whether each predicate or its negation holds of it. The simplest approach to logi-
cal probability would ascribe to each state description the same probability. The con-
ditional probability P(h|e) is now fixed and so, therefore, is our confirmation relation. 
The drawback of this approach is that it does not allow any room for inductive learning. 
One might have thought that repeated observations of Fs that are Gs (without non-G 
Fs) would raise the probability that the next F to be examined will be G. But this simple 
approach to inductive logic does not yield that outcome. Carnap’s important move is to 
concentrate not on state descriptions but on structure descriptions. ‘Fa∋¬Ga∋¬Fb∋Gb’ 
is a different state description from ‘¬Fa∋Ga∋Fb∋¬Gb.’ But they both have the same 
structure: ‘one thing is F but not G and the other thing is G but not F’. Carnap now 
distributes probabilities equally among structure descriptions, rather than across state 
descriptions; then the probability assigned to a structure description is divided equally 
among the state descriptions with that structure. This distribution of probabilities, m* 
yields a confirmation relation c* that does allow for learning from evidence. A central 
problem for such an approach is to articulate why the distribution m* is a priori more 
suitable than some other distribution (e.g. the simple distribution, m†, that gives each 
state description the same probability). If m* isn’t the a priori right distribution, then in 
what sense is this account or probability (and confirmation) logical?
3. Hypothetico-deductivism
Note that in (E1) the conclusion of the inductive inference entails the premise. In (E2) 
and (E3) the conclusions make the premises likely (without entailing them). According 
to (E1)–(E3), inductive support occurs where the inductive conclusion deductively 
entails the evidence or makes it likely. Hypothetico-deductivism takes this as the cen-
tral idea in confirmation. Thus:
(HD) e confirms h iff h entails e.
Here h may be considered to be, for example, the combination of a theory and a set of 
auxiliary hypotheses. Also plausible, but less frequently discussed is the more general:

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
274
(HD′) e confirms h iff h entails that e is likely.
The advantage of hypothetico-deductivism over enumerative induction is that its 
scope is much wider. Enumerative induction (E1) can be seen as a special case of (HD) 
for the case where h is a generalization of e; Nicod’s criterion is a consequence of (HD). 
But hypotheses can entail evidence without being generalizations of the evidence. Thus 
Fresnel’s wave theory of light entails that there is a bright spot at the center of the 
shadow cast by a disk, and is confirmed by the observation of such a spot, even though 
the wave theory concerns unobservable features of the world and so is no kind of gener-
alization of the observational evidence in question.
This advantage turns out, however, to be a disadvantage, when we see that the deduc-
tive relationship allows for too liberal an account of confirmation. The most famous of 
such problems is the Ravens Paradox. The hypothesis that all ravens are black, com-
bined with the auxiliary hypothesis that object x is not black, entails that x is not a raven. 
So observing x, a white shoe, provides confirmation for the hypothesis that all ravens 
are black. Nicod’s criterion delivers this conclusion since the white shoe confirms the 
hypothesis that all non-black items are non-ravens, which is logically equivalent to the 
hypothesis under test. Many find the conclusion absurd, though others accept it, merely 
regarding the support as very weak.
There is another problem. Hempel’s special consequence principle tells us that when e 
confirms h, then e confirms any consequence of h. This seems reasonable: recall (E1″) 
‘all known Fs are Gs therefore the next F to be examined will be G,’ which I claimed to 
be a special case of (E1), for the population consisting of the known Fs plus the next F to 
be examined. But strictly (E1)″
 follows only if we take the confirmation of the hypoth-
esis that the known Fs plus the next F are all G to entail the confirmation of the proposi-
tion deduced from it, that the next F is G. Now assume for the following that h entails 
e. Therefore h∋p also entails e, for any p. According to (HD) not only is h confirmed by 
e, but also h′, where h′
 is h∋p. The special consequence condition tells us that since e 
confirms h′, e confirms any consequence of h′, and so, in particular e confirms p. But p 
was an arbitrary proposition. So any proposition can confirm any other (putting e = h 
makes that especially clear). It seems obvious that the special consequence principle is 
at fault. It can only be unrestrictedly true in the case of absolute confirmation. However, 
some restricted version of the special consequence principle would appear to be true 
for incremental confirmation, if there is ever to be any non-trivial ampliative confir-
mation—as, for example, in (E1″). One would expect one’s theory of confirmation to 
provide an answer: when evidence confirms an hypothesis, which logical parts of the 
hypothesis get confirmed and which do not? One response would be to think that while 
the conjunction h∋p might get confirmed as a whole, this is due just to the confirmation 
of h whereas p itself gets no confirmation, and this is because p plays no role in deducing 
e. But now consider p∋(p → h). The proposition e cannot be deduced from the second 
conjunct alone, so now p does play a deductively essential role—even though p∋(p→
h) is logically equivalent to h∋p. As a theory of confirmation (HD) is thus incomplete; 
moreover, it does not point towards any obvious satisfactory supplementation.
4. Grue—The New Riddle of Induction
A feature of (E1) and (HD) is that they suggest that inductive confirmation is a formal 
relation. In deductive logic, the relevant relations, such as deducibility hold in virtue 

INDUCTIVE KNOWLEDGE
275
of the syntactic form of the relevant propositions. According to hypothetico-deductiv-
ism, the same is true of confirmation, because confirmation is held to be the converse of 
deduction. Likewise enumerative induction holds inductive inference to be licensed on 
grounds of the formal relation of conclusion to evidence, the latter being just a general-
ization of the former and generalization being a formal operation.
A major challenge to both these accounts of induction comes from Goodman’s (1954) 
‘New Riddle of Induction,’ which shows that confirmation cannot be a formal relation. 
Define the predicate ‘gruet’ as holding of x precisely when x is green and is first observed 
before time t or x is blue and is not first observed before time t. Consider the hypoth-
esis ‘all emeralds are green.’ Given the auxiliary proposition that emerald a is observed 
before time t, then we may deduce that a is green. According to (HD), therefore, the 
observation of a green emerald before t provides confirmation of the hypothesis that all 
emeralds are grue. But the latter hypothesis has as a consequence the proposition that 
emeralds first observed after t will be blue. And this surely is disconfirmed by the observa-
tion of a green emerald before t.
This latter result may be seen as a particular case of the claim made in the preceding 
section that hypothetico-deductivism makes confirmation of hypotheses too easy. The 
same goes, however, for the more restrictive enumerative model of induction. Consider 
(E1) where ‘F’ = ‘emerald,’ ‘G’ = ‘grue thing,’ P′ is the set of emeralds observed to 
date (which is before t), and P is the set of all emeralds (or is some subset thereof that 
includes emeralds first observed after t or never observed at all). According to (E1) we 
are entitled to infer that emeralds first observed after t, or never observed, are grue, and 
hence, by the definition of ‘grue,’ are blue.
Neither of these results is acceptable, and so we should conclude that inductive con-
firmation is not a formal relation. Consequently we should not think that inductive 
relations are like deductive relations, which can be formalized in an a priori logic. The 
same applies to Carnap’s inductive logic since the probability distribution m* is rela-
tive to a language, with the consequence that that confirmation is also relative to a 
language. This means that his inductive logic fails to be logical in a key sense. A satis-
factory deductive system should have the feature that if two sentences are deductively 
related in one language, their translations into another language should also be deduc-
tively related in the same way. But that does not hold for Carnapian confirmation.
5. Abduction and Inference to the Only Explanation
The hypothetico-deductive model of confirmation is closely related to the deductive-
nomological model of explanation, according to which:
(DN) Laws L and conditions C together explain fact f iff L&C deductively 
entail f.
Consider (HD). If our hypothesis is that laws L hold and conditions C obtain (i.e. h 
= L&C), then e confirms this hypothesis precisely when, according to (DN), L&C 
would explain e. Just as the hypothetico-deductive model of confirmation suffers from 
problems, so does the deductive-nomological model of explanation. In particular, the 
relation of explanation is not a formal one, contra (DN). From the law that anyone who 
ingests a pound of arsenic will die within 24 hours, and the fact that Jones had ingested 
a pound of arsenic, we might deduce the fact that he died within 24 hours. But, in fact, 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
276
this does not explain his death because he was killed by being hit by a bus before the 
arsenic could kill him (Achinstein 1983). So background knowledge is required in addi-
tion to a deduction in order to work out whether we have an explanation. (Achinstein’s 
case can also be regarded as a counter-instance to (HD). Let us say that we are investi-
gating the hypothesis that a pound of arsenic will kill within 24 hours. The discovery 
that Jones dies within 24 hours of eating a pound of arsenic confirms that hypothesis 
as (HD) says it should. However, when we learn that Jones was, in fact, killed by a bus, 
the fact of his death now lends our hypothesis no support at all. Nonetheless, the death 
is still deducible from the hypothesis plus the fact of his eating the arsenic. One way to 
understand this is to consider that the deducibility relation is monotonic—if it holds at 
all, no further addition of information will prevent it from holding. Thus the confirma-
tion relation should also be monotonic. But it is not, as this case shows.)
Even if both (HD) and (DN) are mistaken, what may be correct is the relation 
between them:
(A) e confirms h iff h would, if true, explain e.
The left to right implication in (A) will not do, however. Incremental confirmation is 
typically (if not always) transmitted by deduction, whereas explanatory power is not. 
For example, rising sea levels might be explained by, and confirm the hypothesis of, 
global warming. From the latter we might be able to deduce that there will be increased 
droughts, in which case the observation of rising sea levels might confirm that hypoth-
esis that there will be increased droughts. But those future droughts do not explain cur-
rent increases in sea levels.
The right to left implication in (A) remains plausible, nonetheless. Abductivist (or 
explanationist) conceptions of confirmation take explanation to be central to inductive 
confirmation. Note that abductivism does not say that e confirms h if h, in fact, explains 
e, since to know that latter would require already knowing that h is, in fact, true. Rather, 
abductivism says that the fact that h is a potential explanation of e provides confirmation 
to h.
Abductivism is able to encompass enumerative induction if one thinks that, in the 
cases where enumerative induction lends confirmation, that is because some relevant 
fact provides explanatory power. For example, observations of planetary motions con-
firm Newton’s law of gravitation via enumerative induction because the law explains its 
instances (Armstrong 1983; Foster 1983). In other cases, a common cause explains the 
known correlation and confirms its extrapolation; we can extrapolate the correlation 
between a high barometer reading and bad weather, because high pressure is a cause of 
both. The hypothesis that all emeralds are grue is not confirmed by the observation of 
green emeralds since background knowledge tells us there is no putative law or causal 
connection covering all the instances.
Abductivism, the claim that being a potential explanation of some evidence con-
firms a hypothesis, like (HD), fails to tell us how much this explanatory relation supports 
the hypothesis and, likewise, when we may infer that the hypothesis is true. Inference 
to the best explanation (IBE) aims to provide a more detailed account of abductivism. 
IBE employs the intuitive idea that some hypotheses are better potential explanations 
of the evidence than others, and regards better explanations as more likely to be true. 
To be more precise, IBE holds that under certain conditions, it is reasonable to infer that 
the best of a set of competing explanations is the actual explanation and hence is true. 

INDUCTIVE KNOWLEDGE
277
The conditions are: (i) that the best explanation is clearly better than its next best com-
petitor, and (ii) that the best explanation is good enough (it meets some threshold of 
goodness—if it does not, then we might suspect that the problem of underconsideration 
applies). A key issue for any thorough account of IBE is to explain what explanatory 
goodness is.
Lipton characterizes IBE as a two-stage process. In the first stage the imaginative 
capacity of the scientist generates a set of possible explanations of a phenomenon. In 
the second stage the generated hypotheses are ranked according to their explanatory 
goodness, and the top ranked is selected.
Three problems face IBE (Lipton 2004: 142–51). The first stage encounters the 
problem of underconsideration. The ranking by goodness at stage two cannot be any 
guide to truth if the actual (true) explanation is not among those considered by the 
imaginative power of the scientist at stage one. Even if the actual explanation is among 
those considered, stage two raises the two remaining problems, which Lipton names 
Hungerford’s objection and Voltaire’s objection. The former notes that beauty is in the eye 
of the beholder; that is, explanatory goodness is too subjective a quality to be correlated 
with objective truth. Even if goodness is objective, Voltaire’s problem asks why it should 
be correlated with the truth. Presumably there are possible worlds where explanations 
that we would judge to be poor explanations are, in fact, very often true. IBE therefore 
assumes that ours is the best possible world, explanation-wise. Why should we think 
that this assumption is correct? Lipton notes that if the second-stage ranking is accurate 
that shows that underconsideration cannot, in fact, be a problem, since ranking is a 
theory-laden process, and the reliability of the ranking implies the truth of the relevant 
background theories. In particular, background theories also play a role in setting our 
standards of loveliness. And so, successful inferential practices will be virtuously rein-
forcing. (In response to Hungerford’s objection, Lipton says that while loveliness might 
be audience-relative, so also is inference.)
6. Bayesian Confirmation
Bayesian epistemology avoids many of the problems facing other accounts of confirma-
tion, including Hume’s problem (see below). It does this by focusing, in its standard 
subjective form, on rationality of incremental changes to credences. Bayes’s theorem:
(B) P(h|e) =
 P(e|h)P(h)
 
P(e)
is derivable from the standard axioms of probability and so is a priori. Subjective 
Bayesianism tells us that the probabilities in question are subjective degrees of belief 
(credences) and that if one receives evidence e then one’s credence in h should now be 
made equal to P(h|e) as given by (B), known as Bayesian conditionalization. One’s old 
credence in h is multiplied by P(e|h)/P(e) (where P(e) is one’s credence in the evidence, 
and P(e|h) is one’s credence in the evidence, given the hypothesis).
An interesting question concerns the relationship between Bayesianism and other 
prima facie conceptions of inductive confirmation. Consider, for example, the case 
where the evidence is deducible from the hypothesis, as in the hypothetico-deductive 
model of confirmation. Then the old credence will be multiplied by 1/P(e), which so 
long as the evidence proposition is previously unknown, will be greater than one. In 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
278
this way Bayesianism can encompass (HD) and does better both by giving an account 
of (HD′) and by giving a quantitative measure of incremental confirmation in these 
cases (the more unexpected the evidence, the better evidence it is). Bas van Fraassen 
argues that Bayesian confirmation and IBE are in conflict, and that because it can be 
shown to be irrational to conditionalize in a way that diverges from the Bayesian pre-
scription (thanks to so-called Dutch book arguments), it follows that IBE is in error. 
Lipton, on the other hand, regards Bayesianism and IBE as compatible. He regards the 
explanationist considerations that are brought to bear by IBE as heuristics that guide 
our estimation of P(e|h).
Since Bayesianism deals in the rationality of incremental changes in subjective prob-
abilities, it makes no claim to say what probabilities one’s beliefs should have. It tells one 
only what one’s new probabilities should be, once the evidence has been received, given 
one’s old probabilities. Except insofar as those old probabilities were, themselves, based 
on evidence subject to Bayesian conditionalization, those old are rationally uncon-
strained. Two people who have the same evidence will find that conditionalization 
brings their credences closer together. But if they start off with sufficiently divergent 
distributions of probabilities they will end up with credences that remain very far apart. 
Since Bayesianism fails to tell one what one should believe nor even how much one 
should believe certain hypotheses, it is unsuited to giving us an account of inference and 
so of inductive knowledge. Thus it evades Hume’s problem principally by limiting its 
ambitions. For these reasons, it cannot be that IBE functions merely to estimate P(e|h). 
IBE tells us about inference—what one may believe in the light of the evidence. (For a 
detailed exposition of Bayesian epistemology, see Chapter 55 in this volume.)
7. Hume’s Problem and the Reliabilist Response
The best-known and fundamental problem with any account of the capacity of induc-
tive reasoning to yield knowledge is Hume’s problem. What Hume’s actual intentions 
were with this problem are a matter of debate (see Chapter 65 in this volume), but its 
basic structure is clear. When using some form of reasoning, it seems appropriate to ask 
whether use of that form of reasoning is justified. Prospects for an a priori justification 
are poor for those forms of inductive reasoning, the majority, that are ampliative. The 
very obvious efficacy of inductive reasoning, in science and everyday thought, would 
seem to be an obvious source of justification. However, the inference from the fact that 
induction has worked successfully for us on many occasions to its general reliability 
(we can expect induction to be reliable in current and future applications) is, itself, 
an inductive inference, an instance of (E1). And so this attempt to justify our induc-
tive practices itself employs an inductive form of inference. As such this justification is 
circular and so could be thought to fail. Inductive reasoning, thus, seems to be without 
justification, and so the products of inductive reasoning cannot be knowledge.
One response to Hume’s problem is to regard it as decisive. In which case, if one 
regards science as rational, one must propose a non-inductive basis for scientific reason-
ing. Sir Karl Popper’s falsificationism attempts to do precisely that. Popper (1959) advo-
cated hypothetico-deductivism, but regarded only one special case as admissible, that of 
absolute disconfirmation: the case where from a hypothesis h one deduces consequence 
c; one observes that c is false; hence one infers that h is false. Falsificationism is a highly 
skeptical view: although general hypotheses can be known to be false, they cannot be 
never known to be true.

INDUCTIVE KNOWLEDGE
279
Alternatively, in order to avoid skepticism about science, one may seek a diagnosis 
of Hume’s problem that allows us to reject its conclusion. Hume’s problem assumes that 
for S’s use of a method M to produce knowledge, it must be the case that M is justified in 
a manner that is accessible to S. This requirement is a manifestation of epistemological 
internalism. The internalist rejects while the externalist accepts the idea that the ability 
of a process to justify beliefs may depend on some feature of the world that is not acces-
sible to the user of that process (see Chapter 14 in this volume). Goodman’s new riddle 
raises similar problems. It shows that two inductive arguments can have the same syn-
tactic form but differ in their confirmatory power. So confirmation depends on semantic 
features, such as whether the predicates in question denote natural properties and kinds 
or not. Those semantic facts are external to the structure of an inductive argument and 
the truth of its premises. They might be known to the subject, but only as part of back-
ground knowledge acquired by science, i.e. by some prior piece of inductive reasoning. 
Such knowledge will not be a priori.
Reliabilism is one, natural implementation of externalism that offers an explanation of 
the possibility of inductive knowledge: for a belief to count as knowledge it must be pro-
duced by a reliable process or method, one which produced true beliefs in an appropriate 
range of counterfactual circumstances (Armstrong 1973; Nozick 1981; see Chapter 17 
in this volume). If the world is, in fact, non-accidentally regular (e.g. law-governed) in 
certain respects, then enumerative induction, or certain classes of enumerative induc-
tive inferences at least, might be reliable, and so knowledge generating. Since we are 
concerned with inductive inference, reliability will be a matter of the inferential rule (or 
pattern) producing true beliefs when given true beliefs as premises. A related reliabilist 
account might determine when inductively formed beliefs are justified (indeed reliabi-
lism is typically seen more as an account of justification).
The reliabilist holds that in order for an inductively inferred belief to be knowledge 
(or to be justified) it must meet two kinds of condition: (i) an evidential condition, that 
the premises of the inference are suitable, and (ii) a reliability condition, that the infer-
ence rule employed is a reliable one. As an externalist account, this does not in general 
require that the subject be aware that the reliability condition holds. Reliabilists, and 
externalists more generally, hold that for an inductive belief to be justified, it can suffice 
that the reliability condition, in fact, holds (in addition to the evidential condition). 
Thus Mellor (1991) argues that inductive habits can yield warranted beliefs thanks to 
natural, contingent, regularities, independently of one’s knowing that one has such a 
warrant. However, one might reasonably ask whether, as a matter of fact, S can have, 
in addition to her warranted (justified) belief in h, a justified belief in the reliability of 
R, the rule that led to her belief in h. We do think we have this sort of knowledge and 
justification. When S’s experience in baking leads her to believe a certain technique 
will lead to a firm crust we believe that her belief is justified. But when S* uses tea-
leaves to predict the future, we believe that S*’s resulting beliefs will not be justified. 
Can our beliefs about the methods of S and S* be justified? And can S herself have a 
justified belief that her inductively inferred belief (in the future outcome of her baking) 
is correct?
Let us say that S’s rule of enumerative induction, R, is indeed reliable, so that S’s belief 
in h is justified. We may be able to show that R is reliable, for example, by finding that R 
delivers true beliefs (e.g. predictions about the future that are subsequently verified) in a 
large number and variety of cases, while delivering no false beliefs (or only a few). If our 
rule of reasoning in this case is reliable, then by the reliabilist view of justification, our 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
280
belief that R is reliable is itself justified. And S herself can engage in this reasoning also 
and acquire the same justified belief. Now let us consider the rule of reasoning, R*, just 
used to establish the reliability of R. It is clearly a form of enumerative induction. If R 
is, itself, a general rule of enumerative induction, then R* might be identical to R. Thus 
we will be using an inductive rule to establish the reliability (and so justify our belief in 
the reliability) of that very same rule. This would appear to be the very circularity that 
Hume warns us vitiates any attempt to justify induction.
The standard reliabilist reply draws upon the distinction between premise-circularity 
and rule-circularity (Braithwaite 1953: 255–92; see also van Cleve 1984). The former is 
the kind of circularity in reasoning that is vicious and with which we are familiar—seek-
ing to establish the truth of proposition Q using an argument among whose premises 
is the proposition Q itself. Rule-circularity, however, is something different, and arises 
when one employs an argument to establish some proposition concerning a rule R, e.g. 
that it is reliable, and that argument-form is an instance of that same rule R. The key 
difference is that in rule-circularity there is no premise asserting the reliability of R, and 
so the conclusion is not among the premises. The Humean critic might object that by 
employing the rule R we are implicitly assuming the reliability of R, and so, after all, we 
are assuming what we set out to prove. The reliabilist (and, more generally, external-
ist) response is that a subject need not have any tacit belief or assumption concerning 
the reliability of the rules she in fact uses. Normally, it will suffice for knowledge or 
justification that the rule is reliable. And so while premise-circularity does undermine 
the epistemic value of the conclusions, rule-circularity does not. Reliabilism itself faces 
many questions (see Chapter 17 for more details), for example: What degree of reliabil-
ity is required for justification, and does this differ from the degree of reliability required 
for knowledge? How do we delineate the rule or belief-forming method that a subject is 
using? (One and the same particular inference can be considered as an instance of many 
different inference rules, some of which might be reliable while others are unreliable. 
Which is the rule employed?) Thinking about inductive inferences, is there one general 
rule ‘enumerative induction’ that has the form of, for example, (E3), the straight rule of 
induction? Or are there many rules, methods, and habits that are inductive in character 
but which are specific to certain subject matters or circumstances? (If so, there might 
not even be rule-circularity in the reasoning process described above. Note also that the 
details of the reliability condition required for inductive knowledge will be specific and 
differ from one inductive practice to another.) These questions are linked, because one 
might wonder whether one very general rule of induction is likely to be reliable enough 
to give us inductive knowledge—after all we frequently do get false beliefs from induc-
tion; a more specific rule can have better prospects of high reliability.
Hume’s problem affects not only enumerative induction but other kinds of ampliative 
inductive inference such as IBE. The response to the problem of underconsideration 
and Voltaire’s objection, in effect, depends upon it, in fact, being the case that our 
capacity to generate hypotheses does tend to succeed in including the actual expla-
nation, and it also being the case that our standards of loveliness match the way the 
world is. If asked to justify those claims, one might suggest that the best explanation of 
our success in employing IBE is that our hypothesis-generating and loveliness-judging 
capacities are effective in these respects. But this explanationist argument is just to use 
IBE in the justification of IBE, exhibiting the very circularity that Hume identified. 
A reliabilist answer can be given again here. So long as these capacities are indeed 
effective, IBE will be a reliable way of generating first-order beliefs, which will thus be 

INDUCTIVE KNOWLEDGE
281
justified. Furthermore, the second-order argument that IBE is indeed reliable can, for 
the same reasons, give a justified belief in IBE’s reliability. The circularity identified is, 
again, only rule-circularity, not premise-circularity.
8. Eliminative Induction
One might worry, nonetheless, that IBE is insufficiently reliable to generate inductive 
knowledge. Are our judgments of loveliness so good that the hypotheses judged loveli-
ness are always true? After all, many favored, lovely hypotheses have been found to be 
false. Note that the ranking process implicitly assumes that the lower ranked hypotheses 
are still all consistent with the evidence. Perhaps IBE can only justify an ordering of our 
credences, not an inference that the best is, in fact, true.
A natural extension of this thought would suggest that we can only acquire knowl-
edge of the truth of a hypothesis when inferred from evidence, if that evidence serves to 
eliminate competing hypotheses. Eliminative induction goes back at least to Francis Bacon 
but has been supported by a number of contemporary philosophers (e.g. Earman 1992; 
Papineau 1993; Kitcher 1993; Bird 2005). Considered as a deductive inference:
(L1) One of hypotheses h1, …, hi is true; hypotheses h1, …, hi − 1 are false; 
therefore hypothesis hi is true. 
The capacity of eliminative induction to deliver knowledge of its conclusion depends 
on our ability to know that the first premise is true, i.e. to know of some suitably lim-
ited range of hypotheses, that the true hypothesis is among them. ‘Suitably limited’ 
here means sufficiently limited that it is possible to know the second premise; that is, 
sufficiently limited for us to falsify all but one of the hypotheses referred to in the first 
premise. Another approach would be to cast eliminative induction as non-deductive:
(L2) Hypotheses h1, …, hi − 1 are false; therefore hypothesis hi is true.
In this case, the inference is reliable when the subject has a reliable disposition to infer 
the truth of hi from the falsity of h1, …, hi − 1. Here one appeals to reliabilism again: to 
generate knowledge it might suffice that this inferential disposition is in fact reliable, 
whether or not the subject knows this. And in this case the disposition might be suf-
ficiently specific that it is indeed sufficiently reliable. Alternatively, one might try to 
argue that the premises of (L1) can be known in certain cases. For example when the 
hypotheses are explanatory, it might be possible to know that the possible explanations 
of some phenomenon are limited to a constrained set of hypotheses:
(L3) Only hypotheses h1, …, hi could explain e; e has some explanation; 
hypotheses h1, …, hi − 1 are false; therefore hypothesis hi is true.
In this way eliminative induction can be seen as a limiting case of IBE, the limiting case 
where IBE leads to knowledge. Of course, the first premise (and indeed the second and 
third) will need to be discovered by the methods of scientific investigation that will be 
broadly inductive in the sense being used here. They might, themselves, be instances of 
eliminative induction or might depend on enumerative induction. And so the casting 
of eliminative induction is not intended to solve the problem of induction but, rather, 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
282
to reveal the structure of an important route to inductive knowledge. Ultimately any 
attempt to show that our inductive practices, whatever they are, can lead to knowledge 
will have to appeal to externalist epistemology in some form.
References
Achinstein, P. 1983. The Nature of Explanation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Armstrong, D. M. 1973. Belief, Truth, and Knowledge. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Armstrong, D. M. 1983. What is a Law of Nature? Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bird, A. 2005. Abductive knowledge and Holmesian inference. In T. S. Gendler and J. Hawthorne (Eds.), 
Oxford Studies in Epistemology, pp. 1–31. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Braithwaite, R. B. 1953. Scientific Explanation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Earman, J. 1992. Bayes or Bust? Cambridge, MA: Bradford.
Foster, J. 1983. Induction, explanation, and natural necessity. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 83: 87–
101.
Goodman, N. 1954. Fact, Fiction, and Forecast. London: Athlone Press.
Kitcher, P. 1993. The Advancement of Science. New York: Oxford University Press.
Lipton, P. 2004. Inference to the Best Explanation (2nd ed.). London: Routledge.
Mellor, D. H. 1991. The warrant of induction. In Matters of Metaphysics. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Nozick, R. 1981. Philosophical Explanations. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Papineau, D. 1993. Introduction to Philosophical Naturalism. Oxford: Blackwell.
Popper, K. 1959. The Logic of Scientific Discovery. London: Hutchinson.
Skyrms, B. 1999. Choice and Chance: An introduction to inductive logic (4th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth 
Publishing.
van Cleve, J. 1984. Reliability, justification, and the problem of induction. Midwest Studies in Philosophy 9: 
555–67.

26
A PRIORI KNOWLEDGE
Laurence BonJour
As it has been standardly understood, a priori knowledge is knowledge whose justification 
(or warrant) is a priori rather than empirical in character. This assumes that justification 
is at least a necessary condition for knowledge and that it is the only such condition to 
which the idea of being a priori meaningfully applies. Thus the focus of this chapter will 
be a priori justification—which I will take to be the same thing as having an a priori 
reason in support of the proposition or claim in question.
I will begin by explaining and clarifying the distinction between justifications or 
reasons that are a priori and those that are empirical (a posteriori), also contrasting this 
distinction with some others with which it is sometimes conflated or confused. Next we 
will consider some of the main reasons for thinking that a priori justification, so under-
stood, genuinely exists. The rest of the chapter will be concerned with the three main 
philosophical views that have been held of a priori justification: the rationalist view, 
which defends both the existence of a priori justification and its central significance for 
the cognitive enterprise; and two versions of empiricism, one of which attempts to mini-
mize the importance of a priori justification and the other of which denies its existence 
altogether.
The Concept of A Priori Justification
As reflected in the historical discussion of this issue, the concept of a priori justifica-
tion involves two basic elements or aspects, one negative and one positive. Negatively, 
an instance of a priori justification involves a reason for thinking that a proposition 
is true whose rational force or cogency does not derive from experience, either directly 
(as in immediate sense perception) or indirectly (as by inference of any sort—deduc-
tive, inductive, or explanatory—whose premises, in turn, derive their justification from 
experience). Here it is important to realize that the sort of independence from experi-
ence that is relevant does not mean that someone who has undergone no experience of 
any sort could have such a reason. After all, being justified in accepting any proposition 
at least requires understanding that proposition, and experience, even experience of 
some fairly specific sort, might be required for such understanding.
Nor does the idea of an a priori reason, when understood in this way, imply either: 
(i) that experience-based reasons of some sort could not also count for or against the 
proposition in question; or (ii) that such experiential reasons could not sometimes over-
ride the a priori justification in question; or still less (iii) that an a priori justification 
renders the proposition certain or infallible, immune to mistake. All of these further 
claims might be true in some cases (though it is doubtful that they are true in all or even 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
284
most), but they in no way follow from, or are essential to, the basic idea of a priori jus-
tification itself.
The obvious question is what counts, for these purposes, as experience? The paradigm 
examples of experience are various kinds of sense experience, including such things as 
kinesthetic experiences of bodily orientation in addition to those deriving from the five 
standard senses. But, though this has sometimes been denied in recent discussions, it 
seems quite clear that introspective awareness of one’s thoughts, sensations, and other 
mental states should also count as a variety of experience, and the reasons for belief 
that such experience provides as empirical rather than a priori. Introspective experi-
ence might not depend on clearly identifiable sense organs, but it is still pretty clearly 
an awareness of temporally located contingent facts that depends on causal relations 
between those specific facts and the correlative state of awareness; it is thus far more 
analogous to sense experience than it is to the sort of mental process that is involved 
in the most paradigmatic cases of allegedly a priori justification (see below). And basi-
cally the same thing is true of even the reason for belief in one’s own existence that is 
supplied by the Cartesian cogito, since this is based on introspective awareness of the 
occurrence of specific thoughts and sensations. (For essentially the same reason, such 
things as clairvoyant or telepathic awarenesses, should they exist, should also count as 
species of experience.)
But merely ruling out these kinds of experience as relevant to a priori justification 
obviously does not explain fully how the propositions in question are justified. If their 
justification does not derive from experience, where then does it come from? What is 
the nature of the positive reason for thinking that such a proposition is true which justi-
fication seems to require? Here the traditional view is that such justification results from 
pure thought or reason or rational reflection: from a direct or immediate insight into 
the truth, indeed the necessary truth, of the relevant proposition. (A derivative class of 
a priori reasons, about which little will be said here, would result from similar insights 
into the derivability of a proposition from one or more premises for which such a priori 
reasons exist or from a chain of such derivations.) As we will see, while both rational-
ists and those empiricists who do not simply reject the existence of a priori justifica-
tion would accept this characterization, they give very different accounts of what such 
insight involves and, accordingly, of its ultimate cognitive significance.
Thus, summing up, a priori justification is justification that results from rational 
insight, with no appeal to any sort of experience; while empirical or a posteriori justifi-
cation is justification that results, at least in part, from experience. (Thus justification 
that depends on both experience and insight or reasoning that is in itself a priori in char-
acter would count, for the purposes of this classification, as empirical; but this merely 
taxonomic point should not obscure the fact that such justification is still partially a 
priori.)
There are two other distinctions that are often invoked in the context of discussions 
of a priori justification. First, there is the metaphysical distinction between propositions 
that are necessary, true in all possible worlds, and those that are contingent, true in only 
some possible worlds. (A third category is necessarily false propositions, those that are 
true in no possible worlds.) Second, there is the logical or structural distinction between 
propositions that are analytic and those that are synthetic. Here, as discussed further below 
in the section on moderate empiricism, there is no one standardly accepted definition of 
“analytic,” but the characterization (due to Frege) of an analytic proposition as one that 
is either a truth of formal logic or transformable into such a truth of logic by replacing 

285
A PRIORI KNOWLEDGE
terms with exact synonyms will do as an initial approximation. For the moment, the 
important point is that each of these distinctions is quite distinct from that between a 
priori and a posteriori justification, so that none of these concepts should be confused 
or conflated with each other—as is in fact very frequently done in discussions of the a 
priori (see, for example, Ayer 1946: 78, where the concept of a synthetic proposition is 
simply equated with that of an a posteriori or empirical one).
Arguments for the Existence of A Priori Justification
Does a priori justification, as so far characterized, genuinely exist? The rationalist 
answers this question affirmatively, while one version of empiricism (moderate empiri-
cism), though acknowledging the existence of a priori justification, understands it in a 
way that drastically limits its scope and significance, and a second (radical empiricism) 
gives an entirely negative answer to this question. These views will be considered below, 
but it will be easier to appreciate what is at stake if we first consider the main reasons 
that have been offered for thinking either that a priori justification does, in fact, exist or, 
alternatively, that it must exist if severe versions of skepticism are to be avoided.
The Argument from Examples
The most widely discussed reason for thinking that a priori justification exists is that 
there seem to be many, many examples of propositions for which there are clear and 
obvious reasons of this sort. Here the most straightforward examples come from math-
ematics and logic, but there are others of many widely varying kinds. Here is a mislead-
ingly short list, reflecting some of the main types:
1. 2 + 3 = 5.
2. All cubes have 12 edges.
3. For any propositions P and Q, if it is true that P or Q and it is false that P, then it is 
true that Q.
4. If object A is larger in a specified dimension (length, area, volume, etc.) than object 
B and B is, in turn, larger in that same dimension than object C, then A is larger in 
that dimension than C.
5. No surface can be uniformly red and uniformly blue at the same time.
It is initially very plausible to think that anyone who understands and thinks carefully 
about each of these propositions will be able to see or grasp immediately that it must be 
true, that it is true in any possible world or situation—and the same thing also seems to 
be true of indefinitely many further examples of these sorts and others. From an intui-
tive standpoint, this sort of seeing or grasping seems to constitute, at least in the absence 
of further relevant considerations, a good, indeed compelling, justification or reason 
for thinking that the proposition in question is true, albeit not one that is capable of 
being stated as a separate proposition. Moreover, while independent experiential rea-
sons might also be found for some or all of these propositions, insights of this basic sort 
do not seem to depend on experience in any discernible way.
Both rationalists and moderate empiricists claim that examples like these, which 
could be multiplied more or less without limit, provide compelling evidence for the 
existence of a priori justification and a priori knowledge. Radical empiricists reject this 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
286
conclusion and so are obliged to offer some alternative account of our reasons for think-
ing that such propositions are true, one that makes them dependent on experience after 
all, or else to simply deny that we have any such reasons. Neither of these alternatives 
seems initially very plausible.
One other point is worth adding. What is perhaps most misleading about the list of 
examples just given is that having been chosen for their obviousness, they are far from 
the most philosophically interesting cases of alleged a priori justification. Rationalists 
will argue that there are many more interesting, albeit somewhat less obvious, examples 
as well: propositions about the unlikelihood of complex coincidences of various kinds; 
certain moral propositions; metaphysical propositions about matters such as the struc-
ture of time and space; and many, many others.
Dialectical Arguments for the Existence of A Priori Justification
It is possible to reject such examples as genuine, no matter how intuitively unappealing 
this may at first seem. But there are also other arguments of a more dialectical character 
for the existence of a priori justification, arguments that make clear the high skeptical 
price of rejecting the existence of such justification. (As will be seen later, these argu-
ments also make the moderate empiricist view of the nature of a priori justification more 
difficult to defend.)
The first such argument is concerned with the relation between experience and cer-
tain of the beliefs which it intuitively seems to justify. On any account of the justificatory 
force of experience, there will be some beliefs whose justification derives from a direct 
relation to experience and others whose relation to experience is less direct, requiring 
something like an inference from directly experiential premises to further conclusions. 
Where exactly the line between the beliefs that are directly justified by experience and 
those that are not actually falls is a difficult issue, which need not be resolved here. But 
on any view that has ever been seriously advocated, the class of beliefs that are broadly 
empirical but not justified by a direct relation to experience is extremely large, including 
at least: (i) beliefs about the unobserved past; (ii) beliefs about unobserved situations in 
the present; (iii) beliefs about the future; (iv) beliefs in laws of nature and similar sorts 
of generalizations; and (v) beliefs about unobservable entities and processes, such as 
those described by theoretical science. Taken together, beliefs of these various kinds are 
obviously fundamental to our picture of the world and our place in it.
But how can experience provide justification for beliefs of these kinds, if not directly? 
For an inference from directly experiential premises to these further conclusions to be 
justified seems to require a logically prior justification of some sort for conditional prop-
ositions having a conjunction of beliefs for which there are direct experiential reasons 
as antecedent, and the further belief we are focusing on as consequent—for only this 
can establish the needed connection between experience and something that it does 
not justify in the more direct way. Here it will make the issue clearer to suppose that 
the antecedent of such a conditional is, in fact, a conjunction of all the propositions for 
which there are direct experiential reasons, even though most of these will be irrelevant 
to any particular consequent.
What sort of reason could we have for thinking that a conditional proposition of the 
indicated sort is true? If all of the things for which there are direct experiential reasons 
are already contained in the antecedent and if the consequent genuinely goes beyond 
the content of the antecedent (as only some highly implausible reductionist view could 

287
A PRIORI KNOWLEDGE
deny for the sorts of propositions in question), then experience can offer no direct rea-
son for thinking that such a conditional proposition is true—and no indirect reason 
without assuming some other conditional of the very same sort. It apparently follows 
that the justification for a conditional proposition of this sort, if there is any, can only be 
a priori in character. In this way, a blanket rejection of the very existence of a priori jus-
tification leads to a deep and pervasive version of skepticism, one in which we have no 
reason for thinking that any of the various seemingly empirical propositions that are not 
directly justified by experience are true. And this is a result that is difficult to accept.
A further dialectical argument is, in effect, a generalization of the first. It questions 
whether a view that denies the existence of a priori justification can satisfactorily 
account for reasoning itself. Any reasoned or argumentative transition from a proposi-
tion or group of propositions to some further conclusion seems also to rely on there 
being a good reason for thinking that a conditional proposition is true, in this case one 
having the conjunction of the premises as its antecedent and the conclusion in question 
as its consequent. That such a conditional is true (or probably true) is, in general, not 
the sort of thing that could be directly established by experience, while to say that it is 
itself arrived at via some further process of reasoning is only to raise the identical issue 
about that previous step. The suggestion is that if we never have a priori justification 
for thinking that if one proposition or set of propositions is true, some further proposi-
tion must be true as well, then there is simply nothing that genuinely cogent reasoning 
could consist in. In this way, the rejection of a priori justification seems tantamount to 
intellectual suicide.
Three Main Philosophical Views of A Priori Justification
Rationalism
The view most straightforwardly supported by these arguments is rationalism. According 
to the rationalist, human beings possess, in addition to the cognitive faculties involved 
in the various sorts of experience, a fundamental faculty of a priori insight (or a priori 
intuition) that yields direct and justified apprehensions of necessary truths. Such appre-
hensions or insights are not regarded by the rationalist as merely brute convictions of 
truth, on a par with the hunches and fears that might simply strike someone in a psy-
chologically compelling way. On the contrary, these insights at least purport to reveal 
not just that the proposition in question must be true but also, at some level, why this is 
and, indeed, must be so. They are thus, the rationalist claims, putative insights into the 
essential nature of things or situations of the relevant kind, into the way that reality in 
the respect in question must be. According to rationalism, it is insights or intuitions of 
this sort that account for the justification of propositions like those enumerated earlier 
and that also account for justified inferences from directly experiential claims to further 
broadly empirical conclusions and for successful reasoning in general.
Historical proponents of rationalism have tended to claim that a priori insight is 
infallible, incapable of being mistaken, though this view is often more taken for granted 
than explicitly argued for. But, as already mentioned above, such a claim is inessen-
tial to the central idea of a priori justification. It is also clear from a wide variety of 
examples (propositions involved in logical paradoxes, mathematical errors, compet-
ing philosophical propositions, etc.), that it could be defended only by insisting that 
many apparent a priori insights are not genuine, thereby raising the problem of how to 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
288
distinguish genuine a priori insights from merely apparent ones and thus undercutting 
the justificatory force of even what seem to be clear cases of such insight. Thus more 
recent rationalists have repudiated the claim of infallibility, arguing that such a claim is 
not required for such insights to have substantial justificatory force (see BonJour 1998; 
and Bealer 1998).
The more moderate sort of rationalist who rejects infallibility can also concede 
that specific a priori insights can be undermined or even refuted by experience, while 
insisting at the same time that the connection between experience and any plausible 
a priori proposition is almost never direct. It follows that the refutation of one a priori 
proposition by experience will still rely on other a priori insights in the way discussed 
above—thus providing no real basis for denying that a priori insight is a genuine source 
of justification.
The rationalist appeal to direct a priori insight as a source of justification has often 
been alleged to be objectionably “mysterious” or “obscure” (see, for example, Devitt 
2005a, 2005b). The idea here seems to be that there is something objectionable, fun-
damentally irrational or at least a-rational, about a non-experiential source of justifica-
tion that relies on direct insight and cannot be articulated further by appeal to steps or 
background principles of some sort. Rationalists will respond that apart from the limited 
class of propositions that are directly justified by experience, there is in the end simply 
no other form that a reason for thinking that something is true could possibly take. To 
be sure, a priori insights can be combined in complicated ways to yield more elaborate 
arguments, but in the end the various steps in such arguments, together with any prem-
ises or principles that they invoke, can only be justified by appeal to the very same sort 
of a priori insight—if, that is, they are to be justified at all. A rationalist can grant that 
it would be nice to have a fuller, richer account of a priori insight and how it works. But 
given both intuitively compelling examples, and an argument showing such insight to 
be essential to any but the most minimal cognitive functioning, he will argue that the 
absence of such an account does not yield a serious reason for denying its existence.
One other point about the nature of a priori insights should also be briefly men-
tioned, though this is one that has been less widely recognized. For a variety of reasons, 
but most fundamentally because of the role that such insights are supposed to play in 
deductive inference, it is often, and quite possibly always, a mistake to construe them 
as propositional in form. The problem here is essentially the one pointed out long ago 
by Lewis Carroll: at least in the most fundamental sorts of cases (think here of modus 
ponens), the application of a propositional insight concerning the cogency of such an 
inference would require either a further inference of the very sort in question or one 
equally fundamental, thereby leading to a vicious regress. Instead, it seems, the relevant 
logical insight must be construed as non-propositional in character, as a direct grasping 
of the way in which the conclusion is related to the premises and validly flows from 
them. And once the need for this non-propositional conception of a priori insight is 
appreciated in the context of deductive inference, it seems plausible to extend it to 
many other cases as well; in particular, it seems plausible to regard the most fundamen-
tal insights pertaining to each of the examples listed in the following section as non-
propositional in character. Thus in the red–blue example, the insight is most plausibly 
viewed as not merely the brute conviction that a certain proposition is true but rather 
as an insight into the nature and relations of the ingredients of that proposition, mainly 
the properties of redness and blueness and the relation of incompatibility between them 
(see further BonJour 2001 [a reply to Boghossian 2001]).

289
A PRIORI KNOWLEDGE
A Priori Justification Without A Priori Insight: Moderate Empiricism
If we set aside the relatively minor issues of infallibility and defeasibility by experience, 
virtually all serious epistemologists up to the time of Hume and Kant were rationalists in 
essentially the sense just explained. But since that time, skepticism about a priori justifi-
cation in general, and rationalism in particular, has become increasingly pervasive. The 
most prominent position since that time and especially for much of the past century has 
been a relatively moderate version of empiricism, one that concedes the existence of a 
priori justification of a sort, but claims that when properly understood, such justification 
does not have the epistemological and metaphysical significance that is attributed to it 
by the rationalist. Instead, according to this moderate empiricist view, a priori justifica-
tion, rather than reflecting genuine insights into reality, derives merely from definitions 
or from conceptual or linguistic conventions.
The basic idea of moderate empiricism is to explain a priori justification in a way 
that at the same time drastically undercuts its significance. For this purpose, the most 
standard versions of moderate empiricism appeal to the concept of analyticity, holding 
both (i) that all propositions for which there is genuine a priori justification are ana-
lytic, and (ii) that the a priori justification of an analytic proposition does not require 
the sort of insight into the character of reality advocated by the rationalist, but instead 
can be explained in a more modest way. It is important to see that each of these claims 
is equally essential to the view, and thus a successful version of moderate empiricism 
must advocate one univocal conception of analyticity in relation to which both of them 
can be plausibly defended. In fact, moderate empiricists have put forth not one, but 
many different and not obviously equivalent conceptions of analyticity, and have often 
tended to shift illegitimately among them depending on which of these two theses they 
are defending at any particular moment.
When the various conceptions of analyticity have been sorted out, they fall mostly 
into two main groups. Some conceptions are reductive conceptions: they explain some 
cases of a priori justification by appeal to other cases, while providing in principle no 
way to account for the latter cases. Here the most obvious example is the Fregean con-
ception of an analytic proposition already mentioned above. To say that all propositions 
for which there is genuine a priori justification are, or are transformable into, truths of 
formal logic obviously does nothing at all to explain how these propositions of formal 
logic are themselves justified a priori (which they must be if a priori justification is to 
result from the overall account). And something similar is true of the familiar Kantian 
conception of an analytic proposition as one whose predicate is included in its subject: 
this amounts to reducing a priori justified propositions to propositions of approximately 
the form “all FGH are F,” but again without accounting for the a priori justification of 
those propositions. In addition, there are many propositions that appear to be justified a 
priori, but which do not seem to fit these reductive accounts—including, in fact, all of 
the examples cited earlier except (3), which is one of the logical claims whose justifica-
tion remains unexplained.
Most at least of the moderate empiricist views that are not in this way reductive seem 
to lose sight of the main epistemological issue altogether by simply equating analytic-
ity with one of the features that a proposition for which there is an immediate a priori 
justification undeniably has (or at least seems to have) on the rationalist account, not 
realizing that this fails to yield an independent account of a priori justification itself. 
The plainest example of this mistake is the view that identifies an analytic proposition 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
290
with one that is “true by virtue of meaning” or “true by definition” (where these for-
mulations are not further explained in some reductive way). This apparently amounts 
to nothing more than the view that one who understands such a proposition can see 
directly or intuitively that it is true—and this is really just a misleading restatement 
of the rationalist view, not an alternative to it. Obviously a rationalist does not think 
that one can have rational insight into the truth of a proposition without understand-
ing its meaning; the question is whether such an insight can be entirely reduced to, or 
accounted for by reference to, that meaning, something that this version of analytic-
ity does nothing to establish. Other would-be versions of moderate empiricism equate 
analyticity with necessity, again failing to realize that this metaphysical feature fails to 
account for a priori justification unless supplemented by just the sort of a priori insight 
into necessity that the rationalist advocates (e.g., Lewis 1946: 57 and Salmon 1967: 30; 
both seem guilty of this mistake). 
Is there any version of moderate empiricism that avoids both of the pitfalls just 
described? One possibility is a view that holds that a priori justification results from 
linguistic convention. Another, closely related view holds that sentences that express a 
priori justified propositions (or more plausibly some subset of such sentences) should be 
viewed as implicit definitions of the pivotal terms that they contain, with the suggestion 
that it is this status as implicitly definitional that accounts for the a priori justification 
of the propositions in question (see, for example, Boghossian 1996). Unfortunately, 
however, it is far from clear what these views amount to or how they are supposed to 
work, and a full consideration of them is impossible here. Both views seem, however, to 
rely essentially on the idea that a priori justification somehow derives from facts about 
language, and the central problem for such views is that this last claim is very dubious. 
To say that the justification (or perhaps even the truth) of a priori justified propositions 
depends on facts about language would apparently mean that alterations in language 
could make these propositions no longer justified (or perhaps even no longer true)—as 
opposed to merely changing how they can properly be expressed. In relation to exam-
ples of apparent a priori justification like those offered above, such a claim seems fairly 
obviously mistaken.
One other point worth noticing is that no version of moderate empiricism seems at 
all likely to be able to account for all of the instances of a priori justification needed 
to satisfy the dialectical arguments discussed above. In particular, it seems clear that 
the inferences from directly experiential premises to conclusions that go beyond direct 
experience cannot plausibly be regarded as merely matters of definition (implicit or oth-
erwise) or linguistic convention or as justified on purely logical or conceptual grounds—
at least not if reductive views such as phenomenalism and the even more implausible 
analogs of phenomenalism that would apply to historical propositions or propositions 
about seemingly unobservable entities are rejected.
The Rejection of A Priori Justification: Radical Empiricism
A more extreme alternative is to reject the very existence of any sort of a priori justifica-
tion, a view that has been most prominently advocated by W. V. O. Quine (see Quine 
1961). There are two main questions that need to be asked about this more radical ver-
sion of empiricism. The more obvious one is what the arguments for it, and against the 
existence of a priori justification, are supposed to be. A second, less obvious question 
is whether, especially in light of the dialectical reasons in favor of a priori justification 

291
A PRIORI KNOWLEDGE
discussed above, it is possible for this radical version of empiricism to yield a non-skepti-
cal epistemology.
Quine himself tends to assume that anyone who defends the idea of a priori justifica-
tion must be a moderate empiricist, and some of his arguments (in particular the famous 
“circle of terms” argument in Quine 1961) really apply only to that view and are thus 
ineffective against rationalism. (This argument also makes the mistake, already dis-
cussed, of conflating the three main distinctions in the area.)
When these ineffective arguments are set aside, the only very clear Quinean argument 
that remains is one that appeals to the Duhemian thesis that claims about the world can-
not be experimentally tested in isolation from each other but only in larger groups (see 
Quine 1961). Quine’s extreme version of this thesis is the holistic claim that nothing 
less than “the whole of science” can be meaningfully confronted with experience. From 
this he infers that any belief in the total “web of belief,” including those for which there 
is allegedly a priori justification, might be “given up” in order to accommodate “recalci-
trant experience,” and so, apparently, that such a priori justification does not exist after 
all. But this conclusion does not follow in any clear way, even if the extreme holistic 
view is accepted. Quine is, in effect, assuming that the only reasons relevant to retaining 
or giving up a belief in the “web of belief” have to do with accommodating experience, 
but this is just to beg the question against the existence of independent, a priori justi-
fication for or against such beliefs by assuming that all justification is empirical. And if 
this assumption is not made, then a proponent of a priori justification can freely admit 
that holistic empirical reasons of this sort might count against a proposition for which 
there is a priori justification, while insisting that the reverse is true as well. Thus the 
ultimate outcome would depend on the relative weight of these two sorts of reasons in a 
particular case, with there being no reason to think that a priori justification will always 
or even very often be overridden—or, still less, that it does not exist at all. And a propo-
nent of a priori justification will also insist (see below) that the very connections among 
beliefs that result in the holistic web can, in the end, only be understood as a priori in 
character. (Followers of Quine also sometimes appeal to the alleged “mysteriousness” or 
“obscurity” of the idea of a priori justification, already discussed above.)
The other main issue concerning radical empiricism is whether it can offer a gen-
uinely non-skeptical epistemology. While the details of Quine’s view are themselves 
quite obscure, it is clear that a belief is supposed to be justified in virtue of being an 
element of a holistic system of beliefs, some of whose members are appropriately related 
to experience and which, as a whole, satisfies certain further criteria, such as simplicity, 
scope, explanatory adequacy, fecundity, and conservatism. Presumably he would say this 
about beliefs whose content is the apparently a priori justified propositions listed above, 
and others like them.
While such a claim is very implausible in these cases and many others, the deepest 
objection to it is more dialectical in character and is, in fact, an application of one of 
the arguments discussed above. Consider then the conditional proposition (call this 
Q) that if a proposition is included in a system that satisfies all of the Quinean condi-
tions, whatever exactly they amount to, then it is likely to be true, and ask what reason 
there is for thinking that this conditional proposition is itself true. Clearly Q cannot 
be directly justified by experience, and to appeal to its inclusion in a holistic system of 
beliefs satisfying these very conditions seems plainly circular. Thus either there is an a 
priori reason (whether immediate or resulting from a more extended a priori argument 
of some sort) for thinking that Q is true, or there is apparently no reason at all. If the 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
292
latter is the case, then Quine’s view fails to yield genuine justification, while if the for-
mer is the case, then his rejection of a priori justification must be mistaken. In addition 
to reiterating the point that a priori justification is indispensable for any justification 
beyond that yielded by direct experience, this argument also seems to show that a priori 
justification is at least as well understood as the idea of holistic empirical justification, 
which turns out, in fact, to depend upon it. Moreover, similar points could be made 
about the more specific claims that Quine’s various criteria are themselves satisfied 
by a particular holistic system, since none of these can be plausibly construed as being 
directly justified by experience.
Is there any response to this objection that is available within a broadly Quinean, rad-
ical empiricist position? One recent proponent of such a view, Michael Devitt, attempts 
to argue that circularity apparently involved in justifying Q by appeal to its inclusion 
in a system satisfying the Quinean conditions is not, in fact, viciously circular (Devitt 
2005a, 2005b). Devitt follows R. B. Braithwaite (1953) in distinguishing “premise-cir-
cularity” from “rule-circularity,” with the suggestion being that while premise-circular-
ity is plainly objectionable, this is not so clearly true of rule-circularity. Thus if we think 
of Q as a Quinean epistemic rule, the idea is that Q could after all be justified by being 
included in a system satisfying the Quinean conditions and thus by appeal to Q itself. 
But this suggestion seems extremely dubious. If the issue is whether accepting beliefs 
or claims in accordance with Q (in the way that Quine’s “holistic empirical” approach 
sanctions) gives us any reason to think that our results are true and so any justification 
for the propositions thus accepted, it is obviously no help at all to be told that the claim 
that those results are likely to be true (or that Q is a good rule) can be arrived at by 
employing Q itself—the very rule whose truth-conduciveness is in doubt. Such an argu-
ment might not beg the question in quite the sense that a premise-circular one does, but 
it is just as unsatisfactory in relation to the question at issue. Thus the basic objection 
to a Quinean view still stands: such a view can give no satisfactory account of how the 
fact that a belief satisfies its requirements constitutes a reason to think that it is true—or 
indeed of how we can have reason to think that its requirements are indeed satisfied. In 
this way, radical empiricism, with its rejection of a priori justification, apparently leads 
only to a deep and pervasive skepticism.
A Summary of Some Main Outstanding Issues
It will be useful to conclude by summarizing the main issues that are reflected in the 
previous discussion, issues that are still under active debate, adding also some that have 
not so far been explicitly mentioned.
First, is the rationalist idea of a priori intuition or insight too obscure to be philo-
sophically acceptable or otherwise objectionable on broadly scientific grounds? One 
issue here, as we have seen, is whether the standard of unacceptable obscurity or the 
alleged requirement for scientific explanation can themselves be established without an 
a priori appeal.
Second, a further, related issue is whether the sort of understanding of the content of a 
claim that the rationalist view seems to require as a basis for a priori intuition or insight 
or self-evidence can be explained in an acceptable way. Being able to see or grasp in a 
direct, intuitive way that a claim like “nothing can be red and green all over at the same 
time” must be true seems to require mental access to the content of this claim, and in par-
ticular to the properties of redness and greenness themselves. But many recent accounts 

293
A PRIORI KNOWLEDGE
of mental content (externalist accounts and those that appeal to a language of thought) 
have no real room for this sort of direct awareness of content. Is this an objection to the 
idea of a priori intuition or insight, and so to rationalism (and perhaps also to moderate 
empiricism), or does it merely show that these accounts of mental content are inadequate 
(since such a grasp of content is a familiar and undeniable feature of experience)?
Third, is there a viable account of how the non-observational claims that seem from 
a common-sense standpoint to be justified can be accounted for on a purely empirical 
basis with no a priori appeal? Does the limitation to empirical sources of justification 
leave everything that goes beyond direct observation unjustified and arbitrary, as the 
rationalist argument claims, or is there some way in which a purely empirical epistemol-
ogy can avoid this result?
Fourth, is there an account of analyticity that can genuinely account for all of the 
plausible cases of a priori justification? Such an account must avoid presupposing some 
cases of a priori justification and also must not merely amount to a restatement of the 
rationalist view in other terms. (See Boghossian 1996 for one effort in this direction.)
Fifth, what is the bearing on this issue of the recently popular idea of naturalism? 
While the idea of naturalism has been elaborated in many different ways, proponents 
of naturalized epistemology have almost always been hostile to the idea of a priori justi-
fication, and some have, in effect, made the rejection of the a priori the defining thesis 
of naturalized epistemology. But some recent philosophers (see Rey 1998 and Goldman 
1999) have argued that when each is properly understood, naturalism and a priori jus-
tification can be reconciled.
Sixth, are there viable further alternatives to the three main views discussed above, 
perhaps alternatives involving a weaker conception of what a priori justification 
amounts to, but one that still has epistemological value? A number of recent discussions 
of the a priori (see Boghossian and Peacocke 2000) can be understood as attempts in 
this direction.
References
Ayer, A. J. (1946) Language, Truth and Logic, 2nd ed., London: Gollancz.
Bealer, G. (1998) “Intuition and the Autonomy of Philosophy,” in M. DePaul and W. Ramsey (eds.), 
Rethinking Intuition: The Psychology of Intuition and Its Role in Philosophical Inquiry, Lanham, MD: Rowman 
and Littlefield.
Boghossian, P. (1996) “Analyticity Reconsidered,” Noûs 30, 360–91.
—— (2001) “Inference and Insight,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 63, 633–40.
—— and Peacocke, Christopher (2000) New Essays on the A Priori, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
BonJour, L. (1998) In Defense of Pure Reason, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
—— (2001) “Replies,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 63, 673–98.
Braithwaite, R. B. (1953) Scientific Explanation, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Devitt, M. (2005a) “There is No A Priori,” in M. Steup and E. Sosa (eds.), Contemporary Debates in Epistemology, 
Oxford: Blackwell.
—— (2005b) “Reply to BonJour,” in M. Steup and E. Sosa (eds.), Contemporary Debates in Epistemology, Oxford: 
Blackwell.
Goldman, Alvin (1999) “A Priori Warrant and Naturalistic Epistemology,” in James Tomberlin (ed.), 
Philosophical Perspectives, vol. 13, pp. 1–28.
Lewis, C. I. (1946) An Analysis of Knowledge and Valuation, La Salle, IL: Open Court.
Quine, W. V. (1961) “Two Dogmas of Empiricism,” in From a Logical Point of View, 2nd ed., Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Rey, Georges (1998) “A Naturalistic A Priori,” Philosophical Studies 92: 25–43.
Salmon, Wesley (1967) The Foundations of Scientific Inference, Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
27
PERCEPTUAL 
KNOWLEDGE
David Sosa
Introduction
We acquire knowledge through perception. But how? What role does perception play 
in our knowing things? And what must it be like in order to play that role? These are 
philosophical issues about perceptual knowledge.
Perceptual experience is a dominant characteristic of consciousness. And it is hard 
not to feel that experience immediately reveals to us an external reality. That same 
thought, that experience reveals an external world—a world “beyond” the experience, 
with its own character—creates a problem, because it opens up the possibility that the 
world experienced is different from what it appears to be, a possibility that should be 
closed off, it would seem, if the revelatory quality of experience is to be secured.
Securing that quality is not merely a matter of satisfactory self-understanding, not 
merely a matter of making good philosophically on what our experience appears to us 
to be (i.e., immediately revelatory): it is in virtue of that revelatory quality that we take 
ourselves to acquire knowledge from perception of the world beyond ourselves. An epis-
temological issue hangs in the balance. And satisfactory understanding of this way of 
connecting with the world around—by knowing it—is pressing for practical reasons too: 
skepticism is alienating and depressing as much as it is intellectually implausible.
How shall we understand the relationship between perceptual experience and the 
reality it purports to represent? One way to characterize a deep philosophical tension 
here is as between (i) the apparent directness of perceptual experience—when we see 
an apple, there doesn’t seem to be anything other than (a part of) the apple itself in 
virtue of seeing which we’re seeing the apple—and (ii) an indirectness to which we 
appear to be committed by the intrinsic similarity between veridical experiences on 
the one hand and illusory and hallucinatory experiences on the other: if an experi-
ence can misrepresent, then how can it be in its nature to represent directly? It is this 
apparent intrinsic indiscriminability between epistemically sound experience and 
misleading experience, together with the apparent directness of our perceptual con-
tact with external reality, that constitutes the deepest philosophical problem about 
perceptual knowledge.
Because the issue is complex, touching on questions beyond epistemology in meta-
physics and philosophy of mind, there isn’t room for a comprehensive survey of all the 
most important contributions to all the relevant issues. This will be instead a selective, 
partial, and opinionated review of a small number of the topics and texts that seem 

295
PERCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE
especially useful in connection with this deep philosophical issue about the role of 
perception in knowledge.
Traditionally there are broadly two realist responses to the tension noted above: 
oppose (i)—deny that perceptual experience is direct in the relevant sense—and 
thereby embrace “indirect realism,” or oppose (ii)—deny that veridical experiences are 
relevantly similar to illusory or hallucinatory experiences—and thereby embrace “direct 
realism.”
We will look at a representative version of each of direct and indirect realism, consid-
ering compelling ways of developing them, in turn. “Sense-datum theory” is an indirect 
realism whose unpopularity today is perhaps exceeded only by its longevity and tenac-
ity. “Disjunctivism” is a direct realism and of more recent vintage.
For completeness, note that anti-realist positions are also possible, according to 
which, to take Berkeley’s idealism as one example, the world revealed by experience is 
not, in the relevant sense, “beyond” experience—the character of any world we might 
engage perceptually is not independent of the character of perceptual experience itself. 
Although the specifically epistemic motivations for idealism are often insufficiently 
appreciated, we will simply presuppose realism in our discussion below: idealism and 
other anti-realisms raise additional, independent metaphysical issues.
Direct Realism: Sense-Datum Theory
In his useful book on our topic, The Problem of Perception, A.D. Smith (2002) presents 
a traditional “Argument from Illusion” in careful detail and a sympathetic light. The 
argument consists of four steps:
1. Sense experience is subject to illusion: some ordinary objects do not have features 
they perceptually appear to have.
2. [The “Phenomenal Principle”]: Whenever something perceptually appears to have 
a feature when it in fact does not, we are directly aware of something that does actu-
ally have that feature.
3. If what we are immediately aware of has a feature the ordinary object does not, we 
are not in such cases immediately aware of the ordinary object.
4. Even in veridical situations, we are immediately aware of “sense-data,” and at best 
only indirectly aware of normal physical objects.
This argument, in one form or another, has long been a part of the philosophical 
tradition. In effect, it argues for the existence of a perceptual intermediary—a “veil”—
between subjects like us and the physical world that we perceive. One version of this 
view is “sense-datum theory,” It’s a variety of indirect realism associated with Bertrand 
Russell among many others.
Characteristic of opposing positions, what we will call “direct realism,” is that what 
gives sensory character to perceptual consciousness is a public quality of some physical 
object. As we’ve seen, and as Smith notes, the problem with any such position is that it 
appears to hold at best only for veridical perceptions.
Smith urges that:
What the Argument from Illusion attempts primarily to achieve is the recogni-
tion that . . . qualities can be present to consciousness in perception despite the fact 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
296
that they do not characterize the normal physical objects we are said to be perceiving. 
It then challenges us to make sense of this fact.
(Smith 2002: 36–7)
Objects can appear to us in inaccurate form. The “Phenomenal Principle,” expressed 
in thesis (2) above, embodies one way of making sense of this: the quality is present to 
consciousness because it is instantiated rather by something else—a mental particular.
Later, Smith claims that what is essential to direct realism is that “that which gives sen-
sory character to perceptual consciousness is a public quality of some physical object” (Smith 
2002: 43–4). But how could the public quality of a physical object be what is giving 
character to experience in cases of illusion or hallucination?
To foreshadow: this question can be given a rather more satisfactory answer than 
might at first appear. That answer will be, eventually, the key element in opening up 
new space for the position between direct and indirect realism toward which we will 
finally move. At this stage, what’s important is to appreciate the prima facie difficulty: 
how can the character of perceptual experience be given by public qualities of ordinary 
physical objects (as seems to be the case), when experience can have the same charac-
ter even in cases of illusion, when candidate ordinary physical objects do not have the 
quality in question, and, in cases of hallucination, when there are no candidate ordinary 
physical objects?
Before Smith, John Foster had usefully offered a refinement of claims about the direct-
ness of perception by distinguishing two sorts of issue about “direct realism” (Foster 
2000). One issue concerns specifically perceptual mediation in experience. According 
to direct realism about this issue, once we reach the “origin” of the in virtue of perceiving 
relation as it applies to physical objects (perhaps as a limit), we’ve reached the origin of 
the in virtue of perceiving relation. Another sort of direct realism insists, rather, that there 
is no psychological mediation, at all, beyond perceptual relations to physical objects. 
Once we’ve reached the origin of the in virtue of perceiving relation as it applies to physi-
cal objects (perhaps as a limit), we’ve reached the origin not only of the in virtue of per-
ceiving relation but, indeed, of any psychological in virtue of relation at all. This stronger 
direct realism is not supported by the mundane phenomenological evidence mentioned 
earlier—that the external world appears to be revealed to us in experience and that the 
constituents of experience seem to be the very physical objects represented, with no 
other perception of a physical object intervening.
Another philosopher, Howard Robinson, was—before Foster—concerned with what 
he defines as the “intentionality” of perceptual experience, its putting us in touch with 
particular objects in the physical world. Robinson’s characterization of Aristotle’s views 
is remarkable in this connection: in sensory experience we are in receipt of phantasms, 
which amounts to our being in receipt of the form of the external objects we perceive 
(Robinson 1994: 4–11). Robinson is doubtful that Aristotle provides any relief for the 
problems urged for “representationalism” and other conceptions of intentionality that 
are less restrictive than his: if what constitutes our experience is the form of the object 
perceived, on a particular conception of form, then, according to Robinson, “It is dif-
ficult to see how [on Aristotle’s view, perception] can constitute an especially good way 
of being in touch with that very object” (Robinson 1994: 9).
But although on the Aristotelian view under consideration, the intentionality of 
phantasms would require the cooperation of causation—it would be because that phan-
tasm was produced by that very object that the phantasm puts you in touch with it, this 

297
PERCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE
need not rule out the resulting intentionality as the genuine article. Something can 
possess intrinsic intentionality even if its putting you in touch with particular physical 
objects requires the satisfaction of conditions external to it.
Qualities of Experience, and the Speckled Hen
Return now to the “Phenomenal Principle,” the important premise in the Argument 
from Illusion above. Gilbert Harman, in his influential paper, “The Intrinsic Quality of 
Experience,” sees the principle as urging that because we can be subject to illusion and 
hallucination, we must, in experience, actually be seeing something internal or mental. 
According to Harman (1990: 35), this fallacious inference on the part of the “notori-
ous” sense-datum theory of perception arises through failure to keep elementary points 
straight.
In fact, together with other critics, Harman himself might have done more to main-
tain important distinctions here, including the one observed earlier between two sorts of 
direct/indirect realism issue: the sense-datum theorist need not claim that the nature of 
the awareness we have of the internal items is the same—is, for example, perceptual—as 
the awareness we have of external objects when we see them. Harman seems to be com-
mitted to the idea that in hallucination there are some things that we literally see: “what 
Eloise sees before her is a tree, whether or not it is a hallucination” (Harman 1990: 36). 
And, indeed, with that commitment in place, it might become harder to target the best 
version of the sort of view Harman seems to want to oppose. The best version of indirect 
realism does not characterize a subject’s relation to sense-data as itself visual.
To his credit, Harman does, in effect, take up this issue. He notes that there can seem 
to be an ambiguity, of the relevant sort, in perceptual verbs. But he thinks it “does not 
affect the point [he] is trying to make” (Harman 1990: 36). Whether Harman’s right 
about that or not, sense-datum theory faces other difficulties.
The “Speckled Hen” is a compelling example used to create a philosophical problem 
for a sort of position in epistemology that goes naturally with the acceptance of sense-
datum theory (Chisholm 1942). So-called “foundationalist internalism” analyzes the 
justification of perceptual belief as grounded in a specific relation to perceptual experi-
ence. In one version of the position, if one’s experience has a certain character, and one, 
on that basis, forms a belief “to that effect,” then that belief is foundationally justified 
(and further beliefs formed inferentially on the basis of that foundation can be justified 
in turn).
The problem is that this analysis appears to be insufficient: your experience might be 
as of a hen with, say, 48 speckles and yet if you were, on that basis, to form a belief that 
you were having an experience as of a hen before you with 48 speckles, or a belief that 
there was in fact a hen before you with 48 speckles, such a belief would not be adequately 
justified (no more justified, for example, than the belief that the hen had 47, or 49, 
speckles—only withholding belief seems appropriate). The problem for the postulation 
of sense-data is that they are of no help, here, in a case like those for which they were 
designed.
But one might be skeptical, to begin with, about some of the presuppositions involved: 
it is far from obvious that one’s experience could, as in the case described, have a suf-
ficiently determinate character in representing the hen’s speckles. Perhaps in the sort of 
case that would be troubling, what’s normally the most plausible description is that the 
experience is indeterminate in various ways.

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
298
In order for the counterexample to work, it would have to be that although it would 
not be justified to form the belief that you’re having an experience as of a hen before you 
with 48 speckles, nevertheless the content of your experience is as of a hen with exactly 
that many speckles—not 47, not 49. The example needs to motivate the thought that 
the experience is determinate in ways that go beyond your ability to be aware of. But it’s 
not clear this should be maintained.
Two lines of support would tend to sustain it: first, we can imagine holding your expe-
rience fixed in mind while you, in some sense (and indeed some sense can be given to 
this, since it is plausible that something like this can be done), take the time to count the 
number of speckles on “the-hen-in-your-experience.” If nothing about your experience 
changes while you perform this count, and if the answer you come up with at the end is 
48, then it is plausible that the content of your experience was always as of a hen with 
that many speckles—was not indeterminate in that way. (We can even make sense of 
your having counted erroneously, having missed a few of the speckles—again, suggesting 
that there are a certain number of speckles in some sense there to be counted prior to 
your noticing them.)
Second, there is a cost to denying that your experience is determinate in the relevant 
way. For you might it seems be conscious of the hen’s having some determinate number 
of speckles (you just don’t know how many). So then we appear to be forced to say that 
although it is determinate that there is some number of speckles the hen has, there is no 
number of speckles such that it is determinate that the hen has that number of speckles. 
Or, worse, we might be forced to say that there exists some number of speckles such that 
it is how many the hen-in your-experience has and yet it is not the case that the hen has 
just one, or two, or three . . . for every number.
But there are considerations that go against each of these lines of support. First, while 
it is more or less plausible that we can hold an experience fixed in mind in such a way 
that if there were to be an alteration, we would notice it, it is less clear that we should 
notice “changes” in your experience that involve only consistent specifications or deter-
minations. Indeed, does the defender of the speckled hen objection deny that any feature 
of your experience is indeterminate as envisaged? Suppose not; suppose, for example, 
that experience simply left open the particular shade of the grass on which the hen 
was running around. Now you hold the experience fixed and focus on the grass and it 
resolves into a particular shade of forest green. This resolution process does not present 
itself as an alteration. But I think it’s not implausible to say that although, ultimately, 
after and because of the process, the grass as experienced is forest green, this was not 
determinately true of the experience previously.
With respect to the second point, I’m not sure how costly we should find the high-
lighted consequence: indeed, experiences appear to have precisely the peculiarity to 
which the critic adverts. They can be such that they’re determinately (F or G) and not 
determinately F and not determinately G. It can be determinate that there exists an n 
such that P(n) and yet not determinate that p1, not determinate that p2 . . . and so on 
without end. It’s as if one were to write a (very short!) story that went like this: there was 
a hen, it had some (number of) speckles, then it passed away. Now, is it determinately 
true of the hen in the story that it had some number of spots? Apparently so. Is it deter-
minately true that it had one? Two? And so on.
In any case, we can take a different approach again. Grant, for the sake of argument, 
the speckled hen objection. It relies on a certain distinctive experiential phenomenon; 
the number of speckles is not available in experience in the same way that, say, the 

299
PERCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE
number of legs is. This availability might be a matter of degree. But the examples work 
precisely by focusing on aspects of the experience that are not available in the right 
way to ground a corresponding belief. Though we would be justified on the basis of our 
experience in forming a belief that there is a hen there with two legs, we would not be 
justified in forming a belief that there’s a hen there with 48 speckles.
The approach now being considered defines, even if stipulatively, a new sort of psy-
chological category, the “foundational experience,” that’s just like perceptual experi-
ence except that the “unavailable” aspects are left out—it is, by definition, a state all 
of whose aspects are like the experience of the legs, not of the speckles. And now the 
justificatory status of perceptual beliefs is determined by their relation to foundational 
experiences. The resulting position is less substantial than traditional foundationalism. 
But no speckled hen problems can now arise.
Indirect Realism: Disjunctivism
Whether or not sense-datum theory is viable in the end, a more direct realism might by 
now have become very tempting, in any case. Is there any way, consistent with the phe-
nomenon of illusion, to avoid the postulation of a perceptual intermediary between the 
subject and the reality perceived? In his seminal “Criteria, Defeasibility, and Knowledge,” 
John McDowell gives early expression (but see also Hinton 1973 and Snowdon 1981) 
to a kind of view (that reappears elsewhere in his own work and that has influenced 
many others), according to which we have “ways of telling how things are” which can 
subserve our knowledgeable judgments without being “something on which we have 
a firmer cognitive purchase than we do on the judgment itself” (McDowell 1982: 385).
In an earlier essay McDowell urges us not to interpret away the commonsense thought 
that one can sometimes literally perceive in another person’s facial expression that he is 
in pain. And though he recognizes some difficulties, he thinks ultimately that the oppos-
ing view relies on what he calls the “highest common factor” conception of experience 
and is the product of a problematic “objectifying” tendency in our understanding of 
human action. In this mode, we do not see human behavior in the right way as expressive 
of our human character; if it is seen as expressive at all, it is as merely the outward mani-
festation of fundamentally mental goings-on. Objectifying human behavior in this way, 
according to McDowell, “leads inexorably to the traditional problem of other minds” 
(McDowell 1982: 393).
Notice how McDowell’s dialectic here recapitulates a familiar variety of reaction to 
the threat of skepticism. McDowell thinks generally that so long as facts themselves are 
conceived as outside the reach of experience, then skepticism is inevitable. His basic 
point is that a conception of knowledge in which it can be grounded on what, for all one 
knows, is consistent with the falsity of what one might know, is inadequate or incoher-
ent (cf. Descartes, and then, much later, Lewis 1996).
McDowell’s view is then a species of perceptual “disjunctivism” according to which 
although veridical experience might be indistinguishable “from the inside” from illusory 
or hallucinatory experience, that should not lead us to a conception of those experiences 
on which they are, in relevant respects, the same. And disjunctivism is a direct realism, 
in contrast to the indirect realism of which sense-datum theory is the most outstanding 
example. Like sense-datum theory, disjunctivism effectively takes sides on the tension 
that set the general framework for this discussion, the tension between (i) the apparent 
directness of perceptual experience—when we see an apple, there doesn’t seem to be 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
300
anything other than (a part of) the apple itself in virtue of seeing which we’re seeing 
the apple—and (ii) an indirectness to which we appear to be committed by the intrinsic 
similarity between veridical experiences on the one hand and illusory and hallucinatory 
experiences on the other. While sense-datum theory takes (ii) to be primary and gives 
up on the directness of our relation to external reality—it’s sense-data that we, primar-
ily, see—disjunctivism takes (i) to be fundamental and gives up on (ii)—the apparent 
similarity between veridical experiences on the one hand and illusory and hallucina-
tory experiences on the other is merely apparent; it does not reveal any philosophically 
significant similarity in the nature of those experiences.
Ironically, McDowell, in effect, resists a kind of epistemological (rather than percep-
tual) “disjunctivism.” On this analog of the position about perceptual knowledge, there’s 
a deep, in a way brute, normative difference between a pair of possible subjects who pos-
sess the same criterion for belief but only one of whom, because of a mere difference in 
truth value, knows. I think that idea is remarkable because of how it engages McDowell’s 
own defense of a view according to which there’s a deep, in a way brute, normative dif-
ference between those in “phenomenally” indistinguishable states only one of whom, 
because of nothing more than a causal difference (with, itself, no discernible differential 
cognitive effect), perceives.
McDowell is sensitive to this structural similarity (McDowell 1982: 388–9, and 390) 
but thinks it is arguable that there are important disanalogies. But consider a pair of 
cases in both of which someone has experiences of exactly the same “phenomenal type” 
(experiences they cannot distinguish “from the inside”), but in only one of which the 
experience is caused in the familiar, normal way. According to McDowell’s suggestion, 
the subject in the latter case can, on the basis of his experience, come by knowledge, the 
subject in the former case cannot. But, we can press, echoing McDowell, the scope of 
the phenomenal is the same in each case; the fact is outside the reach of the phenom-
enal, so why should we not conclude that the achievements of the two subjects match? 
How can a difference in something phenomenally inaccessible to both subjects make it 
the case that one of them knows while the other does not?
I don’t offer this parody in order to defend it. I mean it only to bring out that 
McDowell’s argumentative scheme could be applied more broadly. Of course, McDowell 
has no sympathy for the idea that the phenomenal is the limit of the cognitively norma-
tive. So the last, rhetorical, question in the preceding paragraph will strike him as badly 
misguided: “Why shouldn’t it?” would likely be his answer. That is, on the other hand, 
not what he would say to the analogous question he himself asks here, “[h]ow can a dif-
ference in respect of something conceived as cognitively inaccessible to [two] subjects 
. . . make it the case that one of them knows . . . while the other does not—rather 
than leaving them both, strictly speaking, ignorant on the matter?” (McDowell 1982: 
373–4). But why not, once one accepts the attractive McDowellian thought about the 
phenomenal, continue in the same way and find it unproblematic that a difference in 
respect of something conceived as cognitively inaccessible to two subjects might make it 
the case that one of them knows while the other does not?
Michael Tye nicely lays out a line of thought leading to what he calls “the disjunc-
tivist’s insight”: that no veridical and hallucinatory experiences share the same repre-
sentational content. The key element in that insight is that the content of veridical 
visual experience is singular: the objects we perceive are components of the contents of 
our veridical visual experiences. The crucial step in the line of thought is nicely sum-
marized in the following (rhetorical) question: “[H]ow can the object be experienced as 

301
PERCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE
being some way unless the object itself figures in the content of the experience?” (Tye 
2009: 77).
The thought implicit in that question has a great deal of traction on the contempo-
rary philosophical scene. But from another perspective it can seem bizarre. Why should 
one think that unless the content of experience is singular in the relevant sense, unless 
the object of an experience partly constitutes its content, then we cannot make sense 
of the experience’s being one in which a particular object is experienced as being some 
way? A traditional view (whatever its other issues) seems to do perfectly well on this 
score: so long as an object in the relevant way causes an experience with a given con-
tent (though it should be no component of the content of the experience it causes), the 
experience can plausibly be said to be one in which that object is experienced in some 
way. The object produces (an experience with) a content that is of it, precisely because 
of that causal relation, and not because of its figuring in the content: another object 
could produce an experience with that same content.
Disjunctivism promises a direct realism that avoids the veil of perception erected by 
the sense-datum theory. It too takes sides on the original problem: veridical experiences 
on the one hand and illusory or hallucinatory experiences on the other are not funda-
mentally of the same kind. What’s true is only that they can’t be distinguished. But even 
aside from the cost of having to take sides on the original issue, disjunctivism is often 
motivated by a questionable conception of what it takes to have a “singular” thought—a 
thought that’s about a particular object—and indeed by an optional aversion, ironically, 
to a more general epistemic disjunctivism according to which a mere difference in the 
truth value of what’s believed can mark an important normative distinction between a 
pair of subjects (one of them knows), even when there is no relevant difference in their 
experiences or in how they’re basing their beliefs on those experiences.
An Alternative
But if neither sense-datum theory nor disjunctivism is fully adequate, is there any alter-
native? I’ll close this chapter with a sketch of an alternative view, a view that finds a 
middle path between direct and indirect realism, a view according to which although 
the intrinsic character of veridical experiences and their less accurate counterparts 
might be exactly the same, still, in veridical perceptual experience, the world comes 
to constitute your experience, so that an external reality is in that sense revealed to us 
(Sosa 2007). The problem of perception, in effect, urges that this combination is inco-
herent. But that’s because one possibility has often been overlooked. (And that even 
though, in fact, the alternative has well-known historical antecedents: precursors may 
be found in Brentano and Husserl and even in medieval sources such as Aquinas and 
maybe Avicenna. For more recent views in the same family, see Bealer (1982), Johnston 
2004—which contrasts with Johnston (1996), to which Sosa (1996) was a critique from 
the perspective developed here; and Forrest (2005).)
There’s an important sense in which, whether an experience is illusory or veridical, we 
“see the same thing.” But the problem of perception presses: if in the illusory case we’re 
not seeing the external world, in the veridical case we’re not either. Granted, in illusion 
our experience does not reveal the character of the external world. But we should sepa-
rate the distal object of perception (the pear, or the apple, as the case may be)—what we 
see, in one sense—and the content of the perception (the shapes and colors, for example, 
that give character to the experience)—what we see, in another sense.

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
302
Already, it might seem, we have erected a veil of perception, a distinction between 
the immediate elements of experience and the external world. But, and this is our alter-
native’s key distinction: the very same entities that give content to our experience can 
characterize the object of our experience. The very redness that gives our experience 
phenomenal character and content can also be exemplified by the apple. There’s no 
additional particular object that would need to be red (to instantiate redness) and whose 
being red would have to be appreciated by us (and so on—there need be no intermedi-
ary). There’s just the property itself, present—in different modes—in the mind of the 
subject (intentionally) and in the object (by instantiation).
Isn’t it right to describe some of our experiences as containing, for example, a red and 
round apple? If there were a particular that had properties like redness and roundness 
and whose having those properties mediated our experience of the distal object, then we 
would have, in effect, sense-datum theory all over again. Preferable is a view on which 
properties can constitute an experience in a way that accurately represents the part of the 
world that caused the experience. That will be so, normally, because some object has some 
properties. So the experience in that way represents an object as having a property. That, 
I think, suffices for us to speak of the experience as containing, for example, an apple. 
But that is to speak ambiguously: the experience contains the red apple in the sense that 
the experience is veridical only if an apple is red. But the experience does not contain an 
apple in the way that it contains redness and the distinctive apple shape and so on. Those 
properties are essential to the experience and exhaustively characterize it intrinsically.
In both veridical and illusory (and hallucinatory) experiences, we are, in a loose 
sense, seeing the same “thing.” But that sense resolves on analysis. Strictly speaking, 
in hallucination we are seeing nothing and in illusion we might be seeing something 
but not just what we are seeing in the veridical case. The sense that we are seeing the 
same thing in all three cases is given content, on this view, by the claim that all three 
experiences are constituted by the same properties. But only in the veridical case are all 
those properties instantiated by the object of the experience. In the hallucination, the 
limiting case, the experience has no object and in illusion the object lacks some of the 
properties instantiated.
Again, even if in an ordinary illusion the object does not have the property present 
in the experience, that need not push us into a view on which, in the veridical case, 
we do not have any direct engagement with the world around us. In the veridical case, 
our experience is revelatory: the redness we experience is that of the apple. There’s no 
extra category, no new theoretical entity postulated to explain the illusory case (though, 
admittedly, we must recognize the distinctive intentional mode of presence of the prop-
erty). Similarly in the illusory case, experience presents itself as revelatory of the world 
around us. But that is not the way things in fact are, in the sense that the causal circum-
stances of the relevant part of the physical world do not comport with the content of 
that experience. The directness of perceptual experience should not be confused with 
infallibility.
Note that on this alternative to sense-datum theory, some experiences are, after all, 
intrinsically as of a red round object. The link between red round objects and experience 
with the corresponding character is quite intimate: the very redness and roundness of 
the object is present, in a different mode, in the experience. We, in a quite literal sense, 
get aspects of the world in mind, even if, of course, physical objects are too bulky to fit.
The initial tension, between (i) perception “reveals” the external world—not some 
other, internal, thing instead and (ii) illusion and hallucination are just like veridical 

303
PERCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE
experience, was supposed to force us to sense-datum theory or disjunctivism (which are 
indeed partly defined in terms of the position they take on that very tension). But there 
is room for a middle way: perception reveals the external world directly, not some inter-
nal thing instead, because the very properties constituting the experience are instanti-
ated in the external world. In that way the alternative is more like disjunctivism than 
like sense-datum theory. But on this view hallucination and illusion do have a “highest 
common factor” with veridical experience: and this “highest common factor” idea is 
what motivated the sense-datum theorists in the first place and is denied by disjunctiv-
ists. Here the alternative is on the side of sense-datum theory.
Importantly, we can on this line make robust sense of the appropriateness of form-
ing the belief that there’s a red round object before you in the face of that experience. 
There is now a possible internal relation between the experience and the belief. This 
relation is internal in two respects: it is typically available to the subject in a distinctive 
first-person way and it is a relation that is wholly determined by the character of the 
relata—no features of other things matter. The character of the experience determines 
a class of beliefs that is appropriately based on that experience.
And this takes us back naturally to the specific issues with which we began: how do 
we acquire knowledge through perception? There is available an attractive conception 
of the nature of perceptual experience, useful in connection with the problem of percep-
tion, that provides a good account of the felt appropriateness of believing a specific way 
in response to experiences of a given character.
On this view, the veridicality of an experience will be a function of the accuracy of its 
characterization of its object. What it is for a particular to be the object of an experience 
has to do with causation: the object of an experience will be, given certain additional 
conditions, a distinguished part of its external cause. Accordingly, on this view, if the 
experience is hallucinatory, if the distinctive relation that gives an experience an object 
simply does not obtain, then the experience literally has no object. We will still want 
a distinction between the experience’s “would-be” object and other things. If Macbeth 
is not seeing a dagger, then, presumably, his experience is without object; nevertheless, 
his experience represents a dagger, and not, say, a witch’s cauldron. This is familiar 
philosophical territory: was a fountain of youth the object of Ponce de León’s search? 
“Object” here is a theoretical term. One attractive answer is that his search did not, in 
fact, have an object. But there are correct and incorrect answers to the question: “What 
did de León seek?” The distinction some want (and that the alternative here does not 
directly provide) between the object of (even) a hallucinatory perception and things 
that are not its object, can be made in another way simply by noting (for example) that 
Macbeth’s experience represents a dagger and not a cauldron.
We began with a purpose: to understand how perception gives a distinctive epistemic 
status to ordinary empirical belief. In perception we are in receipt of something effec-
tively given (contrast with taken—we exercise only receptivity, there is no spontaneity). 
This does not alienate us from our environment: what is given to us in experience is 
also, often enough, present in the world. In this sense the alternative sketched here is a 
direct realism. There is no veil of perception, even though there is content to percep-
tion in the form of properties that need not be instantiated. Although when a percep-
tion is veridical, the properties are instantiated as represented, it’s possible that the 
properties fail to be so instantiated.
The flaw in sense-datum theories was to model our relation to the content of percep-
tual states on a relation to the external world that is rather enabled by our relation to that 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
304
content. We do perceive the external world in the relevant sense directly, even though 
illusion is possible. We do so in virtue of having properties as constituents of our expe-
rience. When the appropriate cause of our experience instantiates the properties pre-
sented, the experience is veridical. Otherwise, it is not. But on this alternative, veridical 
perception and its less accurate counterparts are states of fundamentally the same kind. 
They both consist in a specific sort of relation to abstracta. So some of disjunctivism’s 
less attractive features are avoided, too.
On the alternative sketched here, we better understand perception’s epistemic role. 
Because it is in the nature of perception to reveal the world to us, and because the beliefs 
we form on the basis of perceptual states can bear intimate internal relations with the 
contents of those perceptions, then perceptual states can differentially justify some of 
our beliefs. And though the alternative conception of perception does not suffice, by 
itself, to refute skepticism about our knowledge of the external world, we can better 
understand how, when all goes well, perception can even yield knowledge.
References
Bealer, G. (1982) Quality and Concept, Oxford: Clarendon.
Chisholm, R. (1942) “The Problem of the Speckled Hen,” Mind 51: 368–73.
Forrest, P. (2005) “Universals as Sense-Data,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 71: 622–31.
Foster, J. (2000) The Nature of Perception, Oxford: Clarendon.
Harman, G. (1990) “The Intrinsic Quality of Experience,” Philosophical Perspectives 4: 31–52.
Hinton, J.M. (1973) Experiences: An Inquiry Into Some Ambiguities, Oxford: Clarendon.
Johnston, M. (1996) “Is the External World Invisible?” Philosophical Issues 7: 185–98.
—— (2004) “The Obscure Object of Hallucination,” Philosophical Studies 120: 113–83.
Lewis, D. (1996) “Elusive Knowledge,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 74: 549–67.
McDowell, J. (1982) “Criteria, Defeasibility, and Knowledge,” in McDowell (1998) Meaning, Knowledge and 
Reality, Cambridge: Harvard University Press. Originally published in Proceedings of the British Academy 
68: 455–79.
Robinson, H. (1994) Perception, London: Routledge.
Smith, A.D. (2002) The Problem of Perception, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Snowdon, P. (1981) “Perception, Vision and Causation,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 81: 175–92.
Sosa, D. (1996) “Getting Acquainted With Perception,” Philosophical Issues 7: 209–14.
—— (2007) “Perceptual Friction,” Philosophical Issues 17: 245–61.
Tye, M. (2009) Consciousness Revisited, Cambridge: MIT.
Further Reading
Anscombe, G.E.M. (1965) “The Intentionality of Sensation: a Grammatical Feature,” in R.J. Butler (ed.) 
Analytical Philosophy: First Series, Oxford: Blackwell.
Austin, J.L. (1962) Sense and Sensibilia, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ayer, A.J. (1940) The Foundations of Empirical Knowledge, London: Macmillan.
—— (1967) “Has Austin Refuted the Sense-Datum Theory?” Synthese 17: 117–40.
Chisholm, R. (1957) Perceiving: A Philosophical Study, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Martin, M.G.F. (2002) “The Transparency of Experience,” Mind and Language 17: 376–425.
Moore, G.E. (1905) “The Refutation of Idealism,” in his Philosophical Studies, London: Routledge & Kegan 
Paul.
Price, H.H. (1932) Perception, London: Methuen.
Russell, B. (1912) The Problems of Philosophy, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Swartz, R.J. (1965) Perceiving, Sensing and Knowing, Los Angeles and Berkeley: University of California 
Press.

28
SELF-KNOWLEDGE
Sanford Goldberg
Philosophical interest in self-knowledge is long-standing. Socrates cited with approval 
the Delphic oracle’s injunction to “Know Thyself,” and he took the fulfillment of this 
injunction to be a core part of the philosophical life. Descartes regarded a subject’s 
knowledge of the contents of her own mind as providing the foundation for her knowl-
edge of the world more generally. More recently, philosophers have addressed the scope, 
sources, and nature of one’s self-knowledge.
The topic of self-knowledge is also of philosophical interest for the connections it 
bears to other core issues. In addition to being given center stage in a very traditional 
(Cartesian and foundational) theory of our knowledge of the world, the sort of self-
knowledge that is of interest to philosophers has been alleged to be the distinctive mark 
of the mental; it has been taken to be intimately related to rational and practical agency, 
and to our view of ourselves as subjects of experience; it is held to be linked to the nature 
of the self, as well as to the use and meaning of the first-person pronoun ‘I’; it has been 
connected to the paradoxicality of sentences like, ‘It is raining but I don’t believe it’; 
and it has been contrasted with the “problem of other minds.”
In what follows we begin in section 1 by charactering the scope of the sort of 
self-knowledge that is of philosophical interest. In section 2 we examine attempts to 
provide an epistemological characterization of the judgments involved in this sort of 
self-knowledge. Our discussion here will raise questions about the sources and nature 
of self-knowledge; these we examine in section 3, where we will touch on some of the 
related issues in metaphysics and epistemology.
1. Scope
Is there a sort of knowledge you have of yourself which is different in principle from the 
knowledge another person could have of you? Let us designate the sort of self-knowl-
edge in question as ‘Self-Knowledge’ (with capital letters). You know such things as 
your height, your birth name, or what you had for breakfast this morning. But this 
knowledge isn’t distinctive, and so is not Self-Knowledge: in principle others could 
acquire the same knowledge, and acquire it in the same way, or much the same way, 
as you did.
When trying to find this special sort of knowledge that you have of yourself, it is 
tempting to suppose that it can be found in the knowledge you have of your “self,” where 
this “self” is taken to be something to which only you yourself have access. David Hume 
cast a famous critical eye on this sort of proposal:

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
306
For my part, when I enter most intimately into what I call myself, I always 
stumble on some particular perception or other, of heat or cold, light or shade, 
love or hatred, pain or pleasure. I never can catch myself at any time without a 
perception, and never can observe anything but the perception.
(Hume 1888: 252; italics in original)
Hume’s point is negative: we should not think of the “self” as a private sort of object to 
which one oneself, and only one oneself, might (inwardly) direct one’s attention. Most 
contemporary philosophers have accepted this point (for a discussion see Shoemaker 
1986).
Might you have a special knowledge of those features that constitute your character? 
It would seem not. Your character traits are manifested in how you behave under vari-
ous conditions; those who observe this behavior will be in as good a position as you are 
to draw conclusions about your character. Indeed, there are even cases where another 
person—a parent or friend, a partner, a good therapist—knows your character better 
than you do yourself. To take an example, suppose that Johnny wonders whether he is 
brave, and on reflecting on the matter concludes that he is. Since being brave is a mat-
ter of behaving bravely under adverse conditions, whether Johnny is brave will depend 
on how he has behaved or would behave under the relevant conditions. On this score 
his reflections on the matter might well be less reliable than is an objective friend.
Still, many philosophers continue to support the hypothesis that each of us has 
Self-Knowledge. This hypothesis has been advanced in connection with knowledge 
of at least three distinct features of oneself. In particular, Self-Knowledge is alleged to 
involve knowledge of: (i) features of one’s own conscious experience (including one’s 
conscious sensory experience, but also one’s conscious bodily experiences as well, such 
as pains, tickles, twinges, and the like); (ii) one’s standing beliefs, desires, fears, inten-
tions—in short, what philosophers call one’s “propositional attitudes”; and/or (iii) the 
current relative position of one’s own body parts. It is arguable that the items in (i)–(iii) 
are known by the subject in a special (and an especially authoritative) sort of way—a 
way that is not available to anyone else who hopes to come to know how the subject 
stands in these regards. So, for example, while another person can know that you are in 
pain, only you can acquire such knowledge by feeling the very pain in question. Further, 
the fact that only you can know that you are in pain by feeling the pain seems to account 
for the especially authoritative nature of the judgments you make regarding your own 
pains. Analogous things might be said about your beliefs, or about the current position 
of your body parts: while anyone might acquire knowledge of what you believe, only you 
can acquire this knowledge through introspection; and while anyone might acquire the 
knowledge that you are standing with your arms raised above your head, only you can 
acquire this knowledge through having an inner sense (proprioception) of the relative 
position of the relevant body parts. Or so many philosophers have argued.
2. Epistemic Principles Regarding First-Person Authority
If the scope of Self-Knowledge is delimited by the judgments one makes regarding (i)–
(iii), it is natural to think that the specialness of Self-Knowledge can be understood in 
terms of the nature of these judgments. These “first-person judgments,” as we will call 
them, appear to be special in one or both of two ways: first, in that they enjoy a special 
sort of epistemic authoritativeness (“first-person authority”); and second, in that they 

SELF-KNOWLEDGE
307
appear to be the result of the subject’s “privileged access” to the facts in question. We 
will take up these matters in this and the next section.
What does the authoritativeness of first-person judgments amount to? One of the 
strongest doctrines in this area is infallibilism regarding first-person judgments. According 
to this doctrine, first-person judgments are guaranteed to be true whenever they are 
made—or at least whenever they are sincerely made by a subject in good cognitive 
health. The infallibility of these judgments ensures that they are (as it were) objectively 
authoritative. Arguably, Descartes was an infallibilist regarding a broad swath of first-
person judgments. Many contemporary philosophers continue to feel some temptation 
to hold an infallibilist position regarding more limited domains. For example, we might 
hold that first-person judgments regarding one’s own current pains are infallible: one 
could not sincerely and in good mind judge that one oneself was in pain when one 
was not. Those tempted in this way might also be tempted to hold an infallibilist posi-
tion regarding sensations more generally. And Tyler Burge (1988) has famously held 
that first-person judgments regarding one’s conscious, occurrent thoughts are infallible, 
because they are self-verifying.
The doctrine of infallibilism should not be confused with its converse, that of self-inti-
mation. (Williamson (2000) uses ‘luminosity’ in place of ‘self-intimation’ to name the 
feature in question.) A state of an individual is self-intimating when the following con-
dition holds: whenever the subject is in a state of that type, the subject will judge that 
she is in that state (so long as she is sane of mind and possesses the relevant concepts).
The combination of infallibility and self-intimation yields the doctrine of transpar-
ency. A mental state is transparent to its subject when the following holds: the subject 
is in the mental state in question if and only if she judges that she is in the mental state 
in question. Transparency rules out errors of commission: it cannot happen that the 
subject judges that she is in a mental state of this type when she is not. But transparency 
also rules out errors of omission: it cannot happen that the subject is in a state of this 
type but fails to judge that she is (even as she attends to the matter). Since transparency 
involves both infallibility and self-intimation, any doubts about the extent of infallibil-
ity and self-intimation are doubts about the extent of transparency.
Another traditional doctrine in this area, weaker than infallibility, is the doctrine of 
incorrigibility. A first-person judgment regarding a mental state is incorrigible just in case 
it cannot be corrected. Incorrigibility does not entail that these judgments are true; only 
that they can’t be shown false. For this reason, the epistemological significance of incor-
rigibility—its significance for an account of first-person authority—is not entirely clear. 
Even so, an incorrigibilist view is natural if one assumes a private mental theater concep-
tion of the mental (more on which below); and even philosophers who reject any such 
conception have endorsed incorrigibility as a feature of some first-person judgments.
It is worth noting that the three doctrines considered so far—infallibility, self-intima-
tion, and incorrigibility—look better in connection with first-person judgments regard-
ing one’s sensations, than with those regarding one’s standing propositional attitudes. It 
is difficult (though perhaps not impossible) to imagine rejecting another person’s sincere 
reports of her own sensory experiences. By contrast we can, and sometimes do, reject 
another person’s sincere reports about what she herself believes, hopes, fears, or intends. 
(“Sure, he says that he believes that women are equal to men in the skills needed for 
this job, but I don’t think that he really believes this: he has never hired a woman into 
this position in his thirty-plus years of hiring.”) Such examples strongly suggest that, 
when it comes to judgments about one’s own propositional attitudes, infallibilism and 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
308
incorrigibility are both false. Counterexamples can be given as well for the hypothesis 
that standing propositional attitudes are self-intimating. (“Her behavior suggests that 
she thinks men are incompetent at child-rearing—although she would never admit to as 
much, even to herself.”)
Suppose it is agreed that first-person judgments regarding one’s standing propositional 
attitudes are neither infallible nor incorrigible, and that these judgments do not have a 
self-intimating subject-matter. Still, it seems that these judgments enjoy some (weaker) 
sort of authoritativeness. Consider your reaction when a friend tells you, “I believe that 
Mary will come to the party tonight.” Normally this settles the matter regarding what 
your friend believes. In general, we accept another’s first-person belief report unless we 
have positive reasons for rejecting it (in the form of relevant behavioral evidence to 
the contrary). This gives rise to yet another characterization of first-person authority, 
in terms of the positive-presumptiveness of the relevant judgments. To say that a given 
judgment is positive-presumptive is to say that it enjoys the benefit of the doubt and so 
stands by default, where this default is overridden only when there is positive reason to 
do so. (See Crispin Wright 1989a, 1989b, and 1989c.)
It might well be that first-person authority is to be characterized in different ways, 
according to the subject matter—(i), (ii), or (iii)—being judged. Thus, where the 
authoritativeness of one’s judgments regarding one’s own current pains might amount to 
infallibility, the authoritativeness of one’s judgments regarding what one believes would 
amount to much less—perhaps to nothing more than positive-presumptiveness.
Of course, it is one thing to say that a given first-person judgment is infallible, or posi-
tive-presumptive, as the case may be; it is quite another to account for the fact that the 
judgment has this feature. It is to the latter task that we now turn.
3. On “Privileged Access” and the Nature and Subject-Matter of 
First-Person Judgments
In the previous section we considered various attempts to articulate what the authori-
tativeness of first-person judgment comes to. But in virtue of what do these judgments 
have the authority that they have? Contemporary philosophers have followed one of 
two familiar strategies in their attempt to account for the authoritativeness of first-per-
son judgments. (As will emerge, the difference between these strategies is a matter of 
emphasis; they need not be seen as logically exclusive.) A constructive account traces 
the epistemic authoritativeness of first-person judgments to features of the processes 
that produce these judgments. So, for example, a reliabilist will hold that first-person 
authority is a matter of the reliability of the processes through which first-person judg-
ments are made; an evidentialist will hold that the processes in question are sensitive 
to the relevant evidence; and so forth. By contrast, an ideological account of first-person 
authority is one that traces the authoritativeness of first-person judgments to the ine-
liminable role such judgments play in rational and practical agency. As we will see, both 
sorts of account can claim virtues, but both face challenges as well. We will conclude by 
considering the prospects for a ‘hybrid’ account.
3.1. Constructive Accounts
We begin with constructive accounts. For those who think that mental states are 
‘private’ states to which only the subject herself has direct access, there is a natural 

SELF-KNOWLEDGE
309
constructive account of first-person authority: the ‘acquaintance’ account. (An early 
version of the acquaintance account is defended by Russell (1917), from whom the 
notion of acquaintance is borrowed; more recent versions can be found in Fumerton 
(1996, 2005, 2009) and Bonjour (2003); and see also Gertler (2001) and Chalmers 
(2003), where a version of the acquaintance view is defended with respect to one’s 
own occurrent phenomenal states.) According to the acquaintance account of first-
person authority, a subject is ‘acquainted with’ (some subset of) her own mental states, 
and it is in terms of the features of this relation of acquaintance that we can account 
for the authoritativeness of first-person judgments. The relation of acquaintance is a 
relation that holds between a subject and her mental states when the subject enjoys 
an unmediated access to the state itself. On this view, the unmediated nature of this 
access accounts for the epistemic security of the subject’s first-person judgments: the 
access provided by the subject’s acquaintance with her mental states yields a basis on 
which she forms her first-person judgments regarding those states; and the unmediated 
nature of this access restricts the sorts of errors it would be possible for the subject to 
make in those judgments. (Whether any errors at all are possible, and if so what sorts, 
will depend on the details of the correct account of the acquaintance relation and the 
nature of mental state(s) in question.)
Various questions can be raised regarding acquaintance accounts. For one thing, one 
might wonder whether the acquaintance account is open to the objections tradition-
ally raised against the privacy conception of the mental: it makes knowledge of other 
minds—both their existence and their contents—problematic. (This worry will be 
acute if the acquaintance account is only plausible on the assumption that mental states 
are private.) In addition, one might question whether the acquaintance account can 
plausibly be extended to cover the whole range of authoritative first-person judgments 
we make. For example, while we might think to offer an acquaintance-based account of 
first-person authority regarding one’s own conscious states and/or one’s own bodily ori-
entation, it might be doubted that we can do so with respect to one’s own propositional 
attitudes. (Gertler (2001) explicitly mentions this sort of worry as a reason for restrict-
ing acquaintance accounts to one’s own phenomenal states.)
An alternative constructive account of first-person authority was offered by the mid 
twentieth-century philosophical behaviorists. Their view of the matter was shaped 
by their view of mental states (or, more correctly, of sentences involving mental state 
vocabulary). They held that sentences involving mental state terms can be translated 
without loss into sentences involving descriptions of the subject’s behavior and behav-
ioral dispositions. Consequently, they took first-person judgments to be (equivalent 
in content to) judgments regarding one’s own behavior and behavioral dispositions. 
Accordingly they thought of first-person judgments as based on (perhaps implicit) 
inferences from behavioral evidence. So any authoritativeness that these judgments 
had, they held, derived from one’s having a greater amount of relevant evidence, than 
the evidence others had of one.
The behaviorist account has struck many as surrendering the idea that self-knowledge 
is special. But this account faces some obvious difficulties. First, it gives up on the idea 
of “privileged access” altogether: it holds that there is no principled difference between 
one’s knowledge, and another person’s knowledge, of one’s own mental states. The only 
differences this view recognizes are those that reflect a mere disparity in the amount of 
evidence possessed. (The doctrine of privileged access may be false; but its denial ought 
to be independently established, rather than be a direct implication of one’s account 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
310
of first-person authority.) In addition, it seems implausible to think that first-person 
judgments, as a class, are always based on behavioral evidence. Often it seems that a 
subject “just knows” what she herself thinks, fears, senses, and so forth; she doesn’t form 
her judgment on the basis of any evidence, or through any inferential process. (Think 
about your knowledge of your own occurrent thoughts: it seems strange to think that 
you acquire this knowledge by observing your behavior.) And even if (contrary to what 
was just said) this account can handle self-knowledge of one’s propositional attitudes, 
it cannot handle self-knowledge of one’s own pains and twitches, or of one’s own cur-
rent body position. One’s first-person judgments regarding these are not inferences from 
observation of one’s own behavior.
One lesson from the failure of the philosophical behaviorist account is that first-per-
son judgments should not be seen as epistemically inferential—as depending for their 
authoritativeness on inferences from e.g. one’s behavior. Since any constructive account 
of first-person authority must have something to say about the processes that eventu-
ate in the formation of first-person judgments, it seems that one who hopes for such an 
account would do best to regard these processes as non-inferential. What is perhaps the 
most popular proposal in this regard is to construe the processes in question as processes 
of a kind of “inner” perception. (See Armstrong 1968 and Lycan 1997; Dretske (1995) 
speaks of “displaced” perception, but while his is an “internal perception” account, it is 
somewhat idiosyncratic in that it holds that the first-person judgments themselves are 
epistemically inferential.)
If the processes that eventuate in first-person judgments are non-inferential, and if 
“inner perception” is the best model for such a process, then the prospects for a construc-
tive account of first-person authority—one that honors the idea of “privileged access”—
will stand or fall with the case to be made for introspection as an inner, perception-like 
process. The introspection-as-inner-perception proposal has been defended by appeal 
to two analogies with outer perception. First, it has been argued that, just as in outer 
perception, where there is a reliable causal connection between the items perceived and 
the subject’s outer-perceptual experience of those items, so too there is such a causal 
connection between the items of “inner perception” and the subject’s inner-perceptual 
experience of those items. Second, it has been argued that, just as one’s outer-perceptual 
attention might shift from object to object in one’s external environment, so too one’s 
inner-perceptual attention might shift from, for example, one’s current thought to one’s 
current pain.
The epistemological virtues of the “inner perception” model of introspection are 
clear. If first-person judgments are formed through a process of inner perception, then 
the authoritativeness of these judgments can be accounted for in terms of the epistemic 
features of this process. An analog of one’s favored account of perceptual justification 
and knowledge could then be pressed into service regarding first-person judgments. 
Reliabilists could hold that first-person authority is a matter of the reliability of the 
judgments of inner perception. Evidentialists might hold that such authority is a matter 
of the evidence of inner perception (and then treat the evidence as the inner analog 
of outer-perceptual experience). Dogmatists about perceptual justification might hold 
that first-person authority reflects the truth of the principle that, in the absence of 
countervailing reasons, being in an inner perceptual state as of p suffices to provide 
justification for endorsing p.
At the same time, “inner perception” accounts of first-person authority face some 
serious obstacles. First, for at least some first-person judgments, it is unclear that we need 

SELF-KNOWLEDGE
311
anything approaching “inner perception.” It is arguable that proprioception and pain 
perception can be modeled as forms of “inner perception”; but it is much more contro-
versial to suppose that the other items of Self-Knowledge can be so modeled. As Gareth 
Evans noted, if asked whether you believe that there will be a third world war, typi-
cally you address this by looking at the evidence for thinking that there will be a third 
world war—a matter of looking outward, not inward. Relatedly, it is unclear whether 
there is any distinctive inner phenomenology associated with the propositional atti-
tudes—in which case an account of introspection in terms of inner perception threatens 
to be insufficiently general. In addition, one might doubt whether the introspection-as-
inner-perception view can do justice to the first-personal nature of the subject-matter. 
If introspection is really a kind of inner perception, it should be possible—in principle, 
though presumably not in practice—for one’s introspective system to be hooked up to 
another person’s mind/brain, enabling one to introspect the other’s mental states. This 
suggestion has struck many philosophers as nonsensical, suggesting that the inner per-
ception model of first-person authority is wrongheaded from the start.
An additional challenge facing the inner perception model arises from what appears 
to be an important disanalogy between paradigm instances of outer-perceptual judg-
ments and those of introspection. Suppose that, on the basis of seeing a person you take 
to be your friend Sam, you form the judgment that Sam is happy. There are two ways 
in which this judgment might go wrong. First, the person in question might not have 
the property you ascribed to her—as when she is actually quite sad at the moment. 
Alternatively, the person you take to be Sam might actually be someone else altogether. 
Call the latter error one of misidentification. Sydney Shoemaker and Gareth Evans 
have argued that first-person judgments are immune to errors of misidentification. 
According to them, this immunity reflects the identification-free nature of the self-ref-
erence involved in ordinary uses of the first-person pronoun ‘I’ (see Shoemaker 1968, 
1986, 1994; Evans 1980).
If Shoemaker and Evans are right, then the would-be judgments of inner perception 
(such as “I am in pain”) differ from paradigmatic instances of the judgments of outer 
perception, in that the former are not susceptible to errors involving misidentification. 
Is there a way, consistent with acknowledging this point, to salvage the inner percep-
tion account of first-person authority? Shoemaker (1994) has identified a challenge 
facing any attempt of this sort. Since first-person judgments are immune to errors of 
misidentification, it appears that these judgments do not involve an object-identifica-
tion component at all. In that case, they should not be modeled as the inner perception 
of objects. So those who seek to retain the inner perception model will have to endorse 
what Shoemaker (1994) calls the “broad perceptual model.” On this model, percep-
tion—whether inner or outer—relates a thinker, not to objects, but rather to states 
of affairs. (As an example consider a judgment like ‘It is raining,’ made on the basis of 
observing the weather: such a judgment is perceptual without involving any identifica-
tion of an object.) But it is hard to see how introspective judgments might be as the 
broad perceptual model would require.
At issue here is the independence of the subject-matter from the judgments about 
that subject-matter. Consider a judgment about the weather in Timbuktu. Such a judg-
ment is correct or incorrect, according to how things are weather-wise in Timbuktu. 
What is more, how things are weather-wise in Timbuktu in no way depends on how 
any one person thinks things are weather-wise in Timbuktu: the weather there is inde-
pendent of our judgments on the matter. Contrast this with the status of psychological 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
312
facts. Suppose we want to know what a given person believes about, say, the virtues of 
playing sports. As we saw in section 2, the person’s own judgments on the matter have 
an all-important role to play here. In the absence of positive evidence to the contrary, 
her judgments about what she believes are taken to determine the matter: absent behav-
ioral evidence to the contrary, she is taken to believe whatever it is she judges herself 
to believe. In this way we see that facts about what a given subject believes are not 
independent of her judgments on the matter, in the way that facts about the weather are 
independent of what she (or anyone else) judges to be the case weather-wise.
The failure of independence between first-person judgments and their subject-matter 
calls into question the prospects for a constructive account of first-person authority. It is 
easy to appreciate why this is. The idea behind constructive accounts is that the author-
itativeness of first-person judgments has its source in, for example, the reliability of the 
processes that produce these judgments. But it would now appear that, to the extent 
that these processes are reliable, this is not a matter of their success in tracking the facts, 
so much as it is a matter of their (defeasibly) establishing the very facts at issue. And 
if this is so, it might lead us to doubt whether Self-Knowledge is actually a cognitive 
achievement—one whose presence calls for a substantial epistemological account—in 
the first place. (See Wright 1989b, 1998 and Bar-On 2004 for further discussion.)
3.2. Ideological Accounts
Even so, it is important not to lose sight of the fact that when a person reports on her 
own state of mind, we assume that her report is correct unless we have positive evidence 
to doubt its correctness. If a constructive account of the authoritativeness we ascribe to 
others’ first-person judgments is not available, how should we account for it? An ideo-
logical account of first-person authority holds that the presumption of authority granted 
to others’ self-reports has its source in the preconditions of (rational and practical) 
agency. On this view, first-person authority has to do with the rationality of first-person 
judgments in any creature that exhibits rational agency. Ideological accounts can be 
differentiated both in the precise connections they make between first-person authority 
and rational agency, and by whether they include some modest constructive component 
in their overall account of first-person authority.
Davidson (1984, 1987) has argued that authoritative knowledge of one’s own 
thoughts and meanings is a precondition for there being thoughts and linguistic mean-
ing in the first place. The result is that anyone who aims to interpret the speech and 
thought of another subject must credit that subject with authoritative knowledge of her 
own thoughts and meanings. Davidson had much less of a positive nature to say on the 
mechanisms through which subjects have such self-knowledge. What little he did say 
(see Davidson 1988, 1989) suggests that he would reject the call for any sort of construc-
tive component in an account of first-person authority.
Tyler Burge (1996) appeals to the conditions on being a critical reasoner as part of 
his account of first-person authority. Burge’s idea, roughly, is that one who is a critical 
reasoner is one who can assess her own beliefs, and the relations between them, in light 
of the demands of reason. One who believes that it is raining but who looks through the 
window onto the street and sees no sign of wetness thereby has a reason to give up the 
belief that it is raining. But in order for this reason to be a reason for the subject to give 
up her belief that it is raining, she must recognize that she believes that it is raining, 
and recognize as well that she has just acquired evidence that conflicts with this belief. 

SELF-KNOWLEDGE
313
Burge generalizes the point: one’s opinions about the full range of one’s own standing 
propositional attitudes (not just beliefs but also desires, fears, intentions, etc.) enjoy a 
special entitlement deriving from one’s status as a critical reasoner.
As with Davidson’s account, we might wonder about the completeness of Burge’s 
account of first-person authority. It is one thing to argue that, as a critical reasoner, 
one’s first-person judgments must be authoritative; it is another to give an account of 
that authority—to say how one’s first-person judgments have this authority (Peacocke 
1996). On this matter Burge points to what he calls the “non-contingent, rational rela-
tion . . . between relevant first-person judgments and their subject-matter or truth” 
(1996: 98). His claim here appears to be close to the point made above, regarding the 
lack of independence between first-person judgments and their subject-matter. But even 
if it is granted to Burge that this sort of consideration establishes that first-person judg-
ments are rational whenever they are made, we might still wonder how these judgments 
manage to be as reliable as they are. To see why one might still wonder about this, sup-
pose that we grant the non-contingency of the relation between first-person judgments 
and the facts that are their subject-matter. In particular, suppose that we grant that 
the judgments themselves serve to defeasibly determine the facts in question. Even so, 
first-person judgments have two other features that make it hard to see how they could 
be reliable (Wright 1989a, 1989b, 1989c; Goldberg 1999). They are typically formed in 
a baseless or groundless manner (though see Cassam (forthcoming) for the distinction 
between epistemic and explanational groundlessness); and yet they are “answerable,” 
after the fashion of dispositions, to the overall behavior of the subject herself (Wright 
1989b, 1989c). Thus a question arises: how do a subject’s first-personal judgments suc-
ceed in squaring as well as they do with her overall behavior, given that she forms these 
judgments without attending to the relevant behavioral evidence? It is no answer to be 
told that a subject’s first-person judgments stand as correct so long as they cohere with 
her nonverbal behavior; for what needs explanation is precisely how these judgments 
attain such a high level of coherence with her behavior.
One natural (constructive) suggestion here is that one’s first-personal judgments 
about one’s beliefs are generated by the same sort of conditions that give rise to one’s 
forming the very beliefs in question. (For variants on this idea see Wright 1989b, 1989c; 
Peacocke 1996; Goldberg 2002; and Fernandez 2003.) This constructive suggestion 
need not be associated with the “inner perception” account of introspection (see e.g. 
Byrne forthcoming). But it might be used in combination with an ideological account 
of first-person authority, as part of what we might call a ‘hybrid’ account. In this respect, 
the evolving account in Sydney Shoemaker’s recent work is of some interest. In broad 
outline, Shoemaker’s account of first-person authority is an ideological one, having 
developed out of his (1988, 1994) arguments denying the possibility of ‘self-blindness’. 
A self-blind person would be one who has beliefs and desires, possesses the concepts of 
belief and desire, is fully rational, and yet lacks second-order knowledge of her first-order 
beliefs and desires. In denying the possibility of self-blindness, Shoemaker is in effect 
saying that, on pain of irrationality, a creature who possesses the relevant concepts and 
who attends to the matter will ipso facto judge that she has a given propositional attitude 
whenever she does, in fact, have that attitude. More recently, however, Shoemaker 
(forthcoming) has proposed something like a mechanism through which such second-
order knowledge is acquired. According to this proposal, having an available belief—
roughly, having a belief ‘come to mind’ in a conscious episode—gives one warrant for 
judging that one has that belief. The warrant in question reflects the claims, first, that 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
314
full rationality requires that one revise one’s beliefs in a way that aims at greater consis-
tency and coherence, and second, that forming such second-order beliefs on the basis 
of having a belief ‘come to mind’ satisfies this requirement. Thus Shoemaker’s evolving 
position appears to be something of a hybrid, combining the key feature of an ideologi-
cal account—first-person authority is understood in terms of its connection to rational 
agency—with an attempt to provide some modest constructive component—the war-
rant or authoritativeness of first-person judgments involves the mechanisms through 
which one’s mental states ‘come to mind.’
References
Armstrong, D. 1968: A Materialist Theory of Mind. (London: Routledge.)
Bar-On, D. 2004: Speaking My Mind: Expression and Self-Knowledge. (Oxford: Clarendon Press.)
BonJour, L. 2003: “Reply to Sosa.” In BonJour, L. and Sosa, E. Epistemic Justification: Internalism vs. 
Externalism, Foundations vs. Virtues. (Malden: Blackwell.)
Burge, T. 1988: “Individualism and Self-Knowledge.” Journal of Philosophy 85, 649–63.
Burge, T. 1996: “Our Entitlement to Self-Knowledge.” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 96, 91–116.
Byrne, A. 2005: “Introspection.” Philosophical Topics 33, 79–104.
Cassam, Q. 2009: “The Basis of Self-Knowledge.” Erkenntnis 71:1, 35–51.
Chalmers, D. 2003: “The Content and Epistemology of Phenomenal Belief.” In Smith, Q. and Jokic, A., eds. 
Consciousness: New Philosophical Essays. (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 220–71.
Davidson, D. 1984: “First Person Authority.” Dialectica 38, 101–11. Reprinted in Davidson 2001.
Davidson, D. 1987: “Knowing One’s Own Mind.” Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical 
Association. Reprinted in Davidson 2001.
Davidson, D. 1988: “The Myth of the Subjective.” In Benedikt, M. and Berger, R., eds. Bewusstsein, Sprache 
und die Kunst (Vienna: Verlag). Reprinted in Davidson 2001.
Davidson, D. 1989: “What is Present to the Mind?” In Brandl, J. and Gombocz, W. eds., Grazer Philosophische 
Studien 36, Special edition: The Mind of Donald Davidson (Amsterdam: Rodopi). Reprinted in Davidson 
2001.
Davidson, D. 2001: Subjective, Intersubjective, Objective. (Oxford: Oxford University Press.)
Dretske, F. 1995: Naturalizing the Mind. (Cambridge: MIT Press.)
Evans, G. 1980: Varieties of Reference. (Oxford: Oxford University Press.)
Fernandez, J. 2003: “Privileged Access Naturalized.” The Philosophical Quarterly 53: 352–72.
Fumerton, R. 1996: Metaepistemology and Skepticism. (Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.)
Fumerton, R. 2005: “Speckled Hens and Objects of Acquaintance.” Philosophical Perspectives 19: 121–39.
Fumerton, R. 2009: “Luminous Enough for a Cognitive Home.” Philosophical Studies 142:1, 67–76.
Gertler, B. 2001: “Introspecting Phenomenal States.” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 63: 305–28.
Goldberg, S. 1999: “The Psychology and Epistemology of Self-Knowledge.” Synthese 118:2, 165–99.
Goldberg, S. 2002: “Belief and its Linguistic Expression: Towards a Belief-Box Account of First-Person 
Authority.” Philosophical Psychology 15:1, 65–76.
Hume, David, 1888: Treatise of Human Nature. Ed. L.A. Selby Bigge. (Oxford: Oxford University Press.)
Lycan, W. 1997: “Consciousness as Internal Monitoring.” In Block, N., Flanagan, O., and Güzeldere, G., eds. 
The Nature of Consciousness: Philosophical Debates. (Cambridge: MIT Press.)
Peacocke, C. 1996: “Entitlement, Consciousness, and Conceptual Redeployment.” Proceedings of the 
Aristotelian Society 96: 117–58.
Russell, B. 1917: “Knowledge by Acquaintance and Knowledge by Description.” In Mysticism and Logic. 
(London: George Allen and Unwin.)
Shoemaker, S. 1968: “Self-Knowledge and Self-Awareness.” Journal of Philosophy 65:19, 555–67. Reprinted 
in Shoemaker 1996.
Shoemaker, S. 1986: “Introspection and the Self.” Midwest Studies in Philosophy 10: 101–20. Reprinted in 
Shoemaker 1996.
Shoemaker, S. 1988: “On Knowing One’s Own Mind.” In J. Tomberlin, ed. Philosophical Perspectives 2: 183–
209. Reprinted in Shoemaker 1996.
Shoemaker, S. 1994: “Self-Knowledge and ‘Inner-Sense’.” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 54: 249–
314. Reprinted in Shoemaker 1996.

SELF-KNOWLEDGE
315
Shoemaker, S. 1996: The First-Person Perspective and Other Essays. (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.)
Shoemaker, S. 2009: “Self-Intimation and Second-Order Belief.” Erkenntnis 71:1, 35–51.
Williamson, T. 2000: Knowledge and Its Limits. (Oxford: Oxford University Press.)
Wright, C. 1989a: “Critical Notice: Wittgenstein on Meaning.” Mind 48: 390.
Wright, C. 1989b: “Wittgenstein’s Later Philosophy of Mind: Sensation, Privacy, and Intention.” Journal of 
Philosophy 86, 622–34.
Wright, C. 1989c: “Wittgenstein’s Rule-following Considerations and the Central Project of Theoretical 
Linguistics.” In George, A., ed. Reflections on Chomsky. (Oxford: Basil Blackwell.)
Wright, C. 1998: “Self-Knowledge: The Wittgensteinian Legacy.” In Wright, Smith, and Macdonald, eds. 
Knowing Our Own Minds. (Oxford: Oxford University Press), pp. 13–46.

29
TESTIMONIAL KNOWLEDGE
Jennifer Lackey
Testimony is responsible, either directly or indirectly, for much of what we know, not 
only about the world around us but also about who we are. Despite its relative historical 
neglect, recent work in epistemology has seen a growing recognition of the importance 
and scope of testimonial knowledge. Most of this work has focused on two central ques-
tions, which will be the main topics of this chapter. First, is testimonial knowledge 
necessarily acquired through transmission from speaker to hearer, or can testimony gen-
erate epistemic features in its own right? Second, is justified dependence on testimony 
fundamentally basic, or is it ultimately reducible to other epistemic sources, such as 
perception, memory, and reason?
Testimony itself is typically understood quite broadly so as to include a variety 
of acts of communication that are intended or taken to convey information—such 
as statements, nods, pointings, and so on. (For a full development of this view, see 
Lackey 2008.) Knowledge that is distinctively testimonial requires belief that is based 
or grounded in, not merely caused by, an instance of testimony. For instance, suppose 
that I sing “I have a soprano voice” in a soprano voice and you come to believe this 
entirely on the basis of hearing my soprano voice. (This is a variation of an example 
found in Audi 1997.) While my testimony is certainly causally relevant to the for-
mation of your belief, the resulting knowledge is based on your hearing my soprano 
voice rather than on what I testified to, thereby rendering it perceptual in nature. 
What is of import for distinctively testimonial knowledge is that a given belief be 
formed on the basis of the content of a speaker’s testimony. This prevents beliefs that are 
formed entirely on the basis of features about a speaker’s testimony from qualifying as 
instances of testimonial knowledge.
1. Testimonial Knowledge: Transmission Versus Generation
Much work in the epistemology of testimony centers around the view that knowledge 
is transmitted from speaker to hearer. There are two main theses to this Transmission 
View (TV) of testimony; one is a necessity claim and the other is a sufficiency claim. 
In particular:
TV-N: For every speaker, A, and hearer, B, B knows that p on the basis of A’s testimony 
that p only if A knows that p. (See the references for a list of proponents of different 
versions of this thesis.)
TV-S: For every speaker, A, and hearer, B, if (1) A knows that p, (2) B comes to 
believe that p on the basis of the content of A’s testimony that p, and (3) B has no 

TESTIMONIAL KNOWLEDGE
317
undefeated defeaters for believing that p, then B knows that p. (See the references 
for a list of proponents of different versions of this thesis.)
The Transmission View is often supported by a purported analogy between testimony and 
memory. While memory is said to only preserve knowledge from one time to another, 
testimony is thought to merely transmit knowledge from one person to another. Thus, 
neither is a generative epistemic source. For instance, just as I cannot now know that 
p on the basis of memory unless I non-memorially knew that p at an earlier time, the 
thought underlying the TV-N is that I cannot know that p on the basis of your testi-
mony unless you know that p. Similarly, just as my knowing that p at an earlier time is 
sufficient, in the absence of current undefeated defeaters, for me to now know that p 
on the basis of memory, the TV-S holds that your knowing that p is sufficient, in the 
absence of undefeated defeaters, for me to know that p on the basis of your testimony.
Now, there are two kinds of defeaters that are standardly taken to be relevant to the 
satisfaction of condition (3) in TV-S. First, there are what we might call psychological 
defeaters. A psychological defeater is a doubt or belief that is had by S, which indi-
cates that S’s belief that p is either false or unreliably formed or sustained. Defeaters 
in this sense function by virtue of being had by S, regardless of their truth-value or 
epistemic status. (For various views of psychological defeaters, see BonJour 1980, 1985; 
Nozick 1981; Pollock 1986; Goldman 1986; Plantinga 1993; Lackey 1999, 2006, 2008; 
Bergmann 1997, 2004; Reed 2006.) Suppose, for instance, that Wally believes that the 
dog next door is a Siberian Husky but then his wife tells him, and he thereby comes to 
believe, that it is instead an Alaskan Malamute. In such a case, the justification that 
Wally had for believing that the neighbor’s dog is a Siberian Husky has been defeated 
by the belief, or psychological defeater, that he acquires via the testimony of his wife. 
Second, there are what we might call normative defeaters. A normative defeater is a 
doubt or belief that S ought to have, which indicates that S’s belief that p is either 
false or unreliably formed or sustained. Defeaters in this sense function by virtue of 
being doubts or beliefs that S should have (whether or not S does have them) given the 
presence of certain available evidence. (For various views of normative defeaters, see 
BonJour 1980, 1985; Goldman 1986; Fricker 1987, 1994; Chisholm 1989; Burge 1993, 
1997; McDowell 1994; Audi 1997, 1998; Williams 1999; Lackey 1999, 2006, 2008; 
BonJour and Sosa 2003; Hawthorne 2004; Reed 2006.) For example, suppose that in 
the case above, Wally fails to believe his wife when she tells him that the dog next door 
is an Alaskan Malamute, though he has no good epistemic reason for doing so. Here 
Wally should believe his wife’s testimony, even though he in fact does not, and thus he 
has a normative defeater for his belief that the dog next door is a Siberian Husky. The 
thought underlying both psychological and normative defeaters is that certain kinds of 
doubts and beliefs—either that a subject has or should have—contribute epistemically 
unacceptable irrationality to doxastic systems and, accordingly, defeat the justification 
possessed by the target beliefs in question.
Moreover, a defeater can itself be either defeated or undefeated. For instance, sup-
pose that after accepting his wife’s testimony, Wally consults a handbook on dogs and 
he discovers that its smaller size indicates that it is in fact a Siberian Husky, thereby 
providing him with a defeater-defeater for his original belief. And, as should be suspected, 
defeater-defeaters can be defeated by further doubts and beliefs, which, in turn, can be 
defeated by further doubts and beliefs, and so on. Similar considerations involving rea-
sons, rather than doubts and beliefs, apply in the case of normative defeaters. When one 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
318
has a defeater for one’s belief that p that is not itself defeated, one has what is called an 
undefeated defeater for one’s belief that p. It is the presence of undefeated defeaters, not 
merely of defeaters, that is incompatible with testimonial justification.
While there is much intuitive support for the Transmission View, there are also objec-
tions that have been raised to both of its claims. Against the necessity claim, cases have 
been presented where a speaker fails to believe, and hence know, a proposition to which 
she is testifying, but she nevertheless reliably conveys the information in question through 
her testimony. So, for instance, suppose that a devout creationist who does not believe in 
the truth of evolutionary theory nonetheless researches the topic extensively and, on this 
basis, constructs extremely reliable lecture notes from which she teaches her 3rd grade 
students. In such a case, the teacher seems able to reliably teach to her students that Homo 
sapiens evolved from Homo erectus, thereby imparting knowledge to her students that she 
fails to possess herself. Against the sufficiency claim, cases have been presented where a 
hearer’s belief fails to be an instance of knowledge even though the hearer has no relevant 
undefeated defeaters, the speaker from whom it was acquired has the knowledge in ques-
tion, and the speaker testifies sincerely. For instance, suppose that a speaker in fact knows 
that there was a bald eagle in the park this morning because she saw one there, but she is 
such that she would have reported to her hearer that there was such an eagle even if there 
hadn’t been one. In such a case, the speaker’s belief is an instance of knowledge and yet 
because she is an unreliable testifier, the belief that the hearer forms on the basis of her 
testimony is not. Both counterexamples show that the Transmission View is false. (Both 
types of cases are developed in more detail in Lackey 2006, 2008.)
One of the central conclusions that these considerations motivate is the replacement 
of the TV with conditions focusing on the statements of speakers rather than on their 
states of believing or knowing. More precisely, the TV may be replaced with the follow-
ing Statement View of testimony (SV):
SV: For every speaker, A, and hearer, B, B knows that p on the basis of A’s testimony 
that p only if (1) A’s statement that p is reliable or otherwise truth-conducive, (2) 
B comes to truly believe that p on the basis of the content of A’s statement that p, 
and (3) B has no undefeated defeaters for believing that p. (For a detailed defense 
of the SV, see Lackey 2006, 2008.)
Further conditions might be needed for a complete view of testimonial knowledge. But 
regardless of what is added to the SV, such a view avoids the problems afflicting the TV. 
For instance, despite the fact that the devout creationist in the above case does not pos-
sess the knowledge in question, her statement that Homo sapiens evolved from Homo 
erectus is reliably connected with the truth via the extensive research that she did on 
evolutionary theory. So, though she fails the TV-N, she satisfies condition (1) of the 
SV, thereby enabling her students to acquire the knowledge in question. Conversely, 
despite the fact that the speaker in the second case above knows that there was a bald 
eagle in the park this morning, her statement that this is so is not reliably connected 
with the truth since she would have reported that there was such an eagle even if there 
hadn’t been one. Thus, the hearer cannot acquire knowledge about the bald eagle on 
the basis of the speaker’s testimony. The SV can, therefore, handle both types of coun-
terexamples with ease.
Moreover, the SV reveals that testimony is not merely a transmissive epistemic 
source, as the TV assumes, but that it can instead generate epistemic features in its 

TESTIMONIAL KNOWLEDGE
319
own right. In particular, hearers can acquire testimonial knowledge from speakers who 
do not possess the knowledge in question themselves. In this respect, then, testimony 
is on an epistemic par with sources traditionally considered more basic, such as sense 
perception and reason.
2. Testimonial Justification
Another question at the center of work in the epistemology of testimony is how pre-
cisely hearers acquire justified beliefs from the testimony of speakers, where justification 
is here understood as being necessary and, when added to true belief, close to sufficient 
for knowledge. Traditionally, answers to this question have fallen into one of two camps: 
non-reductionism or reductionism. According to non-reductionists—whose historical 
roots are typically traced to the work of Thomas Reid—testimony is a basic source of 
justification, on an epistemic par with sense perception, memory, inference, and the 
like. Given this, non-reductionists maintain that, so as long as there are no undefeated 
defeaters of either the psychological or the normative variety, hearers can be justified in 
accepting what they are told merely on the basis of the testimony of speakers. (See the 
references for proponents of various versions of non-reductionism.)
In contrast to non-reductionism, reductionists—whose historical roots are standardly 
traced to the work of David Hume—maintain that, in addition to the absence of unde-
feated defeaters, hearers must also possess non-testimonially based positive reasons in order 
to be justified in accepting the testimony of speakers. These reasons are typically the 
result of induction: for instance, hearers observe a general conformity between reports 
and the corresponding facts and, with the assistance of memory and reason, they induc-
tively infer that certain speakers, contexts, or types of reports are reliable sources of 
information. In this way, the justification of testimony is reduced to the justification for 
sense perception, memory, and inductive inference. (See the references for proponents 
of different versions of reductionism.) Broadly speaking, there are two different ver-
sions of reductionism. According to global reductionism, the justification of testimony as 
a source of belief reduces to the justification for sense perception, memory, and inductive 
inference. Thus, in order to be justified in accepting the testimony of speakers, hearers 
must possess non-testimonially based positive reasons for believing that testimony in 
general is reliable. According to local reductionism, which is the more widely accepted of 
the two versions, the justification for each instance of testimony reduces to the justifica-
tion for instances of sense perception, memory, and inductive inference. So, in order to 
be justified in accepting the testimony of speakers, hearers must have non-testimonially 
based positive reasons for accepting the particular report in question.
Objections have been raised to both non-reductionism and reductionism. The central 
problem raised against non-reductionism is that it is said to permit gullibility, epistemic 
irrationality, and intellectual irresponsibility (see, e.g., Fricker 1987, 1994, 1995; Faulkner 
2000, 2002; Lackey 2008). In particular, since hearers can acquire testimonially justified 
beliefs in the complete absence of any relevant positive reasons on such a view, randomly 
selected speakers, arbitrarily chosen postings on the internet, and unidentified telemar-
keters can be trusted, so long as there is no negative evidence against such sources. Yet 
surely, the opponent of non-reductionism claims, accepting testimony in these kinds of 
cases is paradigmatic of gullibility, epistemic irrationality, and irresponsibility.
Against reductionism, it is frequently argued that young children clearly acquire a 
great deal of knowledge from their parents and teachers and yet it is said to be doubtful 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
320
that they possess—or even could possess—non-testimonially based positive reasons for 
accepting much of what they are told. (See, for instance, Audi (1997). For a response 
to this objection, see Lackey 2005, 2008.) For instance, an 18-month-old baby might 
come to know that the stove is hot from the testimony of her mother, but it is unclear 
whether she has the cognitive sophistication to have reasons for believing her mother 
to be a reliable source of information, let alone for believing that testimony is generally 
reliable. Given this, reductionists—of both the global and the local variety—might 
have difficulty explaining how such young subjects could acquire all of the testimonial 
knowledge they at least seem to possess.
There are also objections raised that are specific to each kind of reductionism. 
Against the global version, it is argued that in order to have non-testimonially based 
positive reasons that testimony is generally reliable, one would have to be exposed to a 
wide-ranging sample of reports. But, it is argued, most of us have been exposed only to a 
very limited range of reports from speakers in our native language in a handful of com-
munities in our native country. This limited sample of reports provides only a fraction 
of what would be required to legitimately conclude that testimony is generally reliable. 
Moreover, with respect to many reports, such as those involving complex scientific, 
economic, or mathematical theories, most of us simply lack the conceptual machinery 
needed to properly check the reports against the facts. Global reductionism, then, is said 
to ultimately lead to skepticism about testimonial knowledge, at least for most epistemic 
agents.
Against the local version of reductionism, it is argued that most ordinary cognitive 
agents do not seem to have enough information to possess relevant positive reasons in 
all of those cases where testimonial knowledge appears present. For instance, it is argued 
that most cognitive agents frequently acquire testimonial knowledge from speakers 
about whom they know very little (see, e.g., Webb 1993; Foley 1994; Strawson 1994; 
Schmitt 1999. For a response to this objection, see Lackey (2008)). For instance, upon 
arriving in Chicago for the first time, I might receive accurate directions to Navy Pier 
from the first passerby I see. Most agree that such a transaction can result in my acquir-
ing testimonial knowledge of Navy Pier’s whereabouts, despite the fact that my positive 
reasons for accepting the directions in question—if indeed I possess any—are scanty at 
best.
The direction that some recent work on testimony has taken is to avoid the problems 
afflicting non-reductionism and reductionism by developing qualified or hybrid versions 
of either of these views (see, e.g., Fricker 1995, 2006b; Faulkner 2000; Goldberg 2006, 
2008; Lehrer 2006; Pritchard 2008). For instance, in an effort to avoid the charges of 
gullibility and epistemic irresponsibility, some non-reductionists emphasize that hearers 
must be “epistemically entitled” to rely on the testimony of speakers or that they need to 
“monitor” incoming reports, even though such requirements do not quite amount to the 
full-blown need for non-testimonially based positive reasons embraced by reductionists 
(see Goldberg 2006 and 2008, respectively, for these qualifications to a non-reduction-
ist view). And some reductionists, trying to account for the testimonial knowledge of 
both young children and those hearers who possess very little information about their 
relevant speakers, argue that positive reasons are not needed during either the “devel-
opmental phase” of a person’s life—when a subject is acquiring concepts and learning 
the language, relying in large part on her parents and teachers to guide the formation of 
her belief system—or when hearers are confronted with “mundane testimony”—about, 
for instance, a speaker’s name, what she had for breakfast, the time of day, and so on 

TESTIMONIAL KNOWLEDGE
321
(see Fricker 1995 for these modifications to reductionism). On this version of reduc-
tionism, then, while positive reasons remain a condition of testimonial justification, 
such a requirement applies only to hearers in the “mature phase” of their life who are 
encountering “non-mundane testimony.” Such qualified or hybrid versions of both non-
reductionism and reductionism often encounter either variations of the very same prob-
lems that led to their development, or altogether new objections (see, e.g., Insole 2000; 
Weiner 2003; Pritchard 2004; Lackey 2008).
Arguably, a more promising strategy for solving the problems afflicting non-reduc-
tionism and reductionism should, first, include a necessary condition requiring non-
testimonially grounded positive reasons for testimonial justification. This avoids the 
charges of gullibility, epistemic irrationality, and intellectual irresponsibility facing the 
non-reductionist’s view. Second, the demands of such a condition should be weakened 
so that merely some positive reasons, even about the type of speaker, or the kind of 
report, or the sort of context of utterance, are required. This avoids the objections fac-
ing the reductionist’s position that young children cannot satisfy such a requirement 
and that beliefs formed on the basis of the testimony of those about whom we know very 
little cannot be justified. Third, additional conditions should be added for a complete 
account of testimonial justification, such as the need for the reliability of the speaker’s 
statement found in the SV. This frees the positive reasons requirement from shouldering 
all of the justificatory burden for testimonial beliefs, thereby enabling the weakening 
of its content discussed above (for a detailed development of this strategy, see Lackey 
2008).
There is, however, an alternative family of views that has been growing in popularity 
in recent work in the epistemology of testimony, one that provides a radically different 
answer to the question of how testimonial beliefs are justified. Though there are some 
points of disagreement among some of the members of this family, they are united in 
their commitment to at least three central theses. First, and perhaps most important, 
the interpersonal relationship between the two parties in a testimonial exchange should 
be a central focus of the epistemology of testimony. Second, and closely related, certain 
features of this interpersonal relationship—such as the speaker offering her assurance to 
the hearer that her testimony is true, or the speaker inviting the hearer to trust her—are 
(at least sometimes) actually responsible for conferring epistemic value on the testimo-
nial beliefs acquired. Third, the epistemic justification provided by these features of a 
testimonial exchange is non-evidential in nature. Let us call the general conception of 
testimony characterized by these theses the Interpersonal View of Testimony, or the IVT 
(proponents of the IVT include Ross 1986; Hinchman 2005; Moran 2006; and Faulkner 
2007).
One of the central motivations for the IVT is a perceived failure on the part of existing 
views of testimony—particularly those that regard a speaker’s testimony that p merely as 
evidence for a hearer to believe that p—to adequately account for the import of the inter-
personal relationship between the speaker and the hearer in a testimonial exchange. In 
particular it is argued that a significant aspect of true communication is missing when 
a speaker is treated as a mere truth gauge, offering nothing more than words. In con-
trast, proponents of the IVT argue that speakers should be regarded as agents who enter 
into interpersonal relationships with their hearers. For instance, according to Richard 
Moran’s version of the IVT, a speaker’s testimony that p is understood as the speaker 
giving her assurance that p is true. Since assurance can be given only when it is freely 
presented as such, Moran claims that a speaker freely assumes responsibility for the truth 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
322
of p when she asserts that p, thereby providing the hearer with an additional reason to 
believe that p, different in kind from anything given by evidence alone.
A central objection facing proponents of the IVT is that the interpersonal fea-
tures that lie at the heart of their views are not clearly epistemologically relevant. For 
instance, the mere fact that a speaker offers her assurance to a hearer does not affect 
the reliability, proper functioning, truth-tracking, evidential relations, or any other rel-
evant truth-conducive feature of the testimony in question. Given this, a speaker can 
give assurance—and thereby a justified belief—even when she shouldn’t be able to, say, 
because she is a radically unreliable testifier. In an attempt to avoid this sort of prob-
lem, some proponents of the IVT add to their view conditions that are distinctively 
epistemic, such as requiring the reliability of the speaker’s testimony or the absence of 
defeaters on the part of the hearer (see, e.g., Hinchman 2005). The problem with this 
move is that all of the justificatory work is done by the addition of these new conditions, 
leaving the interpersonal features epistemologically superfluous. This leads to the fol-
lowing dilemma: either the IVT is genuinely interpersonal but epistemologically impo-
tent, or it is not epistemologically impotent but neither is it genuinely interpersonal 
(see Lackey 2008 for this objection to the IVT). Either way, the IVT fails to provide a 
compelling alternative to existing theories in the epistemology of testimony.
References
Audi, R. (1997) “The Place of Testimony in the Fabric of Knowledge and Justification,” American Philosophical 
Quarterly 34: 405–22.
——. (1998) Epistemology: A Contemporary Introduction to the Theory of Knowledge, London: Routledge.
Bergmann, M. (1997) “Internalism, Externalism and the No-Defeater Condition,” Synthese 110: 399–417.
——. (2004) “Epistemic Circularity: Malignant and Benign,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 69: 
709–27.
BonJour, L. (1980) “Externalist Theories of Epistemic Justification,” Midwest Studies in Philosophy 5: 53–73.
——. (1985) The Structure of Empirical Knowledge, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
—— and E. Sosa. (2003) Epistemic Justification: Internalism vs. Externalism, Foundations vs. Virtues, Oxford: 
Blackwell Publishing.
Burge, T. (1993) “Content Preservation,” The Philosophical Review 102: 457–88.
——. (1997) “Interlocution, Perception, and Memory,” Philosophical Studies 86: 21–47.
Chisholm, R. (1989) Theory of Knowledge, 3rd edn, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Faulkner, P. (2000) “The Social Character of Testimonial Knowledge,” The Journal of Philosophy 97: 581–
601.
——. (2002) “On the Rationality of our Response to Testimony,” Synthese 131: 353–70.
——. (2007) “What Is Wrong with Lying?” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 75: 535–57.
Foley, R. (1994) “Egoism in Epistemology,” in F. Schmitt (ed.) Socializing Epistemology: The Social Dimensions 
of Knowledge, Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield: 53–73.
Fricker, E. (1987) “The Epistemology of Testimony,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, supp. vol. 61: 
57–83.
——. (1994) “Against Gullibility,” in B. Matilal and A. Chakrabarti (eds.) Knowing from Words, Dordrecht: 
Kluwer Academic Publishers: 125–61.
——. (1995) “Telling and Trusting: Reductionism and Anti-Reductionism in the Epistemology of 
Testimony,” Mind 104: 393–411.
——. (2006b) “Knowledge from Trust in Testimony is Second-Hand Knowledge,” Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research 73: 592–618.
Goldberg, S. (2006) “Reductionism and the Distinctiveness of Testimonial Knowledge,” in J. Lackey and E. 
Sosa (eds.) The Epistemology of Testimony, Oxford: Oxford University Press: 127–44.
——. (2008) “Testimonial Knowledge in Early Childhood, Revisited,” Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research 76: 1–36.
Goldman, A. (1986) Epistemology and Cognition, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hawthorne, J. (2004) Knowledge and Lotteries, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

TESTIMONIAL KNOWLEDGE
323
Hinchman, E. (2005) “Telling as Inviting to Trust,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 70: 562–87.
Insole, C. (2000) “Seeing Off the Local Threat to Irreducible Knowledge by Testimony,” The Philosophical 
Quarterly 50: 44–56.
Lackey, J. (1999) “Testimonial Knowledge and Transmission,” The Philosophical Quarterly 49: 471–90.
——. (2005) “Testimony and the Infant/Child Objection,” Philosophical Studies 126: 163–90.
——. (2006) “Learning from Words,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 73: 77–101.
——. (2008) Learning from Words: Testimony as a Source of Knowledge, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lehrer, K. (2006) “Testimony and Trustworthiness,” in J. Lackey and E. Sosa (eds.) The Epistemology of 
Testimony, Oxford: Oxford University Press: 145–59.
McDowell, J. (1994) “Knowledge by Hearsay,” in B. Matilal and A. Chakrabarti (eds.) Knowing from Words, 
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers: 195–224.
Moran, R. (2006) “Getting Told and Being Believed,” in J. Lackey and E. Sosa (eds.) The Epistemology of 
Testimony, Oxford: Oxford University Press: 272–306.
Nozick, R. (1981) Philosophical Explanations, Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press.
Plantinga, A. (1993) Warrant and Proper Function, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pollock, J. (1986) Contemporary Theories of Knowledge, Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littlefield.
Pritchard, D.H. (2004) “The Epistemology of Testimony,” Philosophical Issues 14: 326–48.
——. (2008) “A Defence of Quasi-Reductionism in the Epistemology of Testimony,” Philosophica 78: 
13–28.
Reed, B. (2006) “Epistemic Circularity Squared? Skepticism about Common Sense.” Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research 73: 186–97.
Ross, A. (1986) “Why Do We Believe What We Are Told?” Ratio 28: 69–88.
Schmitt, F. (1999) “Social Epistemology,” in J. Greco and E. Sosa (eds.) The Blackwell Guide to Epistemology, 
Oxford: Blackwell Publishers: 354–82.
Strawson, P.F. (1994) “Knowing From Words,” in B. Matilal and A. Chakrabarti (eds.) Knowing from Words, 
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers: 23–27.
Webb, M. (1993) “Why I Know About As Much As You: A Reply to Hardwig,” The Journal of Philosophy 
110: 260–70.
Weiner, M. (2003) “Accepting Testimony,” The Philosophical Quarterly 53: 256–64.
Williams, M. (1999) Groundless Belief: An Essay on the Possibility of Epistemology, 2nd edn, Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.
For endorsements of the TV-N, see:
Audi, R. (1997) “The Place of Testimony in the Fabric of Knowledge and Justification,” American Philosophical 
Quarterly 34: 405–22.
——. (1998) Epistemology: A Contemporary Introduction to the Theory of Knowledge, London: Routledge.
——. (2006) “Testimony, Credulity, and Veracity,” in J. Lackey and E. Sosa (eds.) The Epistemology of 
Testimony, Oxford: Oxford University Press: 25–49.
Burge, T. (1993) “Content Preservation,” The Philosophical Review 102: 457–88.
——. (1997) “Interlocution, Perception, and Memory,” Philosophical Studies 86: 21–47.
Faulkner, P. (2006) “On Dreaming and Being Lied To,” Episteme 3: 149–59.
Hardwig, J. (1985) “Epistemic Dependence,” The Journal of Philosophy 82: 335–49.
——. (1991) “The Role of Trust in Knowledge,” The Journal of Philosophy 88: 693–708.
McDowell, J. (1994) “Knowledge by Hearsay,” in B. Matilal and A. Chakrabarti (eds.) Knowing from Words, 
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers: 195–224.
Owens, D. (2000) Reason without Freedom: The Problem of Epistemic Normativity, London: Routledge.
——. (2006) “Testimony and Assertion,” Philosophical Studies 130: 105–29.
Plantinga, A. (1993) Warrant and Proper Function, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Reynolds, S. (2002) “Testimony, Knowledge, and Epistemic Goals,” Philosophical Studies 110: 139–61.
Ross, A. (1986) “Why Do We Believe What We Are Told?” Ratio 28: 69–88.
Schmitt, F. (2006) “Testimonial Justification and Transindividual Reasons,” in J. Lackey and E. Sosa (eds.) 
The Epistemology of Testimony, Oxford: Oxford University Press: 193–224.
Welbourne, M. (1979) “The Transmission of Knowledge,” The Philosophical Quarterly 29: 1–9.
——. (1981) “The Community of Knowledge,” The Philosophical Quarterly 31: 302–14.
——. (1986) The Community of Knowledge, Aberdeen: Aberdeen University Press.
——. (1994) “Testimony, Knowledge and Belief,” in B. Matilal and A. Chakrabarti (eds.) Knowing from 
Words, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers: 297–313.

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
324
Williamson, T. (1996) “Knowing and Asserting,” The Philosophical Review 105: 489–523.
——. (2000) Knowledge and its Limits, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
For endorsements of the TV-S, see:
Adler, J. (1994) “Testimony, Trust, Knowing,” The Journal of Philosophy 91: 264–75.
——. (2002) Belief’s Own Ethics, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Audi, R. (1997) “The Place of Testimony in the Fabric of Knowledge and Justification,” American Philosophical 
Quarterly 34: 405–22.
Austin, J.L. (1979) “Other Minds,” in his Philosophical Papers, 3rd edn, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Burge, T. (1993) “Content Preservation,” The Philosophical Review 102: 457–88.
Coady, C.A.J. (1992) Testimony: A Philosophical Study, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Evans, G. (1982) The Varieties of Reference, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Fricker, E. (1987) “The Epistemology of Testimony,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, supp. vol. 61: 
57–83.
McDowell, J. (1994) “Knowledge by Hearsay,” in B. Matilal and A. Chakrabarti (eds.) Knowing from Words, 
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers: 195–224.
Owens, D. (2000) Reason Without Freedom: The Problem of Epistemic Normativity, London: Routledge.
——. (2006) “Testimony and Assertion,” Philosophical Studies 130: 105–29.
Welbourne, M. (1979) “The Transmission of Knowledge,” The Philosophical Quarterly 29: 1–9.
——. (1981) “The Community of Knowledge,” The Philosophical Quarterly 31: 302–14.
——. (1986) The Community of Knowledge, Aberdeen: Aberdeen University Press.
——. (1994) “Testimony, Knowledge and Belief,” in B. Matilal and A. Chakrabarti (eds.) Knowing from 
Words, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers: 297–313.
Williamson, T. (1996) “Knowing and Asserting,” The Philosophical Review 105: 489–523.
——. (2000) Knowledge and its Limits, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
For endorsements of non-reductionism, see:
Audi, R. (1997) “The Place of Testimony in the Fabric of Knowledge and Justification,” American Philosophical 
Quarterly 34: 405–22.
——. (1998) Epistemology: A Contemporary Introduction to the Theory of Knowledge, London: Routledge.
——. (2006) “Testimony, Credulity, and Veracity,” in J. Lackey and E. Sosa (eds.) The Epistemology of 
Testimony, Oxford: Oxford University Press: 25–49.
Austin, J.L. (1979) “Other Minds,” in his Philosophical Papers, 3rd edn, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Burge, T. (1993) “Content Preservation,” The Philosophical Review 102: 457–88.
——. (1997) “Interlocution, Perception, and Memory,” Philosophical Studies 86: 21–47.
Coady, C.A.J. (1992) Testimony: A Philosophical Study, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
——. (1994) “Testimony, Observation and ‘Autonomous Knowledge’,” in B. Matilal and A. Chakrabarti 
(eds.) Knowing from Words, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers: 225–50.
Dummett, M. (1994) “Testimony and Memory,” in B. Matilal and A. Chakrabarti (eds.) Knowing from 
Words, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers: 251–72.
Evans, G. (1982) The Varieties of Reference, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Foley, R. (1994) “Egoism in Epistemology,” in F. Schmitt (ed.) Socializing Epistemology: The Social Dimensions 
of Knowledge, Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield: 53–73.
Goldberg, S. (2006) “Reductionism and the Distinctiveness of Testimonial Knowledge,” in J. Lackey and E. 
Sosa (eds.) The Epistemology of Testimony, Oxford: Oxford University Press: 127–44.
Goldman, A. (1999) Knowledge in a Social World, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Graham, Peter J. (2006) “Liberal Fundamentalism and Its Rivals,” in J. Lackey and E. Sosa (eds.) The 
Epistemology of Testimony, Oxford: Oxford University Press: 93–115.
Hardwig, J. (1985) “Epistemic Dependence,” The Journal of Philosophy 82: 335–49.
——. (1991) “The Role of Trust in Knowledge,” The Journal of Philosophy 88: 693–708.
Insole, C. (2000) “Seeing Off the Local Threat to Irreducible Knowledge by Testimony,” The Philosophical 
Quarterly 50: 44–56.
McDowell, J. (1994) “Knowledge by Hearsay,” in B. Matilal and A. Chakrabarti (eds.) Knowing from Words, 
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers: 195–224.
Millgram, E. (1997) Practical Induction, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Owens, D. (2000) Reason Without Freedom: The Problem of Epistemic Normativity, London: Routledge.

TESTIMONIAL KNOWLEDGE
325
——. (2006) “Testimony and Assertion,” Philosophical Studies 130: 105–29.
Plantinga, A. (1993) Warrant and Proper Function, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Reid, T. (1983) Essay on the Intellectual Powers of Man, in R. Beanblossom and K. Lehrer (eds.) Thomas Reid’s 
Inquiry and Essays, Indianapolis: Hackett.
Ross, A. (1986) “Why Do We Believe What We Are Told?” Ratio 28: 69–88.
Rysiew, P. (2002) “Testimony, Simulation, and the Limits of Inductivism,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 
78: 269–74.
Schmitt, F. (1999) “Social Epistemology,” in J. Greco and E. Sosa (eds.) The Blackwell Guide to Epistemology, 
Oxford: Blackwell Publishers: 354–82.
Sosa, E. (2006) “Knowledge: Instrumental and Testimonial,” in J. Lackey and E. Sosa (eds.) The Epistemology 
of Testimony, Oxford: Oxford University Press: 116–23.
Strawson, P.F. (1994) “Knowing From Words,” in B. Matilal and A. Chakrabarti (eds.) Knowing from Words, 
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers: 23–27.
Webb, M. (1993) “Why I Know About As Much As You: A Reply to Hardwig,” The Journal of Philosophy 
110: 260–70.
Weiner, M. (2003) “Accepting Testimony,” The Philosophical Quarterly 53: 256–64.
Welbourne, M. (1979) “The Transmission of Knowledge,” The Philosophical Quarterly 29: 1–9.
——. (1981) “The Community of Knowledge,” The Philosophical Quarterly 31: 302–14.
——. (1986) The Community of Knowledge, Aberdeen: Aberdeen University Press.
——. (1994) “Testimony, Knowledge and Belief,” in B. Matilal and A. Chakrabarti (eds.) Knowing from 
Words, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers: 297–313.
Williamson, T. (1996) “Knowing and Asserting,” The Philosophical Review 105: 489–523.
——. (2000) Knowledge and its Limits, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
For endorsements of reductionism, see:
Adler, J. (1994) “Testimony, Trust, Knowing,” The Journal of Philosophy 91: 264–75.
——. (2002) Belief’s Own Ethics, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Fricker, E. (1987) “The Epistemology of Testimony,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, supp. vol. 61: 
57–83.
——. (1994) “Against Gullibility,” in B. Matilal and A. Chakrabarti (eds.) Knowing from Words, Dordrecht: 
Kluwer Academic Publishers: 125–61.
——. (1995) “Telling and Trusting: Reductionism and Anti-Reductionism in the Epistemology of 
Testimony,” Mind 104: 393–411.
——. (2006a) “Testimony and Epistemic Autonomy,” in J. Lackey and E. Sosa (eds.) The Epistemology of 
Testimony, Oxford: Oxford University Press: 225–50.
——. (2006b) “Knowledge from Trust in Testimony is Second-Hand Knowledge,” Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research 73: 592–618.
Hume, D. (1977) An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, Eric Steinberg (ed.) Indianapolis: Hackett.
Lehrer, K. (2006) “Testimony and Trustworthiness,” in J. Lackey and E. Sosa (eds.) The Epistemology of 
Testimony, Oxford: Oxford University Press: 145–59.
Lipton, P. (1998) “The Epistemology of Testimony,” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 29: 1–31.
Lyons, J. (1997) “Testimony, Induction and Folk Psychology,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 75: 163–78.
Pritchard, D. (2008) “A Defence of Quasi-Reductionism in the Epistemology of Testimony,” Philosophica 
78: 13–28.
Van Cleve, J. (2006) “Reid on the Credit of Human Testimony,” in J. Lackey and E. Sosa (eds.) The 
Epistemology of Testimony, Oxford: Oxford University Press: 50–74.

30
MEMORY KNOWLEDGE
Sven Bernecker
Introduction
Knowledge can be subdivided according to the sources from which it arises. Among 
the basic sources of knowledge and justification are perception, testimony, reason, and 
inference. Whether memory is a basic source of knowledge is a controversial issue. Some 
philosophers maintain that memory only retains or preserves knowledge but doesn’t 
generate new knowledge. Others insist that there are cases where a person first comes 
to know by remembering.
Section 1 explains the distinction between direct and representative realism about 
memory. Section 2 concerns the question of whether memory implies knowledge. 
Section 3 examines whether memory is merely a preservative source of justification 
and knowledge or whether it can also function as a generative source. Finally, section 4 
discusses responses to skepticism about memory knowledge.
1. The Objects of Memory
Traditionally philosophers were concerned with the debate between representative (or 
indirect) and direct realism about memory. The discussion of memory closely followed 
the discussion of perception. Just as philosophers have debated the question whether 
perception is a direct awareness of objects or an inferential procedure, so it has been 
debated whether memory provides mediate or immediate awareness of the past.
Representative realism about memory claims that, though there is a past that causes 
us to have memory experiences, we are not directly or immediately aware of the past. 
What we are directly aware of are the effects the past has on us—representations or 
sense-data of things past. We remember something not by way of being directly aware 
of that thing, but rather a mediating representation of that thing. To remember is to 
undergo a certain sort of mental experience; it is to experience a mental representation 
which reproduces some past sense-experience. Among the advocates of the representa-
tive theory are Hume (1978: 8–10), James (1890: i. ch. 16), Locke (1975: 149–55), and 
Russell (1995a: ch. 9).
What speaks in favor of representative realism is the fact that, phenomenologically 
speaking, there might be no difference between veridical and illusory rememberings. 
There doesn’t seem to be a subjective mark whereby we can distinguish between those 
rememberings in which the object as presently visualized is identical with the object 
as originally seen and those in which it is not. Why not, therefore, say that what is 
directly remembered in either case is something internal to us—a representation or 

MEMORY KNOWLEDGE
327
sense-datum? The representative realists claim that even in cases of veridical remem-
bering the primary object of awareness is a representation of the past thing rather than 
the thing itself.
The most widely canvassed objection to representative realism about memory is that 
it makes the past unknowable. If all we are directly aware of are our representations 
about the past, how can we know that there is a past at all, much less that the past is 
the cause of our present representations? How can we discriminate memory representa-
tions from other representational states such as figments of the imagination? The need 
to discern memory representations from other kinds of representations is particularly 
pressing if one wants to base knowledge on ostensible memories. It seems that to come 
to know about the past on the basis of one’s ostensible memories one would have to 
first establish what the past was like and then check one’s ostensible memories against 
the past facts. But how can one do this if, as the representative realist insists, the direct 
objects of memory are internal representations? To discover whether something is a 
genuine memory representation, one would have to inspect it from an external point 
of view, but, according to the representative theory, the only way of finding out what 
happened in the past is via one’s representations of the past. Thus the representative 
theorist finds himself imprisoned within his representations, with no way of confirming 
that the ostensible memory representations do, in fact, reveal the past, as they have to 
if he is to have memory knowledge.
Some advocates of representative realism have responded to this problem by main-
taining that one can indeed tell, by reflection alone, whether a particular representa-
tion one is having stems from memory or one of the other faculties of the mind, such 
as perception or imagination. The feature of memory representations that distinguishes 
them from other kinds of representational states and that stamps them as authentic 
is the memory marker. Memory markers are defined as a priori knowable features of 
memory representations on the basis of which they can be distinguished from other 
mental phenomena. Memory markers have been described by representative realists in a 
number of ways, as the feeling of warmth and intimacy (James 1890: i. 650), the feeling 
of familiarity and pastness (Russell 1995a: 163), or as the force and vivacity of memory 
representations (Hume 1978: 9–10, 85–6).
The problem all the various proposals of memory markers have in common is that 
they don’t offer a reliable mark. There are cases in which these alleged memory mark-
ers are present, but in which there is no inclination to speak of memory, and there 
are instances where memories lack these alleged markers. What is more, the features 
identified as memory markers don’t bear their own explanation upon their face. The 
mere fact, if it is one, that we are inclined to associate representations that strike us as 
familiar with memory, doesn’t imply that we are justified to make this association. The 
required justification could, of course, come from some independent evidence suggest-
ing that memories appear familiar more often than fantasies. Yet if such evidence exists 
at all, it isn’t available by reflection alone. Alternatively the required justification could 
be the result of a general principle whereby it is reasonable to trust our cognitive facul-
ties (including our memories) even though we lack a non-question-begging assurance 
of their reliability. But if we are entitled to trust our cognitive faculties, including our 
memory, then memory markers are superfluous (cf. Bernecker 2008: chs. 5–6).
According to direct realism, we don’t remember the past by virtue of being aware of 
a representation presenting the past to us, rather, our awareness of the past is direct. 
Although remembering something requires the having of representations and although 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
328
these representations determine the way the thing appears to us, there is no reason to 
suppose we are aware of these representations themselves. We are aware of the past 
thing by internally representing the thing, not by being aware of the internal represen-
tation of the thing. Representations, according to the direct realist, don’t function as 
the objects of memory, but are merely the vehicle of memory. Direct realism about mem-
ory is defended by, among others, Laird (1920: 56), Reid (1997: essay 3), and Russell 
(1997: 114–15).
Direct realism derives some of its plausibility from the fact that when we remember 
something, what we are aware of is just that thing, and nothing further. As Reid (1997: 
28) remarks, “upon the strictest examination, memory appears to me to have things that 
are past, and not present ideas, for its object.” Since, on the realist view, what we are 
directly aware of in memory is the past event in propria persona, and not some represen-
tation of it, one of the difficulties of representative realism about memory disappears: 
the difficulty of explaining how we can be justified in inferring the occurrence of a past 
thing from a present memory representation. If what we are directly aware of is the past 
event itself, and not just a representation thereof, no such inference is required.
Though direct realism makes some problems disappear, it gives rise to others. One of 
the problems of direct realism is to explain our direct acquaintance with, or experience 
of past things. Another worry is that direct realism is incompatible with the highly 
intuitive causal theory of memory, that is, the view that for someone to remember some-
thing his representation of that thing must be suitably causally connected to his past 
representation of that same thing. Hume famously held that the relation between cause 
and effect is a metaphysical rather than a logical relation and that, therefore, causal 
relations cannot be known a priori. The only way in which a particular effect can be 
inferred from a given cause is on the basis of experience, in particular by observation of 
a regularity between events of the same type. Now, there is the worry that direct realism 
about memory is incompatible with the causal theory of memory because it violates the 
Humean requirement whereby a cause and its effect must be “independent existences” 
(1978: 79–80). For, given direct realism, if the effect is characterized as “S’s having a 
memory representation of X,” then it is possible to tell a priori that X occurred.
The Humean worry that if there is a logical relation between two events that supports 
an a priori inference from one to the other, then there is no room left for causal efficacy 
among them is misguided. We can always re-describe the effect in a way as to make it 
an entailment of the cause. But from this it doesn’t follow that causation is a myth. For 
even if we chose to describe the effect-event in a different manner it would still follow 
the cause with the same regularity as before. Causation is a relation between events. 
Logical relations, however, hold between propositions and linguistic entities. And just 
because there is a logical relation between the descriptions of two events doesn’t pre-
clude that the events themselves stand in a causal relation. Thus there is no reason to 
suppose that direct realism conflicts with the causal theory of memory.
2. Memory and Knowledge
According to received wisdom in epistemology, remembering that p implies knowing 
that p. Propositional memory is thought to be long-standing or continuing knowledge. 
Audi (2003: 69), for example, says that “if you remember that we met, you know that 
we did. Similarly, if you remember me, you know me.” Malcolm (1963: 223) defines 
propositional memory thus: “A person B remembers that p if and only if B knows that p 

MEMORY KNOWLEDGE
329
because he knew that p.” And Margalit (2002: 14) writes: “To remember now is to know 
now what you knew in the past, without learning in-between what you know now. And 
to know is to believe something to be true. Memory, then, is knowing from the past.”
Most philosophers hold that the concept of propositional knowledge has three nec-
essary conditions: belief, truth, and justification (however construed). (I use the term 
“justification” to refer to any factor that transforms a true belief into knowledge.) Given 
that memory implies knowledge and given the transitivity of implication, memory 
implies belief, truth, and justification. Now it is beyond doubt that both knowledge and 
memory imply truth. Just as you can know that p only if p is true, so you can remember 
that p only if p is true. If not-p, then you might think you remember that p, but cannot 
actually remember that p. Truth is a component of both knowledge and memory. The 
task of evaluating the view whereupon memory is a form of knowledge is thus a matter 
of determining the tenability of the belief constraint and the justification constraint.
To see that one can remember that p without believing that p consider the follow-
ing example adapted from Malcolm (1963: 213–14): S suddenly finds himself with the 
thought that he has been kidnapped when he was a small boy. The idea that he has 
been kidnapped just pops into his head; it seems to come “out of the blue.” S can’t make 
sense of this idea and takes it to be merely imaginary; after all the likelihood of being 
kidnapped is low. What is more, the idea in question is inferentially isolated from the 
large body of inferentially integrated beliefs to which S has access. Nothing of what S 
knows or believes about his past connects with the idea that he has been kidnapped. But 
now suppose that, unbeknown to S, it is in fact the case that he has been kidnapped. 
The flashbulb thought is an instance of propositional memory.
Believing that p involves holding p true yet it doesn’t involve actively reflecting on 
p or an especially high degree of confidence with respect to p. Given that acceptance 
is a central component of both occurrent and dispositional belief, it would be wrong 
to say that S believes that he was kidnapped when he was a small boy. For only after 
he is presented with the police record and newspaper clippings about his kidnapping 
does he reluctantly consent to the thesis according to which the thought in question 
springs from his memory rather than his imagination. And when he finally accepts this 
thesis he acquires a novel belief rather than reviving a dormant one. Thus S not only 
remembers that p without believing that he remembers that p, but he remembers that p 
without believing that which he remembers, namely p. (Obviously, if knowledge didn’t 
imply belief, as some argue, cases of memory without belief wouldn’t count against the 
thesis that to remember that p is to know that p.)
The most compelling cases of memory without justification are ones where the sub-
ject remembers that p but where there is some defeating information such that, if he 
became aware of it, he would no longer be justified in believing p. Despite the dazzling 
number of different conceptions of epistemic justification, philosophers on both sides 
of the internalism/externalism divide sign up to the idea that justification is incom-
patible with undefeated defeaters. In the case of epistemic internalism, it is obvious 
that the presence of undefeated defeaters undermines justification. Given that what 
justifies a belief is a mentally accessible item (something that one can come to know 
whether it obtains just by reflecting on one’s mental states), being justified in believing 
p excludes a person’s having sufficient reasons for supposing either that p is false or that 
the belief that p is not grounded or produced in a way that is sufficiently truth-indi-
cating. Moreover, the majority of externalists hold that although a subject need not 
be aware of the factors that justify his belief, he might not be aware of evidence that 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
330
undermines his belief. In addition to the reliabilist justification condition they adopt 
a no-defeater condition that ensures that a justified belief is not incoherent with the 
background information the subject possesses.
Consider the following case of memory without justification. In the past S learned 
that John F. Kennedy was assassinated in 1963. He came to know this fact. Today S’s 
friends play a practical joke on him. They tell him that Kennedy wasn’t assassinated 
until 1964 and present him with plausible yet misleading evidence to this effect. Given 
the incompatibility of justification with the presence of undefeated defeaters, S doesn’t 
know anymore that Kennedy was assassinated in 1963, for he is unable to rule out 
the relevant alternative that he was not assassinated until 1964. He fails to know that 
Kennedy was assassinated in 1963, despite the fact that he still remembers this fact. This 
example is meant to show that one can know at t1 that p, remember at t2 everything 
one knew at t1, and yet fail to know at t2 that p—even though one continues to truly 
believe that p—for the reason that one isn’t anymore justified in believing that p. The 
upshot is that memory doesn’t imply knowledge since it implies neither belief nor justi-
fication. Not only is it possible to remember something one doesn’t believe but also one 
might acquire some plausible yet misleading evidence that destroys the status as justified 
belief of the once-genuine justified belief that one still remembers (cf. Bernecker 2010: 
65–94).
3. Memory and Justification
Even if memory doesn’t imply justification and knowledge, memory beliefs can, of 
course, be justified and qualify as knowledge. And so the question arises whether mem-
ory is merely a preservative source of justification and knowledge or whether it can also 
function as a generative source.
The standard view, which may be called preservationism, has it that memory is noth-
ing but a preservative source of justification and knowledge. Just as testimony is said 
to transmit knowledge from one person to another, memory is said to preserve knowl-
edge from one time to another. Both in the case of memory knowledge and testimonial 
knowledge the proposition in question must have been known when it was originally 
acquired and a source other than memory or testimony, respectively, must have been 
responsible for its original acquisition (Plantinga 1993: 61n). If one justifiably believes 
that p on the basis of memory, then one must have acquired this justification in a non-
memorial way at some earlier time. Memory cannot improve the epistemic status a 
belief has at the time of recall vis-à-vis the epistemic status it had at the time it was 
originally acquired. Memory is incapable of making an unknown proposition known, 
an unjustified belief justified, or an irrational belief rational—it can only preserve what 
is already known, justified, or rational.
How does memory preserve the positive epistemic status of the original belief? 
According to some preservationists (e.g., Conee and Feldman 2004: 60–1), epistemic 
justification is a matter of internal or conscious justifying factors. The obvious problem 
with internalist preservationism is that there are numerous justified memory beliefs for 
which there are no internal or conscious justifying factors because they are (irretriev-
ably) forgotten. This is how Williamson (2007: 110–11) states the problem:
Many of our factual memories come without any particular supporting phe-
nomenology of memory images or feelings of familiarity. We cannot remember 

MEMORY KNOWLEDGE
331
how we acquired the information, and it may be relatively isolated, but we still 
use it when the need arises. Although few if any memories stand in total isola-
tion from the rest of our conscious lives, very many memories are too isolated 
to receive impressive justification from other internal elements.
Internalists seem to be stuck with the implausible result that retained beliefs are unjus-
tified unless the past evidence is also recalled. In response to the problem of forgotten 
evidence, virtually all proponents of preservationism adopt the principle of continuous 
justification: at t2, S’s belief from t1 that p is continuously justified if S continues to 
believe at t2 that p—even if he lost his original knowledge-producing justification and 
has acquired no new justification in the meantime (Shoemaker 1967: 271–2). According 
to some preservationists (e.g., Pappas 1980), continuous justification is a kind of basic 
or foundational justification. According to others (Burge 1993: 458–9; Owens 2000: 
153), the reason we are continuously justified in holding our memory beliefs is that we 
are entitled to believe what memory “serves up,” in the absence of defeaters.
According to generativism, a memory belief can not only be less but also more justified 
than the original belief. A memory belief might be justified even if the original belief 
wasn’t justified. How does memory generate justification? According to Audi (1995: 
37) and Pollock (1974: 193), it is the phenomenology of recalling that generates justi-
fication for memory beliefs. They draw a parallel between memory and perception. In 
a standard case of perceptual belief, one is “appeared to” in a certain way and, on the 
basis of this appearance, comes to justifiably believe something about the perceptual 
surroundings. Similarly, when one remembers something one has a recollection and, 
on the basis of this phenomenal state, comes to justifiably believe something about the 
past. The idea is that if one bases one’s belief that p on one’s state of seeming to remem-
ber that p, and p is undefeated, then one is at least prima facie justified in believing p.
Even if we grant that there is a distinctive phenomenology that attends all the mem-
ory beliefs we are justified in holding and even if we grant that the experiential features 
of memory beliefs can do the epistemic work that Pollock and Audi assign to them, this 
version of generativism runs into problems. In the absence of defeating conditions, the 
epistemic status of a belief is said to improve simply in virtue of the belief being recalled. 
Every time a belief is retrieved from memory it receives an extra epistemic boost. But 
is it plausible to suppose that, everything else being equal, a belief that is retrieved 
often enjoys a better epistemic status than a belief that is retrieved infrequently? There 
doesn’t seem to be a neat correlation between the positive epistemic status a belief has 
and the number of times it has been retrieved from memory. Following McGrath (2007: 
19–22), we can call this the epistemic boost problem.
According to Audi’s and Pollock’s radical generativism, memory can generate new jus-
tificatory factors, new evidence. If, for instance, I came to justifiably believe at t1 that p 
and if I remember at t2 that p, then the memory belief inherits (some of) the justifica-
tion the original belief had and there will be an additional justificatory element due to 
the process of remembering. The justification of the memory belief has two parts: there 
is a preserved component and a new component due to the act of recalling. Moderate 
generativism (cf. Bernecker 2010: 96–103; Lackey 2005: 640–4), by contrast, agrees with 
preservationism in that the memory process generates no new elements of justification 
or evidence. Memory cannot make justification and knowledge from nothing. Instead, 
the only way for memory to function as a generative source of justification is by remov-
ing defeaters and thereby unleashing the justificatory potential that was already present 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
332
at the time the belief was initially entertained. All the elements required for a memory 
belief to be justified must already have been present when the belief was encoded. If the 
original belief had no justificatory potential, then memory cannot turn it into a justified 
belief. Memory can generate justification only by lifting justificatory elements that were 
previously rebutted or undermined by defeating evidence.
4. Skepticism about Memory Knowledge
“S remembers that p” implies that p is the case. Though memory entails truth, we are 
frequently mistaken in thinking that we remember something. Memories are not trans-
parent to the mind in the sense that we can identify them and discriminate them from 
other states in any possible situation. Whether we genuinely or ostensibly remember 
that p we cannot tell just by reflection. But we all trust our ostensible memories to 
a greater or lesser degree. What reasons, if any, do we have for believing that events 
we seem to remember actually happened? What kind of justification do we have for 
accepting (at least some of) our ostensible memories as reliable information about the 
past? Do we, for example, have any way of ruling out Russell’s (1995a: 159) hypothesis 
whereupon the world sprang into being five minutes ago, exactly as it then was, with a 
population that seemed to remember a wholly unreal past?
As was shown above (section 1) there are no intrinsic features of memory experiences 
from which it can be read off that they are memory experiences rather than imaginary 
experiences. Given that there are no memory markers, is it possible to validate osten-
sible memories by checking them against the past events they are (purportedly) about? 
This isn’t possible because the past events have ceased to exist and hence are not avail-
able for comparison. Could we then validate ostensible memories by means of diaries, 
photographs, testimony, and the like? The problem with this proposal is that it begs the 
question at issue: the employment of this kind of evidence assumes the trustworthiness 
of some ostensible memories (one’s own or someone else’s). Any inductive argument to 
the effect that ostensible memories are, in general, reliable depends on other memories. 
And however great the probability of an inductive generalization might be, its prob-
ability is based on (what we take to be) past observations; and we have only memory to 
confirm those past observations. But how else, then, should we validate our ostensible 
memories?
Lewis (1949: ch. 11) suggests that we can validate our ostensible memories by exam-
ining the degree to which they cohere. Such coherence (he calls it congruence) is said to 
raise the probability of what is remembered to the level of practical certainty in a way 
analogous to that in which agreement of independently given testimonies can convince 
us that what is being testified is true. The idea is that the degree of coherence of our 
ostensible memories is sufficiently high for rational and practical reliance. But coher-
ence can play this amplifying role only if the states of ostensible memory have some 
positive degree of initial credibility. And one might think that our ostensible memories 
lack the required initial credibility due to systematic delusion or general unreliability. 
Lewis argues that these prima facie possibilities are not genuine possibilities since they 
are either incoherent or contradict our experience. However, the argument against the 
possibility of systematic delusion depends on the contentious verifiability criterion of 
meaning (whereby a statement is meaningful if and only if it is either analytic or empiri-
cally verifiable). And even if the verifiability criterion of meaning is conceded, Lewis 
seems to overestimate the power of coherence to amplify probability.

MEMORY KNOWLEDGE
333
Malcolm (1963: 193–6) and Shoemaker (1963: 229–34) take a very different 
approach to the task of validating our ostensible memories. They argue that the general 
reliability of ostensible memories is an analytic truth. There are two main arguments to 
the effect that ostensible memories are necessarily reliable. According to the first argu-
ment, if someone were to consistently make wildly inaccurate claims about the past and 
seemed to remember things that never happened, we would have to say not that he was 
misremembering, but that he has lost his understanding of “to remember.” The problem 
with this argument is that habitual mistakes about memory claims need not be mistakes 
of meaning rather than fact. Even if someone’s memory claims were consistently wrong, 
he could still have a correct understanding of the verb “to remember.” That he correctly 
understands the verb “to remember” could be established by the fact that he uses it to 
talk only about things that he believes did happen and not about things that he believes 
he imagined. The second argument to the effect that ostensible memory is necessarily 
reliable rests on the observation that one cannot help thinking that one’s confident 
memory beliefs constitute knowledge. However, just because one cannot question one’s 
own confident memory beliefs doesn’t mean that one cannot question someone else’s 
claim concerning his confident memory beliefs. Moreover, even if it is incoherent to 
question one’s confident memory beliefs, this doesn’t mean that one couldn’t be con-
sistently false. The skeptical problem actually gets worse because not only is it pos-
sible that one’s memory beliefs are consistently false but also one might be incapable of 
coherently entertaining this possibility.
In the end, none of the strategies for validating ostensible memories seem to work. 
We don’t seem to be able to put our reliance on memories in question and then dem-
onstrate the reliability of a given ostensible memory. As Russell (1995b: 154) remarks, 
“no memory proposition is, strictly speaking, verifiable, since nothing in the present 
or future makes any proposition about the past necessary.” At the same time, we can-
not secure a connection with epistemic rationality unless we trust at least some of our 
ostensible memories. This has led some philosophers (e.g., Burge 1993) to work out a 
transcendental argument to the effect that we have an a priori entitlement to trust our 
ostensible memories, unless there are stronger reasons not to do so.
References
Audi, R. (1995). “Memorial Justification,” Philosophical Topics 23: 31–45.
Audi, R. (2003). Epistemology: A Contemporary Introduction to the Theory of Knowledge. 2nd edn. London: 
Routledge.
Bernecker, S. (2008). The Metaphysics of Memory. Dordrecht: Springer.
Bernecker, S. (2010). Memory: A Philosophical Study. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Burge, T. (1993). “Content Preservation,” The Philosophical Review 102: 457–88.
Conee, E. and Feldman, R. (2004). Evidentialism: Essays in Epistemology. Oxford: Clarendon.
Hume, D. (1978). A Treatise of Human Nature, ed. L.A. Selby-Bigge. 2nd edn. rev. P.H. Nidditch, Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
James, W. (1890). The Principles of Psychology. 2 vols. London: Macmillan.
Lackey, J. (2005). “Memory as a Generative Epistemic Source,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 
70: 636–58.
Laird, J. (1920). A Study in Realism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lewis, C.I. (1949). An Analysis of Knowledge and Valuation. La Salle: Open Court.
Locke, J. (1975). An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, ed. P.H. Nidditch. 2nd edn. Oxford: 
Clarendon.
Malcolm, N. (1963). Knowledge and Certainty. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Margalit, A. (2002). The Ethics of Memory. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
334
McGrath, M. (2007). “Memory and Epistemic Conservatism,” Synthese 157: 1–24.
Owens, D. (2000). Reason Without Freedom. London: Routledge.
Pappas, G. (1980). “Lost Justification,” Midwest Studies in Philosophy 5: 127–34.
Plantinga, A. (1993). Warrant and Proper Function. New York: Oxford University Press.
Pollock, J.L. (1974). Knowledge and Justification. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Reid, T. (1997). An Inquiry into the Human Mind, ed. D.R. Brookes. Edinburgh: University of Edinburgh 
Press.
Russell, B. (1995a). The Analysis of Mind, intro. T. Baldwin. London: Routledge.
Russell, B. (1995b). An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth, intro. T. Baldwin. London: Routledge.
Russell, B. (1997). The Problems of Philosophy. New York: Oxford University Press.
Shoemaker, S. (1963). Self-Knowledge and Self-Identity. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Shoemaker, S. (1967). “Memory,” in P. Edwards (ed.), The Encyclopedia of Philosophy. New York: Macmillan, 
vol. 5, 265–74.
Williamson, T. (2007). “On Being Justified in One’s Head,” in M. Timmons, J. Greco, and A.R. Mele (eds.), 
Rationality and the Good: Critical Essays on the Ethics and Epistemology of Robert Audi. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 106–22.
Further Reading
Dretske, F. and Yourgrau, P. (1983). “Lost Knowledge,” Journal of Philosophy 80: 356–67.
Huemer, M. (1999). “The Problem of Memory Knowledge,” Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 80: 346–57.
Locke, D. (1971). Memory. London: Macmillan.
Martin, C.B. and Deutscher, M. (1966). “Remembering,” The Philosophical Review 75, 161–96.
Naylor, A. (1971). “B Remembers that P from Time T,” Journal of Philosophy 68: 29–41.
Senor, T. (1993). “Internalistic Foundationalism and the Justification of Memory Belief,” Synthese 94: 
453–76.
Urmson, J.O. (1967). “Memory and Imagination,” Mind 76: 83–91.

31
SEMANTIC KNOWLEDGE
Peter Ludlow
We often talk about people knowing the meanings of expressions and sentences (or 
utterances thereof), but this kind of knowledge is probably more extensive than we 
realize. In the first place, our semantic knowledge appears to be unbounded—for an 
unlimited number of expressions (up to memory and processing limitations) we know 
what those expressions can (and cannot) mean. For example, despite having never 
encountered the sentence before, we all appear to know the meaning of ‘I want to adopt 
a cat that chased a mouse that stole some cheese from the bedroom of the oldest daugh-
ter of the 43rd President of the United States.’
Our semantic knowledge is also very broad, in that it covers a wide range of linguistic 
phenomena and intersects with a broad range of other linguistic abilities. For example, 
we appear to have syntactic knowledge that ‘Who did John kiss?’ is a correct way to form 
a question in English and that ‘John kissed who?’ is not, unless we stress the ‘who’ as 
in ‘John kissed WHO?’, and we know the natural interpretation of the sentence with a 
stressed ‘who’ is as a kind of “echo question”—we are not really asking who John kissed 
but, rather, we are asking the interlocutor to repeat herself because we did not hear or 
because we found the information so surprising on the first pass.
Some would say that we not only know the meanings of expressions, but we also know 
the rules by which we compute these meanings. And of course much of this knowledge 
(whether of sentence meanings or rules) appears to be tacit knowledge.
This semantic knowledge is not only very broad but it also has played a critical role 
both in syntactic theorizing in linguistics and in numerous philosophical arguments 
made during the past one hundred and twenty years. We might not recognize that many 
of the premises of our arguments in analytic philosophy rest upon our semantic knowl-
edge, but, as we will see, they do.
In this chapter I explore some of the richness and complexity of our semantic knowl-
edge, as well as some of the puzzles that arise when we begin to reflect on the nature 
of such knowledge. I’ll begin in part 1 with a sample of some of the myriad semantic 
facts that we appear to have knowledge of, and point out some of the places where this 
semantic knowledge has been exploited in syntax and in analytic philosophy. I’ll also 
take a look at the feasibility of our having knowledge of the underlying semantic rules. 
In part 2 I’ll discuss the nature of this semantic knowledge: does it involve knowledge of 
the external world, or, as some have argued, is it “internal” knowledge? In part 3 I’ll take 
up the question of our access to this knowledge—typically through linguistic intuitions 
or judgments—and discuss some of the worries about this form of access. Finally, in part 
4, I’ll address skeptical worries that have been raised by philosophers such as Kripke.

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
336
1. The Richness of Our Semantic Knowledge
Even the most mundane (utterances of) sentences belie a considerable amount of seman-
tic knowledge. Consider the oft-used example ‘The cat is on the mat.’ We know that if 
this sentence is to be uttered intelligibly and truly there should be exactly one salient cat 
and exactly one salient mat (or that one of each can be made salient by our utterance and 
other contextual clues, like pointing, that we provide). We also know what kinds of things 
‘cat’ is true of and we know what kinds of things ‘mat’ is true of, although our knowledge 
of the extensions of these terms might be incomplete or underdetermined—for example, 
there are things we know to be mats and things we are not so sure about (is that a mat or a 
discarded piece of cardboard on the floor?). To this end we know that whether something 
falls in the extension of ‘mat’ depends on human intentions in a way that falling in the 
extension of ‘cat’ does not. Further, as Higginbotham (1989b) has stressed, our knowledge 
of the meanings of expressions such as ‘cat’ and ‘mat’ are partial, but can also be expanded 
by learning how experts use the term ‘cat’ or by learning about ways people use the term 
‘mat’ in new contexts (for example, in a gym or an art class). There might even be expec-
tations about how much of the meaning we are expected to know.
Our semantic knowledge also extends to knowledge we have of secondary and ter-
tiary ways expressions can be used truly. We know that one way for ‘The cat is on the 
mat’ to be true is for the cat to be on top of the mat, but not floating above the mat—the 
cat must be in physical contact with the mat. But we also know there are other ways 
an utterance of the sentence could be true. For example, we know that if we nail the 
doormat to the wall and the cat leaps up and clings to the mat with its claws, ‘The cat is 
on the mat’ is arguably true in this case too.
Although we might not express our knowledge in these terms, we know that ‘cat’ and 
‘mat’ are count nouns (unlike mass nouns like ‘water’), and that being ‘on the mat’ is a 
“stage level predicate” not an “individual level predicate” (unlike the predicates ‘four 
legged’ and ‘calico’). That is, we know it is the sort of predicate that is likely only true of 
the cat temporarily. We also know that the sentence is in the present tense and hence 
that for it to be true the cat must be on the mat now.
Our semantic knowledge extends to inferential knowledge involving this simple case. 
If I know ‘the cat is on the mat is true’ then I know it will be true that ‘the cat was on 
the mat’, that ‘something was on the mat’ will be true etc.
There are many more bits of semantic knowledge that we have about simple sen-
tences like ‘The cat is on the mat’, but our semantic knowledge extends to much more 
complex constructions as well. For example, we know that the following sentences are 
ambiguous.
(1) John went to the bank.
(2) Flying planes can be dangerous.
(3) Every man loves some woman.
Our knowledge also extends to subtle facts about the interpretation of pronouns and 
reflexives. For example, one fact that plays an important rule in binding theory in lin-
guistics is that in (4) ‘himself’ can be associated with ‘Bill’ but not ‘John’ (unless, for 
some reason, John does not realize he is Bill).
(4) John said Bill likes himself.

SEMANTIC KNOWLEDGE
337
There are many more things we know about binding facts. Geach (1962) and many 
subsequent philosophers and linguists working in discourse representation theory have 
appealed to our knowledge that in a “donkey sentence” such as (5), the pronoun ‘it’ can 
be associated with ‘a donkey,’ but the pronoun cannot be associated with ‘no donkey’ in 
(6) (contrast with ‘No donkey thinks someone should own it’).
(5) Everyone who owns a donkey beats it.
(6) Everyone one who owns no donkey beats it.
Another piece of semantic knowledge relating to binding facts can be found in 
Chomsky (1986), who makes the case for innate linguistic structures involving bind-
ing theory by appealing to our knowledge that even though (7) is unambiguous, (8) 
is ambiguous between: (i) a reading in which we are asking what letter John filed 
without doing his daily reading and (ii) what letter John filed without reading it (the 
filed letter).
(7) John filed every letter without reading it.
(8) What letter did John file without reading?
We also have knowledge about facts that mix scope and binding facts, and this knowl-
edge has been deployed in linguistic theorizing. For example, May (1977) made the case 
for a linguistic level of representation LF, by appealing to our knowledge that in (9), 
‘every city’ can bind ‘it’, but only if it also takes scope over ‘someone.’
(9) Someone from every city hates it.
Our knowledge also appears to extend to the interpretation of implicit linguistic 
elements. In Ludlow (1989) I made the case for implicit comparison classes being rep-
resented by appealing to our knowledge that the preferred comparison class in (10) is 
glasses of orange juice, but the preferred comparison class in (11) is just glasses.
(10) That glass of orange juice is large.
(11) That glass with orange juice in it is large.
As noted earlier, our semantic knowledge also includes knowledge about entailment 
relations. For example, philosophers and linguists working on generalized quantifier 
theory (e.g., Barwise and Cooper 1981; Higginbotham and May 1981) have relied upon 
the fact that if collies are dogs then we know that (12) entails (13) but not (14).
(13) Every dog barked.
(14) Every collie barked.
(15) Every animal barked.
Another case where our knowledge of entailment relations plays a role in analytic 
philosophy is in Davidson’s (1967) case for events. Davidson’s argument relied upon our 
knowledge that (16) entails (17).
(16) John buttered the toast with a knife.
(17) John buttered the toast.

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
338
And, of course, philosophical appeal to our knowledge of entailment relations goes back 
at least as far as Frege (1892), who famously made the case for senses by appealing to our 
knowledge that (18) does not entail (19).
(18) John believes the morning star is visible in the morning.
(19) John believes the evening star is visible in the evening.
The list goes on. I would argue that nearly every paper in analytic philosophy relies 
upon semantic knowledge in some crucial way. Of course, most papers do not put the 
matter this way. Typically they will talk about our “intuition” that (16) entails (17) or 
perhaps our “judgment” that this is the case, but this is false modesty. Clearly we do 
know that (16) entails (17), even if that knowledge is defeasible. Indeed part of the 
strength of these philosophical arguments is that they rest upon our semantic knowl-
edge. Of course, there are many example sentences in philosophy papers that are less 
clear and that are disputed, but this does not mean that other semantic facts are not 
known to us, and good thing too, because those facts anchor some of our best and most 
important philosophical theories.
Clearly some of the semantic knowledge that I have just discussed would count as 
“tacit knowledge.” Perhaps we never before thought about the possible interpretations 
of ‘John filed every letter without reading’ (indeed, Chomsky’s argument crucially relies 
upon the assumption that we haven’t). So we need to allow for the possibility of knowing 
that P in the case where we are not entertaining P, but if called upon to judge whether or 
not P is the case we would be in a position to truthfully and justifiably assert P, we would 
judge that P, and whatever other conditions we think normally apply to knowledge. 
This isn’t the place to discuss tacit knowledge (see Evans (1981), Davies (1987), Wright 
(1986) for a discussion of tacit semantic knowledge), but I do want to note that most of 
our semantic knowledge would count as tacit in this rough and ready sense.
Some philosophers and linguists have contended that we not only have (tacit) knowl-
edge of the semantic facts listed above, but also that we have knowledge of the rules 
that underwrite those facts. So, for example, we might think that there are rules that 
explain why ‘himself’ can be linked with ‘Bill’ and not ‘John’ in English (in Swedish 
such long-distance binding would be possible) and we might therefore think that we 
(tacitly) know those rules.
Chomsky himself seems ambivalent about whether we have knowledge of linguis-
tic rules, shifting between talk about “knowing rules” and “cognizing rules.” There is 
certainly some reason to avoid using the term ‘knowledge’ in this context. With the 
exception of the simplest lexical axioms, such rules are discovered by intensive and 
subtle theoretical study, and are typically offered tentatively as part of inferences to 
the best exploration of our linguistic competence. We don’t have first-person access to 
such rules, and we can’t produce them on request as we can with standard examples of 
tacit knowledge. At best, only theoretical linguists know what those rules are, and this 
knowledge seems to be a species of scientific or theoretical knowledge that is not in any 
interesting sense semantic knowledge.
In Ludlow (2010) I suggested that we can put the matter this way: we know semantic 
facts (and perhaps some simple lexical rules), and we have semantic rules. Presumably, 
the fact that we have the semantic rules that we do explains why we have the semantic 
knowledge that we do. Intuitions or judgments come into the picture in that they pro-
vide evidence for the semantic facts. The picture is something like the following.

SEMANTIC KNOWLEDGE
339
(we have) 
(we know)
Semantic Rules → explain/predict → Semantic Facts ← evidence for ← 
Semantic Judgments
 
← are evidence for ←
Of course, if we are to have knowledge of semantic facts everything turns on whether 
our semantic judgments are reliable. I will turn to this question in section 3. First, how-
ever, it will be useful to say a bit more about the nature of semantic knowledge (assum-
ing for now that we have it).
2. The Nature of Our Semantic Knowledge
Some philosophers and linguists have supposed that if we talk about knowledge of 
meaning then we must ipso facto be talking about knowledge of some kind of internal 
mental state—knowledge of meaning entails that meanings must be in the head.
I don’t wish to bring up the debate about externalism about content and the idea 
that “meanings ain’t in the head” (cf. Putnam 1975), but I do want to stress that when 
we talk about knowing the meaning of an expression or knowing what an expression 
refers to we are not committed to this knowledge being Cartesian. To the contrary, it is 
completely plausible to invoke an anti-Cartesian conception of knowledge and contend 
that we have knowledge of semantic facts like the following.
(20) ‘water’ refers to water
The idea is that our knowledge of this fact straddles language and the external world. 
It tells us that (to a first approximation) the word spelled w-a-t-e-r refers to (is used to 
refer to) the substance water.1
Two confusions must now be avoided. First, nothing about the possibility of such 
knowledge tells against a Cartesian picture about the syntax of natural language. As I 
argued in Ludlow (2003) we could quite easily wed an externalist picture about seman-
tics to a Chomskyan internalist picture about syntax. The latter would be a theory 
of language as a chapter of narrow psychology, and semantics would be a story about 
our knowledge of the relations between those narrow representations and the external 
world.
The second confusion would be in supposing that externalism about semantics implies 
that semantics (and our knowledge of semantics) could not be a chapter in cognitive 
psychology. To the contrary, such a theory could be a chapter in cognitive psychology 
provided that we follow Burge (1986) in understanding cognitive psychology in an 
appropriately anti-Cartesian way. Psychology need not be construed as “methodologi-
cally solipsistic” in the sense of Fodor (1980).
This point holds even if we wish to talk about knowing semantic rules and not just 
semantic facts. There is no reason why the rules of a semantic theory cannot, as it were, 
straddle language and the world. Indeed, we might take (20) as a rule or axiom in our 
semantic theory; nothing in that would tell against the idea that a semantic theory (or a 
theory of our knowledge of semantic rules) could not be part of cognitive psychology.
There is perhaps a subsidiary confusion that needs to be avoided here. If we introduce 
(20) into our semantic theory as a basic lexical axiom, and if we say that an agent knows 
the rule, and if we say that our theory of the agent’s knowledge is a chapter in cognitive 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
340
psychology, this is not to say that the rule is in the agent’s head. To the contrary, we 
might say that the rule is represented internally, but that the represented rule itself is an 
abstract object (linking language and the world) that is the object of our knowledge.
3. Concerns about Our Semantic Knowledge
As I noted earlier, we can think of semantic facts being things that we know, but how 
do we come to know these facts? For the most part we rely upon our first-person judg-
ments, and this naturally tends to be a source of concern. Judgments, after all, can be 
mistaken. We might misjudge the meaning of an expression and we might misjudge an 
inferential relation as holding when it does not. Indeed, examples of such misjudgment 
are all too common. Because of the possibility of error in cases such as these, a number 
of philosophers and linguists have opted for talking about semantic intuitions in place 
of judgments.
Following Williamson (2004), discussing philosophical “intuitions” more generally, 
I think we should resist the move to talk of intuitions. Williams puts the case for resis-
tance in the following way.
what are called “intuitions” . . . are just applications of our ordinary capacities 
for judgement. We think of them as intuitions when a special kind of scepti-
cism about those capacities is salient. Like scepticism about perception, scepti-
cism about judgement pressures us into conceiving our evidence as facts about 
our internal psychological states: here, facts about our conscious inclinations to 
make judgements about some topic rather than facts about the topic itself. But 
the pressure should be resisted, for it rests on bad epistemology: specifically, on 
an impossible ideal of unproblematically identifiable evidence.
Of course the mere fact that we swap talk of intuitions for talk of judgments does not 
ameliorate worries about the character of our semantic judgments. And to be sure, lin-
guists have expressed a number of concerns about the reliability of our judgments in 
semantics (and linguistics more generally).
Linguistics papers and philosophy papers are full of semantic judgments that are dis-
puted, but this does not tell against semantic knowledge. It rather suggests that in argu-
ing for one theory over another we are often forced to seek out more subtle examples, 
and some of these judgments are tentative. Undisputed cases don’t appear in papers 
because they are already incorporated into the available candidate semantic theories. A 
theory that predicts ‘The cat is on the mat’ to mean that every dog is smoking orange 
peels will not be in the discussion.
Still, even for simple cases such as ‘the cat is on the mat’ one might press on why we 
should think that semantic judgments are sufficient to support semantic knowledge. 
There are two routes one can go here. The first, taken by Stich (1972) is to divorce the 
judgments from the objects of judgment (in this case semantic facts). The second route 
is to argue that we have good independent evidence to believe in the reliability of our 
semantic judgments. Let’s start with Stich’s approach.
According to Stich (1972) linguistic theory is fundamentally an attempt to account 
for our faculty of judgment or linguistic intuitions by systematizing or axiomatizing 
our intuitions. Linguistic theory, then, would be a theory of our linguistic judgments. 
Semantic theory, would simply be a theory of judged entailment relations without regard 
to whether those relations tracked actual logical relations.

SEMANTIC KNOWLEDGE
341
There might be some interest in such a project, but at a minimum it does not seem 
to me to be the project that linguists are engaged in. For linguists, intuitions or judg-
ments are data that support linguistic facts. Chomsky (1982), for example, is pretty 
explicit about this point: “To say that linguistics is the study of introspective judgments 
would be like saying that physics is the study of meter readings, photographs, and so 
on, but nobody says that” (pp. 33–34). Likewise, semantic knowledge would not have 
much philosophical interest if it were simply knowledge of the meaning judgments and 
entailment relations we happen to make. Stich rescues judgments, but the Cartesianism 
returns in that the external object of those judgments is lost.
If we allow that there are semantic facts is there some way we can show that semantic 
judgments are reliable? There are a number of answers here. In the first place we can 
find widespread agreement on these judgments at least within our linguistic communi-
ties. We might not agree on all cases, but the mere fact that we successfully communi-
cate at all suggests that we agree on many semantic facts.
It is also incorrect to think that semantic judgments are our only route to semantic 
facts. Inferential facts are a case in point. Getting logical inferences wrong can have 
fatal consequences, and we have, of course, developed logical models that can be used 
to evaluate the reliability of our entailment judgments.
Furthermore, analysis of corpora data can give the lie to claims about the possibility 
or impossibility of certain uses of language and interpretations of linguistic expressions. 
Like our semantic judgments corpora data might contain error, but this does not mean 
that it cannot be a source of semantic knowledge or that it cannot be used to calibrate 
and test our semantic knowledge.
Of course most of the semantic knowledge we have is not checked against a corpus or 
formalized and checked for logical coherence. We rely upon our judgments themselves, 
and we presumably have no idea how those judgments were formed and few of us might 
be in a position to explain why those judgments are reliable. This suggests that to a 
first approximation any account of semantic knowledge is going to be reliabilist. That 
is, our semantic knowledge is underwritten by the fact that it is the product of reliable 
processes, much like some people have claimed for perceptual knowledge. We need 
not know what those processes are (just like in the case of perception most of us simply 
don’t know); what entitles us to semantic and perceptual knowledge is that the relevant 
processes are in fact reliable.
4. Skepticism about Semantic knowledge
In the previous section we canvassed a number of worries about the reliability of our 
semantic judgments and, by extension, about the extent of our semantic knowledge, 
but some philosophers (notably Quine, Kripke, and Wittgenstein) have offered full-on 
skeptical arguments that, when applied to semantic knowledge, appear to go to the 
heart of whether semantic knowledge is even possible. Let’s focus on Kripke’s argument, 
which he offers as a possible interpretation of Wittgenstein’s argument.
Kripke’s Version of Wittgenstein’s Skeptical Argument
What fact can one appeal to in order to justify saying that a particular rule used in the 
past is identical to the rule being used now? Take Kripke’s (1982) example of some-
one (let’s say Jones) who determines that ‘68 plus 57 = 125’ is true. The skeptic then 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
342
asks Jones how she knows that the rule meant by ‘plus’ right now is the same rule she 
meant by ‘plus’ in the past. Suppose that Jones has never before added two numbers 
totaling greater than 57. Is it not possible that in the past Jones was using ‘plus’ to refer 
to another rule altogether, perhaps one which we might call ‘quus,’ which is like plus 
in all respects except that when two numbers totaling greater than 57 are quused, the 
answer is 5, not 125? Jones would surely be right in saying that the skeptic is crazy. But 
what fact about Jones (or the world) could we point to show that she was in fact using 
the rule plus before? Of course if we cannot succeed, then there is not merely a problem 
for past uses of ‘plus’ but for current one’s as well. When we say that we are using an 
expression to denote a particular rule, what fact backs up our assertion? As Kripke puts 
the problem:
Since the sceptic who supposes that I meant quus cannot be answered, there 
is no fact about me that distinguishes my meaning plus and my meaning quus. 
Indeed there is no fact that distinguishes my meaning a definite function by 
‘plus’ (which determines my responses in new cases) and my meaning nothing 
at all.
(Kripke 1982: 21)
It is natural to think we can get around the skeptical argument by saying that the addi-
tion function is, in turn, defined by the rule for counting, and the quus rule violates the 
counting rule at a more basic level. But here the Kripkean skeptic can reply that there 
will be a non-standard interpretation of the rule denoted by ‘count.’ Perhaps Jones is 
really using the rule quount.
There is a temptation to say the skeptical argument is nothing more than Goodman’s 
puzzle about grue. Recall, that given a predicate ‘grue,’ which is true of objects that are 
green before the year 2100, and blue thereafter, any evidence we find which confirms 
that all emeralds are green will also confirm all emeralds are grue. Applied to the case of 
Jones, we could say the following. Until she begins to add numbers greater than 57, any 
evidence that confirms that Jones is following the rule addition, will also confirm that 
she is using the rule quaddition.
Kripke thinks there is an important difference in these cases. According to Kripke, 
Goodman’s argument presupposes the stability of our semantic knowledge—in particu-
lar he presupposes the extensions of ‘grue’ and ‘green’ to be understood. In effect, one 
has to assume semantic knowledge to even get the grue puzzle off the ground.
There is a great deal of literature on Kripke’s version of the skeptical argument, but if 
we focus on the narrow question of whether the argument really undermines our seman-
tical knowledge I think that Soames (1998) provides the best answer to the core part 
of the argument (other aspects of the argument are not directly engaged by Soames). 
According to Soames, Kripke’s skeptical argument incorporates two different notions of 
determination (as in what it is that determines that I meant plus instead of quus). The 
first is an epistemological notion of determination and the second is a notion of deter-
mination that is grounded in metaphysical necessity.
On the question of epistemological determination, Soames concedes that if meaning 
statements are grounded in non-intentional facts we wouldn’t be in a position to know 
how they are grounded or to demonstrate the truth of the intentional claims, but why 
should we expect to know this? Wasn’t this the whole point of Kripke’s case for neces-
sary a posteriori truths?

SEMANTIC KNOWLEDGE
343
[the skeptics] try to establish that no collection of nonintentional truths will 
allow us to demonstrate the truth of the relevant intentional claims. This, I 
have suggested, is tantamount to an attempt to convince us that claims about 
meaning (and propositional attitudes) are not a priori consequences of any set 
of nonintentional truths.
 On this point it must be admitted that the skeptic has a strong case. . . . I 
don’t know how to give such a derivation and I am not sure that any is possible 
. . .
 If it were clear that any necessary consequence of a set of claims P was also 
an a priori consequence of P, this admission would provide the skeptic with just 
what he needs; for then he could force me to admit that claims about meaning 
may not be necessary consequences of nonintentional truths. That would con-
flict with my conviction that meaning facts must supervene on nonintentional 
facts, and so would threaten my pretheoretic commitment to meaning facts. 
However, this argumentative strategy fails. Thanks to the work of Kripke and 
others, it has become clear that many necessary consequences of propositions 
are not apriori consequences of them. Consequently my admission that claims 
about meanings may not be apriori consequences of nonintentional truths need 
not undermine my belief that they are necessary consequences of those truths.
(Soames 1998: 230–231)
In effect, if there are some nonintentional facts that necessarily determine the rule I am 
following, it does not follow that I should be in a position to know these facts (as we are 
taught by Kripke 1980). A remarkable error for Kripke, of all people, to have made.
With respect to the notion of metaphysical determination, Soames argues that how-
ever we broaden the relevant class of non-intensional facts, there is no reason for us 
to reject the metaphysical determination—the idea that meaning facts are necessarily 
determined by nonintensional facts.
Would the result change if we enlarged the set of potential meaning-determin-
ing truths still further to include not only all truths about my dispositions to 
verbal behavior, but also all truths about (i) the internal physical states of my 
brain, (ii) my causal and historical relationships to things in my environment, 
(iii) my (nonintentionally characterized) interactions with other members of 
my linguistic community, (iv) their dispositions to verbal behavior, and so on? 
Is there a possible world in which someone conforms to all those facts—pre-
cisely the facts that characterize me in the actual world—and yet that person 
does not mean anything by ‘+’?
 I think not. Given my conviction that in the past I did mean addition by 
‘+’, and given also my conviction that if there are intentional facts, then they 
don’t float free of everything else, I am confident that there is no such world. 
Although I cannot identify the smallest set of nonintensional facts about me in 
the actual world on which mean facts supervene, I am confident that they do 
supervene. Why shouldn’t I be?
(Soames 1998: 229)
In sum, Soames is arguing for a stable philosophical fixed point in which we hold that 
meanings are necessarily determined by a broad range of nonintensional facts, but in 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
344
which we are not in a position to know how they are determined. But lacking knowl-
edge of how the meanings are determined does not undermine the semantic knowledge 
itself.
Conclusion
Our semantic knowledge is not only extensive, but also lies at the foundation of many 
of our philosophical and linguistic theories—indeed, if Kripke is right, even many skep-
tical arguments (such as the grue puzzle) presuppose that our semantic knowledge is 
intact. Concerns about the status of semantic knowledge and skepticism about semantic 
knowledge are, therefore, daggers aimed at the heart of analytic philosophy. In the face 
of this we need to ask: Are we entitled to claims of semantic knowledge? Extant skepti-
cal arguments about semantic knowledge appear to fall short, but there remain concerns 
about particular claims of fact and the veracity of the semantic judgments that support 
those claims. Fortunately we have ways of corroborating semantic judgments with other 
sources of evidence. This opens the door to a reliabilist story on which we are entitled to 
our semantic knowledge because of the reliability of our semantic judgments. Of course, 
the reliability of semantic judgments (like all linguistic judgments) has been a point of 
controversy, to say the least.
Note
1 Obviously, as Chomsky (2003) has stressed, our knowledge of the meaning of ‘water’ is much more robust 
than this, but (20) at least reflects some of what we know. In the terminology of Dummett (1975) (20) is 
not a “robust” description of what we know but a “modest” one. See also Higginbotham (1989a) on this 
point.
Bibliography
Barwise, J., and R. Cooper. 1981. “Generalized Quantifiers and Natural Language.” Linguistics and Philosophy 
4, 159–219.
Burge, T. 1986. “Individualism and Psychology.” The Philosophical Review 95, 3–45.
Chomsky, N. 1982. The Generative Enterprise: A Discussion with Riny Huybregts and Henk van Riemsdijk. 
Dordrecht: Foris.
Chomsky, N. 1986. Knowledge of Language. New York: Praeger.
Chomsky, N. 2003. “Reply to Ludlow.” In N. Hornstein and L. Antony (eds.), Chomsky and His Critics. 
Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 287–295.
Davidson, D. 1967. “The Logical Form of Action Sentences.” In Essays on Actions and Events. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1980.
Davies, M. 1987. “Tacit Knowledge and Semantic Theory: Can a Five Per Cent Difference Matter?” Mind 
96, 441–462.
Dummett, M. 1975. “What is a Theory of Meaning?” In S. Guttenplan (ed.) Mind and Language. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 97–138.
Evans, Gareth. 1981. “Semantic Theory and Tacit Knowledge.” In S. Holtzman and C. Leich (eds.) 
Wittgenstein: To Follow a Rule. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Fodor, J. 1980. “Methodological Solipsism Considered as a Research Strategy in Cognitive Psychology.” 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3, 63–73.
Frege, G. 1892, “Sinn und Bedeutung,” Zeitschrift fur Philosophie und philosophische Kritik, 100, 25–50 (pub-
lished as “Sense and Reference,” in P. Geach and M. Black (eds.), Translations from the Philosophical Writings 
of Gottlob Frege. Oxford: Blackwell, 1952.
Geach, Peter. 1962. Reference and Generality. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Higginbotham, J. 1989a. “Elucidations of Meaning.” Linguistics and Philosophy 12, 465–517.

SEMANTIC KNOWLEDGE
345
Higginbotham, J. 1989b. “Knowledge of Reference.” In Alexander George (ed.), Reflections on Chomsky. 
Oxford: Blackwell, 153–174.
Higginbotham, J. and R. May. 1981. “Questions, Quantifiers, and Crossing.” Linguistic Review 1, 41–79.
Kripke, S. 1980. Naming and Necessity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kripke, S. 1982. Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Ludlow, P. 1989. “Implicit Comparison Classes.” Linguistics and Philosophy 12, 519–533.
Ludlow, P. 2003. “Referential Semantics for I-Languages?” In N. Hornstein and L. Antony (eds.), Chomsky 
and His Critics. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 140–161.
Ludlow, P. 2010. The Philosophy of Generative Linguistics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
May, R. 1977. The Grammar of Quantification. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, MIT.
Putnam, H. 1975. “The Meaning of ‘Meaning’.” In K. Gunderson (ed.), Language, Mind and Knowledge. Vol. 
7, Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Soames, S. 1998. “Skepticism about Meaning: Indeterminacy, Normativity, and the Rule-Following 
Paradox.” In A. Kazmi (ed.), Meaning and Reference. The Canadian Journal of Philosophy, Supplementary 
Volume 23.
Stich, S. 1972. “Grammar, Psychology, and Indeterminacy.” Journal of Philosophy 69, 799–818.
Williamson, T. 2004. “Philosophical ‘Intuitions’ and Scepticism about Judgement.” Dialectica 58, 109–153.
Wright, C. 1986. “Theories of Meaning and Speakers’ Knowledge.” In S.G. Shanker (ed.), Philosophy in 
Britain Today. Albany: SUNY Press, 267–307.

32
SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE
Peter Achinstein
The claim is often made that scientific inquiry is superior to other forms of inquiry 
because it is capable of supplying knowledge of the world, and, of all forms of inquiry, it 
is the most likely to do so. Many of those who make this claim subscribe to the following 
Principal Theses:
1. Science aims at and can achieve knowledge of the world.
2. Knowledge in science requires proof, the standards for which are universal for 
all the sciences, and can be formulated in a set of rules called the “scientific 
method.”
3. Although unproved propositions (sometimes called “hypotheses”) are intro-
duced into science for purposes of investigation, scientists are not justified in 
believing them until they are proved in accordance with the standards set by 
the “scientific method.”
In what follows, three prominent but very different historical views about scientific 
knowledge will be discussed, each of which subscribes to the three Principal Theses. 
Afterwards various more contemporary positions will be examined that contradict one 
or more of these three ideas.
Part I. Views Defending the Three Principal Theses
1. Cartesian Rationalism René Descartes (1988), in his Rules for the Direction of the Mind, 
written between 1619 and 1628, and published posthumously in 1701, offers 21 rules 
for how to gain scientific knowledge. The view is a form of Rationalism according to 
which, although experience can suggest ideas to the scientist, whether these ideas are 
true can be known only by pure thought of a sort characteristic of mathematics. Rule 1 
states that the aim of science is not just truth, but justified truth. Rule 2 states that the 
only kind of legitimate justification in science is that which leads to certainty, and not 
mere probability. By “certainty” Descartes does not mean “beyond reasonable doubt” 
(by analogy with a criminal legal standard), but “beyond any possible doubt” (as he 
envisages being the case in mathematics). Rule 3, the most important one for our pur-
poses, is that the only way to obtain truth that is justified beyond any possible doubt is to 
employ what he calls “intuition” and “deduction.” The former he characterizes as “the 
indubitable conception of a clear and attentive mind which proceeds from the light of 
reason.” His examples include one’s thought that one exists, that one is thinking, that 
a triangle has three sides, and that 2 + 2 = 4. Their truth is immediately evident to us 

SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE
347
just by thinking them. By “deduction,” Descartes means a continuous, uninterrupted 
train of reasoning to some proposition that follows necessarily from other propositions 
known with certainty. Example: an inference from 2 + 2 = 4 and 3 + 1 = 4 to 2 + 2 = 
3 + 1. In rules 5–8, Descartes advocates solving scientific problems by raising a series 
of more and more basic questions that will lead eventually to a set of “intuitions” from 
which “deductions” can be made to propositions that will solve the problems. Descartes 
makes it clear in rule 12 that although sense experience might suggest ideas about the 
world (e.g., that two points determine a line, or that a force is required to change a 
moving body’s direction), the truth of these ideas is established scientifically only by 
an “intuition” of the facts they represent or by a “deduction” of these facts from others 
similarly established.
Descartes intends these rules to be applicable to the sciences generally, not just to 
mathematics. One of the best places to see this in his work is in his derivations in phys-
ics of what he takes to be the laws governing bodies in motion (in his work Principles 
of Philosophy (1971)). From “intuitions” about motions of bodies (including that the 
“quantity of motion” of a body is its volume times its speed), and from “intuitions” 
concerning God (in particular that God exists and is the “efficient cause of all things,” 
including motion, and that God is immutable), Descartes “deduces” a fundamental prin-
ciple in his physics: God sustains the total quantity of motion in the universe, which is 
therefore conserved, even if the motions of individual bodies vary. The latter is an early 
formulation of what came to be known as the principle of conservation of momentum, 
in which “momentum” is understood as mass (not Cartesian volume) times velocity 
(which contains not only the Cartesian idea of speed but direction as well). From his 
conservation of motion principle Descartes deduces three “laws of nature,” the first 
two of which yield what came to be known as the law of inertia—that moving bodies if 
left to themselves tend to continue to move in straight lines. With this idea Descartes 
provides a revolutionary answer to the age-old question of why projectiles continue in 
motion after they are launched: they do so because they are already in motion and there 
is no force acting to change that motion.
Descartes subscribes to the three Principal Theses: science aims at and can achieve 
knowledge of the world. This requires proof beyond all possible doubt, which can be 
achieved via the method of “intuitions” and “deductions,” satisfying standards universal 
for all the sciences. While unproved propositions (e.g., ones suggested by sense experi-
ence) can be introduced for purposes of investigation, scientists are not justified in 
believing them until they are proved in the Cartesian way; otherwise their truth can be 
doubted.
2. Inductivism: Newton and Mill Descartes’ rationalist views about science were com-
pletely rejected by Empiricists, who hold that knowledge about the physical world is 
possible only through observation and experiment, not through Cartesian intuitions, 
which are notoriously unreliable, nor from Cartesian deductions from these. One of the 
most prominent forms of empiricism in science, Inductivism, was defended in the late 
seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries by Isaac Newton (1999) in his great scien-
tific work Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy (usually called the Principia), and 
in the mid-nineteenth century by John Stuart Mill (1872) in his philosophical work A 
System of Logic.
Book 3 of Newton’s Principia, in which he derives his law of universal gravitation, 
begins with four “rules for the study of natural philosophy.” Although following these 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
348
rules does not guarantee scientific knowledge of the physical world, it is the best way to 
proceed to gain such knowledge. The first two rules pertain to inferences to causes of 
phenomena from observed effects:
(RULE 1): If one cause will suffice to explain phenomena, more causes should not be 
inferred.
(RULE 2): From effects of the same kind, the same kind of cause should be inferred.
So, to use Newton’s own examples, if one universal force of gravity suffices to explain 
the motions of all the planets in our solar system, one should not infer a different force 
of gravity for each planet; and if stones in Europe and America fall in the same way, then 
one should infer that they have the same cause.
The third and fourth rules express ideas about inductive reasoning in which general-
izations are inferred from observations and experiments on bodies:
(RULE 3): Properties that belong to all bodies on which experiments can be made 
should be inferred to belong to all bodies universally.
(RULE 4): One should consider such inductive generalizations to be true, or approxi-
mately true, until new phenomena are discovered that show that the gener-
alizations need to be revised.
Newton provides some simple examples:
The extension of bodies is known to us only through our senses, and yet there 
are bodies beyond the range of these senses; but because extension is found in 
all sensible bodies, it is ascribed to all bodies universally. . . . That all bodies are 
movable and persevere in motion or in rest by means of certain forces (which 
we call forces of inertia) we infer from finding these properties in the bodies 
that we have seen.
These two examples are of special interest because they are examples cited by the ratio-
nalist Descartes as examples of propositions that can be known only by pure reason. (For 
Descartes we can “intuit” that bodies are extended in space; and we can “deduce” that 
they persevere in their motion, as Descartes’ first and second laws of motion state.) By 
contrast, Newton is claiming that such generalizations can be known to be true only by 
observations of extended and moving bodies, not by pure thought. Newton goes on to 
show how each of his four methodological rules for the study of natural philosophy is 
actually used in the derivation of his law of gravity from observed phenomena involving 
the motions of the known planets and their moons.
John Stuart Mill (1872) offers a formulation of scientific inductivism that is more 
philosophically developed than Newton’s, though without Newton’s applications to 
sophisticated scientific examples. He defines induction as “the process by which we 
conclude that what is true of certain individuals of a class is true of the whole class, or 
that what is true at certain times will be true in similar circumstances at all times.” So if 
all the As examined are Bs, and we make an inference to the proposition that all As are 
Bs, this is what Mill calls an induction. Not all inductions are justified; it depends on 
the number and variety of the As examined and found to be B, on the sorts of properties 
A and B are, and on additional knowledge we have about these and related properties.

SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE
349
Among the most important general propositions of concern to scientists are laws 
causally relating properties, e.g., “forces produce accelerations.” Mill presents four 
“methods of experimental inquiry” for determining whether a generalization inferred 
inductively is truly causal. This involves not just observing As and Bs but performing 
experiments on them. Suppose that bodies on which forces are exerted always acceler-
ate. To determine whether this is a causal relationship Mill’s first method (the “method 
of agreement”) tells us to exert forces on a variety of different types of bodies (e.g., ones 
with different masses, sizes, shapes, and positions) such that the only relevant property 
in common is that all these bodies were subjected to a force. If all such bodies accelerate 
then we can infer not only that forces and accelerations are constantly conjoined, but 
that forces cause accelerations. Another method, the “method of difference,” asserts 
that we can test for causation by examining two groups of bodies in which the only 
relevant difference is that in one group forces are exerted while in the other they are 
not. If bodies in the first group accelerate but not those in the second, we can infer that 
forces cause accelerations.
In the theoretical sciences, effects are often explained by reference to multiple causes. 
For such purposes Mill introduces his “deductive method,” which requires three steps 
in order to infer the truth of a theoretical system: causal-inductive generalizations from 
experiments and observations to a set of causal laws comprising the system; “ratiocina-
tion,” which involves deductive inferences showing how this set, if true, can explain 
and predict various observable effects; and verification of the new effects predicted. If 
and only if these three steps are appropriately followed, we can infer the truth of the 
theoretical system.
Both Newton and Mill subscribe to the three Principal Theses about scientific 
knowledge. They agree that science aims at and can achieve knowledge of the world; 
that such knowledge requires proof (indeed Mill, in his initial definition of “induc-
tion,” defines it as “the operation of discovering and proving general propositions”); 
and that the standards of proof are universal. However, their concept of proof in 
the sciences is very different from Descartes’. For them, it is proof “beyond reason-
able doubt,” not “beyond any possible doubt.” A proof can be overturned by new 
experiments and observations not previously available to the scientific community. 
However, if the standards of proof advocated by Newton and Mill are satisfied by sci-
entists—i.e., if the “scientific methods” advocated by Newton and Mill are appropri-
ately applied—then the scientists are justified in believing the propositions “proved.” 
Finally, although Newton in his writings introduces unproved propositions, and Mill 
allows them to be introduced for purposes of investigation, neither of these inductiv-
ists permits inferences to their truth. Their claim is that scientists are not justified in 
believing them until they are proved in accordance with the standards of the scientific 
method they propose.
3. Inference to the Best Explanation: William Whewell In the mid-nineteenth century, the 
British scientist, philosopher, and historian of science, William Whewell (1840), for-
mulated a scientific method that, although empirical, he regarded as very different from, 
and far superior to, the inductivism of Newton and Mill. (In fact the contemporaries 
Mill and Whewell debated each other in print.) Whewell believed that the methods 
of Newton and Mill would allow scientists to infer the truth of theories postulating 
unobserved causes only if the latter were of a type previously observed. But, Whewell 
claimed, it is possible to have knowledge of the truth of theories postulating unobserved 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
350
causes of a sort very different from any previously observed. One of his favorite examples 
was the wave theory of light that postulates unobservable transverse waves undulating 
in an unobservable ether.
Whewell’s method contains two stages, the first of which is the discovery not of the 
truth of a hypothesis, but of the idea of the hypothesis. His example is that of Kepler dis-
covering the idea that the planet Mars travels in an elliptical orbit about the sun. This 
involves two things: observations of the phenomena (in this case observations, made by 
the astronomer Tycho Brahe, of the position of Mars at different times of the year); and 
the introduction of “some general conception, which is given, not by the phenomena, 
but by the mind” (in Kepler’s case, an idea that connects Tycho’s observations, namely, 
that the observed points lie on an ellipse). Whewell calls the observations plus the 
mental conception a “colligation” of the facts, which involves a “conjecture,” not an 
inference to its truth. The conjecture needs to be tested, which is the second stage of 
Whewell’s method.
In the testing stage Whewell imposes various conditions, the satisfaction of which 
will allow one to conclude with certainty that the hypothesis is true. First, the hypoth-
esis should not only explain phenomena that have been observed but also predict ones 
not yet observed. Second, it should explain and predict phenomena “of a kind different 
from those which were contemplated in the formation of our hypothesis.” Whewell 
speaks of this as the “consilience of inductions.” In the third condition Whewell intro-
duces the idea that a hypothesis is usually part of a system or theory whose members 
are not framed all at once, but are introduced, added to, and altered over time, as a 
result of discoveries of new phenomena. If in this process the theory becomes simpler, 
more unified, and more coherent, then one can infer with the highest certainty that it 
is true; if it becomes more complex, less unified, and less coherent, then one can infer 
that it is false. On the basis of these three criteria Whewell proclaimed that, given the 
optical phenomena that had been observed by the mid-nineteenth century, one could 
confidently infer the truth of the wave theory of light and the falsity of the competing 
particle theory.
Whewell’s scientific method is most akin to what contemporary writers such as 
Gilbert Harman (1965) and Peter Lipton (2004) have called “inference to the best 
explanation.” The idea is holistic, since one most confidently infers the truth not of 
an isolated hypothesis, but of a system of hypotheses; and one does so if that system 
provides the best—the simplest, most unifying, most coherent—explanation of all the 
data. Whewell regards such inferences as providing a proof of the system and therefore 
knowledge of its truth, which is what science aims at. Accordingly, like the other meth-
odologists discussed above, he subscribes to the three Principal Theses.
In his critical discussion of Whewell, Mill notes that one of the most important dif-
ferences between them can be seen in the context of Mill’s “deductive method,” which 
also involves a theoretical system of hypotheses. For Whewell what is required to infer 
the truth of the system is given in Mill’s “ratiocination” (explaining and predicting 
various phenomena) and his “verification” (determining by observation and experi-
ment whether predictions are correct). But, Mill complains, Whewell has omitted the 
first “inductive” step, which requires causal-inductive reasoning to the set of hypotheses 
considered in “ratiocination.” Otherwise, Mill says, different conflicting theories could 
all be inferred using Whewell’s criteria. (For a discussion of this issue and others in the 
Mill–Whewell debate, see Achinstein 1991.)

SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE
351
Part II. Views Attacking the Principal Theses
Various more recent views will be considered, each of which rejects one or more of the 
Principal Theses.
1. “Science Does Not Aim at and Cannot Achieve Knowledge of the World” One of the 
strongest forms of this view is the “Falsificationist” position of Karl Popper (1959) in 
the twentieth century. Following Hume’s discussion of the justification of induction in 
the eighteenth century, Popper regards any inference to the truth of a general scientific 
hypothesis or theory from particular observations and experiments to be unjustified. 
Such inferences cannot be shown to be valid a priori by deductive reasoning; nor can 
they be justified empirically by their past success, since that would be using this form of 
reasoning to justify itself.
Popper’s view is that the aim of science is not to prove that theories are true, but to 
eliminate false ones. For this purpose he formulates a falsificationist version of a scien-
tific method called “hypothetico-deductivism” or “the method of hypothesis.”
On his version science begins with observations and questions about them. To answer 
these questions the scientist introduces a set of hypotheses, which are to be treated 
as guesses or conjectures, rather than as inferences from the observations. From the 
hypotheses conclusions are to be inferred deductively. If any of these conclusions can 
be shown to be false by observation and experiment, then the set of hypotheses must 
be revised or replaced. If all the observational conclusions turn out to be true, then, 
because of Popper’s rejection of non-deductive reasoning, we cannot infer that the 
hypotheses are true or even probable. All we can say is: “So far so good; the hypotheses 
have not been shown to be false.” The best procedure for the scientist, in response to a 
set of observations and questions about them, is to propose the strongest, most general 
hypotheses that have not yet been refuted by experiment and observation, and try to 
refute them by severely testing their observational consequences. Although we cannot 
have knowledge of their truth, we can and should proceed to root out error. Popper 
believes that this is how the best scientists in fact operate.
A less extreme view is held by a group of scientists and philosophers under the 
general category “anti-realism” or “instrumentalism.” It begins by distinguishing the 
“observable” part of the world from the “unobservable.” Take, for example, the electron 
theory designed to explain cathode rays produced by an electrical discharge in a highly 
evacuated cathode tube. The observable part of the world would include the scintilla-
tions produced by the rays on the glass of the tube; the unobservable part would include 
the negatively charged electrons postulated by J.J. Thomson in 1897 to explain these 
scintillations. What the anti-realist says is that scientists can have knowledge of truth 
of claims about the observable part of the world, but not the unobservable.
The basic idea is that science is empirical, and hence can only sanction inferences 
to what is observable in nature, not what is unobservable. For example, Pierre Duhem 
(1954), a French physicist who also wrote works in the history and philosophy of sci-
ence, says this:
Now these two questions—Does there exist a material reality distinct from sen-
sible appearances? And What is the nature of this reality?—do not have their 
source in experimental method, which is acquainted only with sensible appear-
ances and can discover nothing beyond them. The resolution of these ques-
tions transcends the methods used by physics; it is the object of metaphysics.

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
352
And the contemporary philosopher of science Bas van Fraassen (1980) similarly writes: 
“I explicate the general limits [of experience] as follows: Experience can give us information 
only about what is both observable and actual.” For such anti-realists empirical science can-
not give us knowledge of the unobservable world. What it can do is give us theories that 
are, in van Fraassen’s words, “empirically adequate,” that is, theories whose claims about 
the observable part of the world are true. Such theories might make claims about unob-
servables such as electrons, but these theories are to be judged not on the grounds of their 
truth about electrons but on the grounds of whether what they entail about observable 
“electron effects” is true. If a theory postulates unobservables, then at best we are justified 
in believing only that the theory is empirically adequate, not that the theory is true.
Responses
At the heart of many responses to Popper’s falsificationism is a rejection of two of his 
main claims: (i) that, by contrast to deduction, inductive reasoning is invalid; (ii) that 
induction is not in fact employed by good scientists. The second claim is addressed by 
pointing to many actual uses of inductive reasoning in the sciences, even explicit ones, 
as in Newton’s derivation of his law of universal gravitation. The first claim, the most 
controversial one, can be addressed, in part at least, by asking why Popper believes that 
deductive reasoning is valid. If he says that deductive reasoning always leads from truths 
to truths, then that claim depends on the assumption that he means “valid” deductive 
reasoning. (There are fallacious deductive arguments in which truths do not always lead 
to truths.) But then an analogous claim can be made for inductive reasoning: “valid” 
inductive reasoning leads from truths to probable truths. If the claim is that some induc-
tive arguments are invalid, then that is something with which inductivists can agree. 
But this hardly establishes the invalidity of induction in general. (The topic of the jus-
tification of induction is a large and complex one; for discussions of various issues, see 
the anthology of Swinburne (1974)).
At the heart of responses to “anti-realism” lies the question of why anti-realists such 
as Duhem and van Fraassen assume that scientists can make inferences only about what 
is observable, not what is unobservable. These writers offer no argument whatever for 
this claim: they simply make this a fundamental assumption. Yet scientists do in fact make 
causal-inductive inferences from observed effects to unobservable entities, forces, and 
properties—as Newton did to the universal force of gravity, and Thomson did to the 
existence of electrons. What anti-realists fail to show is why such inferences can be 
made from observed effects to unobserved, but observable causes cannot be made from 
observed effects to unobservable causes. Why does the unobservability of the entities 
inferred make an inference of this sort invalid? (For a discussion of possible anti-realist 
arguments, and realist replies, see Achinstein 2002.)
2. “There is no Universal Standard of Proof, or Scientific Method, that Must Be Followed for 
All Times, and For All the Sciences” The strongest version of this claim is that of the phi-
losopher of science Paul Feyerabend (1970), who defends a view he calls an “anarchistic 
theory of knowledge,” or “anything goes.” In actual scientific practice, he asserts, “there 
is not a single [methodological] rule, however plausible, and however firmly grounded 
in epistemology, that is not violated at some time or other.” According to Feyerabend, 
such violation is not a bad thing but a good one, since only in this way can scientists 
discover errors in accepted theories and only in this way can new, interesting theories be 

SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE
353
developed. The sole methodological principle to which Feyerabend subscribes is what 
he calls the “principle of proliferation”—the idea that scientists should introduce and 
elaborate “hypotheses which are inconsistent either with well-established theories or 
with well-established facts.” But there are no general rules to be followed in “prolifera-
tion” other than “Anything goes.”
The historian and philosopher of science Thomas Kuhn (1970) developed a some-
what more moderate view in the “Postscript” to his classic work The Structure of Scientific 
Revolutions. There are, he claims, values shared by scientific communities generally. He 
mentions predictive accuracy, consistency, and simplicity. But, he insists, these values 
do not function as rules that uniquely determine what theory to believe, since values 
can be applied differently by different scientists even in the same community. Two sci-
entists might agree on the importance of simplicity as a criterion for believing a theory, 
yet they might apply the concept of simplicity differently, depending on subjective con-
siderations involving training and personality.
Finally, John Norton (2005), in defending what he calls a “material theory of induc-
tion,” claims that the reason there have been many conflicting accounts of scientific 
inference, including those presented in section 1, is that those who formulate them 
“have sought formal theories of induction based on universal inference schemas.” But, 
he claims, “our inductions are not susceptible to full systematization by a formal theory 
. . . [since] the warrant for an induction is not ultimately supplied by a universal tem-
plate; the warrant is supplied by a matter of fact.” What warrants an inference from 
“these samples of copper melt at 1083 degrees Centigrade” to “all copper melts at that 
temperature” is that copper is a metal, and metals are generally uniform in their melting 
points—not some formal principle of induction telling us to infer all As are Bs from the 
fact that all observed As are Bs. And what fails to warrant an inference from the fact 
that all 100 voters sampled in Maryland vote Democratic to the claim that all voters in 
Maryland do is not that it fails to satisfy such a principle of induction, but the fact that 
the sample is too small, that voters in all states are not uniform in their voting habits, 
etc. General methodological rules—e.g., Newton’s four rules—are mere window dress-
ing. What is doing the work in the causal-inductive inferences Newton makes to his law 
of gravity is not Newton’s “general template” urging scientists to infer the same cause 
from effects of the same kind, but the fact that accelerations are produced by forces and 
that the accelerations of the planets all satisfy an inverse square force law.
Responses
In response to Feyerabend, defenders of universal scientific methods can say that his 
“principle of proliferation” is not at all incompatible with universal methods. His 
principle does not tell us to infer or to believe a theory that is inconsistent with one 
accepted on the basis of a scientific method. It tells us only to consider such a theory. 
Scientists defending a theory on the basis of a universal method do this a good deal of 
the time. For example, Newton, in giving some arguments in favor of his particle theory 
of light, considers the incompatible wave theory, and notes empirical problems with it. 
If Feyerabend means that one should infer or believe a theory incompatible with the well-
established one simply because it is a conflicting theory, then indeed his view would and 
should have few if any followers.
Feyerabend also claims that although generally it is “good policy” to act in accor-
dance with rules of reasoning such as Newton’s four rules, they should not be universally 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
354
followed. There are numerous important occasions on which they are, and should be, 
violated or ignored. In response, we need to draw a distinction between, on the one 
hand, violating or ignoring a rule, and, on the other, knowing when it is supposed to 
be applied and when not. One might refuse to use inductive generalization when one 
has very few instances, or when they are all of the same narrow type, or when other 
information exists that makes the generalization implausible. But this is not violating or 
ignoring the rule; it is simply realizing that it is not applicable in such situations. If this 
is all Feyerabend means, then those he is criticizing would agree. Is Feyerabend suggest-
ing that even when inductive generalizations are perfectly justified (say, because they 
are based on numerous and varied instances, the properties involved are of the right 
sort, etc.), there are numerous important occasions on which the inductive conclu-
sions should not be drawn, or on which some conflicting conclusions should be drawn? 
Unless some reason can be given for this (other than “the inductive conclusion might 
be false”), those he is criticizing should be unmoved.
In response to Kuhn’s subjective aspects of “shared values,” a defender of objective 
scientific standards can reply by making some distinctions. First, there is the idea that 
different scientists, confronted with the same data and the same background theories, 
do indeed sometimes come to different conclusions about whether, or to what extent, 
the data confirm or support a conclusion. That is perfectly compatible with the scien-
tific standards being objective, even though there are differences between scientists in 
their beliefs about whether the data conform to those standards. Second, there is the 
idea that even though whether, or to what extent, the data support a hypothesis is an 
objective matter, whether it is reasonable to take certain actions with respect to that 
hypothesis (e.g., to test it by designing and building expensive equipment) is at least in 
part subjective. Finally, there is the idea that the data might be such that, in conformity 
with the objective standards, they do not clearly point to any particular conclusion, or 
if they do, how strongly they support that conclusion is not clear. (The analogy here is 
with a medical test coming back “inconclusive.”) None of these possibilities, however, 
suffices to make the standards or “shared values” in any way subjective.
In response to Norton, the empiricists Newton, Mill, and Whewell will deny that 
they are providing general formal templates for valid scientific inferences which are 
such that any inferences having these forms will be valid. For example, Mill explicitly 
says that some inductions of the form “all observed As are Bs; therefore all As are Bs” are 
valid, and some are fallacious. The validity of an inference of this form depends on vari-
ous empirical factors in addition to the fact that all observed As are Bs. Unlike formal 
deductive logic, to determine the validity of an inductive inference of the form noted, 
you can’t just look at its form. This view is also implicit in the works of Newton and 
Whewell. What these writers are saying is that in order to obtain scientific knowledge 
of the world via “proofs” one needs to produce arguments that have a certain structure 
(e.g., that infer similar causes from similar effects; that generalize from observed samples 
to populations). They are not claiming that these arguments are valid simply in virtue 
of their structure.
3. “Scientists Can Be, and Frequently Are, Justified in Believing Unproved Propositions” 
This claim runs counter to the last (and arguably the most vulnerable) of the three 
Principal Theses, according to which scientists are justified in believing propositions 
only if they are proved in accordance with the standards set by the “scientific method.” 
One of the best defenses (and illustrations) of this claim was offered in 1875 by the great 

SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE
355
British theoretical physicist James Clerk Maxwell (1875). He introduced what he called 
a “method of physical speculation” for developing and defending a theory you cannot 
at the moment experimentally prove, and doing so in a way that can make it possible to 
be justified in believing the theory to be true. The particular theory he was concerned 
with was the kinetic-molecular theory of gases and liquids which postulates molecules 
that cannot be observed, and makes claims about their motions that at the time could 
not be demonstrated to be true by observation and experiment. Maxwell contrasts his 
“method of physical speculation” with two others: Newtonian inductivism, which is 
meant to provide proof “beyond reasonable doubt,” and “the method of hypothesis,” in 
which an hypothesis is assumed without proof or any argument and its consequences 
tested. Maxwell’s method is weaker than the former, but stronger than the latter, which 
at best yields “instance confirmation,” but not justified belief.
Maxwell’s method (which can be gleaned more from his actual use of it than from his 
pronouncements about it) is to be employed when developing and defending a theory 
about unobservables when whatever experimental evidence exists does not suffice to 
establish the theory. It is particularly appropriate for theories in which the unobserv-
ables comprise a micro-system of which some observable macro-system is claimed to be 
composed, and in which the behavior of the micro-system is supposed to determine that 
of the macro-system. There are four components.
i. Independent Warrant. Whatever reasons one can offer should be given for the exis-
tence of the unobservables and in favor of supposing that the principles used are appli-
cable to these unobservables. These reasons might include appeal to experiments that 
provide some indirect but not conclusive support for supposing that some type of unob-
servables comprise the macro-system and produce observed behavior of the macro-
system. (For example, Maxwell mentions friction experiments suggesting that heat is 
not a fluid but a motion of bodies too small to see.) The independent warrant might 
include an inductively based appeal to the success of the principles in other domains. 
(For example, in applying the laws of classical dynamics to molecules, Maxwell argues 
that such laws have been successful in astronomy and in electrical science.) The inde-
pendent warrant can also appeal to methodological ideas such as simplicity or unifica-
tion. (Maxwell argues that his molecular theory satisfies these criteria by explaining 
macro-systems composed of bodies in terms of micro-systems composed of bodies, and 
so introduces no new ontological category.) The strength of this independent warrant 
can vary, depending on the arguments given. It does not yield proof, but it is a good deal 
more than saying simply “let’s make these assumptions without argument, and see what 
consequences follow.”
ii. Explanations. The second component of Maxwell’s method consists in giving expla-
nations of known properties, laws, and experimentally established deviations from these 
laws, from assumptions made about the unobservable micro-system. (Maxwell shows 
how to derive Boyle’s law for gases from his molecular assumptions, and how to derive 
known deviations from this law from a virial equation for certain macro-systems when 
that equation is applied to the molecular system he postulates.)
iii. Theoretical Development. The postulation of unobservables satisfying the properties 
and principles introduced will suggest a range of questions about what properties and 
principles in addition to those introduced in components 1 and 2 these unobservables 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
356
satisfy. To the extent possible, the theorist should attempt to develop the theory further 
by answering these questions. This usually requires the introduction of new theoretical 
assumptions about the unobservables for which there might be no independent warrant, 
and derivations of new results that might or might not be testable by known means. 
(Maxwell formulates a series of questions about the motions of molecules, their mean-
free paths, the distribution of molecular velocities, etc. To answer them he introduces 
various new assumptions, which he had no way of experimentally verifying, and draws 
new conclusions, including his famous distribution law for molecular velocities, which 
he had no way of testing.)
iv. Unsolved Problems. These can include a reference to known laws and properties of 
the macro-system not yet explained, as well as experimental results that are not in accord 
with certain consequences of the theory. (From his theory Maxwell derived information 
about specific heats of gases that are not in accord with observed values; and he notes 
various properties of gases, including electrical ones, the theory does not explain.) This, 
of course, is not a way of defending the theory, only the “theorist” by showing that he is 
aware of difficulties and knows aspects of the theory that need further development.
Maxwell’s method offers a defense of a theory that is of two sorts: epistemic and 
non-epistemic. First, the independent warrant cited for assumptions introduced might 
provide enough epistemic warrant to make one justified in believing them, even though 
they have no experimental proof; and if from those assumptions one can derive known 
laws and deviations, then one might be justified in believing them on the basis of a 
range of known phenomena. Second, an important way of defending a theory is by 
showing that it can, and how it can, be developed theoretically, even when that theo-
retical development involves postulating or deriving new theoretical propositions for 
which there is no experimental proof or even independent warrant. What such theo-
retical development adds is “completeness”—a non-epistemic value Maxwell regards 
as valuable for its own sake. Without it, he claims, the basic assumptions of the theory 
are “vague” in the sense of being underdeveloped and imprecise. From the use of his 
method in developing his kinetic-molecular theory the way he did, Maxwell concluded 
that he was epistemically justified in believing the basic assumptions of his theory, and 
non-epistemically justified in continuing to pursue this theory—even though neither 
he nor others had provided experimental proof.
On the Maxwellian view, then, you can accept the first two Principal Theses (which 
Maxwell in fact does) without accepting the third. Even if scientific knowledge requires 
proof satisfying some preferred “scientific method,” scientists can be justified in believ-
ing and pursuing a theory they are not yet able to prove and claim to be scientific knowl-
edge (see Achinstein 2010).
Conclusion
Despite the fact that there is no general agreement about scientific methodology among 
the influential historical writers cited, there is agreement among them about the three 
Principal Theses governing scientific knowledge. More contemporary writers have 
enlivened the discussion by challenging one or more of even these common theses. 
It has been claimed by some that no scientific knowledge is possible at all, or that it is 
possible only with respect to the observable world, or that standards of proof required 

SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE
357
for scientific knowledge are not universal but theory-specific, or that scientists can be 
justified in believing hypotheses without proof. As is the case with philosophical argu-
ments generally, these more recent discussions yield no universally accepted position. 
But they do furnish a very valuable stimulus for thinking about the nature of scientific 
inquiry, and about whether, and to what extent, such inquiry can, or needs to, supply 
knowledge of the world.
References
Achinstein, Peter (1991) Particles and Waves, New York: Oxford University Press.
—— (2002) “Is there a Valid Experimental Argument for Scientific Realism?” Journal of Philosophy 99, 
470–95.
—— (2010) “What to Do if You Want to Defend a Theory You Cannot Prove: A Method of ‘Physical 
Speculation’,” Journal of Philosophy 107, 35–56.
Descartes, René (1971) Descartes: Philosophical Writings, trans. and ed. Elizabeth Anscombe and Peter 
Thomas Geach, Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill.
—— (1988) Descartes: Selected Writings, trans. John Cottingham, Robert Stoothoff, and Dugald Murdoch, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Duhem, Pierre (1954) The Aim and Structure of Physical Theory, trans. Philip P. Wiener, Princeton: Princeton 
University Press.
Feyerabend, Paul (1970) “Against Method: Outline of an Anarchistic Theory of Knowledge,” Analyses 
of Theories and Methods of Physics and Psychology, ed. Michael Radner and Stephen Winokur, vol. 4 of 
Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Harman, Gilbert (1965) “Inference to the Best Explanation,” The Philosophical Review 74, 88–95.
Kuhn, Thomas (1970) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 2nd ed., Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lipton, Peter (2004) Inference to the Best Explanation, 2nd ed., London: Routledge.
Maxwell, James Clerk (1875) “On the Dynamical Evidence of the Molecular Constitution of Bodies,” The 
Scientific Papers of James Clerk Maxwell, ed. W.D. Niven, New York: Dover, 1965.
Mill, John Stuart (1872) A System of Logic, Ratiocinative and Inductive, 8th ed. London: Longmans (new 
impression 1959).
Newton, Isaac (1999) The Principia: Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy, trans. I. Bernard Cohen 
and Anne Whitman. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Norton, John (2005) “A Little Survey of Induction,” in Peter Achinstein, ed. Scientific Evidence: Philosophical 
Theories and Applications, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 9–34.
Popper, Karl (1959) The Logic of Scientific Discovery, New York: Basic Books.
Swinburne, Richard (1974) The Justification of Induction, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Van Fraassen, Bas (1980) The Scientific Image, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Whewell, William (1840) The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences, Founded upon their History, 2 volumes, 
London: John W. Parker; reprinted London: Routledge/Thoemmes Press, 1996.
Further Reading
Selections from many of the writers discussed in this article, together with critical discussions, can be found 
in the present author’s Science Rules: A Historical Introduction to Scientific Methods, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 2004. Some of the material in this chapter is derived from that work.

33
LOGICAL AND 
MATHEMATICAL 
KNOWLEDGE
Otávio Bueno
Introduction
What is mathematical and logical knowledge? And how are such kinds of knowledge 
obtained? In order to answer these questions, we need to determine, first, what math-
ematics and logic are about. But any such answers presuppose certain philosophical con-
ceptions of mathematics and logic, and depending on the conception that is adopted, 
different answers are advanced.
For example, according to a Platonist account of mathematics, mathematical objects 
exist independently of us. These objects are not mind-dependent (their existence is 
not the result of our mental processes and linguistic practices), and they are abstract 
(that is, mathematical objects are causally inert and are not located in space-time). 
On a Platonist view, mathematics is ultimately about mathematical objects and their 
relations, the structures they determine and the concepts that are introduced in order 
to describe them. But how can we form even reliable beliefs, let alone knowledge, of 
such an abstract realm? This is the epistemological problem faced by Platonism. In what 
follows, I will discuss some strategies that Platonists have developed in order to address 
this problem. As will become clear, these strategies rely, in more or less direct ways, on 
the use of logic, and so they presuppose some logical knowledge (knowledge of what 
follows from what).
According to nominalists, mathematical objects do not exist or, at least, need not be 
taken to exist to make sense of mathematics. Clearly, if these objects do not exist, we do 
not—in fact, we cannot—have knowledge of them as objects that exist independently 
of their descriptions. In this guise, there is not much we can know about them of math-
ematical interest. Presumably, we can know things such as that they can be thought of 
by us, that Platonists believe that they exist, and so on. But these are not mathemati-
cally significant properties. In the end, the epistemological problem of mathematics is 
ultimately dissolved. However, another problem emerges. How can we distinguish a 
mathematician from a non-mathematician with respect to their mathematical beliefs? 
In outline, what distinguishes them is their logical knowledge (Field 1989). A math-
ematician has significantly more logical knowledge involving mathematical principles 
than a non-mathematician does. She knows what follows or not, given a logic, from 

LOGICAL AND MATHEMATICAL KNOWLEDGE
359
various mathematical principles, whereas a non-mathematician lacks, in many cases, 
that sort of knowledge.
So, both Platonists and nominalists about mathematics ultimately rely on logical 
knowledge. After critically discussing some of the main Platonist strategies to accom-
modate mathematical knowledge, I will examine a non-Platonist strategy that re-con-
ceptualizes the whole issue, suggesting that it also offers an account of logical knowledge 
that even Platonists can adopt.
Mathematical Knowledge Via Abstraction
The first approach to mathematical knowledge I will consider emphasizes the impor-
tance of having a suitable conception of mathematical ontology. In fact, the idea is that 
once the ontology of mathematics is properly worked out, mathematical epistemology 
will turn out to be much less troublesome than it might initially seem to be.
This strategy was most thoroughly developed by the Fregean Platonists (Frege 1974: 
Hale and Wright 2001). On this approach, the abstract character of mathematical objects 
emerges from the kind of thing these objects are: objects that fall under certain con-
cepts. Given that Fregean concepts are abstract, mind-independent things, numbers and 
other mathematical objects inherit the same abstract character from the concepts they 
fall under. The Fregean Platonist has no difficulty in making sense of the objectivity of 
mathematics, given the mind-independence of the concepts involved in their character-
ization. Frege’s own motivation to develop his proposal, which was initially developed to 
make sense of arithmetic, emerged from the need to provide a formulation of arithmetic in 
terms of logic. Frege had developed the first formal system of symbolic logic (in fact, it was 
a version of second-order logic), and his goal was to show that arithmetical concepts could 
be reduced to logical concepts (such as identity, predication, negation, and conjunction) 
plus some definitions. Frege was, thus, what we now call a logicist about arithmetic. For 
instance, the number 0 was characterized in terms of the concepts of negation, identity, 
and predication: 0 is the number of objects that fall under the concept not identical to itself 
(since no objects fall under that concept, the characterization seems quite right).
Crucial to Frege’s approach was the use of what is now called Hume’s Principle: two 
concepts are equinumerous if, and only if, there is a one-to-one correspondence between 
them. Hume’s Principle was used at various crucial points. For instance, it was invoked 
to show that the number 0 is different from the number 1. As just noted, the concept 0 
is characterized in terms of the number of objects that fall under the concept not identi-
cal to itself. The concept 1, in turn, is characterized in terms of the concept identical to 
0. Now, given that nothing falls under the concept not identical to itself, and only one 
object falls under the concept identical to 0, by Hume’s Principle, these two concepts are 
not equinumerous. As a result, 0 is distinct from 1.
How can one establish that Hume’s Principle is true? Frege thought he could derive 
Hume’s Principle from a basic logical law (called Basic Law V). According to this law, 
the extension of the concept F is the same as the extension of the concept G if, and 
only if, the same objects fall under the concepts F and G. Basic Law V seemed to be a 
fundamental logical law, dealing with concepts, their extensions, and their identity. It 
seemed to have the right sort of generality and analytic character that was needed for a 
logicist foundation of arithmetic.
But here is the problem: Basic Law V is inconsistent. It immediately raises Russell’s 
paradox once we consider the set of all sets that are not members of themselves (Boolos 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
360
1998). However, not everything was lost. Although Frege acknowledged the problem, 
and tried to fix it by introducing a new, consistent principle, his solution ultimately 
did not work. The principle that Frege introduced as a replacement for Basic Law V, 
although logically consistent, was inconsistent with the claim that there are at least 
two distinct numbers. Since the latter claim was true in Frege’s system, the proposed 
principle was unacceptable (Boolos 1998).
There was, however, a different solution available to Frege. He could have jetti-
soned the inconsistent Basic Law V, and adopted Hume’s Principle as his basic prin-
ciple instead. Given that the only use that Frege made of Basic Law V was to derive 
Hume’s Principle, if the latter were assumed as basic, one could then run, in a perfectly 
consistent manner, Frege’s reconstruction of arithmetic. In fact, we could then credit 
Frege with the theorem to the effect that arithmetic can be derived in a system like 
Frege’s from Hume’s Principle alone. Frege’s approach could then be extended to other 
branches of mathematics. To implement a program along these lines is one of the cen-
tral features of the neo-Fregean approach to the philosophy of mathematics (Hale and 
Wright 2001; for a critical discussion, see Boolos 1998).
But in order to carry out this program, at least within Fregean lines, it is crucial that 
Hume’s Principle be analytic. However, as Boolos (1998) argued, how can something 
that entails the existence of infinitely many objects (infinitely many natural numbers) 
be considered analytic? This is a challenge that neo-Fregeans have tried to address (Hale 
and Wright 2001).
Part of the motivation for Frege’s logicism was epistemological. The logicist approach 
can offer a suitable account of our knowledge of arithmetic, and of other branches of 
mathematics, if suitable abstraction principles (similar to Hume’s Principle) are identi-
fied for other areas of mathematics, such as analysis, algebra, and set theory. The central 
epistemological move is that with the introduction of suitable abstraction principles, 
the relevant properties of the objects under consideration can be adequately captured 
in terms of only logic and definitions. The Fregean is then in a position to make sense 
of mathematical knowledge.
This strategy faces considerable challenges. It is unclear even which abstraction prin-
ciples are acceptable (Linnebo and Uzquiano 2009). Moreover, given the logicist set-
ting, there are significant constraints on the allowable concepts and constructions. To 
account for mathematical knowledge, the Fregean introduces a parallel discourse to 
mathematical practice—a discourse that often has no counterpart in actual mathemati-
cal practice. As a result, the account is unable to explain mathematical knowledge as 
the latter is actually obtained by mathematicians.
Mathematical Knowledge Via Intuition
Kurt Gödel approached mathematical knowledge very differently. On his view, the 
truth of basic mathematical axioms can be obtained directly by intuition (Gödel 1964; 
Maddy 1990). Frege thought that intuition played a role in how we come to know the 
truth of geometrical principles (which, for him, following Kant, were synthetic a priori); 
but arithmetic, being derivable from logic and definitions, was analytic. For Gödel, 
however, not only the principles of arithmetic, but also the axioms of set theory can be 
apprehended directly by intuition. We have, Gödel claims, “something like a percep-
tion of the objects of set theory” (1964: 485). That is, we are able to “perceive” these 
objects as having certain properties and lacking others, in a similar way that we perceive 

LOGICAL AND MATHEMATICAL KNOWLEDGE
361
physical objects around us. That we have such a perception of set-theoretic objects is 
supposed to be “seen from the fact that the axioms [of set theory] force themselves upon 
us as being true” (Gödel 1964: 485).
The issue then arises: how exactly does the fact that the axioms of set theory “force 
themselves upon us as being true” support the claim that we “perceive” the objects of set 
theory? Gödel seemed to have a broad conception of perception, and when he referred 
to the objects of set theory, he thought that we “perceived” the concepts involved in 
the characterization of these objects as well. The point might seem to be strange at 
first. After all, how exactly are we supposed to “perceive” abstract objects? With further 
reflection, however, and an extra bit of clarification, the point is not unreasonable. In 
fact, an analogous move can be made in the case of the perception of physical objects. 
For example, in order for me to perceive a tennis ball, and recognize it as a tennis ball, 
I need to have the concept of tennis ball. Without the latter concept, at best I will per-
ceive a round yellow thing—assuming I have these concepts. Similarly, I would not be 
able to recognize certain mathematical objects as objects of set theory unless I had the 
relevant concepts. The objects could not be “perceived” to be set-theoretic except if the 
relevant concepts were in place.
But to be able to justify the “perception” of set-theoretic objects from the fact that the 
axioms of set theory are forced upon us as being true, Gödel needs to articulate a certain 
conception of rational evidence (Parsons 2008: 146–148). Minimally, we have rational 
evidence for a proposition—such as an axiom of set theory—only if we make sense of 
the concepts that occur in that proposition and, in making sense of them, we realize 
that what is stated in that proposition is true. When we make sense of these concepts, 
we “perceive” them. Mathematical concepts are robust in their characterization, in the 
sense that what they stand for is not of our own making. Our perception of physical 
objects is similarly robust. If there is no pink elephant in front of me right now, I cannot 
perceive one. And you cannot fail to perceive the letters of this sentence as you read it, 
even though you might not be thinking about the letters as you read the sentence, but 
what the latter stands for. The analogy between sense perception and the “perception” 
of concepts is grounded on the robustness of both.
The robustness requires that I perceive what is the case, although I can, of course, be 
mistaken in my perception. For instance, as I walk on the street, I see a bird by a tree. 
I find it initially strange that the bird does not move as I get closer to the tree; just to 
find out, when I get close enough, that there was no bird there, but a colorful piece of 
paper. I thought I had perceived a bird, when in fact I perceived something else. The 
perception, although robust—something was perceived, after all—is fallible. But I still 
perceived what was the case: a piece of paper in the shape of a bird. I just mistook that 
for a bird, something I corrected later.
Similarly, the robustness of our “perception” of the concepts involved in an axiom 
of set theory is part of the account of how that axiom can force itself upon us as being 
true. By making sense of the relevant set-theoretic concepts, we “perceive” the latter 
and the connections among them. In this way, we “perceive” what is the case among the 
sets involved. Of course, similarly to the case of sense perception, we might be mistaken 
about what we think we perceive—that is part of the fallibility of the proposal. But the 
“perception” is, nevertheless, robust. We “perceive” something that is true.
This account of “perception” of mathematical concepts and objects is, in fact, an 
account of mathematical intuition. Following Charles Parsons (2008: 138–143), we 
should note that we have intuition of two sorts of things. We have intuition of objects 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
362
(e.g., the intuition of the objects of arithmetic), and we have intuition that some propo-
sition is true (e.g., the intuition that “the successor of a natural number is also a natural 
number” is true). The former can be called “intuition of,” and the latter “intuition that.” 
In the passage quoted in the first paragraph of this section, Gödel seems to be using 
the intuition that the axioms of set theory force themselves upon us to support the 
corresponding intuition of the objects of set theory. The robustness of both intuitions 
involved here is a central feature of the account.
The fallibilism that underlies this account of mathematical intuition contributes to 
making it more plausible. We might be wrong, after all, about which mathematical entity 
we think we have an intuition of, and we might be wrong in the intuition that a certain 
axiom is true. However, once these possibilities are acknowledged, it becomes clear that 
we need an account of the reliability of these mathematical intuitions. Otherwise, what 
prevent us from thinking that we are having an intuition of certain numbers, when we 
are in fact having an intuition of certain sets? And given that numbers, in general, are 
different from sets, the intuition in question could be misleading. Similarly, we might 
have an intuition that a certain axiom is true when unbeknown to us the axiom in ques-
tion is inconsistent. Think about Frege having the intuition that Basic Law V was true. 
Accounts of mathematical intuition within a Platonist setting invite concerns along 
these lines, since they need to ensure that the intuitions involved are about the right 
sort of objects, and that they offer reliable information regarding the appropriate rela-
tions among the objects in question.
Mathematical Knowledge as Continuous with Empirical Knowledge
There are dramatic ways in which considerations regarding empirical matters can shape 
an epistemology of mathematics. In the hands of the Quinean Platonist, there is a close 
connection between mathematics and the empirical sciences. Suppose you have a strong 
nominalistic tendency, but find out that, in the end, you cannot avoid being committed 
to the existence of mathematical objects when you try to make sense of the best theories 
of the world. In this case, you probably are a Quinean Platonist. W.V. Quine himself was 
such a Platonist (Quine 1960). Even when he acknowledged the indispensable role that 
reference to mathematical objects plays in the formulation of our best theories of the 
world, Quine insisted that he was only committed to one kind of mathematical object: 
classes. All the other mathematical objects that he needed, such as numbers, functions, 
and geometrical spaces, could be obtained from classes.
For the Quinean, Platonism is a matter of ontological honesty. Suppose you are a 
scientific realist about science, that is, you take scientific theories to be true (or, at 
least, approximately true), and you think that the terms in these theories refer. So, for 
example, in quantum mechanics, you acknowledge that it is crucial to refer to things 
like electrons, protons, photons, and quarks. These posits are an integral part of the 
theory, and positing their existence is crucial to the explanation of the behavior of 
the observable phenomena. These explanations include making successful predictions 
and applying quantum theory in various contexts. Now, in the formulation of quantum 
mechanics, it is indispensable to refer not only to electrons and other quantum particles, 
but also to mathematical objects. After all, it is in terms of the latter that we can charac-
terize the former. For instance, there is no way to characterize an electron but in terms 
of a certain group of invariants. These invariants are particular mathematical functions 
(particular mappings). So, to acknowledge commitment to the existence of electrons 

LOGICAL AND MATHEMATICAL KNOWLEDGE
363
but deny the existence of the corresponding mathematical functions is to take back 
what has to be assumed in order to express what such a physical object is. To engage in 
this, Quine insists, is to indulge in double thinking, in ontological dishonesty.
Quine’s indispensability argument is an attempt to get us straight—particularly the 
scientific realists among us. According to this argument (Quine 1960; Putnam 1971; 
Colyvan 2001):
(P1) 
We ought to be ontologically committed to all and only those entities that 
are indispensable to our best theories of the world.
(P2) 
Mathematical entities are indispensable to our best theories of the world.
Therefore We ought be to be ontologically committed to mathematical entities.
The point of the indispensability argument is to ensure that mathematical and physi-
cal posits be treated in the same way. In fact, on the Quinean picture, there is no sharp 
divide between mathematics and empirical science. Both are part of the same contin-
uum and ultimately depend on experience. There is only a difference in degree between 
them. Certain mathematical theories are presupposed and used in various branches of 
science but, typically, the results of scientific theories are not presupposed in the con-
struction of mathematical theories. In this sense, the theories in mathematics are taken 
to be more general than the theories in science. Mathematics also plays a fundamen-
tally instrumental role in science, helping the formulation of scientific theories and the 
expression of suitable relations among physical entities.
Of course, not every mathematical theory has indispensable applications in science. 
For example, theories about inaccessible cardinals in set theory do not seem to have 
found such applications. For Quine, such theories constitute mathematical recreations, 
and do not demand ontological commitment, that is, commitment to the existence of 
the entities they posit. The situation is entirely different, however, when we consider 
those mathematical theories that are used in science. Given that we cannot even formu-
late the corresponding scientific theories without using (and quantifying over) math-
ematical objects—such as functions, numbers, and geometrical spaces—the existence 
of the latter is required as much as the existence of physical posits—such as neutrons, 
protons, and positrons. Platonism then becomes the outcome of an honest understand-
ing of the ontology of science.
To the extent that we want to describe mathematical knowledge as knowledge about 
mathematical objects, relations, and structures, the indispensability argument indi-
cates which objects, relations, and structures we should be ontologically committed to 
(namely, those that are indispensable to our best theories of the world). From this point 
of view, mathematical knowledge ultimately emerges from, and is continuous with, 
empirical knowledge. We have good reason to posit some mathematical objects to the 
extent that such a positing is indispensable to our best theories of the world (theories 
that are simple, explanatory, heuristically fruitful, and empirically successful). There is 
no need to reconstruct these objects within a logicist setting or to have suitable math-
ematical intuitions about them (the reduction that Quine favors is to set theory, not to 
logic). Positing the objects as part of the theories is all that is needed.
It is not clear, however, that this account accommodates mathematical knowledge 
in general. It is often the case that what eventually becomes applied mathematics is 
first developed independently of any application context. It is only later that the math-
ematical theories in question are eventually applied. So an account is still needed of 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
364
how something that is merely a form of mathematical recreation suddenly raises to the 
level of serious ontological commitment upon successful application. Even if this pro-
posal offered an adequate picture of applied mathematics, an account of mathematical 
knowledge in pure mathematics is still needed. Simply describing pure mathematics as 
a form of mathematical recreation does not illuminate the central role it plays in the 
development of applied mathematics.
Mathematical Knowledge Via Structure Identification
Perhaps we should not think of the basic focus of mathematical investigation as the 
study of objects; rather, we should conceptualize mathematics as the study of structures. 
Mathematical knowledge is then not knowledge of mathematical objects, but of math-
ematical structures. This is the key point of mathematical structuralism. Different forms 
of structuralism provide different accounts of structure (Resnik 1997; Shapiro 1997). 
But, crucially for the structuralist, it does not matter which mathematical objects one 
considers; as long as they satisfy the relevant structure it will be sufficient to explain the 
possibility of mathematical knowledge.
This move is clearly found in Michael Resnik’s defense of structuralism. To explain 
the possibility of mathematical knowledge, Resnik introduces the notion of a template, 
which is a concrete entity—including things such as drawings, models, blueprints—and 
is meant to link the concrete aspects of our experience with abstract patterns (Resnik’s 
term for structure). The crucial idea is that there are structural relations (such as iso-
morphisms) between templates and patterns that allow us to represent the latter via 
the former. In particular, it is because there are such structural relations between pat-
terns and templates that mathematicians can use proofs—the process of creating and 
manipulating concrete templates via certain operations—to generate information about 
abstract patterns (Resnik 1997: 229–235). And given that mathematicians only have 
access to templates, no direct access to positions in patterns—that is, no direct access to 
mathematical objects—is presupposed in Resnik’s picture.
Patterns have a significant feature according to Resnik: the positions in such pat-
terns are incomplete. This means that there is no fact of the matter as to whether these 
positions have certain properties or not. Consider, for example, the third position in 
the natural number pattern (for simplicity, call that position “the number 3”). It is not 
clear that there is a fact of the matter as to whether this position—the number 3—is 
the same as the corresponding position in the real number pattern. In other words, it 
is not clear that there is a fact of the matter as to whether the number 3 in the natural 
number pattern is the same as the number 3 in the real number structure. After all, the 
properties that a position in a pattern has depend on the pattern to which it belongs. In 
the natural number pattern, the number 3 has the fourth position in the pattern—that 
is, the number 4—as its immediate successor. But this is not the case in the context of 
the real number pattern. Of course, in the real number pattern, the immediate succes-
sor of the number 3 that is also a natural number is the number 4. But to say that this is 
the same property as the one in the natural number pattern is already to assume that 
the corresponding numbers are the same, which is the point in question. It is then not 
obvious how issues such as these can be decided.
According to Resnik, rather than a problem, this incompleteness of the positions in 
a pattern (or structure) is a significant feature of mathematics. Ultimately, we will not 
be able to decide several issues about the identity of the positions in a structure. We 

LOGICAL AND MATHEMATICAL KNOWLEDGE
365
can decide, however, issues about the mathematical structures themselves, where such 
incompleteness typically does not emerge. That is expected on a structuralist account. 
After all, what we get to know when we know mathematics does not have to do with the 
nature of mathematical objects, but rather the structures (or patterns) they are part of.
One significant benefit of mathematical structuralism, at least on Resnik’s view, is that 
mathematical objects drop out of the picture entirely. This simplifies significantly the 
epistemology of mathematics. After all, the mathematical structuralist does not require 
any logicist formulation of mathematical objects via abstraction principles. Moreover, 
no access to mathematical objects via mathematical intuition is presupposed, nor is a 
problematic distinction between mathematical recreation and ontologically commit-
ting mathematics ever made.
The epistemological difficulties emerge, not surprisingly, at the level of mathematical 
structures. What reasons do we have to believe that by manipulating concrete templates 
we successfully describe abstract mathematical patterns? How can we know that there 
is an isomorphism between a certain concrete template (to which we do have access) 
and an abstract pattern (to which we have none)? Clearly, we cannot simply stipulate 
that once a given template is formulated—even if it is a consistent or a coherent tem-
plate—there is an isomorphic abstract pattern that corresponds to it. After all, it is 
still possible that no mathematical structures exist, or that only some such structures 
exist, and hence some templates correspond to no abstract patterns. What is needed 
here is the development of a strategy that guarantees the alleged connection between 
templates and patterns. It is unclear, however, how such a strategy can be implemented 
without presupposing any access to patterns.
Mathematical “Knowledge” Via Logical Knowledge
The epistemological difficulties faced by the Platonist views discussed so far motivate 
the need for a different approach to mathematical knowledge. The difficulties emerged 
because of the assumption that a domain of abstract objects (or structures) exists inde-
pendently of us, and that domain needs to be described. If we drop this assumption, 
the difficulties will also vanish. For such difficulties challenged the way in which each 
Platonist strategy tried to forge a connection between mathematical objects (or struc-
tures) and particular mechanisms of belief generation about them. But if mathematical 
objects or structures do not exist, or are not taken to exist, is there any sense in which 
there is mathematical knowledge? What is such knowledge about?
Nominalist views in the philosophy of mathematics, we noted, either deny the exis-
tence of mathematical objects (Field 1989; Azzouni 2004) or do not require the exis-
tence of these objects to make sense of mathematics (Bueno 2008). The latter form of 
nominalism offers an agnostic position, according to which the issue of the existence of 
mathematical objects (or relations) is left open.
But if mathematical objects (and relations or structures) do not exist, or are not taken 
to exist as part of an account of mathematics, what kind of knowledge do we have of 
mathematics? Clearly, we cannot have knowledge of mathematical objects (relations or 
structures) if they do not exist. In this case, mathematical “knowledge” becomes knowl-
edge of what follows from certain mathematical principles: logical knowledge (Field 
1989). Whether mathematical objects exist or not, once certain mathematical principles 
are introduced and a given logic is adopted, the issue arises as to what follows from such 
principles. This is the scope of mathematical “knowledge” on a nominalist setting.

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
366
Are there any constraints on what counts as an acceptable mathematical principle? 
As opposed to the neo-Fregean strategy that requires very specific types of abstraction 
principles (due to the logicist demands on the program), no similar constraints are found 
here. From a mathematical point of view, there are no real constraints on allowable 
principles. The only significant requirement is that these principles produce interesting 
mathematics, that is, the principles are computationally tractable (so some results can 
be derived from them), and the results are unexpected, compelling, and illuminating.
Although typically mathematical principles are taken to be consistent, they need 
not be and, in some instances, they are not. In that case, assuming that the principles 
are not revised, the underlying logic cannot be classical, otherwise the resulting theory 
becomes trivial, that is, every statement follows from the principles in question. To pre-
vent such triviality in the presence of inconsistent principles, it would be better if the 
underlying logic were paraconsistent. This logic tames inconsistency by not allowing 
everything to follow from the latter (da Costa et al. 2007).
On this approach to mathematical “knowledge,” the existence of mathematical 
objects, relations, or structures plays no role. What matters is what can be derived from 
the relevant principles, assuming a given logic. Note that once some mathematical 
principles are introduced and a particular logic is adopted, it is not up to us what follows 
(or not) from such principles. In this sense, mathematics is objective—independently 
of the existence of mathematical objects.
As an illustration of the account, let us consider the concept of a metric. To operate 
mathematically with this concept, we need first to specify which conditions the concept 
satisfies. These conditions are formulated in the relevant mathematical principles. Let 
us assume that real numbers have been introduced via suitable mathematical principles 
in the usual way. We can then specify a metric d as a two-place function defined on the 
Cartesian product of a non-empty set S with values in the set of real numbers, as follows: 
d is always positive (d(x, y) ≥ 0, for every x and y in S); d has value 0 precisely when its 
arguments are the same (d(x, y) = 0 if, and only if, x = y), and d satisfies the properties 
of symmetry (d(x, y) = d(y, x), for every x and y in S), and triangle inequality (d(x, z) + 
d(z, y) ≥ d(x, y), for every x, y and z in S). A metric space is then a pair (S, d), where S is 
a non-empty set and d is a metric.
What follows from these principles? Suppose that we now introduce the concepts 
of a sequence {xk} in S, and that we say that the sequence {xk} converges to x in S (with 
respect to the metric d) as long as limk d(xk, x) = 0. We can then prove that if a sequence 
in a metric space converges, it converges to a unique point; that is, if lim xk = x and limxk 
= y, then x = y. After all, given that the metric satisfies the triangle inequality, d(x, xk) + 
d(xk, y) ≥ d(x, y), for all k, it follows that d(x, y) = 0. Thus, since d (x, y) = 0 if, and only 
if, x = y, we obtain the result.
Clearly, this is a simple fact about sequences in a metric space. And it might be very 
tempting to think of it as a fact about objects, such as sequences and metric spaces. 
There is nothing wrong with that as long as we do not reify the objects, and suddenly 
start thinking that they exist. The mathematical principles referred to above allow us 
to describe these objects (sequences, metric spaces), but the existence of the latter plays 
no role in the account. What matters is how the objects have been characterized and 
which results can be derived. The facts in question are facts about what follows from the 
principles involved, not about the existence of mathematical objects.

LOGICAL AND MATHEMATICAL KNOWLEDGE
367
Logical Knowledge
The account just sketched relies on the adoption of a particular logic to obtain deriva-
tions from the relevant mathematical principles. Clearly, depending on the logic that 
is adopted, different results can be derived from the same mathematical principles. For 
instance, as noted, if the principles are inconsistent and the logic is classical, everything 
follows from the principles. This is not the case, however, if the logic is paraconsistent. 
There is, of course, a plurality of logics besides the classical one, such as intuitionistic 
logic, quantum logic, deontic logic, and relevant logic, among many others. Which of 
these logics (if any) is the right one?
The answer depends on the stance one adopts regarding logic. For the logical monist, 
there is only one such logic (Quine 1986; Priest 2006); for the logical pluralist, there 
are several (Beall and Restall 2006; Bueno and Shalkowski 2009). The monist needs 
to explain: (i) why there is only one logic, despite the apparent plurality of logics, and 
(ii) why the logic he or she defends is indeed the right one. Note that logical monists 
need not take classical logic as the correct one, since the right logic might well be non-
classical, or even just a fragment of some logics (Priest 2006). The pluralist, in turn, 
needs to explain: (i) why the plurality of logics is a genuine fact, and (ii) why despite 
that plurality, we do not get logical anarchy (a situation in which anything goes as far 
as logical derivation).
But what does it mean to say that a logic is the right one? The right logic is the one 
that provides, to borrow Stephen Read’s useful phrase, “the correct description of the 
basis of inference” (Read 1988: 2). When we are given a logic, we are given certain 
inferences that are sanctioned as valid. A correct description of these inferences is one 
that sanctions as valid those inferences that intuitively seem to be so, and does not sanc-
tion as valid those inferences that intuitively do not seem to be so. The logical pluralist 
insists that there are many correct descriptions of the basis of inference, whereas the 
monist denies that this is the case. The determination of which inferences are correct 
(or not) is a matter of a conceptual evaluation—of comparison of which inferences are 
sanctioned as valid by a given logic and which inferences seem to be intuitively so. This 
presupposes that there is a primitive modal concept of consistency that is being used in 
the assessment. In fact, on this view, a statement A intuitively follows from a statement 
B if the negation of A is inconsistent with B (Bueno and Shalkowski 2009).
Some monists insist that any departure from classical logic simply amounts to a change 
of subject matter. Classical negation is negation; any change in the properties that nega-
tion might satisfy entails that we are no longer considering negation—we are talking 
about something else (Quine 1986). But clearly this argument assumes the point in 
question, namely, that we already know what the right logic is (namely, classical logic), 
and that there is only one such correct logic. Logical monism is simply assumed.
The logical pluralist, in turn, argues that different logics are right (or adequate) for 
different domains: intuitionist logic is adequate to capture constructive features of math-
ematical reasoning, whereas paraconsistent logic succeeds in dealing with inconsistent 
bits of information without triviality (da Costa et al. 2007; Bueno and Shalkowski 
2009). Some logics, however, are simply inadequate for certain domains. For example, 
due to explosion—the fact that, in classical logic, everything follows from a contradic-
tion—classical logic is unable to deal with inconsistency without simply rejecting some 
of the offending contradictory principles. Given that some logics are adequate for some 
domains, and inadequate for others, despite the pluralism, we do not obtain logical 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
368
anarchy. Not everything goes with regard to logical derivation (Bueno and Shalkowski 
2009).
Note that the account of logical knowledge sketched here, despite not presuppos-
ing the existence of abstract entities, is one that the Platonist about mathematics, in 
principle, can also adopt. The account highlights the importance of logic selection on 
the basis of the connection between the validity of certain inferences given a logic and 
what is intuitively taken to be valid given a primitive concept of consistency. Nothing 
in this account rules out Platonism. In this way, the epistemology of logic is an area that 
Platonists and anti-Platonists can fruitfully explore together.
References
Azzouni, J. (2004) Deflating Existential Consequence, New York: Oxford University Press.
Beall, J.C. and Restall, G. (2006) Logical Puralism, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Benacerraf, P. and Putnam, H. (eds.) (1983) Philosophy of Mathematics: Selected Readings (2nd edition), 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Boolos, G. (1998) Logic, Logic, and Logic, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bueno, O. (2008) “Nominalism and Mathematical Intuition,” Protosociology 25: 89–107.
Bueno, O. and Shalkowski, S. (2009) “Modalism and Logical Pluralism,” Mind 118: 295–321.
Colyvan, M. (2001) The Indispensability of Mathematics, New York: Oxford University Press.
da Costa, N.C.A., Krause, D., and Bueno, O. (2007) “Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency,” in 
Jacquette (ed.) (2007): 791–911.
Field, H. (1989) Realism, Mathematics and Modality, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Frege, G. (1974) Foundations of Arithmetic (translated by J.L. Austin), Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Gödel, K. (1964) “What is Cantor’s Continuum Problem?,” in Benacerraf and Putnam (eds.) (1983): 470–
485.
Hale, B. and Wright, C. (2001) The Reason’s Proper Study, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Jacquette, D. (ed.) (2007) Philosophy of Logic, Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Linnebo, Ø, and Uzquiano, G. (2009) “Which Abstraction Principles Are Acceptable? Some Limitative 
Results,” British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 60: 239–252.
Maddy, P. (1990) Realism in Mathematics, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Parsons, C. (2008) Mathematical Thought and its Objects, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Priest, G. (2006) Doubt Truth to Be a Liar, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Putnam, H. (1971) Philosophy of Logic, New York: Harper and Row. (Reprinted in Putnam 1979: 323–357.)
Putnam, H. (1979) Mathematics, Matter and Method (2nd edition), Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Quine, W.V. (1960) Word and Object, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Quine, W.V. (1986) Philosophy of Logic (2nd edition), Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Read, S. (1988) Relevant Logic, Oxford: Blackwell.
Resnik, M. (1997) Mathematics as a Science of Patterns, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Shapiro, S. (1997) Philosophy of Mathematics: Structure and Ontology, New York: Oxford University Press.

34
AESTHETIC KNOWLEDGE
Matthew Kieran
Why Aesthetic Knowledge?
Creating and appreciating art is a rational activity. Our descriptions, responses, and 
evaluations are not only informed by thought but are constrained and guided by various 
criteria. Look at a music review and it will contain characterizations of the music, what 
it appears to be doing, and why, as well as judgments as to why the overall effect is good, 
bad, or indifferent. Alternatively consider what often happens after seeing a movie with 
friends. We talk about why we enjoyed it (or didn’t), how good it was, and strive to justify 
our judgments where we disagree. Furthermore, we often change our minds in light of 
considerations raised by others and defer to the expertise of others. Thus underlying our 
ordinary aesthetic practices is the presumption that at least some disputes are rationally 
resolvable and some people do know more about certain aspects of the aesthetic realm 
than others, whether it be indie rock, film noir, or contemporary literature. Aesthetic 
appreciation is also an activity that is valued highly. We enjoy aesthetic appreciation 
for its own sake and tend to think that engaging with art cultivates our minds in ways 
that add to our understanding of the world. The bewitching elegance of a painting or 
design can not only be absorbing in its own right but the ways in which a work is expres-
sive, profound, or insightful can enhance our understanding. Shakespeare’s plays would 
surely be less significant if they did not express and explore fundamental aspects of 
human nature in the ways they do. Why be interested in aesthetic epistemology? First, 
it is worth understanding when, where, and why we can legitimately make art critical 
judgments or claims. Second, it may prove fruitful to consider what the differences and 
similarities in the aesthetic case are as contrasted with other areas.
Aesthetic Concepts
When considering the epistemology of aesthetic judgment we need to know which 
features of an object are aesthetically relevant, how they relate to others and how we 
can come to our knowledge of them. Sibley (1959, 1965) distinguishes aesthetic knowl-
edge from other kinds of knowledge (such as interpretative or historical knowledge). 
Aesthetic judgment involves the attribution of aesthetic properties and Sibley starts 
from considering paradigmatic aesthetic attributions such as “unified, balanced, inte-
grated, lifeless, serene, somber, dynamic, powerful, vivid, delicate, moving, trite, senti-
mental, tragic” (1959: 421). The list ranges from formal aesthetic concepts to reactive 
and emotional ones and we should be careful to distinguish between the use of such 
terms in aesthetic and non-aesthetic ways. Now, according to Sibley, successfully pick-

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
370
ing out aesthetic features requires perception and taste. We have to apprehend the 
relevant features of the work as balanced or dynamic. It is one thing to see that Picasso’s 
Weeping Woman has thick marks of black paint across a depicted woman’s face. Any 
standard viewer can see that. It is, however, quite another matter to be able to see the 
slashing angularity of the painted marks as conveying a discomforting sense of fingers 
viciously clawing away.
According to Sibley, while the attribution of aesthetic concepts depends on non-
aesthetic features, the aesthetic character of a work can never be inferred from its non-
aesthetic character. This is not to say that we can’t make any inferences at all since 
we might be able to rule certain aesthetic attributions out (this is what Sibley means 
by stating that aesthetic concepts are negatively condition governed). It is hard, for 
example, to conceive of how a canvas evenly painted grey all over in thinly applied 
water-color could be gauche. Now, contra Sibley, at least some aesthetic concepts do 
seem positively condition governed. If a piece of music exemplifies a certain kind of 
contrapuntal composition then we will know that it is a fugue and possesses a certain 
kind of unity (Kivy 1973: 38–9, 1979). Nonetheless, the spirit of Sibley’s claim is that 
no amount of information about a work’s non-aesthetic features could rationally com-
pel us to judge that the work possessed particular aesthetic attributes where, crucially, 
the attributions have at least partly evaluative components. An accurate non-aesthetic 
description of a song or movie will never be enough to tell you whether or not it really 
is elegant, vital, or moving as opposed to say prosaic, banal, or lifeless. It is the job of the 
critic to show others how to perceive what she does, using a range of methods devoted 
towards orientating and promoting the appropriate perception.
If aesthetic features are those picked out by taste and taste is the capacity to pick out 
aesthetic features, then worries about circularity arise. We might also wonder just what 
this seemingly mysterious faculty of taste is (Cohen 1973). One way of understanding 
the claim renders it trivial. Taste could just be the capacity that all of us possess to apply 
aesthetic terms and, as with other concepts, we need education to learn how to apply 
them appropriately. What it is to have taste just is to be able to attribute aesthetic con-
cepts. This is something we do all the time, from appraising the elegance of a football 
pass or new outfit to judging the aesthetic character of art works. If the claim is that 
taste somehow goes beyond the capacity of most normal people then it either looks false 
or at best uninformative.
Let us assume that taste just is the ability to apprehend how aesthetic concepts apply 
in our experience with a work. Now none of this is to deny that there aren’t better or 
worse aesthetic appreciators. Hume famously discusses a case from Don Quixote where 
Sancho’s kinsmen pronounce a village’s wine to be marred for different reasons, in par-
ticular a hint of leather and iron, respectively (Hume 1993). The villagers mock them 
and enjoy the wine, yet when the bottom of the barrel is reached a rusty key attached to 
a leather thong is found. As with wine so, too, with art, since the refinement of certain 
capacities we all share is required in order to be able to grasp more completely the aes-
thetic character of a work. Indeed Hume goes on to characterize ideal critics as requiring 
not only a wealth of comparative experience but also delicacy of imagination, sympathy, 
and freedom from prejudice or fashion. Now two questions arise. First, what knowledge 
is relevant to apprehending the aesthetic character of a work? Second, what role does 
the notion of an ideal critic play?
Art seems disanalogous from wine in at least one crucial respect. Artistic apprecia-
tion might be sensuously mediated but the aesthetic character of a work doesn’t seem 

AESTHETIC KNOWLEDGE
371
straightforwardly identifiable with its directly perceivable sensuous character. The 
model of perceptual taste looks ill fitted to the case of literature and, furthermore, even 
in perceptual artistic media the application of aesthetic concepts often depends on rela-
tional features. What it is for a work to belong to a certain category, have a particu-
lar style or possess particular aesthetic, expressive or cognitive features often depends 
on its relation to other works (Walton 1970). Consider Mondrian’s mid to late phase 
where the geometric lines and colored blocks have a rigid, austere quality. Given this 
it is appropriate to see Mondrian’s Boogie Woogie as a riot of color with a free, dynamic 
vibrancy concomitant with the title’s allusion to jazz. The same design produced by 
Miro would have been rigid and austere when compared with his typical penchant for 
organic squiggles squirming amid brightly colored canvases. Relational knowledge plays 
a huge role in fixing a work’s aesthetically relevant features and how we should appre-
ciate them. This is compounded by the role that creative originality plays in art. Two 
works might be perceptually indiscernible and yet where one was created years before 
the other we should appreciate and value them differently, for example the later work 
might be derivative, a pastiche, or forgery depending on the intention under which it 
was produced (Davies 2004; Kieran 2005: 6–46).
What role does the ideal critic play? One Humean-influenced idea is that we should 
idealize the notion of a good critic in order to track (or even constitute) what a work’s 
aesthetic features are, their inter-relations and thereby what a work’s value is. Ideal 
critics possess standard human nature but, in addition, have honed the aspects of such 
required for full aesthetic appreciation. One way of attempting to fix just what these are 
is by identifying the capacities, skills, knowledge, and attitudes required to appreciate 
the great works of the past. The recommendations of an ideal critic are likely to point 
us toward works that yield greater satisfaction than those we are likely to make for our-
selves in our non-idealized situation (Levinson 2002). However, matters are not quite 
so straightforward. Even setting aside worries about the convergence of judgment of all 
ideal critics, there is reason to worry about idealization in the intrapersonal case. The 
notion of an ideal critic stripped away from personal contingencies and history looks 
worrying given that much of the best criticism is personal. If the notion of an idealized 
counterpart to ourselves is that of a hypothetical ranker able to take on different dis-
positional sets and run through them evaluating works accordingly then it is far from 
clear how the resultant idealizing pronouncements are epistemically authoritative for us 
(Kieran 2008). Indeed, how could we even be in a position to know what such an ideal 
critic would recommend for us to appreciate? It might be much more fruitful to think 
in terms of a general point of view, according to which the best epistemic guide is what 
emerges from the pronouncements and verdicts of different actual critics across time 
and cultures (Sayre-McCord 1994). Good actual critics possess greater refinement and 
knowledge than most while nonetheless responding to works in ways shaped by their 
own psychological individualization. What emerges across the verdicts of such is the 
sum of different perspectives or takes on a work. The more robust a work is in the face 
of such differences, the greater the indication of its worth.
Aesthetic Particularism, Principles, and Reasons
Are there general reasons or principles that might guide and justify aesthetic judgment? 
Many are tempted by the thought that aesthetic thought, as contrasted with ethics, is 
necessarily particularist either because critical reasoning aims at perceptual apprehension, 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
372
which cannot be compelled by rational justification (Hampshire 1954; Isenberg 1949; 
Mothersill 1984: 143), or on the grounds that aesthetically relevant features and concepts 
change valence across particular cases (Goldman 2006).
While fine brushwork is often a good making feature of a painting nonetheless in a 
late Titian it might undermine a work’s expressivity. Consider many aesthetic concepts 
that have both a descriptive and evaluative aspect and it seems that the valence can 
change due to the particulars of the case. Terms such as gaudy, brash, and vulgar are 
typically negatively valenced but they can sometimes be applied in ways that connote 
praise. It makes sense to praise scenes in Shakespeare and Chaucer’s The Wife of Bath’s 
Tale for their riotous vulgarity or appreciate the gaudy, non-naturalistic colors distinc-
tive of Fauvism. Obscenity might typically be a bad making feature in works, yet in pas-
sages from Joyce’s Ulysses, Philip Larkin’s poetry, or the art of Jake and Dinos Chapman 
it is often playful. Thus the typical evaluative valence of aesthetically thick concepts 
can sometimes be undermined, enhanced, neutralized, or even inverted. No amount of 
argument can compel us to the conclusion that this is so in any particular case; rather, 
it is a matter of coming to see how and why this is so as worked through in the context 
of the particular work in question.
What might explain how and why this is so? The complex inter-relationality of aes-
thetic features suggests aesthetic holism. If aesthetic holism is right, then justifying rea-
sons seem to be variable in the sense that being a reason of a certain kind (e.g., ‘because 
it is gaudy’) will not necessarily underwrite one and the same justification (e.g., insofar 
as something is gaudy it is aesthetically disvaluable). If principles are taken to be highly 
general and codifiable articulations of the connection between a justifying reason and 
the judgment it is a reason for, then aesthetic holism seems to present a problem for the 
idea that there are aesthetic principles.
Despite such considerations there are those who have argued that there are general 
aesthetic reasons (Beardsley 1962; Sibley 1983; Shelley 2007) or principles (Conolly and 
Haydar 2003; Dickie 1988, 2006). How might an argument for such claims proceed? One 
place to start from is the intuition that any aesthetic reason requires a normative basis to 
explain it. If this were not the case then it is hard to see what, if anything, could serve 
to rescue aesthetic justification from being a random and arbitrary matter. Furthermore, 
aesthetic reasons do seem at the very least to be implicitly general in form. While it is true 
that any adequate critical appreciation must attend to the particular ways a work realizes 
its aesthetic features, nonetheless reasoned justification of evaluations has an apparently 
general structure. What is it that makes Balzac, Dickens, or Tolstoy great writers? Part 
of the explanation lies in the richness of the imagery as well as their truth to life: the 
rich metaphorical characterization that draws out the nature of, and inter-actions among, 
human emotions, character, and social milieu. How they do so differs markedly in particu-
lars, yet this should not detract from the recognition that part of what explains why they 
are valued so highly are reasons that are general in form and holds across the differences 
between them. This is not itself sufficient to show that there must be aesthetic principles. 
What is further required is an argument to suggest either that: (a) principles can be arrived 
at from generalizations arrived at on the basis of actual experience and thought experi-
ment (Dickie 1988, 2006), or, more strongly, (b) that the normative basis of aesthetic 
reasons depends upon the existence of aesthetic principles (Conolly and Haydar 2003). 
After all, someone might think, where else could the normative force come from?
Now one thing to bear in mind here is that we are primarily interested in the epis-
temic thesis. Even if there are general aesthetic reasons or principles it does not thereby 

AESTHETIC KNOWLEDGE
373
automatically follow that we must use them in order to justify aesthetic judgments. Work 
in linguistics, the science of perception, neuroscience, and cognitive science suggests 
there might be underlying principled naturalistic explanations as to why we appreciate 
works as we do. There is evidence to suggest that certain literary techniques involving 
heightened processing costs function in particular ways that enhance patterning effects 
or salience (Sperber and Wilson 1995) and in the visual arts it has been argued that 
studying perceptual processing yields principles that explain how and why we take plea-
sure in certain visual structures (Ramachandran and Hirstein 1999; Kawabata and Zeki 
2004). Yet even if such approaches are genuinely explanatory it does not automatically 
follow that the resultant reasons or principles are of the right kind to feature as justifica-
tions for aesthetic evaluations. After all, it is not obvious that such principles are the 
right kind to feature in art critical appreciation and evaluation, since any straightfor-
ward causal story cannot make room for the normative aspect of aesthetic judgment. 
What is required to make progress here is both conceptual work on the nature of our 
aesthetic intuitions and the disentangling of the multiple factors that underlie and con-
tribute to aesthetic appreciation. Furthermore, many factors that figure in appreciation 
concern the intentional content of the prescribed propositional attitudes. What justi-
fies or merits many of our cognitive-affective responses to works depends upon both the 
artistic conventions involved and the criteria that govern the relevant emotional or, 
more broadly, propositional attitudes concerned. Pity, for example, might be diminished 
to the extent it is judged undeserved, or naive sentimentality in a work might under-
mine judgments about its emotional depth or truth to life.
Insofar as reasons underwrite our aesthetic judgments it would seem that, contra 
Beardsley, they can be both general and context-sensitive, where the reasons are taken 
to be defeasible ones—i.e., prima facie or pro tanto (Bender 1995). This is perfectly 
consistent with the recognition that inter-relations to other features means that the 
prima facie goodness or badness of some feature can be overridden, trumped, or under-
mined given its context. The technical mastery of painting and compositional structure 
might well be prima facie good making features of a painting, and yet the sentimentality 
as expressed in some particular work might be strong enough to render the work medio-
cre and banal. Furthermore, it could be argued, wherever there are valence switches this 
must be for a principled reason on pain of arbitrariness. Thus, for example, fine brush-
work might be a prima facie good making feature in painting but in a late Van Gogh, 
late Titian, or Jackson Pollock it would cut against a work’s expressiveness. Valence 
variability or change in particular contexts can be explained in a way that does not 
undermine the applicability of general reasons. Thus the generality of critical reasons 
looks secure and might yet provide a basis from which to argue for aesthetic principles. 
After all, the less descriptively fine-grained the relevant thick concept is and the more 
general the applicability of the justifying reason, the more it might begin to look as if 
we are nearing something close to an aesthetic principle (e.g., ‘insofar as something is 
sentimental its value as a work of art is lessened’). Nonetheless, even if this were the 
case, it would not follow that there is a unique lexically ordered set of principles. After 
all, even if aesthetic principles could be secured further argument would be required 
to show that there are any higher-order principles which determine how they inter-
relate—a Herculean looking task, especially if there are permissible differences in the 
prioritization of distinct aesthetic sensibilities or values. Alternatively, there might be 
some reason to think that a mixed view holds, namely that while there might be some 
aesthetic principles, not all justifying reasons advert to or depend on such.

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
374
Aesthetic Testimony and Skepticism about Aesthetic Knowledge
It has seemed to many that we cannot gain aesthetic justification or knowledge from 
anything other than our own experience. This can’t be true for all aesthetic judgments. 
After all, we can make description-based warranted attributions without experiencing 
a work. If we read the Cliffs notes on a particular novel we can gain warrant for making 
all sorts of claims, for example, who created a work, when, what style it is in, its structure 
and themes. The interesting claim is that we cannot judge the good making features of a 
work without experiencing it. This amounts to “a well-entrenched principle in aesthet-
ics, which may be called the Acquaintance Principle, and which insists that judgments 
of aesthetic value, unlike judgments of moral knowledge, must be based on first-hand 
experience of their objects and are not, except within very narrow limits, transmissible 
from one person to another” (Wollheim 1980: 233).
Now for some, such as Kant, there are no limits within which aesthetic testimony 
can be transmissible (Kant 1952: S. 33). Yet, as has been pointed out (Budd 2003), 
this is just because Kant defined aesthetic judgment as being necessarily based on 
a hedonic response to the object judged. Thus while we cannot aesthetically judge 
(construed in Kant’s terms) an object without experiencing it, this does not preclude 
aesthetic knowledge about an object’s value from being transmissible. It has been 
argued that in the aesthetic case, unlike other areas, we do not have a priori reason to 
take warrant to be transmitted via testimony but, nonetheless, testimony can provide 
an evidential basis for justification (Hopkins 2000). The basic idea is that if someone 
says that they witnessed a certain event yesterday or was morally outrageous, we should 
believe them unless other countervailing considerations emerge. If someone says that 
a film was good, who knows? Unless, that is, we have additional reason to believe the 
testifier. One reason for holding that aesthetic testimony is weaker as contrasted with 
other realms arises from the assumption that there are different aesthetic sensibilities. 
This cannot be Kant’s position. Kant famously held that aesthetic judgment proper 
depended upon the operations of the faculties of imagination and understanding, ones 
we all must share as rational embodied agents. Nonetheless perhaps what explains 
the weakness of aesthetic testimony involves the indexing of aesthetic judgment to 
distinct aesthetic sensibilities. Yet simplistic relativism about the aesthetic is prob-
lematic and it is unclear why sophisticated expressivism or anti-realism about aesthet-
ics would explain what is supposed to be distinctively problematic about aesthetic 
testimony (Meskin 2007). Furthermore, even granting relativism, it is unclear why 
testimony could not transmit justification at least relative to whatever the relevant 
framework or sensibility implicitly invoked is. It has been argued that aesthetic tes-
timony is variegated and, in some areas, more unreliable than elsewhere due to folks’ 
presumption of relativism as often expressed by the phrase ‘beauty is in the eye of the 
beholder’ (Meskin 2004). Indeed, the unreliability of such might be alternatively 
explained or compounded by a range of other factors ranging from the amount of 
relevant relational knowledge required and aesthetic expertise, to the easy conflation 
of what we like with what is aesthetically good (Meskin 2004, 2007). One interesting 
parallel between ethics and aesthetics when it comes to testimony is that there seems 
to be something importantly lacking about an agent who gains his ethical/aesthetical 
knowledge (assuming there is such a thing) via testimony. Instead, these are things 
which, intuitively, one should (ultimately at least) ascertain for oneself. One possible 
explanation for this is that what we seek in these domains is not merely knowledge 

AESTHETIC KNOWLEDGE
375
but understanding. Understanding, however, cannot be gained passively through the 
testimony of experts.
It has been argued that the aesthetic is particularly susceptible to snobbery due to a 
range of factors including some of those cited above (Kieran 2010). To take just one 
consideration, where pleasure is taken in engaging with a work, we have strong defea-
sible reason to value it and thus to judge that it is good. Given standard appreciators 
and conditions, defeasibility arises due to two considerations: (a) whether an apprecia-
tor is suitably informed and discriminating, and (b) whether an appreciator identifies 
and responds appropriately to the aesthetically relevant features. However, we are often 
terrible at identifying in aesthetic appreciation when, where, and why our pleasure is, or 
may be, a result of aesthetically irrelevant bias. Empirical studies suggest that factors we 
are unconscious of, ranging from familiarity to status cues, influence the pleasure taken 
in appreciation. Frederic Brochet’s infamous wine tasting experiments bring this out 
nicely. In one experiment Brochet used the same middling Bordeaux wine and decanted 
it into two different bottles. One bottle bore all the marks of an ordinary vin de table 
while the other was a smart grand cru bottle. Out of a sample of 56 oeneology students 
only 12 judged the wine from the cheap bottle to be worth drinking while 40 judged the 
wine in the more expensive looking bottle to be worth drinking. It was the same wine. 
This simply reflects the extent to which expectations can be cued up and influenced 
by aesthetically irrelevant factors we are wholly unaware of. It is no surprise that mul-
tinational corporations spend huge amounts of money on marketing and brand place-
ment for precisely this reason. Intuitively it seems that if we are judging or responding 
snobbishly then we lack internal justification for aesthetic claims and we are not in a 
legitimate position to claim aesthetic knowledge. (Is this true though? Won’t it seem 
to us that X is better than Y, and won’t it seem to us that we are good at making these 
judgments? In a purely internal sense, then, one could argue that any beliefs so formed 
are very reasonable, even despite their unreliable basis.) We are judging a work to be 
good or making critical claims about a work for the wrong sorts of reasons (i.e., because 
doing so marks us out as superior in some way relative to some group). Whatever else 
is true, any adequate account of aesthetic appreciation ought to preclude the idea that 
something is aesthetically good just in virtue of a certain class or group’s perceived social 
status. Given the pervasiveness of snobbery and the difficulty of knowing whether or 
not someone is being snobbish we get a skeptical problem—how can we know whether 
or not any particular aesthetic response or judgment really is justified?
One way of answering the challenge appeals to reliability. What matters is the reliabil-
ity of the faculties and processes involved in arriving at aesthetic judgments. Snobbish 
judgment might tend toward error but it is not necessarily mistaken and snobs can 
acquire justification. Tracking the judgments of acknowledged critics and working at 
aesthetic appreciation might put the snob in a position to make, reliably, the right sorts 
of aesthetic judgments and claims. An alternative virtue-theoretic approach emphasizes 
the ways in which snobbish motivation constitutes an appreciative vice which thereby 
undermines the epistemic status of the snob’s beliefs (Kieran 2010). Even where snob-
bery reliably arrives at the right judgments this will be so for the wrong sort of reasons. 
Hence a snob’s achievement is not epistemically praiseworthy in the way in which the 
judgment of a true appreciator is. Furthermore, the true appreciator’s knowledge con-
nects up to appreciation in the right sort of way. Aesthetic knowledge matters primarily 
for the ways in which it inflects and feeds back into our appreciation.

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
376
Aesthetic Cognitivism
Aesthetic epistemology is not just concerned with knowledge about aesthetics and art 
but the ways in which we can gain knowledge through our experiences with art. Plato 
famously thought that art could afford no knowledge whatsoever. In part the claim 
arose as a function of Plato’s metaphysics, according to which works are only imper-
fect imitations of actual objects, which themselves are only imperfect instantiations of 
abstract forms. Art, for Plato, is two removes from, and thus doubly distortive of, reality. 
Nonetheless, Plato’s skeptical worry can be articulated without adverting to his distinc-
tive metaphysics.
When engaging with art works we entertain imaginings about make-believe worlds. 
The artistic techniques and conventions deployed prompt particular imaginings and 
thereby shape our responses. Artists need not have any great knowledge about what they 
represent, nor need appreciators be interested in what is true or false. When responding 
to Dracula or a painterly landscape it is beside the point to complain that such an entity 
could not exist or that the landscape never existed as it was painted. Games of make-
believe need not aim at, or fix on to, reality. To the extent we are impressed by this line 
of reasoning it might be thought that art can only have at best an accidental relation 
to knowledge. Furthermore, to the extent that art is accidentally related to knowledge, 
what it does reveal can only be trivial commonplaces. Nash’s We Are Making a New 
World conveys desolation at the horrific waste of human life in WWI and Balzac’s nov-
els convey the cynicism of people preoccupied by social calculation, but do we really 
acquire any worthwhile knowledge from them? The propositions that vast loss of life 
in war is tragic or that preoccupation with social esteem lends itself to cynicism are 
hardly enlightening in any deep sense. The propositions involved are either truisms or 
we are prepared to assent to them only to the extent to which we are already inclined 
to believe them independently of, and prior to, experiencing the works in question 
(Stolnitz 1992; Gibson 2003).
A quick response to this challenge is to point out that many art works are epistemi-
cally constrained with respect to truth (Friend 2007). It is integral to certain kinds of 
literary essays, non-fiction novels, still life painting, and portraiture that they are con-
strained by, and aim to inform us about, how things actually are. Hence the scandal 
when Misha Defonseca’s Holocaust memoirs (1997) and James Frey’s autobiographical 
novel (2003) turned out to be fraudulent. Daniel Mendelsohn’s The Lost (2006) can tell 
us what happened to six relatives during the Holocaust and much about his attempt to 
uncover their story, which in turn suggests much about the nature of memory and our 
relations to the past. Photographers such as Martin Parr can show us what life was like 
for dying industrial communities in northern England at the turn of the last century or 
what life is like for the internationally wealthy at the start of the twenty-first century. 
Nonetheless, such a move leaves the charge unanswered as applied to fictional works.
What if anything can we learn from fictional works? One option is to concede that 
while we cannot gain knowledge from fiction, nonetheless art works can get us to care 
about the truths they concern. It is one thing to know in the abstract that racism is 
bad, it is quite another to read To Kill a Mockingbird and be moved to care about its 
perniciousness. Another option emphasizes the extent to which fictional works might 
afford practical knowledge, phenomenal knowledge, or even knowledge of ways of 
apprehending others, that are not wholly reducible to straightforward propositions. 
Literary narratives, for example, might be particularly well suited to showing us how to 

AESTHETIC KNOWLEDGE
377
apprehend morally relevant features of particular situations (Nussbaum 1990). A more 
direct approach argues that fictional works can and do afford propositional knowledge 
(Carroll 1998, 2002; Gaut 2006, 2007; Kieran 2005; Stock 2007). A modest version of 
the strategy holds that artistic narratives can clarify the nature and inter-relations of 
our beliefs and presumptions that we hold. We might all recognize that desire for social 
esteem does not necessarily lead to happiness, but reading Anna Karenina might show 
how it is that the desire for social esteem can lead people to act in ways that are self-
deceived, that this in turn can undermine the capacity to be true to one’s self, and hence 
how valuing social esteem can lead away from, rather than towards, true happiness. A 
stronger version of this strategy holds that in addition to clarification more radical cog-
nitive revisions are possible, on the grounds that works are capable of revealing genuine 
insights to us that might cut against the grain of our prior beliefs through utilizing strate-
gies such as imaginative identification.
It is worth pointing out that we can learn straightforwardly from works how some 
actual people (e.g., artists) experience, conceive of, and respond to the world, or how 
some possible people could do so (e.g., where a work’s narrator is not to be straightfor-
wardly identified with its creator). At least to the extent that we are impressed by the 
thought that writers and artists are often more perceptually or emotionally discrimi-
nating than most, this looks as if it should be enough to render art cognitively signifi-
cant. Furthermore, given that we learn from experience there is reason to hold that we 
can also learn from imaginative experience (Currie 1995; Kieran 1996; Gaut 2007). A 
standard way of trying to find out how one would feel in a certain kind of situation is 
by imagining oneself to be in such a scenario. If that is right, then works can provide 
particularly complex and rich ways of exercising our imaginations in epistemically sig-
nificant ways, or even finding out about one’s actual or possible desires and dispositions. 
None of this is to claim that there is a straightforward relationship between what we can 
imagine, conceivability, and knowledge (Stokes 2007). Yet at least to the extent that 
we hold there is some such relationship, then that will be the extent to which we can 
hold that what works can get us to imagine might show us something about how things 
could be or, indeed, are.
Thus far we have focused primarily upon the contents of beliefs we can glean from 
works and worries about the justification of such. A rather different strategy looks else-
where for art’s cognitive significance. One route involves emphasizing the extent to 
which the cognitive significance of works is not reducible to knowledge but is closely 
related to understanding. Works might draw out how our beliefs relate to human activ-
ity, practices and the ways in which such things have significance for us (Gibson 2007) 
or cultivate our imaginative understanding of the significance of certain beliefs (Kieran 
1996). Another route stresses the exercise of a range of cognitive capacities and virtues 
involved in art appreciation (Kieran 2005; Lopes 2005). Attending to Monet’s Rouen 
cathedral painting series, where each picture depicts the cathedral from distinct view-
points with markedly different lighting effects, might cultivate the capacity to perceive 
small visual differences and grasp how they can have striking effects upon the overall 
impression. This kind of account can be broadened out with respect to all art forms. 
Reading Sappho’s poetry alongside Catullus’s transliterations can cultivate greater dis-
crimination with respect to minute differences in literary form, allusion, and thus lan-
guage in general. Indeed engaging with works might develop not just our discriminative 
capacities but broader intellectual virtues ranging from the patience, self-discipline, and 
humility to the imaginativeness required to do justice to, and appreciate, a work.

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
378
References
Beardsley, M. (1962) “On the Generality of Critical Reasons,” Journal of Philosophy 59: 477–86.
Bender, J. W. (1995) “General but Defeasible Reasons in Aesthetic Evaluation,” Journal of Aesthetics and Art 
Criticism 53: 379–92.
Budd, M. (2003) “The Acquaintance Principle,” British Journal of Aesthetics 43: 386–92.
Carroll, N. (1998) “Art, Narrative and Moral Understanding,” in J. Levinson (ed.) Aesthetics and Ethics: 
Essay at the Intersection, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
—— (2002) “The Wheel of Virtue: Art, Literature and Moral Knowledge,” Journal of Aesthetics and Art 
Criticism 60: 3–26.
Cohen, T. (1973) “Aesthetic/Non-aesthetic and the Concept of Taste,” Theoria 39: 113–52.
Currie, G. (1995) “The Moral Psychology of Fiction,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 73: 250–9.
Conolly, O. and B. Haydar (2003) “Aesthetic Principles,” British Journal of Aesthetics 43: 114–25.
Davies, D. (2004) Art as Performance, Oxford: Blackwell.
Defonseca, M. (1997) A Memoire of the Holocaust Years, Gloucester, MA: Ivy Press.
Dickie, G. (1988) Evaluating Art, Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
—— (2006) “Iron, Leather and Critical Principles,” in M. Kieran (ed.) Contemporary Debates in Aesthetics 
and the Philosophy of Art, Oxford: Blackwell.
Frey, J. (2003) A Million Little Pieces, New York: Doubleday Books.
Friend, S. (2007) “Narrating the Truth (More or Less),” in M. Kieran and D. Lopes (eds.) Knowing Art: 
Essays in Aesthetics and Epistemology, Dordrecht: Springer.
Gaut, B. (2006) “Art and Cognition,” in M. Kieran (ed.) Contemporary Debates in Aesthetics and the Philosophy 
of Art, Oxford: Blackwell.
—— (2007) Art, Emotion and Ethics, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gibson, J. (2003) “Between Truth and Triviality,” British Journal of Aesthetics 43: 224–37.
—— (2007) Fiction and the Weave of Life, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Goldman, A. (2006) “There are No Aesthetic Principles,” in M. Kieran (ed.) Contemporary Debates in 
Aesthetics and the Philosophy of Art, Oxford: Blackwell.
Hampshire, S. (1954) “Logic and Appreciation,” in W. Elton (ed.) Aesthetics and Language, Oxford: 
Blackwell.
Hopkins, R. (2000) “Beauty and Testimony,” in A. O’Hear (ed.) Philosophy, the Good, the True, and the 
Beautiful, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hume, D. (1993) “Of the Standard of Taste,” in S. Copley and A. Edgar (eds.) Hume: Selected Essays, 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Isenberg, A. (1949) “Critical Communication,” The Philosophical Review 58: 330–44.
Kant, I. (1952) Critique of Judgement, Oxford: Oxford University Press [orig. 1790].
Kawabata, H. and S. Zeki (2004) “Neural Correlates of Beauty,” Neurophysiology 91: 1699–705.
Kieran, M. (1996) “Art, Imagination and the Cultivation of Morals,” Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 
54: 337–51.
—— (2005) Revealing Art, London: Routledge.
—— (2008) “Why Ideal Critics are not Ideal: Aesthetic Character, Motivation and Value,” British Journal 
of Aesthetics 48: 278–94.
—— (2010) “The Vice of Snobbery: Aesthetic Knowledge, Justification and Virtue in Art Appreciation,” 
Philosophical Quarterly 60(239): 243–63.
Kivy, P. (1973) Speaking of Art, The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
—— (1979) “Aesthetic Concepts: Some Fresh Considerations,” Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 37: 
423–32.
Levinson, J. (2002) “Hume’s Standard of Taste: The Real Problem,” Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 
60: 227–38.
Lopes, D. (2005) Sight and Sensibility, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Mendelsohn, D. (2006) The Lost: A Search for Six of the Six Million, New York: HarperCollins.
Meskin, A. (2004) “Aesthetic Testimony: What Can We Learn from Others about Beauty and Art?,” 
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research LXIX: 66–91.
—— (2007) “Solving the Puzzle of Aesthetic Testimony,” in M. Kieran and D. Lopes (eds.) Knowing Art: 
Essays in Aesthetics and Epistemology, Dordrecht: Springer.
Mothersill, M. (1984) Beauty Restored, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nussbaum, M. (1990) Love’s Knowledge, New York: Oxford University Press.
Plato (1974) The Republic, 2nd ed., Harmondsworth: Penguin [orig. approx. 375bc].

AESTHETIC KNOWLEDGE
379
Ramachandran, V. S. and W. Hirstein (1999) “The Science of Art: A Neurological Theory of Aesthetic 
Experience,” Journal of Consciousness Studies 6: 15–51.
Sayre-McCord, G. (1994) “On Why Hume’s ‘General Point of View’ Isn’t Ideal—And Shouldn’t Be,” Social 
Philosophy and Policy 11: 202–28.
Shelley, J. (2007) “Critical Compatibilism,” in M. Kieran and D. Lopes (eds.) Knowing Art: Essays in 
Aesthetics and Epistemology, Dordrecht: Springer.
Sibley, F. (1959) “Aesthetic Concepts,” The Philosophical Review 68: 421–50.
—— (1965) “Aesthetic and Nonaesthetic,” The Philosophical Review 74: 135–59.
—— (1983) “General Criteria and Reasons in Aesthetics,” in J. Fisher (ed.) Essays on Aesthetics, Philadephia: 
Temple University Press.
Sperber, D. and D. Wilson (1995) Relevance: Communication and Cognition, Oxford: Blackwell.
Stock, K. (2007) “Fiction and Psychological Insight,” in M. Kieran and D. Lopes (eds.) Knowing Art: Essays 
in Aesthetics and Epistemology, Dordrecht: Springer.
Stokes, D (2007) “Art and Modal Knowledge,” in M. Kieran and D. Lopes (eds.) Knowing Art: Essays in 
Aesthetics and Epistemology, Dordrecht: Springer.
Stolnitz, J. (1992) “The Cognitive Triviality of Art,” British Journal of Aesthetics, 32: 191–200.
Walton, K. (1970) “Categories of Art,” The Philosophical Review 79: 334–67.
Wollheim, R. (1980) Art and its Objects, 2nd ed., Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

35
MORAL KNOWLEDGE
Robert Audi
Common parlance seems to presuppose that there is genuine moral knowledge. We hear 
people say that someone knew full well that he was doing wrong and did it anyway, or 
that someone knew a friend had been immoral but would not acknowledge this, or that 
some people pretend not to know their moral responsibilities. Indeed, mere sanity is 
supposed to imply ability to “know the difference between right and wrong.” But there 
are skeptics about moral knowledge, as about other kinds of knowledge; and the former 
include people not skeptical about other domains, such as natural science (see Sinnott-
Armstrong 2006 for a full-scale treatment of the nature and varieties of moral skepti-
cism). Two kinds of skepticism should be distinguished. One denies that there is moral 
knowledge but not that there is justification for moral claims. The other denies that there 
is either moral justification or moral knowledge. We must consider both possibilities, 
but the prior question is whether there are even moral propositions to be known.
I. The Cognitivity of Moral Discourse
On one view of moral discourse, there cannot be moral knowledge or moral justifica-
tion, owing to lack of the right raw material. I refer to noncognitivism. In a generic form, 
this is the view that moral claims, such as that lying is wrong, are not “cognitive,” i.e., 
do not express propositions or anything capable of truth or falsity (of being “cognized” 
in one sense of that term). Originally, noncognitivism took the form of emotivism, for 
which moral claims express emotion but not propositions (Ayer 1936). A later version 
is prescriptivism, which made their prescriptive—especially, action-guiding—content, as 
opposed to any descriptive content they have, central (Hare 1952). More recent ver-
sions are often called expressivism, since they take moral claims to express attitudes or 
commitments but not to assert propositions (Gibbard 1990). All of these views are anti-
realist: they assert or presuppose that there are no moral properties to be truly or falsely 
ascribed to actions or persons and, correspondingly, no facts about any moral reality for 
declarative moral sentences to express.
Why might one hold noncognitivism? Once this is understood, we can see whether 
the major alternatives in moral epistemology can solve the problems that motivate non-
cognitivism. Let us begin with an influential metaphysical perspective.
Suppose that, like a great many philosophers, one holds a kind of naturalism that, at 
least since David Hume, has gained strength in the Anglo-American intellectual world 
and elsewhere. In broad terms, this kind of naturalism is the view that nature—roughly, 
the physical universe—is all there is and that the only basic truths are truths of nature 
(for an examination of the varieties and some difficulties of naturalism, see Audi 2000). 

MORAL KNOWLEDGE
381
Then, any genuine properties will be physical—the kind central in explanations and 
predictions in physics, chemistry, and other natural sciences. If there are moral proper-
ties, then, they must be reducible to physical properties. Noncognitivists, however, deny 
that moral terms express anything for which such reducibility is possible. For them, to 
say that an act is wrong, for instance, is not to attribute a property to it, such as causing 
suffering. It is to express a certain kind of negative attitude toward the act, as opposed 
to ascribing a property to it.
*On the epistemological side, it is not unnatural to think that if a claim represents 
knowledge, it should be appraisable on the basis of experience or reason: roughly, on the 
basis of sense experience or a priori reflection (the kind appropriate to logic and pure 
mathematics). But many skeptics and some non-skeptical naturalists deny that either 
experience or a priori reflection can yield moral knowledge. They hold that perception 
cannot ground it; moral terms do not, for instance, express observable properties. Moral 
terms are not even empirical in the way psychological ones are: not, for example, names 
of emotions or attitudes. But moral terms are also not the kind central in logic or math-
ematics, where self-evidence and rigorous proof can ground knowledge.
Some thinkers endorse noncognitivism for a different kind of reason. Many follow 
Hume in maintaining that moral judgments are, on their own, motivating for those who 
hold them, whereas “factual” judgments (roughly, descriptive judgments) are not. This 
view goes with the idea that actions—including omissions—speak louder than words: 
when (without special circumstances) people do not act on their declared moral judg-
ments, we do not believe they really hold those judgments. We also tend to be motivated 
to act on our own moral judgments, and they often “feel” motivating. To be sure, we 
are also motivated by discovering such plain facts as that a hailstorm is approaching; 
but noncognitivists tend to hold that this is because we are motivated by an indepen-
dent aversion to being hit by hail, not just by judging that there is in fact a hailstorm 
approaching. Moral judgments, by contrast, are considered intrinsically motivating, need-
ing no support from independent desires (for detailed accounts of the relation of moral 
cognitions to motivation, see Audi 1997; cf. Smith 1993 and Parfit 1997).
One might think that, for noncognitivists, ordinary moral discourse cannot be seen 
as rational. But noncognitivism does not imply that. Attitudes, after all, and not just 
propositions, might be supported by good reasons and might be rational. To say, for 
instance, that only one of two assailants did wrong in beating an old man for his wallet, 
though they differed only in skin color, would be inadmissible: incapable of expressing a 
rational attitude. Morality can impose constraints on rational attitudes just as, on cog-
nitivist views, it can impose them on believing propositions. Even a kind of objectivity 
seems possible: rational moral attitudes must be based not on prejudice but on relevant 
facts, such as facts about what causes suffering or promotes social harmony.
Many objections have been brought against noncognitivism (for criticism of Gibbard 
see Sinnott-Armstrong 1993 and Dreier 1999, which shows how a plausible generaliza-
tion of the view tends to undermine its claim to expressivist as opposed to cognitivist 
status; and, on the Frege-Geach problem, van Roojen 1996, which is also a critique of 
Simon Blackburn). This is not the place to discuss these objections. It is better in a short 
sketch in moral epistemology to indicate what kinds of considerations support the alter-
native, moral realist views. If moral realism is sound, then there really are at least moral 
propositions to be candidates for knowledge, and there is less reason to deny cognitivity 
to moral claims that, in form and important functions, seem to ascribe genuine proper-
ties to acts and to have truth value.

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
382
II. Reductive Realism
Some philosophers hold reductivist views that challenge the metaphysical anti-realism 
common to noncognitivists. For reductivists, we can show something noncognitivists 
deny: that moral terms express natural properties, in a sense implying that moral proper-
ties are reducible to (hence really are) natural ones and thus are real.
John Stuart Mill appears to have held a realist ethical naturalism. At least three 
degrees of ethical naturalism should be distinguished. First, one might hold that moral 
properties are equivalent to certain natural ones. For instance, the property of being 
obligatory might be considered equivalent to the property of producing at least as favor-
able a contribution to the proportion of happiness to unhappiness (in some specified 
population) as any alternative the agent has. Second, one might hold that moral prop-
erties are identical with certain natural ones. The same example will serve: this interme-
diate naturalistic reductivism would simply interpret the equivalence as representing 
an identity rather than just a necessary correspondence: to be a moral property is to be 
a causal-hedonic property of the kind just illustrated. Third, a strong moral naturalism 
would take this identity claim to be conceptually true, in the sense entailing knowabil-
ity on the basis of analysis of the constituent concepts.
Mill apparently held not only that moral properties are equivalent to certain natural 
ones but also (for at least some normative terms) the strong naturalistic view. He said, 
for instance, “that to think of an object as desirable (unless for the sake of its conse-
quences), and to think of it as pleasant [where pleasantness is a natural, psychological 
property], are one and the same thing” (1861/1979, p. 38). Mill did not make all the dis-
tinctions just presented, but this statement (in which ‘desirable’ means roughly ‘intrin-
sically good’) at least illustrates one thesis of analytical naturalism even if, for deontic 
terms (e.g. ‘ought’, ‘obligatory’, and ‘wrong’), he held only the intermediate view.
This intermediate naturalism is held by some who reject strong naturalism. On the 
theoretical reductivist view (sometimes called Cornell Realism), moral properties are 
like certain theoretical properties of a kind important in scientific theories. They are 
not observable, as are colors and shapes; but they are natural, causally efficacious, and 
understandable in a complex network of explanatory and descriptive relations to other 
natural properties (Boyd 1988; Sturgeon 1985).
On any of these reductivist views, moral knowledge is possible on the basis of the 
“descriptive” natural knowledge grounding it. For a very strong naturalism, to know 
that an action has a certain moral property is equivalent to knowing that it has the 
identical natural one, such as optimally conducing to the proportion of happiness to 
unhappiness in a certain population. For the theoretical and even the weak reductivist 
views, provided one knows to what natural property a moral property is identical (say by 
knowing a “bridge principle” linking them), one can have as good grounds for knowing 
that something has the moral property as for knowing it has the natural property with 
which that moral property is identical.
III. Non-reductive Realism
Moral realism and an associated moral epistemology need not be reductive, and phi-
losophers tend to resist the strong theses constituted by reductive identifications. 
G. E. Moore, for instance, famously argued against naturalism about the good (he also 
said that all propositions about the good are synthetic; see 1903, p. 7). He did not, to 

MORAL KNOWLEDGE
383
be sure, consider theoretical naturalism, but he probably would have rejected the idea 
that identity of properties could be theoretical yet not conceptual. This is evidenced 
by his conceptually identifying being right with being maximally contributory toward the 
(intrinsically) good. That identification would make him a reductivist about the right—a 
“definist” in one terminology—but not a naturalist about the right, since he regarded 
the property of being intrinsically good as non-natural. In any case, he thought we have, 
through rational intuition, two kinds of general moral knowledge: conceptual knowl-
edge about what kinds of acts are right (a kind of moral knowledge); and metaphysical 
knowledge indicating what kinds of things are intrinsically good. Since some kinds of 
goodness are non-moral, and since he might have considered moral goodness derivative 
from non-moral goodness, we might call knowledge of the good, for him, ethical rather 
than moral.
It is important to see, however, that Moore accommodated the possibility of moral 
knowledge of particular propositions, such as that a specific killing was wrong. For him, 
we can know such a proposition if we know that the action failed to conduce at least as 
favorably to the good as any alternative the agent had. Granted, one could be skeptical 
here, but many would think that we can know, or at least justifiedly believe, that, say, 
the gratuitous killing of a philanthropist satisfies that description.
If Moore is an anti-reductivist intuitionist, an intuitionist as such might simply be a 
metaphysical neutralist: a neutralist intuitionism leaves open whether moral properties 
are natural but asserts that we can sometimes have non-inferential intuitive knowledge 
of moral truths involving them (Audi 2004). Broadly interpreted, W. D. Ross’s view 
might be understood so, though his philosophical judgment was apparently non-natu-
ralist. Ross certainly did not agree with Moore in taking propositions about the right to 
be equivalent to any set of propositions about the good; but he did hold, with Moore and 
others, that moral properties are consequential on non-moral ones: i.e., moral properties, 
say wrongness, are possessed in virtue of some natural property, such as killing. (See Ross 
1930, p. 28, on parti- vs. toti-resultant attributes.) Consequentiality is not a reductive 
relation. Being wrong might be consequential on being a killing, but is not reducible to 
that property. Still, the consequentiality of a property on properties of another kind does 
not preclude its reducibility to some set of properties of the kind representing its basis. 
When a thing has a moral property, such as being wrong, in virtue of possessing a natural 
property, say being a killing, the former is not even equivalent to the latter; but it does 
not follow that being wrong is irreducible to any set of properties, including a set of the 
kind—for instance, natural properties—of the property on which it is consequential.
In epistemology, Ross was a rationalist: he held (against Hume, Mill, and other 
empiricists) that we can know substantive propositions (as opposed, say, to truths of 
formal logic) a priori, hence without relying on perceptual evidence. Ross, indeed, held 
that it is self-evident that given an act’s having certain properties (a kind one might 
consider natural), it also has the moral property of being a “prima facie duty.” By this he 
meant roughly being morally supported by a consideration (say, being promised) that, 
if not opposed by an at least equally strong consideration (say, causing harm), indicates 
what one ought, all things considered, to do. Now the self-evident is knowable a priori, 
so such principles as that lying is prima facie wrong represent a kind of general moral 
knowledge accessible to us. Ross emphasized that propositions about final duty—duty all 
things considered—such as what I am overall obligated to do for a distressed friend, are 
never self-evident and that even propositions that are self-evident might not be know-
able without a certain “mental maturity” (Ross 1930, p. 29). Unfortunately, however, 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
384
he compared the self-evident moral truths in question with obvious truths, such as those 
of elementary arithmetic (pp. 29–30). This comparison opens the way to a skepticism 
that is arguably not justified against his main view.
If intuitionists are to claim self-evidence for the moral principles they consider 
basic, they need an account of the self-evident that accommodates the intuitive idea of 
knowability without dependence on premises (an idea implicit in a proposition’s being 
evident in itself), but does not invite an expectation of obviousness or even incontest-
ability. Here is the core of my account: Self-evident propositions are truths such that (a) 
adequately understanding them is sufficient for justification for believing them (which 
does not entail that adequately understanding them entails believing them), and (b) 
believing them on the basis of adequately understanding them entails knowing them. 
We might also speak of a full understanding to avoid the suggestion that an adequate 
understanding is simply one sufficient for knowledge of the self-evident; neither term 
is ideal, but ‘full’ has the disadvantage of suggesting maximality. On this conception of 
self-evident propositions, they need not be obvious or even readily understandable. (For 
a detailed account of self-evidence, see my 1999; my 2008 makes some extensions.)
It is also important for understanding self-evidence to see that being justified in 
believing does not entail actually believing. Think of parents who have excellent evi-
dence of their children’s wrong-doing, but cannot believe them guilty. The proposed 
account of self-evidence thus allows for rejection of a self-evident proposition by people 
holding competing ethical theories or by skeptical philosophers who might not believe 
even what non-skeptics find obvious. A utilitarian, for instance, might hold that in 
certain terminal illnesses, voluntary euthanasia would not be even prima facie wrong. 
Even lengthy and thoughtful discussion between the opposing theorists on this issue 
might not yield consensus.
One might now think that if self-evidence allows for such persisting disagreements 
between rational moral philosophers, then even the self-evidence of certain moral prop-
ositions does not guarantee their knowability, at least by a normal person. This view is 
defensible, but has been challenged (Audi 2008; Kelly 2005). It cannot be appraised 
here, but two points will help to put it in perspective. First, if disagreements of this 
sort preclude anyone’s knowing the disputed proposition (or its negation), then a simi-
lar skepticism besets claims to scientific knowledge and perhaps even to mathematical 
knowledge, at least where incontestable proofs are unobtainable. Second, and perhaps 
more important, the possibility of such disagreements does not imply that neither party 
can be justified. Since justification for believing a proposition, unlike knowing it, does 
not entail its truth, two people can be justified in believing mutually incompatible prop-
ositions. If knowledge is unobtainable, then, justification might not be. Justification 
is an important epistemic status. Achieving it implies both that one is intellectually 
responsible regarding the proposition in question and, often, that where one’s belief is 
true, it constitutes knowledge.
If intuition, conceived as a kind of rational cognition, can yield moral knowledge, 
one might wonder whether a theorist who thinks there is intuitive moral knowledge can 
account for the epistemological role of reflective equilibrium. Consider a case of such 
equilibrium: a kind of balance among one’s intuitions and other cognitions concerning 
a judgment of what, in a case of conflicting prima facie obligations, one ought, all things 
considered, to do. (Rawls 1971/1999 is a major source of discussion of reflective equilib-
rium, which he calls “a mutual adjustment of principles and considered judgments” (p. 
18 n7); see also 17–19 and 42–44.) Suppose that as a physician you promise a man to 

MORAL KNOWLEDGE
385
keep confidential that you are treating him for AIDS. Now imagine that his estranged 
wife becomes your patient and tells you she plans to return to him soon. She has discov-
ered he is your patient and asks you whether he is infected. You can say you never discuss 
one patient with another without the prior consent of the former, but you might know 
that he will not give his consent and cannot be reached in time. This kind of case is one 
in which you might have no intuition as to what to do and should consider all the facts 
and select the most plausible option. You might, to be sure, have an intuitive sense that 
answering her question directly would be wrong: you would either break a promise or 
lie. The thought of either puts you in disequilibrium. In seeking a solution that achieves 
equilibrium, you might see that you can say that your policy is to urge anyone who has 
the least doubt in such cases to exercise great caution. The thought that this might 
reveal the confidential information could now be a discordant note, but that might be 
neutralized by the realization that you would be making a policy statement. Might you 
know the truth of your moral judgment arrived at by achieving such equilibrium? There 
is no reason to rule this out, but there is also no guarantee that reaching reflective equi-
librium on a moral question implies knowledge or even justification.
We should also ask whether a failure to achieve reflective equilibrium regarding a 
moral question implies that one does not know its answer. This is doubtful; still, such 
a failure can be disconfirmatory and might indicate that one at least lacks justification. 
The search for reflective equilibrium, then, can yield confirmation or disconfirmation. 
But its value in this does not imply that moral knowledge never comes without it. In 
one kind of case, however, it is commonly essential: in seeking to frame a generaliza-
tion, say for dealing with conflicts like the one just considered. Here we should achieve 
an outlook in which any principle we endorse is consistent with cases—real and hypo-
thetical—of the kind it bears on. As Ross apparently saw, a lesson of such efforts is that 
holding unqualified generalizations, such as ‘Never break a promise’—by contrast with 
‘There is always a prima facie reason to keep promises’—is unlikely to allow maintaining 
equilibrium in difficult cases. On a modest moral epistemology, then, such unqualified 
generalizations are not taken to represent knowledge.
What we have seen so far brings out both the epistemic resources of moral realism, 
especially as supported by intuition, to provide for moral knowledge and justification. 
But we have also seen reason to think that skepticism about moral justification is less 
plausible than skepticism about moral knowledge—which is not to say just how plau-
sible either is.
One further point of clarification should help. Our topic has been normative: mainly 
knowledge or justification regarding propositions of morality. These are chiefly (1) attri-
butions of moral properties to specific actions or particular persons or (2) generaliza-
tions, such as Ross’s prima facie duty principles or Mill’s Principle of Utility, which can 
support such attributions when the relevant act is subsumable under them. Our concern 
has not been propositions about morality, the kind belonging to metaethics, such as the 
thesis that there are irreducible moral properties. One can certainly be skeptical regard-
ing them as well, but the two kinds of skepticism are independent.
IV. Moral Knowledge and Reasons for Action
For Ross and, indeed, for any moral non-skeptic, one kind of moral knowledge is to the 
effect that there is a moral reason for action. A Rossian intuitionist should hold that 
knowledge of the obtaining of any of the a priori grounds of duty, for instance a promise, 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
386
is sufficient for knowledge of a prima facie moral reason. More is required for knowledge 
of an overall reason. Other moral theorists can make the same distinction. At least typi-
cally, we need better grounds for knowledge that an act is supported by overall moral 
reason (hence is a final obligation) than for knowledge that it is supported by a prima 
facie reason. The same holds for justification in ascribing reasons.
So far, I have left open whether having knowledge or justification regarding moral 
reasons implies seeing the element in question, say promising, as a reason. It does not. 
Knowledge of an element that is a reason does not entail knowledge of its being a reason. 
Children, even before acquiring the concept of a reason, acquire some concepts, such as 
that of hurting someone or of lying, whose referents (hurting and lying) constitute rea-
sons. A child can, then, believe that hitting baby sister would hurt her before the child 
can see this as a reason not to hit her.
Even where we know there is a moral reason to A, moreover, we might not know its 
weight—how strong a reason it is—either in absolute terms or in relation to some com-
peting reason. This suffices to explain why resolving conflicts of prima facie obligation 
can be so difficult. Is the obligation not to harm others so strong that, to protect some-
one from harm, one should always be ready to violate the obligation not to lie? Ross 
addressed this kind of question and held that there is no general principle for resolving 
such conflicts (1930, pp. 30–32). Mill recognized such conflicts too, but considered his 
Principle of Utility sufficient for resolving them (1861/1979, p. 25). This position does 
not commit Mill to holding that we can in general know the exact weight of a moral 
reason or can always in practice know even which of two conflicting sets of obligations 
is stronger. But his utilitarianism does appear to commit him to maintaining that the 
strength of a moral reason is “proportional” to the extent to which the consequences 
of performing it yield a favorable ratio of the good to the bad as compared with avail-
able alternatives. (The kind of measurement of happiness and suffering to which Mill is 
committed is not ratio measurement; and, for decision problems, his qualitative factor, 
as where one pleasure is better than another, can be represented in terms of quantity, 
say, by simply assigning much higher numerical value to the higher-quality pleasure as 
against the competing lower-quality one.)
For utilitarian and certain other consequentialist theories, then, a kind of commen-
surability of different moral reasons is posited, and their relative strength can be taken 
to be, in principle, knowable. One might think that, insofar as we can weight certain 
elements in life, such as hurting people and lying to them or, on the positive side, aiding 
others and improving one’s own capacities, we can place acts in a hierarchy depending 
on the net value of their consequences. But if this should be so, it would be at best a con-
tingent truth. Some lies might have good consequences overall; some beneficent deeds 
might have bad consequences overall. Commensurability of the imperfectly quantita-
tive kind Mill is committed to implies at most that we can know, in individual cases, 
which of two conflicting sets of obligations is stronger. It does not imply that we can 
typically know such generalizations as that hurting someone is invariably worse than 
lying.
Intuitionists have tended to deny that there is any a priori hierarchy among the 
prima facie obligations; and although many of them would hold that by and large the 
obligation not to harm is stronger than the obligation of beneficence, no plausible intu-
itionism implies the a priori knowability of such overriding for any particular conflict 
between prima facie obligations. Here, however, the reason for the restriction is not 
the difficulty of calculation, as with total “utility”; it is that overall obligation is not an 

MORAL KNOWLEDGE
387
additive matter in the first place. Intuitionists might point out that an act could be seen 
to have complex relations of fittingness (a non-additive notion) that bear on whether it 
is morally permissible. Thus, criticizing a student in detail for a careless paper, though a 
prima facie teaching obligation, might ill-befit the student’s vulnerability. There might 
be overall moral reason to abstain from the action even if its long-run consequences 
have positive value exceeding the negative value of the suffering one would cause.
Kant also deserves discussion in relation to the possibility of moral knowledge in 
the common cases of conflicting prima facie obligations. Interpreting his ethics in an 
overall way is impossible here, but perhaps we might assume that he took us to have a 
priori knowledge of the categorical imperative, say of the truth of the principle (which 
is a reading of one of his formulations of the imperative) that an act is right if and only 
if it treats no one concerned “merely as a means” and everyone concerned “as an end.” 
He might have held that we can also know a priori the kinds of principles and appli-
cations of them that we find in relation to his four famous examples (Kant 1948, secs 
429–430).
Kant was not committed to claiming the possibility of a priori moral knowledge 
regarding specific actions. He seems to have held, however, that one could know what 
one ought to do by pursuing the question in the light of the categorical imperative 
(presumably in any formulation, but certainly using two or more formulations for the 
clarity one can thereby gain). Did Kant think that we could be assisted in achieving 
moral knowledge by appeal to an a priori hierarchy among the prima facie obligations? 
He apparently held (in some passages) that where perfect and imperfect obligations 
conflict, for instance obligations not to lie with obligations to protect the innocent, 
the former have priority. But this view is not required by the categorical imperative: 
situations of conflict can be referred to that master principle regardless of the kinds of 
obligations involved. Once a resolution is reached by using the imperative, one can 
claim knowledge or justification of the judgment thus formed; but the procedure is com-
plex enough to allow skeptics to raise doubts. Nonetheless, the categorical imperative 
framework surely adds to our resources for justifying moral claims. It is also important to 
see that often a judgment based on a proper appeal to the categorical imperative is also 
supported by intuition.
Particularly in interpreting Kant, we should distinguish between knowledge of moral 
obligation and knowledge of “moral worth,” roughly moral creditworthiness. He saw 
that we can do what we ought to do, but do it for the wrong reason, or at least for a 
reason that is of the wrong sort to give the action based on it moral worth. If Kant was 
not a skeptic about our knowledge of the obligatory, he was perhaps skeptical about 
presumptive knowledge of moral worth in certain cases (this issue is discussed in detail 
in chapter 3 of my 2006, which addresses both actions supported by more than one piece 
of practical reasoning and actions performed for two or more reasons). If I cannot know 
that I am keeping a promise for a moral reason rather than from self-interest, I cannot 
know that my doing it has moral worth. Knowledge that I have a moral reason and have 
acted in accord with it—have done the deed it calls for—does not imply knowledge that 
I have acted for that reason. Similarly, knowledge that a person acts virtuously does not 
imply knowledge (or even necessarily a basis for knowledge) that the person is virtuous. 
Prudence can effectively mimic virtue.
The upshot of these considerations about moral worth is that one kind of moral knowl-
edge depends on knowledge of why people do certain deeds and not just of why they 
should do them or of whether, on a given occasion, they have done what they should. 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
388
But it is sometimes enormously difficult to know why people do what they do. Even in 
our own case, we can easily be mistaken. None of these points commits us to wholesale 
skepticism about knowledge of moral worth. But that knowledge is difficult to attain in 
some cases, and achieving it might require considerable psychological insight.
V. Moral Knowledge and Ethical Relativism
Our discussion has presupposed that if moral claims are truth-valued, they are in some 
sense universally true or universally false, in the same way that ordinary descriptive fac-
tual propositions, say common-sense observational statements, are true or false. Is there, 
however, a way their truth might be relative, in which case knowledge of them would be 
correspondingly so? There are many varieties of ethical relativism, but it might suffice 
for our purposes to consider three kinds.
The first case is the thesis that moral obligation (hence at least one kind of moral 
truth) is relative to circumstances. Consider the prohibition of killing. It is not gener-
ally thought that killing is wrong when required for self-defense. We might call this view 
circumstantial relativism or relativizationism. It is compatible with standard ethical views 
so long as they are taken to ascribe overall moral obligations to persons in the light of 
their circumstances. This is how standard views are best interpreted, so the idea that 
moral obligation is relative to circumstances is not incompatible with such universalistic 
theories as those of Aristotle, Kant, Mill, and Ross (cf. Aristotle’s point, in Nicomachean 
Ethics 1106b–1107a, that “virtue . . . is a state involving a rational choice, consisting of 
a mean relative to us and determined by reason” (emphasis added)).
The second kind of relativism is less easily characterized: it is the view that moral stan-
dards are relative to culture or other contingencies of human life in such a way that there 
are no universally valid moral standards or even universally valid ways to justify moral 
claims. The force of such a view is, in part, to contrast ethics with science, for which both 
kinds of standards are widely believed to exist. For this kind of relativism—call it status 
relativism, since it concerns the ontological and epistemic status of moral claims—moral 
knowledge is knowledge of (or in some sense within) a particular culture’s or group’s stan-
dards of behavior. One could know that, for instance, incest is wrong-in-America, but not 
that it is wrong simpliciter. Exactly what this contrast comes to is not altogether clear, but 
a way to interpret it can be seen in relation to the third kind of relativism.
Suppose that, instead of speaking of morality simpliciter, we speak of a morality rela-
tive to a culture (or other suitably cohesive group) and conceive a morality as a set of 
standards for regulating behavior in a group such that the standards (1) have as their 
main purpose to preserve social coordination and promote some kind of human welfare 
and (2) are internalized in most group members in such a way that their violation tends 
to evoke strong principled disapproval and conformity to them tends to be encouraged 
and to evoke approval. We can now speak of a pluralistic relativism: the view that there is 
more than one (actual) morality, and no one set of moral standards that can be properly 
considered the one true morality (this kind of relativistic view is expressed by Wong 
(2006), e.g. pp. 68–70; but note the axiology, for instance in the relation to “worthwhile 
lives” (pp. 69 and 72), where one senses a commitment to a kind of objective value). 
Notice, however, that this view allows that all the moralities that can play the indicated 
role for human groups might share some standards. It is also left open that justification 
of moral claims within a group might be objective, even scientific.
Pluralistic relativism, then, though it denies that there is one true morality, leaves 

MORAL KNOWLEDGE
389
open that there might be only a limited number of overlapping moralities that can serve 
the social function of a morality. It also leaves open that the differences might be, from 
the point of view of the standard ethical theories, minor. Certain elements in what is 
commonly called ‘sexual morality’ (say, standards prohibiting extra-marital sex) might 
exemplify standards that can vary among societies across which there is almost com-
plete agreement on, say human rights. In any case, pluralistic relativism would provide 
a basis for both intragroup moral knowledge—knowledge of what kinds of acts are, under 
the group’s standards, obligatory—and also some intergroup moral knowledge—knowl-
edge of what is obligatory under the standards common to the groups in question. Like 
the other forms of relativism, then, this one does not entail the impossibility of moral 
knowledge or, especially, of justification for moral claims.
VI. The Possibility of Cognitivity without Realism
We began by considering the view that moral claims lack cognitive content and hence 
are not even candidates for objects of knowledge or justified belief. We saw how a com-
mitment to naturalism, together with certain other views, motivates noncognitivism. 
Without implying that noncognitivism is indefensible, we proceeded to consider realist 
cognitivist views that seem sufficiently plausible to warrant considering noncognitiv-
ism both theoretically avoidable and a departure from common sense. But the views we 
contrasted with it, including the relativist positions, are all realist. They differ about the 
nature of moral properties but each countenances them. Might one preserve cognitivity 
without endorsing realism?
In part, this is what at least some ethical constructivists attempt to do. Consider how 
John Rawls views Kant. He contrasts Kant with ethical intuitionists, for whom Rawls 
thinks “moral first principles and judgments, when correct, are true statements about an 
independent order of moral values” (Rawls 1993, p. 91); for Kant, “the order of moral 
and political values must be made, or itself constituted, by the principles and concep-
tions of practical reason” (p. 99). This view goes with the point that “Kant is the his-
torical source of the idea that reason, both theoretical and practical, is self-originating 
and self-authenticating” (p. 100). Rawls does not explain how anything can originate or 
even authenticate itself. Both ideas are unclear, and whether Kant himself is committed 
to relying on them cannot be pursued here.
For our purposes, it might suffice to distinguish three things that, consistently with 
what Rawls says above, might be meant by ‘moral constructivism’ and to connect them 
with the possibility of moral knowledge.
A genetic construction (in ethics) is a procedure for arriving at (roughly, formulating 
and accepting) moral principles or moral judgments, as where one must make a decision 
on what to do. Genetic constructivism, then, would be the associated view that moral 
principles and judgments are arrived at by (or might evolve from) some procedure, such 
as applying the categorical imperative.
By contrast, an epistemic construction is a procedure, potentially but not necessarily 
combinable with a genetic construction, for coming to know or acquire justification 
for moral judgments or principles. Epistemological constructivism would be the view that 
such knowledge or justification—where “justification is addressed to others” (p. 100)—
must be acquired, or at least validatable, in the prescribed way. Again, the categorical 
imperative might serve as the core of a framework for constructing a justification of a 
moral judgment.

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
390
Thirdly, a metaphysical construction is a way of creating a grounding basis for one or 
more sound moral judgments or principles, as where, in accord with practical reason, 
one creates valid moral principles or just laws, which in turn create obligations. Rawls’s 
terminology of self-authentication suggests that he takes Kant to be a metaphysical 
constructivist, one who regards the moral soundness of a judgment as created by, or 
in any case grounded in, its emergence from a proper construction, such as a correct 
application of the categorical imperative. That lying is wrong, for instance, is not true 
because, owing to “an independent order of moral values,” the property of being a lie 
grounds the property of wrongness; it is true because (for one thing) we can construct a 
valid veracity standard from the categorical imperative and cannot rationally universal-
ize principles that generally allow lying.
How one might succeed in either epistemic or metaphysical constructions without 
some “independent” standards to guide one, such as the idea that human beings have 
value and hence cannot be treated merely as means, is puzzling. It is not clear, moreover, 
that Kantian ethics is committed to affirming this possibility. In the Groundwork Kant 
posits “something whose existence has in itself absolute value,” such that “in it alone, 
would there be the ground of a possible categorical imperative” (1948, sec. 428, p. 95). 
The reference to a ground suggests an antecedent basis for the soundness of the impera-
tive. This suggestion is combinable with the view that hedonic value and promissory 
obligation may be as plainly real as the experiences and interpersonal relations on which 
they are grounded.
The important point here is that despite the terminology of construction, none of 
the positions just described is necessarily anti-realist. Even metaphysical constructivism 
presupposes using some raw materials and can be taken to describe a method for dis-
covering a principle true to the moral facts or at least the axiological facts, for instance 
the fact that rational beings have a kind of absolute value. Obligatoriness, for example, 
would be conceived as the property of being endorsable on the basis of a certain kind of 
constructive procedure: to be obligated to keep a promise would be to have the prop-
erty of being such that, if we correctly viewed the facts of one’s case in relation to the 
categorical imperative, we would frame a principle of action requiring promise-keeping 
in the circumstances one is in. The obligation is, to be sure, a highly complex property 
and can be viewed as a construct from a sound reasoning process; but (a) the property 
of undergoing such a process and (b) the resultant moral property an act might have 
of being required by the conclusion of that process are real properties. Given that they 
essentially involve our reasoning, they need not be conceived as part of an “independent 
order”; but other theorists might note that in this sense of ‘independent’, our pleasures 
and pains are not part of such an order either: they are intrapersonal and depend on our 
experiences. If there were no experiences, there would be no hedonic value. Similarly, if 
there were no interpersonal relations, there would be no promissory obligations.
* * *
If we distinguish moral knowledge from knowledge of morality, and if we take moral 
discourse to be cognitive, then apart from strong skepticism (which is set aside in this 
chapter), there are many plausible ethical theories that provide a basis for the view that 
we know both some moral principles and some singular moral judgments. Moreover, 
since, in the contexts that concern us, knowledge requires stronger grounding than 
justification, whatever the case for our having moral knowledge, the case for our having 

MORAL KNOWLEDGE
391
moral justification with the same content is stronger. Similarly, whatever the case for 
knowledge or justification regarding overall judgments of moral obligation, there is a 
stronger case for prima facie judgments favoring the same act.
Parallel points hold for knowledge and justification regarding moral reasons for 
action. Those reasons, like moral judgments based on them, divide into the prima 
facie and the overall, and knowledge and justification concerning the latter are more 
difficult to achieve than concerning the former. One could thus be a skeptic about 
judgments of overall obligation even if one countenances knowledge of prima facie 
obligations. It is important to see, however, that even positing variable degrees of 
justification that one considers insufficient for knowledge might allow for objectivity 
in holding moral judgments and provide for the possibility of rational resolution of 
moral disagreements. Natural facts might be an anchor for moral judgments even if 
the former do not dictate the latter and allow for disagreements within the range that 
the anchoring permits.
The case of knowledge of moral worth, however, is different from all those just 
recalled. The moral worth of an action or person depends essentially on operative moti-
vation—on the motivational explanation of the action or the motivational nature of 
the person—and these can be very difficult to know, even in our own case. We do seem 
sometimes to know that we have acted for a moral reason, or that a person is predomi-
nantly motivated by morally acceptable desires; but here skepticism is more plausible 
than regarding moral obligation. Skepticism is, in any event, a powerful view and, at 
best, difficult to refute. Whether some degree of it is warranted in moral matters is a 
perennial issue, but we have seen no reason to consider wholesale skepticism unavoid-
able or even to think that on this point ethics is necessarily more vulnerable than other 
domains of inquiry.
Acknowledgment
For helpful comments on earlier versions of this chapter I thank an anonymous reader, 
Michael Quante, and audiences at the Universities of Cologne and Notre Dame.
References
Aristotle. 2000. Nicomachean Ethics. Roger Crisp trans. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Audi, R. 1997. Moral Judgment and Reasons for Action, in Garrett Cullity and Berys Gaut, eds., Ethics and 
Practical Reason, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 125–159.
Audi, R. 1999. Self-Evidence. Philosophical Perspectives 13, 205–228.
Audi, R. 2000. Philosophical Naturalism at the Turn of the Century. Journal of Philosophical Research 25, 
27–45.
Audi, R. 2004. The Good in the Right: A Theory of Intuition and Intrinsic Value. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press.
Audi, R. 2006. Practical Reasoning and Ethical Decision. London: Routledge.
Audi, R. 2008. Intuition, Inference, and Rational Disagreement in Ethics. Ethical Theory and Moral Practice 
11, 475–492.
Ayer, A. J. 1936. Language, Truth and Logic. London: Gollancz.
Boyd, R. 1988. How To Be a Moral Realist. In Geoffrey Sayre-McCord, ed. Essays on Moral Realism. Ithaca: 
Cornell University Press.
Dreier, J. 1999. Transforming Expressivism. Nous 33, 4, 558–572.
Gibbard, A. 1990. Wise Choices, Apt Feelings. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hare, R. M. 1952. The Language of Morals. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kant, I. 1948. Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals. H. J. Paton trans. London: Hutchinson.

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
392
Kelly, T. 2005. The Epistemic Significance of Disagreement. Oxford Studies in Epistemology. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 167–196.
Mill, J. S. 1861/1979. Utilitarianism. Indianapolis: Hackett.
Moore, G. E. 1903. Principia Ethica. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Parfit, D. 1997. Reason and Motivation. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, supp. vol. 71, 99–130.
Rawls, J. 1971/1999. A Theory of Justice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Rawls, J. 1993. Political Liberalism. New York: Columbia University Press.
Ross, W. D. 1930. The Right and the Good. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sinnott-Armstrong, W. 2006. Moral Skepticisms. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sinnott-Armstrong, W. 1993. Some Problems for Gibbard’s Norm Expressivism. Philosophical Studies 69, 
297–313.
Smith, M. 1993. The Moral Problem. Oxford: Blackwell.
Sturgeon, N. 1985. Moral Explanations. In David Copp and David Zimmerman, eds., Morality, Reason, and 
Truth. Totowa, NJ: Roman and Allanheld.
Van Roojen, M. 1996. Expressivism and Irrationality. The Philosophical Review 105, 311–333.
Wong, D. 2006. Natural Moralities. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

36
RELIGIOUS KNOWLEDGE
Linda Zagzebski
I. Introduction
Religion is a complex human practice that includes distinctive emotions, beliefs, acts, 
and artistic and musical creations that express and foster a sense of the sacred. People 
who belong to a particular faith tradition generally think that they have religious knowl-
edge acquired through the practice of their religion, but their religious beliefs form only 
one part of the practice. Beliefs have a more central role for some people than for others, 
and beliefs are much more important in some religions than in others. Christianity and 
Islam are doctrinal religions the practice of which makes certain beliefs crucial, whereas 
Buddhism is much less focused on requiring belief as part of the practice. Nonetheless, 
an important way we distinguish one religion from another religion is in the beliefs that 
are characteristic of the different religious traditions. There might also be beliefs that 
distinguish those who practice religion from those who practice none, but that differ-
ence is harder to identify.
Philosophers care about whether the teachings of any religion are true because many 
religions offer answers to questions philosophers ask: What is the origin of the mate-
rial world? What is the nature of the human person? Is there a God? Where did good 
and evil come from? Is there an afterlife? Philosophers ask these questions from outside 
the practice of any religion and without assuming that one or more religions offer true 
answers to these questions. Philosophy is a practice also, and while the rules of philoso-
phy are themselves a topic for philosophical debate, it is fair to say that philosophers 
have always had especially strong standards for what counts as good answers to ques-
tions like those given above, and especially strong standards for evaluating answers that 
are proposed by others. To the extent that the beliefs of one religious practice compete 
with the beliefs of another practice on issues philosophers raise, philosophy attempts to 
adjudicate the dispute.
Philosophers make more distinctions than those commonly made outside the practice 
of philosophy. An important one for the topic of this essay is the distinction between 
knowledge and reasonable belief. Philosophers almost always agree that you cannot 
know something unless it is true, but you can be reasonable in believing something 
even when it is false. For instance, you can be perfectly reasonable in believing that 
high blood cholesterol increases your chances of getting heart disease, but if it turns out 
that the belief is false, you do not know it. So believing reasonably does not guarantee 
that you get the truth, and so it does not guarantee knowledge. It is also possible that 
you get the truth without believing reasonably. You can be unreasonable but lucky. So 
maybe you believe that drinking green tea increases longevity because you read it in an 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
394
advertisement for green tea. But even if it’s true that green tea will make you live lon-
ger, you do not know it if your source is an ad. You do not know it because the belief is 
unreasonable in your circumstances. So knowledge seems to require some combination 
of believing the truth and believing reasonably.
The way in which truth and reasonable belief come apart makes it tempting to think 
that philosophers should undertake a discussion of the reasonableness of religious belief 
independently of an investigation of religious truth. In other words, truth is one thing, 
reasonableness is another, and knowledge is some combination of the two. If so, religious 
truth is one thing, reasonableness in religious belief is another, and religious knowledge 
is some combination of the two. This seems to me to be basically correct as far as it goes, 
and for most of this essay I will concentrate on the reasonableness of religious belief 
rather than its truth. In a later section we will briefly look at an influential theory of 
religious knowledge that rejects the independence of truth and reasonableness in the 
case of Christian belief.
II. Religious Belief and the Guiding Principles of Enlightenment Philosophy
We have undertaken an investigation of the topic of religious knowledge by starting 
from philosophy, not religion, but it is not obvious that this is the right way to proceed. 
If we think that we should begin with a treatment of knowledge outside of the domain 
of religion, and then apply that treatment to the question of what religious knowledge 
is and whether it is possible, we might end up with a distorted view of the nature of reli-
gious knowledge. That is because philosophers generally begin with certain paradigm 
cases of knowledge, and that limits the way the concept of knowledge is applied outside 
the domain of the paradigms. Typically, the paradigms consist of simple cases of percep-
tual knowledge, knowledge based on memory, and uncontroversial cases of scientific 
knowledge. This method creates problems for understanding many kinds of knowledge, 
particularly moral knowledge, knowledge that depends upon skill, and knowledge that 
depends upon special experience or wisdom. If there is knowledge that derives from the 
wisdom of a few exceptional persons or traditions, or which depends upon experiences 
that not every human being has, religious knowledge would undoubtedly be in that 
category. But it is hard to account for this kind of knowledge if we permit the standard 
paradigms of knowledge to dictate the way we understand religious knowledge.
There are reasons why modern philosophers have the paradigms that we have. We 
have inherited attitudes and principles that severely limit the sources of knowledge 
that we trust, and which set norms for the proper relation among the beliefs we accept 
as reasonable. Most of these attitudes arose during the Enlightenment. Some of them 
are well known and often debated, but some of them have been so completely assimi-
lated that they are not even noticed. For instance, students of Descartes are well aware 
that Descartes was a foundationalist. He thought that our beliefs have a structure like 
an inverted pyramid, with a few beliefs at the bottom supporting the entire edifice of 
our beliefs. To have the most reasonable and secure structure, the foundational beliefs 
ought to be indubitable—absolutely certain. Descartes’ endowment included a widely 
discussed proclivity to foundationalism, but he also left us something else: a suspicion of 
epistemic authority and a lack of trust in the wisdom of traditions and other individu-
als. Descartes begins his Meditations with a lament that people and institutions he had 
previously trusted epistemically let him down. And his own senses had let him down. So 
his search for a new method of getting knowledge was based on a loss of epistemic trust 

RELIGIOUS KNOWLEDGE
395
in others and a partial loss of trust in himself. Experiences of loss of trust in authority 
and traditions were widespread in the early modern period. The result is that suspicion 
of authority of all kinds is deeply ingrained in modern culture.
We have inherited another idea from the Enlightenment that affects the way we 
approach religious knowledge: intellectual egalitarianism. It is commonly assumed 
that we are all roughly equal in our epistemic capacities. Any experience that grounds 
belief must be an experience anybody can have. Furthermore, it is assumed that either 
nobody is especially wise, or if there are wise persons, we cannot identify them in a way 
that would be useful to ourselves. So if there are epistemic communities, they have no 
authority structure, no trustworthy traditions, and there are no persons to whom the 
rest of us should defer for their insights. Both egalitarianism and the modern suspicion 
of authority are important components of political liberalism. So the suspicion of epis-
temic authority and intellectual egalitarianism has roots in modern political theory 
as well as in epistemology. These aspects of philosophical practice are generally not 
debated because they are taken for granted.
There are many different ways in which these principles and attitudes affect the 
way philosophers approach the reasonableness of religious belief and the possibility of 
religious knowledge. For instance, it is not generally noticed that discussions of the 
justification of religious belief, at least since Hume, assume two different forms of foun-
dationalism. First, it is assumed that theistic belief is the foundation for all other reli-
gious beliefs. Second, it is assumed that beliefs are the foundation of religion. Religion 
is a practice in which beliefs come first and the rest of the practice, including religious 
emotions, acts, and rituals derive their justification from the independent justification 
of religious beliefs.
These two forms of foundationalism, together with intellectual egalitarianism and 
the suspicion of authority, explain a line of thought about religion that has persisted 
since the Enlightenment. This line of thought leads to a general doubt about the rea-
sonableness of religious belief. It goes as follows:
(1) The justification of the practice of religion depends upon the justification 
of religious beliefs.
(2) The justification of religious beliefs depends upon the justification of the-
ism.
(3) The justification of theism depends upon the success of arguments the 
premises of which must be accessible to any ordinary intelligent person. 
No special experience can be assumed, and no reliance on authority can 
be made.
These assumptions lead to skepticism about religion if we add one more claim:
(4) There is no sound argument for theism that begins with premises acces-
sible to any ordinary intelligent person without reference to special experi-
ence or to authority.
In my judgment none of the claims (1)–(3) has been established. In fact, I believe that 
they are all false. It would take a much more elaborate theory of the human person than 
epistemologists agree upon to establish (1). Why should we think that emotions must be 
justified by a prior and independent justification of beliefs? Of course, some emotions do 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
396
need to be justified by beliefs. For example, my fear of the object in my backyard needs to 
be justified by my belief that it is a large snake. But some emotions might be more basic 
than any belief and the emotion can serve to justify the belief, not vice versa. I think that 
there are emotions that ground moral beliefs in this way. We feel repugnance at a display 
of arrogance, admiration of an act of courage, and indignation at acts of injustice. If we 
are adept at moral philosophy we might be able to explain what is good about courage 
and how this is an act of courage, and what is bad about arrogance and injustice and why 
these particular acts qualify as acts of arrogance or injustice, but it is highly doubtful that 
we would engage in moral theorizing of this kind were it not for the more fundamental 
insight into the value or disvalue of particular acts that we detect through emotions (see, 
for example, Nussbaum 2001, esp. chap. 1; Solomon 2007, esp. chap 18; Zagzebski 2004, 
esp. chap. 2). Similarly, it seems to me that there is a range of religious emotions, includ-
ing reverence, awe, and compunction that serve a parallel role in revealing religious 
value to us. In any case, the possibility that religious emotions play a fundamental role in 
the justification of religious practice has not been ruled out.
The truth of claim (2) has not been established either. Sandra Menssen and Thomas 
D. Sullivan (2002) have argued that it is not always reasonable to establish the existence 
of a person before establishing that that person has communicated with you. They give 
the example of the SETI research program (Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence) 
which monitors huge numbers of radio signals from space in an attempt to discover if 
any of them would probably be sent by intelligent beings elsewhere in the universe. 
Suppose that the researchers discover a 1126-bit sequence corresponding to the prime 
numbers from 2 to 101. They would be justified in believing, “Some highly intelligent 
being has sent this signal,” and that in turn would justify them in inferring, “Some 
highly intelligent form of life exists (or existed) elsewhere in the universe.” Menssen 
and Sullivan use this example to argue for the falsehood of the following common view 
on the relation between belief in revelatory claims and belief in theism:
One cannot obtain a convincing philosophical case for a revelatory claim with-
out first obtaining a highly plausible case for the existence of God.
But if Menssen and Sullivan are right that that view is false, so is assumption (2). 
Although it is often taken for granted that it is not reasonable to adopt the beliefs of 
a theistic religion without first justifying belief in God, that might not be the way a 
reasonable person operates. A belief such as “I have been forgiven by God” logically 
presupposes that God exists, but it does not follow that I cannot be justified in believing 
the former without first being justified in believing the latter. In some cases it might be 
the reverse.
Claim (3) has been more frequently discussed than the other two, and it has many 
detractors. Some philosophers object to the fact that it rules out arguments for theism 
that are based on religious experience. William Alston (1993) has proposed that reli-
gious experience can justify religious belief for the persons who have those experiences, 
in a way that parallels the justification of beliefs about the physical world based on sense 
experience. This approach to religious knowledge is particularly attractive to empiricists 
since they maintain that individual experience is the ultimate source of knowledge. But 
it requires the rejection of a strong form of intellectual egalitarianism.
There are other reasons to reject claim (3). Religion is a communal practice. 
Of course, individual persons can be religious without participating in a religious 

RELIGIOUS KNOWLEDGE
397
community, but the main reason most religious persons think they have religious 
knowledge is that they have acquired it through participation in a religious com-
munity with authoritative teaching. The authority might derive from a sacred text or 
from tradition or from some combination of the two, but it is very doubtful that most 
people think their religious knowledge derives from their personal experience and the 
use of their own reason. Nor do they think that their beliefs are based on testimony 
from their community, the trustworthiness of which is something they can demon-
strate by the use of their reason unaided by participants in that same community. 
What account of knowledge and reasonable belief would explain this?
My position is that trust in ourselves is the bottom line, but self-trust leads us to trust 
certain others more than ourselves in some respects. Self-trust supports trust in author-
ity and in the wisdom of certain individuals. One way to see this is that there is a natural 
desire for truth, and there is a natural belief that the natural desire for truth is satisfiable. 
Trusting that natural belief requires us to have a basic trust that our natural faculties and 
dispositions to form beliefs put us in a good position to get the truth. But we do not trust 
ourselves equally all of the time, and we trust ourselves in particular when we have the 
disciplined love of truth I call epistemic conscientiousness. We are epistemically consci-
entious when we exercise our belief-forming faculties to the best of our ability. When we 
are epistemically conscientious we conscientiously come to believe that there are other 
people who are more trustworthy than ourselves, and since we trust the way we come to 
have such a belief, we trust the belief. There are individuals who have qualities we trust 
in ourselves in a greater degree than we have ourselves—epistemic conscientiousness, 
the ability to evaluate evidence, good practical judgment, and many other qualities that 
a conscientious person trusts in her search for truth. In many cases deferring to the judg-
ment of such a person follows from consistent self-trust.
Trust in ourselves leads us to trust certain others more than ourselves in another way. 
There are emotions that most of us trust and emotions that most of us do not trust. An 
emotion that I think we trust when we are conscientious is the emotion of admiration. 
When we trust our emotion of admiration, we trust that the person we admire is admi-
rable, deserving of admiration. Sometimes we epistemically admire another person and 
trust that emotion. We then trust that the person we epistemically admire is epistemi-
cally admirable. If that person believes something in the domain of her admirability, 
that gives us a reason to believe it too. Of course, that reason can be defeated by other 
things we trust more, but many times there is nothing we trust more.
Wisdom is often imbedded in communities rather than in individuals. This is espe-
cially true when the community exists to pass on the wisdom of an individual whose 
exceptional wisdom occurs only once in a millennium, or once in ten millennia. A 
person might belong to such a community and trust it in a way that is similar to his trust 
in himself. He might admire the quality of wisdom that he perceives in the community 
and might trust that admiration. I think that trust in wise persons and the wisdom of 
communities is the basis of epistemic authority. Authority rests upon trust, and trust in 
authority is justified by self-trust.
Trust in authority can lead to knowledge. One way is through testimony of those in 
authority, and knowledge through testimony can be justified by conscientious trust. I 
see no reason that there cannot be religious knowledge acquired through testimony in 
this way. But we acquire knowledge from trusted others in ways other than testimony. 
My position is that we acquire many kinds of knowledge, including religious knowledge, 
by imitating those who have it, the people whose wisdom we admire. A conscientious 

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
398
person imitates the intellectual habits and ways of knowing of those she epistemically 
admires. This is the way we learn a specialized field of learning or a skill. We imitate 
those who have mastered the field. There are methods developed by the best practitio-
ners of each field that are transmitted to the next generation during the course of the 
practice of the field. The same point applies to methods of meditation and contempla-
tion developed over many centuries by spiritually wise mentors in religious communi-
ties. With luck, imitating an exemplar of spiritual wisdom can result in acquiring some 
of the most important truths a human being can learn.
This approach to religious knowledge runs counter to the modern value of intellec-
tual egalitarianism and the dis-valuing of authority. We live in an age that has some-
times been called “the age of suspicion” because so many intellectual trends undermine 
trust—trust in political, religious, and epistemic authority, and trust in traditions of wis-
dom. At the epistemic extreme, it undermines trust in testimony as a source of knowl-
edge. Since testimony, authority, and the existence of wise persons are crucial to the 
transmission of religious knowledge as understood within most of the major religious 
traditions, the suspicion of the age undermines religion more directly than it under-
mines human practices that do not rely upon wisdom or authority, such as modern sci-
ence. But all human practices require trust among the participants in the practice, and 
all human beings need to trust themselves when they are being conscientious. I find it 
doubtful that our age can undermine trust in authority and wisdom so thoroughly with-
out also undermining the trust that no one wants to give up.
III. Connecting the Truth of Religion with Reasonable Belief: 
Alvin Plantinga
Alvin Plantinga is well known for his sustained attack on (3). Plantinga does not cri-
tique the features of (3) we have mentioned, and he does not attack foundational-
ism. Plantinga accepts a form of foundationalism himself, but argues that belief in the 
existence of God can be in the foundation (Plantinga 1983, 1993). Recently, he has 
argued that Christian belief can be in the foundation as well (Plantinga 2000). Belief in 
Christian doctrines can be the result of the instigation of the Holy Spirit on the occa-
sion of a person’s coming in contact with the doctrine, for instance, when hearing the 
Gospel proclaimed. If this process of acquiring belief is in accordance with the divine 
design plan for human beings after the Fall, these beliefs are produced by a reliable pro-
cess for getting truth, one that results from epistemic faculties working properly as God 
intended. If this assumption is true, beliefs acquired in this way are rational in several 
different senses of rational, and constitute knowledge. They are foundational or prop-
erly basic beliefs.
What makes Christian belief reasonable on this approach cannot be separated from 
its truth. In section I we saw that philosophers almost always separate rationality or rea-
sonableness from the truth of a belief. What makes a belief reasonable is one thing; what 
makes it true is something else. A belief can be reasonable but false, or true and unrea-
sonable. Plantinga does not reject the separation of truth and reasonableness in general, 
but he defends a way of thinking about Christian belief that ties its reasonableness to its 
truth. Plantinga argues that provided that the world is a certain way and human beings 
are a certain way, it is reasonable to believe certain things that Christianity teaches, and 
we have knowledge of those things. If the world is a different way, then it is not reason-
able to believe those things, and we do not know them.

RELIGIOUS KNOWLEDGE
399
The argument depends upon the idea that one of the tenets of Christianity is a teach-
ing about the way in which Christians come to believe in the tenets of Christianity. 
Christianity not only explains what the religious truth is, but how it is that we come to 
believe those truths in a way that is reasonable. So among the core Christian doctrines 
such as the doctrine that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, there is a doctrine that says that 
Christians come to believe those doctrines by the power of the Holy Spirit according to a 
design plan that is aimed at truth in the same way that our other faculties, such as sensa-
tion, memory, and reasoning, are aimed at truth. It follows that if the core set of Christian 
doctrines is true, belief in it in the way described by one of the doctrines in the set is 
reasonable. The truth of Christianity guarantees its reasonableness, so reasonableness 
comes for free. And if it is true, it also has the combination of truth and reasonableness 
needed for knowledge. So if Christianity is true, belief in it is reasonable and Christians 
have knowledge of the tenets of Christianity (Plantinga 2000: chaps 6 and 8).
I think that Plantinga has succeeded in demonstrating the conditional thesis that if 
Christianity is true and includes among its doctrines a crucial claim about the way in 
which Christians get Christian beliefs, then believing those doctrines is rational for 
those who believe in the way described by that doctrine. The question is what has been 
accomplished for those of us who want to know if Christian belief is rational. To be told 
that it is rational if true is not very helpful for those who think that its truth is undeter-
mined. Even people who are Christians and hence believe Christian doctrines are true 
might want something else when they ask whether Christian belief satisfies standards of 
rationality. To explain what I think that is, I want to identify a principle of rationality 
that I think explains what is worrisome about Plantinga’s position, and why the issue 
of religious knowledge and reasonable belief is an appropriate topic for a handbook in 
epistemology.
I assume that rationality is an intrinsic part of human nature, perhaps even the part 
that most clearly defines it. I do not insist that no non-human animals are rational, but 
I do insist that all normal humans are rational; in fact, it is part of what we mean by 
rationality that it is connected with our humanity. Rationality, therefore, transcends 
both individual differences and cultural differences, as well as differences between one 
religious tradition and another. To be rational is to be able to talk to other persons and 
to make oneself understood, no matter who those other persons are. It is what permits 
us to form a human community, one that transcends the individual human communities 
that we inhabit, including religious communities. The fact that rationality is an intrin-
sic part of our humanity has a corollary, and this is the principle of rationality I wish to 
propose. I call it the Rational Recognition Principle:
If a belief is rational, its rationality is recognizable, in principle, by rational 
persons in other cultures.
This principle obviously needs to be nuanced and much has to be packed into the 
qualification “in principle.” I am not suggesting that every human everywhere is capable 
of grasping the rationality of every rational human belief. But I am suggesting that 
our common humanity means at least that the most rational persons—the wisest per-
sons—in all cultures can comprehend the rationality of the beliefs of rational persons in 
other cultures. It is this property that explains why philosophy exists as a cross-cultural 
discipline, and why the issue of religious knowledge is a topic that philosophers can 
discuss whether or not they adhere to any religious tradition.

KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE
400
It seems to me that Plantinga’s strategy violates the Rational Recognition Principle. 
It does not permit a rational observer outside the community of believers to distinguish 
between the rationality of Christianity as defended by Plantinga and the beliefs of any 
group, no matter how irrational and bizarre—sun-worshipers, cult-followers, devotees 
of the Greek gods . . .—assuming that they are clever enough to build their own epis-
temic doctrines into their models the way Plantinga does. So a clever believer in Zeus 
might also believe that Zeus struck him with a bolt of lightning that has the effect of giv-
ing him true beliefs, including the belief that Zeus exists and struck him with a bolt of 
lightning. But don’t we think that the Zeus believer is not rational, even though he and 
the members of his cult are able to produce an argument exactly parallel to Plantinga’s? 
If so, the rationality of religious beliefs must depend upon something other than their 
truth. That something else, I submit, must be such that its rationality is understandable 
to any rational person, if not to every rational person everywhere, then at least to the 
most rational persons anywhere.
So what does a conscientious person do? The question answers itself. She is conscien-
tious. Nobody can expect more of her, but they should not expect less. The Enlightenment 
strictures on religious belief with which we began are much too demanding. They do 
not permit a reasonable person to trust what she trusts when she is conscientious. But 
it seems to me that Plantinga’s strictures are not demanding enough. A conscientious 
person pays attention to other conscientious persons, and she pays special attention to 
those she regards as wise, whether or not they are members of her own tradition. This is 
not to suggest that she must be egalitarian and trust the persons of other communities as 
much as she trusts the members of her own, but her recognition of the rationality com-
mon to all human beings and which is present in an exemplary form in some human 
beings should lead her to treat other persons, even those outside her community as 
checks on her beliefs.
Religious knowledge in some ways is a special kind of knowledge because it depends 
so heavily on trust in authorities and exemplars of wisdom. But in other ways religious 
knowledge is just like any other knowledge. It is getting the truth in a way that is epis-
temically conscientious.
References
Alston, William P. 1993. Perceiving God: The Epistemology of Religious Experience. Ithaca: Cornell University 
Press.
Menssen, Sandra and Sullivan, Thomas D. 2002. “The existence of God and the existence of Homer: 
rethinking theism and revelatory claims.” Faith and Philosophy 19, 331–47.
Nussbaum, Martha Craven. 2001. Upheavals of Thought: The Intelligence of Emotions. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Plantinga, Alvin. 1983. “Reason and Belief in God,” in Faith and Rationality: Reason and Belief in God, ed. A. 
Plantinga and N. Wolterstorff. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press.
——. 1993. Warrant and Proper Function. New York: Oxford University Press.
——. 2000. Warranted Christian Belief. New York: Oxford University Press.
Solomon, Robert C. 2007. True to Our Feelings: What Our Emotions Are Really Telling Us. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Zagzebski, Linda Trinkaus. 2004. Divine Motivation Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Part V
SKEPTICISM


37
PYRRHONIAN 
SKEPTICISM
Richard Bett
Pyrrhonian skepticism takes its name from the shadowy figure of Pyrrho of Elis (ca. 
360–270 bce). It is debatable to what extent Pyrrho was concerned with questions 
that we would call epistemological (for a brief survey of the main options see Bett 
2006), or to what extent he would have satisfied any reasonable definition of a skep-
tic. Beyond a few immediate followers, he appears to have been all but forgotten until 
early in the first century bce, when another somewhat shadowy figure, Aenesidemus 
of Cnossos, appealed to Pyrrho as a key inspiration for a new form of skeptical think-
ing. Aenesidemus’ writings have not survived, but we do have a summary of his central 
work Pyrrhonist Discourses (Purrôneioi Logoi) by Photius, the ninth-century Patriarch of 
Constantinople (Bibl. 169b18–171a4—in Greek and in English, except for brief critical 
remarks by Photius himself, in Long and Sedley (1987), passages 71C and 72L). And 
it is the movement begun by Aenesidemus that is now known as Pyrrhonian skepti-
cism; indeed, it is from this movement that the term skeptikos, on which more below, 
actually originated. By far the most important representative of this movement, at 
least from our perspective, is Sextus Empiricus (probably second century ce), the one 
Pyrrhonist of whom we have extensive surviving writings. Another important source 
is Diogenes Laertius’ Life of Pyrrho (9.61–108), parts of which consist of summaries 
of what are clearly later Pyrrhonist ideas, rather than anything traceable to Pyrrho 
himself. For the most part, however, I will confine myself to Pyrrhonism as represented 
by Sextus.
What is a Pyrrhonian Skeptic?
Pyrrhonian skepticism differs in multiple ways from Cartesian skepticism. (For an excel-
lent account of the differences, see Williams 2010.) One of the most obvious differences 
is that for Descartes, skepticism is a threat to be warded off, whereas for the Pyrrhonists 
it is an outlook to be embraced. Another is that for the Pyrrhonists, skepticism is not 
specially about epistemology. Sextus treats what we call epistemology as just one subject 
among others, on a par with them and to be examined by the same methods; I return 
to this point below. In addition, in as much as skepticism on the Cartesian understand-
ing is a thesis (an epistemological thesis—but for the present point, the subject-mat-
ter would make no difference), the Pyrrhonian skeptic would consider it just as much 
deserving of suspicion as its negation.

SKEPTICISM
404
Sextus’ best-known work, Outlines of Pyrrhonism (usually known by the abbreviation 
PH, the initials of the title in Greek) actually begins by making this very point. Sextus 
distinguishes three possible positions or attitudes: some people think that they have dis-
covered the truth, some people think that the truth cannot be apprehended, and some 
people are still searching. It is the second position—one that Sextus, rightly or wrongly, 
associates with certain of the Academics—that is evidently closest to what in modern 
times has been understood as skepticism. But it is the third stance, not the second, that 
Sextus describes as the skeptic’s. In fact the Greek word skeptikos means “inquirer”; the 
skeptic is actually defined as someone who keeps on searching, as opposed to someone 
who has come to a definite position—including a definite position to the effect that 
knowledge is impossible. The latter kind of position is just as subject to Sextus’ criticism 
as a form of “dogmatism”—his favorite term for a non-skeptical outlook—as are posi-
tive views about the nature of things. (Modern scholars tend to refer to such positions 
as “negative dogmatism,” although this is not a term Sextus actually uses.)
There is, however, room for dispute about how far Sextus really maintains the stance 
of an open-minded “inquirer.” On the one hand, there do seem to be places where Sextus 
is opting for certain definite positions. I return to this point below. On the other hand, 
his most general account of what skepticism is, together with much of his actual prac-
tice, seems not to fit the pose of an “inquirer”—despite being in accord with it on the 
avoidance of definite positions, at least if by “positions” one means “theses asserted.”
That account, in one of the most important surviving sentences in all of Sextus, is 
as follows:
The skeptical ability is one that produces oppositions among things that appear 
and things that are thought in any way whatsoever, one from which, because 
of the equal strength in the opposing objects and accounts, we come first to 
suspension of judgement, and after that to tranquility.
(PH 1.8)
Sextus refers to skepticism as an ability; as we have been led to expect, then, it is not any 
kind of doctrine or theory, but a certain way of doing things. But the notion of continu-
ing inquiry, at least in any usual sense of “inquiry,” seems somewhat remote from the 
procedure described here. The procedure seems, rather, to consist in the assembling of 
opposing arguments, ideas or impressions, in such a way that both (or all) sides of the 
opposition are equally powerful and thereby together induce suspension of judgment. 
And the skeptic, as someone accomplished in this procedure, looks not like an open-
minded inquirer, for whom eventual discovery of the truth is still a live possibility, but 
like a person who has decided that tranquility is what he wants, and that suspension of 
judgment is the surest way to it—and therefore concentrates on producing and main-
taining suspension of judgment.
This does not require assent to the definite claim that tranquility is a good thing, or 
that suspension of judgment is the rationally required reaction to the situation of “equal 
strength” among the oppositions; nor does the notion of “equal strength” itself have to 
be understood in terms of equal rational justification. “Equal strength” can very well be 
seen as a psychological notion—one simply (if the skeptic’s “ability” is accomplished 
enough) finds oneself experiencing each pole of the opposition as equally persuasive. 
Suspension of judgment, too, might simply be a result one finds oneself experienc-
ing, rather than deciding upon as the appropriate reaction. And finally, the skeptic’s 

PYRRHONIAN SKEPTICISM
405
orientation towards tranquility might simply be a brute fact about his motivations, 
rather than anything for which he would be interested in giving a defense. Sextus does 
not, then, need to be seen as having fallen into one of the two stances that he opened 
the book by repudiating (the belief that one has discovered the truth or the belief that 
this is impossible). But there is at least a certain kind of pre-arranged system of skeptical 
activity—an activity that much of his surviving work appears to exemplify—that does 
not seem to fit well with the picture of the skeptic as someone still searching. (For an 
interpretation that finds more credibility in the picture of the skeptic as an inquirer, see 
Perin 2006.)
Sextus’ account of how someone comes to be a skeptic sheds some further light upon 
this, but does not eliminate the tension just referred to. He says that the skeptic starts 
out as just a normal philosopher—that is, someone seeking tranquility by means of dis-
covering the truth (PH 1.12, 26). The attempt fails; instead of reaching a secure under-
standing of things, one finds equally powerful positions on opposite sides of any given 
issue, which results, as we have seen, in suspension of judgment. And then, as it turns 
out, this very suspension of judgment produces the tranquility that one had originally 
been hoping for (PH 1.26). Now, from the description of the original, pre-skeptical 
position, it sounded as if the worry from which one was seeking release was a worry asso-
ciated with not knowing what to believe; and so one might expect that the tranquility 
one eventually gets derives from a radical change of attitude in which knowledge of 
how things are ceases to seem important. In fact, though, the way Sextus describes it 
is rather different; whenever he explicitly discusses why suspension of judgment yields 
tranquility (PH 1.27–30, 3.235–8, Against the Ethicists 110–67), the focus is on freedom 
from beliefs specifically about good and bad. If one is a dogmatist (or an ordinary non-
philosophical person), one believes certain things to be really good and others to be 
really bad, and so one cares desperately about getting or keeping the good things and 
avoiding the bad things; for the skeptic, who has shed all such beliefs, nothing matters 
to anything like the same extent.
One question this raises is why (as Sextus makes quite clear) skepticism includes sus-
pension of judgment on all topics, rather than just on goodness and badness. Another is 
how the search for the truth, and its abandonment, is even relevant; for it now sounds as 
if beliefs to the effect that things are really good or bad are worrisome simply in virtue of 
their content—whether or not they are true, or even known to be true, seems unimport-
ant. There is, then, some difficulty in seeing just how the relation between suspension 
of judgment and tranquility is supposed to work. A third question is how this account of 
the origin of skepticism fits with Sextus’ picture of the activity of a settled skeptic. For 
in the account of the origin, the equal strength of the opposing positions appears to be 
a brute fact with which one is presented, generating suspension of judgment as an unex-
pected consequence. In his characterization of the skeptic’s “ability,” however, Sextus 
makes it sound as if the equal strength is a product of the skeptic’s deliberate artifice 
in assembling the oppositions. (This could, of course, invite charges of subterfuge or 
intellectual dishonesty—to which the skeptic’s reply would surely be that such charges 
presuppose norms of rationality, logical validity, etc. to which a skeptic does not sub-
scribe.) It would at least have been helpful if Sextus had provided some account of the 
transition between the moment of first reaching tranquility via suspension of judgment 
and the condition of a settled skeptic who habitually exercises his or her developed 
“ability” to produce oppositions. Finally, as already noted, the account of the origin of 
skepticism does not help to justify the notion of the skeptic as an inquirer. The person 

SKEPTICISM
406
who becomes a skeptic does, to be sure, start out as an inquirer; but it sounds as if the 
moment of becoming a skeptic is precisely when one gives up on inquiry and focuses 
instead on pondering the equal strength of opposing arguments and impressions.
The Limited Role of Epistemology
However we try to resolve these problems, it is clear—to pick up another point already 
touched on—that Pyrrhonian skepticism is not an exclusively epistemological outlook. 
For one thing, there is the ethical or practical component having to do with tranquil-
ity; Pyrrhonian skepticism is a way of life, one that its adherents actively recommend. 
Sextus is well aware of the objection, standardly leveled against skeptics in antiquity, 
that a life without definite beliefs is simply impossible. He responds by saying that it is 
quite possible to act in light of how things strike one, without taking any stand as to 
whether they really are as they appear (PH 1.21–4). One eats when one feels hungry; 
one follows the customs of one’s native land; and so on. There is a difficult question 
here as to the scope of the skeptic’s suspension of judgment. Does it cover only issues 
concerning the real, underlying natures of things—the kinds of questions addressed in 
various theoretical disciplines—leaving all or most everyday beliefs intact; or are beliefs 
such as that I am now sitting in my office, that there is a table in front of me, etc., also 
supposed to be matters about which a skeptic suspends judgment—leaving him with no 
more than the ability to register the character of his current phenomenal experience? 
The general tenor of most of Sextus’ surviving writings—where it is the dogmatists who 
are under scrutiny, whether in philosophical matters or in other theoretical disciplines 
such as grammar, mathematics or astrology—seems to support the first option, as does 
his periodic insistence that he is “on the side of ordinary life,” as against the rarefied 
abstractions of the dogmatists. But it is not clear that this posture is consistently sus-
tained. One question might be whether everyday beliefs such as those just mentioned 
are taken to commit one to more fundamental beliefs such as that there is a criterion of 
truth, or that a coherent account can be given of concepts such as time and place—all 
topics that come under Sextus’ skeptical scrutiny. (On this general issue see the essays 
collected in Burnyeat and Frede 1997; also Brennan 2000.) Clearly how one resolves 
this issue affects the plausibility of Sextus’ claim to be able to live a skeptical life. But in 
any case, Sextus does take skepticism to have an effect on one’s life (a beneficial effect) 
beyond the purely theoretical domain, and in that respect he conspicuously differs from 
Descartes and most philosophers since.
Another way in which Pyrrhonian skepticism is not exclusively epistemological is 
that, as mentioned earlier, the issues addressed range far beyond epistemology. (This is 
true even if we accept the narrower, purely theoretical interpretation of the scope of sus-
pension of judgment.) Following the general exposition of skepticism in PH 1, Sextus 
devotes the remaining two books of the work to the three main areas of philosophy, as 
recognized in later antiquity: logic, physics and ethics. The same is true of the much lon-
ger work that seems to have followed the same general plan as PH; from this (only par-
tially surviving) work we have two books Against the Logicians, two Against the Physicists, 
and one Against the Ethicists. In addition, a third surviving work of Sextus treats a variety 
of specialized sciences. In general Sextus’ goal is the one we have been led to expect; 
he seeks to generate suspension of judgment about the existence of the things the 
dogmatists discuss in these various fields, or about the truth of any particular the-
ory of the nature of these things as opposed to any other theory, by devising sets of 

PYRRHONIAN SKEPTICISM
407
opposing arguments. In many cases the arguments on the negative side of the ques-
tion—the question, say, whether there are causes—will be arguments devised by the 
Pyrrhonists themselves; and so it can sometimes look as if Sextus is aiming to refute the 
dogmatists on the subject in question. But he repeatedly indicates that this is not so: 
he is simply supplying an opposing argument of equal strength, with a view to produc-
ing suspension of judgment. (He also points out that this might often require a more 
extensive body of argument on the negative side, given the weight of the standard 
presumption in favor of such things as the existence of causes; see, e.g., Against the 
Logicians 1.443.)
Now, among the subjects he considers are several that we would classify under episte-
mology; in the ancient taxonomy, they belong under logic. So, he addresses at length in 
the logical portions of his work the question whether there is a criterion of truth—that 
is, whether there is any kind of impression or thought whose content is in some way 
guaranteed to be true—and also whether there are such things as signs or demonstra-
tions—both of these being thought of as means by which to establish truths about what 
is not apparent on the basis of truths about the apparent. But these are of no more inher-
ent importance to him than questions about causes, or motion, or God (all of which for 
him belong under physics), about the good and the bad (which belong under ethics), 
or about geometry, astrology or other fields of specialized study. It is true that Sextus’ 
arguments very frequently have an epistemological dimension; one of his most common 
approaches is to try to challenge or undermine the justification for holding some par-
ticular position, and so questions concerning the nature of justification are rarely out of 
sight for long. But these questions arise regardless of subject-matter; they are no more 
prevalent when the topic under discussion is epistemological than when it is physical 
or ethical. They are an aid to producing the desired situation of “equal strength” among 
the alternatives, and are not in general the main focus of attention in their own right. 
Finally, to repeat, even within the epistemological domain, Sextus’ aim is not to show 
that we do not or cannot have certain kinds of knowledge (or, for that matter, justified 
or reasonable belief). Those claims, too, are ones about which he aims to suspend judg-
ment, just as much as about positions claiming that we do have knowledge. Pyrrhonian 
skepticism (again, in this particular area, which is just one among many) is about epis-
temology; it is not a position within epistemology.
The Modes, and the Adoption of Definite Positions
This, at least, is the dominant state of affairs in Sextus, and the one to which his official 
presentation of Pyrrhonism seems to commit him. But, as noted earlier, there are places 
where Sextus does seem to be arguing on his own behalf for definite conclusions, and 
where it is not so easy to understand this as just one side of an opposition. Perhaps the 
most prominent of these, and certainly the one most relevant to our purposes, is the sec-
tion of PH 1 devoted to the Pyrrhonian Modes, or standardized forms of skeptical argu-
mentation (31–186). Sextus presents these as means to suspension of judgment—either, 
we may presume, for non-skeptics who have not yet been converted, or for skeptics who 
feel in danger of lapsing into dogmatism. But the Modes, taken by themselves, are most 
easily read as arguments to the effect that we must suspend judgment—where the neces-
sity is hard not to read as logical or rational rather than merely psychological—because 
there are insuperable challenges to the adequate justification of any position, or because 
we are not in a position to know the real nature of things.

SKEPTICISM
408
Sextus lays out several sets of Modes, of which the most important are the Ten and 
the Five. (For a fine recent treatment of the Modes, see Woodruff 2010. Valuable longer 
treatments are Annas and Barnes (1985) for the Ten Modes and Barnes (1990) for the 
Five.) The Ten Modes present a great variety of opposing impressions. Other animals 
perceive things differently from humans; one human perceives things differently from 
another; even in a single human, the deliverances of different senses are often in opposi-
tion to one another; and even in the case of a single sense, different circumstances (such 
as being healthy or sick, young or old) lead to opposing impressions. These are the first 
four. The rest do not maintain the same sense of a natural and deliberate sequence, and 
Sextus says some confusing things about how they relate to one another (PH 1.38–9); 
but the general effect is to generate multiple sets of oppositions, and the first four are as 
good an illustration of this as any.
The Five Modes are much more general in scope, and together amount to an argument-
scheme that purports to undermine any attempt at justification whatever. In the order in 
which Sextus first introduces them (PH 1.165–9), they are: Undecidable Dispute, Infinite 
Regress, Relativity, Hypothesis, and Circularity. The Mode of Undecidable Dispute sim-
ply asserts that there is undecidable dispute about the matter under discussion. By itself, 
of course, this hardly carries much weight; the skeptic will have to fill out the claim with 
a specific illustration of the existence of undecidable dispute in any given case. But that 
is precisely what the skeptical “ability” of which Sextus spoke earlier is designed to do. 
Suppose, however, that the skeptic’s opponent claims that the matter is decidable in 
some particular way. In that case the skeptic will demand justification for the position the 
opponent adopts; if justification is given, he will demand that the justifying claim, too, 
be justified; and so on. And, Sextus argues (PH 1.171–4), only three eventual outcomes 
to this process are possible. Either (1) the chain of justification never ends—in which 
case we have the Mode of Infinite Regress. Or (2) the opponent comes to a proposition 
that is claimed not to need any justification beyond itself; this Sextus interprets as arbi-
trarily plumping for that proposition, when one might as well have plumped for many 
others—in which case we have the Mode of Hypothesis. Or (3) the process of justifica-
tion eventually relies on a proposition that was already employed earlier on—in which 
case we have the Mode of Circularity. Of course, this is just the beginning of an argu-
ment; many, in the ancient world and since, would contest the notion that these are the 
only three possibilities. Aristotle, for example, who is already aware of patterns of argu-
ment foreshadowing several of the Five Modes (Posterior Analytics I.3), would dispute the 
idea that positing argumentative starting-points that do not need justification beyond 
themselves is merely opting for arbitrary “hypotheses.” Still, there is no doubt that these 
Modes taken together constitute a serious challenge to any justificatory project.
The Mode of Relativity is hard to relate to the other four, and Sextus tacks it on 
to the above schema as no more than an afterthought (PH 1.175). In describing it he 
simply says that the object under consideration appears a certain way in relation to the 
person judging it and in relation to the things observed along with it, but “as for how it is 
in its nature, we suspend judgment” (PH 1.167). As Sextus remarks, this consideration 
already came up in the Ten Modes; one of the Ten is actually a very similar general 
Mode of Relativity—a further anomaly in itself—but this form of argument involving 
relativity occurs a number of other times in the Ten Modes. I shall suggest below that 
this represents a survival of a separate, pre-Sextan variety of Pyrrhonism. For now, it is 
enough to observe that the Mode of Relativity sits awkwardly among the Five; the other 
four seem to fit together much better by themselves.

PYRRHONIAN SKEPTICISM
409
The Five Modes, as noted earlier, look like a knock-down argument (or a sketch of 
one) to the effect that rational justification is impossible. Sextus concludes by saying 
that “it is absolutely necessary to suspend judgment about the matter put before us” 
(PH 1.177), and that accurately represents the tone of what has preceded; suspension 
of judgment is “absolutely necessary” because the schema developed permits no escape. 
It would be possible to use one or more of the Five Modes as part of an argument for 
one side of a pair of opposing arguments; in his examination of specific topics, Sextus 
frequently does so. But in his exposition of the Five Modes themselves, he makes them 
smack far more of negative dogmatism. To return to a formulation used above, they 
differ from Sextus’ usual method by being a position within epistemology—a position 
that, in the modern usage, would be classified as skepticism, but which, as we have seen, 
is not what Sextus himself generally understands by skepticism.
The same impression is given by the Ten Modes (which have far less importance in 
Sextus’ work as a whole than do the Five). One reason for saying this is that the oppos-
ing impressions with which the Ten Modes deal are often not ones with which an indi-
vidual subject could be simultaneously presented. (For appreciation of the importance 
of this point I am indebted to Williams (2010).) In the case of the first two Modes, on 
the contrast between human and animal perceptions and between the perceptions of 
different humans, the same subject cannot experience both poles of the opposition at 
all; in the case of the first, there actually has to be an elaborate argument, of seemingly 
dogmatic character, for the conclusion that animals do indeed experience things dif-
ferently from humans (PH 1.41–58). In the case of the fourth, the same person can, 
of course, be sick and healthy, or young and old, but not at the same time. So much of 
the time, at any rate, Sextus cannot be read as saying, “Feel the equal strength of these 
opposing impressions with which I am presenting you, and find yourself suspending 
judgment between them.” Rather, he has to be read as saying, “There are these opposing 
impressions; there is no way to decide between them in terms of truth; so you have no 
choice but to suspend judgment between them”; and the supposed necessity here is dif-
ficult not to see as one imposed by the force of argument.
This point is reinforced by the fact that the Ten Modes, in Sextus’ presentation of 
them, frequently employ considerations borrowed from the Five Modes. This cannot 
have been what they looked like in their original formulation. Sextus tells us that the 
Ten Modes are earlier than the Five; elsewhere (Against the Logicians 1.345) he attri-
butes them to Aenesidemus, so the Five must have been developed at some point in the 
two centuries or more between Aenesidemus and Sextus himself. (Diogenes Laertius, 
9.88, attributes the Five to someone called Agrippa, but we know nothing else about 
this person.) So Sextus’ version of the Ten Modes is a revision of the original Ten 
Modes, incorporating elements that did not at first belong there. Aside, though, from 
this historical issue, the appearance of the Five within the Ten makes the Ten all the 
more likely to come across as dogmatic; for as we saw, that is the impression left by the 
Five themselves.
A third point is that, when the Five are not brought in, the Ten often employ the 
form of argument mentioned a little earlier, in connection with the Relativity Mode. 
Several of the Ten Modes end by saying that we are not in a position to say how things 
are in their real nature; we can only say how they are (or, more often, how they appear) 
in some given set of conditions, where the appearance varies with the conditions. The 
idea seems to be that for something to be a certain way by nature, it would have to strike 
us invariably as being that way; the nature of a thing is something fixed, and the only way 

SKEPTICISM
410
for us to apprehend that fixed nature would be if its effects on us were also fixed. Since, 
as the oppositions drawn to our attention by the Mode in question illustrate, this is not 
the case (at least in the respect drawn attention to), the prospects are closed off for any 
attempt to determine the thing’s nature (again, in that respect—but then, if it always 
turns out like this, as the Modes collectively seem designed to show, the conclusion can, 
presumably, be generalized).
Now this too, by the standards Sextus sets up at the outset of PH, is a dogmatic con-
clusion. Sextus repeatedly claims, after cataloging some set of relativities, that we cannot 
say how things are in their real nature. The argument depends upon a particular con-
ception of what a thing’s nature would be like, and a particular view of how one might 
grasp that nature. Relativity had no role in Sextus’ initial characterization of skepticism; 
besides being dogmatic according to the terms of that characterization, this other style 
of argument seems to appeal to quite different kinds of considerations.
I mentioned that Sextus ascribes the Ten Modes to Aenesidemus. And there is rea-
son to believe that the position just sketched was the Pyrrhonist position in an earlier 
phase of its history than that represented for us by most of Sextus’ own work. (For a 
more detailed account of this line of interpretation, see Bett 2000, chapter 4.) The 
most extensive surviving instance of this position actually appears in Sextus himself. 
In Against the Ethicists, Sextus argues that nothing is either good or bad by nature. The 
argument depends on the fact that there is nothing which strikes everyone uniformly 
as good or as bad. Hence I can speak about what strikes me as good in a certain set of 
circumstances, but not in others; and we can speak about what strikes some one person 
as good, but not other people. However, we cannot say, of any of these merely relative 
goods, that their goodness belongs to the real nature of the things in question. Indeed, 
since nothing comes across to us as good (or bad) other than in this merely relative 
manner, we can say that nothing is good (or bad) in its real nature. This seems to go 
beyond the pattern of thought represented in the Ten Modes, in that it assumes that, 
were anything to be fixedly and invariably good or bad, we would recognize it as such; 
the Modes would conclude only that we cannot determine the real nature of things 
as far as goodness or badness is concerned. (In fact, this is just what the Tenth Mode, 
having to do with ethical variation, does conclude, PH 1.163.) But Against the Ethicists 
is in step with the Modes in refusing any attempt to offer a positive characterization of 
anything’s nature; shared, uniform impressions—which are precisely what we do not 
find—would be necessary for that.
In this particular book, then, Sextus seems to exemplify this distinct form of 
Pyrrhonism centered around relativity. The case for regarding it as earlier than Sextus’ 
usual Pyrrhonist stance, and for connecting it with Aenesidemus, comes not just from 
its appearance in the Ten Modes of Aenesidemus. Photius’ summary of Aenesidemus’ 
Pyrrhonist Discourses, which I mentioned at the beginning, seems to describe the same 
sort of view. Again we have an emphasis on the Pyrrhonist’s self-limitation to relativ-
ized assertions, coupled with assertions that certain things (in their real nature, we may 
presume) are beyond our cognitive grasp. There are also traces of it in the summary of 
Pyrrhonism given in Diogenes Laertius’ Life of Pyrrho (also mentioned at the outset), 
which appears to be independent of Sextus, even though Sextus and Diogenes are at 
times clearly drawing on the same (now unknown) source.
The position just described might strike us as unintuitive and even naive. But the 
idea that variability in our impressions of things closes us off from discerning the real 
natures of things—or even allows us to assert that they have no real nature—has a long 

PYRRHONIAN SKEPTICISM
411
history in Greek philosophy. It is just such variability that makes Plato portray the world 
shown us by the senses as, on the one hand, not a possible object of knowledge (at least, 
if unchanging Forms are not there to help), and on the other, not genuine beings at all 
(see especially the end of Republic V). The Stoics, too, appeal to a similar line of think-
ing about variability in arguing that nothing is genuinely good or bad except virtue 
and vice, respectively. The Pyrrhonists, then, are by no means alone in appealing to 
these considerations concerning relativity. But this just underscores the fact with which 
I began this historical digression. This earlier Pyrrhonist position is, by Sextus’ usual 
standards, a form of dogmatism; hence its periodic appearance in the Ten Modes only 
adds to their dogmatic character.
Both the Five and the Ten Modes, then, seem to amount to arguments for a definite 
epistemological position—that the nature of things is unknowable. Michael Williams 
has tried to explain this by suggesting that the Modes are themselves only one side of an 
opposition, the other side being the dogmatic positive epistemologies of non-skeptical 
philosophers (see Williams 2010, also Williams 1988). In this case the Modes would 
be an application, within the area of epistemology, of the normal Pyrrhonist method 
of assembling oppositions. Now, I do not think this can be made to fit the text; Sextus 
seems to be quite clear in saying that the Modes, taken all by themselves, are means 
for the producing or maintaining of skeptical suspension of judgment. But we might 
very well agree that this would be a better—or at any rate, more consistent—use of the 
Modes than the use for which he in fact seems to employ them; we might also agree 
that, elsewhere, he does in fact make use of the Modes, especially the Five, in negative 
arguments that clearly are designed to be juxtaposed with positive arguments of the 
dogmatists. So Williams’ proposal is certainly in the spirit of Sextus’ usual Pyrrhonist 
practice.
Contemporary Echoes of Pyrrhonism
The epistemological focus of the Modes—something that, as we saw, is not charac-
teristic of Pyrrhonism as a whole—and also, perhaps, their somewhat doctrinal char-
acter explain why they are the aspect of ancient Pyrrhonism that has most attracted 
the attention of contemporary epistemologists. Specifically, in recent years the term 
“Agrippan trilemma” has become widespread, referring to the Modes of Infinite Regress, 
Hypothesis, and Circularity from the Five Modes (of Agrippa)—the three that, as we 
saw, together purport to undermine any attempt at resolving “undecidable dispute” in 
any particular direction, and hence together constitute a global challenge to any project 
of justification. This has often affected the way fundamental issues in epistemology are 
framed; it has also led to a recognition of the longevity of the considerations with which 
any positive epistemology has to deal. But it is not clear that it has had much effect 
on the subject beyond that (see, for example, Sosa 2007: Lecture 6, which elegantly 
employs the Agrippan trilemma—what Sosa calls the “Pyrrhonian Problematic”—to 
explore issues concerning skepticism and foundationalism that were already central in 
contemporary epistemology).
An exception is, perhaps, Robert Fogelin, who has called himself a neo-Pyrrhonist. 
This involves arguing that “no justificatory program seems to show any prospect of solv-
ing the Agrippa problem” (Fogelin 1994: 193). But Fogelin also distinguishes “philo-
sophical skepticism”—that is, “skepticism that arises from philosophical reasoning,” 
of which he takes the Agrippan trilemma to be a specimen—from “skepticism about 

SKEPTICISM
412
philosophy,” which he sees as the outcome of a confrontation between the Agrippan 
trilemma and various leading theories of justification (Fogelin 1994: 3). He also takes 
himself to be following Sextus in this respect; his understanding of the function of the 
Agrippan Modes in Sextus is thus similar to Williams’ (see the end of the previous sec-
tion). Again, this is open to challenge on historical grounds, but perhaps represents 
what Sextus should have done (or does only at his best) in presenting the Modes. There 
is, however, some question why, by Fogelin’s own argument, the Agrippan trilemma 
does not defeat these theories of justification, rather than inducing suspension of judg-
ment about them—in which case we have a particular, negative result within philosophy 
rather than Pyrrhonian suspension of judgment about it. These and other questions 
about Fogelin’s Pyrrhonism have been examined, and refinements of it proposed, by 
philosophers and historians of philosophy in Sinnott-Armstrong (2004b). But Fogelin 
can reasonably be seen as developing an updated Pyrrhonism.
Sinnott-Armstrong himself argues for what he calls “Classy Pyrrhonism,” in which 
epistemic claims are understood as justified, or not, in relation to different contrast 
classes, but the appropriateness of any given contrast class is never unequivocally 
endorsed. In this way everyday knowledge-claims can be taken as perfectly acceptable 
(given everyday standards of justification), and skeptical challenges (which depend on 
much more stringent standards) also given their place (see Sinnott-Armstrong 2004a, 
also Sinnott-Armstrong 2006, which applies this framework to the epistemology of 
moral claims). The key Pyrrhonist element here is the avoidance of “normative episte-
mology.” Nonetheless, it is clearly an epistemological project, and one with rather more 
definite commitments than either Sextus, most of the time, or Fogelin would probably 
welcome.
Fogelin also detects a Pyrrhonist strand in Wittgenstein (Fogelin 1994: Appendix 
B). The Wittgensteinian themes of philosophy as therapy, and philosophy as needing to 
come to an end, certainly have a family resemblance to Sextus’ approach. But Fogelin 
acknowledges that the parallel goes only so far, and others (Sluga 2004; Stern 2004) 
have questioned how useful it really is to look at Wittgenstein in Pyrrhonian terms.
References
Annas, J. and Barnes, J. (1985) The Modes of Scepticism, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Barnes, J. (1990) The Toils of Scepticism, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bett, R. (2000) Pyrrho, his Antecedents and his Legacy, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bett, R. (2006) “Pyrrho,” in E. Zalta (ed.) The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, online, http://plato.
stanford.edu/entries/pyrrho/.
Brennan, T. (2000) “Criterion and Appearance in Sextus Empiricus,” in J. Sihvola (ed.) Ancient Scepticism 
and the Sceptical Tradition, Acta Philosophica Fennica 66: 63–92.
Burnyeat, M. and Frede, M. (eds.) (1997) The Original Skeptics: A Controversy, Indianapolis: Hackett.
Fogelin, R. (1994) Pyrrhonian Reflections on Knowledge and Justification, New York: Oxford University Press.
Long, A. and Sedley, D. (1987) The Hellenistic Philosophers (2 vols.), Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Perin, C. (2006) “Pyrrhonian Scepticism and the Search for Truth,” Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy 30: 
337–60.
Sinnott-Armstrong, W. (2004a) “Classy Pyrrhonism,” in Sinnott-Armstrong 2004b.
Sinnott-Armstrong, W. (ed.) (2004b) Pyrrhonian Skepticism, New York: Oxford University Press.
Sinnott-Armstrong, W. (2006) Moral Skepticisms, New York: Oxford University Press.
Sluga, H. (2004) “Wittgenstein and Pyrrhonism,” in Sinnott-Armstrong 2004b: 99–117.
Sosa, E. (2007) A Virtue Epistemology: Apt Belief and Reflective Knowledge, Volume I, Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.

PYRRHONIAN SKEPTICISM
413
Stern, D. (2004) Wittgenstein’s Philosophical Investigations: An Introduction, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Williams, M. (1988) “Scepticism Without Theory,” Review of Metaphysics 41: 547–88.
Williams, M. (2010) “Descartes’ Transformation of the Skeptical Tradition,” in R. Bett (ed.) The Cambridge 
Companion to Ancient Scepticism, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Woodruff, P. (2010) “The Pyrrhonian Modes,” in R. Bett (ed.) The Cambridge Companion to Ancient 
Scepticism, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Further Reading
Sextus Empiricus (1994, 2nd ed. 2000) Outlines of Scepticism, tr. J. Annas and J. Barnes, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. (English translation of PH, with Introduction and Notes.)
Sextus Empiricus (2005) Against the Logicians, tr. R.Bett, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (English 
translation with Introduction and Notes.)

38
CARTESIAN SKEPTICISM
Steven Luper
It seems to me that I am typing right now. To you, presumably, it appears that you are 
now reading. But what if you and I are dreaming, you of reading and me of typing? 
Possibilities like this seem to threaten our claim to know things about the world. Let us 
say that a hypothesis, SK, is a skeptical hypothesis relative to subject S just in case (a) SK 
says that S is in situation or possible world W, (b) S’s being in W is inconsistent with S’s 
own beliefs about S’s situation, and yet (c) S’s experiences in W are indistinguishable 
from the experiences S has in the actual world. The hypothesis that I am merely dream-
ing of typing this essay is a skeptical hypothesis for me, since the world it says I am in is 
experientially indistinguishable from the actual world: it would seem as if I were typing 
my essay even if I were merely dreaming that I was typing it.
According to a view which I will call Cartesian skepticism, no one can know anything 
about the world because doing so requires knowledge of skeptical hypotheses which is 
unavailable. Cartesian skeptics argue as follows. Take any contingent proposition about 
the world (not about one’s own mind), PW. We can easily find a skeptical hypothesis 
SK such that we can know PW only if we can also know not-SK. Hence the following 
principle is true:
SP: Where PW is any contingent proposition about the world, and S is any subject, 
there is a skeptical hypothesis SK such that S can know PW only if S can know 
not-SK.
However (the argument continues) it is impossible to know that skeptical hypotheses 
are false, since they are consistent with all of our experiences. Hence we cannot know 
PW. Thus the argument, in its simplest form, is this:
The Cartesian Skeptic’s Argument:
1. SP.
2. No one can know that skeptical hypotheses are false.
3. So no one can know anything about the world.
In what follows I examine some ways to support Cartesian skepticism, and some ways 
to criticize it. First I will distinguish it from some other forms of skepticism.
Other Forms of Skepticism
What we know depends, of course, on what is required for knowledge. Given suffi-
ciently demanding requirements, knowledge will be impossible. For example, it will be 

CARTESIAN SKEPTICISM
415
impossible on the assumption that nothing is known unless it is established without tak-
ing anything whatever for granted. If we take nothing for granted, we will be unable to 
presume that we understand our own thoughts and language, and unable to trust reason 
(Hume 1975; Wittgenstein 1969). We will therefore have no way to think our way into 
knowledge. We cannot even doubt a claim, even the claim that we lack knowledge, 
without presupposing that various things are true (Pierce 1877).
Skepticism can arise even on weaker requirements. Suppose that a belief counts 
as knowledge only if adequately justified. Now consider the following claims about 
adequate justification, all of which arise in the literature on Pyrrhonian skepticism (see 
Sextus 1967):
It cannot be circular.
It cannot rely on mere assumptions.
It cannot be an infinite regress (because we cannot grasp such a justification).
It cannot rely on a proposition that is in dispute.
According to regress skepticism, knowledge is impossible since it requires justification 
that meets the first three conditions, and any finite, noncircular justification must begin 
with a premise that is not based on any further claim, which makes that premise a mere 
assumption.
There are ways to resist this route into skepticism. One way is to deny that knowledge 
requires justification. According to externalists (such as Frank Ramsey (1929); Alvin 
Goldman (1967); Fred Dretske (1970, 2003); and David Armstrong (1973)) we can 
know at least some things by arriving at beliefs via sufficiently reliable methods even 
if we are not justified in thinking that our beliefs have been arrived at this way. Since 
knowledge need not involve justification, regress skepticism is not a threat.
Instead of resisting skepticism by appealing to externalism, we could try to demon-
strate the possibility of beliefs that are justified but not by other beliefs, or we could deny 
that adequate justification must meet all of the first three conditions (e.g., by embrac-
ing the legitimacy of circular coherentist justification). However, skepticism remains 
a threat if we accept the last adequacy condition. If knowledge requires justification 
that avoids disputed propositions, skepticism itself destroys knowledge. Suppose you 
claim to know you have hands because your experiences are best explained by your hav-
ing hands, and I claim that you do not know this since knowledge requires certainty. 
Neither of us has adequately justified his claim if this means defending it solely on 
undisputed grounds. Nevertheless, you do not know you have hands, for your claim is 
plausible only if knowledge does not entail certainty, and I take the view that knowl-
edge does entail certainty.
Accepting the last adequacy condition not only permits skeptics to destroy knowl-
edge, it also makes it impossible to regain knowledge by rejecting conditions that force 
us into skepticism, for we cannot reject these without placing ourselves in dispute with 
skeptics. Skeptics will not agree that a condition is objectionable just because it forces 
us into skepticism.
Of course, we can, and should, reject the last adequacy condition. It is absurd to say 
that we are not justified in believing things whose defense appeals to claims that oth-
ers dispute. Your belief that you exist does not become irrational just because I opt to 
defend solipsism. Similarly, criticisms of skepticism can be reasonable even if, as they 
must, they rely on disputed claims.

SKEPTICISM
416
A final point about the various forms of skepticism: theorists responding to one form 
of skepticism are sometimes criticized for failing to disprove other forms. But we need 
not take on all forms of skepticism at once. In particular, a telling criticism of Cartesian 
skepticism might not speak to regress skepticism at all.
Let us turn to Cartesian skepticism now. We can begin with a few words about René 
Descartes.
Descartes and Skepticism
Descartes himself was not a Cartesian skeptic. He was an antiskeptic. Nevertheless, 
there is good reason to speak of ‘Cartesian skepticism,’ since Descartes clarified and 
struggled against the stance we have called ‘Cartesian skepticism,’ and because he was 
committed to SP: he thought that we can know things about the world only if we can 
know that certain skeptical hypotheses are false. In accepting SP, he conceded quite a 
bit to the skeptic, but he thought the damage could be contained since we can know, 
with certainty, that skeptical hypotheses are false.
Usually certainty is understood as immunity to error, roughly as follows: subject S is 
certain that P iff either S’s belief P cannot possibly be mistaken, or S has eliminated the 
ways in which it might be mistaken. Let M be a way in which S’s belief P might be mis-
taken; S eliminates M by deducing not-M from beliefs S has that cannot be mistaken. 
Descartes himself understood certainty in terms of indubitability, or immunity to doubt. 
How he understood indubitability itself is a controversial matter, but given the way he 
argues (in Meditation II) for the indubitability of the proposition that he exists, namely 
by noting that he must exist to be deceived, it is reasonable to accept the following 
interpretation: S’s belief P is indubitable for S, or immune to skeptical doubts, iff S 
believes, correctly, that if any proposition that is a skeptical hypothesis for S holds, then 
P also holds. For example, in any skeptical scenario, S exists, so the corresponding belief 
is indubitable for S. Supposing that S has experiences E, the proposition that S has E 
is indubitable for S, since it is true in any situation sketched by the skeptic. Descartes 
analyzed knowledge in terms of indubitable beliefs and their consequences, as follows: S 
knows P with certainty just in case (a) S’s belief P is indubitable for S or (b) S sees that 
her belief P follows from things that meet condition (a) or (b).
If knowledge entails either form of certainty, SP is true. Consider a proposition about 
the world, PW. I would be mistaken about PW if various skeptical hypotheses SK were 
true. So my belief PW can be immune to error only if I eliminate SK, and thus am cer-
tain of not-SK, as SP asserts. Moreover, if my belief PW is immune to doubt, then, by 
(b), I can know not-SK by deducing it from PW. So SP is true on Descartes’ analysis as 
well.
After equating knowledge with certainty, Descartes set out, in his Meditations (1641; 
page references are to the Cottingham edition), to explain how we can know things 
about the world. He said (p. 61) that we can identify “all the errors” to which our nature 
is liable, and we can “correct or avoid them without difficulty.” This is because we 
know God exists and he would ensure that we have ways to do these things. However, 
Descartes does not make it clear what these ways are (his explanations are filled 
with qualifications that are inconsistent with the guarantee of certainty; e.g., he says 
(p. 61) that the senses “report the truth much more frequently than not,” and we “can 
almost always make use of more than one sense to investigate the same thing”), and his 
case for God’s existence is notoriously unconvincing.

CARTESIAN SKEPTICISM
417
Let us now put Descartes’ own efforts aside, and consider Cartesian skepticism 
anew.
Defense of Cartesian Skepticism
Recall that the skeptic’s argument is this:
1. SP.
2. No one can know that skeptical hypotheses are false.
3. So no one can know anything about the world.
As formulated, the first two premises are undefended. That is easy to correct if, like 
Descartes, we equate knowledge with certainty.
We have already seen that the first premise, SP, is true if knowledge is certainty. Now 
consider the second premise. Presently, I believe that every skeptical hypothesis I can 
think of is false. In particular, I believe that I am not dreaming, and hence that skeptical 
hypotheses that say I am are false. However, my belief might well be mistaken. If my 
experiences were the product of a dream, or produced in some other skeptical scenario, 
I would still believe, mistakenly, that nothing of the sort is occurring. Hence the second 
premise is true if knowledge entails certainty. But if both the first and second premises 
of the skeptic’s argument are correct, Cartesian skepticism is irresistible.
Let us add that principles that are considerably stronger than SP are true if knowledge 
is certainty. Whatever positions me to know P would have to position me to know that 
various skeptical hypotheses were false; at a minimum these would include ones that are 
incompatible with P. So the following principle would be true:
SPC: Where PW is any proposition about the world and SK is any skeptical hypothesis, 
if PW entails not-SK then S knows PW only if S is in a position to know not-SK.
In fact, anyone who equates knowledge with certainty must accept a principle that is 
even stronger than SPC, namely, the principle that knowledge is closed under entail-
ment, at least in the following qualified sense:
GK: If, while knowing various propositions, subject S believes P because S knows that 
they entail P, then S knows P.
For we can be certain about the things entailed by things we know with certainty.
This way of defending Cartesian skepticism fails if knowledge is not certainty. Hence 
it might seem easy to reject skepticism: we can deny that knowledge is certainty, say, 
because the equation of knowledge with certainty makes nonsense of our ordinary ways 
of using the term ‘knowledge’ and its cognates. After all, we say we know all sorts of 
things about the world; we would not speak this way if we thought knowledge required 
certainty. This argument is plausible, but it has been questioned. Peter Unger (1971, 
1975) argues that ‘certain’ is one of several adjectives, such as ‘flat’ or ‘useless,’ that 
seem “absolute” in the sense that they denote a “limiting state or situation to which 
things may approximate more or less closely.” Nothing is absolutely flat; things only 
approximate the limiting state of flatness. Despite this, we still use ‘flat’; we settle for 
high degrees of flatness. In some contexts we are more stringent about degree of flatness 

SKEPTICISM
418
than in others. But we must acknowledge that nothing is ever wholly flat. All this is true 
of “certainty” as well: in some contexts we are more stringent about doubtfulness than 
in others, but “if someone is certain of something, then that thing is not at all doubtful 
so far as he is concerned.”
We have considered the main route into Cartesian skepticism: the equation of 
knowledge with certainty. Now let us consider some reasons for rejecting Cartesian 
skepticism.
Responses to Cartesian Skepticism
There are three main ways to respond to Cartesian skepticism. We might argue that 
skeptical hypotheses are self-refuting and hence not really possible, or that, while pos-
sible, their falsity is harmlessly unknowable, or knowable, so they constitute no threat 
to our ordinary knowledge claims.
Self-Refuting
Hilary Putnam (1981) argued that the hypothesis that we are brains in vats is, with cer-
tain qualifications, self-refuting. It is falsified by the very nature of language or thought. 
He describes a world he calls Twin Earth that is like Earth except that it lacks water; 
instead, it has a substance called XYZ that looks and feels like H2O but has a different 
chemical composition. On Twin Earth people even use the term ‘water.’ But, according 
to Putnam, their term does not refer to the same thing as ours. Our term ‘water’ refers to 
H2O; theirs refers to XYZ. On the basis of thought experiments like this, Putnam con-
cludes that the meaning of our words and the contents of our thoughts is determined by 
causal relationships between us and things in the world. Because we interact with H2O, 
our term ‘water’ refers to H2O, while on Twin Earth they interact with XYZ, so their 
term ‘water’ refers to XYZ. This causal view of the meanings of terms has interesting 
implications for skepticism. Suppose that we are right to think that we are not really 
brains in vats. Still, there is a possible world in which everyone is, and has always been, 
brains in vats, and in which their perceptual input is qualitatively just like ours. Just 
imagine a world in which the entire human race spends its entire existence as brains in 
vats maintained by sophisticated aliens. Putnam claims that, in this Vat World, when 
people say “I’m a brain in a vat,” their words would not mean what ours do when we say 
“I’m a brain in a vat.” This is because the referent of a word is determined by certain 
causal relationships between the people who use that word and the things they interact 
with, and whereas we interact with vats, people in the Vat World do not. What they 
interact with is some sort of elaborate ersatz sensory input controlled by the computers 
used by the aliens. Their term “vat” refers to something in the sensory input provided 
by the aliens. Hence the skeptical hypothesis “We are brains in vats” is self-refuting: 
whether they utter the words “We are brains in vats,” or we do, what is said is false.
Putnam’s proposal is that our words come to refer to things in our environment with 
which we interact in certain ways. A similar proposal is that the contents of our thoughts 
are determined in a similar way: our thoughts are about the things with which we inter-
act. On this view, we could imagine a Vat World peopled by brains in vats whose mental 
lives are qualitatively identical to ours yet whose thoughts are very different from ours. 
When they are in a state of mind that is qualitatively identical to the state we are in 
when we wonder, “is this stuff water?,” they are not thinking about water at all. They are 

CARTESIAN SKEPTICISM
419
thinking about something with which they are in causal contact, call it schmater. If our 
environment really does determine the referents of our words and the contents of our 
thoughts, perhaps we can use this against the skeptic, by arguing as follows:
The Causal Theorist’s Argument:
1. I know I am thinking about water (and that my word ‘water’ refers to water).
2. I would be thinking about schmater, not water, if I were a brain in a vat.
3. So I know I am not a brain in a vat.
Unfortunately, neither Putnam’s contention nor the Causal Theorist’s Argument is 
much help against Cartesian skepticism.
First, Putnam’s strategy cannot be extended to all skeptical hypotheses. Consider the 
hypothesis that all of us were seized yesterday by aliens, who removed our brains, put 
them into vats, and began giving us illusory sensory data. As the victims of these aliens, 
our words would have their familiar meanings, and our thoughts their familiar contents; 
‘vats,’ for example, would refer to vats, and if we were to say or think, “We are brains 
in vats,” we would indeed be saying or thinking something true. The causal account of 
reference and mental content is entirely consistent with the possibility that this skepti-
cal hypothesis is true.
Second, it is not clear that the Causal Theorist’s Argument is plausible. As Anthony 
Brueckner (2003) has noted, it seems possible for skeptics to respond as follows: from 
the inside, thinking about water is qualitatively identical to thinking about schmater. 
So I do not know I am thinking about water rather than schmater, and hence am in no 
position to rule out the possibility that I am a brain in a vat. Moreover, knowing that 
I am thinking about water does not rule out the possibility that I am a brain in a vat. 
Knowing this is compatible with the possibility that I am a brain in a vat, so long as I am 
actually a brain in a vat! If I am, then my knowing I am thinking about water will turn 
out to be my knowing I am thinking about the brain-in-vat counterpart of water.
Harmlessly Unknowable
Our inability to know that skeptical hypotheses are false would be harmless if it did not 
threaten our commonsense knowledge claims. Perhaps we can resist Cartesian skepti-
cism by arguing that, while we cannot know we are not deceived by demons or super-
scientists, this does not stop us from knowing that we are reading or writing articles and 
so forth.
For this strategy to succeed, we will need some way to stop our inability to know 
whether skeptical hypotheses are true from undermining our commonsense knowledge 
claims. When skeptics deny these claims, they tend to rely on principles such as SP, 
SPC and GK. If such principles are false, we can insist on our commonsense knowledge 
claims yet admit that we do not know that skeptical hypotheses are false.
Of course, the strategy we are considering will also force us to deny that knowledge is 
the same thing as certainty, since, as we have seen, this equation forces us to accept SP, 
SPC and GK. Moreover, if knowledge required certainty, the discriminatory powers we 
would need in order to know things about the world would be great indeed. We would 
need to be able to discriminate between actually reading an essay, on one hand, and 
undergoing the experiential equivalent while dreaming or being deceived by Descartes’ 
demon. Denying that knowledge is certainty allows us to say that the discriminatory 

SKEPTICISM
420
powers we need to know things about the world will vary depending on our circum-
stances and the challenges arising in them (Luper 1987). On this view, which we can 
call the variation thesis, ordinary discriminatory powers suffice in ordinary circumstances, 
in which, for example, we are able to distinguish between being confronted with a bird 
and being confronted with a friend who is bird hunting with us, but much greater power 
is necessary when things that are hard to detect are close possibilities. If, for example, 
the planet were invaded by aliens capable of disguising themselves as birds we would not 
know, just by looking, whether the creature in front of us is a bird or an alien. We would 
need a better way to discriminate between the two. On the variation thesis, skeptical 
possibilities do not preclude our knowing things in ordinary circumstances.
Various ways of understanding knowledge are consistent with the variation thesis. 
One such analysis is the tracking account defended by Fred Dretske (1970, 1971, 2003) 
and Robert Nozick (1981). Very roughly, it says that a subject S knows that a proposi-
tion P is true just when S tracks P’s truth, and that S tracks P’s truth just when S has an 
experience E such that
(1) S’s belief P is based on S’s having E, and
(2) Not-P → not-(S has E).
Condition (2) is expressed as a subjunctive conditional; read a conditional of the form P 
→ Q as “if P held, Q would hold” (for further clarification see Lewis 1973). It says that 
in the closest worlds to the actual world in which P holds, Q does too.
Dretske and Nozick note that the tracking analysis is plausible in a wide range of 
cases. For example, it says that I know that there is a bird in front of me because I can 
distinguish it from other things that I might encounter in my circumstances, such as 
tables, fishes, and tractors. In the closest worlds to the actual world in which there were 
not a bird before me, I would not have the experiences I have now—I would not be 
‘appeared to birdly.’ It is true that if the bird-simulating aliens came I might be appeared 
to in a birdlike way even though no bird is in front of me. But the mere possibility of 
such aliens does not preclude my knowing I see a bird.
The tracking account has another important attribute: if it is correct, then principles 
such as GK are false. This we can verify using some examples. As we said earlier, I know 
that the creature in front of me is a bird, since, were it not, I would not be appeared to 
birdly. However, I do not know that the creature in front of me is not an alien simulat-
ing a bird. I do not know this, according to the tracking analysis, since I would still be 
appeared to birdly if a bird-simulating alien were before me. However, the proposition 
that the creature in front of me is a bird entails that it is false that the creature is a bird-
simulating alien. Hence GK must be false: you know the creature is a bird, and that 
this entails it is not a bird-simulating alien; according to GK, then, knowing it is a bird 
positions you to know it is not a bird-simulating alien. Yet you do not track, and hence 
do not know, it is not a bird-simulating alien. Similar reasoning shows that while you 
track and hence know you have hands, you do not know that aliens have not removed 
your brain, placed it into a vat, destroyed your body, and are presently making it appear 
as if your body is intact. Once again, GK must be false. The same examples illustrate the 
falsity of SPC. SP cannot be proven false in this way, but it is false if, given the tracking 
account (as stated), we cannot track the truth of any skeptical hypothesis.
Nozick and Dretske are not the only proponents of the view that skeptical hypoth-
eses are harmlessly unknowable. In recent work, Gilbert Harman, writing with Brett 

CARTESIAN SKEPTICISM
421
Sherman, defends this view as well. According to Harman, “one knows only if one 
believes as one does because of something that settles the truth of that belief” (Harman 
and Sherman 2004, p. 498). He also says that we make various assumptions, perhaps 
tacitly, in the course of coming to know things. For example, in ordinary situations, you 
might come to know you have hands just by having certain experiences: having them 
settles the truth of your belief. However, in believing in your hands on these grounds, 
you assume that you are not merely dreaming that you have hands, and you are not a 
brain in a vat. But you do not know that the assumptions hold, since you lack grounds 
that settle their truth. According to Harman, the upshot is that it is possible to know 
things that entail other things which we assume but are in no position to know, so we 
should reject “strong closure principles” such as GK.
Although some theorists deny closure principles in order to support the claim that 
skeptical hypotheses are harmlessly unknowable, this strategy has received heavy criti-
cism. Most of the critics say that GK (and the weaker principles which it entails) is 
extremely plausible, and should be rejected only if there are very compelling reasons for 
doing so. Admittedly, if holding onto GK commits us to skepticism, there might well 
be compelling grounds for rejecting GK. However, there seem to be defensible ways to 
reject Cartesian skepticism without abandoning GK.
One way has been offered by (speaker-centered) contextualists (e.g., Lewis 1996), 
who say that whether it is proper for a speaker to attribute knowledge to a subject 
depends on the context of the speaker, and in some contexts, say while doing epistemol-
ogy, it is proper to attribute knowledge only to subjects who meet elevated standards, 
such as certainty. In such contexts people cannot properly be said to know things about 
the world. But in ordinary contexts, such as while driving to work, the standards for 
knowledge attributions are more relaxed, and people can properly be said to know a 
great deal about the world. GK is true in any context. But it cannot be used to show 
that people who know things about the world are in a position to know that skeptical 
hypotheses are false, because there is a shift in context anytime the issue of skeptical 
possibilities arises; if someone considers whether he is a brain in a vat, he is thereby 
placed in a context with elevated standards, and can be said to know neither that he is 
not a brain in a vat nor anything about the world that implies that he is not a brain in a 
vat. Thus for contextualists skeptical possibilities are harmlessly unknowable—as long 
as we ignore them.
Knowable
Next let us ask whether there are good reasons for saying we know that (at least some) 
skeptical hypotheses are false.
Famously, G.E. Moore (1962) argued that we can know with certainty that (at least 
some) skeptical hypotheses are false. He defended this claim by turning the skeptic’s 
argument on its head. Moore assumed, as the skeptic does, that he could know things 
about the world, such as that he had hands, only if he could know he was not dreaming. 
But Moore used this assumption against the skeptic, as follows:
1. S can know something about the (mind-independent) world only if S can know she 
is not dreaming.
2. S knows various things about the world, such as that she has hands.
3. So S can know that S is not dreaming.

SKEPTICISM
422
The conclusion of this argument entails that many skeptical hypotheses are false, namely 
any of them that entail that S is dreaming. So according to Moore, we can know that 
all such skeptical hypotheses, as pertain to us, are false. Moreover, we can know this 
with certainty, as we are certain we have hands. Furthermore, if 1 is correct, presumably 
related claims are too, such as these: S can know he has hands only if S can know her 
experiences are not the product of superscientists, or demons, and so on. On Moore’s 
view we can know, with certainty, that no skeptical hypotheses are true that involve our 
having ersatz experiences.
Moore’s argument faces a glaring objection, however: it seems false that we are cer-
tain that we have hands. Moore was not clear about the nature of ‘certainty.’ However, 
if certainty entails immunity to error, then we are not certain we have hands. Our belief 
would be false if we were merely brains in vats being deceived by superscientists, and 
we cannot eliminate this possibility on the basis of other things about which we cannot 
be mistaken.
Moore’s argument is more plausible if we reject the equation of knowledge with cer-
tainty. Moreover, even if we reject this equation, we can learn something from his dis-
cussion, namely this: if we know things about the world, surely we will also know that 
many, if not all, skeptical hypotheses are false. For GK (and SPC, which GK entails) 
seems extremely plausible. So if we know we have hands, then we can know that any 
skeptical hypothesis that is inconsistent with our having hands is false.
Still, the antiskeptical strategy of citing GK and the assumption that we know we 
have hands seems no better than the skeptical strategy of citing GK and the assump-
tion that we cannot know that skeptical hypotheses are false. A better antiskeptical 
strategy is to supply an account of knowledge that supports both GK and the variation 
thesis. This we can accomplish by replacing the tracking account with the safe indication 
view (Luper 1984; Sosa 2003; Pritchard 2005; and others), which holds, roughly, that 
S knows P just when S believes P on the basis of an experience E that safely indicates 
P’s truth; that is,
(1) S’s belief P is based on S’s having experience E, and
(2) S has E → P.
The safe indication analysis is closely related to the tracking account; the second condi-
tion of the one is the contraposition of the second condition of the other. And like the 
tracking account, the safe indication view has plausible implications across a wide range 
of cases. For example, it implies that you know you have hands. Presumably, your belief 
that you have hands is based on your seemingly experiencing your hands; in the closest 
worlds to the actual world in which you had such experiences, you would indeed have 
hands. However, safe indication differs strikingly from tracking in two ways. First, what 
safely indicates the truth of some proposition (or propositions) P also safely indicates 
the truth of the things that P entails, so GK is true given the safety account. Second, 
our experiences safely indicate that various skeptical hypotheses are false. In the closest 
worlds to the actual world in which you seem to have hands, you are not a brain in a vat, 
and not having a dream that creates experiences that exactly match those you actually 
have. Hence on the safe indication account you know that these skeptical hypotheses 
are false. It is true that you would not know you were not vatted if you were vatted, or 
if in your circumstances people often found themselves vatted. It is also true that your 
experiences would be just like they are now if you were vatted. Hence the plausibility 

CARTESIAN SKEPTICISM
423
of the claim that you know that you are not a brain in a vat hinges on the variation 
thesis.
There are other ways to defend the claim that we know that skeptical hypotheses are 
false. Many theorists (e.g., Harman 1968; Vogel 1990) criticize skeptical hypotheses 
on the grounds that such hypotheses are not the best explanations of a person’s experi-
ences. Skeptical hypotheses are consistent with my having the experiences I have, but 
a better explanation of my experiences and their features is the commonsense view that 
there is an array of physical objects, including my body, and some of these objects act 
upon my body in such a fashion as to cause the experiences I have. Coherentists (e.g., 
Lehrer 1974, 2003; BonJour 1985) criticize skeptical hypotheses on these grounds. They 
say that a set of beliefs is justified (as a whole) to the extent that it is coherent, and that 
the coherence of our beliefs is boosted to the extent that some of them support others, 
and reduced to the extent that such support does not exist. Given their explanatory 
impotence, skeptical hypotheses are not well supported; our scheme of beliefs is more 
coherent without them. Coherentists also reject skeptical hypotheses on the grounds 
that they are inconsistent with wide swatches of our beliefs and these beliefs are them-
selves mutually supporting.
Of course, even if skeptical hypotheses are not the best explanations of my experi-
ences, it does not follow that I know that skeptical hypotheses are false. What fol-
lows is that I am justified in believing that skeptical hypotheses are false, and it is well 
known that justified true belief does not constitute knowledge. But there are accounts of 
knowledge that dovetail well with the coherentist account of justification, and accord-
ing to some such combinations it is possible to know that skeptical hypotheses are 
false. Consider, for example, the defeasibility account of knowledge (defended by Klein 
(1971), among others). According to (one version of) this analysis, a subject S knows 
P iff
1. P is adequately justified for S on the basis of grounds G, and
2. G are undefeated for S by any proposition D that is not misleading, where:
(a) 
D defeats G iff D is true and P is not justified for S on the basis of the conjunc-
tion of G and D, and
(b) 
D is misleading iff D justifies S in believing something false.
Given defeasibilism, I know things about the world as long as I have adequate and 
undefeated justification for my beliefs. In view of its demand that known propositions 
be undefeated, defeasibilism is an externalist account of knowledge, and it is committed 
to the variation thesis, since my circumstances determine which propositions would 
defeat my evidence. Moreover, if I am justified in believing that a skeptical hypothesis 
SK is false on the grounds that it is not the best explanation of my experiences, nothing 
stands in the way of my knowing not-SK. But of course if SK is true, it will defeat my 
justification for believing not-SK.
References
Armstrong, David, 1973, Belief, Truth and Knowledge, London: Cambridge University Press.
BonJour, Lawrence, 1985, The Structure of Empirical Knowledge, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Brueckner, Anthony, 2003, “Trees, Computer Program Features and Skeptical Hypotheses,” in Luper 2003, 
pp. 217–227.

SKEPTICISM
424
Descartes, René, 1641, Meditations on First Philosophy, in Cottingham et al. 1984, The Philosophical Writings 
of Descartes, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dretske, Fred, 1970, “Epistemic Operators,” Journal of Philosophy 67: 1007–23.
——, 1971, “Conclusive Reasons,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 49: 1–22.
——, 2003, “Skepticism: What Perception Teaches,” in Luper 2003, pp. 105–19.
Goldman, Alvin, 1967, “A Causal Theory of Knowing,” Journal of Philosophy 64.12: 357–72.
Harman, Gilbert, 1968, “Knowledge, Inference and Explanation,” American Philosophical Quarterly 5: 
164–73.
—— and Sherman, Brett, 2004, “Knowledge, Assumptions, Lotteries,” Philosophical Issues, 14, Epistemology: 
492–500.
Hume, David, 1975, Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, in Enquiries Concerning Human Understanding 
and Concerning the Principles of Morals, edited by L. A. Selby-Bigge, 3rd edition revised by P. H. Nidditch, 
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Klein, Peter, 1971, “A Proposed Definition of Propositional Knowledge,” Journal of Philosophy 67.16: 
47–82.
Lehrer, Keith, 1974, Knowledge, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——, 2003, “Skepticism, Fallibility and Circularity,” in Luper 2003, pp. 95–105.
Lewis, David, 1973, Counterfactuals, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
——, 1996, “Elusive Knowledge,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 74.4: 549–67.
Luper, Steven, 1984, “The Epistemic Predicament,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 62: 26–48.
——, 1987, “The Causal Indicator Analysis of Knowledge,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 47: 
563–89.
——, ed., 2003, The Skeptics, Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing, Limited.
Moore, G. E., 1962, “Certainty,” in Philosophical Papers, London: George Allen and Unwin.
Nozick, Robert, 1981, Philosophical Explanations, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Pierce, Charles, 1877, “The Fixation of Belief,” Popular Science Monthly 12 (November 1877), 1–15.
Pritchard, Duncan, 2005, Epistemic Luck, Oxford University Press.
Putnam, Hilary, 1981, “Brains in a Vat,” in Reason, Truth and History, Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Ramsey, Frank, 1929, “Knowledge,” in D. H. Mellor, ed., Philosophical Papers, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1990.
Sextus Empiricus, Outlines of Pyrrhonism, trans. R. G. Bury, 1967, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Sosa, Ernest, 2003, “Neither Contextualism nor Skepticism,” in Luper 2003, pp. 165–83.
Unger, Peter, 1971, “A Defense of Skepticism,” The Philosophical Review 80: 198–219.
——, 1975, Ignorance: A Case for Skepticism, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Vogel, Jonathan, 1990, “Cartesian Skepticism and Inference to the Best Explanation,” Journal of Philosophy 
87.11: 658–66.
Wittgenstein, 1969, On Certainty, New York: Harper Torchbooks.

39
SKEPTICAL DOUBTS 
ABOUT SELF-
KNOWLEDGE
Fred Dretske
Valid arguments – even those with true premises—don’t take you very far if you don’t 
know whether the premises are true. The fact that I’m in Heidelberg doesn’t give me a 
reason to believe I’m in Germany unless I know (or at least have reason to believe) I’m 
in Heidelberg. So why does everyone believe the Cogito—I think, therefore I am—is 
such an impressive argument? Because, I suppose, everyone thinks he knows the premise 
is true. Everyone who thinks he thinks, thinks he knows he thinks. So everyone thinks 
his existence as a thinking being is the conclusion of an irresistible argument.
The Cartesian inference is certainly valid, no doubt about that. And the premise is 
clearly true—at least it is for everyone who thinks it is true. I’m not questioning either 
of these claims. I do, however, think it worth pondering the question of whether—and 
if so, how—one knows that the premise is true. What reason do thinkers have for think-
ing they think? Is it simply the fact that they think?
1. Self-Verifying Thoughts
Clyde has cancer, but the fact that he has cancer doesn’t give him a reason to believe 
he has cancer. Why, then, should the fact that he thinks give him a reason to think he 
thinks? There might be something about thinking as opposed to having cancer that—
automatically, as it were—provides one with a reason for thinking one is doing it, but if 
so, we need to know what that is.
Is it, perhaps, because one can think one has cancer and be wrong, but one can’t 
think one thinks and be wrong? Is it, in other words, because thinking one thinks is, as 
philosophers like to put it (though Descartes put it differently), a self-verifying thought? 
Unlike the thought that one has cancer or a thought about almost any other topic, the 
thought that one thinks has to be true.
The thought that one thinks is self-verifying—no doubt about that—but having a 
self-verifying thought doesn’t mean one has a reason to think one thinks—not unless 
one has reason to think one has this self-verifying thought. We are, then, back to where 
we started—maybe, even, a little behind where we started. Remember, our question is: 
what reason does one have for thinking one thinks? It is no answer to say that if one 

SKEPTICISM
426
thinks one thinks, one can’t be wrong. That just leaves the question: what reason does 
one have for thinking one thinks one thinks?
According to extreme versions of reliability theory (I don’t know whether anyone 
actually holds this extreme view), the fact that this thought (the thought that one 
thinks) is self-verifying means that one knows one thinks merely by believing one 
thinks. Beliefs that are perfectly reliable qualify as knowledge. There is, however, noth-
ing in such theories that provides help in the current project. There is nothing in such 
theories that reveals what reasons one has for thinking one thinks. On the contrary, 
according to such austere theories of knowledge, one can know that p is true while hav-
ing absolutely no reasons for thinking p is true—while, in fact, having reasons to think 
p is false. What we are looking for here is something a little more satisfying, something 
a thinker has access to that would justify his or her confidence that he or she is a think-
ing being. We are, that is, looking for reasons whether or not such reasons are deemed 
necessary for knowledge according to certain frugal conceptions of knowledge.
We do enjoy a special kind of authority about what we think, but that should not be 
confused with an authority about the fact that we think it. Several philosophers (e.g., 
Heil 1988; Burge 1988) have argued—persuasively to my mind—that with respect to a 
certain limited class of thoughts (conscious current thoughts), one thinks whatever one 
thinks one thinks. We enjoy a kind of infallibility about what we think, and, therefore, 
an authority that comes with such infallibility. This is so because in thinking (at the 
second level, so to speak) that we think (at the first level) that so-and-so, we thereby 
think that so-and-so. In thinking that I am thinking there is water in the glass I thereby 
think there is water in the glass. It is like an exasperated mother saying to her misbe-
having son, “I’m telling you, Billy, stop pestering your sister.” If we ignore the possible 
performative character of her utterance (in which case what Mother says is neither true 
nor false) Mother can’t really be wrong in what she says to Billy. She tells him whatever 
she says she tells him. Even if the words she utters (“Stop pestering your sister”) mean 
by prior agreement between Mother and Son that he should get ready for bed, Mother is 
still correct in using the words, “Stop pestering your sister” to say what she is telling her 
son to do. She is, as she says she is, telling him to get ready for bed. So she can’t be wrong 
no matter what the words she uses mean. The same is true for thought. One uses the 
content of the 1st order thought to think, at the 2nd level, what one is thinking at the 
first level. There is no room for mistake no matter what one (at the 1st level) happens 
to be thinking or how (with what “words” in the language of thought) one thinks it.
If this is the way thought about (current conscious) thoughts work, then we all enjoy 
a kind of infallibility in our thoughts about our currently conscious thoughts. But even if 
things do work this way, it doesn’t help us understand what reasons we have for thinking 
we have thoughts, much less such infallible thoughts. If I think I am thinking it is hot 
out, then if Burge and Heil are right, that must be what I am thinking. And if I think 
that I am thinking, that too must be what I am thinking. But what tells me, what reason 
do I have to think, I actually have these foolproof thoughts about what I am now think-
ing? The answer to that question is not answered by the infallible nature of higher-order 
thoughts about what one is thinking. Mother does not have a reason to think she is 
telling her son to do X just because she knows that if she is saying “I’m telling you to do 
X,” then she can’t be wrong. She is telling him to do X. But what reason does she have 
for thinking she is saying this? Infallibility about what you think you are thinking and 
about what you say you are saying doesn’t give you a reason to think you are thinking or 
saying anything. If you have such a reason, it must come from elsewhere.

SKEPTICAL DOUBTS ABOUT SELF-KNOWLEDGE
427
I will return in a moment to this important difference between knowing what you 
think and knowing you think it, but, first, a reminder of just what we are looking for. 
We are looking for reasons S has for thinking S thinks that are not available to others. 
We are looking for facts that S has exclusive, and therefore privileged, access to that in 
some way indicate or constitute evidence that S thinks. If S is a normal human being, 
of course, we all have reasons to think he thinks. He has a Ph.D. in physics, forty-
three publications, and he runs rings around us at the bridge table. Of course he thinks—
probably better than we do—and there is no shortage of reasons for believing this 
to be so. And if we have such reasons, so too does S. Anything we can point to as 
accomplishments symptomatic of S’s mental prowess are also available to S. If we have 
reasons for thinking S thinks—and we clearly do—so does S: exactly the same facts we 
have.
This is not in question. Of course we, and therefore S, have reasons to think S is a 
thinking being. What is in question is whether there are any facts that indicate this to 
be so that S has exclusive access to, facts or conditions that S is aware of that we can’t 
be aware of—at least not in the direct and authoritative way that S is. Is there anything 
S is aware of that others can’t be aware of that give S an evidential edge on questions 
about whether S has thoughts?
One way to proceed in an investigation of this sort is to look at how we learned we 
think. We all think before we ever discover what thinking is. Before we think we think. 
So at some point in time, or during some phase of childhood, we learned we think. 
How did we learn this? Who taught us? Parents? Did we take their word for it? Were we 
already aware of our own thoughts as we were of lamps and television sets and merely 
had to learn (as we did with ordinary objects) what to call them? Before pursuing this 
line of inquiry, though, a few words about terminology.
2. Terminological Matters
What is to count as a thought? Like Descartes, I intend to be pretty inclusive. Any 
description of S whose truth requires S to think or be able to think, in the everyday sense 
of the word “think,” will be considered a description of S as thinking. This includes not 
only thinking in the everyday sense (I think someone is following me, he thinks she is 
home), but all the so-called propositional attitudes insofar as the verbs are understood as 
taking a factive complement: believing, judging, knowing, perceiving (i.e., seeing, hear-
ing, feeling, tasting), doubting, remembering, regretting, being sorry, hoping, intending, 
wanting, and imagining that so-and-so. Even wondering whether something is so or 
pretending that something is so (that a banana is a telephone, for instance) will count 
as thinking on this generous construal of thought. One doesn’t, of course, have to think 
(in the narrower sense) that something is so in order to wonder whether it is so or pre-
tend that it is so, but one cannot wonder or pretend without being able to think that it 
is so—without, that is, having the capacity for thinking it is so. In this broad inclusive 
sense, then, thinking is doing something that creatures that cannot think (in the nar-
rower everyday sense) can’t do. Sensations (pains, itches, tickles, hunger, thirst), emo-
tions (anger, fear), and moods (elation, depression) do not qualify as thoughts although 
these feelings, moods, and emotions might well combine with thoughts to yield com-
posite states that qualify as thoughts—e.g., anger that she left, fear that he will fall, 
and relief that she got home safe. I continue to speak of one’s reasons for thinking 
one thinks, but given this inclusive and broad understanding of what a thought is, our 

SKEPTICISM
428
query could be put: what reasons (to which one has exclusive access) does one have for 
thinking one can think in the narrower everyday sense of this word.
One final terminological note. In speaking of thoughts (fears, perceptions, etc.) one 
can be speaking of either (1) what one thinks, the content of the thought, or (2) what 
is often called the act of thinking, that which distinguishes my thought that today is 
Friday from your thought that today is Friday. When we speak of a person’s belief (fear, 
hope), for instance, it is sometimes unclear whether we mean to be speaking of content, 
what the person believes (fears, hopes), or their believing (fearing, hoping) it, a mental 
action. I will always try to make it clear which I intend to be referring to when there is 
any chance of misunderstanding.
3. Acquaintance with Content
So much for sharpening tools. It is time to use them. Imagine, then, a normal three-
year-old, Sarah, who thinks but hasn’t yet learned she thinks. That one thinks is some-
thing psychologists tell us (I rely here on Astington 1993; Bartsch and Wellman 1995; 
Carpendale and Lewis 2006; Flavell 2003; Gopnik 1993) that children only come to 
fully understand around the age of three or four years. Sarah, a typical three-year-old, 
isn’t quite there. She thinks Daddy is home. That is what she tells Mommy. That is why 
she runs to open the door when she hears an automobile pull in the driveway. What 
Sarah tells Mommy is (what else?) what she thinks (knows, hears): that her father is 
home. She does not, however, realize that she thinks it. She might use the word “think,” 
(“know” or “hear”) in describing herself, but if she does, she doesn’t yet fully understand 
that what she is giving expression to is a fact about herself, a subjective condition hav-
ing a content (what she thinks) that might not be true. She will, however, soon acquire 
this knowledge. How and from whom? No doubt from parents, teachers, older siblings 
and friends. If one doesn’t actually teach children this, if they merely absorb it the way 
children acquire their native language, it is nonetheless from others, or at least with the 
help of others, that Sarah will learn that what she has been telling them is what she has 
been thinking, what she believes, what she (sometimes) even knows. It is from (or with 
the help of) other people (and, perhaps, a few disappointed expectations) that she will 
learn that she has thoughts that usually correspond to the way things actually are, but 
that sometimes fail to match the facts. In the process she will learn that her behavior 
and, of course, the behavior of others can be explained not only by the fact that her 
father is home (Sarah already understands this), but also by her thinking he is home—
something (Sarah will learn) that can be true of her, and can explain her excited rush 
to the door, without her father actually being home. As Jonathan Bennett (1991: 97) 
once put it in describing what psychologists have learned about child development, a 
two-year-old predicts and explains another person’s behavior on the basis of what she, 
the child, thinks is true; a four-year-old does so on the basis of what the other person thinks 
is true (or at least what the child thinks the other person thinks is true). To reach this 
level of sophistication one has to understand, as two-year-olds do not, what it means 
to think something is true. That is why normal two-year-olds do not understand the 
behavior of someone who goes to the door when no one is there. A four-year-old will 
understand this: the person went to the door because the person (but maybe not the four-
year-old) thought there was someone at the door.
To understand what kind of access we, those of us who think we have thoughts, have 
to our own thoughts, and thus what kind of reasons we have for thinking we have them, 

SKEPTICAL DOUBTS ABOUT SELF-KNOWLEDGE
429
it is instructive to consider the kind of access Sarah, a person who doesn’t think she 
has them (she doesn’t think she doesn’t have them either), has to her thoughts. I said 
above that Sarah told her mother that her father was home and rushed to open the door 
because she thought he was home. It might not have been her father she heard pulling 
into the driveway, of course, but Sarah thought it was, and the fact that she thought so 
explains why she behaved that way. If she had thought, instead, that it was the mailman 
she wouldn’t have told her mother that her father was home and she wouldn’t have 
rushed to open the door. Sarah’s thoughts and desires explain her behavior in exactly 
the same way our thoughts and desires explain ours. The only difference is that Sarah 
does not yet understand that her behavior can be explained by the fact that (whether or 
not her father is home) she thinks he is home. We do.
If Sarah’s behavior is to be explained by what she thinks even when she does not 
realize she thinks it, and the behavior in question is a deliberate, purposeful act (Sarah 
has and is prepared to give reasons for what she does, and these reasons are, in part, what 
she thinks), there must be a sense in which Sarah is aware of what she thinks—that her 
father is home—without being aware that this is something she thinks. Call this form of 
awareness acquaintance. Sarah is acquainted with what she thinks. Although this word 
has a troubled philosophical history, I use it in its ordinary sense, the sense in which one 
can be acquainted with—in fact, good friends with—a philosopher and not know he is 
a philosopher. It is in this epistemically uncommitted sense of awareness that Sarah is 
acquainted with what she thinks: she is aware (conscious) of what she is thinking in a 
way that doesn’t require her to know (or even think) it is something she is thinking in 
order to be aware of it. If she had thought, instead, that it was the mailman, she would 
have been acquainted with, aware of, something different. Something different would 
have been going through her mind—her conscious mind—at the time she spoke to her 
mother. She would, therefore, have behaved differently.
What is it that Sarah is acquainted with (aware of) when she thinks her father is 
home? We cannot say it is (the fact) that her father is home because her father needn’t 
be home for her to think he is home and to behave (and to give the same reasons 
for behaving) in exactly the same way. Whatever she is acquainted with when she 
thinks he is home must, therefore, be (logically) independent of her father’s actual 
whereabouts in the same way her thought that he is home is (logically) independent 
of his actual whereabouts. So it can’t be the fact that her father is home. There might 
be no such fact. Nor can we say that what Sarah is acquainted with when she thinks 
her father is home is the fact that she thinks her father is home because although this 
(unlike her father’s being home) must be a fact, it is not a fact that Sarah, lacking the 
concept of thought, can be aware of. What, then, if it isn’t a fact, is Sarah aware of 
when she thinks her father is home? Well, propositions have traditionally played this 
epistemological/semantic role. They are the objects of thought. In thinking that her 
father is home, Sarah is acquainted with a proposition, the proposition that her father 
is home. Propositions are the meanings of declarative sentences—those sentences we 
use to express what one thinks. They can be either true or false. So what Sarah is 
acquainted with when she thinks her father is home is a proposition that might be false. 
And given the way we are understanding acquaintance, Sarah can be acquainted with 
this proposition without knowing it is a proposition. If this (acquaintance with proposi-
tions) sounds a bit strange, one has to remember that it is merely our way of saying that 
one can be aware of what one thinks in the same way we (who know we think) can be 
aware of it without knowing it is something one thinks. Indeed, one way to describe the 

SKEPTICISM
430
conceptual development of children is to say that what they learn at around the age of 
four is that what they had been taking to be (what we call) facts about the world are 
really (what we call) propositions—entities that (unlike facts) can be false. Awareness 
of the proposition that her father is home does not mean, of course, that Sarah cannot 
(also) be aware of the fact that he is home, but awareness of the fact requires more than 
awareness of the proposition that he is home. It requires, in addition, awareness that 
this proposition is true.
4. Awareness of What One Thinks
So there is a sense, a perfectly straightforward sense, in which one has a privileged 
awareness of one’s own present conscious thoughts even before one knows one has them. 
If we want to find out what Sarah thinks, we have to ask her. She is the authority on 
what she thinks despite not knowing she thinks it. We cannot, to be sure, find out what 
Sarah thinks by asking her what she thinks. She won’t understand what we are talk-
ing about. But there are indirect ways of getting the answer to this question. Given a 
cooperative child, we can ask Sarah whether her father is home. Or why she is rushing 
to open the door. The answers will reveal, quite unerringly, what Sarah thinks. If Sarah 
wasn’t aware of what she thinks, how could she know how to answer these questions?
What this tells us is that our point of contact with our own thoughts is through their 
content: what it is we are thinking. We have a privileged and exclusive access to our own 
thoughts through acquaintance with their propositional content. This mode of access 
gives our own acts of thought their peculiar diaphanous quality: the acts of thought are 
absolutely invisible to the person whose thoughts they are. All one is aware of (at least 
up to the age of three or four) is their content. Later (after three or four) one becomes 
aware of the fact that this is the content of one’s own thought. Something of this puz-
zling nature can, perhaps, be brought out by comparing thoughts (one’s own thoughts) 
to verbal representations. People say things and they think things. One’s access to what 
a person (including oneself) says is through the person’s act of saying it—an acoustic or 
observable event of some sort. We hear the person say he has a dental appointment, and 
then, if we understand the language, we come to know, become aware of, what that per-
son said, the proposition expressed. We go from the saying to what-is-said, from act to 
content. In the case of thought, however, the route of access is reversed. Our only point 
of contact with our own thoughts is through their content. Sarah thinks Daddy is home, 
that it is raining, and that the dog is barking. Despite no awareness that she thinks these 
things, and no awareness of her own acts of thought, she is, nonetheless, fully aware of 
(that is, acquainted with) what it is she thinks—the content of these assorted thoughts. 
Sarah will eventually learn that there is something about (in?) her—something very 
personal (everyone has their own thoughts) and private (one can keep one’s thoughts to 
oneself)—to which this content is somehow attached. She first becomes aware of what 
she thinks—the proposition that her father is home—and later learns that this fact (or 
what she took to be a fact) was, so to speak, attached to her thoughts but perhaps to no 
one else’s thoughts. Nor does it depend in any essential way on Daddy’s whereabouts. 
Unlike a person saying, “Daddy is home,” a verbal action one can become fully aware of 
without understanding what is being said (the proposition that is being expressed), one 
can be (and at two years, one is) acquainted with what one is thinking (this proposition) 
while having absolutely no awareness or understanding of the act of thought itself. The 
mode of access is completely reversed.

SKEPTICAL DOUBTS ABOUT SELF-KNOWLEDGE
431
This mode of access to one’s own thoughts continues, of course, after one finds out 
one thinks. One learns, around the age of four, that people, including oneself, have 
these privately accessible thoughts. One becomes aware that one thinks, but in learning 
this one doesn’t become aware of one’s own thoughts in any way other than the way 
one was aware of them before one learned this. The access is still via their content. 
One doesn’t suddenly, at the age of four, become aware of one’s own acts of thought. 
One simply becomes aware, learns, comes to believe, that such acts of thought must 
exist somewhere inside each thinker for a thinker to have the thoughts (the thought-
contents) she has, thought-contents to which each thinker has privileged and authori-
tative access (i.e., acquaintance with).
5. Skeptical Conclusions
Well, if this is our mode of access to our own thoughts, doesn’t this provide us with an 
answer to the skeptic’s question—the question of what reason we have for thinking we 
think? Everyone who thinks has a reason to believe he thinks because he is acquainted 
with the propositions that are the content of his own thoughts and which indicate the 
presence of the thoughts for which they are the content.
Unfortunately, this doesn’t work. When you think, there is nothing you are aware 
of that indicates you are thinking. What you are aware of (or acquainted with) is a 
proposition and propositions do not indicate anything. They are not reasons to believe 
that anything is so. Unlike facts (conditions, states of affairs), propositions can be either 
true or false, and a proposition with indeterminate truth-value does not increase the 
probability that anything else is true. Propositions are a dime a dozen. They are episte-
mologically worthless. The proposition that pigs have wings is a perfectly respectable 
proposition—something a person might actually think—but has absolutely no proba-
tive value. It certainly isn’t a reason to think pigs can fly. If it were a reason, we would 
all have a reason to think that pigs can fly. What would be a reason to think pigs can fly 
is if it were true that pigs have wings, if it were a fact that pigs have wings, if pigs actually 
had wings. The proposition that pigs have wings, though, doesn’t require pigs to have 
wings. So a person’s awareness of what he thinks when he thinks pigs have wings—the 
proposition that pigs have wings—doesn’t give him a reason to believe that pigs can 
fly. It doesn’t give him a reason to believe anything. It doesn’t, in particular, give him a 
reason to think that he is thinking pigs have wings. This is true even when what a person 
thinks is that he is presently thinking that pigs have wings. The person needs a reason 
to think that this proposition (that he is thinking that pigs have wings) is true in order 
to have a reason to think that he thinks, and we are back to where we started: looking 
for reasons to think one thinks.
What this means is that there is nothing we are aware of when we think that indi-
cates we are thinking. We are aware of what we think, a proposition, and we enjoy a 
privileged and authoritative form of awareness of this content, yes, but thought content 
is evidentially worthless. Privileged awareness of it makes one an authority on what one 
thinks in the same way Sarah (who doesn’t know she thinks) is an authority on what she 
thinks, but it doesn’t give one a reason, much less make one an authority, on whether 
or not one is thinking it.
What, then, is one’s reason, one’s evidence, for thinking one thinks? If our mode of 
contact with our own thoughts doesn’t give us a reason to think we are having these 
thoughts, what does? I haven’t found anything—at least nothing one has privileged 

SKEPTICISM
432
access to, nothing one’s neighbors and friends don’t have equal access to. If this is, 
indeed, so, then there is a genuine problem of self-knowledge. It turns out to be pretty 
much the same problem as the problem of other minds.
References
Astington, J. W. 1993. The Child’s Discovery of the Mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bartsch, K. and H. M. Wellman. 1995. Children Talk About the Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bennett, J. 1991. How to Read Minds in Behavior: A Suggestion from a Philosopher. In A. Whiten (ed.) 
Natural Theories of Mind (pp. 97–108). Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Burge, T. 1988. Individualism and Self-Knowledge. Journal of Philosophy, 85: 649–93.
Carpendale, J. and C. Lewis. 2006. How Children Develop Social Understanding. Malden, MA: Blackwell 
Publishing.
Flavell, J. H. 2003. Development of Children’s Knowledge About the Mind: The Heinz Werner Lectures. Worcester, 
MA: Clark University Press.
Gopnik, A. 1993. How We Know Our Minds: The Illusion of First Person Knowledge of Intentionality. 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16, 1–14.
Heil, J. 1988. Privileged Access. Mind, 47: 238–51.

40
SKEPTICISM ABOUT 
KNOWLEDGE OF OTHER 
MINDS
Anita Avramides
The philosophical issue of skepticism is one that can be located within epistemology—
although epistemologists dispute the significance and centrality of this issue. The prob-
lem of other minds is often taken to be a skeptical problem. Skeptical questions have 
a long history; the history of questions concerning the minds of others has a shorter, 
somewhat less clear, history. This observation alone should lead one to approach the 
topic of “skepticism and other minds” with a degree of caution. Although I shall discuss 
the intersection of these issues, I shall not feel constrained to see all questions arising in 
connection with the latter as falling into a subclass of questions arising in connection 
with the former. Insofar as it is meaningful to talk of two traditions in philosophy, what 
follows is firmly rooted in the analytic tradition; there is still a rich seam to be mined in 
the continental/phenomenological tradition.
Some Ancient History
Skepticism is a philosophical problem whose roots can be traced back to ancient times 
and to two main schools of skeptical thought: the Academic and the Pyrrhonian. Myles 
Burnyeat (1982) and Bernard Williams (1981) argue that the skepticism of these early 
philosophers is prefaced on an assumption that an experiencing subject acts in a world, 
with a focus on questions concerning how we can know truths about this world. They 
argue that the skeptic of ancient times is a realist who does not question the existence 
of the world, but only its state or condition. Avramides (2001) observes that skepticism 
concerning the existence of other minds also appears to have no place here. These early 
skeptics assume the existence of others in order to raise doubts about dogmatic claims 
concerning the nature of the world.
A group of lesser-known skeptics in ancient times, the Cyrenaics, are reported by the 
second-century skeptic Sextus Empiricus (ad 160–210 [2000]: 195–198) to have made 
the following observation about experience:
For each person is aware of his own private pathos [affections], but whether this 
pathos occurs in him and his neighbour from a white object neither can he him-
self tell, since he is not submitting to the pathos of his neighbor. . . .  And since 

SKEPTICISM
434
no pathos is common to us all, it is hasty to declare that what appears to me of a 
certain kind appears of this same kind to my neighbour as well.
The question raised here is on a par with the kind of question about the world that one 
finds throughout the ancient skeptical literature: given that each person is aware of his 
own affections, and given that he cannot “submit” to the affections of another, we can-
not know whether what appears to me is of the same kind as what appears to another. 
We might label this the knowledge what question: ‘How do I know what another is think-
ing or feeling?’ We can think of this as a restricted skeptical question because, in raising 
it, there is an assumption that the other does have a mind.
Modern Skepticism
Descartes and the Seeds of a Problem
The skepticism of modern philosophy traces its roots back to Descartes’ Meditations. 
Descartes was familiar with the work of Sextus and developed his skepticism against this 
background. Descartes considers the arguments of the earlier skeptics—the possibility 
of illusion, of hallucination, and of dreaming—and to these he adds another: the pos-
sibility that we are being deceived by an evil demon. The importance of this consider-
ation is that it allows us to question, not just how things are beyond my thought, but 
whether there is anything that corresponds to my thought. Once this question is raised 
we can ask a much more radical skeptical question, both about the world of objects and 
about the minds of others. We might label this the knowledge that question: ‘How do 
I know that others have minds?’ Another way of formulating the question is to start by 
reflecting on one’s own experience and ask how I know that I am not the only mind. It 
is modern, Cartesian, skepticism that Simon Blackburn characterizes when he writes: 
“Classically, scepticism springs from the observation that the best methods in some area 
seem to fall short of giving us contact with the truth (there is a gap between appearance 
and reality)” (Blackburn 1994: 340). In the case of another mind the gap might be said 
to be between the body and the mind of the other. Fitting together radical skepticism 
about the world of bodies with that concerning another mind, Donald Davidson once 
observed: “If there is a logical or epistemic barrier between the mind and nature, it not 
only prevents us from seeing out; it also blocks a view from the outside in” (Davidson 
1991: 154). It is a blocked view “from the outside in” that gives rise both to the radical 
and the restricted skeptical problem of other minds.
Descartes raises a radical skeptical question concerning the world of bodies, but 
there is no acknowledgment in his work of a problem concerning the mind of another. 
Nevertheless, when Descartes wants to convince the reader that, contrary to the usual 
way of thinking, we know mind better than body, he writes: “But then if I look out of a 
window and see men crossing the square . . . I normally say that I see men themselves 
. . . Yet do I see more than hats and coats which could conceal automatic machines?” 
(Descartes 1984 [1641]: 21).
Philosophers have found in this passage the seeds of a radical skeptical problem: ‘How 
can I distinguish between a man/person/being with a mind and an automated machine/
zombie/body without a mind?’

SKEPTICISM ABOUT KNOWLEDGE OF OTHER MINDS
435
Malebranche’s Two Ways of Knowing Mind
Nicolas Malebranche (1674–1675) delineated four distinct ways of knowing, two of 
which are connected with mind: knowledge of one’s own mind is through consciousness 
or inner sensation; knowledge of another’s mind is “by conjecture.” The need for con-
jecture in the case of others follows from the following observations. Firstly, we cannot 
know another mind in the way we know bodies, since “our soul . . . not being corporeal, 
cannot be represented to the mind by corporeal images” (Malebranche 1997 [1674–
1675]: 62–63). And secondly “we cannot compare our mind with other minds in order 
to discover clearly some relation between them” (Ibid.: Elucidation 11). Malebranche 
differentiates between knowledge of another’s sensations and knowledge that another 
knows certain truths (e.g. twice two is four, or it is better to be just than rich). This dif-
ference reflects the fact that the body plays a role in the experience of sensations, but 
not in the knowledge of truths. Where the body plays a role, Malebranche holds that 
“I am almost always mistaken in judging others by myself” (Ibid.: 239). This is because, 
if we recognize the difference between a sensation and its cause, then we must also 
recognize that:
it can happen that similar motions in the interior fibers of the optic nerve do 
not produce the same sensation for different people . . . and it might happen 
that motion that will cause the sensation of blue in one person will cause that 
of green or grey in another, or even a novel sensation that no one has ever 
had.
(Ibid.: 63)
Malebranche further considers that, even if we were to think that God has arranged 
things so that the same sensations are conjoined to the same motions of the brain, “there 
is no reason to suppose a perfect resemblance in the optic nerve of all men” (Ibid.: 66).
Malebranche makes observations (where Descartes does not) concerning knowledge 
of other minds. Interestingly, he appears not to raise the radical skeptical question. Our 
conjectures appear to presuppose that others do have minds; they concern the knowl-
edge what question, raising only a restricted skeptical problem.
Berkeley and Reasoning to the Probability of Another (Finite) Mind
When we read the works of George Berkeley (1975 [1710], 1975 [1713]) we find that 
he, like Malebranche, emphasizes a difference in the way we know our own and other 
minds. Unlike Malebranche, however, Berkeley does raise a radical skeptical problem. 
When considering knowledge of his own mind Berkeley makes the following observa-
tion: “I know what I mean by the terms I and myself; and I know this immediately, or 
intuitively, though I do not perceive it as I perceive a triangle, a colour, or a sound” 
([1713]: 231). When considering knowledge of another (finite) mind, Berkeley believes 
we can do no better than to employ a form of reasoning. He explains why this is so when 
he writes:
A human spirit or person is not perceived by sense, as not being an idea. . . . 
It is plain, we do not see a man—if by man is meant that which lives, moves, 
perceives and thinks as we do: but only such a certain collection of ideas, as 

SKEPTICISM
436
directs us to think there is a distinct principle of thought and motion like unto 
ourselves, accompanying and represented by it.
([1710]: 124)
Berkeley further points out that, while our knowledge of our own mind is through 
intuition and therefore secure, our knowledge of the mind of another is only probable 
([1713]: 185).
Malebranche and Berkeley make several interesting observations about mind, among 
them: (i) there is a notable difference in the way in which we know our own and another 
mind; and (ii) the way in which we know another mind is very different from the way in 
which we know body. Berkeley puts this point by saying that we do not perceive another 
mind. This is an idea that has interested philosophers of recent times, with some pro-
posing that we do in fact perceive other minds (see below). On the whole, however, 
philosophers have tended to agree with Berkeley. The idea that we do not perceive 
other minds goes along with another: that the behavior of another is the outward trap-
ping of the other’s mind. Despite these similarities, Malebranche appears to raise only 
a restricted skeptical question concerning the mind of others, while Berkeley raises 
both a restricted and a radical skeptical question. It is important that Berkeley is able 
to explain how it is that we (successfully) reason to the existence of other minds, for 
without such reasoning his philosophy would be mired in solipsism.
Reid: First Principles vs. Reason
Malebranche and Berkeley both inherited their philosophical framework from 
Descartes, although both were concerned to correct what they saw as defects in it. One 
philosopher to raise questions about the Cartesian framework that would lead him to 
a rejection of it, is Thomas Reid. Reid was bothered by what he saw as the inevitable 
outcome of Descartes’ philosophy: skepticism with respect to other intelligent beings. 
This is a skepticism that he finds in Berkeley’s philosophy, which he takes to be mired 
in solipsism. Whether Reid is correct or not depends upon one’s assessment of Berkeley’s 
proposals for how it is that we know that another has a mind. Reid, however, does not 
review Berkeley’s arguments. What Reid claims is that all methods of reasoning—such 
as by analogy or conjecture—yield insecure foundations for knowledge. According to 
Reid, reasoning must be grounded on first principles. This commitment to first principles 
is something that marks Reid out as a philosopher of common sense, and as a profoundly 
anti-Cartesian philosopher. Among the first principles of contingent truths that Reid 
believes form the foundation of all reasoning are these:
There is life and intelligence in our fellow men with whom we converse. 
Certain features of the countenance, sounds of the voice and gestures of the 
body, indicate certain thoughts and dispositions of mind.
There is much to be said both for and against the operation of first principles in phi-
losophy. For our purposes, it is sufficient to note how Reid’s use of these first principles 
is designed to provide a secure foundation for our knowledge of other minds.
What is important for Reid is that one’s relation to others is built on a secure founda-
tion. Reid does not say that we perceive the minds of others. Rather, he holds that one 

SKEPTICISM ABOUT KNOWLEDGE OF OTHER MINDS
437
of the foundations of all our reasoning is that there are other intelligent beings. This 
is an important and profoundly anti-Cartesian observation. It is not designed as a way 
of combating skepticism but as eliminating the framework within which skepticism 
arises. According to Reid the skeptical framework is the Cartesian one, and what should 
replace it are first principles of contingent truths.
John Stuart Mill and Proof of the Real Externality of Another Mind
Reid’s philosophy is the subject of much discussion by the nineteenth-century philoso-
pher Sir William Hamilton, and the writings of Hamilton are the subject of an impor-
tant work by John Stuart Mill (1872). Mill characterizes Reid’s philosophy as one that 
holds that the existence of the external world and other minds is something we are 
compelled to believe in by our mental constitution. What we are compelled to believe 
in is what is captured in Reid’s first principles of contingent truths. In the place of this 
Mill proposes that all truths are known in one of two ways: either directly through the 
authority of consciousness, or indirectly by inference from truths known directly. Mill’s 
psychological theory (or phenomenalism) is intended to account for our belief in mat-
ter and in mind. It is important to note that the development of Mill’s theory marks a 
return to and an acceptance of the Cartesian framework. It is a framework that—despite 
much talk of its overthrow—still dominates philosophical thinking about mind today.
Mill believes there is an asymmetry between our belief in objects external to our-
selves and our belief in intelligent beings other than ourselves: while the former is a 
construction out of groups of possible sensations, the latter corresponds to the existence 
of other, quite separate, minds. Indeed, Mill goes so far as to write that, “I do not believe 
that the real externality to us of anything, except other minds, is capable of proof” (Mill 
1872: 238–239). Indeed, Mill’s “proof” has come to be taken as the locus classicus of one 
of the more popular forms of reasoning to the existence of other minds, the argument 
from analogy:
I conclude that other human beings have feelings like me, because, first, they 
have bodies like me, which I know, in my own case, to be the antecedent condi-
tions of feelings; and because, secondly, they exhibit the acts and other outward 
signs, which in my own case I know by experience to be caused by feelings.
(Mill 1872: 243)
While all the material for an argument by analogy is present in Mill’s work, Mill claims 
that he is offering a good inductive argument to the desired conclusion. He writes: “If 
the evidence stopped here [in a conclusion drawn from analogy], the inference would 
be but an hypothesis; reaching only to the inferior degree of inductive evidence called 
Analogy” (Mill 1872: 260). Mill believes the evidence is stronger than that:
I find that my subsequent consciousness presents those very sensations, of 
speech heard, of movements and other outward demeanor seen . . . which, 
being the effects or consequents of actual feelings in my own case, I should 
expect to follow upon those other hypothetical feelings if they really exist: 
and thus the hypothesis is verified. It is thus proved inductively that there is a 
sphere beyond my consciousness.
(Mill 1872: 260)

SKEPTICISM
438
A similar point was made by A.J. Ayer over half a century later (Ayer 1956).
It is worth pausing to note that Mill’s inductive proof yields a conclusion stronger 
than that yielded by the argument from analogy, yet still falls short of the secure foun-
dations for which Reid was searching. Of course our hypothesis here would be well 
confirmed, but it is arguable that this still misses the point. Just what point it misses 
is not easy to explain. A contemporary critic of Mill’s, H. F. O’Hanlon, attempted to 
explain Mill’s mistake by pointing out that Mill simply assumes that we can extend the 
principles of inductive inference beyond our own sphere of consciousness, whereas the 
existence of another sphere of consciousness is precisely what wants proving. Mill was 
quick with a rejoinder: “There is nothing in the nature of the inductive principle that 
confines it within the limits of my own consciousness, when it exceptionally happens 
that an inference surpassing the limits of my consciousness can conform to inductive 
conditions” (Mill 1872: 259). Who is correct here is a matter of some consequence.
The Appearance–Reality Distinction
Descartes’ Distinction and the Cartesian Question
Descartes constructs his entire Meditation from the first-person point of view and aims to 
question everything beyond this. In particular, his skeptical considerations are founded 
on a distinction between the world as it appears to a mind and as it is apart from any 
mind. Let us call this appearance–reality distinction “Descartes’ distinction,” and the 
question it gives rise to “the Cartesian question.” Both the distinction and the question 
are the result of what Descartes took to be our capacity to doubt the existence of bodies 
while remaining steadfastly unable to doubt the existence of mind. Once Descartes’ dis-
tinction is in place, it is possible to see that it gives rise to further distinctions and ques-
tions, this time concerning minds other than one’s own. When I contemplate another’s 
mind, the appearance–reality distinction is in its mirror image, so to speak. While it is 
the other’s body that appears to me, it is the reality of the other’s mind that is in ques-
tion. And this question remains even after the existence of bodies has been proved. As 
Davidson so aptly observed (above), the problem now is that our view is blocked “from 
the outside in.”
If we accept that this appearance–reality distinction gives rise to both a radical and 
a restricted skeptical problem about other minds, we must also remember that these 
problems do not attach to all minds. My mind is exempt from such doubts. There is also 
an interesting difference between the appearance of a body and the appearance of a 
mind: in the case of the external world what appears to the subject is a body; in the case 
of another mind what appears to a subject is also a body, while what we take this to be 
an appearance of is another mind.
Reasoning Across the Gap
Thus the gap between my mind and the world of bodies opens up another gap between 
my mind and all other minds, and these gaps give rise to skeptical questions, both radical 
and restricted. Philosophers since the time of Descartes have suggested various meth-
ods of reasoning to the conclusion that other minds do exist and experience the world 
roughly along the same lines as I do. As indicated above, Berkeley explicitly acknowl-
edges that the conclusion of any such reasoning can only be probable, while Reid insists 

SKEPTICISM ABOUT KNOWLEDGE OF OTHER MINDS
439
we must resist this conclusion. What Reid points to is the fundamental nature and 
importance of the relation between one’s own and other minds. “When a child asks a 
question of his nurse, this act supposes . . . a conviction that the nurse is an intelligent 
being, to whom he can communicate his thoughts, and who can communicate her 
thoughts to him” (1969 [1785]: 72). The importance of this conviction and the security 
of this relation led Reid to reject the Cartesian framework that requires that we reason 
to the existence of other minds.
John Stuart Mill returned philosophy to its Cartesian roots, and since his time many 
philosophers have been content to discuss different methods of reasoning to the exis-
tence of other minds. Questions about a more secure foundation tend to be lost after 
Reid (although I mention an important exception below). The argument from analogy 
and the argument from induction are two popular responses, both in the history of phi-
losophy and today. Although the argument from analogy has tended to find less favor 
since the middle of the twentieth century, it has had a rigorous defense in the past few 
decades from some Australian philosophers (Hyslop and Jackson 1972; Hyslop 1995). 
More popular has been an argument from best explanation (Pargetter 1984; cf. Putnam 
1975; Ayer 1973). In his defense of the argument from analogy we find that Hyslop, in 
effect, takes the side of Mill against O’Hanlon. Hyslop sees little problem in extending 
one’s inductive argument outside the sphere of one’s consciousness, and he believes that 
we should rest content with the weak inductive argument that is the argument from 
analogy. Pargetter, on the other hand, insists that we can bypass this—and other—prob-
lems with the argument from analogy by moving to an argument from best explanation. 
Here all that matters is the explanatory power of the conclusion. Pargetter is clear that, 
on his account, “my reason for believing in the existence of other minds similar to my 
own is in all important respects the same as the scientific realist’s reason for believing 
in the existence of sub-atomic particles” (Pargetter 1984: 159). Insofar as Pargetter’s 
form of reasoning bypasses O’Hanlon’s problem, it is to be preferred to Hyslop’s. It does, 
however, raise a new question: Is it correct to think that my reason for believing in the 
existence of other minds is in all important respects the same as the scientific realist’s 
reason for believing in sub-atomic particles?
It is worth remembering that in all these cases of reasoning, the conclusion that oth-
ers have minds is only probable. Of course, the conclusion is highly probably, or can be 
considered to be a well confirmed hypothesis. But it is not a conclusion that could be said 
to be ‘skeptic proof’ in the way that Reid thought it must be.
What Is Mind?
Each of the arguments mentioned above is designed to take us from something we per-
ceive (the body of another) to something we do not perceive (the mind of another). 
We must, however, be careful about the conclusion of our reasoning here. It is one thing 
to reason that another mind exists, and yet another to understand the nature of that 
existence. If we return to Berkeley we find that he is very clear that he does not think 
it a contingent fact that I do not perceive a mind. He does not take it that the mind lies 
hidden behind or inside the body that we do perceive. He does not believe that, could 
we but peer around the body, we would perceive the mind of another.
We may infer . . . that . . . it is not more reasonable to think our faculties 
defective, in that they do not furnish us with an idea of spirit or active 

SKEPTICISM
440
thinking substance, than it would be if we should blame them for not being 
able to comprehend a round square.
(1975 [1710]: 120)
If Berkeley is right—if a mind is not the sort of ‘thing’ that is capable of being per-
ceived—then what appears in the case of a mind would necessarily be something else. 
But if we think about this a little more, it can come to seem odd that there should be 
any sort of ‘appearance’ of such a ‘reality.’ It may be that in the case of mind there is no 
appearance–reality distinction.
If Berkeley is right this leaves us with the question, ‘How are we to understand the 
reality or the nature of mind?’ It might also give us pause when considering whether 
reasoning from the body of another to the mind of another—be it by employing an argu-
ment from analogy, induction or best explanation—is the correct way to understand 
our knowledge of another mind. We might wonder whether there is any better way of 
dealing with a skeptic concerning the mind of another than telling him that it is highly 
likely that the body I observe moving in various ways is backed by a mind.
Ignoring the Skeptic
The Cartesian tradition accepts that skeptical questions lie at the heart of epistemology 
and takes it that philosophers must in some way engage with them. Some epistemologists 
of more recent times have held that we can have knowledge without having to engage 
with the skeptic. These epistemologists have come to be known as knowledge external-
ists, and their more traditional opponents as knowledge internalists. These externalists 
do not have a response to skepticism, but insist that epistemology can proceed without 
one. Thus there has been a succession of externalists who hold that the skeptical pos-
sibility is “idle” (Goldman 1976: 775), or irrelevant (Dretske 1970), or that the skeptic’s 
question concerns a possible world too distant to bother us (Nozick 1981). According 
to these externalists it is possible to know, for example, that another is in pain without 
knowing that the other is not an automaton.
If one looks at Nozick’s counterfactual analysis it is clear why knowledge that, for 
example, one’s daughter is in pain can be achieved while knowledge that she is not 
an automaton is not forthcoming. According to Nozick’s analysis, knowledge is a true 
belief that tracks the truth, and tracking involves, among other conditions, the follow-
ing: if a proposition p were not true, subject S would not believe that p. If my daughter is 
writhing in pain as the result of a boulder falling on her foot, my belief that she is in pain 
tracks the fact that she is: if she were not in pain she would not be behaving like that, 
so I wouldn’t believe that she was in pain. If, however, my daughter were an automaton 
she might still behave in this fashion and I might still believe that she was in pain, so 
this tracking condition would not be fulfilled. Nozick concludes that I do not know that 
my daughter is not an automaton (Nozick 1981: 218). The radical skeptical possibility 
concerning the mind of others is left in place on this and other knowledge externalist 
accounts of knowledge.
We could say that these externalists side-step the radical skeptical problem while 
offering a reply only to a restricted skeptical question. I know that my daughter is in 
pain because (on one view) I can track her pain. It is not clear that this would have 
satisfied Reid. While contemporary knowledge externalists put the skeptic to one side 
and get on with the business of saying how we can have knowledge, Reid attempts 

SKEPTICISM ABOUT KNOWLEDGE OF OTHER MINDS
441
to engage with—and reject—the Cartesian framework that he believes leads to the 
radical problem.
Perception and Other Minds
Quassim Cassam (2007) has recently defended a perceptual model of our knowledge 
of another mind, which he contrasts with inferential models of the sort considered 
above. Cassam’s defense of the perceptual model takes the form of removing obstacles 
that stand in the way of our accepting it. What Cassam wants to be able to say is that I 
see, for example, that another is angry. The sense in which I see this is that: (i) I see the 
other; (ii) the other is angry; (iii) the conditions are such that the other wouldn’t look 
the way he looks now unless he was angry; and (iv) believing that the conditions are like 
this I take the other to be angry. Cassam emphasizes that “I have in the way the [other] 
looks a reason for believing that he is angry” (Cassam 2007: 164), and he notes that 
there is an important difference between having a reason and concluding as the result 
of some process of reasoning. Cassam calls this a case of “primary epistemic seeing,” and 
models it on an idea of Dretske’s. Dretske introduces the idea in connection with seeing 
that a piece of metal is hot. He suggests that I can see that the metal is hot (a case of 
primary epistemic seeing) just so long as I see that it is hot by seeing it glow “in the way 
characteristic of hot metal” and not by seeing how another object—say a temperature 
gauge—behaves (cf. Dretske 1969). Cassam defends the perceptual model in a way that 
might be thought not to conflict with the Berkelian observation that we do not perceive 
another’s mind. Cassam points out that, in the case of the metal, we do not actually see 
its heat (heat can be felt but not seen); nevertheless, I can see that the metal is hot. So 
I can see that another is angry without seeing his anger.
Although Cassam’s work here follows Dretske’s, it also departs from it in important 
ways. Dretske, like Nozick, holds that I can know, for example, that my daughter is 
in pain, but not that she is not an automaton. Cassam disagrees. He holds that I can 
know both that another is in pain and that she is not an automaton. If one can see that 
one’s daughter is in pain then she cannot be an automaton. Cassam suggests that one’s 
knowledge that one’s daughter is not an automaton “owes its credentials to the fact 
that [one] can see” that she is in pain (2007: 165). This difference between Cassam and 
Dretske reflects another. Dretske appears to accept the following relationship between 
skepticism and knowledge: we must be in a position to rule out the skeptical possibility 
in advance and in independence of our claim to know. As Dretske believes this cannot 
be done, he proposes instead that epistemology can proceed without answering the 
skeptic. Cassam does not accept that we must respond to the skeptic in advance and in 
independence of our claim to know. Thus he is able to say that I can see that my daughter 
is in pain, something that wouldn’t be possible if she were an automaton. Like G.E. 
Moore before him, Cassam holds that our commitment to the external world and the 
mind of another is stronger than our commitment to any skeptical possibility (Moore 
1953).
A Secure Foundation
When Reid rejects the Cartesian framework that he believes leads to radical skepti-
cism, he puts in its place a series of first principles with the aim of setting our relations 
to others on a more secure foundation. It seems fair to say that philosophers who offer 

SKEPTICISM
442
one or another of a form of reasoning from the body of another to the mind of another 
are adhering to that Cartesian framework. The externalist rejects the Cartesian legacy 
in epistemology, arguing that the skeptic should not be taken to stand in the way of 
knowledge, but this is a rejection of only a part of that legacy. It is not as radical a rejec-
tion of Descartes’ work as it needs to be to achieve the secure foundation that Reid was 
after. Like the internalist, the externalist still accepts the radical skeptical question; he 
just thinks we can ignore it. Reid does not just ignore the skeptic, but aims to take away 
the very structure within which he works. In this way Reid is more radical in his rejec-
tion of the Cartesian legacy. Reid is also arguably more radical than Cassam. Cassam 
claims that his perceptual model can do better than an argument from best explana-
tion because the latter can only lead us to the conclusion that it is highly unlikely that 
another is not an automaton and “highly unlikely isn’t good enough” (2007: 166–167). 
But Cassam’s perceptual model depends crucially on the idea of commitment, and he 
does not say enough about this idea to convince that his model can do better. Cassam 
allows for the skeptic’s question and believes he can show how knowledge is possible. 
The security that Reid was after leaves no room for the skeptic. As Reid sees it, our com-
mitment to others runs deep.
From Reid to Wittgenstein
A philosopher who can be taken to react to skepticism in a way not dissimilar to Reid 
is Ludwig Wittgenstein. Wittgenstein, too, is concerned with the Cartesian framework 
which gives rise to the skeptic’s questions. And, like Reid, Wittgenstein takes our rela-
tionship to the world and to others as an important starting point in his philosophy. But 
in the place of first principles, Wittgenstein carefully examines the nature and devel-
opment of our use of language to see what we can learn about ourselves in relation to 
others.
What Wittgenstein struggles to understand is the asymmetry between the first- and 
third-person uses of our talk about sensations. He also identifies a certain mistake in 
the way philosophers proceed here: they notice an asymmetry between what I feel in 
my own case and what I observe (behavior) in the case of the other, and they attempt 
to account for this difference by assuming that the observed behavior shields the other’s 
experience from us. Philosophers, then, resort to reasoning by analogy, induction or the 
like in order to obtain knowledge of the other’s mind. He writes: “I wished to say that 
talking about his toothache at all was based upon a supposition, a supposition which 
by its very essence could not be verified.” He quickly continues: “But if you look closer 
you will see that this is an entire misrepresentation of the use of the word ‘toothache’” 
(Wittgenstein 1968: 281). Much of Wittgenstein’s work (including the private lan-
guage argument) is directed at trying to identify the nature of this misrepresentation 
and at explaining how better to think about sensations and thoughts in oneself and 
in others. Many nowadays (see Chihara and Fodor 1966: 390) are inclined to dismiss 
these thoughts on the grounds that is mired in verificationism (which they believe 
can be shown to be mistaken). But many others find in Wittgenstein’s work, scattered 
as it is across many published and unpublished volumes, a rich source when thinking 
about one’s own and other minds. Wittgensteinian ideas are also standardly invoked in 
critiques of the argument from analogy, and other such forms of reasoning (see Bilgrami 
1992).

SKEPTICISM ABOUT KNOWLEDGE OF OTHER MINDS
443
Learning from Wittgenstein
Because of the extent and complexity of Wittgenstein’s work I can only gesture at a pos-
sible lesson that can be learned from it, which is this: the radical skeptical problem that 
philosophers have struggled with under the heading ‘the problem of other minds’ is only 
a problem if one misunderstands what Wittgenstein calls “the grammar” of our language. 
In the place of radical skeptical questions here, Wittgenstein urges that we look at the 
way we use words connected with mind—words such as ‘pain,’ ‘anger,’ ‘belief,’ and the 
like—and thereby come to understand what our concepts of these ‘states,’ ‘events,’ ‘con-
ditions,’ etc. are. Insofar as there is a problem here, it is conceptual, not epistemological. 
Wittgenstein writes in one place: “My attitude is an attitude towards a soul; I am not of 
the opinion that he has a soul” (Wittgenstein 1958: 178e). This remark and others in a 
similar vein seem designed to turn us away from the idea that what we have here is any 
kind of epistemological relation, that knowing that another has a mind is not the right 
way to think of our fundamental relations to others. Like Reid before him, Wittgenstein 
appreciates that the security of our relationship to others is not adequately captured in 
such an epistemology. Wittgenstein hints at another way when he writes that the child 
acts first and then can be said to know (Wittgenstein 1969: 71e). Perhaps the key to 
understanding the secure foundation of our relations to others lies in exploring the dif-
ference between knowing the world and acting in it with others. Wittgenstein is careful 
to tease out the radical skeptical question, ‘How do I know that another has a mind?’, 
and helps us to see something odd about it. Understood aright, our concepts here are 
such that they leave no room for this question.
If this is right, then the “problem of other minds” needs to shift away from its associa-
tion with radical skepticism. Of course this still leaves the restricted question, and we 
may still speak, for example, of “our knowledge that another is in pain.” But we need 
not fear that this restricted question will precipitate the more radical one. The issue of 
solipsism should no longer plague philosophy.
References
Avramides, A. (2001) Other Minds, London and New York: Routledge.
Ayer, A.J. (1956) The Problem of Knowledge, Harmondsworth: Penguin Books Ltd.
Ayer, A.J. (1973) The Central Questions of Philosophy, Harmondsworth: Penguin Books Ltd.
Berkeley, G. (1975 [1710]) A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Knowledge, in M. Ayers (ed.) The Philosophical 
Works, London: Dent.
Berkeley, G. (1975 [1713]) Three Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous, in M. Ayers (ed.) The Philosophical 
Works, London: Dent.
Bilgrami, A. (1992) “Other Minds,” in J. Dancy and E. Sosa (eds.) A Companion to Epistemology, Oxford: 
Blackwell.
Blackburn, S. (1994) The Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Burnyeat, M. (1982) “Idealism and Greek Philosophy: What Descartes Saw and Berkeley Missed,” in 
G. Vesey (ed.) Royal Institute of Philosophy Lectures, 13: 19–50.
Cassam, Q. (2007) The Possibility of Knowledge, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chihara, C.S. and Fodor, J.A. (1966) “Operationalism and Ordinary Language: A Critique of Wittgenstein,” 
in G. Pitcher (ed.) Wittgenstein: The Philosophical Investigations, London: Macmillan.
Davidson, D. (1991) “Three Varieties of Knowledge,” in A.P. Griffiths (ed.) A.J. Ayer Memorial Essays, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Descartes, R. (1984 [1641]) Meditations on First Philosophy (trans. J. Cottingham, R. Stoothhoff and D. 
Murdock), in The Philosophical Works of Descartes, Vol. I, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dretske, F. (1969) Seeing and Knowing, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Dretske, F. (1970) “Epistemic Operators,” Journal of Philosophy 67, 1007–1023.

SKEPTICISM
444
Goldman, A. (1976) “Discrimination and Perceptual Knowledge,” The Journal of Philosophy, 73: 771–791.
Hyslop, A. (1995) Other Minds, Dordrecht/Boston/London: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Hyslop, A. and Jackson, F. (1972) “The Analogical Inference to Other Minds,” American Philosophical 
Quarterly, 9(2): 168–176.
Malebranche, N. (1997 [1674–1675]) The Search After Truth, (trans. & ed. T.M. Lennon & P.J. Olsen), 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mill, J.S. (1872) An Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy (4th edition), London: Longman, 
Green, and Dyer.
Moore, G.E. (1953) Some Main Problems of Philosophy, London: Allen & Unwin.
Nozick, R. (1981) Philosophical Explanations, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Pargetter, R. (1984) “The Scientific Inference to Other Minds,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 62(2): 
158–163.
Putnam, H. (1975) “Other Minds,” in Mind, Language and Reality, Philosophical Papers Volume 2, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Reid, T. (1969 [1785]) Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man, introduction by B.A. Brody, Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
Sextus Empiricus (ad 160–210 [2000]) Against the Professors (M) VII. (trans. R.G. Bury), Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press.
Williams, B. (1981) “The Legacy of Greek Philosophy,” in I. Finley (ed.) The Legacy of Greek Philosophy: A 
New Appraisal, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wittgenstein, L. (1958) Philosophical Investigations (3rd edition) (trans. G.E.M. Anscombe), Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Wittgenstein, L. (1968) “Notes for Lectures on ‘Private Experience’ and ‘Sense Data’,” The Philosophical 
Review, 77(3): 275–320.
Wittgenstein, L. (1969) On Certainty (ed. G.E.M. Anscombe & G.H. Wright), New York: Harper & Row.

41
SKEPTICISM ABOUT 
INDUCTIVE KNOWLEDGE
Joe Morrison
Introduction
Hume’s argument against inductive knowledge is perhaps one of the most endearing and 
enduring arguments in philosophy. It is relatively simple and direct, but even after close 
examination it loses none of its beguiling power. Inductive inference is ampliative—the 
propositions that an agent knows are used to infer new propositions, and these new 
propositions go beyond what was already known (see “Inductive Knowledge,” Chapter 
25 in this volume). Inductive inferences are the means by which agents reason from 
specific claims to general claims; from claims about past instances to future instances; 
and from observed states of affairs to unobserved and perhaps unobservable states of 
affairs. The Humean problem for induction is as follows. Some of our beliefs are formed 
by inductive inference, and since we want reason to think that those beliefs are justified 
we should provide some grounds for thinking that inductive inference itself is justified. 
Induction cannot be defended by a deductive argument; inductive inferences are not 
deductively valid, since deductive inference is non-ampliative. Any attempt to give 
a deductive argument for an ampliative conclusion would have to include among its 
premises a claim to the effect that current knowledge can be extended to new instances. 
Such a claim involves an inductive inference, and will need further defense. And any 
attempt to give an inductive justification of induction will be viciously circular. So 
inductive inference is not justified. The result is that beliefs formed by inductive infer-
ence are not formed by a justified method, so they are not justified, and so cannot 
qualify as knowledge.
This attack on the possibility of inductive knowledge can be used to generate a sec-
ond skeptical problem, the underdetermination thesis, which illustrates a general rela-
tionship between inductive inference and skeptical arguments. An inductive inference 
attempts to secure a conclusion which goes beyond the content of the premises: we have 
seen two hundred white swans, so we infer that the two-hundred-and-first swan will be 
white. Compare this with a slightly different induction, where from the same premises 
we infer that the two-hundred-and-first swan will be white and majestic. Hume’s argu-
ment tells us that neither inference is justified. And an inference to the conclusion that 
the two-hundred-and-first swan will be white and not-majestic is similarly unjustified. 
If all inductive inferences are unjustified, then one induction is just as good as another: 
they’re all no good at all. Worse than that, these same premises are compatible with a set 
of conclusions that is logically inconsistent. Since we have no reason for favoring one 

SKEPTICISM
446
conclusion over any of the others on the strength of the premises alone, and since the 
conclusions are mutually exclusive, we shouldn’t believe any of them. Any inductive 
attempt to go beyond our premises is thus faced with a problem of underdetermination, 
whereby many competing candidate conclusions have equivalent epistemic standings. 
Samir Okasha has argued that a similar argumentative form can be found in all skepti-
cal arguments (Okasha 2003). Take the familiar ‘brain-in-a-vat’ scenario: all of your 
current experiences no more determine that you’re an embodied human being reading 
this text than that you’re a disembodied brain in a vat being fed experiences as such. 
Since you’ve no more reason to believe that you’re an embodied human being than a 
disembodied brain, you cannot know either. The primary difference between induc-
tive skepticism and this global skepticism is that the conclusions of inductive infer-
ences are underdetermined by whatever the actual premises might happen to be, while 
global skepticism suggests that knowledge claims are underdetermined by all possible 
evidence.
So there are at least two projects for responding to skepticism about inductive knowl-
edge. One is to argue against Hume’s problem: to try to spell out why and how inductive 
inferences are justified. Such strategies might involve any of the following: arguing that 
deductive defenses of induction are possible; that inductive arguments for induction 
are not viciously circular—after all, deduction seems to be justified deductively; that 
there are justifications of induction which are neither deductive nor inductive; that 
induction needs no justification—perhaps by arguing that inductive inference is epis-
temically basic, or that it is analytic that inductive inferences are justified. The second 
project is to argue against the underdetermination thesis which claims that for any 
inductively inferred conclusion there is an epistemically equivalent rival. Such projects 
will attempt to explain why some inductive inferences are better or worse than others, 
even if we cannot give a general account of why inductive inferences are justified. This 
latter project is comparable to the attempt to give accounts of justification which do 
not attempt to defeat global skepticism. Such accounts might concede that the rea-
sons which support my belief that the bank is open might not be sufficient to defeat 
evil-demon or brain-in-vat-type hypotheses, but nevertheless those reasons are still suf-
ficient to justify the belief that the bank is open, and do not justify the belief that the 
bank is shut.
These two projects are independent. A satisfactory resolution to the problem of 
underdetermination will not secure the conclusion that induction is justified in the 
global sense: we might be able to explain why one inductive inference is preferable 
to another, without thereby explaining why any inductive inference is justified at 
all. Indeed, most philosophers working in confirmation theory are not attempting to 
defend induction in general; success in the second project will not secure success in the 
first. Perhaps more importantly, there are specific, non-Humean arguments for the 
underdetermination thesis that for any inductively inferred conclusion there is an 
epistemically equivalent rival. This means that even if it could be shown that Hume’s 
problem can be defused, the problem of underdetermination might still persist: success 
in the first project might not secure success in the second. In what follows, I will focus 
on attempts to complete the second project. I will introduce a pervasive argument for 
thinking that the problem of underdetermination is a genuine threat: the argument 
from holism. The final sections will consider responses to holism and underdetermina-
tion problems.

SKEPTICISM ABOUT INDUCTIVE KNOWLEDGE
447
The Method of Hypothesis
We can be aware of the Humean problem but still acknowledge that inductive inference 
seems to work, and that clarifying what distinguishes good inductive inferences from 
bad inductive inferences is a productive activity. Such was the project of the logical 
empiricists. Hans Reichenbach attempted to do it using a frequency interpretation of 
probability (Reichenbach 1961). In a related vein, Rudolph Carnap developed a proba-
bilistic logic of induction (Carnap 1936). Bayesianism also uses the probability calculus 
to establish norms of inductive reasoning, which can be used to assess and quantify the 
empirical justification our evidence has on our inductively inferred conclusions. One 
natural intuition is that the greater the body of known propositions (let’s call them the 
evidence), the greater the amount of inductive support they pass on to the conclusion 
of an inductive inference, and thus the better supported is the conclusion. But there are 
other natural intuitions available about the nature of inductive support. Hempel was 
keen to try to articulate all of these intuitions and thereby give an analysis of inductive 
support, or confirmation (Hempel 1965). Such an analysis should allow us to identify 
when one inductive inference is better than another, and when one body of evidence 
favors one conclusion over another, thereby avoiding problems of underdetermina-
tion.
Current knowledge is not the only source of support for an inductively inferred con-
clusion. Suppose, hypothetically, that the conclusion is true. It seems a plausible intu-
ition that any deductive consequence of that conclusion will count as evidence for the 
conclusion. Hypothetico-deductivism made this a central tenet of its analysis of induc-
tive support; a crude version of this principle maintains that for α to support β it suffices 
for α to be deductively derivable from β (for examples, see Braithwaite 1959; Grimes 
1990). Working out what propositions would follow from an hypothetical conclusion if 
it were true, and then attempting to determine the truth of those propositions is thus a 
method of gathering support for the conclusion. Problems of underdetermination can 
be tackled insofar as competing conclusions will yield different predictions, and so a 
notion of selective support can be achieved: the evidence will favor one hypothesis over 
another just in case it makes more correct predictions than the other.
Karl Popper also employed this hypothetical method, but in a different fashion. Popper 
claimed to have solved the Humean problem (Popper 1963: 55), but later acknowl-
edged that he had merely avoided it (1992: 56). Rather than deal with the Humean 
problem of justifying inductive inferences, Popper maintained that no such inferences 
ever occur. He thought that a proper study of actual scientific method would reveal that 
apparently inductive inferences, which seem to proceed from known claims and past 
evidence to new propositions, actually involve a method of conjecture and refutation. 
Rather than rely solely upon current knowledge in making ampliative inferences, what 
actually happens is that current knowledge informs a selection of an ampliative hypoth-
esis, and then that hypothesis is tested. First of all the epistemic agent comes up with 
a new hypothesis which seems to follow, in some sense, from past observations (their 
current evidence). This hypothesis will go beyond the propositions currently known: it 
might make a claim with a wider extension than is currently known, or concern future, 
unobserved or unobservable things. The second step is where the agent attempts to 
derive some testable propositions from the hypothesis, or conjecture. Finally, she sets 
about carrying out those tests, by making new observations. So far this doesn’t sound 
too different from hypothetico-deductivism. The principal difference is that instead of 

SKEPTICISM
448
deriving predictions which, if true, would support the hypothesis, Popper thinks that 
we should attempt to derive predictions which, if false, would show the hypothesis to 
be false. Rather than try to show how we are justified in holding on to these hypotheses 
because they are supported or confirmed by the evidence, Popper argues that we are 
justified in holding on to our conclusions on the grounds of their having been tested. 
“So long as a theory stands up to the severest tests we can design, it is accepted; if it does 
not, it is rejected” (1963: 54). Our observations will justify our accepting an ampliative 
hypothesis just in case they provide testimony to the resilience of that hypothesis in the 
face of attempted falsification.
Popper wanted to preserve the idea that there is a deductive relationship between 
observations and the ampliative conclusion of a putatively inductive inference; as a 
result, he repudiated the notion of inductive support or confirmation. Rather than 
inductively support the conclusion, the evidence is only able to refute it: “Only the fal-
sity of the theory can be inferred from empirical evidence, and this inference is a purely 
deductive one” (Popper 1963: 55). Willard V. O. Quine openly endorses this picture of 
the relation:
Traditional epistemology sought grounds in sensory experience capable of 
implying our theories about the world, or at least of endowing those theories 
with some increment of probability. Sir Karl Popper has long stressed, to the 
contrary, that observation serves only to refute theory and not to support it.
(Quine 1990: 12)
Where the logical empiricists attempted to formalize and explicate an independent 
notion of inductive support or confirmation, Quine and Popper think that we should 
stick with deductive relations between evidence and hypotheses in the form of falsi-
fication. However, the two strategies also share some things in common. Both posi-
tions involve a method of hypothesis, where predictions are derived from the ampliative 
conclusion and then tested. Both make pragmatic appeals in favor of accepting those 
hypotheses. Logical empiricists thought that we are justified in accepting hypotheses on 
the basis that they work—they make correct predictions; falsificationists think we are 
justified in accepting hypotheses just so long as they continue to work—only if those 
hypotheses do not make false predictions. We could summarize both approaches under 
Quine’s slogan that “nothing succeeds like success” (1969: 128), so long as we did not 
ignore the important philosophical differences. For the logical empiricists, the success 
of our hypotheses’ predictions is counted as support for those hypotheses; while for the 
falsificationists, the success of our hypotheses (their continued ability to prevail in the 
face of attempted falsifications) is counted simply as a reason not to reject them. Popper’s 
falsificationism similarly attempts to deal with the underdetermination problems by the 
method of hypothesis. Two logically inconsistent hypotheses will yield inconsistent pre-
dictions—identifying which prediction is wrong will falsify that hypothesis.
Probabilistic theories of confirmation offer a rival account of the nature of predic-
tion and its relation to confirmation and falsification. When logical empiricists started 
to equate epistemic support with the mathematical apparatus of probability, a formula 
devised by Thomas Bayes came to be used to calculate and express the quantitative 
relations between hypotheses and evidence. The probabilistic framework in use centers 
on the idea that the epistemic status of a proposition can be expressed as a quantitative 
value. These values, or probabilities, are used to represent our confidence in the truth 

SKEPTICISM ABOUT INDUCTIVE KNOWLEDGE
449
of the proposition, or the extent to which we would take risks about their truth, where 
0 represents no confidence and 1 represents certainty. Using the axioms of the prob-
ability calculus we can construct Bayes’ formula, which can be used to calculate what 
degree of support one proposition confers upon another. Underdetermination problems 
for Bayesians will be more nuanced—it’s not sufficient for two hypotheses just to predict 
all the same evidence; they also need to imply the evidence to the same degree, and the 
hypotheses need to have identical prior probabilities.
Underdetermination and Holism
Both hypothetico-deductivism and falsificationism construe prediction as a deductive 
relation: a hypothesis h predicts e just in case h entails e. The problem of underdeter-
mination is where evidence can equally support a variety of conflicting hypotheses: the 
evidence fails to uniquely determine or selectively support a specific hypothesis. If both 
h1 and h2 entail e, then e supports them both to the same extent; or alternatively, e fails 
to falsify both of them, putting both h1 and h2 on a par, epistemically speaking. Assuming 
that h1 and h2 are inconsistent, our epistemic agent cannot be justified in believing h1 on 
the grounds of e. As such, demonstrating that for any hypothesis there is a possible predic-
tively equivalent alternative is a direct way to argue for the underdetermination thesis.
(One concern we might have here is as follows: if two hypotheses are entirely predic-
tively equivalent—if they entail all and only the same predictions—then in what sense 
are they in tension? For example, the verificationists’ principle stated that the meaning 
of a sentence is exhausted by its ‘empirical significance’—the collection of observations 
that it would entail if it were true. For verificationists, two entirely predictively equiva-
lent hypotheses would have precisely the same meaning; they could not be in tension, 
for any putative disagreement between them results in no difference in predictions, and 
is therefore meaningless. However, this verificationist principle is no longer recognized 
as a plausible account of meaning, partly due to the problems below.)
Why think that for any hypothesis there will always be a predictively equivalent alter-
native hypothesis? The simple example of ‘tacking problems’ for hypothetico-deductiv-
ism will serve to illuminate the general idea. If h entails e, then so does (h&f), where f is 
a logically independent proposition. So, by the hypothetico-deductive principle we saw 
above, e confirms h, and it also confirms (h&f). But if f is logically independent from 
h, then so is its negation. So because both (h&f) and (h&~f) entail e, it follows that e 
equally supports (h&f )  and (h&~f), which are inconsistent (see Chapter 25: §3).
Perhaps the fact that e follows from h regardless of whether f is true or false is a reason 
for thinking that f has nothing to do with predicting e, and thus by giving such an inde-
pendence proof we can say with confidence that e supports h alone in this case. Such 
a strategy was favored by Popper (1963: 239). But the case for the possibility of pre-
dictively equivalent hypotheses can be made more complicated, so that independence 
proofs aren’t obviously available.
The argument relies on a claim most often associated with Quine and Pierre Duhem 
which says that prediction is holistic. Most hypotheses, taken by themselves, do not tell 
us what to infer: it is not obvious what evidence statements are entailed by individual 
hypotheses.
[I]n order to deduce from this proposition the prediction of a phenomenon and 
institute the experiment which is to show whether this phenomenon is or is 

SKEPTICISM
450
not produced . . . [the scientist] does not confine himself to making use of the 
proposition in question; he makes use also of a whole group of theories accepted 
by him as beyond dispute.
(Duhem 1954: chapter 6, §2)
[An individual theoretical sentence] will not have its separable bundle of 
observable or testable consequences. A reasonably inclusive body of scientific 
theory, taken as a whole, will indeed have such consequences . . . as Duhem 
has emphasized, these observation conditionals are implied only by the theory 
as a whole.
(Quine 1981: 70–71)
This holistic prediction thesis states that for most hypotheses, individual hypotheses do 
not entail some e; rather, a conjunction of the hypothesis with some additional claims 
will entail some e. As it is presented by Duhem above, this prediction thesis appears to 
be an empirical claim about the practices of working scientists, or at the very least it is 
an appeal to an intuitively plausible account about what they do. Quine’s motivation 
for the prediction thesis is intimately tied up with his theories concerning ‘observation-
sentences’ and ‘observation-categoricals’ (Quine 1990: 9–10). Another motivation for 
the thesis follows from the theory-laden nature of evidence (Morrison 2010). If cor-
rect, the prediction thesis suggests that independence proofs are not straightforwardly 
available—the sum (of hypothesis with additional claims) is predictively greater than 
its parts. This problem for independence proofs is illustrated by considering predictions 
that are the consequence of the conjunction of more than one hypothesis, neither of 
which taken independently yields any predictions.
Similarly, Bayesian accounts of prediction and confirmation will have to modify their 
models in line with the prediction thesis such that the degree to which some individual 
h makes e probable is 0, and only non-zero when h is conjoined with some other set of 
statements. In addition, it might no longer be possible to talk about the prior probability 
of some h taken individually—the prediction thesis could be taken to suggest that such 
values don’t exist.
The contrapositive of the prediction thesis is the falsification thesis. If, for the most 
part, the prediction of evidence statements only follows from conjunctions of hypoth-
eses and auxiliary assumptions, then a false prediction entails that the conjunction is 
false.
The [scientist] can never subject an isolated hypothesis to experimental test, 
but only a whole group of hypotheses; when the experiment is in disagreement 
with his predictions, what he learns is that at least one of the hypotheses con-
stituting this group is unacceptable and ought to be modiﬁed; but the experi-
ment does not designate which one should be changed.
(Duhem 1954: chap. 6, §2)
If the conjunction (h&a) predicts e, and we discover that not-e, it follows that (h&a) 
is falsified, but we are unsure as to how to distribute the blame. What has gone wrong? 
The hypothesis, or one of the auxiliary assumptions? Such a test does give us some useful 
epistemological information: it tells us that we’re not justified in relying upon the con-
junction of that hypothesis with that set of auxiliary assumptions. But we are faced with 
a type of underdetermination problem in which the evidence underdetermines what 

SKEPTICISM ABOUT INDUCTIVE KNOWLEDGE
451
has gone wrong. Indeed, we might be unable to identify whether a particular hypothesis 
has been tested at all. So it seems plausible that two competing hypotheses could be 
predictively equivalent as a consequence of the company of auxiliary assumptions that 
they keep, and our evidence won’t allow us to reject one and retain the other, since it 
fails to specify which parts are letting the side down.
Relevance
The issue at stake concerns identifying grounds for specifying why e is relevant to H 
in particular: why e supports h in particular (rather than a host of things which may be 
‘tacked on’ to h), and why not-e falsifies h in particular. So a solution to the skeptical 
problem of underdetermination will be to come up with an account of evidential rel-
evance, while negotiating the added complication that is holism.
Popper’s response was to invoke independence proofs, but the details do not clearly 
engage with the spirit of the prediction thesis. He also suggested that in some cases 
it is a matter of “sheer guesswork which [. . .] ingredients should be held responsible 
for any falsification” (1963: 239), but that the “temporary successes of our theories 
[allow us to be] reasonably successful in attributing our refutations to definite portions 
of the theoretical maze” (p. 243). The guesswork in resolving the underdetermination 
of falsification is supposed to be informed by background knowledge about which of 
our hypotheses is working well. It is a matter of some debate whether this notion of 
“temporary successes” that Popper called ‘corroboration’ is an epistemic quantity that 
is distinct from confirmation (see Putnam 1991 for discussion). In a comparable vein, 
Clark Glymour attempted to provide an account of evidential relevance for theories 
of confirmation in which background knowledge determines which claims have been 
confirmed (Glymour 1975, 1980). The method is called ‘bootstrapping’—the image is 
that someone lifts themselves up by pulling on their own bootstraps, and analogously 
that matters of evidential relevance are determined within a system of hypotheses and 
background knowledge, and not externally by some general criterion. The net result of 
bootstrapping is that evidence claims do not confirm hypotheses simpliciter but, rather, 
that inductive support is relative to particular theories (systems of hypotheses, evidence 
and background knowledge).
Kenneth Gemes has given accounts of how to axiomatize theories in order to give a 
theory of content, whereby we can begin to work out the significance of parts of theo-
ries. Such a strategy confronts the problem of relevance straight on—it allows us to 
distinguish which parts of a theory are relevant or irrelevant to the prediction of some 
evidence claim (Gemes 1993, 1998a, 1998b).
Various methods have been suggested for modifying the Bayesian formula to take on 
board the insights of holism (Dorling 1979; Earman 1992; Howson and Urbach 1993: 
§7.h; Strevens 2001; but see also Fitelson 1999; Fitelson and Waterman 2005, 2007; 
Strevens 2005). But it might be that holism has some commitments that rule out using 
various Bayesian measures. For example, the Bayesian formula requires that we give a 
value for the likelihood of the evidence, P(e,h), which is the probability that the evi-
dence will occur assuming that the hypothesis is true, prior to observing it. Likelihood 
theorists use a confirmation measure that consists of contrasting two such values for two 
different hypotheses (Royall 1997; Sober 1995). As such, it is important that a value 
can be given—particularly if we wish to contrast two seemingly predictively equivalent 
hypotheses to enable further evidence to decide between them. However, at first glance, 

SKEPTICISM
452
it seems as though the prediction thesis says that no such value can be given: that it 
does not make sense to talk about the likelihood of the observation given an individual 
hypothesis, since individual hypotheses have no observable consequences.
The standard response is to calculate the likelihood as being a value that is expressed 
relative to our background theory or knowledge: P(e,h|k). Indeed, the whole Bayesian 
formula can be written with a ‘given k’ added in at each relevant place—most expres-
sions leave it out simply for expediency. But one issue with doing so that is potentially 
worrying is that our background theory (k) might include information affecting the 
value that we might give to P(e,h)—information which does not directly concern h, 
indeed, which we might think is irrelevant to the likelihood of e but which will affect it 
regardless.
This concern should not be considered as fatal to the possibility that Bayesianism 
and holism be compatible, since it will depend on how we choose to represent the claim 
that some irrelevant part of k affects P(e,h), on how we think that prior probabilities are 
fixed, and which measure of confirmation we use. It might be that holism constrains our 
story about priors (Christensen 1992: 556), or our choice of measure.
What each of these responses has in common is the attempt to generate some sort of 
generalizable schema by which the relevance of some evidence can be attached directly 
to a particular hypothesis, thereby attempting to cripple the first steps of an argument 
for underdetermination. John Norton has argued that there are no universal rules of 
induction (Norton 2003, 2005). Rather, he argues that particular facts, local to the 
domain in which the inductive inference is being made, help to determine the nature 
of the epistemic support.
We can be quite sure of a result in science as long as we look at the particulars 
of the result and the evidence that supports it, but we often end up struggling 
to explain by means of standard inductive inference schemas how the evidence 
can yield that strength of support.
(Norton 2003: 669)
It will be interesting to see how further examination of his ‘material theory of induction’ 
manages to explain away apparent problems of underdetermination, although it seems a 
likely supposition that such problems will be described as a consequence of the mistaken 
attempt to give universal or generalized accounts of inductive inference. In addition, 
Norton argues that his material theory of induction is not exposed to Hume’s problem 
concerning the justification of inductive inferences, so is seemingly able to take on both 
of the skeptical challenges presented in the introduction.
References
Braithwaite, R. B. (1959) Scientific Explanation, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Carnap, R. (1936) “Testability and Meaning,” Philosophy of Science, 3(4): 419–471.
Christensen, D. (1992) “Confirmational Holism and Bayesian Epistemology,” Philosophy of Science, 59: 
540–557.
Dorling, J. (1979) “Bayesian Personalism, the Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes, and Duhem’s 
Problem,” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, 10: 177–187.
Duhem, P. (1954) The Aim and Structure of Physical Theory, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Earman, J. (1992) Bayes or Bust, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Fitelson, B. (1999) “The Plurality of Bayesian Measures of Confirmation and the Problem of Measure 
Sensitivity,” Philosophy of Science, 66: 362–378.

SKEPTICISM ABOUT INDUCTIVE KNOWLEDGE
453
Fitelson, B. and Waterman, A. (2005) “Bayesian Confirmation and Auxiliary Hypotheses Revisited: A 
Reply to Strevens,” British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 56: 293–302.
—— and Waterman, A. (2007) “Comparative Bayesian Confirmation and the Quine-Duhem Problem: A 
Rejoinder to Strevens,” British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 58(2): 333–338.
Gemes, K. (1993) “Hypothetico-Deductivism, Content & the Natural Axiomatization of Theories,” 
Philosophy of Science, 60: 477–487.
—— (1998a) “Hypothetico-Deductivism: The Current State of Play; The Criterion of Empirical Significance: 
Endgame,” Erkenntnis, 49(1): 1–20.
—— (1998b) “Logical Content and Empirical Significance,” in P. Weingartner, G. Schurz and G. Dorn 
(eds.), The Role of Pragmatics in Contemporary Philosophy: Proceedings of the 20th International Wittgenstein 
Symposium, Vienna: Hölder-Pichler-Tempsky.
Glymour, C. (1975) “Relevant Evidence,” Journal of Philosophy, 72(14): 403–426.
—— (1980) Theory and Evidence, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Grimes, T. R. (1990) “Truth, Content, and the Hypothetico-Deductive Method,” Philosophy of Science, 57: 
514–522.
Hempel, C. (1965) Aspects of Scientific Explanation, New York: Free Press.
Howson, C. and Urbach, P. (1993) Scientific Reasoning: The Bayesian Approach (2nd ed.), Chicago: Open 
Court.
Morrison, J. (2010) “Just How Controversial Is Evidential Holism?” Synthese, 173: 335–352.
Norton, J. D. (2003) “A Material Theory of Induction,” Philosophy of Science, 70: 647–670.
—— (2005) “A Little Survey of Induction,” in P. Achinstein (ed.), Scientific Evidence: Philosophical Theories 
and Applications, Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Okasha, S. (2003) “Scepticism and its Sources,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 67(3): 610–623.
Popper, K. (1963) Conjectures and Refutations—The Growth of Scientific Knowledge, London: Routledge & 
Kegan Paul.
Putnam, H. (1991) “The ‘Corroboration’ of Theories,” in R. Boyd, P. Gasper and J. D. Trout (eds.), The 
Philosophy of Science, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Quine, W. V. (1969) “Natural Kinds,” in Quine (ed.), Ontological Relativity and Other Essays, New York: 
Columbia Press.
—— (1981) “Five Milestones of Empiricism,” in Quine (ed.), Theories and Things, Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
—— (1990) Pursuit of Truth, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Reichenbach, H. (1961) Experience and Prediction, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Royall, R. (1997) Statistical Evidence: A Likelihood Paradigm, London: Chapman and Hall.
Sober, E. (1995) “Contrastive Empiricism,” in Sober (ed.), From a Biological Point of View, New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
Strevens, M. (2001) “The Bayesian Treatment of Auxiliary Hypotheses,” British Journal for the Philosophy of 
Science, 52: 515–537.
—— (2005) “The Bayesian Treatment of Auxiliary Hypotheses: A Reply to Fitelson and Waterman,” British 
Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 56: 913–918.

454
42
RULE-FOLLOWING 
SKEPTICISM
Alexander Miller
1. Rules, Rule-Following and Meaning
Suppose that you intend to follow the rule “Add 4” in continuing the arithmetical 
series: 0, 4, 8, . . . . Intuitively, you can continue the series in ways that accord or fail to 
accord with the dictates of the rule. For example, the continuation 16, 20, 24, . . . would 
accord with the rule, while 17, 20, 23, . . . would fail to accord with the rule. In other 
words, the first continuation would be correct according to the rule, while the second 
continuation would be incorrect according to the rule. In this way we can think of the 
rule as providing a normative standard, according to which particular continuations of 
the series count as correct or incorrect. The notion of rule-following is important in the 
philosophy of language because intending to follow a rule such as “Add 4” is analogous 
to meaning something by a linguistic expression. The meaning of a linguistic expres-
sion provides a normative standard according to which particular uses of that expres-
sion count as correct (or incorrect), as according with (or failing to accord with) that 
meaning. For example, given that as a matter of mathematical fact the result of adding 
the numbers 68 and 57 is 125, and given the normal meanings of “68,” “57,” “+” etc., 
the answer “125” to the query “What is 68 + 57?” will be correct, while the answer “5” 
will be incorrect.
To return to our first example, suppose that Smith has continued the series 0, 4, 8 
. . . up to 992, 996, 1000. Is there a fact of the matter concerning which (if any) rule 
Smith has been following in doing so? It is certainly possible that Smith has chosen those 
numbers entirely by accident so that there simply is no rule that he’s been following, but 
that would be unusual, and ordinarily we’d be inclined to say that there is a fact of the 
matter: in all likelihood, Smith has been following the rule “Add 4” (and not, say, the 
rule “Add 4 up to 1000 and then add 8 thereafter,” or not following any rule at all but 
simply writing down numerals arbitrarily).
The discussions of rule-following in Ludwig Wittgenstein’s Philosophical Investigations 
(Wittgenstein 1953) and Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics (Wittgenstein 
1974) have inspired a number of leading philosophers—principally Saul Kripke and 
Crispin Wright—to consider arguments that challenge the idea that there can be a 
fact of the matter as to which if any rule we are following in writing out a series like the 
one above, or a fact of the matter as to what a speaker means by linguistic expressions 
(Kripke 1982; Wright 1980: chapters 2 and 12). Kripke and Wright initially developed 
their discussions of rule-following independently, and a full discussion of rule-following 

RULE-FOLLOWING SKEPTICISM
455
skepticism would have to consider both. Here we’ll concentrate on the discussion in 
(Kripke 1982). (Note that Wright’s more recent discussions of rule-following, collected 
in Wright (2001), focus more on whether there can be objective facts about rule-follow-
ing and meaning.)
Kripke’s discussion of rule-following skepticism “should be thought of as expound-
ing neither ‘Wittgenstein’s’ argument nor ‘Kripke’s’: rather Wittgenstein’s argument as 
it struck Kripke, as it presented a problem for him” (Kripke 1982: 5). In what follows 
“Kripke’s Wittgenstein” (or “KW” for short) refers to the purveyor of “Wittgenstein’s 
argument as it struck Kripke.” According to KW, the idea that there can be a fact of the 
matter as to what rule Smith has been following is an illusion, and the idea that there 
can be a fact of the matter as to what meaning a speaker associates with, for example, 
the “+” sign is also illusory: there can be no fact of the matter as to what Smith means 
by “+,” and indeed no fact of the matter as to whether the “+” sign as used by Smith 
means anything all.
2. Ontological and Epistemological Skepticism
An epistemological skeptic about a region of thought attempts to undermine the knowl-
edge-claims that we typically make within it. For example, an epistemological skeptic 
about the external world might argue that I am not entitled to claim that I know that at 
9.42 a.m. on September 8, 2008 I am wide awake and sitting in my room in Birmingham 
(perhaps, as with the skeptic who figures in Descartes’ Meditations, because for all I 
know I might be having an especially vivid and unusually coherent dream). The 
epistemological skeptic is prepared to concede that there is a fact of the matter as to 
whether I’m currently awake or having an especially vivid and unusually coherent 
dream; he questions only whether I’m entitled to say that I know which of the two 
possibilities actually obtains. Rule-following skepticism, as considered here, is first and 
foremost a form of ontological skepticism. KW argues not just that we don’t know whether 
we mean, for example, addition by “+” or intend to follow the rule “Add 4” but, more 
strongly, that in these cases there simply can be no fact of the matter for us to know: 
there can be no fact of the matter as to which rule we intend to follow in tracing out the 
series or as to what the “+” sign means. So KW is first and foremost an ontological skeptic 
who denies that there can be facts about rule-following and meaning (although as we’ll 
presently see, KW’s argument for ontological skepticism goes via an epistemological 
route).
3. The Skeptical Argument
Suppose that the largest number Smith has reached previously in (apparently) tracing 
out an arithmetical series has been 996 and that the largest number he has encountered 
in prior attempts to answer arithmetical queries has been 57 (these assumptions import 
no loss of generality into the argument to follow: since Smith is a finite creature, we can 
always find numbers to play the roles of 996 and 57). If there could be a fact about the 
rule Smith intends to follow, or a fact about what he means by the “+” sign, there would 
be a fact about how he ought to expand the arithmetical series (in order to accord with 
the relevant rule), and a fact about how he ought to answer the query “68 + 57 = ?” (in 
order to accord with the relevant meaning and—given the mathematical facts—his 
intention to speak the truth).

SKEPTICISM
456
KW argues that there can be no fact about how Smith ought to expand the number 
series, and no fact about how he ought to answer the query “68 + 57 = ?” Perhaps—KW 
suggests—Smith intends to follow the rule “Gradd 4,” where gradding 4 is the same as 
adding 4 to numbers smaller than 1000 but the same as adding 8 to numbers greater 
than or equal to 1000. If Smith is a gradder rather than an adder he ought to continue 
the series 992, 996, 1000, 1008, 1016, . . . and not as one might expect 996, 1000, 1004, 
1008, 1012 . . . and so on. Likewise, KW suggests that perhaps Smith doesn’t mean 
addition by “+” but rather quaddition, where quadding two numbers is a matter of adding 
them if they are both less than 57, but giving the answer “5” if either of them is greater 
than or equal to 57. Since 68 quus 57 is 5, if Smith meant quaddition by “+,” he ought 
to answer “5” to the query “68 + 57 =?,” and not (as we might think), “125.”
As we noted above, KW’s argument for ontological rule-following skepticism goes 
via an epistemological route. KW allows us unlimited epistemic access to two types of fact 
about Smith—facts about his previous behavior and behavioral dispositions, and facts 
about his mental history and mental states—and argues that even given omniscient and 
unlimited access to these two types of fact we cannot find any fact that might constitute 
Smith’s intending to gradd rather than add in expanding the series or his meaning addi-
tion rather than quaddition by “+.” Given the (plausible) assumption that facts about 
rule-following and meaning would have to be found in these areas if they are to be found 
anywhere, it follows that if unlimited epistemic access to them fails to yield a fact that 
might constitute Smith’s intending to follow “Add 4” rather than “Gradd 4,” or a fact 
that might constitute his meaning addition rather than quaddition, there simply are no 
such facts to be found.
Facts about how Smith has behaved in the past aren’t capable of making it the case 
that he means addition by “+” or following the rule “Add 4” in extending the series, 
since everything that he has done previously is consistent with his meaning quaddition 
by “+” or intending to follow the “Gradd 4” rule: ex hypothesi, he had never previously 
dealt with cases where the numbers in play were large enough for “Add 4” and “Gradd 
4,” or meaning addition and quaddition, to require different extensions of the series or 
different answers to arithmetical queries (Kripke 1982: 7–15). KW next considers facts 
about how Smith is disposed to extend the series, or answer arithmetical queries, and 
finds these unsuitable to constitute facts about rule-following and meaning. For one 
thing, Smith’s dispositions (like his past actual behavior with the “+” sign) are finite, so 
facts about his dispositions will be unable to distinguish between his meaning addition 
and his meaning, for example, skaddition, where the result of skadding two numbers x 
and y is the same as adding them, except for cases where the numbers involved are so 
large that Smith will die before he is able to respond to the arithmetical query, in which 
case, the result is 5: KW argues that Smith’s actual dispositions are consistent both with 
his meaning addition by “+” and with his meaning skaddition by “+.” Furthermore, 
even supposing it was true that if Smith had reached 1000, he would have continued 
1004, 1008, and so on, or true that if he’d been asked “68 + 57 =?” he would have replied 
with “125” rather than “5,” in neither case could these facts be regarded as constituting 
his intending to follow the rule “Gradd 4,” or meaning addition by “+.” Facts about the 
rule he intended to follow, or what he meant by “+,” are normative facts; facts concern-
ing how he ought to expand the series of numbers or reply to arithmetical queries. But 
the facts about Smith’s behavioral dispositions tell us at most what he would do in cer-
tain circumstances, as opposed to telling us what he ought to do in those circumstances 
(Kripke 1982: 22–38). In a passage that has been widely quoted, Kripke writes:

RULE-FOLLOWING SKEPTICISM
457
Suppose I do mean addition by “+.” What is the relation of this supposition to 
the question how I will respond to the problem “68+57”? The dispositionalist 
gives a descriptive account of this relation: if “+” meant addition, then I will 
answer “125.” But this is not the proper account of the relation, which is nor-
mative, not descriptive. The point is not that, if I meant addition by “+”, I will 
answer “125”, but rather that, if I intend to accord with my past meaning of 
“+”, I should answer “125.” Computational error, finiteness of my capacity, and 
other disturbing factors may lead me not to be disposed to respond as I should, 
but if so, I have not acted in accordance with my intentions. The relation of 
meaning and intention to future action is normative, not descriptive.
(1982: 37)
KW then argues that none of the following kinds of fact can be what constitutes mean-
ing addition by “+,” because they fail to pin down a determinate meaning, or fail to 
capture meaning’s normative character (similar arguments apply in the case of following 
a rule governing the expansion of an arithmetical series): the alleged fact that Smith’s 
use of “+” is governed by the counting rule or by his grasp of general thoughts or instructions 
(Kripke 1982: 15–17); the fact that “+” as used by Smith figures in various arithmetical 
laws that are definitive of addition (1982: 16–17); the totality of facts about Smith’s 
past mental history, construed in terms of occurrent mental states (1982: 17–22; see 
also 43–51); the fact that Smith embodies “a kind of machine, whose potential actions 
embody the [addition] function” (1982: 32–35); the fact that the hypothesis that Smith 
meant addition by “+” is the simplest of the hypotheses consistent with how he behaves 
(1982: 37–39); the alleged fact that (when Smith uses “+”) he has “an irreducible expe-
rience, with its own special quale, known directly . . . by introspection” (1982: 43–51); 
the alleged fact that Smith is in “a primitive state, not to be assimilated to sensations or 
headaches or any ‘qualitative’ states, nor to be assimilated to dispositions, but a state of 
a unique kind of its own” (1982: 51–53); the alleged fact that Smith grasps an objective 
and abstract entity—the sense of “+”—and that this abstract entity singles out the addi-
tion function as the referent of “+” as used by Smith (1982: 53–54).
There are thus no facts about rule-following and meaning, according to KW’s argu-
ment, so “it seems that the entire idea of meaning [and rule-following] vanishes into 
thin air” (1982: 22).
4. The Skeptical Solution
There are thus no facts in virtue of which claims such as “Smith means addition by ‘+’” 
or “Smith intends to follow the rule ‘Add 4’” are true or false: there is simply no fact of 
the matter either way. Kripke describes this result as a “skeptical paradox” (1982: 68), 
and suggests that it threatens us with the conclusion that “all language is meaningless” 
(1982: 71), a conclusion that he describes as “incredible and self-defeating” (ibid.) and 
“insane and intolerable” (1982: 60). He then suggests that KW offers us a radical way of 
avoiding the insane and intolerable conclusion.
Using Hume’s discussion of judgments about causation as his model (Hume 1748), 
Kripke distinguishes between two different sorts of response to a skeptical philosophical 
problem:
[A] proposed solution to a skeptical philosophical problem [is] a straight 
solution if it shows that on closer examination the skepticism proves to be 

SKEPTICISM
458
unwarranted. A skeptical solution of a skeptical problem begins on the con-
trary by conceding that the skeptic’s negative assertions are unanswerable.
(1982: 66)
Whereas a straight solution would attempt to find a fact in virtue of which, for example, 
“Smith means addition by ‘+’” might be true—perhaps by arguing that contra KW dis-
positional facts can both pin down determinate meanings and capture the normativity 
of meaning—a skeptical solution concedes up front that there can be no such facts: 
“Wittgenstein holds, with the skeptic, that there is no fact as to whether I mean plus or 
quus” (1982: 71).
The main idea of the Skeptical Solution is that the “insane and intolerable” para-
dox can be avoided by arguing that ascriptions of meaning and rule-following have a 
non fact-stating function. An analogy with an emotivist view of ethical judgment might 
help explain the idea (McGinn 1984: 65). Suppose that for one reason or another you 
have reached the conclusion that there are no such things as moral facts, so no facts in 
virtue of which claims such as “Stealing is wrong” can be true or false. Then, you might 
worry that moral thought and talk is liable to be convicted of a massive and systematic 
error: since moral claims purport to describe moral facts, and there are no such facts, 
the conclusion that all (positive, atomic) moral judgments are false appears to follow, 
threatening us with a form of moral nihilism according to which the notions of right 
and wrong “vanish into thin air.” An emotivist view of ethical judgment attempts to 
avoid the spiral into moral nihilism by denying that the function of ethical claims is to 
state facts: according to the emotivist, moral claims do not purport to describe moral 
facts, since they have a non fact-stating function, the expression of emotion. A. J. Ayer 
proposed a famous example of such a view:
If I say to someone, “You acted wrongly in stealing that money”, I am not 
stating anything more than if I had simply said, “You stole that money.” In add-
ing that this action is wrong, I am not making any further statement about it. 
I am simply evincing my moral disapproval about it. It is as if I had said, “You 
stole that money”, in a peculiar tone of horror, or written with the addition of 
some special exclamation marks. The tone, or the exclamation marks, adds 
nothing to the literal meaning of the sentence. It merely serves to show that 
the expression of it is attended by certain feelings in the speaker. . . . If I now 
generalise my previous statement and say, “Stealing money is wrong”, I produce 
a sentence which has no factual meaning—that is, expresses no proposition 
that can be either true or false.
(Ayer 1946: 107)
The Skeptical Solution proposed by KW suggests that judgments about rule-follow-
ing and ascriptions of meaning can be viewed as possessing a non fact-stating role. 
Although it would be implausible to suggest that “Smith means addition by ‘+’” has 
the function of expressing an emotion or a feeling, KW’s idea seems to be that it can 
be viewed as expressing our confidence that Smith’s use of “+” will agree with that of 
our speech-community, or perhaps as marking our acceptance of Smith as a member 
of that community (Kripke 1982: 92). It follows—according to KW—that our practices 
of ascribing rule-following and meaning avoid the spiral into nihilism threatened by the 
skeptical paradox. Kripke argues further that in spelling out the detail of the skeptical 

RULE-FOLLOWING SKEPTICISM
459
solution KW reaches the view that the notions of rule-following and meaning only 
make sense relative to a community of rule-followers or speakers and that consequently 
“solitary” language and rule-following is impossible (1982: 96). (Note that the interpre-
tation of KW as advocating a form of non-factualism is challenged in Wilson 1994. For 
a reply to Wilson, see Miller 2009.)
5. How Plausible is the Skeptical Solution?
The ascription of a non fact-stating function to a type of statement still presupposes that 
there is a distinction between correct and incorrect uses of statements of that type. For 
example, suppose that statements of the form “X is bad” have the function of expressing 
moral disapproval of X, while statements of the form “X is yummy” have the function 
of expressing a desire to eat X. Suppose that I intend to express moral disapproval of 
George Bush, and I utter, “George Bush is yummy.” Then we can say that this use of the 
sentence is incorrect, unlike “George Bush is bad,” which, modulo my intention, would 
have been correct. In other words, a serious non-factualist account of the semantic 
function of a type of statement requires a distinction between correct and incorrect uses 
of statements of that type, on pain of collapsing into a form of nihilism about the type of 
statement in question (according to which utterances of statements of that type would 
be mere noise or mere “sounding off,” and hence not assessable in terms of correctness 
and incorrectness).
This suggests that whatever may be the case with non-factualism in other areas, such 
as ethics, a non-factualist response to Kripke’s skeptical paradox about meaning will 
not be sufficient to avoid the “insane and intolerable” conclusion that all language is 
meaningless. This is because the skeptical argument rehearsed in §3 applies to expressions with 
non-descriptive semantic functions as well as statements with descriptive semantic functions. 
And this is so because even in the case of statements with non-descriptive semantic 
functions, there are requirements in the light of which uses of those statements can be 
assessed as either correct or incorrect.
To put it another way, the skeptical argument targets the notion of a rule per se, not 
just the notion of a rule governing the use of expressions with descriptive semantic 
functions: even non fact-stating language is rule-governed, and hence susceptible to the 
argument of the rule-following skeptic.
We can illustrate how the rule-following skeptic’s argument can be extended even 
to non-factualist language as follows. Suppose for the sake of argument that we hold 
an emotivist account of judgments about goodness according to which the semantic 
function of “X is good” is to express moral approval of X. Suppose at time t I intend 
to express moral approval of Fidel. Then, it seems, I ought to utter “Fidel is good.” 
However, according to the rule-following skeptic, I should not utter “Fidel is good” 
because the rule governing “good” is not
R1: Utter “X is good” if and only if you intend to express moral approval of X
but, rather,
R2: Utter “X is good” if and only if (a) it is time t* < t and you intend to express 
moral approval of X or (b) it is time t** ≥ t and you intend to express moral 
disapproval of X.

SKEPTICISM
460
If R1 is the rule governing my use of “good” then my utterance of “Fidel is good” at 
time t is correct, while if R2 is the condition governing my use of “good” then my 
utterance of “Fidel is good” at time t is incorrect (since I do not at that time intend to 
express moral disapproval of Fidel). Putting it fancifully, one might say: according to R1, 
“good” expresses moral approval, whereas according to R2, “good” expresses moral 
schmapproval . . . .
Now, just as earlier the skeptic allowed me omniscient access to facts about my behav-
ioral dispositions, mental life and so on and challenged me to find a fact in virtue of 
which “+” as I use it means addition rather than quaddition, the skeptic now challenges 
me to justify the claim that “good” as I use it is governed by rule R1 rather than rule R2. 
As before, the skeptic’s claim is that we can find no such fact. (Note that for the emotiv-
ist, “correctness” as applied to uses of “Fidel is good” is not to be identified with truth. So 
in setting up the skeptic’s argument as above we are not guilty of conflating emotivism 
with a form of cognitivist subjectivism, according to which facts about our intentions 
are written into a truth-condition for “Fidel is good.”)
The considerations above suggest that any form of non-factualism that is more sophis-
ticated than, for example, a very crude form of emotivism that views moral judgments 
as mere “sounding off,” presupposes determinate facts about the semantic functions of 
linguistic expressions, or the rules governing their correct use, irrespective of whether 
those functions are conceived to be descriptive or non-descriptive or whether the rules 
govern description or some non-descriptive linguistic practice. A generalized version of 
KW’s argument establishes that there are no such facts. So the strategy of the Skeptical 
Solution—conceding that there are no facts about meaning but attempting to prevent 
this from spiraling into a form of nihilism about meaning via the adoption of non-factu-
alism about ascriptions of meaning—is ultimately self-defeating. Any form of non-fac-
tualist account of a region of discourse presupposes that there are normative standards 
governing the correct and incorrect use of expressions belonging to it, so non-factualism 
about meaning—which denies that there are any such normative standards—is ulti-
mately self-contradictory.
(It is perhaps worth pausing briefly to note in more detail how the skeptical argument 
generalizes beyond the descriptive cases. In the case of a descriptive expression such as 
“+,” whatever fact that is proposed as making it the case that “+” means the addition 
function must be inconsistent with the hypothesis that “+” means some other function, 
such as quaddition. In the generalized version of the argument, which applies to both 
descriptive and non-descriptive language, this becomes: whatever fact that is proposed 
as making it the case that rule Ra is the rule governing Smith’s use of expression E must 
be inconsistent with the hypothesis that the rule governing his use of E is Rb, where Ra 
and Rb are such that for some possible use Δ of E, Δ is correct according to Ra but incor-
rect according to Rb.)
We can reiterate the point by considering what would happen if KW’s Skeptical 
Solution were construed as characterizing ascriptions of meaning as, for example, dis-
guised orders or commands, i.e. if we attempt to view utterances of ascriptions of mean-
ing as performing speech-acts such as ordering or commanding.
To see how, suppose I intend to get Jones to open the window at time t. So I utter 
“Open the window!” Intuitively, this utterance is correct, modulo my intention to get 
Jones to open the window. But the skeptic can argue that it is incorrect, since actually 
“window,” as I use it, means windows before time t but doors at time t and thereafter. 
(In fact, “window” actually means qwindow . . . .) Thus, despite the fact that “Open 

RULE-FOLLOWING SKEPTICISM
461
the window!” is an imperative rather than a description, it presupposes facts about the 
meanings of its constituent expressions. So, any form of non-factualism about a kind of 
statement presupposes facts about the meanings of the various expressions that figure 
in those statements. So, the strategy of the Skeptical Solution—conceding that there 
are no such facts but attempting to stem the paradoxical consequences of this via a 
non-factualist account of ascriptions of meaning—is again seen to be ultimately self-
defeating.
Anandi Hattiangadi develops an argument (2007) which is superficially similar to 
that just rehearsed, so it is perhaps worthwhile to point out that Hattiangadi’s argument, 
unlike the argument above, actually misconstrues the nature of the Skeptical Solution. 
Hattiangadi writes:
The skeptic might say that meaning ascriptions are neither true nor false 
because they are only masquerading as judgements when they are really some-
thing else. The judgements that Jones means addition by “plus” and that Jones’s 
uses agree with our own are both expressions of approval. When we see Jones 
adding, if he does so in a way that we like, we might say “fantastic!”, “wonder-
ful!”, “well done!”, or we might say “Jones means addition by ‘plus’.” The latter 
takes the form of a declarative sentence, but it is just another way of express-
ing our approval of what Jones does. One expression of approval (a.k.a. the 
“judgement” that Jones’s uses of “plus” agree with our own) could then be said 
to legitimate another expression of approval (a.k.a. the “assertion” that Jones 
means addition by “plus”).
Unfortunately, this too presupposes meaning. The skeptical argument is par-
ticularly lethal; its conclusion is not just that sentences and beliefs have no 
truth conditions, but more importantly, that words and concepts have no cor-
rectness conditions. Thus it is not just meaning and belief ascriptions that are 
bereft of content, but any word or sentence whatsoever—including sentences 
that putatively express approval or disapproval. If the sentence, “Jones’s uses of 
‘plus’ agree with mine” is to express approval, it must be meaningful. If “Jones” 
does not refer to Jones, then it cannot be used to express approval of what Jones 
does, as opposed to Smith or Baker. If the phrase “uses of ‘plus’” has no mean-
ing, it cannot be used to express approval of Jones’s uses of “plus”, as opposed 
to her gestures or her taste in music. Once again, we need to suppose that some 
words have meanings in order to legitimate meaning ascriptions. Yet, meaning 
non-factualism makes such appeal to meanings illicit.
(Hattiangadi 2007: 89–90)
Hattiangadi here appears to attribute to KW the “insane and intolerable” view that 
all language is meaningless, when in fact KW’s non-factualism is, in intention at least, 
supposed to provide a way of avoiding that “incredible and self-defeating” conclusion. 
In other words, Hattiangadi assumes that KW’s Skeptical Solution explicitly embraces 
a view that it is intended to avoid. The Skeptical Solution does not concede that all 
language is meaningless: KW after all castigates that claim as “insane and intolerable” 
and “incredible and self-defeating” and proposes the Skeptical Solution as affording us 
a way of avoiding it.
In contrast, the point of our argument is not that the words used in non-descriptive 
sentences need to be meaningful in order for the sentences to carry out the non-descriptive 

SKEPTICISM
462
function we are assuming them to have (although clearly they do) but, rather, that even 
if KW, in propounding the Skeptical Solution, is explicitly committed to avoiding an 
insane and intolerable form of meaning nihilism, a generalized version of the skeptical 
argument as applied to descriptive expressions can be re-employed to show that even 
non-descriptive sentences have no determinate semantic function and are governed by 
no determinate rule. The upshot of which is that KW is forced, by the generalized ver-
sion of the argument he accepts as directed against descriptive expressions, to embrace 
the “insane and intolerable” form of nihilism that he intends his Skeptical Solution to 
avoid.
The upshot of these considerations is thus that the “insane and intolerable” mean-
ing nihilism threatened by the skeptical argument cannot be avoided by embracing a 
skeptical solution or a form of non-factualism about ascriptions of meaning. In Crispin 
Wright’s words:
The Skeptical Solution seems to me, therefore, to be a failure. More: to sustain 
the Skeptical Argument is to uncage a tiger whose depredations there is then 
no hope of containing.
(Wright 1984: 106)
If meaning nihilism is to be avoided, a straight solution—an account of the facts 
that render ascriptions of meaning true or false—would thus appear to be mandatory.
Acknowledgments
For comments and discussion, I am grateful to Paul Broadbent, Wilson Cooper, Kirk 
Surgener, Daniel Whiting, Crispin Wright, and seminar audiences at the Universities 
of Turku, Aberdeen and Szczecin.
References
Ayer, A. J. (1946) Language, Truth and Logic, 2nd Edition, London: Gollanz.
Hattiangadi, A. (2007) Oughts and Thoughts: Skepticism and the Normativity of Content, Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Hume, D. (1748) An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, eds. L. A. Selby-Bigge and P. H. Nidditch, 
Oxford: Clarendon Press 1975.
Kripke, S. (1982) Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language, Oxford: Blackwell.
McGinn, C. (1984) Wittgenstein on Meaning, Oxford: Blackwell.
Miller, A. (2009) “Kripke’s Wittgenstein, Factualism and Meaning,” in D. Whiting (ed.) (2010) The Later 
Wittgenstein on Language, Basingstoke: Palgrave, pp. 167–190.
Wilson, G. (1994) “Kripke on Wittgenstein on Normativity,” reprinted in Miller and Wright (eds.) Rule-
Following and Meaning, Chesham: Acumen.
Wittgenstein, L. (1953) Philosophical Investigations, Oxford: Blackwell.
Wittgenstein, L. (1974) Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics, Oxford: Blackwell.
Wright, C. (1980) Wittgenstein on the Foundations of Mathematics, London: Duckworth.
Wright, C. (1984) “Kripke’s Account of the Argument against Private Language,” reprinted in his Rails to 
Infinity (2001).
Wright, C. (2001) Rails to Infinity, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

RULE-FOLLOWING SKEPTICISM
463
Further Reading
Miller, A. and Wright, C. (eds.) (2002) Rule-Following and Meaning, Chesham: Acumen. (A collection 
of some of the most important reactions to KW’s arguments, including contributions by Blackburn, 
Boghossian, McDowell, McGinn, Pettit and Wright.)
Miller, A. (2007) Philosophy of Language (revised and expanded 2nd edition), London: Routledge. (Chapters 
5 and 6 give an overview of the literature inspired by Kripke’s discussion of rule-following skepticism. 
Chapter 4 gives an overview of W. V. O. Quine’s approach to skepticism about meaning.)

SKEPTICISM
464
43
MORAL SKEPTICISM
Geoffrey Sayre-McCord
Introduction
All the standard arguments for global skepticism apply mutatis mutandis to moral skep-
ticism. Whatever reason there is to doubt we know anything, is reason to doubt that we 
have moral knowledge. Yet our moral views invite skepticism even if global skepticism 
is false. One doesn’t need to be a skeptic about everything to have serious doubts about 
moral knowledge.
The grounds of moral skepticism are legion. They are found in the evidently irrecon-
cilable moral disagreements that are a familiar fact of life. They are found in the difficulty 
people often have in articulating, let alone explaining in any precise way, what they 
mean when they say that something is morally wrong or a moral duty. They are found 
in the fact that, as it seems, people might have all the same non-moral beliefs about 
(say) some course of action, about the alternatives, and about their effects, and yet still 
intelligibly disagree about whether so acting is morally permissible. They are found in 
the recognition that moral arguments are not something that might even conceivably 
be settled by empirical investigation. They are found in the striking extent to which an 
appeal to intuitions or gut feelings (that not everyone shares) are the only “argument” 
people have for the moral views they embrace. And they are found in the ways in which 
peoples’ moral views look to be more a reflection of private interest or cultural practice 
or even biological forces, than a recognition of independent moral facts.
These familiar observations offer significant grounds for skepticism, notwithstanding 
the strength of peoples’ moral convictions and their readiness to sacrifice in the name 
of those convictions. There is a long history of moral skeptics appealing, in different 
ways, to these observations. Along the way, a remarkable variety of positions have 
emerged.
One way to understand the variety of views that count as versions of moral skepticism 
is to relate them to a standard account of the nature of knowledge, moral and other-
wise. According to this account, knowledge is justified, true, belief. The idea is that a 
person will not count as knowing something in particular if she does not believe it; or 
if, though she believes it, it isn’t true; or if, though she believes it, and it is true, she is 
not justified in believing it. This is regularly offered as a general account of knowledge 
and is not supposed to be specific to moral knowledge. Nonetheless, specific versions 
of moral skepticism can be sorted according to whether they deny (i) that people have 
moral beliefs; or, granting moral beliefs, (ii) that such beliefs are true; or, granting that 
people might have moral beliefs, and that some of them might be true, (iii) that people 
ever have an appropriate justification for those beliefs.

465
MORAL SKEPTICISM
In what follows, I will canvass the arguments people have offered for thinking that 
we don’t have moral beliefs; that if we do, none of them are true; and that, even if some 
might be true, we are never justified in thinking of any of them (or, at least, any that are 
substantive) that they are true.
Do People Have Any Moral Beliefs?
The suggestion that people do not have moral beliefs might seem difficult to take seri-
ously. It seems clear that people do sometimes sincerely believe that, for instance, racism 
is morally wrong, or that justice demands that we treat others as equals. These claims 
and others seem to express moral beliefs that at least some people genuinely have. In 
fact, such beliefs sometimes seem to be among people’s strongest commitments.
Still, a powerful strain of moral skepticism has its roots in denying that people have 
moral beliefs. These moral skeptics grant that people sometimes genuinely accept the 
positions they advocate. Their distinctive claim is that moral convictions, no matter 
how strongly held, are not beliefs. Instead, these skeptics argue, peoples’ moral views 
are a reflection of their affective, and not their cognitive, attitudes. To hold a moral 
view, they argue, is a matter of looking at some things with approval and others with 
disapproval, or of being motivated to do some things and not others, or of hoping others 
will behave in one way rather than another. It is not a matter of having a belief with a 
distinctively moral content.
According to these “non-cognitivists” (as they are usually called), once we distin-
guish a person’s beliefs from her other (non-belief) attitudes, and, specifically, once we 
recognize the distinctive role of her preferences, of her desires and aversions, and of her 
approvals and disapprovals, none of which are themselves beliefs, we’ll see (they argue) 
that a person’s moral convictions are among these non-belief attitudes. Having a moral 
view is not a matter of having a belief.
The apparently necessary connection between a person’s moral commitments and 
what she is motivated to do is the most influential argument for thinking that moral 
attitudes are not beliefs.
The argument goes back at least to David Hume who emphasized the distinctively 
practical role of moral thought (see Hume 1978). It starts with the observation that if a 
person is utterly unmotivated to pursue, promote, or protect what she claims to be good 
or right (or to oppose and work against what she claims to be bad or wrong) her claims 
will have been shown not to express her genuine views.
The argument goes on to claim that beliefs are all, in themselves, motivationally 
inert. Simply knowing which belief a person might have doesn’t by itself (the argument 
goes) tell us how the person will be motivated. To know how someone might be moti-
vated we need to know what preferences she has. This marks a sharp contrast, the argu-
ment goes on, between a person’s moral views, on the one hand, and her beliefs, on the 
other, since in knowing a person’s moral views we do know that she will be motivated in 
certain ways. This contrast shows, the argument concludes, that a person’s moral views 
are not among her beliefs.
There are various ways one might push against this argument. For instance, one might 
deny that in holding a moral view, one is, ipso facto, motivated at all one way or the 
other. Even if normally coming to hold that something is good or right has a motiva-
tional impact, there certainly seem to be cases where a person sincerely recognizes that 
something is morally right and yet shows no motivation to do it. Or one might argue 

SKEPTICISM
466
that the motivational impact of our moral views actually establishes that, at least in 
some cases, knowing a person’s beliefs does tell us about that person’s motivations.
A different argument for thinking people lack moral beliefs highlights the difficulty 
people have in identifying and articulating just what they mean in saying that some-
thing is right or good or wrong or bad.
Following G. E. Moore, many philosophers argue that any attempt to define moral 
terms is bound to fail (Moore 1903). They note that for any proposed definition (say, 
of ‘good’ as ‘pleasant’ or ‘the object of desire’ or ‘conventionally accepted,’ or of ‘right’ 
as ‘conducive to happiness’ or ‘approved by God’ or ‘consistent with society’s rules’) 
one can intelligibly ask, of whatever met one’s preferred definition, whether it really 
was good or right. That these are intelligible questions seems to show that (i) thinking 
something satisfies the proposed definition and (ii) thinking that thing is good or right 
involves thinking two different things. Yet if the definitions were successful, the argu-
ment supposes, the thoughts would be one and the same (just as thinking something is a 
triangle is one and the same as thinking that it is a three-sided plane figure).
The worry is not about any particular proposed definition. Rather, it seems, any 
attempt to define moral terms by appeal to events or properties that are testable or in 
other ways cognitively tractable, will leave open an important question: are things that 
satisfy the definitions actually good or right? Even if we end up answering “yes,” our 
being able intelligibly to raise the question seems to establish that the proposed defini-
tions fail as definitions. They each fail to capture a distinctive and important element 
of what we are doing in making moral claims.
What, though, is this missing important element? Non-cognitivists hold that it is not 
some additional cognitive component, over and above what is captured by some defini-
tion. Instead, they maintain, the extra element is some non-cognitive attitude that we 
are expressing in making a moral judgment.
This suggestion fits naturally with the motivation argument, since it returns us to the 
view that sincere moral judgments are tied to some non-cognitive attitude (that many 
have argued is a motivating attitude). The two arguments fit together so well that their 
coincidence is reasonably taken as an additional consideration in favor of both.
Importantly, while non-cognitivists reject the idea that we have moral beliefs, and 
so (on the assumption that knowledge entails belief) reject the idea that we have moral 
knowledge, they can and often do offer an account of what we are doing in saying of 
someone that she has moral knowledge: we are expressing our approval of her moral 
commitments. Just as our moral thought and talk is used to express our attitudes, so too 
(on this view) is our thought and talk about knowledge and justification. In counting 
someone as knowing something, or in characterizing her as being justified, we are, on 
this view, not reporting a fact or expressing a belief, but instead we are expressing some 
non-cognitive attitude of our own concerning her (Blackburn 1993; Gibbard 1990).
Do People Have Any True Moral Beliefs?
Without denying that it might be impossible to define moral terms in any way other 
than by appeal to other moral terms, many hold that we are nonetheless expressing 
beliefs, and purporting to report facts, when we make moral judgments. We are not 
simply expressing our likes (and dislikes), we are claiming that those things are right, or 
good (or wrong, or bad, and these claims are properly evaluated as true or false in light 
of the way the world actually is. On this cognitivist view, liking (or disliking) something 

467
MORAL SKEPTICISM
shouldn’t be mistaken for thinking it good (or bad). The latter involves forming a belief 
about the thing, perhaps a belief that justifies our liking (or disliking) it, but in any case 
a belief that is distinct from, and something over and above, the feelings in question.
Thinking that people have moral beliefs, though, is compatible with thinking all the 
beliefs are false. As a result, one might embrace cognitivism and yet advance an error 
theory, according to which no moral beliefs are true. Error theorists grant that we do 
have moral beliefs and that, in making moral claims, we are purporting to report facts 
about how the world is, morally. In that respect, it is less radical than non-cognitivism. 
In another respect, however, it is much more radical, since error theorists hold that our 
moral thought is fundamentally mistaken, whereas the non-cognitivists challenge our 
understanding of what we are doing in making moral claims, but might leave our mak-
ing those claims utterly unchallenged (Mackie 1977).
A useful parallel here is found in the modern view of the Greek Gods. In ancient 
Greece, people had beliefs about Zeus and the other Olympian Deities, beliefs that 
were strongly held and tremendously influential Yet we now see those beliefs as funda-
mentally mistaken, no matter how sincerely held and no matter how salutary in their 
effects. Other useful parallels are found in, for instance, current scientists’ rejection of 
beliefs concerning phlogiston, and the now common rejection of the idea that there 
are witches with occult powers. As we see things, particular claims about Zeus’ desires, 
or phlogiston’s effects, or the magical impact of a witch’s incantation, are false because 
they presuppose the existence of things that don’t actually exist—Zeus, phlogiston, 
occult powers, respectively.
Similarly, error theorists about morality argue that particular moral claims, which 
they grant often express sincerely held beliefs, are all false because they presuppose the 
existence of things that don’t exist. Different error theorists trace the mistake to dif-
ferent specific presuppositions that, they argue, are part and parcel of holding a moral 
view. But they all maintain that our moral thought and talk presupposes the presence of 
something that, simply put, does not exist.
According to some, in holding a moral belief we are presupposing authoritative stan-
dards for human behavior. And, they go on to argue, there are no such standards, so we 
should reject all the beliefs (i.e. all moral beliefs) that commit us otherwise.
According to others, we are presupposing desire-independent reasons for acting in 
certain ways, such that people have reason to act in certain ways, regardless of their 
desires. And, they go on to argue, there are no such reasons, so we should reject all the 
beliefs (i.e. all moral beliefs) that commit us otherwise.
According to still others, we are presupposing the existence of an all powerful and 
loving creator who sets the standards for our behavior, or establishes reasons for us to 
act, or in some other way provides what has to be in place for any moral claims to be 
true. And, they go on to argue, there is no such creator, so we should reject all the beliefs 
(i.e. all moral beliefs) that commit us otherwise.
In whichever way the details are worked out, error theorists maintain that we should 
reject all moral beliefs as being false on the grounds that, in holding them, we are com-
mitted to something that does not exist.
Clearly, the error theorist’s position is only as strong as her grounds for thinking (i) 
that the presuppositions she identifies are ones to which we are committed in holding a 
moral belief, and (ii) that the relevant presupposition is false. Predictably, cognitivists 
who reject the error theory regularly argue either (i′) that the claims about what moral 
beliefs presuppose get things wrong or (ii′) that, while they are right, the presupposition 

SKEPTICISM
468
is satisfied. In taking the first line, the argument is that error theorists saddle those with 
moral beliefs with commitments that are not theirs to bear. In taking the second line, 
the argument is that the relevant commitments are, contra the error theorists, commit-
ments for which we have, on balance, grounds for thinking they are satisfied.
Working through these issues is nicely complicated and involves weighing evidence 
that certain presuppositions are in play, evidence that the presuppositions are not satis-
fied, and evidence that people might have gone so far wrong. All of this gets balanced, 
in the process, against the evidence that some things really are right or wrong, good 
or bad.
But this last bit of evidence needs to be handled carefully. The error theorists are 
challenging the claim that anything is right or wrong or good or bad. So, to the extent 
contrary evidence presupposes what is at stake (as presumably most of our moral evi-
dence in favor of particular moral claims, does) there is a pressing worry about begging 
the question. Of course, error theorists acknowledge, if cruelty is always wrong, then 
evidence that someone has done something wrong is found in their having been cruel. 
But the claim that cruelty is always wrong, no less than the claim that a particular per-
son did something wrong, presupposes, they will argue, just what is in question.
However, the conviction that some things are genuinely right or wrong, good or bad, 
provides impetus for showing either that the purported presuppositions are not actually 
being made, or that they can be vindicated. That fact understandably structures how 
people set about defending their moral beliefs as not actually undermined by the error 
theorist’s challenge.
In the process, error theorists and their opponents, alike, work to figure out what 
people are claiming in saying that something is right or wrong, good or bad, since argu-
ments for or against certain candidate presuppositions turn on what is involved in these 
claims. These debates introduce discussion of whether the putative moral facts would 
have to be something supernatural, or whether they might properly be identified with, 
or constituted by, natural entities or properties. And these debates force a discussion 
as well about what might constitute successful definitions of our moral terms, about 
whether such definitions are necessary or desirable, and about how it is that our lan-
guage and our thoughts might come to be about various things in the way they appar-
ently are.
In the context of a discussion of skepticism, the important point is that if the error 
theorists are right, we lack moral knowledge (assuming that knowledge entails justified 
true belief) because none of our moral beliefs are true. Importantly, in making their 
argument, error theorists are not claiming that no one has, or has ever had, justified 
moral beliefs. Error theorists argue that we have grounds for rejecting all moral beliefs as 
false, on the grounds we have for thinking that they all have false presuppositions. Yet 
their position is consistent with holding that people who lack the evidence we have, or 
have different evidence, might well be perfectly justified in holding the moral beliefs 
they do. Their point is that, justified or not, we have reason to think such beliefs are 
actually false.
Are Any Moral Beliefs Justified?
But what would it take for someone’s moral beliefs to be justified?
An attractive answer to this question, provided by “foundationalism,” starts with the 
idea that a belief is justified if but only if (i) there is evidence for it, or (ii) it is, in some 

469
MORAL SKEPTICISM
way, self-evident (or not in need of evidence, though able to provide evidence for other 
beliefs, or, at least, not such that there could be any good evidence against it). And the 
answer continues with the thought that beliefs that fall into (i) do so thanks to being 
properly related to those that fall into (ii). (Foundationalism doesn’t require that the 
foundational beliefs be dubitable, corrigible, or even true. They simply need to be able 
to justify other beliefs without having to secure support from other beliefs.)
Foundationalism brings two questions to the fore. Which beliefs are of type (ii)? 
(Here, talk of self-evidence, certainty, indubitability, etc. looms large.) And: What does 
it take for a belief to count as being “properly related” to those beliefs? (Here, talk 
of entailment, evidential relations, explanations, and inductive support, looms large.) 
Among foundationalists, there is a great deal of disagreement as to how to answer these 
two questions.
In thinking specifically about moral beliefs, explanatory relations have become espe-
cially salient (see Harman 1977 and Sayre-McCord 1988). The problem is that the 
truth of our moral beliefs seems not to play any explanatory role in our understanding of 
our own experiences, nor of what happens in the world, nor why. Even when evil people 
do horrible things to virtuous people, we can have (in principle) a full explanation of 
what the evil people have done and why, and what happens to the virtuous people, and 
how they suffer, all without having to appeal to our moral beliefs at all. Psychology, 
sociology, biology, and physics, in some combination, provide the explanation. While 
adding talk of evil and virtue might let us categorize those involved, it seems not to 
help us explain what has happened. Similarly, we might find ourselves repulsed by the 
behavior of the evil person and indignant at the treatment the virtuous person has suf-
fered. While we might be tempted to say that our being repulsed is explained by the 
person’s evil nature and our indignation is explained by undeserved suffering, our reac-
tions are fully explained by appeal to our having the moral beliefs we do, without having 
to suppose those beliefs are true. We would have been repulsed and indignant, having 
believed the person evil and the sufferer virtuous, even if, as a matter of fact, our beliefs 
were false. According to many moral skeptics, this point holds generally and shows that 
our moral beliefs are explanatorily impotent.
This is going just a bit fast. After all, the truth of our moral beliefs would, it seems, 
explain the truth of other moral beliefs. The wrongness of cruelty explains why a person 
who is cruel is evil, and the virtue of a victim explains why that person’s suffering is 
undeserved. Perhaps. Yet, the skeptics point out, all of our moral beliefs are being called 
into question. So these explanatory relations among our moral beliefs are of no justifica-
tory value unless some of our moral beliefs are independently justified. Our moral beliefs 
could be justified, they insist, only if either they bear some other relation to privileged 
beliefs, or they themselves fall into the privileged class. But, according to the skeptics, 
neither is plausible.
So, for instance, our moral beliefs would bear an appropriate relation to privileged 
beliefs if they were entailed by those beliefs. Thus, if the fact that something was pleas-
ant entailed that it was morally good, or if the fact that some course of action maximized 
happiness entailed that it was morally right, then as long as we were justified in believ-
ing certain things were pleasant or certain courses of action maximized happiness, our 
beliefs concerning what was morally good or right could be justified.
Yet Moore’s observation that there is always an open question when it comes to 
whether something that satisfies a non-moral description (as, for instance, being pleas-
ant) satisfies as well a moral description (as, for instance, being morally good), renders 

SKEPTICISM
470
contentious (to say the least) the claim that there are entailment relations between 
the content of non-moral beliefs and the content of moral beliefs (Moore 1903; Sayre-
McCord 1997).
Inductive relations seem no better placed to provide justifications for our moral 
beliefs. After all, inductive relations supporting particular moral beliefs require already 
having on hand, as justified, some moral beliefs that we can use as the basis for the 
induction. That simply shifts back to those beliefs, leaving us unable to make a legiti-
mate induction on their basis unless they are themselves justified.
If, as it appears, explanatory, entailment, and inductive relations exhaust the rel-
evant possibilities, there seems no hope for the justification of our moral beliefs unless 
some moral beliefs count as epistemically privileged—as self-evident, or indubitable, 
or in some other way such that we are both justified in holding them and able to rely 
on them in justifying other moral beliefs. Indeed, virtually all foundationalists end up 
taking this view. (The skeptics, of course, deny that any moral beliefs qualify, while the 
non-skeptics maintain that some do.) The challenge facing non-skeptics, at least those 
who accept foundationalism, is to show that some moral beliefs qualify as epistemically 
privileged.
Some moral beliefs might immediately come to mind as not possibly false—for 
instance, that committing a murder is morally wrong. But what seems to guarantee this 
truth—its being an analytic that murder is wrong—seems to guarantee as well its trivi-
ality. For such beliefs to justify other moral beliefs, we need another substantive belief, 
for instance, that a certain act was a murder (and not a justified killing). But the justi-
fication of these beliefs is just what is at issue, and the (trivial) truth of various analytic 
claims seems to be of no help with them.
One might argue that the available analytic truths are much more surprising and 
complicated than this example suggests. One might hold too that discovering their 
truth is a kind of revelation even to those who are sophisticated in their moral thinking. 
Yet, surprising or not, complicated or not, a revelation or not, analytic moral truths, 
considered alone, still apparently leave us with no justification for specific substantive 
moral beliefs. For this reason, the ambition of those who ground moral epistemology 
in analytic truths involves finding successful analyses that trade in epistemically 
unproblematic non-moral terms. Only then, relying on the analyses, and relevant, 
and justified, non-moral beliefs, might the moral beliefs in question inherit epistemic 
credentials.
If, for instance, a correct analysis reveals that something is morally wrong if in doing 
it one is acting contrary to the recommendation of one’s ideal advisor, and if we can 
have a justified view of what one’s ideal advisor would recommend, then we could have 
a justified belief about what is wrong. The challenge, the skeptic will press, is to show 
that the terms of the analysis themselves have the required epistemic credentials.
Alternatively, putting putative analytic truths aside, one might defend some substan-
tive moral beliefs a priori, even if not analytic. Thus, for instance, one might maintain, 
as an a priori truth, that an action is wrong if and only if the agent could not consistently 
will that everyone act on the same grounds she is taking as sufficient for her.
Against such views, a moral skeptic presses two challenges. The first challenge is to 
show that the claim is, in fact, an a priori truth. The second is to show that our beliefs 
concerning what an agent might consistently will are on a better footing, epistemically, 
than the moral claims concerning the wrongness of an action seem to be. Predictably, 
bearing each of these burdens is a real challenge.

471
MORAL SKEPTICISM
Hoping to meet both burdens, moral intuitionists argue that there are some sub-
stantive moral claims that all who are morally competent, clear-headed, and unbiased, 
can be brought to recognize as true. Moreover, they maintain, the credentials of these 
claims are comfortably on a par, epistemically, with the rules of logic and the axioms 
of mathematics. As the intuitionists emphasize, the rules of logic and the axioms of 
mathematics admit of no more proof, nor do people think they need more proof, than 
is found in the fact that those who are logically or mathematically competent, clear-
headed, and unbiased, can “see” their truth. The reflective faculties of humans, no less 
than their sensorial faculties, are, when properly used, sources of information about the 
world (Ross 1930).
Thus, for instance, they suggest that we are justified in believing that, other things 
being equal, promises ought to be kept, and that (again) other things being equal, if 
possible, we ought to help those in need. We are justified in believing these things not 
because they help us explain our experiences, nor because they are analytic truths, but 
because, on reflection, those who are morally competent, clear-headed, and unbiased, 
see their truth. Once such claims are on hand, the intuitionists note, we can justify 
other moral beliefs by appeal to them. So while most of our moral beliefs are not them-
selves directly intuitive—our moral world is far too complex for that—moral intuition 
provides the fundamental truths that we can use to justify our other moral beliefs.
Moral skeptics, though, highlight that what strikes people as intuitive, when it comes 
to morality, so regularly reflects how they happen to have been raised, and what their 
interests are, that there is a persistent, and seemingly well-grounded, suspicion that 
what gets valorized as intuitive is really simply what one is unwilling to reject.
More generally, moral skeptics press, there are no substantive moral claims that are 
unchallengeable and so none that are not in need of some evidence or support. Yet that 
suggests, they hold, that no moral beliefs are properly seen as epistemically privileged in 
a way that would allow them to serve as a foundation for our other moral beliefs. And 
if no moral beliefs are foundational (i.e. appropriately epistemically privileged), and 
no set of exclusively non-moral beliefs can alone provide a justification for our moral 
beliefs, then no moral beliefs are justified at all. This argument holds even if some of our 
moral beliefs are, in fact, true. The problem here is not that there are no moral truths, 
but that even if there are such truths, we apparently have no reason whatsoever to think 
that we have got them right.
Putting things this way brings us back to the explanatory challenge. Unless the truth 
of our moral beliefs figures, at the very least, in an explanation of why we hold the 
beliefs we do—unless we have grounds for thinking that our moral beliefs have been, 
and are, responsive to the (moral) truth—we have reason to worry that our moral views 
simply free-float from the moral facts (assuming there are such facts).
This worry is amplified by the extent to which psychology, sociology, political science, 
and evolution, with appeals to self-interest, false consciousness, political influence, and 
genetic advantage, seem in some combination to offer compelling explanations of our 
moral beliefs; all, it seems, without ever giving us reason to think any of them are true.
In order to establish that our moral beliefs are responsive to the moral facts we must 
justify our view that the facts are one way rather than another. Eschewing an appeal to 
intuitions, and the claim that some substantive moral claims are epistemically privi-
leged in the way foundationalists demand, those who reject skepticism offer a variety 
of arguments in favor of some substantive position or another. Thus, for instance, Kant 
offers a transcendental argument for the categorical imperative, while Mill defends 

SKEPTICISM
472
hedonism on the grounds that our view of the desirability of our own pleasure commits 
us to acknowledging anyone else’s like pleasure as equally desirable (even if it is not 
equally desired). Others appeal to our capacity to engage in practical reason, or to some 
inescapable feature of our nature, arguing that it commits us to accepting some principle 
or other (Korsgaard 1996). Still others find arguments for substantive moral claims in 
our need for shared standards for cooperation, or our commitment to mutual respect, 
or in the capacity of certain standards to explain and justify our more particular moral 
judgments (Gauthier 1986; Scanlon 1998; Rawls 1971).
Of course, in offering such arguments (in the attempt to show that our beliefs are 
responsive to the truth), we are supposing that they are themselves sensitive to the 
truth. A skeptic will charge that, in doing so, these defenses all assume, illegitimately, 
that some of our beliefs are right.
Interestingly, according to many, moral beliefs are not the only ones that suffer this 
problem. In fact, it seems attempts to establish that any contingently true beliefs are 
appropriately sensitive to the facts they concern will implicitly or explicitly appeal to 
other beliefs about those very facts. After all, it is only if we have those facts right that 
we can show that our beliefs are appropriately sensitive to the facts. But we are then 
presupposing that (some of) our beliefs are appropriately sensitive to the facts when we 
try to establish that they are.
Those who embrace global skepticism often press this point and rely on it in arguing 
that virtually all of our beliefs are unjustified, with the result that we lack knowledge 
not simply of morality but of the external world, of other minds, even of our own expe-
riences. At the same time, many who reject global skepticism embrace this point too, 
and then take it as grounds for thinking that in some way or other the foundationalist 
has misunderstood what is required for justification. In particular, they reject the idea 
that a belief can be justified only if it is either self-evident (or otherwise epistemically 
privileged) or justified by appeal, ultimately, to such beliefs. Instead, they maintain, we 
can succeed in justifying a particular belief by appeal to another, without supposing we 
can get a perspective on our beliefs that allows us, from outside (so to speak), to show 
that our beliefs are responsive to the facts. Such a perspective is, in principle, unavail-
able, they argue, so if there is justification at all, ever, it must not require our having 
succeeded in taking this perspective.
With this in mind, coherentists about justification argue that how justified our beliefs 
are—moral beliefs, no less than beliefs about the taste of coffee or the effects of penicil-
lin or the fuel economy of a car, or whatever—is dependent on, and a reflection of, how 
they are related to the other things we believe, with there being no need for any of the 
beliefs to be epistemically privileged in the way a foundationalist requires.
This suggestion meets with a familiar objection that is right in the point it makes, 
but which, in the process, reveals a common misunderstanding of what the coherentist 
holds. The objection is that the extent to which beliefs happen to hold together is no 
evidence that they are true. Indeed, for any set of coherent beliefs, it seems easy to imag-
ine an alternative set that is just as coherent, yet incompatible. A piece of fiction need 
be no less coherent than a historical treatise. That means that one cannot reasonably 
offer, as evidence of the truth of one’s beliefs, that they are coherent. Coherence is not 
evidence of truth. The misunderstanding here is in thinking that a coherentist offers 
coherence as evidence of truth. She doesn’t, or at least shouldn’t. The coherentist’s 
proposal is, or should be, that while (relative) coherence is not evidence of truth, it is 
a measure of the strength of the evidence the person has. The idea is that each person’s 

473
MORAL SKEPTICISM
evidence for whatever she might be considering is found in the contents of her other 
beliefs. The more the contents of her beliefs support some claim, the more coherent 
the claim is with her beliefs and the more justified she is in believing it (Sayre-McCord 
1996).
Coherentism takes as given, but not as privileged, whatever beliefs we find ourselves 
with. It then sees the process of testing, refining, and justifying our beliefs as a matter 
of seeing how the various things we believe hang together, putting ourselves in place to 
gather more information (which becomes available as we form new beliefs), and refin-
ing and rejecting various claims in light of our evidence. As the skeptic has pointed out, 
none of the beliefs count as unchallengeable. Yet, contrary to the skeptic’s claim, in the 
face of challenges, a person is justified in appealing to, and indeed has no recourse but 
to appeal to, whatever she does believe.
This of course leaves open the possibility that a person’s justified beliefs, even those 
that are extremely well justified, might turn out to be false. Justification is no guarantee 
of truth on the coherentist’s view. But that does not mean that a person had no reason 
to think of her justified beliefs that they are true—she has all the reason provided by 
her other beliefs. Each of these beliefs can be challenged, but each is also in principle 
something that might meet the challenge.
While the coherence theory of justification is meant to account for how our scientific 
theories and our common-sense beliefs about the world might be justified, even though 
they are neither self-evident (nor otherwise epistemically privileged) nor supported by 
beliefs that are, the account applies directly to moral beliefs as well. To say that is not, 
of course, to say that our moral beliefs will, on the coherentist account, turn out to be 
justified. That cannot be determined ex ante and depends on seeing whether, and how, 
our moral (and other) beliefs hang together, putting ourselves in a position to gather 
more information, and refining and rejecting various claims in light of our evidence. 
Coherentism makes sense of how we might intelligibly discover that our moral beliefs 
are appropriately responsive to the facts, without thereby ensuring that they are. Far 
from it.
Part of what makes moral skepticism a serious challenge is that, as we consider the 
full range of what we take ourselves to know—about how moral convictions are shaped 
and changed, about how the world operates more generally, and about how we might 
gather information effectively—we find grounds for suspecting that our moral beliefs 
do not cohere well with our other beliefs. At the same time, our moral convictions are 
so central to our understanding of ourselves and others that coming to grips with them, 
either as justified beliefs, or as unjustified beliefs, or as convictions not properly seen as 
beliefs at all, is a challenge we cannot reasonably ignore.
References
Blackburn, S. (1993) Essays in Quasi-Realism, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gauthier, D. (1986) Morals by Agreement, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gibbard, A. (1990) Wise Choices, Apt Feelings, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Harman, G. (1977) The Nature of Morality, New York: Oxford University Press.
Hume, D. (1978) A Treatise of Human Nature, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Originally published in 
1739–40.
Korsgaard, C. (1996) Sources of Normativity, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Mackie, J. L. (1977) Ethics: Inventing Right and Wrong, London: Penguin Books.
Moore, G. E. (1903) Principia Ethica, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

SKEPTICISM
474
Rawls, J. (1971) A Theory of Justice, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Ross, W. D. (1930) The Right and the Good, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sayre-McCord, G. (1988) “Moral Theory and Explanatory Impotence,” Midwest Studies in Philosophy, Vol. 
XII, Morris: University of Minnesota Press, 433–457.
—— (1996) “Coherentist Epistemology and Moral Theory,” in W. Sinnott-Armstrong and M. Timmons 
(eds.) Moral Knowledge? Oxford: Oxford University Press, 137–189.
—— (1997) “‘Good’ on Twin Earth,” Philosophical Issues, 8, 267–292.
Scanlon, T. What We Owe to Each Other, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Part VI
RESPONSES TO 
SKEPTICISM


44
SKEPTICISM AND 
ANTI-REALISM
Richard Schantz
I. Realism and Anti-Realism
To gain an understanding of the dialectical relationship between skepticism and anti-
realism, we must begin with a characterization of realism. After all, it is realism that 
seems to pave the way to skepticism or at least to contain a certain skeptical potential. 
Anti-realism, then, deems itself as faced with the task of trying to give a satisfactory 
theoretical answer to the skeptical challenge. This is the typical argumentative pattern 
of the debate.
The basic idea of realism about a particular domain can be roughly expressed as a con-
junction of two theses, an existence thesis and an independence thesis: firstly the kinds 
of thing distinctive of that domain exist, and secondly their existence and nature are 
objective and independent of us, of our perceptions, thoughts, and language. The things 
within the domain must be out there to be discovered rather than constructed or con-
stituted by our minds or our conceptual schemes. Anti-realism rejects this conjunction 
of theses. Some forms of anti-realism attack the existence thesis by flatly denying that 
entities of the relevant kind really exist, while according to other forms entities of the 
relevant kind do exist but are not objective or have no independent status in reality.
Realism and anti-realism are domain-specific positions. There are distinct categories 
of entities one can be realist or anti-realist about: physical objects, universals, mental 
states, space, time, moral values, God, numbers, meaning, and so on. Most philosophers 
are neither global realists nor global anti-realists. Rather, most of them are pickers and 
choosers, local realists about some kind of entities, and local anti-realists about others.
I shall be concerned here only with the traditional debate between realism and anti-
realism about the external, physical world, that is, with the debate about whether physi-
cal objects and events exist independently of the mental. Realists maintain that there 
really are mountains, rivers, and stars, and that their existence and nature, what they 
are like, are constitutively independent of what anyone happens to believe or say about 
the matter. Usually anti-realists do not dispute that there are such things. Quite the 
contrary, they maintain that, of course, everyday macroscopic objects do indeed exist, 
but, so they typically add, not objectively, not independently of us—not “without the 
mind.”
Realism and anti-realism, as so far characterized, are ontological or metaphysical the-
ses. It is often suggested, however, that this characterization should be supplemented 
to include an epistemological thesis. Two proposals, not incompatible but highlighting 

RESPONSES TO SKEPTICISM
478
different aspects of our epistemic situation, can be distinguished. Some realists, the 
epistemological optimists, claim that we are mostly capable of acquiring knowledge 
about the objective world; they are persuaded that, difficult as it might be, the world 
is principally epistemically accessible to us (Davidson 1986; Devitt 1984; McDowell 
1994). Other realists, however, the epistemological pessimists, are a bit more cautious 
in this regard (Nagel 1986; Stroud 1984; Williams 1978). They tend to stress the ever-
present possibility of error and ignorance. There is no guarantee that our beliefs about 
the world, even if they are maximally supported by evidence, are true. Truth about the 
world, so they characteristically contend, is always potentially evidence-transcendent 
or verification-transcendent.
The crucial point is that, according to realism, there is a logical gap between our 
beliefs about the world, or our sensory experiences of it, and the way the world is in 
itself. The totality of our beliefs about the world is one thing, the objective world quite 
another; obviously, our believing something to be so-and-so, does not make it so. This 
basic realist conviction, apparently a platitude acknowledged by both naive and reflec-
tive common sense, is the main reason why many philosophers think that realism is 
threatened by a deep internal tension: if the world is constitutively independent of 
our experiences and beliefs, then how can we be confident of gaining any knowledge 
about it?
While the camp of the so-called epistemological realists seeks to combine its onto-
logical thesis of the mind-independence of the world with the epistemological thesis 
that it is nevertheless humanly possible to gain knowledge about it, epistemological 
skeptics resolve the apparent tension in realism in a quite different way: they assert 
that it is impossible to know anything about the external, objective world at all; we can 
attain knowledge, at most, only of our minds and its ideas or representations. This is the 
standpoint of skepticism about the external world. We can know neither that there is 
an external world nor, should there be one, what it is like.
In this dialectical situation anti-realists—idealists, verificationists, phenomenalists, 
Kantians, social constructivists, etc.—enter the stage. Deeply convinced that meta-
physical realism opens the door to skepticism, anti-realists argue that the realist concep-
tion of an independent world behind the appearances, beyond the world as we perceive 
it and believe it to be, is wrong or even incoherent. They often urge that there are sig-
nificant connections between understanding and verification, which the skeptic simply 
ignores. The only world there is, the only world we can find out about, is the world our 
senses present to us. A hypothesis with no connection to experience is regarded as spu-
rious; after all, it could never be verified or falsified. So anti-realists tend to assert that 
we cannot even understand the skeptic’s speculations about the wildly different ways 
the world might really be, even though all our experiences remain unaltered. According 
to anti-realism, there is indeed an ordinary perceptible world, a world of trees, tables, 
and stars, but this world is, in a philosophically significant sense, dependent on, or 
constituted by, our epistemic activities. So what the anti-realists are willing to abandon 
is the distinctive realist conception of the world as what is there anyway, the alleged 
objectivity and autonomy of the world. To block skepticism, they offer us a revisionary 
ontology, which marks a considerable departure from the deeply entrenched metaphys-
ics of common sense.
The skeptic, on the other hand, need not deny the existence of an independent 
world. She is an agnostic, who merely claims that we do not know whether or not such 
an objective world, a world as the realist conceives it, really exists. To achieve her aim, 

SKEPTICISM AND ANTI-REALISM
479
it is enough to raise reasonable doubts about our beliefs concerning the external world, 
thereby seeking to show that we are not justified in holding these beliefs, and so do not 
know that they are true. Anti-realism is a drastic reaction to skepticism; it is a radi-
cal form of anti-skepticism. Our knowledge of the world is unproblematic and secure 
because it seems to be not very difficult to know what is going on in our own minds—in 
our subjective or internal world.
II. Radical Skepticism
The classic work on the philosophical problem of our knowledge of the external world 
is Descartes’ Meditations in which he places all the beliefs he had formerly accepted in 
doubt in order to put his whole system of beliefs on a secure foundation and to build a 
reliable edifice of knowledge. His ambitious project is to make a general examination 
of everything he believes or takes to be true, with the aim of conclusively eliminating 
all error. To this purpose, he employs his famous “method of doubt”: he decides to ten-
tatively reject any belief or principle that is not absolutely certain, any for which some 
reason for doubt can be found, some possible way in which the belief might be false.
The major part of our beliefs and our knowledge of the physical world is based on, 
or grounded in, sensory experience. No wonder, then, that empiricism—the view that 
most, or even all, of our knowledge comes to us from the evidence of the senses—once 
clearly dominated the epistemological scene. So it is reasonable for Descartes to begin 
by casting doubts on the reliability of the senses as a source of knowledge. He points 
out first that the senses sometimes deceive us. Sometimes things appear different from 
the way they really are, so our judgments about how they really are, if based on the ways 
they appear, can be wrong. One might be tempted to conclude that as a general source 
of knowledge the senses should never again be trusted. But, plainly, such a simple ver-
sion of the argument from illusion would not be sound. From the fact that something 
is sometimes deceptive it does not follow that it is always deceptive. Fallibility does 
not entail general skepticism. However, Descartes regards the argument from illusion 
as only the first stage in the over-all structure of his skeptical argument. He himself 
recognizes that the senses might be reliable in circumstances that we would ordinarily 
regard as favorable.
At this point, he introduces his famous “dreaming argument” as an adequate reason 
for doubting all of his sense-based beliefs. He reminds us of the fact that we sometimes 
sleep and therein dream. Dreams are contentful conscious experiences whose content 
does not correspond in any reliable way to events in our surroundings, and therefore 
they do not yield knowledge of what is going on in the world around us. Descartes 
claims that the impossibility of distinguishing being awake from being asleep by certain 
marks provides reason for doubting even those sense-based beliefs that are formed under 
the best possible circumstances. Thus, we cannot rule out the possibility that we are 
presently dreaming. For all we know, we might even be dreaming all the time. And if 
we cannot know that we are not dreaming, we can know nothing about the real extra-
mental world. A necessary condition for our knowledge of the world around us cannot 
be fulfilled.
Finally, Descartes introduces his most radical doubt-inducing argument: the hypoth-
esis of an evil demon. Suppose there is an omnipotent being bent on universal decep-
tion. Such a being would be capable of artificially producing in my mind all my sensory 
experiences of the world without these being related to objects and events in the 

RESPONSES TO SKEPTICISM
480
external world. Hence the real world could be very different from the way it appears to 
be. Perhaps there even exists no real external world at all.
An updated variant of Descartes’ thought experiment is the renowned science fiction 
scenario of a “brain in a vat” (Putnam 1981). Imagine that evil scientists have removed 
your brain from your body and placed it in a vat of nutrient fluids that keep the brain 
alive and functioning. They have also inserted lots of electrodes into your brain and in 
all the relevant nerve fibers in order to be capable of delivering inputs to the normal 
neural information channels. The electrodes are controlled by a sophisticated super-
computer that contains a complete model of the physical world and does the calcula-
tions necessary to produce the same pattern of neural stimulation as a normal brain in a 
human body receives. As a result, you enjoy the same sort of experiences and thoughts 
as you would enjoy if you were a normal, embodied human being. The scientists have 
put you in a virtual reality that, for you, is qualitatively indistinguishable from the real 
world you think you live in.
The skeptical question now is: how do you know that you are not a brain in a vat? 
You might reply that there is no evidence to suggest that you are a brain in a vat. This 
is surely right. The crucial point, however, is that if you were a brain in a vat, you would 
not possess any evidence for this hypothesis either. According to the brain-in-a-vat 
scenario, you would have the same kinds of sensory experiences as you are having when 
you perceive external objects in the normal way. Moreover, your sensory experience is 
ultimately all the evidence you have to go on. All your beliefs about the external world 
depend in the end on your sensory experiences. Therefore, you have no evidence that 
the skeptical scenario is not true, and, therefore, you cannot know that you are not a 
brain in a vat. From this, the skeptic infers that you do not know anything about the 
external world at all.
The various thought experiments we have considered seem to support radical skep-
ticism about the external world. This position differs from other, less radical forms of 
skepticism by aiming primarily at justification simpliciter, not at some demanding con-
ception of knowledge, which requires certainty or indefeasible justification or at least 
a high degree of justification. For Descartes and his numerous followers, certainty was 
an essential feature of knowledge. Our modern conception of knowledge, however, is 
fallibilist. We have learned to recognize that the logical possibility of error can never be 
ruled out entirely. Every one of our empirical beliefs might turn out to be false. Hence 
radical skepticism should not be confused with the quite plausible fallibilist standpoint 
that our beliefs always fall short of being certain. Rather, the main thesis of radical skep-
ticism is the dramatic thesis that the justification condition for knowledge cannot be 
fulfilled. Our actual system of beliefs is not justified at all because there are many empiri-
cally equivalent alternatives, which are logically no less coherent. In contrast, non-rad-
ical forms of skepticism typically concede the possibility of justification, even of strong 
justification, but deny the possibility of knowledge. Its advocates merely maintain that, 
while we might have all sorts of good reasons for our beliefs, we cannot be absolutely 
certain, or strongly enough justified, to believe that they are really true because there is 
some error possibility, however remote, which we cannot exclude.
III. The Problem of Our Knowledge of the External World
We seem to have lost the world (Stroud 1984: 1–38). We know how things appear to 
us but we do not know how they really are. We know the contents of our conscious 

SKEPTICISM AND ANTI-REALISM
481
experiences but we cannot dismiss the possibility that they are totally disconnected 
from the objective world. The Cartesian problem of our knowledge of the external 
world is the problem of how we can attain knowledge of the world around us if the 
information the senses deliver is compatible with many different ways the world might 
be. The skeptical arguments seem to have shown that direct realism is not a tenable 
position. According to direct realism, we are directly aware of real physical objects and 
events in perception and thereby often, indeed typically, acquire direct or immediate 
knowledge of them. If the skeptical arguments are correct, direct realism must be wrong 
because the most important consequence of those arguments is that we are never per-
ceptually directly aware of the physical objects in the external world. The direct objects 
of perception or sensory experience are a special kind of mental or subjective objects 
instead—objects that are usually called “sense-data,” “sense,” or “appearances.” It is 
characteristic of these entities that their existence and properties are dependent on our 
awareness of them.
The problem of our knowledge of the external world can now be formulated as the 
problem of whether, and if so, how, beliefs about external objects can be justified on the 
basis of the direct perception of sense-data. If the skeptical conclusion is accepted, direct 
realism is a non-starter. But there is another realist option: representative or indirect 
realism. Historically, John Locke was surely its most prominent advocate; a judicious 
modern proponent of it is Frank Jackson (Jackson 1977). This theory holds that there 
really are external objects with which we causally interact in perception and about which 
we thereby acquire knowledge, indirect knowledge based on the more direct knowledge 
of the directly perceived sense-data, which represent and are caused in us by objects 
in our surroundings. So, according to this theory, beliefs about the external world are 
inferable from beliefs about sense-data by some cogent inductive argument. Surely, it is 
prima facie a plausible idea that a causal inference could lead us from the effects, the 
directly perceived sense-data, to their causes, the external objects and events.
But this simple type of induction is of no help. As David Hume, the eminent skep-
tic, has argued, causal relations can be known only by observing the regular sequence 
of cause and effect—in particular, by observing the cause being followed by the effect 
on a number of occasions. Establishing causal relations requires independent access to 
the objects or events to be correlated; we have to experience both sides of the causal 
relation. Thus it is impossible to establish any correlations between objects existing out-
side sensory experience and sensory experience itself. Since by hypothesis we have no 
independent access to physical objects, we cannot observe the presence of such objects 
causing our sense-data. Therefore, Hume concludes, the assertion that such a causal 
relation exists can never be known or justified.
Some advocates of representative realism invoke a more sophisticated form of induc-
tive inference, hypothetical induction or abduction, to help to justify their belief in the 
external world. This is a method of reasoning in which a hypothesis is inferred as the 
best, or most likely, explanation of certain phenomena. Accordingly, it is claimed that 
the hypothesis or theory that there is an external world of persistent physical objects 
behaving in regular law-governed ways with which we are causally interacting offers 
the best explanation of the course of our sensory history, of why and how our various 
sensory experiences with their characteristic regularity and order, their “constancy and 
coherence,” as Hume called it, arise.
Plainly, the radical skeptic is not impressed by the realist’s appeal to hypothetical 
induction. In fact, this version of representative realism seems to be an easy target for his 

RESPONSES TO SKEPTICISM
482
typical skeptical assaults. He will simply ask how we are supposed to know that sense-
data represent or correspond to real physical objects if we are always presented with 
sense-data and never with physical objects themselves. The standard objection to rep-
resentative realism is that it is a veil-of-perception doctrine. If we can directly perceive 
only sense-data, then these mind-dependent entities form a veil, or a barrier, preventing 
us from ever acquiring any knowledge about external objects. If we can never break out 
of the circle of sense-data, how can we know what properties the external objects pos-
sess, indeed, how can we even know that there are such objects? After all, we cannot 
draw the veil aside, to look whether there is something behind it. Hence, the skeptic 
concludes, the hypothesis that there is an external, objective reality is massively under-
determined by all the evidence we will ever have to go on.
IV. Phenomenalism
Ontological phenomenalism is a direct and sharp response to the serious epistemologi-
cal difficulties raised by representative realism. Its defenders are prepared to reject real-
ism completely. In the history of philosophy, George Berkeley was doubtlessly its most 
illustrious champion. Deeply convinced that Locke’s representative realism unavoid-
ably leads to skepticism, Berkeley offered a strikingly simple solution. He made the 
drastic proposal to solve the problem of skepticism by an ontological reduction. If the 
root of skepticism is the distinction between sense-data and physical objects, then to 
undermine skepticism we apparently need only to identify physical objects with sense-
data. Thus phenomenalism’s central claim is that physical objects are nothing but com-
plexes or groups of sense-data. This claim implies that to be real is to be perceived. 
Phenomenalism is a form of idealism, of the doctrine that the natural objects making up 
the external world are in some way mind-correlative.
If a physical object is identical with a complex of sense-data, then the relation 
between the perception of a certain set of sense-data and the perception of a physical 
object is not contingent, as in representative realism, but necessary. Our claims to per-
ceive physical objects can be justified by logical means, by deductively deriving them 
from premises about sense-data. The logical gap between appearance and objective real-
ity seems to be closed. Thus, the theory seems to have clear epistemological advantages 
over representative realism. But the pressing question naturally arises of whether these 
advantages have not been purchased at too high a price, namely implausible ontologi-
cal consequences. After all, phenomenalism’s novel conception of a physical object 
diverges massively from the standpoint of common sense.
Perhaps the best-known objection to ontological phenomenalism is that it has the 
absurd consequence that physical objects exist discontinuously, that they constantly 
jump into and out of existence. Sense-data are short-lived entities; they exist only when 
and only as long as they are being perceived. Hence, since a physical object is nothing 
but a complex of sense-data, it follows that it ceases to exist when nobody perceives it, 
and begins to exist anew when somebody perceives it again at a later time. But surely 
this is an extremely implausible result, for physical objects exist continuously while they 
are not being perceived by anybody. Berkeley anticipated this objection and replied that 
the groups of sense-data that are identical with physical objects exist continuously even 
when not being perceived by a finite being because there is an infinite being, namely 
God, who preserves them in existence by, according to his official view, having ideas of 
them in His mind.

SKEPTICISM AND ANTI-REALISM
483
It remained to John Stuart Mill to present a version of ontological phenomenalism 
that is independent of any assumptions about the existence of God (Mill 1865). His 
essential innovation was the introduction of the concept of a possible sense-datum. A 
possible sense-datum is simply one that could be obtained under certain specifiable con-
ditions. So, according to Mill’s version of phenomenalism, a physical object is identical 
with a complex of actual and possible sense-data—physical objects, in his own words, 
are “permanent possibilities of sensation.” The possible sense-data take over the func-
tion of Berkeley’s deus ex machina as guarantors of the existence of unperceived objects. 
For even if no actual sense-data of a given physical object exist at this moment—because 
nobody is perceiving it—we can still say, according to Mill, that if anybody were to look 
at it, he would perceive sense-data belonging to it. But a physical object, during inter-
vals of time when nobody is perceiving it, consists of possible sense-data and nothing 
else. Mill’s theory thus seems to deprive physical objects of their categorical status and 
to concede to them a merely hypothetical status as unfulfilled possibilities. But, since 
merely possible existence is a mode of non-existence, this theory embodies a bizarre 
conception of objective physical reality. It implies, among other things, that an existent 
physical object can consist of non-existent components, and that whenever a certain 
event is being perceived, without its cause also being perceived, a mere possibility gives 
rise to an actual effect.
The ensuing development of phenomenalism can be understood as a succession of 
heroic attempts to preserve its epistemological advantages while avoiding its manifest 
metaphysical absurdities. A milestone in this development was an influential study by 
A. J. Ayer, which initiated a new phase of the phenomenalistic movement: analytical 
phenomenalism (Ayer 1940). Its main difference from ontological phenomenalism lies 
in its linguistic orientation. According to analytical phenomenalism, physical objects 
do not literally consist of sense-data, but are “logical constructions” out of them. In 
his explication of this puzzling assertion, Ayer formulates the central thesis of analyti-
cal phenomenalism: propositions which are usually expressed by sentences referring to 
physical objects could also be expressed by, reduced to, or translated into statements 
referring exclusively to sense-data.
In the wake of Ayer’s discussion, the claim that statements about physical objects 
can be reduced to statements about sense-data came to be understood as the claim that 
the relationship between these two classes of statements is a relationship of logical or 
analytical equivalence. So, according to analytical phenomenalism, propositions about 
the physical world are logically equivalent to logically complex propositions about the 
appropriate sorts of sensory experiences we do, or in a variety of conditions, would have. 
To assert that a certain physical object exists is just to assert that certain sense-data have 
been perceived, are being perceived, or would be perceived under certain specifiable cir-
cumstances. To solve the problem of the unperceived existence of physical objects the 
phenomenalist employs the conceptual machinery of subjunctive conditionals, includ-
ing, of course, counterfactuals. The proposal is that claims about actually unperceived 
objects are nothing more than useful abbreviations for claims about what experiences or 
sequences of experience a person would enjoy if certain conditions were fulfilled. The 
use of subjunctive conditionals, however, presupposes the existence of lawful regulari-
ties between patterns of sense-data. Since the phenomenalist program is to fully reduce 
talk about the physical world to talk about experience, pure laws of experience are 
needed; laws whose antecedents and consequents must be specifiable solely in terms of 
sense-data, without reference to any physical objects or processes.

RESPONSES TO SKEPTICISM
484
A severe objection to phenomenalism denies that there are such regularities between 
patterns of sense-data. Surely, the stream of our sensory episodes is not chaotic. We can 
indeed discover complex uniformities in our sensory histories, but discovering them 
depends on the conceptual framework of physical things in space and time, which 
includes a conception of ourselves as persons having a body. The regularities we notice 
reflect the fact that we live in an environment consisting of such and such physical 
objects. We have no idea of how to find lawful regularities without relying upon our 
knowledge of the particular physical and physiological conditions in which our percep-
tions occur. So what the phenomenalist discovers are object-dependent uniformities, 
but what he needs are object-independent uniformities. The snag is that the reference 
to external and internal physical conditions is essential and ineliminable. The sphere 
of sensory experience does not exhibit an intrinsic order of its own. That is why the 
grand project of translating sentences about physical objects into sets of sentences about 
sense-data is doomed to failure. In the end, phenomenalism comes to grief because of 
its commitment to epistemological atomism. There is no avoiding the basic insight of 
epistemological holism: single statements about physical objects have no fund of expe-
riential consequences they can call their own. It is only as members of more or less com-
prehensive systems of statements that they have definite experiential consequences.
V. Epistemic Conceptions of Truth
The fundamental realist conviction that the facts of the world are not bound to be what 
we take them to be is often expressed as a thesis about the relation between truth and 
justification: our beliefs about the objective world, even if they were maximally sup-
ported by evidence, might still be false. Truth, for the realist, is a radically non-epistemic 
notion (Putnam 1978: 125), and so the truth of our beliefs about the world is always 
potentially evidence-transcendent. Truth is one thing, justification another.
Some realists think that the best way to explicate their conception of truth is to 
embrace a version of the correspondence theory of truth, according to which the truth 
of a proposition has to be explained in terms of a referential relation to the world. The 
basic intuition is that a proposition is true just in case there is a fact to which it corre-
sponds, and false just in case it does not correspond to a fact. Advocates of a full-blooded 
correspondence theory are confronted with the difficult task of spelling out explicitly 
the relation between the proposition that p and the fact that p by virtue of which the 
former is made true by the latter.
But, actually, realists need not espouse a detailed form of the correspondence theory 
of truth. It is also open to them to adopt a version of the so-called deflationary concep-
tion of truth, and many contemporary realists do so. The central claim of deflationism is 
that the various attempts of traditional philosophers to analyze the inner nature of truth 
were misguided, and thus must be deflated. Truth, on the deflationary account, has no 
nature. Hence the concept of truth is not a philosophically contentious concept, not a 
concept that stands for a substantial or robust property. Rather, propositions expressed 
by sentences of the form “The proposition that p is true” are logically equivalent to the 
proposition expressed by p itself. Consequently, the whole content of the truth-predi-
cate is given by the totality of appropriate instances of the conceptually fundamental 
equivalence schema “The proposition that p is true if and only if p.”
The important point, for the realist, is that the deflationary perspective shares the 
idea that the truth of a belief about the world depends on the way the world is, and thus 

SKEPTICISM AND ANTI-REALISM
485
is, in at least a minimal sense, a matter of correspondence or fitting the facts. Truth 
is, both for the authentic correspondence theorist and for the deflationist, a radically 
non-epistemic concept, a concept without any conceptual connections to verification, 
justification, or other epistemic notions. Anti-realists tend to overlook the option of 
connecting realism with a deflationary account of truth. Commonly, the target of their 
assaults is the traditional combination of realism with a robust correspondence theory 
of truth.
The central realist idea, however, that truth is an epistemically unconstrained con-
cept, has quite often been regarded as an entering wedge for a variant of the skeptical 
challenge. The objection is often raised that if the truth of a belief does not in any 
way depend on an internal trait of it, such as its epistemic status, but on a relation to 
something external, on a transcendent fact in the objective world, then the tie between 
justification and truth is severed. On the realist view, so it is often argued, the criterion 
of truth and the nature of truth seem to be torn apart, with the disastrous consequence 
that it becomes impossible to determine whether our beliefs are true. This is supposed to 
be so because in order to determine whether a belief is true we would have to determine 
whether it corresponds to a fact. But we cannot compare a belief with reality because 
there is no direct, conceptually unmediated grasp of facts or objects which we are sim-
ply given to our consciousness. All our epistemic states are conceptually structured and 
have a propositional content. Thus, in attempting to apprehend the external side of 
the correspondence relation, we find ourselves with just another belief and so end up 
comparing a belief with a different belief—even if it is a perceptual belief. We can never 
get outside the circle of our beliefs to inspect the independent facts that are supposed 
to make our beliefs true. Hence the principal assumption of epistemological founda-
tionalism, that there is such a thing as verification by confrontation, must be thrown 
overboard. There are no epistemologically basic beliefs that require no justification or 
justify themselves.
For many philosophers, an argument along these lines has been the main motive for 
espousing the coherence theory of justification, according to which justification is solely 
a matter of internal relations among beliefs. Only beliefs can contribute to the determi-
nation of what one can be justified in believing. But a coherence theory of justification 
alone is not capable of meeting the skeptical challenge. On the contrary, if justification 
consists in supporting beliefs by other beliefs, whereas truth depends on relations between 
beliefs and the external world, then the skeptic can ask one of his characteristic ques-
tions, namely the question of why even an ideally coherent and comprehensive system 
of beliefs might not be false about the real world. To establish the required connection 
between coherence and truth and thereby to avoid skepticism, many philosophers of a 
verificationist frame of mind—interestingly enough, both logical positivists such as Otto 
Neurath and Carl G. Hempel and neo-Hegelian absolute idealists such as H. H. Joachim, 
F. H. Bradley and Brand Blanshard—have combined their coherence theory of justifica-
tion with the coherence theory of truth (Neurath 1932–33; Hempel 1935; Joachim 1906; 
Bradley 1914; Blanshard 1939). According to the latter, a belief is true if and only if it 
is an element of a maximally coherent and maximally comprehensive system of beliefs. 
In explaining truth in terms of internal coherence, this theory puts forward an epistemic 
analysis of truth. Any such theory has immense metaphysical consequences. Since the 
truth-value of a belief is not something that it possesses independently of our capacity to 
find it out, reality is no longer conceived of as independent of what we may think about 
it. Rather, reality itself is determined by the coherent system of beliefs.

RESPONSES TO SKEPTICISM
486
Many philosophers have proposed epistemic analyses of truth, analyses that attempt 
to define truth by verifiability, by rational assertibility, by permanent credibility, by 
superassertibility, or by justifiability under ideal conditions. Obviously, truth cannot 
simply be identified with justification simpliciter. There are countless beliefs that were 
once justified for certain persons at certain times, but which later turned out to be false. 
Justification is tensed and so can be lost. But truth is a stable or permanent property, 
a property that cannot be lost. So advocates of epistemic accounts had to refine their 
position. Aware of our fallibility, testified by the enormous changes that have happened 
in the history of human thought, they came to believe that truth should not be bound to 
what is justified by present standards. Our present epistemic situation might be imper-
fect; it might not include all the relevant evidence. Rather, so the improved suggestion 
goes, truth consists in coherence with the system of beliefs that human investigators will 
hold at the final stage of inquiry, in the limit of an ideal science which has all relevant 
evidence at its disposal. So C. S. Peirce famously claimed: “The opinion which is fated 
to be ultimately agreed to by all who investigate, is what we mean by the truth” (Peirce 
1934: 5.407). More recently, Hilary Putnam, during his interim internal realist phase, 
maintained that truth is an idealization of rational acceptability (Putnam 1981: 55). 
It should be mentioned, however, that he later abjured any attempt to define truth in 
epistemic terms (Putnam 1988: 115).
Critics have raised the objection that the ideal justifiability account of truth is cir-
cular since its main concept of an epistemically ideal situation ultimately cannot ade-
quately be defined without reference to the concept of truth (Alston 1996: 188–230). 
Proponents of the epistemic approach to truth have wisely abstained from making any 
serious attempt to specify what ideal epistemic conditions for a given belief involve, 
thus preventing the construction of counterexamples in which someone might be ide-
ally justified in holding a false belief. One thing is clear, however: the possibility of error 
must be ruled out definitely. Hence one might suggest characterizing ideal conditions 
as conditions in which all relevant sources of error have been identified. But it seems 
hardly possible to understand this suggestion without a prior grasp of the concept of 
truth.
Moreover, numerous philosophers hold that there is even a conceptual connection 
between the very concept of epistemic justification and the concept of truth (Schantz 
2007). After all, it is constitutive of justification that it leads to the truth. These 
philosophers share the view that it is an essential element of the concept of 
epistemic justification that it is truth conducive. This means that the conditions of 
justification must be such that satisfying them can guarantee that it is very probable 
that a particular belief is true. Certainly, manifold attempts have been made to charac-
terize epistemic justification without referring to the concept of truth in any way at all. 
The decisive point, however, is that those who advocate equating truth and justifica-
tion under epistemically ideal conditions cannot find support in such attempts to sever 
the conceptual connection between justification and truth, because their entire argu-
ment that truth is nothing other than epistemically ideal justification fails if the 
concept of justification does not involve truth conducivity. For if the concept of justi-
fication does not even include a guarantee of the probability that a statement is true, it 
is obvious that a belief, regardless of how ideally justified it might be, can nonetheless 
be false.

SKEPTICISM AND ANTI-REALISM
487
VI. Final Remarks
Neither the various foundationalist and reductionist enterprises of phenomenalism nor 
the attempts, rooted in the coherence theory of truth, to refashion the concept of truth 
in epistemic terms provide us with really persuasive responses to the threat of skepti-
cism. The serious problem with anti-realist positions is that they are prepared to make 
too large concessions to skepticism. After all, they agree with the skeptic that our ordi-
nary conception of knowledge of an objective world must be given up. The knowledge 
they rescue is no longer knowledge of genuine worldly facts but, ultimately, merely 
knowledge of subjective or internal facts.
Natural realism with its central assumption that the world is independent of the 
existence of sentient beings is hard to shake. There were stars long before there were 
people having thoughts about them, there would have been stars even if no intelligent 
beings had ever evolved, and there will be stars long after we have disappeared from 
the scene. Such facts do not seem to depend on what anyone believes or under certain 
circumstances would believe. On the other hand, realism seems to open the door to 
skepticism. But is this really true? We must guard against an influential confusion, the 
confusion of the omnipresent possibility of error with the threat of radical skepticism. 
Clearly, human beings are prone to error in their judgments about what is the case. Even 
our most successful scientific theories had to be abandoned in the light of new discover-
ies. Hence we ought to appreciate the basic insight of fallibilism that the possibility of 
error can never be ruled out entirely. We have to make allowance for corrigibility. But 
fallibilism must be sharply distinguished from radical skepticism. It is one thing to hold 
that any of our beliefs might involve error; it is another to hold that none of our beliefs 
is justified at all.
References
Alston, W. (1996) A Realist Conception of Truth, Ithaca: Cornell University Press
Ayer, A. (1940) The Foundations of Empirical Knowledge, London: Macmillan
Blanshard, B. (1939) The Nature of Thought, 2 vols., London: Allen & Unwin
Bradley, F. H. (1914) Essays on Truth and Reality, Oxford: Oxford University Press
Davidson, D. (1986) “A Coherence Theory of Truth and Knowledge,” in E. LePore (ed.) Truth and 
Interpretation. Perspectives on the Philosophy of Donald Davidson, Oxford: Blackwell, 307–319
Devitt, M. (1984) Realism and Truth, Oxford: Blackwell
Hempel, C. G. (1935) “On the Logical Positivists’ Theory of Truth,” Analysis 2, 50–59
Jackson, F. (1977) Perception. A Representative Theory, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Joachim, H. H. (1906) The Nature of Truth, Oxford: Oxford University Press
McDowell, J. (1994) Mind and World, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press
Mill, J. S. (1865) An Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy, London: Longmans et al.
Nagel. T. (1986) The View from Nowhere, Oxford: Oxford University Press
Neurath, O. (1932–3) “Protocol Sentences,” Erkenntnis 3, 204–214
Peirce, C. S. (1934) Collected Papers vol. 5, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1958
Putnam, H. (1978) Meaning and the Moral Sciences, London: Routledge
—— (1981) Reason, Truth, and History, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
—— (1988) Representation and Reality, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press
Schantz, R. (2007) “Why Truth is not an Epistemic Concept,” in D. Greimann and G. Siegwart (eds.), Truth 
and Speech Acts, London: Routledge, 307–320
Stroud, B. (1984) The Significance of Philosophical Scepticism, Oxford: Oxford University Press
Williams, B. (1978) Descartes: The Project of Pure Enquiry, Harmondsworth: Pelican

45
SKEPTICISM AND 
EPISTEMIC EXTERNALISM
Richard Fumerton
The internalism/externalism debate occupies center stage in contemporary epistemol-
ogy. While externalists offer a number of different arguments in support of their approach 
to understanding epistemic concepts, an important advantage they often claim for their 
views is that they can avoid classical arguments for skepticism. In what follows, I will not 
be primarily concerned with evaluating the general plausibility of externalism. Instead, 
I will examine how, if at all, externalists can occupy a high ground in the battle against 
the skeptic.
Kinds of Skepticism
Let us begin by distinguishing different kinds of skepticism. In the first place we 
should distinguish skepticism concerning knowledge from skepticism concerning 
justification. We should also distinguish global skepticism from what we might call local 
skepticisms. The global skeptic concerning knowledge asserts that we don’t (some would 
say can’t) know anything. Local skeptics concerning knowledge claim only that we 
don’t or can’t have knowledge concerning certain classes of propositions, such as propo-
sitions describing the past. The global skeptic concerning knowledge is committed to 
the slightly awkward view that we don’t or can’t know even that global skepticism is true, 
but that skeptic can consistently claim to have good reason to believe that the view is 
true.
The global skeptic concerning justified belief claims that we have no epistemic justi-
fication for believing anything. (There might be reasons other than epistemic reasons, 
such as practical reasons, but unless I indicate otherwise you should always construe the 
reasons or justification I describe as epistemic.) The local skeptic concerning justified 
belief claims that we have no justification for believing certain classes of proposition. 
There have been very few global skeptics concerning justification. Such skeptics would 
be committed to the very odd view that they have no justification at all for believing 
that their view is true, and one would surely wonder why, realizing that, they bother to 
assert it.
It would, however, be a mistake to dismiss for this reason the philosophical interest of 
arguments for global skepticism concerning justified belief. The skeptic’s target might be 
in the equally awkward position of believing the premises of a deductively valid argument 
for global skepticism. And the fact that the conclusion of the argument entails that we 

489
SKEPTICISM AND EPISTEMIC EXTERNALISM
don’t have any reason to believe those premises still leaves the proponent of common-
sense in a quandary. Put another way (as Duncan Pritchard once suggested to me), an 
argument for global skepticism could still be interesting by presenting us with a paradox. 
When Zeno presents an argument for the conclusion that we can’t move through space, 
philosophers often find the argument interesting and important despite the fact that 
they don’t, of course, believe the conclusion. Rejecting the conclusion doesn’t tell them 
which premises or reasoning to reject, and until we figure that out we are philosophi-
cally unsatisfied. Still, I do think that there are very few global skeptics concerning the 
possibility of justified belief. There are, however, many very interesting versions of local 
skepticism concerning justified belief, some of which present a formidable challenge to 
commonsense.
In what follows I focus on local skepticism concerning justification for believing vari-
ous propositions endorsed by commonsense. It is here, I think, that paradigmatic exter-
nalists are best positioned to argue that they have a dialectical advantage over traditional 
internalists in turning back the skeptical challenge. Many skeptical arguments against 
the possibility of knowledge threaten externalists just as much as they threaten internal-
ists. The reason is that many of those arguments employ closure principles to argue for 
incredibly high standards of justification for knowledge. We claim to know some com-
monsense proposition P, but are uncomfortable claiming to know some other proposition 
Q that is entailed by P. I claim to know, for example, that I will be in France this summer, 
but feel uncomfortable claiming to know that I won’t die in a car accident this spring. 
But if I know that P entails Q and acknowledge that I don’t know that Q, then I should 
feel uncomfortable, the argument goes, in claiming to know that P. There are all sorts 
of moves and countermoves made in response to these sorts of arguments, but many of 
them cut across the internalism/externalism divide. A reliabilist endorsing the view that 
knowledge requires justified belief, but who allows that the justification in question need 
not guarantee the truth of what is believed can probably join forces with traditional 
internalists in trying to figure out how to respond to closure arguments against the pos-
sibility of knowledge. In any event, I have always thought that the concept of justifica-
tion is of far more interest to epistemology. On one (to be sure controversial) view, the 
factors that turn justified belief into knowledge are matters beyond our epistemic control. 
Knowledge requires the world to co-operate in various ways. The best we can do is make 
sure that our beliefs are epistemically rational. If other factors conspire to deprive us of 
knowledge, then we are simply unlucky.
The Structure of Skeptical Arguments
As Ayer (1956) pointed out, many skeptical arguments for local justification skepticism 
have a common structure. The skeptic’s first step is typically to convince us that the 
beliefs under skeptical attack are not noninferentially justified. The next step is to drive 
a logical wedge between the best possible evidence we can have for believing the propo-
sitions under attack and the truth of those propositions. Put another way, the skeptic 
argues that we cannot deduce the relevant propositions from the best available evidence. 
The skeptic then claims that there are no plausible nondeductive principles of reasoning 
that will sanction the relevant inference. So consider the following skeptical argument 
against the possibility of having justified belief about past experience (and to avoid rais-
ing the problem of perception, suppose we restrict the content of the memory belief to 
past subjective experience):

RESPONSES TO SKEPTICISM
490
1m) 
Beliefs about past experience are not noninferentially justified.
2m) 
The best evidence I can have for believing that I had some experience 
this morning is that I seem to remember having had the experience, and 
to justifiably believe that I did have the experience I must be in a position 
to justifiably infer that proposition from what I seem to remember.
3m) 
To justifiably infer some proposition P from another proposition E, I must 
be in a position to see that E makes probable P (where E’s entailing P can 
be viewed as the upper limit of E’s making probable P).
4m) 
I know that what I seem to remember doesn’t entail any proposition 
about the past.
5m) 
I can’t inductively establish that apparent memory is a reliable indicator 
of past events—I would have to rely on memory to establish the relevant 
correlations.
6m) 
There is no other way to establish the reliability of apparent memory as 
an indicator of past events.
Therefore,
7m) 
I have no justification for believing any proposition about past experi-
ence.
Or consider the following familiar argument for skepticism with respect to justified belief 
about the external world:
1e) I am never noninferentially justified in believing any contingent proposi-
tion describing the existence of a physical object.
2e) The best evidence I can possibly have for the existence of anything physi-
cal are truths describing my sensations (what I seem to see, feel, hear, 
smell, and taste), and to justifiably believe that there is, for example, a 
table before me now, I must be in a position to justifiably infer that propo-
sition from what I seem to perceive.
3e) To justifiably infer some proposition P from another E, I must be in a posi-
tion to see that E makes probable P (where E’s entailing P can be viewed 
as the upper limit of E’s making probable P).
4e) 
I know that no proposition that describes only subjective experience entails 
the truth of any proposition asserting the existence of a physical object.
5e) I can’t inductively establish that my sensations are a reliable indicator of 
the presence of physical objects—while I can correlate sensations with 
sensations perhaps, I can’t correlate sensations with physical objects.
6e) There is no other way to establish that sensation is a reliable indicator of 
physical reality.
Therefore,
7e) I have no justification for believing any propositions describing physical 
reality.
Each of the premises can, of course, be challenged. As we shall see below, premises (1), 
(2), (3), (5), and (6) of both arguments might well be challenged by most contemporary 
versions of externalism.

491
SKEPTICISM AND EPISTEMIC EXTERNALISM
The Internalism/Externalism Debate
Before we examine externalist responses to traditional skeptical arguments we should 
pause to say a few words about the internalism/externalism controversy (cf. Fumerton 
1995: Chapter 3). There is, unfortunately, no one way that the controversy has been 
understood by contemporary epistemologists. We can distinguish all of the following 
versions of internalism and define corresponding versions of externalism in terms of their 
rejections of the relevant internalist thesis.
Internal State Internalism
The very label “internalism” suggests what is, perhaps, the most natural way of under-
standing the internalist’s thesis. The internal state internalist claims that the justification 
one has for believing a given proposition is fully determined by the internal states of 
the believer. The strongest, and most common, way of understanding this claim is that 
in all possible worlds your internal twins have precisely the same justification you have 
for believing, disbelieving, and withholding belief in various propositions. In its most 
plausible form, I believe, the claim should be restricted to the propositional justification 
there is for someone to believe a given proposition (in contrast to a claim about what 
the person justifiably believes, where the latter might involve basing one’s belief on the 
appropriate justification available, a relation that, in turn, might involve a belief’s hav-
ing the appropriate causal origin). The externalist who rejects internal state internal-
ism is convinced that we must look beyond the internal states of a believer to find the 
source of justification, if any, enjoyed by a given belief. The causal history of a belief, for 
example, is often thought by externalists to be critical.
While the view might seem relatively straightforward, it is no small feat to define 
clearly the relevant concept of an internal state. So, for example, if properties are univer-
sals and one can be acquainted in thought with a universal, shall we understand being 
acquainted with a universal as an internal state? If we presuppose an understanding of 
self or mind, we might, for present purposes, construe internal states as nonrelational 
properties of the self along with introspective awareness of such properties and also, if 
there is such a thing, acquaintance “in thought” with abstract entities such as universals, 
numbers, logical relations, and the like.
Access Internalisms
Perhaps because there has been a long tradition associating states of mind with states to 
which we have a privileged introspective access, a great many self-proclaimed internal-
ists explain their internalism in terms of access requirements for justification. We can 
distinguish among others the following views. Actual Access Internalism advances the 
very strong thesis that a condition J constitutes S’s justification for believing P only if S 
has direct access to the fact that J obtains and is justification for S to believe P. Potential 
Access Internalism requires only that S be able to (when possessing requisite concepts) 
access directly the fact that J obtains and is justification for believing P. The ability in 
question can be understood in different ways, as can the access. Where J is a mental state, 
the access in question is typically taken to be introspective and its status as justifier is 
taken to be knowable a priori.
I have argued elsewhere (Fumerton 1995) that one should be very careful before 
accepting access requirements on justification, even if one is an internal state internalist. 

RESPONSES TO SKEPTICISM
492
Problematic regress is extremely difficult to avoid on most versions of access internal-
ism—even those that insist only on potential access.
Inferential Internalism
Of special interest to us here is a view that I have called inferential internalism. The 
inferential internalist insists on the following principle governing inferential justifica-
tion:
(PIJ) There is justification for S to believe one proposition P on the basis of another 
proposition E only if (1) there is justification for S to believe E, and (2) there is jus-
tification for S to believe that E makes probable P (where entailment can be viewed 
as the upper limit of making probable).
Almost all foundationalists, internalist and externalist alike, accept the first clause of the 
principle, but externalists of all stripes will typically deny the second. As the skeptical 
arguments presented above suggest, the skeptic traditionally presupposed both clauses of 
(PIJ), and the externalist’s rejection of the second clause helps enormously in the fight to 
deflect the force of the skeptic’s challenge.
Externalist Responses to Traditional Skeptical Arguments
I suggested earlier that externalists will often claim that it is an advantage of their view 
that they can respond effectively to the skeptical challenge. And certainly on the face 
of it this claim is plausible. It’s a bit difficult to discuss the issue, however, given that 
there are a number of quite different versions of externalism. Let’s proceed by looking at 
a sampling of externalist responses to each of the controversial premises of the skeptical 
arguments sketched above.
Premises (1m) and (1e) deny that we have noninferential justification for believing 
propositions describing past experiences and the external world, respectively. Arguments 
for this position typically presuppose some version of internalism. So on the view I find 
plausible, for example, one has noninferential justification for believing some proposi-
tion P when one is directly acquainted with the truthmaker for P while one is directly 
acquainted with the correspondence between one’s thought that P and that truthmaker. 
I have also argued that one might be able to gain noninferential justification for believing 
falsely that P when one is directly acquainted with a fact very similar to the truthmaker 
for P. On such a view one can establish that one lacks noninferential justification for 
believing truths about the past or truths about the external world if one can establish that 
one is never directly acquainted with the relevant truthmakers for such truths. And the 
following arguments seem persuasive to the acquaintance theorist:
1) In nonveridical memory, we can seem to remember having had an experi-
ence in such a way that we possess the very same justification for believ-
ing that truth about the past that we would have had were we veridically 
remembering that experience.
2) The justification we have in the nonveridical case is obviously not direct 
acquaintance with a past experience—by hypothesis the past experience 
didn’t occur.

493
SKEPTICISM AND EPISTEMIC EXTERNALISM
Therefore,
3) The justification we have in the veridical case (the same kind of justifica-
tion) is not direct acquaintance with past experience either.
The familiar argument against epistemological direct realism is run the same way:
1) In nonveridical experience, we can seem to experience a physical object in 
such a way that the relevant appearance gives us the very same justification 
we would have had were we veridically seeing a physical object.
2) The justification we have in the nonveridical case is obviously not direct 
acquaintance with a physical object—by hypothesis the physical object 
doesn’t exist.
Therefore,
3) The justification we have in the veridical case (the same kind of justifica-
tion) is not direct acquaintance with a physical object either.
Both arguments have enormous appeal, at least for the philosopher who endorses the 
relevant account of noninferential justification. To be sure one can still advance the so-
called disjunctivist hypothesis that the justificatory states in the “good” and the “bad” 
cases should receive a quite different ontological analysis, but the phenomenological 
indistinguishability of the “good” and the “bad” cases puts enormous pressure on the 
plausibility of such a view. But at least some externalists needn’t go the disjunctivist 
route.
Consider, for example, standard process reliabilism. And let’s use as our model the 
original formulation of the view suggested by Goldman (1979). According to Goldman a 
belief is noninferentially justified when it is produced by a belief-independent, uncondi-
tionally reliable belief-producing process. A belief-producing process is belief-indepen-
dent when it takes as its input something other than another belief. (To accommodate 
noninferential introspective knowledge of what one believes, one should modify this to 
allow a belief-independent process to take as input a belief when the justificatory status 
of the belief is irrelevant to the output belief—in this case a metabelief). A process is 
unconditionally reliable in virtue of the fact that its output beliefs are usually true (we 
don’t have to make the reliability that defines justification a reliability that is conditional 
on the truth of input beliefs). To avoid obvious counterexamples, reliabilists will almost 
always turn from actual frequency to something like counterfactual frequencies in defin-
ing reliability.
Despite the fact that we sometimes misremember and misperceive, it seems obvious 
that we could live in a world in which both beliefs about experience relying on apparent 
memory about past experience and perceptually based beliefs result from uncondition-
ally, generally reliable processes. And if they do then premises (1m) and (1e) of the 
skeptic’s argument will be false. A great deal depends, of course, on how the reliabilist 
handles the well-known generality problem for reliabilism. Painting with a broad stroke, 
the problem is just this. It seems that we can characterize relevant belief-producing pro-
cesses in any number of different ways. Moreover, the reliabilist will probably want to 
relativize the relevant reliability that defines the epistemic status of a belief to a given 

RESPONSES TO SKEPTICISM
494
kind of environment, and the relevant kind of environment can be characterized in any 
number of different ways. So when I reach the conclusion that there is a dog in front of 
me, I can characterize the belief as resulting from visual experience, resulting from visual 
experience under ideal conditions of perception, resulting from visual experience when I 
am completely inebriated, resulting from visual experience with background familiarity 
with various sorts of dogs, and so on. Still, however we characterize the relevant belief-
producing process in trying to solve the generality problem, there seems to be no a priori 
objection to the possibility of the process being both belief-independent and uncondi-
tionally reliable (though there might be good empirical reason to reject the supposition 
that the process really is belief-independent).
Of course, the reliabilist hasn’t yet given us a reason to believe that the relevant prem-
ises of the skeptical argument are false, but we are in a position to reject the traditional 
foundationalist’s argument for the truth of the premises. That argument presupposed 
that the truthmaker for a noninferentially justified belief, or at least something very close 
to the truthmaker for a noninferentially justified belief would enter any plausible story 
about what makes the belief noninferentially justified. And our reliabilist (like some 
other internalists—for example, philosophers who take mere belief or seeming to have 
evidential weight) is straightforwardly rejecting that presupposition. Noninferentially 
justified beliefs on a reliabilist’s view can be just barely more likely to be true than false.
While a reliabilist is in a position to reject premises (1m) and (1e) of the skeptical 
arguments, other externalists hold views that are similarly positioned to reject the criti-
cal premises, but for different reasons. The arguments against the existence of noninfer-
ential justification for believing propositions about the past and the external world both 
critically claim that we have the same justification for believing such propositions in the 
veridical cases that we have in the phenomenologically indistinguishable nonveridi-
cal counterparts. As we saw above, the reliabilist can grant that claim but argue that it 
is compatible with our having noninferential justification in both the “good” and the 
“bad” cases. Other externalists will allow that the justification is importantly different 
but that it is, nevertheless, noninferential in the “good” case. Consider, for example, an 
externalist who gives a causal account of direct (noninferential) knowledge (and with 
that knowledge, justified belief). The crudest of such views will allow that one has direct 
knowledge of P when the fact that P is causally responsible for the belief that P, where the 
causal chain leading from the fact that P to the belief that P contains no belief states as 
intermediate links. In veridical memory, the belief P about the past is, arguably, caused 
in this way by the fact that P. The apparent memory and the belief it induces obviously 
aren’t caused in this way by the fact that P. So this externalist will claim noninferential 
status for the belief that P in the veridical case and deny it in the nonveridical case. And, 
of course, exactly the same sort of move can be made for perception.
Timothy Williamson (2000) is another philosopher who will deny the claim that we 
have the same justification in both “good” and “bad” cases. While much of the tradi-
tion has tried to explain knowledge in terms of allegedly more fundamental epistemic 
concepts such as justification and evidence, Williamson suggests a dramatic alternative 
to this way of thinking. His idea is that we should explain evidence in terms of what he 
takes to be the more fundamental concept of knowledge. He suggests, in effect, that we 
should identify our evidence with those propositions we know to be true. We can then 
talk about justified belief that falls short of knowledge in terms of the probability vari-
ous propositions have for us relative to the evidence we possess. Famously, Williamson 
refuses to provide an analysis of knowledge (though he is willing to identify various 

495
SKEPTICISM AND EPISTEMIC EXTERNALISM
conditions that are necessary for one to know a given proposition). In any event, 
Williamson will claim that (veridically) remembering that P just is a species of knowl-
edge, and that seeing that P is another species of knowledge. In veridical memory and 
perception our evidence base includes the truths remembered and perceived. There is no 
corresponding truth in the case of what I have been calling apparent memory and appar-
ent perception, so, trivially, we don’t have the same evidence in the veridical and the 
nonveridical cases. Williamson’s view is clearly a version of epistemic externalism. The 
conditions that constitute one’s having a justified belief include the conditions that con-
stitute knowledge. Knowledge requires the truth of what is believed and since he thinks 
that we know truths about the past and the external world, it is at least sometimes true 
that the factors that make a given belief justified include facts that lie outside of us.
There is no real distinction between inferential and noninferential knowledge on 
Williamson’s view. The “foundation” relative to which we assess various probabilities is 
the entirety of what we know. So, like the causal theorist, Williamson will deny that we 
have the same justification in the good and bad cases, and, as we have seen, he is in a posi-
tion to deny premises (2m) and (2e) of the skeptic’s argument. He will reject the skeptic’s 
retreat to apparent memory and appearance as more secure foundational truths from 
which we must infer truths about the past and the external world, respectively. Given 
that he thinks we know that the past experience occurred in the case of veridical memory 
or that the external object exists in the case of veridical perception—indeed that actu-
ally remembering that and actually perceiving that are just species of knowledge, the 
probability of these respective propositions known relative to our evidence is, trivially, 
1. In the nonveridical case the probability of those same propositions is far less than 
1—it is whatever such probabilities are relative to known propositions about apparent 
memory and mere appearance. Of course, given that some of the propositions Williamson 
claims we know seem obviously more (epistemically) certain than others, one might 
well take this consequence of Williamson’s view to be a reductio of it. Traditional 
foundationalists have a much more narrow conception of foundational knowledge. They 
are positioned to claim that probability is always probability relative to foundational 
knowledge.
The externalists we discussed above might feel no need to proceed to an examination 
of premises (3m) and (3e) of our sample skeptical arguments since they might reject the 
premise that we lack noninferential justification for believing the propositions under 
skeptical attack. Indeed, I have argued elsewhere that most externalists are committed 
to the view that there is no a priori restriction on the range of propositions for which we 
have noninferential justification. To the chagrin of many externalists, Plantinga (2000) 
is quite correct in suggesting that there is nothing internally inconsistent in the supposi-
tion that we have noninferential justification for believing that God exists. Still, it is 
worth remembering that there is also nothing in the externalist’s account of justification 
that requires them to view the propositions under skeptical attack as noninferentially jus-
tified. Indeed, in the case of perceptually produced beliefs it seems to me that it is almost 
bizarre to suppose that the belief-producing process is belief-independent. If anything 
seems obvious to me it is that commonplace beliefs about our physical surroundings carry 
with them a host of (causally operative) background assumptions about conditions of 
perception—some of them extremely complicated. To be sure these background beliefs 
might not rise to the level of occurrent beliefs of which we are conscious, but there is no 
reason to reject the possibility of dispositional beliefs being processed as input where that 
processing results in a torrential output of beliefs about our environment. So it is still 

RESPONSES TO SKEPTICISM
496
worth looking at how an externalist would respond to premises (3m) and (3e) through 
(6m) and (6e) of the skeptic’s argument.
The first thing to note is that premises (3m) and (3e) of our sample skeptic’s argument 
will be rejected by all of those externalists (and internalists, for that matter) who reject 
the second clause of the principle of inferential justification. And virtually all external-
ists reject the principle. As I suggested earlier, I think that all of the historically important 
skeptics just took the principle for granted. Unless you “see” the connection between your 
evidence and that which you infer from your evidence, you are hardly in a position to gain 
justification through the inference. At least this is true for ideal justification—the kind 
of justification that the philosopher seeks in order to gain assurance of the truth. To be 
sure, we might allow that there is something good about a belief that is caused by justified 
beliefs in propositions that do in fact support a given conclusion, and I have argued else-
where (Fumerton 2004a) that one might well allow for derivate concepts of degenerate 
justification. But even in the case of deductively valid inference it doesn’t take a whole 
lot of argument to convince many that one is in a better position vis à vis believing in an 
epistemically ideal way the conclusion of the argument if one sees that the premises do 
entail the conclusion (Fumerton 2004b). In any event, paradigmatic externalists will quite 
unapologetically reject any view about inferential justification that requires for inferential 
justification anything as strong as the conditions laid down by the inferential internalist. It 
is enough, the reliabilist will argue, that the inferential process resulting in belief be appro-
priately conditionally reliable. It is enough the causal theorist might argue that belief in 
the proposition inferred be caused by a chain of reasoning that leads all of the way from the 
truthmaker for the belief to the belief (though the causal theorists will have their hands full 
dealing with counterexamples involving so-called deviant causal chains). It is enough for 
justified belief that P, Williamson might argue, that the conditional probability of P on your 
evidence E is high. Premises (4m) through (6m), and (4e) through (6e) could be true in our 
sample skeptical arguments, but their truth doesn’t prevent you from possessing inferential 
justification even on the assumption that the justification in question is inferential.
Moving Up a Level
Even if the externalists were right in arguing that the truth of their metaepistemological 
account involves rejecting the skeptic’s demands on both noninferential justification 
and inferential justification, many wonder if skeptical problems won’t simply reappear 
at another level. Perhaps, the argument goes, we have justified beliefs as the externalist 
understands justification, but without good reason to believe that our beliefs are justified, 
won’t we be in the unsatisfying position of having to admit that we should be silent on 
the question of whether or not our beliefs are justified (assuming that a minimal norm for 
acceptable assertion in this sort of context is that one have good reason to believe what 
one asserts)? And externalists seem to be anything but silent on that question. They seem 
to assert with an odd sort of subjective certainty that most of the commonsense beliefs 
we find ourselves inclined to form are indeed justified. Externalists often accuse inter-
nalists of confusing conditions necessary for having second-level justification that we 
have justified beliefs with conditions necessary for having first-level justified beliefs. But 
again, even if that were true, the philosophically inclined will surely want some reason to 
believe that we have justified beliefs.
As it turns out, on most externalist analyses it won’t be much more difficult to get 
metajustification than it will be to get justification. Consider again the reliabilist’s 

497
SKEPTICISM AND EPISTEMIC EXTERNALISM
account of justification. And assume for this discussion that our reliabilist has conceded 
that there is such a thing as apparent memory and that there is a belief-producing pro-
cess that takes as input these apparent memories and generates beliefs about past experi-
ence. What could get me justification for believing that I have justification for believing 
various propositions about the past? Well, according to the reliabilist, for beliefs about 
the past to be justified the process that yields them needs to be reliable. For a belief that 
these beliefs are justified to be justified there must be some reliable way of reaching the 
conclusion that the relevant beliefs are reliably produced. Now if memory is reliable 
and induction is reliable, then we are in business with what some call a track record 
argument. I seem to remember seeming to remember P while I also seem to remember P. 
Relying on apparent memory I conclude that I seemed to remember P when P. I seem to 
remember seeming to remember Q while I also seem to remember Q. Relying on appar-
ent memory again, I infer that I seemed to remember Q when Q. I do this again and 
again with different memories, and eventually conclude on the basis of massive success 
in relying on memory to reach true conclusions about the past that memory is indeed 
reliable. That wasn’t hard! While we are at it, we might as well use memory, induction, 
and perception to justify our belief that beliefs resulting from sense experience are reli-
ably produced. I seem to see a table and conclude that there is a table there. I seem to 
see a tree and conclude that there is a tree there. I seem to see a dog and conclude that 
there is a dog there. I seem to remember all these successful beliefs produced by sense 
experience, and conclude that experientially produced beliefs are usually true. That 
wasn’t hard either!
Indeed on the reliabilist’s view, it isn’t hard to get second-level justification for believ-
ing that one has first-level justified beliefs provided that we have the first-level justification 
the reliabilist thinks we have. Things can, of course, not go well. As memory begins to 
fade, I might find myself seeming to remember many occasions on which I reached false 
conclusions relying on memory. But absent the kind of situation in which a faculty turns 
on itself, getting justification for believing that the faculty is reliable is easy. So easy that 
many philosophers get a bit nervous. I have argued elsewhere (Fumerton 1995: Chapter 
6) that the reliabilists’ commitment to the legitimacy of track record arguments of this 
kind for the reliability of belief-producing process is, in effect, a reductio of their account 
of justified beliefs. Can we really rely on memory to justify our belief that memory is reli-
able? Can we rely on perception to justify our belief that perception is reliable? We would 
find it comical if an astrologer tried to assure us of the legitimacy of astrological reasoning 
by claiming to read in the stars that astrology is legitimate. We would find it comical if a 
tea leaf reader relied on tea leaf reading to assure us that tea leaf reading is a reliable way 
of making predictions. Isn’t there something equally problematic about our reliabilist 
using the very process the reliability of which we are trying to establish in order to get 
philosophically respectable justification that the process is reliable?
Peter Markie (2005) has argued that we can alleviate at least some of the initial con-
cern we might have with what Cohen (2002) has called the problem of easy knowledge, 
by making a distinction between what will get us justification and what we can permis-
sibly do in the context of arguing. There are rules, Markie argues, governing the practice 
of argument. One of those rules is that one can’t beg the question against one’s opponent. 
One begs the question when one “too obviously” presupposes the truth of one’s conclu-
sion or the legitimacy of one’s reasoning when that is the very topic under dispute. The 
skeptic who denies the legitimacy of reliance on memory will quite correctly character-
ize as objectionably question-begging any argument that presupposes the reliability of 

RESPONSES TO SKEPTICISM
498
memory. But even if that were true, Markie argues, it doesn’t prevent us from acquiring 
the metalevel justification in the way described above.
While Markie’s suggestion is intriguing, one can’t help but wonder if the distinction 
doesn’t collapse at least in the context of philosophical reflection. As epistemologists, 
when we think about the question of whether a given way of forming belief is epistemi-
cally legitimate, we want to convince ourselves of the truth—we want to gain philo-
sophical assurance. And in that context it is hard to see how we can gain the assurance 
we want with an argument that presupposes the very truth of that about which we were 
intellectually curious.
I focused above on how the reliabilist might appeal to track record reasoning to secure 
justified belief that we have justified belief. Other externalists might proceed differently. 
But by and large the story will be similar. One exception might be Williamson. It’s hard 
to know how he would think of justified belief about justified belief. On his view what we 
are justified in believing is always a function of what is probable relative to our evidence. 
And that is defined in terms of probability relative to what we know. Because we don’t 
get an analysis of knowledge it’s hard for me to tell how he figures out when we know and 
when we don’t know. Despite the fact that he doesn’t embrace a causal theory of know-
ing, he seems to me only really comfortable ascribing knowledge to people when there is 
a causal link between the truthmaker for a belief and the belief. I’m not sure, therefore, 
whether he thinks we can get knowledge of general truths when our only means of dis-
covering them is enumerative induction. Still I’m quite confident that he thinks we can 
know propositions about the past and that we can have introspective knowledge that we 
seemed to remember many of these truths about the past. So we would still have available 
as evidence premises we could use in an inductive justification for the proposition that 
memory is reliable. Put another way, the proposition would presumably be probable rela-
tive to what we know, and we could presumably know that it is probable relative to what 
we know as long as we could know the relevant principle of probability. As I said, I don’t 
really know how Williamson decides what we do and don’t know, but I imagine he thinks 
that the relevant truths about relative probability are among the things we know.
Summary
The majority of epistemologists agree with Chisholm’s (1966: Chapter 4) suggestion that 
we must choose at the outset whether or not to take skepticism seriously. The implication 
of Chisholm’s view is that we should simply make whatever adjustments are necessary 
to our epistemology in order to avoid skepticism with respect to ordinary, commonplace 
claims about the world around us. Externalism clearly has advantages in allowing for the 
possibility of justified belief.
It has always seemed to me that philosophers show a bit of hubris in assuming that their 
desire for intellectually satisfying justification will be met. And one can’t help but wonder 
if the externalists haven’t simply changed the subject matter of epistemology in their zeal 
to avoid the skeptic’s arguments. Earlier, I argued that if paradigmatic externalist analyses 
of epistemic concepts were correct, it wouldn’t be much more difficult to get metajus-
tification for believing that one has justified beliefs than it would be to have first-level 
justification. But even many externalists will sometimes betray uneasiness about this 
implication of their views when they retreat to more modest characterizations of their 
positions. For example, it is so very tempting for the reliabilist to claim only that if various 
belief-producing processes are reliable then our commonsense beliefs are justified. And if 

499
SKEPTICISM AND EPISTEMIC EXTERNALISM
those same belief-producing processes are reliable then we will have metajustification for 
believing that we have justified beliefs. But as philosophers, of course, we want justifica-
tion for believing more than the conditional statement. When the externalists trot out 
something like a track record argument to justify their belief that we have all sorts of justi-
fied beliefs, many of us can’t help but ask again how we can tell that the relevant processes 
are, in fact, reliable. We’ll probably just get another track record argument that will net 
us meta-metajustification, but we won’t feel that we are getting any closer to the kind of 
philosophical assurance we sought when we asked the question about metajustification, 
or, for that matter, when we sought first-level justification.
It therefore strikes many internalists that the externalist is content to rely on a kind 
of faith in the reliability of at least our most basic ways of forming beliefs. And the most 
plausible definition of faith is belief without justification.
References
Ayer, A. J. 1956. The Problem of Knowledge. Edinburgh: Penguin.
Chisholm, Roderick. 1966. The Problem of Knowledge. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Cohen, Stewart. 2002. “Basic Knowledge and the Problem of Easy Knowledge,” Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research, 65: 309–29.
Fumerton, Richard. 1995. Metaepistemology and Skepticism. Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littlefield.
—— 2004a “Achieving Epistemic Ascent,” in Sosa and his Critics, Blackwell, 2004, 72–85.
——2004b “Epistemic Probability,” Philosophical Issues, 14: 149–64.
Goldman, Alvin (1979). “What is Justified Belief?” in Justification and Knowledge, ed. George Pappas. 
Dordrecht.
Markie, Peter. 2005. “Easy Knowledge,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 70: 406–16.
Plantinga, Alvin. 2000. Warranted Christian Belief. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Williamson, Timothy. 2000. Knowledge and Its Limits. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

RESPONSES TO SKEPTICISM
46
SKEPTICISM AND 
SEMANTIC EXTERNALISM
Anthony Brueckner
The Cartesian Skeptical Argument
In Meditation I, Descartes had us consider a world in which my mind exists just as it actu-
ally is and yet no physical things exist. In this world, another mind, God-like in its power, 
causes me to have my experiences: this is the malin genie, the Evil Genius. Let us consider 
an updated version of the skeptical concerns that Descartes raised via the Evil Genius 
(Descartes 1996). Imagine a living brain floating in a vat of nutrient fluids while attached 
to a supercomputer. The computer is programmed to provide electrical stimuli to the 
brain that are just like those a normal brain receives due to input to the sense-organs con-
nected to the normal brain. As a result, the brain in a vat is caused to have experiences 
just like those of a normal human. The brain in a vat, we are to imagine, is the subject 
of conscious mental life just like that of a normal human: experience, thought, belief, 
desire, intention, and so on. Upon having various experiences, the brain in a vat thinks, 
“The waves are breaking nicely here on Sands Beach in Santa Barbara.” Imagine that 
the brain in a vat is a mental twin of you: whenever you have an experience of seeing 
sand and surf, the brain in a vat has an exactly similar experience. When you think, “The 
sand is hot, and the surf is big,” the brain thinks, “The sand is hot, and the surf is big.” 
According to the Cartesian philosopher, the brain in a vat is massively mistaken about 
his world. He believes that he is sitting on a beach, for example, even though he is not. 
He cannot sit anywhere.
You might ask: in the imagined vat scenario, what is the explanation for the envatted 
brain’s predicament? On one version of the thought experiment, we are to imagine a 
normal human who is kidnapped by evil neuroscientists who relieve him of his brain in 
order to test the deceptive powers of their supercomputer’s brain-manipulating program. 
(This is similar to the situation depicted in the movie The Matrix.) On a different version 
of the thought experiment (due to Hilary Putnam), we are to imagine that the brain has 
always been envatted; there are no evil neuroscientists; there are no trees or beaches in 
the vat world; there is nothing but the brain in its vat in a room with the supercomputer; 
and this arrangement has come about as a result of some cosmic accident (Putnam 1981). 
We will call this special Putnamian brain in a vat a BIV. The immaterial Evil Genius, as 
the cause of my experiences, plays a role in Descartes’ thought experiment that parallels 
that of the supercomputer in the BIV scenario. From now on, let SK stand for the proposi-
tion that I am a BIV.

501
SKEPTICISM AND SEMANTIC EXTERNALISM
After having sketched the BIV hypothesis SK, the skeptic issues a challenge: can I 
rule out the possibility described in the hypothesis? Do I know that the hypothesis SK is 
false? The skeptic now argues as follows. Choose any target proposition P concerning the 
external world which I think I know to be true (for example, the proposition that I am 
sitting at a computer). Here is the now-standard formulation of the Cartesian skeptical 
argument:
(1) If I know that P, then I know that ~SK.
(2) I do not know that ~SK.
So,
(3) I do not know that P.
Premise (1) is backed by the principle that knowledge is closed under known entailment:
(CL) For all S,α,β: If S knows that α, and S knows that α entails β, then S knows that β.
Since I know that P entails that ~SK, by (CL) I know that P only if I know its entailed 
consequence: ~SK. Premise (2) is backed by the consideration that my experiences do 
not allow me to discriminate between the hypothesis that ~SK (I am not a BIV but, 
rather, a normal human) and the hypothesis that SK (I am a BIV). My experience would 
be the same regardless of which hypothesis were true. So I do not know that ~SK.
Putnam’s Semantic Externalism
Let us now consider a response to the skeptical argument that employs some ideas that 
derive from the work of Putnam (Putnam 1981; Brueckner 1986, 1992, 2003). Imagine 
that a Martian looks at a paint blob that causes him to form a mental image that exactly 
resembles my mental image of a palm tree. Imagine that the Martian has had no causal 
contact with trees and no causal contact with anyone who has had causal contact with 
trees. My image is an image of a palm tree; it represents and refers to palm trees. But even 
though the Martian’s image exactly resembles mine, his image does not have the fore-
going semantic features of aboutness, representation, and reference. Putnam’s intuition 
is that there is a causal constraint on such semantic features that is not satisfied by the 
Martian’s image.
We are assuming that the BIV has a language that he uses in thinking, believing, 
wondering, and so on. The BIV never speaks or writes, of course, but he has a rich mental 
life that involves use of his language. The BIV’s language is superficially just like English 
(recall that we imagined him to be my mental twin, though, as we will shortly see, this 
cannot be quite right). For example, whenever I think a thought using the sentence 
“That is a palm tree,” my BIV twin thinks a thought using that sentence. But what do 
the BIV’s words “palm tree” refer to? Given the foregoing considerations concerning the 
Martian’s image, Putnam maintains that the BIV’s “palm tree” does not refer to palm 
trees, just as the Martian’s image does not refer to or represent palm trees. This is because 
the causal constraint on reference is not satisfied by the BIV’s words “palm tree” and palm 
trees. That is, there are no palm trees in the vat world to serve as referents for his words 
“palm tree”; the BIV never has any causal contact—direct or indirect—with palm trees, 

RESPONSES TO SKEPTICISM
502
and thus his words do not refer to palm trees. What do those words refer to, then? One 
answer that is suggested by Putnam is as follows. Find the entities in the vat world that 
play a causal role vis à vis the BIV’s uses of “palm tree” that is analogous to the causal 
role that palm trees play vis à vis a normal English speaker’s uses of “palm tree.” The best 
candidates for such entities are the recurring computer program features that cause elec-
trical stimuli in the brain, which stimuli, in turn, produce experiences just like those that 
are produced in normal humans as a result of seeing palm trees. Call these PT program 
features.
So, on this view, the BIV’s words “palm tree” differ in their reference from a normal 
human’s words “palm tree.” So there must also be a difference in meaning between the 
BIV’s words and a normal human’s words, given that the meaning of a term determines 
its reference. These semantic differences will also induce a difference between the truth 
conditions of a BIV’s sentence “A palm tree is near” and those of a normal human’s corre-
sponding sentence. The normal human’s sentence “A palm tree is near” is true if and only 
if a palm tree is near to the human, whereas the BIV’s sentence “A palm tree is near” is 
true if and only if PT program features are running. The semantic differences between the 
BIV’s language (call it vat-English) and that of a normal human are ultimately induced by 
the differences between the two creatures’ external, causal environments. Let us call this 
Putnamian view semantic externalism.
Semantic externalism engenders some interesting results concerning the mental states 
of the BIV. Since the BIV’s words “palm tree” do not refer to palm trees and differ in 
meaning from a normal human’s corresponding words, and since his sentence “A palm 
tree is near” does not have the same truth conditions as a normal human’s corresponding 
sentence, we cannot say that when the BIV thinks a thought using that sentence, he is 
thinking a thought with the same content as a normal human’s thought that a palm tree 
is near. The semantic differences between languages that we have noted induce differ-
ences in the contents of the mental states had by the BIV and a normal human. The BIV 
cannot think that a palm tree is near, nor can he think that there are big waves at Sands 
Beach. The BIV’s corresponding thoughts are about the entities in his external, causal 
environment which systematically produce his experiences, namely, recurring computer 
program features such as the PT program features. So the contents of the BIV’s thoughts, 
beliefs, desires, and wonderings depend upon his external, causal environment. This 
view is known as content externalism, and it is really a form of semantic externalism, 
insofar as the content-properties of intentional states of mind are plausibly considered 
semantic properties of the states.
Now we see that the BIV cannot be the mental twin of a normal human. If God were 
to somehow “look inside” the minds of the BIV and his normal human counterpart, then 
he could not distinguish the two creatures’ mental states purely on the basis of their inner 
phenomenology. But the states would nevertheless differ in content in virtue of the dif-
ferences between the creatures’ external, causal environments. Now we also see that one 
of our key initial Cartesian claims about the BIV thought experiment was not correct. 
That is, we characterized the BIV as being massively mistaken about his world. But that 
claim presupposed that when the BIV has a belief that he expresses via his sentence “A 
palm tree is near,” the content of the belief in question is that a palm tree is near. If the BIV 
had that belief, then he would be mistaken, since no palm tree is near to him. But accord-
ing to semantic externalism, the BIV has no such belief. Instead, he has a belief about 
computer program features—a belief that is not mistaken, given that the appropriate 
program features are running, producing “treeish” experience. According to the content 

503
SKEPTICISM AND SEMANTIC EXTERNALISM
externalist, the Cartesian philosopher is mistaken in the following assumption: in the 
BIV thought experiment, we can hold fixed the mental life of a normal human while vary-
ing, in thought, his external environment (normal world to vat world), with the result 
that the BIV’s beliefs are those of a normal human and hence massively mistaken.
Putnamian Responses to Skepticism
Let us now return to the Cartesian skeptical argument formulated earlier. Its second 
premise is
(2) I do not know that ~SK.
In other words, I do not know that I am not a BIV. We will now construct an argu-
ment for the conclusion that ~SK—that I am not a BIV. If the argument is successful, 
then I can claim to know ~SK on the basis of knowing the premises of the argument and 
knowing that they logically imply the conclusion, ~SK. By this method, we will block 
the Cartesian skeptical argument by showing that its premise (2) is false. In order for this 
strategy to work, we must make a case for the claim that my knowledge of the constructed 
anti-skeptical argument’s premises does not somehow rest upon or presuppose knowledge 
of propositions about the external world. As we will see, it is a rather delicate matter to 
decide whether our constructed argument satisfies this criterion of adequacy. We are try-
ing to construct a sort of transcendental argument for ~SK: an argument whose premises 
are (i) thin enough to be allowed in play by the skeptic (since they do not somehow pre-
suppose knowledge about the external world), but, at the same time, (ii) strong enough 
to establish the conclusion ~SK.
The Disjunctive Argument
Let “brain*” refer to the computer program feature that causes experiences in the BIV 
that are qualitatively indistinguishable from normal experiences that represent brains, 
and let “vat*” refer to the computer program feature that causes experiences that are 
qualitatively indistinguishable from normal experiences that represent vats. A BIV, 
then, is not a brain* in a vat*: a BIV is not a certain computer program feature located 
in a certain other computer program feature. Here is the Disjunctive Argument that is sug-
gested by Putnam’s text (hereafter DA):
(a) 
Either I am a BIV (speaking vat-English) or I am a non-BIV (speaking 
English).
(b) If I am a BIV (speaking vat-English), then my utterances of “I am a BIV” 
are true iff I am a brain* in a vat*.
(c) 
If I am a BIV (speaking vat-English), then I am not a brain* in a vat*.
(d) If I am a BIV (speaking vat-English), then my utterances of “I am a BIV” 
are false. [(b),(c)]
(e) 
If I am a non-BIV (speaking English), then my utterances of “I am a BIV” 
are true iff I am a BIV.
(f) 
If I am a non-BIV (speaking English), then my utterances of “I am a BIV” 
are false. [(e)]
(g) 
My utterances of ‘I am a BIV’ are false. [(a),(d),(f)]

RESPONSES TO SKEPTICISM
504
DA stops short of delivering the desired result, namely a proof of
(~SK) I am not a BIV.
To establish ~SK we need to add a couple of further steps:
(h) My utterances of “I am not a BIV” are true.
(T) My utterances of “I am not a BIV” are true iff I am not a BIV.
~SK follows from (h) and (T). Step (h) itself follows from (g) on natural assumptions 
about negation, truth, and quotation, but (T) is problematic in the current anti-skeptical 
context. The assumption of (T) seems to beg the question against the skeptic. Putnam’s 
semantic externalist picture is this: if I am a non-BIV (speaking English), then (T) is the 
correct statement of the truth conditions of my sentence “I am a BIV,” using the device 
of disquotation; but if instead I am a BIV (speaking vat-English), then the correct state-
ment of my sentence’s truth conditions is the strange one given in (b) of DA, not using 
the device of disquotation. So in order to know that (T) is the correct statement of my 
sentence’s truth conditions, I need to know that I am a non-BIV (speaking English). 
But that is what the anti-skeptical argument was supposed to prove. According to this 
objection, Supplemented DA (DA plus (h) and (T)) is epistemically circular, in William 
Alston’s sense: knowledge of one of its premises—(T)—requires knowledge of its conclu-
sion (Alston 1989).
The Simple Arguments
Let us consider two other reconstructions of Putnam’s thinking regarding BIVs. Here is 
Simple Argument 1 (SA1):
(A) If I am a BIV, then my word “tree” does not refer to trees.
(B) My word “tree” refers to trees.
(C) I am not a BIV. [(A),(B)]
We will discuss (B) below. Premise (A) comes from Putnam’s semantic externalism, as 
seen above. DA’s claims about the BIV’s sentences’ truth conditions are grounded in 
claims about reference such as (A): since the BIV’s words differ in their referents from the 
corresponding words of a normal speaker, the BIV’s sentences accordingly differ in their 
truth conditions from the corresponding sentences of a normal speaker.
The semantic differences just mentioned induce differences at the level of thought 
content that are exploited in the following Simple Argument 2 (SA2):
(D) If I am a BIV, then I am not thinking that trees are green.
(E) I am thinking that trees are green.
(F) I am not a BIV. [(D),(E)]
We will discuss (E) below. Regarding (D): since the BIV’s word “tree” does not refer to 
trees when he uses the sentence “Trees are green” as a vehicle for thinking a thought, his 
thought does not have the content that trees are green. Rather, it has some content con-
cerning tree*s, that is, computer program features that cause in the BIV experiences that 

505
SKEPTICISM AND SEMANTIC EXTERNALISM
are qualitatively indistinguishable from normal experiences that represent trees. Perhaps 
the content is something like this: the program feature that causes “treeish” experience is 
associated with a program feature that causes experiences that are qualitatively indistin-
guishable from normal experiences that represent objects as being green.
SA2 highlights the connection between semantic externalism and the mind. Not only 
do meaning, reference, and truth conditions depend upon one’s external environment 
in the ways we have discussed; further, the representational contents of one’s thoughts, 
beliefs, desires, and other propositional attitudes also depend upon circumstances exter-
nal to one’s mind.
The simple arguments are obviously simpler than DA. Further, they do not commit 
the anti-skeptic to a specification of the referents of the BIV’s words and the contents 
of its thoughts. The arguments rest only upon the claim that the referents and con-
tents in question differ from my referents and contents. Another advantage of the Simple 
Arguments is that they do not, on the face of it, seem to beg the question against the 
skeptic, as did Supplemented DA.
Objections to the Simple Arguments and Responses
Let us now turn to an objection to SA1. Though the argument does not obviously require 
knowledge that I am a non-BIV (speaking English), as Supplemented DA seemed to, its 
premise (B) does seem upon reflection to be question begging. On a natural understand-
ing of (B), the truth of this premise requires the existence of trees as referents for my word 
“tree.” So to know that (B) is true, I would need to know that I am a non-BIV in a world 
containing trees, rather than a BIV in a treeless vat world. This problem infects SA2 as 
well, since my ground for holding that I can think tree-thoughts while the BIV cannot 
is ultimately the claim that the words we use to express our respective thoughts differ in 
reference (trees versus things that are not trees, such as tree*s).
SA1 can be modified so as to avoid this objection:
(A*) If I am a BIV, then it is not the case that if my word “tree” refers, then it 
refers to trees.
(B*) 
If my word “tree” refers, then it refers to trees.
(C) 
I am not a BIV. [(A*),(B*)]
Premise (A*) comes from semantic externalism. Re premise (B*): knowledge that there 
are trees in my world is not required in order to justify this premise. But a problem still 
remains. In order to know (B*), don’t I need to know that I am a non-BIV (speaking 
English), so that I can use the device of disquotation in stating the referents of my words 
(if they do have referents at all)?
A similar worry can be laid at the door of SA2. In order to know its second premise, 
(E), I need to know what I am now thinking. But if I am a BIV, then I use the sentence 
“Trees are green” to express some thought concerning tree*s. So in order to know what I 
am now thinking (in order to know that I am thinking that trees are green), it seems that 
I need to know that I am not a BIV thinking a thought with a strange content.
A reasonable response to the foregoing objection to Modified SA1 is as follows. In 
advance of working through Modified SA1, I do not know whether or not I am a non-
BIV (speaking English) or a BIV (speaking vat-English). But I do know certain things 
about my own language (whatever it is and wherever I am speaking it). By virtue of 

RESPONSES TO SKEPTICISM
506
knowing the meaning of “refers” and the meaning of quotation marks, I know that dis-
quotation can be correctly applied to any successfully referring term of my language, in 
the way that (B*) indicates for my word “tree.” This is a priori knowledge of semantic 
features of my own language (whatever it is—English or vat-English). I know (A*) in 
virtue of my a priori, philosophical knowledge of the theory of semantic externalism and 
of how it applies to the case of the BIV. Knowing (A*) and (B*), I can then knowledge-
ably deduce that I am not a BIV.
A similar response to the foregoing objection to SA2 is that I have knowledge of my own 
mind that is not experientially based. I can gain the knowledge that I am now thinking that 
trees are green via introspection. Putting this self-knowledge together with my a priori, 
philosophical knowledge of SA2’s first premise, (D), (knowledge based upon my under-
standing of semantic externalism), I can then knowledgeably deduce that I am not a BIV. 
A problem for this response has been raised by various philosophers. It has been suggested 
that semantic externalism engenders severe limits on self-knowledge: if I do not know that 
I am not a BIV, then I do not know which contents my thoughts possess: the normal ones 
that I think that they possess, or the strange ones that they possess if I am a BIV. So the 
response we have considered might be in trouble if semantic externalism gives rise to such 
skepticism about knowledge of content (Ludlow and Martin 1998; Nuccetelli 2003).
A final objection to the semantic arguments is hard to dispute. The problem is the 
narrow scope of the arguments. They cannot prove that I am not a recently disembodied 
brain in a vat (as opposed to a Putnamian BIV). If I have been speaking English up until 
my recent envatment, then my words will retain their English referents (to trees and so 
on) and my thoughts will retain their normal contents (about trees and so on). Thus, the 
Putnamian semantic externalist considerations will find no purchase against the skepti-
cal hypothesis that I am a fledgling brain in a vat. On the recent envatment hypothesis, 
I am not massively mistaken about my world in the way I would be if I were a BIV or a 
victim of Evil Genius deception. Depending on the details of the skeptical hypothesis, I 
might well have a very large body of correct views about my world. In order to accommo-
date this point, the skeptic could proceed in a piecemeal fashion, constructing a different 
‘recent envatment’ hypothesis for each of my beliefs (I believe that I ran yesterday—but 
I could have been envatted the day before yesterday and so not have done any running 
yesterday . . .) (Brueckner and Altschul 2010).
Another more radical brain-in-a-vat hypothesis that is left unscathed by semantic 
externalism is that I am a brain in a vat whose experiences are randomly caused by a 
supercomputer: there are no systematic causal connections, for example, between the 
computer program features and my recurring “treeish” experiences. The semantic exter-
nalist would say that in such a vat world, my words fail to refer to things in my world, and 
no truth conditions can be properly assigned to my sentences. These sentences accord-
ingly fail to express contentful thoughts. On this radical brain-in-a-vat hypothesis, I am 
asked, then, to countenance the (alleged) possibility that I am not thinking contentful 
thoughts via meaningful sentences with reference and truth conditions. But if this ‘possi-
bility’ is actual, then there is no such thing as a skeptical argument upon which I am reflect-
ing. Thus, this radical skeptical hypothesis might well in the end undermine itself.
Davidson, Radical Interpretation, and Charity
Let us now discuss some anti-skeptical considerations that flow from Donald Davidson’s 
semantic externalist account of radical interpretation, in which I am trying to understand 

507
SKEPTICISM AND SEMANTIC EXTERNALISM
a speaker whose language is utterly foreign to me (Davidson 1984, 1986). My task in 
radical interpretation is to simultaneously solve for two unknowns: What do the speak-
er’s sentences mean? Which beliefs do his (sincere) utterances express? Using Quine’s 
famous example, imagine that my foreign informant utters the sentence “Gavagai” only 
in the presence of rabbits. What do I believe when confronted by a rabbit? Which English 
sentence do I use to express my occasioned belief, i.e., to which English sentence do I 
assent when prompted by the rabbit stimulus? I believe that a rabbit is present, and I use 
“A rabbit is present” to express that belief. How should I interpret my informant when 
he utters “Gavagai”? Should I attribute to him the belief that a large hadron collider is 
present and translate his sentence accordingly? Obviously not. I should reason that the 
presence of the rabbit in front of us causes in him the same belief that it causes in me, and 
I should translate “Gavagai” accordingly.
These remarks suggest the following principle:
In radical interpretation, assign beliefs by reference to their causes, and translate 
the foreigner’s belief-expressing sentences accordingly.
Davidson calls this method of assigning meanings and beliefs triangulation (Davidson 
2001). The method of triangulation goes hand in hand with Davidson’s Quine-inspired 
Principle of Charity:
In radical interpretation, maximize agreement in belief between you and the 
subject of interpretation.
In the presence of the rabbit, I am not caused to believe that a large hadron collider is 
present, and the rabbit does not prompt my assent to “A large hadron collider is pres-
ent.” So in interpreting my foreign informant, I should bring him into agreement with me by 
attributing to him the belief that is caused in me by the rabbit.
Triangulation embodies a semantic externalist approach to radical interpretation. 
According to Davidson’s method, the correct attribution of meanings and beliefs is 
constrained by the interpretee’s causal environment. Charity is entrained by this con-
straint.
Davidson has a famous anti-skeptical argument that proceeds from the foregoing views 
(Davidson 1986). The argument starts with the observation that given Charity, I cannot 
encounter another language user who is correctly interpreted as holding beliefs which 
do not substantially overlap my own. Massive disagreement between me and the inter-
pretee is not possible. The point holds mutatis mutandis for the case in which I am the 
interpretee undergoing scrutiny by an interpreter: massive disagreement between us is 
not possible, given Charity.
How is this relevant to skepticism? Both interpreter and interpretee might well be 
massively mistaken about their world even given their substantial agreement in belief. 
For all that has been said, I must take seriously the skeptic’s suggestion that I might be 
massively mistaken about my world, as I would be were I a brain in a vat. A related worry 
is expressed by Michael Williams. Isn’t the Davidsonian appeal to constraints on radical 
interpretation question begging in the context of discussion of skepticism? Doesn’t this 
appeal presuppose that an interpreter can come to know what another’s meanings and 
beliefs are by coming to know facts about the stimuli which prompt the informant’s utter-
ances (Williams 1996; Brueckner 1999)? Davidson is well aware of this limitation on the 

RESPONSES TO SKEPTICISM
508
anti-skeptical force of Charity. This is why he invokes the possibility of an omniscient 
interpreter (hereafter an OI).
Davidson maintains that the following situation is possible: an omniscient being, 
believing all and only true propositions, attributes meanings to my sentences and cor-
relative beliefs to me. The OI is just as much subject to the constraints of Charity as any 
interpreter. In such a situation, Charity dictates that the OI maximize agreement in belief 
between him and me, regarding the subject matters about which we both form opinions; 
the OI has many recondite beliefs that I do not share. (NB. We are not to suppose that 
the OI starts in ignorance of my meanings and beliefs and ends by forming beliefs about 
me on the basis of evidence that he gleans from observing my linguistic behavior in the 
presence of various environmental stimuli. Instead, the OI has thoroughly correct and 
exhaustive beliefs about my meanings and beliefs that conform to the method of trian-
gulation and respect Charity. On Davidson’s view of meaning and belief, meanings and 
beliefs are just what would be attributed to me by an interpreter guided by the constraining 
principles of radical interpretation.)
Since the OI’s beliefs are true without exception, and those beliefs which he attri-
butes to me match his own as much as possible, the result is that the beliefs which he 
attributes to me are mostly true. If we suppose, finally, that the OI’s interpretation of me 
is correct (which it must be given his omniscience), then it follows that, in the envisaged 
possible situation, most of my beliefs are true. In the possible situation we are consider-
ing, then, the skeptic’s suggestion that I might be massively mistaken is simply a non-
starter.
Richard Foley and Richard Fumerton pointed out that unless Davidson is a theist who 
holds that we are in fact in the company of an OI, the OI considerations are compat-
ible with my actually being massively mistaken (Foley and Fumerton 1985). Foley and 
Fumerton in effect consider a Davidsonian reply along the following lines.
Surely an OI is at least a possible being. Consider, again, a possible world W 
containing an OI along with me. Assume that (1) my beliefs in W are just those 
which I actually have, and (2) the states of affairs relevant to the truth and falsity 
of those beliefs are just those which actually obtain. Since my beliefs in W sub-
stantially overlap those of the OI, my beliefs in W will not be massively mistaken 
about W. Given assumptions (1) and (2), it then follows that my beliefs about 
the actual world are not massively mistaken about the actual world.
Foley and Fumerton in effect reply as follows.
I grant that there are worlds containing me and an OI—which are worlds in 
which I am perforce massively right about my world. But why should I grant 
that there is a possible world such as W, containing me and an OI and satisfy-
ing assumptions (1) and (2)? If I am in fact massively mistaken, then there is 
no world containing me and an OI and satisfying (1) and (2), though there are 
worlds containing me and an OI which differ from the actual world in respect 
of what I believe and in respect of the states of affairs relevant to the truth 
of my beliefs. Nothing about my actual freedom from error follows from the 
bare assumption that there is a world containing me and an OI. The stron-
ger assumption regarding conditions (1) and (2) is unwarranted since question 
begging.

509
SKEPTICISM AND SEMANTIC EXTERNALISM
Let us consider an alternative assumption about possibility (Brueckner 1991). Grant 
for the moment that there is a possible world containing a being who is modeled on a 
Leibnizian god who possesses perfect modal knowledge (knowledge which, were he a 
creator, the god could employ in a choice regarding which of all the possible worlds is the 
one to be made actual):
(L) Some possible world W* contains an OI who has perfect knowledge about all pos-
sible worlds, including the actual world; thus the OI believes, among other things, 
all and only true propositions about the actual world.
(NB. There is no commitment here to Lewisian modal realism. (L) could be paraphrased 
along the lines of: There might have been an OI with perfect modal knowledge . . . The 
truth-maker of such modal talk could be held to be an actually existing abstract entity, 
rather than a non-actual, concrete, existent, Lewisian possible world.)
For all that has been assumed in (L), W* is not the actual world and does not contain 
me. So the foregoing criticisms from Foley and Fumerton do not apply to (L).
Given (L) and Charity, we can show that I am not massively mistaken in my actual 
beliefs about the actual world, as follows. The OI contained in W* has beliefs about the 
meanings of the sentences to which I actually assent and about what beliefs those sen-
tences express as I actually use them. He arrives at these beliefs through radical interpre-
tation that is constrained by Charity. Thus, he maximizes agreement in belief between 
him and me. In particular, he attributes to me beliefs about my world (the actual world) 
which are in agreement with his beliefs about my world. His beliefs about my world, the 
actual world (which are of the form “Proposition P is true at W1,” where “W1” denotes the 
actual world) are all true. Thus my beliefs about my world (the actual world) are at least 
mostly true. Thus I am not actually massively mistaken about my world.
The simplest way of responding to this twist on Davidson’s omniscient interpreter 
anti-skeptical strategy is to deny the possibility of a Leibnizian OI with perfect modal 
knowledge. Just as one might have qualms about the possibility of a necessary being (in 
light of the Leibnizian ontological argument), one might also have qualms about the pos-
sibility of a Leibnizian OI: given Charity, such a being’s mere possibility delivers the result 
that I am mostly right about my world.
Conclusion
We have looked at two ways of using semantic externalist ideas against Cartesian skepti-
cism. Both sorts of anti-skeptical argument could be seen as a transcendental argument in 
the grand Kantian mold, in which some sort of mind-to-world connection is discerned—
a connection that would enable us to argue from unproblematically knowable facts about 
mind and language to a substantial, surprising anti-skeptical conclusion. Let the reader 
be the judge of the success of these anti-skeptical strategies.
References
Alston, W. (1989) “Epistemic Circularity,” in Epistemic Justification: Essays in the Theory of Knowledge, Ithaca: 
Cornell University Press.
Brueckner, A. (1986) “Brains in a Vat,” Journal of Philosophy 83: 148–67.
—— (1991) “The Omniscient Interpreter Rides Again,” Analysis 51: 199–205.
—— (1992) “Semantic Answers to Skepticism,” Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 73: 200–19.

RESPONSES TO SKEPTICISM
510
—— (1999) “Transcendental Arguments from Content Externalism,” in R. Stern (ed.) Transcendental 
Arguments: Problems and Prospects, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—— (2003) “Trees, Computer Program Features, and Skeptical Hypotheses,” in S. Luper (ed.) The Skeptics: 
Contemporary Essays, Aldershot: Ashgate.
—— and Altschul, J. (2010) “Terms of Envatment,” in Essays on Skepticism, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Davidson, D. (1984) “A Radical Interpretation,” in Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation, Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
—— (1986) “A Coherence Theory of Truth and Knowledge,” in E. Lepore (ed.) Truth and Interpretation: 
Essays on the Philosophy of Donald Davidson, Oxford: Blackwell.
—— (1996) “Three Varieties of Knowledge,” in Subjective, Intersubjective, Objective, Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
—— (2001) “Radical Interpretation,” in Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Foley, R. and Fumerton, R. (1985) “Davidson’s Theism?,” Philosophical Studies 45: 83–9.
Ludlow, P. and Martin, N. (ed.) (1998) Externalism and Self-Knowledge, Stanford: CSLI Press.
Nuccetelli, S. (ed.) (2003) New Essays on Semantic Externalism and Self-Knowledge, Cambridge: MIT Press.
Putnam, H. (1981) Reason, Truth and History, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Williams, M. (1996) Unnatural Doubts: Epistemological Realism and the Basis of Scepticism, Princeton: Princeton 
University Press.

Part VII
KNOWLEDGE AND 
KNOWLEDGE 
ATTRIBUTIONS


47
CONTRASTIVISM
Adam Morton
We often backtrack in ascriptions of knowledge. “Well, I’m not that sure,” “That’s what 
I think, at any rate,” “She knows as well as a ten year old could.” Elsewhere, backtrack-
ing can mean shift of parameter. “Well, it’s left from your point of view,” “Always in 
the past year, at any rate,” “Big for a mouse, I meant.” This insinuates a tempting idea. 
Perhaps some disputes about knowledge are hollow, because we ignore factors to which 
a meaningful ascription of knowledge is relative. Several developments in epistemology 
can be taken as ways of working out this idea. There is Peter Unger’s (1975) suggestion 
that “know” is like “flat,” requiring comparison to some standard or purpose. There is 
epistemic contextualism, entailing that a person knows that they have toenails when 
discussing how to trim them, but does not when engrossed in a discussion of Cartesian 
skepticism. And then there are “rather than” positions, which say that a person typically 
knows that she has ten toenails rather than thirty-six, but does not typically know that 
she has ten toenails rather than a number that flummoxes human counting routines. 
This chapter is about “rather than” positions. I shall be concerned with contrastivism 
about knowledge, the idea that “knows that p rather than that q” has advantages over 
simple “knows.”
Philosophers have often made suggestions that can be interpreted in the “rather 
than” idiom. Fred Dretske’s ideas are particularly important. And in the past few years, 
several philosophers have explicitly suggested that “s knows that p” can profitably be 
expanded to “s knows that p rather than q” (Dretske 1972; Johnsen 2001; Karjalainen 
and Morton 2003; Schaffer 2004, 2005). The claim might be that when we say that a 
person knows something the ascription is always implicitly relative to some alternative 
proposition. Or the claim might be that although this is not what we normally mean 
when we ascribe knowledge, philosophical and other purposes would be better served if 
we did always provide a contrast. Or it might be simply that we do have the contrastive 
form of knowledge-ascription, and that it is in some ways important. I compare these 
claims at the end of this chapter. I must begin, though, with a less impressionistic expla-
nation of what the core ideas are.
The Dretske Phenomenon
By this I mean the phenomenon of partial Gettierization, first described in Dretske 
(1970). A person can have a belief that involves the combination of several items of 
information. Sylvia might believe that the man in front of her is drunk. This combines 
three pieces of information: that it is in front of her, that it is a man, and that it is drunk. 
One way of attributing the belief to her would be to point to the person swaying before 

KNOWLEDGE AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS
514
her and say “Sylvia thinks he is drunk.” Suppose that it is a man (no cross-dressing) and 
is before her (no mirrors) and is drunk (not ill, not exhausted), and suppose that Silvia 
has evidence for all three. But suppose there are hidden problems with two of the three. 
The man has just come from a party of cross-dressers around the corner; there is a mirror 
in the line of sight. But the drunk part is uncomplicated. We would say “Silvia knows 
he is drunk.” The “he” form has the advantage of focussing us on the information that 
is most likely to be of importance to Sylvia, that the person is drunk. She knows that, 
even though there is something incomplete or imperfect about her knowledge. We can 
describe the gaps in her knowledge by saying that she does not know that the man is in 
front of her, and that she does not know that he is a man. But to describe the part that 
is not flawed, we cannot say “Sylvia knows that the man in front of her is drunk,” since 
that could be taken to include the parts that are flawed.
Sylvia knows that the man is drunk rather than sober, ill or exhausted. We might sug-
gest this in conversation with verbal stress “Sylvia knows that he is drunk.” Even this is 
not quite explicit enough; we have to read into it the assertion that the indicated con-
trasts are the only ones that we are claiming Sylvia’s information satisfies. So for greater 
accuracy we should say “Sylvia knows the man in front of her is drunk rather than sober 
(etc.), but she does not know that he is a man rather than a woman or a robot, or that 
he is in front of her rather than seen through a mirror (etc.).” Saying this is compatible 
with the information that it is a man and that he is in front of her being true, and even 
well-supported by evidence. It is with respect to status as knowledge that the failures of 
contrast are relevant.
Now many examples come to mind. There are examples based on accuracy. Sylvia 
might know that the man is roughly five meters away. Suppose her knowledge is accu-
rate to within a meter. So she knows that he is five meters away rather than six or four 
meters, but she does not know that he is five meters away rather than 4.8 or 5.2. There 
are examples based on conceptual repertoire. Sylvia might never have heard of tardive 
diskenesia, which can present symptoms similar to those of drunkenness. So it might 
be helpful to say that Sylvia knows that the man is drunk rather than sober, and knows 
that he is drunk rather than exhausted or fevered, but that she does not know that he is 
drunk rather than suffering from tardive diskenesia. There are also examples based on 
the limited discriminatory power of evidence. Sylvia might know that the man is a man 
rather than a woman, because she is very sensitive to normal gender differences. But 
nothing her eyes tell her might be relevant to the question of the person’s chromosome 
pattern. So she does not know that the person is an XY man rather than a transgendered 
person. There are many examples along these lines involving scientific theories and the 
limited power of evidence to choose between them.
In saying that someone knows that p rather than that q we might be making a trivial 
or a stringent contrast. Saying that Sylvia knows that there is a drunk in front of her 
rather than that there is not a drunk in front of her, does not give more information 
than saying that she knows that there is a drunk in front of her. Saying that she knows 
that the man in front of her is drunk rather than not drunk, is more informative: it 
focuses specifically on drunkenness. Saying that Sylvia knows that the man is drunk 
rather than sober, but does not know that he is drunk rather than suffering from tardive 
diskenesia, gives yet more information. If we identify a person’s knowledge with the 
range of her beliefs which are known relative to very wide contrasts then we might find 
that there is little difference between knowledge and true belief supported by evidence. 
If we identify knowledge with beliefs known relative to very narrow contrasts then we 

CONTRASTIVISM
515
might find that people have almost no knowledge. But we do not need to make either 
identification. We can just describe people’s epistemic situation in terms of what they 
do and do not know relative to different contrasts.
Giving the details of a person’s epistemic situation is usually more complex than 
might be predicted from a very simple contrastivism. Sylvia knows that the man is 
5 meters away and drunk rather than 4 meters away and exhausted; she does not know 
that he is 5 meters away and drunk rather than 4.8 meters away and suffering from 
tardive diskenesia. She also knows that he is 5 meters away and drunk rather than 12 
meters away and suffering from epilepsy; and does not know that he is 5 meters away 
and drunk rather than 5.2 meters away and suffering from Sydenham’s Chorea. The 
full contrastive story will require many, perhaps infinitely many, detailed contrastive 
attributions.
Discriminatory Capacities
Our knowledge is in part based on our capacity to tell things apart. Most people can 
tell dogs from frogs. But there are individuals and kinds that we cannot discriminate. 
Marbles can be pretty hard to distinguish. Imagine that you have been taught how to 
tell Astogmatic marbles from Blosphemious ones. You have a list of crude criteria and 
also you’ve just been trained with examples: we rap your knuckles or feed you cookies 
until you can answer correctly. We have a big bucket of a million marbles, and they’re 
all Astogmatic or Blosphemious: all that is except for two or three Croduloid ones some-
where in there. The Croduloids can look like Astogmatics or Blosphemiouses, except 
for very subtle magnetic characteristics that it takes years to understand. You draw a 
marble from the bucket and you are sure that it is an Astogmatic one: indeed given that 
you are 100 percent accurate when it’s just As versus Bs, and that the probability of this 
being one of the two or three Cs is minimal, your confidence is justified.
Suppose that the marble is in fact Astogmatic. Is your belief, that it is, knowledge? 
You have more evidence for it than you do for many things that we routinely credit 
as knowledge. But for all you know it might turn out to be a Croduloid. You have 
the capacity to know when things, marbles at any rate, are Astogmatic rather than 
Blosphemious, but you do not have the capacity to know when things are Astogmatic 
rather than Croduloid. This natural description of your capacities can apply equally 
well to the result of using them: you know that the marble is Astogmatic rather than 
Blosphemious, and you do not know that it is Astogmatic rather than Croduloid.
A variation on the example evokes stronger intuitions. Suppose that the bucket of 
marbles is chosen at random from a whole warehouse of such buckets. Out of a million 
buckets all but two or three are composed of Astogmatics and Blosphemiouses, and these 
two or three have a small proportion of Croduloids. You choose a marble from the bucket 
picked at random from the warehouse. You conclude correctly that it is Astogmatic. In 
so doing you are presupposing that the extremely unlikely choice of a Croduloid-con-
taining bucket has not occurred. So in knowing that the marble is Astogmatic rather 
than Blosphemious you are remaining ignorant whether it is Astogmatic rather than 
Croduloid. You are in no position to eliminate unlikely possibilities about the choice of 
bucket, but your training and vision suffice to eliminate possibilities about the marble 
taken from whatever bucket was chosen.
The limits of a person’s discriminatory capacities are like margins of error in mea-
surements. Measurements show that a star is 7 light years away plus or minus 0.01 light 

KNOWLEDGE AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS
516
years. So it is determined not to be more than 7.01 light years away and not to be less 
than 6.99 light years away. If these measurements are accurate and we trust them, then 
we know that the star is 7 light years away rather than 8, but do not know that it is 7 
light years away rather than 7.005 light years away. Ascribing contrastive knowledge to 
a person is like describing them as having a degree of accuracy in one dimension of their 
representation of the world (see Morton and Karjalainen 2008).
Assumptions: Knowledge Modulo Q
Often we cannot settle whether or not something is true, though we are pretty sure that 
it is. Whether the bucket is Croduloid-free, or whether the universe is a law-governed 
place. One solution is just to take it for granted and get on with science and action. 
Philosophers have sometimes resisted the idea that beliefs further down the line from 
such an assumption can count as knowledge. But the number of unjustified assump-
tions scattered around our systems of belief is then very worrying, especially when one 
considers not only completely arbitrary assumptions but also assumptions for which 
there is serious but not overwhelming support. There is a natural contrastive solution. 
When some aspects of a belief are not known, then the whole belief itself is known in 
a way that is relative to those aspects. The belief is known modulo the assumptions, as 
a mathematician might say: it is known as a representative of a class of beliefs, ultimate 
choice between which is not possible.
When p is known modulo an assumption then the knower knows p rather than other 
possibilities that depend on the same assumption, but does not know p rather than other 
possibilities that depend on alternatives to it. What “depend on” and “alternatives” 
exactly amount to will depend on one’s theory of knowledge. Contrastivist vocabulary 
allows an epistemology to hold that a person can know that the marble is Astogmatic 
modulo the assumption that it is not Croduloid. Or that Sylvia knows that there is a 
drunk before her, modulo the assumption that the apparition is human. Or that an 
astronomer knows that a star is 7 light years away modulo the assumption that certain 
equipment is working properly within a certain margin of error.
Knowledge can be modulo an assumption in very ordinary circumstances. Sylvia is 
walking in the woods in fading light. She sees a large black animal on a branch and 
assumes unreflectively that it is a bird. It is a bird but it is also true that the neighbor’s 
cat likes to sit on branches. She concludes that it is a raven, because of its size and color. 
She knows, modulo the bird assumption, that it is a raven rather than a crow (size) and 
that it is a raven rather than an eagle (color). She does not know that it is a raven rather 
than a cat, or that it is a bird rather than a mammal. Does she know that it is an ani-
mal, or that it is a black animal? She knows, modulo the arbitrary bird assumption. It is 
harder to put this as a single contrastive statement. She knows that it is an animal—bird 
or mammal—rather than an eagle, and that it is an animal rather than a stone, but she 
does not know that it is an animal rather than a bird in particular. It is misleading here 
to give the positive contrasts without also giving the negative (“does not know”) ones.
The fact that a person has assumed or presupposed that p, or just ignored the pos-
sibility that not p, does not have to show that she does not know that p rather than q, 
or that she does not know that r rather than s, where r would be false if p was. For p 
might be something that she can ignore, without affecting her attitude to r. If Sylvia 
doesn’t pay any attention to the possibility that the thing in the tree is the last surviving 
pterodactyl, that really makes no difference to whether she knows that it is a bird rather 

CONTRASTIVISM
517
than some other animal. There are many possible positions here. On a very demanding 
view, the failure to have evidence that p rather than q, or to be sensitive to the contrast 
between p and q, will result in the person’s failing to have a wide range of contrastive 
knowledge. On a more tolerant view, the impact will be minimal. This is an important 
issue if one takes our beliefs to be riddled with more or less arbitrary assumptions.
The New Skepticism
The tug of intuitions between Moorean confidence and Cartesian doubt is a dramatic 
version of conflicts that arise in everyday epistemic life (see DeRose 1995). Some of 
these can be arranged in patterns that invite contrastivity. There are cases that turn on 
accuracy. It seems obvious that Sylvia knows she is larger than her sister, but her sense 
of her and others’ features might be systematically distorted. There are cases that turn 
on conceptual repertoire. It seems obvious that Sylvia knows that she is a woman. But 
she might not distinguish between various natural kinds that “woman” labels. There are 
cases that turn on the limits of the power of evidence to discriminate. It seems obvious 
that Sylvia knows that her college graduation is a unique event. But it is possible that 
after the universe collapses into a singularity it will re-expand into a universe identical 
to the present one, repeating her graduation in every detail.
These can be described as traditional skeptical possibilities, in which what a person 
takes to be knowledge is in fact false. But post-Gettier epistemology makes another kind 
of skepticism possible. We can have large-scale knowledge failure even though most 
of our beliefs are true and supported by evidence, if they fail to meet additional condi-
tions for knowledge. (A little-remarked-on development: epistemologists now gener-
ally share a fallibilist attitude that makes traditional skepticism less attractive, but they 
also share attitudes that make the new skepticism more threatening.) We need only a 
change of emphasis. The skeptical possibility is now presented as an alternative to the 
person’s beliefs which, unless she can eliminate it, disqualifies them as knowledge. One 
influential version of the new epistemology requires that in order to have knowledge 
one must be able to eliminate relevant alternatives to the beliefs in question (Dretske 
1970; Lewis 1996). (Rival accounts will impose alternative conditions which for pres-
ent purposes amount to much the same.) A link with contrastive knowledge emerges 
here via the Dretske phenomenon.
Consider again Sylvia’s belief that the man in front of her is drunk. She is unlikely to 
have considered and eliminated all the alternatives to his being a man, to his being in 
front of her, and to his being drunk. Some of these are relevant in many circumstances, 
and in most circumstances many of them will be, so that it might be fairly rare that 
a person’s belief is knowledge-worthy throughout its content. On the very plausible 
assumption that we do not in fact normally exclude all the alternatives relevant to the 
total content of many of our beliefs, we get the conclusion that we rarely know the 
whole content of many of our beliefs.
This is a skeptical conclusion. But I think it is a true one, and one that we can live 
with. Sylvia probably does not know that there is a male human being directly before 
her and between three and ten meters away who is suffering the effects of excessive 
ingestion of CH3CH2OH. But she might well know that the guy before her is drunk 
rather than sober. Or that it is a man rather than a woman who is before her and show-
ing symptoms of drunkenness. Or that the apparently male person acting drunk nearby 
is directly in front of her rather than more than 5 degrees from her line of sight. Which 

KNOWLEDGE AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS
518
contrasts apply will depend on what she has been considering and paying attention to, 
and which aspects of the environment she is sensitive to. And it might be very hard 
for her or anyone to tell which contrasts apply and which do not. It might be hard to 
determine which of her assumptions are arbitrary in ways that block which contrasts. So 
of all the things Sylvia truly believes, a scattered subset fail to be knowledge with respect 
to the contrasts that she might expect, and some fail to be knowledge with respect to 
any contrast. Knowledge of how non-knowledge is scattered among one’s beliefs is rare 
and difficult.
We can apply this point of view to classic cases. Take Sylvia sitting in a philosophy 
seminar making a Moorean point. She waggles her appendages with conviction. She 
stresses that she sees and feels her hands and that there are two of them. What more 
could anyone want? Well, since it is a philosophy seminar she is thinking of irrefutable 
and probably irrelevant blockbuster possibilities. But she has not gone through a lot 
of nearer-to-home scenarios. Supposing there are two of these things, what claim does 
she have on them as hers? Might she have sold them to someone last night in the pub? 
The chances are that she has not even given the matter any thought. Might they be 
not hands but grafts of giant axolotl paws, which look a lot like human hands (Cortázar 
1952)? So she might know that she is linked to two hands rather than to none, but not 
know that she possesses two human hands rather than none. The differences between 
these contrasts have probably not occurred to her. Might she be suffering a failure of 
motor control and proprioception, analogous to the well-known tendency of people 
who have limited neural contact with their limbs to disown them, so that she thinks 
that hands that are actually attached to someone else are her own? There are many 
such possibilities, and she can only eliminate a few of them. Some will be more relevant 
to her situation than others, but she might well not have any rebuttal for some of the 
more relevant of them. So Sylvia’s claim to knowledge that she has two hands rather 
than none or three is more robust here than her claim to know that she has two human 
hands of her own. But in other situations the balance will fall differently. Or, to put 
the point more carefully, allowing the inevitable vagueness of “know,” Sylvia’s claim 
to know that she has two hands rather than none is stronger than her claim to know 
that she has two hands rather than being in contact with two appendages that are not 
her own home-grown hands. But the relative strength of these claims, and the factors 
that affect their strength, depend on her circumstances in ways that it is hard for her 
to assess.
Contrastive knowledge is not skeptic-proof. The claim is comparative: contrastive 
knowledge survives more challenges. It is an important claim when combined with 
the new skepticism. The result is the suggestion that if we do not concede that many 
knowledge claims are contrastive then we can sustain our pretensions to know a lot only 
by having low epistemic standards.
Lotteries
People usually refuse to ascribe knowledge that individual lottery tickets will lose, even 
when the probability of losing is higher than that of many propositions they do believe. 
They do, however, have beliefs from which it follows that individual tickets will lose, 
and will describe these as knowledge. Someone might claim to know that he will still be 
living in his cheap apartment in a year’s time, in spite of the million dollar lottery ticket 
on his desk. John Hawthorne (2004) has argued persuasively that ubiquitous situations 

CONTRASTIVISM
519
with these general features have a lot in common with skeptical hypotheses. There 
are claims to knowledge here which it seems outrageous to deny, but which seem to be 
undermined by the fact that we cannot be sure that some very unlikely but inconsistent 
event will not occur.
One person knows that he will be in his apartment rather than in a mansion, but does 
not know that he will be in his apartment after failing to win the lottery rather than in 
a mansion as a result of winning. Someone else knows that she will be delighted when 
her daughter gets her medical degree, rather than disappointed, but does not know that 
she will be delighted having escaped death by car crash, lightning strike, epidemic, or 
political violence, rather than dead from some such cause. Or so a contrastive episte-
mologist would naturally say. The contrastive idiom seems naturally suited to express 
the way that we both have knowledge and—seen from a different perspective—fail to 
have it, of these everyday expectations.
One rationale is the modulo phenomenon already described. Assume that people 
normally suspend judgment on whether an individual lottery ticket will win or lose. 
Then they can proceed to form other beliefs, carefully skipping around the gaps in con-
ceptual space left by this agnosticism. They will do this largely by making a scattered 
set of arbitrary assumptions. Our ticket-holder will assume that he will still be in his 
apartment in a year’s time, that his relatives will continue to be as inattentive to him 
as they now are, and that generally his life will go on its present course. The mother of 
the medical student will make similar assumptions about the persistence of the familiar. 
They will not assume that particular persistence-disturbing events—lottery wins, car 
accidents—will not occur. These things are not ruled out, though some events closely 
linked to them or their non-occurrence are explicitly ruled in. The result is a rather 
messy patchwork of beliefs, providing the assurance about the future needed for normal 
planning while not excluding developments that the person knows just might occur. 
And, modulo the suspended judgment and the resulting patchwork, the person has a 
good deal of contrastive knowledge.
Systematic Contrasts: Kant Without Tears
Most of the contrastivity so far discussed comes from the way individual people eliminate 
possibilities in the course of their belief-formation. There are also grounds for supposing 
that human knowledge is in general attuned to certain dimensions of contrast, so that 
humans can hope to know things of one kind rather than another, but not rather than 
some third kind. For example, there is Kantian contrastivism, which counts as epistemi-
cally distinct possibilities those descriptions of the world that differ in the distribution 
of things in space and time and the causal relations between them, and which discounts, 
as epistemically insignificant, many differences between descriptions that cannot be 
expressed in these terms. Thus a Kantian agent can know that the tides are the result 
of the gravitational force of the moon rather than the rotation of the earth, but cannot 
know that the tides are the result of the gravitational force of the moon rather than 
the result of a pre-established harmony between them and the moon’s movements (see 
especially Kant 1787: A278/B334).
Kantian contrastivism is different from its descendant positivist contrastivism, which 
counts as epistemically distinct possibilities only those descriptions that could be dis-
criminated by possible empirical evidence. A positivist agent can know that objects 
near the surface of the earth accelerate towards its center at 980 cm/sec2 rather than 

KNOWLEDGE AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS
520
700 cm/sec2, but cannot know that objects accelerate down because of gravity rather 
than accelerating down because of Newtonian gremlins.
Both Kantian and positivist contrastivism are different from reliabilist contrastivism, 
which distinguishes beliefs epistemically when the process that produces them is sen-
sitive to the differences in their truth conditions. A reliabilist agent can know that a 
ball is accelerating downwards at about 900 cm/sec2 rather than 450 cm/sec2—she has 
enough accuracy to catch it—but not that it is accelerating downwards at 900 cm/sec2 
rather than 905 cm/sec2. Reliabilist contrastivism provides a simple way of describing 
the knowledge of non-human species. Salmon know that their target stream is this one 
rather than that one; they do not know that it is a stream rather than a sluice; they do 
not know that they are going up it to mate rather than to feed (Kornblith 2002: ch 2). 
The salmon example shows how hard it is to find exactly the right set of contrasts to 
capture a non-human set of sensitivities. It would be surprising if they could always be 
characterized in common-sense terms. So the best way is to specify the contrastivity—
what kinds of facts the animal can respond to differently from what other kinds—as 
an object in itself, without trying to find human words for the conceptual repertoire 
involved.
Given that there are physical properties to which members of any species are not 
sensitive, it would be amazing if the same were not true of human beings. Sensitivity 
includes inferential and hypothesizing capacities, so the suggestion is that there are 
aspects of the universe we do not register at all. Or, more carefully, that there are distinct 
sets of possible worlds such that no human being can know that the actual world is a 
member of one set rather than the other. Call this hyper-realist contrastivism. My purpose 
now is not to defend it, but to point out a natural way of stating the position, in terms 
of contrast spaces underlying our knowledge.
Many big pictures of human knowledge combine a knowledge-affirming and a knowl-
edge-denying side in ways that suggest a contrastive formulation. Besides Kant’s tran-
scendental realism, a similar interpretation could be put on Hilary Putnam’s internal 
realism, on van Fraassen’s constructive empiricism, and on structural realism in contem-
porary philosophy of science (Ladyman 1998; van Fraassen 2006). Structural realism 
holds that we can know that the laws of nature have one form rather than another, but 
cannot know that the objects satisfying them are of one kind rather than another. Some 
contrasts are out of bounds.
Which Contrastivism?
I end with a very basic question that has been with us from the beginning. What really 
is the claim that knowledge is contrastive? Is it (a) that when people naively ascribe 
dyadic knowledge to others they are really describing a triadic relation between person, 
target proposition, and contrast proposition? Is it (b) that the triadic form is a variant 
that is available to us in common sense, as a fall-back from full dyadic knowledge and 
that has interesting philosophical uses? Is it (c) that the triadic form is an option with 
a loose resemblance to our everyday use of “know” that has a philosophical payoff as an 
extension of it? Is it (d) that the triadic form is a philosophical invention, a creature of 
theory that should be used to replace the confused or confusing ordinary concept?
(a) and (d) are the strongest positions. (a) suggests that the hidden form of “know” 
has an extra argument place, which is usually left implicit. If this were true we would 
expect that whenever we make an intelligible ascription of knowledge it will be possible 

CONTRASTIVISM
521
to extract enough information from the context to fill in the missing contrast proposi-
tion. Jonathan Schaffer (2007) has suggested something stronger, that the linguistic 
structure of “know” is triadic. In fact, Schaffer believes that (a) can only be true if this 
is the case. Some form of (a) might be true, though, even if the facts about “know” are 
not coded linguistically. Compare “to the right of.” When a is to the right of b we have 
to take account of a direction—the red buoys to port when entering a European harbor 
are to starboard when leaving it—and also of which direction is up—entry signs in space 
will need to have arrows as well as colors. But there is no evidence that the lexical item 
“to the left of” is anything but a two place relation. So I shall take it that we can defend 
some version of (a) by claiming that the facts that make a knowledge claim true or false 
are contrastive, and that awareness of these facts guides us in ascribing knowledge to 
one another.
I take it that (d), the other extreme position, is not very attractive. It is a position of 
last resort. In effect it says “we can’t make much sense of knowledge, so if we are to have 
something to mark our epistemic achievements, it has to be something rather different 
from what we have taken to be the target.” That is a skeptical position that, unlike the 
skeptical positions sketched above, is not balanced by a corresponding affirmation of 
knowledge. So in that respect it undermines the aim of admitting the force of skepticism 
while relativizing in a way that allows it to be consistent with an equally definite affir-
mation. It also undermines the aim of reacting to the Dretske phenomenon by letting 
a belief be both known and not known relative to different aspects of its content. On 
a (d)-type position a partially Gettierized proposition is not known—in the standard 
meaning of “know”—in any respect.
But in all of (a)–(d) the formulation in terms of a triadic propositional attitude is 
misleading. For, as we have seen, the full content of a contrastive knowledge-ascription 
is not given by a single contrast proposition. One needs a more complex list of which 
contrasts the person manages with respect to the fact in question, and which not. So 
in saying that a person knows p rather than q we are not describing their full epistemic 
situation with respect to p, just as we are not when we say simply that they know that 
p. Saying that the person knows that p rather than q better than they know r rather 
than s—that they can discriminate p-possibilities from q-possibilities more reliably than 
they can discriminate r-possibilities from s-possibilities—gives more information than 
either (Hetherington 2001). But, still, for the reasons just given this too does not give a 
complete report on the person’s epistemic relation to p.
And that is the answer to the original question. None of (a)–(d) are completely 
satisfactory, though each has some truth to it. A person in a situation has an epistemic 
situation with respect to a possibility or fact. It is this situation that makes knowledge 
attributions true or false, when they have definite truth values. We make knowledge 
attributions on the basis of partial information about it. Contrastive idioms capture 
more of the epistemic situation, so that when people make non-contrastive attributions 
some of the information they are using can be helpfully expressed in contrastive terms. 
To that extent (a) is correct. Some, not all, of the tangles we get into when trying to 
sum up our individual and species-wide epistemic situations can be resolved by using 
a richer vocabulary. To that extent (b) is correct. The more of the structure of epis-
temic situations we want to capture the further we have to move from the very simple 
things we say in everyday life. To that extent (c) is correct. There are some aspects of 
some epistemic situations that are almost impossible to describe unconfusingly in non-
contrastive terms. To that extent (d) is correct.

KNOWLEDGE AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS
522
The upshot is that a systematic use of everyday idioms of contrastive knowledge, 
directed deliberately towards aspects of our epistemic situation that are hard to describe 
in non-contrastive terms, is a valuable tool. We should not neglect it.
References
Cortázar, Julio (1952/1996) “Axolotl,” in La autopista del sur y otras cuentas, Penguin Books.
DeRose, K. (1995) “Solving the Skeptical Problem,” The Philosophical Review 104, 1–52.
Dretske, F. (1970) “Epistemic Operators,” The Journal of Philosophy 67, 1007–1023.
Dretske, F. (1972) “Contrastive Statements,” The Philosophical Review 81, 411–437.
Hetherington, Stephen (2001) Good Knowledge, Bad Knowledge. Oxford University Press.
Hawthorne, John (2004) Knowledge and Lotteries. Oxford University Press.
Johnsen, Bredo (2001) “Contextualist Swords, Skeptical Plowshares,” Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research 62: 385–406.
Kant, Immanuel (1787) Kritik der reinen Vernuft (Critique of Pure Reason). For a clear contemporary transla-
tion, by Jonathan Bennett, see http://www.earlymoderntexts.com/kcpr1.html, and http://www.earlymod-
erntexts.com/kcpr2.html.
Karjalainen, Antti and Adam Morton (2003) “Contrastive Knowledge,” Philosophical Explorations 6: 74–
89.
Kornblith, Hilary (2002) Knowledge and its Place in Nature. Oxford University Press.
Ladyman, J. (1998) “What is Structural Realism?” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 29: 409–424.
Lewis, David (1996) “Elusive Knowledge,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 74: 549–567.
Morton, Adam and Antti Karjalainen (2008) “Contrastivity and Indistinguishability,” Social Epistemology 
22: 271–280.
Schaffer, Jonathan (2004) “From Contextualism to Contrastivism,” Philosophical Studies 119: 73–103.
Schaffer, Jonathan (2005) “Contrastive knowledge.” In: Oxford Studies in Epistemology 1, edited by T. Gendler 
and J. Hawthorne. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schaffer, Jonathan (2007) “Closure, Contrast, and Answer,” Philosophical Studies 133: 233–255.
Unger, Peter (1975) Ignorance: A Case For Skepticism. Oxford University Press.
Van Fraassen, B. C. (2006) “Structure: Its Shadow and Substance,” The British Journal for the Philosophy of 
Science 57: 275–307.

48
CONTEXTUALISM
Patrick Rysiew
1. Introduction: What Contextualism Is (And Isn’t)
Whether you know that p depends on many features of you and your situation. 
Epistemologists disagree over which such features are important—whether knowing 
depends on what else you believe, on objective features of your situation beyond whether 
p is true, on certain counterfactuals holding of you, on your evidence for (/against) p, on 
the etiology of your belief, and so on. The natural thought, though, is that the meaning 
of ‘S knows that p,’ for example, is insensitive to shifts in factors such as these, and that 
once such factors are fixed the proposition expressed by such a sentence is either true 
or false.
Hence the significance of epistemic contextualism (EC). For contextualists deny the 
‘invariantist’ (Unger 1984) thinking just articulated. In the words of one leading con-
textualist, EC is the view that “the truth conditions of sentences of the form ‘S knows 
that p’ or ‘S does not know that p’ vary in interesting ways depending on the context 
in which they are uttered” (DeRose 1992: 914), and ‘context’ here means none other 
than such things as the interests, expectations, and so forth of knowledge attributors 
(e.g., DeRose 1999: 189–190; Cohen 1999: 57). Put slightly differently, EC is the view 
that the proposition expressed by a given tokened knowledge sentence depends upon 
features of the knowledge attributor(s)’ psychology and/or conversational-practical 
situation. As a result of such context-dependence, it’s said, utterances of a given such 
sentence, made in different contexts, might differ in truth value.
Before proceeding further, and by way of further clarifying EC, we should pause to 
fend off a pair of possible confusions.
The first stems from the fact that different views have been termed ‘contextualist’. 
Again: EC as we’re discussing it here concerns the truth conditions of knowledge sen-
tences, or the propositions expressed by utterances thereof. The thesis is that it is only 
relative to a contextually determined standard that a knowledge sentence expresses 
a complete proposition; further, change the standard, and you change what the sen-
tence expresses. This view differs significantly from ‘contextualism’ of the sort defended 
by David Annis (1978) and Michael Williams (1991), which is an attempt to clarify 
the nature of knowledge and/or justified belief itself. At the same time, in its linguis-
tic orientation EC naturally comports with another bearer of the ‘contextualism’ label: 
namely, the general semantical-linguistic approach that sees ‘context’ as central to cer-
tain fundamental semantic issues, including meaning itself. (See, e.g., Recanati 1989; 
Travis 2005.) Still, EC should not be confused with this general philosophy of language 
view.

KNOWLEDGE AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS
524
The second possible confusion to guard against concerns just wherein the relevant 
context-sensitivity resides, if EC is true. Here, it’s useful to consider utterances involv-
ing uncontroversially context-sensitive terms. For instance, just what proposition is 
expressed by an utterance of
(1) ‘It’s raining,’
(2) ‘I’m hungry,’ or
(3) ‘That’s red,’
depends in obvious ways upon such facts as the location (1) or identity (2) of the speaker, 
and/or the referent of the demonstrative (3). Similarly, it is plausible that attributions 
of tallness or flatness are context-sensitive, insofar as there are varying standards that 
one might have in mind in applying either predicate and which affect just what is said 
in doing so.
Note, though, that insofar as the truth value of such utterances “depends on context,” 
that is because their truth conditions—or, the proposition expressed thereby—are so 
dependent: it is not as though (1)–(3) each has fixed truth-evaluable contents, the 
truth values of which happen to depend on context, perhaps because there are context-
variable standards for their assessment. So too for EC: though the thesis is sometimes 
put in terms of the context-variability of knowledge sentences’ truth values (e.g., Rieber 
1998: 190; Cohen 1998: 289; 2005: 57), or variable “standards” for knowing or for what 
“counts as” knowing (DeRose 1995), this is misleading (Bach 2005: §I): those truth 
values shift only because, according to EC, different propositions are expressed in different 
contexts.
Likewise, just because EC is a thesis about knowledge sentences’ truth conditions it 
is not a thesis about knowledge itself. So it is misleading too when EC is described, as it 
sometimes is, as the view that whether one knows depends upon context (Feldman 2004: 
24; Bach 2005: 54–55). EC is an epistemological theory only in the sense that it concerns 
sentences used in attributing (/denying) “knowledge,” as opposed to those employing 
some non-epistemological term(s).
But while it does not concern knowledge (/justified belief) in the way that tradi-
tional epistemological theories do, EC’s departure from the traditional epistemologi-
cal assumption of ‘invariantism’ is claimed to allow an attractive solution to certain 
long-standing puzzles about knowledge, as well as to best comport with our everyday 
knowledge-attributing practices. As we’ll see, there is good reason to doubt whether 
EC delivers on all it promises, and indeed whether it is really well supported. But first, a 
brief review of the sort of considerations used to motivate EC is in order.
2. Theoretical Motivations
Although EC is not itself a theory of knowledge (or other epistemic matters), it has 
been said to afford a resolution of certain epistemological puzzles, both ordinary and 
extra-ordinary. Most notably, EC is said to give us a way of responding to certain cases 
in which we have apparently inconsistent knowledge claims, each of which enjoys some 
real plausibility. Though these puzzles are not exclusively skeptical, it is EC’s offering a 
solution to skeptical problems that figures most prominently in recent discussions. So 
that is the natural place to start.

CONTEXTUALISM
525
2.1. A Skeptical Puzzle
Consider one particular form of skeptical argument upon which leading contextualists 
have focused (e.g., Cohen 1986, 1988, 2005; DeRose 1995; Neta 2003a & b). We’ll call 
it ‘SA’, for ‘skeptical argument’:
P1. 
I don’t know that not-h [h = some skeptical ‘hypothesis’; e.g., that I’m a bodiless 
brain in a vat, being stimulated to have just those experiences I would be having 
if I weren’t a brain in a vat (‘BIV’)].
P2. 
If I don’t know that not-h, then I don’t know that p [p = some mundane proposi-
tion which we commonly take ourselves to know; e.g., that I have hands].
C. 
So, I don’t know that p.
SA constitutes a puzzle because (a) each of the premises enjoys some plausibility. As to 
P1, how, after all, could I know that I’m not a bodiless brain in a vat? By waving my arms 
around? As to P2, it is just an instance of the closure principle for knowledge—i.e., the 
principle that if S knows that p and that p entails q, then S knows that q (a rough state-
ment, but good enough here); and many, including leading contextualists, are inclined 
to regard this principle as axiomatic. But (b) given our intuitive anti-skepticism, C 
seems immensely implausible, even though (c) the argument appears to be formally 
valid.
On the face of it, we have a paradox—a set of independently plausible but seemingly 
mutually inconsistent propositions. Because that is the problem, a complete solution to 
SA will have to explain both which of the assumptions lying behind the generation of 
the paradox should be rejected and why, and why the assumption singled out for rejec-
tion struck us as plausible in the first place (DeRose 1995).
At first blush, it might seem that there are just three possible responses to SA:
 i. we can capitulate to skepticism;
 ii. we can reject P2 and the closure principle on which it depends; or
 iii. we can reject P1 (the ‘Moorean’ response, as it’s sometimes called).
Essential to EC is the idea that these three options do not exhaust the possible responses to 
SA. Stephen Schiffer (1996, 2004) agrees, but his recommendation is that we admit (iv) 
that our concept of knowledge is incoherent, and that epistemological paradoxes such as 
SA are irresolvable. For most, this is no more satisfactory than embracing skepticism.
Enter the contextualist alternative: (v) we deny that SA’s conclusion really does 
threaten our intuitive anti-skepticism. According to EC, recall, the proposition 
expressed by a given knowledge utterance crucially depends upon ‘context.’ If a token 
of ‘S knows that p’ is true just in case the subject has a true belief and is in a strong epis-
temic position vis-à-vis p, there might be variable standards governing just how strong 
the subject’s epistemic position must be in order for the tokened sentence to express a 
truth. While different contextualist theories differ in their details (see Rysiew 2007a: 
§3.3), the basic contextualist solution to SA involves claiming that it involves a dra-
matic upwards shift in the operative standards. Those standards are not epistemic in the 
strict sense, of course, since they do not concern knowledge per se; but they do affect 

KNOWLEDGE AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS
526
whether a given tokening of ‘S knows that p’ expresses a truth; for they affect just what 
it expresses.
Thus an utterance of P1, such as occurs in SA, might express a truth only because, 
owing to the introduction of a high-standards context, what it expresses is that the 
subject does not stand in an extraordinarily strong epistemic position with regard to the 
proposition that he has hands. But that, of course, is compatible with his meeting the 
lower standards ordinarily in play.
Of course, we still need an explanation of why we thought that the skeptic’s claims 
threatened our ordinary claims to know. The contextualist seeks to explain this—more 
generally, why we might think that what is said in a given ‘high-stakes’ case is incom-
patible with what is said in its ‘low-stakes’ counterpart—by adopting an error theory: 
“competent speakers can fail to be aware of [. . .] context-sensitive standards, at least 
explicitly, and so fail to distinguish between the standards that apply in skeptical con-
texts, and the standards that apply in everyday contexts” (Cohen 1999: 77; 2005: 60; 
DeRose 1995: 40–41; 1999: 194; 2004: 37).
2.2 Everyday Cases
While a major selling point of EC is supposed to be its resolution of skeptical puzzles, 
contextualists also emphasize EC’s (alleged) consonance with our ordinary knowledge-
attributing practices. There too, they say, we find evidence of the same sort of context-
sensitivity that SA exploits.
For a couple of reasons, it’s very important not to overlook this appeal to everyday 
cases. First, as we will see, a number of philosophers have questioned just how effective 
EC is in its response to skepticism; and if they are right, then it matters greatly that the 
effectiveness of that response is not EC’s sole basis. Second, as Keith DeRose says, “the 
contextualist’s appeal to varying standards for knowledge in his solution to skepticism 
would rightly seem unmotivated and ad hoc if we didn’t have independent reason from 
non-philosophical talk to think such shifts in the content of knowledge attributions 
occur” (2002: 169). But in fact, DeRose says, “The best grounds for accepting contex-
tualism concerning knowledge attributions come from how knowledge-attributing (and 
knowledge-denying) sentences are used in ordinary, non-philosophical talk: What ordi-
nary speakers will count as ‘knowledge’ in some non-philosophical contexts they will 
deny is such in others” (2005: 172; 2006: 316). Likewise, as with DeRose (1992) and 
his well-known Bank Case, Stewart Cohen claims that examples such as the following 
“strongly [suggest] that ascriptions of knowledge are context-sensitive” (1999: 59):
Mary and John are at the L.A. airport contemplating taking a certain flight to 
New York. They want to know whether the flight has a layover in Chicago. 
They overhear someone ask a passenger Smith if he knows whether the flight 
stops in Chicago. Smith looks at the flight itinerary he got from the travel agent 
and responds, “Yes I know—it does stop in Chicago.” It turns out that Mary and 
John have a very important business contact they have to make at the Chicago 
airport. Mary says, “How reliable is that itinerary? It could contain a misprint. 
They could have changed the schedule at the last minute.” Mary and John 
agree that Smith doesn’t really know that the plane will stop in Chicago. They 
decide to check with the airline agent.
(Ibid.: 58)

CONTEXTUALISM
527
Here too, contextualists claim that regarding the relevant sentences’ truth conditions as 
context-dependent makes best sense of the flexibility in knowledge-attributing behav-
ior. Thus, contextualists tend to agree that in everyday cases, such as that just described, 
the practical importance of the subjects’ ‘getting it right’ tends to raise the standards for 
the truth of a sentence of the form ‘S knows that p’. (Remember: what changes here is 
what an utterance of such a sentence expresses; we do not have a fixed such proposi-
tion, with different standards for its truth applying in the more demanding context.) 
So here too, the sentences used by someone in a ‘high-stakes’ context (John and Mary) 
and their ‘low stakes’ counterpart (Smith) can both be true, since the propositions they 
express are not really conflicting after all. (For discussion of when such a claim should/
shouldn’t be made, see DeRose 2006: §1; 2005: §§3–4.)
In general, then, EC posits a neat symmetry between the flexibility in our (alleged) 
judgments as to the truth of a given knowledge claim/denial, and a parallel plasticity 
in the truth conditions (and, as a result, truth values) of the knowledge-attributing 
sentences we utter. And if speakers realize, however tacitly, that what is expressed by 
such utterances is a context-sensitive matter, that can be used to explain the observed 
tendency to attribute/deny knowledge in a way that depends on such things as “the 
purposes, intentions, expectations, presuppositions, etc., of the speakers who utter these 
sentences” (Cohen 1999: 57).
2.3 Other Allegedly Pro-Contextualist Considerations
In addition to the foregoing, some contextualists (e.g., Cohen 1988, 1998; Lewis 1996; 
Rieber 1998; Neta 2002) have suggested that EC enables an attractive solution to 
‘the lottery problem.’ So too, David Lewis (1996) has proposed extending EC to the 
Gettier problem; but this is a much more controversial idea among EC’s proponents. 
Controversial too is whether concessive knowledge attributions (Rysiew 2001)—i.e., 
sentences of the form ‘S knows that p, but it is possible that q’ (where q entails not-
p)—motivate EC. (Lewis (1996) thinks so; both Stanley (2005a) and Dougherty and 
Rysiew (2009) disagree, though for rather different reasons.) Finally, DeRose (2002) 
has argued that ‘the knowledge account of assertion’ (Williamson 2000)—the idea 
that one should assert only what one knows—favors EC. But whether the knowledge 
account is correct is highly contentious (e.g., Weiner 2005); and several people have 
pointed out that there is no direct path from it to EC anyway (e.g., Blackson 2004; Leite 
2007).
In any case, it is fair to say that the consideration that has figured most prominently 
in arguments for EC is the fact that there are some cases, skeptical and otherwise, about 
which both a knowledge claim and a surface-incompatible knowledge-denial have some 
appeal. The primary virtue of EC is supposed to be that it gives us a straightforward way 
of accommodating this: the claims can both be true because they don’t express contrary 
propositions after all.
3. Objections to Contextualism
In spite of its promising a neat solution to certain problems involving knowledge attri-
butions, EC remains very controversial, with critics pointing out several serious difficul-
ties it faces. Here, three are discussed.

KNOWLEDGE AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS
528
3.1. Is EC Linguistically Plausible?
According to EC, ‘know(s)’ is a context-sensitive term. However, it’s not clear that 
the linguistic data surrounding ‘know(s)’ is what one would expect were it genuinely 
context-sensitive. For example, Jason Stanley (2004) argues that, unlike ‘flat’ and ‘tall,’ 
for example, ‘knows’ is not clearly gradable. (It makes sense to describe someone as 
“very tall,” but while I might say that someone knows something “very well,” ‘very’ does 
not seem here to function as a degree modifier.) And while ‘(is) justified’ is obviously 
gradable, even if gradability were sufficient for context-sensitivity, from the fact that 
knowledge requires justification it would not follow that ‘knows’ is context-sensitive as 
well (pace Cohen 1999: 60). Nor, Stanley argues, does ‘know(s)’ behave like indexicals 
(‘I,’ ‘here’) or relational terms (such as ‘enemy’).
In a related argument, Herman Cappelen and Ernie Lepore (2003) contend that, 
according to certain tests for the genuine context-sensitivity of a term, ‘know(s)’ just 
does not pass muster.
Finally, John Hawthorne points out that with uncontroversially context-dependent 
terms, we find it very natural to employ “the clarification technique.” For instance: 
I balk at your claim that Kansas is flat, pointing out that there is a small rise just 
ahead of us. You clarify: “Well, what I meant was that there are very few mountains.” 
Hawthorne’s point is that we have very few techniques of clarification in the case of 
‘know(s)’; whereas, it “is through the clarification technique that sensitivity to context-
dependence is manifested” (2004: 104–106).
Responses on behalf of EC to such arguments vary. Commenting on Stanley, Barbara 
Partee (2004) agrees that ‘know(s)’ is unlike expressions such as ‘tall’, but that perhaps 
better models are available. Nikola Kompa (2002) suggests that the context-sensitivity 
of ‘know(s)’ is best understood as deriving from a sui generis sort of “unspecificity.” And 
Rob Stainton (2010) argues that if there are pragmatic determinants of what is stated/
asserted/claimed, then what is stated (/etc.) in different uses of “knowledge” sentences 
can vary in truth conditions, even if ‘know(s)’ itself is not context-sensitive. (Here, 
we see a connection between EC and its philosophy-of-language namesake mentioned 
above; a similar connection is evident in Travis (2005).)
Ceding less ground, Peter Ludlow (2005) argues that questions about gradability are 
too crude a standard by which to judge whether ‘know(s)’ is context-sensitive. Ludlow 
disagrees with Hawthorne about the prevalence of clarificatory devices for ‘know(s)’ 
and argues that there is good reason to think its semantics includes some placeholder(s) 
for the variable standards that EC posits. Like DeRose (2005), Ludlow casts EC as a 
piece of ‘ordinary language’ philosophy, and he presents the results of Google searches 
in which clauses like, “. . . by objective standards,” “. . . by academic standards,” “. . . 
with some certainty,” “. . . doggone well . . .,” and so on, accompany uses of ‘know(s).’
It’s not clear what to make of such data. In general, from the fact that different 
qualifying phrases are used in making some evaluative judgments (whether x is/isn’t 
F, whether S does/doesn’t A) in different domains, it does not immediately follow 
that a contextualist semantics for the relevant terms (‘F-ness,’ ‘(to) A’) is correct (cf. 
Conee 2005: 50–51). Such devices might be semantically revealing—as they arguably 
are with, for instance, “He’s pretty tall for a jockey”; but they might be grammatically 
misleading—as they would be with, for example, “She spoke with confidence,” or “By 
anyone’s reckoning, Albert lied.” In the latter cases, the extra information involves, not 
the making explicit of context-variable standards (for “speaking” or “lying”), but the 

CONTEXTUALISM
529
featuring of information over and above that encoded in the relevant verb (the manner 
of speaking, the obviousness of the deceit). In the same fashion, the qualifying phrases 
in Ludlow’s examples might be overt references to standards for knowing per se; but they 
might be serving merely to indicate such things as the nature or quality of the subject 
S’s evidence, just who has judged S to be a knower, S’s exact degree of confidence, the 
uncontroversial character of S’s knowing or of what S knows, and so on.
3.2. Does EC Really Help with Skepticism?
Recall (§1) that EC is a semantic or linguistic thesis—it doesn’t concern knowledge 
itself, but rather the context-variable nature of the propositions expressed by utterances 
of ‘knowledge’-attributing/-denying sentences. Just because this is so, one can wonder 
whether EC successfully engages skepticism. Various versions of this objection have 
been lodged (e.g., Feldman 1999, 2001, 2004; Klein 2000; Kornblith 2000; Sosa 2000; 
Bach 2005). On one version, (e.g., Conee 2005; Feldman 2001), it’s noted that EC 
per se does not generate the results essential to the contextualist resolution of SA, for 
example, since EC alone does not ensure that the propositions expressed by utterances 
of knowledge sentences in ordinary contexts are true.
On another version, the objection is that EC does not correctly characterize the 
skeptical problem. As we have seen, EC has it that skeptical claims express truths only 
relative to extraordinarily high epistemic standards. But, the objection runs, what’s at 
issue between skeptics and non-skeptics is whether we satisfy even our ordinary epis-
temic standards (Kornblith 2000; Feldman 2004). As Ernest Sosa (2000) puts it, the 
antiskeptical “Moorean stance” is not the thesis that folks in ordinary situations who 
claim to “know” things often express truths. Rather, it “is a stance, adopted in a philo-
sophical context, about what one then knows and, by extension, what people ordinarily 
know” (Sosa 2004: 281).
Of course, the contextualist might counter that this Moorean view presumes falsely 
that there is some ‘knowledge’ proposition which is both true and expressible acon-
textually: perhaps the Moorean view itself manifests a failure to be aware of the con-
text-sensitivity of the expressions in question (§2.1). But both that error theory and 
the contextualist’s appealing to it have been the target of strong objections. So, while 
other grounds for dissatisfaction with an EC-based response to skepticism have been 
cited—for example, that it’s not well-positioned to explain the plausibility of certain 
anti-skeptical claims (e.g., Sosa 2000: 15), that it’s not obviously applicable to forms of 
skeptical argument beyond SA (e.g., Feldman 2001: 78ff.), or that it makes certain true 
“knowledge” propositions inexpressible (e.g., Brady and Pritchard 2005)—we will leave 
those aside, and turn instead to worries about EC’s error theory.
3.3. Is the Contextualist’s Error Theory Problematic?
As we’ve seen, one of the major attractions of EC is said to be that it allows us to resolve 
certain apparent conflicts among sets of individually plausible claims without forcing us 
to reject any of the members thereof as false. However, as we’ve also seen (§2.1), con-
textualists are committed to the claim that we fail to fully appreciate the contextualist 
semantics and/or to faithfully track shifts in context.
This gives rise to another oft-voiced objection to EC (e.g., Schiffer 1996; Hofweber 
1999; Rysiew 2001; Hawthorne 2004; Conee 2005; Williamson 2005). As formulated 

KNOWLEDGE AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS
530
by Stephen Schiffer, the objection is simply that it is implausible that we would get 
“bamboozled by our own words” (1996: 329) in the way the contextualist alleges, since 
“speakers would know what they were saying if knowledge sentences were indexical in 
the way the Contextualist requires” (ibid.: 328).
This complaint might seem not to have much weight. With respect to SA above, 
for example, the two premises are (suppose) individually quite plausible, the argument 
appears valid, yet the conclusion seems very implausible. So “something plausible has to 
go” (DeRose 1995: 2)—we’re going to end up being confused (mistaken) about some-
thing. This is one of the ways in which Cohen has recently responded to concerns about 
contextualism’s error theory (Cohen 2005: 70). And DeRose (2006) has replied along 
similar lines: if you present a group of subjects with SA, for instance, and ask them 
whether the conclusion contradicts an ordinary claim to know, some will say ‘yes,’ and 
some will say ‘no.’ If contextualism turns out to be true, then many are blind to that, 
and so on. So, whoever’s right, a substantial portion of ordinary speakers are afflicted 
by “semantic blindness” (Hawthorne 2004: 107). ‘Bamboozlement’ is something we’re 
stuck with either way.
In assessing this type of response to the objection under consideration, it is useful to 
separate out two questions: First, whether, considered on its own, the contextualist’s 
error theory is plausible. Second, whether that theory raises any problems internal to 
the contextualist view.
As to the first question, there are precedents for the type of error that the contextual-
ist says is going on in the case of knowledge attributions. For example, by implicitly rais-
ing the standards—drawing attention to previously disregarded bumps, etc.—you can 
get a competent speaker to take seriously ‘flatness skepticism,’ the view that nothing’s 
really flat (Cohen 1999: 78–9; 2001: 91; 2004: 193; 2005: 60, 70).
However, such cases are conspicuous in manifesting a disappearance effect: when an 
apparent incompatibility between certain uttered sentences is due to their expressing 
different propositions, once this is pointed out, any appearance that they are incompat-
ible tends to go away. Thus, we might ‘disagree’ over whether Kansas is flat, but once 
it is made clear that you mean relatively un-mountainous and I mean devoid of any hills at 
all, we quickly agree that we were both right. But for many, no such effect attends the 
consideration of EC (Feldman 2001: 73, 77–78; Rysiew 2001: 484–485; Conee 2005: 
55, 66). Thus, using subscripts to denote the context-sensitivity that the contextualist 
alleges is at work in the airport case (§2.2), we can make explicit the (alleged) truth-
conditional content of the two uttered sentences as follows:
(SMITH) ‘S has a true belief and is in a strongC1 epistemic position,’ and
(MARY) ‘It is not the case that (S has a true belief and is in a strongC2 epistemic posi-
tion)’
(Rysiew 2007b: 652–653; cf. Bach 2005: §I)
To many, however, such renderings of the relevant claims don’t bring to light a context-
sensitivity that’s immediately obvious upon being brought to our attention; they serve 
only to highlight the controversial character of EC.
Acknowledging this fact, Cohen notes that there are “varying degrees to which com-
petent speakers are blind to the context-sensitivity in the language” (2005: 61). That of 
indexicals (‘I,’ ‘now’) is easy to spot, that of ‘flat’ somewhat harder. For ‘knows,’ “it may 
be very difficult even after some amount of reflection for competent speakers to accept 

CONTEXTUALISM
531
context-sensitivity. It may take subtle philosophical considerations concerning the best 
way to resolve a paradox in order to ‘see’ the context-sensitivity of ‘knows’” (ibid.).
This type of response to the worry at hand brings into focus the second sort of con-
cern noted above: that the contextualist’s error theory raises problems internal to the 
contextualist view itself. For, to the extent that the context-sensitivity of the relevant 
expressions can remain deeply hidden, even after careful reflection, it becomes even 
less clear than it already was that in the cases of concern (SA, the airport example, 
etc.) what’s driving our judgments as to whether what speakers say is correct is, as the 
contextualist says, precisely an awareness of that context-sensitivity.
More has been said concerning the plausibility of EC’s error theory (for which, see 
Rysiew 2001: §3 and §10; 2007a: §4.3). But it’s clear that we’ve moved beyond consid-
erations merely of the contextualist’s imputation of linguistic error to ordinary speakers: 
in spite of how it is sometimes presented, both by critics of EC (e.g., Schiffer 1996; 
Hawthorne 2004) and by its defenders (e.g., DeRose 2006), the issue does not concern 
semantic ‘blindness’ or ‘bamboozlement’ per se. Rather, it has to do with the unsatisfac-
tory or troubling nature of the contextualist’s appeal to such a thing in particular.
Still other criticisms of EC have been made as well (see Rysiew 2007a: §4.5). Of 
course, if EC were the only solution to the data that inspire it, we’d have good reason 
to at least hope that all the various problems facing EC could be overcome. However, 
several alternative treatments of the relevant data have been proposed.
4. Alternative, Non-Contextualist Accounts
Among critics of EC, at least three such alternative explanations have emerged. Since 
each is intended to preserve the thought that we do ordinarily know many things, the 
granting of knowledge in the relevant ‘low standards’ case is taken to express a truth. 
What needs explaining, then, is why denying knowledge of the same subject can seem 
correct once the standards are raised, even though nothing in the subject’s situation 
changes. Though they are not obviously competing, each attempt to explain this in 
non-contextualist terms keys on different factors. Framed in terms of the airport exam-
ple described above (§2.2), and in broad outline only, these sample non-contextualist 
proposals are as follows.
4.1. Salience, Conflicting Arguments, and Focusing Effects
When we find people seeming to disagree about some matter, often that’s because there 
is a genuine conflict of evidence—arguments and considerations on either side of the 
issue, none of which can be easily dismissed. And which of these one focuses on can 
affect one’s view as to the truth of the proposition in question. So, for instance, if Mary 
and John focus on the various ways in which Smith might be mistaken (e.g., because 
of a misprint in the itinerary), this can get them thinking that he does not know what 
he claims to know, especially if focusing on a possibility tends to make one over-rate 
its probability. (See especially Feldman 2001: 74–78. For similar ideas, see Williamson 
2005: 112; Conee 2005: 63–66; and Rysiew 2001: 503–505.)
4.2. Psychological Presuppositions of Attributing Knowledge
Kent Bach (2005: 76–77) points out that if Mary is not sure that Smith’s itinerary is 
reliable, she won’t be confident enough herself to believe that the plane will stop in 

KNOWLEDGE AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS
532
Chicago, in which case she cannot coherently attribute knowledge of that fact to Smith. 
Indeed, Mary will have to deny that she knows it, “since she thinks that it is not yet 
established. And, since Smith has no evidence that she doesn’t have, she must deny 
that he knows it [too].” In a similar spirit, Jonathan Adler (2006) suggests that such 
cases are best explained in terms of the subject’s diminished confidence as to p, where 
the latter does not imply a lack of belief.
4.3. Pragmatic Factors
According to some (e.g., Blaauw 2003; Black 2005; Brown 2006; Pritchard 2010; 
Rysiew 2001, 2005, 2007b), pragmatic factors explain the relevant knowledge-attribut-
ing behavior. (There are differences among these views; here, one sample elaboration is 
sketched.) In the airport case, it is mutually obvious to John and Mary that they want to 
ensure that their epistemic position with respect to the flight plan is very strong—strong 
enough to rule out the possibility of a misprint, for example, being in an epistemic 
position of such strength might or might not be required for knowing. Hence, whether 
Smith does know—whether the proposition literally expressed by “Smith knows . . .” is 
true—might or might not be relevant to John and Mary’s concerns. Either way, ‘S knows 
that p’ entails that S is in a good epistemic position—this is why granting someone 
knowledge involves representing them as entitled to their belief. But it would be odd of 
Mary and John to grant Smith such an entitlement (by saying ‘he knows’) and represent 
him as being in a good epistemic position if they thought that his evidence wasn’t so 
good as to put their concerns to rest. Whereas, by denying knowledge to Smith, they are 
able to express the thought, which seems not just relevant but true, that his epistemic 
position is not so good that they do not need to check further. And if they (we) read 
what is conveyed by the relevant utterance onto the sentence uttered, the knowledge 
denial will strike them (us) as expressing a truth.
Of course, the contextualist can deny that pragmatic factors play any real role in the 
relevant cases. Suppose that’s so—i.e., suppose that the information that each of the 
speakers in the airport example (e.g.) is concerned to communicate, and to which our 
intuitions about their utterances are responsive, is nothing more or less than that which 
is, according to EC, what the sentence he/she utters semantically expresses. In that 
case, we should expect that our laying bare those contents—as we did with (Smith) and 
(Mary), the explicit relativizations in §3.3—will generate the very same response as did 
their inexplicit counterparts. But of course they don’t: the airport case, or SA, presents 
a puzzle only because the relevant claims strike us as incompatible; but (Smith) and 
(Mary) are obviously compatible—and not just with each other, but with a non-contex-
tualist view of the truth conditions of knowledge sentences (Rysiew 2007b: 652–653)! 
In response, the contextualist could once again resort to his/her error theory; but at this 
point such a move should appear rather strained.
4.4. Other Alternative Views
Each of the preceding alternative treatments of the data can be made to fit with standard 
epistemological thinking about knowledge (and ‘knows’). But EC faces other recent 
and less orthodox competitors, including those treated in other essays in this volume—
contrastivism (e.g., Karjalainen and Morton 2003; Schaffer 2004); ‘subject sensitive 
invariantism’ (e.g., Fantl and McGrath 2002; Hawthorne 2004; Stanley 2005b); and 

CONTEXTUALISM
533
relativism (e.g., MacFarlane 2005). As the field of available views expands, the case 
for EC’s providing a uniquely viable treatment of the data that inspires it is further 
weakened.
5. Conclusion
EC has garnered a lot of attention in recent years, and rightly so. It poses a challenge 
to standard, invariantist thinking. Just as importantly, it has forced epistemologists to 
pay closer attention to our actual knowledge-attributing practices. However, whether it 
provides the best account of the latter, and the best resolution of certain long-standing 
philosophical problems, is far from clear.
References
Adler, J., 2006, “Withdrawal and Contextualism,” Analysis, 66(4): 280–285.
Annis, D. B., 1978, “A Contextualist Theory of Epistemic Justification,” American Philosophical Quarterly, 
15(3): 213–219.
Bach, K., 2005, “The Emperor’s New ‘Knows’,” in G. Preyer and G. Peter, eds., Contextualism in Philosophy: 
Knowledge, Meaning, and Truth, Oxford: Clarendon, pp. 51–89.
Blaauw, M., 2003, “WAMing Away at Contextualism,” Nordic Journal of Philosophy, 4(1): 88–97.
Black, T., 2005, “Classic Invariantism, Relevance, and Warranted Assertability Manœuvers,” Philosophical 
Quarterly, 55(219): 328–336.
Blackson, T., 2004, “An Invalid Argument for Contextualism,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 
68(2): 344–345.
Brady, M. and D. H. Pritchard, 2005, “Epistemological Contextualism: Problems and Prospects,” Philosophical 
Quarterly 55(219): 161–171.
Brown, J., 2006, “Contextualism and Warranted Assertibility Manoeuvres,” Philosophical Studies, 130: 
407–435.
Cappelen, H. and E. Lepore, 2003, “Context Shifting Arguments,” Philosophical Perspectives 17: Language and 
Philosophical Linguistics: 25–50.
Cohen, S., 1986, “Knowledge and Context,” Journal of Philosophy, 83: 574–583.
——, 1988, “How to be a Fallibilist,” Philosophical Perspectives, 2: Epistemology: 91–123.
——, 1998, “Contextualist Solutions to Epistemological Problems: Skepticism, Gettier, and the Lottery,” 
Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 76(2): 289–306.
——, 1999, “Contextualism, Skepticism, and the Structure of Reasons,” Philosophical Perspectives 13: 
Epistemology: 57–89.
——, 2001, “Contextualism Defended: Comments on Richard Feldman’s ‘Skeptical Problems, Contextualist 
Solutions’,” Philosophical Studies, 103: 87–98.
——, 2005, “Contextualism Defended” and “Contextualism Defended Some More,” in M. Steup and E. 
Sosa, eds., Contemporary Debates in Epistemology, Malden MA: Blackwell, pp. 56–62, 67–71.
Conee, E., 2005, “Contextualism Contested” and “Contextualism Contested Some More,” in M. Steup and 
E. Sosa, eds., Contemporary Debates in Epistemology, Malden MA: Blackwell, pp. 47–56, 62–66.
DeRose, K., 1992, “Contextualism and Knowledge Attributions,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 
52(4): 913–929.
——, 1995, “Solving the Skeptical Problem,” The Philosophical Review, 104(1), 1–52.
——, 1999, “Contextualism: An Explanation and Defense,” in J. Greco and E. Sosa, eds., The Blackwell 
Guide to Epistemology, Malden, MA: Blackwell, pp. 185–203.
——, 2002, “Assertion, Knowledge and Context,” The Philosophical Review, 111(2): 167–203.
——, 2004, “Sosa, Safety, Sensitivity, and Skeptical Hypotheses,” in J. Greco, ed., Ernest Sosa and His Critics, 
Cambridge, MA: Blackwell, pp. 22–41.
——, 2005, “The Ordinary Language Basis for Contextualism and the New Invariantism,” Philosophical 
Quarterly, 55(219): 172–198.
——, 2006, “‘Bamboozled by Our Own Words’: Semantic Blindness and Some Arguments Against 
Contextualism,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 73(2): 316–338.

KNOWLEDGE AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS
534
Dougherty, T. and P. Rysiew, 2009, “Fallibilism, Epistemic Possibility, and Concessive Knowledge 
Attributions,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 78(1): 123–132.
Fantl, J. and M. McGrath, 2002, “Evidence, Pragmatics, and Justification,” The Philosophical Review, 111: 
67–94.
Feldman, R., 1999, “Contextualism and Skepticism,” Philosophical Perspectives 13: Epistemology: 91–114.
——, 2001, “Skeptical Problems, Contextualist Solutions,” Philosophical Studies, 103: 61–85. (A revised 
version of Feldman 1999.)
——, 2004, “Comments on DeRose’s ‘Single Scoreboard Semantics’,” Philosophical Studies, 119(1–2): 
23–33.
Hawthorne, J., 2004, Knowledge and Lotteries, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hofweber, T., 1999, “Contextualism and the Meaning-Intention Problem,” in K. Korta, E. Sosa, and X. 
Arrazola, eds., Cognition, Agency and Rationality, Dordrecht: Kluwer, pp. 93–104.
Karjalainen, A. and A. Morton, 2003, “Contrastive Knowledge,” Philosophical Explorations, 6(2): 74–89.
Klein, P., 2000, “Contextualism and the Real Nature of Academic Skepticism,” Philosophical Issues, 
10: 108–116.
Kompa, N., 2002, “The Context Sensitivity of Knowledge Ascriptions,” Grazer Philosophische Studien, 64: 
11–18.
Kornblith, H., 2000, “The Contextualist Evasion of Epistemology,” Philosophical Issues, 10: 24–32.
Leite, A., 2007, “How to Link Assertion and Knowledge Without Going Contextualist: A Reply to DeRose’s 
‘Assertion, Knowledge, and Context’,” Philosophical Studies, 134: 111–129.
Lewis, D., 1996, “Elusive Knowledge,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 74(4): 549–567.
Ludlow, P., 2005, “Contextualism and the New Linguistic Turn in Epistemology,” in G. Preyer and G. Peter, 
eds., Contextualism in Philosophy: Knowledge, Meaning, and Truth, Oxford: Clarendon, pp. 11–50.
MacFarlane, J., 2005, “The Assessment Sensitivity of Knowledge Attributions,” in T. S. Gendler and J. 
Hawthorne, eds., Oxford Studies in Epistemology 1, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 197–233.
Neta, R., 2002, “S knows that P,” Noûs, 36(4): 663–681.
——, 2003a, “Skepticism, Contextualism, and Semantic Self-Knowledge,” Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research, 67(2): 397–411.
——, 2003b, “Contextualism and the Problem of the External World,” Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research, 66(1): 1–31.
Partee, B., 2004, “Comments on Jason Stanley’s ‘On the Linguistic Basis for Contextualism’,” Philosophical 
Studies, 119(1–2): 147–159.
Pritchard, D. H., 2010, “Contextualism, Skepticism, and Warranted Assertibility Manoeuvres,” in J. K. 
Campbell, M. O’Rourke and H. S. Silverstein, eds., Knowledge and Skepticism, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
pp. 85–103.
Recanati, F., 1989, “The Pragmatics of What is Said,” Mind & Language, 4(4): 295–329.
Rieber, S., 1998, “Skepticism and Contrastive Explanation,” Noûs, 32(2): 189–204.
Rysiew, P., 2001, “The Context-Sensitivity of Knowledge Attributions,” Noûs, 35(4): 477–514.
——, 2005, “Contesting Contextualism,” Grazer Philosophische Studien, 69: 51–70.
——, 2007a, “Epistemic Contextualism,” in E. Zalta, (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. URL = 
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2007/entries/contextualism-epistemology/.
——, 2007b, “Speaking of Knowing,” Noûs, 41(4): 627–662.
Schaffer, J., 2004, “From Contextualism to Contrastivism,” Philosophical Studies, 119(1–2): 73–103.
Schiffer, S., 1996, “Contextualist Solutions to Skepticism,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 96: 
317–333.
——, 2004, “Skepticism and the Vagaries of Justified Belief,” Philosophical Studies, 103: 161–184.
Sosa, E., 2000, “Skepticism and Contextualism,” Philosophical Issues, 10: 1–18.
——, 2004, “Replies,” in J. Greco, ed., Ernest Sosa and His Critics, Cambridge, MA: Blackwell, 
pp. 275–325.
Stainton, R., 2010, “Contextualism in Epistemology and the Context-Sensitivity of ‘Knows’,” in J. K. 
Campbell, M. O’Rourke and H. S. Silverstein, eds., Knowledge and Skepticism, Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, pp. 137–163.
Stanley, J., 2004, “On the Linguistic Basis for Contextualism,” Philosophical Studies, 119(1–2): 119–146.
——, 2005a, “Fallibilism and Concessive Knowledge Attributions,” Analysis, 65(2): 126–131.
——, 2005b, Knowledge and Practical Interests, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Travis, C., 2005, “A Sense of Occasion,” Philosophical Quarterly, 55(219): 286–314.
Unger, P., 1984, Philosophical Relativity, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

CONTEXTUALISM
535
Weiner, M., 2005, “Must We Know What We Say?,” The Philosophical Review, 114(2): 227–251.
Williams, M., 1991, Unnatural Doubts: Epistemological Realism and the Basis of Skepticism, Cambridge, MA: 
Blackwell.
Williamson, T., 2000, Knowledge and its Limits, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—— 2005, “Knowledge, Context, and the Agent’s Point of View,” in G. Preyer and G. Peter, eds., 
Contextualism in Philosophy: Knowledge, Meaning, and Truth, Oxford: Clarendon, pp. 91–114.

536
49
RELATIVISM AND 
KNOWLEDGE 
ATTRIBUTIONS
John MacFarlane
Relativism, in the sense at issue here, is a view about the meaning of knowledge attribu-
tions—statements of the form “S knows that p.” Like contextualism, it holds that the 
truth of knowledge claims is sensitive to contextual factors, such as which alternatives 
are relevant at the context, or how high the stakes are. For the relativist, however, the 
relevant context is the context from which the knowledge claim is being assessed, not 
the context at which it was made.
The Relativist’s Position
One kind of relativist position can be defined by its acceptance of the following four 
theses:
Local Invariantism:
The relation expressed by “know” does not vary with context.
Dyadic Relation:
This relation is a two-place relation; it does not have implicit argument places that must 
be filled through hidden variables in the logical form or “free enrichment.”
Fancy Intensions:
Although “know” invariantly expresses the knowledge relation, this relation does 
not have an intension of the familiar sort—a function from possible worlds and times 
to truth values. That is, its extension is not determined by the state of the world at 
a time, but depends on something else in addition, which we will call an epistemic 
standard.
Assessment Sensitivity:
The accuracy of an assertion or belief depends on the epistemic standard that is relevant 
at the context of assessment. Thus, there is no “absolute” answer to the question whether 
such an assertion or belief is accurate; accuracy is an assessment-sensitive matter.

RELATIVISM AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS
537
A few words of explanation are in order.
Local Invariantism is rejected by philosophers who take “know” to be an indexical. 
An indexical is a word whose content (its contribution to the propositions expressed 
by sentences of which it is a part) is determined in part by features of the context. A 
paradigm is “today,” which denotes the day on which it is uttered. Some epistemic 
contextualists (Cohen 1988: 97; DeRose 1996: 194 n.4) hold that “know” is indexical, 
meaning that there are many different knowledge relations, and the particular rela-
tion expressed by “know” on an occasion of use depends on contextual factors such as 
relevant alternatives or practical stakes.
One might accept Local Invariantism, however, while still holding that the contents 
of sentences of the form “S knows that p” depend on contextual factors of this kind. 
For one might reject Dyadic Relation and hold that “know” invariantly expresses a 
three-place relation between a person, a proposition, and something else—perhaps an 
epistemic standard, a set of alternatives, or a “question” (Schaffer 2004b). Although no 
part of the English sentence explicitly denotes the third relatum, it might be denoted 
by an “aphonic” element in the deep syntax, or the speaker might simply expect hearers 
to be able to fill in the blank using contextual cues. Let us call views with this shape 
relational contextualism.
Views that accept both Local Invariantism and Dyadic Relation take knowledge-
attributing sentences not containing other indexical or demonstrative elements to have 
contents that are invariant over contexts of use. All such views, then, can be charac-
terized as forms of invariantism. We can distinguish, however, between standard invari-
antism, which rejects both Fancy Intensions and Assessment Sensitivity; nonindexical 
contextualism, which accepts Fancy Intensions and rejects Assessment Sensitivity; and 
truth relativism, which accepts both Fancy Intensions and Assessment Sensitivity.
According to standard invariantism, “know” invariantly expresses a two-place rela-
tion between persons and propositions—the relation of knowing—and this relation has 
an intension of the standard sort: a function from worlds and times to extensions. There 
is still a lot of room for arguing about what that intension looks like. Skeptical invarian-
tists say that x stands in the knowing relation to p at a world w and time t just in case x’s 
evidence for p at w and t is strong enough to rule out any possibility that p is false, while 
dogmatic invariantists propose a more relaxed condition, and subject-sensitive invariantists 
hold that the strength of evidence required for x to stand in the knowing relation to p 
at w and t depends on aspects of x’s practical situation at w and t (Hawthorne 2004: chs. 
3–4). But although these different invariantist positions disagree about which worldly 
states of affairs suffice for a person to stand in the knowing relation to a proposition, 
they all assume that there is a definite, context-independent, answer to this question. 
That assumption is precisely what relativists and nonindexical contextualists deny in 
accepting Fancy Intensions.
According to Fancy Intensions, there is no answer to the question at issue between 
dogmatic, skeptical, and subject-sensitive invariantists, because the knowing relation 
does not have any particular extension at a world and a time. In order to get an exten-
sion, one must specify not just a world and a time, but also an epistemic standard, which 
determines how well placed a subject must be in order to stand in the knowing relation 
to a proposition. We can be neutral here about what an epistemic standard consists 
in. On some views, it will be defined by a threshold strength of evidence required for 
knowledge; on others, by a set of relevant alternatives that must be excluded if the 
subject is to have knowledge. In what follows we will talk of standards being “low” and 

KNOWLEDGE AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS
538
“high,” but we do not mean to imply that standards must be linearly ordered. Sets of 
relevant alternatives, for example, are only partially ordered.
In order to explain Assessment Sensitivity, which separates relativists from 
non-indexical contextualists, we must say a few words about what is meant here by 
“accuracy.” It is standard in semantics to think of contents as having their extensions 
relative to possible worlds, or in some cases worlds and times (see King 2003 for a nice 
discussion of some of the issues relevant to choosing between these two options). That 
means that propositions have truth values relative to worlds (or worlds and times). 
But in these frameworks, whether a speaker has gotten it right—whether her assertion 
is accurate—depends only on the truth value of the asserted content relative to the 
world and time of the context of use. Thus, even though the content of an assertion 
is something that has different truth values relative to different worlds (and perhaps 
times), whether a particular assertion is accurate is, in standard frameworks, an absolute 
matter.
The point is perhaps easiest to see if we work with “tensed” propositions, which have 
different truth values relative to different times. According to temporalists, in saying 
“Socrates is sitting,” one expresses the tensed proposition that Socrates is sitting—a 
proposition that is true relative to some times (noon) and false relative to others (mid-
night). (“Eternalists,” by contrast, hold that this sentence expresses different eternal 
propositions when used at different times.) Suppose Jake asserts this proposition at 
noon, when Socrates is sitting on a bench at the agora, and Sally asserts it at midnight, 
when Socrates is lying down at the symposium. Then, as both parties can recognize, 
Jake’s assertion is accurate, while Sally’s is not. Even though the truth of the proposi-
tion asserted is time-relative, the accuracy of an assertion of it is not; the accuracy of an 
assertion depends on the truth value of its content at the time the assertion was made.
The point can also be made with standard “eternalist” propositions. Suppose we are 
considering an assertion, in a possible world where diamonds can be found just about 
everywhere, of the proposition that diamonds are rare. Although this would be an asser-
tion of a proposition that is true in the actual world, it would nonetheless be inaccurate, 
since diamonds are not rare in the world at which the assertion is made. Accuracy hangs 
on truth in the world in which the assertion is made.
But what about the new coordinate that Fancy Intensions adds to intensions—the 
epistemic standard? Which epistemic standard do we look at in determining whether a 
particular assertion or belief that p is accurate? A natural view is that, just as accuracy 
depends on the world and time of the context of use, so it depends on the epistemic 
standard that is relevant at the context of use. This view would resemble indexical con-
textualism in taking the extension of “know” (as used at a particular context) to depend 
not just on the worldly state of affairs but on a contextually relevant epistemic standard. 
It would depart from it, however, in denying that the content of “know” varies with 
the contextually relevant epistemic standard. MacFarlane (2005b, 2007a, 2007b, 2009) 
has dubbed such views forms of nonindexical contextualism. (Nonindexical contextualist 
accounts of “know” are defended by Kompa (2002) and Brogaard (2008).)
But this decision about how to treat the epistemic standard coordinate when evaluat-
ing uses of propositions is not the only possible one. One could, alternatively, take the 
accuracy of an assertion or belief that p to depend on the truth of p at the world and 
time of the context of use and the epistemic standard that is relevant at the context of 
assessment. On this view, there are no absolute facts about accuracy; a particular asser-
tion or belief might be accurate as assessed from one context and inaccurate as assessed 

RELATIVISM AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS
539
from another, if different epistemic standards are relevant at the two contexts. It is 
this move—relativizing accuracy—that raises the philosophical questions that have 
traditionally been associated with “relative truth.” So this view deserves the label truth 
relativism. (Relativist accounts of “know” are defended by Richard (2004) and 
MacFarlane (2005a).)
Instead of relativizing truth, one might take the contents of knowledge attributions 
to be assessment-sensitive. According to content relativism, there is no assessment-
independent fact of the matter about what proposition is asserted by an utterance of 
a knowledge-attributing sentence. This view accepts Assessment Sensitivity, because 
the accuracy of an assertion depends in part on what its content is, and according to 
content relativism, this depends on the context of assessment. It parts company with 
truth relativism, however, in rejecting Fancy Intensions and either Local Invariantism 
or Dyadic Relation. Indexical content relativism resembles indexical contextualism in 
rejecting Local Invariantism, while relational content relativism resembles relational con-
textualism in rejecting Dyadic Relation. (For a defense of a form of content relativism, 
see Cappelen 2008.)
We can categorize the positions we have discussed by looking at which of the four 
principles they accept (Table 49.1).
The Case for Relativism
Relativism about knowledge attributions can be seen as a kind of synthesis of con-
textualism and invariantism. Like the contextualist, the relativist holds that the truth 
of knowledge attributions is relative to contextual epistemic standards. And like the 
invariantist, the relativist holds that “know” expresses the same relation at every con-
text of use. So a case for relativism can be made by cobbling together the best of the 
invariantists’ arguments against contextualism and the best of the contextualists’ argu-
ments against invariantism. Relativism promises to retain what is right about both 
contextualism and invariantism while avoiding their flaws.
Against Contextualism
The literature contains quite a few different arguments against contextualism. Some 
of these apply only to indexical contextualism, while others apply also to relationalism 
and/or nonindexical contextualism.
Table 49.1
 
Local  
Dyadic  
Fancy 
Assessment
 
Invariantism 
Relation 
Intensions 
Sensitivity
Indexical contextualism 
 
✓ 
 
Relational contextualism 
✓ 
 
 
Invariantism 
✓ 
✓ 
 
Nonindexical contextualism 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
Truth relativism 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓
Indexical content relativism 
 
✓ 
 
✓
Relational content relativism 
✓ 
 
 
✓

KNOWLEDGE AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS
540
One argument against indexical contextualism and relationalism is that competent 
speakers ought to know whether the contents of their knowledge claims are contextu-
ally sensitive. Yet, as Schiffer (1996: 326–7) observes, “no ordinary person who utters 
‘I know that p,’ however articulate, would dream of telling you that what he meant and 
was implicitly stating was that he knew that p relative to such-and-such standard” (see 
also Feldman 2001: 74, 78–9; Hawthorne 2004: §2.7). (For a defense of the contextual-
ist’s imputation of “semantic blindness” here, see DeRose 2006.)
Another argument (Hawthorne 2004: §2.7) is that “know” does not behave like 
paradigm context-sensitive terms inside attitude reports. If Joe, in a high-stakes con-
text, says “I don’t know whether the bank will be open tomorrow,” Sarah can say the 
next day, in a low-stakes context, “Joe said he didn’t know whether the bank would 
be open today.” Sarah uses “today” instead of “tomorrow” in reporting the content of 
Joe’s claim, because “tomorrow” is indexical and would not have the same content if 
she were to use it that it did when Joe used it. But she does not find another word to 
replace “know,” and this suggests that she takes “know” as she uses it to express the same 
relation that it expressed when Joe used it the day before. However, this argument does 
not have any force against nonindexical contextualism, which holds that the content of 
“know” remains invariant between contexts. Nor does it rule out relationalist accounts 
of “know,” which allow that the reporter can “fill in” the implicit argument place in the 
same way as the original speaker did.
A third argument, which counts against all three forms of contextualism, is that con-
textualist views make faulty predictions about agreement and disagreement, and about 
proprieties for correction and retraction of assertions (Feldman 2001: 77; Rosenberg 2002: 
164; Hawthorne 2004: 163; Richard 2004: 216–17; MacFarlane 2005a: §2.3; Stanley 
2005: 52–6). Here there seems to be a real contrast between “know” and context-sensitive 
words like “tall.” If Joe says that Chiara is tall (meaning tall for a fifth-grader) and Sarah 
says that she is not tall (meaning tall for an American female), they have not disagreed, and 
(barring misunderstanding) Joe will not take Sarah’s claim to be any kind of challenge to 
his own. It would be positively bizarre for Joe to say to Sarah, “Yes, you’re right, she isn’t 
tall after all; I take back what I said.” Things are otherwise with “know.” If Joe (in a low-
standards situation) says, “I know that the bank is open on Saturday,” and Sarah later says 
(in a high-standards situation), “You didn’t know that the bank was open,” Joe will natu-
rally take Sarah’s claim as a challenge to his own, and either defend his claim or withdraw 
it. We do not expect him to say (as the contextualist account would suggest he should): 
“Yes, you’re right, I didn’t know. Still, what I said was true, and I stick by it. I only meant 
that I knew-by-low-standards.” Similarly, the skeptic regards himself as disagreeing with 
ordinary knowledge claims, but if the contextualist is right, this is just a confusion.
Thus the contextualist seems forced to say that ordinary speakers are mistakenly 
taking themselves to disagree (or to agree). But attributing this kind of error tends 
to undermine the positive case for contextualism, which rests largely on observations 
about speakers’ propensities to use “know” in various contexts. The more semantic and 
substantive error we attribute to speakers, the less their usage can tell us about the 
meanings of their words.
Against Invariantism
Invariantists have an easy time explaining speakers’ perceptions of agreement and dis-
agreement, since they take them to be veridical. But they have a hard time explaining 

RELATIVISM AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS
541
the basic data that motivate contextualism. There does seem to be some variation in 
the strength of the epistemic position one must be in if one is to count as “knowing.” 
Contextualists explain that by saying that the extension of “know” is sensitive to con-
textual factors. How can invariantists explain it?
One strategy would be to attribute this variation to speaker error. Perhaps speakers 
systematically misjudge the strength of subjects’ epistemic positions, and that explains 
why they are readier to count someone as “knowing” in some situations than in others. 
Speakers certainly do make mistakes of this kind. However, this strategy is committed 
to positing a source of systematic error that precisely mirrors the contextual variation we 
see in the usage of “know.” This is a tall order.
A second strategy is to appeal to loose use or figurative uses of language. Perhaps 
knowledge demands a very high standard of evidence—so high that we rarely if ever 
meet it. If we wish to speak literal truth, then, we should not say that we know, but 
describe our evidence more precisely, acknowledging its limitations. In practice, though, 
this would often be pedantic and pointless. Just as it serves our purposes to say that it’s 
noon, when in fact it is one minute past noon, so it might serve our purposes to say that 
we know, when in fact we only approximate the epistemic position required for knowl-
edge (Schaffer 2004a; Davis 2007). This strategy concedes that the skeptic is correct 
that, strictly speaking, knowledge is rare, and holds that our knowledge claims can be 
explained as loose use.
One problem with the loose use strategy is that speakers are normally conscious of 
their loose use. We might ask: “Strictly speaking, is it noon, or one minute past noon?” 
And the loose talker will say (with an exasperated grumble): “Okay, if you want to be 
precise, it’s not noon, it’s one minute past.” So the loose use strategy requires that speak-
ers are normally aware that their knowledge claims are not strictly true. If that were so, 
however, skepticism would be universally accepted as true but uninteresting. And it 
isn’t.
A loose use theorist might hold, alternatively, that standards for knowledge are 
invariant but moderate, so that the skeptic’s denials of knowledge are false. Uses of 
“know” that seem to assume a stricter standard could perhaps be explained by appeal to 
implicatures (Rysiew 2001). One would also like some explanation, however, of why the 
standard for knowledge is what it is, and not something stricter or laxer.
A third invariantist strategy for explaining the apparent variation in standards for 
knowing is subject-sensitive invariantism (SSI) (Hawthorne 2004; Stanley 2005). 
According to SSI, the standard a subject must meet in order to stand in the knowl-
edge relation to a proposition (at a particular possible world and time) depends on the 
subject’s practical situation (at that world and time). This is not a contextualist posi-
tion, because the relevant epistemic standard is fixed by the subject’s situation, not the 
speaker’s. Nor does it require “fancy intensions”: since the world and time of evaluation 
fix a relevant standard for the subject, the intension of “know” does not need to be 
separately relativized to a standard.
SSI yields the same predictions as contextualism about present-tense, first-person 
knowledge attributions (“I know that p”), since for these the speaker’s context and the 
subject’s circumstances coincide. To distinguish the two views, we must look at third-
person or past-tense knowledge attributions. Contextualism predicts that the accuracy 
of assertions of “Joe knew last Friday that the bank would be open on Saturday” can 
depend on aspects of the speaker’s current situation (for example, whether the stakes are 
high, or whether a given possibility is contextually salient), while SSI predicts that it 

KNOWLEDGE AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS
542
will depend only on Joe’s situation last Friday. There is considerable disagreement about 
which of these predictions is better supported (see Hawthorne 2004; Stanley 2005; 
DeRose 2004, 2005). DeRose (2005: 189) notes that the contextualist can accommo-
date many cases that might seem to support SSI, because “sometimes speakers’ own con-
versational purposes call for employing standards that are appropriate to the practical 
situation of the far-away subjects they are discussing.” But, he observes, it is hard to see 
how SSI could accommodate the cases that seem to support contextualism.
Relatedly, SSI predicts that when the subject’s circumstances are shifted by a tem-
poral or modal embedding, there should be a corresponding shift in the standards the 
subject must meet in order to count as knowing. Thus, it predicts that sentences such as 
the following should come out true:
(1) Joe doesn’t know that the bank is open on Saturdays, but five minutes ago, before 
he learned that he would have to pay for emergency surgery on Sunday, he did 
know that it is open on Saturdays.
(2) I don’t know whether the bank is open on Saturdays, but if I didn’t really need the 
money on Sunday I would know.
Even proponents of SSI are embarrassed by these predictions, and try to explain them 
away. Hawthorne (2004: 162–5) invokes a kind of error theory, arguing that we tend 
to “project” our current standards to other knowers, times, and circumstances (for criti-
cism, see MacFarlane (2005a: §3.2.2)). Stanley (2005: ch. 6) argues that contextualist 
views have similar bad consequences for modal embeddings, and that SSI can handle 
temporal embeddings (for criticism, see Blome-Tillman 2009). In the end, Hawthorne 
and Stanley concede that temporal and modal embeddings are problematic for SSI, but 
that SSI should be accepted anyway because the problems facing contextualism and 
standard invariantism are worse. But this argument is weaker if there is a genuine rela-
tivist alternative that avoids both the embedding problem and the standard problems 
with contextualism.
Relativism as Synthesis
Many people find something compelling in both the arguments against contextualism 
and the arguments against invariantism. The relativist account provides a third option, 
removing the need to choose between two unpalatable alternatives.
As we have seen, invariantism faces difficulties accounting for the apparent contex-
tual variation in the standards one must meet to be counted as “knowing.” Relativism 
accounts for this variation straightforwardly, since it takes the epistemic standard rel-
evant for evaluating instances of “know” to be fixed contextually. But, unlike contextu-
alism, it takes this standard to be fixed by features of the context of assessment, rather 
than the context of use. Because of this, it avoids the problem of “lost disagreement” 
faced by all forms of contextualism. Suppose Joe says “Moore knows that he has hands,” 
and René says “No, Moore doesn’t know that he has hands.” If, as the relativist holds, 
the accuracy of these assertions depends on the standards relevant at the context of 
assessment, then, although which of them is accurate might vary from one perspective 
to another, from no perspective will it be possible for both assertions to be accurate. This 
helps explain why we take these assertions to express a disagreement, even when they 
are made in very different contexts.

RELATIVISM AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS
543
From the relativist’s point of view, invariantism and contextualism each capture part 
of the truth about knowledge attributions. Invariantism is right that there is a single 
knowledge relation, and that the accuracy of knowledge ascriptions does not depend on 
which epistemic standard is relevant at the context of use. But contextualism is right 
that the accuracy of such ascriptions depends somehow on contextually relevant stan-
dards. Relativism seeks to synthesize these insights into a more satisfactory picture.
Questions for the Relativist
Although relativism does not share the problems of invariantism and contextualism, it 
faces philosophical difficulties of its own. Here are some questions the relativist needs 
to answer. (Answers are not attempted here.)
(1) It would be odd if “know” were the only expression for which a relativist semantics 
was appropriate. Indeed, the relativist semantics would appear ad hoc if “know” 
were its only target. Are there other expressions for which a relativist treatment is 
needed? How does “know” relate to them? (See MacFarlane 2003; Richard 2004; 
Lasersohn 2005; MacFarlane forthcoming.)
(2) Assuming “know” has a relativist semantics, can anything be said about why an 
expression with the role of “know” should work this way, or is this just a brute 
fact?
(3) Can the relativist really vindicate the intuitions of disagreement that proved dif-
ficult for the contextualist (and even the nonindexical contextualist)? What is 
required for disagreement, in general? (See MacFarlane 2007a.)
(4) Are there any operators that shift the epistemic standards coordinate of circum-
stances of evaluation, as modal operators bind the world parameter? If not, how 
can we motivate positing this coordinate? (See Stanley 2005: ch. 7; MacFarlane 
2009: §6.)
(5) Can we really make sense of the idea that there is no absolute answer to the ques-
tion whether a particular assertion is accurate, but only a perspective-relative one? 
(See MacFarlane 2005b.) Even if we can make sense of a relativist linguistic prac-
tice, could it be rational to engage in such a practice? (See Zimmerman 2007.)
Whether the relativist synthesis is really an improvement on invariantist and con-
textualist views will depend on whether these (and other) questions can be answered 
adequately.
References
Blome-Tillman, M. (2009) “Contextualism, Subject-Sensitive Invariantism, and the Interaction of 
‘Knowledge’-Ascriptions with Modal and Temporal Operators,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 
79: 315–31.
Brogaard, B. (2008) “In Defence of a Perspectival Semantics for ‘Know’,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 
86: 439–59.
Cappelen, H. (2008) “Content Relativism and Semantic Blindness,” in M. García-Carpintero and M. 
Kölbel (eds.), Relative Truth, Oxford: Oxford University Press, ch. 12, 265–86.
Cohen, S. (1988) “How To Be a Fallibilist,” Philosophical Perspectives 2: 91–123.
Davis, W. (2007) “Knowledge Claims and Context: Loose Use,” Philosophical Studies 132: 395–438.
DeRose, K. (1996) “Relevant Alternatives and the Content of Knowledge Attributions,” Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research 56: 193–197.

KNOWLEDGE AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS
544
DeRose, K. (2004) “The Problem with Subject-Sensitive Invariantism,” Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research 68: 346–50.
DeRose, K. (2005) “The Ordinary Language Basis for Contextualism and the New Invariantism,” Philosophical 
Quarterly 55: 172–98.
DeRose, K. (2006) “‘Bamboozled by Our Own Words’: Semantic Blindness and Some Arguments Against 
Contextualism,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 73: 316–38.
Feldman, R. (2001) “Skeptical Problems, Contextualist Solutions,” Philosophical Studies 103: 61–85.
Hawthorne, J. (2004) Knowledge and Lotteries, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
King, J. (2003) “Tense, Modality, and Semantic Values,” Philosophical Perspectives 17: 195–247.
Kompa, N. (2002) “The Context Sensitivity of Knowledge Ascriptions,” Grazer-Philosophische Studien 64: 
1–18.
Lasersohn, P. (2005) “Context Dependence, Disagreement, and Predicates of Personal Taste,” Linguistics and 
Philosophy 28: 643–86.
MacFarlane, J. (2003) “Future Contingents and Relative Truth,” Philosophical Quarterly 53: 321–36.
MacFarlane, J. (2005a) “The Assessment Sensitivity of Knowledge Attributions,” in T. Szabó Gendler and 
J. Hawthorne (eds.), Oxford Studies in Epistemology 1: 197–233. Reprinted in E. Sosa, J. Kim, J. Fantl, and 
M. McGrath (eds.), Epistemology: An Anthology, second edition, Oxford: Blackwell, 2008.
MacFarlane, J. (2005b), “Making Sense of Relative Truth,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 105: 
321–39.
MacFarlane, J. (2007a) “Relativism and Disagreement,” Philosophical Studies 132: 17–31.
MacFarlane, J. (2007b) “Semantic Minimalism and Nonindexical Contextualism,” in G. Preyer and G. 
Peter (eds.), Context-Sensitivity and Semantic Minimalism: New Essays on Semantics and Pragmatics, Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2007, 240–50.
MacFarlane, J. (2009) “Nonindexical Contextualism,” Synthese 166: 231–50.
MacFarlane, J. (forthcoming) “Epistemic Modals are Assessment Sensitive,” in E. Egan and B. Weatherson 
(eds.), Epistemic Modality, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Richard, M. (2004) “Contextualism and Relativism,” Philosophical Studies 119: 215–42.
Rosenberg, J. F. (2002) Thinking About Knowing, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rysiew, P. (2001) “The Context-Sensitivity of Knowledge Attributions,” Noûs 35: 477–514.
Schaffer, J. (2004a) “Skepticism, Contextualism, and Discrimination,” Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research 69: 138–55.
Schaffer, J. (2004b) “From Contextualism to Contrastivism,” Philosophical Studies 119: 73–103.
Schiffer, S. (1996) “Contextualist Solutions to Scepticism,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 96: 317–
33.
Stanley, J. (2004) “On the Linguistic Basis for Contextualism,” Philosophical Studies 119: 119–46.
Stanley, J. (2005) Knowledge and Practical Interests, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Zimmerman, A. (2007) “Against Relativism,” Philosophical Studies 133: 313–348.

50
EPISTEMIC MODALS
Josh Dever
1. Initial Scene-Setting
Let’s begin with some truisms. First truism: one of the many things that philosophers 
want is a theory of epistemology, laying out generalizations regarding epistemological 
notions such as knowledge, justification, and evidence, and predicting (for example) 
under what conditions various agents will know various things. Second truism: philoso-
phers want not just any theory of epistemology, but the right theory. That means we 
need a method of selecting among the vast array of possible epistemological theories. 
Such a method might deploy any number of considerations, such as theoretical elegance 
and integration with neighboring areas of philosophy, but surely (third truism) a central 
feature of any plausible method is conformity to epistemological data, in the form of 
facts of the form so-and-so knows/doesn’t know such-and-such under these circumstances, 
or so-and-so has/doesn’t have good reason for believing such-and-such under these circum-
stances.
Epistemologically minded philosophers thus have reason to collect epistemological 
data. There are many ways to gain such data, but one central method is via judgments 
about sentences that contain epistemological vocabulary. So, in the ideal (or, perhaps, 
oversimplified) case, a piece of epistemological theorizing might proceed through the 
following stages:
1. The sentence “Jones knows that the cat is on the mat” is true.
2. Therefore, Jones knows that the cat is on the mat.
3. Epistemological theory T entails that Jones does not know that the cat is on the 
mat.
4. Therefore, T is not the right epistemological theory.
Hence, a fourth and final truism: those interested in epistemology have reason to be 
interested in the linguistic devices for reporting epistemological facts.
The four truisms present a pretty picture of (a certain aspect of) epistemological theo-
rizing, but in the real philosophical world, things inevitably become more complicated. 
Here are two complicating factors. First, not all epistemological vocabulary is trans-
parently epistemological. No one will miss the fact that constructions of the form “A 
knows that p” or “That p is a reason to believe that q” are important sources of data 
for epistemological theorizing, but other constructions might only with some coaxing 
reveal their epistemological relevance. Indicative conditionals, for example, are often 
taken to depend on the evidential state of speakers—consider a view on which the truth 

KNOWLEDGE AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS
546
(or assertability) of “If p, then q” requires that the conditional probability of q given p 
exceed some threshold. So—moving on from mere truisms to the more exalted realm of 
morals—we observe:
First Linguistic Moral: Philosophers interested in epistemology have a deriva-
tive reason to be interested in the philosophy of language—detailed seman-
tic theory construction may reveal unexpected epistemological aspects to the 
semantic values of expressions or constructions.
Second, not all epistemological vocabulary is semantically transparent. It would be 
nice if we could move directly from the truth of the sentence “Jones knows that the cat 
is on the mat” to the fact that Jones knows that the cat is on the mat, but it might turn 
out that such movement is too simple-minded. Suppose, for example, that knowledge 
attributions have a contextual element—perhaps an utterance U of “A knows that p” 
made in context C expresses the claim that A’s p-favoring evidence is strong enough 
to defeat all alternatives to p salient in C. Contextually sensitive claims cannot be 
straightforwardly transported from one context to another—if I know that “It’s hot 
here” has been truthfully uttered in one context (in location L1), I cannot conclude (in 
my different context, in location L2) that it’s hot here. Similarly, given a contextual-
ist component to epistemological vocabulary, an epistemologist situated in a different 
context C0 who moves from the truth of U (made in C) to the fact that A knows that 
p errs, since that fact, as expressed in context C0, is the fact that A’s evidence suffices 
to defeat alternatives salient in C0, not C. If there are alternatives salient in C0 but not 
in C, the truth of U will not in fact justify the conclusion the epistemologist reaches. 
Possible lack of semantic transparency leads to:
Second Linguistic Moral: Philosophers interested in epistemology have 
a(nother) derivative reason to be interested in the philosophy of language—
detailed semantic theory construction may reveal unexpected semantic com-
plexities to expressions or constructions with an epistemological aspect to their 
semantics, and these complexities may shape the proper use of linguistic data in 
epistemological theorizing.
In short, more data and better understanding of data are both good things, and both of 
these good things give those interested in epistemology reason also to be interested in 
some parts of philosophy of language and formal semantics.
2. Modals
So much for initial scene-setting. We turn now to examining the way in which these 
morals play out in one particular case: that of modal vocabulary. Consider the words 
“might” and “must.” It is a standard observation (at least since Kratzer (1977)) that 
these modal terms admit a variety of readings:
1. Metaphysical: My yacht might have been longer than it is.
2. Deontic: Tax returns must be filed by April 15.
3. Preferential: We might order Thai take-out for dinner.
4. Dispositional: Conference participants who must cough repeatedly are encouraged 
to step outside.

EPISTEMIC MODALS
547
Among these various readings is typically taken to be an epistemic reading. Thus a 
speaker can utter:
(1) The black marble must be in the first box.
(2) The red marble might be in the second box.
to convey (respectively) that the black marble’s being in the first box is something she 
knows, and that the red marble’s being in the second box isn’t something she can rule 
out, given what she knows.
There are two reasons for taking the modals in these sentences to be epistemic. First, 
our immediate grasp of the truth conditions is epistemic—such utterances just seem to 
depend on matters of what’s known and unknown. (There is, for example, no meta-
physical or deontic necessity to the black marble being in the first box.) Second, we 
judge that agents can differ in what modalized statements they can truthfully make, in 
cases in which differences in the epistemic states of the agents seem most prominent. 
Thus suppose both Alice and Barbara know that exactly one of the two boxes contains 
a black marble, but Alice (and not Barbara) has looked in the second box, and seen it 
to be empty. Then both of the following utterances look true:
(3) (Uttered by Alice) The black marble must be in the first box.
(4) (Uttered by Barbara) The black marble might not be in the first box.
On the plausible assumption that “must” and “might” are duals:
Duality: “Must p” is equivalent to “Not might not p.”
Alice’s utterance and Barbara’s utterances are, syntactically, contradictories. Their 
simultaneous truth is then explained by hypothesizing that Alice’s modal depends on 
her epistemic situation, while Barbara’s modal depends on hers.
“Must” and “might” are not the only modals with epistemic readings—others include 
“can”/“could,” “probably,” and “certainly”—but these two will be used as the paradigm 
cases in this discussion. Many of these other epistemic modals introduce interesting 
complications that lie beyond the scope of this piece.
Here is a tempting first-draft semantics for epistemic “must” and “might.” Given an 
agent A, let KA be the set of all propositions known by A. Given a proposition p, let 
[[p]] be the set of possible worlds at which p is true. Then EA = pKA [[p]] is the set of 
possible worlds consistent with what A knows. (Given the facticity of knowledge, the 
actual world is always an element of EA.) Given a context C, let CS be the speaker in 
the context. Then:
1. An utterance of “It must be that p” in context C is true iff ECS is a subset of [[p]].
2. An utterance of “It might be that p” in context C is true iff ECS  [[p]] ≠ Ø.
Informally: a must claim is true if every world epistemically open to the speaker supports 
the prejacent; a might claim is true if some world epistemically open to the speaker sup-
ports the prejacent. The difficulties that this first-draft theory encounters provide the 
point of entry to the philosophical interest of epistemic modals.

KNOWLEDGE AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS
548
3. Whose Knowledge?
Consider the following case:
Case 1: Alice and Barbara are engaged in a cooperative attempt to determine 
the location of a red marble. There are four marbles—black, red, yellow, and 
green—and four boxes, with exactly one marble in each box. Alice has looked 
in the first box, and seen a yellow marble in it. Barbara has looked at a pair 
of rules governing the placement of marbles, one of which is “If the first box 
contains a yellow marble, the third box contains a blue marble” and the other 
of which is “If the first box does not contain a yellow marble, the fourth box 
contains a red marble.” Prior to combining their information, they have the 
following exchange:
ALICE: I wonder if the red marble might be in the second box.
BARBARA: I don’t know—that depends on what you saw in the first box. 
Did it contain a yellow marble?
ALICE: Yes, it did.
BARBARA: In that case, the red marble might indeed be in the second box.
Alice and Barbara’s discourse in Case 1 seems fine—they both speak reasonably and 
truly. But it provides a challenge to the first-draft semantics. According to this seman-
tics, when Alice wonders if the red marble might be in the second box, she is wondering 
whether it is compatible with what she knows that the red marble be there. But this 
would be odd—surely she knows that it is compatible with what she knows that it be 
there. And Barbara’s response is also puzzling, both because it would seem too obvious to 
be worth mentioning that she does not know what is compatible with Alice’s knowledge 
(including undisclosed knowledge about the contents of the first box), and because her 
follow-up question would seem irrelevant to the target “might” claim.
Case 1 thus suggests that epistemic modals sometimes run not on the egocentric 
epistemic state of the speaker, but on the total knowledge of the conversational partici-
pants. Given a group G of individuals, let the distributive epistemic state of G, or ED
G, be 
gGEg. The moral of Case 1 is that we must consider the semantic rules:
1. An utterance of “It must be that p” in context C is true iff ED
CG is a subset of [[p]], 
where CG is the group of discourse participants in C.
2. An utterance of “It might be that p” in context C is true iff ED
CG  [[p]] ≠ Ø.
Whether these semantic rules represent a competing analysis to the first-draft rules, or 
merely another possible meaning of epistemic modals, remains to be determined.
Distributive readings of epistemic modals broaden the sphere of epistemic interest 
beyond the individual to a larger group. Similar cases show that the relevant group 
needn’t be limited to the discourse participants:
Case 2: Charles and Daniel are discussing the financial forecast for their Silicon 
Valley startup. Having determined that losses are inevitable in the second quar-
ter, they move on to later in the year.
CHARLES: Might we make a profit in the third quarter?

EPISTEMIC MODALS
549
DANIEL: I don’t know. I’ve got the sales projections here with me, but my assis-
tant has the expense projections, and without both, I can’t say whether a 
profit is possible.
Similar cases can be constructed in which the relevant group contains only some of the 
discourse participants.
Other cases show that the epistemic reach of modals can, rather than broaden from 
the egocentric to the communal, instead displace from one individual to another. One 
such style of exocentric reading is available in deferential cases:
Case 3: Ethan and Francine are running an experiment in which an electron 
has been fired into a chamber. A discussion ensues regarding the possible loca-
tion of the electron.
ETHAN: Might the electron be in the top half of the chamber?
FRANCINE: I don’t know—I forgot to note the orientation of the electron gun. 
But Gretchen would know if it might be there—she set the gun orientation 
before she left this morning.
In Case 3 (which shares the same form as the Cancer Test Cases of DeRose (1991)), 
it is the epistemic state of Gretchen, not a conversational participant, that determines 
the truth conditions for the “might” claim. Other exocentric cases shift the epistemic 
modal onto the epistemic state of an agent other than the speaker for nondeferential 
reasons, as in:
Case 4: Gerald the geography teacher is watching his student Harold label a 
map of Brazil. As Harold labels one city Uberlândia:
GERALD: If a city of population at least 600,000 lies on the north-south line 
between São Paolo and Brasilia, must it be Uberlândia?
As Harold labels a river:
GERALD: Not so fast—that might be Paranapanema River.
In fact, Uberlândia is the only city of that size between São Paolo and Brasilia, and the 
river Harold is labeling is, as Harold has labeled it, the Paraná River. But Harold’s grasp 
of the facts is weak—he doesn’t know the exact population of Ribeirão Preto, and was 
only guessing at the relative locations of the Paraná and Paranapanema Rivers. Gerald, 
though, is fully aware of the geographic facts. Nevertheless, it seems that Gerald’s ques-
tion to Harold was a reasonable and relevant one, and that his comment was correct. 
Such judgments suggest that Gerald is using the epistemic modals exocentrically to 
depend on Harold’s epistemic state (despite the inferiority of that state), as part of a 
pedagogical practice.
In addition to shifting the epistemic burden from the speaker (partially or wholly) 
to other agents, we can also find uses of epistemic modals in which the space of worlds 
over which “might” and “must” range is constrained by information not possessed by 
any agent. Such cases were first discussed in Hacking (1967); a case with the same 
flavor is:

KNOWLEDGE AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS
550
Case 5: Irene is an emergency room physician, and is treating John, who is 
complaining of chest pain and shortness of breath. Irene hastily announces 
to John:
IRENE: You might be having a heart attack.
She then sends him for bypass surgery. The surgery, however, finds no arterial 
blockage or signs of cardiac damage, and the surgeon Katherine concludes that 
John was merely suffering from indigestion. Irate, Katherine chastizes Irene:
KATHERINE: You put the patient through a dangerous procedure for no good 
reason.
IRENE: But I had a good reason—I thought he might be having a heart 
attack.
KATHERINE: Look, a simple EEG test could have been used to check your diag-
nosis. Five minutes of checking would have shown that you were wrong, 
and that there was no chance he was having a heart attack.
In Case 5, Katherine’s assertion that Irene’s original “might” claim was incorrect seems 
true, even though nothing that Irene, or anyone else, knew at the time ruled out the 
possibility that John was having a heart attack. The case thus suggests that the evidence 
relevant to epistemic modals can extend beyond what is actually known to include that 
which could easily have been ascertained. (Note that if Irene had done an EEG test, and 
taken other standard diagnostic precautions, but John had been suffering from a rare 
condition which mimics the symptoms of a heart attack and can only be differentiated 
with unusual and hazardous tests, it would seem unreasonable to object to her claim that 
John might be having a heart attack.)
Finally, in addition to shifting the appropriate source of information, we can also shift 
the type of information to which the epistemic modals are sensitive. (The distinction 
here is ultimately artificial, but helpful.) Thus consider:
Case 6: Leonard is attempting to prove that when P is a point on the circum-
circle of triangle ABC, the feet A1, B1, and C1 of the perpendiculars from P to 
the sides of ABC are collinear. After studying a diagram extensively and track-
ing out various angle identities, Leonard announces in triumph:
LEONARD: Aha! AC1PB1 is a cyclic quadrilateral. So angles C1PA and C1B1A 
subtend the same arc, and are identical. That gives me that angle A1B1C 
equals angle C1B1A, and hence A1, B1, and C1 must all lie on a line.
The striking phenomenon here is that Leonard could not, prior to completing his proof, 
correctly make his “must” claim—even if he already knew, perhaps because his geom-
etry teacher told him so (without proof), that the points were collinear. In this use of the 
epistemic modal, what is required is that the prejacent claim be entailed by the informa-
tion that Leonard has on pure “compass and straight-edge” grounds.
Such cases show that one major project in investigating the semantics of an epis-
temic modal is properly delimiting the space of worlds over which the modal ranges 
(or, equivalently, the set of evidence used in generating that space)—call this space of 
worlds, following Kratzer (1981), the modal base for that (use of the) modal. There are 
at least three different approaches that can be pursued here:

EPISTEMIC MODALS
551
1. Ambiguity: We already distinguish epistemic, metaphysical, deontic, preferential, 
dispositional, circumstantial, and other readings of modals. The above cases could 
be accommodating by hypothesizing further readings: egocentric, group distribu-
tive, deferential exocentric, and so on.
2. Naive Unificationism: We can seek a general formula for carving out the right 
modal base, one which yields the correct prediction in each of the above cases. For 
example, Teller (1972: 310–311) suggests that:
 
It is possible that p if and only if
(a) p is not known to be false by any member of community C
(b) Nor is there a member, t, of community C, such that if t were to know all the 
propositions known to community C, then he could, on the strength of his 
knowledge of these propositions as basis, data, or evidence, come to know that 
p is false.
3. Sophisticated Unificationism: Seeking to preserve elements of both Ambiguity 
and Naive Unificationism, we can pursue a contextually sensitive general formula 
for selecting the modal base—one which, in the manner of DeRose (1991), appeals 
to notions such as contextually relevant communities of agents and sources of infor-
mation.
4. A Methodological Worry
Selecting among, or further refining, these three options lies beyond the scope of this 
overview. Instead, we turn now to a concern about the data driving the search for a 
proper specification of the bounds of epistemic space. The cases presented above pres-
ent two types of evidence:
1. Judgments (by the theorist, situated in a neutral theoretical context) of the truth or 
falsity of claims made (in a different context) involving epistemic modals.
2. Expressions of agreement or disagreement with, or correction of, epistemically 
modalized claims, made by agents in the context under consideration.
Both of these evidence types, however, are problematic.
Expressions of agreement and disagreement typically take one of two forms. 
Sometimes there is a repetition, inside a “that”-clause, of the claim which is being 
(dis)agreed with—I disagree that it might be raining. In other cases, devices of propo-
sitional anaphora are used to refer back to what was claimed before—I agree with that/
what you said. If, however, an expression contains any context-sensitive elements, its 
repetition in a (dis)agreement might not express the same proposition as the original 
use, and the (dis)agreement can then be used as a source of data only with much cau-
tion. (See, for example, the discussion in chapters 2 and 3 of Cappelen and Hawthorne 
(2009) on the difficulties context-sensitivity can create in this type of data use.) If the 
semantics of “might” and “must” include any contextual element in the selection of the 
modal base, then repetition-style expressions of (dis)agreement might fail to express 
exactly the same propositional content (in the theoretical sense relevant to construc-
tion of a formal semantic theory) as the original use.
In an attempt to avoid these difficulties, anaphoric data is often employed. If Alice 
makes an utterance with a context-sensitive element:

KNOWLEDGE AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS
552
(5) Alice: I am a linguist.
Barbara can engage with Alice by using expressions anaphoric on Alice’s utterance:
(6) Barbara: I agree with that/what Alice said.
In this way, the indexical “I” does not shift its interpretation to that determined by 
Barbara’s context. However, propositional anaphora is a notoriously complicated matter 
(see Asher 1993 for numerous examples), and it is far from clear that all of the pitfalls 
of context-sensitivity can be safely avoided using anaphoric mechanisms. (Consider the 
acceptability of the following discourse:
(7) Alice: I’m so bored with this lecture.
(8) Barbara: I couldn’t agree more with that. Let’s leave.
Despite the anaphoric “that,” the interpretation of “I” needs to shift to Barbara.)
These difficulties caused by the interaction of context-sensitivity and agreement/
disagreement data are broad ones impacting discussions throughout philosophy of lan-
guage. The assessments of truth and falsity of epistemically modalized claims, however, 
display a more local problem. This local difficulty derives from a phenomenon of trump-
ing. Hawthorne (2004) observes that “ordinary people evaluate present tense claims of 
epistemic modality as true or false by testing the claim against their own perspective” 
(27). This is a good first approximation, but the phenomenon is slightly more subtle—
an agent will prefer his own perspective only when he is confident that his evidential 
state is superior to that of the agent making the original epistemically modalized claim. 
Thus in the following situation:
 (9) Michelle: I just spoke to Oscar, and given what he told me, he must be in Paris by 
now.
(10) Nathan: That can’t be right—I have no idea where Oscar is.
Nathan’s assessment of Michelle’s claim is highly unnatural, despite the fact that it 
reflects his own evidential perspective, because he knows his perspective is evidentially 
inferior to Michelle’s. The more precise description of the phenomenon is thus:
Trumping: Given two evaluations E1 and E2 of an epistemically modalized 
claim C, if E1 derives from a stronger epistemic state than E2, then E1 is pre-
ferred to E2.
Trumping is not an unproblematic description of the phenomenon—see von Fintel and 
Gillies (2008a) and Wright (2007) for examples in which speakers reasonably stand by 
assessments of epistemically modalized claims in the face of superior evidence, and, as 
well, the usual concerns about properly separating judgments of truth from judgments of 
assertibility apply—but it does seem to describe a major aspect of our practice.
But trumping has a troubling consequence. Suppose that when an assessment of a 
claim is preferred to all others, it is, in fact, the correct assessment. Given trumping, 
a state of perfect information is preferred to all others. But in a state of perfect infor-
mation, both “might p” and “must p” are equivalent to p. Thus trumping entails that 
epistemic modals are semantically superfluous.

EPISTEMIC MODALS
553
5. Some Formal Options
Surely epistemic modals are not semantically superfluous, so we need some other options. 
The most obvious route toward accommodating trumping without modal vacuity is to 
allow some sort of variability, so that the modal is achieving something different when it 
is first used than it is when it is later assessed in light of full information.
Recent literature has developed two major forms of variability: contextualism and rela-
tivism. The general form of truth condition for epistemically modalized claims that we 
have been using suggests that one parameter needed to evaluate such claims for truth or 
falsity is a modal base (a set of epistemically determined possible worlds). Basic features 
of the behavior of epistemically modalized claims then suggest that the modal base 
parameter is subject to variation—so much is mandated, for example, by the thought 
that paradigmatically the use of “might” or “must” is linked to what is epistemically pos-
sible for the speaker. There are then two broad categories of models for fixing the value 
of the modal base parameter:
1. Semantic: The modal base is part of the content of the proposition expressed by an 
utterance—the semantic machinery governing the language determines, for any 
given utterance, what modal base enters into the proposition, and given that propo-
sition, the truth of the utterance (relative to a given world) is fully determined. 
Contextualism is characterized by semantic determination of the modal base.
2. Pragmatic: The modal base is not part of the content of the proposition expressed 
by an utterance—the semantic machinery governing the language determines a 
proposition that is silent on the question of modal base, and given that proposi-
tion, the truth of the utterance is determined relative to a given world and modal 
base. Pragmatic mechanisms then determine, in any given situation, with respect 
to which modal base a proposition is to be evaluated. Relativism is characterized by 
pragmatic determination of the modal base.
Contextualist accounts of epistemic modals are defended by, for example, DeRose 
(1991), von Fintel and Gillies (2008a), Schaffer (2009), and Cappelen and Hawthorne 
(2009). Such accounts owe an explanation of the semantic mechanism by which the 
modal base is contextually determined. (Of course, one can always posit a “modal base” 
index in context, and have epistemic modals contextually dependent on that index, 
but this is to give the problem a name, not a solution—what is wanted is an account of 
how that dimension of context is determined.) There are numerous options for such a 
mechanism, such as:
1. Index-Linked Descriptivism: The modal base is determined via its descriptive rela-
tion to some standard index of (a Kaplan-style) context. The egocentric truth con-
ditions given at the end of section 2 are a form of index-linked descriptivism.
2. Liberalism: The modal base is highly unconstrained—for example, the modal base 
is fully determined by the intentions of the speaker, or there are many simultaneous 
modal bases (a multiple content view).
3. Dynamicism: The modal base is shaped by the prior discourse context, so that (for 
example) a previous assertion that p, or the location of the epistemic modal in the 
consequent of a conditional whose antecedent is p, requires that the modal base be 
a subset of the p worlds.

KNOWLEDGE AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS
554
(The taxonomy here is neither exhaustive nor exclusive.) Since contextualist accounts 
place the modal base in the semantics and thus deliver a truth-evaluable proposition, 
they have the advantage of wedding nicely with standard accounts of assertion and 
belief. On the other hand, the account of agreement, disagreement, and assessment 
tends to be problematic. Consider an instance of trumping: Alice, in a deprived epis-
temic state E1, utters “It might be that p,” and Barbara, in an enriched epistemic state 
E2, assesses Alice’s claim as false. Contextualism can straightforwardly explain why 
Barbara, were she to utter “It might be that p,” would utter something false, but explain-
ing why she can assess Alice’s claim, which contains an E1-determined modal base as 
part of its propositional content, as false is more difficult. Contextualists at this point 
appeal to a mixture of error theory (with respect to Barbara’s assessment), worries about 
the data underlying trumping, subtleties regarding propositional anaphora, and contex-
tualist mechanisms that create shared content between Alice and Barbara.
Relativist accounts of epistemic modals are defended by, for example, Egan et al. 
(2005), MacFarlane (2008), Egan (2007), and Stephenson (2007). On such accounts, 
propositions do not determine a truth value simplicter (relative to a world), but only 
a truth value relative to a modal base (and a world). Relativist accounts thus owe an 
explanation of the pragmatic mechanisms by which, in a given situation, the appropri-
ate (for purposes of believing, assessing, or choosing to assert) modal base is determined. 
There are numerous options for such a mechanism, such as:
1. Index-Linked Descriptivism: The relevant modal base is determined via its descrip-
tive relation to some standard index of context. For example, the modal base rel-
evant to an assessment of an epistemically modalized claim might be the epistemic 
state of the assessor. The descriptive determination can vary for varying pragmatic 
relations to claims (assessment, assertion, belief, etc.).
2. Liberalism: The relevant modal base is highly unconstrained—there is simply a 
collection of facts, with respect to any epistemically modalized claim, about its 
truth value with respect to different modal bases.
3. Dynamicism: The modal base is shaped by the prior discourse context, so that (for 
example) an epistemically modalized claim is properly assessed relative to a modal 
base shaped by what has been asserted in the discourse prior to the assessment.
(Again, the taxonomy is neither exhaustive nor exclusive.) Since relativist accounts 
provide a propositional content that is shared by all utterances of a particular epistemi-
cally modalized claim, they have the advantage of providing smooth explanations of 
trumping. Alice, in a deprived epistemic state E1, utters “It might be that p,” and her 
claim is true relative to the modal base determined by E1, thus (perhaps) licensing 
her assertion. Barbara, in an enriched epistemic state E2, assesses Alice’s claim as false, 
which indeed it is relative to the modal base determined by E2. Barbara’s assessment 
straightforwardly targets the same propositional content that Alice advances. On the 
other hand, it is a challenge for relativist accounts to integrate with standard accounts 
of assertion and belief. When a speaker comes to assert a claim of the form It might be that 
p, he will see that the content he intends to advance is true relative to a host of modal 
bases and false relative to a host of others. The challenge is to find a norm of assertion, 
responsive to some subset of these bases, that makes it simultaneously reasonable for 
the speaker to assert and for the audience to update their beliefs with the content of his 
utterance. Egan (2007) and MacFarlane (2005) both address this challenge.

EPISTEMIC MODALS
555
The extent to which contextualism and relativism are genuinely competing options, 
rather than notational variants, is not entirely clear. The way the conceptual territory 
is divided here is not the only option; see MacFarlane (2009) for a careful discussion of 
variety of other options.
6. Knowledge, Justification, and Belief
The discussion so far has assumed that the epistemic notion to which epistemic modals 
are sensitive is knowledge, with the critical question being whose knowledge. However, 
knowledge is not the only available epistemic notion, and it is worth considering cases 
designed to test the hypothesis that knowledge is uniquely linked to epistemic modals. 
Thus consider:
Case 7 (Gettierization): Pauline thinks that Ralph owns a Ford, on the reason-
able grounds of having seen him take the keys to a Ford from his pocket. In fact, 
Ralph does own a Ford, but (by mere chance) happened to have the keys to the 
Ford of his friend Sam in his pocket at the time. Pauline thus has a justified true 
belief that Ralph owns a Ford, but a belief that does not amount to knowledge. 
Pauline then says (intending to say something false):
PAULINE: Ralph might not own a Ford.
A knowledge-based account of epistemic modals naturally predicts that Pauline, despite 
her intentions, says something true—that Ralph doesn’t own a Ford is not, in fact, ruled 
out by what she knows. However, it is at least unclear that this prediction is correct. 
There is some temptation to say that Pauline does indeed speak falsely.
There are (at least) two complications. First, the trumping phenomenon can inter-
fere with our judgments. Since we, as theorists, are given that the prejacent of Pauline’s 
might claim is false, there is a temptation to let our superior epistemic state drive an 
assessment of her claim as false. The fan of a knowledge-based account can thus hold 
that any inclination to judge Pauline’s claim false is (inappropriately) driven by trump-
ing. We must therefore strive to avoid trumping, and assess Pauline’s claim in the same 
spirit that allowed us to view Barbara’s claim in (8) above as true. It is not clear that 
we can reliably perform this task, and our judgments are thus suspect in these cases. 
Second, it is especially crucial to separate issues of truth and assertability in this case. 
The fan of a knowledge-based account holds that Pauline’s claim is true, but agrees that 
Pauline does not know it to be true (because she thinks she knows that Ralph owns a 
Ford). If there is an obligation to assert only that which one knows, Pauline violates 
that obligation, and for that reason we will judge her claim to be deficient at least in 
terms of assertability. Judgments of truth and of assertability are notoriously difficult to 
separate, so the knowledge fan can with some plausibility claim that Pauline’s assertion 
is in fact true, but unassertable. This complication can be mitigated by making Pauline’s 
utterance an act other than an assertion—she can merely suppose, or set out for consid-
eration, or offer a bet on the proposition, that Ralph might not own a Ford.
If there is any plausibility to the view that Pauline’s claim in Case 7 is false, we have 
reason to believe that epistemic modals (sometimes?) have their modal base determined 
not by what is known, but by what is truly and justifiably believed. Once the possibility 
of weakening the epistemic goal of “might” and “must” is raised, we ought to consider a 
range of other options. Thus:

KNOWLEDGE AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS
556
Case 8 (Justification Without Truth): Terry thinks there is an apple on the 
table in front of him. He has every reason to think this, since he is in direct 
visual contact with the table, and it looks to have an apple on it. However, 
there is no apple on the table—that it looks to Terry to have an apple on it 
is a result of an apple hologram. Terry then says (intending to say something 
false):
TERRY: There might not be an apple on the table.
If epistemic modals have their modal base determined by what is known or by what is 
truly and justifiably believed, then Terry’s claim is true, since neither what he knows 
nor what he truly and justifiably believes rules out the absence of an apple on the table. 
But there is some grip to the thought that Terry’s claim is indeed false. He can seem to 
be misrepresenting his situation with his utterance. (Again, truth and assertability must 
be carefully separated. In this case, trumping promotes the thought that Terry’s claim 
is true, but still must be set aside for proper evaluation.) If his claim is false, we have 
reason to believe that epistemic modals (sometimes?) have their modal base determined 
by what is justifiably believed, whether true or not.
Finally, consider:
Case 9 (Mere Belief): Ursula believes quite sincerely but, as she is aware, with 
absolutely no justification, that there is life on a planet orbiting Vega. She says 
(intending to say something false):
URSULA: There might not be life on a planet orbiting Vega.
Again, there is some pull to the thought that Ursula does speak falsely. (One can con-
sider the case under both the hypothesis that there is indeed life on a planet orbiting 
Vega, and on the hypothesis that there is not.) The pull is perhaps less than in the other 
cases (it is important not to let Ursula’s open lack of justification trend into a view that 
she does not genuinely believe there is life near Vega), but it is there—as with Terry, 
Ursula seems to be misrepresenting her situation.
What to make of these cases? The data is cloudy at best (and it is hard to get cor-
responding judgments with “must” constructions), so there is ample room to dig in 
one’s heels at knowledge, or some other epistemic cut-off point. Alternatively, we could 
abandon the idea that there is anything distinctively epistemic about epistemic modals. 
One version of this thought returns to the basic Kratzer (1981) position, and holds that 
there is only one notion of modality—one which then allows differing sorts of specifica-
tions of the modal base (“in view of what the laws require,” “in view of what is know,” 
“in view of what I believe”), some epistemic and some not. (Schaffer (2009) endorses 
a position like this, although not on the basis of these sorts of cases.) But this simple 
position is not without its own difficulties. It does not seem possible, for example, to 
obtain readings on which the modal base combines deontic and epistemic restrictions 
(“in view of what is legal and of what is known”). Suppose Walter is obligated to file 
his tax report today, and we know that to do so, he will need to visit the post office this 
evening. Now consider the claim:
(11) Walter must visit the post office before midnight.

EPISTEMIC MODALS
557
The modal “must” can be read deontically: Walter’s obligation to file his taxes induces 
an obligation to perform the necessary means. It can also be read epistemically: we add 
to what we know the tacit assumption that Walter will fulfill his obligations (thereby 
converting the deontic restriction into an epistemic one). What we cannot do is read 
the “must” as indicating inevitability in light of a mixture of deontic and epistemic 
restriction. Despite the tempting simplicity of a unitary view of modality, some form of 
epistemically, or at least doxastically, flavored modal may be unavoidable.
References
Asher, N.: 1993, Reference to Abstract Objects in Discourse. Kluwer.
Cappelen, H. and J. Hawthorne: 2009, Relativism and Monadic Truth. Oxford University Press.
DeRose, K.: 1991, “Epistemic Possibilities.” The Philosophical Review 100(4), 581–605.
Egan, A.: 2007, “Epistemic Modals, Relativism, and Assertion.” Philosophical Studies 133, 1–22.
Egan, A., J. Hawthorne, and B. Weatherson: 2005, “Epistemic Modals in Context.” In: G. Preyer and G. 
Peter (eds.): Contextualism in Philosophy. Oxford University Press.
Hacking, I.: 1967, “Possibility.” The Philosophical Review 76(2), 143–168.
Hawthorne, J.: 2004, Knowledge and Lotteries. Oxford University Press.
Kratzer, A.: 1977, “What ‘Must’ and ‘Can’ Must and Can Mean.” Linguistics and Philosophy 1, 337–355.
Kratzer, A.: 1981, “The Notional Category of Modality.” In: P. Portner and B. Partee (eds.): Formal Semantics: 
The Essential Readings. Blackwell.
MacFarlane, J.: 2005, “Making Sense of Relative Truth.” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 105, 
321–339.
MacFarlane, J.: 2008, “Epistemic Modals are Assessment-Sensitive.” In: B. Weatherson and A. Egan (eds.): 
Epistemic Modality. Oxford University Press.
MacFarlane, J.: 2009, “Nonindexical Contextualism.” Synthese 166, 231–250.
Schaffer, J.: 2009, “Contextualism for Taste Claims and Epistemic Modals.” In: A. Egan and B. Weatherson 
(eds.): Epistemic Modality. Oxford University Press.
Stephenson, T.: 2007, “Judge Dependence, Epistemic Modals, and Predicates of Personal Taste.” Linguistics 
and Philosophy 30, 487–525.
Teller, P.: 1972, “Epistemic Possibility.” Philosophia 2(4), 303–320.
von Fintel, K. and A. Gillies: 2008a, “CIA Leaks.” The Philosophical Review 117, 77–98.
Wright, C.: 2007, “New Age Relativism and Epistemic Possibility: The Question of Evidence.” Philosophical 
Issues 17(1), 262–283.

558
51
PRAGMATIC 
ENCROACHMENT
Jeremy Fantl and Matthew McGrath
In his classic article, Richard Rudner claims that
in accepting a hypothesis the scientist must make the decision that the evi-
dence is sufficiently strong or that the probability is sufficiently high to warrant 
the acceptance of the hypothesis. Obviously, our decision regarding the evi-
dence and respecting how strong is ‘strong enough’, is going to be a function of 
the importance, in the typically ethical sense, of making a mistake in accepting 
or rejecting the hypothesis . . . How sure we need to be before we accept a hypoth-
esis will depend on how serious a mistake would be.
(Rudner 1953: 2, emphasis Rudner’s)
According to Rudner, an adequate account of the conditions of warranted hypothesis 
acceptance must include reference to an ethical or, more broadly, a pragmatic factor.
Rudner explicitly confines his discussion to the evidence or probability needed to be 
warranted in accepting a hypothesis, where acceptance for him seems to be subject to 
voluntary control, at least in certain cases: we decide the evidence is sufficiently strong. 
But in the past decade a number of philosophers have offered views similar to Rudner’s 
about a broader range of epistemic concepts. For example, regarding knowledge, Jeremy 
Fantl and Matthew McGrath (2002, 2007, and 2009), John Hawthorne (2004), and 
Jason Stanley (2005) have recommended views according to which, whether a subject 
knows something to be the case depends on their practical situation.
This sort of conclusion shouldn’t strike us as immediately implausible. After all, 
there are widely acknowledged links between the practical and the epistemic. What 
you should do in a certain choice situation is widely acknowledged to be determined 
not merely by how good or preferred certain possible outcomes of your acts would be, 
but by how probable these outcomes are given that you act in certain ways. Or consider 
again the importance of not being wrong. This seems obviously relevant to whether you 
should inquire further into whether p and to whether your evidence is strong enough 
to justify you in ignoring the chance that p is false. If your practical situation can be 
relevant to these matters, it might not seem to be a huge step to think it can be relevant 
to whether you know.
Some of our intuitions about specific cases seem to support the claim that knowledge 
can depend on practical factors. Consider DeRose’s famous “Bank Cases”:

PRAGMATIC ENCROACHMENT
559
Bank Case A (Low Stakes). My wife and I are driving home on a Friday after-
noon. We plan to stop at the bank on the way home to deposit our paychecks. 
But as we drive past the bank, we notice that the lines inside are very long, as 
they often are on Friday afternoons. Although we generally like to deposit our 
paychecks as soon as possible, it is not especially important in this case that they 
be deposited right away, so I suggest that we drive straight home and deposit our 
paychecks on Saturday morning. My wife says, “Maybe the bank won’t be open 
tomorrow. Lots of banks are closed on Saturdays.” I reply, “No, I know it’ll be 
open. I was just there two weeks ago on Saturday. It’s open until noon.”
Bank Case B (High Stakes). My wife and I drive past the bank on a Friday 
afternoon, as in Case A, and notice the long lines. I again suggest that we 
deposit our paychecks on Saturday morning, explaining that I was at the bank 
on Saturday morning only two weeks ago and discovered that it was open until 
noon. But in this case, we have just written a very large and important check. 
If our paychecks are not deposited into our checking account before Monday 
morning, the important check we wrote will bounce, leaving us in a very bad 
situation. And, of course, the bank is not open on Sunday. My wife reminds 
me of these facts. She then says, “Banks do change their hours. Do you know 
the bank will be open tomorrow?” Remaining as confident as I was before that 
the bank will be open then, still, I reply, “Well, no. I’d better go in and make 
sure.”
(DeRose 1992: 913)
It looks as if Keith speaks truly in Case A in attributing knowledge to himself that the 
bank will be open tomorrow, while he also speaks truly in Case B in denying himself 
knowledge. The only thing that changes in the two cases is how important it is for Keith 
to be right about whether the bank will be open tomorrow. Therefore, it looks as though 
how important it is for Keith to be right about whether the bank will be open tomorrow 
is relevant to whether Keith knows that the bank will be open tomorrow. And relevant 
in a clear way: holding fixed Keith’s evidence concerning whether the bank will be open 
tomorrow, whether he knows it will be open varies with variations in how important it 
is for him to be right about this.
If this is the proper lesson to draw from the Bank Cases, it would appear to follow that 
two subjects can have the same evidence concerning whether the bank will be open 
tomorrow, even though one of them knows it’ll open tomorrow and the other doesn’t. 
One might think this isn’t so problematic. Might this just be because in one case Keith 
believes the bank will be open tomorrow but in the other he doesn’t? Belief is of course 
often taken to be necessary for knowledge. Notice that DeRose includes in his descrip-
tion of Bank Case B that Keith remains “as confident as [he] was before that the bank 
will be open then.” This stipulation seems meant to ensure that he is equally confident 
in the two Bank Cases. Following Kent Bach (2008), we might question whether, even 
if Keith retains the same degree of belief in the two cases, his degree of belief in both 
cases is high enough for outright belief. (Bach’s worries are shared and expanded upon 
by Jennifer Nagel (2008).)
However, if one thinks Keith can’t sincerely say “I’d better go in and make sure” if he 
has an outright belief that the bank will be open tomorrow, then we can alter the case 
by stipulating that Keith says, “I know it’s open tomorrow.” We can further emend the 

KNOWLEDGE AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS
560
case by having Keith’s wife say, “No you don’t. This is important, Keith. You need to go 
in and make sure they’re open tomorrow.” The question would then be whether what 
Keith said is false. We see no great gulf between the original Case B and this altered 
one.
The appeal to a difference in belief, then, seems not to explain why there is a differ-
ence in knowledge, despite the sameness in evidence. Nor do there seem to be other tra-
ditional factors in knowledge to which we can appeal here. What appears to make the 
difference in knowledge are the stakes. In fact, one subject might have more evidence 
than another that the bank will be open tomorrow—be better informed, have done 
more checking, etc.—but because much more is at stake for the more well-informed 
subject, the more well-informed subject can fail to know that the bank will be open 
tomorrow while the less-informed subject knows that the bank will be open tomorrow. 
All this is, of course, very hard to swallow.
DeRose draws a different moral from the cases. He grants that Keith speaks truly in 
Case A when he says “I know it’ll be open” and he also speaks truly in Case B when he 
responds “no” to the question, “Do you know that the bank will be open tomorrow?” 
But he insists that it does not follow that the Bank Cases show that pragmatic factors 
can make a difference to knowledge. Why not? DeRose’s answer, roughly, is that Keith’s 
pragmatic situation affects what he means by ‘know’ but makes no difference to whether 
he knows. More precisely, his answer has two parts. First, there is a contextualist claim: 
which epistemic relation Keith’s use of ‘know’ picks out varies with his pragmatic situa-
tion, and so varies across the Bank Cases. If the epistemic relations picked out vary with 
the pragmatic situation—the higher the stakes, roughly, the more demanding the epis-
temic relation picked out—what Keith says in Case A might be true while what he said 
in Case B might be false. That is the first part—the claim that pragmatic factors matter 
to the content of knowledge attributions. The second part is the denial that they matter 
to knowledge: for each epistemic relation K that can be picked out by ‘know’ in some 
context, pragmatic factors make no difference to whether you stand in K to a proposi-
tion. If this is true of all such relations, then the sentence ‘Pragmatic factors make no 
difference to whether one knows’ comes out invariantly true.
What is important for our purposes is that the contextualist finds a way to salvage 
the intuitions in the cases while avoiding some of the problematic consequences of let-
ting knowledge involve the subject’s practical situation. Thus, an important motivation 
for contextualism, it might be thought, is the avoidance of those problematic conse-
quences. (This point is emphasized in DeRose (2009: 107).)
But contextualism comes with problems of its own; for one thing, the problematic 
consequences remain, but bumped up a level. The contextualist, it seems, must grant 
that two subjects might have the same evidence that the bank will be open tomorrow, 
but one could truly self-attribute knowledge while the other truly self-denies knowl-
edge. One subject could have more evidence than the other, be better informed about 
whether the bank will be open tomorrow, have done more checking into whether it 
will be open tomorrow, but the less well-informed subject might be able to truly self-
attribute knowledge while the better-informed subject cannot. In addition, there are 
independent difficulties. For example, Stanley (2005) takes the contextualist about 
knowledge attributions to be positing a sort of context-sensitivity which departs signifi-
cantly from the familiar sorts.
So, perhaps we should deny contextualism while maintaining our commitment to 
the intuitions in the Bank Cases—our commitment to the view that whether a sub-

PRAGMATIC ENCROACHMENT
561
ject knows something depends on the subject’s practical situation. This is the subject-
sensitive invariantism of Hawthorne (2004) and Stanley (2005). (Hawthorne calls his 
view ‘sensitive moderate invariantism’ and Stanley calls his ‘interest-relative invarian-
tism’. The label ‘subject-sensitive invariantism’ is due to DeRose (2004).) It is a form of 
invariantism because it holds that the proposition expressed by a knowledge-attribution 
does not vary from attributor context to attributor context. But it is subject-sensitive 
because it holds that whether a subject knows something is sensitive to the practical 
situation of the subject.
Note, though, that we are not forced to a denial of contextualism simply by an accep-
tance of subject-sensitivity. If the primary motivation for contextualism is the preservation 
of the view that a subject’s practical situation must be irrelevant to whether that subject 
knows, then there will be some pressure, upon accepting subject-sensitivity, to reject 
contextualism. But there might be other pressures in favor of contextualism. For exam-
ple, as DeRose (2004) and Stanley (2005) both point out, subject-sensitive invariantists 
have difficulty accommodating third-person cases, in which a high-stakes subject denies 
knowledge to a low-stakes subject, even though each subject has the same evidence—
evidence, when we are thinking about the low-stakes subject alone, we are tempted to 
think is good enough to give the low-stakes subject knowledge. (Cohen’s (1999) airport 
case is a good example.) We can adopt contextualism to handle these cases, while still 
accepting subject-sensitivity if we think it is the most natural way to handle cases like the 
Bank Cases, or if there are independent arguments for subject-sensitivity—for the claim 
that your practical situation is relevant to whether you know. Contextualism might also 
provide a way of dealing with some of the counterintuitive consequences we discussed 
above. If the attributor A has a certain high stakes practical situation in mind, perhaps 
that tends to affect the content of ‘knows’ in A’s context, so that an attribution of knowl-
edge can be true in her context only if the subject meets suitably high standards. Thus, it 
is hard to truly utter the likes of ‘S1 and S2 have the same evidence concerning whether 
p but only S1 knows, because S2 is in a high stakes situation.’
One might well ask under what conditions the relevance of the practical or pragmatic 
becomes the fearsome encroachment in Jonathan Kvanvig’s (2004) label, “pragmatic 
encroachment.” So far, we have treated ‘pragmatic’ as equivalent to ‘practical.’ But 
there is a broader use of the former term, to cover not only factors having to do with 
action and preference but also features of a speech context that have been standardly 
taken not to be relevant to the content of what is said but only to the appropriateness 
of saying it, e.g., the salience of error-possibilities. Since John Hawthorne tentatively 
proposes that salience of possible error is relevant to knowledge, let us use ‘pragmatic’ 
in the broader sense.
We can distinguish at least two grades of pragmatic relevance. We focus on knowl-
edge, but a similar account could be given for any epistemic feature:
First grade: Knowledge has a pragmatic condition. That is, there is some inter-
esting true principle of one or both of the following forms, where PC is prag-
matic:
 in order to know that p, you must satisfy condition PC,
 in order to satisfy condition PC, you must know that p.
Thus, examples of such a condition would include: being rational to act as if p (Fantl 
and McGrath 2002), being rational to ignore in action the chance that p is false (Fantl and 

KNOWLEDGE AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS
562
McGrath 2009), being appropriate to use p as a premise in practical reasoning (Hawthorne 
2004; Stanley 2005), being such that no counterpossibilities of error are salient (Hawthorne 
2004).
Notice that Rudner wants to go further than this, with respect to hypothesis accept-
ability. For him, it’s not merely that in order to be warranted in accepting a hypoth-
esis, you must satisfy some pragmatic condition, though that is true; it’s that whether a 
hypothesis is acceptable for you can vary with mere variations in a pragmatic factor, in 
particular with mere variations in how important it is to be right about the hypothesis. 
This suggests a second, deeper, grade of pragmatic relevance:
Second grade: Knowledge can vary with mere variation of pragmatic factors. 
There are cases of knowledge such that if we merely vary a pragmatic factor 
present in that case, and leave everything else the same (as much as possible), 
we arrive at a case of ignorance.
The Bank Cases support this thesis: we have merely varied the importance for Keith 
of being right about whether the bank will be open tomorrow, leaving everything else, 
as much as possible, the same, and with this pragmatic variation comes a variation in 
knowledge.
The second grade is certainly more controversial than the first. Suppose there is prag-
matic relevance only of the first grade, and not the second. Then we would not have 
to cope with the peculiarity of statements such as ‘I know that p but I wouldn’t know 
that p if more were riding on whether p’. One way to accept the first grade without the 
second is to accept the claim that knowledge that p requires epistemic certainty, which 
in turn requires the satisfaction of pragmatic conditions, such as being rational to ignore 
the chance that not-p in one’s decision-making. The obvious worry about such a view is that 
it makes knowledge too hard to come by.
It is clear that, of these two grades of pragmatic relevance, only the second grade 
should count as pragmatic encroachment on knowledge. In previous work, we have 
endorsed the second grade—and so endorsed pragmatic encroachment—because we 
think it is a simple consequence of the denial of a supervenience thesis concerning 
knowledge, which we have called “epistemological purism”:
Epistemological purism: two subjects alike with respect to their strength of epis-
temic position with respect to p are alike with respect to whether they know that 
p (or at least with respect to whether they are in a position to know that p).
It is a tricky matter to specify precisely what strength of epistemic position involves. We 
take it that your strength of epistemic position with respect to p is determined by your 
standing on truth-relevant dimensions with respect to p, including reliability, strength 
of evidence, epistemic probability, and the like. Truth-relevant dimensions, intuitively, 
can be thought of as dimensions a higher standing on which with respect to p places 
you in a better position with respect to the truth of p. So, how important it is for your 
life that you are right about whether p doesn’t count as a truth-relevant dimension, nor 
does your standing on it seem to be fixed by your standing on truth-relevant dimensions 
with respect to p.
We will say more about the grounds on which we reject this thesis later on. For 
the moment, notice that one could accept the second grade without denying 

PRAGMATIC ENCROACHMENT
563
epistemological purism, as Stanley (2005) does. Stanley argues that variations in knowl-
edge that p, due to pragmatic factors, give rise to variations in your standing along 
the truth-relevant dimensions. So, in Bank Case A, Keith has better evidence for the 
proposition that the bank will be open tomorrow than he does in Case B: in Case A, 
part of his evidence is the bank will be open tomorrow, which is superbly good evidence 
for the bank will be open tomorrow; in Case B, Keith lacks this evidence. Stanley sug-
gests the same goes for other epistemic concepts we would like to think of as picking 
out standings on truth-relevant dimensions. If Stanley is right, then, on the one hand, 
epistemological purism is not threatened by pragmatic encroachment, but on the other, 
epistemological purism doesn’t deserve its name, because there are no purely truth-rele-
vant dimensions of the relevant sort that come even close to providing a supervenience 
base for knowledge.
One might think that Stanley’s position, although it saves one from the denial of 
epistemological purism, is a more radical form of pragmatic encroachment than ours, 
which denies purism. For Stanley thinks there is no genuinely epistemic notion that is 
unsullied by pragmatic factors. Change the stakes and you change not only knowledge 
but evidence, justification, reasons, probability, etc. There is pragmatic encroachment, 
in Juan Comesaña’s (forthcoming) words, all the way down.
One nice feature Stanley’s view might appear to have is that it avoids having to 
explain away the peculiarities such as ‘A and B have the same evidence for p, but only 
A is in a position to know that p’. We say his view ‘appears’ to have this nice feature. 
But we doubt it does. Notice that even if there is pragmatic encroachment all the way 
down, we can still ask whether some epistemic properties supervene on others. For 
example, consider the following, where evidence is non-factive (with respect to p) iff it 
is evidence for p which does not entail p:
Two subjects alike with respect to their non-factive evidence regarding p are 
alike with respect to whether they are justified in believing that p.
It is not clear to us how Stanley’s acceptance of “pragmatic encroachment all the way 
down” enables him to avoid denying this antecedently plausible claim.
But for the sake of argument, let us assume that Stanley can avoid peculiar statements 
asserting sameness of evidence but difference in knowledge. Still, Stanley will have to 
explain away peculiar temporal and modal claims about pragmatic factors making a 
difference to knowledge, but perhaps these aren’t as counterintuitive. Nonetheless, the 
cost of following Stanley’s particular way of explaining these peculiarities seems greater 
than the cost of the peculiarities explained away. That’s because your standing on many 
epistemic dimensions isn’t plausibly affected by mere changes in practical environment. 
Consider probability: you are offered a high-stakes bet on the proposition this die will 
come up 6, that doesn’t seem to lower its probability for you and it certainly does not 
raise the probability for you that it will come up 1–5, or any of 1–5 individually. We see 
no reason to think that matters are different when the probabilities approach 1, and so 
when it can seem plausible that, before being offered the bet, you know.
Putting Stanley’s deep pragmatic encroachment aside, here is what we take to be the 
simplest and most convincing case for accepting pragmatic encroachment of the second 
grade.
Think about Keith in Bank Case A. Unless we are willing to accept the claim that 
knowledge requires epistemic certainty, we should say that he knows the bank will be 

KNOWLEDGE AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS
564
open tomorrow (or if one doesn’t like this claim because it is about the future, make 
any adjustments to the example you like, but preserve lack of certainty). At any rate, if 
knowledge doesn’t require certainty, there will be some case relevantly like Bank Case 
A in which the subject has knowledge. So, Keith knows in Bank Case A that the bank 
will be open tomorrow. Keith also knows that if it will be open tomorrow, the option 
with the best outcome is to wait until tomorrow. Given how very well Keith knows this 
conditional, Keith also knows that waiting until tomorrow will have the best outcome 
of his available options. And this is what he is justified in doing.
Now consider Keith in Bank Case B. Assume, for reductio, that the second grade of 
pragmatic encroachment fails: knowledge can’t vary with mere changes of pragmatic 
factors. Then, since Keith knows the bank will be open tomorrow in Case A, he knows 
it in Case B. But he also seems to know that if it will be open tomorrow the available 
option with the best outcome is to wait until tomorrow to cash the check. Knowing 
this so very well—just as well as in Case A—Keith will also know that the available 
option in Case B with the best outcome is to wait until tomorrow. Now ask yourself: if 
you know that of all your available options, option O will have the best outcome, what 
should you do? It is hard not to answer: well, O! That O will have the best outcome of 
all your options seems to be a decisive reason to do O, not anything else. Think of what 
you will know about the other options: that they will have worse outcomes than O. 
So, if Keith knows that waiting until tomorrow to deposit the check will have the best 
outcome, he will know that going in to check further will have a worse outcome. Should 
he do what he knows to be worse than O? That sounds absurd. (Remember here: it’s not 
just that he knows that going in to check further is worse than some other actions; he 
knows which action it is worse than.)
Given that he can’t be certain that the bank will be open tomorrow, then assuming 
the stakes are high enough, and that it is important enough to be right, shouldn’t Keith 
play it safe? Shouldn’t he go in and check further and, if necessary, wait in line to deposit 
the check today? This seems like sound advice, and is likely the advice most decision-
theorists will give, at least assuming the stakes are high enough. So, it seems in Case B, 
Keith isn’t justified in waiting until tomorrow to deposit the check; he should rather go 
in and check further. But we saw that it was absurd to think one should take an option 
one knows to be worse than a given option. So, our assumption that Keith knows that 
the bank will be open tomorrow in Case B must be false. (Our argument against what 
we called evidentialism in Fantl and McGrath (2002) takes roughly this form, using 
our train case. See also our argument against epistemological purism in our (2007). We 
should stress: the argument given does not pump intuitions about the Bank Cases in 
particular. All we need is some case of knowledge without certainty, in which what is 
known is not irrelevant to the question of what to do.)
What is crucial to this argument are not any intuitions specific to the Bank Cases 
but, rather, three general claims: (1) the fallibilist thesis that knowledge doesn’t require 
certainty; (2) the assumption that if a subject lacks certainty concerning a proposition 
relevant to the question of what to do, the lack of certainty can make a difference as to 
what the subject is justified in doing, if the stakes are high enough; and (3) the assump-
tion that if you know that an option O will have the best outcome of all your available 
acts then you are justified in doing O. Given these claims, we can show that there is a 
pair of cases, like the Bank Cases, in which whether a subject knows something varies 
with mere variations in pragmatic factors.
We take it that assumption (2) is pretty safe. Perhaps in the end (1) should go, though 

PRAGMATIC ENCROACHMENT
565
there are serious questions about the skeptical implications of giving it up. There are 
also hard questions, which we are ignoring here, about how precisely to understand the 
sort of certainty involved (clearly it is epistemic rather than psychological). Assumption 
(3) is doing a lot of the work here. One might hope to deny it while explaining away 
the apparent absurdity of ‘I know O will be better than P but I should do P’ in terms of 
a Gricean implicature. We think the prospects for this gambit are poor, but we cannot 
discuss the matter further here. (We discuss the matter further in our (2007).)
The most serious worry about (3), to our mind, is whether it is just an isolated intu-
ition, or instead can be fitted into a plausible account of the relation between knowl-
edge and what knowledge can justify. So, let’s ask: if (3) is right, why might it be? The 
natural answer is that the proposition that option O will have the best consequences 
of all your available acts is a decisive reason for doing O. Of course, not all reasons that 
there are for doing something will justify you in doing it. That there is petrol in the glass 
is an excellent reason for refraining from drinking what’s in the glass. But it only justifies 
you doing so if you have that reason.
What epistemic relation do you have to bear on a reason in order to have it? Our 
claim is that knowledge of a reason satisfies a sufficient condition on the epistemic 
relation you have to bear to a reason in order to have it. If you know that r, and r is a 
good reason for ϕ-ing, then r is a good reason you have for ϕ-ing. (See Hawthorne and 
Stanley (2008) for a similar view. The argument to follow is an abbreviated version of 
the main argument given in chapter 3 of Fantl and McGrath (2009).)
Surely, this is the case when ϕ-ing is restricted to believing: if you know that r, and r 
is a good reason for believing q, then you have that good reason for believing q. Suppose 
you know that Clinton has already been U.S. president twice and that U.S. presidents 
can only serve two terms. This is a good reason for believing that Clinton won’t be 
president again. Then you have that good reason for believing that Clinton won’t be 
president again. But knowledge of r satisfies an epistemic condition sufficient for having 
r, even when what r is a reason for is not restricted to belief.
When trying to determine what is true—that is, in forming beliefs—we draw conclu-
sions from the reasons we have. The same goes for trying to decide what to do. Here, 
too, we draw conclusions about what to do—we form intentions—from the reasons 
we have. We bring reasons into our reasoning knowing that we might draw all sorts of 
conclusions from them along the way, some practical and some theoretical. Suppose 
your sister calls you on the phone to tell you about plans for her upcoming visit to see 
you. She tells you, and you thereby come to know, that she’ll be arriving at the airport 
at 8 a.m. and will need a ride to your place. You might well include this proposition in 
your reasoning and at some point draw a practical conclusion from it, for example, ‘I’ll 
be there a little after 8 a.m. with my car’, but you might also draw along the way any 
number of theoretical conclusions as well, e.g., that she’ll be ready to be picked up a 
little after 8 a.m., that she’ll be tired when she arrives, that you’ll not be able to drop 
the kids off at preschool, and so on. The bottom line is that we don’t segregate reasons 
by whether they are available for drawing practical or for theoretical conclusions. But if 
knowledge that r gave us r as a reason for forming beliefs but not for performing actions, 
we’d expect some degree of segregation, if not always, at least when something signifi-
cant is at stake.
This is not what we find. Even when the stakes are high there is no segregation; 
rather, when the stakes are high, we are more careful about drawing theoretical conclu-
sions—as careful as we are about drawing practical conclusions. Do you walk across or 

KNOWLEDGE AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS
566
walk around the frozen pond? Walking around will take a while, but you don’t want to 
fall through the ice. (Thanks to Mark Migotti for suggesting this example.) How do you 
decide? Presumably, your decision will depend on whether you think the ice is thick 
enough to hold you. So, you’ll start trying to make your decision about what to do by 
trying to figure out whether the ice is thick enough. Suppose you do some checking 
and on the basis of your information, you come to know that the ice is thick enough. 
So the ice is thick enough becomes a reason you have to draw theoretical conclusions on 
its basis (e.g., that it would be perfectly safe to cross it). It would then be very odd not 
to allow this knowledge into your practical reasoning. Why did you try to figure out 
whether the ice was thick enough in the first place? For fun? No, you tried to figure it 
out because you were (correctly) under the impression that figuring out whether the ice 
was thick enough would help you decide what to do. When r becomes available as a 
basis for theoretical conclusions, it is ‘barmy’ (to use an expression suggested by one of 
our informants) to just ignore p in one’s decision-making and planning.
So, it looks as if whatever we treat as epistemic status sufficient to have r for use 
in reasoning—as a reason—for beliefs, we also treat as sufficient to have r for use in 
reasoning—as a reason—for intention and action. Similar remarks can also be applied 
to emotional states, desires, hopes, and reactive attitudes generally (here the emphasis 
on reasoning would have to be toned down with regard to some of these states, though 
there clearly is such a thing as responding to reasons in these cases). These observations 
support the claim that if knowledge that r qualifies r to be a reason you have for belief, 
it qualifies r to be a reason you have for any ϕ.
Clearly, that option O will have the best results of all your available actions is a rea-
son for taking option O. Therefore, when you know this reason to be true, it’s a reason 
you have for taking option O. If it’s a reason you have for taking option O, what could 
stand in the way of it justifying you in taking option O? Well, perhaps it’s defeated by 
some contrary reason—e.g., that there’s a chance that option O is not the best option 
and, if it’s not, the consequences will be disastrous. This reason might be true consistent 
with your knowing that option O is the best option, provided that knowledge does not 
require certainty. And if it is, perhaps it is natural to reason this way:
Yes, I do know that waiting until tomorrow to go to the bank is best. Of course, 
if it’s not best, then that means that the bank isn’t open tomorrow, and so if 
I do wait until tomorrow, the consequences will be disastrous. And there’s a 
chance that waiting until tomorrow isn’t best. It’s just too risky. I’ll wait in 
line now.
Does this reflect the way we reason? In reasoning, do we find ourselves weighing p—a 
reason for ϕ-ing—against there is a serious risk that not-p—a reason for not ϕ-ing? Not 
plausibly. For here’s what the weighing of competing reasons feels like in uncontrover-
sial cases:
Ice cream tastes good, and that’s a reason I have to eat it, but it also is unhealthy, 
so that’s a reason I have not to. Which is more important, taste or health?
The rain will make me wet, so that’s a reason I have to bring my umbrella, but 
the umbrella’s also really heavy, so that’s a reason I have not to. Which is more 
important, staying dry or being unencumbered?

PRAGMATIC ENCROACHMENT
567
His paper didn’t have an argument, so that’s a reason I have to give him a bad 
grade, but also he did work really hard, so that’s a reason I have to give him a 
good grade. Which is more important, quality of work or quality of effort?
Contrast these examples with:
There’s a serious risk that waiting until tomorrow isn’t best, so that’s a reason 
I have to wait in line now. But waiting until tomorrow is also best, so that’s a 
reason I have to wait until tomorrow. Which is more important, the serious risk 
that waiting until tomorrow isn’t best, or the fact that waiting until tomorrow 
is best?
People don’t weigh these kinds of reasons in the way we’d expect them to if people could 
have both of them at once. We’d expect to find people explicitly weighing up reasons 
concerning actual results against conflicting reasons concerning expected results. We 
find no such thing. People do vacillate: ‘The ice is very thick. Surely it will hold me. 
But . . . there’s a real possibility it won’t. I’d better not risk it.’ Perhaps even with the 
right halting tone of voice someone might say, ‘The ice will hold me (won’t it? surely it 
will, right?). Forget it. I’ll play it safe and walk around.’ What you don’t find is the likes 
of, ‘Hmm, the ice might not hold me. That’s one consideration. Another is that it will 
hold me.’
So, if you have a reason, r, for ϕ-ing, it seems that the reason can’t be defeated by some 
further reason to the effect that r might be false. And this is for the simple reason that 
we never have both of these reasons at the same time. Of course, even if we did have O is 
best and O might not be best at the same time as reasons for doing contrary things, it’s not 
at all clear that O might not be best would be the winning reason. We care about actual 
results, not expected results, and if we have O is best that seems like it should beat out 
O might not be best, regardless of the consequences. But, the fact of the matter is that we 
don’t ever have both reasons at once, and this is reflected in the fact that it is absurd to 
picture us reasoning by weighing the fact that p against the possibility that not-p.
So, if you know that O is best, then that’s a reason you have to do O. And if that’s a 
reason you have to do O, then it can’t be defeated by considerations about the chance 
that O isn’t best or any other epistemic considerations with respect to the reason that 
O is best. And it doesn’t seem as though, in this case, any other obstacles could stand in 
the way of your being justified in doing O. Therefore, if you know that O is best, you are 
justified in doing O. And this is just premise 3 in the above argument.
Premise 3, then, is not just an arbitrary premise. It is grounded in principles about 
knowledge and the having of reasons, in particular:
A) If you know that r, then if r is a reason for ϕ-ing, r is a reason you have for 
ϕ-ing.
B) If r is a reason you have for ϕ-ing, then r can’t be defeated by any consider-
ation to the effect that r might be false.
Suppose you know that O is best. That O is best is a reason to do O. By (A) O is best 
is a reason you have do O. By (B), this reason isn’t defeated by any consideration to 
the effect that O might not be best. The only plausible obstacles to O is best being a 

KNOWLEDGE AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS
568
justifying reason you have to do O are considerations about the chance that O might 
not be best. So, that O is best is a justifying reason you have to do O. If you have a jus-
tifying reason to do something then you are justified in doing it. Thus, if you know that 
O is best, you are justified in doing O.
Once knowledge doesn’t require certainty, then, commitment to the second grade 
of pragmatic relevance—pragmatic encroachment—doesn’t just get motivated by 
our intuitive reactions to hypothetical cases. It is grounded in deep principles about 
knowledge and reasons.
Bibliography
Bach, Kent. (2008). “Applying Pragmatics to Epistemology.” Philosophical Issues 18: 68–88.
Cohen, Stewart. (1999). “Contextualism, Skepticism, and the Structure of Reasons.” In Tomberlin, J. (Ed.) 
Philosophical Perspectives. Cambridge: Blackwell: 57–89.
Comesaña, Juan. (forthcoming). “Epistemic Pragmatism: An Argument Against Moderation.” Midwest 
Epistemology Workshop. University of Nebraska-Lincoln.
DeRose, Keith. (1992). “Contextualism and Knowledge Attributions.” Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research 52: 913–29.
——. (2004). “The Problem with Subject-Sensitive Invariantism.” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 
68: 346–50.
——. (2009). The Case for Contextualism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fantl, Jeremy and McGrath, Matthew. (2002). “Evidence, Pragmatics, and Justification.” The Philosophical 
Review 111: 67–94.
——. (2007). “On Pragmatic Encroachment in Epistemology.” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 75: 
558–89.
——. (2009). Knowledge in an Uncertain World. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hawthorne, John. (2004). Knowledge and Lotteries. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—— and Stanley, Jason. (2008). “Knowledge and Action.” Journal of Philosophy 105: 571–90.
Kvanvig, Jonathan. (2004). “Pragmatic Aspects of Knowledge?” Blog. January 29, 2009. <http://fleetwood.
baylor.edu/certain_doubts/?p=13>
Nagel, Jennifer. (2008). “Knowledge Ascriptions and the Psychological Consequences of Changing Stakes.” 
Australasian Journal of Philosophy 86: 279–94.
Rudner, Richard. (1953). “The Scientist Qua Scientist Makes Value Judgments.” Philosophy of Science 20: 
1–6.
Stanley, Jason. (2005). Knowledge and Practical Interests. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Part VIII
FORMAL
EPISTEMOLOGY


52
LOGIC AND FORMAL 
SEMANTICS FOR 
EPISTEMOLOGY
John Symons
Epistemic expressions such as ‘knows that’ or ‘believes that’ have systematic properties 
that are amenable to formal study. Most obviously, statements containing epistemic 
expressions sometimes involve logical constants which behave in the usual way. So, for 
example, if you know p and q then you know q. The conceptual features of statements 
concerning knowledge and belief become more interesting when one begins to examine 
the characteristics of general principles governing the use of epistemic concepts. The 
behavior and interaction of these general principles has been the focus of epistemic 
logic. For example, as G.E. Moore pointed out, there seems to be something wrong with 
claiming
(1) “p and I do not believe p.”
Assertions of this kind are self-defeating because of the conceptual features of knowledge 
or belief and not because of the syntactical features of the sentence or the character of 
the logical constants that are involved. As Moore noted “‘I went to the pictures last 
Tuesday, but I don’t believe that I did’ is a perfectly absurd thing to say” (1952: 543). The 
perfect absurdity here is due to a violation of a principle governing epistemic concepts.
Notice that (1) is often a correct description of the state of affairs in question. For 
instance, since I recognize that I am fallible, I am committed to the possibility that 
there are cases where it is true that p and I do not believe p. Furthermore, I can assert, 
without paradox or contradiction, that there is some proposition p such that p and I do 
not believe p.
The paradox arises from the peculiarity of the agent in question attesting to particu-
lar instances of (1), where the variable p is replaced by an assertion concerning some 
state of affairs. Specifically, it is paradoxical insofar as it is, what John Austin called, an 
illocutionary act (1975: 133). While I recognize that there might be cases where replac-
ing p with some description of some state of affairs is true, I cannot sincerely attest to 
both parts of the conjunction contained in (1) at a particular moment for any specific 
instance of (1). In this sense, Moore’s paradox sheds light on the properties of epistemic 
agents and the concept of belief. Reflecting on the perfect absurdity of Moore’s examples, 

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
572
shows us that an agent’s belief and its agency are related. However, we are not restricted 
to relying on epistemic intuitions in our consideration of Moore’s paradox. Exploration 
of the principles or norms governing epistemic notions can take place in an axiomatic 
fashion. Jaakko Hintikka, for example, provided a proof of the contradictory nature of 
the paradoxical form of the Moore statements, the case where the statement asserts 
that an agent believes p and not-p (1962: 67). I can take as a rule for instance that it is 
prohibited or confused to say:
(2) “I know p but it is not the case that p.”
If (2) is prohibited, it is due in part to the illocutionary considerations which applied 
in (1) but unlike assertions of belief, (2) is prohibited by virtue of another general prin-
ciple, namely the veracity of knowledge.
(3) If one knows p then it is true that p.
If we accept that knowledge implies veracity then we can consider what the implica-
tions of taking it as an axiom might be and whether it is consistent with other general 
epistemic principles we might hold. As discussed below, considerations of this kind 
have been given an elegant formal framework by epistemic logicians. Wolfgang Lenzen 
(1978) provided an excellent overview of arguments from the 1960s and 1970s con-
cerning the appropriate axioms for knowledge.
Observations of the kind emphasized by Moore, concerning the behavior of the term 
“knows that” served as the starting points for the development of modern epistemic 
logic. G.H. von Wright was the first to sketch an axiomatic treatment of the behavior of 
epistemic concepts (1951: 29–35). However, modern epistemic logic began in earnest 
once Hintikka provided a semantic interpretation of epistemic and doxastic notions in 
the early 1960s.
Hintikka began by supplementing the language of propositional logic with two unary 
epistemic operators Ka and Ba such that Kap reads ‘Agent a knows p’ and Bap reads 
‘Agent a believes p’ for some proposition p. In this way, candidate epistemic or doxastic 
axioms can be presented in formal terms. So, for instance, we have already seen that one 
intuitive axiom which we are likely to accept into our epistemic logic is:
(4) KcA → A
This is known as axiom T which we saw above as (3). With our modest addition to first-
order logic in hand, we can begin to catalog other plausible epistemic axioms.
A standard list of the axioms (following Lemmon (1977), Bull and Segerberg (1984)) 
that are relevant for epistemic logic run as shown in Table 52.1:
Table 52.1 Axioms of Epistemic Logic
K 
Kc(A→A') → (KcA → KcA')
D 
KcA → ¬Kc¬A
T 
KcA → A
4 
KcA → KcKcA
5 
¬KcA → Kc¬KcA

LOGIC AND FORMAL SEMANTICS FOR EPISTEMOLOGY
573
.2 
¬Kc¬KcA → Kc¬Kc¬A
.3 
Kc(KcA → KcA') v Kc(KcA' → KcA)
.4 
A → (¬Kc¬KcA → KcA)
We can consider the philosophical merits of each axiom to a certain extent without the 
introduction of additional formalism. However, Hintikka’s approach to the semantics of 
epistemic notions offers an important supplement to our intuitive reflections. In order 
to begin thinking about the relative merits of these axioms one can begin by consider-
ing the familiar interpretation of the K and B operators using possible world semantics 
along the lines discussed above:
KcA: In all possible worlds compatible with what c knows, it is the case that A
BcA: In all possible worlds compatible with what c believes, it is the case that A
The basic assumption is that any ascription of propositional attitudes such as knowl-
edge and belief, involves dividing the set of possible worlds in two: Those worlds com-
patible with the attitude in question and those that are incompatible with it.
The central idea in possible worlds semantics is the notion of accessibility. Accessibility 
is a relation that is defined on the set of possible worlds. In standard modal logic we say 
that some world w is accessible from some world w' just in case w is possible relative to 
w'. Specifically, the relation can be characterized as a subset of the Cartesian product of 
the set of possible worlds. As described below, determining the accessibility relation is 
the most basic step in determining the properties of our semantical framework. So, for 
example, whether one assumes that the accessibility relation is symmetric, transitive, 
reflexive, or some combination of the three, will make a significant difference in how 
one thinks about the modal or epistemic properties of the system in question. In the 
epistemic context, the set of worlds accessible to an agent (its set of epistemic alterna-
tives) depends on its informational resources at an instant. This dependency is captured 
via the specification of the accessibility relation, R, on the set of possible worlds. To 
express the idea that for agent c, the world w' is compatible with his information state, 
or accessible from the possible world w which c is currently in, it is required that R holds 
between w and w'. This relation is written Rww' and reads “world w' is accessible from 
w”. The world w' is said to be an epistemic or doxastic alternative to world w for agent c, 
depending on whether knowledge or belief is under consideration. We can give this a 
semantic interpretation, by saying that if a proposition A is true in all worlds which 
agent c considers possible then c knows A.
A possible world semantics for a propositional epistemic logic with a single agent c 
then consists of a frame F which in turn is a pair <W,Rc> such that W is a non-empty 
set of possible worlds and Rc is a binary accessibility relation (relative to agent c) over 
W. A model M for an epistemic system consists of a frame and a denotation function ϕ 
assigning sets of worlds to atomic propositional formulas. Propositions are taken to be 
sets of possible worlds; namely the set of possible worlds in which they are true. Let atom 
be the set of atomic propositional formulae, then ϕ : atom ↦ P(W), where P denotes the 
powerset operation.
The model M = <W,Rc,ϕ> is called a Kripke-model and the resulting semantics 
Kripke-semantics (Kripke 1963): An atomic propositional formula, a, is said to be true 
in a world w in M (written M,w ⊨ a) iff w is in the set of possible worlds assigned to a, 
i.e., M,w ⊨ a iff w ∈ ϕ(a) for all a ∈ atom. The formula KcA is true in a world w (i.e., 

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
574
M,w ⊨ KcA) iff ∀w'∈ W, if Rcww', then M,w' ⊨ A. The semantics for the Boolean 
connectives follow the usual recursive recipe. Similar semantics can be formulated for 
the belief operator. Since a belief is not necessarily true but, rather, probably true, pos-
sibly true, or likely to be true, we must modify our approach to the semantics of belief 
appropriately. For instance, belief can be modeled by assigning a sufficiently high degree 
of probability to the proposition in question and determining the doxastic alternatives 
accordingly. The truth-conditions for the doxastic operator are defined in a way similar 
to that of the knowledge operator and the model can also be expanded to accommodate 
the two operators simultaneously.
A modal formula is said to be valid in a frame if, and only if, the formula is true for all 
possible assignments in all worlds in the frame.
An important feature of possible world semantics is that the epistemic axioms listed 
above, correspond to algebraic properties of the frame in the following sense: A modal 
axiom is valid in a frame if, and only if, the accessibility relation satisfies some algebraic 
condition (see Hendricks and Symons 2006). For example, the axiom expressing the 
veridicality property that if a proposition is known by c, then A is true,
(5) KcA → A,
is valid in all frames in which the accessibility relation is reflexive in the sense that 
∀w∈W : Rww. Given reflexive accessibility, every possible world is accessible from 
itself. Similarly if the accessibility relation satisfies the condition that
(6) ∀w, w', w' ∈ W : Rww' ^ Rw'w' → Rww'
which is also known as transitivity, then the axiom (7) is valid.
(7) KcA → KcKcA
(7) is called axiom 4 and is also known as the axiom of self-awareness, positive intro-
spection, or the KK-thesis. In this case, the axiom captures the idea that if the agent 
knows p then it has knowledge of its knowledge that p. Other axioms require yet other 
relational properties to be met in order to be valid in all frames: If the accessibility rela-
tion is reflexive, symmetric and transitive, then
(8) ¬KcA → Kc¬KcA
is valid. (8) is called axiom 5, also better known as the axiom of wisdom. This is the 
much stronger thesis that an agent has knowledge of its own ignorance: If a does not 
know p, it knows that it doesn’t know p. The axiom is also known as the axiom of nega-
tive introspection.
One contentious axiom which is valid in all possible frames,
(9) Kc (A→ B) → (KcA → KcB),
is the closure condition for knowledge, also known as axiom K, or the axiom of 
deductive cogency: If the agent a knows p → q, then if a knows p, a also knows q. As dis-
cussed below, this axiom leads to the most difficult philosophical problem for epistemic 

LOGIC AND FORMAL SEMANTICS FOR EPISTEMOLOGY
575
logicians, namely the apparent commitment to logical omniscience. It seems that if one 
accepts this axiom, then an epistemic agent must know everything that follows logically 
from its knowledge.
Other axioms of epistemic import require yet other relational properties to be met 
in order to be valid in all frames. When combined in various ways, these axioms make 
up epistemic modal systems of varying strength. Their strengths vary according to 
the modal formulas valid in the respective systems and given the algebraic properties 
assumed for the accessibility relation.
Returning to the axioms listed above, we can begin to see how we might compare 
their relative strengths. The weakest system of epistemic interest is usually considered 
to be system T. The reader should take care to distinguish the epistemic operator K, the 
modal axiom K and the system of axioms K in what follows. Similarly, we distinguish 
the axiom T from the system T. T is a system of modal logic which is characterized by 
reflexive frame with the axioms T and K as valid axioms.
Additional modal strength can be obtained by extending T with other axioms drawn 
from the above pool, altering the frame semantics to validate the additional axioms. By 
way of example, while
(10) KcA → A
is valid in system T,
(11) KcA → A, KcA → KcKcA and ¬KcA → Kc¬KcA
are all valid in S5 but not in T.
System T has a reflexive accessibility relation, S5 has reflexive, transitive and sym-
metrical accessibility relations. The arrows in Table 52.2 below indicate that the system 
to which the arrow is pointing is included in the system from which the arrow originates 
and hence reflect relative strength. Then S5 is the strongest and S4 the weakest of the 
ones listed.
Table 52.2 Relative Strength of Epistemic Systems Between S4 and S5
 
Epistemic Systems
KT4 
= 
S4 
KT4 + .2 
= 
S4.2 
↑
KT4 + .3 
= 
S4.3 
↑
KT4 + .4 
= 
S4.4 
↑
KT5 
= 
S5 
↑
One of the important tasks of epistemic logic is to catalog all sound and complete sys-
tems of such logics in order to allow us to pick the most ‘appropriate’ ones. The log-
ics range from S4 over the intermediate systems S4.2–S4.4 to S5. By way of example, 
Hintikka settled for S4 (1962), Kutschera argued for S4.4 (1976), Lenzen suggested 
S4.2 (1978), van der Hoek has proposed to strengthen knowledge according to system 
S4.3 (Meyer and van der Hoek 1995). Van Ditmarsch, van der Hoek and Kooi (2007) 
together with Fagin, Halpern, Moses and Vardi (Fagin et al. 1995) and others assume 
knowledge to be S5 valid.

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
576
In the doxastic context, we can also catalog the completeness properties of the alter-
native systems in a similar fashion. Of course in doxastic logic we drop axiom T, which is 
usually replaced by D. This avoids committing doxastic logic to the truth of beliefs while 
retaining the condition that beliefs be consistent. Replacing T with D generates systems 
like KD4–KD45. This approach permits the combination of epistemic and doxastic 
systems and for studying the interplay between knowledge and belief (see Voorbraak 
1993). There are some important philosophical concerns with such combined doxastic 
and epistemic systems. Lenzen (1978) and Stalnaker (1996) point out that such com-
bined systems risk conflating knowledge and belief.
How does semantic formalization relate to epistemology? By way of example, it is 
worth returning briefly to our discussion of Moore’s problem to see what kind of light 
Hintikka’s formalization shed on that case. In Knowledge and Belief, he was able to prove 
that statements of the sort “p and I do not believe p” are perfect absurdities not because 
they run afoul of some kind of epistemic intuition, but because, when properly analyzed, 
they generate a contradiction. More importantly, the analysis allows us to recognize 
which epistemic commitments are involved in generating the contradiction. These 
commitments are formulated as rules for epistemic alternatives in model systems. So, 
for example, the proof of the absurdity of “p and I do not believe p” (Hintikka 1962: 68) 
relies on the conditions governing the semantics of sentences concerning belief. The 
difference between the kind of reasoning we find in Moore and Hintikka with respect to 
“p and I do not believe p” boils down to difference with respect to the degree of explicit-
ness and control that the philosophers aspire to in their arguments. For Hintikka, unlike 
Moore, the point is to achieve the same level of explicitness in epistemology as is found 
in logic:
The word “logic” which occurs in the subtitle of this work is to be taken seri-
ously. My first aim is to formulate and to defend explicit criteria of consistency 
for certain sets of statements—criteria which, it is hoped, will be comparable 
with the criteria of consistency studied in the established branches of logic.
(1962: 3)
Logical Omniscience and Idealized Epistemic Agents
Epistemic logic inevitably traffics in idealizations. As discussed below, the problem of 
logical omniscience (a product of accepting the axiom of deductive cogency or axiom 
K and standard possible world semantics) encouraged theorists to craft formal systems 
which more adequately reflected the actual properties of epistemic agents. Since real 
epistemic agents modify their beliefs and engage in inquiry, there was some philo-
sophical interest in attempting to formally capture the dynamical features of inquiry. 
Developments since Knowledge and Belief, principally those since Kutchera (1976) and 
Lenzen (1978), attempted to integrate broader insights from modal logic with epis-
temic logic and have made it possible to formally model some prominent features of 
the dynamical nature of epistemic agency. Gärdenfors’ (1988) account of belief revi-
sion was particularly important in setting the stage for a slew of dynamical models of 
knowledge.
Logical omniscience is related to closure properties. Axiom K can, under certain 
circumstances, be generalized to a closure property for an agent’s knowledge which is 
implausibly strong: Whenever an agent c knows all of the formulas in a set Γ and A 

LOGIC AND FORMAL SEMANTICS FOR EPISTEMOLOGY
577
follows logically from Γ, then c also knows A. In particular, c knows all theorems (letting 
Γ = ø), and he knows all logical consequences of any formula which he knows (letting 
Γ consist of a single formula).
In response to the threat of logical omniscience, some epistemologists raised the 
question of whether the very idea of a logic of knowledge makes any epistemological 
sense. For instance, Hocutt challenged the applicability of logic to any realistic account 
of knowledge (1972). Because there is no guarantee that a knower will recognize that 
it is committed to some proposition that is logically equivalent to some proposition to 
which it readily assents, the very idea of an epistemic logic is on slippery ground.
Some of the first proposals for solving the problem of logical omniscience introduce 
semantical entities which explain why the agent appears to be, but in fact is not really 
logically omniscient. These entities were called ‘impossible possible worlds’ by Hintikka 
(1975). The basic idea is that an agent might mistakenly count among the worlds con-
sistent with his or her knowledge, some worlds containing logical contradictions. The 
mistake is simply a product of limited resources; the agent might not be in a position to 
detect the contradiction and might erroneously count them as genuine possibilities.
‘Seemingly possible’ worlds are introduced by Veikko Rantala (1975) in his urn-
model analysis of logical omniscience. Rantala devised a way of alleviating the mis-
match between our model theoretic reasoning about knowledge and our proof theoretic 
commitments: He asks us to conceive of our epistemic relationship with the world by 
analogy with an urn from which we can draw balls (individual units of information) 
one by one over time. With each new piece of information drawn from the urn, we can 
modify our models. The idea is, simply, that inquiry is a dynamical process in which our 
model of the world changes with new information. Rantala has provided a formalism 
which incorporates an intuitively reasonable notion of change in a model. Such change 
can be understood as a change in the properties of individuals of the model or a change 
in its universe of discourse.
Representing how the agent’s model might dynamically update is one way of thinking 
about epistemic agency in a more realistic manner. However, on any realistic account of 
epistemic agency, the agent is likely to consider (albeit inadvertently) worlds in which 
the classical laws of logic do not hold. In this context, the general problem of establish-
ing a set of epistemic principles for a realistic agent is unavoidable. Rantala’s approach 
provides a way of making the appearance of logical omniscience less threatening, but 
at the cost of introducing a degree of arbitrariness along with impossible or seemingly 
possible worlds (see Rantala 1982). In Rantala’s discussion of the semantics for impos-
sible worlds (1982) the truth condition is completely free, insofar as any contradiction 
among an agent’s beliefs can be represented by a model containing an impossible world. 
While logical omniscience is avoided, the price we pay is high, since no real epistemic 
principles hold broadly enough to encompass impossible and seemingly possible worlds 
(see Meyer and van der Hoek 1995: 87–88).
Some conditions must be applied to epistemic models such that they cohere with 
epistemic principles. Computer scientists have proposed that what is being modeled 
in epistemic logic is not knowledge simpliciter but a related concept which is immune 
to logical omniscience. The epistemic operator KcA should be read as ‘agent c knows 
implicitly A,’ ‘A follows from c’s knowledge,’ ‘A is agent c’s possible knowledge,’ etc. 
Propositional attitudes like these should replace the usual ‘agent c knows A’. While there 
exists some variation, the locutions all suggest modeling implicit knowledge or what is 
implicitly represented in an agent’s information state rather than explicit knowledge 

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
578
(Fagin et al. 1995, and others). The agents neither have to compute knowledge nor 
can they be held responsible for answering queries based on their knowledge under the 
implicit understanding of knowledge. Logical omniscience is an epistemological condi-
tion for implicit knowledge, but the agent might actually fail to realize this condition.
There are a variety of ways of responding to these kinds of challenges. One rather 
unpromising approach is to deny that epistemic logic is under any obligation to connect 
with more general epistemological concerns (see, for example, Lenzen 1978: 34). Rather 
than treating epistemic logic as a purely formal exercise, a preferable response involves 
maintaining that epistemic logic does carry epistemological significance but in an inevi-
tably idealized sort of way. One restricts attention to a class of rational agents where 
rationality is defined by certain postulates. Thus, agents have to satisfy at least some 
minimal conditions to simply qualify as rational. This is, for example, what Lemmon 
originally suggests (Lemmon 1959). One such condition would involve assuming that 
rational agents should acknowledge the laws of logic. For instance, if the agent knows p 
and p → q, it should be able to recognize that q follows validly.
These ‘rationality postulates’ for knowledge exhibit a striking similarity to the laws 
of modal and epistemic logic. One can, in turn, legitimately attempt to interpret the 
necessity operator in alethic axioms as a knowledge operator and then justify the modal 
axioms as axioms of knowledge. While Lemmon constructs the rational epistemic agent 
directly from the axiomatization of the logic, another way of justifying the epistemic 
axioms involves reference to their semantical features. This is the line of thought that 
Hintikka pursued in Knowledge and Belief. Hintikka stipulated that the axioms or prin-
ciples of epistemic logic are conditions descriptive of a special kind of general (strong) 
rationality. The statements that can be proved false by application of the epistemic 
axioms are not inconsistent, meaning that their truth is logically impossible. They are, 
rather, rationally ‘indefensible.’ Indefensibility is fleshed out as the agent’s epistemic 
laziness, sloppiness or perhaps cognitive incapacity whenever to realize the implications 
of what he in fact knows. Defensibility, then, means not falling victim of ‘epistemic 
negligence’ as Chisholm calls it (Chisholm 1963, 1977). The notion of indefensibility 
gives away the status of the epistemic axioms and logics. Some epistemic statement for 
which its negation is indefensible is called ‘self-sustaining.’ The notion of self-suste-
nance actually corresponds to the meta-logical concept of validity. Corresponding to 
a self-sustaining statement is a logically valid statement. But this will again be a state-
ment which is rationally indefensible to deny. So, in conclusion, epistemic axioms can 
be understood to be descriptions of rationality. This argument is spelled out in detail by 
Hilpinen (2002).
Common Knowledge and Distributed Knowledge
So far, this essay has discussed the epistemic properties of individual agents. However, 
many recent developments in epistemic logic concern the study of the formal proper-
ties of systems of interacting agents. This section introduces two of the most prominent 
notions in the study of multi-agent systems: common and distributed knowledge.
When we consider agents who are connected via some network we can study the 
effect of new information, presented to part of the (or made public to the whole) group. 
Formal grasp of the role of announcements in a complex network of agents has impor-
tant practical consequences for our understanding of cooperation and competition. The 
manner in which new information moves through a multi-agent system and how it 

LOGIC AND FORMAL SEMANTICS FOR EPISTEMOLOGY
579
causes individual agents to modify their beliefs is, in part, dependent on the character 
of the networks connecting those agents. However, analysis of the cooperative and 
competitive behavior of agents immediately brings into focus the dependency of these 
behaviors on a prior shared epistemic medium known as common knowledge.
Common knowledge, as distinguished from shared or mutual knowledge begins with 
the knowledge that one’s fellow agents know that p. However, it is more than that, 
because not only do all the agents in a group know that p, they also know that all other 
agents know p and, furthermore, that they all know that they all know p, and so on. I 
know that my fellow drivers know that they ought to stop at the red light and they know 
that I know that they know that they should stop, etc. Thus, in one sense common 
knowledge is a very powerful kind of phenomenon. The social role played by common 
knowledge in a broad range of human activities has long been recognized by philoso-
phers from David Hume (1740) to David Lewis (1969).
Common knowledge became a concern for theoretical computer scientists given the 
difficulties faced by projects in artificial intelligence which focus too narrowly on the 
epistemic condition of single agents. These difficulties encouraged theoretical com-
puter scientists to focus on the social and conventional features of knowledge and belief. 
Common knowledge is the basic background knowledge which supports the kinds of 
social entanglements that are crucial for sophisticated forms of intelligence; it is what 
any fool knows (to echo John McCarthy (1979)). Philosophical accounts of common 
knowledge see it as carrying a great burden; supporting the very possibility of the kind 
of collaborative activity that defines human intelligence. In order to approach anything 
resembling human epistemic agency, a significant level of social scaffolding needs to 
be in place. Clearly, for example, we depend on shared epistemic starting points for 
most basic social interactions, including, prominently, membership in a linguistic com-
munity. As Lewis noted (1969) a convention requires common knowledge among the 
agents that observe it. Robert Aumann (1995) also emphasized the centrality of com-
mon knowledge with respect to norms, social and linguistic practices, agent interactions 
and games.
A detailed treatment of the various formal techniques for tackling common knowl-
edge is beyond the scope of this essay (see Vanderschraaf and Sillari 2007 for an excel-
lent overview). However, given our account of the logical landscape for single-agent 
systems above, it is possible to introduce some of the main features of multi-agent sys-
tems with just a little oversimplification. The primary difference between the seman-
tics of single- and multi-agent semantics is that more than one accessibility relation is 
introduced. A modal system for n agents results from combining n modal logics in cases 
where it can be assumed that the agents are homogeneous in the sense that they can all 
be described by the same logical system. Thus, in the simplest case, an epistemic logic 
for n agents consists of n copies of a certain modal logic. In such an extended epistemic 
logic it is possible to express that some agent in the group knows a certain fact, that an 
agent knows that another agent knows a certain fact, etc.
It is possible to develop the logic even further: Not only can an agent know that 
another agent knows a fact, but they can all know this fact simultaneously. From 
here it is possible to express that everyone knows that everyone knows that everyone 
knows that everyone knows that . . . some fact holds. This is what is meant by com-
mon knowledge.
One way of defining common knowledge involves defining common knowledge for 
the entire group of agents rather than partitioning the group of agents into subsets with 

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
580
different common ‘knowledges.’ Once multiple agents have been added to the syntax, 
the language is augmented with an additional operator C. CA is then interpreted as 
‘It is common knowledge among the agents that A.’ Well-formed formulas follow the 
standard recursive recipe with modifications that account for the multiple agents. So, 
for instance, the operator E is introduced such that EA means ‘Everyone knows that A.’ 
EA is defined as the conjunction K1A ^ K2A ^ . . . ^ KnA.
To semantically interpret n knowledge operators, binary accessibility relations Rn are 
defined over the set of possible worlds W. A special accessibility relation, R°, is intro-
duced to interpret the operator of common knowledge. The relation must be flexible 
enough to express the relationship between individual and common knowledge. The 
idea is to let the accessibility relation for C be the transitive closure of the union of 
the accessibility relations corresponding to the knowledge operators for the individual 
agents.
The model M for an epistemic system with n agents where the agents have common 
knowledge is a structure M = <W,R1,R2, . . .,Rn,R°,ϕ>, where W is a non-empty space 
of possible worlds, R1,R2, . . .,Rn,R° are accessibility relations over W for which R° = (R1 
 R2  . . .  Rn) and ϕ again is the function assigning worlds to atomic propositional 
formula ϕ : atom ↦ P(W). The semantics for the Boolean connectives remain intact. 
The formula KiA is true in a world w, i.e., M,w ⊨ KiA iff ∀w'∈W : if Riww', then M,w' 
⊨ A. So, A is common knowledge in a world w, when M,w ⊨ CA iff R°ww' implies 
M,w' ⊨ A.
Varying the properties of the accessibility relations R1,R2, . . .,Rn, results in different 
epistemic logics. For instance system K with common knowledge is determined by all 
frames, while system S4 with common knowledge is determined by all reflexive and 
transitive frames. Similar results can be obtained for the remaining epistemic logics 
(Fagin et al. 1995).
Informally speaking, the claim that some proposition is common knowledge is 
extremely strong. Therefore, those propositions for which we can claim common 
knowledge tend to be very weak. To claim that some proposition is common knowledge, 
that everyone knows that everyone knows A, implies that everybody knows A, which 
implies individual knowledge of A.
If we think of common knowledge as involving very strong claims about the epis-
temic state of a group of agents, at the opposite end of the spectrum is the notion of 
distributed knowledge. Distributed knowledge is an epistemic property which captures 
the idea that there is an aggregated store of knowledge in a group, some of which might 
not necessarily be possessed by any individual member of the group. If even one agent in 
a group knows A then A is part of the distributed knowledge of the group. Where com-
mon knowledge is very strong (and its argument is rather weak), distributed knowledge 
is weaker, but can be obtained for much stronger facts, as we shall see.
One way to think about distributed knowledge is to recognize its relationship to a 
communication network. Something is distributed knowledge in a group if it could be 
known by the individuals were they able to talk to each other. For instance, in a crowd 
of 100 people, when two people have the same birthday, this might not be individually 
known, but could be known if the members were able to talk to each other. So, to take 
a simple case, if A knows that B is older than C or D and E knows that B is not older 
than D, then while no individual agent knows that A is older than C, that knowledge is 
distributed throughout the group and could be elicited given the right kinds of commu-
nication. This is a kind of knowledge that can be ascribed to some collection of agents 

LOGIC AND FORMAL SEMANTICS FOR EPISTEMOLOGY
581
(given certain conditions) but which need not necessarily be ascribed to any agent in 
isolation. Of course the knowledge that an individual agent has is also part of the aggre-
gated store of distributed knowledge.
When we consider the epistemic properties of groups such as corporations or sci-
entific communities, distributed knowledge that the group exhibits is likely to be one 
of the properties of interest. For instance, if we are entitled to say that the electric 
company as a whole knows how to maintain the power supply, we do so by reference 
to the distributed knowledge that exists in the group. Similarly, in debates concerning 
the nature of cognition which relies on resources beyond the confines of the individual 
brain and body, those problems related to the possibility of extended cognition, the for-
mal study of distributed knowledge might prove useful. The distribution of knowledge 
in a community might seem like a rather nebulous or metaphysically extravagant notion 
until we begin to examine it in a formal setting.
The most famous example of the formal study of features of group knowledge involves 
scenarios like the muddy children problem. The scenario involves n children and their 
father. k children have mud on their foreheads. The children can see each other but 
they cannot see whether they have mud on their own foreheads. The children trust 
their father, do not cheat, are rational and do not communicate with one another. The 
scenario involves the effect of the father’s announcement on the behavior of the group 
and on the epistemic states of the members of the group. The father announces: ‘There 
is at least one child with mud on its forehead. Will all the children who know they 
have mud on their foreheads please step forward?’ If k is greater than one, no child steps 
forward. When their father makes his announcement the k-th time all muddy children 
step forward.
In order to explain this scenario, we first consider the simplest case. Where k = 1 then 
the child with mud on its head knows that it must be the muddy one since it sees no 
other child with mud on its head. So, when k = 1 the explanation is clear. In the case 
where k = 2 we can imagine the following scenario with two muddy children a and b:
k = 2.
a* → b*
↓[[points from a* to c]]
c
Muddy child a can see that b is muddy, but it does not know whether it is muddy itself. 
After the father’s first announcement, when b does not step forward, a knows that b does 
not know whether b has a muddy forehead. This means that b sees at least one muddy 
forehead on either a or c. Since a can see that c has a clean forehead, a reasons that 
the muddy forehead that b saw, was a’s. b reasons in the same way based on the failure 
of muddy headed a to step forward after the father’s first announcement. So, after the 
second announcement, both children step forward. By induction from cases with one 
and two muddy children, we can easily see how cases with greater numbers of muddy 
children would proceed. A full treatment of the muddy children problem can be found 
in Meyer and van der Hoek (1995: 56) or in Fagin et al. (1995: 3).
There is a range of cases like these in which we must account for the interaction of 
multi-agent systems and in which certain collective features of group behavior must be 
explained. The kinds of epistemic systems under consideration include cases, like the 
muddy children, which are sensitive to the introduction of new information via public 

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
582
announcement and in which the interactions of the agents contributes another dynam-
ical component which has an effect on the unfolding states of the system. The muddy 
children problem is a simple example of the kinds of dynamical features that epistemic 
logic tackled in the 1980s and 1990s.
Game Theory, Belief Revision and the Properties of Agents
In multi-agent settings, it is natural to consider the role of competition and coopera-
tion. Thus, as epistemic logic began to attend to the dynamics of groups, game theory 
began to play a more prominent role in reflections on epistemic agency. Aumann, van 
Benthem, Brandenburger, Fagin, Halpern, Keisler, Moses, Stalnaker, Vardi and others 
have contributed to uncovering important features of agent rationality showing how 
game theory adds to the general understanding of notions such as knowledge, belief 
and belief revision. By the end of the 1990s, Baltag, Moss and Solecki had combined 
epistemic logic with belief revision theory to study actions and belief updates in games 
(Baltag et al. 1998).
In the 1980s, Alchourrón, Gärdenfors and Makinson developed a theory of belief 
revision theory (AGM) which provides an account of rational change of belief in light 
of novel evidence (Alchourrón 1985; Gärdenfors 1988). Expansions, contractions and 
revisions in an agents’ set of belief are characterized formally. ‘Revision’ here means 
additions of beliefs to the agent’s belief-set which maintain consistency. Revision is 
distinguished from simple expansion, which takes place without regard for consistency, 
and contraction, where beliefs are removed from the set. In order to be considered 
rational, an agent who revises his beliefs must obey the AGM postulates. Taking K to be 
the agent’s initial set of beliefs and * to be the revision operation and letting A be the 
additional information that the agent encounters, the basic postulates are presented by 
Robert Koons (2009) as follows:
(1) K*A is closed under logical consequence.
(2) A belongs to K*A.
(3) K*A is a subset of the logical closure of K  {A}.
(4) If ¬A does not belong to K, then the closure of K  {A} is a subset of 
K*A.
(5) If K*A is logically inconsistent, then either K is inconsistent, or A is.
(6) If A and B are logically equivalent, then K*A = K*B.
(7) K*(A & B) is a subset of the logical closure of K*A  {B}.
(8) If ¬B does not belong to K*A, then the logical closure of K*A  B is a 
subset of K*(A & B).
Following Andre Fuhrmann’s development of the idea of translating AGM into 
dynamical modal logic (1988, 1991), de Rijke also showed that the AGM postulates 
governing expansion and revision can be translated into the object language of dynamic 
modal logic (de Rijke 1994). At about the same time, Segerberg demonstrated how the 
theory of belief revision could be formulated in modal logic. Segerberg merged the static 
first generation doxastic logic with the dynamics of belief change into ‘dynamic doxas-
tic logic’ (Segerberg 1995). Doxastic operators in the logic of belief like BcA can be cap-
tured by AGM in the sense that ‘A is in c’s belief-set T’, or ¬Bc¬A becomes ‘¬A is not 
in c’s belief-set T.’ An immediate difference between the two perspectives is that while 

LOGIC AND FORMAL SEMANTICS FOR EPISTEMOLOGY
583
AGM can express dynamic operations on belief-sets like expansions (‘A is in c’s belief-
set T expanded by D,’ i.e., A ∈ T + D), revisions (‘A is in c’s belief-set T revised by D,’ 
i.e., A ∈ T*D), and contractions (‘A is in c’s belief-set T contracted by D,’ i.e. A ∈ T − 
D), no such dynamics are immediately expressible in the standard language of doxastic 
logic. On the other hand, action languages include operators like [μ] and <μ> which are 
prefixed to a well-formed formula A. On Segerberg’s interpretation, [μ]A (<μ>A) mean 
that ‘after every (some) way of performing action μ it is the case that A.’ By introduc-
ing three new operators [+], [*], and [−] into the doxastic language, the three dynamic 
operations on belief-sets may be rendered as [+D]BcA, [*D]BcA and [−D]BcA.
After revising the original belief revision theory such that changes of beliefs hap-
pen in ‘hypertheories’ or concentric spheres enumerated according to entrencement, 
Segerberg (1999a, 1999b) provided several axiomatizations of the dynamic doxastic 
logic together with soundness and completeness results. The dynamic doxastic logic 
paradigm can also be extended to iterated belief revision as studied by Lindström and 
Rabinowicz (1997) and accommodate various forms of agent introspection. A related 
approach drawn up by van Ditmarsch, van der Hoek and Kooi’s new ‘dynamic epis-
temic logic’ studies how information changes and how actions with epistemic impact 
on agents may be modeled (van der Hoek et al. 2003; van Ditmarsch et al. 2007). For 
a more detailed discussion of belief revision theory, see André Fuhrmann “Theories of 
Belief Change,” Chapter 56 in this volume.
One might also choose to endow the agents with epistemic capacities facilitating spe-
cial epistemic behaviors. Fagin, Halpern, Moses and Vardi have, for instance, consid-
ered ‘perfect recall’ (Fagin et al. 1995): interacting agents’ knowledge in the dynamic 
system might increase as time goes by but the agents might still store old information. 
The agent’s current local state is an encoding of all events that have happened so far 
in the run. Perfect recall is, in turn, an epistemic recommendation telling the agent to 
remember his earlier epistemic states.
There are other structural properties of agents being studied in the literature of 
dynamic epistemic logics. In an epistemic logic suited for modeling various games of 
imperfect information, van Benthem (2000) refers to such properties as ‘styles of playing.’ 
Properties such as ‘bounded memory,’ various ‘mechanisms for information updates’ and 
‘uniform strategies,’ infallibility, consistency etc. have been investigated. Yoav Shoham 
and Kevin Leyton-Brown’s Multi-Agent Systems (2009) provides an updated overview 
of the relevant literature on game theory and belief revision in a multi-agent setting. 
Agents as explicitly learning mechanisms are also integral parts of Kelly’s (1996) com-
putational epistemology and a related approach called modal operator epistemology 
(Hendricks 2001, 2003). Researchers in artificial intelligence have additionally been 
trying to describe and specify the behavior of intelligent/rational agents by extensions 
of epistemic of logic by augmenting logics of time, action and belief with modalities for 
desires and intentions (see Meyer 2003, in particular, his discussion of the BDI-frame-
work of Rao and Georgeff in Section 5.2).
Acknowledgments
I owe a special debt of gratitude to Wiebe van der Hoek, whose detailed criticism of this 
chapter has improved it considerably. I am very grateful to Vincent Hendricks for his 
comments and for graciously permitting me to use some of our previously co-authored 
material in this chapter. Specifically, pages are largely taken from our co-authored 2006. 

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
584
Thanks also to Duncan Pritchard, Clifford Hill and Emmanuel Genot for helpful criti-
cism of an earlier draft of this essay.
References
Alchourrón, C.E., Gärdenfors, P. and Makinson, D. (1985). “On the Logic of Theory Change,” Journal of 
Symbolic Logic 50: 510–530.
Aumann, R. (1995). “Backward Induction and Common Knowledge of Rationality,” Games and Economic 
Behavior 8: 6–19.
Austin, J. (1975). How To Do Things with Words. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Baltag, A., Moss, L.S. and Solecki, S. (1998). “The Logic of Public Announcements, Common Knowledge, 
and Private Suspicion.” Proceedings of TARK 1998. Los Altos: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 43–56.
Benthem, J.F.A.K. van (2000). “Logic and Game Theory—Close Encounters of the Third Kind,” in van 
Loon, I., Mints, G. and Muskens, R. (eds.), Proceedings of LLC99. Stanford: CSLI Publications.
Bull, R. and Segerberg, K. (1984). “Basic Modal Logic,” in Gabbay, D. and Guenthner F. (eds), Handbook of 
Philosophical Logic, vol. II: Extensions of Classical Logic. Dordrecht: D. Reidel Publishing Company, 1–88.
Chisholm, R. (1963). “The Logic of Knowing,” Journal of Philosophy 60, 773–795.
Chisholm, R. (1977). Theory of Knowledge (2nd ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Ditmarsch, H. van, van der Hoek, W. and Kooi, B. (2007). Dynamic Epistemic Logic. Dordrecht: Springer.
Fagin, R., Halpern, J.Y., Moses, Y. and Vardi, M.Y. (1995). Reasoning about Knowledge. Cambridge: MIT 
Press.
Fuhrmann, A. (1988). Relevant Logic, Modal Logic and Theory Change, Ph.D. Thesis, Department of 
Philosophy and Automated Reasoning Project, Institute of Advanced Studies, Australian National 
University, Canberra.
Fuhrmann, A. (1991). “On the Modal Logic of Theory Change,” in Fuhrmann, A. and Morreau, M. (eds.), 
The Modal Logic of Theory Change. Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence 465. Heidelberg-Berlin-New 
York: Springer.
Gärdenfors, P. (1988). Knowledge in Flux—Modelling the Dynamics of Epistemic States. Cambridge: MIT 
Press.
Gettier, E. (1963). “Is Justified True Belief Knowledge?” Analysis 23: 121–123.
Hendricks, V.F. (2001). The Convergence of Scientific Knowledge—A View from the Limit. Trends in Logic: 
Studia Logica Library Series, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Hendricks, V.F. (2003). “Active Agents,” Journal of Logic, Language and Information, van Benthem, J. and van 
Rooy, R. (eds.), 12, 4: 469–495.
Hendricks, V.F. (2005). Mainstream and Formal Epistemology. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hendricks, V.F. and Symons, J. (2006). “Where’s the Bridge? Epistemic Logic and Epistemology,” Philosophical 
Studies 128, 1: 2–26.
Hendricks, V.F. and Symons, J. (2007). “Epistemic Logic,” The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 
2009 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2009/entries/logic-
epistemic/>.
Hilpinen, R. (2002). “Deontic, Epistemic and Temporal Modal Logics,” in Jacquette, D. (ed.), A Companion 
to Philosophical Logic. Malden, MA: Blackwell, 491–509.
Hilpinen, R. (2006). “Jaakko Hintikka on Epistemic Logic and Epistemology,” in Auxier, R.E. (ed.), The 
Philosophy of Jaakko Hintikka. Chicago: Open Court Publishing Company, 783–818.
Hintikka, J. (1962). Knowledge and Belief: An Introduction to the Logic of the Two Notions. Cornell: Cornell 
University Press.
Hintikka, J. (1975). “Impossible Possible Worlds Vindicated,” Journal of Philosophical Logic 4: 475–484.
Hintikka, J. (2007). “Epistemology without Knowledge and Without Belief,” in Hintikka, J., Socratic 
Epistemology: Explorations of Knowledge Seeking by Questioning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
11–37.
Hocutt, M.O. (1972). “Is Epistemic Logic Possible?” Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 13, 433–453.
Hoek, W. van der, Ditmarsch, H. van, Kooi, B. (2003). “Concurrent Dynamic Epistemic Logic,” in 
Hendricks, V.F., Jørgensen, K.F. and Pedersen, S.A. (eds.), Knowledge Contributors. Synthese Library, vol. 
322. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 105–173.
Hume, D. (1976 [1740, 1888]). A Treatise of Human Nature, ed. L.A. Selby-Bigge. Rev. 2nd edn, ed. P.H. 
Nidditch. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

LOGIC AND FORMAL SEMANTICS FOR EPISTEMOLOGY
585
Kelly, K. (1996). The Logic of Reliable Inquiry. New York: Oxford University Press.
Koons, R. (2009). “Defeasible Reasoning,” The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2009 Edition), 
Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2009/entries/reasoning-defeasi-
ble/>.
Kripke, S. (1963). “Semantical Analysis of Modal Logic,” Zeitschrift für Matematische Logik und Grundlagen 
der Matematik 9: 67–96.
Kutschera, F. von (1976). Einführung in die intensional Semantik. Berlin: W. de Gruyter.
Lemmon, E.J. (1959). “Is There Only One Correct System of Modal Logic?,” Aristotelian Society Supplementary, 
Volume XXXIII, 23–40.
Lemmon, E.J. (1977). An Introduction to Modal Logic, in collaboration with D. Scott. Oxford: Basil Blackwell 
Publishers.
Lenzen, W. (1978). Recent Work in Epistemic Logic, in Acta Philosophica Fennica 30: 1–219.
Lewis, D. (1969). Convention: A Philosophical Study. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Lindström, S. and Rabinowicz, W. (1997). “Extending Dynamic Logic: Accommodating Iterated Beliefs 
and Ramsey Conditionals within DLL,” in Lindahl, L., Needham, P. and Sliwinski, R. (eds.), For Good 
Measure. Uppsala Philosophical Studies, 46: 123–153.
McCarthy, J. (1979). “Ascribing Mental Qualities to Machines.” Technical Report STAN-CS-79–725 
Stanford University.
Meyer, J.-J. Ch. (2003). “Modal, Epistemic and Doxastic Logic,” in Gabbay, D. and Guenthner, F. (eds.), 
Handbook of Philosophical Logic (2nd edition) Vol. 10, Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1–38.
Meyer, J.-J.Ch. and Hoek, W. van der (1995). Epistemic Logic for AI and Computer Science. Cambridge Tracts 
in Theoretical Computer Science 41. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Moore, G.E. (1952). The Philosophy of G. E. Moore. (2nd edition) ed. Paul Arthur Schilpp, New York: Tudor 
Publishing Company.
Rantala, V. (1975). “Urn Models: A New Kind of Non-Standard Model for First-Order Logic,” Journal of 
Symbolic Logic 4: 455–474.
Rantala, V. (1982). “Quantified Modal Logic: Non-Normal Worlds and Propositional Attitudes,” Studia 
Logica 41, 1: 41–66.
Rijke, M. de (1994). “Meeting Some Neighbours: A Dynamic Modal Logic Meets Theories of Change and 
Knowledge Representation,” in Eijck, J. van and Visser, A. (eds.), Logic and Information Flow, Cambridge: 
MIT Press, 170–196.
Segerberg, K. (1995). “Belief Revision from the Point of View of Doxastic Logic,” Bulletin of the IGPL, 3: 
535–553.
Segerberg, K. (1999a). “The Basic Dynamic Doxastic Logic of AGM,” Uppsala Prints and Preprints in 
Philosophy, 1.
Segerberg, K. (1999b). “A Completeness Proof in Full DDL,” in Sliwinski, R. (ed.), Philosophical Crumbs: 
Essays Dedicated to Ann-Mari Henschen-Dahlqvist on the Occasion of her Seventy fifth Birthday, Uppsala 
Philosophical Studies, 49: 195–207.
Shoham, Y. and Leyton-Brown, K. (2009). Multiagent Systems: Algorithmic, Game-Theoretic, and Logical 
Foundations, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stalnaker, R. (1996). “Knowledge, Belief and Counterfactual Reasoning in Games,” Economics and Philosophy, 
12: 133–163.
Stalnaker, R. (2006). On Logics of Knowledge and Belief, Philosophical Studies 128, 169–199.
Vanderschraaf, P. and Sillari, G. (2007). “Common Knowledge,” The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy 
(Spring 2009 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2009/entries/
common-knowledge/>.
Voorbraak, F. (1993). As Far as I Know. Epistemic Logic and Uncertainty, Dissertation, Utrecht University, 
Utrecht. Published as volume 7 in Queastiones Infinitae. Department of Philosophy, Utrecht University.
Wright, G.H. von (1951). An Essay on Modal Logic. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company.

53
SECOND-ORDER
KNOWLEDGE
Christoph Kelp and Nikolaj J.L.L. Pedersen
1. Introduction
Knowledge involves belief. Belief is a propositional attitude, i.e. an attitude that a subject 
holds towards a proposition. If a subject S knows that P and the proposition P involves 
no further knowledge attribution, let us say that S possesses first-order knowledge. On the 
other hand, if S knows that P and the proposition P involves a knowledge attribution, 
let us say that S possesses higher-order knowledge. The aim of this article is to shed light 
on the nature of second-order knowledge, a specific kind of higher-order knowledge. It 
is worth noting, however, that the kinds of considerations offered here are also relevant 
to cases of knowledge of higher orders—if properly extended or modified.
An example of second-order knowledge is the following:
(1) Duncan knows that he knows that 4 + 5 = 9
as the proposition within the scope of “knows” involves a further knowledge attribu-
tion. We will approach the task of shedding light on second-order knowledge by discuss-
ing it in relation to three issues from the epistemological literature:
1. Internalism/externalism: according to internalists about warrant, if a subject S is 
warranted in believing that P, then the reasons that underwrite S’s warrant are 
accessible to S by reflection—that is, by introspection, a priori reasoning, or mem-
ory—alone. Externalists deny this idea. (For more on internalism/externalism, see, 
e.g., BonJour 1992, Pryor 2001, and the articles in Kornblith 2001 and Goldberg 
2007. “Warrant” here should not be taken in the sense of Plantinga 1993, i.e. as that 
which renders knowledge when added to true belief.)
2. KK-Principle: if S knows that P, then S knows that S knows that P. We can write this 
formally as follows: KSP → KSKSP (where “KS” is read “S knows that . . .” and “. . .” 
is to be replaced by a proposition).
3. Knowledge-Transmission Principle: if S knows that R knows that P, then S knows that 
P (formally: KSKRP → KSP).

SECOND-ORDER KNOWLEDGE
587
2. Internalism/Externalism, Monism/Pluralism and 
Second-Order Knowledge
Before we turn to the task of showing how the internalism/externalism distinction can 
be used to gain insights into the nature of second-order knowledge, a clarificatory remark 
is in order. The distinction between internalism and externalism has been introduced 
as pertaining to warrant. How, then, can it be relevant to the nature of second-order 
knowledge?
The answer is this: most epistemologists take warrant to be a necessary condition on 
knowledge. One cannot know that P without also being warranted in believing that P. 
For this reason, internalists about warrant are also internalists about knowledge in an 
interesting sense: knowledge is subject to a substantial internalist warrant constraint. 
Externalists about warrant, on the other hand, maintain that there is no substantial 
internalist warrant constraint on knowledge. Typically they hold this view, because they 
hold the further view that being warranted is grounded in features of the relevant belief-
forming method or process (possibly in conjunction with features of the environment) 
and that these features need not be reflectively accessible to the subject in order to be 
warrant-conferring. According to Goldman (1979), a prominent advocate of external-
ism, a belief—if warranted—is so because the relevant belief-forming process is reliable, 
meaning that it yields a good enough ratio of true to false beliefs. The warrant-giving 
reason—i.e. reliability—need not be reflectively accessible to the subject. It is enough 
that the process is reliable. For our present purposes, we need not dive into the intricate 
details of the debate between internalists and externalists. It will suffice to table three 
views that mark the scope of, respectively, internalism and externalism in rather differ-
ent ways.
The first view and second view are, respectively, internalist and externalist warrant 
monism (or, respectively, “IW-monism” and “EW-monism,” in short). The opposition 
between these two views has traditionally fueled the internalism/externalism debate, 
the articulation of the third view—pluralism—being a more recent development. 
According to the IW-monist, all warrants are subject to an internalist accessibility con-
straint: warrant-underwriting reasons always have to be accessible to the warranted indi-
vidual through reflection alone. According to the EW-monist, there is no such thing 
as internalist warrant. No warrant is such that a subject is excluded from being war-
ranted just because the warrant-underwriting reasons fail to be reflectively accessible. 
(It might be that these reasons are reflectively accessible in some cases. However, this 
should not be run together with the internalist idea that this kind of accessibility is 
required for warrant.) EW-monism can be held on various grounds. One might think that 
no warrant involves any warrant-underwriting reason that has to be reflectively acces-
sible. Alternatively, one could grant that some warrants involve reasons that have to be 
reflectively accessible, but maintain that these reasons never, by themselves, suffice for 
warrant. To yield warrant they have to be supplemented by reasons that are not subject to 
a reflective accessibility constraint—“externalist reasons,” as it were. The first incarna-
tion of EW-monism is more radically externalist than the second, but both yield a rather 
strong form of externalism—one that goes beyond what externalism commits one to, 
as characterized above. Externalism thus characterized only commits one to saying that 
there are instances of warrant for which the underwriting reasons are not reflectively 
accessible. The third view is warrant pluralism (or “W-pluralism,” in short). According 
to W-pluralism, some types of warrants are subject to a reflective accessibility constraint, 

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
588
while others are not. The former types of warrants are thus internalist in nature, while 
the latter are externalist.
The three views just presented are pairwise incompatible. What we will now do is to 
assume the truth of each of these views in turn and see what can be said about the nature 
of second-order knowledge against the background of these assumptions.
Assume that IW-monism is true and consider a case of second-order knowledge—ren-
dered formally: KSKSP. What can be said about the nature of this instance of knowledge? 
The assumption of IW-monism enables us to make some progress with respect to this 
question: both knowledge attributions have to be understood along internalist lines. 
Formally, we can write this by using a superscript: KI
SKI
SP.
To get a specific point of focus let us return to the example of second-order knowl-
edge given earlier. Duncan knows that he knows that 4 + 5 = 9. Internalism tells us that 
whatever warrant-giving reasons are involved in Duncan’s first-order knowledge that 4 
+ 5 = 9 must be accessible via introspection, a priori reasoning, or memory. This con-
straint could be satisfied by Duncan’s knowing that 4 + 5 = 9 on the basis of a proof in 
elementary arithmetic. In that case Duncan’s warrant-giving reasons—provided by the 
proof—are a priori accessible. He can access them by thinking alone. As for Duncan’s 
second-order knowledge, IW-monism dictates that this, too, be subject to an accessibil-
ity constraint. How could this constraint be satisfied? Here is one way: Duncan might 
introspect and come to believe that he knows that 4 + 5 = 9, because he reflects on the 
pedigree of his proof and reaches the conclusion that it is a solid one. The reasons that 
underwrite the warrant for his higher-order belief are the belief-contents I know that 4 + 
5 = 9 and I know so on the basis of a solid proof. These contents are reflectively accessible 
to him, as introspective access is a species of reflective access. The general point to draw 
from this specific case is that an advocate of IW-monism is committed to saying that 
every case of second-order knowledge is like the one just considered by involving two 
internalist warrants.
Let us leave IW-monism behind and instead assume that EW-monism is true. What 
can be said about the nature of second-order knowledge against this assumption? We 
immediately get that the warrant involved in each of the knowledge attributions has to 
be externalist in nature. The warrant-underwriting reasons need not be accessible purely 
via reflection. As before, we can signal this formally by using superscripts: KE
SKE
SP.
To get a specific point of focus let us suppose that
(2) Sven knows that he knows that there is a bottle of water on the table.
Let us see how the EW-monist can account for (2). We will do so by assuming reliabi-
lism, i.e. the brand of externalism mentioned earlier. Furthermore, assume that Sven 
believes that there is a bottle of water on the table on the basis of visual perception, 
that he believes that he knows that there is a bottle of water on the table as a result of 
introspection, and that both of these belief-forming processes are reliable. This delivers 
the warrants involved in (2), without the satisfaction of a requirement to the effect that 
the warrant-underwriting feature—i.e. reliability—be reflectively accessible to Sven. 
This feature by itself renders Sven warranted on the reliabilist picture. What the EW-
monist is committed to is the idea that all instances of second-order knowledge can be 
accounted for in the same manner as (2)—meaning, in particular, that both ingredi-
ent warrants must be of an externalist character. (In showing how an externalist can 
account for (2) we appealed to reliabilism. However, it is important to note that some-

SECOND-ORDER KNOWLEDGE
589
one who is a reliabilist—or broader, an externalist—about visual-perceptual warrant 
and/or introspective warrant by no means is committed to EW-monism.)
Let us now turn to warrant pluralism, the last of the three views. According to the 
pluralist, some types of warranted belief involve satisfaction of the internalist accessibil-
ity constraint, while others do not (Burge (1993, 2003), Goldman (1988), and Wright 
(2004) are sympathetic to some version of warrant pluralism). As we have seen, the 
IW-monist and the EW-monist alike are committed to holding that all instances of 
second-order knowledge have a uniform nature. What is interesting about W-pluralism 
is that it leaves conceptual room for two kinds of non-uniform second-order knowledge, 
in addition to the uniform kinds endorsed by IW-monism and EW-monism, respec-
tively. Using the formalism relied on so far, W-pluralism accommodates the following 
four possibilities:
Uniform second-order knowledge:
• 
KI
SKI
SP
• 
KE
SKE
SP
Non-uniform second-order knowledge:
• 
KI
SKE
SP
• 
KE
SKI
SP
The considerations just offered show that what stance one takes with respect to the 
internalism/externalism and monism/pluralism issues is relevant to the nature of sec-
ond-order knowledge. On the IW-monist view, second-order knowledge is tied thor-
oughly to reflection. Both knowledge attributions involved in any case of second-order 
knowledge are subject to the requirement that the warrant-giving reasons be acces-
sible through reflection alone. According to EW-monism, no instance of second-order 
knowledge has this nature. The ingredient warrants are not subject to a reflective acces-
sibility constraint. The warrant pluralist begs to differ with both the IW-monist and 
the EW-monist. Some instances of second-order knowledge might have a reflective 
character (KI
SKI
SP), while others might have an externalist character (KE
SKE
SP). Yet 
other instances, might have neither of these uniform characters, but be non-uniform or 
mixed instead (KI
SKE
SP or KE
SKI
SP).
3. The KK-Principle
We will now turn to perhaps the most widely discussed issue in the debate over sec-
ond-order knowledge, the KK-principle. To begin with, recall the formulation of the 
principle mentioned earlier:
Strong-KK 
KSP → KSKSP
This principle is not obviously true and so it requires defense. A full defense of the KK-
principle will show not only why we ought to buy into it, but also that it is validated 
by one’s preferred account of (first-order) knowledge. And already at this stage, there 
is some reason to believe that Strong-KK does not hold. After all, knowledge requires 
belief. If it turns out to be so much as possible to know a proposition yet fail to believe 

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
590
that one does, Strong-KK will be refuted. And this does certainly seem possible. For 
instance, one might fail to register that one knows some proposition—due to a lapse 
of attention, say—and, in consequence, fail to form the corresponding belief. For that 
reason, one might think that the prospects for Strong-KK are rather dim.
In view of such difficulties, some have tried to restrict the KK-principle. Perhaps the 
most common move here is to weaken it: if one knows that P then one is in a position to 
know that one knows that P. Or again, formally (where “◊KS” is read as “S is in a position 
to know . . .” and “. . .” is to be replaced by a proposition):
Weak-KK 
KSP → ◊KSKSP
There are various ways of spelling out the notion of being in a position to know. 
Crucially, however, all of these ways maintain that being in a position to know does 
not require belief. This will, of course, remedy the above defect. It remains to be shown 
whether there is good reason to accept Weak-KK and whether it is validated by the cor-
rect first-order account of knowledge.
The answer to the question concerning the KK-principle is often viewed as reflecting 
the traditional divide between IW-monism and EW-monism (recall that the monism/
pluralism divide is a more recent development in the debate). IW-monists tend to be 
more sympathetic to the KK-principle, while EW-monists tend to reject it (some, e.g. 
Williams (1991), have gone as far as cashing out the distinction between the two views 
in terms of their diverging stances on the KK-principle). It is not hard to see why this 
should be so. Consider reliabilism again. Reliabilists typically reject the KK-principle 
even in its weak form because they typically construe at least some of the processes 
that are crucial to the delivery of the first-order beliefs—such as perception, testimony 
etc.—not only as being different from but also as being independent from the ones that 
are crucial to the delivery of the second-order beliefs—such as introspection. If these 
processes are both separate and independent, however, it is possible that one—the first-
order process, say—operates in such a way as to deliver the warrant, while no second-
order process follows suit. In such a situation the subject could acquire a first-order 
warrant while not even being in a position to acquire a second-order warrant—hence 
the reliabilists’ rejection of even Weak-KK.
Contrast this position with the one favored by the IW-monist. If, as IW-monists 
think, the subject’s (S’s) reasons that underwrite her warrant for P must be accessible 
to her by reflection alone, then through reflecting S can come to know that she has a 
warrant for P. If, as some IW-monists are also happy to grant, belief is luminous in the 
sense that one can know by reflection alone that one believes P on grounds G whenever 
one does, S also has a warrant that she believes that P and that this belief is suitably 
grounded in her warrant for P. Since in order to know P S must also have a warrant 
that P is true, she thus has a warrant (a) that she has a warrant for P, (b) that P is true, 
(c) that she believes P and (d) that her belief that P is grounded in her warrant for P. 
Given an IW-monist conception of knowledge according to which one knows that P 
just in case one truly believes P on the basis of a warrant for P, it follows that S has a 
warrant that she satisfies all the conditions for knowledge that P. In other words, she has 
a warrant that she knows that P. Thus, if S knows P, she has a warrant that she knows 
P (and, of course, it is true that S knows P). Finally, suppose that to be in a position to 
know that P is to be but a suitably based belief that P away from knowledge that P. By 
the present IW-monist account of knowledge that means that one is in a position to 

SECOND-ORDER KNOWLEDGE
591
know P if and only if one has a warrant for P and P is true. On this account of being in a 
position to know, it follows that if S knows P she is in a position to know that she knows 
P. Thus we have one way in which an IW-monist conception of knowledge validates 
Weak-KK.
4. Objections to the KK-Principle
Gettier Cases
Let us now move on to some objections to the KK-principle. Some, including card-car-
rying internalists (e.g. Chisholm 1986: 90), have thought that the Gettier problem not 
only constitutes the demise of the kind of IW-monist conception of knowledge sketched 
above, but also highlights that the prospects even for a weak version of the KK-principle 
are dim.
One way of articulating their worry is as follows: Gettier cases show that knowledge 
cannot just be warranted true belief (where warrant is construed along IW-monist lines). 
They show that a further external condition for knowledge is required. Given that the 
condition is external, however, it will (at least in some cases) be impossible to come to 
know by reflection alone that one satisfies it. But, the thought continues, in order to 
be in a position to know that one knows, one must, by IW-monist lights, at least have a 
warrant—i.e. an internalist warrant—that one satisfies all the conditions for first-order 
knowledge. So, even the IW-monist will be unable to validate Weak-KK. If even the 
IW-monist cannot do this, the prospects for Weak-KK might appear to be rather dim.
There are a number of ways in which this worry can be allayed. The one we would 
like to focus on here concerns the possibility of W-pluralism, discussed briefly above. 
Let it be agreed that knowledge requires a degettierization condition in addition to 
internalistically warranted true belief. If we are willing to countenance warrant plural-
ism, we might be able to rescue Weak-KK by putting to use the idea of an externalist 
warrant that one has by default—call it “entitlement.” (For more on entitlement see, 
e.g., Burge 1993, 2003 and Wright 2004.) Suppose it can be argued that one is entitled 
to believe that one’s first-order beliefs are not gettierized, which seems plausible if a case 
can be made that there is any proposition one is entitled to believe. Suppose, further-
more, we are willing to grant warrants constituted, on the one hand, by one’s internalist 
warrant that one satisfies the internalist warrant, truth, belief and grounding condition 
for knowledge and, on the other hand, by one’s entitlement that one satisfies the deget-
tierization condition. Then we might be able to validate a version of the KK-principle 
after all. For now, at least in the default case, one does have a warrant that one possesses 
first-order knowledge. Again, if to be in a position to know is to be but a suitably based 
(and, we must now add, degettierized) belief away from knowledge, and if knowledge 
is degettierized, internalistically warranted and true belief, then, if one has first-order 
knowledge, one is also in a position to know that this is so. (Notice, however, that 
since the second-order warrant contains an externalist component, the second-order 
knowledge must be externalist in nature, i.e. the KK-principle will be of the form K*
SP 
→ ◊KE
SK*
SP.)
What is also interesting about this line is that it is available also to the EW-monist. 
Just like the W-pluralist, the externalist might wish to countenance the possibility 
of entitlements to propositions about the satisfaction of the conditions for first-order 
knowledge and venture to defend an EW-monist version of the KK-principle. So, 

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
592
somewhat surprisingly, even if the prospects of an IW-monist version of the KK-
principle are dim, EW-monists who are willing to grant that we have entitlements that 
the conditions for first-order knowledge are satisfied might be able to countenance a 
purely externalist version of the KK-principle. (McHugh (2010) exploits the notion 
of entitlement to defend a version of the KK-principle that he claims to be compatible 
with both internalist and externalist conceptions of knowledge.)
Children and Animal Knowledge
The second objection to the KK-principle we will discuss is as simple as it is powerful. 
It starts from the observation that it is plausible that small children and certain animals 
can have basic first-order knowledge of the world. For instance, a toddler might know of 
his toy that it is red and a dog might know that his master is approaching. At the same 
time, children, if they are small enough, and certainly many of the relevant animals, do 
not possess the reflective abilities and concepts requisite to acquire the corresponding 
second-order knowledge. For instance, they might lack the very concept of knowledge 
needed to grasp the proposition that they know. Thus, small children and animals might 
know things but, since they might also lack the very concept of knowledge, they might 
not be in a position to know that they know. In consequence, the KK-principle fails 
(Dretske 2004: 176).
Again, there are moves to be made here for the champion of the KK-principle. 
Perhaps the most obvious one is to place an additional restriction on the principle to 
the effect that the agent can grasp the proposition that she knows (e.g. Ginet 1970; 
McHugh 2010). One disadvantage of this move is that it seems to demote the KK-prin-
ciple’s status: instead of capturing a fundamental truth about knowledge it now captures 
a truth about a certain kind of cognitive agent, i.e. those capable of grasping propositions 
about first-order knowledge. Alternatively, one could insist that even small children 
and animals are in a position to know that they have knowledge where this means that 
they are but a suitably based (and degettierized) belief away from second-order knowl-
edge. Of course, small children and animals are in no position to form a belief that they 
know. It remains true, however, that they are but a suitably based (and degettierized) 
belief away from knowing that they know. Now, it might be objected that in order to 
have a warrant for some proposition P one already must have the concepts needed to 
grasp P (Feldman 2005: 111). While this might be plausible for types of warrant that 
the subject needs to achieve, it is far from clear that this also needs to be the case for 
types of warrant that can be held by default. Since entitlement is just such a type of 
warrant, the champion of the KK-principle can avoid this objection by construing the 
relevant second-order warrants as entitlements. So, it seems that some version of the 
KK-principle might remain defensible even in the face of the objection from children 
and animal knowledge.
Williamson’s Anti-Luminosity Argument
The last objection against the KK-principle we will discuss here is due to Timothy 
Williamson. Williamson (2000) argues against the possibility of “luminous conditions.” 
Roughly, a condition is luminous if and only if it is such that if and when one is in it, one 
is also in a position to know that one is in it. Alternatively, a condition C is luminous 
just in case

SECOND-ORDER KNOWLEDGE
593
Luminosity: For all subjects S and times t, if at t S is in C then at t S is in a posi-
tion to know that S is in C.
The KK-principle can then be interpreted as stating that the condition of knowing a 
proposition is luminous.
Williamson ventures to show that conditions such that one can gradually move from 
times at which one is in them to times at which one isn’t cannot be luminous. The 
crucial step in Williamson’s argument is to show that in conjunction with a plausible 
application of the so-called “Safety” condition on knowledge, according to which in 
order to know a proposition, P, one must avoid false belief in P across relevantly similar 
situations, Luminosity yields the paradoxical result that it is impossible to move gradu-
ally from times at which one is in the allegedly luminous condition to times at which 
one isn’t.
In order to see how the argument works, let C be any condition that admits of gradual 
movement in the relevant sense, S any cognitive agent with limited cognitive capacities 
and ti and ti+1 any two adjacent instants in a series of instants that describes S’s gradual 
movement from times at which S is in C to times at which S is not in C. Furthermore, 
let the instants in the series be separated by intervals so small that, due to S’s limited 
cognitive capacities, S cannot distinguish between adjacent instants with respect to 
whether S is in C. Surely, in this situation any two adjacent instants in the series are 
relevantly similar to one another. Suppose at ti S believes that she is in C. By Safety, 
her belief counts as knowledge only if she avoids false belief at ti+1. How can S achieve 
this? Suppose at ti+1 S is not in C. Of course, ex hypothesi, S cannot achieve avoidance 
of false belief at ti+1 through an ability to distinguish between ti and ti+1 with respect to 
whether she is in C. The only other way in which S can achieve avoiding false belief 
here is if between ti and ti+1 S loses her belief for some other reason, for instance, as a 
result of a decrease in confidence below the threshold for belief. As Williamson points 
out, however, in that case S’s belief at ti is ill based—in the example just mentioned on 
misplaced confidence—and therefore does not qualify as knowledge. Thus, if at ti+1 S is 
not in C, S’s belief at ti does not qualify as knowledge. Otherwise put:
Safety: For all subjects S and any two adjacent instants, ti and ti+1, if at ti S 
knows that S is in C then at ti+1 S is in C.
Now Williamson assumes a conception of what it takes to be in a position to know 
that is closely related to but slightly stronger than the one outlined above: “If one is in a 
position to know P, and one has done what one is in a position to do to decide whether 
P is true, then one does know P” (Williamson 2000: 95). Supposing, as Williamson 
might in his example, that S does what she can to determine whether P is true, we get 
that if at ti S is in C, then at ti S knows that S is in C. By Safety we can derive: at ti+1 S is in 
C. Since Luminosity holds for all times and Safety for any two adjacent instants ti and ti+1 
in the series, continuous application of the two principles will show that if, at any time, 
S is in C, at all times S is in C—contrary to the assumption that S can move gradually 
from times at which S is in C to times at which S isn’t in C. So, conditions that admit 
of such gradual movement cannot be luminous.
In order to put the anti-luminosity argument to work against the KK-principle, 
it remains to be shown that one can move gradually from the condition of knowing 
a proposition to not knowing it. Fortunately, this is fairly easily done. Consider the 

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
594
following example: S is looking at a surface the color of which gradually changes from 
red to orange along the color circle. Suppose, at the outset, S believes on the basis of 
visual-perceptual evidence that the surface is red. Since the surface is clearly red, surely 
she also knows that it is red. However, as time passes, the visual-perceptual evidence 
grounding her belief changes gradually from red to orange. The evidence grounding her 
belief that the surface is red thus becomes gradually weaker until it is no longer strong 
enough to give her knowledge that it is red. So, it is possible to gradually move from the 
condition of knowing a proposition—here, that the surface is red—to the condition of 
not knowing it. The anti-luminosity argument applies. The KK-principle fails.
Powerful as Williamson’s argument might be, it does not go uncontested. There are 
a variety of responses to it including Neta and Rohrbaugh (2004), who deny the Safety 
condition on knowledge; Weatherson (2004), who argues that conditions that are con-
stituted by the subjects’ believing them are luminous; and Dokic and Égré (2009), who 
have tried to rescue a version of the KK-principle for certain types of knowledge. For 
present purposes, however, we would like to develop a response on behalf of champions 
of the KK-principle that is inspired by Hintikka (1970) and Malcolm (1952). Malcolm 
and Hintikka respond to objections to the KK-principle by restricting the principle to 
what they call “a strong sense of the concept of knowledge,” the sense of the concept 
they claim to be at issue in most of the epistemological literature. What Malcolm and 
Hintikka seem to be suggesting here is that the concept of knowledge is ambiguous. 
While this proposal might have been understandable and even attractive at the time 
they were writing, strong reasons against such an ambiguity thesis have since come to 
light (see, e.g., Stanley 2005: 81). Yet, there is a way of breathing new life into this 
response by combining it with contextualism, a prominent view in recent epistemol-
ogy. (For more on contextualism see, e.g., Cohen 1988, DeRose 2009 and Lewis 1996.) 
According to the contextualist, the term “knows” and its cognates are context-sensi-
tive. They express different relations in different contexts. Crucially, context deter-
mines just how strong a warrant one needs to have in order to count as “knowing.” We 
can once again express this suggestion formally by introducing a superscript indicating 
the strength of warrant needed for “knowledge”: K0
SP, K1
SP, K2
SP, etc. The rule here is: 
the higher the numeral in the superscript, the stronger the warrant needed for “knowl-
edge,” i.e. the stronger the knowledge relation. We can now argue, and this is where 
the present line takes its inspiration from Malcolm and Hintikka’s remarks, that the 
KK-principle holds in contexts in which “knows” expresses a suitably strong knowledge 
relation. That is to say, we get: Kn
SP → ◊Kn
SKn
SP for suitably large n. If Williamson’s 
argument is sound, it is hard to see how any being with limited cognitive capacities 
could ever stand in such a strong knowledge relation (except perhaps to a very limited 
range of propositions). However, contextualists are typically happy to grant that at least 
in some contexts “knows” might express such a strong relation. If so, contextualists 
might be able to countenance a version of the KK-principle even if Williamson’s anti-
luminosity argument goes through.
5. The Social Aspect of Second-Order Knowledge
Above, our discussion of second-order knowledge has focused on single-agent cases, i.e. 
cases where S knows that R knows that P, and S and R are identical. We will now drop the 
assumption of identity and consider multi-agent cases. The following example involving 
Fermat’s Last Theorem is an example of multi-agent second-order knowledge:

SECOND-ORDER KNOWLEDGE
595
(3) Bob knows that Jack knows that no solution exists for the equation an + bn 
= cn for positive integers a, b, c, and n and n > 2.
Cases like (3) are interesting for several reasons. One quite simple reason is that it serves 
to highlight the social nature that second-order knowledge sometimes has. (3) reflects 
the fact that we—or most of us, anyway—do not live in complete epistemic isolation. 
We are part of epistemic communities or groups that involve other agents with whom 
we interact and to whom we bear significant epistemic connections.
An example of this kind of interaction or connection is captured by the following 
principle of knowledge transmission:
(KTP) 
KSKRP → KSP
KTP will strike many as plausible, at least to the extent that it is thought that we often 
gain knowledge by knowing that someone else knows something. Applying this idea 
to the Bob–Jack example, one might think that, by knowing that Jack knows Fermat’s 
Last Theorem (i.e. the theorem in (3)), Bob knows the theorem too. How could this be? 
Well, perhaps Bob—who has no specialist knowledge about mathematics—has been 
told by Jack what Fermat’s Last Theorem says and that he, Jack, is working on a proof 
of the theorem (assuming, for the sake of exposition, that he is unaware that Wiles 
proved it). Bob knows that Jack is an extremely talented mathematician. Over a very 
extended period of time Bob witnesses Jack work on the proof and eventually hears 
him utter, “Fermat’s Last Theorem is true! I’ve proved it!” Let us suppose that Jack has 
in fact proved the theorem, and that he knows that the theorem is true on this basis. 
Furthermore, suppose that by observing Jack and hearing his utterance, Bob knows that 
Jack knows Fermat’s Last Theorem. But does Bob also know the theorem? This is just 
another way of asking whether KTP holds in this particular case.
KTP has some prominent advocates—Hintikka (1962), to mention just one. However, 
even if we suppose that advocates of KTP are right in maintaining that the principle 
holds, it is important to avoid confusion about what the principle says. In particular, 
although it is natural to read KTP as saying that subject S knows that P by knowing that 
subject R does so, the specific warrant involved in R’s knowledge is not automatically 
transmitted to, or inherited by, S. This can be so even if S is fully aware of what the 
source of R’s knowledge—and warrant—is. The Bob and Jack example will serve nicely 
to drive this point home. Jack’s knowledge—and warrant for believing—that Fermat’s 
Last Theorem is true is based on the proof that he has constructed. Bob is fully aware 
of this. It should be clear, though, that this does not make Bob’s warranted belief in the 
theorem—and his corresponding knowledge—directly proof-based. He is not capable 
of following the proof, for one. If anything, the warrant possessed by Bob is based on 
Jack’s testimony (for more on testimony, see Burge 1993 and the articles in Lackey and 
Sosa 2007).
Turn now to internalism/externalism and monism/pluralism, the themes against 
which our discussion has been cast. Both forms of monism deliver only uniform instances 
of KTP. For the IW-monist all warrants are internalist, whereas the EW-monist thinks 
that they are all externalist. What this means in our present context is that KTP must 
be read uniformly on both of the monist views:
KTP + IW-monism: 
KI
SKI
RP → KI
SP
KTP + EW-monism: KE
SKE
RP → KE
SP

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
596
KTP is a different story from a W-pluralist point of view. As earlier, one reason to find 
W-pluralism interesting is that it widens conceptual space. This is reflected by the dif-
ferent kinds of instances it leaves room for:
KTP + W-pluralism: 
Uniform: 
Non-uniform:
 
KI
SKI
RP → KI
SP 
KI
SKI
RP → KE
SP
 
KE
SKE
RP → KE
SP 
KE
SKE
RP → KI
SP
 
 
KI
SKE
RP → KI
SP
 
 
KI
SKE
RP → KE
SP
 
 
KE
SKI
RP → KI
SP
 
 
KE
SKI
RP → KE
SP
That is, W-pluralism leaves room not only for uniform instances of KTP, but also various 
non-uniform ones.
References
BonJour, L. (1992) “Externalism/Internalism,” in J. Dancy and E. Sosa (eds.) Blackwell Companion to 
Epistemology, Oxford: Blackwell.
Burge, T. (1993) “Content Preservation,” The Philosophical Review 102: 457–88.
—— (2003) “Perceptual Entitlement,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 67: 503–48.
Chisholm, R. (1986) “The Place of Epistemic Justification,” Philosophical Topics 14: 85–92.
Cohen, S. (1988) “How to Be a Fallibilist,” in J. Tomberlin (ed.) Philosophical Perspectives 2: 81–123.
DeRose, K. (2009) The Case for Contextualism, Oxford: Clarendon.
Dokic, J. and Égré, P. (2009) “Margins for Error and the Transparency of Knowledge,” Synthese 166: 1–20.
Dretske, F. (2004) “Externalism and Modest Contextualism,” Erkenntnis 61: 173–86.
Feldman, R. (2005) “Respecting the Evidence,” in J. Hawthorne (ed.) Philosophical Perspectives 19: 95–119.
Ginet, C. (1970) “What Must be Added to Knowing to Obtain Knowing That One Knows?” Synthese 21: 
163–86.
Goldberg, S. (2007) Internalism and Externalism in Semantics and Epistemology, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Goldman, A. (1979) “What is Justified Belief?” in G. Pappas (ed.) Justification and Knowledge, Dordrecht: 
D. Reidel: 1–23.
—— (1988) “Strong and Weak Justification,” in J. Tomberlin (ed.) Philosophical Perspectives 2: 51–69.
Hintikka, J. (1962) Knowledge and Belief: An Introduction to the Logic of the Two Notions, Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press.
—— (1970) “‘Knowing that One Knows’ Reviewed,” Synthese 21: 141–62.
Kornblith, H. (2001) Epistemology: Internalism and Externalism, Oxford: Blackwell.
Lackey, J. and Sosa, E. (eds.) (2007) The Epistemology of Testimony, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lewis, D. (1996) “Elusive Knowledge,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 74: 549–67.
Malcolm, N. (1952) “Knowledge and Belief,” Mind 61: 178–89.
McHugh, C. (2010) “Self-knowledge and the KK-Principle,” Synthese 173: 231–57.
Neta, R. and Rohrbaugh, G. (2004) “Luminosity and the Safety of Knowledge,” Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 
85: 396–406.
Plantinga, A. (1993) Warrant: The Current Debate, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pryor, J. (2001) “Highlights of Recent Epistemology,” British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 52: 95–124.
Stanley, J. (2005) Knowledge and Practical Interests, Oxford: Clarendon.
Weatherson, B. (2004) “Luminous Margins,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 82: 373–83.
Williams, M. (1991) Unnatural Doubts: Epistemological Realism and the Basis for Scepticism, Oxford: 
Blackwell.
Williamson, T. (2000) Knowledge and Its Limits, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wright, C. (2004) “Warrant for Nothing (Foundations for Free)?” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 78: 
167–212.

54
EPISTEMIC CLOSURE
Peter Baumann
1. The Basic Idea
Do we know everything which is entailed by what we know? This would suggest the 
following principle:
If S knows that p, and if p entails q, then S knows that q.
(This would hold for all subjects S and all propositions p and q, of course; for the sake of 
simplicity we can skip this clause in the following.) In other words, knowledge is “closed 
under entailment.” This principle seems much too strong. It would only be true of logi-
cally omniscient subjects (who know all the logical consequences of what they know). 
For instance, everyone who knows certain mathematical axioms would thus also know 
all the mathematical theorems which follow from the axioms; if one does not know one 
of these theorems, then one also does not know the axioms.
A more restricted principle seems much more plausible in the case of human 
subjects:
(C1) If S knows that p, and if S knows that p entails q, then S knows that q.
In other words, knowledge is “closed under known entailment” (or “closed”; see for 
(C1) and for the principle above, Hintikka 1962: 30–38). If Mary knows that both 
Paul and Peter are at the party, then she also knows that Peter is at the party (given her 
knowledge that the latter follows from the former). If we were to deny that Mary knows 
that Peter is at the party, then we would be ready to deny that she knows that Peter and 
Paul are at the party (given her knowledge that the latter entails the former).
2. Importance: Skepticism
(C1) and similar principles play an important role in epistemology. Doesn’t the possibil-
ity of inferential knowledge require the truth of some closure principle? And, apart from 
that, doesn’t closure play an important role in discussions of epistemic skepticism? Here 
is the template of a typical skeptical argument crucial to the recent discussion about 
epistemic skepticism (with “ ~” as the negation sign, “→” as the sign for material impli-
cation, “K” for “S knows that,” “s” for some skeptical proposition—like I am a handless 
brain in the vat merely imagining that I have hands (see Putnam 1981)—and “o” for some 
ordinary proposition—like I have hands):

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
598
(1) ~K ~s
(2) (~K ~s) → (~Ko)
(C) ~Ko
I don’t know I have hands because I don’t know I am not a brain in a vat and if I don’t 
know the latter, then I don’t know the former. The crucial premise (2) follows from 
(C1) together with the relatively unproblematic assumption that K(o → ~s).—Some 
anti-skeptics (called “Neo-Mooreans”) like to turn this kind of argument on its head, 
again relying on closure:
(1′) Ko
(2′) (Ko) → (K ~s)
(C′) K ~s.
I know I am not a brain in a vat because I know that I have hands and if I know the 
latter then I also know the former. Some of those who are not convinced by the latter 
argument but do not want to give in to skepticism propose to give up (C1) and similar 
or related principles (see Dretske 2005a but cf. also Brueckner 1985). Whatever option 
one chooses, it seems that closure—whether in the form of (C1) or of some other prin-
ciples (see below)—plays an important role for the discussion of at least some important 
forms of epistemic skepticism (but cf. also Brueckner 1994, Cohen 1998 and David and 
Warfield 2008).
3. Refinements
The closure principle (C1) requires some refinements and modifications. Suppose Frank 
knows that the temperature has just fallen below freezing point. Suppose he also knows 
that if the temperature is below freezing point, then driving can be dangerous. However, 
it seems perfectly possible that Frank does not “put two and two together” and thus does 
not know that driving can be dangerous now. Only if Frank makes the relevant infer-
ence, does he come to know that driving can be dangerous now. To accommodate such 
cases, the following modification seems appropriate:
(C2) If S knows that p, knows that p entails q, and deduces from all this that q, 
then S knows that q.
Now, “p” could stand for a complex proposition of the form “p and (p → q).” This gives 
us the case of “single-premise closure” which is at the centre of the current discussion 
about closure (see sec. 7 below for multi-premise closure):
(C3) If S knows that p, and deduces q from p, then S knows that q.
Sometimes people propose to weaken (C1) in the following way rather than moving 
on to (C2) or (C3):
(C1′) If S knows that p, and if S knows that p entails q, then S is in a position 
to know that q.

EPISTEMIC CLOSURE
599
However, being in a position to know is not the same as knowing; hence (C1′) is too 
weak for our purposes; we would not be talking about knowledge closure any more but 
rather about being-in-a-position-to-know closure. And, apart from that, it is not clear at 
all what is required for being in a position to know; this idea seems a bit too unspecific 
to be of much help (see David and Warfield 2008: sec. IV).
Now, the deduction mentioned in (C3) needs to be a correct one and based on a gen-
eral ability of the subject to draw such a correct inference. Let us say that in such a case 
the subject “competently” deduces q from p. If Frank makes an invalid inference even to 
a true conclusion, he might not come to know the conclusion. Also, if he just happens 
to make a correct inference when he usually fails to get these things right, he also might 
not come to know the conclusion. Hence, we had better replace (C3) by
(C4) If S knows that p, and competently deduces q from p, then S knows 
that q.
But what if Frank is the kind of person who simply cannot believe that it could ever be 
too dangerous for him to drive? Even though he deduces q from p, he does not come to 
believe that q (and he does not come to believe it on the basis of his deduction; see on 
this Harman 1986: 11–12). Let us modify (C4) then (see also Bogdan 1985; Hales 1995: 
188–192):
(C5) If S knows that p, competently deduces q from p, and believes that q, 
then S knows that q (see, e.g., Forbes 1984: 43, 49–50 and Williamson 
2000: 117 who add that S “thereby” comes to believe that q; see also (T) 
below).
(C5) expresses not just a contingent fact but a necessity. Hence, we can add that 
“necessarily” (C5) is the case.—What if S ceases to know that p in the process of 
deducing q from it? Some (see, e.g., Hawthorne 2004: 29, 33) hold that we have 
to add a further condition: that S retains knowledge that p throughout the process 
of deduction.—Kvanvig (2006: 261–262) proposes a further qualification: that S 
learns of no undefeated defeater for q (e.g., someone extremely trustworthy just told 
me that not q and even though they are wrong there is no indication of that). Thus 
we get:
NECESSARILY: If S knows that p, competently deduces q from p while retaining 
knowledge that p throughout the inference, believes that q and does not learn 
of any undefeated defeater for q, then S knows that q.
There might be further conditions to be added (see David and Warfield, Ms.; David and 
Warfield 2008: secs. II–III; Warfield 2004) but we don’t need to get into a potentially 
endless discussion (resembling the post-Gettier discussion about knowledge); it is not 
clear whether one can indicate sufficient conditions for inferential knowledge that q 
(similar things hold of similar principles below). Anyway, the basic idea should be both 
clear and robust enough now. (C5) expresses the core of the idea of knowledge closure 
currently discussed. I will stick with (C5), also for the sake of simplicity and because 
nothing in the following depends on the added subtleties.

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
600
4. Transmission
Closure principles remain silent about where S’s knowledge that q comes from: S need 
not know q on the basis of deduction from p. Now, one might want to stress that S’s 
knowledge that q can be derived from or based upon S’s knowledge that p (where p dif-
fers from q). This gives us a transmission principle:
(T) If S knows that p, competently deduces q from p, and believes that q, then 
S knows or comes to know that q on the basis of that deduction (no matter 
whether q is also known independently from the knowledge that p).
This is a transmission principle in the sense that it specifies the conditions under 
which knowledge can “transmit” by deduction from one proposition (p) to another (q). 
Closure principles like the ones above do not say anything about transmission as such. 
Unfortunately, closure and transmission principles are very often not, or not clearly, 
distinguished; sometimes it is very difficult to tell whether an author talks about closure 
or transmission of knowledge (for a clear distinction, see: Wright 1985: 438, fn. 1, 2000: 
141; Davies 1998: 325–326, 2000: 393–394, 2003b: 108; McLaughlin 2003: 83; Dretske 
2005a: 15, 16).
Very often transmission is explained in terms of transmission of warrant (where war-
rant is taken as whatever turns true belief into knowledge; but cf., e.g., Williamson 
2000). This results in principles of the transmission of warrant across valid inference, 
like, e.g., the following one:
(TW) If S has warrant for (believing that) p, competently deduces q from p, 
and believes that q, then S acquires (for the first time or not) warrant for 
(believing that) q on the basis of that deduction (and S can thus come to 
know that q).
It does not matter here whether the subject believes or knows she has warrant or whether 
the subject believes or knows that the warrant supports the relevant proposition. The 
discussion about the transmission of warrant principles does not seem to depend on 
what position one takes on such issues.
If having warrant for a true belief is sufficient for turning that belief into knowledge, 
then every case of a true belief that q which meets a transmission principle like (TW) 
also meets a closure principle like (C5). The reverse, however, is not true (see above): 
A case can meet (C5) but not (TW) because the subject’s knowledge that q might not 
be derived from or based upon their knowledge that p. I know that there is an apple in 
front of me and I also know that this entails that there is no fake apple in front of me; 
according to many, even if I know that there is no fake apple in front of me, I cannot 
know this on the basis of my knowledge that there is an apple in front of me (more on 
such cases below).
5. Denials: Dretske and Nozick
The conviction that some closure (or transmission) principle is true is very widespread 
in contemporary philosophy. It seems very hard to deny that we can acquire new knowl-
edge by making inferences from what we already know. Denying closure (or transmission) 

EPISTEMIC CLOSURE
601
seems to jeopardize the very idea of inferential knowledge. And how abominable does it 
sound to say, e.g., that “I know that I am sitting on a chair but I don’t know that I am not 
merely dreaming that I am sitting on a chair”?
However, there are dissenters. One of the first philosophers who can be read as deny-
ing closure is Ludwig Wittgenstein. In On Certainty (1969) he makes remarks which 
suggest that what we know is based on and presupposes things we don’t know (see also, 
more recently: Greene 2001: 67–71; Harman and Sherman 2004). If we read “based” 
and “presupposes” as involving some known entailment relation (between what we 
know and what we presuppose), then all this comes to a denial of closure. I know there 
is a tree in the yard but I don’t know there is an external world. Much more explicit is 
the denial in the case of some more recent epistemologists, particularly Robert Nozick 
and Fred Dretske. In Nozick’s case, the failure of closure is a consequence of his account 
of knowledge. His “Sensitivity” or “Tracking Account of Knowledge” has it that (with 
“iff” for “if and only if” and with “⇒” as the sign for the subjunctive conditional, that is, 
for a conditional of the form “If p were the case, then q would be the case”)
S knows that p iff
(a) p,
(b) S believes that p,
(c) (~p) ⇒ S does not believe that p, and
(d) p ⇒ S believes that p.
S knows that there is a dog over there just in case the following conditions are met: 
S truly believes this (a, b); furthermore, if there were no dog over there, S would not 
believe it (c); finally, under different possible circumstances under which there is a 
dog over there, S would believe it (d). Sure, knowledge does not require that S’s belief 
“tracks” the truth even under the wildest possible circumstances (in the presence of 
artificial fake-dogs, etc.). Therefore, the subjunctive conditionals (c) and (d) have to 
be evaluated not with respect to all possible worlds but only to “close” ones—to those 
which resemble the actual circumstances very much. Furthermore, one has to take into 
account the way in which the belief was formed (see Nozick 1981: 172ff.). Such details 
left aside, it becomes clear quickly that this account is not compatible with any of the 
closure (or transmission) principles mentioned so far (see Nozick 1981: 206, 227–240). 
Consider this case. Bob knows that he has hands because he has hands, he believes he 
has hands, in all close possible worlds in which he has hands he believes this, and in 
all close possible worlds in which he lacks hands (e.g., because of an accident) he does 
not believe he has hands. Suppose Bob also knows that if he has hands then he is not 
a handless brain in a vat. Does he or can he also know that he is not a handless brain 
in a vat? According to Nozick’s condition (c), if Bob were a handless brain in a vat, he 
would have to not believe that he is not a handless brain in a vat. However, given what 
it means to be a brain in a vat, he would believe that he is not a handless brain in a vat. 
Hence, Bob does not meet Nozick’s condition (c) and thus does not know that he is not 
a handless brain in a vat. The problem for closure is now obvious: According to Nozick, 
one can know something even without knowing something else which one knows fol-
lows from what one knows. Closure fails (where closure is understood along the lines of 
(C5) and similar principles). Many philosophers hold the closure principle so dear that 
they hold the failure of closure against Nozick’s account of knowledge. Nozick went the 
other way and proposed to give up closure principles like (C5). One advantage in the 

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
602
case of skeptical arguments is that Nozick can thus accommodate both our view that 
we know a lot of ordinary propositions and the skeptical insight that we don’t know 
that we’re not brains in a vat. Other modal accounts, of knowledge, like the safety view 
(see, e.g., Sosa 1999), also have problems with closure (see the dachshund example in 
Goldman 1983: 84, which has an echo in a well-known similar example by Saul Kripke; 
Sosa (1999: 292–294) concedes that there is a problem).
Dretske’s denial of ordinary closure principles is at least partly motivated by reasons 
very similar to Nozick’s (see Dretske 2003: 113, 2005a: 19–20, 2005b: 43–44). However, 
it also seems triggered by the discussion of cases. Here is one of Dretske’s most well-known 
examples (see Dretske 1970, 1982; cf. critically Klein 1981: 29–33 and Vogel 1990: 13–15; 
see, for other examples, Audi 1998: 169 and the debate on it in: Feldman 1995 and Audi 
1995; see also Hookway 1989/90: 9–10; Maitzen 1998; Salmon 1989: sec.VI). Suppose 
Fred is in the zoo and standing in front of the zebra cage. Does he know that he is looking 
at zebras? There seems to be no reason to deny this. But does he know that he is not look-
ing at cleverly disguised mules (painted as zebras)? It seems clear that he does not know 
that. However, the latter proposition can be easily known by Fred to be entailed by the 
former one. Hence, closure fails. Dretske also applies this to contemporary skeptical argu-
ments: One can know that there is a cup in front of one even if one does not know what 
is known to be entailed by it, e.g., that one is not merely dreaming that there is a cup in 
front of oneself. Like Nozick, Dretske can thus make peace between the skeptic and the 
anti-skeptic (see Dretske 2005a: 18, 23). One can also explain all this in terms of Dretske’s 
“relevant alternatives theory of knowledge” (Dretske 1981, 2005a: 19; McGinn 1984: 
544; Stine 1976; Lewis 1996; Heller 1999; for Dretske’s view on information and closure 
see Dretske 2003: 115, 2004: 176–177).
It should be stressed that both Dretske and Nozick seem to talk not just about closure 
but about transmission principles, too (see Nozick 1981: 205–206). More importantly, I 
should stress that, strictly speaking, neither Dretske nor Nozick opt for an unrestricted 
denial of any principle of closure (not just (C5)). Dretske accepts closure in cases of 
(known) conjunction-elimination (Dretske 1970; but cf. Hawthorne 2005: 31–32) 
while Nozick denies it in those cases (as well as for universal instantiation; see Nozick 
1981: 227–229); Nozick accepts closure for cases of (known) equivalence, existential 
generalization, conjunction-introduction or disjunction-introduction (see Nozick 1981: 
229, 230, 236; cf. p. 231 for a restriction of closure rather than its denial). Furthermore, 
Dretske has later argued in a way which seems to explicitly suggest a restriction of 
closure principles rather than their abolishment (see Dretske 2005a: 16, 17 or 2003 
where he argues that closure breaks down when “q” stands for a “heavyweight” or “lim-
iting proposition”). And Roush (2005) has defended a closure-compatible version of 
Nozick’s theory. Looking at such later modifications, one should conclude that the 
real controversy is much more about the proper formulation of a closure (or transmis-
sion) principle than about the acceptance of any such principle (see Goldman 2008: 
478–479; but also Becker 2007: 113–128, who, supporting Nozick, recommends giving 
up closure, or Adams and Clarke 2005 who defend the tracking account against com-
mon counterexamples; see also Luper-Foy 1987).
6. Problems: Lotteries and Easy Knowledge
There are also some serious problems which anyone who wants to defend some clo-
sure (or transmission) principle would have to address. The apparent incompatibility of 

EPISTEMIC CLOSURE
603
ordinary knowledge claims, closure and the impossibility to know one is not in a skep-
tical scenario has already been mentioned above. Let us now look at a problem first 
brought up by Gilbert Harman (see Harman 1973: 161; see also Hawthorne 2004 and 
Vogel 1990: 15–20). Suppose you believe that you will never be a millionaire. Suppose 
that this is in fact true and you know it. Now, you also know that if you will never be 
a millionaire, then you will never win the millionaires’ lottery. But how can you know 
that you won’t win that lottery? If we assume—with many contemporary epistemolo-
gists—that one cannot know that one won’t win a lottery (given normal circumstances, 
like having bought a ticket for a fair and unrigged lottery, etc.), then it seems very hard 
to stick with the claim to know that one will never be rich (given closure). This prob-
lem easily generalizes to all pairs of propositions such that one proposition is an ordinary 
proposition we would tend to claim to know and the other proposition is a “lottery” 
proposition entailed by the first one; a lottery proposition is a proposition which has a 
high probability of being true but which we would typically not tend to claim to know 
(for more on the notion of a lottery proposition see Vogel 1990: 16–17). Here is another 
example, not involving a literal lottery. Frank knows that his children are playing in the 
garden but he does not know that his children have not been kidnapped and replaced 
by actors who pretend convincingly to be his children. Since it is hard to think of any 
ordinary proposition which does not entail some lottery proposition and since such 
an entailment can easily be known by the subject, our problem is hard to contain and 
concerns all kinds of propositions we ordinarily think we know. Three main responses 
are on offer in the current debate. First, one could accept closure as well as the idea that 
one cannot know a lottery proposition (both plausible); but then one also has to accept 
the resulting widespread skepticism (not plausible to many). Second, one could accept 
closure as well as our ordinary knowledge claims (both plausible); but then one would 
also have to be ready to accept the possibility of knowledge concerning lottery proposi-
tions (not plausible to many). Finally, one could accept both skepticism concerning 
lottery propositions as well as our ordinary knowledge claims (both plausible); but then 
one would have to reject closure (cf. from the recent debate: Hawthorne 2004). An 
analogous problem arises, of course, for transmission principles.
Another problem is the problem of “bootstrapping” and “easy knowledge” (see Cohen 
2002; Sosa 2009: chs. 4, 5, 9, 10). My speedometer tells me that I am driving at 40 mph. 
Suppose I am traveling at that speed. It seems hard to deny that I can thus come to 
know that I am traveling at 40 mph. I can also come to know that the speedometer indi-
cates a speed of 40 mph (by looking at it). From both I can infer that the speedometer 
is indicating the speed correctly. If I repeat this little exercise many times, I can infer 
that the speedometer is working reliably. However, these conclusions do not seem to 
constitute knowledge. But they follow from other things I know and the entailment is 
also known. Here is another example of the same kind. I look in front of me and thus 
come to know that there is an apple in front of me. I also know a real apple is not a fake 
apple made to look like an apple. I can conclude but, it seems, not come to know in this 
way that there is no such fake apple in front of me. Knowledge cannot be acquired that 
easily. What has gone wrong? And what ought we to say about such cases? Should we 
deny knowledge of one of the two premises? Should we allow for bootstrapping and easy 
knowledge? Or should we deny closure? All three options seem implausible. Again, a 
parallel problem arises for transmission principles.
One way out would be to restrict the closure principle in a certain way. Here is a 
rough idea. What is common to such cases of bootstrapping and easy knowledge is that 

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
604
the subject is granted knowledge of the premises but only insofar as the subject is also 
granted certain assumptions or presuppositions even if they do not constitute knowl-
edge from the outset: that the speedometer is working, that the subject’s vision is fine, 
etc. If we were to not grant the subject these assumptions and presuppositions—if, for 
instance, we saw good reasons to doubt that everything is fine with the speedometer or 
the eyes of the subject—then we would not attribute knowledge of the premises to the 
subject. This suggests the following modification of (C5):
(C6) If S knows that p, competently deduces q from p, and believes that q, 
then S knows that q—but not if q is both antecedently unknown by S but 
taken for granted and presupposed by S’s belief and knowledge that p (see 
Barke 2002: 164–166 and even Dretske 1970: 1014 as well as Nozick 1981: 
239–240).
Even if a closure principle like (C6) holds in certain cases, transmission might still 
fail. In any case, it is good to have a restricted transmission principle which takes care 
of such potential failures of transmission. Here is a proposal (for the case of transmission 
of warrant):
(TW*) If S has warrant for (believing that) p, competently deduces q from p, 
and believes that q, then S acquires (for the first time or not) warrant for 
(believing that) q on the basis of that deduction (and may thus come to 
know that q)—but not if the having of the warrant for (believing that) p 
depends on antecedent reliance on q (for more along such lines, see Wright 
1985: 432–438, 2000, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2007; Davies 1998: 351–355, 
2000: 402–412, 2003a: 30–45, 2003b: 122–130, but cf. 2004; see further 
McLaughlin 2003: 91, 84–91; Brown 2004; Pryor 2004 and forthcoming; 
Okasha 2004; Silins 2005; Nozick 1981: 239–240; Olin 2005: 237–238, 
243).
We can leave the question open whether principles like (C6) or (TW*) can help us 
deal with the problem of easy knowledge, bootstrapping or with the lottery problem (see 
Hawthorne 2004). There is some hope but we cannot go into that here.
7. Further Problems: Multi-Premise Closure and Probability
So far we have only considered cases in which the subject deduces one proposition 
from another proposition. But what about a case like the following? You’re throwing a 
party and have invited all of your 100 friends. Alfonsina has accepted the invitation 
and promised to come. You believe her because you know her to be extremely reliable; 
as a matter of fact, she will indeed show up. It seems uncontroversial to say that you 
can thus come to know that she will come to your party. Similar things are true of 
Bernie, Claire and all your other friends. You know 100 premises where each premise 
says of one of your friends (a different one each time, of course) that they will come 
to the party: You know that p1, that p2, . . . that p100. You also know about conjunc-
tion-introduction. You thus make the inference to the conjunction and conclude that 
all of your 100 friends will attend the party. But even if they all do this hardly seems 
to be knowable by you. Again, we have a problem: the knowledge of the premises, 

EPISTEMIC CLOSURE
605
some closure principle and the lack of knowledge of the conclusion are incompatible 
with each other.
What creates the problem? Here is an idea. For each individual proposition there is a 
very high though not maximal (subjective) probability that it is true. Let us assume the 
probability is .99 in each case. It seems plausible that such a proposition can be known 
to be true despite the element of fallibility. Let us further assume that all these proposi-
tions are probabilistically independent from each other. The probability of the conjunc-
tion of all these propositions is then much smaller than .99 (namely less than .37). It is 
hard to believe that such a relatively unlikely proposition can still be known. However, 
it follows from all of the highly likely individual propositions, given plausible logical 
principles (there are obvious parallels here with Kyburg’s lottery paradox (Kyburg 1961: 
197) as well as with the preface paradox (Makinson 1965; Olin 2005)).
What should one do about this? Skepticism with respect to the individual premises 
appears too high a price to pay. Even less plausible is it to claim that one can come to 
know the rather unlikely conclusion. What then about denying multi-premise closure? 
This principle might seem much more plausible anyway than it ought to. The plausibil-
ity of closure principles seems to depend on using simple cases with just one premise; 
it seems to fade away as soon as we consider cases with more than one premise (see 
Hawthorne 2004: passim). (A very thorny problem comes with the question of how 
one should individuate premises: Is it always clear how many premises the subject used? 
Aren’t there cases where one could count premises in more than one way, with different 
results?)
Perhaps we should then just give up the idea—bitter as it might seem—that there is 
more than single-premise closure to have (but cf. Stine 1976: 251 and Lasonen-Aarnio 
2008). Neither the multi-premise parallel of the simple closure principle (C1),
(MC1) If S knows that p1, . . ., and that pn, and if S knows that p1, . . ., and pn 
together entail q, then S knows that q,
nor the multi-premise parallel of the more complex closure principle (C6),
(MC6) If S knows that p1, . . ., and that pn, competently deduces q from p1, 
. . ., and pn, and believes that q, then S knows that q—but not if q is 
both antecedently unknown by S but taken for granted and presupposed 
by S’s belief and knowledge that p1 or . . . by S’s belief and knowledge that 
pn,
are true. The same holds, mutatis mutandis, for transmission principles (see also Olin 
2005).
Not all acceptable inferences are deductive. Some inferences are “probabilistic” in 
the sense that the truth of the conclusion is not “guaranteed” by the truth of the prem-
ises but made probable by the premises. The probability of such a conclusion might not 
be extremely high but it can still be high enough for knowledge (again: if a probability 
less than 1 is compatible with knowledge). Here is an example: Ann’s car is parked 
in front of her flat and she is usually at home when her car is there; hence, Ann is at 
home. If one knows the premise(s), then one should be able to come to know the con-
clusion—if it is true—by such an inference. This suggests probabilistic versions of our 
closure principles. Here is a principle parallel to (C1):

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
606
(P1) If S knows that p, and if S knows that p makes q probable (enough), and 
if q is true, then S knows that q.
And here is the principle parallel to (C6):
(P6) If S knows that p, competently makes a probabilistic inference to q from 
p, believes that q, and if q is true, then S knows that q—but not if q is both 
antecedently unknown by S but taken for granted and presupposed by S’s 
belief and knowledge that p.
There will be similar transmission principles. But again, for the kinds of reasons 
explained above, one should not expect there to be true principles of multi-premise 
probabilistic closure.
8. Conclusion
The idea of closure of knowledge under known entailment is of great importance for 
epistemology (we had to leave closure principles for epistemic justification and other 
relevant notions aside here). There seems to be very widespread agreement—and not 
without good reason—that some closure principle has to be true. What looks like a con-
temporary debate between a majority of defenders of closure and a minority of deniers 
of closure is to a large degree (though not completely) a debate about the right kind 
of closure principle. It is plausible to assume that several whistles and bells have to be 
added to the simple closure principle (C1). Furthermore, there is not only a plausible 
closure principle for the case of deductive inference but also for the case of probabilistic 
inference. It is much harder to see how a principle of multi-premise closure could be 
true. There are also problems for principles of single-premise closure awaiting a con-
vincing solution, such as Harman’s problem or the problem of bootstrapping and easy 
knowledge. The related discussion about transmission of failure can give useful impulses 
to the debate about closure.
References
Adams, F. and Clarke, M. (2005) “Resurrecting the Tracking Theories” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 83, 
207–221.
Audi, R. (1995) “Deductive Closure, Defeasibility, and Scepticism: a Reply to Feldman” The Philosophical 
Quarterly 45, 494–499.
Audi, R. (1998) Epistemology: A Contemporary Introduction to the Theory of Knowledge, London & New York: 
Routledge.
Barke, A. (2002) The Closure of Knowledge in Context, Paderborn: mentis.
Becker, K. (2007) Epistemology Modalized, New York & London: Routledge.
Bogdan, R.J. (1985) “Cognition and Epistemic Closure” American Philosophical Quarterly 22, 55–63.
Brown, J. (2004) Anti-Individualism and Knowledge, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Brueckner, A.L. (1985) “Skepticism and Epistemic Closure” Philosophical Topics 13, 89–117.
Brueckner, A.L. (1994) “The Structure of the Skeptical Argument” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 
54, 827–835.
Cohen, S. (1998) “Two Kinds of Skeptical Argument” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 58, 143–
159.
Cohen, S. (2002) “Basic Knowledge and the Problem of Easy Knowledge” Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research 65, 309–329.
David, M. and Warfield, T.A. (2008) “Knowledge-Closure and Scepticism,” in Q. Smith (ed.) Epistemology. 
New Essays, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 137–187.

EPISTEMIC CLOSURE
607
David, M. and Warfield, T.A., “Six Possible Counterexamples to One or Two Epistemic Closure Principles,” 
Ms.
Davies, M. (1998) “Externalism, Architecturalism and Epistemic Warrant,” in C. Wright, B. Smith and C. 
Macdonald (eds.) Knowing Our Own Minds, Oxford: Clarendon, 321–361.
Davies, M. (2000) “Externalism and Armchair Knowledge,” in P. Boghossian and C. Peacocke (eds.) New 
Essays on the A Priori, Oxford: Clarendon, 384–414.
Davies, M. (2003a) “The Problem of Armchair Knowledge,” in S. Nuccetelli (ed.) New Essays on Semantic 
Externalism and Self-Knowledge, Cambridge, MA & London: MIT Press, 23–55.
Davies, M. (2003b) “Externalism, Self-Knowledge and Transmission of Warrant,” in M.J. Frápolli and 
E. Romero (eds.) Meaning, Basic Self-Knowledge, and Mind. Essays on Tyler Burger, Stanford: CSLI 
Publications, 105–130.
Davies, M. (2004) “On Epistemic Entitlement: Epistemic Entitlement, Warrant Transmission and Easy 
Knowledge” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Supplement 78, 213–245.
Dretske, F.I. (1970) “Epistemic Operators” The Journal of Philosophy 69, 1007–1023.
Dretske, F.I. (1981) “The Pragmatic Dimension of Knowledge” Philosophical Studies 40, 363–378.
Dretske, F.I. (1982) “A Cognitive Cul-de-sac” Mind 91, 109–111.
Dretske, F.I. (2003) “Skepticism: What Perception Teaches,” in S. Luper (ed.) The Skeptics. Contemporary 
Essays, Aldershot: Ashgate, 105–118.
Dretske, F.I. (2004) “Externalism and Modest Contextualism” Erkenntnis 61, 173–186.
Dretske, F.I. (2005a) “The Case against Closure,” in M. Steup and E. Sosa (eds.) Contemporary Debates in 
Epistemology, Malden, MA: Blackwell, 13–26.
Dretske, F.I. (2005b) “Reply to Hawthorne,” in M. Steup and E. Sosa (eds.) Contemporary Debates in 
Epistemology, Malden, MA: Blackwell, 43–46.
Feldman, R.(1995) “In Defence of Closure” The Philosophical Quarterly 45, 487–494.
Forbes, G. (1984) “Nozick on Scepticism” Philosophical Quarterly 34, 43–52.
Goldman, A. (2008) “Knowledge, Explanation, and Lotteries” Noûs 42, 466–481.
Goldman, A.I. (1983) “Review of Nozick, Philosophical Explanations” The Philosophical Review 92, 81–88.
Greene, R. (2001) “A Rejection of the Epistemic Closure Principle” Southwest Philosophy Review 17, 59–
73.
Hales, S.D. (1995) “Epistemic Closure Principles” Southern Journal of Philosophy 33, 185–201.
Harman, G. (1973) Thought, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Harman, G. (1986) Change in View. Principles of Reasoning, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Harman, G. and Sherman, B. (2004) “Knowledge, Assumptions, Lotteries” Philosophical Issues 14, 492–
500.
Hawthorne, J. (2004) Knowledge and Lotteries, Oxford: Clarendon.
Hawthorne, J. (2005) “The Case for Closure,” in M. Steup and E. Sosa (eds.) Contemporary Debates in 
Epistemology, Malden, MA: Blackwell, 26–43.
Heller, M. (1999) “Relevant Alternatives and Closure” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 77, 196–208.
Hintikka, J. (1962) Knowledge and Belief. An Introduction to the Logic of the Two Notions, Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press.
Hookway, C. (1989/90) “Scepticism and Autonomy” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 90, 103–118.
Klein, P.D. (1981) Certainty: A Refutation of Scepticism, Brighton: The Harvester Press.
Kvanvig, J.L. (2006) “Closure Principles” Philosophy Compass 1/3, 256–267.
Kyburg, H.E. Jr. (1961) Probability and the Logic of Rational Belief, Middletown, CN: Wesleyan University 
Press.
Lasonen-Aarnio, M. (2008) “Single Premise Deduction and Risk” Philosophical Studies 141, 157–173.
Lewis, D. (1996) “Elusive Knowledge” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 74, 549–561.
Luper-Foy, S. (ed.) (1987) The Possibility of Knowledge. Nozick and His Critics, Totowa, NJ: Rowman & 
Littlefield.
Maitzen, S. (1998) “The Knower Paradox and Epistemic Closure” Synthese 114, 337–354.
Makinson, D.C. (1965) “The Paradox of the Preface” Analysis 25, 205–207.
McGinn, C. (1984) “The Concept of Knowledge” Midwest Studies in Philosophy 9 P.A. French, T.E. Uehling 
Jr., H.K. Wettstein (eds.), Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 529–554.
McLaughlin, B.P. (2003) “McKinsey’s Challenge, Warrant Transmission, and Skepticism,” in S. Nuccetelli 
(ed.) New Essays on Semantic Externalism and Self-Knowledge, Cambridge,MA & London: MIT Press, 
79–96.
Nozick, R. (1981) Philosophical Explanations, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
608
Okasha, S. (2004) “Wright on the Transmission of Support: A Bayesian Analysis” Analysis 64, 139–146.
Olin, D. (2005) “A Case against Closure” Veritas 50, 235–247.
Pryor, J. (2004) “What’s Wrong with Moore’s Argument?” Philosophical Issues 14, 349–378.
Pryor, J. (forthcoming) “When Warrant Transmits,” in A. Coliva (ed.) Wittgenstein, Epistemology and Mind: 
Themes from the Philosophy of Crispin Wright, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Putnam, H. (1981) “Brains in a Vat,” in H. Putnam, Reason, Truth and History, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1–22.
Roush, S. (2005) Tracking Truth. Knowledge, Evidence, and Science, Oxford: Clarendon.
Salmon, N. (1989) “Illogical Belief” Philosophical Perspectives 3, 243–285.
Silins, N. (2005) “Transmission Failure Failure” Philosophical Studies 126, 71–102.
Sosa, E. (1999) “How to Defeat Opposition to Moore” Philosophical Perspectives 13, 141–154.
Sosa, E. (2009) Reflective Knowledge. Apt Belief and Reflective Knowledge, vol. II, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Stine, G.C. (1976) “Skepticism, Relevant Alternatives, and Deductive Closure” Philosophical Studies 29, 
249–261.
Vogel, J. (1990) “Are there Counterexamples to the Closure Principle?,” in M.D. Roth and G. Ross (eds.) 
Doubting. Contemporary Perspectives on Skepticism, Dordrecht etc.: Kluwer, 13–27.
Warfield, T.A. (2004) “When Epistemic Closure Does and Does not Fail: A Lesson from the History of 
Epistemology” Analysis 64, 35–41.
Williamson, T. (2000) Knowledge and Its Limits, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wittgenstein, L. (1969) On Certainty, Oxford: Blackwell.
Wright, C. (1985) “Facts and Certainty” Proceedings of the British Academy 71, 429–472.
Wright, C. (2000) “Cogency and Question-Begging: Some Reflections on McKinsey’s Paradox and Putnam’s 
Proof” Philosophical Perspectives 10 (Skepticism), 140–163.
Wright, C. (2002) “(Anti-) Sceptics Simple and Subtle: G.E. Moore and John McDowell” Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research 65, 330–348.
Wright, C. (2003) “Some Reflections on the Acquisition of Warrant by Inference,” in S. Nuccetelli (ed.) 
New Essays on Semantic Externalism and Self-Knowledge, Cambridge, MA & London: MIT Press, 57–77.
Wright, C. (2004) “Warrant for nothing (and foundations for free?)” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 
Supplement 78, 167–212.
Wright, C. (2007) “The Perils of Dogmatism,” in S. Nuccetelli and G. Seay (eds.) Themes from G.E. Moore: 
New Essays in Epistemology and Ethics, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 25–48.

55
BAYESIAN 
EPISTEMOLOGY
Stephan Hartmann and Jan Sprenger
1. Introduction
Bayesian epistemology addresses epistemological problems with the help of the math-
ematical theory of probability. It turns out that the probability calculus is especially suit-
ed to represent degrees of belief (credences) and to deal with questions of belief change, 
conﬁ rmation, evidence, justiﬁ cation, and coherence. Compared to the informal discus-
sions in traditional epistemology, Bayesian epistemology allows for a more precise and 
ﬁ ne-grained analysis which takes the gradual aspects of these central epistemological 
notions into account. Bayesian epistemology therefore complements traditional episte-
mology; it does not replace it or aim at replacing it.
Bayesian epistemology can be traced back to the work of Reverend Thomas Bayes 
(1701–1761) who found an elementary mathematical theorem that plays a central 
role in Bayesian epistemology. More on this below. Later Bayesian ideas began to 
surface not only in philosophy, but also in statistics, formal learning theory, and other 
parts of science. Obviously, the probability calculus ﬁ nds many applications because 
of its enormous ﬂ exibility, expressive power, and formal simplicity. Bayesian episte-
mology shares much with these endeavors, including a certain scientiﬁ c attitude vis-
à-vis the problems in question, but it is worth noting that Bayesian epistemology is, 
in the ﬁ rst place, a philosophical project, and that it is its ambition to further progress 
in philosophy.
This essay is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces the probability calculus 
and explains why degrees of belief obey the probability calculus. Section 3 applies the 
formal machinery to an analysis of the notion of evidence, and highlights potential 
application. Section 4 discusses Bayesian models of coherence and testimony, and 
section 5 ends this essay with a comparison of traditional epistemology and Bayesian 
epistemology.
2. Probability and Degrees of Belief
Bayesian epistemology can be described as the attempt to use an intuitive, but power-
ful tool—the probability calculus—for tackling longstanding problems in epistemology 
and philosophy of science. In particular, Bayesian epistemology models degrees of belief 
as mathematical probabilities. Probability is interpreted subjectively or epistemically (as 
opposed to the “objective chance” of an event). This section explains the relationship 

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
610
between the different interpretations of probability, the concept of degree of belief, and 
the application of those tools to epistemological problems. We start with some motiva-
tional remarks that draw on the analogy to deductive logic.
Deductive logic is often perceived as the logic of full rational belief, in the sense that an 
agent’s set of (fully endorsed) beliefs can be described as a set of ﬁ rst-order propositions. 
If this set is logically inconsistent, i.e. if there is no joint model of all propositions, then 
the agent cannot be (epistemically) rational: the propositions cannot hold simultane-
ously, hence she ought to abandon at least one of her beliefs. The calculus of deductive 
logic is helpful here: it detects inconsistencies in a set of beliefs by exploring their im-
plications according to a set of inferential rules.
The mathematical theory of probability plays the same role with respect to partial 
rational beliefs, in the sense that the probability calculus is a powerful instrument in 
order to infer the doxastic implications of a certain set of partial beliefs. To spell out 
the concept of a rational or irrational degree of belief, Frank Ramsey [1926] (1978) 
suggested to make use of the standard, economic conception of rationality—irrational 
degrees of belief would cost us money if we let them guide our actions. The crucial 
concept is betting behavior, or the inclination to accept and reject bets according to our 
degrees of belief. For ﬁ xed betting odds, a bet appears to be more favorable if we have a 
strong degree of belief in the underlying propositions than if we only weakly believe in 
them. This suggests to quantify a degree of belief in terms of the betting odds which we 
consider to be fair. As Ramsey argues, sports events are not the only occasion when we 
get involved in betting:
[. . .] all our lives we are in sense betting. Whenever we go to the station we are 
betting that a train will really run, and if we had not a sufﬁ cient degree of belief 
in this we should decline the bet and stay at home. 
(Ramsey [1926] 1978: 85)
Thus, we can describe our degrees of belief by means of the betting odds which we con-
sider fair. To make this explicit, we need some formalism: A bet on the event A is a triple 
〈A|x|y〉 where x and y are positive real numbers. The bookie pays the bettor y euros if 
A occurs and the bettor pays the bookie x euros if A does not occur. x is the bettor’s stake, 
and the ratio (x + y)/x is called the betting odds on A, indicating the bettor’s total gain 
(including the stake) for a successful € 1 euro bet. Such a betting odd is a preliminary 
quantiﬁ cation of a degree of belief. Naturally, an agent judges the bet 〈A|x|y〉 to be fair 
if it offers no advantage to either side, i.e. if to the agent’s mind, neither the bookie nor 
the bettor have an advantage, and both have the same expected utility. In this case, (x 
+ y)/x are the betting odds corresponding to the agent’s degree of belief.
The connection to the probability calculus is quickly made: if x is much greater than 
y and the bettor takes more risk than the bookie, the agent believes the event A to be 
probable. Conversely, if agent S believes A to occur in (100*p)% of all possible cases, he 
will consider the bet 〈A|x|y〉 to be fair if and only if there is no advantage for either 
side and the bet is a zero-sum game:
py + (1 – p) (–x) = 0. 
(1)
The only real number that solves equation (1) is p = x/(x + y) ∈ [0,1]. This value p is 
called the probability corresponding to S’s degree of belief. It is easy to see that there is an 

BAYESIAN EPISTEMOLOGY
611
isomorphism between probabilities and betting odds since we can determine the prob-
ability from the betting odds by taking the inverse, and vice versa. In the remainder, 
we will therefore read “the probability of A” as the subjective degree of belief in A. 
Evidently, 1 denotes maximal and 0 minimal degree of belief. What exactly makes a 
judgment on the fairness of a bet, or actual betting behavior, irrational? If we accept 1:1 
bets on an event A which you know to be highly improbable, we might still be rational. 
Maybe we have less information than you. Or perhaps there is not enough information 
available to determine a uniquely rational degree of belief. For instance, if we have a 
certain degree of belief in the independent propositions A and B, our degree of belief 
in A ∨ B should not be lower. Thus, degrees of belief/betting odds/probabilities are not 
arbitrary if we proceed from A and B to their truth-functional compounds. Probability 
theory reﬂ ects these entanglements in two simple axioms (Kolmogorov 1933): 
Deﬁ nition: Let A be a ﬁ eld of propositions (i.e. a set of propositions that is 
closed under truth-functional combination and contains all tautologies). P: A 
→ [0,1] is a probability function on A if and only if
• P(A) = 1 for any tautology A.
• For incompatible (mutually exclusive) propositions A and B, P(A ∨ B) 
= P(A) + P(B).
Any such function P is called a probability. The axioms are natural: Each tautology is 
assigned maximal degree of belief, and the disjunction of mutually exclusive proposi-
tions is assigned the sum of the individual degrees of beliefs. As a corollary, we obtain 
that P(¬A) + P(A) = P(A ∨ ¬A) = 1.
We will see in a minute that these simple equations contain everything that an agent’s 
rational degrees of belief have to satisfy, and vice versa. Here, the famous Dutch Book 
Theorem comes in: if one of the probability axioms is violated, the betting odds implied 
by the agent’s probabilities cannot have been fair altogether—it is possible to construct 
a system of bets that assures a risk-free gain to the bookie or the bettor, a so-called Dutch 
Book. Therefore, these degrees of belief cannot have been rational either.
Dutch Book Theorem: Any function P: A → [0,1] on a ﬁ eld A that does not 
satisfy the axioms of probability allows for a system of bets that is vulnerable to 
a Dutch Book. 
There is a second theorem, the Converse Dutch Book Theorem, which ensures that 
probability functions are not vulnerable to Dutch Books: 
Converse Dutch Book Theorem: No probability function P: A → [0,1] is vulner-
able to a Dutch Book.
Proofs: See Kemeny 1955.
In other words, the Dutch Book Theorem establishes the probability calculus as a 
logic of partial belief. Probabilistic degrees of belief are immune to Dutch Books, and 
non-probabilistic degrees of belief aren’t. For instance, if your degrees of belief in A, B 
and (A ∨ B) did not conform to the probability axioms, we could offer you a bet on (A ∨ 
B) in a twofold way: directly, or as a bet implied by two single bets on A and B. But the 
implicit betting odds would be different, leading to a reductio ad absurdum:

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
612
If anyone’s mental condition violated these laws [of the probability calculus], 
his choice would depend on the precise form in which the options were offered 
him, which would be absurd.
(Ramsey [1926] 1978: 84)
Thus, the Dutch Book Theorem establishes probability as the mathematical model of 
degrees of belief. However, the axiom of probabilities merely constrains systems of de-
grees of belief. They do not capture the irrationality of isolated beliefs. There are some 
people who know that the (objective, ontic) chance that their football club wins the 
national championship is no more than 0.01, but they continue to accept 1:8 bets on 
that event. Whatever the reasons for such a behavior, they act against their own knowl-
edge. The inconsistency arises from the gap between the subjective degree of belief and 
the objective chance of the event. For this reason, we need a principle that supplements 
the Dutch Book Theorem with an account of the relationship between chances—ob-
jective probabilities in the world—and rational degrees of belief. This task is fulﬁ lled by 
the Principal Principle (PP, Lewis 1980): If an agent knows the objective probability of 
proposition A to be equal to p and he has no “overruling information” available, then 
his rational degree of belief in A must also be equal to p. Lewis (1980) argues for the 
self-evidencing character of (PP), and this is in line with our intuitions: if we know a 
roulette table to be perfectly fair, we have no reason to play a speciﬁ c strategy. But as 
Strevens (1999) points out, it is hard to give a non-circular defense of (PP).
Nevertheless, (PP) gives, together with the Dutch Book Theorem, a comprehensive 
account of the statics of rational belief. But what about the dynamics? We are lacking a 
principle that asserts how degrees of belief should be changed in the light of incoming 
information. Here, the third and ﬁ nal cornerstone of Bayesian epistemology enters, 
namely the updating of degrees in the light of new evidence. The degree of belief in 
proposition A after learning another proposition E is expressed by the conditional prob-
ability of A given E, P(A|E). This value is deﬁ ned as P(A.E)/P(E) and is usually inter-
preted as the probability of A if we take E for granted.
Bayesian Conditionalization: The rational degree of belief in a proposition A af-
ter learning E is the conditional probability of A given E: Pnew (A) = P(A|E).
 By means of the famous Bayes’s Theorem (see Joyce 2008), we can reformulate 
this equation and make it easier to handle in practice:
Pnew(H) = P(H|E) = P(H) P(E|H)
 
P(E)
 
=  
P(H) P(E|H)
 
P(H) P(E|H) + P(¬H)P(E|¬H) 
(2)
To give an easy example: A friend of yours has bought a new car. Your prior degree 
of belief that it is a Ford is about 0.1 (corresponding to the percentages of Fords among 
newly bought cars). One day, he comes to your place, driving a Ford. If he actually 
owns a Ford, it is quite likely that you see him in a Ford rather than in his wife’s Toyota 
P(E|H) ≈ 0.8), whereas, if he did not own a Ford, he would probably have taken his 
wife’s car or public transport rather than borrowing a Ford from someone else (P(E|¬H 
≈ 0.05). Using (2), this leads to your new degree of belief Pnew (H) ≈ 0.94. In other words, 
you are now quite convinced that he has bought a Ford.

BAYESIAN EPISTEMOLOGY
613
Together, the Dutch Book Argument, the Principal Principle and Bayesian Condi-
tionalizations are the three pillars of Bayesian epistemology. Let us have a look at what 
one can do with them.
3. Measuring Evidence
A central concept in modern epistemology and modern science is evidence. Something 
is evidence for a proposition or a scientiﬁ c theory A, something makes us believe that 
A, etc. Philosophy of science has, over the past decades, exploited the probabilistic 
machinery to explicate what it means that a scientiﬁ c theory is conﬁ rmed or under-
mined. Although this debate mainly took place in philosophy of science journals, it is 
obviously signiﬁ cant for epistemology: probabilistic conﬁ rmation renders a theory more 
credible, in other words, it is evidence for the theory, and evidence is, in turn, central 
to justiﬁ cations and reasons. There are two concepts of evidence that have to be kept 
apart: the absolute and the relative. According to the absolute concept, E is evidence 
for a proposition A if and only if, given E, A is highly probable (P(A|E) is high). For 
instance, a perception is (absolute) evidence for a certain belief if, taking the percep-
tion for granted, the belief is highly probable. This understanding certainly captures 
some ways of using the word “evidence,” but on the other hand, E can be absolute evi-
dence for A even if E lowers the probability of E. For instance, let A be the proposition 
that your favorite football club will not be national champion in the next year. Even 
if they win a league match (E), the probability of A given E is still sufﬁ ciently high to 
make E absolute evidence for A (P(A|E) is still sufﬁ ciently high, although lower than 
P(A|¬E)). At least unless you support Chelsea, Barcelona, or the like.
This unintuitive property of absolute evidence calls for a second, different concept of 
evidence, namely evidence in the sense of support. In the above example, E is evidence 
for ¬A because it increases the chance of winning the overall competition (though only 
to a tiny degree). This relative concept of evidence as support is the subject of the rest 
of the section. Not only is it much more of a relation than the absolute concept, it is also 
fruitful and widely applicable, as we will see later.
Deﬁ nition: E is (relative) evidence for a proposition A if and only if P(A|E) > 
P(A).
Often, we have to tell good from bad evidence, similar to telling good from bad rea-
sons, or to quantify degree of support, e.g. in order to address famous challenges such 
as the Duhem-Quine problem (Earman 1992). For these tasks, we need a measure of 
evidence. But what is the most adequate measure of evidence? Which one should we 
use when judging, for instance, whether “evidence of evidence” is also evidence? Here 
are some suggestions with both an intuitive appeal and a longstanding tradition (other 
suggestions have been made by e.g. Crupi et al. 2007):
 Difference Measure Takes the difference between the posterior and the prior 
degree of belief in A as a measure of the support evidence E lends to A: d(A, E) 
:= P(A|E) – P(A). (Earman 1992; Rosenkrantz 1994)
Log-ratio Measure Proposed by Howson and Urbach (1993), this measure is 
based on the very same quantities, but replaces the difference in d by the loga-
rithmic ratio: r(A, E) := log P(A|E)/P(A).

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
614
Counterfactual Difference Measure Takes quite a different approach and 
compares the posterior degree of belief in A with the counterfactual degree of 
belief in A had ¬E occurred instead of E: s(A, E) := P(A|E) – P(A|¬E). 
Log-Likelihood Ratio Measures Looks whether A or its negation –A better 
accounts for observed evidence E: l(A, E) := log P(E|A)
 
P(E|¬A).
The task of explicating evidence thus amounts to making a decision between these 
measures. This is an intricate task since they also capture different aspects of evidence. 
Let’s come back to the Ford example. If you already knew that your friend had the ﬁ rm 
plan to buy a Ford (P(A) = 0.95) then the evidence that you see him in a Ford is not 
very impressive from d’s standpoint (d < 0.1) since your degrees of belief do not change 
a lot. Still, A accounts much better for E than ¬A (l ≈ 2.77). Thus, E remains highly 
useful to discriminate between A and ¬A, and therefore strong evidence from l’s stand-
point. Christensen (1999: 438–439) presents a nice analogy: How would we measure 
the extent to which a candidate for US presidency P is ﬁ nancially supported by a group 
G? The proportion of G-donations in P’s funds? P’s relative position in the presidential 
run as a function of the G-donations? And so on. Christensen conjectures
Thinking about these different measures of support suggests to me that there is 
no single clearcut question being asked when we ask “How much support does 
P get from G?” It would not be surprising if the same were true of the question 
“How much does evidence E support hypothesis A?”
(Christensen 1999: 439)
Hence, a purely example/intuition-based approach to ﬁ nding measures of evidence 
is misguided, since different questions are asked. But one can set up criteria which all 
reasonable measures of evidential support have to satisfy. Then, a lot of measures drop 
from the list. The remaining ones can be used to model coherence (see the following 
section), to tackle longstanding philosophy of science puzzles such as the Duhem-Quine 
problem (see Earman 1992), and they can be connected to empirical evidence in psy-
chology, delivering insights into human reasoning.
To illuminate the strategy, we discuss the problem of irrelevant conjunctions. If your 
watch yields strong evidence that your philosophy seminar is about to begin, this should 
not be strong evidence for the claim that your philosophy seminar is about to begin 
and that your favorite football club is going to win the national championship. The 
latter proposition just seems to be irrelevant to the evidential reasoning. Formally, if E 
is (strong) evidence for A, then E should not always be (strong) evidence for A plus an 
arbitrary claim X. However, all measures of evidence yield that E is evidence for A.X, 
too, due to the positive impact of E on A:
Proposition 1 (Fitelson 2002): Assume that E is evidence for A and that P(E|A.
X) = P(E|A) for a sentence X consistent with A. Then E is evidence for A.X, 
too, for any measure of support.
In other words, if we tack a conjunct to our belief in question that does not change 
the likelihood of the evidence, then the evidence relation extends to the conjunc-
tion as well. For instance, the seminar schedule and the precision of your watch are 

BAYESIAN EPISTEMOLOGY
615
apparently independent of the results of football matches. And precisely such conjuncts 
are the ones we would call “arbitrary” or “irrelevant,” leading to the counterintuitive 
Proposition 1, regardless of the used measure. Therefore it is important that in such situ-
ations, an evidence measure c satisﬁ es c(A, E) > c(A.X, E), i.e. E is weaker evidence for 
the conjunction A.X than for the original proposition A. It turns out that such a result 
is available, and that the paradox can be mitigated:
Proposition 2 (Hawthorne and Fitelson 2004): Assume that E is evidence for A 
and P(E|A.X) = P(E|A) for a proposition X with P(X|A.K) ≠ 1. Then the 
evidence E lends to A exceeds the evidence E lends to A.X, for d, l, and s, e.g. 
d(A, E) > d(A. X, E). But for the log-ratio measure r, we always get r(A, E) = 
r(A.X, E).
Thus, the measure r drops from our list of candidate measures: If E is evidence for A, 
then E is equally strong evidence for A.X for an irrelevant X, and this is apparently an 
unacceptable result. 
These results do not only affect the debate about evidence measures -- they are im-
portant for the psychology of human reasoning as well. You might have heard about the 
conjunction fallacy observed by Tversky and Kahneman (1983): Take the propositions
• 
E: Linda is 31 years old, single, outspoken, and very bright. She majored in philoso-
phy. As a student, she was deeply concerned with issues of discrimination and social 
justice, and also participated in anti-nuclear demonstrations.
• 
A: Linda is a bank teller.
• 
A.X: Linda is a feminist and a bank teller.
Subjects were asked to assess whether A or A.X is more probable given evidence E. 
Strikingly, they predominantly judged A.X to be more probable, thereby violating the 
probabilistic law that for each A and X, P(A.X) ≤ P(A). Or in other words, a proposi-
tion cannot be more credible than one of its consequences. How shall we interpret this 
result? Are the subjects unaware of elementary logical laws? We need not draw that 
conclusion. In terms of our measures of evidence, we can tell a story about their judg-
ments (see Crupi et al. 2008; Schupbach 2010). The subjects intuitively judged the 
support relations between E, A and A.X. Obviously, E is strong evidence for X (“Linda is 
a feminist”) and by proposition 1, at least weak evidence for A.X, whereas E is equally 
obviously evidence against A. This implies a fortiori that E is much stronger evidence 
for A.X than for A. Thus, the subjects apparently confounded the concepts of high 
probability and the concept of evidential support, instead of committing a mathemati-
cal fallacy (but see the alternative story of Hartmann and Meijs 2010). Note that this 
formal analysis of the problem is measure-sensitive: as proposition 2 shows, it would 
not be available if we used r as the measure of support. Similarly, claims of social epis-
temology can be tackled by means of evidence measures. For instance, Douven (2010) 
investigates whether “evidence of evidence” is evidence for a proposition, using the dif-
ferent explications of evidence presented in this section. All this illustrates that Bayes-
ian techniques are not (only) a mathematician’s delight, but valuable means of tackling 
traditional epistemological problems. The next section describes Bayesian models of 
coherence and testimony.

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
616
4. Coherence and Testimony
In epistemology, the coherence theory of justiﬁ cation is the main alternative to founda-
tionalism. It says that a set of propositions is justiﬁ ed if it coheres well (BonJour 1985). 
The theory is attractive as it avoids the problems of foundationalism, but it has its prob-
lems as well. Most importantly, it is not clear what it means that a set of propositions 
coheres. How can this notion be made more precise? The situation is complicated by 
the observation that coherence is a gradual notion. Some sets of propositions seem more 
coherent, while others are less coherent. Apparently, we need a measure that speciﬁ es 
how coherent a set of propositions is. Constructing such a measure might also help to 
get a better grasp of what coherence is. Moreover, the availability of a coherence mea-
sure will help addressing longstanding problems in the coherence theory of justiﬁ cation. 
For example, one might ask if and when coherence is truth-conducive, i.e. under which 
conditions is the coherence of a set of propositions an indicator of its truth? Bayesian 
epistemologists have addressed these questions and made substantial progress over the 
last couple of years. A natural way to start the construction of a measure of coherence 
is to depart with an epistemological intuition and to formalize it. The following two 
intuitions about coherence can be identiﬁ ed:
(R) Coherence as positive relevance.
(O) Coherence as relative overlap in probability space.
(R) expresses the intuition that the elements of a coherent set mutually support each 
other (in the sense of the deﬁ nition of relative evidence). Such sets of propositions 
seem to be more coherent than sets of independent propositions or sets whose ele-
ments are negatively relevant to each other. (O) expresses the intuition that identical 
propositions are considered to be coherent. This is especially plausible if one adopts a 
witness scenario: Imagine that several independent witnesses of a crime give identical 
reports (“The butler left the crime scene with a bloody knife in his hand.”). Obviously, 
the given reports are maximally coherent and any deviation reduces the coherence ac-
cordingly. Probabilistically speaking, identical reports maximally overlap in probability 
space. So, according to (O), coherence measures the relative overlap of the propositions 
in probability space. Coherence measures can be classiﬁ ed according to which intuition 
they formalize. For instance, the Shogenji measure, the ﬁ rst explicit coherence measure 
in the literature, is a pure relevance measure (Shogenji 1999). For two propositions A 
and B, it is given by the following expression:
CS (A, B) := P(A|B) = P(B|A) =  P(A.B) 
(3)
 
P(A) 
P(B) 
P(A) P(B)
CS (A, B) measures how relevant B is for A, i.e. how much the probability of A is raised 
if one learns that B is true. Note that the expression is symmetrical in A and B, which is 
a natural request for a coherence measure. Hence, CS (A, B) also expresses how relevant 
A is for B. According to this Bayesian explication, the coherence of a set of propositions 
is a property of this set relative to a probability measure P. Different agents with different 
probability functions might, therefore, come to different coherence assignments. They 
might also rank different sets differently according to their coherence. The expression 
on the right-hand side indicates how the Shogenji measure can be generalized to more 

BAYESIAN EPISTEMOLOGY
617
than two propositions. This generalization, however, is problematic as Fitelson (2003) 
has shown. The Glass–Olsson measure (Glass 2002: Olsson 2005) is a pure overlap 
measure:
CO (A, B) :=  P(A.B)  
(4)
 
P(A ∨ B)
Also CO (A, B) can be generalized to more than two propositions in a natural way. It 
turns out that none of these and related measures always leads to an intuitively satisfac-
tory coherence ordering of sets of propositions (Bovens and Hartmann 2003a; Dou-
ven and Meijs 2007). This suggests the search for more complex measures that take 
both intuitions—positive relevance and overlap—into account. This is achieved by the 
Bovens–Hartmann measure (Bovens and Hartmann 2003a) and the family of measures 
that generalize the Bovens–Hartmann measure (Douven and Meijs 2007). Contrary to 
the Shogenji measure and the Glass–Olsson measure, the construction of these mea-
sures does not start with the formalization of an epistemic intuition. It rather starts with 
the question what the function of the coherence of a set of propositions is. One obvious 
answer is that the coherence of a set of propositions boosts our conﬁ dence in the truth of 
these propositions. To make this approach explicit, we need to introduce a witness sce-
nario. Consider a set of propositions S(n) := {A1, . . ., An}. Assume that each proposition 
Ai (i = 1, . . ., n) is conﬁ rmed by a report Ei of a different witness. The n witnesses are 
independent and have the same reliability. The construction of a coherence measure 
then proceeds in three steps:
1. Work out the ratio of the posterior probability P(A1, . . ., An|E1, . . ., En) and the 
prior probability P(A1, . . ., An). The posterior probability measures the probability 
of the set of propositions after the reports came in. The prior probability measures 
the probability of the set of propositions before the reports came in. The ratio of 
both, then, measures the conﬁ dence boost in S(n). This takes intuition (R) into 
account.—Notably, Douven and Meijs (2007) replace the ratio measure by alter-
native evidence measures (e.g. d and l from section 3), thus obtaining a family of 
coherence measures.
2. Normalize this ratio to make sure that a set of propositions which fully overlap in 
probability space, has maximal coherence. This takes intuition (O) into account. 
It is easy to see that the resulting function cannot be a coherence measure as it 
depends on the reliability of the witnesses. Coherence, however, is traditionally 
conceived as an intrinsic property of a set of propositions and independent of the 
reliability of the witnesses.
3. To solve this problem, it is requested that a set S(n) is more coherent than a set S'(n) 
if and only if the normalized ratio of posterior and prior probability is greater for 
S(n) than for S'(n) for all values of the reliability of the witnesses. It is easy to see that 
this entails that there are sets of propositions X(n) and Y(n) that cannot be ordered 
according to their coherence, which is also intuitively plausible. See Bovens and 
Hartmann (2003a) and (2003b) for details.
However, it turns out that none of the coherence measures proposed so far is without 
problems (Meijs and Douven 2005; Bovens and Hartmann 2005). So instead of starting 
with various armchair intuitions, it might be more promising to go empirical and study 

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
618
the coherence judgments or real people. The results can then be confronted with the 
coherence measures put forward in the philosophical literature. It is also possible that 
the data suggest a new coherence measure. For preliminary work in this direction, see 
Harris and Hahn (2009) (see also Oaksford and Chater 2007). It is hoped that a combi-
nation of empirical studies, formal modeling and conceptual analysis will help to resolve 
the deadlock in the current debate about coherence measures.
Formal analyses of coherence have already been used to examine the relation be-
tween coherence and truth. While recent theoretical results seem to rule out a general 
connection (Olsson 2005), in certain cases coherence is an indicator of truth in the 
following sense: if two sets of propositions of equal cardinality have the same prior prob-
ability and can be ordered according to their coherence, then the more coherent of the 
two also has the higher posterior probability if all witnesses have the same reliability.
We conclude this section with a discussion of testimony. Epistemologists have stressed 
that much of our knowledge derives from the testimony of others: parents, teachers, 
textbooks etc. While this seems true, more speciﬁ c questions can be asked. For example, 
how shall the testimonies of several witnesses be combined? And how shall we change 
our beliefs in the light of testimonial evidence? Bayesian epistemology has the resources 
to make these questions more precise and to answer them. In Bayesian Epistemology, 
Bovens and Hartmann (2003a) develop a general methodology, using the theory of 
Bayesian networks (Neapolitan 2003), that facilitate a detailed analysis.
More speciﬁ cally, models with more or less dependent witnesses of different reliabil-
ity can be considered and a range of interesting results can be proven. For example, 
“too-odd-to-be-true” reasoning can be studied: imagine that several independent and 
partially reliable witnesses give the same report; they all claim that they saw no. 1 in a 
lineup of n people at the crime scene. We ask: When are we more convinced that the 
witnesses tell the truth, if the number of suspects is, say, 2 or if it is 100? Most people 
would say that we are the more convinced in the truth of the reports, the larger the 
number of suspects is. This makes much sense as it becomes increasingly unlikely that 
a witness hits the truth by accident if the number of suspects is large. The probability 
for this is only 1/n and decreases if n goes up. From a Bayesian perspective, however, 
different perspectives on this phenomenon are possible: On the one hand, coinciding 
reports provide the better relative evidence (cf. section 3) the higher the number of 
suspects is. This seems to conﬁ rm our intuitive judgment. But on the other hand, with 
increasing number of suspects, the prior probability of no. 1 being responsible for the 
crime declines. Thus the posterior probability of the witnesses telling the truth falls, 
too, and the coincidence is “too odd to be true.” (Note the analogy to the Linda case!) 
This example illustrates once more that Bayesian epistemology provides fruitful tools to 
tackle questions of coherence, testimony and reliable evidence. For detailed models and 
discussion, see Olsson (2002) and Bovens and Hartmann (2003a: ch. 5).
5. Concluding Remarks
We conclude this essay with a comparison of traditional epistemology and Bayesian 
epistemology and a few remarks about the future of epistemology. Traditional epistemol-
ogy typically starts with an epistemic intuition, developed, perhaps, by examining an ex-
ample in some detail. Think about the Gettier cases as an illustration. These intuitions 
inspire a philosophical theory which, in turn, is criticized by other examples, triggered 
by different or more ﬁ ne-grained intuitions.

BAYESIAN EPISTEMOLOGY
619
Bayesian epistemology, on the other hand, draws much of its power from the math-
ematical machinery of probability theory. It starts with a mathematical intuition. The 
construction of Bayesian models is much triggered by what is mathematically elegant 
and feasible (e.g. Spirtes et al. 2001). The mathematics develops a life of its own (to 
adopt a phrase due to Hacking), and the comparison with intuitive examples comes 
only after the Bayesian account is given.
One of the goals of this essay was to show that traditional epistemology and Bayesian epis-
temology can learn from each other: Bayesian epistemology makes certain debates in tradi-
tional epistemology more precise, and traditional epistemology inspires Bayesian accounts.
Both Bayesian epistemology and traditional epistemology do not much consider em-
pirical data. Both are based on intuitions, be they mathematical or epistemological. 
This might be a problem as privilege is given to the philosopher’s intuitions. However, 
recent work in experimental philosophy (Knobe and Nichols 2008) has shown that 
non-philosophers might have different intuitions. While it is debatable how seriously 
these intuitions should be taken (maybe people are simply wrong!), it seems clear that 
both can proﬁ t from taking empirical studies into account so that epistemology be-
comes, at the end, an endeavor to which philosophers with various tools (conceptual 
analysis, formal methods, and empirical studies) contribute.
The Bayesian framework is very convenient for these studies. It is easy to use, very 
powerful, and it comes with principles that can be made plausible on rational grounds 
(Dutch Book arguments, Principal Principle, Bayesian Conditionalization). Moreover, 
this framework has been very successful as the various applications in epistemology and 
philosophy of science demonstrate. It has been a progressive research program, to use 
Lakatos’s terminology. But the Bayesian framework might reach its limits just as a scien-
tiﬁ c theory has to be given up at some point. It is therefore advisable that philosophers 
also keep on paying attention to other formal frameworks such as alternative theories 
of uncertainty (such as the Dempster–Shafer theory; see Haenni and Hartmann 2006) 
and epistemic logics.
References
BonJour, L. (1985) The Structure of Empirical Knowledge. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bovens, L. and S. Hartmann (2003a) Bayesian Epistemology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bovens, L. and S. Hartmann (2003b) “Solving the Riddle of Coherence,” Mind 112: 601–634.
Bovens, L. and S. Hartmann (2005) “Why There Cannot Be a Single Probabilistic Measure of Coherence,” 
Erkenntnis 63: 361–374.
Chater, N. and M. Oaksford (eds.) (2008) The Probabilistic Mind: Prospects for Bayesian Cognitive Science. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Christensen, D. (1999) “Measuring Conﬁ rmation,” Journal of Philosophy 96: 437–461.
Crupi, V., B. Fitelson and K. Tentori (2008) “Probability, Conﬁ rmation and the Conjunction Fallacy,” 
Thinking and Reasoning 14(2): 182–199.
Crupi, V., K. Tentori and M. Gonzalez (2007) On Bayesian Measures of Evidential Support: Theoretical and 
Empirical Issues. Philosophy of Science 74(2): 229–252. 
Douven, I. (2010) “Is Evidence of Evidence Evidence?,” under review.
Douven, I. and W. Meijs (2007) “Measuring Coherence,” Synthese 156: 405–425.
Earman, J. (1992) Bayes or Bust? Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Fitelson, B. (2002) “Putting the Irrelevance Back into the Problem of Irrelevant Conjunction,” Philosophy 
of Science 69: 611–622.
Fitelson, B. (2003) “A Probabilistic Theory of Coherence,” Analysis 63: 194–199.
Glass, D. (2002) “Coherence, Explanation, and Bayesian Networks,” in: M. O’Neill et al. (eds.), AICS 2002, 
LNAI 2464, 177–182.

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
620
Haenni, R. and S. Hartmann (2006) “Modeling Partially Reliable Information Sources: A General 
Approach Based on Dempster–Shafer Theory,” Information Fusion 7: 361–379.
Hájek, A. (2003). What Conditional Probability Could Not Be. Synthese 137: 273–323.
Harris, A.J.L. and Hahn, U. (2009) “Bayesian Rationality in Evaluating Multiple Testimonies: Incorpo-
rating the Role of Coherence,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 35: 
1366–1373. 
Hartmann, S. and W. Meijs (2010) “Walter the Banker: The Conjunction Fallacy Reconsidered,” to appear 
in Synthese [DOI: 10.1007/s11229–009–9694–6].
Hawthorne, J. and B. Fitelson (2004) “Re-solving Irrelevant Conjunction with Probabilistic Independence,” 
Philosophy of Science 71: 505–514.
Howson, C. and P. Urbach (1993) Scientiﬁ c Reasoning: The Bayesian Approach. La Salle: Open Court.
Joyce, J. (2008) “Bayes’ Theorem,” in: E. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2008 Edi-
tion).
Kemeny, J.G. (1955) “Fair Bets and Inductive Probabilities,” Journal of Symbolic Logic 20: 263–273.
Knobe, J. and S. Nichols (2008) Experimental Philosophy. New York: Oxford University Press.
Kolmogorov, A.N. (1933) Grundbegriffe der Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung. Berlin: Springer. English transla-
tion: Foundations of the Theory of Probability. New York: Chelsea 1950.
Lewis, D. (1980) “A Subjectivist’s Guide to Objective Chance,” in: R. Jeffrey (ed.), Studies in Inductive Logic 
and Probability, Vol II., Berkeley: University of California Press, 263–293.
Meijs, W. and I. Douven (2005) “Bovens and Hartmann on Coherence,” Mind 114: 355–363.
Neapolitan, R. (2003) Learning Bayesian Networks. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Oaksford, M. and N. Chater (2007) Bayesian Rationality: The Probabilistic Approach to Human Reasoning. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Olsson, E. (2002) “Corroborating Testimony, Probability and Surprise,” The British Journal for the Philosophy 
of Science 53(2): 273–288.
Olsson, E. (2005) Against Coherence: Truth, Probability, and Justiﬁ cation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ramsey, F.P. (1978) “Truth and Probability,” in: Hugh Mellor (ed.), Foundations: Essays in Philosophy, Logic, 
Mathematics and Economics, 58–100. London: Routledge. Original article published in 1926.
Reichenbach, H. (1956) The Direction of Time. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Rosenkrantz, R.D. (1994) “Bayesian Conﬁ rmation: Paradise Regained,” British Journal for the Philosophy of 
Science 45: 467–476.
Schupbach, J. (2010) “Is the Conjunction Fallacy tied to Probabilistic Conﬁ rmation?,” to appear in Synthese 
[DOI: 10.1007/s11229–009–9698–2].
Shogenji, T. (1999) “Is Coherence Truth-Conducive?” Analysis 59: 338–345.
Spirtes, P., C. Glymour, and R. Scheines (2001). Causation, Prediction and Search. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.
Strevens, M. (1999) “Objective Probability as a Guide to the World,” Philosophical Studies 95: 243–275.
Tversky, A. and D. Kahneman (1983) “Extensional versus Intuitive Reasoning: The Conjunction Fallacy in 
Probability Judgment,” Psychological Review 90: 293–315.
Further Reading
Carnap, R. (1950) Logical Foundations of Probability. Chicago: Chicago University Press. (A classic, nowa-
days out-of-fashion theory of evidence.)
Fitelson, B. (2001a) Studies in Bayesian Conﬁ rmation Theory. PhD thesis, University of Wisconsin, Madison. 
(Comprehensive overview of the debate on measures of evidence.)
Jeffrey, R. (1983). The Logic of Decision. 2nd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. (Explicates Jeffrey 
Conditionalization—a more general version of Bayesian Conditionalization that allows to conditionalize 
on uncertain evidence.)
Williamson, J. (2005) Bayesian Nets and Causality: Philosophical and Computational Foundations. Oxford: Ox-
ford University Press. (An introduction to objective Bayesianism—the position that only one degree of 
belief is rational in a given information situation.)

56
THEORIES OF BELIEF 
CHANGE
André Fuhrmann
Synchronic Versus Diachronic Epistemic Justification
Karl sees Peter on a bicycle. He believes that if Peter rides a bicycle, then he owns that 
bicycle. Thus, Karl believes (at time t) that
(p) Peter owns a bicycle.
Here is a traditional epistemological problem: Let K be Karl’s state of belief at t. Are all 
of Karl’s beliefs justiﬁ ed? In particular, are the two beliefs
(a) Peter rides a bicycle
and
(b) If Peter rides a bicycle, than he owns that bicycle
justiﬁ ed? For, if they are, then they jointly entail p.
This is the problem of epistemic justiﬁ cation concerning actual beliefs. We take a 
time slice of an agent’s beliefs and ask whether the beliefs at the given point of time are 
justiﬁ ed. This problem of synchronic justiﬁ cation enjoys such a central status in modern 
epistemology that it is frequently taken to deﬁ ne the subject.
In a way, this is rather unfortunate. For, there is another problem, at least as pressing 
as the problem of synchronic justiﬁ cation, which besets our states of belief.
Suppose that Karl learns from a source he recognizes as reliable that Peter does not 
own a bicycle. He therefore resolves to retract his belief that p. In other words, he re-
solves to move from K to a belief state K-without-p. But in K the belief that p is deduc-
tively forced by the beliefs a and b (= a → p). So in order to give up p, Karl must give up 
at least a or b. And backtracking from a and b in the deductive network of K we might 
ﬁ nd further beliefs involved in producing p. There are thus many candidate states that 
all satisfy the requirement that p be no longer believed—including the initial Cartesian 
state, cogito. The challenge is to justify a choice of such a candidate state as the unique 
successor K-without-p to K. This is the problem of justifying belief change or of diachronic 
justiﬁ cation, as we shall say.

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
622
The above example shows clearly that no unique successor belief state K’ is in general 
determined by a given origin state K, a piece of evidence and a logical consequence 
relation that calculates the consequences of K and the new evidence or backtracks un-
welcome consequences to subsets of K. Transitions to unique successor states essentially 
involve an element of choice.
The problem of synchronic justiﬁ cation consists in ﬁ nding items that could plausibly 
replace the variable in the schema
(S) = x R K
where R indicates the relation of justiﬁ cation. Prominent candidates for x in (S) are 
fundamental beliefs, coherent integration of beliefs or reliable causal groundings.
In the diachronic case the schema under consideration is this:
(D) = x R (K, K′)
where the object of justiﬁ cation is a pair representing a transition from an origin state 
K to a successor state K′.
One might ask whether the two problems are distinct. This is an intricate question. If 
we could somehow derive a solution to the problem of diachronic justiﬁ cation from an 
extant account of synchronic justiﬁ cation the apparent dominance of the synchronic 
problem in modern epistemology would emerge as well-deserved in retrospect. But there 
is no plausible such derivation in sight.
By contrast, the reduction of synchronic to diachronic justiﬁ cation seems to be a 
more promising enterprise. As a ﬁ rst attempt consider the Cartesian proposal: A belief 
state K (and thereby each belief in K) counts as justiﬁ ed if and only if it is connected 
by a chain of justiﬁ ed belief changes to an unassailable urcorpus of beliefs. The term ‘ur-
corpus’ is taken from Levi (see e.g. Levi 1980). It does not matter here what one takes 
to be part of the urcorpus. (Levi, by the way, does not advocate assigning the urcorpus a 
foundational role.) At best, however, the Cartesian proposal affords a partial reduction 
of justiﬁ ed belief to justiﬁ ed belief change, since the urcorpus cannot itself be the result 
of justiﬁ ed belief changes. Approaches that take their inspiration in a pragmatist theory 
of inquiry do away with ultimate epistemic foundations. In a way, such approaches could 
be taken to call into question the very problem of synchronic justiﬁ cation: There is a 
real problem of legitimately ﬁ xing one’s beliefs; and there is the bogus problem of le-
gitimizing beliefs already ﬁ xed. (See Peirce 1877 and Levi’s “Truth, fallibility and the 
growth of knowledge’’ in Levi 1984.)
In sum, there are two prima facie problems of epistemic justiﬁ cation: The problem of 
justifying one’s presently held beliefs and The problem of justifying a change in one’s 
present beliefs. It is by no means obvious that the one problem can be reduced to the 
other. Moreover, in a ﬁ rst person perspective the problem of justifying belief change 
seems much more pressing than the problem of justifying presently held beliefs. For, on 
the one hand, a proposition believed is a proposition held to be true. On the other hand, 
attempts at justiﬁ cation are responses to living doubts. But it is incoherent to doubt 
something that at the same time is held to be true. Living doubt as to present beliefs 
arises when hitherto unknown evidence becomes available. Then we face the question 
how to accommodate the new evidence. Such accommodation needs justiﬁ cation. But 
the required justiﬁ cation is one that pertains to a belief change, not to the belief state 
prior to the new evidence.

THEORIES OF BELIEF CHANGE
623
In the light of these considerations it is all the more surprising that theories of dia-
chronic justiﬁ cation have been largely neglected for a long time, with a few exceptions. 
Only in the 1980s—again, with a few exceptions—philosophers started to develop sys-
tematic approaches to the problem. Since then theories of belief change (or theory 
change or belief revision) have rapidly progressed to a presently rich ﬁ eld of investiga-
tion with many crossconnections to other problems, including some of particular con-
cern to computer scientists.
2. The Classical Theory of Belief Change: AGM
The Fundamental Problem
Let us start by asking how much structure in a belief state we need to invest for an inter-
esting problem of belief change to emerge.
We ascribe beliefs to agents. We usually do this by using language, though what we 
ascribe, using language, are not linguistic items. When using language to ascribe beliefs, 
we proceed on the innocuous presupposition that sentences can be used to represent 
beliefs. When we refer to the beliefs of an agent, we can, therefore, do so by representing 
these beliefs by a set of sentences. Of course, the language needs to be expressive enough 
to represent the beliefs we are interested in representing. Should that prove difﬁ cult, we 
might start by restricting our attention to an easily representable kind of beliefs.
Beliefs have consequences. A believer is committed to the consequences of his be-
liefs. There are believers who fail to live up to their commitments. But we do expect be-
lievers to acknowledge their commitments once they are clearly and patiently pointed 
out to them. This expectation is not of an inductive but of a normative kind: One ought 
to acknowledge the consequences of one’s beliefs. Thus belief states—as they ought to 
be—are closed under consequence.
We are now ready to formulate the fundamental problem of belief change. Suppose 
an agent’s belief state K contains beliefs A and B from which follows (by consequence) 
a further belief C. By closure under consequence, C is also in K. Suppose now that a de-
cision has been taken to remove C from K. How should this decision be implemented? 
This is the given change problem. At least one of A or B has to give way. What should 
the resulting belief state not containing C be like?
At this point we could stop with the simple observation that K without A, or K with-
out B, or K without both, or even the closure under consequence of cogito are all succes-
sors to K satisfying the condition that C be no longer believed. Belief change would thus 
be relational rather than functional: There simply is no unique successor to K.
Since relational belief change is unhelpful (though see Lindström and Rabinowicz 
1991 for a dissenting view) we need to assume some more structure on belief states 
which delivers a ranking of possible successors such that each change problem issues in 
a unique successor.
To summarize, we need two assumptions for posing the problem. First, beliefs must 
be representable in some language for which we can deﬁ ne a relation of consequence. 
Equivalently we could represent beliefs by sets of possible worlds, with inclusion doing 
duty for (the converse of) consequence; see e.g. Grove (1988) or Stalnaker (2009). Sec-
ond, the beliefs held in a belief state are closed under consequence. Some philosophers 
have argued that for certain purposes it might be advisable to keep track of the base 
beliefs from which complete belief states are generated by closing under consequence: 

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
624
see Fuhrmann (1991b) and Hansson (1992). Even if one prefers base changes over 
theory changes, the problem of belief change emerges in the same way, i.e. only once 
we consider logical commitments. Finally, a third assumption is needed for solving the 
problem: Belief states are not merely closed sets of beliefs; they have further structure 
ranking some (clusters of) beliefs higher than others.
The Sources of the AGM-Theory
The classical theory of belief change has been developed in the 1980s by Carlos Al-
chourrón, Peter Gärdenfors and David Makinson (hence AGM for short). The “pure’’ 
theory of belief change resulted as an abstraction from two more concrete and well-
known problems.
Alchourrón’s principal interest lay in the concept of legal derogation. This is the act 
of a legislator of revoking a regulation from a legal code with the implicit intention of 
thereby also removing everything from the code that implies that regulation (see Al-
chourrón and Makinson 1981, p. 127).
Gärdenfors tried to elaborate the idea of belief change implicit in the following much-
quoted passage from Frank P. Ramsey:
If two people are arguing “If p will q?” and are both in doubt as to p, they are 
adding p hypothetically to their stock of knowledge and arguing on that basis 
about q.
(“General propositions and causality” (1929), in Ramsey 1931)
Thus the theory of belief change to be developed was thought to be constrained by the 
acceptance test for conditionals suggested by Ramsey. We shall come back to this con-
straint below. Gärdenfors (1988) is the ﬁ rst book-length treatment of theory change. 
The three authors joined forces in the standard exposition, of the AGM-theory (Al-
chourrón et al. 1985). The development of the AGM-theory has been much inspired 
and critically accompanied by the work of Isaac Levi (see in particular Levi 1984, 1991, 
2004). (Rott (2001) summarizes the rise of the AGM-theory over 20 years, provides 
important missing links and draws out connections with defeasible and practical reason-
ing. Hansson (1999) is a textbook-style exposition of the AGM-theory containing also 
some important extensions.)
In the AGM-theory it is assumed that the language used to represent belief states 
contains all boolean connectives and that the consequence operation (or relation) un-
der which belief states are to be closed is a closure operation in the usual Tarskian 
sense, including classical logical consequence. As pointed out in Fuhrmann (1997a) 
and (1997b), for the most part of the theory no such assumptions are really necessary. In 
fact, the theory enjoys such a degree of abstraction that it covers not only belief change 
but changes of any items that can be represented in a closure systems.
The consequence operation Cn is thus expected to satisfy the following conditions 
(for any sets X and Y of sentences):
X ⊆ Cn(X);
if X ⊆ Y, then Cn(X) ⊆ Cn(Y);
Cn(Cn(X)) = Cn(X);
if A ∈ Cn(X), then ∃X′ ⊆ X: X′ is ﬁ nite and A ∈ Cn (X′).

THEORIES OF BELIEF CHANGE
625
Sometimes we may also write relationally: 
X ⊢ A for A ∈ Cn(X) and A ≡ B for Cn(A) = Cn(B).
Since belief states K are closed under logical consequence we have (for every sentence 
A)
A ∈ K iff K ⊢ A.
Suppose now that we receive input information that triggers a decision to incorporate A 
into one’s present state of belief K. There are two cases to distinguish.
First, A is consistent with K. In that case incorporation is simple: We add A to K and 
then close again under consequence. We write K + A for this operation of expanding K 
by A. Expansion is easily deﬁ ned: K + A := Cn(K ∪ {A}), where Cn is the operation of 
taking the consequences of a set of beliefs.
Second, A is inconsistent with K, i.e. ¬A is in K. Here simple expansion would result 
in an inconsistent belief state—of which classically there is only one, the trivial belief 
state including all beliefs. Thus a more subtle operation is called for which will be called 
the revision of K by A, K * A.
It is natural to think of revision as a composed operation: First we have to withdraw 
beliefs from K so as to make our beliefs compatible with A; then we can add A by expan-
sion. The result of retracting from K to a weaker belief state is called a contraction. In the 
case at hand, we would need to contract K by ¬A; then we could expand the result, K 
– ¬A, by A without danger of inconsistency. This reduction of revisions to contractions 
followed by an expansion is the Levi Identity:
K * A = (K– ¬A) + A.
Given the Levi Identity the theory of belief changes reduces to a theory of contractions 
(and expansions). We note in passing that one could also take the other direction, from 
contractions to revisions, via the so-called Harper (or Gärdenfors) Identity: K–A = (K 
* ¬A) ∩ K.
The strategy of the theory is simple. On the one hand we transpose plausible condi-
tions on contractions (or revisions) into the language of set-theory, thereby giving an 
implicit characterization of the operation. On the other hand, we try to give a recipe for 
solving a given contraction problem, thereby producing models in which contractions 
can explicitly be deﬁ ned. Finally, the two approaches need to be linked by a represen-
tation result: An operation satisﬁ es the contraction postulates just in case it can be 
deﬁ ned as a contraction in a model. If postulates on the one hand and models on the 
other hand are independently plausible, such a representation result makes for a prima 
facie stable theory of contractions and of belief change in general. Of the four models 
furnished in the AGM-theory we shall here present two: partial meet contractions and 
systems of spheres. The other two are safe contractions, as in Alchourrón and Makinson 
(1981), and models in terms of epistemic entrenchment, for which see Gäerdenfors 
(1988) and Rott (2001).

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
626
The AGM-Postulates
The postulates for contraction come in two groups:
 
Basic
(C1) Closure 
K – A = Cn(K–A)
(C2) Success 
A ∉ K–A, if ⊬ A
(C3) Inclusion 
K – A ⊆ K
(C4) Vacuity 
If A ∉ K, then K – A = K
(C5) Recovery 
K ⊆ (K – A) + A 
(C6) Congruence 
If A ≡ B, then K – A = K – B 
 
Supplementary
(C7) Conjunction 1 
K – A ∩ K – B ⊆ K – (A ∧ B)
(C8) Conjunction 2 
If A ∉ K – (A ∧ B), then K – (A ∧ B) ⊆ K – A
Likewise the postulates for the revision operation:
 
Basic
(R1) Closure 
K * A = Cn(K * A)
(R2) Success 
A ∈ K * A
(R3) Inclusion 
K * A ⊆ K + A
(R4) Preservation 
If ¬ A ∉ K, then K * A = K + A
(R5) Consistency 
If ⊥ ∈ K * A, then ⊢ ¬ A
(R6) Congruence 
If A ≡ B, then K * A = K * B
 
Supplementary
(R7) Conjunction 1 
K * (A ∧ B) ⊆ (K * A) + B
(R8) Conjunction 2 
If ¬B ∉ K * A, then K * A) + B ⊆ K*(A ∧ B) 
The labels must sufﬁ ce here to indicate the rationale for each of the postulates; only 
Recovery (C5) will be considered more closely in a moment.
The postulates harmonize: We can derive the revision postulates from the contrac-
tion postulates via the Levi-Identity K * A = (K – ¬A) + A. (Note that for this deri-
vation Recovery is not needed.) Conversely we can derive the contraction postulates 
(including Recovery) from the revision postulates via the Harper Identity K – A = (K* 
¬ A) ∩ K.
Recovery requires that in contracting we should avoid gratuitous loss of information. 
Without such a condition contractions are insufﬁ ciently constrained by the other pos-
tulates: They could result in too small belief states. For example, the operation deﬁ ned 
by K – A = Cn(Ø) would satisfy all the remaining C-postulates (Makinson 1987).
The idea that contractions should minimize losses of information is essential to a 
theory of rational belief changes. Thus the theory requires a condition like Recovery. 
Yet Recovery stands out in at least three other respects.
First, as pointed out above, Recovery is redundant in deriving revisions from 
contractions.

THEORIES OF BELIEF CHANGE
627
Second, unlike the other postulates, Recovery is sensitive to the underlying logic: 
It depends essentially on closure under classical consequence. For every B ∈ K we have 
by closure for every A, ¬ A ∨ B ∈ K. When we then contract by A, there is no logical 
compulsion to remove ¬A ∨ B. Thus in the models considered below we invariably 
have ¬A ∨ B in every plausible contraction candidate whence also in K – A. But then 
expanding K – A by A reinstates any B that was previously removed from K. (The last 
move proceeds by disjunctive syllogism, an inference called into question by relevant 
logicians among others; see e.g. Dunn 1986.)
Third, under certain circumstances Recovery seems implausible. In order to remove 
A from K, we typically need to remove stronger beliefs that imply A from K. But when 
we then reinsert the weaker A, why and how should we then regain those stronger be-
liefs? The circumstances that call Recovery into question are easily identiﬁ ed: Recovery 
fails indeed when the objects of contractions are open belief bases instead of closed 
belief states. For certain purposes it might be preferable to change states of beliefs by 
making all incisions in an axiomatic, usually ﬁ nite representation of such a state might 
see (Fuhrmann 1991b, 1997a; Hansson 1992). This is also the more general format for 
a theory of belief change. The AGM-theory, however, operates under the assumptions 
that the units of change are closed sets of belief, i.e. theories in the logical sense.
The Ramsey-Test for Conditionals
One of the initial motivations for developing a theory of belief revision was the prob-
lem of characterizing the operation of “adding something hypothetically to a stock 
of belief’’ such that an acceptance or assertion condition for certain conditionals 
would result, as suggested by Ramsey. Here then is the Ramsey Test for counterfactual 
conditionals:
RT. A ⊐ B ∈ K iff B ∈ K * A.
One might take RT either (from right to left) as a recipe for generating a logic of con-
ditionals, given a theory of revisions, or (from left to right) as generating a theory of 
revisions from a given logic of conditionals, or simply as a bridging principle requiring 
conditionals and revisions to walk hand in hand.
Any such aspirations have to be laid to rest by observing that RT requires revisions 
to be monotonic:
MR. If K ⊆ H, then K * A ⊆ H * A.
Monotonicity is not a desirable feature for revisions; counterexamples are not difﬁ cult 
to ﬁ nd. Yet we do not need to remain at the level of assessing intuitions. For, from MR 
we quickly slip to triviality. It can be shown that MR, Preservation and Consistency are 
compatible only on pain of triviality. The result was found by Gärdenfors (1988) and 
will be proved in a moment. It is closely related to Lewis’s impossibility theorem (1976) 
concerning the identiﬁ cation of probabilities of conditionals with conditional probabil-
ity and Arrow’s theorem concerning social choice under certain conditions (see Leitgeb 
and Segerberg 2007).
We suppose that there are A, B and K such that A and B are independent in K and K 
is not opinionated as to A and B. That is to say,

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
628
(1) neither A → B nor B → A is in K, and
(2) neither A, ¬A, B nor ¬B is in K.
(1) and (2) give the sense in which the revision task is supposed to be non-trivial.
First step: Let K′ = K + A and K″ = K + B. Then . . .
 
B ∉ K′
 
A ∈ K′ 
A ∧ B ∉ K′ 
Preservation
A ∈ K′ + ¬(A ∧ B) 
K′ + ¬(A ∧ B) = K′ * ¬(A ∧ B)
 
A ∈ K′ * ¬(A ∧ B)
The same reasoning also gives
B ∈ K″* ¬(A ∧ B).
Second step: Let H = K + (A ∧ B). Then . . .
 
K′ ⊆ H ⊇ K″
 
K′ * ¬(A ∧ B) ⊆ H* ¬(A ∧ B) ⊇ K″ * ¬(A ∧ B) 
MR
A ∈ K′ * ¬(A ∧ B) ⊆ H* ¬(A ∧ B) ⊇ K″ * ¬(A ∧ B) ∋ B ﬁ rst step
 
A ∧ B ∈ H* ¬(A ∧ B) 
Consistency
 
contradiction!
Various ways of constraining RT in such a way that its spirit is maintained have been 
explored. The general lesson seems to be this: Caution needs to be exercised when try-
ing to systematically connect factual beliefs (“objectual beliefs’’) with beliefs reﬂ ecting 
the behavior or content of belief states (“meta-beliefs’’). This is conﬁ rmed by a similar 
impossibility result concerning the Levi Test for serious possibility. (Levi does not pro-
pose such a test. He notes that such a test for epistemic possibility might be suggested 
and counsels caution.)
LT. ◊ A ∈ K iff ¬A ∉ K.
The modality in LT is what is called a reﬂ ective modality in Fuhrmann (1989); all such 
tests of a reﬂ ective kind, including LT can be shown to be inconsistent.
Partial Meet Contraction
As pointed out above, belief change is fundamentally a choice problem. The partial 
meet models of AGM model this element of choice by brute force by simply assuming 
the existence of an appropriate choice function.
Suppose we decide to remove A from K. We might proceed as follows. First we col-
lect all maximal subsets of K that do not entail A. (Let K ⊥ A denote the family of such 
remainders.) Then we select the “best’’ of them. (Let sK be a choice function that is deﬁ ned 
on the family of subsets of K; if K ⊥ A happens to be empty, then we let s(K ⊥ A) = {K}.) 

THEORIES OF BELIEF CHANGE
629
In the sequel we omit the subscript K to the choice function s. But it is important to re-
member that the choice functions used represent the theoretical preferences of a given 
belief set K. These preferences might change after a contraction has been performed. 
It is for this reason that the AGM-theory does not cover in any interesting way iter-
ated belief changes. For an attempt at tackling iterated changes see Darwiche and Pearl 
(1997). Finally we take what is common to all such best subsets. Thus
K – A := ∩ s(K ⊥ A).
It is not difﬁ cult to verify that this deﬁ nition of a contraction operation satisﬁ es all the 
basic C-postulates.
Conversely, every contraction operation satisfying the basic C-postulates can be de-
ﬁ ned as a partial meet contraction. We prove this in a moment. Together the two ob-
servations yield the sought representation result: Essentially the same operation may be 
characterized implicitly by the postulates (C1–6) or explicitly deﬁ ned as a partial meet 
contraction. Thus postulates and models support each other.
To prove that the postulates pick out partial meet contractions we assume that K – ( ) 
satisﬁ es (C1–6) and deﬁ ne a canonical selection function for K, σ, as follows:
 
{X ∈ K ⊥ A: K–A ⊆ X},  if K ⊥ A ≠ Ø;
(σ) σ(K ⊥ A) := {
 
{K}, 
otherwise.
We need to show that σ (for K) is a selection function sK of the above introduced kind. 
This is done by verifying ﬁ ve claims:
(1) σ is well-deﬁ ned, i.e. K ⊥ A = K ⊥ B entails σ(K ⊥ A)= σ(K ⊥ B).
(2) σ(K ⊥ A) = {K}, if K ⊥ A = Ø.
(3) σ(K ⊥ A) ⊆ K ⊥ A, if K ⊥ A ≠ Ø.
(4) σ(K ⊥ A) ≠ Ø.
(5) K–A = ∩ σ (K ⊥ A).
(1–4) are more or less immediate reﬂ ections of the C-postulates. It will thus sufﬁ ce to 
give the argument for (5). One direction, K–A ⊆ ∩ σ(K ⊥ A), is immediate from (σ) 
and Inclusion (C3). It remains to show
(*) If B ∉ K–A, then B ∉ ∩ σ(K ⊥ A)
Case A ∉ K. Then by Vacuity (C4) K – A = K and so, according to (σ), K = ∩σ (K ⊥ 
A), whence (*) holds.
Case A ∈ K. (*) is trivially true if B ∉ K. So let us suppose further that B ∈ K. We 
need to convince ourselves that there will be a set X such that
(a) K – A ⊆ X and (b) B ∉ X and (c) X ∈ K ⊥ A.
We proceed on the basis of a Lemma proved in Alchourrón et al. (1985) (Lemma 2.4):
X ∈ K ⊥ C D ∈ K X ⊬ D
 
X ∈ K ⊥ D

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
630
Then the sought conclusion follows thus:
 
 
B ∈ K Hyp.
 
K – A, A ⊢ B (C5) K – A ⊬ B Hyp. 
X ∈ K ⊥ A ∨ B 
a)
Ad a)  
K – A, ¬A ⊬ B 
Ad b) 
X ⊬ A ∨ B
 
 
K – A ⊬ A ∨ B 
B ∉ X
 
∃X ∈ K ⊥ A ∨ B: K – A ⊆ X 
 
 
X ∈ K ⊥ A ∨ B 
a)
 
 
X ⊬ A ∨ B
Ad c) A ∈ K Hyp. X ∈ K ⊥ A ∨ B 
a)
 
X ⊬ A Lemma
 
X ∈ K ⊥ A
This concludes the proof that contractions satisfying the basic AGM-postulates repre-
sent exactly the partial meet contractions. The result can be extended to the supple-
mentary postulates by generating the selection function from a preference relation (see 
Alchourrón et al. 1985, §4). The representation result carries over to revisions via the 
Levi Identity.
Systems of Spheres
The Ramsey Test, even though not tenable in its naive form, suggests a close analogy 
between counterfactual conditionals and the revision operation. The analogy naturally 
invites the thought that extant semantics for counterfactuals might be adapted to yield 
models of belief revision.
The Ramsey Test can be seen as an epistemic version of what one might call the 
Stalnaker Test:
A ⊐ B in w iff B (w * A).
The *-operation on the right-hand side takes the world w and sentence A to the least 
deviation from (“revision’’ of) w so as to make A true. Perhaps there is no unique such 
least deviation, whence we might prefer the Lewis Test:
A ⊐ B in w iff B in all worlds in (w * A).
The task at hand is now to determine w * A. A system of nested spheres centered around 
w is the key to modeling w * A in David Lewis’ semantics for counterfactuals. Put brieﬂ y, 
in the spheres semantics for counterfactuals worlds are ordered around w in spheres of 
similarity (see Figure 56.1a). If sphere S2 is more distant from w than S1, i.e. if S1 ⊆ S2, 
then the worlds in S1 are more similar to w than the worlds in S2. To assess A ⊐ B at w, 
we look at the closest-to-w sphere S that contains A-worlds; w * A collects the A-worlds 
in S. To evaluate the conditional we check whether all worlds in w * A satisfy B. If so, 
the conditional is true at w, otherwise it is false at w. This is the principal case. If there 
are no A-permitting spheres around w, i.e. if the antecedent is not entertainable when 
viewed from w, then the conditional is stipulated to be vacuously true at w.

THEORIES OF BELIEF CHANGE
631
The Ramsey Test, however, does not test for the truth of a conditional in a world w 
but for acceptance in a belief state K. A belief states can be modeled by the set of worlds 
not ruled out by what is believed. Thus, in the Ramsey Test,
A ⊐ B in K iff B in K * A,
the belief states K and K * A can be interpreted as standing for sets of worlds. We can 
simply adapt the spheres models for counterfactuals by centering spheres on a set of 
worlds (representing K) and determining the new belief state K * A as before. The 
spheres represent now fallback positions ordered as to comparative plausibility from the 
viewpoint of K. The result is shown in Figure 56.1b.
This is the proposal. It remains to verify that it works. That is to say, we need another 
representation result.
Let W be a universe of possible worlds, let K be a belief state and let [K] ⊆ W be the 
representation of K in W. A system of spheres for K is a family of subsets of W such that 
[K] is the smallest and W the largest sphere, all spheres are comparable by set-inclusion, 
and for any nonempty subset X of W, there is always a smallest sphere, SX, cutting X 
nonemptily. Thus a spheres system for K can be pictured as an onion or Russian doll, 
with [K] in the centre and W as the outermost shell; formal deﬁ nitions can be found in 
Grove (1988). We deﬁ ne the set of worlds representing K * A thus:
(*) [K * A] := {
S[A] ∩ [A], if A is consistent;
 
Cn(⊥) 
otherwise.
Then we can prove the following result (Grove 1988): Revisions, as deﬁ ned in (*), 
satisfy the revision postulates (R1–8), and any revision operation satisfying (R1–8) can 
be deﬁ ned as in (*). An analogous representation result holds for contractions via the 
Harper Identity.

	




	








Figure 56.1 
(a)
(b)

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
632
Given the correspondence between revision in systems of spheres and revisions sat-
isfying the AGM-postulates, there follows a correspondence between spheres-revisions 
and partial meet revisions. This should not be surprising. The latter correspondence can 
be made transparent without detouring via the postulates. It sufﬁ ces to note a bijection 
between [¬A] and K ⊥ A. (Here we only look at the principal case that A ∈ K and A 
is consistent.) From spheres to remainders we have for every w ∈ [¬A] a corresponding 
remainder |[K] ∪ {w}| in K ⊥ A, where |X|={A: ∀y ∈ X: y ⊨ A}, for each subset X of 
W. Conversely, from remainders to spheres we have for every remainder X ∈ K ⊥ A a 
unique w ∈ [¬A] such that w ∈ [X]. Thus a system of spheres for K selects among the 
¬A-worlds just in case a selection function for K takes its pick in K ⊥ A.
3. Multimodal Theories of Belief Change
A sentence like B ∈ K * A we read thus: 
(1) After revising his beliefs so as to include A, K believes that B.
Perhaps the logical form of (1) can be analyzed in a number of ways. But one particu-
larly natural analysis would be this: There is a sentence B that stands in the skopus of 
an epistemic operator (“K believes that’’) which in turn stands in the skopus of an action 
operator (“after revising his beliefs’’) parameterized by a sentence (“so as to include A’’). 
This suggests conducting the whole theory of belief change in a multimodal language 
containing a belief operator B and action operators [a0], [a1], [a2], . . . with each action of 
the form * 〈sentence〉 (for revision) or –〈sentence〉 (for contraction).
The idea of recasting the AGM-theory in a modal language has been aired repeatedly. 
Early attempts are found in van Benthem (2004b) and Fuhrmann (1991a). There are 
presently two approaches to belief revision in a modal setting, Public Announcement 
and Dynamic Epistemic Logic (PAL and DEL), and Doxastic Dynamic Logic (DDL). In 
the remainder of this survey we give a brief exposition of DDL, as presented in Leitgeb 
and Segerberg (2007), and then add a few remarks on PAL and DEL.
What are the advantages of presenting a theory of belief change in a modal language? 
First, we can help ourselves to the rich reservoir of semantical techniques available for 
modal languages. This is a cheap point and might indeed amount to nothing unless the 
techniques employed deliver clear beneﬁ ts. But in one respect at least there is every 
reason to expect such beneﬁ ts; they will be indicated in connection with the third point 
below.
Second, the modal language sketched above is more expressive than the set-theoretic 
AGM-language. We can express metabeliefs such as that the subject believes that after 
revision by A she will believe B: B[*A]B B. A direct translation back to AGM would 
render that formula as “(B ∈ K * A) ∈ K’’—which is ill-formed. Alternatively the 
language of AGM would have to be stratiﬁ ed—a notoriously unwieldy and artiﬁ cial 
device.
Third, the modal language is in some respects less expressive and thereby less mis-
leading than the AGM-language. The notation K * A suggests that K and A are ar-
guments en par to a revision operation *. That is not the case. Perusing the postu-
lates shows that nothing of interest is said about varying the belief state-parameter. 
Indeed, the only candidate postulate we have considered, Monotonicity for revisions, 
turned out to lead to disaster. The models showed why this is so. Both the selection 

THEORIES OF BELIEF CHANGE
633
functions and spheres determining the new, changed belief state are essentially tied to 
the belief state to be changed; they unfold the theoretical preferences built into that 
belief state. The AGM framework has no resources to study interactions or transitions 
between different theoretical preferences.
However, just like the AGM-language, the modal language allows to chain changes, 
as in
[–A][–B]B C.
This is known as iterated belief change. Iterated belief change is difﬁ cult precisely be-
cause we need to know how the transition from the theoretical preferences of K to those 
of K – B and in turn to those of (K – B) – A is constrained so as to settle the question 
whether the latter belief state ought to include C. This is where modal semantics can be 
beneﬁ cial: It might deliver or suggest constraints for iterated modalities and make their 
evaluation more transparent.
Basic Doxastic Dynamics
We shall simplify the exposition of how belief change can be treated in a multimodal 
language by conﬁ ning ourselves to a language in which belief states can only be changed 
by and can only contain “factual’’ beliefs. This simpliﬁ cation regrettably takes away the 
potential of the modal framework for a substantial theory of iterated belief change. We 
shall indicate prospects and problems for the more general theory in the ﬁ nal section.
The language is based on a set of atoms from which we generate the factual formulae 
by Boolean combinations. Every factual formula is a formula. The modal formulae are 
built by employing a belief and a knowledge operator, B and K, and a revision operator 
[*]. If A is factual and B a formula, then BA, KA and [*A]B are formulae. Contractions, 
[–A]B, are deﬁ ned in the spirit of the Harper Identity as B ∧ [* ¬A]B. Expansions can be 
introduced in analogy to so-called tests in dynamic logic, i.e. [+A]B := BA → B.
The knowledge operator K appears in DDL for mainly technical reasons: it will be 
used to signal unrevisable beliefs, those belonging to the urcorpus, to use Levi’s term 
again. In particular, the urcorpus contains all logical truths. Note that this notion of 
knowledge as unrevisable belief is slightly at odds with the more usual notion that re-
quires knowledge to entail truth.
What is the logic of these operators? Usually this depends on the kind of models one 
aims to describe. But in this case we have yet another clue. If we suppose that the AGM-
postulates provide a reliable and complete description of belief revision, we shall be in 
the vicinity of the desired logic by combining the basic properties of the unary modal 
operators B, K and [*A] (for each factual A) with translations of the AGM revision 
postulates into our modal language. Adjustments need then possibly be made in light of 
the aimed at models.
Before presenting the system of basic DDL (for “Doxastic Dynamic Logic’’) a cau-
tionary note is in order. We know that the Ramsey Test trivializes the AGM-theory. The 
Ramsey Test requires a systematic connection between revisions and conditionals. The 
fact that we do not have a (counterfactual) conditional connective in our language for 
which the Ramsey Test is plausible is no sufﬁ cient reason to relax. We must rule out the 
possibility that some formula C in our language might step in for the conditional in the 
Ramsey Test, i.e. that the dangerous schema

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
634
D. BC(A, B) ↔ [*A]BB
be derivable for some formula C with constituents A and B. In basic DDL this is ruled 
out by the syntactic formation rules in combination with the Congruence Rule below.
The basic system of DDL extends classical propositional logic to a normal modal 
logic for each of the modalities B, K and [*A] (where A is factual), i.e. it contains apart 
from all tautologies the following axiom schemes and schematic rules (□ ∈{B, K, [*A]: 
A factual}, 〈*A〉:= ¬[*A] ¬):
Regularity 
□ (A ∧ B) ↔ (□A ∧ □B)
Necessitation 
□⊤
Congruence Rule 
A ↔ B
 
□A ↔ □B
To these we add the following translations of the AGM-postulates for revision:
Success 
[*A]BA
Inclusion 
[*⊤]BA → BA
Preservation 
¬B⊥ → (BA → [*⊤]BA
Consistency 
[*A]B⊥ → K ¬A
Congruence 
K(A ↔ B) → [*A]BC ↔ [*B]BC
Supp. 1 
[*(A ∧ B)]BC → [*A]B(B → C)
Supp. 2 
¬[*A]B ¬B → ([*A]B(B → C) → [*(A ∧ B)BC])
No translation of the closure postulate is required as it is already built into the ﬁ rst 
group of axiom schemes. Finally we need to make sure that revision issues in a deﬁ -
nite (belief) state and we give a minimal characterization of the required notion of 
knowledge:
Function 
〈*A〉 B ↔ [*A]B
KB 
KA → BA
K*K 
KA ↔ [*B]KA
Spheres Semantics
The interpretation of (normal) multimodal languages generalizes that familiar from 
simple (normal) modal logic in a straightforward way. Each modality □i is matched by 
a binary relation Ri (on the set W of evaluation points) such that we have a clause of 
this form:
w ⎪= □i A iff ∀υ : Ri wυ ⇒ υ⎪= A.
In the case at hand, however, some modalities come with a structure which we should 
like to make available for logical investigation. Thus in our semantics, we should like 
the relations concerned to reﬂ ect that structure, as in

THEORIES OF BELIEF CHANGE
635
w⎪= [*B]A iff ∀υ : R[B] wυ ⇒ υ⎪= A,
where [B] is the proposition denoted by B. A clause of this form results on adapting 
again the spheres semantics.
A revision structure on a (nonempty) universe W consists of a family of systems of spheres 
in W and for each proposition P ⊆ W a binary relation RP between systems of spheres. 
The systems of spheres are, as before, families of subsets of W, closed under intersection 
(so that the system is centered on the smallest sphere, representing one’s beliefs in that 
sphere), completely ordered under set-inclusion (so that the system is nested), and such 
that for each nonempty proposition P there is a smallest sphere cutting P (so that the 
system is sufﬁ ciently discrete). We let S•P = {S ∈ S: S ∩ P ≠ Ø} denote the collection 
of those spheres S in a system S that cut P nonemptily.
The structure is subject to four conditions. It is customary to ﬁ rst state these condi-
tions before proceeding to the interpretation of the modal language. Let us here change 
the ofﬁ cial order of exposition; we shall then see how the conditions help the interpre-
tation to deliver the correct results.
Some formulae, the modal ones, receive their truth-values depending on what system 
of spheres we are considering. For this reason the satisfaction relation ⎪= will link sys-
tems of spheres and worlds on the one hand with formulae on the other. For atoms p and 
Boolean formulae, of course, only the world-coordinate contains relevant information. 
Let a valuation V distribute atoms over possible worlds. Then
S, w⎪= p iff w ∈ V(p),
and so on for ¬, ∧,
S, w⎪= BA iff ∩ S ⊆ [A],
S, w⎪= KA iff ∪ S ⊆ [A],
S,w⎪= [*A]B iff ∀S′ : R[A]SS′ ⇒ ,w⎪= B.
According to the clause for B, the current beliefs of an agent as evaluated in a system of 
spheres are represented by the innermost sphere. The clause for K displays the notion of 
knowledge used here: unrevisable beliefs, i.e. beliefs that stay, no matter to what sphere 
we shall retreat.
Now back to the four conditions. First,
RPSS′, then ∩ S′= {
P ∩ min (S• P), if (S • P) ≠ Ø
 
Ø 
otherwise.
This deﬁ nes the revision of one’s current belief state (in S) by the sentence representing 
P: it is the shaded area in the right diagram in the earlier illustration.
The second condition guarantees that systems of spheres are large enough to carry 
out any revision:
W\ ∪ S = W\∪ S′ (∀S, S′ ∈ ∑) 
It replaces for technical reasons our earlier and simpler requirement that each system is 
bounded above by W. 
The ﬁ nal two conditions make sure that revision operations are well-deﬁ ned. The 
ﬁ rst secures that they always have a value,

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
636
∀S∃S′ : RSS′,
the second that they always have at most one value:
RSS′ and RSS″, then S′ = S″
Segerberg has shown that the theorems of basic DDL are exactly those formulae that 
are true relative to all pairs (S, w) in any interpretation in a revision structure.
4. Current and Future Changes
The transposition of the AGM-theory into a modal framework attempts to address from 
a different angle certain questions and problems left open in the classical version of that 
theory. Four such questions arise immediately.
The ﬁ rst three concern higher-order beliefs. If we waive the syntactic restrictions 
imposed in basic DDL, we will be confronted with three types of higher-order beliefs. 
First, there will be beliefs about changes, as in B[*A]B: Karl believes that after revising 
by A, B is the case, or, counterfactually: Were he to believe that A, then he would believe 
that B, where the place of B will typically be taken by another belief formula, BC. Now, if 
it is the case that [*A] BB, then Karl can know that fact by pure introspection: The result 
is determined by logic plus his present theoretical preferences. What Karl can know in 
this way, he should know. Thus it would seem to be quite in order to impose the following 
condition on how the belief operator should interact with revisions:
B([*A]BB) ↔ [*A]BB.
But this is just an instance of the dangerous schema D! Thus adding beliefs about chang-
es to our language amounts to a non-conservative and indeed potentially hazardous 
extension of the theory.
Second, there will be changes by beliefs, as in [*BA]B: If Karl were to come to believe 
that he believes A, then B would be the case. At ﬁ rst sight one would expect that the 
Success condition for revisions carries over to the extended language and that we thus 
have in particular [*BA]BA. But now consider a Moore-sentence like
m.  p ∧ ¬Bp.
By Success we expect [*Bm]Bm from which we get by Regularity both [*Bm]Bp and 
[*Bm]B ¬Bp. Even in very weak logics of belief, the latter gives [*Bm] ¬Bp, thus con-
tradicting the former. (It sufﬁ ces to add to the basic axioms above the condition that 
belief be consistent, B ¬A → ¬BA, and the introspective schema BA → BBA. Jointly 
these conditions describe a KD4-type modal logic.) So one cannot (successfully and 
consistently) revise one’s beliefs so as to include a Moore-sentence. This is as it should 
be. But it also shows that there are classes of formulae that must be systematically ex-
empted from conditions that otherwise make good sense. For an elaboration of this 
point as applied to sentences of the form “A and I do not know that A”—which trigger 
the Fitch-paradox—see van Benthem (2004b).
Third, there will be changes of changed belief states, as in [*A] ([*B]C): Were Karl 
to revise by A, then a further revision by B would make it the case that C. The models 

THEORIES OF BELIEF CHANGE
637
of basic DDL permit evaluating such formulae; but they have nothing interesting to say 
on iterated belief changes, just like the original AGM-theory. Iterated belief changes 
involve possible changes in theoretical preferences. Such changes ﬁ nd no direct repre-
sentation in the modal languages considered so far. Thus one natural way to proceed is 
to introduce preference changes into the object language, as in van Benthem (2004a).
Fourth, the methodological restriction to a single-agent perspective must eventually 
give way to considering belief change in a multi-agent environment. Most of our belief 
changes are made in response to, or under the inﬂ uence of, the belief states of others. 
We have beliefs about what others believe and they are aware of this, and so on.
Beliefs about what other agents believe are the subject matter of Public Announce-
ment Logic (PAL, see Baltag et al. 2006) and the closely related paradigm of Dynamic 
Epistemic Logic (DEL, see van Ditmarsch et al. 2005, 2008). They study the rational 
commitments of agents who receive information by public announcements. It would be 
misleading, however, to think of these theories as logics of belief revision. In their basic 
forms they study the rather limited scenario of knowledge expansions in a multi-agent 
environment under the inﬂ uence of an oracle. As reduction results show, PAL (and 
DEL) without a “looping” common knowledge modality does not go beyond a multi-
epistemic logic. But PAL is open to incorporate genuine belief revision operators; see 
e.g. Baltag and Smets (2006). It is to be expected that PAL, DEL, DDL and the logic of 
preference change will merge into a uniﬁ ed and general framework for studying belief 
change; an outline of such an integrated family of theories may be found in Bentham 
(2004a).
References
Alchourrón, Carlos, and David Makinson. Hierarchies of regulations and their logic. In R. Hilpinen, editor, 
New Studies in Deontic Logic, pages 123–148. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1981.
Alchourrón, Carlos, Peter Gärdenfors, and David Makinson. On the logic of theory change: Partial meet 
contraction and revision functions. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 50: 510–530, 1985.
Baltag, Alexandru and Sonja Smets. The Logic of Conditional Doxastic Actions: A theory of dynamic 
multi-agent belief revision. In Sergei Artemov and Rohit Parikh, editors, Proceedings of the Workshop on 
Rationality and Knowledge, ESSLLI 2006. 2006.
Baltag, Alexandru, Lawrence S. Moss, and Slawomir Solecki. The logic of public announcements, common 
knowledge, and private suspicions. In TARK ‘98: Proceedings of the 7th conference on Theoretical aspects 
of rationality and knowledge, pages 43–56. San Francisco, CA, USA, 1998. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers 
Inc.
Darwiche, Adnan and Judea Pearl. On the logic of iterated belief revision. Articial Intelligence, 89: 1–29, 
1997.
Dunn, John M. Relevance logic and entailment. Handbook of Philosophical Logic. In D. M. Gabbay and F. 
Guenthner, editors, Handbook of Philosophical Logic, volume 3, pages 117–224. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1986.
Fuhrmann, André. Reflective modalities and theory change. Synthese, 81: 115–134, 1989.
Fuhrmann, André. On the modal logic of theory change. Lecture Notes in Articial Intelligence 465, pages 
259–281. Springer, Heidelberg-Berlin-New York, 1991a.
Fuhrmann, André. Theory contraction through base contraction. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 20: 256–281, 
1991b.
Fuhrmann, André. An Essay on Contraction. Studies in Logic, Language and Information. CSLI Publications, 
Stanford, 1997a.
Fuhrmann, André. Everything in flux: Dynamic ontologies. In R. Sliwinski, S. Lindström, and J. Österberg, 
editors, Odds and Ends. Philosophical Essays Dedicated to Wlodek Rabinowicz, pages 111–125. Uppsala, 
1997b.
Gärdenfors, Peter. Knowledge in Flux. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1988.
Grove, Adam. Two modellings for theory change. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 17: 157–170, 1988.

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
638
Hansson, Sven Ove. In defense of base contraction. Synthese, 91: 239–245, 1992.
Hansson, Sven Ove. A Textbook of Belief Dynamics. Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1999.
Leitgeb, Hannes and Krister Segerberg. Dynamic doxastic logic: why, how, and where to? Synthese, 155: 
167–190, 2007.
Levi, Isaac. The Enterprise of Knowledge. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1980.
Levi, Isaac. Decisions and Revisions. Cambridge University. Press, Cambridge, 1984.
Levi, Isaac. The Fixation of Belief and Its Undoing. Cambridge University. Press, Cambridge, 1991.
Levi, Isaac. Mild Contractions. Cambridge University. Press, Cambridge, 2004.
Lewis, David. Probabilities of conditionals and conditional probabilities. The Philosophical Review, 85: 297–
315, 1976.
Lindström, Sten and Wlodek Rabinowicz. Epistemic entrenchment with incomparabilities and relational 
belief revision. In André Fuhrmann and Michael Morreau, editors, The Logic of Theory Change, Lecture 
Notes in Articial Intelligence 465, pages 93–126. Springer, Heidelberg-Berlin-New York, 1991.
Makinson, David. On the status of the postulate of recovery in the logic of theory change. Journal of 
Philosophical Logic, 16: 383–394, 1987.
Peirce, Charles S. The fixation of belief. Popular Science Monthly, 12: 1–15, 1877.
Ramsey, Frank P. The Foundations of Mathematics. Routledge and Kegan Paul, Oxford, 1931.
Rott, Hans. Change, Choice and Inference. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 2001.
Stalnaker, Robert. Iterated belief revision. Erkenntnis, 70: 189–209, 2009.
van Benthem, Johan. Language in Action: Categories, Lambdas and Dynamic Logic. Studies in Logic and the 
Foundations of Mathematics. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1991.
van Benthem, Johan. Dynamic logic for belief revision. Journal of Applied Non-Classical Logics, 14: 1–26, 
2004a.
van Benthem, Johan. What one may come to know. Analysis, 64: 95–105, 2004b.
van Ditmarsch, Hans, W. van der Hoek, and B. P. Kooi. Playing Cards with Hintikka: An introduction to 
dynamic epistemic logic. The Australasian Journal of Logic, 3: 108–134, 2005.
van Ditmarsch, Hans, Wiebe van der Hoek, and Barteld Kooi. Dynamic Epistemic Logic. Springer, Dordrecht, 
2008.

57
THE KNOWABILITY
PARADOX
Joe Salerno
The paradox of knowability (a.k.a. Fitch’s paradox or the Church-Fitch paradox) is a proof 
that threatens all too easily to refute various forms of semantic anti-realism and to collapse 
useful modal epistemic distinctions. The anti-realisms in question are those that advocate 
an epistemic characterization of truth. They tell us that truth and knowability are neces-
sarily coextensive—or at least that any truth is knowable in principle. We call this the 
knowability principle (KP), which is naturally expressed by the following formula:
(KP) ¬∀ϕ(ϕ → ◊Kϕ)
(KP) says, “for all propositions ϕ, if ϕ then it is possible that somebody at some time 
knows that ϕ.” Interesting versions of the thesis focus on moderately idealized human 
knowability—that is, knowability by subjects whose capacities and resources are only 
finitely better than our own. Knowability-by-God is too weak of an idealization, since 
it leaves us with a view that is consistent with realism—namely, the view that truth can 
outrun the epistemic capacities of subjects like us. Moderate epistemic theories of truth 
also aim to protect themselves from going in the other direction; the epistemic idealiza-
tion is meant to distance the theory from naive forms of idealism (NI), which say that 
something is true only if it is known (by someone at some time):
(NI) ∀ϕ(ϕ → Kϕ)
The thesis is often cited as the “omniscience principle,” because it says that for every 
truth there is someone who knows it. The omniscience in question is group (and not 
individual) omniscience. It doesn’t say that there is someone who knows every truth, 
but that every truth is known by someone or other. However, allowing infinitary propo-
sitions, the conjunction of all truths is itself a truth, and so by (NI), is known by some-
one. In that case, someone among the humans is indeed omniscient. (For more on the 
paradox in the context of infinitary propositions, see Humberstone 1985; Bigelow 2005; 
Fox unpublished ms.)
While linking truth with God’s knowledge is vacuous, naive idealism fails to appreci-
ate the objectivity and discoverability of truth. The moderate (KP) is a candidate expres-
sion or consequence of various historical non-realisms, including Michael Dummett’s 
semantic anti-realism, Hilary Putnam’s internal realism, the logical positivisms of the 

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
640
Berlin and Vienna Circles, Peirce’s pragmatism, Kant’s transcendental idealism, and 
Berkeley’s metaphysical idealism.
The knowability paradox is naturally characterized as the following result:
(Knowability Paradox) ∀ϕ(ϕ → ◊Kϕ) ⊢ ∀ϕ(ϕ → Kϕ),
where our variables are propositional (suitably regimented); ◊ is some brand of alethic 
possibility, and K is the epistemic operator ‘somebody at some time knows.’
A very weak normal modal logic and relatively uncontroversial assumptions about 
knowledge are enough to establish the result. We’ll look at a proof in a moment. Note 
that the converse is trivial, since truth entails possibility.
It should be clear that if the result is valid, then it threatens moderate anti-real-
ism. That is because a natural expression (or consequence) of anti-realism—namely, 
(KP)—entails a widely implausible brand of idealism—namely, (NI).
The significance of the knowability paradox is not simply that any plausible epis-
temic theory of truth that has (KP) as a consequence is false. It is more interesting than 
that. If the proof is valid, then there is no logical distinction between truth being a mat-
ter of what can be known and truth being a matter of what in fact is known. So if we 
merely think there is a significant difference between moderate anti-realism and naive 
idealism, we have some explaining to do. We have ourselves a paradox.
The first publication of the result appears in its contrapositive form in Frederic Fitch 
(1963; 2009). There it was called Theorem 5, which may be expressed as follows:
(T5) Ǝϕ(ϕ & ¬Kϕ) ⊢ Ǝϕ (ϕ & ¬◊Kϕ),
Under this expression of the proof, we learn that whenever there is an unknown truth, 
there is an unknowable truth. Again, the converse is trivial. So, if our ignorance (i.e., 
the existence of an unknown truth) is a contingent matter, then (T5) does the work in 
collapsing the logical distinction between the existence of contingent ignorance and 
the existence of necessary ignorance.
The Proof
To demonstrate the knowability paradox, one begins with four modest logical prin-
ciples. First, knowing a conjunction entails knowing each of the conjuncts:
(A) K(ϕ & ψ) ⊢ Kϕ & Kψ
Second, knowledge entails truth:
(B) Kϕ ⊢ ϕ
Third, the necessitation of a modal epistemic theorem is itself a theorem:
(C) If ⊢ ϕ, then ⊢ □ϕ.
And finally, things necessarily false are not possible:
(D) □¬ϕ ⊢ ¬◊ϕ.

THE KNOWABILITY PARADOX
641
A version of the proof goes like this (explanation below):
 (1) ∀ϕ(ϕ → ◊Kϕ) 
(KP)
 (2) K(p & ¬Kp) 
Assumption [for reductio]
 (3) Kp & K¬Kp 
from 2, by (A)
 (4) Kp & ¬Kp 
from 3, applying (B) to the right conjunct
 (5) ¬K(p & ¬Kp) 
from 2–4, by reductio, discharging Assumption 1
 (6) □¬K(p & ¬Kp) 
from 5, by (C)
 (7) ¬◊K(p & ¬Kp) 
from 6, by (D)
 (8) (p & ¬Kp) → ◊K(p & ¬Kp) 
instance of (1)
 (9) ¬(p & ¬Kp) 
from 7,8
(10) p → Kp 
from 9, by classical logic
(11) ∀ϕ(ϕ → Kϕ) 
from 10, by generalization
Suppose (KP), and suppose for reductio that a Fitch-conjunction, p & ¬Kp, is known. 
Then, by (A), it follows that Kp & K¬Kp. By (B) and some trivial logic, Kp & ¬Kp. 
The contradiction allows us to negate and discharge our only supposition, giving the 
theorem, ¬K(p & ¬Kp), which we may now necessitate by (C). So, by (D), our sup-
position is impossible. This together with the relevant instance of the knowability prin-
ciple, (p & ¬Kp) → ◊K(p & ¬Kp), jointly entail ¬(p & ¬Kp). A classical equivalent is 
p → Kp, which we can now generalize—giving ∀ϕ(ϕ → Kϕ). QED.
The first proof of the result originates in a pair of anonymous referee reports authored by 
Alonzo Church in 1945. The reports appear in their entirety in Church (2009). Fitch was 
the recipient, and eventually published the result with credit to the unknown referee. He 
also generalized the finding by showing that the collapse occurs with any monadic propo-
sitional operator O that is both factive and distributes over conjunction (i.e., that satisfies 
the corresponding formulations of principles A and B, substituting O for K). What signifi-
cance Fitch initially gleaned from the result is not immediately apparent in Fitch’s paper 
(Salerno 2009). Fitch appears not in the business of refuting any particular theory of truth 
but, rather, seems to be interested in the consequence that unknowable truth has for giv-
ing a formal definition of value. It is clear, however, that he does not take the knowability 
proof or the general result to be paradoxical. Yes, ∀ϕ(ϕ → ◊Oϕ) ⊢ ∀ϕ(ϕ → Oϕ) is valid 
for any operator O that is factive and conjunction-distributive, but that’s not enough for 
paradoxicality. After all, substituting the S5 necessity operator for O (and reading ◊ as S5 
possibility) leaves us with a non-paradoxical result. That is because in S5 there is indeed 
no significant distinction between possible necessities and necessities.
On the face of it, a Fitch paradox arises for any operator O that satisfies the following 
four conditions:
1. The O-ability principle is plausible:
 
∀ϕ(ϕ → ◊Oϕ)
2. Clearly, some truths are not O-ed:
 
Ǝϕ(ϕ & ¬Oϕ)
3. O is factive:
 
Oϕ ⊢ ϕ
4. O is closed under conjunction-elimination:
 
O(ϕ & ψ) ⊢ Oϕ & Oψ

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
642
But even this isn’t general enough. On closer inspection, however, even this list does not 
capture what is essential to a Fitch paradox, since neither (3) nor (4) is necessary to prove 
the result. For instance, there is a version of the paradox without conjunction-distributiv-
ity in Williamson (1993). And, as is shown in Wright (2000: 356), one can derive an O-
ability paradox without an unrestricted O-factivity principle. The application of Factivity 
(i.e., principle (B)) in the above proof is applied only to higher order O-claims of the form 
O¬Op. All we really need then is a restricted factivity principle of the form:
(Restricted Factivity Principle): O¬Oϕ ⊢ ¬Oϕ
An example of a non-factive operator that arguably satisfies the restricted principle 
is the reflective belief operator. The corresponding principle says, whenever one reflec-
tively believes that one doesn’t reflectively believe ϕ, then indeed one doesn’t reflec-
tively believe ϕ.
Most generally the paradox then arises when:
1. The O-ability principle is plausible:
 
∀ϕ(ϕ → ◊Oϕ)
2. Clearly, some truths are not O-ed:
 
Ǝϕ(ϕ & ¬Kϕ), and
3. it is a theorem that the conjunction, ϕ & ¬Oϕ, is not O-ed:
 
⊢ ¬O(ϕ & ¬Oϕ)
Notice that the well-known paradox of omnipotence is an instance of the generalized 
Fitch paradox. Fitch actually demonstrates his general result with that example. Since 
‘God brought it about that’ is factive and conjunction-distributive, we get the following 
apparently sound argument:
 (i) If a proposition is true, then God could have brought it about. (By definition of 
Omnipotence.)
 (ii) Some truths were not brought about by God.
 (iii) Contradiction! [via Fitch’s reasoning]
Therefore, by reductio, (ii) is false. So,
 (iv) all truths were in fact brought about by God. (So much for freewill and man-made 
evil.)
The following paradox of explanation also fits the template. Read “p is explained” in 
a factive and conjunction-distributive sense—as in, “the fact that p is (at some time) 
explained.” Then we get the following Fitch paradox:
 (i) Any deterministic empirical truth can be explained, but
 (ii) some deterministic empirical truths are never explained.
 (iii) Contradiction! [via Fitch]
Therefore, (ii) is false. Hence, absurdly,
 (iv) every deterministic empirical truth is (at some time) explained.

THE KNOWABILITY PARADOX
643
One other example is a new paradox of happiness. It would seem that at least in princi-
ple one could be happy about . . ., well, just about anything. The relative arbitrariness of 
the attitude makes plausible the generalization that (at least in principle) a person could 
be happy about any truth. More carefully, if ϕ is true, then it is possible for someone to 
be happy that ϕ. Moreover, it is arguable that “happy that” is factive and conjunction-
distributive. Necessarily, if s is happy that ϕ then ϕ. And one isn’t happy that a conjunc-
tion is true, unless she is happy that each of the conjuncts are true. The assumption here 
is that happiness about a conjunct is implicit in happiness about the conjunction. We 
don’t need the more general, and most implausible, principle that happiness is closed 
under logical entailment—namely, If ϕ entails ψ and someone is happy that ϕ, then she 
is happy that ψ. Finally, it is obvious that there are truths that we are not happy about. 
So once again a Fitch paradox emerges.
An alternative approach is to accept the weaker restricted thesis that one can be 
happy that one isn’t happy that p, only if one isn’t happy that p. Or if even this does 
not seem plausible, then stipulate a factive sense of the operator—e.g., “happy about 
the fact that.”
Reactions to the Paradox
There are numerous reactions to the knowability proof. The first wave of replies to 
Fitch’s 1963 paper, including Hart and McGinn (1976), Hart (1979), Mackie (1980), 
and Routley (1981), has a unified theme: Fitch’s proof is valid and discredits various 
forms of verificationism (i.e., the view that all meaningful statements, and so all truths, 
are knowable). An exception is Walton (1976), whose aim was to draw lessons in the 
philosophy of religion. It wasn’t until the 1980s that the perception in the literature 
had changed. The perception seems to be that Fitch’s result is paradoxical. Compare 
Rasmussen and Ravnkilde (1982), Williamson (1982, 1988), Edgington (1985) and 
Wright (1987). The thought being that either the reasoning is subtly invalid, or there is 
a better (although elusive) formal expression of the epistemic theory of truth.
The first suggestion for blocking the proof is found in one of Church’s referee reports 
(2009: Report 2, pp. 4–5). Here’s the background. Church proved (T5). Recall that it 
roughly says that if there is an unknown truth then there is an unknowable truth:
(T5) Ǝϕ(ϕ & ¬Kϕ) ⊢ Ǝϕ(ϕ & ¬◊Kϕ)
More carefully, he proved, “if there is a truth that s doesn’t know at time t, then there 
is a truth that s can’t know at t.” This had the affect of undermining a certain formal 
definition of ‘value’ that Fitch was articulating in the paper submitted for consideration. 
The paper was called “A Definition of Value.” The definition was a natural formal 
expression of the informed desire characterization. It said, roughly, ϕ is valuable to s just 
in case, for some truth ψ, s would desire that ϕ if she were to know ψ. By the above con-
trapositive result, whenever s is non-omniscient, there will be a truth that she cannot 
know. In that case there will be a truth ψ such that, vacuously, if s were to know ψ she 
would desire ϕ. That is because conditionals with impossible antecedents are vacuously 
true. Hence the right-hand side of the analysis of value is satisfied, for arbitrary proposi-
tions ϕ. s values everything!
Church offered Fitch a way of blocking the trivialization objection by appealing to 
Russell’s theory of types for the attitude operators. The key idea is that one might not 

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
644
knowi a proposition ϕ, if ϕ contains an operator ‘knowsn’ (or any other attitude opera-
tor On) where n ≥ 0. So, even though it will be impossible to knowi the conjunction, ϕ 
but it’s not knowni that ϕ, it will be logically possible to knowi the conjunction, ϕ but 
it’s not knownn that ϕ, when n < 0. This has the effect of blocking the reductio in the 
knowability proof. However, Church dismisses the option of typing the operators as 
contrary to Fitch’s purposes, since so doing would invalidate closure principles central 
to Fitch’s discussion of value. Later defenses of the type-theoretic strategy appear in 
Linsky (1986; 2009) and Paseau (2008) (cf. Hart 2009).
When Fitch finally published the value paper in 1963, he did not embrace the type-
theoretic strategy. Indeed he clearly takes the knowability proof to be valid. So instead 
Fitch (2009: 27) restricts the right-hand side of his analysis of value to relevant truths 
that it is possible to know. Hence, the modified analysis roughly says, “it is valuable to s 
that ϕ just in case s would desire that ϕ if she were appraised of the relevant knowable 
truths.”
Interestingly Fitch and Church had already in 1945 discussed (through the editor, 
Ernest Nagel) the question of whether this sort of restriction blocks the initial trivializa-
tion worry. Church did not think that it did, and Fitch ultimately withdrew the 1945 
paper owing to “a defect in my definition of value.” (See Salerno 2009 for commentary 
on their discussion.)
The secondary literature on Fitch considers the paradox in an all-together different 
context, that is, independently of value-theory. However, we find that the restriction 
strategy is a typical reaction. The restriction is applied directly to the knowability prin-
ciple. More generally, a typical reaction to Fitch paradoxes is to restrict the dominant 
quantifier in the O-ability principle. For instance, Aquinas restricts the omnipotence 
principle to those truths that it is logically possible for God to bring about. Analogously, 
Neil Tennant (1997) restricts the knowability principle to any truth that it is logically 
possible for someone to know. The resulting O-ability principle is not circular if the 
operant notion of possibility is stronger than logical possibility.
(Restricted O-ability) ∀ϕ(ϕ → ◊Oϕ), where Oϕ does not entail a logical 
inconsistency.
One might object that the restricted knowability principle is already an abandon-
ment of the anti-realist theory of truth. After all, the restriction is motivated by the 
admission that there are at least some truths that are not knowable. However, a realism 
debate might be interesting even if the target class of truths is restricted. For instance, 
if for the general case, a failure to meet one’s obligations warrants blame, then it seems 
plausible to suppose that all truths of the form, “it is obligatory that ϕ,” are know-
able in principle. The interest of a dispute over this deontic knowability principle does 
not decrease with the concession that truths of that form do not include “it is obliga-
tory that ϕ, but nobody ever knows that it is obligatory.” Such truths are unknowable 
owing to the placement of the embedded epistemic operator in the compound sentence. 
Intuitively, such considerations seem more relevant to the metaphysical status of truths 
expressed by knowledge attributions than they do to the status of truths expressed by 
attributions of obligation.
One major problem with O-ability principles restricted in the above way is that they 
remain vulnerable to Fitch-like paradoxes once we grant stronger modal epistemic prin-
ciples that are attractive to semantic anti-realists (Williamson 2000b, 2009; Brogaard 

THE KNOWABILITY PARADOX
645
and Salerno 2002; 2008; Rosenkranz 2004; Tennant 2010). Of course, the above restric-
tion is not the only way to restrict the knowability principle. Dummett (2001), for 
instance, considers restricting it to basic truths, and inductively defines the truth of 
complex formulas with standard intuitionistic clauses. Since ‘ϕ & ¬Kϕ’ is not basic, 
its unknowability does not threaten this brand of anti-realism. Dummett (personal cor-
respondence) does not actually endorse the basicality restriction, but instead proposes 
it shows that the knowability paradox is not a problem for every form of semantic anti-
realism. Still, questions about whether ‘Kϕ’ is basic and questions about the status of 
the operant notion of possibility are left open by Dummett. Other Fitch-like paradoxes 
exploit these facts by way of showing that the basicality restriction is not sufficient to 
eliminate the problem (Brogaard and Salerno 2002). Jose Burmúdez (2009) argues that 
the basicality restriction is well-motivated, given Dummettian considerations about 
how one must clarify the notion of indefinite extensibility of such concepts as set and 
natural number. He concludes that the basicality restriction provides a principled solu-
tion to the knowability paradox.
Dorothy Edgington (1985) argues that one can know from a counterfactual perspec-
tive that, as things actually are, ϕ and it is not known that ϕ. The temporal analogy is 
helpful here: One cannot now know both that ϕ is true and that ϕ is not now known, but 
one can know at some time t both that ϕ is now true and that it is not now known. So 
long as t and the present moment are not identical, no contradiction emerges. Similarly, 
one cannot in the actual situation know both that ϕ is true and that ϕ is not actually 
known, but in a counterfactual situation one can (without contradiction) know that, 
in the actual situation, ϕ is true but unknown. Edgington’s knowability principle can be 
understood as restricted to truths of the form ‘Actually ϕ’:
Aϕ → ◊K(Aϕ)
The formula says, if it is actually the case that ϕ then it is possible to know that it is 
actually the case that ϕ.
Williamson’s objection (2000a: 290–298) to this brand of anti-realism is that it 
requires transworld knowability (i.e., counterfactual knowledge of what is actually the 
case), which he argues is metaphysically impossible. The reason is that transworld 
knowability is knowledge de re; it is about the actual world uniquely. To achieve this, a 
merely possible agent would need to stand in the required causal relations, or relations 
of acquaintance, to the actual world. But no merely possible agent can stand in these 
relations to actuality. So a merely possible agent cannot directly refer to, let alone have 
knowledge of, the actual world. Alternatively, if the reference to the actual world is 
fixed descriptively, the suggestion might be that our possible thinker can know that the 
relevant proposition ϕ is true at the world specified by the description. Williamson con-
tends that such knowledge would be uninterestingly trivial. The description would have 
to be detailed enough to uniquely specify the actual world. Knowledge that a proposi-
tion is true at such a world would be trivial logical knowledge, because it would amount 
to something like knowing that ϕn is true at the world where ‘. . . & ϕn & . . .’ is true.
Edgington’s response (2010) is that one really can have non-trivial counterfactual 
knowledge of actuality. If we deny that possible-world talk always commits us to maximal 
specificity and deny a Lewisean metaphysics in which worlds/possibilities stand entirely 
in causal isolation from one another, then a plausible story can be had. Edgington makes 
use of the temporal analogy once again. I can refer to the future boiling pot of water, 

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
646
having just turned on the burner, even though the water is not boiling at the time 
of successful reference. And I can refer to a given future table, even if only the parts 
lie before me yet to be assembled. Just as the relevant shared temporal history of the 
thinker and future objects plays an important role in securing reference of those objects, 
the right kind of overlap between actual and counterfactual possibilities can help us 
to understand how reference and knowledge is achievable across worlds/possibilities. 
Edgington’s view is that non-trivial counterfactual knowledge of what is actually the 
case is plausible, when the counterfactual thinker can identify her point of departure 
from the actual world and know the relevant details about how things would have 
developed from there.
Others have published developments that are sympathetic to varying extent to 
Edgington’s original proposal (cf. Lindström 1997; Rückert 2004; Proietti and Sandu 
2010; Fara 2010). Carlo Proietti and Gabriel Sandu, for instance, focus on a quite differ-
ent sort of worry that arises for Edgington’s strategy. Within the standard semantics for 
basic modal logic, propositions of the form “Actually p” are necessary—giving
⊢ Ap ↔ □Ap.
This is problematic if we think that Edgington’s knowability principle should tell us 
something about contingent, as well as necessary, truths. Moreover, when the knowl-
edge operator K is treated as a universal modal operator (such that ‘Kp’ is true iff ‘p’ is 
true in every epistemically accessible possible world), we get the analogous epistemic 
collapse,
⊢ Ap ↔ K(Ap).
That is, we regain the very sort of epistemic determinism (i.e., group omniscience) 
that Edgington’s strategy was designed to avoid. Modeling the knowability paradox in a 
temporal framework and utilizing ceteris paribus modalities, Proietti and Sandu develop 
notions of necessity and knowledge that are not susceptible to the above collapses. They 
go on to formulate knowability principles in the spirit of Edgington’s original proposal.
Another traditional strategy for dealing with the paradox is to argue the knowability 
proof is invalid. For instance, a central theme of Dummett’s work is that an epistemic 
theory of truth carries with it independent reasons for rejecting classical logic in favor 
of intuitionistic logic. With a semantic foundation that characterizes truth and falsity 
epistemically, we lose the unrestricted validity of double-negation elimination, ¬¬ϕ 
⊢ ϕ. For instance, constructing a refutation of the possibility of a disproof of ϕ leaves 
open the question of whether we can construct a proof of ϕ. The penultimate step of 
our knowability proof, which derives p → Kp from ¬(p & ¬Kp), abbreviates a piece of 
classical reasoning that is not intuitionistically valid, since it employs double-negation 
elimination (or something intuitionistically equivalent to it). Hence, an anti-realist 
who has independent reasons for favoring intuitionistic logic over classical need not be 
moved by the intuitionistically invalid knowability proof (Williamson 1982).
The intuitionist herself only gets as far as proving p → ¬¬Kp. Generalizing, we get 
∀ϕϕ → ¬¬Kϕ), or the intuitionistic equivalent, ¬Ǝϕ(ϕ & ¬Kϕ), which appears to 
say that no truth is forever unknown. An important objection to the intuitionistic 
strategy is found in the view that such intuitionistic consequences of Fitch’s reasoning 
are as bad, or almost as bad, as the classical consequences (Percival 1990). The main 

THE KNOWABILITY PARADOX
647
intuitionistic consequence is ¬Ǝϕ(ϕ & ¬Kϕ), which apparently says that no truth is 
forever unknown. Some equivalent formulas include ∀ϕ(¬Kϕ → ¬ϕ), which says that 
anything forever unknown is false, and ¬Ǝϕ(¬Kϕ & ¬K¬ϕ), which denies that there 
are any forever undecided statements.
The intuitionistic anti-realist need only reply that these consequences sound bad 
only when read with a classical semantics. Intuitionistically, they sound harmless (cf. 
Rasmussen and Ravnkilde 1982; Wright 1987). ¬Ǝϕ(ϕ & ¬Kϕ), for instance, says that 
there is a refutation of the possibility of constructing a proof of the conjunction, ϕ & 
¬Kϕ. Indeed we do have the skeleton of such a refutation in lines (2) through (5) of our 
presentation of the knowability proof. However, I believe the thrust of the objection is 
not that the intuitionistic consequences are themselves implausible when understood 
intuitionistically, but that intuitionism doesn’t have the resources to express what seems 
clearly expressible (and true)—namely, some truths are never discovered. It’s not that 
we have a disproof of the possibility of ever discovering them but, rather, that there just 
so happens to be no time at which they are discovered.
The expressibility objection, which is a focus of Wright (1993: 426–427) and 
Williamson (1994), can be put this way. The intuitionistic anti-realist lacks the logical 
constants to express the apparent truism that there might be truths that never in fact 
will be known, formally Ǝϕ (ϕ & ¬Kϕ). That is because the inconsistency derivable 
from the joint acceptance of the knowability principle and Ǝϕ (ϕ & ¬Kϕ) is intu-
itionistically valid. There seems to be two ways the intuitionist can go here. Add some 
constants to the language (for instance, an empirical/contingent negation, ~, such that 
the joint acceptance of the knowability principle and Ǝϕ (ϕ & ~Kϕ) is intuitionisti-
cally consistent), or bite the bullet. Arguments against the former approach appear in 
Williamson (1994). Dummett (2009; and personal correspondence) defends the latter 
strategy, and happily denies that there is any coherent reading of ‘never’ other than the 
reading allowed by the intuitionistic logical constants. (For discussion, see Weiss 2007; 
Bermúdez 2009; Hand 2009, 2010; Rasmussen 2009; Murzi 2010).
Still others reject classical logic in favor of a paraconsistent logic. Paraconsistent 
logics allow inconsistency without trivialization, by rejecting the validity of ex falso 
quadlibet, the principle stating that anything follows from a contradiction. A paracon-
sistent approach to the paradox was first suggested in Richard Routley (1981; reprint 
2010). While considering the liar (‘This very statement is not true’), the knower (‘This 
very statement is not known’) and Fitch’s proposition, ◊K(p & ¬Kp), Routley enter-
tains a uniform treatment on behalf of the “hardened paraconsistentist”—namely, that 
these (but not all) inconsistencies are coherent and indeed hold true. Routley does not 
endorse the strategy, but merely entertains it in a footnote. The paraconsistent approach 
is first defended in J.C. Beall (2000), where it is argued that the knower sentence pro-
vides independent evidence that a proper description of our knowledge is inconsistent. 
For the knower entails that Kp & ¬Kp, for some p. Further, it is argued that without a 
solution to the knower we should accept contradictions of this form and go paracon-
sistent. On Beall’s approach, the inconsistency in the knowability proof then does not 
license the reductio used ultimately to derive naive idealism. (See also Wansing 2002; 
Priest 2009; Beall 2009.)
In the only book-length treatment of the paradox, Jonathan Kvanvig (2006) proposes 
that Fitch’s result is invalid, owing to a fallacious substitution into a modal context. The 
mistake is to be explained by the context-sensitivity of quantified expressions—in par-
ticular expressions of the form, ‘somebody at some time knows’. On a Russellian view of 

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
648
propositions, the value of a logically proper name enters into the proposition expressed 
by the sentence in which the name occurs. If, for example, ‘Kripke’ is a logically proper 
name, then Kripke himself is a part of the proposition expressed by ‘Kripke is a philoso-
pher’. Similarly, on Kvanvig’s neo-Russellian view, the domain of quantification enters 
into the proposition expressed by a quantified statement. The proposition expressed by 
‘all humans are mortal’, for example, contains the domain fixed by the context of utter-
ance as a constituent part. Consequently, the proposition expressed by ‘all humans are 
mortal’ is sensitive to the modal context in which it is embedded. And so, this modal 
indexicality, as Kvanvig calls it, is a species of non-rigidity. For the case at hand, Kvanvig’s 
neo-Russellian account tells us that ‘p but nobody ever knows that p’ is non-rigid and 
the domain of quantification is a constituent of the proposition expressed. As such, 
the proposition it expresses when embedded in a modal context might differ from the 
proposition it expresses unembedded. Hence, the substitution of that conjunction for 
the propositional variable in knowability principle, ϕ → ◊Kϕ, is said to be fallacious.
One immediate cost of Kvanvig’s view is that we lose the unrestricted validity of a 
host of other useful modal principles, such as necessitation (i.e., the principle that every 
theorem is necessary). However, this sort of loss is a familiar phenomenon in the face 
of related forms of context-sensitivity. For instance, ‘actually’ is modally indexical, and 
the sentence, ‘p just in case actually p’ (formally, p ↔ Ap), is a theorem even though 
it is not necessary. That is because there might be worlds where p is false even though 
p is actually true.
Critical reviews of Kvanvig’s approach appear in Jenkins (2006a) and Percival 
(2007). Brogaard and Salerno (2008) offer a related approach that does not depend on 
Kvanvig’s philosophy of language but does rely on the syntactic approach to quantifier 
restriction advocated in Stanley and Szabo (2000). A two-dimensional analysis of an 
alleged modal fallacy appears in Costa-Leite (2006).
Much of what has been written on the knowability paradox comes in the form of 
attempts to express a relevant form of anti-realism without paradox (cf. Chalmers 2002; 
Dummett 2009; Edgington 2010; Fara 2010; Hand 2009, 2010; Jenkins 2006b; Kelp 
and Pritchard 2009; Linsky 2009; Restall 2009; Tennant 2009). David Chalmers, for 
instance, defends the idea that given enough qualitative information about the world 
we could in principle know the truth value of any claim. More carefully, his scrutability 
thesis says, if D is a complete qualitative description of the world, then for all T, it is 
knowable a priori that D (materially) implies T. Importantly, the knowability paradox 
does not threaten the claim that true Fitch-conjunctions are derivable a priori from a 
complete description of the world.
Christoph Kelp and Duncan Pritchard (2009) offer some hope for an anti-realism 
that endorses a justified believability principle in place of the knowability principle. 
They evaluate the thesis that, for any true proposition, it must be possible to justifiably 
believe it. An alternative weakening of the knowability principle is proposed by Greg 
Restall (2009). His principle states that, for every truth p, there is a collection of truths, 
such that (i) each of them is knowable and (ii) their conjunction is equivalent to p. 
Restall proves that this formulation evades the paradox, and draws lessons about the 
operant notion of possibility.
There is disagreement about whether the knowability proof is paradoxical at all. 
Williamson (2000a: Chapter 12; 2009), for instance, considers the result merely sur-
prising, but warns that it is a sign of doom for anti-realist theories of truth. However, 
that position would best be complemented with an explanation of how moderate 

THE KNOWABILITY PARADOX
649
anti-realism can so convincingly appear to be distinct from naive idealism. Williamson 
does not offer such an explanation. How might the explanation begin? One possibility 
is this. The knowability principle and naive idealism are both necessarily false and, as 
such, are in fact logically equivalent. Routley (1981) and Rescher (2005), for instance, 
offer arguments that both the ignorance and the unknowability of some truth are neces-
sary. Importantly, there are plenty of logically equivalent sentences that do not appear 
to express the same proposition (e.g., ‘2 + 2 = 4’ and ‘p → p’). If a rational subject has 
some attitude toward one without having that attitude toward the other, then that must 
be because one fails to recognize the equivalence. However, this is not satisfying. We 
might recognize the equivalence between the knowability principle and idealism, and 
still think there is no such equivalence between moderate anti-realism and idealism. We 
simply deny that the knowability principle is the best characterization of the moderate 
thesis. Intuitively, there really is a difference between understanding truth as idealized 
knowledge and understanding truth as actual knowledge. Writing off the knowability 
principle as implausible does nothing to help us to understand the metaphysical differ-
ence at the heart of this problem. And it surely does not support the thought that there 
is no way to formulate that difference. So we are back to where we started, seeking a 
semantic story about how a moderate epistemic thesis about truth can be distinguished 
from naive idealism.
So what can we all agree to? Not everyone thinks that the knowability proof is para-
doxical, but if it is not then some explaining is still required. Among those who think 
there is a paradox, there is divergence on whether the knowability proof is valid. Even 
those who agree that it is not valid cannot seem to agree about which principles are 
violated. Among those who think the proof is valid but paradoxical, there is little agree-
ment about how to resolve the paradoxicality and express the relevant form of moderate 
anti-realism. The only consensus there might be is that there is no consensus about how 
properly to deal with the paradox of knowability.
References
Beall, J.C., (2000). “Fitch’s Proof, Verificationism, and the Knower Paradox” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 
78, 241–247.
——, (2009). “Knowability and Possible Epistemic Oddities” in J. Salerno (ed.), New Essays on the Knowability 
Paradox. Oxford University Press, 270–299.
Burmúdez, J., (2009) “Truth, Indefinite Extensibility, and Fitch’s Paradox” in J. Salerno (ed.), New Essays on 
the Knowability Paradox. Oxford University Press, 76–90.
Bigelow, J., (2005). “Omnificence” Analysis 65: 187–196.
Brogaard, B. and Salerno, J., (2002). “Clues to the Paradoxes of Knowability: Reply to Dummett and 
Tennant” Analysis 62: 143–150.
—— and ——, (2008). “Knowability, Possibility and Paradox” in D. Pritchard and V. Hendricks (eds.), New 
Waves in Epistemology. Palgrave Macmillan, 270–299.
Chalmers, D., (2002). “Does Conceivability Entail Possibility?” in T. Gendler and J. Hawthorne (eds.), 
Conceivability and Possibility. Oxford University Press, 145–200.
Church, A., (2009). “Referee Reports on Fitch’s ‘A Definition of Value’” in J. Salerno (ed.), New Essays on 
the Knowability Paradox. Oxford University Press, 13–20.
Costa-Leite, A., (2006). “Fusions of Modal Logics and Fitch’s Paradox” Croatian Journal of Philosophy 6: 
281–290.
Dummett, M., (2001). “Victor’s Error” Analysis 61, 1–2.
——, (2009). “Fitch’s Paradox of Knowability” in J. Salerno (ed.), New Essays on the Knowability Paradox. 
Oxford University Press, 51–52.
Edgington, D., (1985). “The Paradox of Knowability” Mind 94, 557–568.

FORMAL EPISTEMOLOGY
650
——, (2010). “Possible Knowledge of Unknown Truth” Synthese 173: 41–52.
Fara, M., (2010). “Knowability and the Capacity to Know” Synthese 173: 53–73.
Fitch, F. (1963). “A Logical Analysis of Some Value Concepts” The Journal of Symbolic Logic 28: 
135–142. Reprinted in J. Salerno (ed.), New Essays on the Knowability Paradox. Oxford University Press. 
2009.
Fox, J. Unpublished Manuscript. “Fitch-Humberstone Arguments.”
Hand, M., (2009). “Performance and Paradox” in J. Salerno (ed.), New Essays on the Knowability Paradox. 
Oxford University Press, 283–301.
——, (2010). “Antirealism and Universal Knowability” Synthese 173: 25–39.
Hart, W. D., (1979). “The Epistemology of Abstract Objects: Access and Inference” Proceedings of the 
Aristotelian Society, supp. vol. 53, 153–165.
——, (2009). “Invincible Ignorance” in J. Salerno (ed.), New Essays on the Knowability Paradox. Oxford 
University Press, 320–323.
—— and McGinn, C., (1976). “Knowledge and Necessity” Journal of Philosophical Logic 5: 205–208.
Humberstone, I., (1985). “The Formalities of Collective Omniscience” Philosophical Studies 48: 401–423.
Jenkins, C., (2006a). “Review of Kvanvig: The Knowability Paradox” Mind 115: 1141–1147.
——, (2006b). “Anti-Realism and Epistemic Accessibility” Philosophical Studies 132: 525–551.
Kelp, C. and Pritchard, D., (2009). “Two Deflationary Approaches to Fitch-Style Reasoning” in J. Salerno 
(ed.), New Essays on the Knowability Paradox. Oxford University Press, 324–338.
Kvanvig, J., (2006). The Knowability Paradox. Oxford University Press.
Lindström, S., (1997). “Situations, Truth and Knowability: A Situation-Theoretic Analysis of a Paradox 
of Fitch” in E. Ejerthed and S. Lindström (eds.), Logic, Action and Cognition: Essays in Philosophical Logic. 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 183–210.
Linsky, B., (1986). “Factives, Blindspots and Some Paradoxes” Analysis 64: 10–15.
——, (2009). “Logical Types in Arguments about Knowability and Belief” in J. Salerno (ed.), New Essays on 
the Knowability Paradox. Oxford University Press, 163–179.
Mackie, J. L., (1980). “Truth and Knowability” Analysis 40, 90–92.
Murzi, J., (2010). “Knowability and Bivalence” Philosophical Studies 149: 269–281.
Paseau, A., (2008). “Fitch’s Argument and Typing Knowledge” Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 49: 153–
176.
Percival, P., (1990). “Fitch and Intuitionistic Knowability” Analysis 50, 182–187.
——, (2007). “Review of Jonathan Kvanvig’s The Knowability Paradox” Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews. 
URL= http://ndpr.nd.edu/review.cfm?id=8924.
Priest, G., (2009). “Beyond the Limits of Knowledge” in J. Salerno (ed.), New Essays on the Knowability 
Paradox. Oxford University Press, 93–104.
Proietti, C. and Sandu, G., (2010). “Fitch’s Paradox and Ceteris Paribus Modalities” Synthese 173: 75–87.
Rasmussen, S. A., (2009). “The Paradox of Knowability and the Mapping Objection” in J. Salerno (ed.), 
New Essays on the Knowability Paradox. Oxford University Press, 53–75.
—— and Ravnkilde, J., (1982). “Realism and Logic” Synthese 52: 379–437.
Rescher, N., (2005). Epistemic Logic. University of Pittsburgh Press.
Restall, G., (2009). “Not Every Truth Can be Known (at least not all at once)” in J. Salerno (ed.), New 
Essays on the Knowability Paradox. Oxford University Press, 339–354.
Rosenkranz, S., (2004). “Fitch Back in Action Again?” Analysis 64: 67–71.
Routley, R., (1981). “Necessary Limits of Knowledge: Unknowable Truths” in M. Edgar, N. Otto, and Z. 
Gerhard (eds.) Essays in Scientific Philosophy. Dedicated to Paul Weingartner/Philosophie als Wissenschaft. 
Paul Weingartner gewidmet. Bad Reichenhall: Comes Verlag : 93–115. Reprinted in (2010) Synthese 173: 
107–122.
Rückert, H., (2004). “A Solution to Fitch’s Paradox of Knowability” in S. Rahman, J. Symons, D. Gabbay, 
and J. van Bendegem (eds.) Logic, Epistemology and the Unity of Science. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Salerno, J., (2009). “Knowability Noir: 1945–1963” in J. Salerno (ed.) New Essays on the Knowability Paradox. 
Oxford University Press, 29–48.
Stanley, J. and Szabo, Z., (2000). “On Quantifier Domain Restriction” Mind and Language 15: 219–261.
Tennant, N., (1997). The Taming of the True. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
——, (2009). “Revamping the Restriction Strategy” in J. Salerno (ed.), New Essays on the Knowability 
Paradox. Oxford University Press, 223–238.
——, (2010). “Williamson’s Woes” Synthese 173: 9–23.
Walton, D., (1976). “Some Theorems of Fitch on Omnipotence” Sophia 15: 20–27.

THE KNOWABILITY PARADOX
651
Wansing, H., (2002). “Diamonds are a Philosopher’s Best Friend: The Knowability Paradox and Modal 
Epistemic Relevance Logic” Journal of Philosophical Logic 31: 591–612.
Weiss, B., (2007). “Truth and the Enigma of Knowability” Dialectica 61: 521–537.
Williamson, T., (1982). “Intuitionism Disproved?” Analysis 42: 203–207.
——, (1993). “Verificationism and Non-Distributive Knowledge” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 71: 
78–86.
——, (1994). “Never Say Never” Topoi 13: 135–145.
——, (1998). “Knowability and Constructivism” Philosophical Quarterly 38: 422–432.
——, (2000a). Knowledge and its Limits. Oxford University Press.
——, (2000b). “Tennant on Knowable Truth” Ratio 13: 99–114.
——, (2009). “Tennant’s Troubles” in J. Salerno (ed.), New Essays on the Knowability Paradox. Oxford 
University Press, 183–204.
Wright, C., (1993 [1987]). Realism, Meaning and Truth. 2nd ed., Blackwell.
——, (2000). “Truth as Sort of Epistemic: Putnam’s Peregrinations” Journal of Philosophy 97: 335–364.


Part IX
THE HISTORY OF 
EPISTEMOLOGY


58
PLATO
Timothy Chappell
No great philosopher is more centrally concerned to ask questions about knowledge 
(Greek epistêmê) and its definition (Greek logos) than one of the first and greatest phi-
losophers of all: the Athenian aristocrat Plato (428–348 bc). Among much else, he is 
the first philosopher to propose and explore a possible definition of knowledge as justi-
fied true belief (in the Meno, Republic, and Theaetetus). He is the first philosopher to 
suggest and discuss the principle that knowledge can only be based on knowledge (most 
clearly in Republic Book VII). And he is the first philosopher to explore the problems 
of misrepresentation (most notably in the Theaetetus) and of self-knowledge (in the 
Charmides and elsewhere).
Note that I say “propose,” “discuss,” “explore,” not “teach,” “assert,” or “take the view 
that.” Engaging philosophically with Plato is not a simple matter of displaying a row of 
propositions, surgically abstracted from the texts, that give us Plato’s definitive views. It 
is more like joining a concrete and particular philosophical conversation, where dead 
ends and messy digressions are only too possible, and where even the surest conclusions 
remain tentative and provisional because there is always more to say. How ironic that 
Plato’s most familiar caricature should make him an inhumanly abstract dogmatizer, 
when in truth the human concreteness of his writings problematizes at every turn the 
very words “Plato says . . . .”
It is not merely that Plato’s journey to the answers that he has to offer us goes a round-
about way. The journey itself—the dialectic, to use Plato’s word—is what Plato has to 
offer us (Sedley 2003: 1): “Plato’s real reason for persisting with the dialogue form is . . . 
his growing belief that conversation, in the form of question and answer, is the structure 
of thought itself.”
This conception of the nature of philosophy is already a doctrine in epistemology. 
The doctrine is that all human “knowledge,” all human doctrines, are no more than 
moments in a continuing conversation which, for all we know, might turn out to refute 
them at the very next moment.
This doctrine comes within its own scope; as we shall see, it is itself subjected to dia-
lectical examination and development as Plato’s career progresses. But it is clearly where 
he starts. Thus what is probably the earliest picture of Socrates that Plato gives us, in 
the Apology, is dominated by a near-skeptical conception of human knowledge. (It was 
not for nothing that the ancient skeptics—Pyrrho and Sextus Empiricus for instance—
routinely claimed that they, not the Platonists, were the true heirs of Socrates.)
In the Apology Socrates tells a (hostile) Athenian jury that his mission in life is 
to discover whether anyone has any knowledge, by way of the dialectical method: by 
asking them questions about what they claim to know. But Socrates has found no one 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
656
who can defend their own knowledge-claims. For instance, he says, politicians have, on 
examination, nothing to back up their reputation for wisdom—except a resentment if 
this reputation is undermined. Poets create their works “not by wisdom, but by divine 
inspiration and something in their natures” (Apology 22c1). Even craftsmen, despite 
their apparent specialist knowledge in particular areas, share with the poets an inability 
to explain their own expertise, and a brash over-confidence outside that expertise, as if 
wisdom in one area guaranteed wisdom in all. Socrates thinks that these failings under-
mine the craftsmen’s claim to knowledge even in their own specializations. Hence, con-
cludes Socrates, the truest “knowledge” that humans can have (it might, he speculates, 
be otherwise for gods) is only self-aware epistemic humility, and a willingness to ask 
hard questions: “the wisest man among [us] is the one who recognises, like Socrates, that 
in truth he is worth nothing where wisdom is concerned” (Apology 23b1).
One striking thing about this remark from the Apology is that it is about as close 
as Plato gets to the celebrated paradox “All I know is that I know nothing,” often 
attributed to Socrates (following Diogenes Laertius, Life of Socrates XVI), but never 
quite put in his mouth by Plato. A second striking feature is that the passage treats 
knowledge and wisdom as being, in the final analysis, one and the same thing. This 
equation of knowledge and wisdom seems to be no linguistic accident, and no passing 
slip either: it is explicitly argued for in the later dialog the Theaetetus (145d7–e7). Part 
at least of the import of this equation is, surely, to take us away from an emphasis on 
the propositional. We paradigmatically think of knowledge as justified belief in a true 
thesis. Where all theses and doctrines are—at least for knowers like us—permanently 
vulnerable to unexpected refutation, it is perhaps not these shakily provisional claims 
that most stably deserve the name of knowledge. In the absence of the kind of stable 
known that, for instance, we might have access to if we could define any of the virtues, 
the focus shifts to the inquirer: what most deserves to be called (human) knowledge is 
the best state that that inquirer can reasonably be expected to get himself into. And this 
is, once more, the epistemic humility described above.
Thus, for Plato, knowledge is not primarily a matter of awareness of doctrines, but 
of what we nowadays call epistemic virtue. Epistemic virtue, moreover, is the greatest 
virtue of all. It is Plato’s Socrates who first defends the thesis that virtue and knowl-
edge/wisdom are one and the same thing, and that wisdom is the key to everything else. 
When Plato famously says (Republic 473c) that the state cannot be well ruled until it has 
philosopher-kings, another way of putting this which might have appealed to Socrates 
would be to say that the truest justice, the true master-virtue, is wisdom.
Returning to the Apology passage: what does Socrates think the politicians, poets, 
and craftsmen of Athens lacked? Why exactly didn’t they count as having (complete 
or perfect) knowledge? It is common ground among Plato scholars to reply that what 
he thought they lacked was the ability to logon didonai (Theaetetus 175d1). We might 
translate this as “provide definitions,” but that translation is misleading. Plato’s point 
is not the implausible one that Mr Gradgrind makes in Hard Times, Chapter II: that if 
Sissy Jupe cannot define the word “horse,” then she cannot know anything about horses 
(even though she rides a pony every day in her father’s circus). Plato is not unaware 
that a potter does not need to be able to enounce explicitly a formal scientific defini-
tion of clay to produce first-rate pots (see Parmenides 130c8; Theaetetus 147a–c), or that 
a poet does not need a definition of meter to produce magnificent verse—he can, as 
the Apology passage acknowledges, produce it simply by “inspiration” (whatever that 
is). And Plato is not claiming that the potter, poet, or any other craftsman needs to be 

PLATO 
657
able to produce such definitions in order to perform their own distinctive crafts. What 
he is claiming is that such crafts cannot be complete or perfect knowledge all on their 
own. For what is needed for complete and perfect knowledge is a synoptic understanding 
of each and every craft: a coherent overall account of the place of each activity and its 
aims within the overall aim of living well. An overall account can also show us that 
something that seems a genuine craft actually is not, because it has no real place in the 
overall good life. That is part of the message of the Gorgias’ contrast of false crafts (e.g. 
cookery, rhetoric) with true crafts (e.g. medicine, dialectic).
When we turn from questions about crafts to questions about virtues, a parallel point 
is taken even further by Plato. The crafts can at least exist in isolation: one can be a 
good potter without being a good man, even if knowledge of pottery without an under-
standing of where it fits into the good life can never be complete or perfect knowledge. 
By contrast, anyone who lacks a coherent overall account of any given virtue, one 
which integrates it with all the other virtues, does not really have any knowledge at 
all, even of that virtue on its own. (This is Plato’s famous doctrine of “the unity of the 
virtues.”) In the case of the crafts, we need to “give an account” of them to complete our 
knowledge of them. In the case of the virtues, our knowledge of them is not even begun, 
never mind completed, until we can “give an account” of them.
Equipped with this understanding of logon didonai, and granted a careful reading of 
the dialogs, we can divide the victims of Socrates’ questioning into three groups. In the 
first group are those, like the poets, who can provide no answers whatever when he asks 
them to give an account of their expertise. At least as Socrates reports them, they sim-
ply cannot explain at all how they know what they claim to know; they have nothing 
whatever to say about what makes the difference, for them, between success and failure. 
This makes their knowledge-claims as mysterious, from a holistic point of view, as a 
psychic gambler’s. Someone who reliably backs the winning horse, but has no idea how 
he picked the winner out from all the other horses, is plausibly said to have no knowledge 
of which horse will be the winner—he is simply a lucky guesser.
In the second group are those, e.g. Euthyphro and Laches in the eponymous dialogs, 
who do have some sort of answer to Socrates’ request for an account (of holiness and 
courage, respectively). However, the accounts that they offer are not coherent. They 
include logical contradictions, and their adherents’ assent to them is fickle, unstable 
over time. These features of contradiction and fickleness make their knowledge-claims 
highly dubious.
On contradiction: someone who says that he knows p, and that he knows that p 
implies q, and that he knows that p implies not-q, is not in a mental state that we can 
comfortably and unambiguously describe as knowing p. On fickleness: consider a sce-
nario described to me by Nicholas Denyer. Suppose Nick is sure at 0701 that p, sure at 
0702 that not-p, not sure one way or the other at 0703 p.m., and back to certainty that p 
at 0704. At all four times, Nick is not in a mental state that deserves to be called know-
ing p. (Interestingly, this seems the right thing to say even if Nick’s belief that p at 0701 
and 0704 is justified true belief; not all counter-examples to “knowledge = justified true 
belief” are Gettier cases.)
In the third group we find those whose claim to know a given craft, or to understand 
a given virtue, is compromised when Socrates’ questioning reveals that the so-called 
expert has no idea, or a wrong or inadequate idea, of how the aims of his particular exper-
tise relate to any other aims that he might be expected to have. Evidently Protagoras is 
meant to exemplify this fault in relation to the virtue of courage (Protagoras 349d–351b). 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
658
Even if he can give a satisfactory account of what courage is like, he cannot say anything 
convincing about how the aims of courage relate to the aims of the other virtues. This 
undermines his right to say that he knows anything about courage. For to be ignorant 
of how courage fits into the good life overall is not an incidental flaw in an account of 
courage. It spells the collapse of the whole account, from the top downwards.
The basic problem here is one about isolated knowledge-claims. Someone who claims 
to know, say, that they farm ostriches in Aberdeenshire, seems at first sight to have a 
piece of knowledge. After all, they do farm ostriches in Aberdeenshire. But now sup-
pose that this person does not know that ostriches are birds, or where Aberdeenshire is. 
Do we still feel confident that this person knows something as opposed to having a true 
belief? (Notice, again, that there might be counter-examples here to the equation of 
knowledge with justified true belief which are quite unlike Gettier’s counter-examples.) 
Suppose, further, that this person does not even know that ostriches are animals, or that 
Aberdeenshire is a place, or what farming is. By this point we might begin to doubt that 
such a person even has a belief—never mind a true belief, or a piece of knowledge.
The same point, that knowledge or expertise cannot, in the end, exist in isolation, 
is made by Plato’s notorious critique of poetry in Republic Book X. However good poets 
might be technically, there remains the question what ends their technical mastery 
really serves. The poets themselves, Plato complains (surely unfairly, but that’s another 
story), are utterly casual about this question. But without an answer to it, there is no 
guarantee that their sort of goodness is really goodness at all. To get that guarantee, 
we need to know first that poets have any place in the ideal state, and if so, what that 
place is. Until we are clear about this, we can no more infer from “x is a good poet” to 
“x is a good person” than we can infer from “x is a good concentration-camp guard” to 
“x is a good person.” In what we might call the hierarchy of the crafts and virtues, the 
overarching holistic vision of the good governs everything below it. That is why Plato 
insists, at Republic 352d7–9, that his argument “is not about just any chance question; it 
is about the question how life should be lived.”
It is important not to be distracted here by the largely ethical content of many of 
the knowledge-claims that Plato assesses. A modern philosophical outlook typically 
sees ethical discourse as a special case, clearly demarcated from non-ethical discourse, 
and not even fully truth-apt as non-ethical discourse is. This might tempt us to see 
Plato’s focus on ethical knowledge-claims, and equally his claim that virtue is identi-
cal to knowledge, as a naive anachronism. We should resist the temptation. Ethical 
subjectivism was as widespread in Plato’s society as in ours, and Plato was anything but 
naive about it. One aim of the last paragraph’s argument is, precisely, to undermine the 
subjectivist assumption that ethical knowledge can ultimately be separated from other 
sorts of knowledge. To be sure, you can be a good potter without being a good man: 
you can concern yourself solely with questions such as how hot the kiln should be and 
what mixture of mud and water makes the best clay, and ignore questions such as how 
my being a potter fits into the rest of my life or into the rest of the city. The subjectiv-
ist wants to call these latter two questions specially ethical ones, and to claim that, 
unlike the former two, they have no clear or incontestable answers. Plato would reply 
that every potter is also a human, that all humans face questions like these latter two, 
and that it would be surprising indeed if there were expertise about small matters like 
pottery, but no expertise about the greater matters of ethics—not just how pottery is to 
be practiced, but how life itself is to be lived. In this a fortiori argument, apparently, he 
would have Aristotle’s support (Nicomachean Ethics 1094a1–23). For Plato, there simply 

PLATO 
659
isn’t the sharp distinction between the ethical and the non-ethical that the subjectivist 
wishes to draw.
The more Plato spells out his negative account of why his own ordinary contem-
poraries do not count as having knowledge, the more he uncovers, as if by accident, a 
positive account: an account of what it would be to have knowledge. The transition 
from Plato’s early period to his middle dialogs consists in a growing confidence about 
this positive account. Plato becomes clearer what the conditions for knowledge must be, 
and comes to think that there might after all be cases where human cognition actually 
meets those conditions: cases where humans do actually know.
It was evidently mathematics that led Plato in this more optimistic direction. To see 
what most struck Plato about mathematics, recall the three marks of those who do not 
know listed above. At least one of the following is true of the ignorant person: (1) he 
can say nothing about what makes the difference between cases where he gets it right 
and cases where he gets it wrong; (2) he cannot spell out and describe what he knows, 
e.g. to answer (1), without falling into contradiction, or failing to form a stable view, 
or both; (3) he cannot state the significant interrelations between the parts and wholes 
of knowledge, or explain how knowledge in his area contributes to and interrelates 
with knowledge as a whole. Removing the negations from this, we get three marks of 
someone who does know, or of what is known: we can call them (1) perspicuity, (2) 
consistency, (3) holism. What is striking about mathematicians is how well they display 
at least the first two marks.
(1) No familiar form of human inquiry exposes faulty methodologies more starkly than 
mathematics does, or makes it plainer why good methodologies are good. Compare pot-
tery: only practice and trial and error can teach me the knack of using a potter’s wheel. 
Even once I have learned that knack, I might not understand why there are some things 
you can do with a piece of clay, and others you can’t—I just recognize that that’s how 
it is for potters. By contrast, to understand why a mistake in mathematics—say, the 
claim that 5 + 7 = 11—is a mistake is simply to understand the meanings of the terms 
involved. No one who clearly understands these terms can possibly make that mistake. 
And there is a crunchy little puzzle, which preoccupies Plato in Theaetetus 187–201, 
about how mathematical and other a priori mistakes are possible at all. How can some-
one who knows 5, 7, 11, addition, and equals, end up thinking that they are connected 
as above? Isn’t it a condition of knowing them that anyone who does know them should 
be incapable of making this sort of mistake? But then, equally, how can anyone who 
does not know them make such a mistake—since, not knowing them, he can’t think 
about them at all?
To demonstrate the correctness of a mathematical claim, we need only display how 
the truth of the whole claim follows from the meanings of its parts plus the rules for 
conjoining them. Likewise, to show where a piece of mathematical reasoning has gone 
wrong, we need only show where the reasoner has failed to assign the correct meanings 
to the terms involved, or failed to follow the conjunction-rules, or both. To show this we 
need no special equipment—only the concepts themselves. Even the person who made 
the original mistake can be shown where he has gone wrong, provided he at least under-
stands the concepts. That person need be no expert: as Socrates undertakes to demon-
strate to his friend Meno, he might be no more than an uneducated slave-boy (Meno 
82b–86b). Anyone who merely understands the concepts can, with a little coaxing, be 
led to unearth their interrelations—to ‘recollect’ what, in truth, he already implicitly 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
660
knows about them. Hence, Socrates argues, our implicit knowledge of the interrelations 
of concepts is evidence for the immortality of the soul. In tapping into this knowledge 
which is part of our souls, we are tapping into something eternal; so there is a part of our 
souls which is eternal.
(2) Hence, no familiar form of human inquiry is better than mathematics at produc-
ing extended trains of reasoning and argument which simply cannot involve incon-
sistencies—if they did, these inconsistencies would be immediately detectable and 
eliminable—and which simply cannot be easily changeable. The mathematician’s 
understanding of the reasonings might come and go, but the reasonings themselves are 
true unchangingly. If the mathematician fully grasps the reasoning, his understanding 
too will become unchanging in this way (Meno 97d–98b).
(3) Mathematics is then for Plato a paradigm of knowledge in its perspicuousness, and 
in its consistency. It is only in the third respect, holism, that it falls short. We can put 
the point about holism in two ways. We can say either that mathematics is less than 
paradigmatic knowledge because we can imagine that someone might give a fairly full 
specification of the good, the purpose, of mathematics, without being able to say how 
the good of mathematics fits into the good as a whole: more briefly, a good mathemati-
cian is not necessarily a good person, or even a wise one. Or we can put the point as 
Plato puts it in Republic 511b–c, and say that the shortcoming of mathematics—high 
though it stands in the scale of human cognitive achievements—is that it is a funda-
mentally conditional inquiry: it starts from assumptions, and unfolds the implications of 
those assumptions, but it never justifies the assumptions themselves. Hence mathemat-
ics fails to be fully holistic, fully integrated into knowledge as a whole, in the way that 
true knowledge must be: “the person who sees things synoptically is a dialectician; the 
person who does not is not”: Republic 537d8).
Plato finds a related flaw in the program of science conducted by the philosopher 
Anaxagoras (c.500–428 bc) that Socrates criticizes in Phaedo 97c ff. Anaxagoras, he 
complains, raised high hopes by his slogan “Mind governs all” (DK 59B12). This slo-
gan sounded to Socrates like the announcement of a unitary program of teleological 
explanation of everything, of the sort that Plato himself was to attempt in the Timaeus. 
But in fact, Socrates reports, Anaxagoras offered no such thing. His use of “Mind” was 
only sloganeering; his real explanations were ad hoc, messy, and “by way of all sorts of 
out-of-place agents—‘airs’ and ‘ethers’ and ‘waters’ and so on” (Phaedo 98c2–3). Thus 
Anaxagorean “scientific explanation” does not even get as close as mathematics does to 
satisfying the requirements for knowledge. Socrates’ criticism (whether it is a fair criti-
cism is another story) of Anaxagorean science is this: it consists of disjointed, isolated 
postulates, jammed untidily together without any true holistic unity. That is why, even 
if such an account is perspicuous and consistent, it still is not true knowledge.
Take a third example of something that falls short of Plato’s ideal of true knowledge, 
the case of the skill of making artifacts such as the bed that Plato mentions in Republic 
596b5–7. The making of artifacts is a teleological business. Knowing how to make a 
good table means knowing what a table would be like that perfectly served the specific 
function of a table. That is, it means looking towards the ideal table; which in turn 
means, in part at least, understanding the truth of (arguably) timelessly true claims like 
these: “A good table has legs of equal length”; “The perfect table would not be made of 
thistledown or jelly”; “Ideally, a table will have a flat surface,” and so on.

PLATO 
661
Plato’s reason for raising this example is partly to suggest an a fortiori argument. If even 
a craftsman’s technical mastery cannot be fully understood without treating it as involving 
Plato’s famous Ideas or Forms, still less can the much more purely conceptual mastery of 
the mathematician—or the true science of the dialectician himself. Why then does the 
craftsman’s mastery fail to count as true knowledge? For at least two reasons.
First, because, as before, it is not guaranteed by its content to be holistic. Wisdom or 
expertise in table-making can exist in isolation, but not as complete or perfect knowl-
edge, because it on its own does not entail wisdom or expertise about everything; a 
good table-maker might have no idea of how to explain how the good of table-making 
fits in with the other goods. Contrast the world-maker in the Timaeus, who (at least 
on a neo-Platonist interpretation) does have this holistic understanding, and creates 
the world according to it. What he “looks towards” is not just a single Form but also 
“the eternal,” i.e. the whole of God’s own nature; what he makes is “aimed towards 
what can be understood by reason and wisdom, and what is unchangingly the same” 
(29a7–8). Hence the world is completely ordered by a single all-encompassing explana-
tion (Timaeus 29e–30c).
Secondly, the table-maker’s expertise falls short of being knowledge because it is 
unclear to us, in our state of understanding, that there is any such thing as the specific 
function of a table anyway. A table can be used for eating from; or for resting a computer 
and books on (like my own just now); or for signing a peace treaty on; or for a game of 
shove ha’penny; or for dancing on; or to block a doorway; or as an objet trouvé in an art 
gallery. . . . Which of these is the function of the table? We do not know. This is not to 
say that there is no answer; in fact Plato at least outlines what an answer to this question 
would be like at Cratylus 389a–d. But it is to say that the answer can only come from the 
holistic understanding of everything, and of how the goods of every thing interrelate, 
that alone Plato is prepared to call knowledge.
All three of these cases, then—mathematics, Anaxagorean science, table-making—
are cases of partial understanding, but they do not pass Plato’s three tests for complete 
and perfect knowledge. To remind ourselves of those tests: knowledge, for Plato, is a 
system of reasoned argument which is, in the senses I have spelled out, (1) perspicuous, 
(2) consistent, and (3) completely holistic. (1) Real knowledge cannot coexist with 
ignorance of how epistemic success differs from epistemic failure. (2) Real knowledge 
cannot coexist with logical inconsistency, or with the different sort of inconsistency 
that is involved in constantly changing one’s mind about what is true or false. (3) Real 
knowledge cannot be isolated knowledge: true knowledge is systematic, indeed the true 
system of knowledge must be one of maximally integrated logical systematicity.
There is an obvious objection to this conception of knowledge: it is too demanding. 
If this is what any cognition needs to be to count as knowledge, then hardly anything 
will count. But (the objection continues) it is a matter of familiar observation that we 
count lots of things as knowledge. So Plato’s conditions for knowledge are untenably 
stringent.
This objection is central to the critique of Plato’s epistemology that was already being 
developed, in Plato’s own lifetime, by his great pupil Aristotle (Nicomachean Ethics I.6, 
Metaphysics I.9). We can see from Parmenides 133b–134e that Plato had arrived at some-
thing like this objection on his own account, almost certainly before Aristotle stated 
it. According to “Parmenides” there, the greatest difficulty for Plato’s theory of Forms is 
that it creates a super-world of super-knowledge, quite unrelated to the needs and reali-
ties of our world and our knowledge.

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
662
Plato can say at least four things in response. First, he can observe that his strin-
gent conception of the conditions for knowledge is derived from an examination of 
the concept of knowledge itself. All along, his project has been to ask what “we,” 
on reflection, are prepared to count as knowledge, and by what criteria. Thus his 
demanding conception of knowledge is not one that he has plucked out of the air. It 
is one that Socrates has carefully developed through discussions with other reflective 
people. (Here again we see the crucial importance of the fact that Plato’s method is 
dialectical, i.e. conversational.) So it is pointless to object that “we” “count lots of 
things as knowledge.” That observation merely returns us to the beginning of the 
Platonic dialectic that was aimed at refining what we so count. The critic who makes 
this objection just isn’t keeping up.
Secondly, Plato can concede that something quite close to skepticism is indeed the 
upshot of his conception of knowledge. That is not itself a good reason for doubting 
his arguments for that conception; any real philosopher is committed to “following the 
argument wherever it goes” (Crito 46b5), no matter how inconvenient the destination. 
Moreover, it is not clear that the skepticism is complete. When Socrates famously won-
ders, at Republic 540d3, whether the city that he describes can ever come into being, it 
is perhaps not too fanciful to suggest that it is not just an ideal political system that he 
thinks it “certainly difficult—yet possible somehow” to realize. It is an epistemic system 
too. It is a striking difference between Plato’s way of thinking and our own that for him 
these possibilities stand or fall together.
Thirdly, Plato can and does accept the thought that naturally follows from the 
demandingness objection to his epistemic ideal: the thought that if the conditions for 
knowledge are so hard to satisfy, then perhaps, a lot of the time, the best thing for us 
to do is to stop worrying about knowledge, and accept some lesser epistemic state—true 
belief or perception, say—as a makeshift (Meno 97c5, Philebus 58d–62d). This is not 
to say that Plato would accept the connected thought that a modern reader (such as 
Kvanvig (2003)) is quite likely to have: that Plato’s whole argument is not really about 
knowledge at all, but about some more epistemically exalted state—understanding, per-
haps, or science. Certainly, Plato’s word for “knowledge,” epistêmê, is also the classi-
cal Greek for “science.” And certainly, as I have observed, Plato himself argues that 
“knowledge” and “wisdom” are synonyms. It is, nonetheless, still knowledge, in just our 
sense, that Plato is talking about. Thus his point about epistemic isolation, for instance, 
is not only the point that an isolated cognition cannot be understanding. It is also the 
point that an isolated cognition cannot be knowledge; and we have already seen why 
there is something very plausible about that point. If the point is correct, that lends sup-
port to Plato’s idea that understanding, wisdom, and knowledge are (at the very least) 
inextricably connected concepts.
Fourthly, Plato is anyway not entirely negative in his conception of knowledge. In the 
Republic he has a great deal to tell us about what the epistemic system that he envisages 
might look like—even if what Socrates tells us there is, confessedly and deliberately, 
expressed only in tantalizing images, by “one who speaks of what he does not know, as 
if he did know” (506c1):
As to the Good Itself, we should let it be for now; to speak of that would seem 
to me to be beyond our reach at present. But I am willing to tell you about the 
offspring of the Good, and of what is most like to it . . .
(506e1–6)

PLATO 
663
The “offspring of the Good” that Socrates speaks of here are the three magnificent 
extended metaphors of Sun, Line, and Cave that immediately follow. (Here notice 
again the pervasive irony of Plato. To speak of the Good via these images is to break his 
own ban on eikasia, imitation (Republic 598b), a ban imposed because imitation gives 
us no knowledge of the reality of things. So what knowledge of the Good can we derive 
from Plato’s three metaphors?)
The Sun, Line, and Cave are immensely rich and intricate images, and there is of 
course no substitute for reading them. But Republic 532a–b offers us a fairly brief sum-
mary of the central point that at least the Sun and the Cave make about knowledge (the 
Line is more complicated). Understanding progresses upwards by the criticism of such 
provisional and incomplete forms of cognition as (say) table-making, physical science, 
and mathematics. Elsewhere in Plato other examples of incomplete forms of cognition 
include the science of naming, criticized in the Cratylus, and the love of individual 
beauty criticized in the Symposium. To come to understand why these are not cases 
of knowledge, by seeing how they measure up to something like the three criteria for 
knowledge that I have suggested, is to move beyond them. The ultimate goal of that 
movement is The Form of the Good. But once that is reached, there is a re-descent 
(Republic 520c2–3). The Form of the Good is the first principle of all reality, and so, 
likewise, the first principle of all understanding of reality. The person who has once 
grasped it will therefore understand everything else in the light of it, including all the 
interrelations of the various other subordinate Forms that are teleologically controlled 
by The Form of the Good; hence, the person who grasps it will have full knowledge of 
everything.
Here, in the same spirit as before, we are bound to meet the objection: What is the 
use of such an ideal of knowledge, if in fact no actual human cognizer can ever satisfy 
it? The answer to that, I think, is that Plato is interested in how we approach this ideal. 
More generally, he is interested in how the whole of reality, insofar as it is intelligible 
or knowable at all—even in only a lowly degree and an approximate sense of “know-
able”—is bound to be intelligible or knowable via the Forms.
Two of the main arguments that Plato offers for the Forms are relevant here: as they 
are usually called, the One over Many (Republic 596a ff.), and the Argument from 
Opposites (Phaedo 104b ff.; Republic 477a ff.). The One over Many gives an explana-
tion of similarities: it says that where two different things X and Y are F, that is no mere 
coincidence, and not something for which there can be no more explanation than just 
the brute fact that X and Y are similar. There is a reason for the similarity, and the reason 
lies in the fact that X and Y share in a property, F-ness, this property being by nature 
one of Plato’s Forms. To understand X and Y as F is, then, to understand them as being 
informed (the mot juste) by the Form of F-ness.
The Argument from Opposites, on the other hand, gives a resolution of differences 
and contradictions: it notes that things in the world are full of contradictions, that they 
never perfectly exemplify the properties of which we baldly take them to be exemplars. 
There is, for instance, no such thing as a perfect circle in nature; as Plato might rather 
hyperbolically express it, any natural figure “is just as much a circle as not a circle.” 
Discarding the hyperbole, we can see an important point here about, for instance, 
geometry. When someone says that the area of the circle is πr2, they do not mean that 
the area of this circle here ο is πr2. For that circle is not truly a circle at all; it is only an 
approximation to a circle. What πr2 applies to, strictly and accurately speaking, is only 
the ideal circle; it applies to actual and imperfect circles only insofar as they approximate 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
664
that ideal; moreover, the degree to which actual and imperfect circles are rationally 
intelligible, by geometry, is only the degree to which they approximate that ideal circle. 
To make rational sense of actual and imperfect circles in the world is, then, only possible 
insofar as we see them as resembling that ideal circle.
These two arguments for the Forms show how and why Plato came to think that, nec-
essarily, real knowledge at the very least always involves the Forms, and quite possibly is 
never about anything but the Forms. Plato thinks that an argument can be developed to 
the same conclusion that shows how knowledge necessarily involves the Forms, by try-
ing to construct an account of knowledge that ex hypothesi does not involve the Forms, 
and demonstrating how it fails.
Just this (at least on my reading: Chappell 2004) is the project that Plato engages in 
the Theaetetus, where his aim is to refute on its own terms the empiricist view (as we 
might anachronistically call it) that we need nothing more than perception to give a 
full account of knowledge. Thus the Theaetetus first shows that knowledge cannot be 
identical to perception. Perception, in itself, is no more than unstructured sensation. 
For us to derive knowledge from such sensation is for us to impose the kind of structure 
on it that gives it propositional shape. But this is precisely the kind of structure that only 
the Forms can give to things. Furthermore, if knowledge is only perception, then there 
could be no distinction between true and false belief: for perception without the Forms 
is (as we have seen) only unstructured sensation, to which no true/false distinction can 
apply until it is given propositional structure. Thus the empiricist’s problem is not just 
with false belief, but with belief as such: what the empiricist lacks is an account of how 
the objects of perception can attain semantic structure, so as to become possible objects 
of knowledge. This he will go on lacking until he becomes a Platonist.
The Theaetetus thus exploits another crucial aspect of the Forms—that they are what 
structures thought and discourse (Sophist 259e6; Theaetetus 202b6)—to run what is in 
effect a transcendental argument for the necessity of the Forms for knowledge. So far 
from the Parmenides being (as some have held) the dialog where Plato gives up on the 
Forms because of the objections to them that are there produced, it already foreshadows 
this transcendental argument (Parmenides 135b7–c2):
if someone, with an eye on all these and other similar objections, will neither 
allow there to be Forms of the things that exist, nor define a single Form for 
each one, then he will have nowhere else to turn his understanding, because he 
does not allow there to be an eternally-changeless Form for each thing; and so 
he will completely destroy our capacity for language.
The Forms, on this account, are necessary conditions of our understanding anything at all, 
or even formulating propositions. And as the Argument from Opposites and the One over 
Many imply, the world is intelligible and knowable only because it comes to us with intel-
ligibility and knowability built into it, insofar as it is structured by the Forms. In works of 
the Later period such as Timaeus, Sophist and Philebus, Plato spells out this thesis more fully 
than it is spelled out by the metaphors of the Republic and the purely negative transcen-
dental argument of the Theaetetus: he attempts, that is, to give us a more detailed picture 
of how the Forms structure the world and render it intelligible, knowable, and oriented to 
the Good in the way that the Phaedo and Republic originally proposed.
Plato’s attempt to spell his theory out can lead him into some strange and, to our eye, 
philosophically unfruitful territories; witness the oddities of physiology and numerology 

PLATO 
665
that we find in the Timaeus. Many of these oddities in the detail are undoubtedly best 
understood as early attempts to do science. However they are to be understood, that 
there are oddities in Plato, particularly at the level of his detailed theorizing, should 
come as no surprise. Plato is not the only great philosopher to propose with great plausi-
bility, via a brilliant transcendental argument, that reality or some key part of it can only 
be understood as having a certain structure—and then get into difficulties and awkward 
over-complications when he tries to say something more positive about what that struc-
ture is like. Kant’s philosophical psychology is notoriously the most rebarbative part of 
his critical philosophy. To cite an even closer parallel, Frege’s difficulties over what we 
can positively say about the denizens of his drittes Reich are equally notorious. At any rate 
the disappointment is there, and was already reported by Plato’s earliest auditors. Most 
of those who came to Plato’s lecture “On the Good,” Aristoxenus tells us (Aristoxenus, 
Harmonics 39.8–40.4, apparently reporting a tale he heard from Aristotle), hoped to 
hear about the conditions of human well-being; what they got instead was “a discussion 
of the mathematical sciences” and the enigmatic conclusion “that good is one”; “this 
struck them as utterly paradoxical.” The strangeness to us of (at any rate) the detail of 
Plato’s conceptions of the good and of knowledge is not, then, a result merely of the fact 
that he comes from a radically different philosophical culture; people in his own culture 
found his theories strange too.
In assessing Plato as an epistemologist, we are missing something if we do not register 
this strangeness. We are equally missing something if we do not register Plato’s extraor-
dinarily creative genius: the sheer number of areas where later philosophy as we know it 
is simply inconceivable without his contribution.
Acknowledgments
My thanks to Sarah Broadie, Nicholas Denyer, Michel Narcy, Denis O’Brien, David 
Sedley, and Duncan Pritchard for helpful comments.
References
Timothy Chappell, Reading Plato’s Theaetetus. Academia Verlag/Hackett, 2004.
Jonathan Kvanvig¸ The Value of Knowledge and the Pursuit of Understanding. Cambridge University Press, 
2003.
David Sedley, Plato’s Cratylus. Cambridge University Press, 2003.

59
ARISTOTLE 
Richard Patterson
Aristotle’s views concerning knowledge are broad in scope, encompassing accounts of 
the potential objects of knowledge, the diversity of branches of knowledge and their 
hierarchical organization, the cognitive processes by which humans achieve knowledge, 
the embodied nature of virtually all cognitive capacities, the kind of reasoning through 
which we extend our knowledge by deriving new results from previous knowledge, the 
varieties of understanding or explanation, and the place of knowledge in a good human 
life. Although Aristotle does appear to address one or two familiar skeptical arguments 
(a regress-of-justification argument, Posterior Analytics I.3; perhaps a skeptical dream 
argument, Metaphysics 1011a6–7) he does not much concern himself with the dread 
specter of skepticism that has come to haunt modern epistemology. In his view humans 
clearly do attain theoretical, practical, and productive knowledge; his main concern is 
not to show that there is knowledge, but to understand its varieties, acquisition, exercise 
and value.
Section (A) below provides an overview of Aristotle’s classification of branches of 
knowledge, (B) his theory of scientific understanding proper, and (C) the manner in 
which we know what to do in situations of choice and action. For present purposes 
productive expertise (craft, techne) does not call for extensive discussion, but will serve 
(D) to reinforce the overarching conclusion that although all types of knowledge share 
a broad common framework, Aristotle did not think of science or theoretical under-
standing as a model the rest should all approximate. Finally (E) considers Aristotle’s 
basic assumptions that (1) the contents of knowledge must somehow enter the mind 
via sense perception and (2) all thinking is accomplished in or by means of images. 
These assumptions appear to set significant limits on human knowledge, but in prac-
tice Aristotle copes with difficult cases by broadening the range of underlying images 
beyond those of the five standard senses, and by the use of analogy.
A. The Branches of Knowledge
Aristotle distinguishes two very broad types of knowledge on the basis of their objects 
or subject matter: (I) knowledge of that which is necessary (i.e., cannot be otherwise) 
and (II) knowledge of that which is not necessary. The objects of the latter subdivide 
into (A) things we can affect by action, and (B) products of craft. These two simple 
bifurcations give rise to the traditional categories of theoretical, practical, and produc-
tive knowledge. Theoretical knowledge in turn includes (1) natural science, (2) math-
ematics and (3) “first philosophy” pertaining, respectively, to things that are “natural” 
or “by nature” (i.e., that possess a source of change or stability in themselves, such as 

ARISTOTLE 
667
living things or earth, air, fire, and water); things that exist as embodied in particular 
objects but are studied “in abstraction” from those bodies (mathematical entities); and 
the principles of all “being qua being.” (The relation between the study of being qua 
being—metaphysics—and of the eternal pure forms that govern cosmic motion—theol-
ogy—is still much debated.) Aristotle retains this close tie between epistemology and 
ontology through further subdivisions—e.g., of natural science into basic physics, biol-
ogy, zoology, etc., and productive knowledge into poetry, rhetoric, architecture, etc. 
Each type of knowledge has its own subject domain, whose existence it postulates as one 
of its “starting points” or “first principles” (archai).
B. Theoretical Knowledge
As described in the Posterior Analytics (Apo), each branch of knowledge has an axio-
matic structure resting on necessary “first principles” (archai) from which other truths of 
the science follow deductively. This is not to say that science either discovers or teaches 
these further truths simply by way of deduction, but rather that the results of a science 
can be displayed in the form of deductions from first principles. Since there was at the 
time neither any formal theory nor even any explicit concept of logical consequence, 
Aristotle had to forge these himself (see below). However, scientific deductions are not 
merely supposed to establish the truth of their conclusions, but to explain why they are 
true. Science does not aim primarily at justified true belief, or certainty that a body of 
propositions is true, but at understanding why things are as they are. (See, e.g., Kosman 
1973; Burnyeat 1981.) Deductions that explain general connections by deriving them 
from first principles are called “demonstrations” (epideixeis) or “scientific deductions” 
(syllogismos epistemonikos, APo I, 71b17–18). Thus scientific understanding is a “demon-
strative state” (hexis apodeiktike, NE VI, 1139b31–32), and to know a demonstrable 
truth is just to possess a demonstration of it (APo II, 90b9–13).
In addition to a general existence assumption for its domain (e.g., numbers, animals, 
heavenly bodies), the first principles of a science include basic definitions (odd and 
even number, things existing “by nature,” animate thing) and further non-definitional 
assumptions (e.g., the Law of Non-contradiction in First Philosophy, “Equals added to 
equals . . .” in mathematics, “Nature does nothing in vain” in the natural sciences). To 
function as foundational and explanatory first principles, these archai must be (1) true, 
(2) necessary, (3) not derived from anything prior to them, (4) prior to all other truths 
of the science, (5) “better known” than, and (6) explanatory of all other truths of the 
science (APo I, 71b20–22). How, then, do we know the first principles and how do we 
construct demonstrations?
Aristotle’s formulaic response is that we know scientific archai via epagoge (usually 
translated ‘induction’; see esp. APo I.18), and other truths via demonstrations from 
archai. This is misleadingly simple, however. On the one hand, while it is true that 
propositions which in fact are first principles are known via epagoge (broadly, movement 
from apprehension of particulars to a universal, or from more specific to more generic 
universals), not every proposition or definition reached in that way is a first principle. 
First principles must meet the six conditions just listed, and this is largely a matter of 
their larger, systematic role—e.g., that they be explanatorily fundamental.
Similarly, demonstrations are deductions, but not every deduction is a demonstra-
tion. Here Aristotle had first to characterize deduction itself, then say how demonstra-
tions constituted a special sort of deduction. Thus prior to the theory of demonstration 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
668
worked out in the Posterior Analytics we find, naturally enough, the Prior Analytics (APr), 
in whose first seven chapters Aristotle sets out his system of the plain (i.e., non-modal) 
syllogism (syllogismos, “deduction”), which became the “Traditional Logic” of the West. 
A deduction is a “discourse in which, if some things are given, something else neces-
sarily follows, . . . and follows because of the things stated” (APr I.1, 24b91–22). The 
most famous syllogism (later nicknamed ‘Barbara’: three a’s signify the syllogism’s three 
universal affirmative propositions) has the form, ‘All As are Bs; All Bs are Cs; therefore 
all As are Cs.’ Barbara illustrates the fact that a syllogism concludes to a statement relat-
ing two terms (A, C), where the relation asserted between A and C (e.g., applies to every, 
applies to some) must obtain if A relates to B (the “middle term”) and B relates to C in 
the way asserted in the premises.
However, Aristotle says in the first sentence of APr that the inquiry is “about dem-
onstration” (24a10) and, as he will emphasize in APo, this involves among other things 
necessary premises and conclusions. Accordingly Chapters 8–22 of the APr set out 
Aristotle’s modal syllogistic, adding to “plain” propositions those in which the predicate 
relates necessarily or possibly or contingently to the subject. Thus did Aristotle create 
modal logic. His modal system has its own strengths and weaknesses, both as a logic 
of alethic modalities and as an instrument of science (see, e.g., Patterson 1985). But 
Aristotle was typically content in his actual scientific works to leave results unformal-
ized, or simply to suggest an organization into plain syllogisms.
Whence the First Principles of Theoretical Knowledge?
If we come to know other truths by means of syllogistic deductions from first principles, 
how do we come to know the first principles themselves? APo II.19 describes a four-
stage process: starting with perceptions of “familiar” things, we build up memories of 
similar particulars; over time we acquire experience (empeiria) in a domain; finally we 
grasp an arche or starting point—a basic concept or connection. We achieve this criti-
cal last step by nous—usually translated “intellect” or “reason.” Aristotle tells us little 
about nous. One common reading takes it to be something like “intuition” or “intuitive 
insight,” which might amount to (1) particular episodes of having intuitive insight, 
(2) the capacity to have such insight, (3) the state of understanding we enjoy once 
we have had insight, or (4) all of the above. These alternatives all suggest that nous 
involves a distinctive, immediate apprehension of a basic concept in its simplicity, or of 
the necessity and self-evidence of a general truth, or both. A more “empiricist” and less 
“rationalist” reading (e.g., Barnes 1975; Burnyeat 1981; Wedin 1988) makes nous more 
continuous with experience—i.e., something like the final, clarifying and consolidating 
stage in one’s progress toward apprehension of basic truths or concepts.
A third possibility is that nous recognizes first principles as first principles. Although 
Aristotle’s theories of perception and memory (De Anima, De Sensu, and De Memoria), 
do not make any clearer than APo II.19 exactly how multiple memories become experi-
ence, or how experience leads to understanding, it is clear that becoming experienced 
in a field takes time, practice, and often the guidance of a teacher. It also typically 
involves acquisition of general concepts and connections, rules of thumb and the like, 
even if not the ability to put these things precisely into words, or to organize them into 
a system of explanations. Nous then becomes the recognition of certain propositions, 
definitions, etc. as explanatorily fundamental starting points rather than simply as prim-
itive universals or necessary co-variations among types of thing (see McKirahan 1992: 

ARISTOTLE 
669
Ch. XVIII). On this third reading nous is neither intuition, nor the achieving of an 
explicit, secure generalization; it is, rather, the recognition, as the result of careful obser-
vation and critical reflection, that some concept or connection is fundamental—i.e., 
that it explains without itself having any further explanation. The scholarly debate goes 
on, but in any event all three conceptions of nous have heavily influenced the subse-
quent history of epistemology.
The “Four Causes” in Theoretical (and Other) Knowledge
A second important framework for theoretical knowledge, and one extending to prac-
tical and craft knowledge as well, involves Aristotle’s celebrated “four causes” (aitiai, 
factors responsible for, or explanatory of, something’s being what it is). Physics II.3 
describes and illustrates (1) the formal cause—what it is to be a certain kind of thing, 
as given in a definition; (2) the material cause—that out of which something comes or 
is made, and which persists; e.g., the bronze of the statue; (3) the final cause—the goal, 
telos, for the sake of which a thing exists or is done or is produced; and (4) the efficient 
cause—the primary source of the change or stability that results in the coming-to-be 
of the thing. Aristotle says at APo II.11, 94a20–23 that we have understanding when 
we know the explanation (cf. Physics 194b16–20), and cites the four kinds of cause or 
explanation (although indicating the material cause rather obliquely). He maintains 
further that “these are proved through the middle term,” thus asserting a fundamental 
link between the theory of the four causes and the theory of demonstration from first 
principles. Unfortunately his general defense of this assertion is not entirely clear or 
successful (see esp. Barnes 1994). On the other hand it is often easy to see in practice 
how the four causes would enter into an explanation of the phenomena of biology, 
psychology, craft, etc., and why identifying these causes in particular cases would at 
least implicitly guide a good deal of one’s investigative and pedagogical practice. Not 
every explanandum calls for all four causes, but most do, and Aristotle’s comprehensive 
view is that one understands a phenomenon or correlation only when one has worked 
out all the applicable sorts of aitia, and has seen how they function as explanatory syl-
logistic middle terms.
Scientific Theory and Practice
With these general conceptions of theoretical knowledge in mind we can briefly con-
sider two thorny questions about their adequacy as a description of actual scientific 
inquiry. First, is syllogistic logic (even putting aside questions about modality) ade-
quate for expressing scientific propositions and deductions? Second, is it even used by 
Aristotle in his own scientific works, such as the biological treatises? With regard to the 
first question, Aristotle’s comments on mathematics are especially bold and provoca-
tive. Although Greek geometers do not express their proofs in syllogistic terms—using 
instead a combination of natural language and diagrams—Aristotle says that their proofs 
use syllogisms having the form of Barbara (APo II.14). What does he mean by this, and 
is it even remotely plausible? Two possibilities suggest themselves. First, he might have 
meant only that syllogistic logic is adequate for expressing the heart of any given proof. 
Aristotle frequently cites the theorem that the interior angles of a triangle are equal to two 
right angles (call this 2R). He points out that this is true because the interior angles of a 
triangle (A) are in fact angles equal to the angles around a point (B), and these in turn are 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
670
angles equal to two right angles (C). This explanation goes easily into a standard syllogism 
with B (angles equal to the angles around a point) as the explanatory middle term.
Another possibility is that Aristotle had in mind the more full-dress mathematical 
proofs such as one finds in Euclid’s Elements or its precursors, and more specifically the 
portion of a proof labeled “demonstration” (epideixis)—as opposed to the “setting out” 
of what is to be proved, the “construction” of the diagram, etc. The epideixis section 
simply uses natural language—while referring to points, lines, etc. in a diagram—to 
specify inferential steps leading to a desired conclusion. However, these deductive steps 
are typically expressible as universal affirmative propositions of syllogistic logic (see 
Mueller 1974 and Mendell 1998; the point is developed in detail in Patterson 1995). So 
it is clear enough, given the general terms Aristotle had in mind (e.g., interior angles of 
a triangle, angles around a point) why he might reasonably think that the geometers “use 
syllogisms in Barbara,” even as we see clearly today both that there are many gaps, large 
and small, in Euclid’s own proofs, and that Aristotle’s own syllogistic logic is far from 
adequate for completely formalizing plane geometry.
Second, is syllogistic logic adequate for expressing the results of Aristotle’s own 
scientific work, especially when he focuses on finding specific explanations, in zool-
ogy, physics, etc.? It is striking that even there one finds hardly a trace of a syllogism. 
Recent work has shown, however, that Aristotle’s explanatory practice does reflect the 
Analytics’ conceptions of deduction and demonstration. In zoology, for example, one 
regular feature of land animals is the possession of lungs, with which they breathe air in 
and out. But what is the point of that? Aristotle concludes that this is how land animals 
cool themselves. This gives a syllogism explaining why land animals have lungs: All 
land animals (A) are animals that cool themselves by respiration (B); All animals that cool 
themselves by respiration (B) are animals that have lungs (C); therefore All land animals 
(A) are animals that have lungs (C). The explanatory middle term is (B) animals that 
cool themselves by respiration. Why, then, do animals need to cool themselves? In part, 
because they need to cool the heart. Why? For one thing, the heart is the place where 
nutrients are “cooked” into blood. Why do nutrients have to be concocted into blood? 
And so on. Explanatory answers spread out into widening networks of interconnections 
among natural “differentiae” which themselves fall under four main heads (animal parts, 
activities, life history, and psychology; Balme 1987: 80). The complex interconnections 
among these zoological differentiae and their subtypes are typically expressed in univer-
sal affirmative propositions (All As are B), and can then be arranged into syllogisms in 
which some connections explain others. In short, one can gather from numerous exam-
ples the kinds of syllogistically structured demonstrations Aristotle had in mind, even 
though he seldom bothered, in the course of ground-level investigation, to stop and 
cast results in that form. And in fact he is sometimes still working toward such explana-
tions as an ultimate goal (see especially the articles by Lennox, Gotthelf, and Bolton in 
Section II of Gotthelf and Lennox 1987).
C. Practical Wisdom
Although there are broad parallels between sophia in theoretical science and phronesis 
in the realm of good or bad action, the latter is acquired by a different method and 
has a considerably more complex structure. Since phronesis aims at rationally grounded 
action it must combine elements of what we now call ethics, epistemology, and action 
theory, and its epistemological interest lies largely in the way it combines these diverse 

ARISTOTLE 
671
elements. Again there are archai, and again we must work our way to them starting out 
from what is initially familiar—here, endoxa, views common to everybody or almost 
everybody, or to “the (distinguished) few.” We investigate endoxa critically in order 
to determine what is correct and useful in them as we develop our own account. From 
this perspective the “historical” surveys with which many of Aristotle’s works begin are 
crucially important for the initial gathering of endoxa and marshaling of problems. If 
we wind up disagreeing with reputable endoxa, we should be able to say why reasonable 
people might have believed them; and if we manage to resolve the difficulties in the 
endoxa, and of course in our own views, so as to arrive at a position in harmony with 
the most trustworthy of the (corrected or amended) endoxa, this is “adequate proof” 
(NE 1145b2–7). Aristotle calls the whole process “dialectic” (dialectike) as opposed to 
adversarial debate (eristic), or epagoge in theoretical science.
However, there is no clean separation between the methods of epagoge and dialectic. 
Endoxa and the questions they generate are important in all sciences: in metaphysics 
the views of philosophers predominate, since most people (even Greeks) have few opin-
ions about being qua being; in meteorology one can often start with widespread opin-
ions (e.g., thunder is a noise in the clouds); in ethics opinions are plentiful and varied. 
Nonetheless it is remarkable that in any study endoxa should be so methodologically 
central, and the aim of harmonizing diverse views and resolving difficulties so authorita-
tive. This has raised worries that Aristotle is backsliding toward moral subjectivism, or 
that he holds a coherence theory of truth in ethics or politics. But probably he means 
that (1) this is the best sort of support for our views we can get in ethics and politics, 
which by nature do not afford the exactitude of geometry (NE VI.X); (2) it is in fact an 
adequate basis for our holding our views even if they don’t “prove” us right; and (3) we 
should act on the views that enjoy such support. This is in the spirit of Socrates’ injunc-
tion to put our trust in the logos that survives critical scrutiny (Phaedo 85c–d), and car-
ries no suggestion that coherence or general agreement is what makes our views true.
Dialectical discussion generates a great deal that we would now see as belonging to 
ethics rather than epistemology. For example, it seeks definitions of virtue, courage, 
practical wisdom, deliberation, happiness, et al., formulates and defends fundamental 
assumptions about the nature of “the good” (e.g., the nature of the best human life 
is determined by human nature), discusses such difficult notions as weakness of will, 
voluntariness, pleasure, and so on. But these “theoretical” results are not the primary 
goal of practical wisdom, which aims at doing the right thing in particular situations. 
For this to happen, neither holding the right theory nor, pace intellectualist views, 
recognizing what one should do here and now is sufficient. Thus Aristotle distinguishes 
phronesis from “comprehension” (sunesis), which also judges correctly what ought to be 
done, but merely judges and does not initiate or prescribe action (NE VI.9). Moreover 
phronesis also involves the ability to figure out how best to bring about a decided-upon 
action when intermediate steps are necessary—an ability Aristotle calls mere “clever-
ness” (deinotes) if divorced from phronesis. Unlike cleverness, phronesis aims at good 
action all down the line.
It is here that more recognizably epistemological questions emerge: how do we cor-
rectly and reliably judge that this is the right thing to do; how do we know how to 
bring about a decided-upon end; and what role does knowledge of first principles play 
in any of this? Aristotle’s simplifying formula is that “virtue makes the end right and 
deliberation makes what promotes the end correct” (NE 1144a9–10). Virtue is “a set-
tled disposition that decides, depending on a mean that is relative to us, in accord with 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
672
reason—the reason by reference to which the phronimos would define it” (NE 1106b36 
ff.). Deliberation is rational calculation concerning things that in one way or another 
contribute to achieving the end. (Debate continues as to whether one deliberates about 
ultimate ends, or only “means” in a broad sense.) But how does virtue make the ends, 
deliberation the means, correct?
Although our particular decisions are “in accord with” right reason they are not 
deduced from general principles. This is impossible not just because practical generaliza-
tions “can be otherwise,” but also because there are no deductive chains of universal or 
even “for the most part” connections leading down from basic principles to the specific 
action one ought to perform given one’s particular circumstances—e.g., donate five 
drachma today to the Daughters of Marathon Fund. Phronesis involves all-things-con-
sidered practical judgments (Broadie and Rowe 2002), and these must consider, well, 
all things—from the open-ended variety of circumstances and consequences potentially 
relevant to a particular choice (e.g., agent, patient, means, occasion, as noted at NE 
1109b14, 23), to one’s general conception of the good or happy life. The phronimos is 
the virtuous person who correctly recognizes and assesses the relevant factors, and on 
this basis sees with “the eye of the soul” (nous) the right thing to do. So even if our ethi-
cal principles are themselves structured in important ways by logical relationships, as 
when some conception of human nature implies a specific conception of the good for 
humans, the space between these general truths and the particular, situated actions we 
choose or reject is bridged not by deductions, but by a long-developing, well-practiced 
ability to see how consideration of all things great and small points to doing this rather 
than that.
Some interpreters see moral intuition at work here, this time with nous operating at 
the level of particular actions—perhaps in addition to grasping fundamental ethical 
principles. But once again there are two general readings of nous, parallel to the first two 
of those discussed in connection with theoretical science: first, as a distinct “intuitive” 
faculty of direct moral apprehension and prescription; second, as the concluding phase 
of a process of weighing multiple considerations to determine the best option in a par-
ticular situation in light of one’s principles. Both readings attempt to capture important 
features of relevant human experience, and both are at least possible interpretations 
of the pertinent texts. (The term nous is itself neutral as regards these options, since 
it covers more than one psychic act, condition, or process, depending on the context. 
Nonetheless it appears to be concerned in all its uses with seeing that some item lies at 
a cognitive limit (whether “upper” or “lower”)—a point at which analysis, justification, 
explanation, or deliberation comes to its proper end.)
D. A General Framework Without a Dominant Model
As noted above, both sophia and phronesis seek out general first principles by means 
of a method that starts from what is initially familiar to us, or what appears to be the 
case—the phainomena. Some passages suggest a division of phainomena into sensibles 
(in natural science) and endoxa (in action contexts). This is on the whole correct, 
even though endoxa have a significant role in natural science and in First Philosophy 
as well. Moreover the search for general principles in ethics is driven almost entirely 
by critical reflection and discussion, and in natural science by the interplay of careful 
observation and critical theorizing. Nonetheless, at a very general level the pursuit 
of both sophia and phronesis occurs within a broadly Socratic framework: gather the 

ARISTOTLE 
673
phainomena and the questions and problems to be addressed; where the phainomena are 
views or opinions (endoxa) about a topic, examine them critically and revise or discard 
them where appropriate as one develops one’s own account; at every stage marshal fur-
ther questions and difficulties and, where applicable, pertinent empirical observations; 
finally, adopt the view that best resolves these issues while accounting in a convincing 
way for the phainomena, or at least for the fact that people do pre-critically accept the 
phainomena.
At a yet more abstract level there is a framework of aporia (puzzlement; the formula-
tion of unanswered questions and unresolved difficulties) and lusis (resolution) com-
mon to all sorts of knowing. This applies not only to theoretical and practical reflection, 
but also to productive techne, where the goal is to produce some product separate from 
reflection and from the activity of production (NE VI.4). At a less general, more 
detailed, level one can add that the craftsman needs training, experience, general prin-
ciples, cleverness at figuring out how to proceed in given circumstances, and a good eye 
for judging when a work is or is not well done. These elements all have clear parallels 
in the sphere of phronesis. Thus in terms of the two-fold division of knowledge depend-
ing on whether or not its subject can or cannot be otherwise, practical and productive 
knowledge emerge as similarly structured subtypes of knowledge dealing with mutable 
things.
In sum, while there is a very general (Socratic) framework for pursuit of all forms of 
knowledge, and while there are important parallels between theoretical and practical 
inquiry, and between practical and productive knowing, theoretical science does not set 
“the” model for knowledge in general. Other forms of knowledge need not and should 
not try to conform to an axiomatic structure, and they must employ somewhat different 
means to attain their distinctive practical or productive knowledge.
E. Perceptual Sources and the Limits(?) of Knowledge
Aristotle maintains in De Anima and elsewhere that the content of thought must enter 
the mind via sense perception, and that all thinking involves images. Here it is possible 
only to mention the main features of Aristotle’s position, then consider briefly how 
Aristotle counters, at least in practice, the limits those two assumptions would appear 
to impose on human knowledge.
Regarding the perceptual sources of cognitive content, De Anima (De An) character-
izes both sense perception and thought in terms of matter and form (hule and morphe), 
for these factors are found “in the whole of nature” (De An III.5, 430a10–11). Perception 
of a sense object is “reception of the [perceptible] form [of the object] without the mat-
ter,” and is thus a “becoming like” the object sensed (e.g., II.12, 424a17–21). To distin-
guish perception from other cases of such reception, e.g., a stone’s being heated by the 
sun, Aristotle says that the sense organ, but not the stone, is the locus of a certain logos 
(proportion, measure; II.12, 424b1 ff.), which is the sense proper. He says little about 
this logos, but since perceptible properties are themselves combinations of opposites 
(light/dark, etc., as explained in De Anima and De Sensu) the logos is probably a sort of 
natural balance or proportion between relevant opposites within the sense organ. Since 
by definition “natural” things tend to maintain their natural condition unless disturbed 
and to return to it unless prevented, Aristotle might well have thought of the sensory 
organ-cum-logos as a natural mechanism for monitoring change toward or away from 
some neutral proportion of sensible opposites.

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
674
Similarly, cognition of a universal is reception of [intelligible] form, so that the intel-
lect (nous) “becomes all things” (III.4–5). Thus thought is to the thinkable as sense is 
to the sensible (III.4, 429a13–18). Aristotle distinguishes “active” from “passive” (poi-
etike versus pathetike) intellect, where active nous is somehow like light illuminating the 
intelligible forms received in passive nous (430a10–17). He does not posit a logos in the 
passive or receptive intellect, evidently because it must “become all [universal] things” 
and therefore must be entirely characterless—like, as he fatefully says, a blank tablet 
(429b29 ff.).
How might these difficult texts be related to the entry-level, perceptual sources of 
cognitive content? Certainly Aristotle rejects Plato’s view that humans can in the exer-
cise of nous rise above images to a level of pure conceptual thought (Republic VI, 510b, 
511b). As Aristotle says, one “never thinks without a phantasm” (De An 430a14–16); “it 
is impossible even to think without a phantasm” (On Memory 449b31 ff.); “that which 
thinks, thinks (noei) forms (eide) in images (phantasmata)” (De An 431b1–2). Words are 
not the fundamental medium of thought, but signify “pathemata (affections) in the soul.” 
And while words vary from person to person, these pathemata are the same, and are “like-
nesses” of actual things (De Interpretatione 16a4–8). Although some images arise simply 
as the causal result of sense perception (De An 429a1–2; cf. 428b10–16), humans can 
produce images at will, in the absence of any external sense object (427b17–18). Thus 
images can be formed as needed—in planning action, recollecting, doing geometry, etc.
But if we must think in (particular) images, how can we think abstractly? And again, 
are we not thereby limited to knowing things of which we can form an image? For that 
matter, how do we attain to general truths even about concrete sensibles (horses, bronze 
spheres) by thinking in particular images?
With regard to the practical sphere, De An 431b6 is especially helpful: “At other 
times one reasons and deliberates (logidzetai kai bouleuetai) by images or thoughts (phan-
tasmasi, noemasi) in the soul, as if seeing them (hosper horon), and deliberates and thinks 
about the future in relation to the present.” This mental simulation of alternative prac-
tical scenarios would be basic both to cleverness and to practical wisdom, but in the 
latter case would both elicit and facilitate judgment of right and wrong at all steps of 
deliberation and choice by bringing possible actions concretely before the mind’s eye. 
And even if these imaginings involve images of particular people and circumstances 
(real or imaginary) they could serve in principle as the basis for more general practical 
reasoning, for seeing the universal in the particular. This is crucial for Aristotle’s view 
of how we attain general knowledge, and is addressed directly in connection with geo-
metric diagrams.
The geometer’s diagram is a particular representation, whether external or in the 
imagination, and the typical Greek mathematical proof ostensibly refers throughout to 
particular points, lines, etc. in a diagram. The proof nonetheless establishes a general 
conclusion because, as Aristotle says, although our image might have a determinate size, 
we “do not use that determinate size in our reasoning” (De Mem 449b31 ff.). If we use 
only the shape of the figure (e.g., the fact that it is a triangle) but not its size, then our 
proof holds for all figures of any size whatsoever, so long as they have that same shape. 
In the Greek theory of proportion this universalizing step is even more sweeping, since 
ancient proofs use drawings of line to prove theorems not just about lengths but about 
all types of quantities—areas, volumes, temporal durations, weights, etc.
The case of general proportion theory illustrates not just the seeing of the universal 
in the particular, but also the far-reaching importance of analogy, as in “The length of 

ARISTOTLE 
675
segment AB is to CD as area G (or volume, duration, weight, age G) is to H.” Aristotle 
himself uses analogies from one sensible analog to another quite frequently in his bio-
logical works (e.g., gills:fish :: lungs:land animal), although the importance and mode(s) 
of functioning of analogy there have yet to be thoroughly investigated (but see Lloyd 
1966/1992). Equally important, analogy allows us to extend our understanding from 
sensible things to “theoretical entities”—as, for example, in the case of animal repro-
duction. According to Aristotle in Generation of Animals (GA), motions in the vital 
heat of the father’s semen shape the matter contributed by the mother (the menses) into 
a viable embryo. The semen then dissipates without ever becoming part of the develop-
ing organism. Human beings do not see these motions in the vital heat, but they can 
see and imagine other visible motions, and they can form a conception of how motions 
in the vital heat might work by analogy to the movements, say, of a craftsman bring-
ing determinate form into matter (GA 743b20 ff.; cf. rennet causing milk to curdle or 
“set”; GA 729a9 ff., 737a12 ff., et al.). Here analogy allows one to form at least a vague 
image of how semen and menses combine in passing species’ form from generation to 
generation, and even to understand this process in terms of matter (the menses), form 
(the functional structure of the mature adult that produces the semen), telos or goal 
(reproduction of a new individual according to type) and source of motion (either the 
adult again, or the motion in the vital heat)—i.e., in terms of the four causes.
By contrast “active intellect” is pure form, and is therefore not something of which 
we can literally form even a conjectural image. But in its functional role it is analogous 
to light: as light makes potential colors into actual colors, so active nous makes the 
potentially intelligible actually intelligible (De An III.5, 430a14–17). Or again, active 
intellect is like a craftsman, insofar as it facilitates the bringing of form into matter 
(i.e., the passive intellect’s becoming the object of cognition). It is a serious question 
how far such analogies can actually advance our understanding of the intellect, even 
if we accept Aristotle’s theories concerning light and color, or the need for active and 
passive aspects of intellect. The point is simply that whatever we do know of active 
intellect—including its basic epistemic function—is conveyed, and even conceived, in 
terms of familiar experiential analogs.
Speaking more generally, Aristotle does offer some analysis of arguments from anal-
ogy (Rhetoric B.20). But he does not expressly acknowledge the importance of analogy 
for his own philosophical and scientific practice, or that it is in some key cases essential 
to our understanding of a subject; nor does he attempt to show that imagistic analogs 
can in all cases support our conception of entities that cannot be directly and literally 
imaged. He seems content to devise appropriate analogies as needed, on a case-by-case 
basis.
Conclusion
Aristotle gives us the general picture of humans starting from particular perceptual 
experiences of the world and proceeding by way of memory and accumulated expe-
rience, by careful observation, critical reflection and discussion, to universal truths, 
general concepts and ultimately to first principles. The process is driven by the formula-
tion of questions and problems, and aims to resolve these on as firm a basis as possible 
so as to achieve understanding; for as human beings we “desire to know” (Metaphysics 
A.1, 980a21). Given our human cognitive abilities from sense perception to intellect, 
we segment, clarify, generalize and organize our experience of the world in somewhat 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
676
different ways to achieve stable conditions of understanding of various sorts. Despite 
some important general similarities, the “way up” to first principles and the way down to 
particular cognitions, actions, or productions, differs significantly from one domain and 
one sort of knowledge to another in ways dictated by differences in subject matter and 
aim. But all understanding falls under one of the three great types of knowledge—theo-
retical, practical, or productive—through which we might achieve a life of distinctively 
human excellence.
References
Balme, D. M., “Aristotle’s Use of Division and Differentiae,” in Gotthelf and Lennox, 1987, 69–89.
Barnes, Jonathan, Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics, 2nd ed., Clarendon Aristotle Series, Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1975, revised edn 1994.
Bolton, Robert, “Definition and Scientific Method in Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics and Generation of 
Animals,” in Gotthelf and Lennox, 1987, 120–166.
Broadie, Sarah, and Rowe, Christopher, Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2002.
Burnyeat, M. F., “Aristotle on Understanding Knowledge,” in Berti, E., ed., Aristotle on Science: The Posterior 
Analytics, Padova: Editrice Antenore, 1981, 97–139.
Gotthelf, Allan, “First principles in Aristotle’s Parts of Animals,” in Gotthelf and Lennox, 1987, 167–198.
Gotthelf, Allan, and Lennox, James G., eds., Philosophical Issues in Aristotle’s Biology, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1987.
Kosman, L. A., “Understanding, Explanation and Insight in the Posterior Analytics,” in E. N. Lee, A. P. D. 
Mourelotos, and R. M. Rorty, eds., Exegesis and Argument, Phronesis, supp. vol. 1, Assen, 1973.
Lennox, James G., “Divide and Explain: The Posterior Analytics in Practice,” in Gotthelf and Lennox, 1987, 
90–119.
Lloyd, G. E. R., Polarity and Analogy, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1966; repr. Bristol: Bristol 
Classical Press and Indianapolis: Hackett Pub. Co., 1992.
McKirahan, Richard, Principles and Proofs, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992.
Mendell, Henry, “Making Sense of Aristotelian Demonstration,” Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy 16 
(1998), 160–225.
Mueller, Ian, “Greek Mathematics and Greek Logic,” in Ancient Logic and its Modern Interpretations, John 
Corcoran, ed., Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1974.
Patterson, Richard, Aristotle’s Modal Logic, Cambridge, 1985.
Patterson, Richard, “Aristotle and Syllogistic as the Logic of Mathematics,” unpublished ms., 1995.
Further Reading
For English translations of all Aristotle’s works see The Complete Works of Aristotle, Jonathan Barnes, ed. 
(Princeton, 1984). The Basic Works of Aristotle, Richard McKeon, ed. (New York, Modern Library, 2001), 
and Aristotle: Selections, G. Fine and T. Irwin, eds. (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1995) contain substantial selec-
tions of Aristotle’s work.
For other brief treatments of Aristotle’s epistemology see C. C. W. Taylor, “Aristotle’s Epistemology,” in 
S. Everson, ed., Cambridge Companion to Ancient Thought I: Epistemology (Cambridge, 1990) and D. Modrak, 
“Aristotle’s Epistemology: One or Many Theories?,” in Aristotle’s Philosophical Development, Problems and 
Prospects, W. Wians, ed. (Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 1996).
David Ross’s Aristotle is the classic exposition of Aristotle’s thought as a whole; the 6th edition (London: 
Routledge, 2004) contains a useful introduction and bibliography by J. L. Ackrill.
For an introduction, translation and incisive critical “running commentary” on the Posterior Analytics, 
see Jonathan Barnes’ Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics (2nd ed., Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1994). Richard 
McKirahan’s Principles and Proofs (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992) is a consistently interesting 
examination of the main themes of the Posterior Analytics.
Articles on Aristotle 1. Science, R. Sorabji, M. Schofield, and J. Barnes, eds. (London: Duckworth, 1973), 
and Aristotle on Science: The Posterior Analytics, E. Berti, ed. (Padova: Editrice Antenore, 1981) are both 
excellent collections.

ARISTOTLE 
677
Sarah Broadie’s introduction to Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics (with translation by Christopher Rowe, 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002) is a very helpful introduction to the philosophical themes of the 
work, including the nature of practical wisdom.
On perception, imagination, and cognition see the relevant items in Essays on Aristotle’s De Anima, M. 
Nussbaum and A. Rorty, eds. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1992), and the major studies by D. K. Modrak, 
Aristotle: The Power of Perception (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987), M. Wedin’s Mind and 
Imagination in Aristotle (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1988), and Steven Everson’s Aristotle on Perception 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997).
For an extensive bibliography see Richard Ingardia’s site, aristotlebibliography.com.

60
RENÉ DESCARTES
Stephen Gaukroger
The modern canon for the history of philosophy was provided in Kuno Fischer’s multi-
volume history of philosophy (Fischer 1852–77). Fischer argued two theses: first, that 
the core of philosophy in the seventeenth century shifted from metaphysics to episte-
mology; second that, with this shift, the metaphysical dichotomy between Platonism 
and Aristotelianism was replaced by the epistemological dichotomy between rational-
ism and empiricism. Descartes is identified as the source of both these developments, 
and both Fischer’s typology and his assessment of Descartes have been followed by the 
majority of philosophers since then, at least until recent times. Actually, both his theses 
are profoundly misleading (see, for example, Garber 1992; Gaukroger 1995a; Kuklick 
1984; Loeb 1981), but it remains the case that Descartes did effect a major change in 
philosophical thinking and that it had to do with epistemology. My task in this chapter 
is to elucidate what this change consisted in. To this end, I want to begin by contrast-
ing Descartes’ approach to epistemology with that of two of his influential predecessors, 
Montaigne and Bacon, and then to show that a key problem that shaped his thinking 
was that of representation, before turning to the development of his views on epistemol-
ogy, and to distinguishing three epistemological enterprises in Descartes: the psycho-
physiology of perceptual cognition, the development of an adequate methodology for 
natural philosophy, and the project of legitimating his natural philosophy via a combi-
nation of skepticism and foundationalism.
Epistemology in Descartes’ Immediate Predecessors
If there are any other contenders for the title of the founding fathers of modern philoso-
phy, they are Montaigne and Bacon, the former not only taking skepticism seriously but 
transforming our understanding of the nature of subjectivity in such a way that intro-
spection can form a legitimate source of knowledge, and the latter transforming the pur-
suit of knowledge from a speculative to an observational/experimental enterprise. Both 
of them had distinctive views on epistemology, but in both cases they rely on traditional 
understandings of epistemology that differ significantly from that of Descartes.
Montaigne was a key figure in the revival of systematic doubt in the sixteenth cen-
tury. The term “revival” here is important, because, unlike the systematic skeptical 
doubt that we (correctly) associate with Descartes, ancient doubt was different from 
modern skepticism in two respects that bore centrally on its role in epistemology. First, 
systematic doubt in antiquity was doxastic rather than epistemological. It was directed 
towards beliefs, not towards knowledge as such: its aim was to show that we are not enti-
tled to our beliefs, and indeed there were forms of systematic doubt, such as Pyrrhonism, 

RENÉ DESCARTES
679
associated with a particular kind of ascetic life-style deemed appropriate to someone 
who had rejected all forms of “dogmatism.” Cartesian doubt, by contrast, is epistemo-
logical: there could not possibly be a life-style associated with it because its most distinc-
tive form, hyperbolic doubt, explicitly leaves our beliefs untouched: what it questions is 
whether we are entitled to say that these beliefs constitute knowledge. Indeed, hyper-
bolic doubt need not even affect our degree of certainty. Our degree of commitment to 
some knowledge claims, such as that 2 + 3 = 5, remains unchanged because we do not 
know what it would be like for such claims to be mistaken: Descartes’ argument is that 
what we can conceive of cannot constrain the ways in which an omniscient God could 
deceive us, but he has no doubt that it does constrain us. Second, there is a slippage in 
ancient systematic doubt between skepticism—the view that there is a way the world 
is, but we are unable to establish in what way it is—and relativism—the view that there 
is no way the world is independently of our changing perceptions of it (see Gaukroger 
1995b). The distinctive form of Cartesian doubt, hyperbolic doubt, has no relativist 
analog, and is resolutely skeptical. With the revival of Pyrrhonism in the second half of 
the sixteenth century, we can find both a continuation of relativistically driven doxas-
tic doubt and the beginnings of a skeptically driven epistemological doubt. This is true 
even of Montaigne’s Essais, a point that has not been fully appreciated, because of a 
tendency to assimilate all forms of doubt to skeptical doubt (see, e.g., Popkin 1979: chs 
2–3). In fact, the treatment of doubt in the Essais shows a clearly relativistic strain of 
thought. In the first chapter of Part II, for example, we are told that “we change as does 
that animal that takes the colour of each place it visits” and that:
Not only does the wind of accidents move me at its will, but I am also moved 
and disturbed simply as a result of my own unstable posture, and anyone who 
observes carefully can scarcely find himself in the same state on two occasions. 
I give my soul now one face now another, depending on the direction in which 
I turn it. If I speak of myself in different ways, this is because I look at myself 
in different ways. All contradictions may be found in me by some twist and in 
some fashion.
(Montaigne 1962: i. 369–70)
And even when we turn to the Apologie de Raimond Sebond, much of what Montaigne 
writes has a relativistic connotation: many of the examples he gives—what’s true on 
one side of the mountain is false on the other; we hide away while engaging in sexual 
intercourse, whereas the Indians do it in public; and so on—stick closely to the relativist 
tone of his Pyrrhonist sources.
Francis Bacon’s approach to epistemology, by contrast, was dictated primarily by a 
combination of natural-philosophical and psychological considerations (see Gaukroger 
2001). This is not simply a matter of a different choice of resources, but rather an indica-
tion that his project is directed towards different kinds of questions. One way in which 
one might capture the contrast is between perception and observation. For Aristotle 
and the Aristotelian tradition, perception and observation are part of the same prob-
lem of how we come by knowledge of the world. But by the early-modern era, a gulf 
has opened up between the two. In Descartes, perception tends to be treated either as 
an epistemological issue, or one in optics or psycho-physiology, whereas observation 
is treated as an autonomous methodological issue. Correlatively, whereas perception 
is treated primarily as something that involves the mind or the brain, observation is 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
680
something that involves the person as a whole. Hence, for Descartes, the psychological 
(as opposed to mental or epistemological) dimension is, generally speaking, inappro-
priate in the epistemology of perception, but of central relevance in accounts of the 
methodology of observation. Bacon, by contrast, is concerned with observation above 
all, and questions of perception are subordinate to it, with the result that his account of 
perceptual cognition is largely psychological rather than epistemological.
In fact, Descartes is concerned with observation as well as epistemological questions 
of perception, and the approach is not as completely removed from Bacon’s concerns 
as it might first appear, but there is no doubt that his skeptically driven epistemology, 
which is dictated by how we can respond to systematic hyperbolic doubt, runs along a 
completely different trajectory.
The Problem of Representation
Descartes’ epistemology brings together three different kinds of problem about repre-
sentation, generated, respectively, by rhetoric, late scholastic theories of perception, 
and optics.
The importance of rhetoric lies in the fact that we can trace the genealogy of 
Descartes’ key epistemological doctrine of clear and distinct ideas back to its roots in the 
rhetorical-psychological theories of the Roman rhetorical writers, especially Quintilian 
(see Gaukroger 1995a: 115–24). Quintilian was concerned with the qualities of the 
“image,” with the search for and presentation of images that are distinctive in their 
vividness and particularity, above all with the question of what features or qualities they 
must have if they are to be employed effectively in convincing an audience. Whether 
one is an orator at court or an actor on stage, Quintilian tells us, our aim is to engage 
the emotions of the audience, and perhaps to get it to behave in a particular way as a 
result, and what one needs in order to do this is to employ images that have the qual-
ity of evidentia—vivid illustration. The core of Quintilian’s account is that unless we 
are already convinced by our own images, we will not be in a position to use them to 
convince others. So self-conviction is a prerequisite for the conviction of others, and 
self-conviction, like the conviction of one’s audience, depends on the qualities of the 
image, amongst which must figure clarity and vividness. Note that whether an idea is 
clear and distinct is manifested in its application: the degree to which it moves us, or 
moves our audience, is a sign of its clarity and distinctness. In taking up this model of 
self-conviction, Descartes transforms it from a rhetorical doctrine, in which we amplify 
some emotion or belief by presenting that belief clearly and distinctly to ourselves, into 
a cognitive doctrine, in which we assess the truth or falsity of an idea by presenting it to 
ourselves clearly and distinctly. The first version of this new cognitive doctrine is evi-
dent in the Rules for the Direction of the Intellect, in Rule 3 for example, where we are told 
that what we must seek is something we can clearly and evidently intuit, and that the 
mind that is “clear and attentive” will be able to achieve this (Descartes 1987–91: i. 14). 
The early Rules draw their model of knowledge almost exclusively from mathematics, 
and the doctrine of clear and distinct ideas is applied to the case of mathematics in what 
becomes a paradigmatic way. The idea is that by representing arithmetical operations in 
terms of manipulations of line lengths, rather than in terms of operations on numerals, 
we grasp the validity of the operation in a clear and distinct way. Here again, the clarity 
and distinctness of the idea is manifested in its application. At the end of the 1620s, 
however, Descartes abandons this kind of clear and distinct grasp as a general model and 

RENÉ DESCARTES
681
gradually shifts to a metaphysical conception whereby clarity and distinctness, which 
now require a divine guarantee, are manifested paradigmatically in the cogito. This shift 
into the realm of metaphysics brings with it an inheritance of a number of epistemologi-
cal/psychological questions that had come to prominence in scholastic philosophy in 
the later sixteenth century.
In his discussion of sense perception in Books II and III of De Anima, Aristotle had 
argued that in perception, the mind is identical with its object, meaning by this that 
the form of the thing perceived is in the mind. In his elaboration of this account in the 
Summa Theologia, Aquinas argued that the form of the thing known “must of necessity 
be in the knower in the same manner as in the known itself” and so the sensible form “is 
in one way in the thing which is external to the soul, and in another way in the senses.” 
The intelligible species that the intellect receives from objects in sense perception are 
not forms produced by the mind (they are not mental representations that the mind 
produces to match the object known, for example) but by the thing itself, and indeed 
they are these things themselves in the intellect. These things really exist in the intel-
lect, because what the thing is essentially is its form, and when the intellect takes on 
this form in cognition, what it takes on is the same form as the object. But just what it 
was that was present to the mind in this kind of account was disputed among Aquinas” 
successors, particularly Duns Scotus and Suárez and their followers (see Picard 1926). 
By the late sixteenth century, one pressing issue was what the conformity between the 
object and our idea of it consisted in: what marked out a true idea of something? Two 
kinds of concept—a formal concept and an “objective” concept—were postulated, and 
the question of true ideas was considered to lie in the relation between these (see Dalbiez 
1929; Dear 1992). The formal concept of an object was that object as it existed in the 
intellect, but formal concepts are not necessarily true concepts, for some of them can be 
mistaken. To say this is to say that they do not conform to the object of which they are 
the concept, but the object is a material thing: how can the idea conform to something 
material? The problem was added to by the fact that many scholastic writers denied 
that we have genuine access to essences, but they had no doubt that we had access to 
truth. Where could this truth derive from if not from the object itself? What was needed 
was something immaterial that stood in for the material thing, so that this could be 
compared with the formal concept. That immaterial thing is the objective concept, and 
it is the thing “insofar as it is known.” So what we compare the formal concept with 
is not the thing itself but its objective concept. This leaves the question of what the 
relation between the objective concept and the thing itself is. The relation is labeled 
“objective being,” but what exactly this consists in is obscure. It is initially tempting to 
think that it is just the relation that we might have supposed to hold between the formal 
concept and the thing itself, had it not been for the problem of comparing entities that 
are unlike, in that one is corporeal and one intellectual. In a case where we routinely 
grasped essences in sense perception, this is indeed what the relation would be, but it is 
clear that sense perception is fallible, and we hardly ever—if at all—grasp essences in 
this way. In light of this, the problem is to establish that our formal concepts are not all, 
or even largely, false.
Descartes connects questions of clarity and distinctness and questions of objective 
reality in a distinctive way, but to understand how he does this, we need to consider the 
third area, optics. Kepler’s work on optics at the beginning of the seventeenth century 
shows conclusively that the image in vision is not formed in the crystalline humor, 
whose liquid volume takes on the form of the thing seen, but on the retina, where the 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
682
image is inverted and flat. Descartes believed that there was something deeply wrong 
with the Aristotelian view that we have the sense organs we do because they naturally 
display to us the nature of the world, and that veridical perception is that in which our 
ideas exactly resemble those things in the world of which they are the ideas. In place of 
the Aristotelian account, Descartes offered a representational theory of perception, and 
the representations do not have to resemble what they represent at all. So, for example, 
we perceive colors, but our ideas of colors do not resemble colors. On Descartes’ account 
of color, the corpuscles making up the light transmitted from the sun may be given spins 
of varying speeds on encountering the textured surfaces of objects, and such spins are 
perceived as colors by us because we are “fitted by nature” (“hard-wired” as we might put 
it now) to respond to such spins by perceiving the colors correlated with the particular 
spin speeds.
How, then, do we know which of our representations correspond to how things are 
in the world? We clearly cannot compare them with things in the world, and it is at 
this point that we can draw the questions of representation/resemblance, objective 
reality, and clarity and distinctness together. Basically, in the absence of any means 
of providing an external comparison with how things are in the world, Descartes uses 
the criterion of clarity and distinctness to secure veridicality. The criterion tells us 
something about the quality of the idea independently of its content, and because of 
this, we can assess first whether an idea of this kind is reliable—by assessing its power 
to represent—before asking what the content that it represents is. In this way, it con-
nects with the objective reality of ideas. On the scholastic conception of perceptual 
cognition, comparison of the objective reality of concepts with their formal reality 
seemed to lock us out of establishing veridicality. Objective reality functions differ-
ently in Descartes because of the way in which he conceives of the relation between 
essence and existence. The standard scholastic view was that we must establish the 
existence of something before we can ask about its essence, but Descartes reverses this 
(see Secada 2000). For Descartes, “according to the rules of true logic we must never 
ask whether something exists unless we already know what it is” (Descartes 1987–91: 
ii. 190).
Application of the criterion of clarity and distinctness to an idea tells us something 
crucial about its objective reality. It tells us about the ability of the idea to represent 
anything at all to us. Only once we have established this can we inquire what it is that 
corresponds to the idea. The procedure in Meditation VI is to identify only those ideas 
of the world that satisfy the criterion of clarity and distinctness, and the only such 
ideas that Descartes tells us he is aware of are those which we conceive geometrically. 
When he then asks what corresponds to these ideas, we end up with a mechanical 
world completely different from that which we started out from in Meditation I, one 
quite distinct from the world of sensation. In the world of sensation, there are colored 
objects, for example, but there are no colors in the real physical world revealed in 
Meditation VI. One might ask why our senses have misled us, or, to put the question 
in a different way, why God has provided us with sense organs that represent the world 
without resembling it. The answer supplied by Descartes, is that God has given us 
our sense organs so that we might “preserve our bodies,” not so that we might know 
the world. What reveals the true structure of the world to us is not sensation, but 
reason (which includes sensations guided by reason, as in scientific observations and 
experiments).

RENÉ DESCARTES
683
Descartes’ Naturalized Epistemology
For Descartes, the physiological and physical details of what occurs in sense percep-
tion are absolutely crucial to our assessment of it as a source of knowledge, and this 
is what effectively makes sense perception an unsuccessful competitor to the mecha-
nist natural philosophy that he arrives at in Meditation VI. This has been missed in 
many writers on Descartes, who, mesmerized by the skeptically driven epistemology of 
the Meditations, have assumed that the Meditations delivers its results through skepti-
cism alone (e.g. Williams 1978). On such a reading, the unbridgeable gulf between 
the world of Meditation I and Meditation VI is completely ignored, so that the point 
of the project now becomes that of showing that our initial reasons for believing in the 
existence of the external world, for example, cannot survive radical skeptical probing, 
demonstrating the need for foundations for knowledge, which Descartes provides, in 
the process rebuilding the world from first principles and putting any further skeptical 
doubts to rest.
It is worth reminding ourselves of how thoroughly naturalized Descartes’ epistemol-
ogy was in the period prior to his interest in skepticism in the 1630s, and asking why he 
took up skepticism then. At the end of 1632, Descartes wrote to Mersenne that he was 
“dissecting the heads of various animals, so that I can explain what imagination, mem-
ory, etc. consist in” (Descartes 1987–91: iii. 40). The culmination of this research was 
the Treatise on Man (in Descartes 1998: see Gaukroger 2002: 180–214), an extensive 
account not just of various topics in physiology—such as nutrition and respiration—but 
also in developmental physiology—where Descartes has an account of the develop-
ment of the fetus which excludes goal-directedness—and psycho-physiology. The trea-
tise deals with human physiology to the extent that it shared with animals, and this 
covers psycho-physiology also. Part II of the Treatise, for example, provides a detailed 
account of perceptual cognition in psycho-physiological terms, explaining in particular 
how distance perception is possible through a form of innate trigonometry that animals 
and humans share. What was distinctive about Descartes’ approach was not that he 
introduced two substances—mind and body—where we might have expected one, but 
that he introduced two whereas earlier and contemporary writers were toying with four: 
matter, vegetable soul, sensitive soul, and rational soul. The middle two were intro-
duced on the assumption that bare matter could not account either for such phenomena 
as nutrition, excretion, reproduction, and respiration in plants and animals, or a fortiori 
for sense perception in animals. Descartes rejected this, arguing that the vegetative 
and sensitive souls were just empty labels, and that nutritive and sensitive functions 
could be accounted for in the same mechanical terms that one accounted for ordinary 
material processes, provided one used these resources in a sufficiently thoughtful way 
(e.g. in realizing that sense perception was a semantic not a merely causal process). A 
good deal of perceptual cognition is covered under psycho-physiology: the rational soul 
comes into play only when we turn to the question of reflection on our cognitive states, 
a distinctively human activity in Descartes’ view, and one that raises questions of truth 
and veridicality.
In dealing with these latter questions, we might ask why Descartes didn’t pursue them 
in terms of questions of method, as his contemporaries did, and as he himself had done 
in the Rules and the Discourse on Method (see Gaukroger 2006). Why, in the early 1630s, 
did he suddenly move in a completely novel direction, turning to skepticism? Note that 
he never gave up his psycho-physiological investigations—he summarized these in the 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
684
early sections of his last work, the Passions of the Soul, for example, and continued to 
work on his Description of the Human Body. Even more interesting, in his Search for the 
Truth, he distinguishes between two kinds of procedure. The first is that designed to 
convince anyone of the truth of his natural-philosophical conclusions, which involves 
clearing the mind by going through radical doubt then building up knowledge on a new 
basis. The second, by contrast, concerns what the natural philosopher needs to follow 
in developing the discipline, and here Descartes turns not just to methodological con-
siderations, but also to psychological ones about the persona of the natural philosopher 
(see Gaukroger 2002: 239–44).
In terms of the traditional distinction between methods of discovery and methods 
of presentation, the way in which Descartes divides methodological and psychologi-
cal questions and skeptical/foundational ones indicates that the former fall within the 
ambit of a method of discovery, whereas the latter fall within the ambit of a method of 
presentation. Methodological questions cannot be separated from epistemology, and 
psychological ones had been a vehicle for epistemology in the tradition represented by 
Quintilian for example, so the divide is not between non-epistemological and episte-
mological questions. Rather, it is between what might be termed an exploratory episte-
mology and a legitimatory one. Exploratory epistemology is typically pursued through 
devising theories of method. Legitimatory epistemology, by contrast, is designed not 
to help us discover anything but to establish something that we believe we know, and 
to convince others of its truth. This matches Descartes’ concerns at the time that we 
find him taking an interest in skepticism. In 1633 Descartes abandoned work on his 
account of a cosmological system, The World, begun in 1629. He argued there for a 
system in which the planets orbited our sun, matched by an indefinite number of other 
solar systems, and the principal tools in establishing this were his matter theory and his 
account of centrifugal force, for the theory explained the stability of planetary orbits in 
terms of a balance between centrifugal forces acting outwards from a center into which 
the lightest matter had been squeezed, and pressure towards the center caused by matter 
rotating at a greater speed and pushing the planet inwards. In 1633 Descartes read of the 
Condemnation of Galileo, in which it was argued that natural-philosophical arguments 
in themselves were insufficient to establish conclusively a thesis like heliocentrism, 
which was contrary to the teaching of traditional devotional texts. Descartes’ response, 
as I have argued elsewhere (Gaukroger 1995a: 290–321), was to seek a form of argu-
ment that would bypass both natural-philosophical and confessional views because it 
was so fundamental and certain as to compel assent from any rational person. This was 
the combination of a skeptically driven epistemology and an account of God, the mind, 
and the world on new foundations. The strict separation of the natural world from God 
and the mind removes any notions of intentionality, teleology and, it turns out, inter-
nally generated activity from it, and the world that emerges in Meditation VI is one in 
full accord with Descartes’ matter theory, and whose properties are ripe for geometrical 
exploration. It is this conception of the world, which he had set out in The World in 
1630, that is now prefaced in the Principia by a reworking of the legitimatory metaphys-
ics of the Meditations.
Conclusion: The Status of a Legitimatory Epistemology in Descartes
Descartes’ statements on the status he accords his legitimatory project in epistemol-
ogy are not consistent. In a letter to Princess Elizabeth in 1643, he tells her that the 

RENÉ DESCARTES
685
principles set out in the Meditations need to be understood, but that one should not 
spend more time than is needed on this. Rather, one should devote one’s time to the 
more important part of the exercise, namely “those thoughts in which the intellect 
co-operates with the imagination and the senses” (Descartes 1987–91: iii. 228), that is, 
natural philosophy. Six years later, he tells Burman that he should not waste time on the 
Meditations as this is just a preparation for the main questions, which “concern physical 
and observable things” (Descartes 1987–91: iii. 346). This suggests that a skeptically 
driven metaphysics is merely legitimatory, and can perhaps be bypassed by someone 
who did not need to be convinced in this way, because, being the kind of uncorrupted 
natural philosopher whom Descartes describes in The Search for Truth, they are able to 
appreciate the truth of the Cartesian system on purely natural-philosophical grounds. 
For such a person, methodological considerations would be the sole content of their 
epistemological concerns.
When Descartes’ follower Regius promoted the Cartesian system in the first Cartesian 
textbook (Regius 1646), he proceeded in exactly this way, dispensing with the legitima-
tory epistemological apparatus and moving straight to the natural philosophy. Descartes 
reacted against this in the strongest terms (see Verbeek 1993), keen to set out the errors 
which Regius had opened himself up to by not taking care on foundational questions. 
In other words, Descartes did think that legitimatory epistemology was a critical part of 
the exercise, not an added extra. This was not because it was a procedure for generat-
ing knowledge. To the extent to which epistemology played a role in the generation of 
knowledge it was that form of epistemology that accompanied methodological enquiry, 
not that which began by questioning whether we could claim to know anything.
Yet if on the Cartesian view a skeptically driven epistemology is no more than, but no 
less than, a necessary prelude to natural philosophy, how do we explain its longevity in 
the modern era? Much of this longevity is, I believe, illusory. Not only do natural phi-
losophy textbooks outside the Cartesian tradition not include a legitimatory epistemol-
ogy, none of the Cartesian ones do either. Those identified as Descartes’ “rationalist” 
followers, namely Spinoza and Leibniz, urge the irrelevance of skepticism to epistemol-
ogy at the earliest opportunity. The one continental successor of Descartes—albeit his 
most influential one in the early-modern era—who took a skeptically driven epistemol-
ogy seriously was Malebranche, and it was that British Malebranchean, Berkeley, who 
helped develop it into such a powerful tool. Locke’s moral and political probing was 
motivated more by worries about relativism than skepticism, and his views on real and 
nominal essences are not, I believe, motivated by skepticism but by natural-philosophi-
cal issues about phenomenal explanations (see Gaukroger 2009). Skepticism is central 
in Hume, of course, but it is more like a mixture of ancient doxastic skepticism and 
epistemological skepticism than the straightforward Cartesian/Malebranchean variety, 
for it does indeed prompt a distinctive way of life in response to it (see Livingston 1998), 
which epistemological skepticism alone could not do.
The dominant epistemological concerns among Descartes’ successors in the modern 
era were the more traditional methodological ones, to which Descartes himself devoted 
a great deal of attention. In the debates between Newtonians and Cartesians at the end 
of the century, Descartes’ position was identified with the postulation of hypotheses, 
and his natural-philosophical system was characterized as speculative and hypothetical, 
by contrast with the empirical certainties of the Newtonian one (see Laudan 1981). 
His skeptical epistemology was marginal in the era, outside Malebranche, Berkeley, and 
(with very significant qualifications) Hume. It was revived, in Humean guise, by Russell 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
686
at the beginning of the twentieth century, but to understand why this happened, it is 
twentieth-century philosophy, not that of Descartes, that we need to understand.
References
Dalbiez, R. (1929) “Les sources scolastiques de la théorie cartésienne de l’être objectif,” Revue d’Histoire de 
la Philosophie 3: 464–72.
Dear, P. (1992) “From Truth to Disinterestedness in the Seventeenth Century,” Social Studies of Science 22: 
619–31.
Descartes, R. (1987–91) The Philosophical Writings of Descartes, trans. J. Cottingham et al., Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Descartes, R. (1998) The World and Other Writings, trans. S. Gaukroger, Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Fischer, K. (1852–77) Geschichte der neuren Philosophie, Mannheim: Bassermann & Mathy.
Garber, D. (1992) Descartes’ Metaphysical Physics, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gaukroger, S. (1995a) Descartes, An Intellectual Biography, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gaukroger, S. (1995b) “The Ten Modes of Aenesidemus and the Myth of Ancient Scepticism,” British 
Journal for the History of Philosophy, 3, 371–87.
Gaukroger, S. (2001) Francis Bacon and the Transformation of Early-Modern Philosophy, New York: Cambridge 
University Press.
Gaukroger, S. (2002) Descartes’ System of Natural Philosophy, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gaukroger, S. (2006) “Knowledge, Evidence, and Method,” in D. Rutherford (ed.), The Cambridge Companion 
to Early Modern Philosophy, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gaukroger, S. (2009) “The Role of Natural Philosophy in the Development of Locke’s Empiricism,” British 
Journal for the History of Philosophy, 17, 57–80.
Kuklick, B. (1984) “Seven Thinkers and How They Grew: Descartes, Spinoza, Leibniz; Locke, Berkeley, 
Hume; Kant,” in R. Rorty, J. B. Schneewind and Q. Skinner (eds.), Philosophy in History, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Laudan, L. (1981) Science and Hypothesis, Dordrecht: Reidel.
Livingston, D. W. (1998) Philosophical Melancholy and Delirium, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Loeb, L. E. (1981) From Descartes to Hume, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Montaigne, M. de (1962) Essais, ed. Maurice Rat, Paris: Garnier.
Picard, G. (1926) “Essai sur la connaissance sensible d’après les scolastiques,” Archives de philosophie 4: 
1–93.
Popkin, R. (1979) The History of Scepticism from Erasmus to Spinoza, Berkeley: University of California 
Press.
Regius, H. (1646) Fundamenta physices, Amsterdam: Elzevier.
Secada, J. (2000) Descartes’ Metaphysics, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Verbeek, T. (1993) Ed., Descartes et Regius, Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Williams, B. (1978) Descartes, Harmondsworth: Penguin.

61
JOHN LOCKE
E. J. Lowe
The most important positive contribution of John Locke (1632–1704) to epistemology 
consists in Book IV—“Of Knowledge and Opinion”—of his greatest work, An Essay 
Concerning Human Understanding, the first edition of which was published in 1690. 
To say this is not to detract from the historical importance of Book I of the Essay, “Of 
Innate Notions,” in which he roundly rejects the view that we have innate knowledge 
of any kind, even in the domain of mathematics and logic. But the burden of his argu-
ment there, whatever merits or deficiencies it might be deemed to have, is essentially 
negative. Only in Book IV does he finally attempt to formulate a comprehensive posi-
tive account of the nature and sources of human knowledge. It is this account that we 
shall focus on here, partly because it is less widely known than his famous attack on the 
doctrine of innate ideas and principles, and partly because it has a relevance to present-
day epistemology which that attack now rather lacks, presuming as it does that innate 
knowledge could have only a divine source, being “Originally printed on the Mind” 
(Locke 1975: 1.2.1) by our Creator. Modern evolutionary psychology points to a pos-
sible explanation for innate knowledge which even Locke, as a good empiricist, would 
surely have to acknowledge as scientifically respectable, were he alive today (Lowe 
1995: 27–33).
1. Locke on Intuitive Knowledge and the “Agreement” 
and “Disagreement” of Ideas
Locke endorses a tripartite division of human knowledge by reference to its sources in 
intuition, reason and experience, following a tradition accepted by many other seven-
teenth-century philosophers. But he notoriously combines it with the idiosyncratic and 
somewhat puzzling doctrine that knowledge always consists in our “Perception of the 
Agreement, or Disagreement, of any of our Ideas” (4.3.1). This seems, on the face of it, 
at best to be a way of characterizing certain examples of what Locke calls “intuitive” 
knowledge and is difficult to extend, without considerable strain, to Locke’s two other 
kinds of knowledge. Examples of knowledge of this first kind are provided by Locke in 
passages such as the following:
[S]ometimes the Mind perceives the Agreement or Disagreement of two Ideas 
immediately . . . And this . . . we may call intuitive Knowledge . . . Thus the Mind 
perceives, that White is not Black, That a Circle is not a Triangle, That Three are 
more than Two, and equal to One and Two. (4.2.1)

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
688
Now, the “ideas” of white and black would certainly seem to “disagree,” at least in the 
sense that one cannot perceive a surface as being, at one and the same time, both black 
and white—though whether this “cannot” expresses a mere psychological impossibil-
ity, or something stronger, is open to debate. Such a “disagreement” is apparently not, 
however, a logical disagreement, in the sense that a formal contradiction can be derived 
from the statement “S is both black and white,” when suitable definitions of “black” or 
“white” are provided. Indeed, according to Locke, there can be no such definitions, since 
our ideas of black and white are, according to him, simple and hence unanalyzable—a 
claim which does indeed have considerable plausibility. Certainly, “white” clearly does 
not simply mean “not black,” since red is neither black nor white. Nor does it mean “not 
black nor any chromatic color,” for—even if we could non-circularly define “chromatic 
color”—grey is neither black nor white nor any chromatic color. Nor does it mean “not 
black nor grey nor any chromatic color”—since a transparent surface might come under 
none of these descriptions and yet not be white either. It seems, then, that no satisfac-
tory definition of “white” is available whose definiens, when substituted for “white” in “S 
is both black and white,” turns the latter into a logical contradiction.
It is worth mentioning, in this connection, the interesting question raised recently 
by Lex Newman of whether, on Locke’s account of knowledge, “[t]ruths are knowable 
only if they are analytic” (Newman 2007: 339), in the sense of “analytic” in which it 
involves what Newman calls “idea-containment”—a sense which, I take it, is supposed 
to be distinct from the semantic one that we have just been examining. Newman’s own 
answer to this question is affirmative and he even tries to defend Locke on this score. 
Newman’s test case is, once more, the proposition that White is not Black, concern-
ing which Newman contends on Locke’s behalf that “[t]hough not every idea of white 
explicitly contains an idea of not-black, when considering them in relation to one another 
the mind apprehends in the idea of white that it is not black” (341, emphasis added). 
Now, it could be said that white and black are, by their very natures, the opposite 
extremes of the achromatic color-range, with all the shades of grey in between, and so 
perhaps a case can be made out for saying that “white is not black” expresses an “ana-
lytic” truth in Newman’s sense, since the relation in which they stand to one another 
is precisely that of being these two opposite extremes. Even so, matters are plausibly 
otherwise with, for example, “Red is not green,” a variant of which—“Nothing is both 
red and green all over”—many philosophers have advanced as the very paradigm of a 
necessary but non-analytic truth. It is extremely hard to see how Locke—who again 
took the ideas of red and green to be perfectly simple ones—could maintain that the 
idea of red “contains,” in any sense at all, the idea of not-green. Rather, I think that he 
would probably have maintained that, upon becoming perceptually acquainted with 
both red and green, we simply directly apprehend their mutual exclusiveness, as a brute 
and irreducible fact. Perhaps, in the end, this is really all that Newman himself intends 
to claim: but in that case I think that his talk of “idea-containment” is misplaced and 
misleading in this context.
Notice, however, that even as soon as we come to Locke’s second example of “intui-
tive” knowledge—that a circle is not a triangle—we no longer have an irreducible dis-
agreement between simple, unanalyzable ideas. A triangle can be defined as a plane figure 
bounded by three straight lines, and a circle as a plane figure bounded by a curved line 
which is everywhere equidistant from a central point—and given further axioms and 
definitions of Euclidean geometry it would indeed be possible to derive a formal con-
tradiction from the statement “F is both a circle and a triangle.” Even so, Locke would 

JOHN LOCKE
689
obviously maintain—again with considerable plausibility—that our “perception” of the 
“disagreement” between the ideas of a circle and a triangle is “immediate,” rather than 
being grounded in a demonstration from those axioms and definitions. The same applies 
to his third, arithmetical example that three equals one plus two: no proof of this from the 
axioms and definitions of arithmetic could make us any more assured of its truth than we 
are by simple reflection upon the meaning of the statement itself. (Indeed, we are less 
certain of those axioms and definitions than we are of such simple arithmetical truths 
as that three equals one plus two.) That some things are indeed known to us by “intu-
ition,” as Locke suggests, certainly appears to be at least a truth about our psychological 
condition—although whether it reflects anything special about the status of the objects 
of that knowledge seems altogether more debatable.
Why are some things knowable by us “intuitively”—such as that a circle is not a tri-
angle—but others only “demonstratively,” by inference from other things—such as that 
any triangle whose base is the diameter of a circle and whose opposite vertex lies on the 
circumference of that circle is right-angled? Locke himself says that the reason why we 
do not know intuitively that, for instance, the three internal angles of a triangle equal 
two right angles is that
the Mind being willing to know the Agreement or Disagreement in bigness . . . 
cannot by an immediate view and comparing them, do it . . . Because the three 
Angles of a Triangle cannot be brought at once, and be compared with any 
other one, or two Angles. (4.2.2)
But it is far from evident that this is not just a psychological limitation on our part, 
which could be overcome by other intelligent beings. Might not “demonstrable” truths, 
such as those just cited, be as “obvious” or “self-evident” to some minds as it is to ours 
that three equals one plus two?
Once this thought strikes us, however, and we are led to realize that the intuitive self-
evidence of a proposition is not an intrinsic property of the proposition itself but, rather, 
a status that it has only relative to the mind of the knower, we might come to query the 
reliability of intuition as a supposed source of knowledge. Might there not be beings—
benighted, indeed, by our standards—for whom it was “obvious” and “self-evident” that 
a circle might be a triangle and three equal to two plus two? Locke’s “psychologistic” 
approach to knowledge as being a matter of our perception of agreement or disagreement 
between our ideas inevitably invites such skeptical and relativistic challenges. At the 
same time, it makes for a degree of tension with his own repudiation of the doctrine 
of innate ideas, in Book I of the Essay. For if the obviousness to us human beings that a 
circle is not a triangle is a reflection of our own psychological make-up, which might 
not be duplicated in other species of intelligent creatures, this seems to give succor to 
the innatist thesis that the basic elements of our conceptual repertoire and their general 
organization within our cognitive economy is fixed prior to, and independently of, our 
subsequent experience: that the human mind is not in fact, at birth, the “yet empty 
Cabinet” (1.2.15) that Locke holds it to be.
So much for knowledge by “intuition.” As for knowledge by reason—that is, by logi-
cal demonstration or proof—Locke supposes, again in line with the prevailing tradition 
of his time, that each step in a chain of demonstrative reasoning must be perceived as 
intuitively certain, as must be the initial premises:

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
690
(I)n every step Reason makes in demonstrative Knowledge, there is an intuitive 
Knowledge of that Agreement or Disagreement, it seeks, with the next interme-
diate Idea, which it uses as a Proof . . . By which it is plain, that every step in 
Reasoning, that produces Knowledge, has intuitive Certainty. (4.2.7)
Clearly, any doubts we may have about the status of “intuition” as a source of knowledge 
will extend to the status of “demonstration,” at least on this account of reasoning.
2. Locke on “Sensitive” Knowledge
Locke’s third and final category of knowledge, knowledge by “sensation”—that is, by 
experience—of the existence of things external to ourselves, is especially difficult to 
accommodate with his official characterization of knowledge as the perception of the 
agreement or disagreement of our ideas. This is for the simple reason that, in sensation, 
the idea ostensibly produced in us by an “external” object does not appear to stand in 
any relevant relation of “agreement” or “disagreement” with other ideas we have, so 
much as a relation of “agreement” or “disagreement” with external reality: and this is a 
relation that we cannot be said to “perceive” in any sense in which we could be said 
to perceive relations of “agreement” or “disagreement” amongst our ideas. The danger is 
that we might allow this consideration to persuade us—as it plainly has persuaded some 
of Locke’s critics—that Locke’s theory of sense-perception, coupled with his theory of 
knowledge, condemns his system to vitiation by an insoluble “veil of perception” prob-
lem. In fact, however, I think that it is probably a mistake to suppose that Locke’s system 
is inherently any more vulnerable to this kind of skeptical problem than is even the most 
explicit form of “direct” realism (Lowe 1995: 46–7).
In defending Locke on this score, I have no wish to endorse his official doctrine 
as to the nature of knowledge—that it consists in our perception of the agreement or 
disagreement of our ideas—but I do want to support his common-sense insistence that 
sense experience does constitute a trustworthy source of knowledge concerning the exis-
tence and, to some extent, the properties of external objects, as when he says that
The notice we have by our Senses, of the existing of Things without us, though it be 
not altogether so certain, as our intuitive Knowledge . . . yet it is an assurance 
that deserves the name of Knowledge. If we persuade our selves, that our Faculties 
act and inform us right, concerning the existence of those Objects that affect 
them, it cannot pass for an ill-grounded confidence: For I think no body can, 
in earnest, be so sceptical, as to be uncertain of the Existence of those Things 
which he sees and feels. (4.11.3)
Perhaps what Locke needs in order to give his confidence a satisfactory theoretical 
underpinning is what would today be called an “externalist” account of empirical 
knowledge, whereby states of knowledge are states produced by reliable mechanisms 
interacting causally in appropriate ways with the objects of knowledge. If our “Faculties” 
are such mechanisms, then their products—such as our perceptual judgments—qualify 
as states of knowledge by such an account irrespective of whether or not those states are 
attended by a subjective apprehension of their “certainty.” However, writing as he was 
at a time at which an “internalist” conception of knowledge was dominant, not least 
through the influence of Descartes, Locke could hardly have been expected to make 
such an alternative, “externalist” account his official doctrine.

JOHN LOCKE
691
Before moving on, I should mention another interesting suggestion recently made 
by Lex Newman, this time addressing the difficulty we have just noted of reconcil-
ing Locke’s general definition of knowledge, couched in terms of our “perception of 
the agreement or disagreement of our ideas,” with his account of sensitive knowledge. 
Rather ingeniously, Newman defends Locke on this score by contending that, in the 
case of sensitive knowledge, the required agreement consists not in “an agreement . 
. . between an idea and an actual real existence” (which would ostensibly conflict with 
Locke’s official definition), but rather in “an agreement involving the idea of actual 
existence, not actual existence itself” (Newman 2007: 331). The only trouble with this, 
it seems to me, is that it appears to commit Locke to some form of idealism (as opposed 
to realism), although Newman takes some pains to defend Locke against this charge by 
distinguishing on his behalf between “knowledge per se” (as defined by Locke) and “real 
knowledge”—how convincingly, I leave for others to judge.
3. Locke on Reality and Truth
Some passages in the Essay—as when Locke says that “the Mind knows not Things 
immediately, but only by the intervention of the Ideas it has of them” (4.4.3)—do indeed 
make Locke look very much like an “indirect” or “representative” realist, trapped behind 
the infamous “veil of ideas.” But, as has been suggested elsewhere (Yolton 1970: 132; 
Lowe 1995: 46; Lowe 2005: 43), it might be more helpful to think of the “way of ideas” 
as Locke’s method of explaining how we have access to knowledge of the real world 
rather than as a stumbling block to such knowledge. It could be said, thus, that “ideas,” 
for Locke, are our bridge to reality, or window upon it, not a veil or wall which screens it 
off from us. And, after all, no account of our knowledge of things outside us, however 
“realist” and however “direct,” can place those things themselves literally inside our 
minds or heads, unless we are idealists like Berkeley. Knowledge of things beyond us 
has to be mediated in some way by the impact that those things have on us—and the 
form of that impact will inevitably be conditioned not only by the nature of the things 
themselves but also by our nature and by the nature of our relationship to the things in 
question. Any account of knowledge which attempted to defy these constraints would 
either have to be anti-realist or else non-naturalistic—perhaps, indeed, supernaturalis-
tic. Locke is to be commended, not criticized, for grasping this fact and being prepared 
to work through its consequences.
In response to his own question, as to how the mind shall know that its ideas “agree 
with Things themselves” (4.4.3), Locke answers as follows:
I think there be two sorts of Ideas, that, we may be assured, agree with Things 
. . . The first are simple Ideas, which since the Mind . . . can by no means make 
to it self, must necessarily be the product of Things operating on the Mind in 
a natural way . . . and so . . . represent to us Things under those appearances 
which they are fitted to produce in us . . . Secondly, All our complex Ideas, except 
those of Substances, being Archetypes of the Mind’s own making . . . cannot want 
of any conformity necessary to real Knowledge. (4.4.3–4.4.5)
Locke’s point about simple ideas is, perhaps, not entirely convincing—first because it 
seems question-begging to contend, as Locke does, that these could not be products of 
the mind’s own operations and secondly because, even granting that they are produced 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
692
in us by the operation of “external” things, it might be queried whether they need cor-
respond to unitary properties of those things, as opposed to a great variety of heteroge-
neous properties having the same effect on us in different circumstances. Thus, when 
Locke asserts that
the Idea of Whiteness, or Bitterness, as it is in the Mind, exactly answering that 
Power which is in any Body to produce it there, has all the real conformity it 
can, or ought to have, with Things without us (4.4.4)
it could be objected that, for all we know, what makes one object look white or taste 
bitter to us is utterly different from what makes another object do this. Indeed, modern 
color science does tell us that precisely this is so as far as perceived colors are concerned 
(Hardin 1988). Lights with very different mixtures of wavelengths can all appear exactly 
the same hue to a human observer. However, curiously enough, the very fact that this 
is now empirically well-established shows that, if anything, Locke was too modest in 
his claim about the knowledge we can have of the powers of objects to produce simple 
ideas in us. We are not restricted to knowing those powers only by way of the very ideas 
in question, since by drawing more widely upon observation and experiment, we can 
develop well-confirmed theories to explain how objects produce sensory effects in us. Of 
course, we should not criticize Locke for failing to anticipate just how successful science 
could be in this regard, writing as he was at a time when the scientific revolution had 
barely begun.
The second class of ideas concerning which Locke believes that we can be assured 
that they “agree with Things themselves” is that of “All our complex Ideas, except those 
of Substances.” This might sound as though it is a wildly optimistic claim—until we see 
what it really amounts to. The examples he gives are of such ideas as the complex math-
ematical ideas of a rectangle or a circle and complex moral ideas such as those of justice 
and temperance, remarking
The Mathematician considers the Truth and Properties belonging to a 
Rectangle, or Circle, only as they are in Idea in his own Mind. For ’tis possible 
he never found either of them existing mathematically, i.e. precisely true, in 
his Life. But yet the knowledge he has of any Truths or Properties belonging 
to a Circle . . . are nevertheless true and certain, even of real Things existing: 
because real Things are no farther concerned . . . than as (they) really agree to 
those Archetypes in his Mind. (4.4.6)
So Locke’s point is that in the case of a complex idea like that of a circle and the prop-
erties that circles are conceived of as having according to that idea, the “direction of 
fit”—to deploy that useful modern phrase (see, e.g., Searle 1983: 7)—is not from ideas to 
the world but, rather, from the world to ideas. That is to say, we are not under an obligation 
to show that our idea of a circle conforms to how circles are in reality: rather, whether 
something existing in reality has the form of a circle depends on whether it conforms 
to our idea of that shape. Similar considerations apply, Locke seems to suppose, in the 
sphere of moral ideas.
As far as geometry is concerned, Locke’s contention is no longer as acceptable as it 
might have appeared in his own day. We are now familiar with the fact that there are 
many consistent alternatives to Euclidean geometry: geometries in which, for instance, 

JOHN LOCKE
693
the three internal angles of a triangle do not sum to two right angles. Locke might be 
right in supposing that there are, say, truths of Euclidean geometry which obtain, and 
can be known to obtain, independently of how things are in the real world. But nowa-
days we are faced with a question, unthinkable to Locke, of which geometry, of all those 
that are mathematically possible, best describes the metrical properties of objects located 
in physical space and time. This is an empirical question, involving the idea-to-world 
direction of fit. Whether anything similar can be said of ideas in the moral sphere is less 
clear, but arguably it can.
Why does Locke make an exception of our complex ideas of substances? Locke explains 
this as follows:
(T)o have Ideas of Substances, which, by being conformable to Things, may 
afford us real Knowledge, it is not enough, as in Modes, to put together such 
Ideas as have no inconsistence . . . But our Ideas of Substances being . . . referred 
to Archetypes without us, must . . . be taken from something that does or has 
existed . . . Herein therefore is founded the reality of our Knowledge concerning 
Substances, that all our complex Ideas of them must be such, and such only, as 
are made up of such simple ones, as have been discovered to co-exist in Nature. 
(4.4.12)
Locke’s point, then, is that in the case of substances the “direction of fit” is from ideas 
to the world, not vice versa. Our idea of gold should conform to the properties of some-
thing existing in the real world: but whether certain properties do co-occur in nature 
is something that we can only hope to ascertain by observation, lacking as we do—or 
as in Locke’s time we did—any knowledge of the “real essences” of substances, which 
would serve to explain why some properties occur together while others do not. Locke 
accordingly makes only a very modest claim about our ability to acquire real knowledge 
of substances, but does not deny it altogether:
(O)ur Ideas being thus true, though not, perhaps, very exact Copies, are yet the 
Subjects of real . . . Knowledge of them. Which . . . will not be found to reach 
very far: But so far as it does, it will still be real knowledge. (4.4.12)
Here Locke is, again, at once too optimistic and too pessimistic. He is too optimistic 
because he does not anticipate the problem that Hume was to make of induction—that 
is, the problem of extrapolating from our observation of the co-occurrence of certain 
properties in certain instances to a conclusion that those properties regularly occur 
together in nature. On the other hand, he is too pessimistic in that he did not antici-
pate—through no fault of his own—the degree to which empirical science is capable of 
penetrating to the “real essences” or internal constitutions of substances, with the aid 
of advanced experimental technology and sophisticated methods of analyzing observa-
tional data.
Finally, a word about Locke’s theory of truth, if indeed it can be called a “theory.” He 
himself seems to consider that there is nothing of substance to be said in terms of truth 
that is not already said by him elsewhere in terms of “real knowledge.” Insofar as truth 
is a property of sentences, it is parasitic upon the truth of the thoughts which sentences 
are used to express, and the latter—“mental truth,” as Locke calls it—is nothing other 
than real knowledge:

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
694
When Ideas are so put together, or separated in the Mind, as they, or the Things 
they stand for do agree, or not, that is, as I may call it, mental Truth . . . Truth of 
Words is . . . the affirming or denying of Words one of another, as the Ideas they 
stand for agree or disagree: And this . . . is twofold. Either purely Verbal, and 
trifling . . . or Real and instructive; which is the Object of that real Knowledge, 
which we have spoken of already. (4.5.6)
Most modern philosophers tend to explain the notion of knowledge in terms of a prior 
notion of truth; in Locke the direction of explanation seems to be the reverse of this.
4. Locke on Reason, Probability and Faith
According to Locke, belief or opinion—which he contrasts with knowledge—can be 
grounded either in probability or in faith. Since, by Locke’s account, the scope of our 
knowledge is “very narrow” (4.15.2), in most everyday concerns he thinks we have 
to rely on probability, which is mere “likeliness to be true” (4.15.3), rather than cer-
tainty. One frequently reliable ground of probability is testimony, on which we depend 
for a very large proportion of our firm beliefs, even in those matters which are capable 
of demonstration. Thus Locke gives an example of how a non-mathematician might 
firmly, and quite properly, believe that the three internal angles of a triangle add up 
to two right angles because a mathematician “of credit” has told him that this is so, 
though it is only the mathematician who knows that it is so, having constructed a proof 
or demonstration of that proposition (4.15.1). By contrast, in some matters of religion 
in which intuition, reason and sensation cannot provide us with knowledge, we might 
justifiably ground our belief in (what we take to be) divine revelation, and assent of this 
sort Locke calls faith. He is emphatic that, rightly understood, reason and faith do not 
stand in opposition to one another (both, he assumes, being gifts of God), but he is very 
critical of exaggerated claims of the scope of revelation:
Whatever GOD hath revealed, is certainly true; no Doubt can be made of it. 
This is the proper Object of Faith: But whether it be a divine Revelation, or 
no, Reason must judge; which can never permit the Mind to reject a greater 
Evidence to embrace what is less evident, nor allow it to entertain Probability 
in opposition to Knowledge and Certainty. (4.18.10)
In all of these matters, Locke was broadly representative of the enlightened intel-
lectuals of his time. The divisions that he makes between knowledge and belief, and 
between reason, probability and faith, are standard ones for his time, and not so very 
different from standard epistemological distinctions that are still drawn today. Perhaps, 
though, the biggest gulf between his usage and that of present-day philosophers arises 
from his much more restrictive application of the term “knowledge,” as describing only 
that of which we are certain:
And herein lies the difference between Probability and Certainty, Faith and 
Knowledge, that in all the parts of Knowledge, there is intuition; each immediate 
Idea, each step has its visible and certain connexion; in belief not so. That which 
makes me believe, is something extraneous to the thing I believe. (4.15.3)
Today we would regard it as very odd to say that we do not know that the earth is not 
flat, that the sun is millions of miles away from us or that Napoleon lost the Battle of 

JOHN LOCKE
695
Waterloo—yet, by Locke’s standards, we cannot be said to “know” these things, however 
justifiably assured we might be of their truth, whether through testimony or through sci-
entific or historical research. Thus Locke is apt to sound unduly skeptical to modern ears. 
But although—as I explained in the previous section—I think he was too pessimistic 
about the scope of human knowledge, we should not misconstrue as skepticism a view that 
merely deploys the term “knowledge” in a more restrictive sense than would be acceptable 
today. What we mean by saying that we “know” that the earth is not flat is perhaps not so 
very different from what Locke would mean by saying that we “believe” this, with a high 
degree of probability. At the same time, we should not be too lenient on Locke on this 
account: for, as I remarked in section 1, there are grounds for supposing that his “internal-
ist” approach to knowledge, which is partly responsible for the connection he insists upon 
between knowledge and certainty, is not, ultimately, a fruitful one.
5. Locke on the Extent and Limits of Human Knowledge
To what degree can Locke’s conception of the scope of human knowledge be defended 
today? To a surprisingly large degree, I believe—surprising, at least, when one considers 
the very different world-views taken for granted in seventeenth- and twentieth-century 
educated circles. Locke was writing at a time when it was implicitly believed even by the 
vast majority of enlightened thinkers that the world was only several thousand years old, 
that it had been created in a short period of time by a supremely powerful and intelligent 
Being, and that the earth, although perhaps not at the centre of the universe, was in all 
probability the only inhabited region in a universe by no means inconceivably large by 
human standards. By contrast, almost all educated people today believe that the earth is a 
tiny, insignificant planet orbiting a very ordinary star, that this star is just one of many mil-
lions in a galaxy which is itself only one among a vast number of others spread throughout 
a universe thousands of millions of years old and unimaginably huge in extent—a universe 
that appears to have developed in the way it has quite as much by chance as by law, from 
an initial “singularity” involving stupendously high energies and temperatures but no very 
obvious trace of divine intervention. Human beings themselves are now thought to be the 
products of quite purposeless processes of biological evolution, involving chance mutation 
and natural selection, rather than being the direct handiwork of God. Such “native facul-
ties” as human beings possess—such as a capacity to reason—cannot now be regarded as 
divine gifts designed to enable us to know and understand the world of our Creator, and 
hence cannot for that reason be assumed to be reliable and truth-revealing.
At this point, however, we seem to be threatened by paradox: the modern scientific 
world-view, which leads us to regard our seventeenth-century forebears as radically mis-
taken in their world-view, is one that leads us to regard ourselves as erratic products of 
purposeless evolution, unblessed by any special faculty for revealing the true nature of 
our world—so what right do we have to our confidence in our own superior knowledge 
and understanding of nature? Such reflections might persuade us that Locke’s humility 
regarding the scope of our “real” knowledge was more justified than modern “scientific” 
opinion would perhaps be happy to admit.
It might be helpful at this point to see if we can identify a solid core of common-
sense belief about the “external world” which is stable, in the sense of being relatively 
invulnerable to possible future revolutions in science as fundamental as those that have 
marked the transition from the seventeenth- to the twentieth-century world-views. 
Some radically relativist philosophers would no doubt contend that it is impossible to 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
696
identify any such “core”—a position that seems to commit them to an all-embracing 
anti-realism. Locke, I am sure, would resist such extreme skepticism and, in the face of 
it, defend what might be called a “moderate” or “modest” realism. Such a view holds 
that we can with complete confidence claim to know that an external world of causally 
interacting three-dimensional material objects exists, amid which we ourselves are situ-
ated, our experience of those objects being a product of their interaction with us and 
affording us precisely that knowledge of their existence and behavior as has just been 
claimed. This is a “modest” realism in that it does not claim access to secure and unre-
visable knowledge of what Locke calls the “internal constitutions” or “real essences” of 
physical things, allowing that, for instance, modern quantum physics might in time be 
discarded as emphatically as classical atomism has been today.
In my view, such a modest realism is probably the most that we can reasonably aspire 
to, so that I am broadly in agreement with what I take to be Locke’s position. In earlier 
sections I did, it is true, point to the apparent success of modern science in probing the 
microstructure of the physical world as testifying to Locke’s excessive modesty regarding 
the accessibility to us of the “real essences” of physical things. But now I need to qualify 
those remarks rather than retract them. Locke was indeed—unsurprisingly and perfectly 
excusably—unaware of the degree to which the scientific investigation of nature might 
be facilitated by advances in technology and experimental method, and so could not 
have imagined how scientists would eventually devise techniques enabling them to test 
the empirical implications of different hypotheses concerning the atomic and molecular 
structure of matter. However, what still has to be acknowledged, despite the remarkable 
fruitfulness of such techniques, is that they still only leave us with hypotheses, however 
“well confirmed” by experiment. One does not have to espouse Locke’s perhaps unduly 
restrictive sense of the term “knowledge” to contend that our being in possession of such 
well-confirmed hypotheses need not constitute knowledge of the microstructure of mat-
ter. (If one is an “externalist” about knowledge, one might allow that it is possible that 
our current scientific beliefs constitute knowledge, while conceding that we cannot 
know that they do.) So one might consistently claim that Locke was excessively modest 
concerning the practical possibilities for extending the scope of scientific research, while 
agreeing with him on the more fundamental issue of the extent to which we can aspire 
to achieve a solid and unrevisable core of natural knowledge. With regard to the latter 
issue, Locke’s modest realism does indeed seem to me to be a philosophically defen-
sible position: one that allows us to possess a real but limited knowledge of the natural 
world—but a knowledge which nonetheless has, very arguably, “all the real conformity 
it can, or ought to have, with Things without us” (4.4.4).
References
Hardin, C. L. 1988. Color for Philosophers. Indianapolis: Hackett.
Locke, J. 1975. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding [1690]. Ed. P. H. Nidditch. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press.
Lowe, E. J. 1995. Locke on Human Understanding. London and New York: Routledge.
Lowe, E. J. 2005. Locke. London and New York: Routledge.
Newman, L. 2007. Locke on Knowledge. In L. Newman (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Locke’s “Essay 
Concerning Human Understanding.” Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Searle, J. R. 1983. Intentionality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Yolton, J. W. 1970. Locke and the Compass of Human Understanding. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.

62
GOTTFRIED WILHELM 
LEIBNIZ
Nicholas Jolley
Leibniz is generally classified as a successor of Descartes in the Rationalist tradition, 
but in one way this classification is misleading: it tends to suggest a greater similarity 
between them in epistemology than really exists. It is true of course that both philoso-
phers urge that genuine knowledge is to be achieved by turning away from the senses, 
and they emphasize the superiority of the pure intellect over the imagination. But in 
general Leibniz’s approach to epistemology is very different from Descartes’. Unlike 
Descartes Leibniz was never greatly exercised by the problem of radical skepticism, and 
he was critical of Descartes’ method of doubt as a starting-point in philosophy. Indeed, 
Leibniz’s conception of the role of epistemology in philosophy aligns him more with the 
third major Rationalist, Spinoza, than with Descartes. In his most important expository 
works, such as the Discourse on Metaphysics, Leibniz, like Spinoza in the Ethics, gener-
ally seeks to deduce a theory of knowledge from metaphysical premises. Whether or not 
he was directly influenced by him, Leibniz shares Spinoza’s conviction that the proper 
method in philosophy is to begin with a theory of substance and to derive epistemologi-
cal consequences from that theory.
Significantly, the most striking area of agreement between Leibniz and Descartes in 
epistemology involves a doctrine that is by no means uniquely Cartesian: both philoso-
phers revive the ancient doctrine of innate ideas and knowledge found in Plato’s Meno. 
Leibniz’s indebtedness to the Platonic and Neo-Platonic tradition in philosophy is argu-
ably of vital importance for understanding his whole theory of knowledge. One of the 
main theses of Leibniz’s philosophy, one that is never seriously questioned, is that the 
human mind is a mirror or image of God; Leibniz also expresses the point by saying that 
the human mind is a “little God.” This Neo-Platonic theme helps not only to explain 
his commitment to the theory of innate knowledge, which can be seen as an epistemo-
logical expression of the “mirror” principle; but also to explain his impatience with the 
kind of radical skepticism that Descartes took as his point of departure in philosophy.
Leibniz and Descartes
Leibniz’s lack of sympathy with Descartes’ approach to epistemology is nowhere more 
apparent than in his response to Descartes’ method of doubt; it is of course by means of 
this famous method that Descartes seeks to rebuild the edifice of knowledge on abso-
lutely firm and lasting foundations. For Leibniz, Descartes’ method of doubt is more like 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
698
a theatrical device designed to win the applause of the ignorant than an indispensable 
methodological tool for making progress in philosophy (Leibniz 1969: 384). Perhaps 
because of his conviction that the human mind is a mirror of God, Leibniz is unable to 
take seriously such distinctively Cartesian themes as what is sometimes called “defec-
tive nature doubt”; that is, he dismisses the worry, raised in the First Meditation, that we 
may have a defective nature that makes us incapable of knowledge. For Leibniz, the only 
reasonable grounds for fearing that we may have fallen victim to error are such common-
place ones as that our mind is tired, distraught, or insufficiently attentive. More signifi-
cantly perhaps, Leibniz raises the objection, later developed by Peirce, that Cartesian 
doubt is not serious; as Leibniz remarks in the New Essays on Human Understanding, “to 
doubt in earnest is to doubt in a practical way” (Leibniz 1996: 445). Cartesian doubt, by 
contrast, is self-consciously designed to have no implications for practice.
Leibniz may have been an unsympathetic critic of Descartes’ method of doubt, but 
he was also a characteristically shrewd one. Like some modern commentators Leibniz is 
sharply critical of some of Descartes’ less careful formulations of the method. Notoriously 
Descartes sometimes describes the method of doubt in terms of believing that all one’s 
former opinions are false (e.g. Discourse on Method IV). As Leibniz notes, when described 
in these terms the method is a recipe not for freeing ourselves from error but, rather, for 
acquiring new errors or false beliefs (Leibniz 1969: 384). For among my former opinions 
are presumably some true ones; if then I reject all my previous opinions as false, I have 
simply added to my stock of false beliefs. Obviously Descartes’ method of doubt is more 
carefully characterized by explaining the rejection of previous beliefs in terms of suspen-
sion of judgment about them rather than believing that they are all false.
Leibniz’s attitude towards Descartes’ famous Archimedean point—the cogito—is not 
similarly dismissive, but it is lukewarm and perhaps somewhat insensitive. Certainly 
Leibniz shows no tendency to accord the cogito the privileged status that Descartes 
claims for it. Leibniz insists that “Various things are thought by me” is no less certain 
than “I think, therefore I am.” Here Leibniz is no doubt alluding to his own metaphysi-
cal doctrine that the human mind is a simple substance that perceives many things; 
indeed, it perceives the whole universe according to its point of view. Leibniz’s readi-
ness to put these two principles on a par as primary truths of knowledge suggests a cer-
tain insensitivity to the distinctive features of the cogito. As many commentators have 
noticed, the cogito is not merely an incorrigible judgment in the sense that necessarily, if 
I believe it, it is true; it is also self-verifying. To deny one’s own thinking and one’s own 
existence is not to say something that is necessarily false in the logical sense, but it is 
pragmatically self-defeating or self-stultifying. Curiously, Leibniz never shows any signs 
of appreciating these features of the cogito.
Leibniz on Knowledge of Existence of Bodies
One issue that Descartes’ method of doubt placed on the agenda for subsequent episte-
mology was our knowledge of the existence of bodies, or the existence of the external 
world. This problem, the failure to solve which was regarded by Kant as a scandal to 
philosophy, was taken up not only by Descartes’ Rationalist successors but also, in vary-
ing degrees, by Empiricists such as Locke, Berkeley, and Hume. Descartes’ formulation 
of the problem is a major contribution to philosophy, but his own proposed solution 
to it has been almost universally rejected. Leibniz is no exception to the general cho-
rus of criticism. Indeed, Leibniz makes a memorably damning judgment on Descartes’ 

GOTTFRIED WILHELM LEIBNIZ
699
attempted proof: “The argument by which Descartes tries to prove that material things 
exist is weak; it would have been better not to try” (Leibniz 1969: 391).
Leibniz’s objections to Descartes’ attempted proof of the existence of bodies fall 
into two classes. First, in common with other, more recent critics, Leibniz objects to 
Descartes’ crucial premise that God would be a deceiver if our deeply rooted, instinctive 
belief in the existence of bodies as causes of our sensations should turn out to be false. 
However, Leibniz’s grounds for objecting to this premise are somewhat different from 
those that have become familiar. The standard objection today concerns the internal 
coherence of Descartes’ position. In the Meditations Descartes argues that God would 
be a deceiver if our clear and distinct ideas or judgments should prove to be false; he 
offers no justification for extending this claim to other judgments, no matter how firm 
and instinctive. Yet Descartes never argues that we have a clear and distinct idea of the 
existence of bodies as causes of our sensations. Descartes thus seems to have no warrant 
for this key premise of the argument. Leibniz also focuses on the issue of the epistemic 
warrant for the key premise, but he does not raise the issue of internal coherence; he 
objects rather that God might allow us to be deceived on this issue without having the 
character of a deceiver. Moreover, our being deceived in this matter might be a just 
punishment for sin in a previous life. Leibniz’s other line of objection to Descartes’ 
attempted proof turns on its formal features. Descartes’ proof is of the form of an argu-
ment by elimination; unfortunately, however, Descartes’ enumeration of the alterna-
tives is not complete. According to Leibniz, Descartes overlooks the possibility that 
while our sensory perceptions are caused by God, our judgment that they are caused by 
bodies, and hence the deception, originates with us. Leibniz draws an interesting paral-
lel with the situation regarding our pre-reflective judgments about secondary qualities; 
secondary qualities are not in bodies, but the judgment that they are, and hence the 
deception, originates with us.
Leibniz’s stance with regard to Descartes’ proof raises difficult questions that bear on 
disputed issues in the interpretation of his metaphysics. One strand in Leibniz’s critique 
of Descartes is the observation that Descartes is seeking a greater degree of certainty on 
this issue than the nature of the subject permits. As Leibniz says, “about sensible things 
we can know nothing more, nor ought we desire to know more, than that they are 
consistent with each other as well as with rational principles that cannot be doubted, 
and hence that future events can to some extent be foreseen from the past” (Leibniz 
1969: 384). Elsewhere Leibniz supplements consistency or coherence with vividness 
and complexity as criteria for judging of the veridicality of our experiences (Leibniz 
1969: 363). In contexts such as these it is clear that the criteria Leibniz proposes are 
supposed to be epistemic ones; that is, he is suggesting that the satisfaction of these 
criteria allows us to be at least morally certain that bodies exist. On this approach, 
then, there is a logical gap between our sensory experiences and the existence of bod-
ies; bodies are something over and above such experiences. Yet it must be noted that a 
different approach to the problem is suggested by one doctrine that has sometimes been 
attributed to Leibniz. Some readers have found in Leibniz a commitment to phenom-
enalism of the kind that is more often associated with Berkeley; in other words, bodies 
are reducible to the contents of our perceptual states. If Leibniz does indeed subscribe 
to such a doctrine, then, like Berkeley, he would seem to have a ready way of dealing 
with the skeptical worries that troubled Descartes and some of his successors. Since 
there is no logical gap between sensory perceptions and bodies, the skeptical problem 
cannot get off the ground. Moreover, consistency, complexity and vividness would not 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
700
be merely epistemic criteria for judging of the veridicality of sensory experiences; the 
existence of bodies would be constituted by sensory experiences that satisfy these crite-
ria. For example, to say that I am perceiving a table would just be to say that I am having 
a certain sensory experience as of a table that is vivid, complex, and coherent with my 
own perceptions and those of other perceivers.
Whether Leibniz does indeed subscribe to a phenomenalist account of bodies is a 
controversial issue that cannot be resolved here. It is true that Leibniz sometimes makes 
statements that have a distinctively phenomenalist flavor; he tells a correspondent, Des 
Bosses, for instance, that “we mean nothing else when we say that Socrates is sitting down 
than that what we understand by ‘Socrates’ and by ‘sitting down’ is appearing to us and to 
others who are concerned” (Leibniz 1969: 605). Elsewhere, he similarly writes that “mat-
ter and motion . . . are not so much substances or things as they are the phenomena of 
percipient beings, whose reality is located in the harmony of the percipient with himself 
(at different times) and with other percipient beings” (Leibniz 1969: 537). However, in 
considering the phenomenalist reading of Leibniz, two points need to be kept in mind. 
First, although Leibniz regularly says that bodies are mere phenomena, it is not clear that 
he is thereby committed to Berkeley-style phenomenalism that reduces bodies to the con-
tents of harmonized sets of perceptions; more typically, Leibniz combines the thesis that 
bodies are phenomena with the non-phenomenalist thesis that bodies are aggregates of 
monads or simple substances. Secondly, even Leibniz’s statements that sound most phe-
nomenalistic are not primarily driven by epistemological considerations; they are driven 
rather by metaphysical issues such as the composition of the continuum. The ontology of 
bodies was a matter of vital concern for Leibniz throughout his philosophical career; he 
was deeply interested in the issue of whether any bodies satisfy the conditions for being 
substances. By contrast, the issue of our knowledge of the existence of bodies did not have 
anything like the same urgency in his philosophical thought.
Leibniz’s Theory of Innate Ideas and Knowledge
The contrasts between Leibniz and Descartes in their approach to epistemology are 
apparent even when Leibniz is endorsing and developing Descartes’ position. The doc-
trine of innate ideas and knowledge is a case in point. Leibniz self-consciously follows 
in Descartes’ footsteps in reviving the ancient Platonic doctrine, and they both cite 
Socrates’ argument in the Meno with approval. But the doctrine occupies a different 
position in Leibniz’s philosophical system from that which it occupies in Descartes’. In 
the Meditations Descartes introduces the doctrine of innate ideas at a key stage in the 
journey back from the methodic doubt: in reflecting on his causal proof of the exist-
ence of God, which plays a crucial role in the reconstruction of knowledge, Descartes 
argues that God inscribed the idea of himself on the meditator’s mind in creating him. 
Leibniz, by contrast, typically seeks to deduce his theory of innate ideas from metaphysi-
cal premises; in the Discourse on Metaphysics, for instance, Leibniz argues for a version of 
the doctrine from the thesis that the human mind is a causally self-sufficient substance 
which nothing can enter from the outside. By virtue of his metaphysical commitments 
Leibniz is led to the conclusion that, strictly speaking, all ideas are innate. In some con-
texts, however, such as the New Essays on Human Understanding, Leibniz is prepared to 
accommodate the intuitive distinction between innate and acquired or “adventitious” 
ideas; those ideas, namely sensory ideas, are said to be acquired which represent things 
as external to us.

GOTTFRIED WILHELM LEIBNIZ
701
If Leibniz seeks to argue for the innateness of ideas, it is natural to ask what he means 
by the term “idea.” Fortunately, Leibniz addresses this issue directly, in a short essay that 
actually bears the title “What is an Idea?” (Quid sit Idea?). Here Leibniz explains that an 
idea is something which is “in the mind” and that it “consists not in some act but in the 
faculty of thinking, and we are said to have an idea of the thing even if we do not think 
of it, if only on a given occasion, we can think of it” (Leibniz 1969: 207). With this defi-
nition Leibniz seeks to steer a middle course between the positions of Malebranche and 
Descartes whose teaching was later to be defended against Malebranche by Arnauld. 
Leibniz agrees with Descartes that ideas are mental or psychological entities; by saying 
that they are “in the mind,” Leibniz is resisting Malebranche’s attempt to return to a 
Platonic-Augustinian conception of ideas as abstract entities in God to which our minds 
are related in thinking. Yet despite this point of agreement with Descartes (and later 
Arnauld) over the psychological status of ideas, Leibniz opposes them by treating ideas 
not as mental episodes or occurrent thoughts but, rather, as dispositions to have such 
thoughts. Elsewhere Leibniz supplements this analysis of the nature of ideas by insisting 
that the object of the idea must be internally consistent. Leibniz presses this point into 
service of his critique of Descartes’ version of the ontological argument for God’s exist-
ence; on Leibniz’s analysis, to establish that we have an idea of God it is not sufficient 
to assert that we can think of God, or a being possessing all perfections. It remains to be 
shown that the concept of a most perfect being is free from lurking contradictions.
The thesis that ideas are mental dispositions suggests a tight logical connection between 
the theory of ideas in general and at least Leibniz’s best-known version of nativism. If ideas 
are mental dispositions to think in certain ways, then innate ideas are simply mental dis-
positions to think in certain ways that we have had at least since birth. Leibniz defends the 
dispositional version of nativism most prominently, against Locke, in the New Essays on 
Human Understanding. In his own polemic against nativism Locke had sought to confront 
the defender of the doctrine of nativism with regard to ideas and principle with a dilemma: 
on a strong interpretation, the doctrine is empirically false, for it ascribes ideas to infants 
who do not have them, and on a weak interpretation it is condemned to triviality, for it 
asserts no more than a native capacity to acquire the ideas we have. Leibniz seeks to refute 
Locke by going through the horns of his dilemma by saying that he is defending a thesis 
that is weaker than the first horn but stronger than the second: innate ideas are less than 
fully actual thoughts, but they are more than mere capacities. Leibniz famously illustrates 
his point through a comparison with a block of marble in which the figure of Hercules is 
already marked out by the veins; the sculptor’s task is thus limited to following the veins 
in the marble (Leibniz 1996: 52). Descartes made a somewhat similar attempt to defend 
dispositional nativism through an equally illuminating analogy: ideas are innate in the 
mind in the same way that certain character traits, like generosity, and diseases, like gout, 
are said to be congenital in certain families.
Leibniz’s dispositional defense of innate ideas is his best-known defense of nativism, 
but it is arguably not the only one; in several texts it is accompanied by what might 
seem like an alternative account in terms of the mind’s capacity to reflect on its own 
nature: we can acquire ideas of substance, cause, and identity by turning our mental gaze 
inwards and coming to recognize that our minds are substances, causes, and self-identi-
cal over time. Leibniz often summarizes this account of innateness with the suggestive if 
somewhat opaque tag that “we are innate to ourselves, so to speak” (Leibniz 1996: 51).
The reflection account of innateness has tended to puzzle Leibniz’s critics, and it cer-
tainly raises a number of questions and difficulties. First, the reflection account seems to 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
702
trivialize the nativist claims: to say that an idea is innate on this account is to say simply 
that its origin is non-sensory; there seems to be no implication that it has been present 
in the mind at least since birth. Secondly, the reflection account narrows the scope of 
the nativist thesis to a small set of metaphysical ideas; traditionally, however, nativists 
have wished to argue for the innateness of mathematical (e.g. geometrical) and other 
ideas; indeed Leibniz himself sometimes argues for the innateness of all ideas. In view of 
problems like these it is natural to wonder whether the reflection account is advanced 
as a genuine alternative to the dispositional version or whether, rather, it is intended to 
serve as a strand in a larger, overarching version of nativism that also includes a dispo-
sitional component.
It is not difficult to see why the reflection account has generally received a bad press, 
but it also true that the account has more in its favor than has been realized. For one 
thing, Leibniz might not have been greatly disturbed by the charge that it allows no real 
sense in which ideas are present in the mind since birth. What Leibniz is most anxious 
to defend is not so much a temporal account of nativism as, rather, the non-sensory 
origin of certain ideas. Moreover, it is a mistake to suppose, as some have done, that 
Leibniz is claiming no more than Locke himself would concede, for though Leibniz 
is keen to find common ground with Locke, who admits ideas of reflection or intro-
spection, Leibniz goes beyond Locke by claiming that reflection acquaints us with the 
mind’s own nature, and not just with mental operations. Finally, Leibniz might have the 
resources to broaden the scope of the doctrine in ways that are not easily recognized. For 
instance, Leibniz, following Descartes himself, can make use of the concept of the emi-
nent possession of a property to show how we can acquire mathematical ideas by reflec-
tion on the mind’s own nature. To say that a substance possesses a property eminently 
is to say that it possesses, not the property itself—that is, it does not possess it formally 
in traditional jargon—but, rather, a grander version of the property. Thus if Smith is six 
feet tall, then he is eminently five feet ten inches tall. The mind, then, might not be 
formally triangular, but it is eminently so; in this way the mind can acquire the idea of 
triangularity by reflection on its own nature.
The reflection account might have a further advantage for Leibniz: it harmonizes 
better than does the dispositional version of the doctrine with Leibniz’s fundamental 
insistence that the human mind is a mirror of God. From this standpoint the problem 
with the dispositional version of nativism is that it is not clear that God can have any 
unactualized dispositional properties, for according to theological orthodoxy God is 
pure act. Thus the dispositional version of nativism is dubiously consistent with the 
mirror of God thesis. By contrast, the reflection account emphasizes a capacity of the 
human mind that seems clearly to align us with God: since Leibniz holds that reflec-
tion is a distinctive mark of spirits or higher monads, God can surely reflect on the 
perfections of his own nature. This defense of the reflection account on this score leads, 
however, to an interpretative dilemma. For on this approach the reflection account is 
to be regarded as an alternative to the dispositional version of nativism: the suggestion 
is that the reflection account is free from one weakness that seems to beset the disposi-
tional version. However, there might be other, more strictly philosophical reasons for 
holding that the reflection account is simply a strand in an overarching theory of nativ-
ism with regard to ideas that includes a dispositional component. For instance, a plau-
sible defense of Leibniz would take the form of saying that reflection on properties of 
one’s own mind is simply a stimulus by means of which an innate mental disposition to 
think of such properties is activated. This interpretative dilemma is not easily resolved. 

GOTTFRIED WILHELM LEIBNIZ
703
Certainly Leibniz himself does little or nothing to explain the relationship between the 
reflection account and dispositional nativism.
Whatever its relationship to dispositional nativism, it is clear that the reflection 
account is limited in scope to ideas. More clearly than Descartes, however, Leibniz 
seeks to extend nativism to principles or propositions, that is, items with a truth-value. 
In the Preface to the New Essays on Human Understanding Leibniz argues that necessary 
truths are all innate in the mind in the sense that we are predisposed towards occurrent 
knowledge of these truths. Indeed, Leibniz insists that we cannot establish the necessity 
of these truths without appealing to their innateness, since the senses do not serve to 
establish the necessity of general truths. Thus, for Leibniz, it is innateness that in some 
sense makes a priori knowledge possible.
Leibniz’s thesis that we can have a priori knowledge of necessary truths needs to be 
understood in the light of his distinction between two kinds of truths: truths of reason 
and truths of fact (Monadology 33). Truths of reason are all necessary truths, and their 
opposite is impossible; they can be proved a priori by reduction to identities in a finite 
number of steps. Such truths are to be found in logic, mathematics, and even ethics. 
Truths of fact, by contrast, are all contingent truths, and their opposite is possible; these 
truths cannot be reduced to identities (at least, not in a finite number of steps), but by 
virtue of the Principle of Sufficient Reason, there is always a reason why the facts are as 
they are and not otherwise. Truths of fact, which all concern the actual world, are to be 
found in the natural sciences and other areas of empirical enquiry. Although truths of 
fact can be known only a posteriori by human minds, there is a sense in which God can 
know them a priori; God, for instance, can know the truth of the singular proposition 
“Julius Caesar crossed the Rubicon” by inspecting the complete concept of Julius Caesar 
that he finds in his mind.
Leibniz’s project of extending nativism to knowledge of necessary truths has ante-
cedents in Plato’s Meno and less obviously in Descartes as well. Despite its impressive 
pedigree, however, it seems to face at least two serious philosophical problems. First, 
Leibniz’s dispositional nativism is arguably less persuasive with regard to knowledge of 
necessary truths than with regard to ideas or concepts. In the case of metaphysical ideas 
such as substance and cause, it is rather plausible to maintain that they are innate in 
Leibniz’s dispositional sense; we have a natural tendency to interpret our experience in 
terms of things with properties rather than clusters of features, just as we have a natural 
tendency to look for law-like necessary connections between events. It seems less plau-
sible to maintain such a thesis with regard, say, to the laws of logic: in view of the fact 
that people’s reasoning is fallacious much of the time it is difficult to defend the thesis 
that the rules of the propositional calculus work with the grain of the mind, as it were.
The second difficulty is perhaps more fundamental. Defenders of nativism such as 
Leibniz have often been criticized for conflating two issues that should be kept distinct. 
The objection is that it is one thing to appeal to innateness to explain items of occur-
rent knowledge; it is quite another to appeal to innateness to establish the truth of 
propositions. Consider the case of the slave boy in Plato’s Meno. As a result of Socrates’ 
questioning the slave boy comes to have occurrent knowledge of how to double the size 
of a given square; since the boy made no measurements and received no information 
from Socrates it might be plausible to explain his occurrent knowledge in this case in 
terms of an innate disposition. (Plato of course argues further for the doctrine of recol-
lection of a previous existence, a doctrine that Leibniz rejects as a myth.) But in works 
such as the New Essays on Human Understanding Leibniz appeals to nativism to solve not 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
704
just the explanatory problem of explanation but also the more purely epistemic problem 
of verification; he seeks to argue that necessary truths are “proved by what lies within, 
and cannot be established by experience, as truths of fact are” (Leibniz 1996: 79). But it 
is natural to object that there is no reason to suppose that propositions that are innate in 
our minds are true, let alone necessarily true: why should not a pack of lies be inscribed 
on the mind? Descartes might be able to answer such an objection by appealing to the 
fact of divine benevolence: innate propositions are inscribed on our mind by God who 
is not a deceiver. Leibniz, however, does not have this avenue open to him, since, as we 
have seen, he is highly critical of Descartes’ attempts to solve epistemological problems 
by appealing to divine benevolence. Leibniz never seems to address this objection to his 
doctrine directly, but he might be able to appeal to his mirror of God principle in order 
to solve it. The mirror of God principle guarantees an isomorphism between the human 
mind and the divine mind, which in Leibniz’s words sets “the pattern for the ideas and 
truths which are engraved in our souls” (Leibniz 1996: 447).
Leibniz and Kant
Leibniz’s doctrine of innate ideas and knowledge is possibly his main contribution to 
epistemology; it seems to have exerted an influence on Kant’s doctrine of categories 
in the Critique of Pure Reason. But although Kant might have responded positively to 
Leibniz on innate ideas, he was in general a severe critic of Leibniz’s epistemology. In the 
Critique of Pure Reason Kant memorably criticizes Locke and Leibniz for complementary 
errors. Whereas Locke is guilty of sensualizing the pure concepts of the understanding, 
Leibniz is guilty of intellectualizing appearances; that is, he treats sensory perceptions 
as if they lie on a continuum with intellectual ideas, and regards the former as simply 
obscure and confused versions of the latter. For Kant, the truth is that concepts and 
intuitions are wholly heterogeneous, even if the associated faculties of understanding 
and sensibility might have a common, though to us unknown, root. In terms of this dis-
tinction Kant memorably diagnoses the alleged error behind Leibniz’s principle of the 
Identity of Indiscernibles: the principle is true at the level of concepts, but not at the 
level of particulars given in sensory experience.
Kant’s criticism of Leibniz for treating the sensory and the intellectual as if they lay 
on a continuum might be unfair. Indeed, Leibniz’s position as outlined in the Meditations 
on Knowledge, Truth and Ideas has sometimes been seen as an anticipation of Kant’s own 
distinction between concepts and intuitions. In defense of Leibniz it has been claimed 
that, far from treating sense-perception as a confused form of thought, Leibniz fairly con-
sistently recognizes a basic distinction between concepts and sense-perception (Wilson 
1999: 322–35). Like Descartes, Leibniz employs the terminology of “clarity” and “dis-
tinctness,” and their contraries “obscurity” and “confusion,” to characterize cognition, 
but unlike Descartes, Leibniz recognizes a wholly distinctive way in which this terminol-
ogy applies to concepts. In the Meditations on Knowledge, Truth and Ideas, Leibniz employs 
the Cartesian terminology to characterize levels of conceptual ability. An idea of a king-
fisher, for example, is said to be clear when it enables a person to identify or pick out 
kingfishers; an idea is said to be distinct when it enables a person to state distinguishing 
marks of kingfishers. Leibniz’s paradigm example of a distinct idea is the idea that assayers 
have of gold; it is, as he says, an idea that “enables them to distinguish gold from all other 
bodies by sufficient marks and observations” (Leibniz 1969: 292). It is important to note 
that for Leibniz distinct ideas seem to be a proper subset of clear ideas.

GOTTFRIED WILHELM LEIBNIZ
705
Critics of Leibniz have sometimes objected that his account of conceptual abilities 
is inconsistent with claims that he makes about the ideas of the blind person. In the 
Meditations on Knowledge, Truth, and Ideas, Leibniz says that we cannot explain to a 
blind man what red is; in another work, he similarly says that a blind man could learn 
the whole of optics, but not acquire any idea of light (Leibniz 1969: 285). The objection 
turns on the fact that Leibniz sometimes seems to recognize that sensible qualities, such 
as redness, can be defined in scientific terms; for instance, to say that a body is red is 
just to say it reflects light waves of a certain frequency. But if this is the case, then there 
seems to be no reason in principle why a blind person could not have a distinct idea of 
red: if the blind person knows the scientific definition of red, then he has a distinct idea 
of red despite his inability to have any experience of red things. Thus some critics have 
charged that Leibniz is, after all, blurring the distinction between conceptual abilities 
and perceptual experiences.
The coherence of Leibniz’s position in the Meditations on Knowledge, Truth, and Ideas 
can be defended against these objections. First, Leibniz denies here that it is possible to 
state distinguishing marks for sensible qualities such as redness; in this work at least, he 
does not hold that sensible qualities can be defined in scientific terms. Secondly, even 
if Leibniz concedes that sensible qualities can be so defined, he has a line of defense 
on which to fall back. For it is clear that for Leibniz the recognitional ability—that is, 
having a clear idea—is a necessary condition of having a distinct idea. Since the blind 
person presumably lacks the ability to pick out or recognize red things, he cannot have 
a distinct idea of red, no matter how much science he knows. (Even if the blind person 
could unfailingly pick out red things, Leibniz could say that he or she would have to give 
evidence of following a rule, and it is difficult to see how this could be done.) If there 
is a remaining problem in Leibniz’s account it is not one of internal coherence in the 
Meditations; it is, rather, that Leibniz might vacillate with regard to the issue of whether 
it is sensible qualities themselves, or their causes, that can be scientifically defined.
Leibniz can to some extent be defended against Kant’s criticisms in the Critique of 
Pure Reason. It seems fair to say that his position on concepts and sense-perception 
represents an advance in philosophical sophistication over Descartes; at least it marks 
a step in the direction of Kant’s famous distinction between intuitions and concepts. 
Nonetheless, though the gap between them in this area might not be as great as it has 
sometimes appeared, there is no doubt that they are poles apart on larger issues; they 
differ widely in their attitude towards the nature of epistemology and its place in phi-
losophy. For Kant, the very possibility of speculative metaphysics needs to be called into 
question; for this reason among others, he insists on the need for a critique of pure rea-
son. Leibniz, by contrast, never seems to have been seriously troubled by the possibility 
of speculative metaphysics; as we have seen, to a large extent the theory of knowledge 
finds its proper place in his philosophy as a deduction from metaphysical principles that 
are supposedly known a priori.
References
Leibniz, G.W. (1969) Philosophical Papers and Letters, L.E. Loemker (trans.), Dordrecht: Reidel (2nd edn)
Leibniz, G.W. (1996) New Essays on Human Understanding, P. Remnant and J. Bennett (eds. and trans.), 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press (2nd edn)
Wilson, M.D. (1999) Ideas and Mechanism, Princeton: Princeton University Press

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
706
Further Reading
Jolley, N. (1984) Leibniz and Locke: A Study of the New Essays on Human Understanding, Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. (Emphasizes the metaphysical motivation of Leibniz’s critique of Locke’s Theory of 
Knowledge.)
Jolley, N. (1990) The Light of the Soul: Theories of Ideas in Leibniz, Malebranche, and Descartes, Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. (Places Leibniz’s theory of ideas in general and his theory of innate ideas in relation to 
Descartes and Malebranche.)
Kulstad, M. (1991) Leibniz on Apperception, Consciousness and Reflection, Munich: Philosophia Verlag. (A 
careful analytic study.)
MacRae, R. (1976) Leibniz on Perception, Apperception, and Thought, Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 
(An important and sometimes controversial study.)
Simmons, A. (2001) “Changing the Cartesian Mind: Leibniz on Sensation, Representation, and 
Consciousness,” The Philosophical Review 110, 31–75. (A penetrating study that emphasizes Leibniz’s break 
with the Cartesian theory of mind.)

63
GEORGE BERKELEY
George Pappas
Berkeley’s epistemological views are mainly contained in his three earliest publications: 
the Essay Towards a New Theory of Vision (1709); the Principles of Human Knowledge 
(1710); and Three Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous (1713). A few later works also 
contain some material of epistemological significance. However, Alciphron (1732) is 
primarily a work in the philosophy of religion, and where it touches on epistemologi-
cal issues it largely repeats what is contained in the Essay Towards a New Theory of 
Vision. The same can be said of the Theory of Vision Vindicated and Explained (1733); it 
is a defense of the doctrines contained in the 1709 book. Another later work, De Motu 
(1721), is mainly concerned with a defense of an instrumentalist version of scientific 
explanation.
Another important source of information on nearly every aspect of Berkeley’s philos-
ophy is the Philosophical Commentaries. These are early private notebooks that Berkeley 
kept in the years 1707–08, and they show his thought developing on a wide variety of 
issues that find later expression in the published works, though sometimes in forms that 
are very much modified from those contained in the Philosophical Commentaries.
Perception and Knowledge of Distance
In the New Theory of Vision (NTV), Berkeley considers how it is that we visually per-
ceive, or see, distance, and also how we are able to see the magnitude and situation of 
distant objects (NTV, #1). He also considers how it is that we make judgments, based 
on vision, of the distance objects are from ourselves (NTV, #3). Seeing distance, mag-
nitude and location of objects, we can presume, is somewhat different from judging 
what the distance, magnitude or location of those objects might be. And we might also 
presume that Berkeley is interested in justified judgments of distance, magnitude and 
location, and not merely judgments taken in isolation, since Berkeley thinks that we 
often know the distance from ourselves to an object based on vision.
A theoretical concern with visual perception and with the questions Berkeley con-
siders had been prominent in the half century prior to Berkeley. Descartes’ Optics had 
appeared in 1637, and Isaac Barrow’s Optical Lectures (1669) was widely consulted. 
Malebranche’s Search after Truth (1674) contains a number of chapters on distance 
and the visual perception of it, and, somewhat closer to Berkeley’s own time, William 
Molyneux had published Dioptrica Nova (1692), which is entirely devoted to ques-
tions of the sort that interested Berkeley in NTV. Berkeley knew all of these works 
and it is generally agreed that he drew on all of them in his work in the New Theory 
of Vision.

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
708
Berkeley critically examines the “received” view about visual distance perception, a 
view which held that it involves engaging in some geometrical calculation. Imagine a 
distant object O at which a stationary person S is looking. The object’s facing surface 
will reflect light to each of S’s eyes. We can think of a line connecting each of the 
points at which the light from O enters each eye; this line, roughly, runs from one eye 
across the bridge of the nose to the other eye. We can consider this the base line which, 
together with the lines formed by the incoming light rays, forms a triangle in S’s visual 
perception. According to the theory, S is presumed to know the length of the base line, 
and also to know the angles that each light ray makes at the respective eye with the base 
line. Then, by elementary geometry, S can compute the altitude of the triangle formed 
by these lines and this altitude is the distance from S to object O. It is in this manner 
that one sees the distance, and also in this manner that one comes to know the distance. 
Further, S would know the exact distance up to O, given these calculations, provided 
that S knew the exact degree of the angles and the exact length of the horizontal line. 
Less exact but still useful information would be gained, according to Berkeley’s state-
ment of the theory, depending on the dimensions of the angle formed at the object O. If 
this angle is large the object is taken to be close to the perceiver and the narrower this 
angle becomes the farther away the object is judged to be. Berkeley says:
But when an object is placed at so near a distance as that the interval between 
the eyes bears any sensible proportion to it, the opinion of speculative men 
is the two optic axes (the fancy that we see only with one eye at once being 
exploded) concurring at the object do there make an angle, by means of which, 
according as it is greater or lesser, the object is perceived to be nearer or farther 
off.
(Berkeley 1948–57: Vol. 1, 171; NTV, #4)
Berkeley has several criticisms of the received theory. Perhaps the most interesting 
is one that relies on the supposed self-intimating character of the mental. This thesis 
states that if a person is in some mental state at some time, then the person knows, at 
that time, that she is in that mental state. This thesis, widely accepted in Berkeley’s 
time, is supposed to be fully general, applying to all persons and times. According to the 
received theory, a person would know the relevant angles and the length of the relevant 
line from eye to eye by a kind of perception. Berkeley observes that he never occurrently 
knows those angles and lengths when he is engaged in visual perception, and from this he 
infers via the self-intimation thesis that he does not perceive those angles and lines. This 
is enough, he feels, to refute the received theory, though he is confident that very few 
observers will ever know the relevant angles and lengths of lines. Moreover, of course, 
even if they possessed this knowledge, a great many observers would be in no position to 
actually perform the geometrical calculation said to be required by the received theory. 
In summing up this criticism, Berkeley says: “Since, therefore, those angles and lines are 
not themselves perceived by sight, it follows . . . that the mind doth not by them judge of 
the distance of objects” (Berkeley 1948–57: Vol. 1, 173; NTV, #13).
Berkeley also thinks that the received theory is a priori, in the sense that according to 
the theory one can have a priori knowledge of the distance. This is not entirely correct, 
of course; one has to have perceptual experience of the optic angles and of the length of 
the line between the two eyes. What is a priori in the theory is the geometrical calcula-
tion, presumed capable of being performed by anyone who can see distance.

GEORGE BERKELEY
709
Berkeley’s alternative theory dispenses altogether with geometrical calculations and 
with any a priori elements, and stresses instead experienced correlations between visual 
and tactile ideas of sense. He explains one of these correlations:
It is certain by experience that when we look at a near object with both eyes, 
according as it approaches or recedes from us, we alter the disposition of our 
eyes, by lessening or widening the interval between the pupils. This disposition 
or turn of the eyes is attended by a sensation, which seems to me to be that 
which in this case brings the idea of greater or lesser distance into the mind.
(Berkeley 1948–57: Vol. 1, 174; NTV, #16)
So, to illustrate, upon looking at a distant object one receives some visual ideas or 
appearances. Depending on the distance of the object, one will either narrow the pupils 
or widen them, receiving in either case a tactile (or better, bodily) sensation, which one 
has learned from past experience indicates a certain distance. In this manner one would 
see the distance, and be able to judge what it might be. Unlike in the received theory, 
however, this would be, at best, a rough estimate of the distance.
Berkeley also mentions the degree of clarity in the visual ideas; the closer objects 
are the less clear will be the visual idea, thereby suggesting small distance. There is no 
bodily sensation here to correlate with the visual ideas. However, in many cases where 
one sees a close object, one has to strain the eye in the attempt to produce greater clarity 
in the visual ideas. And here there is a correlation: the greater the bodily sensation of 
straining, as that correlates with the visual ideas then received, the closer the object is 
taken to be. However, even with the correlations Berkeley mentions, one will get only 
a very rough estimate of the distance of some object. A more accurate judgment of an 
object’s distance often will come in a different way.
Suppose one sees a distant small building, thereby experiencing certain visual ideas. 
Berkeley suggests (NTV, #45) that if one were to walk towards this object, having as 
one does some thought of the number of paces taken, then upon reaching the distant 
object one might gain certain tactile sensations by touching the object. Berkeley’s idea 
is that the distance would be measured by the number of paces taken, and one would get 
a more accurate judgment as to the actual distance of the object than from the simple 
visual and tactile correlations mentioned above.
In this example, Berkeley clearly assumes that there is a distant object which exists 
independently of any visual or tactile sensation or ideas anyone might receive. He is 
thus, in the New Theory of Vision, assuming that objects exist independently of all per-
ception, contrary to the thesis he defends in the Principles and Three Dialogues, namely 
that for all sensible objects, to be is to be perceived. Berkeley mentions this very conflict 
at Principles #44, and there indicates that while he made the assumption of the inde-
pendent existence of objects in the New Theory of Vision, this was merely a matter of 
convenience. He could have made do without this assumption, but it was easier not to 
do so. His point is thus that the New Theory of Vision contains no real conflict with his 
idealist thesis that objects exist if and only if they are perceived.
Berkeley’s Realist Opponents
In both the Principles and Three Dialogues, Berkeley discusses theories of his opponents, 
and claims not only that these theories contain various defects, but also that defects 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
710
aside, the theories lead to skepticism. He plainly takes the latter fact, if it is one, as a 
strike against these theories. It is thus important for Berkeley not to have the doctrines 
of the New Theory of Vision commit him to objects which exist independently of all 
perception.
The theory Berkeley is most concerned to attack is the representative realist theory of 
perception. On this theory, whenever a person perceives an object, she is immediately 
aware of one or more ideas, themselves causally related to that object. The object is per-
ceived only mediately or indirectly, by way of the immediate perception of these ideas. 
What makes the theory representational is the fact, as claimed by Locke for example, 
that some of the immediately experienced ideas resemble some surface features of the 
object, namely, the object’s primary qualities. This is the very point at which Berkeley 
criticizes the theory, for Berkeley thinks that the resemblance thesis is false. He holds, 
on the contrary, that an idea can only be like, or resemble, another idea, and of course if 
this is correct, then the representational realist theory of perception would be defective. 
Berkeley makes these points in the following passage:
But say you, though the ideas themselves do not exist without the mind, yet 
there may be things like them whereof they are copies or resemblances, which 
things exist without the mind, in an unthinking substance. I answer, an idea 
can be like nothing but an idea; a colour or figure can be like nothing but 
another colour or figure. If we look but ever so little into our thoughts, we shall 
find it impossible for us to conceive a likeness except only between our ideas.
(Berkeley 1948–57: Vol. 2, 44; Principles, #8)
Of course, there are indirect realist theories of perception which do not contain the 
resemblance thesis, and those theories are immune to this particular criticism from 
Berkeley.
In the New Theory of Vision, Berkeley does hold that distant objects are only mediately 
perceived by sight. Objects are only immediately perceived by touch. One might sus-
pect, then, that the doctrines of the New Theory of Vision lead to a form of skepticism 
about objects, in just the way that Berkeley thinks that representative realism does. 
Berkeley has a way of disarming this suspicion, however. In the case of the New Theory 
of Vision, objects are immediately perceivable by touch, whereas in the case of represen-
tative indirect realism, objects are not immediately perceivable at all. Thus, there really 
is no strong parallel sufficient to think that the doctrines of the New Theory of Vision 
lead to skepticism in the way that Berkeley thinks that representative realism does.
Skeptical Worries
Berkeley also maintains that the representative realist theory leads to skepticism about 
the external world, and he takes this to be a decisive mark against the theory. His worry 
is that the theory would require one to first verify that some form of conformity obtains 
between one’s ideas and external objects, before one could have knowledge of those 
objects. But Berkeley thinks we would never be in a position to actually carry out this 
verification, and so knowledge would never be gained. Here is one version of the argu-
ment Berkeley presents:
It is your opinion, the ideas we perceive by our senses are not real things, but 
images, or copies of them. Our knowledge therefore is no farther real, than as 

GEORGE BERKELEY
711
our ideas are the true representations of those originals. But as these supposed 
originals are in themselves unknown, it is impossible to know how far our ideas 
resemble them; or whether they resemble them at all. We cannot therefore be 
sure we have any real knowledge.
(Berkeley 1948–57: Vol. 2, 246. From Three Dialogues)
Most likely, when Berkeley says the “originals are in themselves unknown” he means 
that the originals are not themselves immediately perceived. That reading would explain 
why he says it would be impossible to know whether the resemblance, or conformity, 
obtains between the ideas and the objects. That is, his line of thought would be that 
in order to know this one would have to compare the two items, ideas and objects; and 
this comparison would require that both objects be immediately perceived. However, 
according to the representative realist theory, physical objects are never immediately 
perceived. Hence, given the theory, the required comparison cannot be carried out and 
so, given the theory, one would never have perceptual knowledge of objects.
This line of argument is successful only if Berkeley is right that, for the representative 
realist, one must have knowledge of this conformity between ideas and objects if one is 
to have perceptual knowledge of objects. It is true that Locke, at whom Berkeley’s argu-
ment is no doubt directed, encourages this way of thinking. He says:
Where-ever we perceive the Agreement or Disagreement of any of our Ideas 
there is certain Knowledge; and where-ever we are sure those Ideas agree with 
the reality of Things, there is certain real Knowledge.
(Locke 1975: 573; Essay, IV, IV, 18)
If this passage expresses Locke’s all-things-considered opinion on this matter, then 
Berkeley’s argument would have some force against Locke. Berkeley’s argument would 
be less effective if the representative realist theory held only that there be a conformity 
between ideas and objects, in order for one to gain perceptual knowledge of objects, and 
not that the cognizer needs to know about this conformity (Pappas 2005: 98–103).
Berkeley has a second argument which is more general in that it can be aimed at 
any version of indirect realism, and not just those that contain some representational 
element. The argument, in a nutshell, is that any indirect realist theory of perception 
would require that any perceptual knowledge we might gain about objects would have 
to be inferential knowledge. That is, such knowledge would have to be based upon 
knowledge of immediately experienced ideas. However, according to Berkeley’s argu-
ment, the required inferences would fail, so that indirect realism would lead to skepti-
cism about objects. The relevant inferences, Berkeley sees, would be either deductive 
or some form of induction. They would not be deductive, because no proposition about 
experienced ideas or group of such propositions entails a physical object proposition. As 
for inductive inferences in this context, the only such inference Berkeley considers is an 
explanatory one. That is, he considers whether the assumption that there are objects of 
relevant sorts best explains the ideas we immediately experience. He rejects this explan-
atory argument because it would presume that we have some accounts of how material 
bodies causally act upon non-material minds wherein, it is supposed, experienced ideas 
are to be located. Berkeley claims that nobody, including all of the indirect realists, 
understands how mind–body causal interaction of that kind operates, and so concludes 
that inductive inferences from idea-propositions to object-propositions do not succeed 
(Berkeley 1948–57: Vol. 2, 48–49; Principles, #19).

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
712
It is clear that this argument by Berkeley has but limited success, however, because it 
considers just one form of inductive inference and, perhaps more importantly, because 
it takes no account of those indirect realist theories that do not assume that minds are 
non-material substances. Moreover, Berkeley’s argument assumes that indirect realism 
entails that perceptual knowledge of objects is always inferential and based upon imme-
diate knowledge of experienced ideas. This assumption is certainly open to challenge, 
though it is not a matter that Berkeley ever addresses (Pappas 2005: 108–113).
Response to Skepticism
We have noted that Berkeley holds that representative realism, and even non-represen-
tative versions of indirect realism, leads to skepticism about objects. He maintains that 
there are other routes to skepticism, however, and he aims to undermine all of these 
routes as well. One such route is the thesis that there are abstract general ideas. Of this, 
Berkeley says that,
My purpose, therefore is, to try if I can discover what those principles are, 
which have introduced all that doubtfulness and uncertainty, those absurdities 
and contradictions into the several sects of philosophy . . . what seems to have 
had a chief part in rendering speculation intricate and perplexed, and to have 
occasioned innumerable errors and difficulties in almost all parts of knowledge. 
And that is the opinion that the mind hath a power of framing abstract ideas or 
notions of things.
(Berkeley 1948–57: Vol. 2, 26–27; Principles, Introduction, #4)
If Berkeley is right that the thesis of abstract general ideas leads to skepticism, then it is 
important to reject that thesis so that one avenue towards skepticism is closed. This is 
exactly what he does in the introduction to the Principles, where he argues that abstract 
general ideas are impossible (Berkeley 1948–57: Vol. 2, 27–31; Principles, Introduction, 
#7–10; Pappas 2000: 39–79).
Another route to skepticism, according to Berkeley, is the thesis that objects consist 
in a material substance or substratum in which qualities inhere. This can be seen in 
the following exchange between Hylas and Philonous in the Three Dialogues, where 
Philonous acts as a spokesperson for Berkeley:
HYLAS: 
What! Can anything be more fantastical, more repugnant to common 
sense, or a more manifest piece of skepticism, than to believe there is no 
such thing as matter?
PHILONOUS: What if I should prove, that you who hold there is, are by virtue of that 
opinion a greater skeptic, and maintain more paradoxes and repugnancies 
to common sense, than I who believe no such thing?
(Berkeley 1948–57: Vol. 2, 172)
Accordingly, Berkeley tries to show in both the Principles and the Three Dialogues, that 
there cannot be any material substratum, either because the very concept of such a 
thing is contradictory or because that concept is empty. At one point in the Three 
Dialogues Philonous says to Hylas, in summing up what he has to say about material 
substance, that,

GEORGE BERKELEY
713
My business was only to shew, you meant nothing; and this you were brought to 
own. So that in all your various senses, you have been shewed either to mean 
nothing at all, or if any thing, an absurdity. And if this be not sufficient to prove 
the impossibility of a thing, I desire you will let me know what is.
(Berkeley 1948–57: Vol. 2, 226)
Yet another route to skepticism that Berkeley identifies is the thesis that objects and 
their qualities exist independently of all perception. On this point he says that,
So long as we attribute a real existence to unthinking things, distinct from 
their being perceived, it is not only impossible for us to know with evidence the 
nature of any real unthinking being, but even that it exists. Hence it is, that we 
see philosophers distrust their senses, and doubt the existence of heaven and 
earth, of every thing they see or feel, or even of their own bodies.
(Berkeley 1948–57: Vol. 2, 79; Principles #88)
Berkeley tries to undermine this route to skepticism by establishing that all sensible 
objects and their qualities exist if and only if they are perceived. This is his famous 
thesis, for sensible things, of esse is percipi, or to be is to be perceived (Berkeley 1948–57: 
Vol. 2, 50–51; Principles, #22–24).
Having blunted all three of these routes to skepticism, and having shown the prob-
lems facing representative realism, Berkeley feels that he has undermined all of the 
principal routes to skepticism.
Berkeley’s Positive Epistemology
Like the representative and indirect realist, Berkeley accepts the thesis that in every 
perceptual experience, one or more ideas are immediately perceived. Unlike the rep-
resentative and indirect realist, however, he maintains that physical objects are also 
among the objects that are immediately perceived. The question then becomes how 
does Berkeley manage to combine the theory of ideas with the thesis that objects are 
immediately perceived?
There are a number of passages where Berkeley endorses the thesis that objects are 
immediately perceived, among them these two:
Wood, stones, fire, water, flesh, iron, and the like things, which I name and 
discourse of, are things that I know. And I should not have known them, but 
that I perceived them by my senses; and things perceived by the senses are 
immediately perceived.
(Berkeley 1948–57: Vol. 2, 230)
and also in a letter to the American philosopher Samuel Johnson:
I see no difficulty in conceiving a change of state, such as is vulgarly called 
Death, as well without as with material substance. It is sufficient for that pur-
pose that we allow sensible bodies, i.e., such as are immediately perceived by 
sight and touch.
(Berkeley 1948–57: Vol. 2, 282; Pappas 2000: 172–178)

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
714
Berkeley can accommodate this line of thought if he identifies individual ideas with 
physical objects, because we know that he holds that ideas of sense are immediately per-
ceived. However, this does not seem to be his considered opinion because he says that,
A certain colour, taste, smell, figure and consistence having been observed 
to go together, are accounted one distinct thing, signified by the name apple. 
Other collections of ideas constitute a stone, a tree, a book, and the like sen-
sible things; which as they are pleasing or disagreeable, excite the passions of 
love, hatred, joy, grief, and so forth.
(Berkeley 1948–57: Vol. 2, 41; Principles, #1)
Thus, his view is that objects are really collections, or groups, of sensible ideas. This 
sort of metaphysical thesis will allow for immediate perception of objects, so long as 
Berkeley is willing to agree that by immediately perceiving some of the ideas making up 
a collection of ideas that is identical to an object O, one thereby immediately perceives 
O. A rough example of this sort, though not in the terminology of ideas, would be when 
a person is standing in a doorway looking into a room containing a class of students. 
From her vantage point in the doorway, she can only see some number of the students, 
but still we do not hesitate to say that she thereby sees the class of students. It is similar, 
and more familiar, with parts. If one looks at the front of College Hall, one thereby sees 
College Hall, even though one sees only some of its connected parts.
Berkeley says very little about what he takes the collections that are identified with 
objects to be. Presumably we do not want to hold that the sensible ideas immediately 
perceived by a given person at a time make up the object, even though those sensible 
ideas form a collection. At a later time that same person immediately perceives a dif-
ferent group of sensible ideas, and so if these later ideas made up an object it would be 
a different object from what was first perceived. However, Berkeley will surely want to 
hold that the same person might perceive the same object at different times, and so he 
will need a concept of collections of sensible ideas that will allow for this.
Notice that, as Berkeley sees it, the fact that objects are always only indirectly per-
ceived, given indirect realism, is what leads those theories to the result that any knowl-
edge one would have of those objects would be inferential. By allowing that objects are 
immediately perceived, by contrast, Berkeley seems to at least leave the way open to 
hold that we have immediate, non-inferential knowledge of objects. Indeed, this is a 
path that he actually takes. Two passages from the Philosophical Commentaries bring out 
this point:
We have an intuitive Knowledge of the Existence of other things besides our 
selves & even praecedaneous to the Knowledge of our own Existence. in that 
we must have Ideas or else we cannot think.
(Berkeley 1948–57: Vol. 1, 69; Commentaries, #547)
and,
I am the farthest from Scepticism of any man. I know with an intuitive knowl-
edge of the existence of other things as well as my own Soul. This is wt Locke 
nor scarce any other Thinking Philosopher will pretend to.
(Berkeley 1948–57: Vol. 1, 70; Commentaries, #563)

GEORGE BERKELEY
715
Here Berkeley makes use of Locke’s term, “intuitive knowledge,” and as Locke had used 
this term, such knowledge is the very paradigm of knowledge which is non-inferential. 
Moreover, in the second of these passages he contrasts his view with Locke’s, and the 
contrast has to be that intuitive knowledge is not restricted to knowledge of ideas. That is 
decidedly Locke’s position, and so for the contrast to make sense Berkeley’s use of the term 
“other things” must refer to objects and not merely to ideas. The same is almost certainly 
the case with the first of these passages, as it appears in the same cluster of passages in the 
Commentaries, #547–563, where Locke’s position on intuitive knowledge is challenged.
In sum, Berkeley’s positive epistemology is supposed to vanquish skepticism about 
objects outright. This is because it shows, as Berkeley thinks, that we do have knowledge 
of objects precisely because we have immediate, non-inferential knowledge of objects. 
We have this sort of privileged knowledge of objects, in turn, because objects are among 
the things that are immediately perceived. Immediate perception of objects, in the right 
circumstances where one is attentive and has the relevant conceptual repertoire, is 
taken by Berkeley to suffice for knowledge. Indeed, Berkeley goes beyond this point 
and, following Locke, insists that we also have immediate, non-inferential knowledge 
of ourselves, and that this self-knowledge is not mediated by nor based upon knowledge 
of ideas (Berkeley 1948–57: Vol. 2, 233).
Foundationalism
It has often been supposed that Berkeley, along with other classical empiricists such 
as Locke and Hume, adopted an empiricist version of foundationalism about knowl-
edge. That is, Berkeley is often taken to have held that all knowledge, or at least all 
knowledge of contingent truths, is based upon and derivable from epistemically more 
basic knowledge of experienced ideas. Whatever might be said about Locke and Hume 
on this matter, we can now see that this is not the right way to understand Berkeley. 
Knowledge of external objects and of oneself is not taken by Berkeley to be based upon 
knowledge of experienced ideas at all. Rather, like our knowledge of experienced ideas, 
much of our knowledge of objects and of oneself is immediate and non-inferential. Thus 
Berkeley, if he is to be construed as a foundationalist about knowledge, is not one who 
accepts the empiricist version of that thesis here described. If he accepts foundation-
alism, then knowledge of objects and of oneself is every bit as basic as knowledge of 
experienced ideas.
Certainty and Knowledge
Under the powerful influence of Descartes, many philosophers in Berkeley’s time period 
accepted the thesis that knowledge implies certainty in one’s belief, and that the sort of 
certainty involved was that wherein the logical possibility of mistaken belief was ruled 
out. If Berkeley accepted, or was committed to, these two principles, then of course 
he would be in no position to maintain that we have immediate knowledge of objects 
because he would be in no position to claim that we have any knowledge of objects. 
After all, propositions about objects are not entailed by propositions about ideas, and 
no belief about objects is immune to error in the way that would be demanded by this 
concept of certainty.
Berkeley does think that one’s knowledge of immediately experienced ideas is certain 
in just the way that the above concept of certainty lays out. He says, for example, that

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
716
So long as I confine my thoughts to my own ideas divested of words, I do not see 
how I can easily be mistaken. The objects I consider, I clearly and adequately 
know. I cannot be deceived in thinking I have an idea which I have not. It is 
not possible for me to imagine, that my own ideas are alike or unlike, that are 
not truly so.
(Berkeley 1948–57: Vol. 2, 39; Principles, Introduction #22)
However, when it comes to our knowledge of objects, Berkeley seems to have a different 
concept of certainty in mind. We can see this in some passages from the Philosophical 
Commentaries and from the Three Dialogues. In the former work, Berkeley says,
I am certain there is a God, tho I do not perceive him have no intuition of him. 
this not difficult if we rightly understand wt is meant by certainty.
and then,
Malbranch in his Illustration differs widely from me. He doubts of the Existence 
of Bodies I doubt not in the least of this.
(Berkeley 1948–57: Vol. 1, 96 & 97; Commentaries, #813 and 800)
In Three Dialogues, we find much the same point:
Let me be represented as one who trusts his senses, who thinks he knows the 
things he sees and feels, and entertains no doubt of their existence.
(Berkeley 1948–57: Vol. 2, 237)
These several passages indicate that Berkeley is content to make use of a very weak 
concept of certainty when it comes to knowledge of bodies, namely a concept in which 
one is certain in one’s belief about an object just when one has no doubts vis-à-vis one’s 
belief about that object. This is a very different concept of certainty from that employed 
by Descartes, and even from that employed by Berkeley in other contexts. It should be 
clear that if he makes use of this weaker notion of certainty, then there is no objection, 
based on the strong concept of certainty that we trace to Descartes, to Berkeley’s claim 
that we have non-inferential and immediate knowledge of objects.
References
Berkeley, G. (1948–57) The Works of George Berkeley, ed. T. Jessop and A. Luce, Edinburgh: Thomas Nelson.
Locke, J. (1975) An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, ed. P. Nidditch, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Pappas, G. (2000) Berkeley’s Thought, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
—— (2005) “Berkeley’s Assessment of Locke’s Epistemology,” Philosophica, Vol. 76, 91–114.
Further Reading
Atherton, M. (1991) Berkeley’s Revolution in Vision, Ithaca: Cornell University Press. (A comprehensive 
treatment of Berkeley’s New Theory of Vision.)
Pitcher, G. (1977) Berkeley, London: Routledge. (Excellent treatment of most of Berkeley’s work.)
Stoneham, T. (2002) Berkeley’s World, Oxford: Oxford University Press. (Focuses on the Three Dialogues.)
Winkler, K. (1989) Berkeley: An Interpretation, Oxford: Clarendon Press. (Excellent examination of 
Berkeley’s overall work.)

64
THOMAS REID
Ryan Nichols
From the earliest pages of his first book, Inquiry Into the Human Mind, epistemology is 
Reid’s major philosophical interest. Reid develops his unconventional epistemological 
theories in response to his predecessors. Uniquely for his time, Reid theorized about 
problems of epistemology from a point of view not divorced from his embodied, social 
and psychological context. After concluding that the skeptics that preceded him—
Descartes, Berkeley, Hume—did not appreciate ways that epistemic theories infect 
other philosophical commitments, Reid articulated and explained the presuppositions 
of knowledge needed to build an epistemological theory capable of providing knowl-
edge of self and world. Reid’s method is governed by common-sense reflection, not 
Cartesian doubt. He presupposes that we have knowledge and seeks to understand how 
and why. It is far from a coincidence that many of the leading lights of contemporary 
epistemology—Lehrer, Plantinga and Alston, to name three—have not only studied 
Thomas Reid’s corpus closely but have published papers and books about Reid’s episte-
mology. This essay explains Reid’s context and method, the content and epistemic sta-
tus of his first principles, his arguments against skepticism and his theory of perceptual 
knowledge.
1. Reid’s Context and Method
Thomas Reid (1710–1796) is a Scottish philosopher whose major works are Inquiry 
into the Human Mind (originally published in 1764), Essays on the Intellectual Powers 
(1785) and Essays on the Active Powers (1788). Reid was educated in Marischal College, 
Aberdeen, during which time Scotland was experiencing religious uprisings and tumult. 
Reid became a parish minister in 1737 (see Wood 1985). In 1751 Reid was appointed 
professor at King’s College, Aberdeen, then in 1764 he replaced Adam Smith as chair 
of moral philosophy at Glasgow.
Reid constructs his epistemology out of the ruins of the epistemologies of Descartes, 
Locke, Berkeley and Hume. They all endorsed the ‘Way of Ideas,’ which can be charac-
terized by the following theses:
Mind-independent objects are not directly perceived, but rather only men-
tal representations (‘ideas’ or ‘images’) are. Sensations are often confused with 
objects of perception. Our perceptual experience does not yield justification 
for beliefs about the mind-independent world. Perception and memory are not 
reliably aimed at forming true beliefs, but the faculty of reason is.

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
718
Reid allows for a use of the term ‘ideas’ to refer to operations of or events in the mind, but 
does not believe there are ideas qua mental intermediaries.
In order to correct the mistakes promulgated by the Way of Ideas Reid bridges the gap 
between philosophy and psychology by drawing his method from Newton’s experimen-
tally minded Opticks and from the theoretically minded Principia. He sought to reorient 
philosophical method so philosophers would embrace natural science and avoid giving 
unthinking allegiance to prior philosophical ideas (EIP 1.4, 51). Reid gathers evidence 
for his conclusions from philosophical argumentation, introspective observation on 
what happens in his own mind, empirical observations of others, and testimony drawn 
from scientists (EIP 1.3, 49–50; see EIP 2.8, 120–21; EIP 5.3, 371; and EAP 527a). 
Proper philosophical explanations, like proper scientific explanations, appeal to laws 
of nature. Reid’s approach to foundationalism is to find laws about patterns of human 
belief formation in accord with a faculty psychology (Lehrer 1998, 15) then defend 
them against skeptical attack.
2. Foundations of Knowledge
2.1. Common Sense First Principles of Contingent Truth
Reid’s approach to the foundations of knowledge—which he calls ‘first principles’—res-
onates with his interest in applying methods from empirical psychology to epistemol-
ogy. He describes his method saying, “there is but one way to the knowledge of nature’s 
work—the way of observation and experiment,” which Reid likens to philosophy con-
ducted in light of Newton’s regulae philosophandi (INQ 1.1, 11–12; Newton 1999, 794). 
First Reid observes what people believe, when people come to believe what they do, 
and how widely these beliefs are disbursed over the population. Second, he attempts to 
unify this observational data through laws of belief formation, i.e. first principles, much 
as a field ecologist might attempt to describe and classify observations of a diversity of 
organisms.
Reid has two sets of first principles. The first set concerns contingent truths and the 
second necessary truths. The set of necessary truths includes principles about grammar, 
logic, morality, metaphysics and theology (see EIP 6.6). For example, “that no man 
ought to be blamed for what it was not in his power to hinder” (EIP 6.6, 494). The foun-
dations in Reid’s theory of empirical knowledge are his first principles of contingent 
truth, which he often describes as his ‘first principles of common sense’. Common sense 
is a faculty of judgment (EIP 6.1, 406–7) whereby we judge of “what is true and what 
is false in matters that are self-evident, and which he distinctly apprehends” (EIP 6.2, 
426). The term ‘first principles’ refers to
propositions which are no sooner understood than they are believed. . . . There 
is no searching for evidence, no weighing of arguments; the proposition is not 
deduced or inferred from another; it has the light of truth in itself, and has no 
occasion to borrow it from another.
(EIP 6.4, 452; see de Bary 2002, 32–48)
This is a psychological description of these principles as opposed to a normative descrip-
tion of the principles. Reid intends to set them in their cognitive context prior to 
explaining their epistemic implications.

THOMAS REID
719
2.2. Opposition to Classical Foundationalism
Since Reid’s own foundationalism follows from his criticisms of Descartes’, we exam-
ine those criticisms now. First, even if Descartes’ cogito could be used as a first prin-
ciple to generate other beliefs, those beliefs would be so narrow in scope that, from 
it, “very little, if anything, can be deduced by just reasoning” (EIP 6.7, 518). Second, 
Descartes’ appeal to God’s goodness and knowledge is viciously circular (EIP 6.5, 481). 
These criticisms generalize: Reid is opposed ‘classical foundationalism,’ the theory that 
foundational beliefs must (i) have epistemic properties—certainty, indubitability—that 
render them ‘skeptic-proof’ and (ii) are epistemically self-evident through the light of 
pure reason. Third, his method of doubt prompts Descartes to search for a solution to 
skepticism in a vacuum—in which Descartes does not know that he is even embodied. 
This, though, falls afoul of Reid’s insistence on an empirically and psychologically real 
epistemology. On this point Reid foreshadows responses to skepticism of Moore and 
Wittgenstein (e.g., see Moore 1959, 226).
Lastly, Reid objects to Descartes’ method of doubt:
How do you know that your consciousness cannot deceive you? You have sup-
posed that all you see, and hear, and handle, may be an illusion. Why, there-
fore, should the power of consciousness have this prerogative, to be believed 
implicitly, when all our other powers are supposed fallacious?
(EIP 6.7, 515)
Descartes’ justification for the cogito depends upon a dubitable presupposition: that first-
person access to thought is transparent and reliable, but that no other belief-forming 
faculty is (INQ 6.20, 168–9). But reason comes from the same “mint of Nature” as 
perception, memory and judgment, which leads Reid to a parity argument: if we regard 
perception as fallible, then we have equal reason to regard reason as fallible. This line 
of Reid’s thinking is aimed at semi-skeptics who assert, of some but only of some cir-
cumscribed areas of inquiry, we lack all knowledge. Extrapolating from these focused 
criticisms, Reid is making a broad criticism of the Enlightenment’s elevation of reason 
over other belief-forming faculties.
2.3. Two Types of First Principles of Contingent Truth
In addition to responding to Descartes’ failed foundationalism, Reid’s foundationalism 
is motivated by recognition of a regress argument (EIP 6.7, 522, and 6.4, 455). First 
principles of contingent truth are necessary in the construction of a body of knowledge 
because “all knowledge got by reasoning must be built upon first principles” (EIP 6.4, 
454) if the regress is to be stopped. While Descartes claimed his foundations for knowl-
edge was indubitable, Reid says his are fallible. While Descartes replies to skepticism 
by identifying a single, widely applicable principle that guided further reflection, Reid 
identifies a number of first principles specific to particular domains.
Reid’s foundations include principles that state a singular fact and principles that 
function as recipes for the generation of particular beliefs:
4. Another first principle is, Our own personal identity and continued exis-
tence, as far back as we remember anything distinctly. (EIP 6.5, 476)

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
720
  5. Another first principle is, That those things do really exist which we dis-
tinctly perceive by our senses, and are what we perceive them to be (EIP 6.5, 
476)
(4) asserts individual human beings have diachronic personal identity; (4) says this 
universal generalization is psychologically self-evident. (5) asserts the veridicality of 
our distinct perceptual beliefs; it implies that token perceptual beliefs about what we 
distinctly perceive are psychologically self-evident. (5) is a recipe, i.e. an ‘epistemo-
logical’ first principle. ‘Epistemological’ first principles include principles of memory, 
reasoning, testimony and induction. ‘Factual’ first principles like (4) include principles 
that we possess free will and that there are other minds. Lastly, in addition to being 
psychologically self-evident, (4) and (5) might also be epistemically self-evident so long as 
the epistemic self-evidence of a statement does not imply that it is necessary that the 
statement is true or the statement is known indubitably.
3. Externalism and Naturalism
Reid is the first to articulate an externalist theory about the basis of epistemic justifi-
cation and to adopt a broadly naturalistic method that sees epistemology as a form of 
psychology (see ‘Externalism/Internalism’, Chapter 14 in this volume). Reid’s episte-
mology resembles contemporary forms of externalism in two key ways: the key epistemic 
feature of any belief type is its veridicality, and Reid is more concerned with the psycho-
logical and physiological genesis of belief than he is with the deontological justification 
of belief (Alston 1985). We might laugh at the fact that Reid writes thousands and 
thousands of words about double vision (INQ 6.15–17), but only by taking this to heart 
can we understand the as yet unappreciated lengths to which Reid goes to bring episte-
mology into relationship with psychology. Reid endorses a nuanced form of externalism 
on the basis of commitments to proper functionalism, theism, and common sense.
3.1. Proper Functionalism and Theism
Reid facilitates his externalism first by endorsing a nascent ‘proper functionalism.’ Reid 
says he will “take it for granted that the evidence of sense, when the proper circum-
stances concur, is good evidence, and a just ground of belief” (EIP 2.20, 229). What 
Lehrer calls Reid’s ‘metaprinciple’ reflects this commitment: “that the natural faculties, 
by which we distinguish truth from error, are not fallacious” (EIP 6.5, 480; see de Bary 
(2002, ch. 5.3) on the ‘metaprinciple’). This point suggests an ‘innocent until proven 
guilty’ attitude about our noetic equipment (see Davis 2006, 35–59) on Reid’s use of 
legal language and courtroom metaphor). By claiming that justification is natural Reid 
affects a contrast with internalism. Non-mental matters of fact, including features of the 
environment and the functioning of one’s body and brain, structure one’s justification.
As with Alvin Plantinga’s proper functionalism (Plantinga 1993), Reid’s is moti-
vated by his Christian theism. Reid is inspired to adopt externalism on the grounds that 
human beings have been created by a supremely intelligent, beneficent being to form 
true beliefs. Whether Reid’s externalism is justified by way of belief in God is a contro-
versial issue among commentators. Reid appeals to the fact of God’s wise creation of 
our faculties as support for his account of first principles on only a few occasions (INQ 
6.24, 196; EIP 2.21, 243–4 and 6.7, 516; EAP 617a). Several scholars conclude that 

THOMAS REID
721
Reid’s anti-skepticism depends firmly upon a prior and unjustified commitment to God’s 
existence (Daniels 1974/1989, 117; Norton 1979, 318; Popkin 1980/1993, 68), but this 
position faces problems, as research about the ‘detachability’ of Reid’s theism from his 
epistemology has revealed (DeBary 2001, 65–74, 160 and 165–88; Lehrer and Warner 
2000; Somerville 1995, 346).
Reid is aware of Descartes’ circular argumentation regarding knowledge and God, 
and he does not make a mistake of that kind. Perceptual beliefs, for example, are the 
“inspiration of the Almighty” in the sense that they are “the immediate effect of our 
constitution, which is the work of the Almighty.” But he explicitly says that ‘inspira-
tion’ does not imply epistemic dependence:
for a man would believe his senses though he had no notion of a Deity. He who is 
persuaded that he is the workmanship of God, and that it is a part of his constitu-
tion to believe his senses, may think that a good reason to confirm his belief. But 
he had the belief before he could give this or any other reason for it.
(EIP 2.20, 232; cf. INQ 6.20, 170; INQ 6.24, 193)
Reid’s externalism is unambiguously motivated by his theism, but knowledge of beliefs 
about the external world does not appear to depend upon prior justification of belief in 
God.
3.2. First Principles Are Token Beliefs
Though Reid’s use of common sense is wide and varied, the conceptual connection 
with externalism is unmistakable. His first principles are not principles derived via a 
priori reason but principles of common sense drawn from observations of human beings. 
Common sense is construed as a faculty responsible for judging of things self-evident 
(EIP 6.2, 426–7). So the beliefs yielded by epistemic first principles have prima facie 
external justification.
By examining an ambiguity in the structure of Reid’s epistemological principles we 
will uncover a key feature of Reid’s externalism. James Van Cleve (1999) argues that 
principles like (5) above can be read in two ways by adjusting the implicit universal 
quantifier:
5.1 It is a first principle that, for all people, every distinct perceptual belief is 
true.
5.2 For all people, every distinct perceptual belief is a first principle for that 
person.
(5.1) represents a ‘methodist’ interpretation, while (5.2) represents a ‘particularlist’ 
interpretation. The particularist version implies, for example, that my visual belief I see 
a tree is self-evident. In contrast, the generalist reading suggests that such a belief is not 
self-evident; its justification depends upon prior justification of and/or inference from 
(5.1). Reid’s claim that particular token beliefs are first principles has been analyzed in 
terms of theses about epistemic directness and reliabilism (Alston 1989; Pappas 1989; 
Cummins 1974).
This interpretation of Reidian first principles best represents Reid’s intent because it 
offers the contrast with Cartesian methodism Reid seeks and is grounded in empirical 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
722
psychology. Also, particularism draws together many of Reid’s ‘signs’ and ‘indications’ 
of the first principles. He says that first principles are self-evident, believed immedi-
ately upon being understood, and universal across cultures (see §4.1 below). Particular 
token perceptual beliefs—I see a tree—fit this description. However, those who inter-
pret Reidian first principles as being general principles, and not particular token beliefs, 
might argue that (i) those general principles are also self-evident, and that (ii) I see a 
tree is self-evident but not a first principle.
Several texts substantiate attribution of an externalism about justification to Reid. 
He says token perceptual beliefs are “part of that furniture which Nature hath given to 
the human understanding” (INQ 7, 215). He says, “There is no reasoning in percep-
tion” (INQ 6.20, 172). These commitments are represented in his examples:
When I hear a certain sound, I conclude immediately, without reasoning, that 
a coach passes by. There are no premises from which this conclusion is inferred 
by any rules of logic. It is the effect of a principle of our nature, common to us 
with the brutes.
(INQ 2.7, 38; see EIP 2.20, 231; cf. EIP 2.5, 98–9)
Sounds are received by our ears. They are non-consciously sorted by our minds into 
categories. If the sound is familiar from previous experience as being caused by a coach, 
then I will non-inferentially form a perceptual belief that there is a coach passing by.
4. Indirect Responses to the Semi-Skeptic
The global skeptic who has adopted a Cartesian method of doubt and presupposes a 
demanding definition of knowledge argues that I can know statements about the mind-
independent world only if the statements are incorrigible. Reid has little interest in 
sparring with such a skeptic because he cannot be refuted through philosophical reason-
ing (EIP 6.5, 480–1). However, the “semi-skeptical” position can be (INQ 5.7, 71–2). 
The semi-skeptic argues that without possession of, or access to, second-order justifica-
tion for beliefs such as I see a tree, I do not know I see a tree. More modestly, the semi-
skeptic might object that, in order to stop a regress, first principles must have positive 
epistemic status and cannot simply be presupposed without support. In Reid’s first reply 
to the semi-skeptic he marshals epistemic support for his first principles. In the second 
he makes a dialectical point about the nature of evidence.
4.1. Track-Record Support for First Principles
Reid denies that first principles are or need be incorrigible and affirms fallibilism about 
the justification of first principles: their justification is defeasible. But Reid does not say 
that first principles can be proven true; rather, “common principles seldom admit of 
direct proof, nor do they need it” (EIP 1.2, 39). Nonetheless, “there are certain ways of 
reasoning even about them, by which those that are just and solid may be confirmed, 
and those that are false may be detected” (EIP 6.4, 463). The contrast between directly 
proving and reasoning on behalf of a first principle hints at his approach (DeBary 2001, 
134).
First principles can be given justificatory support in the form of ‘indirect proofs,’ 
which include:

THOMAS REID
723
(a) denying a first principle yields inconsistency downstream because the first principle 
will inevitably be presupposed in further cognitive processing;
(b) denying a first principle yields absurdity;
(c) the content of languages supports the structure and content of first principles by 
representing psychologically real thought processes;
(d) they are formed early in life, and not by ratiocination on evidence;
(e) they are indispensible in practice.
Among the ‘signs’ that a purported claim is a first principle are that it is: accepted 
when understood; the result of original powers (not inference); in need of no external 
evidence to be psychologically compelling; and accessible to ordinary intelligence (EIP 
6.4, 463–7).
This support is not non-circular since first principles are principles that must be taken 
for granted. But evidence gathered through the use of perception cannot be used to jus-
tify my prior commitment to its reliability in a non-circular way. Likewise, if we attempt 
to prove that reasoning is not fallacious we fall into absurdity “since the very point in 
question is, whether reasoning may be trusted” (EIP 6.5, 480). (Reid is not a coherent-
ist about justification.) Reid offers a type of track-record argument to the semi-skeptic 
along with a distinction between viciously and non-viciously circular patterns of infer-
ence. For example, he says that induction can be given non-viciously circular justifica-
tion because “when we grow up and observe the course of nature, we can confirm [it] by 
reasoning” (EIP 6.5, 489). Reid realizes that his indirect arguments are successful only if 
first principles are in fact true.
Note that, like Alston, Moore and Wittgenstein, Reid’s use of track-record arguments 
of this form is primarily dialectical and intended to shift the burden of proof onto the 
semi-skeptic (see Alston 1985; Wolterstorff 2001). This is why Reid says: that “they 
require to be handled in a way peculiar to themselves. Their evidence is not demonstra-
tive, but intuitive. They require not proof, but to be placed in a proper point of view” 
(EIP 1.2, 41; see INQ 2.5, 32).
4.2. Parity of Belief-Forming Faculties Argument
This leads to the second of Reid’s indirect replies to the skeptic, foreshadowed above in 
§2.2: semi-skeptics are inconsistent because they place unjustified confidence in some 
faculties while withholding confidence in others.
Reason, says the sceptic, is the only judge of truth, and you ought to throw off 
every opinion and every belief that is not grounded on reason. Why, Sir, should 
I believe the faculty of reason more than that of perception; they came both out 
of the same shop, and were made by the same artist; and if he puts one piece of 
false ware into my hands, what should hinder him from putting another.
(INQ 6.20, 169; see EIP 2.22, 244 and 252; EIP 6.4, 463)
When Descartes believes reason is reliable and no other faculty is, Reid charges him 
with inconsistency. Reid frames a dilemma for the semi-skeptic: either we accept mul-
tiple sources of belief as reliable, or we reject them all (EIP 6.5, 480–1). Reid accepts 
them, relies upon his indirect proofs of the epistemological, belief-generating first prin-
ciples and grants these particularist first principles prima facie justification.

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
724
5. Direct Responses to the Semi-Skeptic
Reid also opposes specific semi-skeptical arguments with direct refutations. The semi-
skeptical arguments of most concern are mounted from a commitment to the Way of 
Ideas. The Way of Ideas asserts that forms of mental awareness are mediated by repre-
sentations, whether ideas or images or both.
5.1. The Way of Ideas
Reid’s arguments against skepticism often take the form of arguments against the Way 
of Ideas because:
[the] sceptical system . . . leans with its whole weight upon a hypothesis, which 
is ancient indeed, and hath been very generally received by philosophers, but 
of which I could find no solid proof. The hypothesis I mean, is, That nothing is 
perceived but what is in the mind which perceives it.
(INQ Dedication 4)
Reid (i) supports his claim that this claim about the objects of perception on the Way 
of Ideas (EIP 1.1, 31; cf. EIP 2.7, 105; IHM 1.7, 23); (ii) argues the Way of Ideas implies 
or suggests skepticism; then (iii) infers that the Way of Ideas is false by reductio. Reid 
offers other arguments against the Way of Ideas that have the effect of serving as proxy 
for arguments against skepticism.
5.2. Inferences in Perception
However, not all skeptical arguments in this milieu presuppose the existence of ideas 
as intermediaries (Greco 2004, 142). One important semi-skeptical argument begins 
with reflection on the nature of sensations as phenomenal experiences. These experi-
ences are insufficient evidence on which to infer beliefs about the mind-independent 
world. When a tree-like image appears to my eyes, the visual sensations are insufficient 
to justify my belief that I see a tree. Sensations are events in the mind and they do not 
represent mind-independent objects. Often they do not suggest true beliefs about the 
world, as in cases of mirages.
Reid responds to this concern by stressing that perception is a non-inferential process; 
by denying that sensation resembles what causes it; and by leaning upon his naturalistic 
account of our sensory experience (Greco 2004, 145). These points are deployed as 
objections to the foregoing skeptical argument. For example, whereas the semi-skeptic 
says that we form beliefs about sensations from which we cannot justifiably infer beliefs 
about the external world, Reid argues that we form no beliefs about sensations in the 
first place (see §6.2, below).
5.3. Perceptual Relativity Argument
The semi-skeptic might take a different tack in order to argue for the existence of ideas 
and for perceptual skepticism. Historically the most forceful arguments for mental inter-
mediaries arise from visual experience. For example, Hume says that, contrary to the 
“universal and primary opinion of all men,” philosophy teaches us that

THOMAS REID
725
nothing can ever be present to the mind but an image or perception, and that 
the senses are only the inlets through which these images are conveyed, with-
out being able to produce any immediate intercourse between the mind and 
the object. The table, which we see, seems to diminish, as we remove farther 
from it: but the real table, which exists independent of us, suffers no alteration: 
it was, therefore, nothing but its image, which was present to the mind. These 
are the obvious dictates of reason.
(Hume 2007, 111/12.9; see T 187/1.4.1.12)
Our visual sensations misinform us about the size of the table since our visual sensations 
are relative to the particular coordinates from which we view the table. So the table is 
not an immediate object of perception.
Reid has several replies to this argument. First, Hume equivocates on the implicit 
term ‘size of the table’ because it refers to both tangible and visible size (EIP 2.14, 182–
3; see INQ 6.2, 81–2). Tangible size does not change as I move my eyes relative to the 
table’s location, even though the visible size does. Second, Reid develops an account 
of visible figure, including discussion of the ontology of the objects of vision, the rela-
tionship between visible figure and tangible figure, and a geometry for visible space. 
Visible figure is not a private mental representation but, rather, a relational property 
between a pair of eyes and an object’s tangible figure (Van Cleve 2002; Nichols 2002c). 
Thus visible figures are not ideas; they have a foothold in the mind-independent world. 
They are also unlike ideas by being intersubjective: if anyone occupies the coordinates 
my eyes are now in, they will see the same figure as did I. Vision still gives us some 
measure of non-inferential knowledge about the world, even though this is nuanced 
and subtle.
Third, Reid turns the tables on proponents of the argument from perceptual relativity 
by arguing that his account and his geometry of visibles are the only plausible ways to 
explain the uniformity and regularity of visible figures across persons’ visual experience 
(Yaffe 2002). This constancy is difficult to explain in terms of each person being aware 
of their own private mental ideas. (On visible figure see Yaffe 2003a, 2003b; Falkenstein 
and Grandi 2003; Nichols 2007, ch. 4). Fourth, Reid argues that even if this argument 
were sound, it would not imply that the immediate objects of all perception are ideas. At 
most it implies that the immediate objects of visual perception are not mind-independent 
objects. Vision and touch are structured differently (EIP 2.14, 182–3), and touch gets us 
closer to the mind-independent world than does vision.
6. Perception and Perceptual Learning
As the previous point indicates, understanding Reid’s theory of perception is crucial 
for understanding his epistemology. In this section I explain the fundamentals of Reid’s 
theory of perception, then discuss its relevance for his epistemology.
6.1. The Perceptual Process
The perceptual process has three features: conception, belief and immediacy (EIP 2.5, 
111–12; cf. IHM 6.20, 168). Conception and belief are simple operations of the mind 
and Reid says of them that they are primitive and do not admit of analysis. States of 
conception are necessarily intentional states (EIP 4.1, 405), as are states of perception. 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
726
But one can conceive of things that do not exist (EIP 4.2, 320–3; cf. Nichols 2002a), 
whereas one cannot perceive things that do not exist.
Conceptions of mind-independent objects like those embedded in acts of perception 
are not obtained through a process of abstraction from our sensations (Van Cleve and 
Sosa 2001, 183). This is the principal point of Reid’s ‘experimentum crucis,’ a thought 
experiment in which a subject is given various tactile sensations (IHM 5.6–7, 65–72). 
In Reid’s judgment, the subject is in principle unable to form the conception of an 
extended, mind-independent body merely from his reception of tactile sensations. But, 
contrary to Berkeley, Reid is unwilling to conclude that we lack concepts of mind-inde-
pendent bodies. Instead, the concept of extension is innate in the sense that we are 
endowed with a natural capacity to form the concept of extension once cued with the 
appropriate sensory signs (IHM 5.7, 72; Nichols 2007, ch. 3). The immediate objects of 
perceptual states are mind-independent bodies and/or their qualities. My conception of 
the object is not mediated by mental representations, and my perception of the object 
is not mediated by mental representations.
Reid is the first clearly to distinguish between sensations and perceptions. Reidian 
sensations are non-intentional sensory events with phenomenal content, such as pains 
or tastes. He says, “The form of the expression, I feel pain, might seem to imply, that the 
feeling is something distinct from the pain felt; yet, in reality, there is no distinction” 
(IHM 6.20, 167–8). Sensations play important roles in perceptual events, even though 
Reid omits sensation from his formal definition of ‘perception.’ Specifically, sensations 
signal or suggest perceptions on the proviso that the agent is functioning properly in 
apt circumstances. Reid offers a complex taxonomy of the roles of sensations for various 
types of perception (INQ 2.7, 38, INQ 5.3, 59–60 and INQ 6.2, 177–8), though it has 
inconsistencies (Nichols 2007, Table 1 p. 88).
Reid recognizes that sensations are sometimes immediate objects of conception in acts 
of perception. But, first, Reid is not asserting every act of perception is direct. Second, 
perceptions in which we conceive of or think about sensations are typically perceptions 
of the secondary qualities of objects (IHM 5.5, 63; IHM 5.3, 61). Reid is up front about 
the way perception yields direct concepts of primary qualities and only yields ‘relative’ 
ideas of secondary qualities (EIP 2.17, 252). Third, ideas were originally hypothesized 
to be imagistic mental resemblances of objects in the world. Like Berkeley (Principles 
1.8, WGB ii, 44), Reid argues that the ontology of sensations as events implies that 
sensations are ill-suited to represent, which is in part why Reid presses sensations into 
service as signs functioning to suggest conceptions in perception (EIP 2.11, 156). How 
this process works is difficult to understand and is dealt with in Reid’s embryonic theory 
of suggestion.
6.2. Inference, Reasoning and Conceptual Content
We mentioned an objection from the semi-skeptic to the effect that a perceiver is unjus-
tified in believing I see a tree because perceptual experiences occur in the mind. The 
semi-skeptic might be persuaded to allow as foundational I see red or I seem to see a tree 
because the conceptual content of those statements does not require a causal connection 
to a mind-independent reality. According to the semi-skeptic, belief about a mind-inde-
pendent feature of the world is not non-inferentially known—if it is known at all. In this 
context contrasting terms seeing and seeing as illustrate perceptions with poor and rich 
conceptual content. My distinct perceptual belief I see a tree might be irresistible and 

THOMAS REID
727
self-evident in Reid’s psychological sense, but it could be produced by hallucination. This 
drives a wedge between mere psychological self-evidence and perceptual knowledge. 
Reid does not address skepticism motivated by hallucination cases, but he does discuss 
the cognitive and non-cognitive stages involved in acquiring perceptual knowledge.
First, Reid works with an implicit account of defeasible justification, as his objections 
to Descartes’ standards for knowledge imply (see §2.2). I see a tree is prima facie justi-
fied by virtue of being formed by my perceptual systems. I know I see a tree so long as my 
belief is produced by reliable perceptual systems that bear the appropriate connection 
to the external world, even if it is dubitable or corrigible. That is, I know I see a tree if 
it is produced reliably in the proper circumstances, and it is undefeated by further facts. 
If I’ve ingested something that causes my visual system to produce hallucinations, then 
Reid’s proper function condition fails and I am not justified in believing I see a tree.
Malfunctions of my perceptual equipment are relatively rare. But, second, particular 
first principles are defeated in another way discussed in EIP 2.22—‘Of the Fallacy of 
the Senses’: “We are disposed to impute our errors rather to false information than to 
inconclusive reasoning, and to blame our senses for the wrong conclusions we draw from 
their testimony” (EIP 2.22, 244–5). This suggests, oddly, that we do reason to perceptual 
beliefs in some cases in which we erroneously form false perceptual beliefs. But, the 
semi-skeptic would reply, if we reason in those cases, and those cases are phenomeno-
logically identical cases in which we form true beliefs, then, by parity, we also reason 
to form true perceptual beliefs. This appears inconsistent with Reid’s externalism about 
perceptual knowledge.
This presents a philosophical problem for Reid, and current research has not yet 
solved it. Nonetheless, Reid’s published and unpublished works yield clear evidence of a 
distinction between two stages of perceptual belief formation, which Reid calls ‘original’ 
and ‘acquired’ perception, that is helpful here. Original perceptions are formed without 
application of universals that allow differentiation and classification of the perceived 
object with other objects. They are produced “probably before judgment is brought 
forth; but these first notions are . . . gross and indistinct” (EIP 6.1, 416). Original visual 
perceptions include perceptions of “extension in two dimensions” (EIP 2.21, 236) and 
original tactile perceptions include the three-dimensional extension of objects (INQ 
6.20, 171). Acquired perceptions differ in content from original perceptions, but they 
also differ in the means by which they are formed. Their content is conceptually robust 
in comparison because to perceive the apple as an apple one must apply the general 
concept apple to the object of perception (INQ 6.24, 192). This requires “some ripeness 
of understanding” (EIP 2.19, 219; see Nichols 2002b, 2007).
Reid implicitly subdivides the category of acquired perceptions. To motivate this 
point, consider: he says the belief in the moon’s three-dimensionality is a conclusion 
“not obtained by simple perception, but by reasoning” (INQ 6.20, 172), but also says 
“Perception, whether original or acquired, implies no exercise of reason; and is com-
mon to men, children, idiots, and brutes” (INQ 6.20, 173). In manuscripts and drafts 
of EIP Reid distinguishes acquired beliefs that directly involve reasoning and acquired 
beliefs formed on the basis of prior reasoning. This process is complex. It starts with an 
original perception of sound waves in the ambient atmosphere. In the stage prior to the 
establishment of an habituated perception, I actively reason that the sound is caused 
by the carriage. Once that occurs several times, I automatically and non-inferentially 
form a belief, upon hearing that tell-tale sound, that a carriage passes by. In the latter 
stage, once the belief is habituated, I no longer reason. Only inferential perceptions are 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
728
formed by conscious reasoning; habituated perceptual beliefs merely depend upon prior 
reasoning for their justification.
7. Conclusion
Reid’s epistemology is naturalistic and is crafted from commitments to empirical psy-
chology. He offers a proto-reliabilist theory of empirical justification, and a fallibilist 
foundationalism that eschews a priori Cartesian demands on knowledge. His direct 
realist theory of perception yields non-inferential knowledge of the mind-independent 
world.
Future work on Reid’s epistemology is needed (i) to better understand first principles as 
psychological generalizations within the context of Reid’s Newtonian method, while still 
making sense of their justificatory status; (ii) to clarify the apparent confusion in Reid’s 
description of the role of reasoning in perception, and its relation to original and acquired 
perceptual beliefs; and (iii) to understand Reid’s account of the intentionality of concep-
tion and perception. This final point is only one of many issues surrounding Reid’s episte-
mology (memory knowledge; other minds; self-knowledge) that this cannot address.
Abbreviations
AC 
Animate Creation, Reid 1995.
EAP 
Essays on the Active Powers, Reid 1994
EIP 
Essays on the Intellectual Powers, Reid 2002a
INQ 
Inquiry into the Human Mind, Reid 1997
Bibliography
Alston, William. (1985). “Thomas Reid on Epistemic Principles,” History of Philosophy Quarterly 2: 435–
52.
——. (1989). “Reid on Perception and Conception.” In The Philosophy of Thomas Reid. M. Dalgarno and E. 
Matthews, eds., pp. 34–47. Kluwer: Dordrecht.
Berkeley, George. (1948). The Works of George Berkeley, ed. by A. Luce and T. Jessop. London: Nelson and 
Sons.
Cummins, Phillip. (1974). “Reid’s Realism,” Journal for the History of Philosophy 12: 317–40.
Daniels, Norman. (1974/1989). Thomas Reid’s Inquiry: The Geometry of Visibles and the Case for Realism. 
Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Davis, Thomas C. (2006). Thomas Reid’s Ethics: Moral Epistemology on a Legal Foundation. Continuum Studies 
in British Philosophy. James Fieser, Series Editor. London: Continuum.
de Bary, Phillip. (2002). Thomas Reid and Scepticism: His Reliabilist Response. London: Routledge.
Falkenstein, Lorne and Grandi, Giovanni. (2003). “The Role of Material Impressions in Reid’s Theory of 
Vision: a Critique of Gideon Yaffe’s ‘Reid on the Perception of the Visible Figure’,” The Journal of Scottish 
Philosophy 2: 117–33.
Greco, John. (2004). “Reid’s Reply to the Skeptic.” In The Cambridge Companion to Thomas Reid. T. Cuneo 
and R. van Woudenberg, eds., pp. 134–55. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hume, David. (2007). An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, ed. by Peter Millican. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Lehrer, Keith. (1998). “Reid, Hume and Common Sense.” Reid Studies 2: 15–26.
——, and Warner, Bradley. (2000). “Reid, God and Epistemology,” American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly 
74: 357–72.
Moore, G. E. (1959). Philosophical Papers. London: George Allen and Unwin.
Newton, Isaac. (1999). The Principia: Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy: A New Translation and 
Guide, ed. & trans. by I. B. Cohen and A. Whitman. Berkeley: University of California Press.

THOMAS REID
729
Nichols, Ryan. (2002a). “Reid on Fictional Objects and the Way of Ideas,” Philosophical Quarterly 52: 582–
601.
——. (2002b). “Learning and Conceptual Content in Reid’s Theory of Perception,” British Journal for the 
History of Philosophy 10: 561–90.
——. (2002c). “Visible Figure and Reid’s Theory of Visual Perception,” Hume Studies 28: 49–82.
——. (2007). Thomas Reid’s Theory of Perception. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Norton, David Fate. (1979). “Hume and his Scottish Critics.” In McGill Hume Studies. D. F. Norton et al., 
eds. San Diego: Austin Hill Press.
Pappas, George. (1989). “Sensation and Perception in Reid,” Noûs 23: 155–67.
Plantinga, Alvin. (1993). Warrant and Proper Function. New York: Oxford University Press.
Popkin, Richard. (1980/1993). The High Road to Pyrrhonism. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing.
Reid, Thomas. (1994). Essays on the Active Powers of Man, in The Works of Thomas Reid. Vol. 2, ed. by W. 
Hamilton. Bristol: Thoemmes Press.
——. (1995). Thomas Reid on the Animate Creation, ed. by P. Wood. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State 
University Press.
——. (1997). An Inquiry into the Human Mind on the Principles of Common Sense, ed. by D. Brookes. University 
Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press.
——. (2002a). Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man, ed. by D. Brookes. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania 
State University Press.
——. (2002b). The Correspondence of Thomas Reid, ed. by P. Wood. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State 
University Press.
——. (2004). Thomas Reid on Logic, Rhetoric, and the Fine Arts, ed. by A. Broadie. University Park, PA: 
Pennsylvania State University Press.
Somerville, James. (1995). The Enigmatic Parting Shot. London: Avebury.
Van Cleve, James. (1999). “Reid on the First Principles of Contingent Truths,” Reid Studies 3: 3–30.
——. (2002). “Thomas Reid’s Geometry of Visibles,” The Philosophical Review 111: 373–416.
—— and Sosa, Ernest. (2001). “Thomas Reid.” In The Blackwell Guide to the Modern Philosophers. Steven 
Emmanuel, ed., pp. 179–200. Blackwell: London.
Wolterstorff, Nicholas. (2001). Thomas Reid and the Story of Epistemology. New York: Cambridge University 
Press.
Wood, Paul. (1985). “Thomas Reid and the Scottish Enlightenment: An Exhibition to Celebrate the 200th 
Anniversary of the Publication of Thomas Reid’s Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man 1785.” Prepared 
for the Thomas Fisher Rare Book Library, University of Toronto (33 pp.).
Yaffe, Gideon. (2002). “Reconsidering Reid’s Geometry of Visibles,” Philosophical Quarterly 52: 602–20.
——. (2003a). “Reid on the Perception of Visible Figure,” The Journal of Scottish Philosophy 2: 103–15.
——. (2003b). “The Office of an Introspectible Sensation: A Reply to Falkenstein and Grandi,” The Journal 
of Scottish Philosophy 2: 135–40.

65
DAVID HUME
Helen Beebee
1. Introduction
David Hume (1711–76) was an empiricist—the third in the famous trio of British 
Empiricists, after John Locke and George Berkeley. His aim, as stated in the Introduction 
to his Treatise of Human Nature (1739–40, henceforth “T”), is to instigate the “science 
of man”; and the appropriate method, Hume thinks, is “experimental philosophy”: “the 
only solid foundation we can give to this science . . . must be laid on experience and 
observation.” Hume’s science of man, then, is the “application of experimental phi-
losophy to moral subjects” (T xx). Hume’s contemporary status as a founding father 
of analytic philosophy in the empiricist tradition thus needs to be approached with a 
certain amount of caution; indeed, as I shall argue, in the particular case of the Problem 
of Induction Hume’s interests are more psychological than epistemological.
Nonetheless, an important feature of the context of Hume’s work is his opposition 
to what Edward Craig (1987) calls the “Image of God” doctrine, according to which 
human beings are imperfect versions of God. The Image of God doctrine carries with 
it substantive epistemological commitments, and at least part of Hume’s aim is to show 
that those commitments are spurious. For example, the Image of God doctrine drives 
the view that in principle, a priori access to the nature of the world is possible. Such a 
view naturally leads to a conception of the causal structure of the world that is analogous 
to logical entailment, so that stages in a causal process are like stages of a mathematical 
proof: if we could fully comprehend the nature of the cause, we would be able to infer 
a priori what the next stage in the process would be. Thus, for example, the principle 
ex nihilo nihil fit (nothing comes from nothing) was generally taken to be a conceptual 
truth, knowable a priori, as was the related principle that a cause must contain at least 
as much reality as its effect—a principle that Descartes famously used in his “Trademark 
Argument” for the existence of God in the Meditations.
Hume, in opposition to this consequence of the Image of God doctrine, holds that: 
“If we reason a priori, anything may appear able to produce anything. The falling of a 
pebble may, for aught we know, extinguish the sun; or the wish of a man control the 
planets in their orbits” (Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, 1748—henceforth 
“E”—164). His discussion of inductive inference is aimed, at least in part, at establish-
ing this claim that the inference from causes to effects cannot be a priori. From a con-
temporary perspective, this is hardly a claim that needs to be justified; but of course the 
acknowledged implausibility of the Image of God doctrine is part of the philosophical 
debt we owe to Hume.
Hume’s contribution to epistemology is not, of course, limited to his discussion of 

DAVID HUME
731
induction (the topic of §2 below). Inter alia, he also grapples with the problem of skep-
ticism concerning the external world. I discuss Hume’s views about belief in the external 
world in §3, and conclude, in §4, with a general discussion of Hume’s attitude towards 
skepticism.
2. Inductive Inference (or Causal Reasoning)
Hume is often credited with inventing, and showing to be insoluble, the “Problem of 
Induction.” The Problem of Induction is the problem of justifying the belief that the 
unobserved resembles the observed. For example, on every previous occasion when I 
pressed the brake in a car, the car slowed down; and so, this time I press the brake, I 
expect the car to do the same. But what, if anything, justifies this belief? That the car 
has slowed down in the past does not entail that it will do so on this occasion; so why 
should we think that my experience of past slowing-downs justifies the belief that it 
will slow down now? Or, in other words, what justifies the inference from “all previous 
brake-pressings have been followed by slowing down” to “this brake-pressing will be 
followed by slowing down?” An adequate answer to this question would be a solution to 
the Problem of Induction; unfortunately such an answer turns out to be very hard (and, 
according to some philosophers, impossible) to come up with.
While, as we shall see, the main elements of the Problem of Induction are certainly 
present in Hume’s discussion, it is not at all clear that he is really concerned with the 
Problem of Induction—a problem about the justification of beliefs about the unob-
served—at all. In fact, I shall claim, his concern is rather with the psychological ques-
tion of how belief in the unobserved arises.
2.1. Inductive Inference and Causation
One important difference between the Problem of Induction as standardly understood 
and Hume’s discussion is that for Hume, “inductive” inference is reasoning from causes 
to effects (he does not use the terms “inductive” and “induction” at all; he merely talks, 
in the Enquiry (E 36), about our being “induced to expect” effects). Indeed, his discus-
sion of what I shall call causal reasoning—the inference from cause to effect—is an 
essential part of a larger project, that of examining the “idea” of causation (we can think 
of Hume’s “ideas” roughly as concepts). As we shall see, Hume’s own view about causal 
reasoning is that the inference is a matter of mere custom or habit. Having observed 
sufficiently many Cs being followed by Es, on observing a C we automatically come to 
expect an E to follow—not as a result of any process of “argument or ratiocination” (E 
39) but as a result of an associative mechanism: the same psychological mechanism 
that leads a dog to expect a walk when its lead is taken off its hook. And it turns out, 
in Hume’s famous discussion of the idea of necessary connection (in the Treatise Book 
I, Part III, §14—T 155–73—and the Enquiry, §7, E 60–79), that it is the operation of 
this mechanism—the “determination of the mind to pass from one object to its usual 
attendant” (T 165)—that provides the impression-source for this idea (Hume being an 
empiricist, all legitimate ideas must have their source in an element of experience, or 
an “impression”).
So for Hume, (a) judging that one event is the cause of another, and (b) inferring 
the existence of the second on the basis of past experience of similar events being “con-
stantly conjoined” are very closely connected:

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
732
when one species of event has always, in all instances, been conjoined with 
another, we make no longer any scruple of foretelling one upon the appearance 
of the other, and of employing that reasoning [namely custom or habit], which 
can alone assure us of any matter of fact or existence. We then call the one 
object, Cause; the other, Effect. (E 75)
Hume’s point here is not that, having established, via inductive inference, that the two 
“species of event” are constantly conjoined, we infer that the first is a cause of the sec-
ond; rather, our inferring the second event and our thinking of it as an effect of the first 
are two sides of the same coin, the inference supplying the impression of necessary con-
nection on the basis of which we make the causal judgment. This approach contrasts 
sharply with most contemporary discussions of the Problem of Induction, which tend to 
focus on the inference from the observed to the unobserved in isolation from any judg-
ments we might happen to make about a causal connection between the relevant events 
or objects (see, for example, Howson 2000).
2.2. The Argument
Hume’s discussion of causal reasoning occurs in Book I, Part III, Section VI of the 
Treatise (T 86–94) and, in a slightly different form, in §4 of the Enquiry (E 32–9). Hume 
himself often talks about looking for a “foundation” for the inference from causes to 
effects. Note, however, that this can be given an epistemological or a psychological 
reading: a “foundation” for the inference might be something that confers justification 
on it, or else it might be something that explains how the inference happens. For now, 
I shall preserve this ambiguity and just focus on sketching the argument; I shall later 
return to the question of whether we should think of Hume’s interest as a psychological 
or an epistemological interest. Here, then, is how Hume’s argument concerning causal 
reasoning—the inference from causes to effects—proceeds. (I shall follow the Treatise 
version of the overall argument.)
First of all, Hume establishes that “the inference we draw from cause to effect, is not 
deriv’d merely from a survey of these particular objects, and from such a penetration 
into their essences as may discover the dependence of the one upon the other” (T 86). 
In other words, we cannot tell, just by examining one object or event, what its effects 
will be. We can be sure of this because “[s]uch an inference wou’d amount to knowl-
edge, and wou’d imply the absolute contradiction and impossibility of conceiving any 
thing different” (T 86–7); whereas clearly it always is conceivable that the effect might 
not occur. It might be a well-established fact that if you drop a wine glass on a stone 
floor from a great height it will shatter, but we can perfectly well imagine it failing to 
do so (while we cannot similarly imagine, say, Socrates’ being a man and all men are 
being mortal, and yet Socrates not being mortal). Since, according to what is sometimes 
called Hume’s “Conceivability Principle,” nothing whose denial is conceivable can be 
known a priori, it cannot be known a priori, and just on the basis of the observation or 
examination of c, that e will be one of its effects. Hume concludes from this that it is “by 
EXPERIENCE only, that we can infer the existence of one object from that of another” 
(T 87). In other words, it is only when we have experienced several Cs being followed 
by Es that we are able, on observing a C, to infer that an E will follow.
Having established that inference from causes to effects proceeds on the basis of past 
observation of constant conjunction, Hume asks “[w]hether experience produces the 

DAVID HUME
733
idea [of the effect] by means of the understanding or of the imagination; whether we are 
determin’d by reason to make the transition, or by a certain association and relation of 
perceptions” (T 88–9). Hume will eventually conclude that the correct account is the 
latter; so he needs to rule out the possibility that the inference from cause to effect is 
founded on some process of reasoning or argument and is therefore the product of the 
understanding. And, he thinks, there is only one possible way this could work: “If reason 
determin’d us, it wou’d proceed upon that principle, that instances, of which we have had 
no experience, must resemble those, of which we have had experience, and that the course of 
nature continues always uniformly the same” (T 89). This principle is often known as the 
“Principle of the Uniformity of Nature” (PUN). So the suggestion Hume is considering 
is that the inference from cause to effect proceeds something like this:
(P1) Cs have always been followed by Es in my experience.
(P2) A C has just occurred.
(P3) Instances I haven’t observed resemble instances I have observed (PUN).
Therefore
(C) An E will occur.
Hume then asks on what (P3) is founded: “let us consider all the arguments, upon 
which such a proposition [PUN] may be suppos’d to be founded; and as these must be 
deriv’d either from knowledge or probability, let us cast our eye on each of these degrees 
of evidence, and see whether they afford any just conclusion of this nature” (T 89). By 
“knowledge” Hume means a priori knowledge, and by “probability” he means belief 
derived from experience. His plan is to show that PUN (a) cannot be known a priori, 
and (b) cannot non-circularly be founded on reasoning from experience.
The first part of the argument, (a), is easy, and simply involves a second appeal to the 
Conceivability Principle. Since we can easily imagine a change in the course of nature, 
it is possible that PUN is false, and so it cannot be known a priori.
As for (b), Hume says:
We have said that all arguments concerning existence are founded on the rela-
tion of cause and effect; that our knowledge of that relation is derived entirely 
from experience; and that all our experimental conclusions proceed upon the 
supposition that the future will be conformable to the past. To endeavour, 
therefore, the proof of this last supposition by probable arguments, or argu-
ments regarding existence, must evidently be going in a circle. (E 35–6)
In other words, all our “experimental conclusions” (that is, beliefs that are founded 
on reasoning from experience or “probable arguments”) presuppose PUN. Hence PUN 
cannot itself be founded on reasoning from experience, because such reasoning presup-
poses that very principle. (I shall claim in §2.3 below, however, that Hume’s complaint 
here makes better sense when the argument from (P1–3) to (C) is construed as a pos-
sible method for forming, rather than justifying, beliefs.)
Hume presents a similar argument against the claim that reasoning from causes to 
effects proceeds via appeal to an unknown “power of production,” present in the cause, 
which guarantees the occurrence of the effect (T 90–2 and E 36–8). Grant, for the sake 
of the argument, that past experience of the constant conjunction of Cs and Es gives 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
734
us reason to believe in the past presence, in Cs, of the “power” to produce Es. Even so, 
without presupposing PUN, there is no foundation for the required inference to “the 
current C has the power to produce an E,” and so no foundation for the inference to the 
occurrence of the effect.
That completes Hume’s argument—after which he proceeds to provide what he calls 
a “sceptical solution” to the problem he has been discussing, which is his well-known 
claim that causal reasoning in fact arises merely as a matter of “Custom or Habit” (E 43) 
or a “principle of association” (T 93).
There can be very few other cases of such a short passage—a mere handful of pages—
having such a powerful and long-lasting impact on philosophical inquiry. While of course 
most contemporary philosophers do not work directly on the Problem of Induction, 
no orthodoxy has emerged concerning the best solution to it. But was the Problem of 
Induction, conceived as a problem about justifying our beliefs about the unobserved, really 
what Hume was interested in? I shall briefly argue in the next section that it was not.
2.3. Interpretative Issues
The standard interpretation of Hume’s discussion of causal reasoning is that he really is 
raising—and pronouncing insoluble—the Problem of Induction, that is, the problem of 
justifying our beliefs about the unobserved. Hence his “solution” is merely a “sceptical 
solution”: it is not supposed to undermine inductive skepticism, but only to excuse our 
reliance on induction on the grounds that we cannot help ourselves, our psychological 
mechanisms being what they are. However, this interpretation is increasingly regarded 
as controversial. Some interpreters have argued that Hume’s intention in his discussion 
of causal reasoning is merely to show that causal reasoning is not a priori reasoning (see, 
for example, Flew 1961 and Stove 1965)—something that does not require him to view 
causal reasoning as unjustified. Others have argued that his aim is to show that belief in 
the unobserved does not in fact arise as a matter of some process of argument about causal 
reasoning (see, for example, Garrett 1997 and Noonan 1999).
My own view is that this latter interpretation is closer to the mark, in that it correctly 
construes the issue Hume is concerned with as a psychological rather than an epistemo-
logical issue. The fact that Hume’s stated project, as described in the Introduction to 
the Treatise, is a “science of man” (T xvi), provides one reason to think that inductive 
skepticism is not on his agenda. After all, according to an inductive skeptic, a “science 
of man” could only deliver completely unwarranted conclusions. The traditional inter-
pretation of his “sceptical solution”—that it excuses, in some sense, our reliance on 
causal reasoning by showing it to be psychologically mandatory—does not help here, 
since indulging in “experimental philosophy” of the kind Hume pursues in his science of 
man is not itself psychologically mandatory. Hume appears both to endorse the experi-
mental method and to regard its pursuit as a distinctly optional enterprise.
I believe that Hume’s primary interest in his discussion of causal reasoning is the 
origin of belief. When I have an impression as of, say, depressing the brake pedal, what 
is the process or mechanism by which I thereby come to believe that the car will slow 
down? One way in which beliefs can be formed is via a priori reasoning: if I start with 
the belief that Jane has three apples and June has two apples, I can infer a priori—and 
hence come to believe—that Jane has more apples than June. But Hume shows that 
reasoning from causes to effects is not a priori reasoning, so belief in the effect, given the 
impression of the cause, cannot come about in that way. How, then, does belief in the 

DAVID HUME
735
effect come about? Crucially, the question here is a general question: not, “how did this 
particular belief come about?” but “how does belief in general come about?” We come 
into the world with no beliefs about any matter of fact that is not present to our senses, 
but we end up with plenty; how does this happen?
On this interpretation of the question Hume wants to answer, the problem with the 
argument invoking PUN is not that it is circular in a justificatory sense, but that it is 
circular in an explanatory sense: the argument from (P1–3) to (C) fails not as an argu-
ment one might give in an attempt to justify belief in (C), but as an attempt to provide 
a model for the formation of belief in general. Hume thinks he has already explained 
the origin of a priori knowledge, through his account of reasoning concerning “rela-
tions of ideas” (T 69–73). So if PUN were knowable a priori, belief in the effect could 
come about as a result of a priori inference from (P1) (an item of memory), (P2) (an 
impression) and (P3) (an item of knowledge): the mechanism that generates belief 
would have as input only mental items whose origins Hume takes himself already suc-
cessfully to have explained. But PUN is not knowable a priori, so its status must be that 
of a belief. But in that case, appeal to PUN is useless in an explanation of how beliefs in 
general arise, for the alleged belief-generating mechanism—the inference from (P1–3) 
to (C)—itself takes a belief as part of the input. So it can only explain how we can come 
to have some particular belief once we already have other beliefs.
The only negative epistemological consequence that Hume intends to draw from his 
discussion of causal reasoning, on this interpretation, is that causal reasoning cannot be 
justified by (because it cannot be a result of) a priori inference from premises that are 
known either a priori or on the basis of immediate sensory experience. Thus he does 
not intend to raise the issue of whether causal reasoning can be justified empirically at 
all; indeed, he appears to simply take it for granted that it can be, and frequently refers 
to causal reasoning as a “just” form of reasoning (though see Beebee 2006: 66–74 for 
the claim that he actually offers—though does not discuss in any detail—a reliabilist 
justification of induction).
On the other hand, Hume is not completely unaware of inductive skepticism as a 
possible philosophical position; but he dismisses it:
For here is the chief and most confounding objection to excessive skepticism, 
that no durable good can ever result from it; while it remains in its full force and 
vigour. We need only ask such a sceptic, What his meaning is? And what he pro-
poses by all these curious researches? He is immediately at a loss, and knows not 
what to answer . . . a Pyrrhonian cannot expect, that his philosophy will have 
any constant influence on the mind: or if it had, that its influence would be 
beneficial to society. On the contrary, he must acknowledge, if he will acknowl-
edge anything, that all human life must perish, were his principles universally 
and steadily to prevail. (E 159–60)
I discuss the merits of this response, along with Hume’s response to external-world skep-
ticism, in §4 below.
3. Skepticism about the External World
Hume’s interest in our belief about the external world is, as with the case of causal rea-
soning, at least partly psychological. He is interested, in the first instance, in how we get 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
736
to have that belief, rather than (as is more usual) being interested solely in whether it is 
justified. Nonetheless, as with the case of causal reasoning, his psychological investiga-
tion has epistemological consequences. And the consequences appear to be rather more 
serious in the case of belief in the external world, since Hume appears to think that 
there are positive reasons to think that that belief is false.
Hume’s account of belief in the external world in the Treatise is lengthy and difficult, 
taking up a good proportion of Book IV. In the Enquiry, by contrast, it takes up only a 
handful of pages (Part I of §12, E 149–55). I shall draw on the Enquiry version of the 
discussion here, first outlining Hume’s basic account and then, in §3.2, addressing the 
question of whether he should be thought of as a skeptic about the existence of the 
external world.
3.1. Belief in the External World
Hume’s account starts out by noting that “men are carried, by a natural instinct or pre-
possession, to repose faith in their senses; and that, without any reasoning . . . we always 
suppose an external universe, which depends not on our perception, but would exist, 
though we and every sensible creature were absent or annihilated” (E 151). When “men 
follow this blind and powerful instinct of nature, they always suppose the very images, 
presented by the senses, to be the external objects, and never entertain any suspicion, 
that the one are nothing but representations of the other” (ibid.). So the “natural,” 
pre-reflective view, according to Hume, is that (a) the world we perceive exists indepen-
dently of our perception of it, but (b) that very independently existing world is nothing 
more than our perceptions. Not surprisingly, Hume finds this view to be untenable: it 
is a view that is “destroyed by the slightest philosophy” (E 152). For we know full well 
that, for example, moving further away from a table does not result in any change in the 
table, while it does result in a change in our perception (the table seems smaller). So, 
on reflection, we know that the table itself cannot be identified with our perception of 
it: perceptions are “fleeting copies or representations of other existences, which remain 
uniform and independent” (ibid.). In the Treatise, Hume describes the two views just 
described as the “vulgar” and the “philosophical” views, the latter being a view that 
postulates a “double existence” (T 189) since it is ontologically committed both to 
perceptions and to external objects that those perceptions represent.
The problem with the “double existence” view, of course, is that we now need an argu-
ment to the effect that the postulated mind-independent objects really do exist—that 
“the perceptions of the mind must be caused by external objects, entirely different from 
them, though resembling them (if that be possible)” (E 152–3). And no such argument 
is possible. It is a “question of fact” (E 153) whether our perceptions are so caused, and 
so our grounds for belief in external objects must be reasoning from experience—that is, 
causal reasoning. Unfortunately, on this question “experience is, and must be entirely 
silent. The mind has never anything present to it but the perceptions, and cannot pos-
sibly reach any experience of their connexion with objects. The supposition of such a 
connection is, therefore, without any foundation in reasoning” (ibid.). In other words, 
causal reasoning requires—as we saw above—experience of constant conjunction. But 
no such experience is possible, when one of the conjuncts—the supposed cause (i.e. 
external objects, considered as distinct from perceptions)—can never be present to the 
mind. Thus “the opinion of external existence . . . if it rested on natural instinct [the 
‘vulgar’ view], is contrary to reason, and if referred to reason, is contrary to natural 

DAVID HUME
737
instinct [that is, causal reasoning], and at the same time carries no rational evidence 
with it” (E 155).
In fact things appear to be even worse than that. Hume seems to endorse Berkeley’s 
argument against the primary–secondary quality distinction. It is “universally allowed” 
that secondary qualities (heat, color, and so on) “exist not in the objects themselves, but 
are perceptions of the mind, without any archetype or model, which they represent.” 
But our ideas of supposed primary qualities are equally “entirely acquired from the senses 
of sight and feeling; and if all the qualities, perceived by the senses, be in the mind, not 
in the object, the same conclusion must reach the idea of extension” (E 154). Thus the 
opinion of external existence turns out not merely to carry “no rational evidence with 
it”; it is actually “contrary to reason . . . Bereave matter of all its intelligible qualities, 
both primary and secondary, and you in a manner annihilate it, and leave only a certain 
unknown, inexplicable something, as the cause of our perceptions; a notion so imperfect, 
that no sceptic will think it worth while to contend against it” (E 155).
3.2. Hume’s Response to Skepticism?
Hume confronts skepticism head-on at the end of both Book I of the Treatise and 
(briefly) the Enquiry; however, the difference in his attitude towards the skeptical posi-
tion his own philosophical system has forced him into in the two works is, at least at first 
sight, quite striking. In the Treatise, Hume’s tone verges on despair:
The intense view of these manifold contradictions and imperfections in human 
reason has so wrought upon me, and heated my brain, that I am ready to reject 
all belief and reasoning, and can look upon no opinion as more probable or 
likely than another. (T 268–9)
Luckily this melancholy state is easily remedied, however, as Hume explains:
Most fortunately it happens, that since reason is incapable of dispelling these 
clouds, nature herself suffices to that purpose, and cures me of this philosophi-
cal melancholy and delerium . . . I dine, I play a game of back-gammon, I 
converse, and am merry with my friends . . . Here then I find myself absolutely 
and necessarily determin’d to live, and talk, and act like other people in the 
common affairs of life. (ibid.)
Of course, this is hardly a philosophical response to the skeptical problem. (Plagued by 
doubts about the existence of the external world? Play backgammon!) Does Hume do 
any better in the Enquiry?
Well, in fact, not only is the melancholia of the Treatise nowhere to be found; in the 
Enquiry Hume barely even seems to bother with considering the consequences of his 
own argument that belief in the existence of the external world is “contrary to reason.” 
He does, as we saw in §2.3, complain that “Pyrrhonian” skepticism cannot, as a mat-
ter of psychological fact, be maintained in the long term, and even if it could it would 
have serious consequences (“men [would] remain in total lethargy, till the necessities 
of nature, unsatisfied, put an end to their miserable existence” (E 160).) But, here, 
he seems to be talking only about inductive skepticism, since this passage is preceded 
by one in which skepticism is identified as the insistence that the natural instinct by 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
738
which we reason from causes and effects “may be fallacious and deceitful” (E 159). 
There seems to be no consideration of the skeptical position on the external world that 
he himself has generated at all. All Hume directly has to say appears when introducing 
the Berkeleian argument against the primary–secondary quality distinction. He says of 
this argument—one he apparently endorses—that it “might merit our attention, were 
it requisite to dive so deep, in order to discover arguments and reasonings, which can 
so little serve to any serious purpose” (E 154). So it looks as though he takes external-
world skepticism to be in the same boat as “Pyrrhonian” skepticism: it serves no useful 
purpose, so we should not waste our time worrying about it.
Given all this (not to mention the fact that he sometimes describes himself as a skep-
tical philosopher), it is easy to see why Hume is traditionally characterized as a skeptic. 
He is clearly well aware of—and indeed appears to endorse—familiar skeptical argu-
ments; and does not, apparently, so much as attempt to find fault with them. However, 
several interpreters have argued that Hume is not in fact a skeptic, in the sense of think-
ing that belief in the external world is unreasonable or unjustified, at all. The fact that 
he does not think that the skeptical arguments can be faulted in the sense of relying on 
dubious premises or fallacious reasoning does not, it is argued, amount to his thinking 
that they cannot be faulted on other grounds.
The source of the non-skeptical conception of Hume’s overall position lies in the 
importance he places on our natural instincts or propensities. In the case of causal rea-
soning, I argued that Hume sees the custom or habit that underlies that reasoning as 
being perfectly legitimate, despite the fact that the appeal to custom or habit clearly fails 
to engage with the inductive skeptic’s argument on its own terms. Arguably, his attitude 
towards external-world skepticism is similar. We know that the “vulgar” belief in the 
external world, according to which external objects are no more than perceptions, is 
false and gives way to the “double existence” view. The vulgar view, Hume thinks, is 
delivered by a “blind and powerful instinct of nature” (E 151). So the double existence 
view, while not delivered straightforwardly by a blind and powerful instinct, is nonethe-
less delivered by blind instinct together with a modicum of straightforward reasoning 
(tables don’t get smaller when you move away from them, so they must be distinct from 
our perceptions). So the double existence view, while different to the “vulgar” view, 
nonetheless “acquires all its influence on the imagination from the vulgar one” (T 213).
This is significant, according to some interpreters, when combined with what Don 
Garrett calls the “Title Principle” (Garrett 1997: 234): “where reason is lively, and 
mixes itself with some propensity,” Hume says, “it ought to be assented to. Where it does 
not, it never can have any title to operate upon us” (T 270). In the case of the double 
existence view, reason does “mix itself with some propensity,” since it is, precisely, the 
result of the vulgar view—itself the result of a natural propensity—together with some 
straightforward reasoning. So the double existence view “ought to be assented to.”
Of course, this still leaves the more troublesome Berkeleian argument for skepticism: 
one according to which belief in the external world is not merely “without any foun-
dation in [causal] reasoning” but “contrary to reason.” Peter Kail points out that the 
Title Principle shows us what is wrong with the Berkeleian argument: unlike the double 
existence view, the view that primary as well as secondary qualities are merely products 
of the mind does not “mix itself with some propensity.” It is the product of pure philo-
sophical argument, and as such has no “title to operate upon us” (see Kail 2007: 70).
On this view, then, Hume is no skeptic about the external world; he is, rather, an 
indirect realist. Our perceptions represent external, mind-independent reality. We 

DAVID HUME
739
cannot know that this external world exists, or that external objects resemble our 
perceptions in any way. Indeed, we cannot even reach such a conclusion by deploy-
ing probable reasoning. Nonetheless, the existence of mind-independent objects that 
resemble our perceptions merits our assent because it arises as a result of our natural 
propensities: belief in the external world is what is sometimes known as a “natural 
belief.”
4. Skepticism, Natural Propensities and the Job of Philosophy
Hume’s response to skepticism concerning both causal reasoning and the external world 
might seem rather unconvincing. After all, why should we believe what we are naturally 
disposed to believe (or corrected versions of these beliefs), when there are perfectly 
sound philosophical reasons to think that such beliefs are not warranted? Hume says, 
apparently, that we should believe these things; but does he—by his own lights—have 
any legitimate reasons for saying so?
One way to answer this question in the affirmative connects with Hume’s claim that 
what, fundamentally, is wrong with skepticism is that it is psychologically impossible 
to live with full-time and serves no useful purpose—and that the best way to deal with 
it is to get out more. This makes considerably more sense if we think of skepticism not 
as merely the view that belief in the external world (or in the deliverances of causal 
reasoning) is unwarranted, but rather as the view that that belief—and the processes 
that give rise to it—ought to be abandoned. Thus conceived, the fact that skepticism is 
not (as Stephen Buckle puts it) “livable” seems to be a reasonable objection to it (see 
Buckle 2001: 310–11), since the skeptic has no positive proposal for a better set of beliefs 
or processes of reasoning by which to live.
Hume does explicitly endorse what he calls “a more mitigated scepticism” (E 161): “a 
degree of doubt, and caution, and modesty, which, in all kinds of scrutiny and decision, 
ought for ever to accompany a just reasoner” (E 162). In addition, “[a]nother species 
of mitigated scepticism, which may be of advantage to mankind, and which may be the 
natural result of the Pyhrronian doubts and scruples, is the limitation of our enquiries to 
such subjects are best adapted to the narrow capacity of human understanding” (ibid.). 
And we can see this “species” of skepticism as precisely the kind of project that Hume 
is undertaking. As Buckle puts it:
From the ashes of unbounded skepticism a new philosophy can arise, a phi-
losophy that is able to draw constructive conclusions—especially about the 
limits of our rational powers—from the failings of dogmatic and Pyrrhonian 
philosophy alike; and, by a careful application of the principles of experimental 
philosophy and its mechanical picture of the world, forge principles of probable 
judgements on which we can confidently rely in the conduct of life.
(Buckle 2001: 314)
Indeed, this “new philosophy,” while it “may be the natural result of the Pyrrhonian 
doubts and scruples,” is also conceived by Hume as “nothing but the reflections of com-
mon life, methodized and corrected” (E 162). And, in the Treatise—after the hand-
wringing over whether one ought to spend one’s time shut in the study despairing of the 
foundations for one’s opinions or out dining with friends—he settles on essentially the 
same view:

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
740
Since therefore ’tis almost impossible for the mind of man to rest, like those of 
beasts, in that narrow circle of objects, which are the subject of daily conver-
sation and action, we ought only to deliberate concerning the choice of our 
guide, and ought to prefer that which is safest and most agreeable. And in this 
respect I make bold to recommend philosophy, and shall not scruple to give it 
the preference to superstition of every kind or denomination. (T 271)
The upshot of all of this is that while on the one hand Hume does not provide a philo-
sophical response to skepticism that, as it were, meets it on its own territory, he does 
provide a response that enshrines a view about the nature and purpose of philosophical 
inquiry. The arguments that lead to skepticism are legitimate on their own terms. But 
a philosopher who stops with skepticism, and fails to draw any conclusions about how 
we ought to proceed in our daily lives, has failed in an important respect, since her 
own conclusions demonstrate how very little her own, narrow philosophical method 
contributes to a proper understanding of our beliefs and actions. Such an understanding 
must include positive recommendations for guiding and correcting those beliefs and 
actions, taking account of—rather than attempting to undermine—our natural pro-
pensities. The failure of skepticism is not that it deploys false assumptions or fallacious 
reasoning; it is, rather, a failure to provide any positive, livable answer to the question, 
“what ought we to believe?” (since the answer, “nothing,” is clearly not livable). The 
skeptic’s mistake is thus to have downed tools before finishing the philosophical job.
Bibliography
Beebee, H. (2006) Hume on Causation. Abingdon: Routledge.
Buckle, S. (2001) Hume’s Enlightenment Tract. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Craig, E. (1987) The Mind of God and the Works of Man. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Flew, A. (1961) Hume’s Philosophy of Belief. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Garrett, D. (1997) Cognition and Commitment in Hume’s Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Howson, C. (2000) Hume’s Problem: Induction and the Justification of Belief. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Hume, D. (1739–40) (T), A Treatise of Human Nature, ed. L. A. Selby-Bigge, 2nd edition, revised and ed. P. 
H. Nidditch. Oxford: Clarendon Press (1978).
—— (1748) (E), Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, in D. Hume, Enquiries Concerning Human 
Understanding and Concerning the Principles of Morals (1748/51), ed. L. A. Selby-Bigge, 3rd edition, revised 
and ed. P. H. Nidditch. Oxford: Clarendon Press (1975).
Kail, P. J. E. (2007) Projection and Realism in Hume’s Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Noonan, H. (1999) Hume on Knowledge. London: Routledge.
Stove, D. C. (1965) “Hume, Probability, and Induction,” The Philosophical Review 74, 160–77.
Further Reading
Beebee, H. (2006) Hume on Causation. Abingdon: Routledge. (Chapters 2 and 3 discuss Hume’s theories of 
a priori and causal reasoning.)
Millican, P. (2002) “Hume’s Sceptical Doubts Concerning Induction,” in his Reading Hume on the 
Understanding. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 107–73. (A detailed and systematic analysis of Hume’s argument 
concerning causal reasoning.)
Noonan, H. (1999) Hume on Knowledge. London: Routledge. (An introductory-level textbook. Chapters 3 
and 4 discuss causal reasoning and belief in the external world.)
Stroud, B. (1977) Hume. London: Routledge. (The classic Hume textbook, though less introductory than 
Noonan 1999. Chapters III–V discuss causal reasoning and belief in the external world.)

66
IMMANUEL KANT
Eckart Förster
Discussions of Kant’s epistemology usually take their departure from his Critique of Pure 
Reason (1781), and justifiably so. Yet in the years preceding its publication, the so-called 
pre-critical period, Kant made a number of discoveries that became the basis for his 
mature philosophy. In particular, there are three insights without which the Critique 
itself would have been impossible. The first one concerns the difference between logi-
cal and real possibility, the second concerns the differences between the basic elements 
of our cognition, the third concerns reason as a source of illusions. I will begin with the 
first two and discuss the third insight at the end of this essay.
Formal and Real Possibility
Early in his career, Kant realized that an ontological proof for God’s existence à la 
Descartes is not possible. Descartes had argued that the concept of God as the most 
perfect being must include existence, because if God lacked existence, a more perfect 
being would still be possible, i.e. a God who actually existed. Kant objected: Even if the 
concept of God is the concept of the most perfect being that has all realities, existence 
is not a reality (not a ‘real’ predicate or determination of an object). If we compare the 
thought of an actual object with the thought of the same object as a possible object 
that has not yet been actualized, we find that both thoughts employ the same set of 
predicates. The difference between them is not to be explained in terms of a conceptual 
difference, but only in relation to possible experience: “Thus existence itself cannot 
be a [real] predicate” (OPA, 2:74), hence it cannot be included in the mere concept of 
anything, including that of God.
Nevertheless, at this time Kant thought that a proof for God’s existence was possible, 
but only indirectly and in relation to another concept, namely that of possibility. To 
judge that something is possible is to say that the concepts or representations related in 
the judgment do not contradict each other. This is the formal condition of possibility. 
But there is also a material condition. In all comparison, what is to be compared must 
be given beforehand; if there is nothing to be compared, there can be no comparison 
and hence no possibility. This means, Kant claimed, that nothing can be conceived 
as possible unless whatever is real in every possible representation or concept exists. 
Moreover, it must exist with absolute necessity because, in its absence, nothing at all 
would be possible. Thus possibility itself would be impossible, which cannot be thought 
without self-contradiction.
Before long, however, Kant realized that this argument is only valid on condition that 
there is thought in the first place. The alleged absolute necessity of all possible reali-

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
742
ties is merely a hypothetical necessity and presupposes that possibilities be entertained. 
This of course is not itself necessary. As Kant would later put the point in the Critique 
of Pure Reason: “I cannot form the least concept of a thing that, if all its predicates were 
cancelled, would leave behind a contradiction” (CPR, A 595/B 623).
Thus Kant became convinced that at the bottom of all theoretical proofs for God’s 
existence lies a confusion of the necessity of thought with the necessity of things. But if 
this is so, one has to distinguish not only a formal and material condition of conceptual 
possibility, but also a formal and a material component with respect to the possibil-
ity of things. There is, in other words, pace the rationalists, a fundamental difference 
between thinking an object and cognizing it. In order to think an object, its concept 
must be non-contradictory. In order also to cognize it, one must know that the object 
that is thought is also objectively real, or “really possible.” Otherwise one has thought 
something, “but not in fact cognized anything through this thinking, but rather merely 
played with representations” (CPR, A 155). If the concept in question is an empirical 
concept, experience shows that its object is really possible. If the concept is an a priori 
concept, however, as is the case in philosophy, one must be able to demonstrate how 
its object is possible in order to also know the objective reality of the concept. Is such 
a priori cognition possible? Can philosophy demonstrate the objective reality of its a 
priori concepts? To answer this question in a general way is one of the main tasks of 
Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason:
A concept is always possible if it does not contradict itself. That is the logi-
cal mark of possibility . . . Yet it may nonetheless be an empty concept, if the 
objective reality of the synthesis through which the concept is generated has 
not been established in particular . . . This is a warning not to infer immediately 
from the possibility of concepts (logical possibility) to the possibility of things 
(real possibility).
(CPR, A 596, cf. B xxvi fn.)
The “Two Stems of Human Knowledge”
The second result of Kant’s pre-critical writings that is essential for an understanding of 
the epistemology of the Critique concerns the fundamental difference between thought 
and perception (or intuition, as Kant calls it). His rational and empiricist predecessors 
alike assumed a merely quantitative or gradual difference between them (cf. CPR, A 
44, 264, 270–1)—the rationalists in terms of “clear and confused” (Leibniz) representa-
tions, the empiricists in terms of the “liveliness and vivacity” (Hume) of representa-
tions. At first Kant shared this view. After 1768, however, he became convinced of its 
falsity. This realization was triggered by a discussion of incongruent counterparts in his 
essay “On the First Ground of the Distinction of Regions in Space” (1768). Incongruent 
counterparts are objects which in respect to size, proportion and the positions of their 
parts are perfectly equal, but which nevertheless can have no boundaries in common 
and therefore do not coincide—for example, the two human hands. “The right hand 
is similar and equal to the left, and if we look at one of them alone by itself, at the pro-
portions and positions of its parts relative to one another and at the magnitude of the 
whole, the complete description of it must also hold of the other in every respect” (DRS, 
2:381). Although conceptually indistinguishable, left and right hand (like all incongru-
ous counterparts) are nevertheless sensibly distinct and incongruent.

IMMANUEL KANT
743
Interestingly, there is also a corresponding case where something that can be concep-
tually represented cannot be sensibly represented: the presence of the soul in a body. 
This case was discussed at some length in Leonhard Euler’s Letters to a German Princess 
(1768, German transl. 1769), which Kant read. Owing to the soul’s effects on the body, 
its presence in the body can be thought, though it cannot be represented sensibly since 
the soul, as being non-physical, can have no spatial coordinates. This case is analogous 
to Kant’s example of incongruous counterparts. In the case of the soul, the presence of 
the soul in the body can be thought but not intuitively represented, while in the case of 
incongruent counterparts, the difference between them is intuitively clear, while elud-
ing conceptual grasp. From this it seems to follow that thought and intuition cannot dif-
fer from each other merely by degree, but that, on the contrary, they must be viewed as 
two fundamentally different sources of knowledge, with their own peculiar conditions 
and constraints. This at any rate is the consequence Kant drew in 1769. In the Critique 
of Pure Reason, the fundamental difference between thought and intuition is taken for 
granted: “By way of introduction or anticipation we need only say that there are two 
stems of human knowledge, namely, sensibility and understanding, which perhaps spring 
from a common, but to us unknown, root. Through the former, objects are given to us; 
through the latter, they are thought” (CPR, A15).
For human cognition, both ‘stems’ of knowledge are equally necessary, for through 
mere thought no objects are given, through mere perception no objects are known. 
Or, as Kant famously claims: “Thoughts without content are empty, intuitions without 
concepts are blind” (CPR, A 51/B 75). If our thoughts were to produce their own cor-
responding objects, we would have an intellectual intuition that knows only actual 
objects. But our understanding is not intuitive; it is discursive and can only combine 
what is given to it from elsewhere. For its knowledge, the understanding is thus depen-
dent on sensibility as a receptive faculty:
Accordingly, the distinction of possible from actual things . . . arises from the 
fact that even if something does not exist, we may yet always give it a place 
in our thoughts, or if there is something of which we have no conception we 
may nevertheless imagine it given. To say, therefore, that things may be pos-
sible without being actual, that from mere possibility, therefore, no conclusion 
whatever as to actuality can be drawn, is to state propositions that hold true 
for human reason, without such validity proving that his distinction lies in the 
things themselves. (CJ, 5:402)
Proof of the objective reality of a priori concepts must hence consist in the demonstra-
tion of their relation to possible experience.
The Critique of Pure Reason
In the Critique of Pure Reason, Kant first looks at both sensibility and understanding 
separately, then at their cooperation in the formation of knowledge.
“The capacity (receptivity) for receiving representations through the mode in which 
we are affected by objects, is entitled sensibility” (CPR, A 19). The effect of this process 
is a “modification of our mind,” a sensation, or an appearance. What is strictly speak-
ing given to us are not objects, but representations “in us.” If all representations are 
modifications of our mind and are thus in us, how is it possible ever to have knowledge 
of objects outside us?

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
744
Kant’s first important step toward a solution of this problem is the claim that the con-
cept of space (and of time) cannot be abstracted from outer experience. For assume it 
could be abstracted from experience, as his empiricist predecessors claimed, how would 
that take place? At first there would be a mere succession of representations in inner 
sense, one after the other. In order to gain the representation of space from these impres-
sions, I would have to be able to abstract from them the representations of coexistence 
of distinct places, and of simultaneity. Now two things, A and B, are simultaneous, if the 
perception of A and B can reciprocally proceed and succeed each other. In inner sense, 
however, everything is successive and each new representation is later than its prede-
cessor. In inner sense alone it is impossible to represent a manifold as simultaneous and 
hence as distinct from me. A distinction between a succession of representations in me 
and something enduring outside me, between a subjective succession of perceptions and 
an objective order of co-existing elements, cannot be drawn on the basis of inner sense 
alone. The representation of space makes experience of simultaneity originally possible 
and cannot be abstracted from it.
According to Kant, this means that space is a form of human sensibility that allows 
us to represent sensations as distinct from us, and as outside and alongside one another. 
At the same time, this form of sensibility constrains us—i.e., I can only represent some-
thing as being distinct from me by representing it as being in a different place. In this 
sense, Kant claims, space is “ideal.” (To show that space (and time) are nothing but 
forms of human sensibility requires a different argument. For it might be said that space 
and time, in addition to being forms of intuition, could also exist in themselves and 
independently of human beings. Kant addresses this objection in the ‘Dialectic’ of the 
Critique of Pure Reason where he shows that if we take space and time to exist in them-
selves, antinomies become inevitable. I will return to this point shortly.)
But this is only half the story. Space as the form of outer intuition constrains my 
attempt to represent something as distinct from me but it does not itself refer. For this, 
concepts and judgments are needed. It is the task of the understanding to supply them. 
“All intuitions, as sensible [= passive] rest on affections, concepts rest on functions. By 
a function, however, I understand the unity of the action of ordering different represen-
tations under a common one. Concepts are therefore grounded on the spontaneity of 
thinking, as sensible intuitions are grounded on the receptivity of impressions” (CPR, 
A 68/B 93).
A concept is a rule that allows me to unite a certain number of representations while 
excluding others. When I predicate something of a subject that is not contained in its 
concept, I thereby determine it. The representations involved are no longer viewed as 
mere ‘modifications of my mind,’ but as representations of something distinct from me, 
and cognition becomes possible. Since the understanding can make no other use of con-
cepts than to combine them in judgments, Kant writes: “we can trace all actions of the 
understanding to judgments, so that the understanding in general can be represented as 
a faculty for judging” (CPR, A 69/B 94).
Since judgments relate concepts or representations to one another, it must be pos-
sible to list all the elementary functions of the understanding by giving an exhaustive 
statement of the functions of unity in judgments. And this, Kant thought, can indeed 
be done.
If one abstracts from the contents in judgments and merely regards their form, one 
finds that they can be distinguished in terms of quantity, quality, relation, and modal-
ity. With respect to quantity, judgments can be universal, particular, or singular. With 

IMMANUEL KANT
745
respect to quality, affirmative, negative, or infinite; with respect to relation, they can be 
categorical, hypothetical, or disjunctive; and with respect to modality, judgments can be 
problematic, assertoric, or apodictic.
How do these functions of the understanding make possible a relation to something 
distinct from the subject? For that to be possible, the manifold of sense must be grasped 
in such a way that it can be determined with respect to the forms of judgment. It must 
be subject to fundamental operations of synthesis that allow for the application of 
judgments, and these fundamental operations of synthesis, the basic concepts, Kant 
calls categories: “The forms of judgments (converted into a concept of the synthesis of 
intuitions) yields categories which direct all employment of understanding in experi-
ence” (CPR, A 312/B 377). These fundamental concepts, corresponding to the twelve 
forms of judgment, are the categories of unity, plurality, totality (Quantity), of real-
ity, negation, limitation (Quality), of substance/accidence, cause/effect, and reciprocity 
(Relation), and of possibility/impossibility, existence/non-existence, of necessity/contin-
gency (Modality) (cf. CPR, A 80/B 106).
Since the understanding does not generate any intuitions of its own but is dependent 
for its activity on a manifold given to it in the senses, it must be able to take together 
such manifold in such a way that it can be grasped as a something about which judg-
ments can be formed. Generally speaking, then, “the pure categories are nothing other 
than the representations of things in general insofar as the manifold of their intuition 
must be thought through one or another of these logical functions” (CPR, A 245).
We can now sketch Kant’s argument more fully. Sensibility, as the “capacity (recep-
tivity) for receiving representations” (CPR, A 19/B 33), is a passive faculty. The mani-
fold it contains is consequently, in virtue of this passivity, disconnected. What we can 
distinguish in sensibility is distinct and separate, each representation being nothing 
but “absolute unity.” For knowledge to arise from this material, it must initially be run 
through and held together, or it must be apprehended. This first act Kant calls the “syn-
thesis of apprehension” (CPR, A 99).
In this process, if we were to lose sight of the first impression as we apprehend the 
second, the second would be the first and only impression and no unity could possibly 
arise. Hence, when apprehending the second impression, the first must be reproduced 
as an impression that was encountered but is no more. This second act, the “synthesis of 
reproduction in imagination,” is required even for the representation of spatial exten-
sion and temporal duration, just as it is for a representation of a manifold contained in 
them.
For this manifold to become the representation of something determinate, still more 
is required. What is apprehended and reproduced must not be connected with all and 
everything that is contained in a given intuition and that has been run through, but 
only with what belongs to it, i.e. what can be taken up in a concept. To this end, it 
has to be compared also with other representations not contained in the given intu-
ition. For a concept, we said earlier, is a rule that unites certain representations that 
belong together, while at the same time excluding those that do not belong to it. For 
example, the sensible data that I apprehend and subsume under the concept ‘dog’ do 
not include the mat on which it currently sleeps; but it must also include past and 
possible future perceptions of a dog awake, chasing, barking, eating, etc. (cf. Strawson 
1974). Thus the third act is a “synthesis of recognition in a concept.” The unity of 
consciousness in this synthesis of different representations Kant calls “apperception.” 
Of it he writes:

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
746
It is this apperception that must be added to the pure imagination in order to 
make its function intellectual. For in itself the synthesis of the imagination, 
although exercised a priori, is nevertheless always sensible, for it combines the 
manifold only as it appears in intuition . . . Through the relation of the manifold 
to the unity of apperception, however, concepts that belong to the understand-
ing can come about, but only by means of the imagination in relation to the 
sensible intuition. (CPR, A 124)
It must be possible for different representations to co-occur in the same consciousness 
for there to be a concept or a thought. Just as different words need to occur in the same 
consciousness to form a sentence, different representations must occur in the same con-
sciousness to form a thought of something: “The identity of the consciousness of myself 
at different times is therefore . . . a formal condition of my thoughts and their connec-
tion” (CPR, A 363).
But how exactly is this identity of consciousness of myself to be understood? To begin 
with, it does not denote the empirical person who I am and who changes and develops 
over time, but the thinking subject that remains identical throughout: everything that I 
have ever thought in the past or will be thinking in the future are thoughts of the same 
subject; myself. I thus have an a priori knowledge of my identity in all my states of con-
sciousness, past as well as future. Of this Kant writes:
We are conscious a priori of the thoroughgoing identity of ourselves with regard 
to all representations that can ever belong to our cognition, as a necessary con-
dition of the possibility of all representations (since the latter represent some-
thing in me only insofar as they belong with all others to one consciousness, 
hence they must at least be capable of being connected in it). This principle 
holds a priori.” (CPR, A 116)
We must thus ask: How is such a priori knowledge of one’s own identity through time 
possible? How can I know already that I will be able in the future to connect all thoughts 
into the unity of my consciousness and proceed from one thought to any other? Such 
knowledge is only possible, Kant claims, if the forms of transition from one thought to 
another are themselves a priori, that is, unchanging and independent of the contents of 
thoughts: “For this unity of consciousness would be impossible if in the cognition of the 
manifold the mind could not become conscious of the identity of the function by means 
of which this manifold is synthetically combined into one cognition” (CPR, A 108).
The a priori nature of this knowledge will become clearer if it is contrasted with 
the empirical knowledge I have of my own biography (cf. Henrich 1976). The latter, I 
know, will be constituted by a continuous string of episodes and experiences that will 
define who I am as a person. But what it is that I will encounter in the course of my 
life I cannot know in advance, or a priori. I have to wait and see what life has in store 
for me. Moreover, the occurrence of each new episode in the course of my life excludes 
others that were possible up to this point but are now irretrievably eliminated. There 
is no going back, as the saying goes. But with respect to the thoughts I might entertain 
in the future, I know that, in principle, I can pass from any representation to any other 
representation and initiate an arbitrary number of thoughts. This kind of knowledge 
is only possible, however, if the rules of relating representations to each other are the 
same in the future as they are now. They must be unchanging rules and thus indepen-
dent of empirical conditions: “for the mind could not possibly think its identity in the 

IMMANUEL KANT
747
manifoldness of its representations, and indeed think this a priori, if it did not have 
before its eyes the identity of its action, which subjects all synthesis of apprehension 
(which is empirical) to a transcendental unity, and first makes possible their connection 
in accordance with a priori rules” (CPR, A 108).
When we ask what these ‘identical actions’ are that unite representations in deter-
minate ways and make possible the unity of consciousness, it is clear that they can 
be none other than the forms of judgment, so that “the understanding in general can 
be represented as a faculty for judging” (CPR, A 69/B 94). The unity of conscious-
ness that I designate with the first person pronoun ‘I’ is brought about by my forming 
concepts and using them in judgments. The forms of judgments are unchanging, and 
what is identical in all fundamental acts of judging is the reference, by means of the 
concepts or representations employed in them, to something distinct from me in which 
these representations are united: “A judgment in general,” Kant defines, is “an action 
through which given representations first become cognitions of an object” (MFNS, 
4:475). Consequently, knowledge that there are things outside me is just as certain as 
the cogito, each being a condition of the possibility of the other.
This argument, Kant’s ‘Transcendental Deduction of the Categories,’ is widely 
regarded as one of the most profound arguments in the history of philosophy. It sets out 
to prove that all objects of experience are necessarily subject to the categories, because 
no objects can be thought without them. And it does so by arguing that the identity of 
self-consciousness, of which we have a priori knowledge, would be impossible without 
knowledge of objects. Self-consciousness and consciousness of objects outside me are 
two sides of the same coin. (This is not to deny, of course, that once I am conscious 
of myself, I can then ascribe ‘purely subjective’ states to myself. Kant’s argument only 
shows that such self-ascription is secondary and presupposes experience of objects.)
“Thus we ourselves bring into the appearances that order and regularity in them that 
we call nature, and moreover we would not be able to find it there if we, or the nature of 
our mind, had not originally put it there” (CPR, A 125). Kant can consequently agree 
with Hume, for example, that our knowledge of causal relations between objects and 
events is empirical, while insisting that there would be no events to be experienced 
had we not previously synthesized a manifold of representations in accordance with the 
category of cause. For we could never distinguish the objective temporal order of an 
event from the merely subjective order of representations in us, Kant argues, unless we 
thought the order of the representations that constitute the event as being irreversible. 
And this we can only do if we think that it is causally structured:
[T]he mere sequence in my apprehension, if it is not, by means of a rule, deter-
mined in relation to something preceding, does not justify any sequence in 
the object. Therefore I always make my subjective synthesis (of apprehension) 
objective with respect to a rule in accordance with which the appearances in 
their sequence, i.e., as they occur, are determined through the preceding state, 
and only under this presupposition alone is the experience of something that 
happens [i.e. an event] even possible. (CPR, A 195/B 240)
The Illusions of Pure Reason
Thus Kant silences the skeptics who doubt or deny that a priori knowledge of objects is 
possible. Such knowledge is possible, he claims, and the categories do have legitimate 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
748
application, but only with respect to possible experience. No less importantly, however, 
Kant also wants to silence any dogmatic metaphysicians who think they can lay claim 
to metaphysical knowledge beyond possible experience. Unlike Descartes who had 
feigned the hypothesis of an evil genius to demonstrate the possibility that we might be 
deceived in our beliefs about the world and ourselves, Kant believes he can show that 
reason encounters contradictions through its own legislation as soon as it transgresses 
beyond possible experience. Early in his career, being puzzled by the fact that opposing 
philosophical positions were supported with seemingly equally strong arguments, Kant 
had tried to prove systematically metaphysical propositions and their opposites. To his 
surprise, he found that he succeeded in this task beyond expectation.
This is the third fundamental discovery Kant made in his so-called pre-critical period. 
Kant regarded this realization as one of his most significant insights: “[T]he Antinomy of 
pure reason, which becomes evident in its dialectic, is in fact the most beneficial error into 
which human reason could ever have fallen, in as much as it finally drives us to the search 
for the key to escape from this labyrinth” (CPrR, 5:107). This key is none other than 
Kant’s transcendental idealism with its allied claims of the ideality of space (and time) and 
the fundamental distinction between appearances and things in themselves. The osten-
sive self-contradiction of reason in the Antinomies can thus be seen, Kant insists, as an 
indirect proof of transcendental idealism. For if space and time with the objects in them 
are viewed as things in themselves, the antinomies arise, and inevitably so.
In the Critique of Pure Reason, Kant presents the problem as follows: If reason leaves 
the realm of appearances and applies itself to what is supposed to exist independently 
of human cognition, it is equally possible to prove, for example, that the world has a 
beginning in time and is also limited as regards space, as it is possible to prove its nega-
tion: that the world is infinite as regards both time and space (CPR, A 426/B 454). In 
the like manner, Kant argues, one can prove that every composite substance is made up 
of simple indivisible parts and that it is infinitely divisible (CPR, A 434/B 462). One can 
also prove that everything in the world takes place in accordance with laws of nature 
and that there is another causality, namely that of freedom (CPR, A 445/B 473). Finally, 
one can likewise prove that there belongs to the world an absolutely necessary being, 
and that no absolutely necessary being belongs to the world (CPR, A 453/B 481).
In the Critique, Kant does not link these propositions with particular philosophers, 
but it is clear that historical references can easily be provided for each of them. Each 
of these antinomial propositions has been supported in the past by one philosopher or 
another and played a significant role in traditional metaphysics. If this is so, one can see 
why there was no general agreement among the great thinkers of the past, and hence 
no progress in the history of philosophy. As soon as theoretical reason leaves the realm 
of possible experience, it can equally ‘prove’ contradictorily opposed propositions that 
are each central to reason’s own operations. This demonstrates the failure, Kant main-
tains, of all earlier metaphysics. For any such metaphysics, since it was not grounded 
in the ideality of space and time, could only claim dogmatically one of the antinomial 
propositions without being able in principle to refute its contradictory opposite. Such 
a philosophy is thus not capable of establishing truths and can never acquire the status 
of a science. Only transcendental idealism, which is established for the first time in the 
Critique of Pure Reason, can make a scientific metaphysics possible: “The critical path 
alone is still open” (CPR, A 856/B 884). To a reviewer of the Critique who doubted 
the correctness of transcendental idealism, Kant offered this challenge. In the Critique, 
Kant wrote, the reviewer

IMMANUEL KANT
749
will find eight propositions which are, pair by pair, always in conflict with one 
another, but each of which belongs necessarily to metaphysics, which must 
either accept it or refute it (although there is not a single one of them that has 
not in its day been accepted by some philosopher or other). He now has the 
freedom to pick any one of these eight propositions he likes, and to assume it 
without proof (which I concede to him) . . . and then he is to attack my proof 
of the antithesis. But if I can rescue it, and in this way show that the opposite of 
the proposition he adopted can be proven exactly as clearly, in accordance with 
principles that very dogmatic metaphysics must of necessity acknowledge, then 
by this means it is settled that there is a hereditary defect in metaphysics that 
cannot be explained, much less removed, without ascending to its birthplace, 
pure reason itself. (Prol. 4:379)
Kant thus likened his Critique of Pure Reason to a tribunal of pure reason that settles 
its disputes once and for all, by striking at the very root of its conflicts. It silences the 
skeptical challenge by demonstrating that we do indeed have a priori knowledge, but 
only of those principles that constitute outer experience. And it demonstrates this by 
showing that without such a constitution of outer experience, self-consciousness would 
be impossible. Knowledge of outer objects is thus as indisputable as the evidence of 
the cogito. But the Critique also silences the dogmatic philosopher who lays claim to 
knowledge beyond possible experience. It does so by showing that reason, as soon as it 
employs itself in the realm beyond the senses, is prone to irresolvable antinomies. Its 
“proposition lies outside the field of possible experience, and therefore also beyond the 
boundaries of all human insight” (CPR, A 753/B 781).
References
References to Kant’s works are given in the text by using an abbreviation for the work cited, followed by 
volume and page number of the Akademie edition of Kant’s gesammelte Schriften, which can be found in the 
margins of all translations of his works into English. References to the Critique of Pure Reason are to the 
standard pagination of the first and second editions, indicated as “A” and “B,” respectively.
Kant, Immanuel, Critique of Pure Reason (CPR). Translated by Paul Guyer and Allen W. Wood. Cambridge/
New York: Cambridge University Press 1998.
—— Critique of Practical Reason (CPrR). In: Immanuel Kant, Practical Philosophy. Translated and edited by 
Mary J. Gregor. Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press 1996.
—— Critique of the Power of Judgment (CJ). Translated by Paul Guyer and Eric Matthews. Cambridge/New 
York: Cambridge University Press 2000.
—— Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science (MFNS). Translated by Michael Friedman. In: Immanuel 
Kant, Theoretical Philosophy after 1781. Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press 2002.
—— “The Only Possible Argument in Support of a Demonstration of the Existence of God” (OPA). In: 
Immanuel Kant, Theoretical Philosophy, 1755–1770. Translated and edited by David Walford, in collabora-
tion with Ralf Meerbote. Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press 1992.
—— “On the First Ground of the Distinction of Regions in Space” (DRS). Translated by John Handyside. 
In: Kant’s Inaugural Dissertation and Early Writings on Space. Westport, Conn: Hyperion Press 1979.
—— Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (Prol.) Translated by Gary Hatfield. In: Immanuel Kant, 
Theoretical Philosophy after 1781. Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press 2002.
Henrich, Dieter (1976), Identität und Objektivität. Heidelberg: Sitzungsberichte der Heidelberger Akademie 
der Wissenschaften.
Strawson, Peter (1974), “Imagination and Perception,” in Freedom and Resentment. London: Methuen & 
Co., 45–65.

67
BERTRAND RUSSELL
William Demopoulos
Introduction: Three Ideas from Logic
Russell’s principal contributions to philosophy derived from his logical investigations 
and the applications he made of them to the philosophy of mathematics and the 
philosophy of language. All of this work was carried out very early in his career, being 
completed in all essentials by the time he turned forty. The Problems of Philosophy, 
which appeared in 1912, was written at the culmination of Russell’s work in logic and 
the foundations of mathematics. Problems is a deceptive book; it represents itself as an 
introduction for students and the general reader, covering traditional issues involv-
ing perception and our knowledge of the material world, the problem of universals, 
the scope of a priori knowledge, and the nature of our knowledge of ethics, to name 
just some of the topics with which it deals. But a closer examination reveals some-
thing much more ambitious than a general survey: Problems is Russell’s first sustained 
attempt to apply two of his main discoveries in logic to classical philosophical issues, 
especially to epistemological problems that a philosopher with empiricist leanings 
would find pressing.
The logical discovery that figures most prominently in the book is the theory of 
descriptions which Russell announced in 1905 in his most extensively cited paper, “On 
denoting.” Problems elaborates the suggestion, made in the closing paragraphs of “On 
denoting,” that the theory of descriptions has important epistemological applications. 
The book also contains a hint of how Russell saw the introduction of the concepts of 
structure and structural similarity in his and Whitehead’s Principia Mathematica (1912) 
as an event of great significance for the theory of our knowledge of the physical world. 
The importance of structure is taken up and argued for at much greater length some 
fifteen years later in The Analysis of Matter. But before AoM another idea from logic 
intervened and made a decisive mark on Russell’s epistemological work: the method 
of logical construction. Its relevance for epistemology received its fullest expression in 
Our Knowledge of the External World. While the theory of descriptions and the concept 
of structure were instrumental to Russell’s elaboration of a broadly realist position, one 
that constituted a sophisticated correction to, and extension of, Lockean representa-
tional realism, the method of logical construction was used in defense of a novel for-
mulation of phenomenalism. This phenomenalist interlude was short-lived; it began 
in 1914, but was called into question by Russell as early as 1919 (see Introduction to 
Mathematical Philosophy, pp. 61–2). Even though for most of his life Russell vigorously 
defended a realist epistemology, it is the phenomenalism of this relatively brief period 
with which he was for a long time most often associated.

BERTRAND RUSSELL
751
The theory of descriptions gave formal precision to Russell’s broadly empiricist view 
of concepts, and the method of logical construction gave his phenomenalism its distinc-
tive character. But the contribution of both of these developments in logic was mainly 
to the formulation of epistemological theses to which Russell had already been led. By 
contrast with the theory of descriptions and the method of logical construction, the 
concept of structure was absolutely essential to the theory Russell articulated after its 
discovery. And although the theory of descriptions retained its importance for Russell’s 
epistemology throughout his career, this was not true of the epistemological interest of 
the method of logical construction: there are barely any distinctively epistemological 
applications of the method after his abandonment of phenomenalism. Most later appli-
cations, such as the construction of space-time points, were mainly devoted to achiev-
ing some sort of ontological economy.
My plan in this chapter is to discuss the three epistemological theories to which 
Russell made his most original contributions: concept empiricism, phenomenalism, and 
structuralism. The organizing principle in each case is to highlight the dependence of 
Russell’s articulation of these theories on the logical doctrines to which they are most 
closely tied. The period of Russell’s intellectual life with which we will be concerned 
begins in 1905, with the appearance of “On denoting,” and continues through 1927, 
the date of publication of AoM. A brief mention of Human Knowledge: Its Scope and 
Limits and its relation to AoM will complete our discussion. It will be noted that I have 
not included in my list of principal texts Russell’s posthumously published Theory of 
Knowledge. This might seem an unjustifiable omission. But ToK is principally concerned 
with the analysis of the form and constituents of propositions. As such the book falls 
more properly within the realm of Russell’s theory of propositions and philosophical 
logic.
The Theory of Descriptions and Concept Empiricism
Classical concept empiricism is a theory concerning the origin of concepts, an elabora-
tion and defense of the slogan, “No idea without a corresponding and prior impression.” 
Russell transformed this doctrine into a theory of propositional understanding: his con-
cept empiricism is a rational reconstruction, along empiricist lines, of our understanding 
of sentences, a reconstruction that is based on an account of our understanding of their 
least grammatical constituents and our grasp of the manner of their combination into 
sentences. The connection of such a theory with concept empiricism is based on the 
premise that our understanding of some of these grammatical constituents is given by 
our “acquaintance” with their referents. But unlike the classical theory, Russell’s notion 
of acquaintance does not, by itself, require the acceptance of any particular doctrine 
about the nature of perception or the primacy of impressions. Such commitments are 
independent additions to Russell’s theory of knowledge, and are not part of his “core” 
theory of propositional understanding. As we will see in greater detail below, failure to 
appreciate this point is a principal source of misunderstanding of Russell’s epistemologi-
cal views. In particular, the interpretation of Russell as a phenomenalist is encouraged 
by a widespread misunderstanding of the epistemological applications he made of his 
theory of descriptions to his theory of propositional understanding.
The notion of a least grammatical constituent presupposes an analysis of the gram-
matical form of sentences. Russell’s analysis of grammatical form was determined by 
his logical theory and the requirement that the latter should, at the very least, support 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
752
a theory of inference capable of representing the theorems of classical mathematical 
analysis and geometry as the product of a process of purely logical reasoning. This is 
a condition of adequacy for a theory of logical inference; although such a theory must 
also constrain the logical form of the propositions of mathematics, it is neutral regarding 
whether or not they are logical truths, and is therefore considerably weaker than the 
thesis that mathematics is a part of logic. There are other desiderata that also played an 
important role in Russell’s assessment of a logical theory, but this appears to have been 
the primary motivation.
For Russell, sentences express propositions. Among propositions there are logical 
relations that are sensitive to the logical form of the propositions they relate. A logi-
cal analysis of propositions determines a grammatical analysis of the sentences belong-
ing to some fragment of a natural language; such a logical analysis is expressed by a 
translation of the sentences of the fragment into a “regimented” version of it, into a 
language that not only shares the vocabulary of the natural language fragment, but also 
extends that vocabulary with additional logical devices for the expression of generality 
and the representation of quantification. The success of a logical theory is measured by 
the adequacy of the translations it affords, but its success also depends on the interest 
and significance of the conditions of adequacy the theory imposes on its translations. 
Russell’s conditions of adequacy, as I indicated earlier, rest on a host of epistemological 
concerns surrounding the nature of proof in mathematics, rather than on the kind of 
descriptive adequacy that would constrain an empirical theory of natural language. In 
the case of recovering the inferences of mathematics as logical inferences—though not 
necessarily logical inferences from purely logical premises—we know Russell’s program 
to have proven highly successful.
There are two respects in which, on Russell’s view, the traditional logic was inad-
equate, both of them connected with its commitment to the thesis that all propositions 
are of subject-predicate form. The first consequence of the adherence to a subject-
predicate analysis was the failure to formulate logic with sufficient generality to deal 
with relations. The second consequence is more subtle and has really to do with the 
understanding of quantification, or what Russell called “denoting phrases”—phrases 
involving the use of the words ‘all,’ ‘some,’ ‘every,’ ‘a,’ etc., and especially, ‘the.’ In The 
Principles of Mathematics, Russell had attempted to deal with the analysis of such phrases 
by the device of denoting concepts, of which Principles contains an elaborate and rather 
difficult theory. The goal of “On denoting” was to achieve a theory of how such phrases 
contribute to the logical form of the sentences in which they occur without appealing 
to the notion of a denoting concept. Fortunately, the central theses of the 1905 theory 
of definite and indefinite descriptions can be explained without going into the details 
of the theory of Principles which it replaced.
To begin with, Russell placed special emphasis on definite descriptions, denoting 
phrases of the form ‘the so and so,’ where ‘the’ is used in its singular sense, as in
The junior author of Principia is mortal.
The sentences
(*) Russell is mortal
and

BERTRAND RUSSELL
753
(**) The teacher of Wittgenstein is mortal,
will be regarded as “in the same form” by anyone who assimilates definite descriptions to 
proper names. Indeed, on such a view, their form is given by the expression
(§) Pa
which, according to the traditional analysis, attributes to the individual the property P. 
On Russell’s analysis, this is incorrect: (**) is actually a general (i.e. quantified) sen-
tence of the form
(§§) ∃x∀yϕ(x, y).
The difference is important, since the logical consequences of (**) will vary 
according to whether it has the form (§) or (§§), a fact emphasized by Russell in “On 
denoting.”
The Russellian analysis of (**) sees it as involving the predicate expressions
x taught y,
x is mortal,
the proper name
Wittgenstein,
and the logical vocabulary of variables, quantifiers, and sentential connectives of first-
order logic with identity. In greater detail, (**) is given the analysis:
∃x(x taught Wittgenstein & ∀y(y taught Wittgenstein, only if x =y) & x is 
mortal)
which, by a well-known procedure (the reduction to prenex normal form) can be 
reduced to a sentence of the form (§§), as claimed.
Of special interest to us is the manner in which Russell combined his theory of descrip-
tions with a principle he discusses in Problems and which he endeavored to maintain 
throughout his philosophical career. In Problems (Ch. V), the principle occurs as The 
fundamental principle and is given the formulation:
Every proposition which we can understand must be composed wholly of con-
stituents with which we are acquainted.
Before discussing this principle, it is necessary to recognize that Russell’s use of ‘proposi-
tion’ is a special, technical, one. For Russell, a proposition is a structured object
<a
1, . . ., a
n; P
1,. . ., P
m>
whose “constituents” are generally non-linguistic entities; thus, the ai are individuals 
and the Pj, are properties and relations (what Russell calls “propositional functions”).

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
754
The fundamental principle evidently embodies a very simple theory of linguis-
tic meaning: we grasp the meaning of a sentence if we understand the proposition it 
expresses. The theory of understanding is compositional: our understanding of the 
whole proposition goes by way of our understanding of its parts (its constituents), and 
the understanding of a non-logical constituent consists in our acquaintance with it.
The model for acquaintance with propositional constituents is the common-sense 
notion of personal acquaintance, as when we distinguish between people whose acquain-
tance we have made, and those we know only by reputation or “description.” There is 
nothing in the notion of acquaintance taken by itself that precludes our acquaintance 
with other persons (or material objects), which is why Russell frequently cites them as 
paradigms of objects of acquaintance when illustrating the fundamentals of his theory. 
Nor is there any restriction to particulars, and in Problems Russell allows acquaintance 
with all manner of universals. (This is a point where Russell’s theory of propositional 
understanding departs from traditional concept empiricism.)
But even with these caveats about the scope of what falls within the range of our 
acquaintance, on first hearing, the theory seems wildly implausible and subject to obvi-
ous counterexamples. Consider again the sentence
(*) Russell is mortal.
How are we to explain our grasp of the meaning of this sentence if, as would seem to be 
the case, the proposition π(*) it expresses is the structured object
π(*) <Russell; x is mortal>
consisting of Russell and the property of mortality? Presumably none of us has been 
acquainted with Russell, and therefore, by the fundamental principle, we should all fail 
to understand (*). But in fact we do understand (*).
Russell’s resolution of this difficulty consists in observing that our knowledge of 
things is only sometimes knowledge by acquaintance. We know many things only by 
description. For example, I know Russell as the junior author of Principia, in which case 
a sentence that better reflects my understanding of (*) is given by its translation into
T(*) The junior author of Principia is mortal.
When T(*) is analyzed in accordance with the theory of descriptions, the non-logical 
constituents of the proposition it expresses are seen to be the referents of the predicate 
expressions
x authored y,
x is junior to y,
x is mortal,
and the proper name
Principia.
My understanding of (*) thus consists in my grasp of its translation T(*), which, 
according to the fundamental principle and the theory of descriptions, requires my 

BERTRAND RUSSELL
755
acquaintance with the referents of the above-mentioned predicate expressions and 
proper name. Observe that Russell is not among the constituents of the proposition expressed 
by T(*); as Russell would say, he has disappeared under analysis.
Notice that although (*) and T(*) might express different propositions—for some-
one acquainted with Russell, (*) is a perfectly good reflection of the proposition such an 
individual understands—they have the same assertoric content: on the assumption that 
Russell was the junior author of Principia, (*) and T(*) are responsible to the obtaining 
of the same state of affairs, namely, that there should exist a time when Russell dies. The 
proposition expressed by T(*) and whose constituents we are acquainted with, contains 
the constituents of a propositional function which is uniquely true of Russell, who is the 
individual the proposition is about. But although Russell is a constituent of the proposi-
tion we assert, he is not a constituent of the proposition we express, and it is the proposi-
tion we express that we understand, since it is its constituents that we are acquainted 
with. I should note that I am imposing this terminology on Russell, and that although 
there is a textual basis for the terminology of expressed and asserted propositions, Russell 
is not consistent in his use of these terms. That he nevertheless relied on the distinc-
tion, both before and after his discovery of the theory of descriptions, is incontrovert-
ible, as is the claim that the distinction clarifies many otherwise puzzling aspects of his 
theory of propositions and theory of propositional understanding.
Russell’s account of our understanding of T(*) is intended to show that we can 
understand propositions that are about constituents which fall outside our acquaintance 
without compromising the fundamental principle of Problems. Russell regarded this 
application of the theory of descriptions as its major epistemological benefit: it gives the 
key to maintaining a staunchly acquaintance-based theory of propositional understand-
ing while preserving our common-sense belief that our knowledge often extends beyond 
the limits of our acquaintance.
This brings us to a point noted earlier: taken by itself, the theory of acquaintance 
is neutral as regards the objects of acquaintance; of the cognitive relations we bear to 
objects, acquaintance is the most direct. But in order to establish what we can legiti-
mately take to be objects of acquaintance, it is necessary to supplement the theory of 
acquaintance with other considerations. For Russell, it is reflection on the nature of 
perception, rather than the nature of acquaintance, that leads to the view that material 
objects and persons are not objects of acquaintance. The considerations that compel 
this conclusion and “drive acquaintance in,” so to speak, are entirely standard, and 
derive from Russell’s understanding of the argument from the relativity of perception 
and the argument from science. The former is taken to show that material objects can-
not be the objects of perception because the sensible qualities with which perception 
presents us fail to exhibit the objectivity we demand of the properties of the material 
world. The argument from science excludes material objects because science gives suc-
cessful explanations of the interactions of things with each other and with us without 
attributing sensible qualities to the material world. Since sensible qualities are indis-
pensable to our conception of the objects of perception, material objects cannot be 
what we are acquainted with in perception. Hence our knowledge of the material world 
must begin from acquaintance with something else—“sense data” or “percepts”—rather 
than from acquaintance with material objects. (For a further discussion of the consider-
ations which led Russell to sense data see Demopoulos 2003.)
With this conclusion regarding the nature of the objects of perception in place, 
Russell’s epistemological views proceeded in two directions, each representing a 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
756
different development of the idea that our acquaintance is with sense data rather than 
material objects and persons. I call the first development “Russell’s phenomenalism,” 
and the second, “Russell’s structuralism.”
Russell’s Phenomenalism
Russell’s phenomenalism was developed most extensively in External World, and is mod-
eled on his definition of the finite cardinal numbers in terms of classes, this being the 
canonical application of the method of logical construction and Russell’s most success-
ful deployment of it. By the time of Principia, Russell realized that the success of his defi-
nition requires that there should be sufficiently many entities of lowest type, namely, 
entities of the type of individuals. Assuming that this is the case, Principia defines the 
finite cardinals as certain classes of classes of individuals. And in general the method 
of logical construction consists in finding classes which can be shown to have the prop-
erties usually thought to be exhibited by individuals. Since for Russell classes belong 
to logic, such constructions are logical constructions. Any difficulty which attaches to 
our knowledge of such individuals is transformed into a problem involving knowledge 
of the classes that replace them. Knowledge of classes is in turn explained in terms 
of knowledge of the propositional functions which determine them, and knowledge 
of such functions is generally conceded to be unproblematic. This, in outline, is how 
the method aims to make a contribution to theory of knowledge. Cases of knowledge 
of epistemically problematic individuals are shown to be explicable as knowledge of 
propositional functions which ultimately rest on knowledge of propositional functions 
of individuals, where knowledge of such propositional functions and the individuals 
they qualify is epistemically unproblematic.
The appeal of the method is directly proportional to the obscurity that is thought to 
attach to the individuals it seeks to replace. In the case of the cardinal number 2, the 
proposal is that 2 should be understood as the class of all two-membered classes, where 
the notion of a two-membered class is, of course, capable of definition without appeal 
to the notion of number or to the number 2. In fact, the propositional function which 
determines the class of two-membered classes can be expressed using only the logi-
cal apparatus of first-order logic plus identity. So clarity regarding the number 2 only 
demands clarity regarding the most basic concepts of logic and the general notion of an 
individual. That the classes corresponding to the finite cardinals are sufficiently numer-
ous depends on the assumption, noted earlier, that there are enough individuals. But 
our understanding of the logical construction depends only on our grasp of the relevant 
logical notions.
Russell was always quick to remark that the success of a proposed logical construc-
tion does not prove that there is nothing answering to the individual for which the 
construction is supposed to be a replacement. In the case of cardinal numbers, one can 
consistently accept the logical construction of 2 as a class of classes and continue to 
assume that in addition to the class of all two-membered classes, there is also the cardi-
nal number 2, which is an entity that, though correlated with the logical construction, 
is not identical with it. The method of logical construction does not claim to refute the 
existence of the objects for which it provides logical constructions, but it does claim to 
make the assumption of their existence unnecessary. To establish such a dispensability 
claim, it must be shown that the logical constructions satisfy some generally agreed 
upon set of conditions. In the case of the finite cardinals, this is straightforward since 

BERTRAND RUSSELL
757
everyone agrees that the relevant conditions are fully captured by the Peano-Dedekind 
Axioms.
The application of this method to the theory of perception led Russell in his External 
World to a view that is best explained by comparison with Berkeley’s subjective ideal-
ism. Berkeley had taken it upon himself to show the incoherence of the view of material 
objects of his philosophical opponents. At the same time he also sought to show that 
his own view captured the common-sense notion of a material object, and that it was 
in fact an analysis of what we take ourselves to mean by matter. The novelty of Russell’s 
contribution consists in this: suppose we can find suitable logical constructions which 
fulfill certain requirements currently satisfied by material objects. Then even if we can-
not disprove the existence of material objects, we might consider ourselves justified in 
refraining from assuming their existence. To establish this, it is not necessary to show 
that the philosophical notion of a material object is incoherent; nor, for the method to 
succeed, is it necessary to argue that the logical construction should yield a Berkeleian 
analysis of the common-sense notion of a material object. It is enough to show that our 
constructed entities fulfill everything we might have demanded of material objects in 
order for us to make empirically verifiable assertions about them. A successful applica-
tion of the method of logical construction requires only that there should be clearly 
recognized criteria that an adequate notion of a material object must fulfill. But fulfill-
ing such criteria might fall far short of capturing everything that we customarily take the 
notion to involve. By comparison with Berkeley’s idealism, the resulting theory is less 
dogmatic, since it refrains from claiming to have shown the impossibility or incoher-
ence of the notion of a material object, and it refrains from claiming to have captured 
what common sense takes itself to mean by the notion. It provides an analysis of our 
conception of a material object by the provision of a logical construction—in the pres-
ent case a class of classes of sense data—which purport to satisfy agreed upon criteria of 
adequacy.
Russell’s execution of the strategy is general and schematic and can give the appear-
ance of circularity, since it is motivated by reference to our common-sense idea of per-
ceiving material objects from various possible spatial perspectives, and this seems to 
assume both material objects and a common or public space. If we are permitted such a 
framework of assumptions it is easy to form a general conception of the collection of all 
the ways in which an object might (for example) visually appear to us. Russell’s logical 
constructions consist of the collection of these visual appearances “of” material objects. 
But if this is Russell’s strategy, hasn’t he assumed what he set out to dispense with? Not 
if the framework of material objects and the public space in which they lie serve merely 
as a scaffolding that is appealed to in specifying the criteria an adequate construction 
of material objects should fulfill. The question of circularity turns on whether the con-
struction can stand by itself when the scaffolding is kicked away, not on whether the 
scaffolding is essential in guiding the construction.
The principal achievement of Russell’s phenomenalism, as well as the respect in 
which it represents an extension of Berkeley’s subjective idealism, is its clarity regard-
ing the nature and status of criteria of adequacy. This, far more than any of Russell’s 
specific proposals, constitutes the philosophical contribution of his phenomenalism. 
Russell’s clarification of the methodological situation opened the field to others—most 
notably to Rudolf Carnap and Nelson Goodman—for the development and articula-
tion of more detailed phenomenalist analyses in accordance with the method of logical 
construction.

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
758
Russell’s Structuralism
Let us turn now to the concept of structure and the theory to which it led. This theory 
would not have been possible without the foundational investigations that culminated 
in logicism; and Russell would not have been convinced of its correctness had he not 
undertaken the extensive study of developments in physics that form the context of 
AoM. But although Russell’s structuralism was informed by his reflections on math-
ematics and physics, the theory was not determined by these reflections but emerged in 
response to a traditional philosophical problem confronted by indirect or representa-
tional theories of perception: What is the character of our descriptive knowledge of the 
material world, if we lack acquaintance with that world? Since at least 1905, the idea 
that we lack such acquaintance was not an assumption Russell ever seriously doubted; 
nor, with the brief exception of his phenomenalist period, did he seriously doubt that 
there are material events and processes.
As early as Problems Russell accepted Berkeley’s criticisms of the Lockean view that 
our knowledge of material objects is divided between knowledge of their primary and 
secondary qualities. He agreed with Berkeley that Locke had no basis for his claim 
that we can know the primary qualitative aspects of the constituents of the material 
world, and he also agreed with Berkeley’s assessment that such a claim is in tension with 
Locke’s own account of secondary qualities. (For the sake of simplicity, I am here assum-
ing a dualism of mental and material events. In a complete account of Russell’s epis-
temology and metaphysics this assumption, and the conclusion just attributed to him, 
would need to be qualified.) But unlike other less sophisticated exponents of similar 
views, Russell understood this to entail that we know neither the qualitative character 
of the properties of material events nor that of the relations among them. To have such 
qualitative knowledge would require acquaintance with the events of which they hold; 
but by hypothesis, this is precisely what we do not have.
Russell’s earliest logical investigations into the concept of number led to the discov-
ery that the notion of a one-one correspondence is expressible with complete general-
ity, being definable in pure second-order logic. As such, it is capable of being understood 
without acquaintance with any of the properties whose extensions it relates. Similarity of 
properties or “equinumerosity” generalizes to similarity of relations—“structural similar-
ity”—and this captures Russell’s discovery of a kind of non-qualitative similarity that 
can be grasped without acquaintance with the relations whose fields it correlates. In 
particular we can have knowledge that a relation with which we are acquainted is struc-
turally similar to one with which we are not acquainted. When we know that a relation 
is structurally similar to a given relation, we are said to have structural knowledge of that 
relation.
On Russell’s structuralism, of percepts we know both their quality and structure (where 
Russell’s use of the term ‘quality’ includes relations), while of external events we know 
only their structure. Structural properties are thus a particular subclass of properties and 
relations: they are distinguished by the fact that they are expressible in the language 
of pure logic. Unlike Locke’s distinction between primary and secondary qualities, the 
Structure/Quality distinction does not mark a difference in ontological status: events 
have both structure and qualities—indeed when we speak of the structure of exter-
nal events, this is elliptical for the structural properties of their qualities and relations. 
Neither is it the case that one is “more fundamental” than the other, or that qualities are 
occurrent while structure is a power. What is claimed is a deficiency in our knowledge. 

BERTRAND RUSSELL
759
Of external events we know the structural properties of their properties and relations, 
but we do not know the properties and relations themselves. The theoretical knowledge 
of the material world expressed by physics falls within the scope of this claim, so that 
Russell’s theory immediately yields the consequence that physical theories give knowl-
edge of structure and only knowledge of structure.
Russell believed that the discovery of structural knowledge yielded a solution to the 
problem that had eluded Locke, and that Kant had addressed with only limited success. 
Contrary to Locke, our knowledge of the material world is not qualitative. Contrary to 
Kant, it is possible to have significant knowledge of the material or “noumenal” world. 
The correct view is that of the relations of the material world our knowledge is always 
structural and never qualitative. As Russell says, of the material world we can know its 
structure, but not its qualitative character. This, in essence, is Russell’s structuralism.
There is a difficulty with this view that was elegantly stated by M. H. A. Newman in 
an article which appeared just one year after the publication of AoM (see Newman 1928 
and Russell 1928, p. 176. The significance of Newman’s observation was first empha-
sized in Demopoulos and Friedman 1985.) The observation on which Newman’s criti-
cism was based is a very simple one: Newman drew a contrast between the claim that a 
given relation has a certain structure—satisfies an appropriate condition that is express-
ible in pure logic or pure mathematics—and the existential claim that there is a relation 
which satisfies this condition. He then observed that provided such an existential claim 
is consistent, it is true in any domain of sufficient cardinality. However, this is not the 
case for claims regarding specific properties and relations: such claims of structural simi-
larity are epistemologically significant precisely because they are assertions concerning 
the similarity of given relations, rather than bare existential claims to the effect that 
there is a relation which is similar to a given one.
In the context of Russell’s Lockean realism, the difficulty this poses is that an asser-
tion about the structure of relations holding among the individuals of the material world 
with which we are not acquainted will be true in any extension of the domain that cor-
rectly models our knowledge of those things with which we are acquainted, provided 
only that the extension is large enough. Hence in a theory such as Russell’s, except for 
a cardinality assumption, the content of our judgments regarding the material world 
virtually coincides with the content of our reports on the objects of our acquaintance. 
(See Demopoulos 2010 for a full discussion of these issues.) Moreover, the cardinality 
assumption is the only component of our knowledge of the material world that is not 
secured by purely logical or purely mathematical considerations. But this is an evident 
distortion of what, pre-analytically, we take the epistemological significance of our judg-
ments about the material world to be. It is particularly damaging for Russell’s claim to 
have avoided phenomenalism, since it reduces the difference between a phenomenalist 
and a realist theory to a claim about cardinality, and this too is an evident distortion of 
the difference between these two philosophical positions.
A possible response to Newman is to argue that the scope of the quantified relation-
variables of the existential claims which express our knowledge of the material world 
should be restricted to natural or real relations. Then it is by no means obvious that the 
condition such a claim expresses is satisfied by real or natural relations. However, there 
are two difficulties with this response. First, it makes a simple fact involving our judg-
ments of epistemic significance depend on metaphysically difficult notions when it is 
clear that it does not. And secondly, it fails to capture the scope of Newman’s observa-
tion, which is independent of a relation’s “reality” or “naturalness”: there is a distinction 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
760
to be made between significant and non-significant claims regarding the structural simi-
larity of relations even when one or both of the relations is artificial. Russell’s theory is 
incapable of capturing this distinction with the necessary generality.
In Russell’s theory the distinction between a claim concerning a given relation and 
one that is merely about some relation or other reduces to the distinction between 
a relation that is “given” to us by our acquaintance with it and one that is not. On 
such a view, it is not possible for an assertion to be of a given relation unless we have 
acquaintance with that relation, and this means that assertions regarding relations that 
fall outside our acquaintance are necessarily general claims, claims of the form there is 
an R, such that . . . R . . . . What Russell’s empiricism seeks to preserve is unexception-
able, namely the distinction between properties and relations that are given in experi-
ence and those that are not. But as Newman’s discussion shows, a position according to 
which claims about given relations can only be made out in terms of acquaintance or its 
absence is a position that is incapable of capturing the epistemological significance of 
common judgments about structural similarity. This observation must be addressed by 
any response to Newman on Russell’s behalf.
In order to compare Russell’s structuralism with the recent interest in “structural 
realism,” it is necessary to explain the notion of the “Ramsey sentence” of a theory 
(introduced in Ramsey 1929). This will also facilitate the comparison of AoM with 
Russell’s final statement of his theory in Human Knowledge (HK). On Russell’s view, our 
assertions regarding relations that fall outside our acquaintance are necessarily general 
claims of the form there is a relation R such that . . . R . . . . To make the connection 
with Ramsey sentences we have only to imagine that our “theory of the world” can 
be captured by a reconstruction which distinguishes among the primitives of its non-
logical vocabulary between those predicates which are true of things with which we 
are acquainted and those which are true of things that transcend our acquaintance. 
Our theory is then schematically expressible by a single postulate which is formulated 
in a language containing two types of primitive non-logical term: the acquaintance or 
A-terms and the transcendent or T-terms. In accordance with Russell’s fundamental prin-
ciple, the A-terms are fully understood, but the T-terms are problematic insofar as we 
are precluded from being acquainted with the things they qualify.
In this framework there are no primitive vocabulary items that mix items of acquain-
tance and items of transcendence. If there were such “cross-category” terms, a ques-
tion would arise as to how they are understood. And if their understanding could be 
accounted for compatibly with the fundamental principle, it is difficult to see why the 
transcendent terms should not also be capable of being understood compatibly with 
this principle. This strongly suggests that our reconstruction of our theory of the world 
should not contain cross-category terms, which is what its representation by acquain-
tance and transcendent terms assumes. But then, given that our understanding of the 
T-terms is completely general, any theory involving them is itself fully captured by its 
Ramsey sentence, that is by the result of replacing the transcendent terms occurring in it 
by variables of the appropriate logical category, and then existentially closing the for-
mula which results from this replacement. The Ramsey sentence expresses the idea that 
of the transcendent part of the world our knowledge is purely general knowledge, and 
that it admits an analysis like the one provided by Russell’s structuralism. Whether and 
to what extent the Ramsey sentence formulations of structural realism that derive from 
Russell are also subject to Newman’s objections is a topic currently very much under 
discussion. (See Ainsworth 2009 for an overview and references.)

BERTRAND RUSSELL
761
HK is replete with the discussion of spatio-temporal structure, which Russell evidently 
intends as a replacement for AoM’s almost complete reliance on purely logical structure. 
From the perspective of Russell’s structuralism, we can represent the change in view 
which marks this transition as the recognition of the necessity of the assumption:
Cross-Category: Some at least of the relations we know to hold among events 
with which we are acquainted also hold among events with which we are not 
acquainted; this includes spatio-temporal relations.
Hence, in HK the sharp Structure/Quality division—and for the Ramsey sentence for-
mulation, the sharp division between A- and T-terms—is relaxed in order to secure the 
conclusion which Newman observed we could not reach from the original statement 
of the theory of AoM, namely, the conclusion that our knowledge of the transcendent 
part of the world is not a mere matter of knowledge of its cardinality but contains many 
propositions that express significant truths.
The status HK assigns to the assumption which secures our knowledge of the tran-
scendent part of the world (namely, Cross-Category) is not unlike the status accorded 
the Axiom of Infinity in the development of Russell’s logicism. Russell initially prom-
ised an account of mathematical knowledge that would reveal it as a species of logi-
cal knowledge. But in light of the paradoxes it emerged that this thesis could not be 
maintained, and that the correctness of its central logical constructions required an 
assumption (namely, the Axiom of Infinity) that logic could not justify. A similar limi-
tation afflicts Russell’s theory of knowledge: if empiricism is to capture the character 
of our knowledge of the physical world, it is necessary to assume that we understand 
at least some cross-category terms. (Cross-Category) entitles such knowledge, but it is 
an assumption that empiricism, in the form of the fundamental principle and Russell’s 
account of the scope of acquaintance, is incapable of securing.
Acknowledgment
I wish to express my gratitude to the Killam Foundation and the Social Sciences and 
Humanities Research Council of Canada for support of my research.
References
Ainsworth, P. M. (2009). Newman’s Objection. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 60: 1–37.
Demopoulos, W. (2003). Russell’s Structuralism and the Absolute Description of the World, in N. Griffin 
(ed.) The Cambridge Companion to Russell (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press) 392–419.
—— (2010). Three Views of Theoretical Knowledge. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science.
—— and M. Friedman (1985). Russell’s Analysis of Matter: Its Historical Context and Contemporary 
Interest, Philosophy of Science 52: 621–39.
Newman, M. H. A. (1928). Mr Russell’s “Causal Theory of Perception,” Mind 37: 137–48.
Ramsey, F. P. (1929). Theories, in R. B. Braithwaite (ed.) The Foundations of Mathematics and other Logical 
Essays (Paterson, NJ, Littlefield and Adams: 1960) 212–36.
Russell, B. (1903). The Principles of Mathematics (London, Allen and Unwin).
—— (1905). On Denoting, Mind 14: 479–93.
—— (1912). The Problems of Philosophy (Oxford, Oxford University Press, reprint of 1998).
—— (1914). Our Knowledge of the External World as a Field for Scientific Method in Philosophy (London, Allen 
and Unwin).
—— (1919). Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy (London, Allen and Unwin).

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
762
—— (1927). The Analysis of Matter (New York, Dover reprint of 1954).
—— (1928). Letter to M. H. A. Newman of April 24, 1928, reprinted in The Autobiography of Bertrand 
Russell, Volume 2 (London, Allen & Unwin: 1968), 176.
—— (1931). Review of F. P. Ramsey’s The Foundations of Mathematics and other Logical Essays, R. B. 
Braithwaite (ed.), Mind 46: 476–82.
—— (1948). Human Knowledge: Its Scope and Limits (London, Allen and Unwin).
—— (1992). Theory of Knowledge: The 1913 Manuscript, E. R. Eames and K. Blackwell (eds.) (London and 
New York, Routledge).
Whitehead A. N. and B. Russell (1912) Principia Mathematica, Volume 2 (Cambridge, Cambridge University 
Press).

68
LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN
Marie McGinn
Introduction
Wittgenstein’s remarks on knowledge present a fragmented and inconclusive picture. 
However, there are two themes that Wittgenstein returns to again and again: first, that 
the idea that “I know” describes a state of affairs which “guarantees” what is known is a 
wrong picture; and second, that there are circumstances in which doubt is excluded and 
questions of justification do not arise, and in which the use of “I know” is equivalent to 
“There is no such thing as doubt in this case” (On Certainty (henceforward OC) 58). 
At least some of these remarks focus on the question of what is sometimes called “non-
inferential knowledge,” that is, on how we are to understand the status of judgments 
that we make “straight off, without any doubt interposing itself” (OC 524). I here focus 
on Wittgenstein’s distinctive treatment of this issue and show how it avoids the prob-
lems that arise for the accounts of non-inferential knowledge put forward by Wilfrid 
Sellars (1997) and John McDowell (1994, 2008).
The Problem of Non-Inferential Knowledge
The idea that some knowledge is non-inferential is prima facie compelling. What is 
non-inferentially known provides known premises for arguments that justify knowledge 
based on inference. In this way, non-inferentially acquired knowledge provides both 
the starting points, and an ultimate court of appeal, within our overall system of empiri-
cal knowledge. However, for those who are moved by these reflections to hold that at 
least some knowledge is non-inferential, there is a question of what the authority of the 
relevant knowledge claims derives from. On the one hand, the non-inferential nature 
of the knowledge seems to preclude the idea of a rational base for the relevant claims; 
on the other hand, the concept of knowledge is internally linked with the idea of being 
able to justify what one claims to know. An externalist, reliabilist account of the source 
of the authority of non-inferential knowledge might offer a way out of the apparent 
tension, but for those who are committed to the view that reliability is not sufficient 
for knowledge—that knowledge requires a knower who is self-consciously aware of his 
right to make the relevant knowledge claim—this is not an acceptable way to resolve 
the problem. The authority of non-inferential knowledge claims must be accounted for 
in some other way.

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
764
Sellars’ Account
Sellars’ approach to non-inferential knowledge is to separate the source of the posi-
tive epistemic status of a non-inferentially acquired belief from its mode of acquisi-
tion. According to Sellars, non-inferential beliefs are just beliefs that a subject acquires 
independently of any process of reasoning. This means there is no a priori limit on 
the concepts that can figure in non-inferentially acquired perceptual beliefs. Sellars 
acknowledges the need to account for both the positive epistemic status of such beliefs, 
and their power to transmit a positive epistemic status to the beliefs that are based on 
them. He argues that no account in terms of the notion of direct apprehension of facts is 
possible. One of the objections he makes to such accounts is that in order to make direct 
apprehension the basis of correct, well-founded perceptual judgments, there would have 
to be a criterion by which a subject could distinguish genuine apprehendings from mere 
seemings to apprehend. He argues that it is only if a subject is in a position to distinguish 
genuine apprehendings from mere seemings that the notion of direct apprehension 
could explain the source of the positive epistemic status of non-inferentially acquired 
perceptual beliefs.
Sellars, therefore, abandons the idea that the epistemic status of non-inferentially 
acquired perceptual beliefs derives from their being somehow self-warranting. Rather, 
the positive epistemic status of such beliefs derives from the fact that the process of 
training which speakers undergo when they learn language brings it about that the 
majority of their spontaneous observation reports are likely to be true. A subject’s pro-
pensity to report “This is green” is thus a reliable indicator of the presence of a green 
object. Sellars does not, however, regard reliable indication as sufficient for knowledge. 
In order for a perceiver’s true and reliable observation reports to count as expressions 
of knowledge, the perceiver must know that, in conditions that are standard for visual 
perception, his propensity to report “This is green” is a reliable indicator of the presence 
of a green object. The perceiver is thus in a position to recognize that his propensity 
to report, straight off, “This is green” gives him a good reason to judge that he is in the 
presence of a green object.
For a perceptual report to count as an expression of knowledge, its reliability as an 
indicator of an objective state of affairs must be recognized by the speaker, and available 
to him as a means to justify the belief that he (non-inferentially) acquired. Sellars avoids 
the infinite regress that appears to threaten the idea that a knower’s justification for any 
particular claim depends upon his knowing that his claims are, in general, reliable indi-
cators, by claiming that a speaker might know that his previous utterances were reliable 
indicators, even if, at the time of making them, they did not amount to expressions of 
knowledge. It is only at the point at which a speaker’s reliability becomes self-conscious, 
and thus available to figure in a justification of his endorsement of reports that he is 
spontaneously inclined to give, that those reports acquire the positive epistemic status 
of observational knowledge.
Objections
There are at least two objections to Sellars’ account of non-inferential knowledge. First 
of all, it is phenomenologically implausible. It just seems false to suggest that the posi-
tive epistemic status of, say, my current perceptual judgment, “This is a piece of paper,” 
derives from a general belief that my propensity to make this kind of observational 

LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN
765
report is a reliable indicator of the presence of a piece of paper. In general, if a proposi-
tion, p, is to serve as a justification for affirming another proposition, q, then p must be 
epistemically more secure than q. But the proposition that my observational reports, 
“This is a piece of paper,” are reliable indicators of the presence of a piece of paper does 
not seem to be epistemically more secure than my current judgment, “This is a piece of 
paper,” and it is implausible to suggest that the latter inherits its epistemic status from 
the former.
This leads to a second objection. For it seems clear that Sellars’ account fails to pre-
serve what makes the idea of non-inferential knowledge compelling. The idea is that 
non-inferential perceptual judgments provide the starting point for all empirical knowl-
edge, and the test against which all knowledge based on inference is to be judged. The 
point of holding that perception provides for the acquisition of non-inferential knowl-
edge lies in our recognizing that perception gives us immediate access to the world. 
Thus, non-inferential perceptual judgments possess their positive epistemic status in 
virtue of the circumstances in which they are made, independently of the kind of gen-
eral justification from which Sellars claims it derives. Moreover, it seems that it is only 
if we hang on to this idea that we could be said to have provided an account of genu-
inely non-inferential knowledge. If that is correct, then Sellars’ account is not a way 
of making non-inferential knowledge intelligible, but of showing that there is no non-
inferential knowledge: all knowledge owes its status qua knowledge to inference. Sellars 
has abandoned the element of foundationalism implicit in the idea of non-inferential 
knowledge and accepted a form of coherentism, in which the epistemic status of any 
belief is a matter of its inferential connections to other beliefs.
McDowell’s Account
One of Sellars’ objections to an account of non-inferential knowledge that employs the 
notion of direct apprehension of a fact is that, in order for such direct apprehension to 
constitute a case of knowing the relevant fact, the subject must be able to know that he 
is directly apprehending that fact. This, Sellars argues, requires a criterion by which a 
subject can distinguish genuine apprehendings from mere seemings. McDowell develops 
an account of non-inferential knowledge which incorporates a form of epistemological 
disjunctivism as a means to avoid this difficulty. McDowell accepts that it is at least 
conceivable that there could be mere seemings to apprehend that are phenomenologi-
cally indistinguishable from genuine cases. However, he argues that this does not force 
us to accept that, in the non-deceptive cases, what is apprehended is not the fact itself. 
Thus, cases of its seeming to me that I see a piece of paper are of two disjoint kinds: 
cases in which I merely seem to see (or directly apprehend) a piece of paper, and cases 
in which the fact that a piece of paper is present is making itself perceptually manifest, 
that is, in which I am directly apprehending the fact that a piece of paper is present. 
McDowell argues that a subject’s epistemic position depends upon whether the good or 
the bad disjunct is realized. In the good case, when a subject is seeing a piece of paper in 
front of him, this constitutes his having direct cognitive access to the fact that there is a 
piece of paper there, and this direct cognitive access entitles him to make the judgment 
“This is a piece of paper.”
According to McDowell, if a subject is undergoing the experience that constitutes 
the good disjunct, then he is thereby warranted in judging that things are as his experi-
ence reveals them to be. The idea that judgment is rationally responsive to what is given 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
766
in experience does, he acknowledges, impose an idea of rational or doxastic responsibil-
ity: if a subject has some special reason to think that appearances are deceptive, then 
the subject is not in a position to take advantage of the warrant for a judgment as to 
how things are that his experience in fact provides. But where there is no special reason 
to think that things might be other than they appear, and the subject is actually per-
ceiving his surroundings, then, McDowell claims, he is in a position to form warranted, 
knowledgeable judgments about what is the case in his environment. The factive state 
of seeing a piece of paper justifies the judgment, “This is a piece of paper,” without any 
need of support from premises that are available independently of the subject’s having 
a direct cognitive grasp on the relevant fact. The possibility of deceptive cases shows 
we are fallible, but our fallibility does not, McDowell claims, undermine the idea that, 
when things go well, we are in possession of an indefeasible experiential warrant that 
constitutes the judgments we base on the exercise of our perceptual faculties as cases of 
genuine knowledge.
McDowell accepts Sellars’ view that relations of warrant can only hold between con-
ceptually structured items. However, he argues that if we accept the Kantian insight that, 
in the case of subjects with the relevant conceptual capacities, the content of experi-
ence is conceptually structured, then we are in a position to see perceptual judgments 
concerning matters of fact as both justified and non-inferential: they are warranted by 
the content of the experience on which they are rationally based. Thus, when things go 
well, a warrant for judgment is provide by the subject’s being confronted by a fact, con-
ceived as a conceptually structured item that constitutes the content of his experience. 
On McDowell’s conception, the idea that judgments based on what is given in experience 
must be intrinsically certain is unnecessary to the idea that what is given in experience 
provides an indefeasible warrant for judgment. For if it is the case that the fact that there 
is a piece of paper before me is making itself manifest in experience, then the warrant that 
the content of my experience provides for the judgment, “This is a piece of paper,” is one 
that is incompatible with the judgment’s being false. The epistemic position I enjoy in 
virtue of that fact’s making itself experientially manifest is one that is incompatible with 
its turning out that my judgment, “This is a piece of paper,” is mistaken.
McDowell argues that his account of non-inferential knowledge does not commit 
him to the idea that there are cases of unmediated knowledge, or cases of knowledge 
that do not require the subject to be in a position to justify what he claims to know. 
He accepts Sellars’ view that epistemic descriptions place the episode described within 
“the logical space of reasons,” i.e. they commit the describer to the idea of a subject who 
can give a reason for judging as he does. However, he holds that this commitment can 
be met insofar as a subject who judges, “This is a piece of paper,” can justify the judg-
ment, by saying “I see that there is a piece of paper.” The justification incorporates the 
judgment that it is used to justify, but the possibility of giving it makes clear that it is 
only a subject who is self-consciously aware of what he sees—and of the entitlement to 
judgment that perception provides—who is in a position to acquire non-inferential per-
ceptual knowledge. Moreover, given the requirement of doxastic responsibility which is 
intrinsic to the idea that a subject is a rational agent, and thus a knower of truths, there 
is a standing obligation on the subject’s part to be aware of possible grounds for doubt, 
which might put him in a position in which he cannot take advantage of the warrant 
that his awareness of an objective fact actually provides.
What is crucial for McDowell is that this account of non-inferential knowledge both 
acknowledges that the world plays a role in determining the goodness of a subject’s 

LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN
767
epistemic position, and at the same time makes the idea of guaranteed, knowledgeable 
judgment intelligible. This does not, he claims, require him to hold that the non-infer-
ential, knowledgeable judgments to which a speaker is entitled, in virtue of the cogni-
tive access to facts that perceptual experience provides, are unmediated, intrinsically 
certain, or incapable of being doubted. All that is required, he argues, is that, when 
things go well, the experiential warrant that awareness of a fact provides is incompatible 
with the falsity of the judgment that the fact obtains. Thus, the absolute indefeasibility 
of the warrant, which the notion of direct apprehension is intended to capture, is con-
ceived in a way that makes it independent of the idea that the judgments that are thus 
warranted are either intrinsically certain or indubitable.
According to McDowell, a subject who is in possession of the relevant sort of expe-
riential warrant and who judges that a fact obtains cannot be wrong about it. But this 
is not to say that the subject’s judgment is infallible: a subject might take himself to be 
apprehending a fact in cases where he merely seems to apprehend a fact. The point is to 
enable us to see how, despite our fallibility, there can be such a thing as an indefeasible 
warrant, which grounds a non-inferential, knowledgeable judgment. The picture is not 
intended to help us to justify a judgment in the face of skeptical doubt, but only to make 
us comfortable with the idea that, when things go well, no further warrant, over and 
above the warrant that derives from the perceptual situation itself, is needed.
Objections
McDowell’s account tries to make us comfortable with the idea of direct apprehension 
of a fact as a ground for non-inferential knowledge, and to show why question-begging 
justifications (“I see that p”) are sufficient to vindicate a subject’s entitlement to assert 
the embedded proposition. The picture of indefeasible, experiential warrant for the 
non-inferential judgment, “This is a piece of paper,” that McDowell presents is intended 
to show how a judgment that I make “straight off” can possess a rational warrant, and 
why a suitable justification of the judgment does not—cannot—take the form of a non-
question-begging argument with the relevant proposition as its conclusion. This pic-
ture of non-inferential knowledge is, on the face of it, a version of what Wittgenstein 
castigates as “the wrong picture,” the one he believes to lie at the root of philosophical 
misunderstanding:
But isn’t there a phenomenon of knowing, as it were quite apart from the sense 
of the phrase “I know”? Is it not remarkable that a man can know something, 
can as it were have the fact within him?—But that is a wrong picture.
(Zettel (henceforward Z) §408)
At least one reason for Wittgenstein’s sense that the picture is misleading is closely 
related to Sellars’ objection to the idea of direct apprehension: the availability of an 
experiential guarantee is taken to require that a subject can know that he is in posses-
sion of such a guarantee, and this would require that he is infallible about whether he 
knows the relevant proposition. Wittgenstein spells out the objection at length:
[I]t is said, it’s only knowledge if things really are as he says. But that is not 
enough. It mustn’t be just an accident that they are. For he has got to know 
that he knows: for knowing is a state of his own mind; he can’t be in doubt or 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
768
error about it—apart from some special sort of blindness. If then knowledge 
that things are so is only knowledge if they really are so; and if knowledge is in 
him so that he cannot go wrong about whether it is knowledge; in that case, 
then, he is also infallible about things being so, just as he knows his knowledge; 
and so the fact which he knows must be within him just like the knowledge. 
(Z §408)
Clearly, McDowell believes that disjunctivism answers this objection. If we accept 
disjunctivism, then we can see how, in the good case, we are not only in possession of a 
guarantee of what we claim to know, but the nature of guarantee enables us to see why, 
when things go well, “I see that p” is a proper justification of the embedded proposi-
tion. As McDowell sees it, the objection that Sellars and Wittgenstein raise reflects a 
distorted picture of direct apprehension, insofar as it assumes that direct apprehension 
entails that a subject must be infallible about whether he is apprehending a fact, and 
thus about whether he knows it.
Suppose we accept that McDowell has changed the picture of knowledge as a state 
in which what is known is guaranteed as a fact, in a way which disconnects it from any 
idea of infallibility, there is still the question of its application. On McDowell’s account, 
the indefeasible warrant for my perceptual judgment, “There is a piece of paper in front 
of me,” consists in the fact that my situation is one in which the fact that there is a 
piece of paper in front of me is making itself visually manifest. I am in possession of a 
warrant that guarantees the truth of my judgment insofar as I stand in a certain kind 
of cognitive relation (that of seeing) to the fact whose obtaining renders the judgment 
true. How are we to understand the notion of warrant when it is employed in this way? 
McDowell suggests that the warrant that I’m in possession of is one that underpins a way 
of justifying the perceptual judgment, “There is a piece of paper in front of me,” which 
is incompatible with that judgment’s being false. Thus, if I’m asked, “How do you know 
there is a piece of paper in front of you?,” I can give a reason for my judgment that “fully 
vindicates” my entitlement to it: “I see that there is a piece of paper in front of me.” The 
justification fully vindicates the judgment insofar as “I see that there is a piece of paper 
in front of me” logically entails “There is a piece of paper in front of me.” However, it is 
clear that the judgment which McDowell claims fully vindicates the judgment, “There 
is a piece of paper in front of me,” does so only if it is true. And the question is what 
guarantees its truth.
On McDowell’s account, what guarantees its truth is the fact that I am currently see-
ing that there is a piece of paper in front of me, and that is not something that can be 
true or false, or for which the question of evidence can arise. That’s why the fact which, 
on McDowell’s account, is the content of my experience is able to provide an indefea-
sible warrant for my judgment, that is to say, provide a guarantee that the judgment 
which asserts that the fact obtains is true. But for precisely this reason, what guarantees 
my judgment’s truth is not something I can give in justification for my assertion “I see 
that there is a piece of paper in front of me.” As far as my assertion goes, the best I can 
do is say something that is true, and not something whose truth I’m in a position to 
guarantee. And insofar as what I say is, at best, true, it seems open to someone to ask 
again, “How do you know that you see a piece of paper in front of you?” And it seems 
that, on McDowell’s account, all I can do, at this point, is dig in my heels and insist that 
I do see it, that I’m not merely seeming to see it, that it would be ridiculous to doubt it. 
Thus, it seems that the indefeasible warrants that McDowell’s picture introduces can’t 

LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN
769
be connected with the actual business of providing a warrant for a judgment, since a fact 
is not itself something that can be offered in justification. In trying to extend the idea 
of a warrant for judgment to what lies outside judgment, McDowell has introduced a 
picture of justification for what one asserts that has no application in the actual process 
of justifying what one claims to know.
It might be objected on McDowell’s behalf that he never intended his picture of 
what guarantees perceptual judgments to be applied in the actual business of justifying 
either perceptual judgments or assertions of the form “I see that . . . .” The whole point 
of McDowell’s picture is to make sense of a notion of indefeasible warrant for judgments 
that operates independently of the question whether we are ever in a position to provide 
a justification for what we claim that would satisfy a skeptic. His account is intended to 
serve merely as a picture by means of which we can, in a position of reflection, reassure 
ourselves that, when things go well, we are in possession of an indefeasible warrant, and 
thus in a position to make knowledgeable judgments about the objects in our surround-
ings. The picture shows how a non-inferential judgment can possess a rational warrant 
which guarantees its truth. The question is, does this succeed in explaining the source of 
our entitlement to our basic judgments concerning the objects in our environment?
The idea is that, other things being equal, it is a fact’s being given in experience that 
provides a rational warrant for the judgment that the fact obtains. If we want to say what 
the fact is that is given in experience and which warrants the judgment that it obtains, 
then we will, of course, be obliged simply to repeat the proposition that is the content 
of the judgment that the fact allegedly warrants. But in that case, doesn’t the picture 
amount to this: I am entitled to the observational judgment that there is a piece of paper 
before me by the fact that there is a piece of paper before me. And how does this differ 
from saying that I am entitled to make the observational judgment that there is a piece 
of paper in front of me in virtue of its being correct to say that there is a piece of paper 
in front of me? McDowell’s picture is supposed to show how this correct judgment can 
be a rational response to something that is given in experience, but when we are asked 
to say what it is a rational response to, we are obliged simply to repeat the judgment: 
the judgment “This is a piece of paper” is a rational response to the fact that this is a 
piece of paper. The question is, what is the criterion of its being a rational response to 
the fact that this is a piece of paper? In my own case, it is just that this is what I judge 
it to be. The fact itself cannot tell me what it is correct to judge; what the fact is is 
something which, for me, is settled (subject to the usual checks) by what I judge to be 
the case. In the case of others, the criterion of its being a rational response is, in normal 
circumstances, that the judgment is correct—that is to say, it is the one that they would 
make—given such background facts as that I am a competent speaker of English.
Thus, the idea that there is something outside judgment that is the source of my 
entitlement to judge seems either to conjure up the idea of something outside judgment 
that can inform me what constitutes a correct description of it, or it adds nothing to the 
idea that, when I judge, I aim to speak truly and whether I succeed is something that 
can be confirmed, either by means of further checks that I can carry out, or by others. 
The former idea is mysterious. I can become informed of what the facts are by determin-
ing (that is to say, judging) what is the case, but it makes no sense to say that the facts 
inform me of what is the case. In trying to apply the notion of an indefeasible warrant in 
the case of basic, non-inferential judgments, McDowell has either to attribute a mysteri-
ous power to facts to inform a judger how to judge, or to bring the chain of justifications 
to an end in a stutter, in which the entitlement to judge that p is held to consist in its 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
770
being correct to judge that p. And given that the latter is itself something judged (either 
by me or by others), the latter gets us no further, for the question immediately arises of 
our entitlement to the judgment that the judgment that p is correct.
Wittgenstein and Non-Inferential Judgments
Wittgenstein does not use the expression “non-inferential knowledge,” and he is in 
general wary of using the term “know” in connection with judgments that we make 
“straight off,” and for which a question of doubt does not normally arise. However, at 
least part of his response to Moore’s defense of common sense reflects his concern to put 
these judgments in a light which relieves us of the sense that our lack of doubt, or our 
lack of a justification, concerning them is in some way amiss. His route to putting us 
philosophically at ease with these judgments is clearly very different from McDowell’s, 
since it explicitly eschews the path of showing how it is that we can know them. In order 
to become clearer about these judgments, Wittgenstein believes, we need to become 
clearer about the nature of the certainty that characterizes our ordinary relation to them. 
The central question for Wittgenstein is whether, as McDowell assumes, this certainty 
is to be understood as belonging to the same species as our certainty concerning such 
well-established facts as the boiling point of water or the date of the Battle of Hastings. 
The idea is that we are tempted by such a picture only because we have not undertaken 
the investigation Wittgenstein wants us to focus on, and which aims to achieve a realis-
tic understanding of the point at which giving grounds comes to an end.
Wittgenstein’s approach to philosophical problems and perplexities can be roughly 
characterized as descriptive. The aim of the description is to overcome the intellectual 
temptations which Wittgenstein believes to lie at the root of philosophical perplexity: 
the temptation to idealize, to create abstractions and hypostatize objects. His aim, as he 
says in Philosophical Investigations (henceforward PI) 94, is to get us to see that “nothing 
out of the ordinary is involved.” Describing, reporting, naming, inferring, calculating, 
etc. are all part of human natural history, and he believes that we have only to come 
to command a clear view of these practices in order to understand their nature. In par-
ticular, he wants us to view judging as “as much a part of our natural history as walking, 
eating, drinking, playing” (PI 25), and to resist the temptation to idealize it. His aim is 
to get us to see our sophisticated language-game, in which doubts about particular judg-
ments are raised and answered, as a refinement of a more primitive form of language-
game, in which a child gradually learns to respond unhesitatingly, in which it trusts its 
teacher implicitly, and in which doubt is not yet a possibility. It is not that he’s con-
cerned to provide an explanation of the origins of our language-game, but he hopes that 
by seeing a certain order in linguistic phenomena, the disquiet which sends us in search 
of a mental state in which the fact known is somehow guaranteed can be dispelled. It 
is not that the foundation we are inclined to look for in indefeasible guarantees is pro-
vided by natural reactions but, rather, the aim is to dispel our sense that without this 
form of guarantee our practice of judging lacks something vital.
The aspects of our practice of judging that Wittgenstein draws attention to are all 
familiar ones. We learn to judge by being taught judgments:
We do not learn the practice of making empirical judgements by learning 
rules: we are taught judgements and their connexion with other judgements. 
(OC 140)

LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN
771
We teach a child “that is your hand,” not “that is perhaps (or “probably”) your 
hand.” (OC 374)
I want to say: our learning has the form “that is a violet,” “that is a table.” (OC 
450)
The process by which we are taught how to judge depends upon an unquestioning trust 
of our teachers, which is entirely natural to us:
The child learns to believe a host of things. (OC 144)
As children we learn facts; e.g., that every human being has a brain, and we 
take them on trust. (OC 159)
The child learns by believing the adult. (OC 160)
For how can a child immediately doubt what it is taught? That could mean only 
that he was incapable of learning certain language games. (OC 283)
The test of our having mastered the language-game of judging is our ability to go on 
independently, and apply expressions in judgements that are made without any hesi-
tancy or doubt:
[O]ne is not playing the game, or is playing it wrong, if one does not recognize 
objects with certainty. (OC 446)
We say: if a child has mastered language—and hence its application—it must 
know the meaning of words. It must, for example, be able to attach the name 
of its colour to a white, black, red or blue object without the occurrence of any 
doubt. (OC 522)
Thus, trusting the judgements of both myself and others “is part of judging” (OC 150); 
“our not doubting . . . is simply our manner of judging” (OC 232). We should, he sug-
gests, see doubt emerging as a complication of this more primitive language-game, in 
which doubt is not yet a possibility.
A child learns there are reliable and unreliable informants much later than it 
learns facts which are told it. (OC 143)
Doubt comes after belief. (OC 160)
One doubts on specific grounds. (OC 458)
When a child learns language it learns at the same time what is to be investi-
gated and what is not. (OC 472)
The child is taught judgments and is trained to recognize objects without hesitation. 
When it reacts to a situation by giving an object its correct name, there is no question 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
772
of its having a reason or being able to justify what it does. No more does it have a reason 
not to doubt. It is not that it learns not to doubt; doubt, at this stage, is not a possibility. 
Later the child learns when doubt is appropriate; it learns to doubt on specific grounds. 
These reminders draw attention to the fact that our language-game does not have its 
roots in reason. But clearly, this is not a matter for concern; it does not undermine or 
falsify our practice. We don’t miss the absence of doubt or justification here.
One way to understand the significance of these reminders is to take the process by 
which we are initiated into our practice as an object of comparison, which helps us to see 
our ordinary language-game in a less idealized and more naturalistic light. It helps us to 
accept that what lies at the bottom of our ordinary language-game are responses that are 
not grounded in reasons, but are confident and unhesitating reactions to our immediate 
environment. Not only that, they are ones that each of us can confidently predict will 
be universally and unhesitatingly shared with others who have been initiated into our 
practice of judging. Regarding these judgments as absolutely solid “is part of our method 
of doubt and enquiry” (OC 151). The confidence I have in making these judgments “is 
something universal . . . not just something personal” (OC 440). Wittgenstein’s aim is 
not to show us that these attitudes are justified, or even correct, but to dispel the sense 
that some other foundation is needed, or can be given. In normal circumstances, trust-
ing our own and others’ judgment—our, and their, ability to say straight off what some-
thing is—characterizes our practice. Without that trust, the whole system breaks down, 
in much the way the capacity to learn breaks down if a child does not trust its teachers, 
or its own ability to go on independently.
One important element in Wittgenstein’s attempt to get us to feel at ease with the 
groundlessness of the judgments that we accept without further question is to get us 
to see them under the aspect of “acting surely, acting without any doubt” (OC 196). 
Although there is a difference between our judgments and the reactions of the child, 
insofar as we are self-conscious judgers who understand what it is we are doing and the 
possibilities for being called to account, Wittgenstein wants us to resist the temptation 
to suppose that this leaves us with a choice between regarding our judgments as mere 
surmises or seeing them as standing in need of a justification. The whole point is that 
we do not make these judgments on the basis of possessing a justification, and any 
justification that might be proffered will be less certain than that which it is supposed 
to justify. With these judgments “I have arrived at the rock bottom of my convictions” 
(OC 248), and for that reason the idea of giving grounds is not in play. But it is wrong 
to think that this reduces these judgments to the status of surmises, for this implies that 
there is a doubt that is being ignored, that these judgments are not as certain as they 
could be.
The idea that we see this certainty as corresponding “to a sureness, not to a knowing” 
(OC 511) is intended to make clear a distinction between the judgments that we make 
unhesitatingly, in response to a question or to our environment, and mere presupposi-
tions which we accept as working hypotheses. In a sense, Wittgenstein could be seen 
as making us feel at ease with the idea of judgments that we are in a position to make 
straight off, with no question of justification, by resisting the temptation to assimilate 
these judgments to those for which the question of evidence is apt. Justification does 
come to an end in judgments that we make straight off, and for which no question of 
evidence or justification arises, but it is just this feature of these judgments that marks a 
logical distinction between them and those for which the question of reasons for belief 
is apt. This does not render these foundational judgments irrational, but their rational 

LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN
773
status derives from their place in a whole system of beliefs that are connected with one 
another, and not from their being based on beliefs that justify them.
Wittgenstein does not rule out the use of the words “I know” in the case of these 
foundational judgments. However, he points out that, in normal circumstances, this use 
of “I know” can be replaced by the words “I can say [what that is]” (OC 586, 591), or 
“I cannot be making a mistake” (OC 425), where the latter is understood to mean: the 
question of a mistake does not arise here; the question of a mistake is “logically excluded” 
(OC 194). It is for this reason that we can see it as an expression of sureness, rather than 
knowledge. At a number of points, Wittgenstein compares the sureness with which 
we say what kind of thing an object is with our treating a calculation as sufficiently 
checked. We might check a calculation by doing it over twice, or by getting someone 
else to work it out, but this process comes to an end. And at the end, the certainty 
we have is already as great as it can be, it would not be increased by our repeating the 
check twenty times or with twenty others. There isn’t, he suggests, any reason why this 
is so. This is what counts as an adequate test in our language-game of calculation: “This 
is how we calculate” (OC 47). In this case, we can see how the whole language-game 
of calculation depends upon this sureness in our way of operating with mathematical 
expressions: there would be no such thing as calculation if we did not act with certainty 
in this way.
It would be wrong to characterize Wittgenstein’s description of our practice of judging 
as a philosophical account of non-inferential knowledge, if this is taken to imply that 
Wittgenstein has explained how non-inferential knowledge is possible. But if he suc-
ceeds in persuading us that no such explanation is needed, then he has done something 
that achieves the sort of philosophical peace that it was assumed could only be provided 
by an explanatory account.
References
McDowell, J.H. (1994), Mind and World, (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press)
—— (2008), “The Disjunctive Conception of Experience as Material for a Transcendental Argument,” 
Disjunctivism: Perception, Action, Knowledge, A. Haddock and F. Macpherson (eds.), (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press)
Sellars, W. (1997), Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind, (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press)
Wittgenstein, L. (1967), Zettel (Z), ed. G.E.M. Anscombe and G.H. von Wright, trans. G.E.M. Anscombe, 
(Oxford: Blackwell)
—— (1977), On Certainty (OC), ed. G.E.M. Anscombe and G.H. von Wright, trans. D. Paul and G.E.M. 
Anscombe, (Oxford: Blackwell)
—— (1998), Philosophical Investigations (PI), trans. G.E.M. Anscombe, (Oxford: Blackwell)

69
RUDOLF CARNAP
Thomas Uebel
Writing about the epistemological doctrines of Rudolf Carnap (1891–1970) and some 
other members of the Vienna Circle holds a certain irony. For the doctrines most closely 
associated with Carnap were rejected by him and his colleagues only a few years after they 
had been given what appeared to be their definitive formulation. Moreover, Carnap did 
not then replace these epistemological doctrines with better but less well-known ones. 
Instead he gave up epistemology and turned to philosophy of science. Carnap’s career 
suggests that, despite their shared concern with knowledge, the concerns of epistemol-
ogy and philosophy of science need not fully coincide.
1. The Aufbau and Its Standard Interpretation
The epistemological doctrines that Carnap is most closely associated with are those of 
his early work Der logische Aufbau der Welt (1928, trans. The Logical Structure of the World, 
hereafter Aufbau). There Carnap tried to establish that all the concepts of empirical sci-
ence could be “rationally reconstructed” with the help of logic and set theory, step by 
step on the basis of just one basic relation, “remembered similarity,” holding between 
as yet unanalyzed experiences. Much later, Carnap summarized the complexities of his 
project as follows.
I developed a method called “quasi-analysis,” which leads, on the basis of the 
similarity-relation among experiences, to the logical construction of those 
entities which are usually conceived as components. On the basis of a certain 
primitive relation among experiences, the method of quasi-analysis leads step 
by step to the various sensory domains—first to the visual domain, then to the 
positions in the visual field, the colors and their similarity system, the temporal 
order, and the like. Later, perceived things in the three-dimensional perceptual 
space are constructed, among them that particular thing which is usually called 
my own body, and the bodies of other persons. Still later, the so-called other 
minds are constructed; that is to say, mental states are ascribed to other bodies 
in view of their behavior, in analogy to the experience of one’s own mental 
states.
(1963, 17)
Clearly, phenomenalist reductionism does not come any more radical than this: even 
sense-data were to be constructed. Yet Carnap was adamant that he did not intend this 
reductionist doctrine to have any ontological consequences: his was but a “methodological 

RUDOLF CARNAP
775
solipsism.” By showing all scientific concepts and statements to be so reducible in principle 
(Carnap only claimed to have provided a sketch), he aimed to show that they shared the 
same type of empirical basis and so sought to re-establish, on a new logico-linguistic basis, 
the unity of science that had been called into question (1928, §4). Moreover, Carnap 
stressed that a rational reconstruction of scientific concepts on a physical or materialistic 
basis was also possible, since “all psychological (and other) objects are reducible to physical 
objects” (ibid., §59), but he did not pursue this further.
Clearly, it must be asked what prompted Carnap to pursue this strategy of rational 
reconstruction and what brought about its perceived failure. But it must also be asked 
what precisely it was that failed, for the interpretation of its philosophical point that 
is most commonly given to the Aufbau has been strenuously argued against in recent 
Vienna Circle scholarship. Popularized by W.V.O. Quine in his “Two Dogmas of 
Empiricism,” this interpretation stuck not just to the Aufbau but to Vienna Circle phi-
losophy generally: epistemological foundationalism.
For Quine, Carnap “was the first empiricist who, not content with asserting the 
reducibility of science to terms of immediate experience, took serious steps toward car-
rying out the reduction” (Quine 1951/1980, 39). Accordingly, what failed when the 
Aufbau failed was the project of up-dating, with the tools of mathematical logic, tradi-
tional empiricism’s attempt to put all of science on the secure basis of sense experience. 
What doomed this project was a deficit first noted by Quine. When it came to assigning 
sense qualities to positions in physical space, Carnap was unable to provide an elimina-
tive reduction of the latter. As Quine put it, “the connective ‘is at’ remains an added 
undefined connective: the canons [which Carnap provides] counsel us in its use but not 
in its elimination” (ibid., 40). The reduction of physical object talk to ever so complex 
logical constructions of remembered similarity relations between originally unanalyzed 
experiences had failed.
Now Quine noted that “Carnap seems to have appreciated this point afterward,” for 
“reductionism in its radical form since ceased to figure” in his work. Even so, he also 
claimed that “the dogma of reductionism has, in a subtler and more tenuous form, con-
tinued to influence the thought of empiricists,” namely, “in the supposition that each 
statement, taken in isolation from its fellows, can admit of confirmation or infirmation 
at all” (ibid., 40–1). By his immediate countersuggestion of Duhemian holism and his 
linkage of the dogmas of reductionism and the analytic-synthetic distinction, Quine 
convicted Carnap and his colleagues of sticking to an insufficiently liberalized program 
of atomistic foundationalism. To be sure, Quine did not explicitly call the Aufbau foun-
dationalist and in his later “Epistemology Naturalized,” he noted that Carnap’s project 
proceeded while “hope of certainty on the doctrinal side was abandoned” (the “side of 
epistemology” concerned with the truth of statements including universal ones). Yet 
that meant only the acceptance of the “Humean predicament”; all the while, “Carnap’s 
heroic efforts on the conceptual side of epistemology” (the side concerned with defini-
tions of terms used) continued to aim for “legitimation by elimination” (Quine 1969, 
74, 78). Singular physical object statements were still expected to be reduced without 
remainder to phenomenalistic statements in the complex fashion described above.
So the picture of the Aufbau that emerges from Quine’s criticism is a foundationalist 
one, admitting fallibilism at the level of physical generalizations, but affirming certainty 
all the way below. Yet we must also note that, if so, it was a foundationalism with a dif-
ference. By demanding the eliminative reducibility of physical object statements, this 
type of foundationalism far exceeded the demands of Chisholm’s mid-twentieth-century 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
776
version which gave defeasible rules for ascent to such statements from statements about 
phenomenal appearances. At the same time, the Aufbau sought a basis far below the 
level at which that foundationalism stopped, beyond what could possibly be expected to 
be introspectively accessible upon reflection (in the only reconstructively attributable 
similarity relations between whole experiences that constituted all objects).
Importantly then, the rational reconstruction provided by the Aufbau does not 
provide an epistemology that lends itself to meliorative concerns with knowledge. 
Cognition was seen from an impersonal perspective inhospitable to epistemic subjects 
wanting control of their domain. Carnap explicitly dismissed as irrelevant for his pur-
poses the psychologically salient “epistemic value” of mental states of a subject, building 
his reconstruction instead on the “logical value” that consists of the reduction formulae 
for those mental contents (1928, §50). (Across all levels of reconstruction mental con-
tents were individuated purely structurally, namely, by the provision of logical reduc-
tion formulae, and the very possibility of communication was said to rest on this shared 
structural constitution of meaning.)
The only concession made to traditional epistemology was Carnap’s adherence to the 
principle of epistemic primacy which determined his order of reduction. Since “the rec-
ognition of our own psychological processes does not need to be mediated through the 
recognition of physical objects, but takes place directly,” Carnap determined that “the 
sequence with respect to epistemic primacy of the four most important object domains 
is: the autopsychological, the physical, the heteropsychological, the cultural” (ibid., 
§58). Carnap’s reconstruction thus imposed a psychologically inaccessible formal logi-
cal structure on an otherwise very traditionally conceived and fixedly ordered domain 
of the objects of human knowledge. His aim that “the order of construction reflect the 
epistemic order of objects” motivated his preference for taking the autopsychological 
language as basic (ibid., §59).
2. The Standard Interpretation Challenged
It might seem that the deficit detected by Quine dealt a fatal blow to the Aufbau project. 
Its radical reductionism is certainly undermined. But while this spells the end of the 
radical foundationalism that Quine saw in it, it would not rule out a more relaxed foun-
dationalism that allows fallible ascent from the autopsychological to the physical. Just 
that is allowed for by Carnap’s mid-1930s non-eliminative reduction sentences which 
made it possible to link terms from the physicalist “thing-language” to the phenomenal 
language as well as disposition terms (and theoretical terms understood as dispositional) 
to a purely observational thing-language (1936a, cf. 1936–37, §xx). For Quine, this 
move “renounce[d] the last remaining advantage we suppose rational reconstruction to 
have over straight psychology” (1969, 78), prompting his own naturalism in turn. Yet 
having indicated the logical possibility of retaining the phenomenal base in this attenu-
ated fashion, Carnap never employed it for this or other purposes.
The trouble with Quine’s diagnosis of the post-Aufbau Carnap is manifold. Not only 
does it overlook that Carnap himself endorsed Duhemian holism already in Logical 
Syntax of Language (1934/1937, §82), but also that soon after Carnap drew the conse-
quence that, given such holism, scientific successor theories can be couched in a lan-
guage incommensurable with that of its predecessor (and gave an example from recent 
physics) (1936b/1949, 126). Moreover, the diagnosis also overlooks that Duhemian 
holism, being of an epistemological and not a semantical kind, is compatible with the 

RUDOLF CARNAP
777
retention of the analytic–synthetic distinction, affirming the confirmability or discon-
firmability of empirical statements only in suitably large chunks. (Consider also the 
holism inherent in Carnap’s later ramseyfications of scientific theories that still sought 
to separate the synthetic and analytic components of the theoretical language (e.g., 
1966, Chs. 26–28).) Most misleading is the continued attribution of foundationalist 
ambitions: it overlooks not only the strongly coherentist motive in Carnap’s think-
ing, but also the constructivist impulse with which he approached the logico-linguis-
tic treatment of problems in the philosophy of science ever since his abandonment of 
methodological solipsism in late 1932.
Quine’s diagnosis of the Aufbau is equally contestable. Following a lead given by 
Michael Friedman, it has been the charge of revisionist Vienna Circle scholarship that 
the Aufbau, despite all appearances, is not a foundationalist tract. (See, e.g., Friedman 
1987, 1992; Richardson 1998, Chs. 1–3, 8; Pincock 2005; Uebel 2007, Ch. 2. The 
present and next paragraphs draw on these sources as well as on Mormann 2007.) To 
be sure, it embodies the perhaps most thorough attempt at phenomenalist reductionism 
ever undertaken. Yet “certainty” is not a term one can find in the Aufbau at all: a central 
aspect of foundationalism in Carnap’s day is missing. (To try to defend the diagnosis by 
arguing that nowadays foundationalism also merely claims prima facie non-inferential 
justification for its foundations would be futile. It was, after all, the traditional aim of 
putting science on the supposedly secure basis of sense experience that Quine imputed 
to the Aufbau.) Moreover, the term “justification” is missing from the text of the Aufbau 
as well, and for good reason: as we saw, Carnap showed no concern for internalist justi-
fication. What replaces it is “rational reconstruction”: the justification of a knowledge 
claim became the satisfaction of its reduction formula (of which agents were ignorant). 
While this looks somewhat “externalist” it would be equally problematical, however, 
to see an anticipation of contemporary externalism in the Aufbau. Carnap was not 
concerned with reliable belief acquisition processes or modal conditions on knowledge 
ascription. The epistemology of the Aufbau, it must be concluded, does not fit happily 
into the taxonomy of current work in the field.
So what did motivate Carnap’s radical phenomenalist reductionism? Revisionist schol-
arship detects a variety of motives reflecting different influences, ranging from the pro-
vision of a logico-linguistic proof for the unified science thesis to the development of a 
neo-Kantian conception of objectivity, with multiple other tendencies besides. That some 
of these interpretations are compatible suggests a strongly integrative ambition at work. 
For instance, by the very scope of his attempted reduction, Carnap sought to avoid both 
the bifurcation in scientific terminology and the split into types of scientific reasoning that 
threatened the unity thesis on two alternative approaches: the postulational approach to 
theoretical terms of Schlick’s General Theory of Knowledge (1918/25) left explicitly and 
implicitly defined scientific terms and their respective languages sharply separated while 
the neo-Kantian differentiation between generalizing “nomothetic” and individualizing 
“ideothetic” statements sharply separated the natural from the human sciences and his-
tory. And by marrying his logically structuralist method of analysis of mental contents to 
the methodologically solipsist starting point of his reconstruction, Carnap was also able 
to defend the objectivity claim of science without abandoning the empiricist perspec-
tive: their origin in subjective experiences held no obstacle to the objectivity of scientific 
knowledge claims since rational reconstruction revealed the structural similarity of all of 
our concept formations, an invariance across all subjects. Carnap’s intention, all this sug-
gests, was to render scientific cognition self-contained.

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
778
The significance of the interpretation that Carnap himself later put on the Aufbau—
an interpretation that does not contradict Quine’s analysis—does not lie in the support 
it seems to lend to the latter, but in the light it casts upon the fate of the Aufbau in the 
Vienna Circle.
Under the influence of some philosophers, especially Mach and Russell, I regarded 
in the Logischer Aufbau a phenomenalistic language as the best for a philosophi-
cal analysis of knowledge. I believed that the task of philosophy consists in reduc-
ing all knowledge to a basis of certainty. Since the most certain knowledge is that 
of the immediately given, whereas knowledge of material things is derivative and 
less certain, it seemed that the philosopher must employ a language which uses 
sense-data as a basis. In the Vienna discussions my attitude changed gradually 
towards a preference for the physicalistic language.
(1963, 50)
If the Aufbau was not built to serve foundationalist aims, why did Carnap say so here? 
The answer is that Carnap himself adopted this perspective on the Aufbau after—and 
only after—he had come to Vienna. It is this take on his Aufbau model that Carnap 
remembered in his autobiography. Just why Carnap adopted this perspective is an inter-
esting question. His acculturation into the Vienna Circle certainly played an important 
role. (As many commentators noted, most of the Aufbau predated that association.) 
Of particular importance was Carnap’s recognition, in Vienna, of the advances that 
Wittgenstein’s conception of logic as tautologous afforded the formulation of a modern 
empiricism and his subsequent desire to accommodate his Aufbau to the demands that 
the Tractatus made of meaningful discourse. So just as Wittgenstein flirted with a phe-
nomenalist interpretation of the elementary propositions of his Tractatus in 1929–30, 
so Carnap was concerned to psychologize his Aufbau model during the same period. 
(And likewise, just as the Circle’s Wittgensteinians helped themselves to the concept 
of strictly speaking meaningless but philosophically necessary “elucidations” to save the 
Tractatus from its meaning-theoretical doctrines, so Carnap appears to have adverted 
to these “elucidations” to save his Aufbau from Wittgenstein’s charge of illegitimate 
metalinguistic discourse.)
What’s most important about this for posterity, however, is that the foundationalist 
reading prompted a sustained debate within the Vienna Circle about the content, form 
and status of “protocol statements” (statements recording the observational evidence in 
science serving as checkpoints for theory acceptance). This debate led Carnap to once 
again abandon foundationalism and soon all traditional, subject-centered epistemologi-
cal concerns. (For more detailed documentation of the episodes related below and the 
entire debate see Uebel 2007.)
3. The Vienna Circle’s Protocol Sentence Debate
As noted, already in the Aufbau Carnap held that the construction system with a physi-
cal basis was possible and that it “has the advantage that its basic domain is the only 
domain (namely the physical) which is characterized by a clear regularity of processes” 
(1928, §59). By 1930, an additional advantage was noted: the physicalist language 
“makes intersubjective knowledge possible” (1930/1959, 144). This raised the question, 
not only of what relation obtained between the physicalist language of unified science 

RUDOLF CARNAP
779
and the phenomenalist system of the Aufbau, but also of whether the latter was still 
needed.
Carnap’s answer was that both were required, for the latter “corresponds to the epis-
temological viewpoint because it proves the validity of knowledge by reduction to the 
given,” whereas the former “corresponds to the view point of the empirical sciences” 
(ibid.). An early draft for his 1932 paper later translated as Unity of Science shows that 
for him both the phenomenalist and the physicalist languages were “universal” lan-
guages. (Roughly, a “universal language” was an empirical language into which all other 
empirical languages were translatable; as in the Aufbau, mathematics was presupposed.) 
What rendered the phenomenal language universal was that it was presupposed by all 
processes of verification whatsoever. What rendered the physical language universal 
was that it was presupposed in the verification of all intersubjectively recognizable states 
of affairs. The division of labor between the two languages was envisaged to be that 
each played the role of universal language in their respective domain. Epistemologically 
speaking, all meaningful languages had to be translatable into a subject’s phenomenal 
language, while scientifically speaking, all languages of the empirical disciplines had to 
be translatable into the physical language. Given their different competencies, neither 
language could usurp the other.
Otto Neurath disagreed strongly with the epistemological conception Carnap 
accepted already by 1930. An early draft for his Empirical Sociology (1931a) shows that 
he regarded the foundationalist methodologically solipsist system as deeply mistaken, 
but as yet was unable to press the point. Beyond finding the notion of elucidations highly 
suspect, Neurath did not yet possess an argument against Carnap’s restriction of the 
universality of the physicalist language to intersubjectively recognizable states of affairs 
and the claim that the autopsychological language was indispensible for epistemological 
purposes. It was not until the Circle meeting on February 26, 1931 that Neurath openly 
rejected reference to the given as superfluous. Carnap was not yet convinced. At the 
meeting of 12 March he indicated instead that he was prepared to jettison the Aufbau’s 
method of quasi-analysis and reconsider the nature of elementary propositions by per-
haps reintroducing sense-data (he entertained similar ideas in the 1961 Preface to the 
second edition of the Aufbau). Neurath moved in the opposite direction.
Crucial to Neurath’s opposition was an argument he first expressed during a pri-
vate but minuted “Discussion about Physicalism” with, among others, Carnap and 
Hans Hahn on March 4, 1931, an argument he subsequently invoked repeatedly (e.g. 
1932a/1983, 62; 1932b/1983, 96; 1934/1983, 110; 1941/1983, 228–9). As he put it in 
its first published form:
only one language comes into question from the start, and that is the physical-
ist. One can learn the physicalist language from earliest childhood. If someone 
makes predictions and wants to check them himself, he must count on changes in the 
system of his senses, he must use clocks and rulers; in short, the person supposedly 
in isolation already makes use of the “intersensual” and “intersubjective” lan-
guage. The forecaster of yesterday and the controller of today are, so two speak, 
two persons.
(Neurath 1931b/1983, 54–5, italics added)
Against Carnap’s methodologically solipsist protocol language, Neurath argued that a 
language must be usable by one individual over time. Phenomenal languages do not 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
780
“come into question from the start” for they do not allow for mechanisms whereby the 
constancy of an individual’s language use can be guaranteed which, in turn, is required 
for “checking” to take place.
What could be called Neurath’s private language argument comes to this. If physi-
calistic statements such as instrument readings need, themselves, to be translated into 
phenomenal terms directly related to a scientist’s experience in order to be meaningful, 
then no touchstone at all is available by which the constancy of an individual’s language 
use could be established. The incoherence that threatens experience conceived of in 
this solipsistic fashion showed that the constancy of the language use of an individual 
over time can be established only by reference to the spatio-temporal determinations of 
physical states of affairs that the language spoke about. If language use was so control-
lable, then that language was already intersubjective. So if the protocol language was 
to be an epistemically functional language, it could not be a phenomenalist one. (Even 
a solitary thinker required a system of symbolic representation for the ordering of his 
experiences over time that is of necessity intersensual—not specific to one particular 
sense modality—and intersubjective.)
By the time Carnap published the German original of Unity of Science in the spring 
of 1932, the two universal languages of the first draft were reduced to one, the physical-
ist language. The argument to this conclusion was that, given even a relatively liberal 
version of verificationism, statements about mental states were unintelligible unless 
they referred to a person’s behavioral disposition or bodily state. Carnap first established 
that on the assumption of the intertranslatability of the psychological and physical 
languages, statements about other minds were verifiable and meaningful (1932a/1934, 
60–6; 1932b/1959, 170–2). Then he assumed the standpoint of the phenomenalist 
opponent (which denies such intertranslatability) and established that in this case 
statements about other minds would be unverifiable and meaningless (1932a/1934, 
78–82; 1932b/1959, 173–4). Following Castañeda (1967), we can understand Carnap’s 
argument here as a verificationist private language argument.
What had changed? The phenomenalistic protocol languages were now deemed to be 
translatable into the physical language. What allowed this change was Carnap’s intro-
duction of the concepts of the (potentially misleading) material and the (correct) for-
mal modes of speech. This distinction pertained to metalinguistic discourse: the former 
mode spoke of (possibly Platonic) meanings of terms and sentences, whereas the latter 
mode spoke only of syntax and meaning relations insofar as these could be expressed in 
terms of logical entailments. Given his adoption of the formal mode of speech and its 
constraints on meaning talk, Carnap was able to drop his previous objections against 
the physicalization of the phenomenalist language (which had restricted the range of 
the physical language to intersubjective states of affairs only and which were based on 
the putative differences in meaning between co-extensive statements of the two lan-
guages).
Even so, for Carnap, protocol languages retained their old office. Since “verification 
is based upon ‘protocol statements’” which “include statements belonging to the basic 
protocol or direct record of the scientists’ experience,” Carnap’s “basic” or “primitive” 
protocol statements (in the material mode) “refer to the given, and describe directly 
given experience or phenomena, i.e. the simplest states of which knowledge can be had.” 
Alternatively put in the formal mode, they are “statements needing no justification and 
serving as the foundation for all the remaining statements of science” (1932a/1934, 
42–5; cf. 1932b/1959, 166). So Carnap retained the idea of “primary” protocol 

RUDOLF CARNAP
781
languages separate from the physical language. While this epistemic priority now offi-
cially no longer necessarily required a phenomenalist language, its de facto retention 
testifies to Carnap’s continued allegiance to the foundationalist ideal, for there remained 
the following asymmetry in justification. Carnap held that “a protocol sentence, being 
an epistemological point of departure, cannot be rejected” (1932b/1959, 191).
Yet as Neurath stressed, the idea that an “original” protocol statement could not be 
rejected, but only its translation into a physical system statement, faced an unenviable 
and entirely avoidable dilemma. According to Carnap, a person could only take their 
own protocol statements as checking points (1932a, 461, dropped from 1934). Now, if 
these protocol languages are construed along phenomenalist lines, a speaker’s grasp of 
their meaning would be incorrigible. This conception retained a sense of privacy that 
was vulnerable to the private language argument that Neurath had been pressing. For 
Neurath, the self-understanding of an individual language user was as problematical as 
was the understanding of other minds. Already an isolated epistemic agent requires the 
intersubjective language for the coherence of his experience: Robinson required one, 
Neurath once averred, “even before Friday arrived” (1934/1983, 110). If, on the other 
hand, these primary protocol languages were construed as already physicalist of sorts, it 
becomes exceedingly difficult to see what enabled primitive protocols to remain unre-
visable. Unable to tie into scientific practice as we know it, Carnap’s protocols remained 
problematic elucidations, after all. Neurath was correct in detecting in Carnap’s con-
ception of separate protocol languages vestiges of the atomistic conception of knowl-
edge that the Circle had been ascribing to the Tractatus.
Arguing from the standpoint of the intersubjectivity of the physicalist language, 
Neurath continued to press the point in “Protocol Statements” (1932b) that it did 
not matter whose protocol statements are used to check scientific claims. Partially in 
response to him, Carnap abandoned his insistence on methodological solipsism even 
in its weakened sense and adopted a straightforward physicalistic construal of fallible 
protocols. But he added: “this is a question not of two mutually inconsistent views, but 
rather two different methods for structuring the language of science which are both 
possible and legitimate” (1932c/1987, 457). Carnap here made first use of the famous 
Principle of Tolerance of Logical Syntax: “Everyone is at liberty to build up his own 
logic, i.e. his own form of language, as he wishes. All that is required of him is that, if he 
wishes to discuss it, he must state his methods clearly and give syntactical rules instead 
of philosophical arguments” (1934/1937, §17).
So Carnap did not fully accept Neurath’s argument (whose private language argument 
had a broader scope than his own), nor Neurath’s specific proposal for the form that 
protocol statements should take (either here or in his later “Testability and Meaning” 
(Carnap 1936–37, 12–13)). The ultimate reason why, it turns out, derives from his 
only just emerging mature conception of the nature of philosophy: “The logic of sci-
ence takes the place of the inextricable tangle of problems which is known as philoso-
phy” (Carnap 1934/1937, §72). From about mid-1932 until the fall of 1935, Carnap 
conceived of philosophy as the study of the “syntax” of the language of science (later 
semantics was included). This logic of science was continuous with philosophy in its 
a priori method. Empirical concerns did not play directly into the exploration of the 
consistency of various logics and of the expressive power of various logico-linguistic 
frameworks. That human beings cannot employ phenomenalist protocol languages in 
justificatory capacities would, as Neurath thought, only provide empirical considera-
tions that bear on possible applications of such models in epistemological contexts, but 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
782
not on their logical probity itself. The logician of science was not debarred from consid-
ering them. Yet as Carnap also stressed, the logic of science was not an end in itself and 
the point was to develop reform proposals that are “useful and productive in practice” 
for “particular point[s] of the language of science” (ibid., §86). But this only showed that 
language choice was a pragmatic issue of convenience and instrumental efficiency, not a 
factual one. Conceptions of a supposed epistemic order no longer dictated the answer to 
the questions about protocol statements. Instead, physicalistic languages were preferred 
for the pragmatic advantage they bestowed on reconstructions of scientific theories.
4. After Epistemology: The Logic of Science
Carnap’s methodological message now was that after the rejection of speculative meta-
physics by Kant and the rejection of his synthetic a priori in empiricist epistemology, a 
third step needed to be taken: the rejection of the mixture of psychological and logical 
concerns typical in that epistemology for the adoption of a strict logic of science. When 
it concerned evidential relations, Carnap’s logic of science was concerned no longer 
with doxastic but with a kind of propositional justification, that is, justification not of 
individual believings but of propositions in light of available evidence independently 
of their appreciation by a subject—where evidence is conceived of independently of 
its appreciation by a subject. Beyond that, philosophy pursued as logic of science could 
offer but different ways of conceptualizing contested scientific notions: it made “propos-
als” and explored conceptual possibilities. (Later Carnap called these proposals “expli-
cations” (1950, §§3–5).)
In 1932 Neurath had declared that “within a consistent physicalism there can be 
no ‘theory of knowledge,’ at least not in the traditional form. It could only consist in 
defense actions against metaphysics, i.e. unmasking meaningless terms. Some problems 
of the theory of knowledge will perhaps be transformable into empirical questions so 
that they can find a place within unified science” (1932a/1983, 67). Two tasks were 
here assigned to whatever was to be philosophy’s successor discipline in unified science: 
unmasking meaningless terms and asking empirical questions about knowledge produc-
tion. Both represented different aspects of what unified science contained alongside all 
of the first-order disciplines: a scientific metatheory. This higher-order theory of science 
comprised logical inquires as well as empirical ones.
By discarding the epistemological-elucidatory ambitions of his methodological sol-
ipsism, Carnap’s position was brought into agreement with this conception. Unlike 
Neurath, however, Carnap stressed an element of continuity in the replacement of tra-
ditional philosophy by the logic of science because its methods of inquiry remained a pri-
ori. What Carnap was able to add to Neurath’s “defensive” task for the logic of science, 
moreover, was his conventionalist constructivism concerning alternative frameworks. 
This was a widening of the scope of scientific metatheory that Neurath could accept. 
That Carnap’s position, in turn, did not rule out of the court of scientific metatheory 
all naturalistic concerns is made clear by his remark that the logic of science is itself 
but part of a still more comprehensive inquiry, the “theory of science,” which comprises 
also “empirical investigation of scientific activity,” namely, “historical, sociological 
and, above all, psychological inquiries” (Carnap 1934/1937, §72). It was precisely these 
fields that Neurath differentiated from the logic of science as “the behavioristics of 
scholars” in which he located his own concerns with protocol statements (1936/1983, 
169) and that Philipp Frank later called the “pragmatics of science” (1957/2004, 360) 

RUDOLF CARNAP
783
and in which he investigated external determinants of theory choice. So both Carnap 
and Neurath (and Frank) recognized the need for both logical and empirical branches of 
scientific metatheory, but they pursued their own detailed work in different branches.
Their final proposals concerning protocols reflect this. For Neurath, protocols were 
complex statements containing embedded clauses meant to indicate different sets of 
conditions which the acceptance of scientific observation reports is subject to (see, e.g., 
his 1932b/1983 and Uebel 2009). By treating protocol statements as testimony whose 
acceptance is circumscribed in particular ways, Neurath moved away from any concern 
one might have—and Schlick did have (1934)—about the “foundation of knowledge” 
in one’s own first-hand experience. First-person authority was, if not wholly undermined, 
then radically subverted: in principle, one’s own protocol carried no more weight than 
another’s. Carnap likewise was no longer concerned with personal beliefs but knowledge 
claims and their objective evidence. Where Neurath sought to outline canons of report 
acceptance, Carnap’s work concentrated on isolating the logical relations of deductive 
and inductive support that protocols afforded to more theoretical statements. He merely 
required that protocol statements in the everyday thing-language feature predicates for 
observable properties, leaving it to psychology to determine exactly what is and is not 
observable (1936–37, 13). Concern with acceptance conditions lay outside his remit.
So one subject-centered form of epistemology—albeit a non-traditional one that was 
socio-naturalized and warrant-centered—continued to be practiced as part of metathe-
ory in unified science, but not as Carnap’s logic of science which kept still greater dis-
tance from the tradition. Of course, already in the epistemological phase of his career 
Carnap had paid no attention to philosophical skepticism: the Aufbau’s defense of the 
objectivity of science proceeded from intra-scientific worries. His move from episte-
mology to logic of science in the mid-1930s was a further radicalization. In the Aufbau 
rational reconstructionism meant abstraction from how people in practice justify their 
knowledge claims and the sole focus on sustaining the extensional validity of their 
beliefs as reconstructed. When Carnap “cleansed” epistemology (1936c, 36) by reject-
ing previously held “psychologistic” assumptions, he moved from rational reconstruc-
tions of subject-based beliefs to logical explications of knowledge claims independent of 
particular epistemic subjects. (His later work on the semantic concept of confirmation 
(1950) is of a piece with this.) What is significant about this move is not so much that 
he rejected naturalistic reasoning as inapplicable in the logic of science (he allowed 
it in the empirical part of scientific metatheory), but what he deemed to be so unduly 
psychological: the notion of doxastic justification and the assumption of the epistemic 
priority of the phenomenal language and of personal protocol languages.
It is notable that by dropping the doctrine of the epistemic priority of phenomenal 
over physicalist beliefs, Carnap abandoned traditional epistemology as he understood 
it. This move leaves open, of course, that he viewed the priority conception as a poten-
tially plausible empirical but philosophically irrelevant thesis. His 1961 Aufbau Preface 
indicates that he saw nothing wrong with it in principle, but also that he still strongly 
preferred the physical basis of the thing-language for reconstructing the concepts of 
empirical science. This suggests that for Carnap—as for Neurath but for different rea-
sons—the concerns of epistemology and the philosophy of science were discontinuous. 
Note, moreover, that for the longest time, the priority conception was challenged only 
by theorists expressly arguing against the epistemological tradition like Quine (1969) 
or, differently, Wilfrid Sellars (1956/1997). Philosophers exercised by skepticism, in 
particular, rarely questioned it until John McDowell’s attack on the “highest common 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
784
factor” element in the argument from illusion (1982) and Michael Williams’ attack on 
“epistemological realism” (1990), both to expose unwarranted skeptical assumptions. 
By contrast, what prompted Carnap’s abandonment of the priority conception was the 
rediscovery of his own earlier disregard of skepticism and his resolve to still more reso-
lutely understand the complexities of scientific knowledge entirely from within (albeit 
in purely logical terms). This suggests that for all their differences about how such a 
program was to be executed, Carnap was much closer to Quine than is often supposed 
(especially if the complementarity of his own logic of science and Neurath and Frank’s 
pragmatics of science is recognized as intended, however imperfectly so).
References
Ayer, Alfred J. (ed.), 1959, Logical Positivism, New York: Free Press.
Carnap, Rudolf, 1928, Der logische Aufbau der Welt, Berlin: Bernary, 2nd ed. Hamburg: Meiner, 1961, trans. 
The Logical Structure of the World, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1967, repr. Chicago: Open 
Court, 2003.
Carnap, Rudolf, 1930, “Die alte und die neue Logik,” Erkenntnis 1, 12–26, trans. “The Old and the New 
Logic,” in Ayer 1959, 60–81.
Carnap, Rudolf, 1932a, “Die physikalische Sprache als Unversalsprache der Wissenschaft,” Erkenntnis 2, 
432–65, transl. with introductions by the author and M. Black The Unity of Science, London: Kegan, Paul, 
Trench Teubner & Co., 1934.
Carnap, Rudolf, 1932b, “Psychologie in physikalischer Sprache,” Erkenntnis 3, 107–42, trans. “Psychology in 
Physicalist Language,” in Ayer 1959, 165–98.
Carnap, Rudolf, 1932c, “Über Protokollsätze,” Erkenntnis 3, 215–28, trans. “On Protocol Sentences” in Noûs 
21 (1987), 457–70.
Carnap, Rudolf, 1934, Logische Syntax der Sprache (Schriften zur wissenschaftlichen Weltauffassung 8), 
Vienna: Springer, rev. ed. transl. by A. Smeaton, The Logical Syntax of Language, London: Kegan, Paul, 
Trench Teubner & Cie, 1937, repr. Chicago: Open Court, 2002.
Carnap, Rudolf, 1936a, “Über die Einheitssprache der Wissenschaft. Logische Bemerkungen zum Project 
einer Enzyklopädie,” Actes du Congres Internationale de Philosophie Scientifique, Sorbonne, Paris 1935, Facs. 
II, “Unité de la Science,” Paris: Herman & Cie, 60–70.
Carnap, Rudolf, 1936b, “Wahrheit und Bewährung,” Actes du Congres Internationale de Philosophie Scientifique, 
Sorbonne, Paris 1935, Facs. IV, “Induction et Probabilité,” Paris: Hermann & Cie., 18–23, trans. with addi-
tions “Truth and Confirmation” in Feigl and Sellars (eds.), Readings in Philosophical Analysis, New York: 
Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1949, 119–27.
Carnap, Rudolf, 1936c, “Von der Erkenntnistheorie zur Wissenschaftslogik,” Actes du Congress Internationale 
de Philosophie Scientifique,Sorbonne, Paris 1935, Facs. I “Philosophie Scientifique et Empirisme Logique,” 
Paris: Herman & Cie, 36–41.
Carnap, Rudolf, 1936–37, “Testability and Meaning,” Philosophy of Science 3, 419–71; 4, 1–40.
Carnap, Rudolf, 1950, Logical Foundations of Probability, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Carnap, Rudolf, 1963, “Intellectual Autobiography,” in P.A. (ed.), The Philosophy of Rudolf Carnap, LaSalle: 
Open Court, 1963, 3–84.
Carnap, Rudolf, 1966, Philosophical Foundations of Physics, New York: Basic Books, 2nd rev. ed. An Introduction 
to the Philosophy of Science, 1974, repr. New York: Dover, 1995.
Castañeda, Hector-Neri, 1967, “Private Language Problem,” in P. Edwards et al. (eds.), 1967, Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy, New York: Macmillan and The Free Press, 1967, vol. 6, 459–64.
Frank, Philipp, 1957, Philosophy of Science. The Link between Science and Philosophy. Englewood Cliffs: 
Prentice-Hall, repr. New York: Dover: 2004.
Friedman, Michael, 1987, “Carnap’s Aufbau Reconsidered,” Noûs 21, 521–45, repr. in Friedman 1999, 89–113.
Friedman, Michael, 1992, “Epistemology in the Aufbau,” in Synthese 93, 15–57, repr. with postscript in 
Friedman 1999, 114–64.
Friedman, Michael, 1999, Reconsidering Logical Positivism, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McDowell, John, 1982, “Criteria, Defeasibility and Knowledge,” Proceedings of the British Academy 68,
 455–79, repr. in McDowell, Meaning, Knowledge & Reality, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 
1998, 369–94.

RUDOLF CARNAP
785
Mormann, Thomas, 2007, “Carnap’s Logical Empiricism, Values and American Pragmatism,” Journal of 
General Philosophy of Science 38, 127–46.
Neurath, Otto, 1931a, Empirische Soziologie. Der wissenschaftliche Gehat der Geschichte undf Nationalökonomie, 
repr. in Neurath, Gesammelte philosophische und methodologische Schriften (ed. by R. Haller and H. Rutte), 
Vienna: Hölder-Pichler-Tempsky, 1981, 423–527, partly trans. “Empirical Sociology,” in Neurath, 
Empiricism and Sociology (ed. by M. Neurath and R.S. Cohen), Dordrecht: Reidel, 1973, 391–421.
Neurath, Otto, 1931b, “Physikalismus,” Scientia 50, 297–303, trans. “Physicalism” in Neurath 1983, 52–7.
Neurath, Otto, 1932a, “Soziologie im Physikalismus,” Erkenntnis 2, 393–431, trans. “Sociology and 
Physicalism,” in Ayer 1959, 282–320, and “Sociology in the Framework of Physicalism,” in Neurath 1983, 
58–90.
Neurath, Otto, 1932b, “Protokollsätze,” Erkenntnis 3, 204–14, trans. “Protocol Sentences,” in Ayer 1959, 
199–208, and “Protocol Statements,” in Neurath 1983, 91–9.
Neurath, Otto, 1934, “Radikaler Physikalismus und ‘wirkliche Welt’,” Erkenntnis 4, 346–62, trans. “Radical 
Physicalism and ‘the Real World’,” in Neurath 1983, 100–14.
Neurath, Otto, 1936, “Physikalismus und Erkenntnisforschung,” Theoria 2, 97–105, 234–236, trans. 
“Physicalism and Knowledge,” in Neurath 1983, 159–171.
Neurath, Otto, 1941, “Universal Jargon and Terminology,” Proceedings of the Aristotel-ian Society New Series 
41, 127–48, repr. in Neurath 1983, 213–29.
Neurath, Otto, 1983, Philosophical Papers 1913–1946 (ed. by R.S. Cohen and M. Neurath), Dordrecht: 
Reidel.
Pincock, Christopher, 2005, “A Reserved Reading of Carnap’s Aufbau,” Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 86, 
518–43.
Quine, W.V.O., 1951, “Two Dogmas of Empiricism,” The Philosophical Review 60, 20–43, repr. in Quine From 
a Logical Point of View, rev. ed. 1980, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Quine, W.V.O., 1969, “Epistemology Naturalized,” in Quine Ontological Relativity and Other Essays, New 
York: Columbia University Press, 69–90.
Richardson, Alan, 1998, Carnap’s Construction of the World, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Schlick, Moritz, 1918, Allgemeine Erkenntnislehre, Berlin: Springer, 1918, 2nd rev. ed. 1925, transl. General 
Theory of Knowledge, LaSalle: Open Court, 1974.
Schlick, Moritz, 1934, “Über das Fundament der Erkenntnis,” Erkenntnis 4, 79–99, transl. “The Foundation 
of Knowledge,” in Ayer 1959, 209–27.
Sellars, Wilfrid, 1956, “Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind,” in H. Feigl and M. Scriven (eds.), The 
Foundations of Science and the Concepts of Psychology and Psychoanalysis (Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy 
of Science Vol. 2), Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Reprinted in Sellars, Empiricism and the 
Philosophy of Mind (ed. by R. Brandom), Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1997, 13–118.
Uebel, Thomas, 2007, Empiricism at the Crossroads. The Vienna Circle’s Protocol-Sentence Debate, Chicago: 
Open Court.
Uebel, Thomas, 2009, “Neurath’s Protocol Statements Revisited. Sketch of a Theory of Scientific Testimony,” 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 40, 4–13.
Williams, Michael, 1990, Unnatural Doubts, Oxford: Blackwell.

70
WILLARD VAN ORMAN 
QUINE
Richard Creath
Willard Van Orman Quine (1908–2000) was one of the most important epistemologists 
of the twentieth century. His name will be linked, possibly forever, with such promi-
nent themes as empiricism, holism, pragmatism, simplicity, underdetermination, fal-
libilism, and naturalism. While he was not the first to discuss any of these themes, he 
brought them together in an intriguing and evolving view that was first sketched in the 
“Introduction” to Methods of Logic of 1950. Especially from 1960 onward, epistemology 
became increasingly the focus of Quine’s work, and his view continued to develop in 
substantial ways for the rest of his life.
1. The 1930s and 40s
Quine began publishing in 1932. By the beginning of 1950 he had four books, thirty-
eight articles, four abstracts, sixteen reviews, and three other miscellaneous publications 
in print, almost none dealing with epistemological topics. It would not be unreasonable 
to view Carnap’s “Principle of Tolerance,” which he sometimes expressed as the prin-
ciple of the conventionality of language forms, as a central part of Carnap’s epistemol-
ogy in which logic and mathematics are to be treated as true in virtue of the language 
chosen and hence as, in some sense, conventional. It might therefore seem reasonable 
to treat Quine’s “Truth by Convention” (1936) as also epistemological because he is 
thought to express doubts there about the idea that logic could be true by convention. 
But this paper was written when Quine was, in his own words, very much the disciple of 
Carnap (Quine 1971: xxiii), and on internal grounds the paper seems not to have been 
directed against Carnap. In fact, Quine shows there how the truths of logic and math-
ematics to the exclusion of other truths can be held to be conventional. This technique 
of conventional truth assignment would “forestall awkward metaphysical questions as 
to our a priori insight into necessary truths” (1936: 119), but it would be “idle elabora-
tion to carry the process further” (1936: 120). In this way, construed as a kind of policy 
(Carnap would have called it a “proposal”), calling logic and mathematics conventional 
would be neither empty, nor uninteresting, nor false.
Nearly twenty years later (in 1954, when “Carnap and Logical Truth” (1963a) was 
written), Quine saw in “Truth by Convention” a powerful argument against calling 
logic true by convention. The argument is that in order to state the conventions and 
have this statement generate all the myriad such truths, the full resources of logic would 

WILLARD VAN ORMAN QUINE
787
already have to be in place at the time the conventions are stated. The 1936 text, 
however, recognized that this involves no vicious regress, for “the verbal formulation of 
conventions is no more a prerequisite of the adoption of conventions than the writing 
of a grammar is a prerequisite of speech; . . . explicit exposition of the conventions is 
merely one of the many important uses of a completed language” (123). As he points 
out immediately after this, “this account accords well with what we actually do” (123). 
So as of 1936 Quine saw no argument to show that logic cannot be true by convention, 
and he embraced the policy of calling logic and mathematics conventional. To be sure, 
he did wonder what might be the explanatory force of calling something an implicit 
convention. One might ask in return why a policy or proposal is expected to have 
explanatory force.
From 1939 onward Quine began to challenge Carnap’s analytic/synthetic distinction, 
abandoning it probably sometime in 1947. But this was in private. His publications, by 
contrast, were mostly in logic and set theory, fields that Quine tended to separate from 
his philosophic work. He wrote philosophic papers too, but until 1950 these were not 
directly about epistemic matters, but instead concerned reference, ontology, indirect 
discourse, and modality.
2. The 1950s: The Classic Statements
In 1950 Quine published the first edition of Methods of Logic. In December he gave 
“Two Dogmas of Empiricism” as a talk, which was published early the next year. It is 
in “Empiricism Without the Dogmas,” the final section of this paper, that we find the 
classic statement of Quine’s epistemology. The “Introduction” to Methods of Logic covers 
much the same ground, and so it will be useful to consider these two pieces together. We 
will also consider two other papers written in the 1950s. These are not primarily about 
epistemology, but are useful for understanding the general view.
The Basic Idea
Quine’s central epistemic image in “Two Dogmas” is that of a fabric (or field) contain-
ing the totality of our beliefs meeting experience only around the edges and meeting 
that experience together as a corporate body rather than as separate statements. This 
Quine calls holism. When there is a conflict with experience, some of the statements in 
the fabric must change. The required changes can be made in many different ways, and 
so our beliefs are underdetermined by experience alone without consideration of any 
extra-evidential factors. This underdetermination is thoroughgoing. Any claim can be 
revised, including those of logic and mathematics (fallibilism). And any statement can 
be preserved, if we are prepared to make drastic enough changes elsewhere.
Not all changes are equally likely, however. Some statements, pictured as near the 
periphery, are sensitive to a certain narrow range of experiences but not to others. The 
statements are said to be germane to the narrow range of experiences, meaning that the 
relative likelihood that the statements will be abandoned, given an incorrect predic-
tion concerning those experiences, is high. Even here statements as close as you like to 
the edge can be preserved when prediction goes awry, if changing them would involve 
a drastic overall cost elsewhere; we can always plead hallucination. Other statements 
might be less sensitive but to a wider range of experiences. These are pictured as further 
from the periphery and are described as having a wider empirical reference. In later 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
788
writings the vocabulary shifts to empirical “focus,” though probably with no change 
to the underlying idea. Finally, there are statements, exemplified by those of logic and 
mathematics, thought of as at the center of the field. These are equally germane to all 
experiences, and least likely to be revised.
Beyond this, there are some general principles that guide our revisions. One is con-
servatism, the idea that we prefer to revise as little as possible. The second is simplic-
ity, though this is not defined. To a certain extent conservatism and simplicity pull in 
opposite directions, but what is sought is a balance between the two. Both principles are 
vital to Quine’s epistemology, but in different ways.
In Methods, but not in “Two Dogmas” he shows how conservatism underwrites the 
feeling of many that logic and mathematics are necessarily true. Because logic and math-
ematics bear on so many other areas, changes in logic or mathematics would require 
many changes in every part of the fabric of our belief. Given conservatism we would 
prefer not to make such changes if we do not have to. Given that we can save any part 
of our belief we want, we will make changes in logic and mathematics last if at all. This 
makes logic and mathematics appear, misleadingly, to be utterly insensitive to whatever 
happens in experience. Logico-mathematical beliefs can be altered if there is a compen-
sating gain in simplicity, and the principles involved in these changes are the same as 
for any empirical theory or claim. The differences are only in degree.
Though not defined, simplicity is deployed systematically in “Two Dogmas” to under-
write ontological decisions. Physical objects are introduced “for working a manageable 
structure into the flux of experience” (1951: 41). In the 1951 version of “Two Dogmas” 
Quine makes the same case for positing irrational numbers over and above the rationals, 
but “the factor of simplification is more overwhelming in the case of physical objects 
than in the numerical case” (42). And it does not stop there for “Objects at the atomic 
level and beyond are posited to make the laws of macroscopic objects, and ultimately 
the laws of experience, simpler and more manageable” (42). The attempt in all this is 
to show, contra Carnap, that all ontological questions are on a par with the questions 
of natural science.
Quine does nothing in “Two Dogmas” to argue that the more conservative choice of 
doctrine or the simpler of two alternatives is more likely to be true. Nor does he claim 
that he needs no such argument. In later years he was to claim for his empiricism that 
it was simply a result of science, but he does not make a corresponding claim for con-
servatism or simplicity here. Of course, even if these two principles were vouched for 
by methods that include the methods themselves, this would hardly convince anyone 
who was genuinely worried about them. Later Quine himself expressed worries on these 
topics.
There is one other principle in revising our beliefs that Quine talks about in Methods, 
but not in “Two Dogmas.” This is the principle of preferring to preserve statements 
about physical objects such as ‘My pen is in my hand,’ that seem closer to possible 
experience over other statements not so situated. The reason given is that “It is only by 
such an allocation of priority that we can hope to claim any empirical content or objec-
tive reference for the system as a whole” (1950: xiii). As a principle of revision this is 
extremely interesting and insightful. But despite arguing in later years that observation 
reports are the opening wedge into reference, Quine did not in later writing return to 
this as a priority in the revision of our beliefs. We are told in Methods that this princi-
ple is “somewhat opposed” by conservatism because a change in laws would be more 
massive than a change of a particular claim at the periphery. But we are also told that 

WILLARD VAN ORMAN QUINE
789
despite the apparent opposition between these two principles, one involves the other 
because “the connection between a statement such as ‘My pen is in my hand’ and the 
experiences which are said to verify it is itself a matter of general principles central to 
the system” (1950: xiii). No attempt is made to explore or resolve this further.
Quine’s discussion of logic in “Two Dogmas” is primarily designed to show that it is 
epistemically on a par with other scientific theories. In “Carnap and Logical Truth,” 
written in 1954, he says a bit more. As indicated above by this point Quine thought 
that his earlier “Truth by Convention” showed convincingly that logic could not be 
true by convention. I shall not reargue the case of what the earlier paper showed. Now 
Quine holds that logic is obvious and set theory is conventional, but he also says that 
logic could become conventional and set theory could become obvious. It is difficult 
to tell what his word ‘conventional’ means, because while logic could not in principle 
be conventional, logic could become conventional. The notion of obviousness is a bit 
less inscrutable. About the only thing that Quine could mean in calling logic obvious 
(and by logic Quine means the truths of the first-order predicate calculus classically 
and extensionally conceived) is that the truths thereof are so far behind the lines of the 
moving front of science that we do not seriously consider revising them. Obviousness, 
then, is an epistemic status of sorts not shared by all other scientific theories. But this in 
no way compromises the kind of parity between logic and recognizably empirical claims 
that Quine was trying to establish in “Two Dogmas.”
This then is Quine’s basic epistemology: Our beliefs meet experience together 
(holism). When revision is required by experience, there are many ways to do this 
(underdetermination). In undertaking such revisions the twin and sometimes opposing 
principles of conservatism and simplicity are centrally involved. The idea that all or 
even most epistemic issues can be addressed by appeal to principles so few in number 
and so elegant in their expression is surely attractive. Though Quine’s basic idea was to 
be modified somewhat in the remaining fifty years of his life, this general architecture is 
discernible throughout. Before we get to that, however, there are some general interpre-
tive questions that must be raised about this epistemology.
Interpretive Questions on the Basic Idea
If our theories of the natural world are underdetermined by the flood of evidence that 
we have or shall have, then the question of what Quine meant by his writings in the 
1950s must be even more severely underdetermined by our more sharply limited evi-
dence. It is tempting, therefore, to read Quine’s later views back into his earlier works. 
The temptation should be resisted because Quine’s way of speaking and the doctrines 
themselves continued to evolve. We have no choice, it seems, but to probe the texts 
themselves. We might not always get a definitive answer. Where we do, this is all to the 
good, and where we do not, even that limitation is worth knowing.
What sort of thing, for example, does the fabric or field under discussion contain? 
Beliefs, of course, but these, whether true or false, are sententially expressed. Strictly 
speaking what admit of truth and falsity are individual acts of utterance because the 
truth of the sentence itself will vary with context of its utterance. But it simplifies logi-
cal theory to abstract via paraphrasing from these individual acts to something whose 
truth does not vary with the context. These Quine calls statements, and he is quite con-
sistent in representing the fabric or field as made up of statements. These are items that 
bear logical relations to one another, a fact that is hardly surprising given that Quine 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
790
first presents his epistemological view in the “Introduction” to a logic book, Methods of 
Logic.
Quine emphasizes these logical relations and speaks often enough as though this is 
what he has primarily in mind. Indeed, unless this were so it is hard to see how an argu-
ment can be made for any interesting version of an underdetermination thesis. Why not 
stop with the announcement that “Any statement can be held true come what may”? If 
it is simply a question of what we can be disposed to utter, there should be no need for 
changes elsewhere in the system, much less drastic changes. But Quine also speaks as 
though what he has primarily in mind are causal relations among beliefs, that is, among 
dispositions to make utterances. What relations could there be other than causal ones 
between experience, which is neither true nor false, and statements, which are sup-
posed to be non-contextually one or the other? Quine speaks of the relative likelihood 
that a change in the acceptance of one statement would be followed by a change in our 
acceptance of some other. This sounds causal or, more minimally, merely descriptive in 
some narrow sense. There is even a third interpretation that makes the revision of state-
ments a matter of social rules and hence normative. He tells us (1950: xiii) that over-
ruling a multiplicity of statements about experience would under certain circumstances 
“invite criticism.” This comment is somehow both normative and descriptive, but it is 
too fleeting to bear much weight.
Given the interpretive difficulty, it is tempting to appeal to some version of Quine’s 
later defense of naturalism to argue that he always had the causal/descriptive idea in 
mind. Unfortunately, Quine’s later views on naturalism are open to various interpreta-
tions and cannot readily help even if we could be sure, which we cannot, that Quine’s 
views had not evolved as the decades passed. He speaks so consistently in “Two Dogmas” 
in ways that finesse this interpretive issue that he must have been leaving it deliberately 
open. We shall as well.
In “Two Dogmas” and Methods Quine speaks consistently of getting belief to conform 
to or, at least, not conflict with, experience, and he uses the word ‘experience’ rather 
than ‘evidence’ here. Later he would mean by ‘evidence’ either observable objects and 
events or else the stimulation of nerve endings. In the 1950s, however, ‘experience’ was 
the word, and he does seem to mean, at least sometimes, private sensory experience. 
This might have been no more than a verbal concession to his colleagues. But even 
then he apparently did not see it as in conflict with his overarching physicalism. And it 
was a form of speech that appeared more rarely in his later writing.
As indicated earlier, underdetermination at this stage seems to be a claim primarily 
about logical relations rather than about psychological ones. Also in Quine’s presenta-
tions underdetermination is announced before simplicity and conservatism are invoked. 
This strongly suggests that he has not committed himself about any general underdeter-
mination if those two principles are invoked. He seems to think that when simplicity is 
invoked the argument that there are physical objects is pretty convincing.
This suggests another question for those cases that Quine believes are underdeter-
mined in the relevant sense. The choice between two hypotheses might not be com-
pletely settled (deductively determined) by all those claims that we might adduce as 
evidence concerning the choice. Even so, one of the two hypotheses might be favored, 
even dramatically so, by the evidence we have. Traditionally, philosophers have tried 
to address this issue by attempts at a probability theory. But Quine explicitly eschews 
such attempts in “Two Dogmas.” What Quine does say about underdetermination in 
the 1950s simply does not allow us to tell whether there will never be a best among the 

WILLARD VAN ORMAN QUINE
791
available alternatives. If there is a best alternative, then the thesis of underdetermina-
tion is very much less important, and it will lack the philosophic consequences that 
Quine will later want to draw from it.
Finally among our interpretive issues is the question of how to understand simplicity. 
Later Quine says that simplicity is relevant to the thinking up of theories but not to the 
testing of them afterward. But this is certainly not his view in the 50s. In “Two Dogmas” 
simplicity is used to compare alternative theories, theories that presumably have already 
been thought up. And in 1954 Quine wrote “The Scope and Language of Science” (pub-
lished in 1957) in which he said: “simplicity itself—in some sense of that difficult term—
counts as a kind of evidence; and scientists have indeed long tended to look upon the 
simpler of the two hypotheses as not merely the more likable, but the more likely” (1957: 
6). This is a fairly strong conception of what simplicity comes to. It was not to last.
3. Word and Object
Because the broad architecture of the classic 1950s texts remained, we can turn to not-
ing changes that ensued over the next nearly fifty years. One of the most provocative 
developments in Quine’s whole career came in Word and Object (WO) (Quine 1960) 
with his thesis of the indeterminacy of translation. This is the claim that in radical 
translation not only will there always be a multiplicity of manuals of translation very 
unlike one another but fully adequate to all the evidence and every other scientific con-
sideration, but there is absolutely no fact of the matter as to which manual is the correct 
one. The thesis that there is no fact of the matter is not itself an epistemic one. But the 
claim about a multiplicity of scientifically adequate manuals of translation is certainly 
epistemic. So Quine begins the book with a largely methodological chapter in which he 
discusses his general view and especially simplicity and underdetermination. There are 
changes, which we shall note, and some old issues come out in sharper relief. WO also 
marks the beginning of a reorientation in Quine’s philosophy in which epistemology 
replaces reference and ontology at center stage.
The basic idea there is his claim that “Scientific method was vaguely seen . . . as a 
matter of being guided by sensory stimuli, a taste for simplicity in some sense, and a taste 
for old things” (1960: 23). The reference to stimuli rather than experience as the touch-
stone of empirical adequacy is an indication of his now much more thorough behavior-
ism. Evidence is equated with nerve hits, though he is happy to speak of observation 
sentences, those that are directly conditioned by evidence. The emphasis on sentences 
rather than statements probably indicates no more than that his concern is with transla-
tion rather than logical theory.
Within the connections of some sentences with others, Quine acknowledges that 
some are logical while others are causal. This distinction can be made only by refer-
ence to so-called logical or causal laws, but these he says are just further sentences of 
the theory. “[B]ut any such interconnections of sentences must finally be due to the 
conditioning of sentences as responses to sentences as stimuli” (1960: 11). In short, 
the connections are understood causally. This is even more obvious with what he calls 
“circumstantial evidence”: “What we are doing when we amass and use circumstantial 
evidence is to let ourselves be actuated as sensitively as possible by chain stimulations as 
they reverberate through our theory, from present stimulations, via the interanimation 
of sentences” (1960: 18). This, of course, does not distinguish using evidence well and 
using it badly.

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
792
In WO simplicity comes to have a curiously dual character. Its earlier role is still 
there. It still underwrites the introduction of frameworks of theoretical entities over 
and above ordinary middle-sized physical objects. It still underwrites the existence of 
physical objects as things glimpsed over and above the glimpses of them. Apparently, 
simplicity can help us choose among alternative hypotheses that we have before us.
So far this is not new. But Quine adds: “Yet this supposed quality of simplicity is more 
easily sensed than described. Perhaps our vaunted sense of simplicity, or of likeliest 
explanation, is in many cases just a feeling of conviction attaching to the blind resultant 
of the interplay of chain stimulations in their various strengths” (1960: 19). This seems 
to say that simplicity is a feature of whatever theory we happen to come up with. If so, 
it is hard to see how it could do any of the work he is having it do regarding frameworks 
of theoretical entities and of physical objects. Later he says: “Simplicity is not a desid-
eratum on a par with conformity to observation. Observation serves to test hypotheses 
after adoption; simplicity prompts their adoption for testing” (19). Quine seems to have 
demoted simplicity from the context of justification to the context of discovery. In 
wanting or needing a very strong underdetermination thesis, there might have been 
reason for desiring to minimize the effectiveness of simplicity. Quine does seem both to 
minimize simplicity, and also to use it in the old way. This duality on the topic was to 
continue for the rest of Quine’s career.
In view of the indeterminacy thesis noted above, underdetermination looms large in 
WO. Earlier, underdetermination had seemed to be primarily a logical rather than a psy-
chological claim. With Quine’s overwhelmingly behavioral presentation, this is no longer 
clear. The account here seems to aim at the explanation of belief and not at its justifica-
tion. Besides, the later stages of the indeterminacy argument need a psychological version 
of underdetermination. In any case, it seems clear that the focus of Quine’s attention is in 
explaining belief rather than in justifying it, though the latter is not entirely gone.
In the 1950s Quine had presented underdetermination before raising principles of 
simplicity and conservatism, and given simplicity, he did not seem to think that the 
question of the existence of physical objects was seriously underdetermined. Now, in 
WO, he makes it very clear that our theories of, say, molecules are underdetermined by 
all the truths at the commonsense level about ordinary things together with an ideal 
organon of scientific method. Such an organon would include simplicity and other prin-
ciples. More precisely he says that theory is conceivably underdetermined and then that 
it is probably so, and then he just takes underdetermination for granted. His only stated 
reason is “It seems likelier, if only on account of symmetries or dualities, that countless 
alternative theories would be tied for first place” (1960: 23).
4. Naturalized Epistemology
In 1969 Quine published “Epistemology Naturalized.” It captured the attention of the 
philosophical world: Some marched proudly under its banner, and others bemoaned it. 
But there was probably no universal agreement as to what naturalism was, in epistemology 
or elsewhere. For Quine ‘naturalism’ is a convenient term to represent his whole point of 
view. It is sometimes represented as a premise in an argument for his views, but that sounds 
more like first philosophy (foundationalism) than Quine could be comfortable with.
Much of the paper is presented as a negative commentary on Carnap’s Aufbau and 
in particular on its aim to provide a rational reconstruction. Probably the most famous 
passage of Quine’s paper comes at this point:

WILLARD VAN ORMAN QUINE
793
But why all this creative reconstruction, all this make-believe? The stimulation 
of his sensory receptors is all the evidence anybody has to go on, ultimately, in 
arriving at his picture of the world. Why not see how this construction really 
proceeds? Why not settle for psychology?
(1969a: 75)
He then describes this as “a surrender of the epistemological burden to psychology” 
(1969a: 75). Given the thoroughly behavioral account in WO, this seems (as it did 
to many of Quine’s readers) to be settling for a purely descriptive account of how the 
neuro-physiological connections do in fact go, to the exclusion of whether this is done 
well or badly. A few pages later Quine goes on in the same vein:
Epistemology, or something like it, simply falls into place as a chapter of psy-
chology and hence of natural science. It studies a natural phenomenon, viz., 
a physical human subject. This human subject is accorded a certain experi-
mentally controlled input—certain patterns of irradiation in assorted frequen-
cies, for instance—and in the fullness of time the subject delivers as output a 
description of the three dimensional external world and its history. The rela-
tion between the meager input and the torrential output is a relation that we 
are prompted to study for somewhat the same reasons that always prompted 
epistemology; namely, in order to see how evidence relates to theory, and in 
what way one’s theory of nature transcends any available evidence.
(1969a: 82–3)
Again this seems aimed at describing the de facto relations of theory to evidence 
to the exclusion of questions of justification. Whether Quine himself thought that 
he was abandoning the normative is less clear. Later he was to say that there was 
still room for the normative, but one must add that Quine’s notion of normativity 
here is somewhat idiosyncratic. Sometime in the 1970s—the publication was much 
delayed—he wrote:
Naturalization of epistemology does not jettison the normative and settle for 
the indiscriminate description of ongoing procedures. For me normative epis-
temology is a branch of engineering. It is the technology of truth-seeking, or, 
in a more cautiously epistemological term, prediction. . . . There is no question 
here of ultimate value, as in morals; it is a matter of efficacy for an ulterior end, 
truth or prediction.
(1986: 664–5)
How much of this Quine had in mind already in 1969, we might never know.
Quine’s contemporaries drew a number of other readings of naturalized epistemology 
from Quine’s text. They differ from one another, but each was inspired to some extent 
by Quine’s suggestive phrasing. One such reading was that in naturalized epistemology 
there is no privileged philosophical vantage point from which to criticize the sciences. 
The old aim of justifying certain beliefs gives way to the bare description of the actual 
processes of belief acquisition. Similarly, the old aim of distinguishing between good and 
bad science gives way to describing how science actually is, to presenting the history 
and sociology of science.

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
794
A related interpretation held that naturalized philosophers are to give no instruction 
to their scientific colleagues. Whether Quine himself meets such a standard is less clear. 
In WO he is comfortable telling linguists what they can and cannot do. And “Truth 
by Convention” of 1936 was, in effect, telling one of the world’s greatest geometers, 
David Hilbert, that he was quite wrong about geometry. But whether Quine would have 
counted himself as a naturalist at that time is open to question.
A further reading of naturalism has it that it is just the rejection that there are any 
first principles where this, in turn, is equated with denying an analytic/synthetic distinc-
tion and embracing holism. Naturalism in this sense adds little to the general point of 
view that Quine had defended from 1950 onward.
5. Other Late Writings
Quine’s views continued to develop throughout his life. And there are a number of 
shorter and longer works after WO that deserve special mention but are usefully grouped 
together. The first topic will be simplicity, then The Web of Belief, then the more nuanced 
holism that gets developed in Pursuit of Truth and From Stimulus to Science, and finally a 
proposed reconciliation between the traditional focus of epistemology and the trench-
ant descriptivism of WO and “Epistemology Naturalized.”
From 1950 onward simplicity was an important element in Quine’s epistemology. 
In 1963 Quine devoted a short paper, “On Simple Theories of a Complex World,” 
entirely to the topic. He does not try to define simplicity, though he links it here to the 
uniformity of nature. He recognizes that while truth is objective and in no way formula-
tion dependent, simplicity is somewhat subjective precisely because it is formulation 
dependent. His rendering of the maxim of simplicity, therefore, is not that the simpler 
of two theories is more likely to be true but, rather, that “If two theories conform equally 
to past observations, the simpler of the two is seen as standing the better chance of con-
firmation in future observations” (1963b: 103). Quine tries to explain, not the truth of 
the maxim, but why people might believe it. He lists four considerations. These four are 
somewhat doubtful and all the more so because Quine and J.S. Ullian (1978: 69–73) list 
four entirely different considerations when they discuss the issue a few years later in The 
Web of Belief. These four are no more compelling than their predecessors.
Thereafter Quine’s settled opinion seemed to be that simplicity (and conservatism 
and any other virtues that a hypothesis might have) is unlike fidelity to observation. 
Simplicity and the other virtues he calls normative, though not in the usual sense. They 
are normative only in that they would be heuristic matters relevant to the thinking 
up of theories but not to the testing of them afterwards. Observation, by contrast, is 
relevant to the testing of theories, and this is where the truth conditions and empirical 
content lie. This is pretty much the view that he had floated in WO, and it is plainly at 
odds with both the view of “The Scope and Language of Science” and with using sim-
plicity as he still does to defend theoretical realism against some sort of instrumentalism 
or physical realism against phenomenalism.
The Web of Belief, co-authored with Ullian, appeared in 1970 shortly after 
“Epistemology Naturalized” with a second, much longer edition appearing in 1978. The 
book is entirely devoted to epistemological matters and enormously engaging. This is 
in part because it is aimed at undergraduates. But its orientation is also different from 
Quine’s work in the 1960s. That earlier work had seemed severely descriptivist, concen-
trating on causal relations among nerve hits, behavioral dispositions, and overt speech. 

WILLARD VAN ORMAN QUINE
795
Moreover, it had seemed to make little if any room for distinctions between reasoning 
well and good scientific practice on one hand and the free rein of prejudice on the 
other. The Web of Belief by contrast talks freely of the confirmation of theories and the 
distinction between good and bad science. Indeed, these seem to be the guiding themes 
of the book. We will address later whether this highly prescriptivist character can be 
reconciled with the descriptivist work.
Earlier work had talked of two principles beyond conformity to observation that 
guided the revision of theory, namely simplicity and conservatism. This book speaks of 
six “virtues” of hypotheses of which simplicity and conservatism are only two. The oth-
ers are modesty, generality, refutability, and precision. These are said to overlap and to 
grade off into one another, so perhaps listing six is no very profound change from listing 
two. In any case Quine reverts to just simplicity and conservatism in later work.
Quine and Ullian discuss a wide variety of topics in the book, but given that it is 
addressed to undergraduates it would perhaps be unfair to think that all of what is said 
there represents Quine’s considered view unless he repeats it in his later work. Because 
much of that later work also has epistemological matters among its major foci we can 
turn to that.
One of those matters is a more nuanced holism that Quine presents in Pursuit of 
Truth and elsewhere. It is a modification of his longstanding view with one dramatic 
departure. He begins by developing the notion of an observation sentence as the vehicle 
of scientific evidence. This is an occasion sentence that is both firmly associated with 
stimulation and intersubjective. The association with stimulation is one where the sen-
tence commands assent or dissent outright given the stimulation independent of further 
investigation or the interests of investigators. The intersubjectivity requires that under 
relevantly similar stimulation the sentence get the same verdict from all linguistically 
competent members of the community. ‘It is raining’ and ‘Birds are singing’ would be 
examples.
Quine then introduces the notion of an observation categorical, a sentence com-
pounded of observable sentences and having ‘Whenever this, that’ as its form. An 
observation categorical would be a standing sentence and thus suitable for implication 
from a theory. They are tested by pairs of observations, and ‘Whenever it rains, birds are 
singing’ would be an example. Quine claims that these categoricals involve no reifica-
tion of or quantification over times.
Quine is still a holist though a more modest one. Our beliefs do not in general meet 
experience by themselves but we do not have to invoke the totality of belief in order to 
test them. In between the extremes is a chunk just large enough to imply an observa-
tion categorical, and this Quine calls a critical semantic mass. This holism is still very 
much in the spirit of the former one in that when the implied categorical proves to be 
in error and we must revise, there will in general be many ways to revise the chunk so 
as to restore conformity to observation. So belief is still underdetermined. Then Quine 
says something surprising. He tells us (1990: 14) that in making our revision we will 
exempt any purely logical truth, not on grounds of conservatism, but because the fateful 
implication would still hold without its help. This gives logic a very special epistemic 
status and creates in effect a two-tier system of confirmation. Much of Quine’s fame rests 
on his having fashioned a single-tier system, so this is a dramatic departure indeed (cf. 
1992: 14; 1995: 352).
Finally we have to see whether the following obvious tension in Quine’s work can 
be resolved. Traditional epistemology and also The Web of Belief are frankly normative 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
796
in that they give advice on how rightly to conduct our cognitive lives. They focus on 
distinctions between good and bad science and between those causes of belief that 
do provide justification and those that do not. WO and “Epistemology Naturalized,” 
by contrast, seem to reject all this in favor of a purely descriptive account, that is, an 
account that makes no room for evaluative or normative claims.
Quine thinks that the two sides of this tension can be reconciled. To borrow some 
Kantian vocabulary, we can think of epistemic norms and evaluations, not as categorical 
imperatives, but as hypothetical ones. These hypothetical imperatives can, in turn, be 
thought of as factual claims linking means and ends. These are the facts of engineering, 
and this is exactly how Quine describes simplicity and conservatism. So instead of ‘Take 
the MassPike’ as a categorical imperative we get ‘If you want to drive from Boston to 
Springfield in the shortest time, take the MassPike’ as a hypothetical imperative. And 
from that we get ‘The MassPike is the quickest driving route from Boston to Springfield’ 
as a factual claim. The first is straightforwardly normative, and the last is straightfor-
wardly descriptive. Or so they seem. And the last seems to capture the imperatival 
character of the second. How to make the corresponding transitions for simplicity and 
conservatism would be a very delicate business. Moreover, establishing the truth of the 
resultant descriptive claim will not be easy either. And this task is made more difficult 
by the fact that the word ‘simplicity’ is itself undefined. But all that is a separate issue 
from whether the purely descriptive account can be reconciled with a more frankly 
normative one. Quine’s answer is yes.
References
Quine, W. V. O. (1936) “Truth by Convention” in Philosophical Essays for A.N. Whitehead, O.H. Lee, ed., 
NY: Longmans, 90–124.
—— (1950) Methods of Logic, NY: Holt.
—— (1951) “Two Dogmas of Empiricism” The Philosophical Review, 60: 20–43.
—— (1957) “The Scope and Language of Science” British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 8: 1–17.
—— (1960) Word and Object, Cambridge, MA: MIT.
—— (1963a) “Carnap and Logical Truth” in The Philosophy of Rudolf Carnap, Paul Schilpp, ed., LaSalle, IL: 
Open Court, 385–406.
—— (1963b) “On Simple Theories of a Complex World” Synthese 15: 107–11.
—— (1969a) “Epistemology Naturalized” in Quine: Ontological Relativity and Other Essays, NY: Columbia 
University Press, 69–90.
—— (1971) “Homage to Carnap” Boston Studies in Philosophy of Science 8: xxii–xxv.
—— (1978) The Web of Belief (with J.S. Ullian) revised edition, NY: Random House.
—— (1986) “Reply to Morton White” in The Philosophy of W.V. Quine, Lewis Hahn and Paul Schilpp, eds., 
LaSalle, IL: Open Court, 663–65.
—— (1990) Pursuit of Truth, Cambridge, MA: Harvard.
—— (1992) Pursuit of Truth, revised edition, Cambridge, MA: Harvard.
—— (1995) “Reactions” in On Quine: New Essays, Paolo Leonardi and Marco Santambrogio, eds., 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 347–61.
Further Reading
Barrett, Robert and Roger Gibson, editors (1990) Perspectives on Quine, Oxford: Blackwell. (A good collec-
tion of essays on Quine with responses by Quine.)
Davidson, Donald and Jaakko Hintikka, editors (1969) Words and Objections, Dordrecht: Reidel. (A good 
collection of papers on Quine with responses by Quine.)
Gibson Jr., Roger F. (1982) The Philosophy of W.V.O. Quine, Tampa, FL: University of South Florida Press. (A 
systematic exposition of Quine’s philosophy with emphasis on epistemology from Quine’s later position.)

WILLARD VAN ORMAN QUINE
797
—— (1988) Enlightened Empiricism, Tampa, FL: University of South Florida Press. (A presentation of Quine’s 
epistemology from the perspective of Quine’s later work.)
—— editor (2004) The Cambridge Companion to Quine, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (A com-
prehensive recent collection of essays on Quine.)
Quine, W. V. O. (1969b) “Natural Kinds” in Essays in Honor of Carl Hempel, Nicholas Rescher et al. eds., 
Dordrecht: Reidel, 5–23. (Discusses the learning of natural kind terms.)
—— (1975) “On Empirically Equivalent Systems of the World” Erkenntnis 9: 313–28. (Discusses cases rel-
evant to simplicity.)

71
JOHN LANGSHAW 
AUSTIN
Mark Kaplan
Introduction
John Langshaw Austin, born in 1911, was a major figure at Oxford University from 
the end of the Second World War until his death in 1961. He did not see a great deal 
into print. His influence was largely due to his lectures at Oxford and elsewhere, and 
to informal study groups he led. Indeed, most of the work now in print under his name 
was published posthumously. Of the thirteen essays in the current (third) edition of his 
Philosophical Papers (Austin 1979b) only seven had reached print by the time Austin 
died. How to Do Things with Words (Austin 1979a) was constructed from the William 
James lectures he delivered at Harvard University in 1955; Sense and Sensibilia (Austin 
1962) from notes Austin wrote for (and others took on) his course lectures.
“Other Minds,” which Austin delivered and published in 1946, and Sense and 
Sensibilia constitute the sum total of his published work on epistemology (although, as 
we shall see, attention to some of the rest of his work is important to assessing the value 
of Austin’s contribution to epistemology). These two works are largely critical in nature, 
each an attempt to counter arguments to the effect that our epistemic situation is more 
fraught than one would ordinarily have thought—for example, arguments to the effect 
that we know little if anything of the world around us, and that we never really (or, at 
least never directly) see such objects as tables and chairs but can at best infer their pres-
ence from sense data. The most remarkable thing about how Austin sought to counter 
these arguments is the extent to which he appealed to what we would ordinarily say and 
do—the extent to which Austin appears to have presupposed its being a condition of 
adequacy, on what we say by way of doing epistemology, that it accord faithfully with 
what we would say in ordinary circumstances.
This commitment to pursuing epistemology (and philosophy in general) in a way 
that respects some such condition of adequacy—this commitment to what came to 
be called “ordinary language philosophy” (a term with which Austin was not entirely 
happy (Austin 1979b: 182))—is, depending on one’s point of view, either one of the 
strengths of his work, or what most undermines it. Not long after his death, the recep-
tion of Sense and Sensibilia and Philosophical Papers pretty much established the latter 
point of view as the default view. As a consequence, Austin’s epistemological work 
has been relegated to the margins of the field, and (except in one small corner of the 
literature on skepticism) is not often cited. I will be suggesting that it is a relegation 
that is undeserved.

JOHN LANGSHAW AUSTIN
799
In what follows, I mean to trace a (necessarily selective) line of thought that runs 
through the anti-skeptical struggle of “Other Minds” and Sense and Sensibilia—and, in 
so doing, highlight some of the most important general conclusions Austin drew as to 
what an epistemology can properly say. I will then ask by what right Austin thought he 
could base those conclusions, to the extent he did, on appeals to what we would ordi-
narily say. This will, in turn, lead us to examine more closely exactly how the condition 
of adequacy those appeals would seem to presuppose is to be understood. I will be sug-
gesting that the condition is more subtle, and his reasons for imposing it far better, than 
his critics have appreciated.
Knowledge
“Other Minds” is nominally meant to address skeptical concerns about our capacity to 
know the minds of others. But it consists mostly in an examination of how philosophers 
have gone wrong on their way to waxing skeptical about knowledge of the world around 
us. The argument from ignorance receives especially thorough treatment.
By “the argument from ignorance,” I mean a form of argument of which Descartes’ 
dream argument in the First Meditation is the most famous instance. There Descartes 
argues that, because “there are never any sure signs by means of which being awake can 
be distinguished from being asleep,” and so no sure sign that he is not in the midst of a 
vivid dream, he has sufficient reason to doubt (and so sufficient reason to deny that he 
knows) even so modest a proposition about the world around him as the one that he is 
sitting by the fire holding a piece of paper in his hand (Descartes 1984/5, vol. 2: 13). 
It is a form of argument that can be described as challenging a person’s claim to know 
that P, by (i) fixing on a proposition Q, such that she cannot but admit that, if Q, then 
she does not know that P, and maintaining that, if she does not know that not-Q, then she 
does not know that P; (ii) arguing (whether on the basis of her never having conducted 
any inquiry that would rule out the truth of Q, or—as in the case of Descartes’ argu-
ment—its being impossible for her to have conducted such an inquiry) that, however 
improbable it might be that Q is true, she does not know that not-Q; and (iii) concluding 
from the foregoing that, therefore, she does not know that P. Descartes’ dream argument 
can thus be viewed as just what results from substituting the proposition that Descartes 
is sitting by the fire with a piece of paper in his hand for P, the proposition that Descartes 
is in the midst of a vivid dream for Q, and supposing that the person whose claim to 
knowledge is being challenged is Descartes himself.
Austin’s way with the argument from ignorance was to investigate whether, if some-
one has claimed in ordinary life to know that P, we really can pick any hypothesis Q we 
all recognize as one that would have to be false for her to count as knowing that P, and 
legitimately demand, before we credit her with the knowledge she has claimed, that we 
be satisfied that (that she/we can explain how) she knows it is not the case that Q. To 
that end, Austin imagined his having claimed to know, by its red head, that the bird in 
his backyard is a goldfinch. He observed that this is a claim that is open to legitimate 
challenge. We could legitimately say to him,
“To be a goldfinch, besides having a red head it must also have the character-
istic eye-markings”: or “How do you know it isn’t a woodpecker? Woodpeckers 
have red heads too.”
(Austin 1979b: 84)

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
800
If he is to be credited with the knowledge he claims, Austin needs to do enough to 
show the bird really was a goldfinch (and, if applicable, that he was in a position—he 
was well-enough situated, well-enough informed about matters avian—to tell it was a 
goldfinch). But, Austin noted, there are limits to how much he needs to do.
Enough is enough: it doesn’t mean everything. Enough means enough to show 
that (within reason, and for the present intents and purposes) it “can’t” be any-
thing else, there is no room for an alternative, competing, description of it. It 
does not mean, for example, enough to show it isnt a stuffed goldfinch.
(Austin 1979b: 84)
That is not to say that it is never in order to demand that the person do enough to show 
that it is not a stuffed goldfinch. We can surely imagine circumstances (we are in an 
aviary that has both stuffed birds and live ones) in which that demand would be very 
much in order. But Austin’s thought was that we have an idea (rough to be sure) of what 
normally counts as enough to establish the propriety of a knowledge claim of a particu-
lar sort (where both the content of the claim and the circumstances in which it is made 
contribute to determining that the claim is of that sort). And it is only in special cases, 
cases in which we have a special reason to suppose that something is amiss, that we can 
demand that more be done than normally counts as enough. As Austin put it (writing 
here about what we can claim to know about other people’s emotions),
These special cases where doubts arise and require resolving, are contrasted 
with the normal cases which hold the field unless there is some special sugges-
tion that deceit &c., is involved.
(Austin 1979b: 113)
And what makes a case special? Austin never explicitly said. What he did tell us, how-
ever, is that our awareness of our human fallibility is no bar at all to our making the 
knowledge claims we do: it does not provide, for any particular occasion on which I 
have made (or might make) the claim to know that P, a special reason to suppose that 
I am (would be) mistaken. (Actually, Austin in this instance uses the expression, “con-
crete reason.” I read him as regarding the two expressions as interchangeable; Austin 
(1979b: 98).) So Austin would seem to have told us this much: for R to count as a spe-
cial reason to suppose things are amiss in a manner incompatible with my knowing that 
P, R has to be, at the very least, a reason that we don’t always have (as we do the reason: 
we are all humanly fallible) in the normal cases—the cases in which my claim to know 
that P is to be credited.
This suggests that Austin held the following view. A person’s claim to know that P is 
to be credited when she has done what counts as enough in a normal case to prove that 
P, where doing enough does not require doing everything one might have done. Only when 
we have some special reason to suppose that things have gone amiss is it legitimate for 
us to demand that she do more than what counts as enough in a normal case. And for 
something to count as a special reason it must at the very least be a reason we do not 
always have in a normal case.
But it is characteristic of the instances of the argument from ignorance that figure 
in the literature on philosophical skepticism that they afford no such reason. Consider 
Descartes’ dream argument. Granted: we have vivid dreams. Granted: for anything a 

JOHN LANGSHAW AUSTIN
801
person claims to have seen to be true, we can coherently hypothesize that the person 
merely had a vivid dream that she saw that thing. But these facts are fully in our posses-
sion in the normal cases—the cases in which we happily and appropriately credit our-
selves and others with knowledge in ordinary life. Thus they cannot properly be thought 
to constitute any special reason to suppose anything has gone amiss with Descartes—any 
special reason to suppose he is dreaming. And so it is a mistake for Descartes to suppose 
that he needs to know (and thus to be able to say how he knows) he is not dreaming, if 
he is to know that he is holding a piece of paper in his hand.
Austin’s view of knowledge counts as contextualist, because he held that whether he 
has proved the bird “can’t” be anything else depends on present intents and purposes. 
But it is a contextualist view that rejects the thought (endorsed by so many contempo-
rary contextualists—see, for example, DeRose (1995) and Lewis (1996)) that someone’s 
simply posing the question, “How do you know that it wasn’t just a stuffed bird?” is 
sufficient to change the context in such a way that Austin no longer has such a proof 
for present intents and purposes unless he has proof that the bird was not stuffed. For 
Austin, unlike these contemporary contextualists, challenges to knowledge claims are 
themselves subject to epistemic appraisal. Absent any special reason to suppose some-
thing is amiss, it is simply illegitimate to demand that a claimant to knowledge do more 
than is in an ordinary case required by way of proving that she knows what she claims. 
Any challenge that makes such a demand in the absence of such a special reason—as 
does the challenge to Austin, “How do you know that it wasn’t just a stuffed bird?” made 
in the circumstances we’ve imagined—should be treated just as it would be in ordinary 
life: it should be dismissed as outrageous.
Austin’s view thus also counts as a relevant alternatives view, insofar as he holds that 
he needs only to be able to prove that not-Q for some of the Q’s he recognizes must be 
false if he is to know that P (e.g. he has to be able to prove that it’s not a red-headed 
woodpecker), not for all (e.g., he doesn’t have to be able to prove that it’s not a stuffed 
goldfinch). But, while Austin’s appeal to special reasons tells us something about how 
he thought these Q’s are to be distinguished from one another, he never said what 
premise, of the relevant instance of the argument from ignorance, he was rejecting: 
whether it is the premise that if he doesn’t know it isn’t a stuffed goldfinch, he doesn’t know 
it is a goldfinch, or the premise that he doesn’t know it is not a stuffed goldfinch. The relevant 
alternatives view has usually been associated with the rejection of the first of these two 
premises. (See, for example, Dretske 1970.) But there is reason to suppose (see Kaplan 
forthcoming) that, had he addressed the matter, Austin would have opted to reject the 
second—not on the grounds that he knows the bird is not stuffed, but on the grounds 
that, in the circumstances at hand, the proposition, it isn’t a stuffed goldfinch, occupies 
a third category: it is neither true that he knows it, nor true that he doesn’t know it. 
Austin had already argued, in “The Meaning of a Word” (Austin 1979b: 67–9), that, 
when asked to handle cases that they aren’t normally asked to handle (even if it is just 
because we don’t normally pay much attention to those cases), ordinary-language dis-
tinctions that appear to be exhaustive (as the distinction between what Austin knows 
and what he doesn’t know appears to be) can break down.
The Foundations of Knowledge
It is clear that, when Austin wrote, in “Other Minds,” of his having to be able to prove 
(for present intents and purposes and within reason) that the bird “can’t” be anything 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
802
other than a goldfinch, he meant nothing more than that he has to be able to give a 
satisfactory answer to the question, “How do you know it is a goldfinch?” He has to be 
able to meet all challenges that would count as legitimate in the circumstances in which 
he makes his claim to know. And, for Austin, a challenge is to be counted as legitimate 
for our purposes as epistemologists only if it is a challenge that we would treat as legiti-
mate in ordinary life: “Whenever I say I know, I am always liable to be taken to claim 
that, in a certain sense appropriate to the kind of statement (and to present intents and 
purposes), I am able to prove it” (Austin 1979b: 85).
It is thus no surprise that subsequently, in Sense and Sensibilia, Austin came out 
in opposition to the doctrine (which had been championed in Ayer (1940), one of 
Austin’s targets, and was later to be championed by many more) that our knowledge 
of the world around us must have (because it doesn’t count as knowledge if it doesn’t 
have) a foundation in claims that purport to say nothing about how the world around 
us is, but only about how it appears or seems to us that the world around us is, where those 
claims are meant to be understood as describing nothing beyond our phenomenology. 
Who among us thinks that, if you were to ask me how I know a mutual friend was at a 
party I attended but you did not, “I saw him,” would not be a perfectly adequate answer? 
Who among us would actually refuse to grant me the knowledge I claim until or unless 
I had offered you an explanation of how I know that our friend was at the party that 
makes no ultimate appeal to anything that, for example, implies that our mutual friend 
was actually at the party?
Of course, in taking the position he did—in holding that “I saw him” provides a per-
fectly good answer to the question “How do you know he was at the party?”—Austin 
stood in opposition not just to foundationalists who hold (see, for example, Chisholm 
1982a: 45) that our knowledge of the world around us must have foundations in claims 
that have no implications as to how things are in the world around us. Austin stood 
in opposition to anyone who holds that my claim to know that our mutual friend was 
at the party requires deeper or more extensive support than “I saw him” provides. This 
includes coherentists (see, for example, BonJour 1985), who hold that my explanation 
of how I know our friend was at the party cannot stop with “I saw him,” but must ulti-
mately appeal to my entire set of beliefs and how my conviction that I saw him coheres 
with that set.
Austin recognized that in holding that, “I saw him,” might count as a perfectly good 
explanation of how I know our mutual friend was at the party, he was allowing such 
explanations to terminate with fallible claims—claims that we are capable of mistak-
enly holding true, and sometimes find that we have mistakenly held true. But Austin 
argued that, even were we to insist on an explanation that terminates in more cau-
tious claims—claims about how it appeared or seemed to me that things were—we 
would still have to accept explanations that terminate in fallible claims. Suppose, for 
example, I said, “It appeared to me that he [our mutual friend] was wearing a magenta 
jacket,” meaning thereby to be making a strictly phenomenological claim. (As we will 
see, Austin actually held that it was a mistake to think this a proper way to understand 
our use of “appear” and “seems.” But I set aside this misgiving for the present purpose.) 
If I am operating under the illusion that I have (when in fact I lack) the discriminatory 
mastery required for someone reliably to tell magenta from other reds in its vicinity, 
what I said might easily be mistaken. (See Austin 1962: 111–13. For a voice on the 
other side, see Chisholm 1982a: sec. 10.)
Not that Austin wanted to deny that there are circumstances in which I say things, 

JOHN LANGSHAW AUSTIN
803
by way of describing how I am appeared to, in which there can be no question but that I 
have the discriminatory mastery sufficient to get them right. But, as Austin pointed out, 
there are likewise circumstances (there is excellent light, I am in close proximity, no 
hoaxes are being perpetrated, and so on) in which I say things about the world around 
me (for example, “There’s a telephone on the table”), in which there can be no ques-
tion but that I have the discriminatory mastery sufficient to get them right (Austin 1962: 
114). Austin’s conclusion: there is no way, by appeal solely to the content of claims, to 
distinguish those that are, from those that are not, legitimate candidates to terminate an 
explanation of how you know something about the world around you; nor any way, by 
appeal solely to the content of claims, to distinguish those that are, from those that are 
not, fallible and open to revision. The circumstance, the context, in which the claim is 
made, has an ineliminable role to play (Austin 1962: 123–4).
Perception and Perceptual Experience
Austin was very much aware, however, that there is a view of perception according to 
which, when I say, “I saw him,” I am, in fact, terminating my explanation of how I know 
with a purely phenomenological claim: I am making a purely phenomenological claim as 
to how it seemed or appeared to me things were (as if I were seeing him), and making an 
inference from that claim to a second claim as to what was causally responsible for its hav-
ing seemed or appeared that things were that way (that he and I were causally related in 
just the manner required for me to count as having seen him). Thus, on this indirect view 
of perception, it would seem that, insofar as we know anything of the world around us, our 
knowledge does have a foundation in purely phenomenological claims.
Austin, however, thought this indirect view of perception fundamentally mistaken. 
He held that no phenomenological claims were implied by my claim, “I saw him.” He 
thought (what he took to be) the abuse of language involved required to express the 
indirect view (for example, he held that talking of how things seem or appear to me isn’t 
a way of describing my phenomenology, it’s just a way of making a more hedged claim 
than I would be making were I to say that things simply are that way) is a symptom of 
the view’s misguidedness (Austin 1962, passim). More tellingly, he argued that the view 
was entirely unmotivated.
Proponents of the indirect view had argued that only on such a view is it possible 
adequately to make sense of the undeniable fact that, were the person I saw at the party 
actually someone so made up that I simply could not tell him apart from our mutual 
friend, I would still say in response to your query as to how I know our friend was at 
the party (and with the same confidence and conviction), “I saw him.” After all (they 
argued), what does this fact show, if not that, for all my having actually seen our mutual 
friend at the party, I might have had exactly the same experience I had as I saw him, yet 
have failed to have seen him? It is just this experience, common to both the seeing and 
to the failure to see, that, on the indirect view, is the phenomenological component of 
perception to which any adequate account of perception must advert.
But Austin denied that the fact that we are subject to illusion does anything to show 
that some phenomenological experience is involved in perception. That is because he 
thought it is simply a mistake to conclude (from the fact that I might have been deceived 
in the way described) that, for all my having actually seen our mutual friend at the party, 
I might have had exactly the same experience I had as I saw him, yet have failed to have 
seen him. The experience I had at the party was the experience of seeing our mutual 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
804
friend. Had I been deceived, I would have had a different experience: the experience of 
seeing the imposter (and taking him for our mutual friend). All that is shown by that 
fact that I could have been deceived in the way imagined is that there are circumstances 
in which I would mistake the latter experience for the former. (See Austin (1962: 32), 
where this point is made with reference to how to describe the experience of a person 
who is deceived by a mirage.)
In Austin’s corner, of course, is the way in which we ordinarily speak of our experi-
ences—the experience of being kissed for the first time, the experience of scoring a 
winning goal in the final minute of play, and so on: in terms that make what we say apt 
only if the world around us is a certain way. You haven’t had the experience of scoring a 
goal in the last minute of play unless you have scored a goal in the final minute of play. 
Austin’s take on experiences has since been dubbed “disjunctivism.” (See Snowdon 
(2005) for a brief primer, by a prominent champion of disjunctivism, on the various 
doctrines that have traveled under that label.)
The Reception of Austin’s Epistemological Writings
While some of Austin’s substantive claims, as to what we would ordinarily say and 
when we would say it, have been hotly disputed (none more hotly than his claims as to 
the proper uses of “appear” and “seems”; see, for example, Ayer (1967) and Chisholm 
(1977: 30–3)) and some would seem to be just plain wrong (for example, his claim that 
“I know that P” is a performative—i.e., something whose utterance makes it true—and 
so it is a mistake to think it is making any descriptive claim), the dominant reaction to 
Austin’s epistemological work has not been to dispute what he said we would say and 
when he said we would say it. It has, rather, been to dispute that facts about what we 
would ordinarily say and when we would say it can possibly be as important as Austin 
thought them to assessing the propriety of epistemological doctrines.
Thus it is that the philosophical reception of his epistemological work has been dom-
inated by a body of papers and books that are unanimous in holding that Austin made 
a fundamental mistake in supposing it a condition of adequacy on an epistemology that 
it faithfully accord with what we would ordinarily say—books and papers that differ one 
from the other only in exactly what blunder its author attributes to Austin by way of 
explaining why Austin would have made so fundamental a mistake. It has been vari-
ously said that Austin thought facts about what we would say when are important in the 
way he did because:
1. he failed to realize that facts about what ordinary people say do not, and cannot, 
settle philosophical disputes; only philosophical argument settles philosophical dis-
putes (Fodor and Katz 1963: 69–70). [Fodor and Katz attribute Austin’s mistake in 
part to his having had an amateurish and armchair-bound approach to linguistics; 
had he appreciated how linguistic research is properly to be done, he would never 
have thought ordinary language as important to philosophy as he did. In this, they 
echo Mates 1958: 68];
2. he failed to realize that the epistemological doctrines he was criticizing by appeal to 
what we ordinarily say when were not meant to have any implications for what we 
would ordinarily say when (Chisholm 1964: 1);
3. he failed to realize (for all his having highlighted the role context plays in deter-
mining what we would say) that the context in which the epistemological doctrines 

JOHN LANGSHAW AUSTIN
805
he criticized were being put forth is distinct, and understood by the proponents of 
these doctrines to be distinct, from the context in which we ordinarily speak of 
what we know and how we know it (McGinn 1989: 62; Williams 1996: 147–8); he 
failed to realize that these philosophers were putting forward doctrines that implied 
things that they themselves freely acknowledged they wouldn’t say in ordinary life 
(Cavell 1965: 217); he failed to take due notice that the fact that, when philosophi-
cally engaged, people ordinarily say things that they would freely acknowledge to 
be at odds with what they would say in ordinary life, is itself a fact about what we 
would ordinarily say (and when we would say it) that speaks against his condition 
of adequacy (Cavell 1979: 57);
4. he failed to realize that it is entirely compatible with, for example, the fact that we 
would ordinarily say that we know a great deal about the world around us, that what 
we thereby say is false; he failed to realize that it is the truth of what we ordinarily say, 
not the propriety of our ordinarily saying it, that is the only thing that is in dispute 
between the skeptic and the anti-skeptic; thus he failed to realize that the points he 
was at pains to make, about what we would ordinarily say, are entirely beside the point 
in dispute between the skeptic and his foe (Stroud 1984: 57–62). [In this, Stroud 
echoes Grice’s more general complaint (Grice 1961) that Austin failed to appreciate 
that there are sometimes things we wouldn’t ordinarily say (because they would be 
misleading) even as we recognize that they are true—and that, because Austin failed 
to appreciate this, he did not realize that, in requiring that philosophy be faithful to 
what we would ordinarily say (i.e., make true what we would ordinarily say, and false 
what we wouldn’t ordinarily say), he was erasing any possibility that we might arrive 
at a philosophy that is true. For an insightful evaluation of Grice’s complaint (and a 
response on Austin’s behalf), see Travis (1991: 237–46).]
In fact, however, none of these explanations of why Austin appealed in the way he 
did to what we would ordinarily say fits at all well with what he actually wrote. Austin 
was well aware of the controversy his way of doing philosophy had generated, well aware 
that many philosophers found his appeals to what we would ordinarily say ill-considered 
and unconvincing in philosophical debate. In “A Plea for Excuses” (Austin 1956/7) 
Austin undertook to respond to his critics—to answer the question (as he put it, Austin 
(1979b: 183)), “Why should what we all ordinarily say be the only or the best or final 
way of putting it? Why should it even be true?” Here is his answer:
Certainly ordinary language has no claim to be the last word, if there is such a 
thing. It embodies, indeed, something better than the metaphysics of the Stone 
Age, namely, as was said, the inherited experience and acumen of many gen-
erations of men. But then, that acumen has been concentrated primarily upon 
the practical business of life. If a distinction works well for practical purposes 
in ordinary life (no mean feat, for even ordinary life is full of hard cases), then 
there is sure to be something in it, it will not mark nothing: yet this is likely 
enough to be not the best way of arranging things if our interests are more 
extensive or intellectual than the ordinary. And again, that experience has 
been derived only from the sources available to ordinary men throughout most 
of civilized history: it has not been fed from the resources of the microscope and 
its successors. And it must be added too, that superstition and error and fantasy 
of all kinds do become incorporated in ordinary language and even sometimes 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
806
stand up to the survival test (only, when they do, why should we not detect it?). 
Certainly, then, ordinary language is not the last word: in principle it can eve-
rywhere be supplemented and improved upon and superseded. Only remember, 
it is the first word.
(Austin 1979b: 185)
It is hard to see in this passage the philosopher who is supposed to have committed the 
blunders just described. On the contrary, we see a philosopher who acknowledges that 
what it is appropriate to say when we are engaged in a sophisticated inquiry—when “our 
interests are more extensive or intellectual than ordinary”—will often answer to differ-
ent standards than those that govern what we would ordinarily say; who agrees that the 
mere fact that a distinction is commonly drawn in ordinary life (or ordinary speech) is 
entirely compatible with its being defective for the purposes of such an inquiry; who 
agrees that the fact that P is something we would say in ordinary life is entirely compat-
ible with P’s being false. [Indeed, Austin repeatedly affirmed that its being appropriate 
to have said one knows something to be so is entirely compatible with one’s not in fact 
having known it to be so. For example (Austin 1979b: 98): “[W]e are often right to say 
we know even in cases where we turn out subsequently to have been mistaken--and 
indeed we seem always, or practically always, liable to be mistaken”; and “It is naturally 
always possible (‘humanly’ possible) that I may be mistaken or may break my word, 
but that by itself is no bar against using the expressions ‘I know’ and ‘I promise’ as we 
do in fact use them.”] We see a philosopher who explicitly denies that the facts as to 
what we would ordinarily say constitute the last word—the decisive word—in matters 
philosophical.
Austin’s Method Properly Understood
So why did Austin appeal to what we would ordinarily say in the way he did? We can 
grant that what we ordinarily say deserves the pride of place he accords it at the end 
of the passage above, and for precisely the reason he thinks it does. While doubtless 
flawed and shot with error, ordinary language works. And it makes sense not to give 
up something that works except for something that promises to work better. But why 
would Austin think that an epistemological theory, understood by its champion not to 
have any implications whatsoever for what we would ordinarily say (and so understood 
as neither seeking to reform ordinary language, nor demanding that we give up any ordi-
nary way of speaking or acting), could be in any way undermined by its failure to accord 
with what we would ordinarily say?
Austin never explicitly answered this question. But the answer is, I submit, not very 
hard to see in his writings. Consider, in particular, the first lecture of Sense and Sensibilia, 
where Austin announces that he will be devoting his lectures to the examination of the 
view that
we never see or otherwise perceive (or “sense”), or anyhow we never directly 
perceive or sense, material objects (or material things), but only sense-data (or 
our own ideas, impressions, sensa, sense-perceptions, percepts, &c.).
(Austin 1962: 2)
He then proceeds to tell us what he thinks of the view and, in particular, of the way its 
champions argue in its favor:

JOHN LANGSHAW AUSTIN
807
My general opinion about this doctrine is that it is a typically scholastic view, 
attributable, first, to an obsession with a few particular words, the uses of which 
are over-simplified, not really understood or carefully studied or correctly 
described; and second, to an obsession with a few (and nearly always the same) 
half-studied “facts”. (I say “scholastic”, but I might just as well have said “philo-
sophical”; over-simplification, schematization, and constant obsessive repeti-
tion of the same small range of jejune “examples” are not only not peculiar 
to this case, but far too common to be dismissed as an occasional weakness of 
philosophers.)
(Austin 1962: 3)
Here we see Austin (particularly in his second, longer parenthetical remark) issuing a 
general complaint about how his philosophical colleagues are plying their trade. They 
appeal to examples to argue for the doctrines they champion. But they do it in a highly 
selective and not very careful way. They are quick, much too quick, to generalize from 
the examples to which they appeal—and so arrive at doctrines that are overly simple, 
and thus defective.
In the light of this, Austin’s way of criticizing epistemological doctrines looks to be 
simply an application of the principle of total evidence. We epistemologists motivate 
our theories, and we could not possibly do epistemology were we barred from motivating 
our theories, by appeal to what we would ordinarily say. This is true even of the most 
skeptical epistemologists, whose mission, after all, is just to convince us that there are 
things we would ordinarily say as to the extent and nature of our knowledge that lead to 
the conclusion that we have far less of it than we think (see, for example, Stroud 1984: 
23–31). Can there be any question but that the instances of the argument from igno-
rance that are offered by way of challenging our claims to know anything of the world 
around us, such as Descartes’ dream argument, would not even seem to have any force 
but for the fact that the argument from ignorance has other instances that issue legiti-
mate challenges in ordinary life? But if we are going to motivate our epistemological 
theories by appeal to what we would ordinarily say in certain cases—if we are going to 
count it in favor of an epistemological theory that it accords with what we would ordi-
narily say in those cases—it is hard to see how we can fail to count it against the theory 
that it fails to accord with what we would ordinarily say in other cases.
After all, as the principle of total evidence rightly says, one cannot evaluate any 
theory on any topic by looking only for, and only counting as probative, such evidence 
as one can find in its favor; one has to evaluate a theory on all the evidence. So if we 
are going to evaluate our epistemological theories according to how they accord with 
certain things we ordinarily say, if we are going to count our ordinarily saying these 
things as evidence in favor of our theories, intellectual hygiene would seem to demand 
that we evaluate these theories according to how well they accord with everything we 
would ordinarily say. Intellectual hygiene would seem to demand that we treat the fact 
that an epistemological theory would have us say things that we would find outrageous 
to say in ordinary life exactly as Austin treats it: as providing reason to reject that epis-
temological theory.
My suggestion, then, is that Austin wrote as he did because he saw anyone who 
would pursue epistemology in a manner at odds with his own as caught in a dilemma. 
Either what we would ordinarily say about cases counts as evidence for epistemological 
theories, or it doesn’t. If it doesn’t, then we cannot make any appeal to what we would 

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
808
ordinarily say to motivate our epistemological theories, in which case we cannot get any 
epistemology off the ground. But if what we ordinarily say thus does count as evidence 
for epistemological theories, then we must judge our epistemological theories as we 
would any others: according to how well they accommodate all of the evidence. Thus 
Austin’s conviction that it is a condition, on our responsibly doing epistemology at all, 
that we do it his way.
Vindicating Austin’s conviction would require arguing that there is no way to navi-
gate between the horns of the foregoing dilemma. There is no space for that here (but 
see Kaplan (2000, 2003, 2006, 2008) for how some of the argument might go). This 
much, however, is evident: it is simply not credible, the supposition that Austin com-
mitted the blunders that his critics have attributed to him. And it is likewise evident 
that we cannot read his as a mindlessly conservative methodology that would dismiss 
sophisticated and innovative ways of thinking and talking simply because they do not 
coincide with what ordinary people think and say.
As we have seen, Austin thought, of what ordinary people think and say, that “in prin-
ciple it can everywhere be supplemented and improved upon and superseded” (Austin 
1979b: 185). In the light of this, it is hard to see how we can possibly read Austin’s 
demand, that epistemology be faithful to what we would say and do in ordinary life, 
as a requirement that would have epistemology bend slavishly to the contours of what 
ordinary people say and do. What Austin was demanding, by way of fidelity, appears, 
rather, to be nothing more or less than this: that our philosophical assessment of our 
epistemic condition coincide with our ordinary assessment of that condition. (Compare 
Goodman (1983: 62–5), where a requirement much like this is put forth as the only 
legitimate constraint we are in a position to impose on the enterprise of trying to arrive 
at an adequate account of what makes for a good inductive inference.)
Thus, when we find our epistemological inquiries leading us to views at odds with 
what we would ordinarily say or do, the requirement of fidelity does not tell us to stop. 
Ordinary language is not, after all, the last word. Rather, the requirement tells us that we 
have two choices. We can either reconsider the path on which those inquiries have led 
us, or change what we are prepared to say and do in ordinary life to conform to our epis-
temological views. What the requirement of fidelity rules out is the position Austin’s 
critics want to allow an epistemologist to occupy. They want to allow an epistemolo-
gist to occupy a pure, disengaged, detached position from which she might conclude, 
without thereby in any way challenging the propriety of our continuing to say and do 
what we say and do in ordinary life, that some (or much) of what we thus say and do is 
nonetheless unsatisfactory from a philosophical point of view. (This is nowhere better 
expressed than in Stroud (1984: 64–7).) Given Austin’s requirement of fidelity to what 
we would ordinarily say, this position is simply unavailable.
By the lights of the requirement so understood, an epistemology that would offer a 
philosophical critique of our claims to knowledge has a much tougher row to hoe. What 
is at stake is no longer simply what we say in the philosophy seminar room; it is also 
what we say and do outside. Anyone who would tell us, on philosophical grounds, that 
we know less than we thought, would tell us that we should stop acting (in thought, 
speech and deed) as if we know more. If she is to sway us, she had better offer us good 
reason to think we will be better off for changing our ordinary practices in the way 
required. It is in this sense that ordinary language, though not the last word, is the first: 
for an epistemologist to convince us that what we ordinarily would say is mistaken, she 
needs to convince us to stop saying it.

JOHN LANGSHAW AUSTIN
809
It might be thought, then, that Austin’s real blunder (and the blunder to which his 
critics have been pointing; see especially Chisholm (1977: 18); Stroud (1984: chapter 
2); Stroud (1989)) was to have failed to appreciate that epistemological inquiry is only 
properly philosophical insofar as it is conducted from a pure, detached, disengaged per-
spective. But, I have been suggesting, this is not something Austin failed to appreciate; 
it is something he considered and rejected. He was convinced (and, I am suggesting, not 
entirely without reason) that to construe epistemology as a discipline whose doctrines 
have no consequences for what it is proper for us to say and do when we are not engaged 
in philosophy is to construe it as no discipline at all. It is to construe epistemology as 
an inquiry intolerably free from evidential constraint, an inquiry that leaves every epis-
temologist entirely free to pick and choose as she fancies, and without any cost, what 
(among the things we would ordinarily say and do) she will consider probative for the 
evaluation of her theories. It can hardly be any wonder that Austin would find it hard 
to see the point of an inquiry that proceeds like that.
Bibliography
Austin, John L. (1946). “Other Minds,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society: Supplementary Volume 20: 
148–87. Reprinted in Austin 1979b, pp. 76–116.
——. (1956/7). “A Plea for Excuses,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 57: 1–30. Reprinted in Austin 
1979b, pp. 175–204.
——. (1961). “The Meaning of a Word,” in Austin 1979b, pp. 55–75. First published in the first edition of 
Philosophical Papers; delivered in 1940.
——. (1962). Sense and Sensibilia, (ed.) G. J. Warnock. Oxford University Press.
——. (1979a). How to Do Things with Words (2nd edn), (eds.) J. O. Urmson and Marina Sbisà. Oxford 
University Press. First edition published in 1962.
——. (1979b). Philosophical Papers (3rd edn), (eds.) J. O. Urmson and G. J. Warnock. Oxford University 
Press. First edition published in 1964.
Ayer, Alfred J. (1940). The Foundations of Empirical Knowledge. Macmillan.
——. (1967). “Has Austin Refuted Sense Data?” Synthese 17: 117–40. Reprinted in Fann 1969, pp. 284–
308.
BonJour, Laurence. (1985). The Structure of Empirical Knowledge. Harvard University Press.
Cavell, Stanley. (1965). “Austin at Criticism,” The Philosophical Review 74: 204–19. Reprinted in Cavell 
1976, pp. 97–144; and in Fann 1969, pp. 59–75.
——. (1976). Must We Mean What We Say? Cambridge University Press.
——. (1979). The Claim of Reason: Wittgenstein, Skepticism, Morality, and Tragedy. Oxford University 
Press.
Chappell, Vere C. (ed.). (1964). Ordinary Language. Prentice-Hall.
Chisholm, Roderick. M. (1964). “Austin’s Philosophical Papers,” Mind, new series 73: 1–26; reprinted in Fann 
1969, pp. 101–26.
——. (1977). Theory of Knowledge (2nd edn). Prentice-Hall.
——. (1982a). “Theory of Knowledge in America,” in Chisholm 1982b, pp. 109–93. Originally published 
in R. M. Chisholm, William K. Frankena, and Manley Thomson, Philosophy. Prentice-Hall, 1964, pp. 
233–344.
——. (1982b). The Foundations of Knowing. University of Minnesota Press.
Descartes, René. (1984/5). The Philosophical Writings of Descartes, 2 vols., (ed.) John Cottingham, Robert 
Stoothoff and Dugald Murdoch. Cambridge University Press.
DeRose, Keith. (1995). “Solving the Skeptical Problem,” The Philosophical Review: 1–52.
Dretske, Fred. (1970). “Epistemic Operators,” The Journal of Philosophy 67: 1007–23.
Fann, K. T. (ed.). (1969). Symposium on J. L. Austin. Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Fodor, Jerry A. and Katz, Jerrold J. (1963). “The Availability of What We Say,” The Philosophical Review: 
57–71.
Goodman, Nelson. (1983). Fact, Fiction, and Forecast (4th edn). Harvard University Press. First edition 
published in 1954.

THE HISTORY OF EPISTEMOLOGY
810
Grice, H. Paul. (1961). “The Causal Theory of Perception,” Proceedings of the Arisotelian Society, Supplementary 
Volume 35: 121–53.
Kaplan, Mark. (1996). “Skepticism and Pyrotechnics,” Acta Analytica 16/17: 159–77.
——. (2000). “To What Must an Epistemology Be True?” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 61: 
279–304.
——. (2003). “Chisholm’s Grand Move,” Metaphilosophy 34: 563–81.
——. (2006). “If You Know You Can’t be Wrong,” in Stephen Hetherington (ed.) Epistemology Futures. 
Oxford University Press, pp. 180–98.
——. (2008) “Austin’s Way with Skepticism,” in John Greco (ed.) The Oxford Handbook of Skepticism. 
Oxford University Press. pp. 348–71.
——. (Forthcoming). “Tales of the Unknown,” in Sørli and Gustafsson (forthcoming).
Lewis, David. (1996). “Elusive Knowledge,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy: 549–67.
Mates, Benson. (1958) “On the Verification of Statements about Ordinary Language,” Inquiry 1: 161–71. 
Reprinted in Chappell 1964, pp. 64–74. Page references are to Chappell.
McGinn, Marie. (1989). Sense and Certainty: A Dissolution of Scepticism. Blackwell Publishers.
Snowdon, Paul. (2005). “The Formulation of Disjunctivism: A Response to Fish,” Proceedings of the 
Aristotelian Society 105: 129–41.
Sørli, Richard and Gustafsson, Martin (eds). (Forthcoming). New Essays on the Philosophy of J. L. Austin. 
Oxford University Press.
Stroud, Barry. (1984). The Significance of Philosophical Scepticism. Clarendon Press.
——. (1989). “Understanding Human Knowledge in General,” in Knowledge and Skepticism, Marjorie Clay 
and Keith Lehrer (eds). Westview Press, pp. 31–50. Reprinted in Stroud 2002, pp. 99–121.
——. (2002). Understanding Human Knowledge. Oxford University Press.
Travis, Charles. (1991). “Annals of Analysis,” Mind 100: 237–64.
Williams, Michael. (1996). Unnatural Doubts: Epistemological Realism and the Basis of Scepticism. Princeton 
University Press. First published in 1991.

Part X
METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL 
ISSUES


72
EPISTEMOLOGY 
AND THE ROLE OF 
INTUITIONS
William G. Lycan
1. Intuitions, What
In everyday English, an “intuition” is something somewhere between a judgment call 
and a hunch, not based on a conscious reason. In cognitive psychology, the term has 
been used to mean something like, an intuitive as opposed to counterintuitive judgment, 
what seems like the reasonable thing to say about something given just the superficial 
facts at hand (Wisniewski 1998), or instinctive “sentiments and preferences” (Shafir 
1998, p. 59).
But the term has a special use in contemporary philosophy (nearly irrelevant to what 
Kant meant by it). First and foremost, intuitions are about cases, actual or hypotheti-
cal—Gettier examples, moral situations, particular sets of sentences. A first pass might 
be to call an intuition a verdictive judgment on a case, not consciously based on infer-
ence or on any other particular reason. But such a characterization would already be 
controversial.
Plantinga (1993, p. 105) speaks of “finding yourself utterly convinced that the propo-
sition in question is true . . . [, and that it] is not only true, but could not have been 
false.” That is consistent with an intuition’s being a judgment, but Bealer (1998) and 
BonJour (1998) question Plantinga’s assumption that intuiting is a type of believing. 
Rather, Bealer calls it an intellectual seeming, “a sui generis, irreducible . . . propositional 
attitude that occurs episodically” (p. 207). BonJour actually assimilates it to perception 
or apprehending, a matter of “seeing” that a proposition is necessary; the proposition 
appears to be necessarily true. BonJour (2001, 2005) moves even further in the percep-
tual direction, maintaining that intuitions are not propositional at all but are more like 
perceptual sensations. As with optical illusions, something X can insuperably continue 
to seem or appear F to us even though we do not believe that X is F, and even when we 
know that X is not F. Sosa (1998) points out that when we accept a particular solution 
to an enduring paradox such as the Liar or the Sorites, rejecting the relevant premise 
does not make the corresponding intuition go away.
But Plantinga’s and BonJour’s common focus on the necessity of a proposition as the 
object of an intuition is unacceptably restrictive: though we do have modal intuitions, 
and perhaps intuitions of some types do have as their contents the necessity of some 

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
814
proposition, there is no reason to think that a moral intuition or a syntactic one takes 
that form. (Someone might argue that in the moral case, what is intuited to be necessary 
is the conditional from the facts of the case to the moral verdict, and in the syntactic 
case the conditional from the sentence’s consisting of its particular string of words to 
the grammaticality judgment, but (a) this is not the phenomenology in either case, and 
(b) to say that either conditional was necessary would be at best controversial in the 
first place.)
Intuitions, then, are intellectual seemings-true. (Williamson (2007) grants this, but 
offers a deflationary account of it in turn: “For myself, I am aware of no intellectual 
seeming beyond my conscious inclination to believe” (p. 217). Yet, while we might 
agree that every seeming-true is a conscious inclination to believe, the latter condition 
is hardly sufficient for intuitionhood. There are many things I am consciously inclined 
to believe: that my wife is home right now, that there is a pool of water over there in 
the sand, that if the coin has come up heads six times in a row it will almost certainly 
come up tails on the next toss, and that all music departments are snake pits. (Some of 
these I do also actually believe, some not.) But none would qualify as an intuition in the 
philosophers’ sense. Not all are even seemings of any kind.)
2. Intuitions as Evidence
Philosophers treat intuitions as data points, as confirming or supporting some hypotheses 
while at least presumptively refuting others. This suggests that they take intuitions to 
be evidence. And it is important to see that appeal to intuitions is ubiquitous and prob-
ably indispensable in philosophy, if only because philosophical arguments themselves 
are based on deductive and ampliative inferences whose legitimacy is attested only by 
intuition.
In order to assess the claim that intuitions are evidence, we need at least two 
distinctions. First, as is discussed by philosophers of science, not every defense of an 
hypothesis is an evidential one (Achinstein 2001); e.g., one might champion H1 
over H2 on grounds of H1’s explanatory virtues even though the two are supported 
by exactly the same set of evidence. Even if intuitions justify, they might not qualify 
as evidence—especially because even if they are quasi-perceptual, they are not 
perceptual.
Let us waive that issue; it is enough to ask whether intuitions do justify. But here too 
a distinction is needed. “Justify” normally has a veritistic sense, in which to justify a 
claim is to support it as being substantively and factually true. In this sense, antirealists 
about a subject-matter, say, moral or other evaluative judgments, could not grant that 
those can be justified, by intuitions or by anything else. But sophisticated antirealists 
agree that moral judgments can be reasonable or unreasonable, well supported or stupid 
and pigheaded. In a weaker sense, such antirealists agree that moral judgments can be 
justified, say, by the method of reflective equilibrium (sec. 5 below). Rosenberg (1994) 
makes this distinction explicit, arguing that an epistemology of reflective equilibrium 
marks a subject-matter as nonfactual; for questions of substantive fact, harder kinds of 
specifically perceptual evidence are required.
Two further qualifications. First, intuitions come in several different epistemological 
types, and we might expect that they will not afford an entirely uniform treatment. There 
are logical intuitions, such as that the sentence “Alex is beautiful and Bill loves her” 
entails “Bill loves Alex.” Then there are more broadly linguistic-semantical intuitions, 

EPISTEMOLOGY AND THE ROLE OF INTUITIONS
815
such as that “Donald furtively buttered the toast in the bathroom” entails “Donald did 
something furtive in the bathroom” and “Something happened to the toast.” There are 
(arguably) a priori modal intuitions, such as: that what is known must be believed, that 
a speaker cannot refer to a physical object if there is no sort of causal contact between 
the speaker and that object, that abstract entities have no causal powers, that gold could 
have lacked all the stereotypical features associated with gold, and that W.V. Quine 
could not have been a ping-pong ball. And there are the empirically tutored modal 
intuitions called to our attention by Kripke and Putnam: that nothing can be gold with-
out having the atomic number 79, that this very table could not have been made of ice 
instead of the wood it is made of, and so on.
Second, there is a tradition, exemplified in Descartes, of taking certain intuitions to 
be epistemically infallible—e.g., modal intuitions held under carefully self-supervised 
conditions. If intuitions can have that status, then it seems obvious that such intuitions 
can justify, and in a fairly dramatic way. But few contemporary philosophers would claim 
infallibility for moral intuitions, or epistemological ones, or even for many metaphysical 
ones. For one thing, nearly every such intuition has actually been disputed by theorists 
of demonstrable intellect, effort and sincerity; and even intrapersonally, I might change 
my mind about a strong intuition I once had. This is true even of some logical intu-
itions, such as the Law of Excluded Middle or Vel-Introduction. It is possible that some 
intuitions are infallible, say purely conceptual intuitions held by people who fully pos-
sess the relevant concepts and are not distracted or confused by any perturbing mental 
conditions, but this is far from the norm.
(David Chalmers (1996) and Frank Jackson (1998) have disputed the claim made 
above, that intuitions come in different epistemological types, and they have explicitly 
tried to assimilate the alleged merely modal intuitions to species of conceptual ones. 
Their arguments have some attraction, but remain controversial at best; see Lycan 
(2009). Williamson (2007) takes a strongly opposing view: that so-called conceptual 
intuitions are nothing special; they result from ordinary counterfactual thinking as on 
any everyday subject.)
3. Anti-Intuitionism
Before turning to positive proposals as to how intuitions justify, let us survey a few argu-
ments for the flat claim that they cannot.
(i) Harman (1977) argues that a person’s having an intuition is a fact about that person, 
specifically about what is going on in that person’s mind. Consequently, what calls for 
explanation is only the fact that the person has it; and in many cases—notably that of 
moral intuitions—the best explanation does not invoke the intuition’s truth or correct-
ness. (In other cases perhaps it does, but in those, auxiliary factual assumptions will be 
needed; the intuition alone does not justify.)
Lycan (1987, Ch. 11) replies that the term “intuition” displays what Sellars called 
the “-ing”/“-ed” ambiguity: It can be used to mean the intuiting done by the subject, a 
condition of the subject’s mind, or it can mean the intuited, the putative fact that is the 
content or object of the intuiting, e.g., that torturing a helpless cat is wrong. Harman 
has focused on the intuitings, but it is the intuiteds that are the proper explananda for 
(as here) moral theory—just as in science it is the observeds and measureds rather than 
the observings and measurings that are the data.

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
816
(ii) Nonetheless, in many cases the psychological basis of an intuition might be, not 
the possession of a concept and clear and perfect grasp of its boundaries, but merely 
the inability to think of a counterexample. Harman (2003) contends that this inability 
shows nothing except perhaps about the poverty of the theorist’s imagination. He adds 
that we have all had the experience of thinking something unimaginable but then find-
ing upon reflection that we can conceive the thing quite clearly.
Russell (2007) replies that seasoned philosophers have been extensively trained to 
sniff out bare possibilities that novices cannot; moreover, we often have sociological 
evidence that no one else has been able to think of a counterexample either. In such 
cases, the best explanation is still that there are no counterexamples and the intuition 
has identified a necessary truth. Of course, this verdict is defeasible.
(iii) DePaul (1998, p. 299) complains that (1) if intuitions are evidence, they function as 
such through the medium of reflective equilibrium; (2) there is no reason to think that 
that method is truth-conducive; (3) to abandon truth-conduciveness as a requirement 
is in effect to fall back on a coherence theory of justification; but (4) mere coherence 
is too weak a standard for justification. (Evidently DePaul is thinking of justification in 
the strong, veritistic sense.) This concern will be addressed in sec. 6 below.
(iv) Cummins (1998) compares the role of intuitions to that of observations in science, 
and argues at length that all philosophical intuitions are “artifacts,” where an observa-
tion is an artifact if it “carries information about the observational apparatus or process 
rather than about the target” (p. 116), as in a case of optical illusion. Cummins surveys 
some possible sources of intuitions, including folk belief, language, concepts, and tacit 
theories, and argues briefly that each of these collapses into the last: a pre-existing tacit 
theory of the relevant subject-matter. But if intuitions are driven by tacit theories, their 
evidential value is only as good as the theories are reliable, and Cummins maintains 
that our tacit theories are the joint products of evolution and social pressure, which 
make for adaptiveness and effectiveness but not necessarily for accuracy and truth. Our 
intuitions reveal more about our coping strategies than they do about the world itself. 
(Kornblith (1998) agrees that intuitions arise from tacit theories and that they have 
value only so far as those theories are reliable, but unlike Cummins he opines that the 
theories are often likely to be true.)
Replies: First, no firm believer in determinate concepts and conceptual truth will be 
convinced by Cummins’ quick Quinean assimilation of conceptual intuitions to fallible 
tacit theory. Second, even if our tacit theories are inaccurate, it does not follow that 
intuitions generated by them are evidentially worthless; it means only that appeals to 
such intuitions should not be given a great deal of weight. Perhaps this varies with the 
type of intuition: Aesthetic intuitions, perhaps, fall at Cummins’ end of the scale, as our 
aesthetic sense is not likely to have been designed for accurate mapping of the world. 
It is a little harder to see how logical intuitions are merely adaptive and not adaptive 
because truth-preserving, though we should not dismiss the former possibility.
(v) The point is often made that intuitions are malleable, in some cases highly so. 
White (1989) presents an ingenious set of examples to show that our intuitions about 
personal identity through time vary radically depending on which of two different 
(though equivalent) ways in which a case is described. Shafir (1998) similarly argues 
that preference orderings shift with description of the options involved.

EPISTEMOLOGY AND THE ROLE OF INTUITIONS
817
When intuitions shift in this dramatic way, obviously their evidential value is weak 
or negligible. But (a) under explicit reflection on the different descriptions, they might 
stabilize; and, more importantly, (b) it has not even been claimed, much less shown, 
that all or even most intuitions are thus malleable. Logical, semantical and syntactic 
intuitions are not, even when they are disputable on other grounds.
Several other arguments have been given against appeal to intuitions, but like (iv) 
and (v), each of them shows at best that the intuitions’ evidential value is small or weak, 
not that it is in principle nil.
For example: Some intuitions are contested; theorists may be deeply split. In such a 
case, of course, the intuition contributes little. Cummins (1998) argues that this is the 
analog of two instances of the same scientific experiment that produce disparate out-
comes; in such an event, no evidence at all can be recorded in the collective logbook; 
the community must await decisive replication of the one result or the other.
But that seems to overdo the analogy between intuitions and scientific observations. 
Science is a public enterprise that operates by institutional rules, one of which is a 
strong standard for publicity based on replicability. It would be pleasant, but mistaken, 
to think that philosophy can aspire to such institutional rigor. True, some intuitions are 
so contested that they should be considered evidentially worthless and banned from 
future use (Swampman comes to mind). But majority intuitions carry some weight how-
ever little, even though there are those who do not share them. Moreover, either of the 
rival theorists might have a shot at explaining away the other’s having, or their failing 
to share, the intuition in question.
However, more dramatically, some intuitions might vary across cultures. Weinberg 
et al. (2001) maintain on the basis of surveys that this is true of the Gettier intuition. 
They present data they have collected, according to which the intuitions of subjects 
from different ethnic groups vary statistically: 60 percent of subjects originally from the 
Indian subcontinent, presented with a Gettier example, judged that its protagonist does 
“really know” as opposed to “only believe.”
Let us ignore doubts about the authors’ experimental procedures (starting with the 
forced choice between “really know” and “only believe”), and suppose that the survey 
results are impeccably produced and robustly replicated: 60 percent of an Asian ethnic 
group firmly reject Gettier and insist, clearheadedly and understanding the terms and 
the issue, that a Gettier subject does know. On that supposition, it seems the most likely 
explanation is that there is a conceptual difference: In the speech of the 60 percent, 
the word we translate as “know” really does mean just justified true belief; it thus differs 
from “know” itself. (It would be interesting to go on to ask those subjects whether they 
see any important difference between the two kinds of “knowers,” the ordinary and the 
Gettiered. Perhaps they would stigmatize the Gettier victims in some way for which 
there is no simple convenient expression. Or, less likely, they would see no important 
difference, and simply have no stronger conception of successful cognition.) Anglo-
American philosophers could not then claim to be explicating a concept universally 
possessed. But, so far as has been shown, the Gettier intuition would nonetheless have 
constituted evidence bearing on the structure of our own concept. (For a fuller response 
to Weinberg et al., see Sosa 2006.)
Weatherson (2003) argues that the evidential value of an intuition, even a very strong 
one, is so slight that it can be ignored in the interest of smooth and elegant theory. Thus, 
e.g., despite the persistence of the Gettier intuition we should continue to maintain 
that knowledge is merely justified true belief and insist that Gettier victims do know.

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
818
4. Intuitions and Reliability
Reliabilism remains the dominant epistemology of our day, and so we must ask whether 
we should suppose that intuitions are produced by reliable cognitive processes, or that 
they reliably indicate states of the universe or the pluriverse. (This question is problem-
atic when an intuition purports to deliver a necessary truth; any such intuition that is in 
fact correct would eo ipso be reliable in the metaphysical sense.)
We have seen that Cummins and Kornblith appeal to reliability, whether negatively 
or positively. Goldman and Pust (1998) simply assume that if intuitions are to serve as 
a “basic evidential source,” they must be reliably connected to the truth (p. 180); the 
authors grant that intuitions can play that role, so long as all they are taken to be evi-
dence for is the structure of concepts in the psychological sense of that term.
But it is George Bealer (1987, 1996a, 1996b, 1998) and Ernest Sosa (1998, 2007) 
who go out of their way to build a positive reliabilist case for the use of intuitions in 
obtaining a priori knowledge. Sosa (1998, pp. 262–3) offers an argument reminiscent 
of Descartes’ bootstrapping of the cogito into a vindication of clarity and distinctness 
as guides to the truth: We do take ourselves to know some propositions on the basis of 
intuition (that Ampersand-Elimination is valid, that “The boy hit the colorful ball” is 
grammatical, that everything is identical with itself). At the very least these beliefs are 
justified. It “must be more than a coincidence” that we are right about them; it is fair to 
say that we would not be believing them if they were not true. But all that justifies them 
is intuition. Therefore, intuition must to some degree track the truth, even if we do not 
understand its mechanism. Sosa points out that similar arguments can be, and are, made 
for the faculties of basic sense perception and introspection. (I know of no theorist who 
believes that there is a distinctive faculty for intuition in the present sense.)
Bealer goes a bit deeper. He argues at some length that intuitions “are evidence,” 
indeed a basic source of evidence, and then he asks how that fact might be explained. 
(Sosa (2007) also adverts to explanatory considerations.) Bealer surveys several poten-
tial explanations, and rejects all but one: “modal reliabilism,” the claim that there is a 
“strong modal tie between [intuition’s] deliverances and the truth” (1998, p. 216). (The 
tie is not infallible, nor would it hold for any very complex proposition or outside an 
appropriately narrow range of subject-matter.)
Bealer adds a further argument (1998, sec. III): He focuses on the notion of “deter-
minate” (full, perfect) concept possession, and offers an analysis of it. According to 
the analysis, to possess a concept determinately just is to have corresponding intuitions 
that track the truth, assuming an absence of cognitive perturbation. Bealer continues 
to assume that truth-tracking justifies; so, for anyone who possesses a concept determi-
nately, the corresponding intuitions are evidence. (See also Goldman 2007.)
Of course, many epistemologists are not reliabilists at all, and they will remain entirely 
unmoved by the arguments surveyed in this section. Perhaps more to the point, it is 
incongruous to hold intuitions up to the bar of reliability, because their natural home 
has always been in the methodology of reflective equilibrium, a coherentist method. To 
that we now turn.
5. Intuitions and Reflective Equilibrium
The method was introduced by Goodman (1955) and developed by Rawls (1971). It 
is a way of systematizing our intuitions on a given topic—originally, in Goodman, our 

EPISTEMOLOGY AND THE ROLE OF INTUITIONS
819
intuitions about the validity of deductive inferences and the probity of inductive ones. 
It consists in taking our original intuitions about particular cases, formulating rules 
or generalizations that attempt to capture them, testing the further predictions of the 
proposed rules, accepting some, rejecting others, revising the rules, and most impor-
tantly, abandoning original intuitions when they stand in the way of major gains in 
explanatory coherence for the system as a whole. Nothing, neither an initial intuition 
nor a rule, is treated as unrevisable. Reflective equilibrium itself is achieved (if ever) 
when the system settles into a stable configuration high in coherence and there is 
no net pressure to revise in any direction. (For fuller description and discussion, see 
Daniels 2003/2008.) The resulting beliefs are justified, it is held, because every one 
has its place in an explanatory web; every one is in principle answerable to every 
other one; and each is able to resist challenge by drawing support from the system as a 
whole.
As a description of deductive logic and inductive logic, this is instantly recognizable 
(though closely allied considerations such as the fit between proof-theoretic derivabil-
ity and model-theoretic semantics play a role also). It also fits linguistic theory very 
well, and can readily be seen in much of epistemology. But if anything, the method is 
now more popularly associated with ethics and moral philosophy. In one style of theoriz-
ing (contrasting sharply with the Kantian a priori deduction of moral principles from 
Ur-concepts), moral intuitions are systematized, and moral theories built, in much the 
same way as are logical and syntactic theories.
Practitioners distinguish between “narrow” reflective equilibrium, as just described, 
and “wide” reflective equilibrium, in which a more diverse range of beliefs are con-
sulted. Moral intuitions and moral rules alike might be brought into confrontation with, 
e.g., theories of human nature, general theories of rationality, relevant epistemology, 
relevant metaphysics, psychology, and even neuroscience. As always, the goal is the 
highest possible degree of explanatory coherence among all those.
In sec. 3 above we heard DePaul maintain that coherence of this sort is too weak a 
standard for justification, at least for veritistic justification. Evidently he is alluding to 
standard objections to coherentist epistemologies, particularly those that apply directly 
to reflective equilibrium. Two in particular come to mind.
First, the method assumes that a moral intuition carries at least some initial evidential 
weight, even though the intuition might later be marginalized or thrown out entirely. 
Some theorists dispute this, notably our more skeptical reliabilists such as Cummins. 
Brandt (1979) complains against Rawls that if the intuitions we begin with have no 
“initial credibility,” which he believes they do not, they cannot then acquire justifica-
tion merely by being brought to cohere with each other.
Second, Stich (1988, 1990) and others have complained that reflective equilibrium 
is an objectionably conservative method, privileging what we already believe and in 
effect insisting that other views be brought into line with that. And some theorists fear 
a kind of relativism: Practitioners who begin with sharply different sets of initial intu-
itions might converge to different equilibrium states, with nothing to choose between 
them. Indeed, a lunatic whose initial intuitions are bizarre could bring them into reflec-
tive equilibrium with other loony things s/he believes, but that would not lend any 
justification to any of the resulting set.
As noted, these objections are special cases of standard anti-coherentist arguments in 
epistemology. Such arguments have been rebutted by coherentists.

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
820
6. Coherentism Defended
Suppose one champions some explanatory coherentist (portmanteau’d “explanation-
ist”) sort of epistemology generally; that is, one maintains that most of our beliefs are 
justified by their plausibly explaining other things we believe, and indeed that all justifi-
cation is explanationist (Harman 1965, 1986; Quine and Ullian 1970; Lycan 1987).
Then one faces a general version of the first objection to reflective equilibrium (Lehrer 
1974, Ch. 7; Plantinga 1993): Because explanation is asymmetric and on pain of regress, 
one must ultimately have some “explained unexplainers” as Lehrer calls them, there 
must be some data propositions that are not themselves justified by explaining more 
primitive data in their turn. Yet an explanatory hypothesis is justified by the data it 
explains only if the data propositions are themselves justified, and so those data propo-
sitions must be justified in some way other than by their explaining anything. But the 
alternative is that the data propositions are justified by themselves being explained; and 
they can be so justified only if the explaining hypotheses are themselves justified, and so 
there seems nowhere for justification to get an initial foothold. So how does the whole 
explanatory enterprise get started in the first place?
Lycan (1987, Ch. 8) holds that the explained unexplainers are justified by a par-
ticular application of the “Principle of Credulity,” which is, “Accept at the outset each 
of those things that seems to be true.” At any given time we involuntarily find our-
selves being seemed to in certain ways, typically though not invariably leading to initial 
belief—at least those produced by perception and by memory, though the Principle 
makes no appeal to those faculties per se as justifying. Call such unconsidered beliefs 
“spontaneous” beliefs; they are mostly about our immediate environment, about past 
events, perhaps about our own mental states, and probably more. Now, since all their 
contents are things that seem true to us, the Principle of Credulity tacks those proposi-
tions in place long enough for them to serve as data for explanation. And once they are 
justly available for explaining, most will soon acquire the kinds of coherence that are 
constituted by a proposition’s being explained. (A minority will not, and will be thrown 
out almost immediately.)
But why should anyone accept the Principle of Credulity? Should it not rather be 
called the “Principle of Credulousness”? As Lehrer observes, any Reidian “innocent 
until proven guilty” principle of this kind stops sounding like just plain good sense as 
soon as one considers cases in which very good or very bad consequences hang on the 
actual truth-value of the belief in question.
Nonetheless, the Principle is defensible; it is a consequence of the more general char-
acteristically explanationist claim that conservativeness, as Quine and Ullian call it 
and as they argue, is a theoretical virtue: Hypothesis H1 will and should be preferred to 
H2 if H1 fits better with what we already believe. If this in its turn sounds dogmatic or 
bigoted, notice that, inescapably, we never even consider competing hypotheses that 
would strike us as grossly implausible—invisible alien invaders from the planet Werdna, 
violations of laws of nature, and such. Granted, epistemic conservatism is itself contro-
versial and in need of defense against those who find it unmotivated, arbitrary, politically 
disgusting and the like; for such defense, see Sklar (1975) and Lycan (1987, Chs. 7, 8). 
The key contention is that: Whatever epistemic or justifying status inheres in the other 
standard pragmatic theoretical virtues—simplicity, testability, fruitfulness, power, and 
the like—conservativeness shares that same status. (Some philosophers have doubted 
whether any of the pragmatic virtues eo ipso justifies beliefs at all, but the present point 

EPISTEMOLOGY AND THE ROLE OF INTUITIONS
821
is that whether or not the other virtues have that power, conservativeness stands or falls 
with the rest of them.)
If we can agree that the Principle of Credulity is a correct epistemological norm, 
i.e., that appearances are innocent until at least some slight reason is given for suspecting 
them guilty, then there is a very simple alternative explanation of the evidential status 
of intuitions. Intuitions are seemings-true. By the Principle of Credulity, therefore, they 
are evidence. There is no need to ask what produces them, or for any bold modal claims 
(even ones as cautious as Bealer’s), or for any weird connection between intuitions and 
truth. For those reasons, the explanationist account of intuitions’ being evidence is at 
least simpler, more straightforward, and considerably less problematic than reliabilist 
ones.
What of the conservatism/relativism charge? It would be idle to deny that sometimes 
a philosopher evinces a truly weird set of intuitions, and with ingenuity is able to ground 
a whole coherent philosophical theory on it.
As before, this complaint is a special case of a more general objection to coherent-
isms; but here I doubt that standard replies to the latter will serve (Lycan 1996). Rather, 
we may return to Cummins’ concern for intersubjectivity (sec. 3 above). Philosophy 
is a communal discipline, and it matters whether one’s intuitions are widely shared. If 
the weirdo’s intuitions are shared by virtually no one, then, as argued above, they have 
negligible justifying power
7. Empirical Approaches
The recent industry, “experimental philosophy” (Knobe and Nichols 2008), has been at 
work testing the epistemological intuitions of ordinary subjects as opposed to those of 
professional philosophers. Weinberg et al. (2001), addressed above, was a leading early 
example; for discussion of it and more recent work, see “Experimental Epistemology,” 
Chapter 73 in this volume.
Some cognitive scientists have begun investigating the psychological foundations 
of moral intuitions, with interesting and controversial results; see, for example, Haidt 
(2001) and Greene (2007).
References
Achinstein, P. (2001). The Book of Evidence (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Bealer, G. (1987). “The Philosophical Limits of Scientific Essentialism,” in J.E. Tomberlin (ed.), Philosophical 
Perspectives 1: Metaphysics (Atascadero, CA: Ridgeview Publishing), 289–365.
Bealer, G. (1996a). “A Priori Knowledge and the Scope of Philosophy,” Philosophical Studies 81: 121–42.
Bealer, G. (1996b). “On the Possibility of Philosophical Knowledge,” in J.E. Tomberlin (ed.), Philosophical 
Perspectives 10: Metaphysics (Atascadero, CA: Ridgeview Publishing), 1–34.
Bealer, G. (1998). “Intuition and the Autonomy of Philosophy,” in DePaul and Ramsey (1998).
BonJour, L. (1998). In Defense of Pure Reason (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
BonJour, L. (2001). “Précis” and “Replies,” in a Book Symposium on BonJour (1998), Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research 63: 625–31, 673–98.
BonJour, L. (2005). “In Defense of the A Priori,” in M. Steup and E. Sosa (eds.), Contemporary Debates in 
Epistemology (Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing).
Brandt, R. (1979). A Theory of the Good and the Right (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Chalmers, D. (1996). The Conscious Mind (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Cummins, R. (1998). “Reflection on Reflective Equilibrium,” in DePaul and Ramsey (1998).
Daniels, N. (2003/2008). “Reflective Equilibrium, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2008 Edition), 
E.N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2008/entries/reflective-equilibrium/>.

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
822
DePaul, M. (1998). “Why Bother with Reflective Equilibrium?,” in DePaul and Ramsey (1998).
DePaul, M., and W. Ramsey (1998). Rethinking Intuition (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield).
Goldman, A. (2007). “Philosophical Intuitions: Their Target, Their Source, and Their Epistemic Status,” 
Grazer Philosophische Studien 74: 1–25.
Goldman, A., and J. Pust (1998). “Philosophical Theory and Intuitional Evidence,” in DePaul and Ramsey 
(1998).
Goodman, N. (1955). “The New Riddle of Induction,” in Fact, Fiction and Forecast (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press).
Greene, J.D. (2007). “Why are VMPFC Patients more Utilitarian?: A Dual-Process Theory of Moral 
Judgment Explains,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 11: 322–3.
Haidt, J. (2001). “The Emotional Dog and Its Rational Tail: A Social Intuitionist Approach to Moral 
Judgment,” Psychological Review 108: 814–34.
Harman, G. (1965). “The Inference to the Best Explanation,” The Philosophical Review 74: 88–95.
Harman, G. (1977). The Nature of Morality (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Harman, G. (1986). Change in View (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Harman, G. (2003). “The Future of the A Priori,” in Philosophy in America at the Turn of the Century 
(American Philosophical Association Centennial Supplement to the Journal of Philosophical Research). 
(Charlottesville, VA: Philosophy Documentation Center.)
Jackson, F. (1998). From Metaphysics to Ethics (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Knobe, J., and S. Nichols (2008). Experimental Philosophy (New York: Oxford University Press).
Kornblith, H. (1998). “The Role of Intuition in Philosophical Inquiry: An Account with No Unnatural 
Ingredients,” in DePaul and Ramsey (1998).
Lehrer, K. (1974). Knowledge (Oxford: Clarendon Press).
Lycan, W.G. (1987). Judgment and Justification (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Lycan, W.G. (1996). “Plantinga and Coherentisms,” in J. Kvanvig (ed.), Warrant and Contemporary 
Epistemology (Totowa, NJ: Rowman & Littlefield.)
Lycan, W.G. (2009). “Serious Metaphysics: Frank Jackson’s Defense of Conceptual Analysis,” in I. 
Ravenscroft (ed.), Minds, Worlds and Conditionals: Essays in Honour of Frank Jackson (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press).
Plantinga, A. (1993). Warrant and Proper Function (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Quine, W.V., and J.S. Ullian (1970). The Web of Belief (New York: Random House).
Rawls, J. (1971). A Theory of Justice (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press).
Rosenberg, J.F. (1994). Beyond Formalism (Philadelphia: Temple University Press).
Russell, B. (2007). “A Priori Justification and Knowledge,” The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (2007 
Edition), E.N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/apriori/>.
Sosa, E. (1998). “Minimal Intuition,” in DePaul and Ramsey (1998).
Sosa, E. (2006). “A Defense of the Use of Intuitions in Philosophy,” in M. Bishop and D. Murphy (eds.), Stich 
and His Critics (Oxford: Basil Blackwell).
Sosa, E. (2007). “Intuitions: Their Nature and Epistemic Efficacy,” in Grazer Philosophische Studien, special 
issue: C. Beyer and A. Burri (eds.), “Philosophical Knowledge: Its Possibility and Scope” (Amsterdam: 
Rodopi).
Shafir, E. (1998). “Philosophical Intuitions and Cognitive Mechanisms,” in DePaul and Ramsey (1998).
Sklar, L. (1975). “Methodological Conservatism,” The Philosophical Review 84: 374–400.
Stich, S.P. (1988). “Reflective Equilibrium, Analytic Epistemology and the Problem of Cognitive Diversity,” 
Synthese 74: 391–413.
Stich, S.P. (1990). The Fragmentation of Reason (Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books/MIT Press).
Weatherson, B. (2003). “What Good are Counterexamples?” Philosophical Studies 115: 1–31.
Weinberg, J., S. Stich and S. Nichols (2001). “Normativity and Epistemic Intuitions,” Philosophical Topics, 
29: 429–60.
White, S. (1989). “Metapsychological Relativism and the Self,” Journal of Philosophy 86: 298–323.
Williamson, T. (2007). The Philosophy of Philosophy (Oxford: Basil Blackwell).
Wisniewski, E.J. (1998). “The Psychology of Intuition,” in DePaul and Ramsey (1998).

73
EXPERIMENTAL
EPISTEMOLOGY
Jonathan M. Weinberg
I. What is Experimental Philosophy?
In recent years a growing number of philosophers have begun to deploy some of the 
methods of the sciences as a component of their philosophical methods. Although this 
chapter is particularly concerned with experimental epistemology, the work so far in this 
area shares a number of traits with experimental philosophy on the whole, including:
• 
a primary concern with intuitions in large part paralleling traditional analytic philo-
sophical practice, while rejecting the epistemic authority of the armchair;
• 
use of the methods of social psychology, in particular in the form of surveys;
• 
almost all work involves contrasting either different versions of the surveys them-
selves, varying in the content of the cases, or their framing, or their order; or look-
ing for differences across different subject populations;
• 
the predominant statistical tools and norms are also taken from social psychology, 
such as null hypothesis testing, with p<0.05 being the critical threshold for signifi-
cance; the number of subjects tends towards the few-dozen to the low hundreds;
• 
a generally exploratory attitude towards the empirical findings themselves, and 
about the philosophical conclusions to be drawn from them.
Some philosophers take the judgments as revealed in the experiments to provide 
evidence for or against substantive philosophical theses, either for first-order epistemo-
logical claims or at least for our folk epistemological theories, perhaps without going 
on to endorse those folk theories; following a usage suggested (in unpublished work) 
by Farid Masrour, call this the positive program. Others, however, do not seek to use the 
experimental results as a basis for any such claims, and aim instead only to undermine 
the practice of appealing to intuitions in the first place; call this the negative program.
II. The Positive Program
A. Contextualism Under Scrutiny
The bulk of work conducted in the positive program of experimental epistemology 
has been concerned with debates about contextualism and various forms of sensitive 
invariantism. It is an inviting target, as the various accounts at play in the literature 

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
824
make clear predictions about what factors should or should not be expected to produce 
different patterns in ordinary judgments about the application of “knows.” Of particular 
interest have been versions of the “Bank Cases” (DeRose 1992; Stanley 2005; Schaffer 
2006). Joshua May et al. (2010) deploy four such cases, contrasting along the dimen-
sions of the stakes involved and whether any uneliminated alternatives have been made 
explicitly salient:
Low Stakes-No Alternative (LS-NA)
Hannah and her wife Sarah are driving home on a Friday afternoon. They 
plan to stop at the bank on the way home to deposit their paychecks. It is not 
important that they do so, as they have no impending bills. As they drive past 
the bank, they notice that the lines inside are very long, as they often are on 
Friday afternoons. Hannah notes that she was at the bank two weeks before on 
a Saturday morning, and it was open. Realizing that it isn’t very important that 
their paychecks are deposited right away, Hannah says, “I know the bank will 
be open tomorrow. So we can deposit our paychecks tomorrow morning.”
High Stakes-No Alternative (HS-NA)
Hannah and her wife Sarah are driving home on a Friday afternoon. They plan 
to stop at the bank on the way home to deposit their paychecks. Since they 
have an impending bill coming due, and very little in their account, it is very 
important that they deposit their paychecks by Saturday. As they drive past 
the bank, they notice that the lines inside are very long, as they often are on 
Friday afternoons. Hannah notes that she was at the bank two weeks before on 
a Saturday morning, and it was open. Hannah says, “I know the bank will be 
open tomorrow. So we can deposit our paychecks tomorrow morning.”
Low Stakes-Alternative (LS-A)
Hannah and her wife Sarah are driving home on a Friday afternoon. They 
plan to stop at the bank on the way home to deposit their paychecks. It is not 
important that they do so, as they have no impending bills. As they drive past 
the bank, they notice that the lines inside are very long, as they often are on 
Friday afternoons. Hannah notes that she was at the bank two weeks before on 
a Saturday morning, and it was open. Sarah points out that banks do change 
their hours. Still, realizing that it isn’t very important that their paychecks are 
deposited right away, Hannah says, “I know the bank will be open tomorrow. 
So we can deposit our paychecks tomorrow morning.”
High Stakes-Alternative (HS-A)
Hannah and her wife Sarah are driving home on a Friday afternoon. They plan 
to stop at the bank on the way home to deposit their paychecks. Since they 
have an impending bill coming due, and very little in their account, it is very 
important that they deposit their paychecks by Saturday. As they drive past 
the bank, they notice that the lines inside are very long, as they often are on 
Friday afternoons. Hannah notes that she was at the bank two weeks before on 
a Saturday morning, and it was open. Sarah points out that banks do change 
their hours. Hannah says, “I know the bank will be open tomorrow. So we can 
deposit our paychecks tomorrow morning.”

EXPERIMENTAL EPISTEMOLOGY
825
May et al. claim that a relevant-alternatives epistemology (like Schaffer’s) would pre-
dict differences between the NA and A versions, with less knowledge attributed in the 
A versions. A pragmatic encroachment epistemology (like Stanley’s) would predict dif-
ferences between the LS and HS versions, with less knowledge attributed in the HS ver-
sions. Their aim is to canvass the folk, and see to what extent the attributions of the folk 
do or do not line up with these epistemologies’ predictions. They found the following 
mean responses, on a 7-point Likert scale in which 1 represented a strong disagreement 
with a knowledge attribution to Hannah, 7 strong agreement with such an attribution, 
and 4 a neutral response: LS-NA = 5.33, LS-A = 5.30, HS-NA = 5.07, and HS-A = 
4.60. The difference between the NA and A versions were not significant, which seems 
problematic for the relevant-alternatives view.
Their findings were also inconsistent with the standardly reported pattern judg-
ments in the LS and HS versions. The typical attributions in the literature would 
attribute knowledge in the LS version, and deny it in the HS version. But May et 
al.’s subjects generally attributed knowledge in both cases—that is, their means were 
statistically above the 4.0 value for a neutral response. However, they did find a differ-
ence in that the subjects in the LS groups were on the whole more enthusiastic in their 
attributions of knowledge than were the subjects in the HS groups. They interpret 
this as a disconfirming finding for claims of stakes-sensitivity, though here we run into 
one of the still-unsettled methodological questions in experimental philosophy: how 
ought we interpret mean responses of groups of subjects? We traditionally speak fairly 
unequivocally of the intuition about a particular case, a yea or a nay, and if we know 
what predictions different epistemologies are supposed to make about the case, then 
we can simply tell whether it is or is not a problem case for which epistemologies. But 
what does it mean if, say, 30 percent of subjects withhold knowledge, and 70 percent 
attribute it—what is ‘the’ intuition in that case? The idea of ‘majority rule’ seems 
tempting, but it is unclear on what basis the 30 percent minority can really be ruled 
wrong just in virtue of their minority status. Relativism might be no more tempting 
here, either.
Positive experimental epistemology might succeed best at evaluating, not what ‘the’ 
folk intuition is about particular cases—there just might not be any fact to be reported 
in such a form—but, rather, what factors do or do not make a difference in folk intu-
itions. So if proponents of stakes-sensitivity are willing to yield authority on the par-
ticular cases that have been their stock-in-trade, they might yet find some confirmation 
in May et al.’s findings.
Several other researchers have also been examining folk intuitions for contextual-
ist/sensitivist effects, and thus far they have fairly consistently found no evidence of 
substantial stakes-sensitivity. Wesley Buckwalter (2010) also used variants on the bank 
cases, and uncovered neither a stakes-based difference nor a relevant-alternatives dif-
ference. Adam Feltz and Chris Zarpentine (manuscript) used a different sort of case, 
involving an agent crossing over a rickety-looking bridge. They report a very weak 
stakes effect, and as with May et al., all of the mean scores were on the positive side 
of neutral. Their findings are suggestive of what they call an “attributer effect,” in that 
their data were consistent with the hypothesis that people are more reluctant to agree 
with third-person knowledge attributions than first-person attributions. Similarly, Ram 
Neta and Mark Phelan (manuscript) used a different sort of case, concerning an agent’s 
knowledge of whether they were on the correct city street, and found no stakes differ-
ences in judgments about how confident an agent should be.

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
826
That the data thus far have been so uniform should not lead one to infer that contex-
tualism in any of its various forms has been anything liked disproved. But the results thus 
far do seem at least to impose that much of a burden on any contextualists who expect 
their theory to reflect ordinary usage.
B. Knowledge-How
Another epistemological question that has received recent experimental attention is 
that of intellectualism about knowledge-how. John Bengson et al. (2009) examined a 
number of hypotheses about the relationship between attributions of knowledge-how 
and attributions of ability, in particular “neo-Ryleanism”: the claim that the ability to 
do X is necessary and sufficient for knowing how to do X. The necessary sub-condition 
they term “anti-intellectualism,” and the sufficient, “praxism.” Their materials included 
scenarios like the following:
Pat has been a ski instructor for 20 years, teaching people how to do complex 
ski stunts. He is in high demand as an instructor, since he is considered to be 
the best at what he does. Although an accomplished skier, he has never been 
able to do the stunts himself. Nonetheless, over the years he has taught many 
people how to do them well. In fact, a number of his students have won medals 
in international competitions and competed in the Olympic games. (391)
Subjects were asked both whether Pat knows how to do the stunts, and whether he is 
able to do them. “Contrary to anti-intellectualism, the vast majority (81%) judged both 
that Pat knows how to perform the stunts and that he is unable to do them” (392). They 
also did an experimental test of “praxis,” using the following scenario (395–6):
Sally, who is an inexperienced hiker with extremely poor vision, decides to go 
snow shoeing through the mountains in February. As she is hiking along, an 
avalanche suddenly starts and a rush of snow sweeps down the mountain and 
over Sally. Sally, however, mistakenly takes the snow to be a body of water (she 
believes incorrectly that a nearby damn has broken) and so she responds by 
making rapid swimming motions. Sally aims to swim through the water towards 
the surface. Though Sally has never heard of this fact before, making swimming 
motions is a way to escape avalanches. As a result of her lucky mistake, Sally is 
able to escape from the avalanche.
Subjects were asked both whether Sally knows how to escape avalanches and whether 
she is able to do so. Since the answer to the latter question is rather explicitly provided 
in the scenario, praxism predicts that subjects will generally respond in the affirmative 
to both questions. However, 75 percent of the subjects attributed to Sally the ability, but 
not the know-how. The remaining subjects were evenly split between those who with-
held both attributions, and those who made the praxism-predicted double attributions.
In short, Bengson et al.’s results indicate that folk patterns of knowledge-how and 
ability attributions are not particularly coupled in the way that neo-Ryleanism would 
predict. Using a further set of questions, however, they also found that subjects in these 
studies did make a link between knowledge-how and understanding, in particular, under-
standing how to perform the action in question. They take their results to be strong 

EXPERIMENTAL EPISTEMOLOGY
827
prima facie evidence for a rejection of neo-Ryleanism, at least as an account of folk 
attributive practices (398).
C. Epistemic Side-Effects
The positive experimental work described thus far has taken on existing epistemologi-
cal debates, and the various predictions of the different positions in those debates, and 
has deployed experimental methods to apply some new evidential pressure on them. 
That is, their hypotheses about which sorts of cases will or will not produce similar 
intuitions have all come from the non-experimental literature. But much of the work 
in experimental philosophy more generally has put into play novel hypotheses—ones 
unanticipated in the armchair-produced literature—as to what sorts of patterns might 
be found in intuitions about cases. One recent research project in positive experimental 
epistemology has attempted to do just that, by exploring whether there are epistemic 
parallels to a now well-documented pattern of intuitions in the literature on agency, the 
‘side-effect effect’, or ‘Knobe effect’ (Knobe 2003, 2006). The original version of the 
side-effect effect concerns attributions of “intentionally” to consequences of an action 
that are foreseen but not in themselves desired: when those consequences are evaluated 
by subjects as positive, subjects are on balance less willing to say that the agents brought 
about those consequences intentionally, but when those consequences are evaluated 
as negative, subjects are much more willing to say that the agents brought about those 
consequences intentionally.
James Beebe and Wesley Buckwalter (forthcoming) hypothesized that a similar effect 
might be found using materials drawn from epistemology instead of action theory, and 
presented subjects with a similar pair of cases:
The vice-president of a company went to the chairman of the board and said, 
“We are thinking of starting a new program. We are sure that it will help us 
increase profits, and it will also help/harm the environment.” The chairman of 
the board answered, “I don’t care at all about helping/harming the environment. 
I just want to make as much profit as I can. Let’s start the new program.” They 
started the new program. Sure enough, the environment was helped/harmed. Did 
the chairman know that the new program would help/harm the environment?
They found that subjects in the “harm” condition were more likely to attribute knowl-
edge to the chairman than were the subjects in the “help” condition. Roughly speaking, 
the mean response to the “help” condition was a bit less than +1 on a 7-point Likert 
scale of −3 to +3, whereas the mean response to the “harm” condition was a bit above 
+2. The effect was also statistically significant when different subjects were asked to 
answer the question as an all-or-nothing matter, instead of on a scale.
The authors interpret these findings as suggestive of a hitherto-unexamined variety 
of pragmatic encroachment, in which standards of attributing knowledge to an agent 
might be raised or lowered by the moral status of the agent’s actions.
III. The Negative Program
Adherents of the negative program in experimental epistemology seek to dethrone the 
centrality of the appeal to intuitions in philosophical methodology. The primary sort 

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
828
of finding appealed to is that of inappropriate variation: intuitions in some philosophical 
domain D are shown to vary with some factor F which does not itself vary with the facts 
in D.
A. The Main Troublemaking Results
With knowledge, primarily there are two classes of results: ethnicity effects, and order 
effects. Inspired by work like that of Richard Nisbett and his collaborators (e.g., Nisbett 
et al. 2001; Nisbett 2003) that found systematic and surprising cognitive variation 
between East Asian and American/European subjects, Weinberg et al. (2001) looked 
for divergence in attributions of knowledge between Asian- and European-descended 
subjects (all of whom were native English speakers attending college in New Jersey, 
however). One result concerned a version of a Gettier case:
Bob has a friend, Jill, who has driven a Buick for many years. Bob therefore 
thinks that Jill drives an American car. He is not aware, however, that her 
Buick has recently been stolen, and he is also not aware that Jill has replaced it 
with a Pontiac, which is a different kind of American car. Does Bob really know 
that Jill drives an American car, or does he only believe it?
As one might expect, close to 80 percent of subjects of European descent said, as most 
epistemologists surely would, that Bob does not really know. Surprisingly, though, 
slightly over half of the subjects of East Asian descent judged that Bob does really know. 
Following Nisbett, Weinberg et al. hypothesize that this difference might be explained 
by the East Asian judgments being more similarity-based, and less causation-based, than 
corresponding Western judgments.
Weinberg et al. also report an ethnicity-based difference in patterns of answers to a 
range of different “Truetemp”-like cases (Lehrer 1990). Different sets of subjects each 
were given a version of the Truetemp case, one in which the human thermometer abil-
ity is acquired by a freak accident, another in which the ability is implanted by a team 
of well-meaning scientists, and yet another in which the ability is acquired by an entire 
community of people. European-descended subjects showed no differences across the 
three cases, but East Asian subjects were somewhat more willing to attribute knowledge 
in the latter two sorts of cases. This difference might be explainable in terms of the 
cognition of subjects of East Asian descent being more influenced by contextual and 
community factors, again consistent with the cross-cultural findings of psychologists.
Swain et al. (2008) pursued a different line of worry, about not interpersonal varia-
tion of intuitive judgments but intrapersonal stability of those judgments. Each of their 
subjects offered knowledge judgments on the same set of four cases: a Truetemp case 
(the same as used in Weinberg et al.), a fake-barn case, a chemist using the scientific 
information of her profession, and a person making a lucky guess about the flip of a 
coin. The latter two cases were expected to count as clear cases of knowledge and non-
knowledge, respectively. What varied from subject to subject was the order in which 
the cases were presented. Swain et al. hypothesized, based on an earlier pilot study, that 
judgments about the Truetemp case would be sensitive to order, and they indeed found 
that attributions of knowledge, as registered on a 5-point Likert scale, were highest 
when the case followed the coin-flip case; lowest when it followed the chemist case; and 
unaffected by the fake-barn case.

EXPERIMENTAL EPISTEMOLOGY
829
These results support the restrictionist challenge: philosophers ought to restrict, 
perhaps in a radical way, their reliance on such intuitions (Alexander and Weinberg 
2007).
B. The Argument
There is some history of empirically-nonspecific challenges to the philosophical practice 
of appealing to intuitions about cases (e.g., Stich 1990; Cummins 1998). However, the 
nonspecificity of those challenges has meant that they have needed very heavy-duty 
epistemological premises, of a sort that defenders of armchair intuitive practices have 
objected can lead to skeptical conclusions, because the epistemological premise will 
apply to too many other putative sources of evidence, very likely including those that 
the challenger would look to use in her own arguments (Bealer 1992; Pust 2000; D. Sosa; 
2006; Williamson 2007). But experimental philosophy results have a specific empiri-
cal content, so maybe they can succeed with a weaker, more targeted epistemological 
argument—and indeed they had better do so, or else the same sorts of anti-skeptical 
concerns will apply to them (E. Sosa 2006). I will offer two such candidate premises for 
consideration here.
First, one might offer an argument very similar in its basic structure to a classical 
skeptical argument, but in which one distinguishes between merely possible sources of 
error, and what we might call live possibilities of error—possibilities for which we have 
at least some evidence for their actuality, where that evidence must cross some moder-
ate but still nontrivial threshold. Allowing the existence of the merely possible sources 
of error to undermine a source of evidence might well lead to skeptical conclusions, 
but the existence of live possibilities for error present legitimate challenges to a source 
of evidence—challenges that must be met before further appeals to that source can be 
considered legitimate. What the experimental results provide, on this view, is just that 
requisite evidence for the claim that these sorts of errors are a live possibility. Until 
philosophers can demonstrate that their intuitions are actually sufficiently immune to 
such errors, the argument goes, they cannot legitimately rely on them. And it will not 
do to protest, as Ernest Sosa does (2006, 105), that these results only mean that phi-
losophers should simply be careful when using their intuitions, as the restrictionist chal-
lenge reveals just how little we know about what kinds of care are actually required of 
us, if we are to deploy our intuitions responsibly.
A different approach here is to take the experimental results to indicate a kind of 
deficiency not in intuitions in general, but rather in the particular practices that philoso-
phers typically engage in when they deploy such intuitions as premises in what might 
be called the “method of cases.” This approach has the advantage of adopting a more 
restricted target, one that does not obviously include either more ordinary or more 
scientific deployments of intuitions, and which would thus avoid immediately running 
into skeptical dangers. Nonetheless, such an approach would still need to show how 
those dangers do not recur at a later stage of consideration. That is, whatever it is that is 
supposed to be deficient about the “method of cases,” if the same worries can be raised 
about ordinary or scientific uses of intuition—or, for that matter, about perception, 
memory, and the like—then we would again have the unwanted skeptical result. What 
the negative experimental philosopher needs to do, therefore, is to identify a deleteri-
ous epistemic characteristic which does apply to the method of cases, but which does not 
apply to (at least most of) ordinary and scientific evidential practices.

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
830
One proposal for a deleterious epistemic characteristic that can thread this needle 
appeals not to the initial risk of error, but rather to what resources a given evidential 
practice has available in order to mitigate such a risk of error when it arises. That is, we 
can attend not only to how likely a given practice is to make errors in the first place, but 
also how good a job it can do at either removing such errors, or at least minimizing their 
impact on the rest of our theories. We can tolerate the danger of error in, say, ordinary 
uses of perception, precisely because we are reasonably able to monitor for such errors, 
and to correct for or at least quarantine such errors when they arise. To the extent that 
an evidential practice possesses such resources for detecting, correcting, and quarantin-
ing errors as they might arise, let us call such a practice hopeful.
We can thus propose the following candidate for a deleterious epistemic characteris-
tic that might apply to the method of cases, but which does not seem to apply to most 
of our ordinary and scientific evidential practices: hopelessness. What the experimental 
results indicate, and moreover what the surprising nature of those results underscore, is 
just how limited is armchair philosophy’s resources of discerning these particular sorts 
of errors as they might afflict our practices. That these sources of error are live threats 
is perhaps not enough by itself to raise deep worries about armchair philosophical prac-
tice; but that these sources of error are live threats for which we currently possess no good 
means of remedying, might well be.
C. Armchair-Defending Responses
The master argument for the restrictionist challenge thus has three main parts. First, 
there are the experimental results themselves, which at this point in time overwhelm-
ingly concern ‘ordinary’ subjects (typically, but not entirely, university undergraduates). 
In particular, there is the claim that the studies in question reveal a worrisome pattern of 
responses in those subjects, such as ethnic variation or sensitivity to the order of presen-
tation of the cases. Second, there is an ampliative inference from the patterns disclosed 
concerning the ordinary subjects to the predicted occurrence of those patterns in profes-
sional philosophers. Third, there is a metaphilosophical claim that these patterns are 
not truth-tracking, with regard to the philosophical domains in question.
We can thus organize responses to this argument in terms of which step any such 
response is aimed at.
C.1. Direct Empirical Responses
One might object to the experimental philosophers’ findings themselves, or at least 
their interpretations of them, and thereby cut off the negative argument at the knees. 
This has not yet proved a particularly popular strategy, perhaps because philosophers do 
not (yet) generally have the requisite training in experimental methods to undertake 
such critiques. Because of this, what few attempts have been made by philosophers to 
address the empirical findings directly have tended to fail to rise to the general adequacy 
conditions of such critiques—in particular, in proposing a confound to an experimental 
finding, one must both (i) provide some minimal empirical motivation for the confound 
and, moreover, (ii) at least sketch how the proposed confound could actually have pro-
duced the observed data. Kirk Ludwig (2007), for example, suggests that Machery et al.’s 
(2004) subjects might not have been uniformly distinguishing between speaker’s refer-
ence and semantic reference—but he fails to suggest why one should find systematic 

EXPERIMENTAL EPISTEMOLOGY
831
confusions among subjects in that regard, and worse, he does not provide any reason 
why one might expect East Asian and Western subjects to display systematic asymmetry 
in this regard. His proposal thus fails both of those necessary conditions on a proposed 
confound.
Somewhat more successful critiques can be found in Justin Sytsma and Jonathan 
Livengood (2009) and Simon Cullen (2010), who admirably undertake to substantiate 
their critiques with further experimental work of their own. Sytsma and Livengood’s 
own studies indicate that the effect that Machery et al. interpreted as a general differ-
ence in semantic intuitions about cases across East Asian and Western subjects might 
better be understood as a difference in preferred perspective adopted when considering 
those cases. They found that conditions that induce subjects to take on the speaker’s 
perspective (“When John uses the name ‘Gödel,’ does John think he is talking about 
. . .?”) in the scenario led to a substantially higher proportion of those subjects giving the 
“descriptivist” judgment. However, inducing subjects to take on the narrator’s perspec-
tive (“When John uses the name ‘Gödel,’ is he actually talking about . . .?”) produces 
a higher proportion of “Kripkean” judgments. Their results go some distance towards 
providing the empirical motivation lacking in Ludwig’s proposal, and thus succeeding 
on the first, ‘empirical plausibility’ condition on proposing confounds). Nonetheless, 
they do not indicate why this difference should be found asymmetrically across ethnic 
groups, and thus do not yet have a finding that predicts the actual results reported by 
Machery et al.
Similarly, Cullen’s research indicates some ways in which incidental aspects of survey 
design, such as the wording of the instructions or whether a binary or Likert-scale judg-
ment is requested, can substantially influence experimental subjects’ responses, which 
usefully confirms some common-but-untested assumptions. For example, asking sub-
jects whether an agent “really knows” a given proposition generates fewer attributions 
of knowledge than simply asking whether or not an agent knows, simpliciter. He goes 
on to suggest that at least some of the order effects reported by Swain et al. might be 
due to such pragmatic instructional factors. However, as with Sytsma and Livengood, 
he does not quite generate predictions of the overall pattern of results reported by the 
negative experimental philosophers, and thus does not quite manage to propose a real 
confound.
C.2. Blocking the Inference from the Folk to the Philosophers
If one grants for the sake of argument that the experimentalists interpretation of their 
findings are correct then there are at least two ways that one might attempt to block the 
inference from that interpretation to the further claim that philosophers’ intuitions are 
similarly susceptible. First, the intuitions offered by the folk might not have the benefit 
of reflection that philosophers typically devote to their own judgments. Second, the folk 
lack the philosophical expertise that would be reflected in the superior performance of 
trained philosophers in the production of intuitions.
Antti Kaupinnen (2007) has offered an argument along the first of those lines, sug-
gesting that intuitions that are the product of due consideration and reflection on 
the cases will produce robust intuitions that are immune to the sorts of effects studied 
by negative empirical philosophers; similar concerns are offered by S. Matthew Liao 
(2008). That reflection will affect, and in at least some ways improve, intuitive judg-
ments is not a claim that experimental philosophers will want to have to disagree with. 

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
832
One worry about this response, however, is that Kaupinnen needs the stronger claim 
that such reflection will immunize intuition from the sort of variation that experimental 
philosophers have been concerned with. But it is hard to see how, for example, consid-
ered reflection will protect philosophers from any culturally local influences on their 
judgments. Moreover, there are some recent experimental findings indicating that sub-
jects likely to give more thought to their judgments are not, as a matter of fact, shielded 
from effects like the order effects reported by Swain et al. It appears that ordinary sub-
jects high in “need for cognition” (NFC)—a personality trait indicating strong intrinsic 
motivation towards thought and reflection—demonstrate an order effect similar to that 
of the Swain et al. subjects, but in the opposite direction. Sometimes greater reflection 
might aid intuitive judgment; but sometimes it might also lead such judgments astray 
in novel directions. Such findings are not unanticipated in the scientific literature 
(Reber 1993; Gigerenzer et al. 1999; Petty et al. 2001; cf. Bishop 2000; Kornblith 2002, 
chapter 4).
The appeal to philosophical expertise has been by far the most popular response to 
the negative experimental challenge. Timothy Williamson offers the following straight-
forward version of it:
Much of the evidence for cross-cultural variation in judgments on thought 
experiments concerns verdicts by people without philosophical training. Yet 
philosophy students have to learn how to apply general concepts to specific 
examples with careful attention to the relevant subtleties, just as law stu-
dents have to learn how to analyze hypothetical cases. Levels of disagreement 
over thought experiments seem to be significantly lower among fully trained 
philosophers than among novices.
(Williamson 2007, 191; cf. Ludwig 2007)
The truth of such claims to expertise is a complicated matter, and there is a large and 
complex literature on the psychology of expertise that could be brought to bear. But 
it is a literature that needs to be brought to bear. Among the central results of that 
literature is that our untutored sense of where expertise might be expected to develop 
is not actually very accurate—where expertise will or will not develop is not, it seems, 
something we can judge well from the armchair (Camerer and Johnson 1991; Shanteau 
1992). Another result from the research on expertise that should unsettle philosophers’ 
confidence in their status as expert intuiters concerns how narrowly defined most expert 
competences are; for example, medical expertise is highly specific to particular types of 
cases (Feltovich et al. 2006). So philosophers’ manifest expertise in areas such as logic 
does not translate over into any special skill at applying general concepts to specific 
cases (Weinberg et al. forthcoming).
C.3. Relativism/Contextualism
Another avenue of response would be to defend the variation documented by the exper-
imental philosophers as actually truth-tracking. Perhaps the different patterns of attri-
bution simply reflect different extant concepts in different cultural groups, and each 
group’s intuitions are correct for that group’s main epistemic concepts (Goldman 2001; 
Jackson 2001; Lycan 2006). Moreover, if different groups care about different epistemic 
matters, this argument goes, then it is not problematic if their intuitions track different 

EXPERIMENTAL EPISTEMOLOGY
833
sorts of epistemic facts as well. Here, for example, is E. Sosa (2006, 109) responding to 
the Weinberg et al. (2001) data:
I wonder how it is any better than saying to someone who values owning money 
banks that since others mean river banks by ‘banks’ his valuing as he does is 
now in doubt, and that he needs to show how owning money banks is better 
than owning river banks. Why need he suppose that owning money banks is 
better? He just thinks it’s quite good as far as it goes. Maybe owning river banks 
is also good, maybe even better in many cases. And the same would seem rea-
sonable when the commodities are all epistemic. The fact that we value one 
commodity, called ‘knowledge’ or ‘justification’ among us, is no obstacle to our 
also valuing a different commodity, valued by some other community under 
that same label.
Stich (1998, 235) has responded that
While Sosa is baffled by our argument, I am baffled by his bafflement, . . . If a 
Yanomamö intuitively judges that it is morally permissible to kill men who are 
not members of his tribe, take their possessions, rape their wives and enslave 
their children, while I intuitively judge that it is not morally permissible to do 
these things, and if the disagreement can’t be attributed to confusion, then the 
Yanomamö and I are invoking different concepts of moral permissibility. And if 
. . . this case is entirely parallel to the knowledge case, presumably Sosa would 
deny that there is any conflict here.
Philosophers pursuing these lines of response to the restrictionist challenge will need to 
consider whether epistemic relativism is any more acceptable than such radical forms 
of moral skepticism.
Where relativism might be an appropriate kind of response to evidence of varia-
tion across ethnicities, contextualism might similarly seem attractive as a response to 
order effects such as those reported by Swain et al. Confronting subjects with cases in 
which an agent clearly knows might raise the standards for knowledge, whereas con-
fronting them with cases in which an agent clearly fails to know might similarly lower 
those standards. This predicts, therefore, that subjects will attribute more knowledge to 
intermediate sorts of cases such as Truetemp when it is presented right after a coin-flip 
case than when it is presented right after a scientific-knowledge case—which is what 
Swain et al. reported. However, it is not clear how this approach would explain why the 
Truetemp-style case showed this contextual effect but a similarly borderline fake-barn 
case did not; it also cannot accommodate the reverse-direction order effect in high-
NFC subjects.
References
Alexander, J. and Weinberg, J. (2007) “Analytic Epistemology and Experimental Philosophy,” Philosophy 
Compass, 2.1, 56–80.
Bealer, G. (1992) “The Incoherence of Empiricism,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Supplementary 
Volume 66, 99–138.
Beebe, J. and Buckwalter, W. (Forthcoming) “The epistemic side-effect,” Mind and Language.
Bengson, J., Moffet, M., and Wright, J. (2009) “The Folk on Knowing How,” Philosophical Studies 142, 
387–401.

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
834
Bishop, M. (2000) “In Praise of Epistemic Irresponsibility: How Lazy and Ignorant Can You Be?” Synthese 
122, 179–208.
Buckwalter, W. (2010) “Knowledge Isn’t Closed on Saturday: A Study in Ordinary Language,” Review of 
Philosophy and Psychology 1.2, 395–406. 
Camerer, C. F. and Johnson, E. J. (1991) “The process-performance paradox in expert judgment: How can 
experts know so much and predict so badly?” in K. A. Ericsson and J. Smith (eds.), Towards a General 
Theory of Expertise: Prospects and Limits (pp. 195–217). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Cullen, S. (2010) “Survey-Driven Romanticism,” Review of Philosophy and Psychology 1.2, 275–296.
Cummins, R. (1998) “Reflections on Reflective Equilibrium,” in Rethinking Intuition: The Psychology of 
Intuition and its Role in Philosophical Inquiry, ed. M. DePaul and W. Ramsey, Lanham, MD: Rowman and 
Littlefield.
DeRose, K. (1992) “Contextualism and Knowledge Attributions,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 
52, 913–29.
Feltz, A.  and Zarpentine, C. (Unpublished manuscript) “Do You Know More When It Matters Less?”
Feltovich, P. J., Prietula, M. J. and Ericsson, K. A. (2006) “Studies of Expertise from Psychological 
Perspectives,” in K. A. Ericsson, N. Charness, P. Feltovich, and R. R. Hoffman, R. R. (eds.), Cambridge 
Handbook of Expertise and Expert Performance (pp. 39–68). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P., and the ABC Research Group (1999) Simple Heuristics that Make Us Smart. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Goldman, A. (2001) “Replies to Contributors,” Philosophical Topics 17, 131–45.
Kaupinnen, A. (2007) “The Rise and Fall of Experimental Philosophy,” Philosophical Explorations 10, 
95–118.
Knobe, J. (2003) “Intentional Action in Folk Psychology: An Experimental Investigation,” Philosophical 
Psychology 16, 309–23.
——. (2006) “The Concept of Intentional Action: A Case Study in the Uses of Folk Psychology,” Philosophical 
Studies 130, 203–31.
Kornblith, H. (2002) Knowledge and Its Place in Nature. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lehrer, K. (1990) Theory of Knowledge. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Liao, S. M. (2008) “A Defense of Intuitions,” Philosophical Studies 140, 247–62.
Ludwig, K. (2007) “The Epistemology of Thought Experiments: First vs. Third Person Approaches,” Midwest 
Studies in Philosophy 31.1, 128–159.
Lycan, W. (2006) “The Gettier Problem Problem,” in Epistemology Futures, ed. S. Hetherington, Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Machery, E., Mallon, R., Nichols, S., and Stich, S. P. (2004) “Semantics, Cross-cultural Style,” Cognition 
92, 3, B1–B12.
May, J., Sinnott-Armstrong, W., Hull, J. and Zimmerman, A. (2010) “Practical Interests, Relevant 
Alternatives, and Knowledge Attributions: An Empirical Study,” Review of Philosophy and Psychology 1.2, 
265–273.
Murphy, D., and Bishop, M., eds. (2009) Stich and His Critics. Oxford: Blackwell.
Neta, R. and Phelan, M., Unpublished manuscript, “Evidence That Stakes Don’t Matter for Evidence.”
Nisbett, R. (2003) The Geography of Thought: How Asians and Westerners Think Differently . . . and Why. New 
York: Free Press.
——, Kaiping, P., Incheol, C., and Norenzayan, A. (2001) “Culture and Systems of Thought: Holistic Versus 
Analytic Cognition,” Psychological Review 108, 291–310.
Petty, R., Tormala, Z., Hawkins, C., and Wegener, D. (2001) “Motivation to Think and Order Effects in 
Persuasion: The Moderating Role of Chunking,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 332–44.
Pust, J. (2000) Intuitions as Evidence. New York: Garland.
Reber, A. (1993) Implicit Learning and Tacit Knowledge: An Essay on the Cognitive Unconscious. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Schaffer, J. (2006) “The Irrelevance of the Subject: Against Subject-Sensitive Invariantism,” Philosophical 
Studies, 127, 87–107.
Shanteau, J. (1992) “Competence in Experts: The Role of Task Characteristics,” Organizational Behavior and 
Human Decision Processes, 53, 252–266.
Sosa, D. (2006) “Scepticism About Intuition,” Philosophy 81, 633–47.
Sosa, E. (2006) “Experimental Philosophy and Philosophical Intuition,” Philosophical Studies 132, 99–107.
Stanley, J. (2005) Knowledge and Practical Interests. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Stich, S. (1990) The Fragmentation of Reason. Cambridge, MA: MIT.

EXPERIMENTAL EPISTEMOLOGY
835
——. (1998) “Reflective Equilibrium, Analytic Epistemology, and the Problem of Cognitive Diversity,” in 
Rethinking Intuition: The Psychology of Intuition and its Role in Philosophical Inquiry, ed. M. DePaul and W. 
Ramsey, Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Swain, S., Alexander, J., and Weinberg, J. (2008) “The Instability of Philosophical Intuitions: Running Hot 
and Cold on Truetemp,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 76, 138–55.
Sytsma, J., and Livengood, J. (2009) “A New Perspective concerning Experiments on Semantic Intuitions,” 
presented as “The Case for Divergent Descriptions,” to American Philosophical Association Pacific 
Division 83rd Annual Meeting, Vancouver, British Columbia.
Weinberg, J., Nichols, S., and Stich, S. (2001) “Normativity and Epistemic Intuitions,” Philosophical Topics 
29, 429–60.
——, Gonnerman, C., Buckner, C., Alexander, J. (Forthcoming) “Are Philosophers Expert Intuiters?” to 
appear in Philosophical Psychology.
Williamson, T. (2007) The Philosophy of Philosophy. Oxford: Blackwell.
Further Reading
Bealer, G. (1996) “A priori knowledge and the scope of philosophy,” Philosophical Studies 81, 121–42.
——. (1998) “Intuition and the Autonomy of Philosophy,” in Rethinking Intuition: The Psychology of 
Intuition and its Role in Philosophical Inquiry, ed. M. DePaul and W. Ramsey, Lanham, MD: Rowman and 
Littlefield.
Feltz, A. (2008) “Problems with the Appeal to Intuition in Epistemology,” Philosophical Explorations 11, 
131–41.
Jackson, F. (2001) “Responses,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 62, 653–64.
Knobe, J. and Burra, A. (2006) “The Folk Concept of Intention and Intentional Action: A Cross-cultural 
Study,” Journal of Culture and Cognition 6, 113–32.
Sosa, E. (2009) “A Defense of the Use of Intuitions in Philosophy,” in Murphy and Bishop (2009).
Stich, S. (2009) “Replies,” in Murphy and Bishop (2009).
Weinberg, J. (2007) “How to Challenge Intuitions Empirically Without Risking Skepticism,” Midwest 
Studies in Philosophy 31(1), 318–43.

836
74
NATURALISTIC
EPISTEMOLOGY
Klemens Kappel
1. Introduction
Naturalistic epistemology names a cluster of views according to which epistemology 
should be reconciled with, or even draw upon, empirical science. By contrast, tradi-
tional epistemology assumes that epistemology is prior to and independent of empirical 
science, both in terms of its subject matter and in terms of its methods. The details of 
this are complicated and there are now many different views championed under the 
heading of naturalistic epistemology.
It is useful to make a rough distinction between two enterprises in epistemology. 
The descriptive project aims to understand the basic nature of matters epistemic, that is, 
the nature of epistemic properties, states, norms, aims, concepts, expressions, practices 
of epistemic evaluations (henceforth I will just write “epistemic notions”). Thus the 
descriptive project asks questions such as: What is knowledge? What is it for a belief to 
be justified? What is an epistemic norm? What is it to say that a belief is known? The 
normative project, by contrast, seeks to advance and justify epistemic evaluations. Do 
our beliefs really qualify as justified? Are the beliefs usually regarded as known rightly 
so judged? Are we doing right in adopting the epistemic norms that we rely upon in 
our epistemic practices? What would improved epistemic practices be? Note that the 
normative project includes, but is not exhausted by, what is sometimes called meliorative 
epistemology, the attempt to improve on our ways of reasoning.
Corresponding to the descriptive and the normative project, one can discern two 
distinct classes of naturalistic views, which I will refer to as descriptive naturalism and 
normative naturalism (Laudan 1990).
Traditionally, epistemology has been conducted using philosophical methods, that is 
methods that allegedly proceed by means of conceptual analysis, linguistic analysis, a 
priori insights, considered intuitions about how to classify possible cases, and attempts 
to reach reflective equilibrium between these possibly conflicting inputs and other the-
oretical commitments. Philosophical methods are non-empirical in that they appeal 
only to what can be justifiably believed or known without conducting empirical inves-
tigations of the external world.
By contrast, methodological naturalism is the view that empirical investigations should 
partly or entirely replace philosophical methods. So, a methodological naturalist about 
the descriptive project thinks that, roughly, when determining what knowledge is, we 

NATURALISTIC EPISTEMOLOGY
837
should in part or entirely turn to empirical investigations, say in cognitive science or 
psychology. Methodological naturalism about the normative project advocates making 
use of empirical findings when addressing questions within the normative project.
These different forms of naturalisms are typically related in being motivated by a 
more general naturalistic outlook, but they are nonetheless logically distinct. One can 
be a descriptive naturalist without being a normative naturalist, and vice versa. And one 
can accept methodological naturalism about the normative project, without endorsing 
it about the descriptive project, or conversely.
2. Quine’s “Epistemology Naturalized”
The recent history of the subject dates back to W.V. Quine’s widely read paper 
“Epistemology Naturalized” (1969). Here Quine famously held that epistemology should 
fall “into place as a chapter of psychology,” confining itself to the study of how subjects 
generate beliefs about the world as a function of the input they receive. For Quine, 
this study of the “relation between the meager input and the torrential output” should 
be undertaken for “somewhat the same reasons that always prompted epistemology; 
namely, in order to see how evidence relates to theory, and in what ways one’s theory of 
nature transcends any available evidence.”
As has often been observed, it is difficult to see how Quine’s naturalism could plausi-
bly be a successor discipline to traditional epistemology (Kim 1988; BonJour 1994: 287). 
The descriptive project asks about the nature of epistemic notions such as knowledge 
or justified belief. Studying the “relation between the meager input and the torrential 
output” could be an attempt to eliminate such questions, but would hardly settle them. 
A crucial part of the normative project is to decide if our everyday and scientific beliefs 
about the world are in fact justified. Again, it is hard to see how a mere description of 
how we in fact proceed when forming beliefs could be a new way of answering those 
questions. In later writings Quine has, however, clarified his position and explicitly 
asserted a normative role of epistemology, saying in one place that normative episte-
mology is “a branch of engineering,” seeking to aid the “technology of truth-seeking” 
(Quine 1986; Foley 1994).
Irrespective of perceived weaknesses of Quine’s “Naturalized Epistemology,” many 
influential epistemologists endorse naturalistic views (Goldman 1986; Kitcher 1992; 
Kornblith 2002; Bishop and Trout 2005). Prominent critics of naturalistic epistemology 
are plentiful, and include Laurence BonJour, Richard Feldman, Michael Williams, Barry 
Stroud, Donald Davidson and Robert Brandom, just to mention a few (see Kornblith 
2002: chapters 3–5).
3. Descriptive Naturalism
Descriptive naturalism claims that the nature of epistemic notions can be accounted 
for in natural terms, i.e. terms referring exclusively to natural objects and properties. 
Natural objects and properties are such as would figure in our best scientific understand-
ing of the world.
Descriptive naturalism remains a controversial position. Knowledge is, by most 
accounts, true belief acquired or sustained for good epistemic reasons, with sufficient evi-
dence, or in non-accidental ways (ignoring Gettier complications). However, notions 
such as having a good epistemic reason, or sufficient evidence for holding a belief do not 

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
838
figure as a part of psychology or cognitive science, and neither does a belief’s property of 
being non-accidentally acquired. So states of knowledge do not immediately seem to be 
composed entirely of natural objects and properties. Similarly, a complete naturalistic 
description of a cognitive process would seem to leave open whether this process would 
count as embodying a proper epistemic norm or not.
Those inclined to naturalism about the descriptive project have responded to this set 
of questions in a variety of rather different ways. Eliminativists have repudiated the nor-
mative side of epistemic notions altogether, in favor of an enterprise that merely seeks 
to describe the ways in which beliefs are actually formed. Quine (1969) held this sort of 
view (see Maffie 1990 for an overview and further references).
Since eliminativism could be said to repudiate rather than account for epistemic 
notions, this position might not be considered a form of naturalistic epistemology at all. 
Other strategies do not seek to eliminate the normative dimension of epistemic proper-
ties, but to account for them. To provide a less abstract presentation of some basic ideas 
within this family of strategies, it might be helpful to consider a more specific theory of 
justification and knowledge:
Reliabilism. Beliefs are justified to the extent that they are acquired or sustained 
by a reliable process. Beliefs are known when true and sufficiently justified.
Reliabilism and similar views have been defended by Alvin Goldman (1979, 1986, 
1992b) and many others. Reliabilism is but one member of a wider class of externalist 
theories which hold that beliefs can be justified (or known if true) in virtue of features 
that are external to the purview of the subject, but, for present purposes, we need not 
consider the wider class of externalist theories. It is important to note though, that 
nothing in descriptive naturalism per se forces one to be an externalist about knowledge 
or justification. It is just that many proponents of descriptive naturalism have adopted 
some form of reliabilism or externalism about knowledge and justification, whereas 
those opposed to naturalism tend to be internalists about knowledge and justification.
A descriptive naturalist who accepts reliabilism might propose this view as a naturalis-
tically acceptable analysis of our concepts of justification and knowledge. Closely related, 
one might consider reliabilism as offering a reduction of epistemic to natural properties. 
Recently, Kornblith (2002) has defended the view that knowledge is a natural kind, just 
as water or aluminum are natural kinds. Reliabilism, on Kornblith’s view, figures as a part 
of the account of the natural properties that constitute knowledge as a natural kind. A 
less ambitious option is to view reliabilism in criterialist terms. According to this view, 
reliabilism specifies the conditions for the proper application of epistemic predicates, but 
refrains from providing an analysis or reduction of those predicates. Hence, the criteri-
alist concedes that “epistemic predicates cannot be naturalistically defined or reduced 
without loss of their essential content” (Maffie 1990: 285). In later work, Goldman 
(1992a) has embedded reliabilism in an empirically supported naturalistic view of how 
epistemic evaluators apply the concepts of knowledge and justification.
All non-eliminativist versions of descriptive naturalism agree that epistemic proper-
ties depend on natural properties:
Supervenience. For any epistemic property E, and any agent x and y, if x has 
E, there is a set of natural properties N, such that x has N, and necessarily, 
whatever agent y has N y also has E.

NATURALISTIC EPISTEMOLOGY
839
Supervenience, or similar views, has been widely endorsed (Van Cleve 1985, 1999; 
Kim 1988; Goldman 1994), though there are noteworthy dissenters (Lehrer 1999). It 
is important to realize, however, that while involving some degree of naturalism, super-
venience is compatible with epistemic properties being genuine but non-natural, and 
hence not analyzable or reducible to natural objects and properties.
Accounting for the Normativity of the Epistemic
Non-eliminativist forms of descriptive naturalism might seem to face a problem account-
ing for the distinctive normative dimension of the epistemic. There is a sense in which 
one ought to acquire beliefs in certain ways, or ought to believe certain things when in 
possession of particular evidence or reasons. How is this “to-do-ness” or the “ought-to-
believe-ness” supposed to flow from an austere account of the natural properties that 
epistemic properties consist of? This problem is, of course, reminiscent of the problem J. 
L. Mackie (1977) pointed out in ethics (cf. Kornblith 2002: chapter 5).
For simplicity, consider the problem specifically in terms of epistemic norms. Let us 
say that an epistemic norm is a directive, principle or rule stating a way to adopt, revise 
or sustain beliefs. Epistemic norms might be embodied in an individual subject’s modes 
of reasoning and methods of inquiry, or they could be embodied in socially embedded 
epistemic practices, such as those found in science or public debate. We might rely on 
particular epistemic norms even when we are not aware of doing so, or are unable to 
explain what, if anything, justifies us in doing so.
Let us say that a proper epistemic norm is one that we are epistemically permitted to 
make use of, given appropriate circumstances. Induction is a proper epistemic norm (or 
set of norms), whereas crystal ball gazing or affirming the consequent is not. So, proper 
epistemic norms exert some sort of normative force: given appropriate conditions, one 
ought to make use of them. Any view in epistemology must account for the purported 
normative force of proper epistemic norms. What is the descriptive naturalist account 
of the normative force of proper epistemic norms?
A common option is to think of epistemic norms as hypothetical imperatives. Relative 
to particular ends, certain ways of reasoning or acquiring beliefs might be more or less 
expedient in various circumstances. So, for example, one might say that for a subject 
S and some appropriate end E, epistemic norm EN is proper just in case relying on EN 
makes S sufficiently adept at arriving at E under the conditions in which S would nor-
mally use EN to arrive at E.
Quine (1986) subscribed to this sort of view, holding that epistemic norms are instru-
ments relative to the aim of finding truth, which on Quine’s view appears to be a purely 
contingent aim. Stephen Stich (1990: 131–2) advocates a very general form of pragma-
tism according to which an agent’s set of epistemic norms should be assessed in terms 
of their contribution to the total set of things the agent values. Kornblith (2002: 158) 
has criticized both of these views and argued that while epistemic norms are indeed 
hypothetical imperatives, the merits of a system of epistemic norms should be assessed 
not relative to contingent aims, but relative to the aim of truth, which we are bound to 
care about “whatever we may otherwise care about.”
Another and quite different strategy that might suit the descriptive natural-
ist is to adapt the expressivist account of normativity that is well-known from ethics 
(Gibbard 1990, 2003; Blackburn 1998). This view, which is only sparsely elaborated, 
is now referred to as epistemic expressivism. Epistemic expressivism holds that epistemic 

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
840
expressions are not fully descriptive but at least partly expressive. Thus, uttering sen-
tences of the form “S knows that p” normally serves to express a distinct kind of pro-
attitude to subjects’ holding certain beliefs. Similarly, saying that some epistemic norm 
is proper is expressing one’s pro-attitude towards the use of that norm. Hartry Field 
(1998) is a proponent of epistemic expressivism (though he calls it non-factualism), and 
a similar view has been defended in Chrisman (2007). Recently, epistemic expressivism 
has been criticized in Cuneo (2007) and Kvanvig (2003)
4. Normative Naturalism
The normative project concerns the epistemic evaluation of our ways of reasoning and 
conducting inquiry. When we judge that beliefs are justified or known, are we right? 
When we rely on specific modes or forming beliefs or patterns of inference, are we doing 
right? Could we improve on our ways of reasoning? Note that issuing and justifying 
epistemic evaluations of beliefs and epistemic norms is different from accounting for the 
normative dimension of epistemic properties, which is part of the descriptive project.
Normative naturalism holds that when addressing the questions of the normative 
project, we can in certain ways appeal to everyday beliefs about the world, as well as to 
empirical findings from disciplines such as psychology and cognitive science. This posi-
tion is controversial and, to understand why, we need to consider the ways in which the 
normative project has traditionally been pursued in epistemology.
The Privileged Class Constraint
The normative project has, to a large extent, evolved around two more specific sets of 
issues: a range of skeptical challenges, and the problem of how to justify our epistemic 
norms, where this includes epistemology’s meliorative project.
The most prominent of the skeptical challenges, the Cartesian challenge, is this: 
How can one rule out the possibility of being a brain in a vat, devoid of genuine percep-
tual contact to the external world? The Lockean challenge is slightly different, and asks 
roughly: How can we have knowledge about the external world, given all we have to go 
on are beliefs about our own perceptual experience?
It is quite crucial for these skeptical challenges that they come with the following 
restriction in permissible responses: one cannot appeal to premises the knowledge of 
which is rendered in doubt by the skeptical challenge in question. So, when responding 
to the Cartesian challenge, one cannot appeal to empirical facts about how extremely 
unlikely the scenario in question is, or indeed to what would normally count as obser-
vations incompatible with being a brain in a vat. When responding to the Lockean 
challenge, one cannot appeal to putative empirical facts about correlations between the 
character of one’s sense experience and the external world. Thus, the common structure 
of the skeptical challenges is that they grant that while we are justified in accepting 
members of a fairly small class of beliefs (the privileged class), we are not justified in a 
certain other class of beliefs (the target class). The skeptic then charges us with the task 
of explaining how we are, after all, justified in accepting members of the target class, 
while appealing only to members of the privileged class. Call this the privileged class 
constraint.
Clearly, different specific skeptical challenges vary with respect to the extensions of 
the target class and the privileged class. Very general skeptical challenges admit only 

NATURALISTIC EPISTEMOLOGY
841
a priori justified beliefs in the privileged class (or perhaps only a subclass of these), 
whereas less general skeptical problems might admit reflectively accessible beliefs, 
including beliefs about the nature of certain perceptual experiences or memory experi-
ences. The problem of other minds admits beliefs about the overt behavior of others in 
the privileged class, while beliefs about the mental life of others are to be found in the 
target class.
Consider then the other part of the normative project, that of justifying our epistemic 
norms. Is there a cogent argument to the effect that we should trust sense perception? 
Are we justified in relying on inductive inferences, and if so, in virtue of what? Again, a 
version of the privileged class constraint is assumed to apply. When replying to the ques-
tion whether we are justified in relying on some epistemic norm EN, we cannot appeal 
to EN or otherwise make use of EN. So, when explaining why certain forms of induc-
tive inferences are reasonable, we cannot make use of induction. When explaining why 
we are permitted to trust sense perception, we cannot rely on the deliverances of sense 
perception, or on beliefs the justification of which depends on sense perception.
Note that the problem of justifying epistemic norms remains distinct from the prob-
lem of responding to skeptical challenges. For example, one might think that one can 
reject as incoherent the possibility that one might be a brain in a vat, and yet still be at 
a loss to explain why we are permitted to rely on inferences to best explanations. But of 
course, one can mount a skeptical challenge by arguing that some class of our epistemic 
norms are not reliable, or that we have no reason to consider them reliable.
Ignoring the Privileged Class Constraint
Throughout the history of epistemology, tremendous efforts have been invested in the 
attempt to address skeptical challenges and justify epistemic norms while observing 
the privileged class constraint. For example, many writers have pursued the strategy of 
mounting transcendental arguments purporting to show that, on a priori grounds, the 
idea that one might be a brain in a vat is incoherent. Others have attempted to argue 
on a priori grounds that we should trust sense perception, memory, or rely on induction. 
For example, P. F. Strawson (1952: 257) once held it to be an a priori knowable truth 
that we are permitted to rely on induction, since the use of induction under appropri-
ate circumstances is part of “what ‘being reasonable’ means in such a context.” BonJour 
(1998) has recently offered a general defense of a priori reasoning which includes an 
a priori defense of induction. Such strategies would, if otherwise successful, provide a 
vindication of certain of our epistemic norms, while still observing the privileged class 
constraint.
Perhaps the single most important and controversial contribution of naturalistic epis-
temology is to advocate ignoring the privileged class constraint. When facing skeptical 
challenges, and when evaluating epistemic norms, we are not obliged to observe the 
privileged class constraint.
There are different ways of pursuing this strategy. One example is Strawson (1985) 
who advocated thinking of “skeptical arguments and rational counter-arguments as 
equally idle—not senseless, but idle—since what we have here are original, natural ines-
capable commitments which we neither choose nor could give up” (27–8). Strawson 
here seems to concede to the skeptic that, properly speaking, we are not really justified 
in a range of our beliefs, just as we are incapable of providing a satisfactory demonstra-
tion that our epistemic norms are proper. It is just, says Strawson, that we cannot really 

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
842
change our minds on these issues. In this sense, Strawson recommends ignoring the 
privileged class constraint.
Another example is, again, Quine (1975), who insisted on “the point that scepti-
cal doubts are scientific doubts,” which for Quine meant that they can and should be 
answered by scientific means (68). Goldman (1978) says something very similar: “In 
studying and criticizing our cognitive procedures, we should use whatever powers and 
procedures we antecedently accept. There is no starting ‘from scratch’” (522). Kitcher 
(1992) concurs, when he concedes that on “naturalism’s own ground, there are bound 
to be unanswerable forms of skepticism,” and adds that the “naturalists should therefore 
decline blanket invitations to play the game of synchronic reconstruction.” Rather, 
“parts of our current scientific beliefs must be assumed in criticizing others” (90–1).
An important question raised by these normative naturalist strategies concerns their 
wider epistemological implications. Here one can distinguish two views. Weak norma-
tive naturalism urges that we can ignore the privileged class constraint and make use of 
empirical findings and ordinary beliefs about the world when pursuing the normative 
project. But, the weak normative naturalist concedes, one does beg the question against 
the skeptic by violating the privileged class constraint. In consequence we should give 
up the hope of providing a genuine justification of our epistemic norms and a genuine 
demonstration that much of what we take to be known is indeed so. What we have is 
a kind of naturalistic ersatz for the normative judgments that (naive) traditional epis-
temology in vain sought to underpin while observing the privileged class constraint. 
Strawson, Quine and possibly Kitcher seem to acquiesce to this view; Bishop and Trout 
(2005b: 161) explicitly endorse it.
Strong normative naturalism, by contrast, insists that thus begging the question 
against the skeptic has no wider epistemological implications. The fact that we cannot, 
without begging the question, demonstrate the propriety of our epistemic norms in the 
face of a skeptical challenge, does nothing to show that we are not epistemically justi-
fied in relying on those epistemic norms. The fact that we cannot rule out a skeptical 
scenario to the skeptic’s satisfaction does not imply that we have virtually no knowledge 
or justified beliefs about the world.
Is Strong Normative Naturalism Tenable?
To see how strong normative naturalism might be a defensible position, return again to 
reliabilism. Part of the normative project is to explain the epistemic status of our beliefs 
and the epistemic norms we use or might use. Consider what reliabilism implies about 
these questions. When our beliefs are formed by reliable processed, they are justified. 
When true, in addition, our beliefs are known. Now, in many cases, we have, or are in 
a position to acquire, justified beliefs to the effect that specific beliefs of ours are indeed 
reliably formed and true, and thus instances of knowledge. So, granted reliabilism and 
certain seemingly innocuous beliefs about the world, we can easily reject certain con-
clusions that seem to be looming in the face of skeptical challenges.
Consider then the problem of evaluating our epistemic norms. Assume that according 
to reliabilism, an epistemic norm is proper just if reliable under the conditions of its nor-
mal use. So certifying that some epistemic norm is proper requires canvassing empirical 
evidence of its reliability under those circumstances. Explaining the features in virtue of 
which the norm is proper would be accomplished by pointing to the features that make 
it reliable. Say that some subject S is justified in relying on an epistemic norm just in 

NATURALISTIC EPISTEMOLOGY
843
case doing so results from a reliable process for the selection of proper epistemic norms 
to rely upon. So, explaining that S is justified in relying on a particular epistemic norm 
would require identifying such processes that led to trusting this norm. Finally, a belief 
to the effect that some epistemic norm is proper is itself justified just if acquired and 
sustained by a reliable process. So for the reliabilist to explain how we can be justified in 
believing certain epistemic norms to be proper requires pointing to such processes. The 
explanation, of course, fails to respect the privileged class constraint.
Unsurprisingly, many epistemologists have objected that the violation of the privi-
leged class constraint is question-begging. Here is Fumerton (1994: 337–8; cf. 1996):
None of this, of course, will make the skeptic happy. You cannot use percep-
tion to justify the reliability of perception! You cannot use memory to justify 
the reliability of memory! You cannot use induction to justify the reliability of 
induction! Such attempts to respond to the skeptic’s concerns involve blatant, 
indeed pathetic, circularity.
The strong normative naturalist can offer a response to this worry, however. For sim-
plicity, consider just the problem of evaluating epistemic norms. The strong normative 
naturalist can distinguish several parts of this enterprise. One is the task of providing 
a dialectically satisfactory response to a challenge posed by someone who is assumed—if 
only for the sake of argument—to seriously doubt the propriety of a particular epistemic 
norm EN. Clearly, in this kind of enterprise one cannot assume EN to be a proper epis-
temic norm. Indeed, this stems from a general feature of argumentative debate. When 
proposing an argument to someone who seriously questions whether there are reasons 
to accept some proposition p, one cannot appeal to p itself, or to premises the truth or 
justification of which depend on p. So, we can understand what motivates the privi-
leged class constraint, and see why it applies to the problem of providing a dialectically 
appropriate response to a skeptic.
However, the strong normative naturalist can insist that the crucial task is not that of 
convincing a presumed skeptic, but the different one of explaining the epistemic status 
of our epistemic norms. Providing a successful explanation of this kind is very differ-
ent from providing a dialectically acceptable argument to someone who is assumed to 
seriously question the propriety of some epistemic norm. Suppose that, as reliabilists 
we seek to explain the epistemic properties of a certain epistemic norm EN. And 
suppose that, when providing such reliabilist explanation of the features of EN, we 
rely on the use of EN. Would this epistemic circularity (Alston 1986), as it is often 
called, invalidate the explanation we seek to mount? It seems not. Explanations gener-
ally appeal to facts that we know or justifiably believe. When, as is generally the case, 
we know or justifiably believe facts by relying on epistemic norms, they must be 
proper norms. So, successful explanations require reliance on proper epistemic norms. 
Clearly, this requirement applies to the epistemic circularity at hand. So, if the expla-
nation of how we can be justified in relying on EN or in believing that EN is a proper 
epistemic norm itself trades on beliefs whose justification depends on the use of EN, 
then the explanation presupposes that EN is indeed a proper norm. So, if EN is in 
fact a proper norm, that is, if EN is reliable under the appropriate circumstances, then 
the explanation is successful, at least as far as EN is concerned, despite the epistemic 
circularity. So, the epistemic circularity at hand need not invalidate the explanation 
we seek.

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
844
What the presence of this kind of epistemic circularity does show, however, is that 
someone doubting the propriety of EN should not let herself rationally convince by the 
explanation we offer, since she rejects part of the basis for the explanation. But, as we 
have seen, the strong normative naturalist can insist that the success of the explanation 
on offer is unaffected by this. 
How is Knowledge Possible?
Barry Stroud has, in many writings, pressed what is effectively a related objection to 
strong normative naturalism. He poses a transcendental question: How is knowledge 
possible? As we have seen, the reliabilist has a simple answer. Knowledge just is true 
belief formed by a reliable process under appropriate circumstances (ignoring Gettier 
complications). So, knowledge is possible because we are beings equipped with a range 
of ways of forming beliefs that are reliable and regularly lead to true beliefs under the 
appropriate circumstances. This explanation of how knowledge is possible relies heavily 
on matters known, of course. But it is not thereby invalidated. One cannot explain a 
fact by itself. But clearly one can explain the fact that we are capable of knowing facts 
by appealing to other facts, knowledge of which are presupposed in the explanation. 
Explaining how knowledge is possible is not convincing to a skeptic.
Stroud (2000) finds this deeply unsatisfactory. As he says: “The difficulty in under-
standing how sense-perception gives us knowledge […] is that it seems at least possible 
to perceive what we do without thereby knowing something about the things around 
us.” According to Stroud, the transcendental question invites us to explain how we nev-
ertheless can have knowledge of the world. As he says, “Given the apparent ‘obstacle,’ 
how is our knowledge possible?” (5–6). In other places Stroud says that a philosophi-
cal theory of knowledge must provide “an account of our knowledge of the world that 
would make all of it intelligible to us all at once” (8).
Stroud seems to assume that a satisfactory answer to the transcendental question 
must also answer a skeptical challenge, or a range of them. Thus, when explaining how 
knowledge is possible we are permitted to appeal only to features that could feature in 
a dialectically acceptable answer to a skeptic. This, in turn, means observing the privi-
leged class constraint. On this construal of the question “How is knowledge possible?” 
strong normative naturalism fails to provide a satisfactory answer.
Clearly, however, the strong normative naturalist can respond that Stroud conflates 
the dialectical requirements relevant when responding to a skeptic with requirements 
reasonably imposed on an explanation of what knowledge is and how it is possible. 
Thus, strong normative naturalism promises a non-skeptical explanation of how we can 
have knowledge and justified belief, but one that cannot convince a presumed skep-
tic. What is decisive is that failing to respect the privileged class constraint carries no 
dramatic epistemological consequences.
Note that the fate of strong and weak normative naturalism is independent of descrip-
tive naturalism. One might reject descriptive naturalism, and still advocate lifting the 
privileged class constraint. Note also that, contrary to what is often assumed, normative 
naturalism does not depend on the rejection of the a priori. One can concede that some 
propositions can be known a priori and yet advocate normative naturalism. One can 
even accept that the propriety of some epistemic norms can be known a priori, and yet 
adopt the general strategy of normative naturalism. And there might be a very good 
reason to do so. Even if the propriety of some epistemic norms could be established a 

NATURALISTIC EPISTEMOLOGY
845
priori, this is unlikely to provide us with the epistemic advice that we need. We need 
to establish, it seems, which specific epistemic norms are best (or at least good enough) 
given the actual “powers and limits of the human cognitive system” (Goldman 1978: 
510), and given our wider non-epistemic interests and concerns. Even on the most 
optimistic views about what might be known a priori, it is hard to see how this could be 
accomplished without resorting to empirical investigations.
5. Naturalism about Methodology in Epistemology
A second dimension of naturalistic epistemology concerns the method by which episte-
mological questions should be pursued. The methodological naturalist rejects the exclu-
sive commitment to philosophical methods in epistemology, and holds that we should 
include methods and empirical findings from various parts of science, including biology, 
cognitive psychology and many other disciplines.
Note that one can advocate the use of non-empirical methods as a necessary supple-
ment to philosophical methods, or one can reject philosophical methods as entirely 
unsuitable for epistemology. Note also that methodological naturalism can be applied 
selectively to the various projects of epistemology. For example, one can reject method-
ological naturalism regarding the descriptive project, but accept it regarding the norma-
tive project.
Kornblith is a prominent advocate of methodological naturalism with respect to the 
descriptive project. According to Kornblith, a theory of knowledge should provide a 
correct account of the nature of knowledge, as distinct from an account of the concept 
of knowledge. And just as an analysis of the concept of aluminum will hardly reveal the 
nature of aluminum, analysis of the concept of knowledge is unhelpful for understanding 
what knowledge is. Rather, we should “examine apparently clear cases of knowledge to 
see what it is that they have in common.” We must, says Kornblith (1999: 161; cf. 2002: 
chapters 1–2), “examine the various psychological mechanisms by which knowledge is 
produced and retained in order to see what, if anything, they have in common.”
Kornblith’s view remains quite controversial, even among philosophers otherwise 
sympathetic to naturalism. One cause of concern is the very idea that the concept of 
knowledge is a natural kind concept. This seems highly contentious—there might be no 
underlying theoretical unity to cases of knowledge, apart from the fact that they, at least 
according to reliabilism, all involve true belief formed by reliable processes (Goldman 
2005: 405).
Kornblith is indeed sympathetic to reliabilism. But reliabilism seems best defended 
by philosophical methods, or at any rate this is how the view has been defended in 
recent epistemology. Reliabilism is justified by the fact that this theory (allegedly) cap-
tures a broad range of our considered epistemic judgment concerning putative cases of 
knowledge and justified belief. Empirical investigations could, of course, have some 
role in providing counterexamples to proposed analyses of knowledge and justification, 
thereby forcing revisions. The problem, however, is that the counterexamples needed 
would seem to be readily available anyway (Feldman 1999). So, it is not clear that 
methodological naturalism could be a vital part of the descriptive project.
However, others have questioned precisely the role of considered epistemic judg-
ments are assumed to have in philosophical methods, and this points to a different 
form of methodological naturalism. Weinberg et al. (2001) call attention to the fact 
that considered epistemic judgments might vary across cultures and social strata. And 

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
846
indeed, preliminary empirical findings did suggest some interesting differences in con-
sidered epistemic judgment. For example, students of Indian, Pakistani and Bangladeshi 
descent were found to be significantly less willing to characterize a typical Gettier case 
as one in which one does not have knowledge than were their Western counterparts.
One might, of course, question the specific findings and methods in Weinberg et al. 
However, assuming that considered epistemic judgments are indeed relevant for under-
standing our epistemic concepts and the nature of epistemic properties, it seems that 
empirical surveys of the actual set of judgments that people have would be indispensable 
for more robust relevant information. At least such empirical surveys would seem neces-
sary to establish that the considered epistemic judgments of professional epistemologists 
are not merely idiosyncratic and therefore beyond general interests, as indeed Bishop 
and Trout (2005a) suspect.
Even if this problem is overcome Bishop and Trout’s discussion points to a wider 
methodological issue concerning the relevance of the descriptive project for the norma-
tive concerns in epistemology. It is often, if only tacitly, assumed that since epistemic 
notions such as knowledge and justification are essentially normative, understanding 
their nature will immediately lead to prescriptions regarding how to reason and conduct 
inquiry. It is not obvious, however, that standard theories of knowledge and justifica-
tion such as fundamentalism, coherentism, reliabilism, and contextualism really are 
prescriptive in this way. These theories are, at their core, descriptive theories aiming 
to capture our considered epistemic judgment, or providing accounts of the content of 
our epistemic concepts. But why pay so much attention to our actual considered set of 
epistemic judgments, or our actual epistemic concepts? Why not turn directly to the 
problem of devising better ways of reasoning and conducting inquiry?
References
Alston, W. P. (1986) Epistemic Circularity. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 47, 1–30.
Bishop, M. and Trout, J. D. (2005a) The Pathologies of Standard Analytic Epistemology. Noûs, 39, 696–
714.
—— (2005b) Epistemology and the Psychology of Human Judgment, Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Blackburn, S. (1998) Ruling Passions: A Theory of Practical Reasoning, Oxford, Clarendon Press.
BonJour, L. (1994) Against Naturalized Epistemology. Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 19, 283–300.
—— (1998) In Defense of Pure Reason, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Chrisman, M. (2007) From Epistemic Contextualism to Epistemic Expressivism. Philosophical Studies, 135, 
225–54.
Cuneo, T. (2007) The Normative Web: An Argument For Moral Realism, Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Feldman, R. (1999) Methodological Naturalism in Epistemology. In Greco, J. and Sosa, E. (Eds.) The 
Blackwell Guide to Epistemology.
Field, H. (1998) Epistemological Nonfactualism and the A Prioricity of Logic. Philosophical Studies, 92, 1–24.
Foley, R. (1994) Quine and Naturalized Epistemology. In French, P. A., Uehling, J., Theodore, E. & 
Wettstein, H. K. (Eds.) Midwest Studies in Philosophy. Philosophical Naturalism. Notre Dame, IN, University 
of Notre Dame Press.
Fumerton, R. A. (1994) Skepticism and Naturalistic Epistemology. In French, P. A., Uehling, J., Theodore, 
E. and Wettstein, H. K. (Eds.) Midwest Studies in Philosophy. Philosophical Naturalism. Notre Dame, IN, 
University of Notre Dame Press.
—— (1996) Metaepistemology and Skepticism, Lanham, MD, Rowman & Littlefield.
Gibbard, A. (1990) Wise Choices, Apt Feelings: A Theory of Normative Judgement, Oxford, Clarendon.
—— (2003) Thinking How to Live, Cambridge, MA; London, Harvard University Press.
Goldman, A. (1978) Epistemics: The Regulative Theory of Cognition. Journal of Philosophy, 75, 509–23.
—— (1979) What Is Justified Belief? in Papas, G. (ed.) Justification and Knowledge, Dordrecht, D. Reidel, 
1–23.

NATURALISTIC EPISTEMOLOGY
847
—— (1986) Epistemology and Cognition, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press.
—— (1992a) Epistemic Folkways and Scientific Epistemology. In Goldman, A. (Ed.) Liaisons: Philosophy 
Meets the Cognitive and Social Sciences. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
—— (1992b) Liaisons: Philosophy Meets the Cognitive and Social Sciences, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
—— (1994) Naturalistic Epistemology and Reliabilism. In French, P. A., Uehling, J., Theodore, E. and 
Wettstein, H. K. (Eds.) Midwest Studies in Philosophy. Philosophical Naturalism. Notre Dame, IN, University 
of Notre Dame Press.
—— (2005) Kornblith’s Naturalistic Epistemology. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 71, 403–10.
Kim, J. (1988) What Is “Naturalized Epistemology”? In Tomberline, J. E. (Ed.) Philosophical Perspectives, 
Epistemology. Atascadero, CA, Ridgeview Publishing Co.
Kitcher, P. (1992) The Naturalists Return. The Philosophical Review, 101, 53–114.
Kornblith, H. (1999) In Defense of a Naturalized Epistemology. In Greco, J. & Sosa, E. (Eds.) The Blackwell 
Guide to Epistemology. Blackwell.
—— (2002) Knowledge and its Place in Nature, Oxford, Clarendon.
Kvanvig, J. L. (2003) The Value of Knowledge and the Pursuit of Understanding, Cambridge, UK; New York, 
Cambridge University Press.
Laudan, L. (1990) Normative Naturalism. Philosophy of Science, 57, 44–59.
Lehrer, K. (1999) Reply to Van Cleve. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 59, 1068–71.
Mackie, J. L. (1977) Ethics: Inventing Right and Wrong, Harmondsworth, Penguin.
Maffie, J. (1990) Recent Work on Naturalized Epistemology. American Philosophical Quarterly, 281–93.
Quine, W. V. (1969) Epistemology Naturalized. Ontological Relativity and Other Essays. New York, Columbia 
University Press.
—— (1975) The Nature of Natural Knowledge. In Guttenplan, S. (Ed.) Mind and Language. Oxford 
University Press.
—— (1986) Reply to Morton White. In Hahn, L. and Schilpp, P. (Eds.) The Philosophy of W.V. Quine. 
LaSalle, IL, Open Court.
Stich, S. P. (1990) The Fragmentation of Reason: Preface to a Pragmatic Theory of Cognitive Evaluation, 
Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
Strawson, P. F. (1952) Introduction to Logical Theory. London, Methuen & Co.; New York, John Wiley & 
Sons.
—— (1985) Skepticism and Naturalism: Some Varieties: The Woodbridge Lectures 1983, London, Methuen.
Stroud, B. (2000) Understanding Human Knowledge: Philosophical Essays. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Van Cleve, J. (1985) Epistemic Supervenience and the Circle of Belief. Monist: An International Quarterly 
Journal of General Philosophical Inquiry, 68, 90–104.
—— (1999) Epistemic Supervenience Revisited. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 59, 1049–55.
Weinberg, J., Nichols, S. and Stich, S. (2001) Normativity and Epistemic Intuitions. Philosophical Topics, 
29, 429–60.

848
75
EVOLUTIONARY
EPISTEMOLOGY
Michael Bradie
Historical Sketch
The seeds of evolutionary epistemology were planted by Charles Darwin in the Descent 
of Man. He there attempted to make good on his throw-away line from the Origin of 
Species to the effect that, from an evolutionary point of view, “light would be thrown on 
the origin of man and his history.” Among the first to exploit and question the episte-
mological implications of Darwinism were the American pragmatists.
Charles Sanders Peirce accepted the view that the emergence of modern science was 
a result of instinctive beliefs that were originally the product of natural selection but he 
resisted the idea that natural selection is a useful tool for explaining which of a number 
of alternative theories might survive (Skagestad 1979). William James, in the Principles 
of Psychology (1983 [1890]), endorsed Darwin’s selectionist account of the development 
of the biological structures underlying human mental capacities. Chauncey Wright 
(1971) had no hesitation in employing natural selection and the “struggle for exis-
tence” to explain the harmonization of beliefs with circumstances. Finally, John Dewey 
(1910) saw the specific import of the Darwinian revolution as radically reshaping the 
philosophical landscape by calling into question traditional epistemological norms and 
projects such as the search for certainty.
In the twentieth century, the psychologist Donald Campbell (1960) is credited 
with coining the term “evolutionary epistemology.” Campbell’s basic idea is that there 
exists a hierarchy of interlocking “blind variation and selective retention processes” 
that explain not only the evolutionary development of the biological bases of human 
knowledge but the evolutionary development of modern science as well. He saw an 
affinity between his view and Karl Popper’s (1962) “conjecture and refutation” model 
of the growth of scientific knowledge. Both Popper and Campbell argued that theories 
and concepts were “shaped” by the environmental circumstances that they represented 
(Lorenz 1982). Popper goes so far as to suggest that biological organs are embodied 
“theories” and scientific theories are disembodied “organs.” One advantage, he claims, 
that human beings have over non-theorizing animals is that theoretical mistakes usually 
only result in the “death” of a theory whereas biological “mistakes” often result in the 
death of the organism.
Both Campbell and Popper see the development of science as “progressing” toward 
a better—i.e., more complete and more accurate—representation of the world. This 

EVOLUTIONARY EPISTEMOLOGY
849
has elicited some criticism of the Darwinian bone fides of their views on the grounds 
that, for Darwin, natural selection is a “directionless” process that has no aim or goal. 
Stephen Toulmin and Thomas Kuhn are two who embrace the Darwinian implications 
and reject the idea that science is “progressive” over the long run. Toulmin (1972) 
adopts a “populational” approach to conceptual change. At any given stage in the his-
torical development of an intellectual lineage, there are competing hypotheses and 
conceptual frameworks that are subject to selective pressures. The net result is some 
notion of “local” progress as judged by the prevailing standards of the age but as these 
themselves are in a population subject to selective processes, no long-term notion of 
“progress” is viable. Kuhn’s thesis in The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962: 172f.) 
can be understood along similar lines.
Two Distinctions
EEM versus EET
Evolutionary epistemology is concerned with two fundamentally different aspects of 
what can be broadly called the “theory of knowledge.” Traditionally, this has meant 
an investigation into the conceptual status of knowledge and belief, the nature and 
status of rules of evidence and justification, the nature of conceptual change, and the 
like. An evolutionary perspective, however, draws attention to the biological substrate 
underlying the acquisition and evaluation of beliefs. It is convenient, therefore, to sep-
arate issues concerned with the Evolution of Epistemic Mechanisms (EEM) from issues 
concerned with the Evolution of Epistemic Theories (EET) (Bradie 1986). EEM projects 
address questions concerning the evolution and development of brain structures and 
psychological mechanisms involved in epistemic processes. EET projects address ques-
tions concerning the growth of human knowledge and the development of epistemic 
norms. One rationale for making this distinction is that evolutionary analyses of EEM 
questions have an initial plausibility that evolutionary analyses of EET questions do 
not. This follows from the fact that, from a Darwinian point of view, there is an evo-
lutionary and, presumably, selective explanation of the development of biological and 
psychological cognitive capacities. We might not be in a position to completely verify 
such accounts but we can be relatively confident that some such stories are broadly 
correct. The situation is different with respect to the “evolution” of human knowledge 
or scientific theories, on the one hand, and epistemic norms on the other. Of course, 
no one denies that the corpus of human knowledge is constantly changing or that 
norms of acceptability have changed over time. What is problematic is the presump-
tion that this process is adequately represented as a “Darwinian” selective process. In 
particular, one must be careful not to conclude that just because there is a Darwinian 
account of the evolution of the underlying biological and psychological mechanisms 
there is a plausible Darwinian account of the growth of the intellectual products of 
those mechanisms.
Ontogeny Versus Phylogeny
Cutting across the EEM/EET distinction is the distinction between ontogenetic ques-
tions dealing with the development of individuals from embryo to adult and phyloge-
netic questions dealing with the development of what Popper (1972) called “objective 

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
850
knowledge” over historical time periods. The net result is a four-fold division of issues. 
Some representative samples are given below.
EEM/Ontogenetic
The issues here involve first the development of the brain structures that enable cog-
nitive and epistemic activity. Recent work by Jean-Pierre Changeux (1985), Gerald 
Edelman (1987) and others suggests that the embryological development of neural tis-
sue involves processes of variation and selection. The architecture of the adult brain is 
not completely determined by inherited genetic “programs” but reflects modulations 
due to the ambient environments of the developing individual. In addition, recent work 
by evolutionary psychologists suggests that the development of inherited psychological 
dispositions imposes constraints on human cognitive abilities (Barkow et al. 1992).
EEM/Phylogenetic
The evolution of the nervous system and the brain emerge as the central concerns of 
phylogenetic EEM projects. Since the brain and its complex substructures are organs, 
there is presumably a broadly Darwinian account of their evolutionary development. Of 
especial importance in this historical story is the emergence of consciousness and the 
capacity for language. That these structures and capacities have evolved is a straight-
forward implication of the presumption that the original life forms were not more than 
complex replicating molecular systems. Unfortunately, it is not clear how much more 
can be said about these significant developments. The phylogenetic emergence of con-
scious organisms is shrouded in the deep past. There is no relevant fossil evidence and 
no prospects for discovering any. Given the current adaptive value of having a neo-
cortex, being conscious with the capacity for language, it is often assumed that these 
features are adaptations, that is, that they were selected for on the basis of the functional 
capabilities that they provided. But, as has been pointed out many times, it is a mistake 
to infer that because some organ or capacity has a present utility, therefore that organ or 
capacity was selected for in the distant past (Gould and Lewontin 1979). So, although 
Darwinian solutions to phylogenetic EEM questions have the most prima facie plausi-
bility, it is not clear that they can remain much more than vague sketches. As such, any 
light they might be thought to throw on epistemological concerns is likely to be dim 
indeed.
More recently, evolutionary psychologists have pursued the development of phyloge-
netic reconstructions of psychological capacities (Barkow et al. 1992). Their working 
hypothesis is often that such and such a psychological capacity is an adaptation, that is, 
was selected for by environmental pressures in the distant past—usually the Pleistocene 
era (1.8 million–10,000 years ago). Their work is both promising and controversial. 
One potentially important epistemological implication is the possibility of account-
ing for various cognitive biases as the results of dispositions that were advantageous 
in the Pleistocene but which are disadvantageous in modern societies. However, this 
work is controversial and has polarized both the philosophical and psychological com-
munities. Some critics contend that the fundamental methodology is seriously flawed 
(Buller 2005; Richardson 2007). One problem is that the Pleistocene covered a long 
period of time and critics suggest that it is impossible to determine exactly what the 
social and natural environmental conditions that allegedly led to the selection of 

EVOLUTIONARY EPISTEMOLOGY
851
various psychological dispositions were. In addition, there is a serious methodological 
worry about the fact that investigators are not in a position to conduct comparative 
studies. Without such evidence, it is reckless to conclude that some feature developed 
in early humans was selected for because it conferred a selective advantage in the 
environments in which early humans found themselves.
EET/Ontogenetic
Organisms acquire knowledge as they mature through a process of learning and assimi-
lation. How are we to model this process? B. F. Skinner explicitly notes the parallels 
between the behaviorist theory of operant conditioning, Edward Thorndike’s “Law of 
Effect” and Darwin’s theory of natural selection (Skinner 1981; Edelman 1987).
Recent work in evolutionary psychology suggests that human beings have inherited 
psychological dispositions that, when triggered by environmental stimuli, influence the 
knowledge we acquire, the conclusions we come to and the inferences that we make. 
Radical behaviorism, insofar as it assumes a “blank slate” model of the newborn mind, is 
not an adequate model for understanding the acquisition of knowledge in the growing 
organism. Nevertheless, there is a strong analogy between operant conditioning where 
an organisms emits a behavior that is reinforced or not by the environment and the 
method of “trial and error” whereby an organism makes a “conjecture” that is either 
confirmed or refuted. The exact details of how learning occurs are still unknown. In 
addition to inherited constraints and individual initiative information is transmitted 
“laterally” from parents, teachers and peers.
Dan Sperber (1996) has argued for what he calls an “epidemiological” model of the 
transmission of cultural information. The basic idea is that ideas in people’s brains give 
rise to behaviors that cause ideas in other people’s brains. People communicate with 
one another by means of this process of transmission. If the ideas that arise in the lis-
tener resemble the ideas in the transmitter, then the latter has been understood by the 
latter. The spread of ideas through a culture is analogous to the spread of a contagious 
disease and warrants, in Sperber’s brain, the medical metaphors he uses to characterize 
his approach.
Sperber’s epidemiological model has certain affinities with memetic approaches to 
the spread of cultural information but Sperber sees his model as emphasizing the impor-
tance of inherited psychological mechanisms in ways that other selectionist models 
do not. Which approach turns out to be most promising in explaining the ontogenesis 
of knowledge remains to be seen but all the current evidence suggests that Darwinian 
mechanisms are not likely to be the whole story.
EET/Phylogenetic
The phylogenetic analysis of the evolution of human knowledge involves a consider-
ation along two dimensions. On the one hand, there is the evolution of specific bits 
of human knowledge, that is, the acquisition of specific facts and the generation and 
validation of specific theories. On the other, there is the evolution of epistemic meth-
odologies and norms. In principle, one can provide different selectionist accounts for 
both processes. Nicholas Rescher (1990), accordingly, distinguishes between what he 
calls “thesis Darwinism” and “methodological Darwinism.” He rejects the selectionist 
accounts of the growth of scientific knowledge but argues for a selectionist account of 

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
852
the development of scientific methods. Popper and Campbell remain the loci classici 
of twentieth-century selectionist accounts of the phylogenetic development of human 
knowledge. This view was extended to all forms of learning and innovation by Gary 
Cziko (1995) who defended a view that he called “Universal Darwinism” following 
Richard Dawkins (1983) and Daniel Dennett (1995).
The Evolutionary Metaphor
To what extent does knowledge “evolve” in a way that is appropriately represented as 
a Darwinian selection process or, for that matter, any evolutionary process found in 
biological systems? Is evolutionary biology an appropriate model for epistemic change 
or is it merely a metaphor, useful for certain points but misleading for others? As noted 
above, Popper and Campbell, as well as the “Universal Darwinists,” argue that the pro-
cess of change in both biology and epistemology is the same (Toulmin 1967, 1972, 
1981; Popper 1972; Popper and Eccles 1977; Hull 1988). Critics argue that the idea of 
“evolutionary” epistemology is only a metaphorical (i.e., non-literal and at best sug-
gestive) extension of evolutionary biology (Thagard 1980; Kary 1982, Lewontin 1982, 
Bunge 1983).
In a series of publications, David Hull (1973, 1975, 1982, 1988) has argued that 
neither biological evolution nor the growth of knowledge serves as the primary model in 
terms of which we are to understand the other. Hull prefers to develop a general analysis 
of “evolution through selection processes which applies equally to biological, social and 
cultural evolution” (1982: 275).
Almost all critics and defenders alike agree that in one important respect concep-
tual evolution differs from biological evolution. In science, it is claimed, there is prog-
ress toward a goal; in biological evolution, there are no goals. Kuhn (1962: 172f.) is 
one of the few who sees a virtue where others see a flaw. Under pressure to clarify the 
sense in which his position did or did not avoid relativism, Kuhn argued that “scien-
tific development is, like biological evolution, unidirectional and irreversible” (Lakatos 
and Musgrave 1970: 264). Toulmin (1972: 322ff.) objected to this reformulation as 
illegitimately attributing unidirectionality to biological evolution and as a throwback 
to a providential view of evolutionary theory rather than a populational view which, 
Toulmin argued, is characteristic of Darwinism. Toulmin argued for a “local” or “eco-
logical” concept of contextual rationality. The recognition of the populational nature 
of concept change leads us to the conclusion that there are no universal criteria for 
rationality and no “global” selection criteria (Toulmin 1972: 317; 1981: 31; Blackwell 
1973; Hull 1973).
That the progress of science implies some such “global” criteria whereas natural selec-
tion does not has, in fact, been taken as a strong point of disanalogy between concep-
tual and biological evolution (e.g., Elster 1979; Thagard 1980; Blackwell 1973). Hull 
(1982) and Robert Bechtel (1984) have argued that scientific progress need not involve 
a commitment to global criteria if it is recognized that the regularities of nature and the 
“laws of nature” exert a transcontextual constraint on the development of scientific 
theories.
The progress issue is a problematic test for the adequacy of evolutionary models of 
scientific development. If the views of Kuhn and Toulmin are correct then our notion 
of progress needs to be re-evaluated. For all we know, progress in science could turn 
out to be as chimerical as we now take immanent purpose in nature to be. Leading 

EVOLUTIONARY EPISTEMOLOGY
853
intellectuals 300 years ago might have disagreed. An appeal to realism, in and of itself, 
does not seem to me to be sufficient to guarantee that science can be progressive (see 
discussion on “convergent” realism below). Popperian realism might appear to provide 
such guarantees but that approach leads to will-o’-the-wisp chases after measures of 
progress such as “verisimilitude.” The fact of the matter is that judgments of progress 
in science are always “local” judgments. Even if “global” criteria exist we are never in 
a position to know what they are except by a local presumption or fiat. The history of 
science and the history of ideas should give us pause when we contemplate reifying a 
contemporary standard as an inviolable canon.
Evolutionary epistemology is not merely the attempt to understand knowing via the 
use of metaphors drawn from evolutionary biology, but also the attempt to understand 
biological processes in terms of metaphors drawn from epistemology (Campbell 1960). 
Vittorio Somenzi (1980) credits Samuel Butler with first introducing the metaphor of 
organisms as problem solvers and it is of interest to note that Samuel Butler is hailed by 
Popper as the most astute nineteenth-century philosopher of biology.
Richard Lewontin (1982) and Toulmin (1967, 1972, 1981) have both noted that 
contemporary evolutionary models of the growth of knowledge based on “Darwinian” 
models do not represent the introduction of biological considerations into epistemology 
but, rather, a shift from one underlying metaphor to another. Lewontin sees two central 
growth metaphors permeating biology and the social sciences: unfolding (a transforma-
tional model characteristic of embryology, classically understood) and trial and error 
(a variational model characteristic of Darwinian evolution). The distinction between 
transformational models and variational models of development corresponds roughly 
to Toulmin’s distinction between providential and populational processes. Lewontin 
explicitly (and Toulmin, implicitly) argues that “unfolding” is as much a metaphor 
for embryology and “trial and error adaptation” is as much a metaphor for biological 
evolution, as they are allegedly metaphors for the evolution of knowledge or culture. 
Lewontin (1982: 155) goes on to argue that both metaphors are bad metaphors for 
embryology and organic evolution, so, he thinks, “little wonder that they have failed to 
resolve the contradictions in the theory of cognition.” The argument against treating 
organic evolution as a process of trial and error adaptations rests on pointing out the 
limitation of viewing organisms as optimality-seeking problem-solvers (157–159).
Lewontin proposes, instead, a metaphor of “dialectical interdependence” which 
involves the “interpenetration of organism and environment” (159–163). Niches exist 
and can be identified only in virtue of the organisms that occupy them. Organisms 
and environments are constantly shaping and reshaping each other. The separation 
of organism from its environment can be, one is led to think, only conceptual and not 
real.
The implications of this metaphor for epistemology are potentially, quite profound. 
For one thing, if niches are “created” by organisms, and do not exist independently 
of them, this suggests that perhaps problems might not properly exist independently 
of their tentative solutions. Taking Lewontin’s dialectical metaphor seriously suggests 
that the theory–problem distinction could turn out to be as problematic as the theory–
observation distinction. More radical consequences follow. If the organism–environ-
ment coupled pair is the analog of the knower–known pair, then the problems loom for 
many forms of realism (Fleck 1979; Lewontin 1982).

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
854
Realism
Campbell (1979: 195f.) argued that descriptive epistemology, which studies how organ-
isms acquire and process knowledge, leads to the “debunking of the value of ‘hard 
facts’.” Nevertheless, he concluded, the ideology of “stubborn facts” has a functional 
truth. Evolutionary epistemology, in turn, abandons “literal truth” while retaining the 
“goal of truth.” For Campbell, the central epistemological issues concern how organisms 
interact with their environments to produce knowledge. Evolutionary and processing 
considerations suggest that knowledge is analogous to a mosaic mural, “a compromise 
of vehicular characteristics and of referent attributes” (183). We find ourselves com-
mitted to an “epistemological relativity.” Amoebas know what they know, frogs know 
other things, and humans still more. Each organism comes to know what it does through 
processing by cognitive structures which are the product of evolutionary development. 
We might know more things than other creatures or different things but each kind of 
organism constructs, as it were, an image of reality based on its own needs and capaci-
ties. However, Campbell, with Popper, is unwilling to push this epistemological rela-
tivism to an ontological relativism even though, as he says, “The language of science 
is subjective, provincial, approximate, and metaphoric, never the language of reality 
itself” (Campbell 1975: 1120).
That reality itself does have a “language” is embodied in Campbell’s presumptive 
ontological view which he calls “hypothetical realism.” The basic postulate of hypo-
thetical realism is that there is an objective world of objects and relations which exists 
independently of any knowing and perceiving organisms. The organisms which inhabit 
and interact with this world, however, have only indirect, fallible knowledge, which is 
“edited” by the “objective referent” (Brewer and Collins 1981; Lorenz, 1977, 1982).
Hypothetical realism, then, is the view that there is a real world which scientific the-
ories only approximately “fit.” As science “progresses,” it converges on a “true descrip-
tion” of that world. The notion of “approximate fit” captures the sense in which the 
view of Campbell and Konrad Lorenz is a “transcendental” as well as a “hypothetical” 
realism. As such it controverts certain forms of instrumentalism, pragmatism and rela-
tivism. That our theories change and might even converge locally, in itself, does not 
entail the Campbellian conclusion (via Peirce and Popper) that an ultimate consensus 
at the end of scientific inquiry is a legitimate goal.
On the other hand, an evolutionary argument for a convergence-free version of real-
ism can be constructed as follows. Biological evolution is opportunistic. Organisms 
exploit their local environments and the longevity of lineages is contingent not only on 
issues of selective advantage but also upon historical accidents (Gould 1989). Most evo-
lutionary epistemologists (Toulmin excepted) are unwilling to accept the implications 
of this for cognitive or conceptual evolution. They will admit that the local, intellec-
tual, social, and cultural background out of which new ideas emerge is a relevant factor 
in forming the selective forces which determine which of those ideas will survive and 
which will not, but they are unwilling to accept the radical implication that the direc-
tion of conceptual evolution and change need not be leading anywhere in particular. 
They are unwilling to abandon the eschatological vision of a terminal-consensus “in the 
long run” (cf. Hull 1988).
To be sure, there are good philosophical motives for their recalcitrance having to do 
with the virtues of “objectivity” and “truth.” But, there is no biological rationale for 
convergence to consensus, at least insofar as it draws upon Darwinism. Hypothetical 

EVOLUTIONARY EPISTEMOLOGY
855
realism, in and of itself, neither suggests nor guarantees convergence. There is a long 
inferential leap from general coping with the environment, which all successful lineages 
must develop, to consensus of structure, content and function of knowledge. The appeal 
to laws or regularities of nature to force convergence assumes that the constraints “real-
ity” imposes on how and what we think are sufficient, in the long run, to wash out the 
social and cultural differences, which, for all we know, operate to induce divergence. 
Even if a global or galactic community eventually reached consensus, shared bias and 
mutual reinforcement could not be ruled out as major contributory causes. Accepting 
a non-convergent form of realism means that the difficult issues of how to construe 
rationality and objectivity remain to be dealt with. But convergent forms of realism face 
these problems as well.
The Question of Norms
Traditional epistemology is, in large part, a normative discipline. Evolutionary episte-
mologies in particular, and naturalistic epistemologies in general, insofar as they construe 
epistemology as continuous with science would seem to be purely descriptive. Can such 
enterprises deal with normative questions? How one approaches this question depends 
upon how one construes the relationship of evolutionary epistemology to traditional 
epistemology. If evolutionary epistemology is seen as a “successor” discipline to tradi-
tional epistemology then one might be well prepared to write off many of the traditional 
questions that epistemology set for itself to answer. Other naturalized theories of knowl-
edge, e.g. Laudan’s (1990), involve reinterpreting normative claims in terms of empirical 
hypotheticals. Willard Van Orman Quine (1990) also argues that naturalizing epistemol-
ogy does not lead to a rejection of norms; “normative epistemology gets naturalized into 
a chapter of engineering: the technology of anticipating sensory stimulation” (19).
Deriving epistemological norms from the facts of human knowledge acquisition 
would seem to commit some version of the naturalistic fallacy. It is open to evolution-
ary epistemologists to challenge the contention that the naturalistic fallacy (or at least 
any attempt to base norms on facts) is a fallacy. An argument of this form can be found 
in Robert Richards (1987) with respect to the naturalistic fallacy in ethics. Richards 
argues that not all derivations of moral norms from facts are fallacious. The general idea 
is that norms need to be calibrated against intuitively clear cases. If some evolutionary 
account is forthcoming as to why we are inclined to argue in certain ways with respect 
to morality (or logic or epistemology) then we can ground our normative principles 
in these evolutionary considerations. A similar argument should be constructible for 
epistemological norms (Munz 1985; Vollmer 1987; Bartley 1987; Bradie 1989). In any 
case, even if some evolutionary account of the emergence of epistemological norms is 
forthcoming, it is very unlikely that specific norms are going to be derivable or justifi-
able from biological or genetic considerations alone. The specific form of the epistemo-
logical norms that are accepted by communities of cognizers will most certainly reflect 
local cultural contingencies in much the same way that specific moral codes reflect local 
cultural contingencies.
Evolutionary Epistemology and the Skeptic
Next to worries about the ability of evolutionary epistemology to deal with the 
problem of epistemic norms the most serious objection to an evolutionary approach to 

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
856
epistemology is that it fails to provide a convincing answer to the skeptic. The problem 
is this. Evolutionary or naturalized epistemologies, drawing as they do on the results of 
the natural sciences, appear to beg the question against the skeptic who demands an 
epistemic warrant before allowing the use of scientific knowledge to account for and 
ground knowledge. The philosophical question of how knowledge is possible at all in 
the first place goes unanswered (Stroud 1981).
The strategy of the evolutionary epistemologist is to adopt what Campbell (1974b) 
called the “epistemology of the other one.” Instead of adopting a Cartesian point of 
view that requires that a knower first justify first-person knowledge claims, we shift 
the focus to the empirical question of how humans (and other organisms) in general 
acquire and process knowledge. Quine (1981) endorses this approach by challenging 
the transcendental Cartesian perspective in favor of an approach that involves routine 
appeals to “analogies and causal hypotheses within our scientific theories.” In such a 
way, Quine thinks, we can get from an epistemology of the other to traditional episte-
mology. Quine’s move might appear to just beg the question against the skeptic again. 
However, the sting of traditional skepticism can be defused by dividing skeptics into two 
groups: those who will not accept anything and those who argue for skepticism on the 
basis of arguments from illusion or the fallibility of science or the like. To the former, we 
can say nothing and must leave them at the crossroads. To the latter, Quine’s point is, 
in effect, a rejection of the skeptic’s move to “transcendentalize” objections which, after 
all, were derived from intersubjective comparisons and errors in the first place. Both the 
skeptic and the epistemologist of the other start from the same intersubjective consid-
erations but the skeptic gives the argument a transcendental turn and then complains 
that appeals to intersubjective experience are question-begging. The epistemologist of 
the other seeks to block the transcendental turn that leads to all the “veil of illusions” 
objections which have plagued post-Cartesian epistemology. The solution is to avoid 
being seduced behind the veil in the first place.
Descriptive Versus Prescriptive Epistemology or Evolutionary 
Epistemology and the Tradition
For Campbell (1974a: 413), evolutionary epistemology minimally takes cognizance of 
and is compatible with “man’s status as a product of biological and social evolution.” 
Campbell characterizes his approach to epistemology as “descriptive” rather than “ana-
lytic” or prescriptive. A descriptive epistemology is “descriptive of man as knower.” 
Descriptive epistemologies, minimally, put constraints on prescriptive epistemologies. 
So, Campbell argues, an evolutionary picture of human development rules out (1) the 
view that truth is divinely revealed to humans; (2) direct realism, which assumes that 
human beings have veridical perception of the world; and, (3) epistemologies based on 
ordinary language analysis. Descriptive epistemology is a branch of science rather than 
traditional philosophy (Campbell 1974b: 141). As such, it is both hypothetical and 
contingent (Brewer and Collins 1981: 12).
Fred Dretske (1971: 586) agrees that evolutionary considerations might be construed 
as explanations for why organisms, in general, get things right but he argues that this 
has no particular epistemological significance, just as the fact that well trained rats invari-
ably find their way through mazes does not entail that the rats know their way through 
the maze. Human beings, unlike rats, make judgments. Evolutionary theory and, by 
implication, evolutionary epistemology fails to address the central issues of “true” 

EVOLUTIONARY EPISTEMOLOGY
857
epistemology such as what counts as the right to be sure, what counts as adequate evi-
dence, what counts as a good or the best explanation, and how to distinguish between 
conclusive and inconclusive reasons (Dretske 1971; Kim 1988).
Campbell does not disagree with this assessment. Descriptive epistemology, in his 
view, is trying to do something different from traditional epistemology (1974b: 140). 
What then is the relationship between evolutionary epistemology and traditional 
epistemology? There are three possibilities:
1. Descriptive epistemology is a competitor to traditional epistemology. On this view, 
both are trying to address the same concerns and offering competing solutions 
(Riedl 1984). Dretske and Jaegwon Kim, among others, argue that descriptive epis-
temology in this sense fails to touch the traditional questions and thereby, is epis-
temologically irrelevant. The force of this argument is tempered by the extent to 
which one rejects the “tradition” as irrelevant or uninteresting.
2. Descriptive epistemology might be seen as a successor discipline to traditional epis-
temology. On this reading, descriptive epistemology does not address the questions 
of traditional epistemology because it deems them irrelevant or unanswerable or 
uninteresting (Dewey 1910; Quine 1969; Davidson 1973; Bartley 1976, 1987; 
Dennett 1978; Harman 1982; Munz 1985; Kornblith 1985).
3. Descriptive epistemology might be seen as complementary to traditional epistemol-
ogy. This appears to be Campbell’s view. Campbell admits that descriptive epis-
temology, in his sense, does beg the traditional epistemological question of how 
knowledge is possible. Descriptive epistemology, as he sees it, attempts to explore 
the problem of knowledge from “within the framework of contingent knowledge, 
and by assuming such knowledge” (1974b: 141).
Assessment and Future Prospects
The heyday of constructive and critical work in evolutionary epistemology was the 
period from the 1970s through the 1990s. For a while, memetics was the rage but this, 
for the moment, seems to have run its course as well. Evolutionary psychologists have 
made contributions to our understanding of the phylogenetic development of cognitive 
mechanisms but that work, although promising, is in its infancy and still controversial. 
Its lasting significance remains to be determined.
It is still an open question whether an evolutionary epistemology can shed any inter-
esting light on the emergence and nature of epistemic norms. Recent work relying on 
computer simulations of evolving populations by Brian Skyrms (1996, 2004) and Bill 
Harms (2004) holds open the possibility of explaining how we come to adopt the epis-
temic norms and methodologies that we do. It is less clear, however, whether such work 
will be able to serve as the basis for any more than a pragmatic justification of these 
norms and methods. From an evolutionary perspective, this might be the best we can 
or ought to hope for.
Finally, much of the work in evolutionary epistemology to date has focused on selec-
tionist scenarios. But, natural selection, although it might be the major factor in bio-
logical evolution is by no means the only factor. In addition, traits can become fixed 
through a process of random drift or as a result of developmental constraints, among 
other options. Our cognitive and epistemic capacities are adaptive complex features 
that are perhaps unlikely to be the result of drift or chance. However, if these capacities 

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
858
are the product of physiological or psychological developmental constraints or are the 
byproducts of selection for other traits, this has potentially serious implications for our 
understanding of what we know and how we know it. At the very least, the adequacy of 
some EEM accounts would need to be re-evaluated. The implication of such possibili-
ties for EET accounts remains to be explored.
References
Barkow, J. H., Cosmides, L. and Tooby, J. (Eds.) (1992) The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the 
Generation of Culture, New York, Oxford University Press.
Bartley, W. W. (1976) The Philosophy of Karl Popper: Part I: Biology and Evolutionary Epistemology. 
Philosophia 6, 463–494.
—— (1987) Philosophy of Biology versus Philosophy of Physics. In Radnitzky, G. and Bartley III, W. W. (Eds.) 
Evolutionary Epistemology: Theory of Rationality and the Sociology of Knowledge, LaSalle, IL, Open Court.
Bechtel, W. (1984) The Evolution of the Understanding of the Cell: A Study in the Dynamics of Scientific 
Progress. Studies in the History and Philosophy of Science 15, 304–356.
Blackwell, R. J. (1973) Toulmin’s Model of an Evolutionary Epistemology. Modern Schoolman: A Quarterly 
Journal of Philosophy, 51, 62–68.
Bradie, M. (1986) Assessing Evolutionary Epistemology. Biology & Philosophy, 4, 401–459.
—— (1989) Evolutionary Epistemology as Naturalized Epistemology. In Hahlweg, K. & Hooker, C. A. 
(Eds.) Issues in Evolutionary Epistemology, Albany, NY, SUNY.
Brewer, M. B. and Collins, B. E. (1981) Scientific Inquiry and the Social Sciences, San Francisco, Jossey-Bass.
Buller, D. (2005) Adapting Minds: Evolutionary Psychology and the Persistent Quest for Human Nature, 
Cambridge, MA, MIT.
Bunge, M. (1983) Treatise on Basic Philosophy, V. 5: Epistemology and Methodology I: Exploring the World, 
Dordrecht, Reidel.
Campbell, D. T. (1960) Blind Variation and Selective Retention in Creative Thought as in Other Knowledge 
Processes. Psychological Review, 67, 380–400.
—— (1974a) Evolutionary Epistemology. In Schilpp, P. A. (Ed.) The Philosophy of Karl Popper. LaSalle, IL, 
Open Court.
—— (1974b) Unjustified Variation and Selective Retention in Scientific Discovery. In Ayala, F. J. & 
Dobzhansky, T. (Eds.) Studies in the Philosophy of Biology. London, MacMillan.
—— (1975) On the Conflicts between Biological and Social Evolution and between Psychology and Moral 
Tradition. American Psychologist, 30, 1103–1126.
—— (1979) A Tribal Model of the Social System Vehicle Carrying Scientific Knowledge. Knowledge, 2, 
181–201.
Changeux, J.-P. (1985) Neuronal Man: The Biology of Mind, NY: Pantheon.
Cziko, G. (1995) Without Miracles: Universal Selection Theory and the Second Darwinian Revolution, Cambridge, 
MA, MIT.
Davidson, D. (1973) On the Very Idea of a Conceptual Scheme. Proceedings of the American Philosophical 
Association.
Dawkins, R. (1983) Universal Darwinism. In Bendal, D. S. (Ed.) Evolution from Molecules to Men. Cambridge, 
Cambridge University Press.
Dennett, D. (1978) Brainstorms: Philosophical Essays on Mind and Psychology, Montgomery, VT, Bradford.
—— (1995) Darwin’s Dangerous Idea, New York, Simon & Schuster.
Dewey, J. (1910) The Influence of Darwin on Philosophy and Other Essays in Contemporary Thought, New York, 
Henry Holt.
Dretske, F. (1971) Perception from an Epistemological Point of View. Journal of Philosophy, 68, 584–591.
—— (1985) Machines and the Mental. Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association, 
59, 23–33.
Edelman, G. M. (1987) Neural Darwinism: The Theory of Neuronal Group Selection, New York, Basic.
Elster, J. (1979) Ulysses and the Sirens: Studies in Rationality and Irrationality, New York, Cambridge University 
Press.
Fleck, L. (1979) Genesis and Development of a Scientific Fact, Chicago, University of Chicago Press.
Gould, S. J. (1989) Wonderful Life: The Burgess Shale and the Nature of History. New York, W. W. Norton 
and Co.

EVOLUTIONARY EPISTEMOLOGY
859
—— and Lewontin, R. C. (1979) The Spandrels of San Marco and the Panglossian Paradigm: A Critique of 
the Adaptationist Programme. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, B, 205.
Harman, G. (1982) Metaphysical Realism and Moral Relativism. Journal of Philosophy, 79, 568–575.
Harms, W. F. (2004) Information and Meaning in Evolutionary Processes, New York, Cambridge University 
Press.
Hull, D. (1973) A Populational Approach to Scientific Change. Science, 182, 1121–1124.
—— (1975) Central Subjects and Historical Narratives. History and Theory, 14, 253–274.
—— (1982) The Naked Meme. In Plotkin, H. C. (Ed.) Learning, Development and Culture. New York, Wiley 
& Sons.
—— (1988) Science as a Process: An Evolutionary Account of the Social and Conceptual Development of Science, 
Chicago, University of Chicago Press.
James, W. (1983 [1890]) Principles of Psychology, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press.
Kary, C. (1982) Can Darwinian Inheritance be Extended from Biology to Epistemology? In Asquith, P. D. & 
Nickles, T. (Eds.) Psa 1982. Philosophy of Science Association.
Kim, J. (1988) What is “Naturalized Epistemology”? Philosophical Perspectives, 381–405.
Kornblith, H. (1985) Naturalizing Epistemology, Cambridge, MA, MIT.
Kuhn, T. S. (1962) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, Chicago, University of Chicago Press.
Lakatos, I. and Musgrave, A. (1970) Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge, Cambridge, Cambridge University 
Press.
Laudan, L. (1990) Normative Naturalism. Philosophy of Science, 57, 44–59.
Lewontin, R. C. (1982) Organism and Environment. In Plotkin, H. C. (Ed.) Learning, Development and 
Culture. New York, Wiley and Sons.
Lorenz, K. (1977) Behind the Mirror, London, Methuen.
—— (1982) Kant’s Doctrine of the A Priori in the Light of Contemporary Biology. In Plotkin, H. C. (Ed.) 
Learning, Development, and Culture: Essays in Evolutionary Epistemology. New York, Wiley & Sons.
Munz, P. (1985) Our Knowledge of the Growth of Knowledge: Popper or Wittgenstein?, London, Routledge.
—— (1993) Philosophical Darwinism: On the Origin of Knowledge by Means of Natural Selection, London, 
Routledge.
Plotkin, H. (1993) Darwin Machines and the Nature of Knowledge, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University 
Press.
Popper, K. (1961) The Logic of Scientific Discovery, New York, Science Editions.
—— (1962) Conjectures and Refutations, New York, Basic.
—— (1972) Objective Knowledge: An Evolutionary Approach, Oxford, Clarendon.
—— (1984) Evolutionary Epistemology. In Pollard, J. W. (Ed.) Evolutionary Theory: Paths into the Future. 
London, Wiley & Sons.
Popper, K. and Eccles, J. (1977) The Self and Its Brain, New York, Springer.
Quine, W. V. (1969) Ontological Relativity, and Other Essays, New York, Columbia University Press.
—— (1981) Theories and Things, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press.
—— (1990) Pursuit of Truth, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press.
Radnitzky, G. and Bartley III, W. W. (1987) Evolutionary Epistemology, Rationality, and the Sociology of 
Knowledge, LaSalle, Illinois, Open Court.
Rescher, N. (1977) Methodological Pragmatism, Oxford, Blackwell.
—— (1990) A Useful Inheritance: Evolutionary Aspects of the Theory of Knowledge, Savage, MD, Rowman & 
Littlefield.
Richards, R. J. (1987) Darwin and the Emergence of Evolutionary Theories of Mind and Behavior, Chicago, 
University of Chicago Press.
Richardson, R. C. (2007) Evolutionary Psychology as Maladapted Psychology, Cambridge, MA, MIT.
Riedl, R. (1984) Biology of Knowledge: The Evolutionary Basis of Reason, New York, Wiley & Sons.
Ruse, M. (1986) Taking Darwin Seriously, Blackwell: Oxford.
Skagestad, P. (1979) C. S. Peirce on Biological Evolution and Scientific Progress. Synthese, 41, 85–114.
Skinner, B. F. (1981) Selection by Consequences. Science, 213, 501–504.
Skyrms, B. (1996) Evolution of the Social Contract, New York, Cambridge University Press.
—— (2004) The Stag Hunt and the Evolution of Social Structure, New York, Cambridge University Press.
Somenzi, V. (1980) Scientific Discovery from the Viewpoint of Evolutionary Epistemology. In Grmk, M. D., 
Cohen, R. S. and Cimino, G. (Eds.) On Scientific Discovery. Dordrecht, Reidel.
—— (1981) Discovery from the Viewpoint of Evolutionary Epistemology. On Scientific Discovery: The Erice 
Lectures 1977. Boston, Reidel.

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
860
Sperber, Dan. (1996) Explaining Culture: A Naturalistic Approach, Oxford, Blackwell.
Stroud, B. (1981) The Significance of Naturalized Epistemology. In French, P. A., Uehling, T. G. J. and 
Wettstein, H. K. (Eds.) Midwest Studies in Philosophy VI. Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press.
Thagard, P. (1980) Against Evolutionary Epistemology. In Asquith, P. D. and Giere, R. N. (Eds.) Psa 1980. 
Philosophy of Science Association.
Toulmin, S. (1967) The Evolutionary Development of Natural Science. American Scientist, 55, 456–467.
—— (1972) Human Understanding: The Collective Use and Evolution of Concepts, Princeton, Princeton 
University Press.
—— (1981) Evolution, Adaptation, and Human Understanding. In Brewer, M. B. and Collins, B. E. (Eds.) 
Scientific Inquiry and the Social Sciences: A Volume in Honor of Donald T. Campbell. San Francisco, Jossey-
Bass.
Vollmer, G. (1987) On Supposed Circularities in an Empirically Oriented Epistemology. In Radnitzsky, 
G. and Bartley III, W. W. (Eds.) Evolutionary Epistemology: Theory of Rationality and the Sociology of 
Knowledge. LaSalle, IL, Open Court.
Wright, C. (1971) Philosophical Discussions, New York, Franklin.

76
PRAGMATIST
EPISTEMOLOGY
Cheryl Misak
1. Introduction
The thought at the heart of pragmatism is that we must look to the consequences of a 
concept in order to fully understand it. This pragmatic maxim gives rise to its inquiry-
centered, anti-foundationalist account of truth, on which truth is not a relationship 
between our beliefs and the believer-independent world but, rather, is the best we 
human inquirers could do. It also gives rise to the central themes running through prag-
matist epistemologies: empiricism, naturalism, fallibilism, and holism.
Pragmatists are empiricists in that they require beliefs and theories to be linked to 
experience; they are naturalists in that they want their philosophical explanations 
down-to-earth (natural as opposed to supernatural)—they require philosophical theo-
ries and norms to arise from our everyday practices; they are fallibilists in that they 
think that none of our beliefs provide us with a certain foundation for knowledge; and 
they are holists in that they take their view of truth and inquiry to encompass all areas 
of inquiry.
This is not to say that pragmatists form one happy family. A debate within prag-
matism that began between James and Peirce continues to this day. The debate arises 
between those who take pragmatism to suggest that there is no truth and objectivity to 
be had anywhere and those who take pragmatism to promise an account of truth that 
preserves our cognitive aspiration to get things right. On the one side of the debate we 
have Richard Rorty and his classical predecessors (James) saying that there is no truth, 
as we usually understand it, at which we might aim—only what works for me, or secures 
solidarity for our community.
On the other side of the divide, we have those who think of pragmatism as rejecting 
ahistorical, transcendental, or metaphysical theories of truth, but nonetheless being 
committed to doing justice to the fact that those engaged in deliberation and inves-
tigation take themselves to be aiming at getting things right, avoiding mistakes, and 
improving their beliefs and theories.
This more objective kind of pragmatism emanates from the founder of the doctrine, 
Charles Sanders Peirce. On this view, the fact that our inquiries are historically situated 
does not entail that they lack objectivity. Neither does the fact that standards of objec-
tivity themselves come into being and evolve. The trail of the human serpent is over 
everything (to use James’ phrase), but (as James himself might or might not have seen) 

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
862
this does not toss us into a sea of arbitrariness, where there is no truth or where truth 
varies from person to person or community to community. In what follows, Peirce’s 
epistemology will be articulated, followed by accounts of how the epistemological views 
of other core pragmatists—William James, John Dewey, W.V.O. Quine, and Richard 
Rorty—merge with it or diverge from it.
2. C.S. Peirce and the Empiricist Background
Peirce (1839–1914) tries to get us to see the difference between three respectable tasks: 
(i) providing an analytic definition of a concept, which might be useful to someone who 
has never encountered the concept before; (ii) knowing how to pick out instances of 
the concept; and (iii) providing a pragmatic elucidation of it—an account of the role 
the concept plays in practical endeavors.
His interest of course lies in the third project. His best expressions of the maxim are 
of the following sort: we “must look to the upshot of our concepts in order to rightly 
apprehend them” (Peirce 1934: vol. 5, s. 4); in order to get a complete grasp of a con-
cept, we must connect it to that with which we have “dealings” (Peirce 1934: vol. 5, s. 
416). Perhaps the most elegant is this:
we must not begin by talking of pure ideas,—vagabond thoughts that tramp the 
public roads without any human habitation,—but must begin with men and 
their conversation.
(Peirce 1958: vol. 8, s. 112)
There is a clear whiff of verificationism here and, indeed, the early pragmatists 
were intensely interested in the verificationism of Auguste Comte’s. But Peirce’s 
maxim is not designed to give us a tidy principle to demarcate the spurious from the 
non-spurious. It is not a semantic principle about the very meaning of our concepts—
it is not designed to capture a full account of meaning. David Wiggins gets Peirce’s 
considered view of the pragmatic maxim exactly right. When a concept is “already 
fundamental to human thought and long since possessed of an autonomous interest,” it 
is pointless to try to define it (Wiggins 2002: 316; see also Misak 1991[2004]). Rather, 
we ought to attempt to get leverage on the concept, or a fix on it, by exploring its con-
nections with experience and practice. This is the empiricist insight at the heart of 
pragmatism.
Peirce worried over what kinds of consequences counted—over what kinds of 
things we must expect from our beliefs. In one of the few papers he published in his 
stunted career (“How to Make Our Ideas Clear”) he says those that count must be 
consequences, “direct or indirect,” for the senses (Peirce 1986: vol. 3, 266). But for 
the most part, he tries to divert our focus from sensory experience and direct it to a 
broader notion of experience that would have been an anathema to the logical 
empiricists.
Experience, for Peirce, is that which is compelling, surprising, unchosen, brute, invol-
untary, or forceful:
anything is . . . to be classed under the species of perception wherein a positive 
qualitative content is forced upon one’s acknowledgment without any reason 
or pretension to reason. There will be a wider genus of things partaking of the 

PRAGMATIST EPISTEMOLOGY
863
character of perception, if there be any matter of cognition which exerts a 
force upon us.
(Peirce 1958: vol. 7, s. 623)
This extremely broad conception of experience is clearly going to allow for a criterion 
of legitimacy that allows beliefs other than those which are directly verifiable by the 
senses.
There is no claim in this account of experience that reports of experience are a kind 
of introspection about which the experiencer cannot be mistaken. Nothing is implied, 
that is, about being given something pure or unadulterated. Experience is the tribunal 
wherein beliefs are tested, but it does not give us access to a truth unclothed by human 
cognitive capacities and interests. This fallibilism and aversion to the “Given” is an 
essential platform of any pragmatist’s epistemology.
Peirce was clear, however, that fallibilism does not entail that we ought to follow 
Descartes and try to bring into doubt all beliefs about which error is conceivable. Such 
doubts would be, Peirce argued, “paper” or “tin”—not the genuine article. He says:
there is but one state of mind from which you can ‘set out’, namely, the very 
state of mind in which you actually find yourself at the time you do ‘set out’—a 
state in which you are laden with an immense mass of cognition already formed, 
of which you cannot divest yourself if you would . . . Do you call it doubting to 
write down on a piece of paper that you doubt? If so, doubt has nothing to do 
with any serious business.
(Peirce 1933: vol. 5, s. 416)
Our body of background beliefs is susceptible to doubt on a piecemeal basis, if that doubt 
is prompted by surprising or recalcitrant experience. We must regard our background 
beliefs as true, until some surprising experience throws one or some group of them into 
doubt.
So on the Peircean epistemology, an inquirer has a fallible background of “common-
sense” belief which is not in fact in doubt. Only against such a background can a belief 
be put into doubt and a new, better, belief be adopted. All our beliefs are fallible but they 
do not come into doubt all at once. Those which inquiry has not thrown into doubt are 
stable and we should retain them until a reason to doubt arises.
The scientific method, Peirce argues, is the method which pays close attention to the 
fact that beliefs fall to the surprise of recalcitrant experience. Here is his metaphor for 
science or inquiry: It “is not standing upon the bedrock of fact. It is walking upon a bog, 
and can only say, this ground seems to hold for the present. Here I will stay till it begins 
to give way” (Peirce 1934: vol. 5, s. 589).
The first step in the scientific method is what Peirce called an abductive inference: 
a hypothesis or a conjecture is identified that explains some surprising experience. 
Consequences are then deduced from this hypothesis and are tested by induction. If the 
hypothesis passes the test of experience, then it is accepted—it is stable and believed 
until upset by experience.
What is the source of the authority of experience on this view? We clearly have no 
recourse to the idea that the authority of experience comes via its incorrigibility. Rather, 
our experiential judgments are authoritative in that we have no choice but to pay atten-
tion to them. They arrive uncritically and then we subject them to reason and scrutiny. 

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
864
When we are careful in evaluating our experiential judgments, they tend not to lead us 
astray and hence our taking them seriously seems wise as well as necessary.
So unlike the logical empiricists, Peirce was not interested in narrowing the scope 
of legitimate inquiry to the empirical sciences. But like them, he was concerned to set 
out some principles that would indeed allow one to distinguish the legitimate from the 
illegitimate. His treatment of mathematical and logical beliefs is the most interesting 
example of what he was trying to achieve. In it, we see the beginnings of the project of 
holism.
The history of empiricism is littered with attempts to show how mathematical and 
logical statements, although apparently unconnected to experience, are nonetheless 
legitimate. Most of those attempts (think of Hume and the logical empiricists) trade 
on the idea that mathematics and logic are somehow exempt from the rigors of the 
empiricist criterion.
Peirce argued that mathematical and logical hypotheses are indeed connected to 
experience in the requisite way. They meet the requirement set out in the pragmatic 
maxim: we expect certain things to be the case if they are true. Not only might we 
have practical or applied or bridge-building expectations about mathematics, but even 
hypotheses in pure mathematics and logic have consequences. They have consequences, 
Peirce argued, in diagrammatic contexts. Diagrams provide us with a forum for matters 
to impinge upon us.
Peirce put considerable effort into trying to get this thought right. (Indeed, he devel-
oped his first-order quantified logic using a diagrammatic proof system just as Frege was 
developing his own logic.) Mathematical and logical inquiry:
involves an element of observation; namely, [it] consists in constructing an 
icon or diagram the relation of whose parts shall present a complete analogy 
with those of the parts of the object of reasoning, of experimenting upon this 
image in the imagination, and of observing the result so as to discover unno-
ticed and hidden relations among the parts.
(Peirce 1986: vol. 3, 41)
The mathematician’s “hypotheses are creatures of his own imagination; but he discov-
ers in them relations which surprise him sometimes” (Peirce 1958: vol. 5, s. 567). This 
surprise is the force of experience.
Of course, one thing that needs attention is the matter of saying just which kinds of 
‘ideal’ experiences count and which do not. Peirce struggled with this problem, never 
getting it quite right. But we shall see below that he certainly thought that James got it 
wrong.
3. Peirce and the Pragmatist Account of Truth
The concept of truth is one of those concepts, fundamental to human thought, in which 
we have a long-standing autonomous interest. Peirce thinks that it can be illuminated 
by looking at our practices—the practices of doubt, belief, inquiry and assertion, which 
are the human dealings relevant to truth. His is thus a naturalist account of truth—we 
should not add anything metaphysical to science, or to any other first-order inquiry. We 
have to extract the concept of truth, as it were, from our practices of inquiry, reason-
giving, and deliberation.

PRAGMATIST EPISTEMOLOGY
865
When Peirce turns his pragmatic maxim on the concept of truth, the upshot is an 
aversion to ‘transcendental’ accounts of truth, such as the correspondence theory, on 
which a true belief is one that gets right or mirrors the believer-independent world 
(Peirce 1934: vol. 5, s. 572). Such accounts of truth are examples of those “vagabond 
thoughts.” They make truth “the subject of metaphysics exclusively.” For the very idea 
of the believer-independent world, and the items within it to which beliefs or sentences 
might correspond, seem graspable only if we could somehow step outside of our corpus 
of belief, our practices, or that with which we have dealings.
So, for instance, once we see that truth and assertion are intimately connected—once 
we see that to assert that p is true is to assert p—we can look to our practices of asser-
tion to see what commitments they entail. As Wiggins puts it, hard on the heels of the 
thought that truth is internally related to assertion comes the thought that truth is also 
internally related to inquiry, reasons, evidence, and standards of good belief (Wiggins 
2004). If we unpack the commitments we incur when we assert, we find that we have 
imported all these notions.
Peirce argues that when we think of how truth engages with our practices, we shall 
see that we need to think of a true belief as the very best that inquiry could do—a belief 
that would be “indefeasible”; or would not be improved upon; or would never lead to 
disappointment; or would forever meet the challenges of reasons, argument, and evi-
dence. A true belief is a belief we would come to, were we to inquire as far as we could 
on a matter (Peirce 1934: vol. 5, s. 569; Peirce 1935: vol. 6, s. 485).
He initially put this idea in the following unhelpful way: a true belief would be agreed 
upon at the hypothetical or “fated” end of inquiry (Peirce 1986: vol. 3, 273). But his 
considered and much better formulations are the ones above. A true belief would with-
stand doubt, were we to inquire as far as we fruitfully could into the matter. On the 
whole, he tries to stay away from unhelpful ideas such as the final end of inquiry, perfect 
evidence, and the like.
This is not to say that truth has now been identified as that which satisfies our aims in 
assertion and inquiry. We must be careful to not take these elucidations of truth to be 
attempts at analytic definition. A dispute about definition, he says, is usually a “profit-
less discussion” (Peirce 1958: vol. 8, s. 100).
One way of describing this project is to say that Peirce deflates the idea of truth by 
linking it to belief, assertion, experience, and inquiry. What we do when we offer a jus-
tification of ‘p is true’ is to offer a justification for the claim that p. If we want to know 
whether it is true that Toronto is north of Buffalo, there is nothing additional to check 
on (“a fact,” “a state of affairs”)—nothing over and above our consulting maps, driving 
or walking north from Buffalo to see whether we get to Toronto, etc. The question of 
the truth of the statement does not involve anything more than investigating the matter 
in our usual ways.
On Peirce’s view, we aim at beliefs which would be forever stable; we aim at getting 
the best beliefs we can. We have in our various inquiries and deliberations a multiplicity 
of local aims—empirical adequacy, coherence with other beliefs, simplicity, explanatory 
power, getting a reliable guide to action, fruitfulness for other research, greater under-
standing of others, increased maturity, and the like. When we say that we aim at the 
truth, what we mean is that, were a belief really to satisfy all of our local aims in inquiry, 
then that belief would be true. There is nothing over and above the fulfillment of 
those aims, nothing metaphysical, to which we aspire. Truth is not some transcendental, 
mystical thing which we aim at for its own sake.

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
866
4. William James on Truth and Consequences
James (1842–1910) was America’s most famous intellectual at the turn of the 1900s—in 
psychology as well as philosophy—and hence, his version of pragmatism has spread 
far and wide. It attracted critical attention (famously from Bertrand Russell and G.E. 
Moore) and was very much the view identified as pragmatism. But the epistemology and 
view of truth put forward by James, while on the surface very similar to Peirce’s, was in 
fact significantly different.
James calls himself a “radical empiricist.” All inquiry must begin with, and then 
advance through, experience. The “postulate” of radical empiricism is this: “the only 
things that shall be debatable among philosophers shall be things definable in terms 
drawn from experience” (James 1909[1914]: 138). He adopts the anti-foundationalist 
epistemology characteristic of all pragmatists and offers us this kind of pragmatist meta-
phor for the growth of knowledge. One can liken the change in belief to house renova-
tions: “You may alter your house ad libitum, but the ground plan of the first architect 
persists—you can make great changes, but you can not change a Gothic church into a 
Doric temple” (James 1907[1949]: 170).
But another part of what he means by ‘radical empiricism’ is that he intends to bring 
together empiricism and religion. James thinks that religious belief is grounded in expe-
rience—in mystical feelings. He says that although he cannot feel what the mystics 
felt, he has to rely on their reports, just as he relies on the reports of scientific experts 
who tell him what they saw. The experience had in trances, dreams, and the like are 
legitimate by James’ lights. These experiences are direct perceptions of fact for those 
who have them, just as the five senses deliver direct perceptions of fact for the majority 
(James 1907[1949]: 336). James infamously argued in ‘The Will to Believe’ that if a reli-
gious hypothesis has consequences for a believer’s life, it is acceptable. James’ holism has 
it that religious hypotheses, like all hypotheses, need to be verified, but the verification 
in question involves finding out only what works best for the believer:
If religious hypotheses about the universe be in order at all, then the active 
faiths of individuals in them, freely expressing themselves in life, are the 
experimental tests by which they are verified, and the only means by which 
their truth or falsehood can be wrought out. The truest scientific hypothesis 
is that which, as we say, ‘works best’; and it can be no otherwise with religious 
hypotheses.
(James 1897[1979]b: 8)
James’ view of truth and objectivity thus: “Any idea upon which we can ride . . . any idea 
that will carry us prosperously from any one part of our experience to any other part, 
linking things satisfactorily, working securely, simplifying, saving labor, is . . . true instru-
mentally” (James 1907[1949]: 58). “Satisfactorily,” for James, “means more satisfactorily 
to ourselves, and individuals will emphasize their points of satisfaction differently. To a 
certain degree, therefore, everything here is plastic” (James 1907[1949]: 61).
Sometimes he puts his position as follows: “True ideas are those that we can assimi-
late, validate, corroborate and verify”; “truth happens to an idea” (James 1907[1949]: 
20). He rather infamously suggested in “The Will to Believe” that if the belief in God 
made a positive or a good impact on someone’s life, then it could reasonably be taken 
as true by that person.

PRAGMATIST EPISTEMOLOGY
867
It is this kind of statement of pragmatism that inspired so much vitriol. As Russell 
argued, one can take ‘works’ or ‘pays’ in two very different ways. In science, a hypoth-
esis works if we can deduce a number of verifiable hypotheses from it. But for James, a 
hypothesis works if
the effects of believing it are good, including among the effects . . . the emo-
tions entailed by it or its perceived consequences, and the actions to which 
we are prompted by it or its perceived consequences. This is a totally different 
conception of ‘working’, and one for which the authority of scientific proce-
dure cannot be invoked.
(Russell 1966[1992]: 210)
Peirce levels the same kind of objection at James. He tells him in a 1909 letter: “I 
thought your Will to Believe was a very exaggerated utterance, such as injures a serious 
man very much” (Skrupskelis and Berkekey (eds) 1992–2004: vol. 12, 171). James’ view 
amounts to: “Oh, I could not believe so-and-so, because I should be wretched if I did” 
(Peirce 1934: vol. 5, s. 378).
G.E. Moore also interrogated the linkage between the true and the useful. If useful-
ness is a property that might come and go (in James’ own words), then “a belief, which 
occurs at several different times, may be true at some of the times at which it occurs, 
and yet untrue at others” (Moore 1907[1992]: 183). The truth of a belief, that is, seems 
to vary from time to time and from culture to culture. Truth is not a stable property of 
beliefs and that is an anathema, in Moore’s view.
James railed against these often harshly put objections, claiming that they had a 
“fantastic” and “slanderous” character and were based on willful misinterpretation 
(James 1909[1914]: xv; 180). His protests, however, had very little impact, as he tended 
to utter the obvious absurdities in his less careful moods.
James Pratt in 1909 makes a distinction that can help to think about the various 
kinds of pragmatist accounts of truth. Pragmatism, Pratt says,
seeks to prove the truth of religion by its good and satisfactory consequences. 
Here, however, a distinction must be made; namely between the ‘good’, harmo-
nious, and logically confirmatory consequences of religious concepts as such, 
and the good and pleasant consequences which come from believing these con-
cepts. It is one thing to say a belief is true because the logical consequences that 
flow from it fit in harmoniously with our otherwise grounded knowledge; and 
quite another to call it true because it is pleasant to believe.
(Pratt 1909: 186–7)
The difference between the views of Peirce and James can be nicely summarized 
by Pratt’s distinction, with two caveats. Peirce holds that “a belief is true because 
the logical consequences that flow from it fit in harmoniously with our otherwise 
grounded knowledge” and James at times seems to hold that a belief is true “because it is 
pleasant to believe.” The first caveat is that Peirce insisted on a subjunctive formula-
tion: a belief is true if the logical consequences would fit harmoniously with our oth-
erwise grounded knowledge, were we to pursue our investigations as far as they could 
fruitfully go. Hence, Peirce preserves the stability of truth—it is not a property that 
comes and goes.

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
868
The second caveat is that James, as his protests suggest, sometimes put forward a 
more careful and subtle account of truth, one that was much closer to Peirce’s. He was 
concerned to characterize truth as something that was of human value, without making 
a true belief what this or that human finds valuable at this or that time. The true, he 
says, is “the expedient,” but the expedient “in the long run and on the whole, of course” 
(James 1909[1914]: vii). That is, James too wants to argue that true beliefs are beliefs 
that survive because they deserve to survive.
5. John Dewey and Instrumentalism
John Dewey (1859–1952) was younger than Peirce and James and outlived them by 
four decades. After James’ death in 1910, Dewey became the standard-bearer for prag-
matism. Like James, he was an extremely high-profile public intellectual in America, 
thoroughly enmeshed in the important debates of his time.
His over-riding mission was to encourage scientific thought in all branches of philos-
ophy. He argued that as thought becomes more scientific, it becomes more rational and 
progressive. In every realm of inquiry, beliefs are to be tested by experience. Political, 
social, and ethical questions fall under the scope of experimental science. But unlike 
some of his empiricist successors, Dewey placed great emphasis on the fact that all sci-
ence is conducted in a context in which social and psychological factors play significant 
roles.
For Dewey, epistemology is the “theory of inquiry” or “experimental logic.” He adopts, 
pretty much wholesale, Peirce’s doubt-belief model of inquiry. Inquirers begin with a 
problematic situation, arrive at hypotheses which might explain or solve that problem-
atic situation, and then test these hypotheses in action. If the candidate hypotheses are 
successfully employed in action, enabling us to meet our goals, they are true or, as Dewey 
later put it, we can assert them with warrant.
The quest for certainty, he later argued, following through on this pragmatist episte-
mology, is not only a fruitless quest, but in fact isn’t the quest that we are engaged in. No 
one investigating this or that problem aims for certainty. What we aim at is “security” or 
a reliable solution to the problem at hand (Dewey 1981: vol. 4, Ch. 1). Knowledge isn’t 
a relationship between a proposition, a speaker, and the world; rather, knowledge is a 
process involving an inquirer and his or her environment. This is Dewey’s special twist 
on the Peircean account of inquiry. He takes as his focus the idea of an organism trying 
to maintain stability or harmony in its environment—hence his famous attack on “the 
spectator theory of knowledge” (Dewey 1929[1984]: vol. 4, 18–19, 163, 195).
Philosophers, Dewey argues, have thought of knowledge in terms of a visual metaphor. 
This has resulted in the dominant view of knowledge being the Spectator Theory, which 
has it that knowing is a relation between a person and an object—a relationship that can 
be characterized as a passive seeing of the object by the subject. Pragmatists, on the other 
hand, argue that everything that we experience comes laden with active cognition.
With James, Dewey thinks that we make truth. Truth is not a “ready-made” property 
of propositions:
The pragmatist says that since every proposition is a hypothesis referring to an 
inquiry still to be undertaken (a proposal in short) its truth is a matter of its 
career, of its history: that it becomes or is made true (or false).
(Dewey 1911[1998]: 114)

PRAGMATIST EPISTEMOLOGY
869
Again with James, he takes pragmatism to be a species of empiricism. But unlike British 
empiricism, Dewey argues that pragmatism
does not insist upon antecedent phenomena but upon consequent phenomena; 
not upon the precedents but upon the possibilities of action. And this change 
in point of view is almost revolutionary in its consequences.
(Dewey 1925: 8)
So for Dewey, as for James, truth and knowledge are not static phenomena—it is not the 
case that our beliefs either mirror reality (and are hence true) or fail to do so (and are 
hence false). Peirce, on the other hand, thought that truth was static in the sense that a 
belief either would or would not survive the rigors of inquiry. But all three of the classi-
cal pragmatists speak with one voice when they suggest that we are always immersed in 
a context of inquiry, where the decision to be made is a decision about what to believe 
from here, not what to believe were we able to start from scratch—from certain infal-
lible foundations.
Where Dewey most distinguishes himself from his fellow pragmatists is in the exten-
sion of his views of truth and objectivity to ethics and politics. He argues that “the 
problems of men” can be brought under the sweep of science or inquiry. Thus Dewey 
characterized his view as being experimentalist, through and through.
He also tries to offer the beginnings of an answer to a pressing problem for all natural-
ist epistemologies. How is it possible to derive norms from practice? Dewey’s answer to 
this query is to challenge the idea that physical science is normless (Welchman 1995: 
2). It is a mistake to think that science is purely descriptive. Science is a rule-gov-
erned activity—one of developing hypotheses, predictions, and explanations, of decid-
ing what is to count as evidence for or against a hypothesis or prediction, of deciding 
which explanations should be adopted and acted upon, etc. It is shot through with 
methodological principles about how it ought to conduct itself; it is shot through with 
normativity. Similarly, the science of ethics is normative. We develop hypotheses and 
predictions about what people desire, approve, disapprove and we develop prescriptions 
about what they ought to desire, approve, disapprove. We develop prescriptions about 
how people ought to conduct themselves as part and parcel of the science of morals.
6. Willard van Orman Quine
Quine (1908–2000), more than any other twentieth-century thinker, most strikingly 
combines the pragmatist pillars of empiricism, naturalism, and holism. Indeed, when he 
first put his position forward, he was happy placing it in the pragmatist camp. He later 
started to distance himself from pragmatism, as James’ radical position was identified 
with pragmatism.
In the abstract of the 1951 “Two Dogmas of Empiricism,” he asserts that one upshot of 
the paper is “a shift towards pragmatism” (Quine 1980: 20). In the same year, he is easy 
talking about science as being a tool for managing the flux of experience that could be 
right out of James and which could not have failed to bring Dewey to mind:
As an empiricist I continue to think of the conceptual scheme of science as a 
tool, ultimately for predicting future experience in the light of past experience. 
Physical objects are conceptually imported into the situation as convenient 

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
870
intermediaries—not by definition in terms of experience, but simply as irreduc-
ible posits comparable, epistemologically, to the gods of Homer. For my part I 
do, qua lay physicist, believe in physical objects and not in Homer’s gods . . . 
But in point of epistemological footing the physical objects and the gods enter 
our conceptions only as cultural posits. The myth of physical objects is superior 
to most in that it has proved more efficacious than other myths as a device for 
working a manageable structure into the flux of experience.
(Quine 1980: 44)
Quine argues that our entire belief system must be seen as an interconnected web. 
Mathematics and logic are at the center, gradually shading into the theoretical sen-
tences of science, and then to specific observation sentences at the periphery. When 
faced with recalcitrant evidence, we must choose where to make adjustments in our 
web of belief—and no observation sentence is immune from revision. It was Quine who 
made famous Neurath’s metaphor: we are like sailors adrift at sea, never able to return to 
dry dock to reconstruct our boat out of the finest materials. We work with what we have, 
replacing our boat of knowledge plank by plank, as required by the surprise of experi-
ence. The resonances with the metaphors offered by the early pragmatists are striking. 
So is the following:
The naturalistic philosopher begins his reasoning within the inherited world 
theory as a going concern. He tentatively believes all of it, but believes also 
that some unidentified portions are wrong. He tries to improve, clarify and 
understand the system from within.
(Quine 1981: 28)
Indeed, it is a perfect summary of the pragmatism that Peirce, James and Dewey were so 
keen to articulate.
7. Contemporary Pragmatism: The Influence of 
Rorty and the Return to Peirce
In the 1970s Richard Rorty (1931–2007) put forward a pragmatist view that tended 
“to center around James’s version (or, at least, certain selected versions out of the many 
that James casually tossed off) of the pragmatic theory of truth” (Rorty 1995: 71). Rorty 
argues that we must cease thinking of the mind as a great mirror which holds represen-
tations of the world. If we look at the practices of first-order inquiry, we see that such 
notions of truth and objectivity are irrelevant to inquirers. What we aim at is not truth, 
but solidarity or agreement with our peers.
Along with every pragmatist, Rorty thinks that our concept of truth cannot outrun 
our practices of inquiry or our current and ongoing ‘conversations’ in the context of 
which we must form our beliefs, make our decisions, and live our lives. “[T]here is noth-
ing deep down inside us except what we have put there ourselves, no criterion that we 
have not created in the course of creating a practice, no standard of rationality that is 
not an appeal to such a criterion, no rigorous argumentation that is not obedience to our 
own conventions” (Rorty 1982: xlii).
Unlike Peirce, who thinks that he can extract a concept of truth from our prac-
tices, when Rorty examines our practices of inquiry, he finds that truth plays no role 

PRAGMATIST EPISTEMOLOGY
871
whatsoever. He thinks that we should abandon the idea in inquiry and that in philoso-
phy: truth is “not the sort of thing one should expect to have an interesting philosophi-
cal theory about” (Rorty 1982: xiii).
What Rorty finds when he looks at our practices is that the transcendental account of 
truth, which has beliefs or sentences corresponding to something non-human, plays no 
role whatsoever. The yearning for an unconditional, impossible, indefinable, sublime 
thing like truth comes at the price of “irrelevance to practice” (Rorty 2000: 2). Inquirers 
simply do not aim at that sort of thing. Here, of course, he is in line with every other 
pragmatist.
Rorty then takes his step away from Peirce and towards James. Inquirers aim not 
at truth, but at solidarity or what we have come to take as true. Truth and objectiv-
ity are what our peers will let us get away with saying (Rorty 1979: 176). What Rorty 
would like to see is a “post-philosophical culture” in which there are no appeals to 
authority of any kind, including appeals to truth and rationality (Rorty 1982: xlii; 
see also 1995: 71). We are to “substitute the idea of ‘unforced agreement’ for that of 
‘objectivity’” in every domain of inquiry—science as well as morals and politics (Rorty 
1991: 36, 38).
The kinds of criticisms that were put to James are put to Rorty. The charge is that 
Rorty really is a relativist, holding that one belief is no better than another, and that one 
must “treat the epistemic standards of any and every epistemic community as on a par” 
(Haack 1995: 136). Like James, Rorty leaves us with no way of adjudicating claims. It is 
argued that this is not only an unsatisfactory view, but also that it is incompatible with 
Rorty’s commitment to his own set of beliefs and with his practice of arguing or giving 
reasons for them.
Rorty’s response to the charge of relativism is that once we drop the vocabulary 
of truth, reason, and objectivity, we shall see that both relativism and its opposites 
are spurious doctrines. The very idea of a claim’s being relative or having only 
relative validity makes sense only if we have something against which to contrast it—
something like absolute validity (Rorty 1989: 47). Rorty is not putting forward a theory 
of truth, hence he is not putting forward a relativist theory of truth (Rorty 1991: 24; 
1989: 53).
One might argue that the dangers of relativism do not disappear so easily. Calling 
for the dissolution of a dualism, such as that between relativism and absolutism, does 
not guarantee that one succeeds in escaping the pitfalls of one or the other of the two 
positions. After the call for the abandonment of a way of looking at things, one must 
replace the problematic mode of thinking with a new way which really does undercut 
the problems endemic in the old view. This can be seen as the project at the heart of the 
best kind of pragmatist epistemology. It tries to replace the old dichotomy of “objective 
standards or no standards at all” with low-profile, non-absolutist conceptions of truth 
and objectivity which can guide us in our inquiries and deliberations.
Peirce and all his pragmatist successors stress that we are always immersed in a con-
text of inquiry, where the decision to be made is a decision about what to believe from 
here, not what to believe were we able to start from scratch or from certain infallible 
foundations. As one of those successors, Arthur Fine puts it, we of course do not go 
forward arbitrarily (Fine 2007: 56). The central and deep pragmatist challenge is how 
we should go from present practice to a future practice, where our very standards them-
selves might be thrown into question.

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
872
References
Dewey, John (1911[1998]) “The Problem of Truth,” in L. Hickman and T. Alexander (eds.), The Essential 
Dewey: Pragmatism, Education, Democracy, vol. 2, Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
—— (1925) “The Development of American Pragmatism,” in L. Hickman and T. Alexander (eds.), The 
Essential Dewey: Pragmatism, Education, Democracy, vol. 1, Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
—— (1929[1984]) The Quest for Certainty, in J.A. Boydston (ed.), The Later Works of John Dewey 
1925–1953, Vol. iv, Carbondale, IL: Southern University Press.
—— (1981) “Creative Democracy: The Task Before Us,” in J.A. Boydson (ed.), The Later Works of John 
Dewey 1925–1953, vol. 14, Essays, Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.
Fine, Arthur (2007) “Relativism, Pragmatism, and the Practice of Science,” in C. Misak (ed.), New 
Pragmatists, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Haack, Susan (1995) “Vulgar Pragmatism: An Unedifying Prospect,” in H.J. Saakamp, (ed.), Rorty and 
Pragmatism: The Philosopher Responds to his Critics, Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press.
James, William (1897[1979]a) “The Moral Philosopher and the Moral Life,” in The Will to Believe and Other 
Essays in Popular Philosophy, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
—— (1897[1979]b) The Will to Believe and Other Essays in Popular Philosophy, in The Works of William James, 
volume 6, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
—— (1907[1949]) Pragmatism: A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking, New York: Longmans, Green 
and Co.
—— (1909[1914]) The Meaning of Truth: A Sequel to Pragmatism, New York: Longmans Green and Co.
Misak, Cheryl ([1991] 2004) Truth and the End of Inquiry: A Peircean Account of Truth, 2nd edition, Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
—— (ed.) (2007) New Pragmatists, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Moore, G.E. (1907[1992]) “Professor James’s ‘Pragmatism’,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 8, 33–77. 
Reprinted in Olin (1992), 161–195.
Olin, Doris (1992) William James: Pragmatism in Focus, London: Routledge.
Peirce, Charles Sanders (1931–1935; 1958) Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, Vols. 1–6, C. Hartshorne 
and P. Weiss (eds.), 1931–35; Vols. 7 and 8, A. Burks (ed.), 1958, Cambridge MA: Belknap Press.
—— (1981–2000) The Writings of Charles S. Peirce: A Chronological Edition, 1–6 Peirce Edition Project, eds., 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Pratt, J.B. (1909) What is Pragmatism, New York: Macmillan.
Quine, Willard van Orman (1980) “Two Dogmas of Empiricism,” in From a Logical Point of View, 2nd 
edition, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
—— (1981) “The Pragmatist’s Place in Empiricism,” in R. Mulvaney and P. Zeltner (eds.), Pragmatism: Its 
Sources and Prospects, University of South Carolina Press.
Rorty, Richard (1979) Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
—— (1982) Consequences of Pragmatism (Essays 1972–80), Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
—— (1989) Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity, New York: Cambridge University Press.
—— (1991) Objectivity, Relativism, and Truth: Philosophical Papers, vol. 1, Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
—— (1995) “Response to Richard Bernstein,” in H.J. Saakamp (ed.), Rorty and Pragmatism: The Philosopher 
Responds to his Critics, Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press, 
—— (2000) “Universality and Truth,” in R. Brandom (ed.), Rorty and his Critics, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Russell, Bertrand (1966[1992]) “William James’s Conception of Truth,” in Philosophical Essays, London: 
Allen and Unwin. Reprinted in Olin (1992), 196–211.
Skrupskelis, K., Berkekey, E.M. (eds.) (1992–2004) The Correspondence of William James, 12 vols., 
Charlottesville, VA: University Press of Virginia.
Welchman, Jennifer (1995) Dewey’s Ethical Theory, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Wiggins, David (2002) “An Indefinibilist cum Normative View of Truth and the Marks of Truth,” in 
R. Schantz (ed.), What Is Truth?, New York: De Gruyter.
—— (2004) “Reflections on Inquiry and Truth Arising from Peirce’s Method for the Fixation of Belief,” in 
C. Misak (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Peirce, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

77
SOCIAL EPISTEMOLOGY
Martin Kusch
Introduction
“Social epistemology” (SE) can be understood broadly or narrowly. On the broad under-
standing, the expression covers all systematic reflection on the social dimension or 
nature of cognitive achievements such as knowledge, true belief, justified belief, under-
standing, or wisdom. The sociology of knowledge, the social history of science, or the 
philosophy of the social sciences are among the key parts of SE thus construed. Many 
contributors to Pragmatism, Marxism, Critical Theory or Hermeneutics also qualify. On 
the narrow understanding, SE dates from the 1980s, is primarily a philosophical enter-
prise, and has its roots in Anglo-American epistemology, in feminist theory, as well as 
in the philosophy of science. The perspective of this chapter lies between the narrow 
and the broad renderings.
Knowledge in a Social World
Goldman’s Knowledge in a Social World (KSW) (1999) has been crucial in giving structure 
and inspiration to the contemporary field of philosophical SE. The book is divided into 
three parts. Part One lays “foundations.” Goldman points out that SE can take different 
forms, depending on whether individuals or groups are taken as knowers. Adopting the 
former perspective, KSW investigates how individuals gain knowledge in and through 
their interactions with one another. Knowledge is taken in the “weak” sense of (merely) 
“true belief.” Goldman’s focus is on the evaluation of the truth-conduciveness (“veritis-
tic quality”) of social practices. In order to develop “veritism” systematically, Goldman 
develops a semi-formal measure of “veritistic value.” One way to spell out this value 
involves defining the V-value of a true belief as 1.0; the V-value of a rejection of a true 
proposition as .0; and the V-value of withholding judgment regarding a true proposition 
as .5. An epistemic practice π1 has a higher V-value than another epistemic practice π2 
if using π1 leads to bigger increases in V-value than using π2.
Having introduced his framework, Goldman turns to the veritistic analysis of “generic 
social practices” in Part Two. Such generic social practices are testimony, argumentation 
and communication. KSW’s main idea concerning second-hand knowledge is that our 
normal practice for assessing testimony can be improved by relying on Bayes Theorem. 
KSW goes on to distinguish fourteen standards for good argumentation. Goldman puts 
much emphasis on what he calls the “truth-in-evidence principle”: “A larger body of 
evidence is generally a better indicator of the truth-value of a hypothesis than a smaller, 
contained body of evidence, as long as all the evidence propositions are true and what 

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
874
they indicate is correctly interpreted” (1999: 145). Part Two concludes with a wide-
ranging discussion of “the technology and economics of communication.” Goldman 
seeks to refute the idea that “more total V-value will be achieved if speech is regulated 
only by free market mechanisms rather than by other forms of regulation” (1999: 194). 
Goldman shows that economic theory does not support this view and that non-market 
regulation is needed to prevent false but persuasive speech.
Part Three turns from “generic social practices” to the “special domains” of science, 
law, democracy, and education. Concerning science Goldman covers inter alia “sources 
of scientific success,” “the distribution of scientific research” (centralized agencies might 
be needed to make sure that different problem-solving methods are pursued), “scientific 
publication” (editors should aim to publish papers that produce the greatest increase in 
knowledge), and “recognizing authority” (novices can recognize authorities via obser-
vational verification and argumentation). KSW criticizes the veritistic credentials of 
the common-law tradition. Veritistic epistemology cannot accept that certain types of 
evidence (e.g. statistical data) are excluded simply because juries are unable to com-
prehend them. KSW also makes provocative claims concerning democracy. Goldman 
urges voters to acquire such knowledge as would enable them to decide which of the 
candidates would, if elected, produce the best outcome. Finally, regarding education, 
Goldman demands, among other things, that schools enable students to identify truths, 
that postmodern relativism be kept away from children, and that the curriculum must 
respect established scientific expertise.
Social Epistemology and the Classical Tradition
Goldman’s KSW is an intriguing intervention into several contemporary philosophical 
and political debates, a useful summary of much earlier work in SE, a clear map of the 
terrain (as Goldman sees it), and a stimulating outline of possible future directions. 
Many of these suggestions have been taken up in subsequent work both by Goldman 
himself and by many others. Since these developments have already been reviewed 
extensively elsewhere (e.g. Goldman 2002b, 2006, 2009b), I shall concentrate on the 
question of how SE should relate to epistemology as a whole. I shall use Goldman’s 
stance on this issue as a foil for my own view.
Goldman wants to convince the traditionalist—that is, the “classical epistemolo-
gist”—that SE deserves to be counted as “real epistemology” (2009b, 2010). To that 
end, Goldman distinguishes between three forms of SE: “revisionist,” “preservationist,” 
and “expansionist.” The three forms differ in how they relate to the basic assumptions 
of classical epistemology; to wit, that epistemic agents are exclusively individuals; that 
epistemology clarifies key concepts of epistemic evaluation (such as knowledge or jus-
tification); that these concepts are of universal validity; and that concepts of epistemic 
achievement are linked to an objective and mind-independent truth.
As far as revisionist SE is concerned, Goldman suggests, the traditionalist is right: it 
does not belong within real epistemology. Revisionists give up most or all of the assump-
tions of classical epistemology and aim for a “successor” project. Metaphorically speak-
ing, revisionists tear down the building of classical epistemology and build themselves an 
altogether new intellectual home. “Postmodernism, deconstructionism, social construc-
tionism, relativism, and social studies of science, including the ‘strong programme’ in 
sociology of science” belong here (Goldman 2010). Goldman pays closer attention only 
to the last-mentioned approach. Its two leading figures, Barry Barnes and David Bloor 

SOCIAL EPISTEMOLOGY
875
deny that there are “context-free or super-cultural norms of rationality” (Barnes and 
Bloor 1982: 27) and they redefine knowledge as “institutionalized belief”; knowledge is 
a “collective representation of the world [that is] . . . held by the group as a convention” 
(Bloor 1991: 169). Bloor’s “Strong Programme” in the sociology of scientific knowledge 
is defined by an insistence on a number of “symmetries”: natural and mathematical sci-
ences as well as the humanities and social sciences can be analyzed sociologically, and 
true as well as false beliefs are open to sociological explanation. Indeed, Bloor writes that 
“the same types of causes would explain, say, true and false beliefs” (Bloor 1991: 7).
Goldman claims that Strong Programmers intend to “debunk the epistemic author-
ity of science” by showing that political interests and power—rather than good evi-
dence—determine theory choice. Goldman objects that this position undermines 
itself. The empirical-historical case studies produced by Strong Programmers seek to 
present empirical evidence for the claim that empirical evidence is always outweighed 
by political interests (Goldman 2006).
Preservationist SE is a conservative extension of classical epistemology—and thus it 
counts as real epistemology. The preservationist adds a new storey to the epistemologi-
cal house but sees no need for laying new foundations. Preservationist SE follows the 
tradition in restricting its interest to understanding and evaluating “doxastic decision 
making” by single epistemic agents: that is, to understanding and evaluating how a sin-
gle epistemic agent adopts or retains attitudes of belief, disbelief, or suspension of belief 
towards a proposition based on perceptions, memories, or prior beliefs. Preservationist 
social epistemology goes beyond classical epistemology, however, in reminding us that 
we often gain vital information or evidence from other human agents. The most impor-
tant phenomena thereby brought into the purview of epistemology are testimony and 
cognitive disagreement.
Expansionist SE proposes bolder forays into new territory—but it, too, is real epis-
temology. The expansionist builds a new wing to the old edifice of classical episte-
mology and this endeavor calls for the laying of some new foundations. A relatively 
modest expansion concerns the epistemic norms of assertion and argumentation. Three 
bolder steps are the assessment of scientific experts in terms of their track records 
(cf. Goldman 2001/2002), sensible ways of diversifying scientific research efforts 
(Kitcher 1993), and the introduction of collective believers and knowers (Pettit 2003; 
Schmitt 1994, 2006).
Sociology of Scientific Knowledge
I agree with Goldman that SE is real epistemology. But I disagree with him over two 
crucial points: I find his portrayal of the sociology of scientific knowledge (SSK) inad-
equate, and I regard his attitude towards classical epistemology as far too deferential. 
Both issues are significant since they influence which ideas and research programs we 
count as relevant to SE, or as part of it.
Correcting Goldman’s misunderstanding of SSK is important for two reasons. First, 
SSK must have a central role within, or opposite, social epistemology: after all, SSK is 
dedicated to the empirical investigation of social dimensions of knowledge. Second, 
philosophical forms of SE tend to use SSK as a foil. Goldman is a case in point. But for 
this to be an adequate maneuver, philosophers must get SSK right.
Goldman assumes that SSK is in the business of motivating skepticism about sci-
ence. Or, as another influential philosophical critic puts it: SSK seeks to establish that 

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
876
science “is just another social institution clamoring for power” (Brown 2001: 143). It is 
hard to square this interpretation with any of the existing historical SSK case studies. 
These studies aim to identify the differences between scientific and other institutions, 
and they are not concentrating on issues of social power. Consider, for example, the 
single most influential idea in SSK, Harry Collins’ “Experimenters’ Regress” (Collins 
1985). Collins shows that in cutting-edge experimental science researchers face at least 
two kinds of uncertainty: they do not know which kinds of phenomena exist, and they 
do not know whether their detection instruments work. The one form of ignorance 
feeds into the other: their lack of knowledge about what exists prevents the experiment-
ers from properly calibrating their instruments; and their lack of knowledge about how 
best to calibrate their instruments prevents the experimenters from having much confi-
dence in their ability to detect. Collins goes on to document, on the basis of numerous 
interviews with scientists, that the latter seek to break the resulting regress on the basis 
of a wide variety of different considerations. Such considerations prominently include 
information about the social standing and the track record of different experimenters 
and their laboratories.
Philosophers who treat Collins as a skeptical “debunker” regarding scientific knowl-
edge attribute roughly the following argument to him (cf. Godin and Gingras 2002):
[1] If scientists (at the cutting edge of research) assess each others’ contributions in 
light of the social criteria Collins mentions, then cutting-edge science does not 
produce knowledge.
[2] Scientists (at the cutting edge of research) do assess each others’ contributions in 
light of the social criteria Collins identifies.
[3] Ergo: Cutting-edge science does not produce knowledge.
Collins’ critics usually take issue with [2]. They contend that the experimental data plus 
relevant theories are always sufficient to break the Experimenters’ Regress. Call this the 
“direct” response to the skeptical argument [1–3]. Collins rejects the direct response. But 
this does not mean that he accepts the skeptical argument (Collins 2002). Using terms 
familiar from philosophical treatments of skepticism, we might say that Collins favors a 
“diagnostic” response to skepticism about science. The diagnostic response rejects [1]; it 
denies that the possibility of scientific knowledge in cutting-edge science depends upon 
the absence of social criteria for the assessment of knowledge-claims.
The point generalizes to other case studies and theoretical writings in SSK. Their 
goal is not to undermine science; their goal is to convince the reader of the social nature 
of all central scientific phenomena, from observation to experiment, theory choice to 
calibration. Or consider how Bloor tackles Saul Kripke’s (Wittgenstein’s) famous mean-
ing-skeptical argument (Kripke 1982; Bloor 1997). Again the response is diagnostic: 
Bloor holds that the meaning-skeptical argument is compelling only as long as we have 
a single and isolated rule-follower in mind. Once we replace the individual with a group, 
meaning skepticism is defeated.
But what about SSK’s commitment to a “nihilistic” relativism (Goldman 2009a), and 
Bloor’s alleged view that “our epistemic reasons never make any contribution whatso-
ever to the causal explanation of our beliefs, so that the correct explanation is always 
exclusively in terms of our social interests” (Boghossian 2006: 112)? The answers are 
straightforward. The relativism of Barnes and Bloor is methodological not substantive. 
Their view “is not that all beliefs are equally true or equally false, but that regardless of 

SOCIAL EPISTEMOLOGY
877
truth and falsity the fact of their credibility . . . calls for empirical investigation” (Barnes 
and Bloor 1982: 23). Boghossian’s charge is refuted by Bloor’s statement according to 
which SSK is committed to the thesis that “our perceptual and thinking faculties are two 
different things and that our perceptions influence our thinking more than our think-
ing our perception” (Bloor 1991: 33). Bloor also rejects the suggestion that “knowledge 
is purely social”: “The strong programme does say that the social component is always 
present and always constitutive of knowledge. It does not say that it is the only compo-
nent, or that it is the component that must necessarily be located as the trigger of any 
and every change: it can be a background condition” (1991: 166).
Diagnostic Social Epistemology
Goldman’s attitude towards classical epistemology is deferential. He deems its central 
assumptions fully adequate to its traditional task of understanding the socially isolated 
knower. And Goldman is eager to show that his favorite examples of SE remain true 
to many if not most of these assumptions. The two modes of deference result in too 
narrow a conception of SE: Goldman has no space for what one might call “diagnos-
tic” programs of SE. Diagnostic epistemology tries to analyze, explain and criticize the 
foundations of classical epistemology. Or, to return once more to the housing metaphor: 
diagnostic epistemology studies the structure of the building, its central pillars and cor-
nerstones, and the rock (or swamp) on which it rests. Diagnostic social epistemology 
does all this in social or political terms.
This can take a variety of forms. An analytic version aims to establish that classical 
epistemology is incoherent, and that—properly understood and reworked—it points 
towards SE. The problem with classical epistemology might be located in how it inter-
prets or selects from our pre-theoretical intuitions. Or the problem might be in how the 
various core assumptions of classical epistemology fit together.
A genealogical SE offers an imaginary social history of the development of our current 
epistemic concepts. In constructing such “just-so” history, the genealogist treats classi-
cal epistemology both as a resource and as a target of criticism. Genealogy is speculative 
history. This is because it concerns itself with pre-historical events of which no records 
survive. The starting point of the narrative is a hypothetical pre-historical “state-of-
nature.” Genealogy explains why “proto-epistemic” concepts were first introduced and 
how they related to human needs and interactions. And the social dimension does not 
end here: every step of the route from epistemic proto-concepts to our concepts is at 
least in part social. Conceptual change is social change.
Eventually the genealogical narrative will reach a stage from which historical records 
do survive. At this point genealogy turns into historical epistemology. This is the project 
of writing the social history of our current epistemic intuitions, practices, and theories. 
This social history can, but need not, discredit classical epistemology.
Political epistemology aims to unveil the political costs of classical epistemology and 
some of our current epistemic practices. This might take the form of convincing us that 
classical epistemology has the ideological function of excluding certain kinds of people 
(e.g. women, ethnic minorities) from qualifying as knowers or true believers.
Finally, naturalistic SE challenges the individualism of classical epistemology in the 
light of results in the natural or social sciences. This can come in two flavors. On the 
one hand, the naturalistic critic points out that some of our best scientific theories 
routinely attribute knowledge to groups of animals or humans. On the other hand, the 

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
878
naturalist insists that we can only understand the possibility of contemporary scientific 
knowledge if we dismiss the individualistic intuitions upon which classical epistemol-
ogy is built.
Analytic Social Epistemology
I shall now add some flesh to the skeleton of diagnostic positions. It is hard to think of 
a better representative of analytic social epistemology than Donald Davidson’s “Three 
Varieties of Knowledge” (1991/2001). Davidson argues that knowledge of my own 
mind, knowledge of the (physical) world, and knowledge of other minds “form a tripod: 
if any leg were lost, no part would stand” (1991/2001: 220). For present purposes the 
most important upshot of this argument is the idea that a social isolate is unable to know 
anything. The central strand of Davidson’s reasoning goes as follows. The starting point 
is the claim that, at least in the case of our simplest perceptual beliefs, their content is 
determined by their causes. But how can we pick out the relevant causes, given that every 
belief has an infinite number of causes—all the way out to the Big Bang, all the way in 
to unobservable brain processes? Davidson maintains that the problem is intractable as 
long as we consider a single perceiver in isolation. Only a second person, interacting 
with the first, is able to determine the right cause. The relevant, content-fixing cause is 
the “last common” cause in the chains of causes that end in the minds or brains of two 
people facing the same object or event in the external physical world. Davidson recog-
nizes that his thought here is close to Wittgenstein’s idea according to which our con-
cepts of objective truth and knowledge depend on interpersonal communication. The 
point is worth emphasizing since Wittgenstein has been a central resource or inspiration 
for other analytic social epistemologists as well. For instance, Wittgenstein is clearly a 
key influence for authors favoring a “dialectical” approach to justification. According 
to this approach, “being justified” is social status granted by others to the believer (see 
Annis 1978; Rorty 1979; Williams 2001; Kusch 2002; cf. Goldberg 2007).
Genealogical Social Epistemology
The modern classic of genealogical SE is Edward Craig (1990). Craig offers a hypo-
thetical social account of the prehistory of our concept of knowledge. His narrative 
is constrained by two ideas. The first idea is that of an epistemic “state-of-nature,” 
that is, of an imaginary, early, social community composed of language-using human 
beings who are co-operative though not kin, and whose conceptual and reflective 
powers are somewhat weaker than our own. The genealogical narrative must make 
intelligible why these creatures found it useful or valuable to introduce an ancestor 
of our concept of knowledge. The second constraint is social-developmental: the 
genealogical narrative must explain—invoking social change as the central cause—why 
the ancestor concept was eventually replaced by our concept. For ease of reference, I 
shall refer to the ancestor concept and word (and their cognates) as protoknowledge, 
“protoknowledge,” etc.
Craig’s genealogy can be summed up as follows. In the state of nature, individu-
als depend upon one another for information. “Inquirers” need information they are 
currently unable to directly obtain themselves; “informants” offer such information. 
Inquirers must be able to separate good from bad informants. And it is natural to assume 
that meeting this need will involve concepts. Assume that protoknower is the central 

SOCIAL EPISTEMOLOGY
879
conceptual tool for dealing with this problem. Which conceptual components should 
protoknower contain? What should we hypothesize our imaginary ancestors to want this 
concept for? Craig’s answers are that our ancestors want this concept as a tag for good 
informants and that the concept protoknower (whether p) comprises the following ele-
ments: (i) being as likely to be right about p as the inquirer’s current needs require; (ii) 
being honest; (iii) being able to make the inquirer believe that p; (iv) being accessible 
to the informant here and now; (v) being understandable to the inquirer; and (vi) being 
detectable as a good informant concerning p by the inquirer. Craig is adamant that (i) 
to (vi) are not necessary and sufficient conditions. Finally, protoknowledge differs from 
knowledge in that: (a) only the former is closely tied to testimony; (b) protoknowledge is 
not a fully public concept insofar as it is indexed to the capacities and needs of specific 
inquirers; (c) protoknowledge can be ascribed only to others but not to oneself; and (d) 
protoknowledge is not undermined by accident or luck.
This brings us to the hypothetical social-historical narrative that takes us from pro-
toknowledge to knowledge. Craig speaks of this development as a process of “objectiv-
ization” of protoknowledge. Key steps in this objectivization are the following. First, 
protoknowledge comes to be used in self-ascription. In response to the question “who 
knows whether p?” group members start to investigate themselves. Second, inquirers 
begin to recommend informants to others. This can be done in a helpful manner only if 
the perspectival or indexical character of protoknowledge is weakened. Recommending 
an informant to ever more inquirers makes protoknowledge increasingly harder to get. 
Third, inquirers begin to use “being recommended” as a property that indicates a good 
informant. This move dilutes the original detectability requirement. Fourth, in the con-
text of group action inquirers cease to care whether the needed information is accessible 
to them as individuals; they are satisfied if it is accessible to someone in the group. As 
a result they will speak of protoknowledge even outside the context of testimony. And 
thus we reach our concept of knowledge.
Craig’s important book has inspired a number of other authors: Bernard Williams 
(2002) provides a genealogy of the epistemic virtues of truthfulness and accuracy; 
Miranda Fricker (2007) a genealogy of virtues of epistemic justice; and Martin Kusch 
(2009) a genealogy of epistemic value. Melissa Lane (1999) seeks to close the gap 
between epistemic and political states of nature.
Historical Epistemology
The development of our epistemic concepts and practices did not end in prehistory. 
Historical epistemology takes up the story from the point where written sources are 
available. Most exercises in historical epistemology are histories of the sciences. Spoiled 
for choice, I shall concentrate on one aspect of Steven Shapin’s social history of testi-
mony (1994). This allows me to illustrate the contribution of SSK-inspired history of 
science to SE.
Bernard Williams (2002) suggests that epistemic concepts and virtues need to be 
studied in the context of other values and ideas. For instance, Williams proposes that 
there are important conceptual links between knowledge and freedom (2002: 146). 
Shapin’s study might be read as a social-historical contribution to understanding this 
link. Shapin’s topic is the role of testimony and gentility in the shaping of the investiga-
tive culture of English natural philosophy during the lifetime of Robert Boyle. Natural 
philosophers of seventeenth-century England accepted—notwithstanding the Royal 

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
880
Society’s motto “Nullius in verba” (on no man’s word)—that testimony was needed to 
make natural knowledge, and that finding good testifiers was a difficult practical prob-
lem. Seventeenth-century literature on the topic suggested any number of maxims, such 
as “(i) assent to testimony which is plausible; (ii) assent to testimony which is multiple” 
or “(iii) assent to testimony which is consistent” (1994: 212). Alas, no sooner was a 
maxim proposed than critics found it to be of only limited help. For instance, maxim 
(i) could potentially and incorrectly exclude true reports that conflicted with dominant 
false beliefs; maxim (ii) was of limited value in cases where the multiple reports derived 
from one another; or maxim (iii) did not account for the experience that “too great a 
display of internal consistency” might be a signal “that a polished performance had been 
prepared” (1994: 233). Only one maxim was never challenged: “assent to testimony 
from sources of acknowledged integrity and disinterestedness” (1994: 212). On first 
sight, this might not sound like a helpful maxim; how were practitioners of the new 
science supposed to know who the disinterested reporters were?
This is where gentility and freedom became important. Shapin’s major historical the-
sis is that “English experimental philosophy . . . emerged partly through the purpose-
ful relocation of the conventions, codes, and values of gentlemanly conversation into 
the domain of natural philosophy” (1994: xvii). And one of the central beliefs about 
the gentleman was that he was a natural truth-teller. The gentleman was thought to 
be a natural truth-teller primarily on the grounds of his possessing a special “disinter-
estedness” (1994: 83). This disinterestedness was taken to derive in good part from 
the gentleman’s economic circumstances. As Henry Peacham put it in his influential 
treatise The Complete Gentleman at the time: “whosoever labour for their livelihood and 
gain have no share at all in nobility or gentry” (Shapin 1994: 50). In other words, to 
be a gentleman was to be financially independent and secure. And a life that was inde-
pendent and secure in this sense was equated with a free life. The overarching thought 
linking freedom, gentry, and testimony together was thus as follows: “Gentlemen were 
truth-tellers because nothing could work upon them that would induce them to be 
otherwise” (1994: 84).
The conventions of gentlemanly experimental philosophy did not allow for anyone 
to openly express disbelief in a report coming from a gentleman. The situation was 
very different for all those who did not make the gentry grade: women, servants, “the 
poor and the mean in general,” merchants, Catholics, Continental gentry, Italians and 
politicians. In the cases of all of these groups, their “unreliable truthfulness . . . was per-
vasively referred to their constrained circumstances” (1994: 86). This obviously did not 
mean that no one but a gentleman was ever believed: given that much of, say, Boyle’s 
experimental work was carried out by “domestics” such widespread distrust would have 
destroyed the whole enterprise of natural philosophy. One has to see the link between 
freedom and truthfulness as a resource: citing the constrained circumstances of domes-
tics-technicians was a way in which a gentleman could explain experimental failures. 
And whatever information the domestics produced, it became knowledge, and thus 
a property of the gentlemanly community of natural philosophers, only once it was 
vouched for by Boyle (or another gentleman) (1994: Ch. 8).
Other SSK-inspired contributions to historical SE include Shapin and Simon 
Schaffer’s (1985) investigation into the social origins of the development of “the 
experimental form of life”; Donald McKenzie’s (2001) social history of attempts to 
mechanize proof; or Martin Kusch’s (1995, 1999) philosophical-historical accounts of self-
knowledge and anti-naturalism. Lorraine Daston and Peter Galison (2007) owe little 

SOCIAL EPISTEMOLOGY
881
to SSK but illustrate elegantly that epistemic virtues have a social history. Many of Ian 
Hacking’s (e.g., 1992/2002) historical-philosophical investigations also belong here.
Political Social Epistemology
Feminist epistemology is arguably the most important contemporary instance of politi-
cal social epistemology. I shall here mention only one prominent view in this regard: 
Sandra Harding’s “standpoint theory.”
Standpoint epistemology has its roots in the Marxist tradition, especially in the 
thought of Georg Lukács. Lukács believed that one’s position in the process of produc-
tion constrains what one is able to learn about society. Some social positions, or “stand-
points,” are more limiting than others. The capitalist understands important aspects 
of the economic process but he is unable to recognize the workers’ essential humanity. 
The proletarian has no such blinkers. His standpoint is therefore superior to that of the 
capitalist, both epistemically and politically.
A number of feminists have adapted Lukács’ idea for the relationship between men 
and women. In Harding’s (1991) influential treatment, a standpoint is an “objective 
location” in society. Women’s lives constitute one such location. Only few standpoints 
are able to meet the standard of “strong objectivity”: to be strongly objective a stand-
point must not only be highly truth-conducive but also be known to be so to its occu-
pants. The latter knowledge must be based on systematic research into the social history 
of the standpoint. For instance, Harding insists that natural science can be strongly 
objective only if its core assumptions have been investigated and found acceptable by 
social-scientific research. She even goes so far as to write that “the natural sciences are 
illuminatingly conceptualized as part of the social sciences” (1991: 14). Strong objec-
tivity contrasts with “weak objectivity” or “objectivism.” The latter position reduces 
objectivity to mere value-neutrality. As far as knowledge of the social world and some 
parts of the natural world are concerned, women’s standpoint is epistemically superior 
to men’s. This is because women are “strangers” to the social order; women are “out-
siders within”; women have a strong interest in understanding oppressive social cir-
cumstances; women experiment with social reality; women are closer to basic material 
conditions; and women are forced to mediate the dualism of nature and culture.
Once the role of standpoints is understood, Harding suggests, it is easy to see what 
is wrong about classical epistemology. Classical epistemology assumes that knowers 
are “interchangeable,” and that social position and one’s embodiment are irrelevant 
to one’s epistemic position. Classical epistemology is therefore unable to support an 
epistemic case for affirmative action. Standpoint theory is a diagnosis and a criticism of 
this failing.
Naturalistic Social Epistemology
John Hardwig (1985, 1991) raises the possibility that the existence of our most cher-
ished knowledge in the natural sciences remains obscure as long as we stick to the 
idea—central to classical epistemology—of individual knowers. Hardwig’s example is 
a highly collaborative experiment in high-energy physics of the 1980s. This research 
resulted in an article with 99 co-authors, many of which will “not even know how a 
given number in the article was arrived at” (1985: 347). Needless to say, producing the 
data for such a joint paper presupposes that scientists exchange information, and that 

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
882
they take each others’ reports concerning measurements as evidence for these measure-
ments. Empirically, it could not be otherwise. It is clear that such experiments could not 
be done by one person. None of the participating physicists could replace his knowledge 
based on testimony with knowledge based on perception—to do so would require too 
many lifetimes.
Hardwig brings out the importance of “epistemic dependence” to knowledge by asking 
who should be said to know the results reported in the co-authored physics paper. There 
seem to be three alternatives. Hardwig does not label them; I suggest “strict individual-
ism,” “relaxed individualism,” and “communitarianism.” Strict individualism insists that 
knowledge is the possession of the individual, and that knowledge presupposes evidence 
based on one’s own “onboard resources.” A philosopher adopting this option would 
have to deny that anyone knows the results of the physicists’ paper. Relaxed individual-
ism allows that individuals know “vicariously,” that is, “without possessing the evidence 
for the truth of what [they] know, and perhaps without even fully understanding what 
[they] know.” Communitarianism sees the community as the primary knower. Thus it is 
the community of physicists, perhaps the 99 co-authors, that constitutes the epistemic 
subject of the knowledge reported in the paper. Communitarianism allows us to retain 
the idea that a knower must be in “direct” possession of the evidence but it breaks with 
the assumption that such a knower must be, or can be, an individual. Hardwig regards 
both relaxed individualism and communitarianism as viable options, but he favors the 
latter: “The latter conclusion may be the more epistemologically palatable; for it enables 
us to save the old and important idea that knowing a proposition required understanding 
the proposition and possessing the relevant evidence for its truth” (1985: 349).
Conclusion
While no one has done more for establishing SE as a vibrant field in epistemology 
than Goldman, in some respects his vision of the field is too limiting. He shows too 
little interest in social-historical and sociological studies of (scientific) knowledge and 
subsumes diagnostic approaches under revisionism, where this is couched as postmod-
ernism and deconstructionism. It is true that some diagnostic theories end up rejecting 
the pillars of classical epistemology. But that should not disqualify them from being 
“real epistemology.” If SE is to grow not just in width but also in depth, then diagnostic 
contributions will have to become more central in the future.
References
Annis, D. B. (1978) “A Contextualist Theory of Epistemic Justification,” American Philosophical Quarterly 
15: 213–19.
Barnes, B. and D. Bloor (1982) “Relativism, Rationalism and the Sociology of Knowledge,” in M. Hollis and 
S. Lukes (eds.), Rationality and Relativism, Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 21–47.
Bloor, D. (1991) Knowledge and Social Imagery, 2nd ed., Chicago: Chicago University Press.
—— (1997) Wittgenstein, Rules and Institutions, London: Routledge.
Boghossian, P. (2006) Fear of Knowledge: Against Relativism and Constructivism, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Brown, J. (2001) Who Rules in Science: An Opinionated Guide to the Wars, Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Collins, H. M. (1985) Changing Order: Replication and Induction in Scientific Practice, London: Sage.
—— (2002) “The Experimenters’ Regress as Philosophical Sociology,” Studies in History and Philosophy of 
Science A 33: 149–56.

SOCIAL EPISTEMOLOGY
883
Craig, E. (1990) Knowledge and the State of Nature: An Essay in Conceptual Synthesis, Oxford: Clarendon 
Press.
Daston, L. and P. Galison (2007) Objectivity, New York: Zone Books.
Davidson, D. (1991/2001) “Three Varieties of Knowledge,” repr. in Davidson, Subjective, Intersubjective, 
Objective, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 205–20.
Fricker, M. (2007) Epistemic Injustice: Power and the Ethics of Knowing, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Godin, B. and Y. Gingras (2002) “The Experimenters’ Regress: From Skepticism to Argumentation,” Studies 
in History and Philosophy of Science A 33: 133–48.
Goldberg, S. C. (2007) Anti-Individualism: Mind and Language, Knowledge and Justification, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Goldman, A. I. (1999) Knowledge in a Social World, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
—— (2001/2002) “Experts: Which Ones Should You Trust?” repr. in Goldman 2002a: 139–63.
—— (2002a) Pathways to Knowledge: Private and Public, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—— (2002b) “What is Social Epistemology? A Smorgasbord of Projects,” in Goldman 2002a: 182–204.
—— (2006) “Social Epistemology,” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Online at http://plato.stanford.edu/
entries/epistemology-social/ (accessed June 1, 2009).
—— (2009a) “Epistemic Relativism and Reasonable Disagreement,” in R. Feldman and T. Warfield (eds.), 
Disagreement, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—— (2009b) “Social Epistemology,” Blackwell Companion to Epistemology, Oxford: Blackwell.
—— (2010) “Why Social Epistemology is Real Epistemology,” forthcoming in A. Haddock, A. Millar and 
D. Pritchard (eds.), Social Epistemology, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hacking, I. (1992/2002) “‘Style’ for Historians and Philosophers,” repr. in Hacking, Historical Ontology, 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 178–99.
Harding, S. (1991) Whose Science? Whose Knowledge? Thinking from Women’s Lives, Milton Keynes: Open 
University Press.
Hardwig, J. (1985) “Epistemic Dependence,” Journal of Philosophy 82: 335–49.
—— (1991) “The Role of Trust in Knowledge,” Journal of Philosophy 88: 693–704.
Kitcher, P. (1993) The Advancement of Science: Science without Legend, Objectivity without Illusions, Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Kripke, S. (1982) Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language, Oxford: Blackwell.
Kusch, M. (1995) Psychologism: A Case Study in the Sociology of Philosophical Knowledge, London: Routledge.
—— (1999) Psychological Knowledge: A Social History and Philosophy, London: Routledge.
—— (2002) Knowledge by Agreement: The Programme of Communitarian Epistemology, Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
—— (2009) “Testimony and the Value of Knowledge,” in A. Millar, A. Haddock and D. H. Pritchard (eds.), 
Epistemic Value, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 60–94.
Lane, M. (1999) “States of Nature, Epistemic and Political,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 99: 211–24.
McKenzie, D. (2001) Mechanizing Proof: Computing, Risk, and Trust, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pettit, P. (2003) “Groups with Minds of their Own,” in F. Schmitt (ed.), Socializing Metaphysics, Lanham, 
MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 167–93.
Rorty, R. (1979) Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature, Oxford: Blackwell.
Schmitt, F. F. (1994) “The Justification of Group Belief,” In F. F. Schmitt (ed.), Socializing Knowledge: The 
Social Dimensions of Knowledge, Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 257–80.
—— (2006) “Testimonial Justification and Transindividual Reasons,” in J. Lackey and E. Sosa (eds.), The 
Epistemology of Testimony, New York: Oxford University Press, 193–224.
Shapin, S. (1994) A Social History of Truth, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Shapin, S. and S. Schaffer (1985) Leviathan and the Air-Pump, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Williams, B. (2002) Truth and Truthfulness: An Essay in Genealogy, Princeton and Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Williams, M. (2001) Problems of Knowledge: A Critical Introduction to Epistemology, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Further Reading
Two journals are dedicated to all areas of SE: Social Epistemology and Episteme.
Barnes, B., D. Bloor, and J. Henry (1996) Scientific Knowledge: A Sociological Analysis, London, Athlone 
Press. (The definitive statement of the Strong Programme in SSK.)

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
884
Brandom, R. (1994) Making it Explicit: Reasoning, Representing, and Discursive Commitment, Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. (Although Brandom is not normally classified as a social epistemologist, there 
are numerous themes here that are relevant for the foundations of SE.)
Coady, C. A. (1992) Testimony: A Philosophical Study, Oxford: Clarendon Press. (In addition to being the 
modern study of testimony, Coady’s book also contains many themes that are relevant for SE more gener-
ally.)
Collins, H. and R. Evans (2007) Rethinking Expertise, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. (A normative 
political epistemology by a leading sociologist of knowledge.)
Fuller, S. (1988) Social Epistemology, Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press. (Fuller’s ver-
sion of SE is a form of science policy with the goal of making science more democratic and accountable 
to the public.)
Gilbert, M. (1989) Social Facts, London: Routledge. (Gilbert’s defense of collective intentionality is a key 
resource for authors defending the idea of collective knowers.)
Hutchins, E. (1995) Cognition in the Wild, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. (This is one of the most important 
empirical studies defending the idea that cognition is embodied and distributed over many individuals.)
Kvanvig, J. L. (1992) The Intellectual Virtues and the Life of the Mind: On the Place of the Virtues in Epistemology, 
Savage, MD: Rowman and Littlefield. (This book defends a social form of virtue epistemology.)
Lehrer, K. and C. Wagner (1981) Rational Consensus in Science and Society, Reidel: Dordrecht. (A semi-
technical study of rational consensus formation in science.)
List, C. (2005) “Group Knowledge and Group Rationality: A Judgment Aggregation Perspective,” Episteme: 
A Journal of Social Epistemology 2: 25–38. (List builds on Pettit’s work on groups as persons and as 
knowers.)
Longino, H. (1990) Science as Social Knowledge, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. (Longino defends 
an intersubjective conception of knowledge and objectivity.)
Schmitt, F. F. (1994) Socializing Epistemology: The Social Dimension of Knowledge, Lanham, MD: Rowman and 
Littlefield. (A highly influential collection of essays on testimony and SE more broadly.)
Selinger, E. and R. P. Crease (eds.) (2006) The Philosophy of Expertise, New York: University of Columbia 
Press. (A collection of papers addressing the problem of how laypersons might assess scientific experts.)
Shera, J. (1970) Sociological Foundations of Librarianship, New York: Asia Publishing House. (The earliest text 
to use the expression “social epistemology.”)
Tuomela, R. (1995) The Philosophy of Sociality: The Shared Point of View, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
(One of the key texts in social ontology, this book also contains discussions of group knowledge and group 
justification.)
Zagzebski, L. T. (1996) Virtues of the Mind: An Inquiry into the Nature of Virtue and the Ethical Foundations 
of Knowledge, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (This book defends a social form of virtue 
epistemology.)

78
FEMINIST EPISTEMOLOGY
Alessandra Tanesini
One of the generally unquestioned assumptions of modern epistemology is that knowl-
edge knows no gender. More specifically, it has been typically presumed that the gen-
der of the knower is and should be irrelevant to the philosophical study of knowledge. 
Feminist epistemologists over the last thirty years have exposed these claims as assump-
tions and have questioned, in some respects, their truth. First, feminist scholars have 
pointed out that the gender of the knower, as a matter of fact, has not been irrelevant 
to epistemology. On the contrary, assumptions about gender and other social charac-
teristics of individuals have influenced the development of epistemology in numerous 
ways which, for the most part, have had detrimental effects for women and, for example, 
people from under-privileged backgrounds. Second, feminist scholars have claimed that 
gender should not be considered irrelevant to the philosophical study of knowledge. 
They have not usually defended this view by arguing that there are distinctively male 
and female styles of reasoning, although—especially in the early 1980s—the view that 
there are styles of knowing and moral thinking which are specific to women enjoyed 
significant popularity (cf. Belenky et al., 1986). Instead, they have based their claim on 
the thesis that knowledge is, typically, value-laden. More specifically, they have argued 
that political values, and especially feminist values, can play a positive role in the 
justification of claims to knowledge.
This essay consists of two sections. In the first, I offer a discussion of some of the 
ways in which theories and claims that have been presented as gender neutral have, as 
a matter of fact, been partly shaped by unhelpful gender biases. In particular, I explain 
how feminist epistemologists have shown that the choice of some forms of knowledge as 
paradigmatic of knowledge in general depends on the implicit coding of some kinds of 
individual as paradigmatic knowers. In the second section, I present the view, held by all 
feminist epistemologists, that gender should not be thought as irrelevant to the philo-
sophical study of knowledge. I show how feminist epistemologists defend the claim that 
knowledge and justification are best understood as value-laden in light of the criticisms 
developed by some of their critics. In the context of this discussion of the importance 
of gender to knowledge I will also present a brief survey of some of the most influential 
versions of feminist epistemology to date.
1. Uncovering Gender Biases
The uncovering of hidden gender biases is a staple of feminist scholarship in many 
fields, and epistemology is no exception. Some of the earliest work in the area has been 
precisely dedicated to this purpose. In particular, feminist scholars have pointed out that 

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
886
the selection of some forms of knowledge over others as paradigmatic of knowledge in 
general, despite its pretence of gender neutrality, depends on biased assumptions about 
the character of the ideal knower. They also noted that it has had significant implica-
tions for the status of women as credible knowers and experts.
Analytic epistemology since Chisholm has inherited a tradition that privileged prop-
ositional knowledge (so-called “knowledge that”) over practical knowledge (so-called 
“knowledge how”) and knowledge by acquaintance of people and places. Such privileg-
ing is still in place. Most textbooks in epistemology are almost exclusively concerned 
with propositional knowledge. Another feature of this tradition which has been inher-
ited by contemporary epistemology is the assumption that only a limited range of states 
can play a positive role in the justification of belief. For instance, it has been presumed 
that emotions and desires can only interfere with the process of justification without 
offering any positive contribution to knowledge or rationality.
While analytic epistemology is in these ways only the latest development of a long 
tradition of Western thought about knowledge, it also differs in equally important ways 
from that tradition. In particular, a lot of work in contemporary epistemology has focused 
primarily on beliefs or other states that might count as knowledge. It has, therefore, 
been almost exclusively concerned with issues of warrant, evidence and justification. 
This focus is a break with the past. The dominant tradition in ancient, medieval and 
even early modern times has been virtue epistemology in its various forms. The tradi-
tional concerns of epistemologists were the intellectual virtues and vices of knowers and 
the training required for the cultivation of an epistemically virtuous character.
This break from the tradition is significant because it has obscured the original moti-
vation for some assumptions that contemporary epistemology shares with that tradition. 
As a result it has become difficult to appreciate fully some of the complaints made by 
feminist epistemologists about androcentric bias, because these, although relevant to 
contemporary debates, have been formulated in the terms of a virtue epistemology. The 
selection of propositional knowledge as paradigmatic of all knowledge is the result of a 
tradition for which theoretical knowledge is a superior form of knowledge, a more sig-
nificant cognitive achievement than any other kind of knowledge. It is also a tradition 
according to which emotions can only be an impediment to knowledge. These views 
were, in the past, explicitly motivated by accounts of the sort of intellectual character 
that fitted the ideal knower. These accounts were developed in ways that associated 
intellectual virtue with masculinity (cf. Lloyd, 1984). Contemporary epistemology has 
preserved the assumptions about propositional knowledge and emotions but lost sight of 
their initial motivations. It has thereby made it harder to reveal their harmful nature.
Several feminists have pointed out that this privileging of propositional over practi-
cal knowledge, of theory over practice, has had negative effects on traditional forms 
of knowledge possessed by under-privileged individuals and communities (Harding, 
1986, 1991). The negative effects of this devaluation of practical knowledge have been 
numerous. In some cases women have been harmed. For example, the number of women 
dying in childbirth initially increased when home births assisted by a midwife were dis-
couraged in favor of hospital births in the care of a medical doctor (cf. Ginzberg, 1987, 
pp. 98–100). This devaluation of the practical is linked, as Ruth Ginzberg has noted, to 
denying the honorific title of “science” to women’s traditional activities (1987, p. 91). 
Thus, forms of knowledge possessed by women have been suppressed and delegitimized. 
As a result a conception of women as individuals who are less capable than men in the 
acquisition of knowledge has taken root (Anderson, 1995a, p. 63).

FEMINIST EPISTEMOLOGY
887
The origins of this phenomenon have been analyzed by Genevieve Lloyd in her 
hugely influential book The Man of Reason (1984). She traces the devaluation of practi-
cal knowledge to various accounts of reason. Lloyd is quite explicit from the start that 
hers is an investigation into the character ideals, centered on the notion of reason, 
advanced in the philosophical tradition. She is not primarily concerned with reason as 
it figures in the assessment of belief. Instead her focus is on reason as it plays a role in the 
assessment of character (1984, p. ix). Further, it is important to emphasize that Lloyd 
is not concerned with reason itself as a trait of character but with various philosophical 
accounts of this faculty. When Lloyd claims that reason has been constructed as mas-
culine, she is not to be read as saying that reason itself has this feature. Her claims are 
about theories about reason, which she claims, attribute to reason features that, either 
by the theorists themselves or by their societies, are associated exclusively or primarily 
with masculinity.
Lloyd’s account is a detailed history of philosophical theories of reason. She traces 
various continuities and differences among these accounts. For our purposes here three 
stages in this history are particularly significant. In the first stage, characterized by 
the work of philosophers in antiquity and late antiquity such as Aristotle, Plato and 
Augustine among others, theories of reasons are embedded in ethical accounts of what 
makes a life well-lived. The ideal life is thought to be the contemplative life, and the 
use of reason is central to living such a life. Ancient philosophers thought of reason 
as comprising several capacities, including some which are practical. Some of them 
ranked these practical uses of reason lower than the more theoretical and contemplative 
uses. They also either explicitly associated these practical uses with women (Augustine) 
or associated them with traits which were commonly understood as feminine (Plato) 
(Lloyd, 1984, p. 31 and pp. 18–22). These same philosophers described as masculine the 
virtuous character necessary for living a good life and in which reason plays a dominant 
role (1984, p. ix). These views did not prohibit the attribution of the ideal character 
to some women. Such a possibility was left open because at least some ancient philoso-
phers thought that women can be as manly as any man.
The second stage is characterized by Descartes’ novel conception of reason. Descartes 
offers an account that narrows the faculty of reason to the employment of only one form 
of reasoning: abstract reasoning. He also draws a clear divide between the reasoning 
mind and the body. Descartes’ intentions are egalitarian. He clearly states that all are 
endowed with the light of reason. However, contrary to his intentions, reason as he 
conceives of it becomes associated with masculinity because of the previous cultural 
associations between femininity and the practical realm as well as the body (Lloyd, 
1984, pp. 46–50). This development marks a difference with ancient conceptions. In 
those views women were associated with lesser forms of rationality. After Descartes they 
become associated with traits that are other than rationality, and often conceived as 
irrational.
This last point characterizes the third stage, dominated by views such as those held 
by Hegel and Rousseau. It is at this stage that the idea emerges that there is not one 
single kind of virtuous character ideal for all human beings, but at least two, one for 
each gender. Lloyd points out that these two ideals map neatly into the public private 
distinction (1984, p. 78). Men are expected to be ideal public citizens, engaged in public 
lives, they are therefore expected to develop the intellectual virtues required to carry 
out their civic duties. Women, on the other hand, are expected to be good mothers and 
homemakers and to develop the moral and intellectual virtues required for these tasks. 

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
888
As a result, knowledge and rationality are important features of the sort of person men 
should aspire to become, while caring and selflessness are seen as important features of 
the ideal woman (Lloyd, 1984, p. 37).
These considerations illustrate the continuing centrality of issues of virtue and char-
acter to knowledge as conceived from the ancient to modern times. It is instructive 
to note that, despite differing views about the intellectual virtues of rationality, these 
accounts are not neutrally specified; they are gender coded. More specifically, the ideal 
is formulated in terms that associate anything which in the philosophers’ societies was 
coded as feminine or as lower class as either an inferior form of rationality or as some-
thing outside rationality (Lloyd, 1984, p. 37). Thus, the accounts embody androcentric 
biases because they treat masculinity as the norm and treat femininity as either inferior 
or abnormal.
It might be argued that even if the history of theories of reason is marred by androcen-
tric bias and sexism, we have now developed accounts that do not suffer from the same 
shortcomings. Such a claim would seem premature. It is true that there have been posi-
tive changes. For instance, recent years have witnessed work on the positive contribu-
tions of emotions and other affective states to rationality (Jaggar, 1992). But many of the 
prejudices of traditional accounts have been inherited without much questioning. These 
include assumptions about the nature of rationality and about the paradigmatic status of 
propositional knowledge. Contemporary epistemologists have, on the whole, done very 
little to challenge the perception of women as either less suited to knowledge and ratio-
nality than men or as having a different style of thinking, one which is more caring.
It is important to realize that the problem highlighted here is not merely political. 
Issues of social justice are pertinent, but the problem is fundamentally epistemological. 
To see that this is the case, we need to consider that the solution to the problem does 
not lie in claiming that women are simply as rational as men. Personally I would be 
surprised if women do not turn out to be as rational as men when non-sexist standards 
are applied. But to make this claim now before scrutinizing current ideals of rational-
ity would be a mistake. If current ideals of rationality are still distorted by androcen-
tric biases, it might simply be false that women match those standards as well as men. 
However, what would follow from this conclusion is not that women are less rational 
than men, but that there might be something wrong with the adopted standards. So the 
solution would lie in the revision of our ideals of rationality which, of course, will need 
to be combined with political activity.
A question might arise naturally at this point. Suppose it is granted that epistemology 
has historically been damaged by an androcentric bias. It would seem that the role of 
feminist epistemology must be limited to exposing the existence of such a bias. There 
cannot be anything positive for feminist epistemology to do. After all, if feminist epis-
temology bears its political commitments on its sleeve, it is inevitably biased. How 
could it, therefore, be desirable? This question, which Louise Antony has called the 
“bias paradox,” has vexed all feminist epistemologists. Their answers on the whole have 
relied on the idea that not all biases are bad, but that some are positively good (Antony, 
1993, pp. 188–9). It is to this question that I turn in the second section.
2. Gender Matters
There is widespread agreement on the claim that all kinds of values might, even in quite 
bizarre ways, lead individuals or communities to formulate theories and hypotheses or to 

FEMINIST EPISTEMOLOGY
889
acquire beliefs that happen to have quite a lot of epistemic mileage. In other words, it is 
undisputed that contextual values, of all sorts, might play helpful or not so helpful roles 
in the so-called context of discovery. A scientist, who values her own success, might be 
spurred on by her desire for fame to a great discovery, or the same desire might blind 
her from recognizing the clear superiority of another’s point of view. Another scientist 
might simply assume that male primate behavior must be determinant of primate social 
organization because of his implicit endorsement of male superiority in primates. These 
values from selfish to sexist can inform for good or for ill the discovery of theories and the 
acquisition of beliefs. Feminist values and commitments to the promotion of women’s 
interests can play the same roles. For example, they might motivate the development of 
gynocentric models of primate social organization which take female competition over 
food to determine whether females are organized in kin-related groups or whether they 
are isolated. Male organization is then determined by the need to gain optimum access 
to females (Hrdy 1999, pp. 122–7).
As the examples illustrate there is no necessary relation between the endorsability of 
the values driving a bit of research and the epistemic value of the theories or beliefs pro-
duced as a result. Good values can lead to bad theories—that is, theories that are false 
or empirically inadequate or with little explanatory power. Bad values, on the other 
hand, can lead to good theories. Hence, the mere fact that bad values played a role in 
the formulation of a view is not sufficient to determine that the theory is epistemically 
bankrupt (Anderson, 1995a, p. 76). It appears reasonable, however, to take the bad his-
tory of a theory to license the need for a thorough scrutiny of its empirical adequacy.
The need for scrutiny in such cases does not imply that values can or should always 
be screened out when we consider the justification of theories or beliefs. Quite the 
opposite might be true, if, as feminist epistemologists hold, enquiry is inevitably value-
laden in the sense that allows for the unavoidable presence of values in the justification 
of theories and beliefs. The value-ladenness of justification in the natural sciences is a 
consequence of the under-determination of scientific theories by all available empirical 
data (Quine, 1980). Often whether any given observation conflicts with, or offers evi-
dence in support of, a given theory might well depend on the background assumptions 
of the theorist. Hence, for instance, the perihelion precession of Mercury was taken by 
astronomers, who subscribed to Newtonian mechanics, as evidence for the existence 
of a small planet “Vulcan” inside the orbit of Mercury. The same phenomenon was, 
instead, interpreted by Einstein as evidence that Newtonian mechanics must be false, 
given the failure to find Vulcan, because his theory of relativity could explain perihelion 
precession as an effect of the sun’s gravitational field.
It is not just factual assumptions that feature in the background and contribute to 
justification, values can play the same role. Cognitive values might directly lead one to 
prefer a theory to another on grounds such as simplicity, ease of applicability, or prospect 
of future explanatory fruitfulness. But contextual values can also play a similar role; they 
might offer support to background assumptions which are not at stake when the justi-
fication for specific theories is being considered. For example, Barbara McClintock’s 
and Evelyn Fox Keller’s preference for ontological heterogeneity and complexity in 
relationships is relevant to the justifications they offer for their theories in genetics (cf. 
Longino, 1994, pp. 477–8; 1995, pp. 387–8).
In the same vein Linda Fedigan showed that the tendency to think of dominance 
as a unified category in primatology led to theories that supported the claim that 
male primates dominate females. Once the category is split into different notions of 

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
890
aggressiveness, victory in conflicts, suppression of conflict, initiation of group move-
ment or direction of such movement, a different picture emerges (cf. Anderson, 1995b, 
p. 30). All of these examples indicate that contextual values can be as significant in the 
justification of theories as they are in the series of events leading to their discovery.
This point can be further strengthened if we note that much knowledge, including 
scientific knowledge is concerned with social kinds. This is especially true in the social 
sciences, but it is equally applicable to medicine where many of the classifications used 
are driven by a concern with promoting human health. The very distinction between 
a pathogenic and non-pathogenic element, for example, is drawn so as to track human 
health rather than reproductive fitness alone. Hence, some organisms that are relevant 
to fitness because they make individuals less attractive (e.g., bad breath) are not classi-
fied as pathogenic, while some pathogenic organisms only cause ailments so trivial that 
they do not have any effect on reproductive fitness (Anderson, 1995b, p. 44). In this 
way, contextual values become embedded in the very content of theories, since the very 
concepts used in the theory reflect these values. Therefore, the influence of the values 
goes well beyond the mere context of discovery.
This claim is denied by Susan Haack. Haack argues that the sole purpose of scientific 
inquiry is the accumulation of significant truths and that contextual values bear no 
evidential relation to the truth of any scientific factual claim (1997). Haack’s criticism 
of the view that scientific inquiry is inevitably value-laden is wholly dependent on her 
views about the goal of inquiry. It is these views that typically are denied by feminist 
epistemologists. For instance, Anderson argues that the constitutive goals of scientific 
inquiry should be understood more broadly, and that—when they are—these goals are 
themselves properly subjected to moral and political evaluation (1995b, p 34).
In what follows I articulate the disagreements among feminist epistemologists in 
terms of their contrasting answers to Antony’s “bias paradox.” Since to be a feminist is, 
at least, to be committed to a cluster of political and ethical values about the injustice of 
discrimination against women, feminists cannot claim value neutrality for their inqui-
ries. The task of feminist epistemology, then, is to offer a defense of value-laden enquiry. 
In order to do so, it must offer criteria for the demarcation of good from bad biases, and 
a justification for that demarcation.
The idea that we need criteria for distinguishing good from bad biases only makes 
sense if the notion of a good bias is intelligible. In this context I use “bias” to refer to all 
contextual values including those which are moral or political. Thus, good biases are 
those contextual values which, in a given context, contribute positively to the acquisi-
tion of knowledge and the justification of belief. Bad biases are those whose influence 
on the progress of enquiry is negative. It is highly possible, of course, that some values 
might function as good biases in some contexts and bad biases in others.
This conception of the task of feminist epistemology as offering criteria for demar-
cating good from bad biases is a basis for the classification of four varieties of feminist 
epistemology: empiricism, standpoint, virtue and postmodernism.
Feminist empiricists are committed to the claim that the grounds for accepting a 
theory should only make a reference to factual evidence and to cognitive values. This 
position is best understood in terms of the notion of impartiality as developed by Hugh 
Lacey (2005). A theory’s acceptance is said to be in accordance with impartiality when 
the theory is best supported by the empirical evidence and manifests the cognitive 
values to a higher degree than its rivals (p. 230). Thus, impartiality requires that moral 
and political values do not appear among the grounds for accepting a theory so that its 

FEMINIST EPISTEMOLOGY
891
justification is rationally binding on all irrespective of the contextual values they might 
endorse. Contextual values, however, are permitted to play numerous roles in accor-
dance with impartiality. First, they are embedded in the research programs or strategies 
that lead to the formulation of any theory. Second, contextual values are crucial to an 
assessment of whether applying the theory in practical contexts is at all useful. That 
is to say, these values are essential to assessing the significance of the theory. Third, 
contextual values play a role in the selection and classification of the empirical data 
that can count for or against a theory. Thus, for instance, interest in the promotion of 
human health is at the basis of the classification of some agents as pathogenic. This is 
a classification that is deployed in the description of the phenomena that can count as 
evidence for or against medical theories about the causes and natures of some diseases. 
Fourth, since contextual values play a role in the selection of the factual data against 
which the theory is measured, and since supporters of different values might use dif-
ferent data as the phenomena that might confirm or disconfirm their theories, if the 
domain of study is amenable to study under more than one research program, then 
before any theory can be accepted more than one program needs to be developed so 
that the theory that is finally accepted is better confirmed by the data selected under 
its research program (and manifests the cognitive values more highly) than any other 
competitor theory is confirmed by the data selected under its own program (Lacey, 
2005, p. 230).
Impartiality is compatible with the value-ladenness of enquiry because it is indepen-
dent of value neutrality, where the latter is understood as the requirement that values 
play no role in the justification of theories (Lacey, 2005, pp. 240–7; Anderson, 2004, 
3). Impartiality requires that cognitive values and factual considerations alone count 
as evidence for or against the truth of a theory. However, impartiality permits that 
contextual values are relevant to an assessment of the significance of a theory. In this 
manner, contextual values can play a positive role in theory choice in accordance with 
impartiality.
Impartiality is the trademark of empiricism understood as the view that theory accep-
tance should proceed in accordance with the virtue of impartiality and that experience 
provides all the evidence we can possibly have about the world. So defined, empiricism 
is one of the most varied and developed forms of feminist epistemology. This character-
ization of feminist empiricism differs from Harding’s account of it as opposed to value-
laden inquiry. In her view feminist empiricism proposes to ameliorate the situation of 
women by stricter adherence to a value-neutral methodology (1986, p. 24). Most self-
proclaimed feminist empiricists, such as Antony, Anderson and Longino would reject 
Harding’s characterization of this position, but I think that they would accept, perhaps 
subject to qualifications, impartiality as an important feature of their views.
Antony appeals to truth-conducivity to distinguish good from bad biases. For her, 
maximizing truth and minimizing falsity are the dual aims of enquiry. Values and inter-
ests are good insofar as they make our belief-forming processes more reliable than they 
would be if we did not adopt them. Antony does not consider the possibility that a 
theory that is a collection of claims or beliefs which are individually true might, never-
theless, be collectively highly misleading. This is a possibility considered by Anderson. 
It is particularly lively in those areas of enquiry which, like history, require selecting 
some among many facts as particularly relevant.
For this reason Anderson proposes that significant truth rather than truth per se 
should be the aim of enquiry. Her view still subscribes to the virtue of impartiality 

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
892
because she is committed to separating out assessments of the significance of a theory 
from assessments of its truth. The facts alone are allowed to play a role in the determina-
tion of truth, but values play a role in the determination of significance (2004, p. 23). In 
her view, what makes the difference between good and bad biases is the epistemic virtue 
of open-mindedness. What matters is that value judgments are not held dogmatically 
so that they do not drive enquiry to a pre-determinate conclusion, irrespective of the 
empirical evidence (2004, p. 11).
Open-mindedness, however, will not by itself be sufficient to promote impartiality as 
defined above. This is because impartiality in many areas requires that different theories 
driven by different values be compared to each other both in terms of their manifesta-
tion of the cognitive values and in terms of their confirmation by the evidence judged 
to be relevant in accordance with the program that has led to the formulation of each 
theory. What is also required is the ability to foster different research programs whose 
resulting theories can be subsequently compared.
Helen Longino’s account takes these considerations at its core (1994, 1995). Her 
proposal amounts to an endorsement of democratic pluralism in epistemology. In par-
ticular she argues that the way to control for the influence of bad biases in science is 
to foster criticism which proceeds from as many points of view as possible (1995, p. 
384). To this end Longino wishes to promote enquiry guided by feminist theoretical 
virtues which she identifies as: empirical adequacy, novelty, ontological heterogene-
ity, complexity of relationship, applicability to current human needs, and diffusion of 
power (1994, pp. 476–9; 1995, p. 386–90). She does not claim that these virtues are 
the exclusive preserve of feminists but simply that they are particularly helpful in the 
attempts to reveal both androcentric biases and sexist assumptions (1995, p. 391). 
Longino also wishes to promote the democratization of the scientific community. This 
would involve the recruitment in the scientific community of individuals from a more 
diverse background, and the acknowledgment that lay members of the community 
should also be granted some cognitive authority to criticize the claims of the so-called 
experts.
While Antony and Anderson think of impartiality as an achievable goal for 
epistemic practices, Longino treats this value at best as a regulative ideal; some-
thing which is desirable but which cannot ever be fully achieved. In places, however, 
Longino appears to shy away even from this moderate support for impartiality. There she 
holds that there are legitimate grounds for accepting theories that are not binding on 
all discussants (1997, pp. 28–9). There are, however, other versions of feminist 
epistemology, which are quite explicit in their rejection of both value-neutrality and 
impartiality. Feminist standpoint epistemology is best understood as belonging to this 
camp.
Crucial to standpoint epistemology is the view that at least some social phenomena 
are not amenable to successful investigation from every perspective. On the contrary, 
these features of social reality can be revealed and understood only by those who inves-
tigate them from some perspective but not from others. A standpoint is a perspective 
which is epistemically privileged in a domain of investigation because it is conducive to 
developing an understanding of that domain which is better (in an epistemic sense) than 
that permitted by research adopting a different perspective. Some cash out the sense 
in which the understanding afforded by the standpoint is better in terms of improved 
truthfulness. More commonly, it is cashed out in terms of its empirical adequacy and its 
applicability in ways that help the needs of human beings.

FEMINIST EPISTEMOLOGY
893
The idea that there are epistemically privileged standpoints is especially plausible 
when it concerns aspects of social reality that can be transformed by the process of for-
mulating theories about them (Haslanger, 2007). For example, the description of some 
forms of eccentricity and rebellion as mental illness has led to the institutionalization of 
many women in the past, thus causing genuine changes in their behavior.
Standpoint epistemologists typically argue that the perspective of social groups which 
are crucial to the continuation of some system of social relations but whose members 
do not benefit from it, offers a better insight into the true workings of the social system 
than that afforded by the viewpoint of those who have a vested interest in the continu-
ation of the system. Thus, Nancy Hartsock (1983) has argued that, in the same way 
in which the perspective of the working class is epistemically privileged with regard 
to understanding capitalism, a feminist perspective is privileged with regard to under-
standing those features of the social system that are responsible for the continuation of 
women’s oppression.
For our purposes in this context three points are especially significant. First, a stand-
point is an achievement. It is not something that pertains to under-privileged indi-
viduals automatically just in virtue of being oppressed. Instead, only those individuals 
who view social reality through the lenses offered by the values and interests of the 
underprivileged can be said to have taken up a standpoint. Hence, for instance, not all 
women, and not only women, view social reality from a feminist standpoint.
Second, a standpoint epistemology entails that values and interests play an essential 
role in the classification of social phenomena into kinds and in the justification of the 
theories developed to explain such a social reality. It is also typically formulated so as to 
include among the goals of enquiry, beyond mere empirical adequacy, the suitability of 
the theory for deployment in the context of political action and debate.
Third, it follows from the two observations above that standpoint epistemology does 
not subscribe to the value of impartiality. Instead, it is committed to the view that con-
textual (moral and political) values can figure among the grounds for accepting a theory 
(Haraway, 1991). It is beyond the scope of this chapter to assess fully the plausibility 
of standpoint epistemology’s rejection of the value of impartiality. It is important to 
notice, however, that some quick dismissals of the position are far too hasty. In order to 
refute the view it is not sufficient to point out that unless research is based on impartial 
grounds then it is not rationally binding on all enquirers, as some critics of standpoint 
theory appear to think. This consideration would only be devastating if there was no 
scope for rational disagreement and discussion about the contextual values themselves. 
If we insist, instead, that values can be subject to rational scrutiny, the quick argument 
provided above offers no refutation of epistemologies that do not require grounds for 
accepting theories to be impartial. What the approach entails is that consideration of 
the facts alone might not be sufficient to settle even factual disputes.
I have so far discussed several ways in which feminist epistemologists have drawn 
the distinction between good and bad bias. These ways of drawing the distinction pre-
sume that it applies primarily to beliefs or theories held by individuals or communities. 
Feminist virtue epistemology takes the distinction to be best applied to stable disposi-
tions and character traits of individuals and to structural features of institutions. So it 
is biased traits of character, or dispositions, which are being assessed for their legiti-
macy. In her pioneering work Lorraine Code (1987) argued that epistemic responsibility 
is the primary intellectual virtue, and more recently both Anderson (1995a) and 
Miranda Fricker (2007) have given prominence to the idea that justice is a fundamental 

METAEPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES
894
intellectual virtue. These accounts do not only include open-mindedness, carefulness, 
honesty and so forth among the epistemic virtues, but they also add some specifically 
feminist theoretical virtues, such as those promoted by Longino (1994 and 1995).
It must be noted that not all feminists are willing to draw a distinction between 
good and bad biases. Some, often called postmodern skeptics, have claimed that the 
idea that there is a genuine distinction between different kinds of bias is mistaken (Flax, 
1990, p. 56). Instead, they claim that we must give up any pretence that conflicts can 
be resolved by rational means. In their view, what dresses up as rational disagreement 
over justification is, in reality, a power struggle for the satisfaction of one’s own group 
interests.
To conclude, this brief survey of various forms of feminist epistemology shows that 
the most important debate within feminist epistemology is about the desirability of 
impartiality. It also demonstrates that all versions of feminist epistemology reject value 
neutrality and accept that contextual values, including feminist values, have a positive 
role to play in empirical enquiry. In this sense they all support the view that gender 
should matter to epistemology.
References
Anderson, E. 1995a: Feminist Epistemology: An Interpretation and a Defense. Hypatia, 10 (3), 50–84.
Anderson, E. 1995b: Knowledge, Human Interests, and Objectivity in Feminist Epistemology. Philosophical 
Topics, 23 (2), 27–58.
Anderson, E. 2004: Uses of Value Judgments in Science: A General Argument, with Lessons from a Case 
Study of Feminist Research on Divorce. Hypatia, 19 (1), 1–24.
Antony, L. M. 1993: Quine as Feminist: The Radical Import of Naturalised Epistemology. In L. Antony and 
C. Witt (eds), A Mind of One’s Own: Feminist Essays on Reason and Objectivity, Boulder: Westview Press, 
185–225.
Belenky, M., Clinchy, B., Tarule, J. and Goldberger, N. 1986: Women’s Ways of Knowing: The Development of 
Self, Voice and Mind. New York: Basic Books.
Code, L. 1987: Epistemic Responsibility. Hanover: Brown University Press.
Flax, J. 1990: Postmodernism and Gender Relations in Feminist Theory. In L. J. Nicholson (ed.), Feminism/
Postmodernism, New York and London: Routledge, 39–62.
Fricker, M. 2007: Epistemic Injustice. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Ginzberg, R. 1987: Uncovering Gynocentric Science. Hypatia, 2, 89–105.
Haack, S. 1997: Science as Social?—Yes and No. In L. Hankinson Nelson and J. Nelson (eds), Feminism, 
Science and the Philosophy of Science, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 79–93.
Haraway, D. 1991: Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism and the Privilege of Partial 
Perspective. In Simians, Cyborgs and Women: The Reinvention of Nature, London: Free Association Books, 
183–201.
Harding, S. G. 1986: The Science Question in Feminism. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Harding, S. G. 1991: Whose Science? Whose Knowledge?: Thinking from Women’s Lives. Ithaca: Cornell 
University Press.
Hartsock, N. 1983: The Feminist Standpoint: Developing the Ground for a Specifically Feminist Historical 
Materialism. In S. G. Harding and M. B. Hintikka (eds), Discovering Reality, Dordrecht: Reidel, 
283–310.
Haslanger, S. 2007: “But Mom, Crop-Tops Are Cute.” Social Knowledge, Social Structure and Ideology 
Critique. Philosophical Issues, 17, 70–91.
Hrdy, S. B. 1999: The Woman That Never Evolved: With a New Preface and Bibliographical Updates. Rev. ed. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Jaggar, A. M. 1992: Love and Knowledge: Emotion in Feminist Epistemology. In A. Garry and M. Pearsall 
(eds), Women, Knowledge and Reality: Explorations in Feminist Philosophy, New York and London: Routledge, 
129–55.
Lacey, H. 2005: Is Science Value Free?: Values and Scientific Understanding. London: Routledge.

FEMINIST EPISTEMOLOGY
895
Lloyd, G. 1984: The Man of Reason: “Male” and “Female” in Western Philosophy. Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press.
Longino, H. E. 1994: In Search of Feminist Epistemology. Monist, 77 (4), 472–85.
Longino, H. E. 1995: Gender, Politics, and the Theoretical Virtues. Synthese, 104 (3), 383–97.
Longino, H. E. 1997: Feminist Epistemology as a Local Epistemology. Aristotelian Society Supp, no. 71, 
19–35.
Quine, W. V. 1980: Two Dogmas of Empiricism. In From a Logical Point of View: 9 Logico-philosophical Essays, 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 20–46.


abductive inference 275–7, 863–4
absolutist relativism 79–82
abstraction 359–60
Academic skepticism 433
access 145, 146, 211–13, 307, 308–14, 428–31
accessibility 573
access internalism 31, 146–50, 491–2
accuracy 538–9
acquaintance 60, 148, 309, 374, 428–31, 492–3, 751, 
753–5, 758–60
acquaintance foundationalism 60
action, reasons for 213–14, 385–8
actual access internalism 491
Adler, Jonathan 168, 532
Aenesidemus of Cnossos 403, 409, 410
aesthetic cognitivism 376–7
aesthetic holism 372
aesthetic knowledge 369–77
aesthetic particularism 371–2
aesthetic reasons 372–3
aesthetic testimony 374–5
Against the Ethicists (Sextus Empiricus) 406, 410
Against the Logicians (Sextus Empiricus) 406–7, 409
Against the Physicists (Sextus Empiricus) 406
AGM theory of belief revision 582–3, 623–7, 636–7
agreement of ideas 687–91
Agrippan trilemma 411
airport scenario 526–7
Alchourrón, Carlos 582–3, 624, 625
Alciphron (Berkeley) 707
alethic pluralism 11
alethic relativism 78–9
Alexander, Joshua 828, 831
alien cognizers problem 179–80
Alston, William 117, 147–8, 162, 182–3, 246–7, 396, 
504: Epistemic Justification 246
ambiguity 551, 594
analogy 674–5; argument from 437–8, 439
The Analysis of Matter (Russell) 750, 751, 758, 759, 
760–61
analyticity 284–5, 289–90, 293, 470
analytic social epistemology 877, 878
Anaxagoras 660
Anderson, Elizabeth 890, 891–2, 893
Angere, Staffan 266
Annis, David 523
anti-intellectualism 826–7
anti-intuitionism 815–17
anti-luck epistemology 91–3, 187–97, 226–7
Antinomies 748
anti-realism 351–2, 477–87, 639, 644–9
Antony, Louise 888, 890, 891
Apologie de Raimond Sebond (Montaigne) 679
Apology (Plato) 96, 104, 655–6
apperception 745–6
apprehension 88–90, 745, 764, 765, 767–8
a priori justification 283–93
a priori knowledge 283–93, 470–71, 703, 734–5, 
746–7, 818
Aquinas, Thomas 681
archai 667, 668–9, 671
archery scenario 225–6, 229–30
argument from analogy 437–8, 439
argument from depression 97
argument from evil 97–8
argument from examples 285–6
argument from ignorance 799–801
argument from illusion 295–6
argument from natural evil 162
argument from opposites 663–4
argument from silence 64–5
Aristotle 666–76; on conditions for knowledge 661; 
De Anima 673–5, 681; formal and efficient 
causes 222; Generation of Animals 675; on 
induction 271; Metaphysics 246, 249; and moral 
knowledge 408; on perception 296, 673–5, 681; 
Posterior Analytics 247, 249, 667–9; practical 
wisdom 670–72, 887; Prior Analytics 668; and 
skepticism 246–7, 249; theoretical knowledge 666–
70; on truth 3; on wisdom 96, 99–101, 670–72, 887
Armstrong, David M. 176
assertion 214–15, 527
assessment sensitivity 536, 537–9
atomism 21, 484
Audi, Robert 331
Augustine, Saint 887
INDEX
Page numbers in bold refer to the chapter of the book dedicated to that topic.

INDEX
898
Aumann, Robert 579
austere reliabilism 249–50
Austin, John Langshaw 571, 798–809: How to Do 
Things With Words 798; “Other Minds” 798, 799, 
801–2; “The Meaning of a Word” 801; Philosophical 
Papers 798; “A Plea for Excuses” 805–6; Sense and 
Sensibilia 798, 799, 802, 806–7
authority 394–5, 397–8, 426
availability 145, 298–9; see also access
Avramides, Anita 433
Ayer, A.J. 119, 438, 458, 483, 489
Bach, Kent 531–2, 559
Bacon, Francis 281, 679–80
Baker, Lynne Rudder 90–91
Baltag, Alexandru 582
bank cases 540, 541–2, 558–64, 824–6
Barnes, Barry 874–5, 876–7
Barrow, Isaac: Optical Lectures 707
basic beliefs 236, 237
basing relation 27–8, 109–18
Bayes, Thomas 448–9, 609
Bayesian conditionalization 29, 80–82, 612–13
Bayesian epistemology 609–19; and belief 
change 29, 80–82, 612–13; and coherence 616–18; 
and confirmation theories 277–8, 448–9, 450–52, 
613–15; and degrees of belief 609–13; and 
evidence 59–60, 65–6, 613–15; and inductive 
inference 447, 448–9, 450–52; and relativism 
80–82
Bayesian Epistemology (Bovens and Hartmann) 618
Bealer, George 301, 813, 818
Beall, J.C. 647
Bechtel, Robert 852
Beebe, James 827
behaviorism 309–10, 851
belief 14–23; degrees of 42–5, 609–13; epistemic 
reasons for 40–42, 54–5; knowledge rule for 214–15; 
non-epistemic reasons for 40–42, 54–5; norm of 
8–9; origins of 734–6; and pragmatism 40–42, 48–
9, 54–5; and rationality 42–5; transparency of 53–4
belief change 29, 80–82, 156, 582–3, 621–37, 787–91
Bender, John W. 258
Bengson, John 826–7
Bennett, Jonathan 428
Benthem, Johan van 583, 632
Bergmann, Michael 148
Berkeley, George 295, 435–6, 438–40, 482, 685, 
699–700, 707–16, 757–8; Alciphron 707; 
New Theory of Vision 707–10; Philosophical 
Commentaries 707, 714–15, 716; Principles of 
Human Knowledge 707, 709–10, 712–13, 714; 
Theory of Vision Vindicated and Explained 707; Three 
Dialogues between Hylas and Philinous 707, 709, 
710–11, 712–13
better-self theories 203
bias paradox 888–94
binding theory 336–7
Bishop, Michael 842, 846
Blackburn, Simon 434
Blanshard, Brand 485
Bloor, David 874–5, 876–7
Boghossian, Paul 876–7
BonJour, Laurence 28, 146–9, 151, 154, 180–81, 250, 
258, 259, 813, 841
Boolos, George 360
bootstrapping 451, 603–4
Bovens, Luc 265, 617–18
Bovens-Hartmann measure 617
Braddon-Mitchell, David 16
Bradley, Francis Herbert 28, 485
brain-in-a-vat scenario 20, 32, 190–91, 418–19, 446, 
480, 500–506
Braithwaite, R.B. 292
Brandt, Richard 819
Brogaard, Berit 85, 648
Brueckner, Anthony 169
Buckle, Stephen 739
Buckwalter, Wesley 825, 827
Burge, Tyler 111, 307, 312–13, 339
Burmúdez, Jose 645
Burnyeat, Myles 433
Butler, Samuel 853
Campbell, Donald 848, 852, 854, 856–7
Cappelen, Herman 528
Carnap, Rudolf 273, 275, 447, 757, 774–84, 786–7: 
Logical Syntax of Language 776, 781; Der Logische 
Aufbau der Welt 774–9, 783; Unity of Science 
779–80
“Carnap and Logical Truth” (Quine) 786, 789
Carneades 132
Carrier, Leonard S. 135, 138
Carroll, Lewis 51, 288
Cartesian doubt 38, 122, 678–9, 697–8, 719, 770–73
Cartesian insight 139–40
Cartesian rationalism 346–7
Cartesian skepticism 133, 138–40, 414–23, 434, 
479–80, 500–501, 685, 799
Cassam, Quassim 441, 442
categorical imperative 387, 471
categories 704, 745–7
causal chains 115
causal theories: action 213–14; basing relation 
111–14; beliefs 37–8; and Gettier cases 124–5; 
inductive inference 731–5; knowledge 150, 176; 
memory 328; reasoning 731–5; responses to 
skepticism 419; truth 4–5
Cavell, Stanley 805
certainty 346–7, 416–18, 422, 480, 563–4, 694–5, 
715–16
Chalmers, David 180, 648
Changeux, Jean-Pierre 850
character traits 199–201, 202–4
charity, principle of 507–9
children 149, 202, 204, 319–21, 428–31, 592, 770–72
Chisholm, Roderick 27, 119, 498, 578, 775–6, 802, 
804
Chomsky, Noam 337, 338, 341
Chrisman, Matthew 840

INDEX
899
Christensen, David 614
Church, Alonzo 641, 643–4
Church-Fitch paradox see knowability paradox
Churchland, Patricia 20
Churchland, Paul 20
circularity 257–8, 289–81, 291–2, 408, 411, 843–4
circularity, mode of 408, 411
circumstantial relativism 388
clairvoyant scenario 146–7, 151, 181–2
clarity 680–83, 699–700, 704
Clifford, William K. 52, 54, 167, 172
closure see epistemic closure
Code, Lorraine 199, 201, 893
Cogito ergo sum 284, 425, 621, 681, 698, 719, 818
cognitivism 48, 55, 389–90, 466–8
Cohen, Stewart 134–5, 138, 140, 178, 497, 526, 
530–31
coherence: and Bayesianism 616–18; defining 
nature of 28–9, 258–61; measures of 260–61, 
265–6, 616–18; and memory 332; and reflective 
equilibrium 819; and sensory experiences 699–700; 
and truth 261–3, 472–3, 485
coherentism 257–66; emergent 250–52; and 
intuitions 820–21; and justification 26–30, 
169, 472–3, 485; and probability 265–6; and 
rationality 41; and regress 237, 250–52; and 
skepticism 250–52, 263–5, 423
Collins, Harry 876
Comesaña, Juan 174, 183, 192–3, 563
common knowledge 578–80
common sense 212–3, 436, 478, 718, 721–2
competing reasons 566–8
complex ideas 691, 692–4
Comte, Auguste 862
conceivability principle 732, 733
concept empiricism 751–6
concepts: and intuitions 704–5, 744–5; and 
norms 50–52
conditional fallacy 5–6, 203
conditionalization 29, 80–82, 612–13
Conee, Earl 167–8, 170–71, 172, 181, 182–3
confirmation theories 266, 271–8, 448–51, 613–15
conjunction fallacy 615
conjunction rule 43–4
consciousness 217; identity of 746–7
conservatism 788, 794
constructivism 308–12, 389–90
content externalism 502–3
content relativism 539
contextualism 33–4, 523–33, 539–40, 553–4, 560–
61, 594, 799–801, 823–6
contingent propositions 284
contingent truths 718, 719–20
contrastivism 513–22
correspondence theory of truth 3–5, 484
cosmology 684
Costa-Leite, Alexandre 648
counterfactual difference measure 614
counterfactual theories 114–16, 150, 203, 440, 645–6
craftsmanship 660–61, 673
Craig, Edward 730, 878–9
Cratylus (Plato) 661, 663
credulity, principle of 820–21
“Criteria, Defeasibility, and Knowledge” 
(McDowell) 299
Critique of Pure Reason (Kant) 704, 705, 741–9
Cross, Charles B. 265
Cruz, Joseph 51
Cullen, Simon 831
cultural variation 817, 828, 831
Cummins, Robert 816, 817, 819
Cuneo, Terence 840
Cyrenaics 433–4
Darwin, Charles 848–9: Descent of Man 848; Origin of 
Species 848
Datson, Lorrane 880–81
Davidson, Donald 18, 19, 21, 111–13, 312, 337, 
434, 438, 506–9, 878; “Three Varieties of 
Knowledge” 878
Dawkins, Richard 852
De Anima (Aristotle) 673–5, 681
de dicto beliefs 21–2
deduction 346–7, 667–8
default and challenge model 164–5
defeasibility 124, 156–65, 317–18, 727
defeater-defeaters 161–2, 317
defensibility 578
definite descriptions 752–3
deflationary theories, of truth 6–10, 484–5
degrees of belief 42–5, 609–13
demon worlds see evil demon scenario
demonstrations 667–8
Demopoulos, William 759
Dennett, Daniel 18–19, 21, 852
DePaul, Michael 816, 819
dependence thesis 236
depression, argument from 97
de re beliefs 21–2
DeRose, Keith 191–2, 526–7, 528, 530, 551, 558–61
Descartes, René 678–86; cogito 284, 425, 621, 
681, 698, 719, 818; Descriptions of the Human 
Body 684; Discourse on Method 683; and 
doubt 38, 122, 678–9, 697–8, 719, 770–73; dream 
argument 799, 800–801; existence of God 741; 
foundationalism 394–5, 719; and Leibniz 697–701, 
703–4; and material existence 698–701; Meditations 
on First Philosophy 394, 416, 434, 438, 479, 500, 
682, 683, 684–5, 699, 700, 730; Optics 707; on 
other minds 438; Passions of the Soul 684; on 
perception on 679–80, 681–2, 683; Principles of 
Philosophy 347; rationalism 346–7, 887; Rules for 
the Direction of the Mind 346–7, 680, 683; Search for 
the Truth 684, 685; on self-knowledge 305, 307, 
425; and skepticism 133, 138–40, 414–23, 434, 
479–80, 500–501, 685, 799; Treatise on Man 683; 
The World 684
Descent of Man (Darwin) 848
descriptions, theory of 750–56
Descriptions of the Human Body (Descartes) 684

INDEX
900
descriptive epistemology 854, 856–7
descriptive naturalism 836, 837–40
determination 342–4
deviant causal chains 112–13, 125
Devitt, Michael 292
Dewey, John 848, 868–9
diachronic justification 621–3
diagnostic social epistemology 877–82
dialectic 655, 662, 671
dialectical defeaters 164
Dietrich, Franz 266
difference measure 613
Diogenes Laertius: Life of Pyrrho 403, 409, 410
Dioptrica Nova (Molyneux) 707
direct apprehension 764, 765, 767–8
direct realism 295, 296, 299–301, 327–8, 481
disagreement 61, 68–74, 384, 748–9
disagreement of ideas 687–91
Discourse on Metaphysics (Leibniz) 697, 700
Discourse on Method (Descartes) 683
discriminatory capacities 515–16
disjunctivism 216, 299–301, 493, 503–4, 765, 768, 
804
dispositional theories 17–18, 456–7, 701–3
distance, knowledge of 707–9
distinctive value 223
distinctness 680–83, 699–700, 704
distributed knowledge 548–51, 580–82
Ditmarsch, Hans van 583
Dodd, Dylan 135
dogmatic invariantism 537
dogmatism: and fallibilism 133, 134, 135, 137–8; and 
skepticism 404, 406, 409, 411
Dokic, Jérôme 594
doubt 38, 122, 678–9, 697–8, 719, 770–73
Dougherty, Trent 135, 142
Douven, Igor 615
doxaxtic defeaters 158, 159
doxastic dynamic logic 632, 633–4, 636–7
doxastic justification 28, 168
dreaming scenario 479–80, 799, 800–801
Dretske, Fred 15–16, 122, 177, 420, 441, 513–15, 602, 
856–7
Duhem, Pierre 351–2, 449–51
Duhem–Quine problem 613
Duhemian holism 775, 776–7
Dummett, Michael 645, 646, 647
Dutch book theorem 278, 611–13
dyadic relation 536, 537, 539
dynamic epistemic logic 632, 637
dynamicism 553, 554
easy knowledge 497–8, 603–4
Edelman, Gerald 850
Edgington, Dorothy 645–6
efficient cause 669
Egan, Andy 554
Égré, Paul 594
eliminative induction 271, 281–2
eliminativism 20, 48, 838
embellished reliabilism 249–50
emergent coherentism 250–52
eminent properties 702
emotivism 458
empirical knowledge 362–4
empirical psychology 718, 721–2
empirical research see experimental epistemology
Empirical Sociology (Neurath) 779
empiricism 289–92, 718, 721–2, 730, 862–4
“Empiricism Without the Dogmas” (Quine) 787
endoxa 671, 672
Enlightenment 394–8
Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding 
(Hume) 730, 731–2, 736–7
entailment 337–8, 469–70, 597
entitlement 51, 591
enumerative induction 272–3
environmental luck 92
epagoge 667
epistemic boost problem 331
epistemic closure 137–8, 236–7, 597–606
epistemic expressivism 839–40
epistemic justification see justification
Epistemic Justification (Alston) 246
epistemic modals see modals
epistemic normativity see normativity
epistemic permissiveness 82
epistemic pluralism 76, 77–8
epistemic privilege 470–71
epistemic purism 562–3
epistemic rationality see rationality
epistemic relationism 76
epistemic standards 536, 537–9
epistemic relativism see relativism
epistemological constructivism 389
epistemological determination 342–3
epistemological skepticism 455
“Epistemology Naturalized” (Quine) 775, 792–4, 837
error theories 467–8, 526, 529–31
Essays (Montaigne) 679
An Essay Concerning Human Understanding 
(Locke) 687–8, 689, 691
Essays on the Active Powers (Reid) 717
Essays on the Intellectual Powers (Reid) 717
eternalism 538
ethical naturalism 382
ethical relativism 388–9
Ethics (Spinoza) 697
ethnicity, and intuitions 828, 831
Euler, Leonhard: Letters to a German Princess 743
Evans, Gareth 311
evidence 58–66; absence of 64–5; and 
Bayesianism 59–60, 65–6, 613–15; and 
coherence 261–2; and defeasibility 158; 
extraordinary 65–6; forgotten 173–4; and 
foundationalism 60–61; and Gettier cases 123–4; 
and independence 66, 262, 264; interpretation 
63–4; and intuitions 814–15; measuring 613–15; 
nature of 58–9, 168–9; and norms 52, 54–5; 
objectivity constraint 61–3; possession of 169–80; 

INDEX
901
principle of total 807; propositional 59–60; 
relevance of 451–2; and social epistemology 873–4; 
and testimony 65–6
evidence-gathering 172–3
evidentialism 52, 54–5, 61–3, 167–74, 181–2
evidentialist reliabilism 161, 183–4
evidential support 171–2
evil, argument from 97–8
evil demon scenario 32, 137, 138–9, 152–3, 177–8, 
434, 479–80, 500; see also new evil demon 
problem
evolutionary epistemology 848–58
evolution of epistemic mechanisms (EEM) 849, 850–51
evolution of epistemic theories (EET) 849, 851–2
Ewing, A.C. 258–9
examples, argument from 285–6
expansionist social epistemology 875
experience 169, 283–4, 286–7, 690–91, 732–4, 862–4, 
866
experiential foundationalism 241–3
experimental epistemology 125–6, 817, 823–33
experimenters’ regress 876
explicit beliefs 16–17
explicit endorsement 22
exploratory epistemology 684
expressivism 48, 55, 380, 839–40
externalism 144–54; and belief 20–21; content 
502–3; and defeasibility 160–61; and evidence 
60–61; and justification 29–32, 38, 144–5, 150–53, 
492–8; and norms 51–2; and Reid 720–22; 
responses to skepticism 153–4, 415, 488–99; 
and second-order knowledge 587–91, 595–6; 
semantic 210–11, 500–509
extraordinary evidence 65–6
faculties: parity of 723; virtues as 204–6
fake barn scenario 120–21, 122, 127, 205, 226–7, 
229–30, 828
Fagin, Ronald 583
fallibilism 121, 122, 131–42, 362, 787, 863
falsificationism 278, 351–2, 447–9, 450
fancy intensions 536, 537–9
Fantl, Jeremy 558
Fedigan, Linda 889–90
Feldman, Richard 123, 134, 135, 138, 142, 167–8, 
170–71, 172–3, 181, 182–3
Feltz, Adam 825
feminist empiricism 890–92
feminist epistemology 881, 885–94
feminist virtue epistemology 893–4
Feyerabend, Paul 352–4
Field, Hartry 840
final cause 669
Fine, Arthur 871
finite minds 253
Fintel, Kai von 552
first-person authority 306–14
first principles: Aristotle 667–9, 671; Reid 436–7, 
441, 718–20, 721–3
Fischer, Kuno 678
Fitch, Frederic 640–44
Fitch’s paradox see knowability paradox
Fitelson, Branden 266, 617
five modes of Agrippa 408–9, 411
Fodor, Jerry 15, 21, 339, 804
Fogelin, Robert 411–12
Foley, Richard 149, 153, 508–9
forgotten evidence 173–4, 331
formal semantics 571–83
form of the good 663
formal cause 669
formal possibility 741–2
Forms 661, 663–4
Forrest, Peter 301
Foster, John 296
foundational beliefs 236
foundationalism 235–44; and Austin 801–3; 
and Berkeley 715; and Carnap 775–8; and 
Descartes 394–5, 719; and evidence 60–61; and 
infinitism 246–50, 254; and justification 26–7, 
164; and moral beliefs 468–70; and perception 297; 
and rationality 41; and Reid 718–20; and religious 
knowledge 394–5; and skepticism 248–50
foundations thesis 236, 237
four causes 669
Fox Keller, Evelyn 889
Fraassen, Bas van 278, 352, 520
Frank, Philipp 782–3
Frege, Gottlob 284–5, 289, 338, 359–60, 665
Fricker, Miranda 879, 893
Friedman, Michael 759, 777
Fuhrmann, André 582, 624, 628, 632
Fumerton, Richard 309, 491, 496, 497, 508–9, 843
functionalism 10–12, 19–20, 31
fundamental principle 753–5
Galison, Peter 880–81
game theory 582–3
Gärdenfors, Peter 576, 582–3, 624, 625, 627
gargabe chute scenario 192–3
Garrett, Don 738
Garrett, Richard 98
Garron, Joseph 20
Geach, Peter 337
Gemes, Kenneth 451
Gendler, Tamar Szabó 23
genealogical social epistemology 877, 878–9
general normative principle 9
generalized quantifier theory 337
General Theory of Knowledge (Schlick) 777
generality 52, 55, 121–2
generality problem for reliabilism 141–2, 182–4, 
493–4
Generation of Animals (Aristotle) 675
generativism 331–2
genetic construtivism 389
genuine overdetermination 115
Gertler, Brie 23
Gettier, Edmund 37, 176, 209: “Is Justified True Belief 
Knowledge?” 37, 187

INDEX
902
Gettier cases 29, 119–29; and causality 124–5, 176; 
and defeasibility 124, 156–7; and evidence 123–4; 
and fallibility 121, 122, 137; and intuitions 125–6, 
817, 828; and knowledge-first epistemology 214–15, 
220; and luck 92, 121, 122–3, 126–8, 187–9; 
and second-order knowledge 591–2; and virtue 
epistemology 205–6
Gillies, Anthony 552
Ginzberg, Ruth 886
Glass, David H. 261, 266, 617
Glass-Olsson measure 617
global reductionism 319–20
global skepticism 488–9
Glymour, Clark 451
Gödel, Kurt 360–62
Goldbach’s conjecture 141
Goldman, Alvin: causal theory of knowledge 150; 
on education 95; on intuitions 818; Knowledge 
in a Social World 873–4; reliabilism 30, 38, 
150–53, 176–7, 179–82, 493, 587, 838, 842; 
social epistemology 873–5, 877; weak sense of 
knowledge 92
Goodman, Nelson 275, 342, 757, 818–19: “New 
Riddle of Induction” 275
Gorgias (Plato) 657
gradualism 127–8
grasping 88–90; see also apprehension
Greco, John 195–6, 200, 205
Grice, H. Paul 805
Griffin, James 84
grue 274–5, 342
gypsy lawyer case 113–14, 115
Haack, Susan 132–4, 139, 890
Hacking, Ian 549, 881
Halpern, Joseph Y. 583
Hamilton, William 437
Harding, Sandra 881, 891
Hardwig, John 881–2
Harman, Gilbert 297, 350, 420–21, 603, 815–16: 
“The Intrinsic Quality of Experience” 297
Harms, William F. 857
Harper identity 625
Hartmann, Stephan 265, 617–18
Hartsock, Nancy 893
Hattiangadi, Anandi 461
Hawthorne, John 92, 169, 518–19, 528, 542, 551, 
558, 561
hedonism 472
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich 887
Heller, Mark 182
Hempel, Carl Gustav 274, 447, 485
Hetherington, Stephen 135–6, 139, 140
Higginbotham, James 336
high stakes cases 525–7, 540, 558–68, 824–5
higher-order knowledge 586
Hilpinen, Risto 578
Hintikka, Jaakko 572–3, 576, 577, 578, 594: 
Knowledge and Belief 576, 578
historical epistemology 877, 879–81
Hocutt, Max O. 577
Hoek, Wiebe van der 583
holism: aesthetic 372; and belief 21; Carnap 776–7; 
Duhem 449–51, 776–7; Plato 659, 660–61; 
Quine 258, 291–2, 449–51, 775, 787–91, 795–6; 
and skepticism 449–51
Horwich, Paul 7
Howson, Colin 613
How to Do Things With Words (Austin) 798
Huemer, Michael 112, 265, 266
Hull, David 852
Human Knowledge: Its Scope and Limits (Russell) 751, 
760–61
Hume, David 730–40; on aesthetic knowledge 370; 
on cause and effect 328, 481; Enquiry Concerning 
Human Understanding 730, 731–2, 736–7; on 
inductive inference 278–81, 445–6, 481, 731–5; 
non-cognitivism 381, 465; on perception 724–5; 
on self-knowledge 305–6; and skepticism 735–40; 
on testimony 35, 65–6, 319; Treatise of Human 
Nature 730, 732–4, 736–7, 739–40
Hume’s principle 359–60
Hume’s problem 278–81, 445–6, 731–5
humility 656
Hungerford’s objection to inference to the best 
explanation 277
hyper-realist contrastivism 520
hypotheses 273–4, 350–51, 447–52, 863–4
hypothesis, mode of 408, 411
hypothetical realism 854–5
hypothetico-deductivism 273–4, 351, 447–9
Hyslop, Alec 439
ideal critic 371
idealism 153, 295, 757; see also phenomenalism
ideality of space 744
idealized agents 576–8
ideal knowers 886–8
identity of consciousness 746–7
ignorance, argument from 799–801
illusion, argument from 295–6
image of God doctrine 730; see also mirror of God 
principle
immanence 12
impartiality 890–91
implicit beliefs 16–17
implicit reactions 22–3
incongruent counterparts 742–3
incorrigibility 307–8
indefeasibility 162–4
independence 66, 262, 264
independent warrant 355
indeterminacy of translation 791–2
indexical content relativism 539
indexical contextualism 539–40
indexicals 537
index-linked descriptivism 553, 554
indirect realism 295–9, 481–2, 710–13, 738–9
inductive knowledge 271–82; skepticism about 
245–52; see also inference

INDEX
903
inductivism 347–9
infallibility 122, 162–3, 239–40, 287–8, 307–8, 426
inference: and the basing relation 111; to best 
explanation 63–4, 172, 275–7; Hume on 731–5; 
and interpretation of evidence 63–4; and 
perception 726–8; scientific 347–50, 353–4; see 
also inductive knowledge
inferential internalism 492
inferential justification 492, 496
infinite regress, mode of 408, 411
infinitism 26–7, 237, 245–55
inheritance principle 248, 252
innate ideas 700–704
Inquiry Into the Human Mind (Reid) 717
instrumentalism 351–2, 868–9
intellectual egalitarianism 395
intension 147–9
intentionality 296–7
internalism 144–54; access internalism 31, 146–50, 
491–2; analysis of knowledge 210; and belief 20; 
and defeasibility 160–61; and evidence 60; 
inferential internalism 492; internal state 
internalism 491; and justification 29–32, 38, 
144–50; mentalism 31, 145; and norms 51–2; 
responses to skepticism 153–4, 491–2; and second-
order knowledge 587–91, 595–6
internal state interalism 491
interpersonal view, testimony 321–2
interpretational theories 17, 18–19
 “The Intrinsic Quality of Experience” (Harman) 297
introspection 284, 310–11; see also access; self-
knowledge
intuition 125–6, 346–7, 360–62, 618–19, 687–90, 
714–15
intuitionism 383–4, 385–7, 471, 646–7
intuitions 704–5, 744–5, 813–21, 823–33
invariantism 33–4, 537, 539, 540–42
irrelevant conjunctions 614–15
Jackson, Frank 16, 481
James, William 53, 54, 327, 848, 861–2, 866–8, 
870–71: Principles of Psychology 848; “The Will to 
Believe” 866–7
Jeffrey, Richard C. 134, 138, 140–41: The Logic 
of Decision 134; “Probability and the Art of 
Judgment” 134; “Probable Knowledge” 134
Jenkins, Carrie 648
Joachim, Harold Henry 485
job/coins scenario 120, 122, 123, 125, 126, 187–8, 
190
Johnston, Mark 301
judgement: non-inferential 764–73; stability of 828; 
suspension of 404–6, 407, 409, 411
justification 25–35; a priori 283–93; and 
coherentism 26–30, 169, 472–3, 485; default 
and challenge model 164–5; diachronic 621–3; 
doxastic 28, 168; and experience 169; and 
externalism 29–32, 38, 150–53, 492–8; and 
foundationalism 26–7, 164, 236–44; and 
indefeasibility 162–4; inferential 492, 496; and 
internalism 29–32, 38, 144–50; and luck 187–8; 
and memory 330–32; and moral beliefs 468–73; 
non-inferential 492–6; and norms 51–2; 
objective 152–3; and pragmatism 33–4; and 
probabilism 28–9; propositional 28, 168, 203–4; 
relation to knowledge 37–9; and reliabilism 30–31, 
38, 150–53, 177–82, 493–4, 497–8; second-
level 496–8; subjective 152–3, 200, 202; 
synchronic 621–3; and testimony 36, 319–22; and 
virtue epistemology 31, 32–3, 202–6; weak and 
strong 152; see also warrant
justified true belief, knowledge as 37, 119, 209, 
214–15 
“Is Justified True Belief Knowledge?” (Gettier) 37, 187
Kahneman, Daniel 615
Kail, Peter 738
Kant, Immanuel 741–9; on aesthetic judgement 374; 
categorical imperative 387, 471; categories 704, 
745–7; contrastivism 519–20; Critique of Pure 
Reason 704, 705, 741–9; and Leibniz 704–5; on 
moral knowledge 387, 389–90, 471; and structural 
knowledge 759; transcendental idealsim 743–9
Kantian contrastivism 519–20
Kaplan, David 180
Kaplan, Mark 126, 219
Katz, Jerrold R. 804
Kaupinnen, Antti 831–2
Kelly, Kevin 583
Kelp, Christoph 648
Kepler, Johannes 681–2
Kim, Jaegwon 857
Kitcher, Philip 842
KK-principle 589–94
Klein, Peter D. 27, 157, 265
Knobe, Joshua 827
knowability paradox 639–49
knowability principle 639
knowledge: as achievement 224–30; aesthetic 
369–77; analysis of 209–11; a priori 283–93, 
470–71, 703, 734–5, 746–7, 818; Aristotle’s 
classification 666–7; causal theories 150, 
176; by experience 690–91; higher-order 586; 
inductive 271–82; by intuition 687–90, 714–15; 
as justified true belief 37, 119, 209, 214–15; limits 
of 695–6; logical 358–68; mathematical 
358–68, 659–60, 669–70; and memory 328–30; 
moral 380–91; non-inferential 763–73; 
perceptual 294–304; practical 100–105, 670–73, 
826–7, 886, 887; by reason 689–90; religious 162, 
393–400; scientific 346–57, 660, 669–70, 
875–7; second-order 586–96; self- 22, 211–13, 
305–14; semantic 335–44; testimonial 316–22; 
theoretical 666–70, 672–3; and understanding 
85–8, 90–93; value of 205, 219–30; and virtue 
epistemology 202–6; and wisdom 656, 662
Knowledge and Belief (Hintikka) 576, 578
Knowledge and its Limits (Williamson) 32
knowledge attributions: and contextualism 
523–33; and contrastivism 513–22; and 

INDEX
904
knowledge attributions (cont.):
 epistemic modals 545–67; and pragmatic 
encroachment 558–68; and relativism 536–43
knowledge externalism 440
knowledge-first epistemology 32, 61, 169, 177, 
208–17, 494–5
knowledge-how 826–7, 886, 887
knowledge internalism 440
Knowledge in a Social World (Goldman) 873–4
knowledge transmission 316–18, 594–6, 600
Kompa, Nikola 528
Kooi, Barteld 583
Koons, Robert 582
Korcz, Keith 117–18
Kornblith, Hilary 816, 838, 839, 845
Kratzer, Angelika 550, 556
Kripke, Saul 341–4, 454–5, 456–9, 573–4, 815
Kripke-semantics 573–4
Kuhn, Thomas 353, 354, 849, 852: The Structure of 
Scientific Revolutions 353, 849
Kusch, Martin 879, 880
Kvanvig, Jonathan 91–3, 113, 199, 201, 219, 221, 
561, 599, 647–8, 840
Lacey, Hugh 890–91
Lackey, Jennifer 128, 226, 318
Lane, Melissa 879
language-like representations 16
Laudan, Larry 855
legitimatory epistemology 684–5
Lehrer, Keith 113–14, 115, 122, 123–4, 258, 265, 720, 
820
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm 697–705: Discourse on 
Metaphysics 697, 700; Meditations on Knowledge, 
Truth and Ideas 704–5; New Essays on Human 
Understanding 698, 700, 703
Lemmon, E.J. 578
Lenzen, Wolfgang 572, 576
Lepore, Ernest 21, 528
Letters to a German Princess (Euler) 743
Levi, Isaac 624
Levi identity 625
Lewis, C.I. 259, 263, 264–5, 332
Lewis, David 16, 135, 527, 579, 612, 627, 630
Lewis test 630
Lewontin, Richard 853
Leyton-Brown, Kevin 583
Liao, S. Matthew 831
liberal dispositionalism 18
liberalism 553, 554
Life of Pyrrho (Diogenes Laertius) 403, 409, 410
Lindström, Sten 583
linguistic convention 290
linguistic-semantic intuitions 814–15
linguistic theory 340–41
Linsky, Bernard 644
Lipton, Peter 277, 350
Livengood, Jonathan 831
living well 97–8, 101–5, 657, 658
Lloyd, Genevieve 887–8: The Man of Reason 887
local invariantism 536, 537, 539
local reductionism 319–20
local skepticism 488–9, 722–5
Locke, John 481, 685, 687–96, 701–2, 704, 711, 
714–15, 758, 759; An Essay Concerning Human 
Understanding 687–8, 689, 691
logic 571–83
logical construction 750–51, 756–7
logical empiricism 34
logical intuitions 814
logical knowledge 358–68
logical monism 367
logical omniscience 576–8
logical pluralism 367–8
logical positivism 34
logical possibility 741–2
Logical Syntax of Language (Carnap) 776, 781
The Logic of Decision (Jeffrey) 134
logic of science 782–4
Der Logische Aufbau der Welt (Carnap) 774–9, 783
log-likelihood ratio measures 614
log-ratio measure 613
Longino, Helen 892, 894
loose use theory 541
Lorenz, Konrad 854
lottery scenarios 29, 43–4, 157, 184–5, 188, 190, 195, 
518–19, 603
loveliness 277, 281
low stakes cases 526–7, 540, 558–68, 824–5
luck: and Gettier cases 91–2, 121, 122–3, 126–8, 
187–9; and justification 187–8; see also anti-luck 
epistemology
lucky disjunction scenario 120
Ludlow, Peter 337, 338–9, 528
Ludwig, Kurt 830–31
Lukács, Georg 881
luminosity 212, 307–8, 590, 592–4
Lycan, William G. 124, 815, 820
Lynch, Michael P. 12
McClintlock, Barbara 889
McDowell, John 299–300, 765–70, 783–4: “Criteria, 
Defeasiblity, and Knowledge” 299
MacFarlane, John 538, 554–5
McGinn, Marie 804–5
McGrath, Matthew 331, 558
Machery, Edouard 830–31
McKenzie, Donald 880
Mackie, J. L. 839
Makinson, David 582–3, 624, 625
Malcolm, Norman 328–9, 333, 594
Malebranche, Nicolas 435, 436, 685, 701: Search after 
Truth 707
Mallon, Ron 830–31
The Man of Reason (Lloyd) 887
map-like representations 16
Marcus, Ruth Barcan 17–18
Margalit, Avishai 329
Markie, Peter 497–8
Masrour, Farid 823

INDEX
905
material cause 669
mathematical knowledge 358–68, 659–60, 669–70
Maxwell, James Clerk 355–6
May, Joshua 824–5
May, Robert 337
meaning nihilism 457–62
“The Meaning of a Word” (Austin) 801
Meditations on First Philosophy (Descartes) 394, 416, 
434, 438, 500, 682, 683, 684–5, 699, 700, 730
Meditations on Knowledge, Truth and Ideas 
(Leibniz) 704–5
meliorative epistemology 836
memory 215–16, 243, 263–5, 317, 326–33, 489–90, 
492–8
memory markers 327
Meno (Plato) 32, 205, 220–24, 697, 700, 703
Menssen, Sandra 396
mentalism 31, 145
metaphysical constructivism 390
metaphysical determination 343–4
Metaphysics (Aristotle) 246
methodological naturalism 836–7, 845–6
Methods of Logic (Quine) 786, 787–91
Mill, John Stuart 347, 348–9, 350, 382, 386, 437–8, 
439, 471–2, 483: A System of Logic 347
mirror of God principle 702, 704; see also image of 
God doctrine
misleading defeaters 157, 161
modal bases 550–51, 553–7
modal epistemology 31, 187–97
modal intuitions 815
modals 545–67
mode of circularity 408, 411
mode of hypothesis 408, 411
mode of infinite regress 408, 411
mode of relativity 408–10
mode of undecidable dispute 408
moderate empiricism 289–90
moderate foundationalism 164
moderate generativism 331–2
moderate realism 696
Moffett, Marc A. 826–7
Molyneux, William: Dioptrica Nova 707
monism, and warrant 587–9, 595–6
Montaigne, Michel de 678–9: Apologie de Raimond 
Sebond 679; Essays 679
Montmarquet, James 199–200, 201–2
Moore, G.E. 382–3, 421–2, 466, 469–70, 571–2, 576, 
867
Moore’s paradox 214–15, 571–2, 576
moral intuitionism 471
moral knowledge 380–91
moral skepticism 464–73
Moran, Richard 321–2
Moretti, Luca 266
Moses, Yoram 583
Moss, Lawrence S. 582
motivation 381, 465–6
Mott, Peter 133
muddy children scenario 581
multiple agents 548–51, 578–82, 594–6
multi-premise closure 604–6
naive unificationism 551
nativism 701–4
natural evil, argument from 162
natural propensities 739–40, 764–5
naturalistic fallacy 855
naturalistic social epistemology 877–8, 881–2
naturalized epistemology 30, 48, 292, 382–3, 683–4, 
720–22, 792–4, 836–46
necessary propositions 284
necessary truths 703–4, 718
neo-Ryleanism 826–7
Neta, Ram 196, 594, 825
Neurath, Otto 485, 779–84: Empirical Sociology 779
New Essays on Human Understanding (Leibniz) 698, 
700, 703
new evil demon problem 177–80, 204
Newman, Lex 688, 691
Newman, Max H.A. 759
“New Riddle of Induction” (Goodman) 275
New Theory of Vision (Berkeley) 707–10
Newton, Isaac 347–9, 718: Optics 718; Principia 347–
8, 718
Nichols, Shaun 125–6, 817, 828, 830–31, 845–6
Nicod’s criterion 272, 273
nihilism 457–62
Nisbett, Richard 828
no-defeater conditions 124, 151–2, 159–60
no false evidence proposal, Gettier cases 123–4
nominalism 358–9, 365–6
non-cognitivism 380–81, 465–6
non-factualism 48, 458–62
non-indexical contextualism 537, 538, 539, 540
non-inferential justification 492–6
non-inferential knowledge 763–73
non-occurrent mental states 170
non-operational epistemology 211
non-originating principle 248, 252
non-reductionism 319
non-reductive realism 382–5
non-reflective justification 149–50
non-trivial mental states 212–13
normal worlds 152, 179–80
normative defeaters 158–60, 317
normative naturalism 836, 840–45
normative objectivity 48
normative principle 9, 80
normative relativism 79–80, 81
normativity 47–56, 77–82, 90–93, 456–7, 839–40, 
855
normativity problem 77, 78–9
norms 8–9, 47–56, 82
Norton, John D. 353, 354, 452
nous 100, 668–9, 672, 674
Nozick, Robert 98, 150, 177, 189–91, 420, 440, 601–2
objective justification 152–3
objective understanding 90–91

INDEX
906
objectivity 3–5, 48, 61–3
objectivity constraint 61
observation 679–80
observation categoricals 795
occurrent mental states 170
O’Hanlon, Hugh F. 438, 439
Okasha, Samir 446
Olsson, Erik J. 261, 265–6, 617
omniscience principle 639, 642, 644
On Certainty (Wittgenstein) 601, 770–73
“On Denoting” (Russell) 750, 751, 752
one over many 663, 664
“On Other Minds” (Austin) 798, 799, 801–2
“On Simple Theories of a Complex World” 
(Quine) 794
ontogenetic evolution 849, 850, 851
ontological skepticism 455
opacity, referential 22
operational epistemology 211–12
opposites, argument from 663–4
Optical Lectures (Barrow) 707
optics 681–2, 707–9; see also perception
Optics (Descartes) 707
Optics (Newton) 718
ordinary language philosophy 798, 804–9
Origin of Species (Darwin) 848
other minds 799; skepticism about 433–43
Our Knowledge of the External World (Russell) 750, 
756–7
Outlines of Pyrrhonism (Sextus) 404–6
over-intellectualization 149–50, 171–2
paraconsistent logic 647
paradox of explanation 642
paradox of happiness 643
paradox of omniscience 642
Pargetter, Robert 439
Parmenides (Plato) 661, 664
Parsons, Charles 361–2
Partee, Barbara 528
partial meet contraction 628–30
Pascal, Blaise 54
Paseau, Alexander 644
Passions of the Soul (Descartes) 684
patterns 364–5
Paxson, Thomas D. 124
Peirce, Charles 5, 132–4, 139, 486, 698, 848, 861–5, 
867, 870–71
perception 294–304, 481–2; Aquinas on 681; 
Aristotle on 296, 673–5, 681; Austin on 803–4; 
Berkeley on 707–15; Descartes on 679–80, 
681–2, 683; distinguished from sensation 726; 
distinguished from thought 742–3; and 
foundationalism 238–44; Hume on 481, 
736–7; Kant on 742–7; and knowledge-first 
epistemology 215–16; Leibniz on 704–5; 
Locke on 481, 690–91; and mathematical 
knowledge 360–62; and other minds 436, 
439–40, 441; Plato on 664; Reid on 724–8; Russell 
on 758–61
Percival, Philip 648
perfect induction 271
permissiveness 82
Phaedo (Plato) 660, 664
Phelan, Mark 825
phenomenalism 153, 437–8, 482–4, 699–700, 750–51, 
756–7
phenomenalist reductionism 774–6, 777–8
phenomenal principle 295–6
Philosophical Commentaries (Berkeley) 707, 714–15, 
716
Philosophical Investigations (Wittgenstein) 454, 770
Philosophical Papers (Austin) 798
philosophy of language 30, 33, 454, 457–62, 546
philosophy of science 612–5, 778–84; see also 
scientific knowledge
phronesis 99–101, 670–73
physical speculation, method of 355–6
Photius: Pyrrhonist Discourses 403, 410
phylogenetic evolution 849–52
Plantinga, Alvin 31, 132, 141, 151, 160, 162, 
398–400, 495, 720, 813
Plato 376, 411, 655–65, 887: Apology 96, 104, 
655–6; Cratylus 661, 663; Gorgias 657; Meno 32, 
205, 220–24, 697, 700, 703; Parmenides 661, 664; 
Phaedo 660, 664; Republic 411, 658, 660, 662–3, 
664; Symposium 663; Theaetetus 656, 659, 664; 
Timaeus 660–61, 665
Platonism 358–9, 362–4
“A Plea for Excuses” (Austin) 805–6
pluralism 11–12, 76, 77–8, 154, 587–9, 591, 595–6
pluralistic relativism 388–9
political social epistemology 877, 881
Pollock, John L. 51, 331
Popper, Karl 278, 351–2, 447–9, 451, 848, 852–3
positivist contrastivism 519–20
possibility 741–2
possible world semantics 573–6
Posterior Analytics (Aristotle) 247, 249, 667–9
postmodernism 874, 882, 890, 894
potential access internalism 491
powers, virtues as 204–6
practical knowledge 100–105, 670–73, 826–7, 886, 
887
practical value 223
practical wisdom 100–105, 670–73, 826–7, 886, 887
pragmatic encroachment 33–4, 558–68
pragmatic relevance 561–2
pragmatism 5–6, 33–4, 40–42, 48–9, 54–5, 532, 
861–71
Pratt, James 867
praxism 826–7
prediction theories 448–51
premise-circularity 280–81, 292
prescriptivism 380
preservationism 317, 330–31
preservationist social epistemology 875
principal principle 612–13
Principia (Newton) 347–8, 718
Principia Mathematica (Whitehead & Russell) 750, 756

INDEX
907
principle of charity 507–9
principle of credulity 820–21
principle of sufficient reason 703
principle of tolerance 781, 786
principle of total evidence 807
principle of uniformity of nature 733–5
principle of utility 385, 386
Principles of Human Knowledge (Berkeley) 707, 
709–10, 712–13, 714
The Principles of Mathematics (Russell) 752
Principles of Philosophy (Descartes) 347
Principles of Psychology (James) 848
Prior Analytics (Aristotle) 668
Pritchard, Duncan 91–2, 122, 189, 194–6, 219, 221, 
225–30, 489, 648
privileged class constraint 840–42
probabilism 28–9, 265–6
probability: and belief 609–13; and closure 605–6; 
and evidence 59–60, 62, 65–6; and fallibilism 
140–42; and inductive inference 447–9; Locke 
on 694; see also Bayesian epistemology
“Probability and the Art of Judgment” (Jeffrey) 134
“Probable Knowledge” (Jeffrey) 134
problem of induction 278–81, 445–6, 731–5
The Problem of Perception (Smith) 295
The Problems of Philosophy (Russell) 264, 750, 753–5, 
738
process reliabilism see reliabilism
Proietti, Carlo 646
proliferation, principle of 352–4
proper function theories 151, 160, 161
proper functionalism 720–21
properly basic beliefs 237–9
propositional anaphora 551–2
propositional attitudes 14, 306
propositional content 78
propositional evidence 59–60
propositional justification 28, 168, 203–4
protocol statements 778–83
Pryor, James 136, 138
pseudo-overdetermination 115–16
psychological defeaters 317
psychology 88–90, 95, 339, 718, 721–2, 793
public announcement logic 632, 637
Pursuit of Truth (Quine) 795
Pust, Joel 818
Putnam, Hilary 5–6, 20–21, 418–19, 486, 501–6, 520, 
815
Pyrrhonian modes 407–11
Pyrrhonian skepticism 248–9, 403–12, 415, 433, 
678–9, 737–8
Pyrrhonist Discourses (Photius) 403, 410
Pyrrho of Elis 403
Quine, W.V.O. 786–96; on a priori knowledge 
290–92; on Carnap 775, 776–8, 783–4; “Carnap 
and Logical Truth” 786, 789; “Empiricism 
Without the Dogmas” 787; “Epistemology 
Naturalized” 775, 792–4, 837; fallibilism 156, 
787; falsificationism 448; Gavagai example 507; 
holism 21, 258, 291–2, 449–51, 775, 787–91, 
795–6; on intuitions 820; Methods of Logic 786, 
787–91; naturalized episemology 792–4, 837, 838, 
839, 842, 855; “On Simple Theories of a Complex 
World” 794; Platonism 362–4; and psychology 30; 
pragmatism 869–70; Pursuit of Truth 795; 
“The Scope and Language of Science” 791, 
794; “Truth by Convention” 786–7, 789; “Two 
Dogmas of Empiricism” 775, 787–91, 869–70; 
underdetermination 787–91, 792; The Web of 
Belief 794–6; web of belief metaphor 258, 291, 
794–6, 870; Word and Object 791–2
Quinean Platonism 362–4
Quintilian 680
Rabinowicz, Wlodek 583
radical empiricism 290–92, 866
radical generativism 331
radical interpretation 18, 506–9
radical skepticism 479–80
“The Raft and the Pyramid” (Sosa) 199
Ramsey, Frank P. 176, 610, 612, 624, 627, 760
Ramsey, William 20
Ramsey sentences 760–61
Ramsey test 627–8, 630–31, 633
Rantala, Veikko 577
rational recognition principle 399–400
rational reconstruction 774–6, 777–8, 783
rationalism 287–8, 346–7
rationality 37–45, 49–50, 399–400
ravens paradox 274, 516
Rawls, John 389–90, 818–19
Read, Stephen 367
realism: and anti-realism 477–9, 814; and 
evolutionary epistemology 854–5; and 
memory 326–8; and moral knowledge 382–5; and 
perception 295–301, 481; and truth 484–5
real possibility 741–2
reason, knowledge by 689–90
reasonable belief 398–400
reason-defeating defeaters 158
reasoning 287
rebutting defeaters 158
reductionism 289, 319–21, 774–6, 777–8
reductive realism 382
Reed, Baron 136–7, 139, 140, 141
referential opacity 22
referential transparency 22
reflection account 701–3
reflective equilibrium 384–5, 814, 818–19
Regius, Henricus 685
regress 26–7, 51, 147–8, 237, 245–52, 257–8, 288, 
415, 719
Reichenbach, Hans 447
Reid, Thomas 35, 319, 328, 436–7, 438–9, 440–42, 
717–28: Essays on the Active Powers 717; Essays on 
the Intellectual Powers 717; Inquiry Into the Human 
Mind 717
relational content relativism 539
relational contextualism 537, 539–40

INDEX
908
relationism 76, 539–40
relativism 75–82; and contextualism 539–40; 
ethical 388–9; and invariantism 540–42; and 
knowledge attributions 536–43; and modals 554; 
and synthesis 542–3
relativity, mode of 408–10
relevance, evidence 451–2
reliabilism 176–85; austere 249–50; and 
defeaters 160–61; embellished 249–50; and 
evidence 61; and induction 279–81; and 
intuitions 818; and justification 30–31, 38, 
150–53, 177–82, 493–4, 497–8; and naturalism 
838, 842–4, 845; and non-inferential knowledge 
763; and norms 52; and second-order knowledge 
588–9, 590; and skepticism 493–4, 497–8; and 
virtue epistemology 201, 204
reliabilist contrastivism 520
reliabilist foundationalism 242–3
reliability 262–3, 264, 333, 764–5, 818
religious knowledge 162, 393–400
Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics 
(Wittgenstein) 454
representational theories: belief 15–17; 
Descartes 680–82; memory 326–7; 
perception 680–82, 710–13; truth 4–5
representative realism 326–7, 710–13
Republic (Plato) 411, 658, 660, 662–3, 664
Rescher, Nicholas 257, 265, 649, 851–2
Resnik, Michael 364–5
responsibility 199–200, 201–2
Restall, Greg 648
revisionist social epistemology 874–5
rhetoric 680–81
Richards, Robert 855
Riggs, Wayne 95
Rijke, Maarten de 582
Roberts, Robert C. 200, 202
Robinson, Howard 296
Rohrbaugh, Guy 196, 594
Rorty, Richard 35, 76, 861, 870–71
Rosen, Gideon 82
Rosenberg, Jay F. 814
Ross, William David 383–6
Rott, Hans 625
Roush, Sherrilyn 602
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques 887
Routley, Richard 647, 649
Rudner, Richard 558, 562
rule-circularity 280–81, 292
rule-following skepticism 454–62
Rules for the Direction of the Mind (Descartes) 346–7, 
680, 683
Russell, Bertrand 750–61; The Analysis of Matter 750, 
751, 758, 759, 760–61; on coherence 264; 
correspondence theory of truth 3; Human 
Knowledge: Its Scope and Limits 751, 760–61; on 
intuitions 816; on memory 327, 332–3; “On 
Denoting” 750, 751, 752; Our Knowledge of the 
External World 750, 756–7; phenomenalism 756–7; 
pragmatism 867; Principia Mathematica 750, 756; 
The Principles of Mathematics 752; The Problems 
of Philosophy 264, 750, 753–5, 738; sense-datum 
theory 295, 756–7; and skepticism 685–6; 
structuralism 758–61; theory of descriptions 751–6; 
Theory of Knowledge 751
Russell’s paradox 359–60
Ryan, Sharon 97–8
Ryle, Gilbert 18
Rysiew, Patrick 135, 142
safe indication theory 422–3
safety theories 193–7, 593
Sagan, Carl 64, 65
Salerno, Joe 648
Salmon, Wesley 91
Sandu, Gabriel 646
scatter problem 200
Schaffer, Jonathan 521
Schaffer, Simon 880
Schiffer, Stephen 525, 530, 540
Schlick, Moritz: General Theory of Knowledge 777
Schlosser, Markus 113
Schubert, Stefan 266
Schwitzgebel, Eric 23
science, logic of 782–4
scientific knowledge 346–57, 660, 669–70; sociology 
of 875–7
scope, problems of 4–5, 6
“The Scope and Language of Science” (Quine) 791, 
794
Search after Truth (Malebranche) 707
Search for the Truth (Descartes) 684, 685
second-level justification 496–8
second-order knowledge 586–96
Segerberg, Krister 582–3
self-blindness 313
self-evidence 383–4, 470, 719, 721–2
self intimation see luminosity
self-justifying beliefs 238
self-knowledge 22, 211–13, 305–14; skepticism 
about 425–32
self-verifying thoughts 425–7
Sellars, Wilfrid 27, 147–8, 764–5, 783
semantic anti-realism 644–5
semantic externalism 210–11; and skepticism 
500–509
semantic knowledge 335–44
semantic transparency 7–8
semi-skepticism see local skepticism
sensation, distinguished from perception 726
Sense and Sensibilia (Austin) 798, 799, 802, 806–7
sense-datum theory 295–9, 481–4
sensitivity theories 189–93
sensory experiences 238–44; see also perception
Sextus Empiricus 132, 246–7, 403–10, 433–4; Against 
the Ethicists 406, 410; Against the Logicians 406–7, 
409; Against the Physicists 406; Outlines of 
Pyrrhonism 404–6
Shafir, Eldar 816
Shah, Nishi 172

INDEX
909
Shapin, Steven 879–80
Sherman, Brett 420–21
Shoemaker, Sydney 311, 313–14, 333
Shogenji, Tomoji 261, 265, 616–17
Shogenji measure 616–17
Shoham, Yoav 583
Shope, Robert 203
Sibley, Frank 369–70
side-effect effect 827
silence, argument from 64–5
simple ideas 691–92
simplicity 788, 791, 792, 794
simultaneity 744
singularity 300–301
Sinnott-Armstrong, Walter 412, 824–5
skeptical scenarios see brain-in-a-vat-scenarios; evil 
demon scenarios
skeptical solution 457–62
skepticism: Academic 433; and anti-realism 
477–487; Cartesian 133, 138–40, 414–23, 434, 
479–80, 500–501, 685, 799; and closure 597–8; 
and coherentism 250–52, 262–5, 423; and 
contextualism 525–6; and contrastivism 517–
18; epistemological 455; and evolutionary 
epistemology 855–6; and externalism 153–4, 415, 
488–99; and fallibilism 133, 134, 135, 137–8; 
and foundationalism 248–50; global 488–9; and 
Hume 735–40; and idealism 153; about inductive 
knowledge 445–52; and infinitism 253–4; and 
internalism 153–4, 491–2; and knowledge-first 
epistemology 212–13, 494–5; local 488–9, 722–5; 
and memory 332–3; moral 464–73; and normative 
naturalism 840–42; ontological 455; about other 
minds 433–43, 799; and phenomenalism 153; 
Pyrrhonian 248–9, 403–12, 415, 433, 
737–8; radical 479–80; and regress 246–7; and 
Reid 722–5; and reliabilism 493–4, 497–8; 
and representative realism 710–13; about rule-
following 454–62; about self-knowledge 425–32; 
and semantic externalism 500–509; and semantic 
knowledge 341–4
Skinner, B.F. 851
Skyrms, Brian 271, 857
Smith, A.D. 295–6: The Problem of Perception 295
Soames, Scott 342–4
social epistemology 35, 55, 615, 873–82
social psychology 823
sociology of scientific knowledge 875–7
Socrates 32, 96, 205, 221, 305, 655–7, 659–60, 662–3, 
700
Solecki, Slawomir 582
Somenzi, Vittorio 853
sophia 99–101, 666–70, 672–3
sophisticated unificationism 551
Sosa, Ernest: anti-skepticism 529; garbage chute 
case 192–3; on intuitions 813, 818, 829, 
833; new evil demon problem 178–9, 204; 
pluralism 154; “The Raft and the Pyramid” 199; 
safety theories 194; on self-knowledge 249; virtue 
epistemology 154, 199, 200
space, ideality of 744
special consequence principle 274
speckled hen scenario 297–9
Sperber, Dan 851
spheres semantics 630–32, 634–6
Spinoza, Baruch 697: Ethics 697
stability, judgements 828
Stainton, Rob 528
Stalnaker, Robert 576
Stalnaker test 630
standard invariantism 537
standpoint epistemology 881, 892–3
Stanley, Jason 135, 137, 528, 542, 558, 560–61, 563, 
648
status relativism 388
Stich, Stephen 20, 125–6, 340–41, 817, 819, 828, 
830–31, 833, 839, 845–6
stoicism 411
Strawson, Peter F. 4, 841–2
Strevens, Michael 612
strong access internalism 146–50
strong justification 152
strong normative naturalism 842–4
strong objectivity 881
strong programme in sociology of science 874–5
strong safety 195–6
Stroud, Barry 805, 844
structuralism 364–5, 750–51, 758–61
structural realism 520, 760
The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (Kuhn) 353, 849
subjective Bayesianism 80–82
subjective idealism 757
subjective justification 152–3, 200, 202
subjective understanding 90–91
subject-sensitive invariantism 537, 541–2, 561
sufficient reason, principle of 703
Sullivan, Thomas D. 396
Summa Theologia (Aquinas) 681
superstructure beliefs 236
supervenience 838–9
superwarrant 6
suspension of judgement 404–6, 407, 409, 411
Swain, Marshall 114–16
Swain, Stacey 828, 831
swamping problem 32–3, 206, 219
Swampman scenario 19
syllogistic logic 668, 669–70
Symposium (Plato) 663
synchronic justification 621–3
synthetic propositions 284
A System of Logic (Mill) 347
systems of spheres 630–32, 634–6
Sytsma, Justin 831
Szabo, Zoltán 648
tacit knowledge 338
Tarski, Alfred 4
taste 369–71
Teller, Paul 551
ten modes of Aenesidemus 408–11

INDEX
910
Tennant, Neil 644
testimony 316–22; and achievement 226; and 
aesthetic knowledge 374–5; and coherence 261–2; 
and evidence 65–6; Hume on 35, 65–6, 319; 
and independence 262; and justification 35, 
319–22; and probability 618, 694; and religious 
knowledge 397–8; and social epistemology 879–80
Thagard, Paul 265
Theaetetus (Plato) 656, 659, 664
theoretical wisdom 100–105, 666–70, 672–3
theory of descriptions 750–56
Theory of Knowledge (Russell) 751
Theory of Vision Vindicated and Explained 
(Berkeley) 707
Thorndike, Edward 851
Three Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous 
(Berkeley) 707, 709, 710–11, 712–13
“Three Varieties of Knowledge” (Davidson) 878
Timaeus (Plato) 660–61, 665
title principle 738
token beliefs 721–2
token functionalism 19
token processes 182
tolerance, principle of 781, 786
Tolliver, Joseph 116–17
Tom Grabit scenario 156–7, 161, 205–6
total evidence, principle of 807
Toulmin, Stephen 849, 852, 853
tracking theories 150, 420, 601–2
track-record arguments 722–3
Tractatus (Wittgenstein) 778
traditional foundationalism 239–40, 241–3
tranquility 404–6
‘Transcendental Deduction of the Categories’ 
(Kant) 743–7
transcendental idealism 743–9
transcendental realism 520
translation 791–2
transmission 316–18, 594–6, 600, 604
transparency 7–8, 22, 53–4, 307
Treatise of Human Nature (Hume) 730, 732–4, 736–7, 
739–40
Treatise on Man (Descartes) 683
Trout, J.D. 842, 846
Truetemp cases 828
trumping 552
truth 3–12, 484–6; and coherence 261–3, 472–3, 
485; correspondence theory 3–5, 484; deflationary 
theories 6–10, 484–5; functionalist theories 10–12; 
Locke on 693–4; and moral beliefs 466–8; norm 
of 52–4; pluralist theories 11–12; pragmatic 
theories 5–6, 864–71; and realism 484–5; and 
relativism 78–9
“Truth by Convention” (Quine) 786–7, 789
truth-conducivity 146, 149, 265–6, 873, 891
truth relativism 537, 539
Tversky, Amos 615
twin earth scenarios 20–21, 418
“Two Dogmas of Empiricism” (Quine) 775, 787–91, 
869–70
twofold consequentialism 101–5
Tye, Michael 300–301
type functionalism 19
type processes 182
type theory 643–4
Ullian, J.S. 794–5, 820
undecidable dispute, mode of 408
undefeated defeaters 318
underconsideration 277, 280
undercutting defeaters 158
underdetermination 445–6, 447, 449–51, 787–91, 792
understanding 84–93, 202, 225, 374–5, 662, 744–5
Unger, Peter 122, 417, 513
uniformity of nature, principle of 733–5
uniqueness 82
Unity of Science (Carnap) 779–80
Universal Darwinism 852
unsophisticated agents 149, 202, 204, 319–21, 
428–31, 592, 770–72
Urbach, Peter 613
utilitarianism 386
utility, principle of 385, 386
validation 332–3
validity 11
value problem 219–30
value theory 643–4
values 47, 55–6, 
Van Cleve, James 721
Vardi, Moshe Y. 583
variation thesis 420–21
verificationism 442, 643, 780, 862
veritic epistemic luck 189
Vienna Circle 775, 778–82
virtue epistemology 31, 32–3, 199–206, 224–30, 
893–4
virtues 99–101, 656–8
Virtues of the Mind (Zagzebski) 96, 199
Voltaire’s objection to inference to the best 
explanation 277, 280
Warfield, Ted A. 265
warrant 248–50, 252, 255, 355, 587–9, 595–6, 
765–70; see also justification
warrant monism 587–9, 595–6
warrant pluralism 587–9, 591, 595–6
way of ideas 717–18, 724
weak justification 152
weak normative naturalism 842
weak objectivity 881
weak safety 196
Weatherson, Brian 594, 817
web of belief 258, 291, 794–6, 870
The Web of Belief (Quine & Ullian) 794–6
Wedgwood, Ralph 113
Weinberg, Jonathan 125–6, 817, 828, 831, 845–6
Whewell, William 149–50
White, Roger 82
White, Stephen 816

INDEX
911
Whitehead, Alfred North: Principia Mathematica 750, 
756
Wiggins, David 862, 864
“The Will to Believe” (James) 866–7
Williams, Bernard 433, 879
Williams, Michael 165, 411, 507, 523, 784, 804–5
Williamson, Timothy: on experimental 
epistemology 832; on intuitions 340, 814; on 
knowability paradox 642, 645, 647, 648–9; 
Knowledge and its Limits 32; knowledge-first 
epistemology 32, 61, 169, 177, 220, 221, 494–5; on 
luminosity 212, 307, 592–4; on memory 330–31
wisdom 95–105, 202, 225, 397, 656–8, 662, 666–73
witnesses 261–2, 618; see also testimony
Wittgenstein, Ludwig 763–73; on closure 601; 
correspondence theory of truth 3; on 
justification 35, 878; on non-inferential 
knowledge 770–73; On Certainty 601, 770–73; 
Philosophical Investigations 454, 770; and Pyrrhonian 
skepticism 412; and regress 26; Remarks on 
the Foundations of Mathematics 454; on rule-
following 454–5; on semantic knowledge 341–4, 
454–5; and skepticism 341–4, 412, 442–3; 
social epistemology 35, 878; Tractatus 778; 
Zettel 767–8
Wood, W. Jay 200, 202
Word and Object (Quine) 791–2
The World (Descartes) 684
Wright, Chauncey 848
Wright, Crispin 6, 11, 454–5, 462, 552, 642, 646
Wright, Georg Henrik von 572
Wright, Jennifer C. 826–7
Zagzebski, Linda 96, 100–101, 199, 200–201, 203–4, 
206, 219; Virtues of the Mind 96, 199
Zarpentine, Chris 825
Zettel (Wittgenstein) 767–8
Zimmerman, Aaron 23, 824–5

