Assessing the role of matching bias in reasoning
with disjunctions
Mathias Sablé-Meyer
PSL University
NeuroSpin
Salvador Mascarenhas
Ecole Normale Supérieure
Department of Cognitive Studies
Institut Jean-Nicod
Abstract
Mental model theories have been uniquely successful accounting for certain
deductive reasoning problems involving disjunctions. In this article we examine
an ingredient of most extant accounts of these problems, a matching procedure.
In two experiments, we show that what is often explained in terms of low-level
matching or overlap in content in these theories must in fact take place at a higher
level of cognition. We show that no current theory of deductive reasoning offers a
satisfactory account of these data, and we outline a version of mental model theory
that incorporates insights from Bayesian conﬁrmation theory. We argue that our
results point toward a uniﬁcation of seemingly very disparate kinds of failures of
reasoning: our new indirect illusory inferences from disjunction and the conjunction
fallacy of Tversky and Kahneman (1983).
1
Introduction
Illusory inferences from disjunction were discovered by Johnson-Laird and Savary
(1999) and Walsh and Johnson-Laird (2004). In (1) we show a paradigmatic example of
the classical variety of these fallacious inferences.
(1) John speaks English and Mary speaks French, or else Bill speaks German.
John speaks English.
Does it follow that Mary speaks French?
(Adapted from Walsh and Johnson-Laird 2004)
The conclusion does not follow logically: if John speaks English and Bill speaks
German, but Mary does not speak French, both premises are satisﬁed and the conclusion
falsiﬁed. However, independent studies have shown acceptance rates for the proposed
fallacious conclusion around 85% in this and structurally identical problems (Walsh and
Johnson-Laird 2004; Mascarenhas and Koralus 2017; Koralus and Mascarenhas 2018).
The pattern in (1) is explained within mental model approaches (Johnson-Laird 1983)
with resort to two central elements. First, a special semantics for disjunction, where the
1

ﬁrst premise of (1) gives rise to two alternative mental models, one for each disjunct.
Secondly, a matching procedure: when reasoners notice that the second premise matches
part of the ﬁrst alternative mental model for the ﬁrst premise, the second alternative
mental model drops from attention. The reasoner is left with a model of what remains,
John speaks English and Mary speaks French, whence the fallacious conclusion follows.
This article investigates the matching component of the general account just sketched.
We show that examples such as (2) give rise to illusory inferences from disjunction, but
crucially the second premise does not exactly match any element of the ﬁrst premise.
For example, “The trigger was pulled” is certainly related to “The gun ﬁred,” but it does
not match it.
(2) The gun ﬁred and the guitar was out of tune, or else someone was in the attic.
The trigger was pulled.
Does it follow that the guitar was out of tune?
We present two experiments establishing the need for a deep revision of the notion of
matching. We propose that the solution involves recasting the matching procedure as
a semantic and probabilistic procedure that is sensitive to the content of the material
being matched and to causal dependencies between those contents.
From a theoretical standpoint, our results suggest a promising new direction toward
bridging the conceptual gap between the study of traditional deductive reasoning prob-
lems and seemingly unrelated probabilistic reasoning fallacies. In our concluding
remarks, we argue that the conjunction fallacy (Tversky and Kahneman 1983) has the
exact same underlying structure as the deductive problem in (2), and we outline a uniﬁed
theory.
2
Illusory inferences from disjunction and matching
bias
The class of illusory inferences from disjunction this article focuses on was discovered
by Walsh and Johnson-Laird (2004), from which we show below in (3) a representative
example.
(3) Either Jane is kneeling by the ﬁre and she is looking at the TV, or otherwise Mark
is standing at the window and he is peering into the garden.
Jane is kneeling by the ﬁre.
Does it follow that she is looking at the TV?
This example and many others in the Walsh and Johnson-Laird (2004) studies have the
structure in (4).
(4) P1: (a∧b)∨(c∧d)
P2: a
Ccl.: b
About 85% of subjects judged that the proposed fallacious conclusion in fact followed.
2

The materials used by Walsh and Johnson-Laird (2004) are unnecessarily complex to
address the question we are interested in. Instead we will use the simpler structure in
(5), instantiated in (1).
(5) P1: (a∧b)∨c
P2: a
Ccl.: b
The structure in (5) generalizes interestingly into a rather diverse paradigm of illusory
inferences with disjunction-like elements. In particular, these inferences can be repro-
duced with quantiﬁers doing the job of conjunction and disjunction (Mascarenhas and
Koralus 2017), or with the weak epistemic modal might doing the job of disjunction
(Mascarenhas and Picat 2019). These results are in line with theories from linguistics
on the semantics of indeﬁnite expressions (Kratzer and Shimoyama 2002) and the
epistemic modal might (Ciardelli, Groenendijk, and Roelofsen 2009), which for entirely
independent reasons have proposed that these logical operators have interpretations that
share crucial formal properties with disjunction.
2.1
Original mental model theory
Walsh and Johnson-Laird (2004) give the clearest account of illusory inferences from
disjunction of the kind we discuss here. This is an account within the original mental
model theory, which has been superseded by a revised version in recent years. We
discuss how the revised theory fares with respect to the illusory inferences of interest
here in the general discussion. Since the revised theory does not have at this point a
published discussion of its account of these particular illusory inferences, we focus here
on the original mental model theory’s account.
Illustrating how the theory gets inferences with disjunction, Walsh and Johnson-Laird
(2004) consider exclusivity inferences of the form in (6) below.
(6) a or b but not both.
a.
Therefore, not b
To make this inference, “reasoners can match the categorical information in the second
premise with the ﬁrst of the models [of the disjunction] and then ﬂesh out the model to
draw the conclusion not-b” (Walsh and Johnson-Laird 2004, 97). This same procedure
is meant to account for classical illusory inferences from disjunction.
To the best of our knowledge, the exact workings of the matching procedure haven’t
been fully spelled out within mental model theory, and the original version of the theory
is underspeciﬁed in additional ways. In particular it lacks a precise formal regimentation
of what mental models are and why disjunctions are interpreted in an idiosyncratic way,
giving rise to sets of alternative mental models rather than simple mental models.
3

2.2
Erotetic Theory of Reasoning
Koralus and Mascarenhas (2013) provide a complete formalization of a variant of mental
model theory, dubbed the Erotetic Theory of Reasoning (ETR). Incorporating results
from linguistic semantics, ETR recasts the mental models account in terms of a question-
answer dynamic. ETR builds on the well-established fact that disjunctive sentences
share many linguistic properties with questions (Alonso-Ovalle 2006; Groenendijk 2008;
Mascarenhas 2009) to propose that reasoners treat the ﬁrst premise of inferences like (1)
as a kind of question: are we in a John speaks English and Mary French-situation or are
we in a Bill speaks German-situation? Reasoners do not like to entertain unanswered
questions, so they attempt to ﬁnd information that will help resolve the question as
swiftly as possible. The second premise “John speaks English” overlaps with (matches)
one of the answers to the question and not the other, so the question is deemed answered
in the John speaks English and Mary French-direction. Whence it follows that Mary
speaks French.
The matching procedure on ETR is given in a fully explicit way, and it requires exact
content overlap. This is in line with ﬁndings of matching bias elsewhere in the reasoning
literature, for example in variants of the Wason selection task (Evans 1999).
Consequently, the erotetic theory of reasoning does not predict a fallacy if the second
premise fails to exactly match one of the alternatives provided by the ﬁrst premise, and
is instead merely related to it. Consider the schema in (7), of which we gave an example
earlier in (2).
(7) (a∧b)∨c
d
Does it follow that b?
(where independently d and a are connected)
We investigated indirect illusory inferences of this kind in two behavioral experiments.
3
Experiment 1 — Indirect Illusory Inference from
Disjunction
The goal of Experiment 1 was to investigate non-matching relatedness, which we
operationalized for simplicity as causal dependence. We hypothesized that the perceived
strength of the causal dependence between d and a in the schema in (7) above would
have a direct effect on the rate of acceptance of the fallacy.
3.1
Method
This experiment required two disjoint sets of participants, one to rate the strength of
causal dependencies and the other to perform an inference-making task on patterns
like (7).
4

3.1.1
Participants
Participants were 323 individuals in the United States recruited via Amazon Mechanical
Turk. We recruited 160+83 in the rating condition and 80 in the inference condition.
All subjects were compensated for participating.
Due to a wording error regarding the reward in the rating condition, we had to cancel our
submission as soon as we were notiﬁed, correct the wording, and resubmit. Both times
the target was 160 participants but we only collected data from 83 in the ﬁrst submission,
which we kept in the analysis, and 156 new participants in the second submission. This
adds up to a total of 239 participants.
We kept 64 participants in the fallacy experiment: 2 did not correctly report back to the
Mechanical Turk website and 14 took the rating experiments prior to this one.
3.1.2
Procedure
Both experiments presented themselves as a web page written in the jsPsych library
(De Leeuw 2015) with custom plugins developed in our lab. They started with a consent
form, followed by instructions, the body of the experiment and then a few demographic
questions.
In the rating experiment participants were asked to “indicate the strength of the causal
link” for a list of sentences of the form “if [proposition 1] then [proposition 2]”. They
were shown 24 conditional sentences, each with a 7-point likert scale ranging from
“none” to “perfect.” Participants saw three groups of eight conditional sentences, as
explained in the Materials section, with repetition of the instructions each time. Two
brief pilot experiments were given in between: a brief Stroop task and a single logic
question of a very different nature.
The instructions for the inference-making study were to tell whether “a proposed
conclusion follows from the sentences.” The instructions included an example of a valid
inference and an example of an invalid inference, unrelated to the stimuli used in the
task, with explanations of why the answer was “yes, the conclusion follows” for one
and “no, the conclusion does not follow” for the other. Then participants saw seven
illusory inference trials structured as in (7) presented in random order, interleaved with
three valid and three invalid controls. For each trial participants could answer yes or no
or decide not to answer.
Valid controls were instances of modus ponens whose syntactic complexity was compa-
rable to that of the targets. We used the structure P1: “If a and b, then c,” P2: “a and b,”
“Does it follow that c?” Invalid controls followed a similar pattern but the antecedent of
the conditional was denied by the second premise. Structurally, P1: “If a and b, then c,”
P2: “not a,” “Does it follow that c?” The role of controls was to establish a baseline for
mistakes and get a measure of participants’ attention.
5

3.1.3
Materials
We borrowed the causally connected items (a and d in the schema in (7)) from Cummins
(1995), who conducted a study involving causal dependencies much like our rating task.
(i)
(iii)
(ii)
P1:
P2:
Figure 1: Desired and confounding causal dependencies in our target materials
The rating experiment measured the strength of three kinds of dependencies, schematized
in Figure 1. Most importantly, (i) the crucial connection from d to a, which we
hypothesized would be predictive of inference-making behavior. We also took two
control measures: we checked for (ii) the strength of the connection from a to b, and (iii)
that from d to b. This was to make sure that, in the inference-making task, the predicted
conclusion b constituted an illusory inference like in the examples in the literature. That
is, (iii) if d were to independently lead to b, then a conclusion of b would be explainable
purely by the presence of the second premise d. Similarly, (ii) if a independently led to
b, and given that d by design was connected to a, the conclusion b would be explained
as probabilistic conditional transitivity. Neither of these two scenarios would constitute
an illusory inference from disjunction. Accordingly, we decided to keep only those
items that showed a moderate or higher connection for (i) d to a, while displaying very
weak connections for (ii) a to b and for (iii) d to b.
In (8) is a sample item from each of the three blocks of the rating task just reviewed,
and in (9) all of our (i) d to a items.
(8)
i. If the trigger was pulled, then the gun ﬁred
ii. If the gun ﬁred, then the guitar was out of tune
iii. If the trigger was pulled, then the guitar was out of tune
(9)
1. If the brake was depressed, then the car slowed down.
2. If Mary jumped into the swimming pool, then Mary got wet.
3. If the trigger was pulled, then the gun ﬁred.
4. If Larry grasped the glass with his bare hands, then Larry left ﬁngerprints
on his glass.
5. If the gong was struck, then the gong sounded.
6. If John studied hard, then John did well on the test.
7. If the apples were ripe, then the apples fell from the tree.
3.2
Analysis and results
3.2.1
Rating
Figure 2 shows the ratings of our 8 item sets in the rating task. We report averages
across participants and the standard error. Blocks two and three being controls, we
6

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
∅
Figure 2: “Strength of the causal connection” rating from the rating experiment. In
black is block (i) where participants rated d ⇒a, in dark gray is (ii) a ⇒b and in light
gray (iii) d ⇒b. Standard error is represented in red.
conducted a one way between-subjects ANOVA to compare the effect of the materials
on the rating. In block 2 no signiﬁcant effect was found at the p < 0.05 level. In block
three there was a signiﬁcant effect at the p < 0.05 level — a post-hoc comparison using
the Tukey HSD test indicated that the effect was entirely driven by a single stimulus, the
item labeled /0 in Figure 2, which we therefore removed from the following experiment.
We were left with 7 item sets that fulﬁlled our requirement of variance in the crucial (i)
rating but very low ratings for (ii) and (iii).
3.2.2
Inference group
Acceptance Rate
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Independent Rating
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Figure 3: Top: Correlation between the average reported strength of the crucial depen-
dence d to a from the rating experiment and the acceptance rate of target fallacies in
the inference-making tasks of experiment 1 (left) and experiment 2 (right). We plot
each individual item. Horizontal and vertical bars indicate the standard error for both
dimensions.
Both valid and invalid controls showed on average around 85% correctness rate (resp.
88.0±2.1% and 75.2±2.8%). Figure 3, left panel, shows the correlation between the
mean acceptance rate of the indirect fallacy and the measured strength of the causal
connection.
Acceptance rate in the inference task is signiﬁcantly predicted by the reported strength
7

of the entailment in the rating task at the p < 0.005 level. Once both variables are scaled
to [0,1], the regression has a slope β = 1.00 (p = 0.0014 and R2 = 0.89).
Estimate
Std. Error
z-value
p-value
Intercept
0.41
0.09
4.59
< 0.001
Rating
4.26
0.84
5.02
< 0.001
Controls
−0.29
0.37
−0.77
0.44
Interaction
13.53
3.55
3.81
< 0.001
Figure 4: Binomial generalized linear model Accepted ∝Rating∗Controls after removal
of the means for both Rating and Controls.
Additionally, we looked at the way answers to control inferences (valid and invalid)
predicted the slope of the correlation between the ratings and the acceptance rate of
participants. Table 1 shows the output of a binomial generalized linear model where the
interaction term is signiﬁcant. The effect is as follows: participants who did not succeed
on the controls show an absence of effect of the rating on the acceptance rate, and within
the others, the higher the score on controls, the tighter the correlation between the rating
and the acceptance rate. This suggests that the effect is as present in people as they are
engaged in the task, conﬁrming that the fallaciousness of the conclusion does not follow
from a lack of attention from participants.
3.3
Discussion
By carefully ruling out internal confounds within each trial, we managed to isolate the
main effect that drives the data and measure it separately. Our results show that the
extent to which participants accept the fallacious conclusion in the inference-making
task is closely positively correlated with an independent measure of the perceived
strength of the connection from d to a. Classical illusory inferences where d = a, that is
the original cases where matching was a plausible account, had an acceptance rate of
85%, suggesting a ceiling effect that matches what we found for valid controls. Given
this, it is expected that a more accurate model would be a sigmoid, and that the data
samples only over a linear portion of it.
The interaction studies conﬁrm that some participants, 7 in the “low control score,” are
hardly doing the task and give ﬂat answers throughout. But the data indicates that the
more accurate on the controls people are, i.e. the more they are paying attention or the
more rational they are, the steeper the slope of the correlation between the rating and the
acceptance rate. This indicates that when people are paying attention, they ﬁnd it easier
to resist invalid controls, but still fall for illusory inferences from disjunction, which
demonstrates the attractiveness of these fallacies. In other words, the fallacious answer
does not solely arise from people generally being irrational, but also from a systematic
attractiveness that even participants that were otherwise correct found hard to resist.
The crucial predictor of fallacious behavior is a connection from d to a that relies entirely
on world knowledge and cannot be accounted for in terms of a matching algorithm.
8

4
Experiment 2 — other forms of indirectness
We explored another strategy for inducing the fallacy in an indirect fashion, as schema-
tized in (10) and exempliﬁed in (11).
(10) (b∧d)∨c
b
Does it follow that a?
(where independently d and a are
somehow linked)
(11) The guitar was out of tune and the
brake was depressed, or else some-
one was in the attic.
The guitar was out of tune.
Does it follow that the car slowed
down?
4.1
Method
Experiment 1 showed that the matching part of the mental models and erotetic theory
of reasoning accounts cannot be whole story. Experiment 2 investigated whether the
sensitivity to world-knowledge causal dependencies was restricted to the interaction
between premises, or was operative throughout in these examples. In particular, extant
accounts involve matching the second premise of (10) to the ﬁrst disjunct of the ﬁrst
premise. This leads reasoners to a model of b ∧d allowing for a conclusion of d by
inspection of this model. But do they then conclude that a follows by pursuing the
causal dependency from d to a?
The study consisted of a straightforward variant of the inference-making task in experi-
ment 1, where the structure of the fallacious trials was changed from (7) to (10). We
recruited 80 participants from the same pool, out of which 10 were already included in
a previous experiment and were removed from the analysis. Subjects were compensated
for their participation.
4.2
Analysis and Results
Both valid and invalid controls showed on average around 85% accuracy (resp. 90.4±
1.9% and 80.4±2.5%). Figure 3, right panel, shows the correlation between the mean
acceptance rate of the indirect fallacy schematized in (10) and the strength of the causal
connection as measured in the rating task of experiment 1.
Acceptance rate for target fallacies is signiﬁcantly predicted by the perceived strength
of the crucial connection d to a at the p < 0.05 level. Once both variables are scaled
to [0,1], the regression has a slope β = 0.58 (p = 0.039 and R2 = 0.60). A binomial
generalized linear model to study the interaction yields only the rating of the crucial
connection d to a as a good predictor of the behavior at the p < 0.001 level.
4.3
Discussion
The signiﬁcant predictive power of the perceived strength of the connection from
d to a over the inference-making behavior shows that contentful, world-knowledge
dependencies aren’t only operative in the mechanism that combines the information
9

in the two premises to pick one alternative, but at later steps in the reasoning process.
Interestingly, the slope here is less steep, and less of the variance is explained. This
suggests that, while these dependencies are operative throughout, the characteristic step
of looking for relatedness between the premises in mental model theory and the erotetic
theory of reasoning is particularly sensitive to this kind of information. The work we
report here allows us to conclude no further than this.
5
General discussion
We’ve established the existence of indirect illusory inferences from disjunction, where
the second premise does not match any model of the ﬁrst premise, but instead merely
raises the probability of a model of the ﬁrst premise. These illusory inferences have
acceptance rates entirely comparable to those of classical illusory inferences from
disjunction where matching is a plausible strategy, modulated by the strength of the
connection between the non-matching models. We conclude that a more sophisticated
process than exact matching is required, one that is sensitive to contentful connections
between models. We now turn our attention to various relevant theories of reasoning
and assess how they fare with our data.
5.1
Original mental model theory
Classical illusory inferences from disjunction were ﬁrst discovered and accounted
for within the original version of mental models theory (Johnson-Laird and Savary
1999; Walsh and Johnson-Laird 2004). As discussed in the introduction, Walsh and
Johnson-Laird (2004) appeal to an underspeciﬁed notion of matching to account for
these fallacies.
It is possible that by “matching” the authors meant a more sophisticated notion that takes
into account world knowledge about causal links and is amenable to modeling varying
degrees in the strength of these connections. But such a sophisticated notion would
require explication, which is not to be found in the articles discussing these illusory
inferences. Taking these articles at face value, the operation is in fact one of direct
matching. We conclude that the original mental model theory is either ill equipped to
handle our indirect illusions, or the correct account is formulated at too high a level.
5.2
Erotetic theory of reasoning
As discussed in the introduction, the erotetic theory of reasoning of Koralus and Mas-
carenhas (2013) formalizes the original mental model theory, supplementing it with
insights from linguistic semantics that converged with the mental model theory, offering
independent motivation for some of its central moving parts. Most importantly, the
notion that disjunctive premises, unlike conjunctive ones, give rise to sets of mental
models converges elegantly with entirely independently motivated theories about the
semantic interpretation of disjunctions as sets of alternative propositions instead of
simple Boolean joins of propositions.
10

The erotetic theory of reasoning explicitly implements direct matching as the strategy
for picking an alternative from the ﬁrst premise as a function of the information in the
second premise. As such, it is ill suited to account for the indirect inferences discovered
in this article.
5.3
Revised mental model theory
The original mental model theory of Johnson-Laird and collaborators underwent a major
revision in the recent past, most clearly presented by Khemlani, Byrne, and Johnson-
Laird (2018). For our purpose of assessing the new mental model theory account of
illusory inferences from disjunction, the following innovations are of central interest.
1. The division of labor between intuitive (System 1) processes and deliberate
(System 2) processes has been revised. System 2 works with fully explicit
models, on which more below. System 1 works with underspeciﬁed mental
models that do not include explicit negations of mental models not asserted in the
premises, manifesting what used to be called the principle of truth. Importantly, a
novel parameter γ determines the degree of tolerance of the notion of necessary
conclusion: System 1 operating with low γ will consider as weak necessities some
cases that with high γ are considered merely possible conclusions.1
2. The theory makes explicit use of a modulation process that takes world knowledge
into account in the interpretation of mental model premises.
We ﬁnd much to commend in the revised version of the theory. In particular, the
precise formulation of modulation seems well-suited to account for the reliance on
world knowledge in the new data we present in this article. In other words, insofar
as the revised mental model theory can account for classical illusory inferences from
disjunction, where matching was a possibility, modulation will take care of extending
that account to an account of the new indirect inferences we investigate in this article.2
However, the revised mental model theory’s coverage of classical illusory inferences
from disjunction is problematic. We see two ways in which the theory might incorporate
classical illusory inferences from disjunction, but each strategy comes with its own
issues and open questions. We discuss these strategies and our reservations about them
presently.
1Khemlani, Byrne, and Johnson-Laird (2018) describe γ as the probability that reasoning relies on the
notion of weak necessity to draw conclusions. This suggests that a high value of γ should prompt reliance
on weak necessity. But the lisp implementation of the theory mSentential in facts works the other way
around: the lower γ is the higher the rate of weak-necessity conclusions. We use the scale for γ deﬁned in
mSentential.
2One caveat that should be mentioned is that it is not entirely clear how the revised mental model theory
accounts for the tight linear relation between the rate of acceptance of the fallacies and the judged strength of
the relevant causal connections. Mental model theory has an elegant and parsimonious way of formalizing
probabilistic reasoning that does not use explicit probability measures. Instead, the theory postulates a process
that considers the proportion of models in a mental model set that support a certain conclusion. But the indirect
illusions in this article rely on world-knowledge connections that do not come with explicit alternatives, so
that it is unclear how to represent these connections and their impact on reasoning without explicit probability
measures. We outline a positive proposal using probabilities in the conclusions to this article.
11

5.3.1
System 2 processes under low γ
If the parameter γ is low enough, then weakly necessary conclusions will be drawn. For
Γ the models of the premises and ϕ those of the conclusion, ϕ will be a weak necessity
of Γ just in case (i) every model of ϕ is supported by the premise models Γ, and (ii)
there is some model of the premises that does not support any model of the conclusion.
Support in turn is deﬁned as follows. A model m′ supports a model m just in case m
is included in m′. This notion generalizes to sets of mental models: a set of premise
models Γ supports a model m just in case there is some model m′ in the premises such
that m′ supports m.
In less formal terms, ϕ will be a weak necessity of Γ just in case (i) every model of
the conclusion is included in some model of the premises, and (ii) there are orthogonal
models of the premises, that is some models of the premises do not contain any models
of the conclusion. Classical illusory inferences from disjunction will come out as weak
necessities under this deﬁnition. Recall the structure of classical illusory inferences
from disjunction in (5), repeated below as (12).
(12) P1: (a∧b)∨c
P2: a
Ccl.: b
The conjunction of the premises in classical illusory inferences from disjunction has
two mental models: abc and abc (a crossed out letter such as x represents the explicit
negation of x). Considering the conclusion b, it is clear that indeed (i) every model of the
conclusion (there is only one, namely b) is included in a model of the premises (in this
case abc), but (ii) there is a model of the premises (abc) that does not include any model
of the conclusion. This provides a System 2 account of these illusory inferences under
low γ. It is not entirely clear whether this is desired, for System 2 is about deliberate
reasoning with fully explicit models and should be resistant to fallacious reasoning.
However, we submit that in and of itself this does no harm, since system 2 under high γ
does resist the fallacy. System 2 under high γ implements a stronger notion of necessity
that requires that every model of the premises support the conclusion.
There is an important wrinkle in this System 2 account of classical illusory inferences
from disjunction. The proof we just sketched can be immediately adapted into a proof
that the schema in (12) supports a conclusion of c as a weak necessity. The conclusion
model c is included in model abc of the premises, and there is still a model of the
premises (now abc) that does not include the model of the conclusion.
This prediction is problematic, for the attractiveness of the two patterns is sharply
different. Consider:
(13) John speaks English and Mary speaks French, or else Bill speaks German.
John speaks English.
Concl.: Mary speaks French.
12

(14) John speaks English and Mary speaks French, or else Bill speaks German.
John speaks English.
Concl.: Bill speaks German.
The example in (13) is a well-known illusory inference from disjunction, with acceptance
rates in the order of 85%, while (14) is, we submit, either not at all a compelling fallacy,
or it is a very weak illusion, by no means comparable to the high acceptance rate of (13).
Further experimental work is required, but it seems clear to us that these two reasoning
patterns are sharply different, and that the System 2 account under low γ just sketched
altogether lacks the ability to make this distinction.3
5.3.2
System 1 processes — a pragmatic confound
System 1 works with underspeciﬁed models of the premises, which represent only what
is explicitly asserted. For the classical illusory inference schematized in (12), the models
of the ﬁrst premise (a ∧b) ∨c are as in (15). Notice in particular the gaps: the ﬁrst
model does not represent the negation of c, nor does the second model represent the
negations of a and b.
(15) a b
c
The second premise of the classical illusory inferences has only one simple model: a.
Following the theory as presented by Khemlani, Byrne, and Johnson-Laird (2018), the
next step is to conjoin the models of these two premises. One asks, for each model of
the ﬁrst premise in (15), whether the conjunction with the second premise a yields a
consistent or an inconsistent model. If the result is consistent, the new model is part of
the resulting conjunction, otherwise it is not. The crucial question is the following: does
the second line in (16) propose a consistent or an inconsistent combined model? What
is the outcome of this procedure? The answer is unclear.
(16) a b
+ a
c + a
In the version of the theory in print, two models are inconsistent when “one represents
a proposition and the other its negation” (Khemlani, Byrne, and Johnson-Laird 2018,
9–10). The left-hand side of the second line of (16) does not represent the negation of a.
This is one of the deﬁning characteristics of mental models, they are underspeciﬁed and
represent only what is true, not what it false. Consequently, the resulting models after
conjunction are ab and ac from which both the b and c conclusions are weak necessities.
This is much like the situation discussed in the previous section for System 2 processes
under low γ, and therefore subject to the same concerns.
However, these predictions conﬂict with the behavior of mSentential, the lisp imple-
mentation of the theory developed by the authors. On mSentential, we observe that
3The original mental model theory was in agreement with our judgments here. As explained by Walsh
and Johnson-Laird (2004), not only is a c conclusion not predicted for examples as in (14), in fact what is
predicted on that theory is a conclusion of not-c.
13

the fallacy is derived as a strong necessity, that is under high γ, and that the c conclusion
is never acceptable.
Inspecting the lisp implementation reveals that it builds the two mental models we
expect for the ﬁrst premise and represents only what is true as in (15). However, when
the second premise, a, is conjoined with the models in (15), explicit negations are added
by mSentential and only one model is present, namely abc. From here the fallacious
conclusion b (strongly) follows immediately, while the unobserved conclusion c does
not follow.
This is a promising result, but it relies on mSentential behavior that is surprising in
view of the presentation of the theory that exists in print (Khemlani, Byrne, and Johnson-
Laird 2018), which we just reviewed. In a nutshell, it is puzzling that conjunction with
the second premise a should eliminate the second model of (15).
As far as we can tell, the implementation in mSentential uses “ﬂags” of a sort, which
keep track of relevant propositional letters that are not represented. These are c for
the ﬁrst line of (15), and a and b for the second line of (15). These ﬂags will be
taken into consideration when conjunctions are computed. In virtue of conjunction, the
models effectively act as if explicit negations were being represented for each relevant
proposition not asserted by the model. In other words, the moment mental model
conjunction occurs, the mental models for the ﬁrst premise of our illusory inferences
from disjunction are not as in (15), but are for all relevant purposes indistinguishable
from the much stronger ones in (17).
(17) abc
abc
The way in which these models are stronger is not without interest. The models in (17)
for the ﬁrst premise of the illusory inference from disjunction correspond in fact to what
formal pragmatics calls a strongly exhaustive interpretation. These interpretations were
ﬁrst discussed by Spector (2007) in an entirely independent context, they were used by
Mascarenhas (2014) to argue for the possibility of an absolving interpretation for these
fallacies, and they were carefully investigated by Picat (2019), who gave experimental
evidence that they were scalar implicatures resulting from pragmatic processes, but that
they did not explain the totality of the phenomenon of illusory inferences.
It is interesting to contrast this account with that of (our reading of) the classical
mental model theory, or the erotetic theory. These accounts used a notion of matching
that derived the fallacy in terms of effects of attention, modeled as a question under
discussion on the erotetic variant of the mental model theory. On these accounts,
the second premise a matched part of the ﬁrst model of the ﬁrst premise in (15),
and consequently the second model of (15) dropped from attention. By contrast, on
mSentential the second model is more than merely forgotten, it is considered to be
directly inconsistent with the second premise.
To sum up, we see two possible interpretations of the revised mental model theory
in the case of System 1. If one follows the presentation by Khemlani, Byrne, and
Johnson-Laird (2018), the fallacious conclusion can be derived, but to the same extent
14

as the unobserved conclusion c. If one follows the implementation in mSentential,
the fallacious conclusion can be derived, but the mechanism whereby this is done
is indistinguishable from a pragmatic mechanism of scalar implicature. This is not
necessarily an unwanted result, but it raises at least two important questions. First,
one would want to understand in what way mental models do not represent what is
false, if indeed the moment conjunction with a second premise is involved they function
as if they represented the negation of every relevant proposition that is not explicitly
afﬁrmed. Second, the broader picture of illusory inferences becomes quite mysterious.
In particular, illusory inferences with indeﬁnites (Mascarenhas and Koralus 2017) and
illusory inferences with epistemics (Mascarenhas and Picat 2019) cannot be accounted
for in terms of pragmatics.
5.4
Probabilistic theories — the new paradigm
There are very successful ways to account for reasoning under uncertainty with the
probability calculus (see in particular Oaksford and Chater 2007, 2007; Adams 1996;
Johnson-Laird, Khemlani, and Goodwin 2015), modeling subjective probabilities. These
theories have been particularly insightful on the broad and important topic of reasoning
with conditionals. This literature is however sparser on the topic of reasoning with
alternatives, such as provided by disjunction and disjunction-like elements.
As far as we can see, this family of theories is not yet well equipped for the kind of
problem we discuss in this article. In particular they have same issue as the one just
discussed for the revised mental model theory in distinguishing the b conclusion from
the c conclusion under ﬂat equiprobable priors, that is P(a) = P(b) = P(c) = 1
2.
There are at least two ways of operationalizing subjective validity for such theories.
One of them is p-validity, under which a conclusion follows to the extent that it is no
less probable than its premises. This will fail to separate the b conclusion from the c
conclusion because P((a∧b)∨c,a) = P((a∧b)∨(a∧c)) = 3
8, and since the priors are
P(b) = P(c) = 1
2 both conclusions b and c end up equally p-valid.
An alternative is to compare not the prior probabilities but the posterior probabilities of
the putative conclusions on the premises. Once again this cannot distinguish b from c
at least under the assumption of independence and ﬂatness of priors, for P(b|(a∧b)∨
c,a) = 2
3 = P(c|(a∧b)∨c,a), and therefore both conclusions b and c should be equally
acceptable.
6
Conclusions and ongoing work
We have shown that previous accounts of illusory inferences from disjunction posited
matching algorithms where in fact a much more sophisticated process was operative.
This process is sensitive to dependencies between propositions that recruit world knowl-
edge, as demonstrated by the close correlation between assessments of the strength of
the dependence and rates of commission of the target fallacy. We further concluded
that other powerful and insightful approaches to reasoning, in particular the revised
15

mental model theory and probabilistic approaches, are ill-equipped to deal even with
the classical examples of illusory inferences from disjunction.
These observations matter. When they were discovered, illusory inferences from dis-
junction weren’t necessarily thought to be more than just another data point to add to
our catalog of failures of deductive reasoning. But recent work at the intersection of
reasoning and linguistic semantics has shown that these illusory inferences are the tip
of a much larger and more interesting iceberg, which can be informally but usefully
characterized as reasoning with alternatives that prompt question-answer dynamics.
Disjunctions are the generators of question-like alternatives par excellence, but they
are by no means the only ones. So far the literature has identiﬁed indeﬁnites and weak
modal operators as inducers of illusory inferences that superﬁcially seem entirely unre-
lated to the original illusory inferences from disjunction. Consequently, understanding
just how the alternatives prompted by the ﬁrst premise (the question) are manipulated
by attempts to match them with the second premise (the answer) is an important step
toward understanding human reasoning with alternatives.
Additionally, the indirect illusory inferences from disjunction in this article may play
a very useful role connecting the study of failures of deductive reasoning to the study
of better known, and perhaps more ecologically valid problems. In the most famous
example of the conjunction fallacy (Tversky and Kahneman 1983), a description d
of an individual suggests that she is interested in social activism. Subjects are given
two options: “bank teller” and “bank teller who is active in the feminist movement.”
Overwhelmingly they consider that the conjunctive option is most likely to be true.
Structurally, this is very much like our indirect illusory inferences from disjunction:
(18)
Indirect illusory inference
(a∧b)∨c
d, which points to a
Conclusion: a∧b (whence b)
Conjunction fallacy
(b∧f)∨b
d, which points to f
Conclusion: b∧f
As (18) shows, the conjunction fallacy can be seen as a more complex special case of
our indirect illusory inferences from disjunction. Studying indirect illusory inferences
can thus in principle be revealing of the reasoning processes behind the conjunction
fallacy, for indirect illusory inferences involve the same structure while removing a
number of extraneous elements from the usual materials used in conjunction fallacy
experiments. In particular, indirect illusory inferences from disjunction do not rely on
individuating information or stereotypes.
In ongoing work, we are formalizing and testing a Bayesian conﬁrmation-theoretic
implementation of the erotetic theory of reasoning that extends to the data we report
in this article and cashes out the connection with the conjunction fallacy. We take the
two alternatives provided by the ﬁrst premise to propose competing hypotheses, and
the categorical information in the second premise to provide adjudicating evidence.
We propose that reasoners compare the extent to which the evidence increases the
ﬁrmness of each hypothesis, and choose the hypothesis that maximizes this measure.
This is a contrastive version of Bayesian conﬁrmation theory (Fitelson 2013), which has
16

been shown to explain behavior in the conjunction fallacy (Crupi, Fitelson, and Tentori
2008). For the schematic indirect illusory inference in (18), reasoners are considering
two competing hypotheses provided by the ﬁrst premise: a ∧b and c. The evidence
in the second premise, d, raises the probability of the ﬁrst hypothesis and not the
second, thereby increasing its ﬁrmness. This process is of necessity a content-sensitive
mechanism, and thus it can handle in the same way classical illusory inferences from
disjunction, the new indirect variants, and the conjunction fallacy.
7
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Benjamin Spector, Emmanuel Chemla, Emile En-
guehard, Philipp Koralus, Ruth Byrne, Vincenzo Crupi, Philippe Schlenker, and three
anonymous reviewers for Cog Sci 2019 for very helpful feedback.
This work was supported by Agence Nationale de Recherche under grant ANR-17-
EURE-0017 (FrontCog, Department of Cognitive Studies, ENS); and Agence Nationale
de Recherche under grant ANR-18-CE28-0008 (LANG-REASON). No potential conﬂict
of interest was reported by the authors. The data that support the ﬁndings of this study
are available from the corresponding author, M. Sablé-Meyer, upon request. As part of
a biger lab project, open sourcing the data is planned.
References
Adams, Ernest W. 1996. “A Primer of Probability Logic.”
Alonso-Ovalle, Luis. 2006. “Disjunction in Alternative Semantics.” PhD diss., UMass
Amherst.
Ciardelli, Ivano, Jeroen Groenendijk, and Floris Roelofsen. 2009. “Attention! Might
in Inquisitive Semantics.” In Proceedings of the 19th Conference on Semantics and
Linguistic Theory (Salt), 91–108.
Crupi, Vincenzo, Branden Fitelson, and Katya Tentori. 2008. “Probability, Conﬁrmation,
and the Conjunction Fallacy.” Thinking & Reasoning 14 (2): 182–99.
Cummins, Denise D. 1995. “Naive Theories and Causal Deduction.” Memory and
Cognition 23 (5): 646–58.
De Leeuw, Joshua R. 2015. “JsPsych: A Javascript Library for Creating Behavioral
Experiments in a Web Browser.” Behavior Research Methods 47 (1): 1–12.
Evans, Jonathan St B. T. 1999. “The Inﬂuence of Linguistic Form on Reasoning: The
Case of Matching Bias.” The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 52 (1):
185–216.
Fitelson, Branden. 2013. “Contrastive Bayesiansim.” In Contrastivism in Philosophy,
edited by Martijn Blaauw. Routledge.
17

Groenendijk, Jeroen. 2008. “Inquisitive Semantics: Two Possibilities for Disjunction.”
In Proceedings of the Seventh International Tbilisi Symposium on Language, Logic and
Computation.
Johnson-Laird, Philip N. 1983. Mental Models: Towards a Cognitive Science of
Language, Inference, and Consciousness. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Johnson-Laird, Philip N., Sangeet Khemlani, and Geoffrey P. Goodwin. 2015. “Logic,
Probability, and Human Reasoning.” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 19 (4): 201–14.
Johnson-Laird, Philip N., and Fabien Savary. 1999. “Illusory Inferences: A Novel Class
of Erroneous Deductions.” Cognition 71 (3): 191–229.
Khemlani, Sangeet, Ruth M. J. Byrne, and Philip N. Johnson-Laird. 2018. “Facts and
Possibilities: A Model-Based Theory of Sentential Reasoning.” Cognitive Science 42
(6): 1887–1924.
Koralus, Philipp, and Salvador Mascarenhas. 2013. “The Erotetic Theory of Reason-
ing: Bridges Between Formal Semantics and the Psychology of Deductive Inference.”
Philosophical Perspectives 27: 312–65.
———. 2018. “Illusory Inferences in a Question-Based Theory of Reasoning.” In
Pragmatics, Truth, and Underspeciﬁcation: Towards an Atlas of Meaning, edited by Ken
Turner and Laurence Horn, 34:300–322. Current Research in the Semantics/Pragmatics
Interface. Leiden: Brill.
Kratzer, Angelika, and Junko Shimoyama. 2002. “Indeterminate Pronouns: The View
from Japanese.” In Third Tokyo Conference on Psycholinguistics.
Mascarenhas, Salvador. 2009. “Inquisitive Semantics and Logic.” Master’s thesis,
ILLC.
———. 2014. “Formal Semantics and the Psychology of Reasoning: Building New
Bridges and Investigating Interactions.” PhD thesis, New York University.
Mascarenhas, Salvador, and Philipp Koralus. 2017. “Illusory Inferences with Quanti-
ﬁers.” Thinking and Reasoning 23 (1): 33–48.
Mascarenhas, Salvador, and Léo Picat. 2019. “Might as a Generator of Alternatives:
The View from Reasoning.” In Proceedings of Salt 29, Ucla.
Oaksford, Michael, and Nicholas Chater. 2007. Bayesian Rationality: The Probabilistic
Approach to Human Reasoning. Oxford University Press.
Picat, Léo. 2019. “Inferences with Disjunction, Interpretation or Reasoning?” MA thesis
(CogMaster), Ecole Normale Supérieure. http://web-risc.ens.fr/~lpicat/website/picat-
m2-thesis-pre-print.pdf.
Spector, Benjamin. 2007. “Scalar Implicatures: Exhaustivity and Gricean Reasoning.”
In Questions in Dynamic Semantics, edited by Maria Aloni, Paul Dekker, and Alastair
Butler. Elsevier.
18

Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman. 1983. “Extensional Versus Intuitive Reasoning:
The Conjunction Fallacy in Probability Judgment.” Psychological Review 90: 293–315.
Walsh, Clare, and Philip N. Johnson-Laird. 2004. “Coreference and Reasoning.” Mem-
ory and Cognition 32: 96–106.
19

