
WHAT PEOPLE ARE SAYING ABOUT

SANSKRIT FOR SEEKERS
My humble praNAms and congratulations for a fantastic work done. It is
going to be useful as long as humans live on this earth.
Professor V. Krishnamurthy, well-known Advaita scholar It is a
pleasure to acknowledge Dennisji’s ‘labor of love’ and his trusting me
with the task of making a few helpful hints along the way. As the Gita
assures us, no good deed ever goes to waste, and even if human beings
ignore this work, Dennisji will be blessed for it.
Sunder Hattangadi, moderator for Advaitin Elist, Sanskrit scholar What
a great work!
Alan Jacobs, president, Ramana Maharshi Foundation UK, and well-
known author This lovely book provides two levels of Sanskrit
instruction. It is a wonderful guide to all those individuals that would
like to know the basic Sanskrit religious vocabulary and how to read,
write, and pronounce Sanskrit terms. The book introduces the
transliterated Sanskrit alphabet and secondly, it teaches the Devanagari
script/alphabet. The second level also teaches the main rules for
combining Sanskrit letters and words – which is often a headache for the
beginner. Many examples are provided from the Hindu scriptures to
illustrate these two levels of teaching. As well, there is a comprehensive
glossary of the most commonly encountered spiritual terms. This useful
book will appeal to all serious spiritual seekers interested in the Hindu
scriptures and Sanskrit terminology. Its aim is to teach the reader so as
to be able to look up Sanskrit words in a dictionary and to write and
pronounce them correctly. I am sure that all ‘beginners’ or even more
advanced seekers of Hindu wisdom will find this a wonderful guide.
John Grimes, author of A Concise Dictionary of Indian Philosophy


First published by Mantra Books, 2014
Mantra Books is an imprint of John Hunt Publishing Ltd., Laurel House, Station Approach,
Alresford, Hants, SO24 9JH, UK
office1@jhpbooks.net
www.johnhuntpublishing.com
www.mantra-books.net
For distributor details and how to order please visit the ‘Ordering’ section on our website.
Text copyright: Dennis Waite 2013
ISBN: 978 1 78279 227 7
All rights reserved. Except for brief quotations in critical articles or reviews, no part of this book
may be reproduced in any manner without prior written permission from the publishers.
The rights of Dennis Waite as author have been asserted in accordance with the Copyright,
Designs and Patents Act 1988.
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Design: Stuart Davies
Printed and bound by CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon, CR0 4YY
We operate a distinctive and ethical publishing philosophy in all areas of our business, from
our global network of authors to production and worldwide distribution.

CONTENTS
Acknowledgments
Introduction
General Introduction to the Language
Level 1 The Transliterated Alphabet
A. The Five Basic Vowels
B. The Five Main Groups of Consonants
C. The Long Vowels
D. The Complex Vowels and Additional Sounds
E. The Semi-Vowels
F. The Sibilants
G. h, h
H. The Complete Alphabet
Level 2 The Devanagari Script
A. The Five Basic (Simple) Vowels, Short and Long
B. The Five Main Groups of Consonants
C. The Remaining Vowels
D. Table Showing the 16 mAtRRikA
E. The Remaining Letters (semi-vowels, sibilants and h)
F. The Complete Alphabet
G. Conjunct Consonants
H. Some Special Characters
I. The Numerals
Level 3 Some Practical Examples
A. shivasUtrANi

B. Words and Sandhi
C. The Four mahAvAkya-s
D. Some Vedic Prayers and Quotations
Resources on the Internet
A. General Resources
B. Learning the Language
C. Dictionaries and Grammar Tools
D. Documents in Sanskrit
Glossary of Sanskrit Terms
Dictionary of Common Sanskrit Spiritual Words
Appendix 1 Transliteration Schemes
Appendix 2 Alternative Letter Forms
Appendix 3 Vowel Forms, with and without Consonants
Appendix 4 Writing the Script
Appendix 5 Answer to Final Example
Bibliography
Index

Acknowledgments
I would like to dedicate this book to the memory of Peter Bonnici, a dear
friend who died on 22nd June 2013. Peter carried out a thorough review
of the first edition of this text and made many corrections and
suggestions. These changes have improved the book very significantly.

Introduction
So, why would you want to learn Sanskrit? Unless you are one of those
fortunate few who have a genetic disposition for language learning or
unless you are unfortunate enough to have a masochistic streak, why on
earth would you want to tackle such an apparently formidable language?
It shares with Latin the characteristic of having to change the ending of
words depending upon the role of a noun or upon who is the subject of a
verb and its tense. In fact, it is even worse than Latin. In Latin there is
only singular and plural number, whereas Sanskrit has singular, two, and
more than two!
It really must be almost impossible to learn this language unless you
begin at school. I only wish that I had had the opportunity and studied it
instead of Latin! Unfortunately, I didn’t and it’s certainly too late to start
now; I often have difficulty remembering what I read yesterday!
Before continuing, I may as well confirm the implied and appalling
admission above: I know very little Sanskrit! I cannot construct
sentences or even decline nouns or conjugate verbs. I can just about read
the script. I can sometimes split words into their parts or put them
together – but would almost always have to refer to other sources for
assistance in this. I could write the script, very clumsily, if I had to,
providing I could refer to a list of the characters or to this book. But,
let’s face it, why would I want to? You need not just any italic pen, but
one with a sloping nib, for goodness’ sake! With free software on the
Internet to convert transliterated Roman characters into the Sanskrit
script, there is not really any need. What then, you may justifiably ask,
gives me the credentials (or temerity) to write a book about Sanskrit?

Well, I hope that by the time you finish reading this short introduction,
you will know and accept the answer. Basically, I was – and to a degree
still am – in the same position that you are.
Sanskrit is a very beautiful language. You only need to look at the
flowing, cursive, perfectly proportioned script to see this, even if you
cannot yet even determine where one word ends and another begins.
And, when you learn about some of its other peculiarities, you will
appreciate this even more. For example, once you learn how to
pronounce a particular letter, you will know how to pronounce it in
every word you will ever encounter. There are not many languages
which could make that claim!
Perhaps the most amazing aspect is the almost mathematical
precision with which letters and syllables combine. One name that you
will find invariably associated with the language is Panini – he
constructed a complex set of rules, which may be memorized through
short ‘sutras’. These enable one to work out how to assemble words and
syllables into sentences. So impressive and logical is this set of rules that
NASA have apparently proposed it as the basis for a new computer
language (see http://post.jagran.com/NASA-to-use-Sanskrit-as-computer-
language-1332758613).
But none of this addresses the original question. What prompted you
to pick up this book (and me to write it)? If it really is the case that you
want actually to learn the language, then please put this book back on
the shelf. There is an excellent two-volume work for learning the
language written by Thomas Egenes (Ref. 6). What is more, Part 1 is
available 
for 
free 
at
http://www.scribd.com/doc/32874508/Introduction-to-Sanskrit-by-
Thomas-Egenes so that you can try it out before committing.)
I suggest (hope) that your interest in this book comes from the fact
that your actual interest is in Hindu scriptures such as the Upanishads
and the Bhagavad Gita and maybe even the works of Shankara and other

writers on non-duality. The fact is that, up until a few hundred years
ago, all books and academic texts in India were written in Sanskrit. In
this respect, it is similar to Latin in the West, except that Sanskrit is
much more tenacious. Whereas Latin really could be said to be dead
now, Sanskrit is still very much alive in the field of spiritual study.
Although it is not really spoken any longer (apart from the odd
commune-style efforts), it is still written. Even today, books are being
published which are entirely in Sanskrit!
The point is that traditional teaching (certainly in the philosophy of
Advaita, which is my own specialization) always refers back to the
original scriptural texts for its authority. This is because those scriptures
are the actual source of knowledge for key truths regarding the nature of
reality and of ourselves. This knowledge is simply not accessible by any
other means. We cannot see God or infer that the visible universe is not
in itself real but depends upon something more fundamental. These
things have to be told to us, by someone in whom we can trust, until
such time as we can realize those truths for ourselves.
Scriptures have an inherent problem – their brevity. For several
thousand years, some of the oldest texts – the Upanishads and the Vedas
of which they form a part – were passed on orally; there were no written
versions. Accordingly, they had to be relatively short and memorable.
They were chanted aloud repeatedly to ensure that they were passed
down the generations without distortion or loss. Even today, traditional
teachers and their disciples chant the mantras before the guru translates
and explains their meaning.
Accordingly, some interpretation is almost invariably required by the
seeker before he or she can grasp what is being said. And, as you may
know, there are not merely different emphases in meaning by different
teachers but totally different schools of philosophy claiming to be
supported by the same scriptural texts. It follows that one is certain to
encounter different translations of the same text. An obvious example is

that the Bhagavad Gita is regarded as the ‘bible’ of the Hare Krishna
movement, which is essentially dualistic (dvaita). Yet this same text has
an authoritative commentary by Shankara and is revered by Advaitins.
Ideally, of course, one would only study Advaita, or any other
philosophy/teaching methodology, under the guidance of a competent
teacher who fully understands the scriptures and how to ‘unfold’ them
(and is also fluent in Sanskrit!). Practically speaking, however, few
seekers in the West have access to a qualified teacher and so are obliged
to read such material themselves. Without any knowledge at all of
Sanskrit, one simply has to hope that one has selected an ‘appropriate’
translation, and will not be misled by the choice of words.
Unfortunately, this can be dangerous!
It would be possible, and maybe both interesting and instructive, to
take a single verse from an Upanishad and examine the translations
given by a selection of different authors. But it would also take quite a
lot of space (and time and effort) to do this in detail. Suffice to say that,
for example, the commentaries of a teacher from the lineage of Swami
Chinmayananda will almost certainly differ in some key areas from those
written by a teacher in the Ramakrishna/Vivekananda lineage. This is
because the latter has incorporated elements from outside of Shankara’s
Advaita school. For example, they will maintain that profound
meditation (samAdhi) can lead to enlightenment, whereas Shankara
would insist that meditation is an action, which is not opposed to
ignorance, and that only Self-knowledge can bring enlightenment.
Consequently, if one is reading a particular translation and
commentary, and one encounters a statement which seems not to be in
accord with one’s prior understanding, it often becomes necessary to
check the meaning of key words and see if the particular translation
given has been biased. In order to be able to do this, a certain minimum
level of understanding is needed.
This book provides that ‘minimum level’ (and no more!). You will not

be able to read, write or understand Sanskrit sentences after reading this
book. But you will, with a little effort, be able to read and understand
Sanskrit words. And that, hopefully, will allow you to read commentaries
on scriptures and look up the meaning of words with which you are
unfamiliar. With this ability, you will hopefully move forward more
quickly on your chosen spiritual path.
And even if you only read the postings of discussion groups on the
Internet, or articles or blogs at my own website for example, you will
find that some writers invariably take it for granted that you will be
familiar with certain Sanskrit terms and they will use them gratuitously
without providing any translation. If you have the patience and really
want to follow such writing, you will have to look up the words that you
don’t know. Mostly, the Sanskrit in such cases will be transliterated so
you just have to be familiar with ITRANS or the use of diacritical marks
on letters (all explained within). But sometimes, a writer will expect you
to know the Devanagari script itself and not even bother to provide
transliteration, let alone translation. Probably you will give up at that
point and simply feel sorry for (or irritated by) the author’s superior
attitude but, if you really want to proceed, this book should provide the
help you need to persevere.
As an example, what would you make of the following two words if
you encountered them?
Presumably not a lot. Yet, if you are a ‘spiritual seeker’, such words will
be central to your life – the very goal of your existence. In addition, most
of the original source material about them will have been written in
Sanskrit. The first of these words usually appears as ‘moksha’ in English
books on the subject. It literally means ‘release from worldly existence’,
liberation from the ignorance that binds us to the illusions of our lives.

In the context of Advaita, a better translation is simply ‘freedom from
Self-ignorance’ or even ‘gaining of Self-knowledge’. But how do you
pronounce it? Probably, as I once did, you will say ‘mocksha’, with the
‘o’ sounding as in the word ‘clock’. In fact, one should sound it like the
‘oa’ in ‘cloak’. The second word is the goal of Buddhists, usually written
‘nirvana’. It means ‘absolute extinction of individual existence or of all
desires and passions’. Probably your pronunciation of this is not too bad
– you may have come across the 1970s pop group of this name. The
accent is on the second syllable, which is a long ‘a’, as in ‘bar’, while the
final ‘a’ is short as in ‘cat’. If you are British as opposed to American,
however, the ‘v’ may well be pronounced as ‘w’.
Ideally, you would like to know all of these things but without
actually having to learn the language. Up to a point, this is possible and
it is the purpose of this book to provide the necessary background. This
claim is possible because these were precisely the requirements that I
had and which I have achieved to my own satisfaction.
This book effectively provides for three levels of attainment. First, it
will teach you the two most commonly used ‘transliterated’ forms of the
language. This word refers to an ‘Anglicized’, or more correctly
‘Romanized’, form of Sanskrit i.e. one that uses the alphabet with which
we are already familiar. True Sanskrit is written in a script that bears no
resemblance to English, has quite different letters, and requires rather
more effort to learn. One of these transliterated forms – usually just
called ‘Roman’ – is used in many books that utilize Sanskrit terms. This
form has dashes and dots over or under letters to indicate how to
pronounce them. They actually are different letters in the Sanskrit! As
these are not available to the average typist, the second transliterated
form, most frequently used on the Internet, is called ITRANS.
(Unfortunately, quite a few books do not use any formal transliteration
at all. These, instead, make crude attempts to reproduce Sanskrit words
phonetically and often do not even bother to do this.)

With the knowledge of these two, it will be possible to look up words
in any dictionary that does not use the actual Sanskrit script. The
glossary of this book aims to provide explanations for many of the terms
that you are likely to encounter in Western books on Eastern philosophy.
You will also be able to use (or download) dictionary facilities on the
Internet to look up words that are not provided here, and an explanation
will be given as to how to go about this.
For those whose ambitions are a little higher, whose need is to be
able to use a full Sanskrit–nglish dictionary to look up words, it is
necessary to learn the Sanskrit alphabet, together with the original script
that is used to reproduce it, and some basic rules for combining letters.
This is the second level of attainment that will be addressed. While the
first level may be achieved very easily, this higher level requires rather
more effort. Suggestions are made as to how to achieve this, and
pointers are given to free resources on the Internet that will prove
helpful.
If the word that you wish to look up is actually in the dictionary,
these first two steps will be adequate. Unfortunately, there are two main
reasons why the word that you want to look up will not be in the
dictionary:
1) The word in the text will have the ending appropriate to its part of
speech or tense, whereas the dictionary only lists the forms before
they have been declined or conjugated. (Unfortunately the scope of
this book does not include the topics of declension or conjugation.)
2) Words in Sanskrit combine with adjacent words in many situations
and the letters at the join frequently change. The consequence of
this is that the separate words that make up a ‘word’ found in a
book may not be immediately recognizable. In order to be able to
separate out the book word into its constituent parts, a third level of
attainment is required – to learn the rules for joining. The last part
of this book will introduce you to some of the main rules of so-
called ‘sandhi’.

The principal problem of course is the alien nature of the script. In order
to be able actually to learn the alphabet in its original form, it is
necessary to learn to recognize the form of each letter. Ideally, you
would practice writing these yourself in order to help commit the letters
to memory. None of this is intrinsically difficult but it does all take time.
In order to achieve the ‘level 1’ ability to pronounce and look up
Romanized words in a glossary, you can expect to have to spend just a
few hours reading the relevant parts of this book a couple of times. In
order to be able to achieve ‘level 2’ ability, reading the actual script and
looking up words in a Sanskrit–nglish dictionary, you must expect to
spend several hours per week for a few months, with serious practice
most days. You need not see this as a chore, however. This book aims to
introduce the letters very gradually and present words for practice at the
earliest opportunity. If you choose to use writing as an aid to learning,
the script has great beauty and giving one’s full attention in calligraphy
is itself a useful practice for stilling the mind. If you wish to go further
and learn all of the rules for joining words, this will require serious
study, together with the assistance of someone who can provide the
solution after you have given up! This book will only provide you with a
good idea of what is involved – far more interesting and rewarding than
crosswords or solving cryptograms!
Any genuine spiritual aspirant will want to make this effort. Your
reward will be to be able to verify for yourself the correct pronunciation
and meanings of words. You will no longer be at the mercy of the
authors, translators or editors of the books you read. You will no longer
be worried that you have misunderstood the meaning of a term used in
an Internet email discussion group or heard from a teacher. You will be
able to check the original source material for yourself and look up the
meanings of key words.
This book will not address anything beyond these simple aims. It will
not tell you how to decline nouns or conjugate verbs. These terms are

not even defined, in case you do not know what they mean! You will not
discover how to construct sentences or all of the rules for combining
words. In other words, this book will not teach you the language in even
its most basic form. Suggestions will be given, however, to those daring
few whose ambitions do stretch that far.

General Introduction to the Language
True Sanskrit uses an alphabet quite unlike ours. For a start, it contains
nearly twice as many letters overall, with more than three times the
number of vowels. These letters can look quite different depending upon
where they appear in a word and which other letters are adjacent. The
language is written in a script called ‘Devanagari’ (meaning ‘city of the
gods’).
It is an extremely interesting language and amazingly logical. There
are many rules but, once you have learned them, there are none of the
tiresome exceptions found in most languages. In addition, once you have
learned how to pronounce a letter, it is always pronounced in that way.
It is interesting to note in passing that there is a close parallel
between the structure of the language and the Sankhya-related myth of
the creation. Indeed, some schools of thought, notably in the north of
India and Kashmir, believe that the universe was ‘spoken’ into existence.
Though this ‘primordial’ language is beyond ordinary sound, Sanskrit is
its earthly manifestation, as it were, and embodies many of the
‘universal principles’. The language itself is believed to embody the truth
of the unity of the Self.
The entire language evolves from a fundamental sound. The laws
governing the way that words are constructed, and the grammar used to
join them, are strict. It is amazing that the language, though the most
ancient known and no longer in general usage, remains true to its
original form. Someone learning it now would be able to communicate
perfectly well with someone who spoke the language thousands of years
ago.

Level 1 The Transliterated Alphabet
Before introducing the Devanagari script, we will learn the basic
alphabet in its transliterated form. All of the words in the ‘Dictionary of
Common Sanskrit Spiritual Words’ (provided towards the end of this
book) are given in this form and ordered as if the letters were English so
that there is not actually any need for you to learn the real Sanskrit
characters or alphabet order if you do not wish to. Rather than
presenting this section twice – once for each of the transliterated forms –
I will give both forms now for each letter, as it is introduced. These are,
in any case, often the same. Note, however, that I will generally only
show the ITRANS form when giving examples of Sanskrit words.
As was noted in the Introduction, the Romanized form is still used in
most written material. This includes serious books and documents on the
Internet held in, for example, postscript or Adobe® ‘PDF’ format. The
reason that ITRANS was developed is that the Romanized form uses
various ‘diacritical’ marks that are not easily available to someone
typing on an ordinary computer keyboard. He or she must make use of
the ordinary fonts provided with word processors, for storing and
communicating the resultant data on or via computers. ‘Diacritical’
marks are modifications to basic letter forms. An example outside of
Sanskrit would be the accents used in French – acute, grave, circumflex,
and cedilla – é, è, ê, and ç. In the Romanized transliteration of Sanskrit,
there are a number of special marks, such as lines (called macrons) over
vowels, for example – ā. In order to be able to type and send this
character easily, ITRANS writes it as ‘aa’ or ‘A’ but I will use ‘A’
throughout as this has now become the favored option of Internet users.

The ITRANS scheme uses only the usual letters of our alphabet, together
with the occasional special character such as the tilde ~. The special
characters of ITRANS always appear as separate characters, however,
and not over or under other letters as they do in Romanized
transliteration.
In the last few years, it has become easier to reproduce the Roman
forms via computers. For example, the Wordpress system, commonly
used for hosting blogs on the Internet, has free plugins such as IndicIME
(http://www.vishalon.net/IndicResources/IndicIME.aspx) 
to 
make
entering languages with diacritical marks easy. Also the changeover to
Unicode character encoding systems on websites has vastly expanded the
number of different letter forms possible. This has meant that Romanized
transliteration is found increasingly frequently in articles and web pages
online. Nevertheless, because ITRANS has been used for so long now in
emails and discussion groups, and because it is so easy to use, it is likely
to remain popular for a long time yet.
It must also be noted that the pronunciation I will be describing is
principally that recommended by the School of Economic Science, which
represents the largest body of Sanskrit students in the UK. The
development of their system is very clear and logical and therefore easy
to learn and understand. Although all traditions generally agree in most
respects, there are key differences regarding some elements. Since the
vast majority of any communication you are likely to have will be
written rather than verbal, this should present no problem, however. The
main difference that would be noticed by anyone learning the language
in the USA is that the ‘v’s are pronounced as ‘v’ there, whereas the
logically correct pronunciation is ‘w’. This will be explained in due
course!
A. The Five Basic Vowels
1. a, a

The first letter of the alphabet forms the fundamental sound from which
all others are derived simply by moving the tongue and lips. You make it
by opening the mouth wide and letting the vocal cords operate. The
sound which emerges sounds like a cross between the short ‘a’ in ‘cat’
and ‘u’ in ‘but’. It is written as ‘a‘ in both of the transliterated forms but
the correct letter in the Devanagari script is:
(I will not show the Devanagari for any of the other letters, until the
second part of the book.) In this first section, on the transliterated
alphabet, I will show each letter as it is introduced in first the ITRANS
form and then the Romanized form. Thus, the first letter is:
a, a
i.e. there is no difference for this letter. The fonts used in this book are:
normal 11 point Times New Roman font for the basic text; 11 point Arial
Unicode MS for the ITRANS and Romanized transliteration. The fonts
used for the Devanagari script are 18 point Sanskrit 98 and 18 point
ancientsanskrit99 for some special characters. Note that any special fonts
used in the manuscript for this book, including the Devanagari script,
may be downloaded free of charge from the Internet. Information about
this will be provided later.
This, then (a, a), is the first letter of the alphabet and the first vowel
or, to use its correct term, svara, meaning ‘sound’. Its literal meaning is
‘self-shining’, to indicate that these are the only letters with sound. The
consonants have no sound of their own and need to be combined with
vowels to be ‘manifest’. Unless we attach a vowel, the consonant is only
throat and tongue position combined with an inner effort – there is no
actual sound. By convention, a is always pronounced after each
consonant (when we are speaking it as a letter) so as to enable the

consonant sound to be manifest.
When we speak an English consonant, we also have to introduce a
vowel before or after it in order to make a sound. For example, when we
speak the letter ‘m’ we effectively say ‘em’. It is never possible to speak a
consonant without doing this, however slightly. When we speak the
letter ‘b’, the expressed vowel comes after the word and we say ‘be’; with
‘k’, we say ‘kay’, and so on. (Note that Sanskrit consonants are not
invariably sounded with a when they occur in a word. Obviously they
can be followed by other vowels! Also, a consonant at the end of a word
or at the beginning of a conjunct consonant will not be sounded with a.
These will be explained later.)
A word such as aham, meaning ‘I’, is an example of the use of a. (I
will give a simple or useful example with each letter to help put it into
context and aid memory.)
2. i, i
If the back of the tongue is now raised slightly towards the back of the
roof of the mouth, keeping the front of the tongue down against the back
of the lower teeth, and the same short movement of the vocal cords is
made, a slightly different sound emerges. This sounds a bit like the short
‘i’ in ‘bit’. It is written:
i, i
The word iti, meaning ‘thus’, is an example. It is frequently used in the
scriptures to add stress to what has just been said.
3. R^i or RRi, ṛ
The next two vowels may seem strange but follow the logic of the
development. The underlying sound for both of these is the ‘i‘ sound just

covered but the tongue is first moved further forward in the mouth. If
you raise the tip of the tongue until it is almost touching the roof of the
mouth and then make the ‘i’ sound as before, the next vowel sound
emerges. Modern students often actually flick the tongue downwards as
the sound is made so that the result sounds something like ‘ri’ in the
word ‘rip’. Strictly speaking, the rolling ‘r’ beginning is not clearly
enunciated because the tongue never actually touches the roof of the
mouth. However, this articulation is not correct. The way in which it is
written in the two forms of transliteration now differs clearly. In
ITRANS, the special character ‘^’ (caret) was used in the early versions,
but is one which is nevertheless easily produced from the normal
typewriter keyboard. In Romanized form, a dot is used beneath the
letter:
ṛ
In the latest version of ITRANS, an alternative form is available that does
not use any special character, namely:
RRi [Note that the free software utilities mentioned later, for
generating Devanagari script, recognize both forms but RRi is the
preferred form in the digital dictionary referred to later, so I will use
this form preferentially.]
One of the oldest, if not the oldest, of the Upanishads is the
Brihadaranyaka. This is a typical Anglicized spelling, which is in fact
quite inaccurate. I will not jump ahead by giving you the full, correct
spelling (look in the Glossary if you must!) but the first vowel in the
word is this one so that the beginning is bRRihad-. Incidentally, it is
convenient to tell you at this point that there is no distinction between
capitals and lower case in Sanskrit – there is just the one case. In the
Roman alphabet, having learned 26 lower-case letter forms, you then

have to learn another 26 for the same letters in upper case. There is
none of this in Sanskrit, which makes up to some extent for the fact that
there are nearly as many different letters altogether and these often
change their form in different situations!
4. L^i or LLi, ḷ (Note that the Roman form here is a lower-case letter
‘el’ with a dot under, not a capital I, nor a number 1, nor an
exclamation mark !)
For the next of the principal vowels, this procedure is repeated but now
the tip of the tongue moves further forward still, to just behind the front
teeth, before the ‘i’ is sounded. Again, modern speakers often flick the
tongue up towards the roof and down so that the sound that actually
comes out is ‘lri’. Again, this is not strictly correct but it hardly matters
since there are very few words in the language that use this letter! The
ITRANS form again may use the ‘^’ symbol and the Romanized form the
dot below the letter: LLi, ḷ
As before, the more recent releases of ITRANS allow the form ‘LLi‘ to
be used and this is the form that will be used here, subsequently. The
word LLi means ‘mountain’.
5. u, u
Continuing the development, the emphasis finally shifts to the lips
(labial position), having begun in the throat (guttural position), moved
to the back of the mouth (palatal), then to the roof of the mouth
(cerebral) and then to the teeth (dental). If a circle is formed of the lips
but without any tension and the basic sound is made, a short ‘oo’ sound
comes out as in ‘soot’ or ‘put’. This is the last of the simple vowels and is
written the same in both transliterated forms:
u, u

This is, of course, the vowel that begins the word ‘Upanishad’ but this
word is an Anglicized version since, as you will discover, the ‘sh’ part is
actually a single letter in Sanskrit. Also remember, there should not
actually be a capital letter. You should not worry too much about this
latter aspect though. It is normal to use a capital where one would be
used in English. This is especially the case (no pun intended) where a
proper name is involved. It would be most unusual to come across the
name Arjuna or, even more so, the name of a god, given in transliterated
form without a capitalized first letter. If you are using Devanagari script,
of course, the need to be aware of this etiquette disappears.
B. The Five Main Groups of Consonants
Before continuing to describe the other vowels, I will now switch to tell
you about some of the consonants. The five vowels just described with
their characteristic mouth positions effectively head up the five main
groups of five consonants in each group. Consonants all effectively still
sound the basic ‘a’ but ‘stop’ it from coming out in that simple way by
varying the position of the tongue and lips in the way dictated by the
vowel at the head of the group. The Sanskrit term for consonants is
vya~njana, meaning a ‘decoration’ (of the basic vowel sound) but you
will have to wait until later to find out how to pronounce this word.
I will attempt to describe how to sound the letters in each of these
groups by appropriate positioning of the tongue and lips and use of the
throat. However, a reviewer of this book pointed out a much simpler and
more general ‘rule’ to bear in mind. That is to consider the mouth
positioning required in order to pronounce English words beginning with
the corresponding semi-vowel. (These will be described later.)
Thus, one can pronounce the guttural letters by having the tongue in
the position required for pronouncing the ‘h’ of ‘happy’. When the
tongue is in the position needed for pronouncing the ‘y’ of ‘yellow’, it is
also in the position for pronouncing the palatals. The tongue positioned

to say the ‘r’ of ‘rat’ accounts for the cerebrals; the ‘l’ of ‘love’ positions
the tongue for the dentals; and the position of tongue and lips to
pronounce the ‘w’ of ‘watch’ is correct for the labial group.
1. The first group of consonants (guttural)
The first group uses the mouth position of the ‘a’ for forming its five
consonants so that this all takes place at the back of the mouth where it
becomes the throat – the ‘guttural’ position.
a) k, k
The first consonant of this group is written ‘k‘, sounded ‘ka’ as in
‘karate’. An example of a commonly used Sanskrit term using this letter
is ‘karma‘, literally meaning ‘action’.
Clearly a consonant can occur at the end of the word, as with ‘k’ in
‘rack’ for example. Here, we do not want to sound an a with it. If we
were to do so, we would end up with a different word – in this example
it would become ‘racka’. When this happens in Sanskrit an additional
mark is added under the letter, called a virAma, literally meaning
‘cessation’, ‘termination’ or ‘end’, and is understood to mean ‘don’t make
any vowel sound after this’. Consonants appearing at the end of a word,
without a following vowel, are also called halanta. This means that a
consonant, which for reasons I won’t go into at the moment is
represented by the abbreviation hal, is at the end, i.e. it is not followed
by a vowel. Because of this, the virAma sign that indicates this is also
called a halant. Thus, a k at the end of a word used to be written ‘k.h‘ in
ITRANS, where the ‘.h‘ after any consonant means that it is followed by
a halant and ‘a’ is not sounded after it. In fact, it is no longer necessary
in ITRANS to do this – if the letter is written on its own at the end of a
word, the halant is inserted automatically. The Devanagari letter for k,
sounded ‘ka’ is:

And, when this appears at the end of a word and we do not want to
sound the ‘a’ that is associated by default with the letter, a halant is
added and it looks like:
There is no corresponding mechanism in the Romanized transliteration
scheme for differentiating between the two. It is simply assumed (as is
the case now with ITRANS) that, if no vowel appears after a final
consonant, then none is sounded. All of this is common sense really and
it might be seen as an unnecessary complication. If you intend to go on
to the second level, however, you will need to know why the form of a
Devanagari character frequently looks slightly different when it appears
at the end of a word.
b) kh, kh
The second consonant in the guttural group is written ‘kh‘. Its
pronunciation is much like the preceding one but with the addition of a
slight breathy sound caused by actually letting out some air immediately
following the ‘k’ sound. This method of uttering the sound is called
‘aspirated’. It is often sounded like ‘k-h’ in ‘cloa(k-h)at’ but there is too
much emphasis in this – it is really more subtle. Consonants such as ‘k‘
are said to be ‘with little breath’ (alpaprANa) while ones like ‘kh‘ are
‘with much breath’ (mahAprANa). Again, I am giving you the correct
Sanskrit terms for these but I have not yet introduced all of the letters so
you will not know precisely how to pronounce them. On the second and
subsequent readings, of course, there will be no problem.
The word ‘khaga‘, meaning ‘bird’, is often used in textbooks teaching
beginners of Sanskrit.
c) g, g

The third in this group is written ‘g‘, sounded ‘g’ as in ‘gap’ (sounded
without any additional breath following the consonant, i.e. alpaprANa).
A well-known word beginning with this letter is ‘guru‘, used to refer to a
spiritual teacher, though its literal meaning is ‘heavy’. In Sanskrit
pronunciation, syllables that are emphasized (e.g. in reading poetry) are
called guru as opposed to unstressed ones, which are called ‘laghu‘,
meaning ‘light’.
d) gh, gh
The fourth is written ‘gh‘ and, like ‘kh‘, is sounded with a superseding
expelling of air – mahAprANa. It sounds like ‘gh’ in ‘doghouse’. The word
‘laghu‘ just given above uses this consonant.
e) ~N, ṅ
The final consonant in this group introduces a new term – anunAsika,
meaning that the sound is made through the nose as well as the throat. It
is written using a tilde followed by a capital N in ITRANS format ‘~N‘ or
with a dot above the lower case ‘n’ in Romanized format. There are four
n-related sounds; hence the need for the special characters. This one has
the sound of ‘ng’ made at the back of the throat and sounding through
the nose, like ‘sing’ but with the ending further back in the throat like
someone who is being strangled rather than singing!
The word ~Na itself means ‘an object of sense’ or ‘desire for any
sensual object’, though, in the dictionary, it is designated as ‘L’, meaning
‘lexicographers’ rather than as a masculine, feminine or neuter noun.
This means that no one has ever found the word being used in any
scripture or other historical text.
2. The second group of consonants (palatal)
This second group forms the sounds in the back part of the mouth but

not the throat. Based on the ‘i‘ vowel, these use the back of the tongue
and the rear of the mouth and are thus called ‘palatal’. As noted above, a
good guideline for this is to position the mouth and tongue for saying
the y in ‘yes’. They follow the same pattern as the previous group (as do
all five of these groups of consonants, you will be pleased to know!). The
first and third members are alpaprANa, the second and fourth are
mahAprANa, and the fifth is anunAsika.
a) c or ch, c
The first is written ‘c‘ or ‘ch‘ in ITRANS and it is sounded like ‘cha’ in
‘chap’. Whereas English pronounces this by using the front of the tongue
near the front of the roof of the mouth, Sanskrit uses the rear parts.
It is likely that you are going to be confused over the choice of
representations here when we look at the next letter in this group.
ITRANS allows either of these forms to refer to the same letter, whereas
Romanized transliteration insists on the first alone. It is perhaps
understandable that ‘ch‘ should be allowed since this is effectively how it
sounds. There is no equivalent of the hard ‘c’ in English, as in ‘tin can’ –
this would use the ‘k‘ from the first group. Nor is there an equivalent of
the soft ‘c’, as in ‘cervix’ – this would use the ‘s‘ that we will look at
later. Therefore, there is actually no confusion in just using ‘c‘ to refer to
this ‘ch’ sound. However, many sources do use ch and, since this is how
it has to be sounded, I will use this form henceforth and Ch for the next
letter.
An example that you will probably have encountered is ‘chakra‘. It
refers to the points in the spinal cord through which energy is supposed
to flow and is particularly relevant in kundalini yoga.
b) chh or Ch, ch
The second character in this group used to be written ‘chh‘ in ITRANS
but, unfortunately, ‘ch‘ in Romanized. More recently, ITRANS has

introduced ‘Ch‘ as the preferred option, which avoids the confusion
somewhat, so that it might be best for you to learn this from the outset
and ignore the ‘chh‘ version altogether. Certainly, you need to decide
which scheme you are using in any given document and stick to it!
Since I have already said that the pattern of the first group is repeated
in the others, you might guess that this is sounded much like ‘ch‘ but
with some added breath – and you would be right! Just remember not to
make it too pronounced so that it comes out like ‘mat(ch-h)ot’ and it
should be fine. If you are familiar with the Upanishads, you will know
that one of the main ones is called the Chandogya. (Again this is not the
correct transliterated spelling but the commonly used Anglicized one. I
will always use normal font for these examples. If the font is italicized,
you will know that it is the correct ITRANSliterated format.) The ‘Ch’
part of the word is this character.
c) j, j
The third is written ‘j‘ and pronounced more or less as we would expect,
like the ‘ja’ in ‘jam’. It uses minimum breath again as for all in this third
‘row’ of the main consonants. (The full table will be presented at the end
of this section on the five main groups of consonants.) If you meditate
using a mantra, you will probably know that the practice of mental
repetition is called ‘japa‘. This is a nice simple word pronounced exactly
as you would expect, but remember to keep the vowels as short as
possible – much shorter than typical English or American diction.
d) jh, jh
The fourth is written ‘jh‘ and you can work out now how it should sound
– like ‘j-ha’ but not too much so. The frequency of letter occurrences in
Sanskrit is very widely spread and there are quite a few letters that
hardly occur at all. As noted above, the vowel LLi is very infrequent. (A
longer version of it that will be discussed later is effectively non-

existent!) jh is one of the less common consonants. An interesting
example of a word that does use it emphasizes the need for care. In
English there are words which, with just a slight variation in spelling,
mean something quite different. Perhaps because there are so many
more vowels in Sanskrit, this seems to happen much more often. The
word jhalA, with a long ‘a’ sound at the end (which we have not yet
discussed), means ‘girl’. Spelling this with a short a at the end and two
l‘s gives jhalla, which means a ‘prize-fighter’.
e) ~n (or JN), ñ
The final letter in this group is the second of the anunAsika characters
(the ‘n’ type sounds made through the nose). It has a sort of ‘ny’ sound
(as in ‘canyon’). To pronounce this, put the tongue into the position in
which you are about to say ‘yes’ and, without changing position, say
‘nya’. This mouth movement is very alien to Westerners and, ideally, you
should endeavor to listen to someone who knows how to pronounce the
letter correctly. This applies to all of the letters but especially to ones
such as this.
The only word listed in the dictionary beginning with this letter is
another lexicographers’ word, ~na, meaning a ‘singer’ or ‘jingling sound’
(or ‘heretic’ or ‘ox’!). A common word that uses it, however, is j~nAna,
as in jnana yoga, meaning ‘knowledge’. This word is often confusingly
represented in books, appearing sometimes as ‘gyana’ or ‘gnana’, and is
very rarely pronounced correctly. This is not helped by the fact that the
Itranslator Software permits GY to be used for the conjunct j~n so that
GYAna is an allowable form of the ITRANS for this word. (The reason for
this is that another transliteration scheme uses this form of
representation – see Appendix 1.) The ITRANS JN is a more recent
change, which is now recognized by the latest version of Itranslator
software.

3. The third group of consonants (cerebral)
This third group has now moved the mouth position another step
forward so that the roof of the mouth is used, with the tip of the tongue
pointing up to it, as when you say ‘rat’. To construct the main
consonants, the tongue actually touches the roof. It is called the cerebral
position.
a) T, ṭ
In ITRANS, all of this third (middle) group are written as capital letters
to differentiate them from the fourth group, which appear very similar
and also sound similar, simply moving the tongue nearer towards the
front of the mouth. In the Romanized transliteration, the letters have a
dot beneath them. ‘T‘ is pronounced as the ‘t’ in ‘tub’, having the tongue
pointing up to the roof of the palate as you say it. That should have been
spoken ‘with only a small breath’ as usual (alpaprANa).
All of the letters in this group are infrequent. If you encounter a word
with a sound that might be in this group, it is far more likely that it will
in fact be in the next group. If your philosophy is that of Advaita, you
are very likely to have heard of the sage Astavakra, born deformed
because of a curse from his father while he was still in his mother’s
womb. (Astavakra means ‘twisted in eight ways’.) The ‘Astavakra Gita’
records how he taught King Janaka the truths of Advaita. The ‘t’ in
Astavakra is actually this one.
b) Th, ṭh
The second letter is the aspirated form, sounded the same as ‘T‘ but with
more breath as you make the sound (mahAprANa), a bit like ‘po-th-ole’
(pothole) – but remember that the tongue must point to the roof of the
mouth, i.e. not how we would normally sound this combination.

c) D, ḍ
The next letter is pronounced like ‘d’ in ‘dot’ but as before, with the tip
of the tongue right up in the roof of the mouth. Most spiritual seekers,
whether or not they belong to the Advaita school, will have heard of the
philosopher Adi Shankara, who systematized the philosophy of Advaita
in the eighth century AD. The teacher of Shankara’s teacher was
Gaudapada, who is famous for writing a verse-commentary (kArikA) on
one of the Upanishads – the Mandukya Upanishad. Unfortunately, all of
these Sanskrit words are incorrectly represented, as you will discover
later. But, for the moment, we can improve on this situation by
acknowledging that the first ‘d’ in ‘Gaudapada’ and the one in
‘Mandukya’ are in fact this character, ‘D‘ – the cerebral form of the ‘d’
sounding letter.
d) Dh, ḍh
The fourth letter sounds the same as the third but with more breath (e.g.
go-dh-ead). An example is Dhola, which is a large drum.
e) N, ṇ
The last in the group is another ‘na’ sound but with the tongue in the
roof of the mouth. The word guNa uses this letter – and here is the first
complete word consisting completely of letters you have now met.
Instead of writing it (incorrectly) as ‘guna’, you can now use the correct
transliteration of guNa or guṅa. It refers to the three ‘qualities’ of nature
in Sankhya yoga – sattva, rajas and tamas.
4. The fourth group of consonants (dental)
This group of consonants is sounded with the tongue positioned just
behind the teeth, as though to say ‘love’, and called, unsurprisingly,
dental. The sounds are essentially the same as those in the cerebral

group but sound much more natural to Western ears and are very much
more common. If you are ever in any doubt as to whether a sound
should be cerebral or dental, guess this one!
a) t, t
The first member of the group is ‘t‘. It is sounded with the tongue
actually touching the back of the teeth. This is further forward in the
mouth than is normally used in English and is better represented by a
word such as the French ‘petite’. A simple example, or even two
examples, is tat as in the mahAvAkya (‘great saying’ from the
Upanishads) tat tvam asi – ‘thou art that’. It means ‘that’ and both t’s are
this dental character (in fact, this word begins its life as tad, as you will
discover later). The final ‘t’ is the halanta form, meaning that there is no
vowel sound following it and the Devanagari character will have a
halant sign beneath it, whereas the first one will not.
b) th, th
Then comes the equivalent aspirated letter, with more breath
(mahAprANa), ‘th‘, pronounced as in ‘butthead’. (Another way in which
this letter is pronounced – and those who do so would maintain it to be
the correct way! – is as the English ‘th’ in ‘path’, for example. It has to be
said that it seems easier, and more consistent, to pronounce the word
sthita, for example, as is indicated in the main text.) The adjective sthita
means ‘standing’ and is used in the sense of ‘steady’ and ‘firm’ in the
word sthitapraj~na in the Bhagavad Gita, where it means ‘a person of
steady wisdom’ or someone who knows the Self.
c) d, d
Next is ‘d‘. This is essentially the same as in ‘dog’ but with the tongue
starting out immediately behind the teeth. Perhaps the French ‘donner’

might be a better representation. The word dama means ‘self-restraint’,
understood as control over the senses. It is one of the six qualities
specified by Shankara as prerequisites for the spiritual seeker.
d) dh, dh
This is the breathy equivalent of the previous character and is
pronounced as the ‘dh’ in ‘adhere’. A similar word to dama, as just
described, is dharma. This word is possibly more familiar to many
readers. It is commonly used to speak of such things as recommended
practice, duty or conduct, and to refer to absolutes of justice etc. More
appropriately, in a spiritual context, it means essence or essential quality
or nature. Our own dharma refers to what we ought to be doing with our
lives in order to move forward on some path towards realization of our
Self.
e) n, n
Finally, in this group, is the one sounded through the nose (anunAsika).
This is pronounced just as in English, as for example in … er … ‘nose’.
The word nAma is a simple word, meaning ‘name’, as in the phrase
nAma-rUpa, the ‘name and form’ of the creation that is, in reality, non-
dual, not separate from ourselves and not actually created, according to
Advaita.
Quite often the ‘n’ at the end of a word will be replaced by the nasal
in the same group as the consonant that follows. This is because the
rules that govern how letters combine are designed so that sound flows
smoothly without gaps or stutters. It would be extremely difficult to
make the correct sound of one of these anunAsika consonants,
immediately followed by the correct sound of another consonant, unless
the two are in the same group – try it later!
Thus, an example of a word with which you are likely to be familiar,
and which uses this letter, is ‘satsa~Nga’. This would typically be

written as ‘satsang’ in books for the Western market. It refers to the
‘good company’ of associating with like-minded people, and especially
with ones who are Self-realized. It is used for the question-and-answer
sessions provided by the teachers who currently tour the Western world.
The anunAsika used has to be ‘~N’ because it is combined with the
immediately following ‘g’ and, since this is in the first, guttural, group of
consonants, so must the nasal letter be.
5. The fifth group of consonants (labial)
The final group of the main consonants is sounded at the lips. They are
called ‘labial’ and pronounced with the lips in the position as if to say
‘woo’ (or, as some say, as if to kiss a baby).
a) p, p
The first is ‘p‘ just like our ‘p’, as in ‘put’. The theory of karma tells us
that we are effectively ‘rewarded’ as a result of ‘good’ or unselfish acts
and ‘punished’ by ‘bad’ or selfish ones, if not in this life, then in future
ones. The result of good action is called puNya; the result of bad action is
called pApa. Both begin with this labial character.
b) ph, ph
Then comes the corresponding breathy ‘ph‘, as in uphill. In respect of the
karma just mentioned, books will often speak of the ‘fruit’ of action
being either good or bad. The Sanskrit for ‘fruit’ is phalam, beginning
with this letter, and ‘fruit of action’ is karmaphalam. You have to
remember not to pronounce this as ‘falam’, thinking that the ‘ph’ sound
is the same as in English!
c) b, b
Next is ‘b‘, as in ‘bad’. buddha means ‘awake’ or ‘enlightened’. (Note that

this word also contains both d and dh from the dental group, in a
compound consonant.)
d) bh, bh
The mahAprANa ‘bh‘ is pronounced as in ‘abhor’. The Bhagavad Gita
begins with this letter. bhagavat means ‘prosperous, happy’. gItA, when
correctly spelt, does not in fact contain short vowels but long ones,
which we will look at in just a moment – it means ‘sung’. A gItA is
usually a philosophical or religious doctrine in the form of a sacred song
or poem. Note that the ‘t‘ at the end of bhagavat becomes a ‘d‘ when it
joins with gItA to become bhagavadgItA.
e) m, m
Finally, the anunAsika in this group is ‘m‘, pronounced as in ‘man’. An
example of its use is the word manas, which strictly speaking means
‘mind’ in its widest sense, including intellect, understanding, perception,
conscience etc. In Hindu philosophies in particular though, it is used in a
much more specific sense. It refers to that part of the mind responsible
for transmitting information from the senses to the part responsible for
discrimination and judgment (buddhi) and then sending instructions back
again to the arms and legs etc. Unfortunately, manas tends not to restrict
itself to these proper functions but gets involved in ‘thinking’ – and this
is the cause of many of our problems!
6. Table of basic consonants
The table of the five groups of consonants, with the corresponding vowel
shown in Column 1 for reference, is as shown below:
Table 1 – The Basic Consonants

This table will be expanded later to show the entire alphabet.
C. The Long Vowels
The five simple vowels that we looked at above are all short vowels –
hrasva. This means that, when pronounced, the sound is made as short as
possible while still being distinguishable – quite short! Each of these
vowels can be sounded long and each long form is treated as effectively
a separate vowel. The duration of the spoken sound is very precise. If the
short form is treated as one measure, then the long form should be two
measures. (A measure is called a mAtrA in Sanskrit.) The long form is
called dIrgha and the ‘I‘ here is an example of the dIrgha form of ‘i‘. In
ITRANS, the vowel is shown as long either by putting two of them, as in
diirgha, or by capitalizing it thus: dIrgha. In Romanized transliteration,
the long form is represented by a macron above the letter, i.e. Ī in this
example. To maintain the format of the presentation, we will look at
each vowel in turn, giving an example.
1. aa or A, ā
When the vowels become long, the pronunciation naturally changes
slightly, too. Thus, the short ‘a‘ becomes ‘aa‘ or ‘A‘ and sounds like the
‘a’ in ‘car’. The difference between short and long vowels can be
appreciated by comparing ‘cut’ and ‘car’. The word Atman, referring to
one’s true nature, the Self, which in Advaita is the same as the universal
Self, brahman, begins with a long ‘A’, while the second ‘a’ in the word is
short.
2. ii or I, ī

The short ‘i‘ becomes ‘ii‘ or ‘I‘ and sounds like the double ‘ee’ sound in
words like ‘beet’. The difference between short and long vowels can be
appreciated by comparing ‘bit’ and ‘beet’. The gItA, meaning ‘sung’, has
already been mentioned. It is a common abbreviation for the
bhagavadgItA, though there is also the other famous Advaita text – the
Astavakra Gita. (The correct transliteration of this would be aShTAvakra
gItA but we have not yet encountered some of the other letters.)
3. R^I or RRI, ṝ
The short ‘R^i‘ or ‘RRi‘ becomes ‘R^I‘ or ‘RRI’. Here there is no option of
having two small i’s. The Romanized version follows the same rule as for
the other vowels, simply adding a macron. The dIrgha vowel is sounded
as for the hrasva but with an ‘ee’ ending instead of ‘i’. This vowel
normally only occurs in the endings of some parts of some nouns and
since this book is not addressing grammatical aspects, we can safely
ignore it.
4. L^I or LLI, ḹ
Similarly, the short ‘L^i‘ or ‘LLi‘ becomes ‘L^I‘ or ‘LLI’ but, since there are
no words at all known to contain it, this hardly seems to matter! Its
existence seems merely to satisfy the need for logical completeness.
5. uu or U, ū
Finally, short ‘u‘ becomes long ‘uu‘ or ‘U‘ and sounds like the double ‘oo’
in ‘root’. The difference between short and long vowels can be
appreciated by comparing ‘put’ and ‘root’. The word sUtra uses the long
form. It literally means a ‘thread’ or ‘string’. It is usually used to refer to
the terse verse-form used in scriptures to formulate the essence of some
philosophical thought. Here the sense is of a thread that holds
everything together like the beads of a necklace. Note that verses in the

Vedas are usually referred to as mantra-s, since they are often used as
objects of meditation. You should also note here the practice of adding
an English ‘-s’ to a Sanskrit word to make it into a plural. This is to avoid
having to learn the endings of nouns, which would depend on
declension, gender and number. Here, for example, the correct plural of
sUtra should be sUtrANi.
6. The even longer vowels
The vowels can be sounded for longer than two measures, in which case
they are called pluta, meaning ‘prolonged’. In this case, they are written
with a number ‘3’ below and just to the right of the letter, both in
Devanagari and in the Romanized version: ‘a3‘. a3 in ITRANS generates
the Devanagari character with a (Devanagari) 3 adjacent to it rather
than as a subscript. Having noted its existence, you really do not have to
remember it; it is not usually encountered in words, being more relevant
to chanting etc.
The well-known Sanskrit word ‘OM’ does employ a pluta sound for the
‘o’ but ITRANS uses the capital letters shown (OM) for this character and
not the number 3.
One use of the prolonged vowel is similar to the corresponding usage
in English, namely when calling someone from a distance. When rAma is
down the road and we want to catch his attention we might call
‘rAAAAAmaaaaa!’ or ra3ma3.
D. The Complex Vowels and Additional Sounds
We have not quite finished with vowels yet, as you will probably have
realized, if you are at all familiar with Sanskrit terms. There are four
vowels that result from combining the sounds of the three simple
vowels: a, i and u. In some grammar books you will see them referred to
as diphthongs.

1. e, e
When a is allowed to continue sounding beyond its natural, short
measure, you get the prolonged ‘a3‘ sound. If this is allowed to continue
sounding and you then raise the back of the tongue towards the ‘i‘
position, but stop before you get there, you should hear the sound of the
first compound vowel, ‘e‘. It’s a bit like the ‘a’ in ‘mate’ but not so open
as speakers of British English would usually pronounce this. ‘e‘ can be
regarded as the combination of ‘a‘ and ‘i‘. It is sounded with the dIrgha
measure, as are all of these four compound vowels, since they are
effectively two vowel-sounds combined. It occurs in the word deva,
meaning ‘god’ and, no, we haven’t yet met that ‘v’ character!
2. ai, ai
If, after making the above sound for ‘e‘, you relax the tongue back
towards the ‘a‘ position but again stop before you get there, there is
another sound formed as a compound between ‘a‘ and ‘e‘. It sounds like
the ‘ie’ in ‘pie’. It is written ‘ai‘ and it occurs in the dualistic philosophy
dvaita, and of course the non-dualistic one advaita. The letter ‘a‘ in front
of a word always negates it. Thus, vidya means ‘knowledge’ and avidya
means ‘ignorance’. (‘v’ and ‘y’ will be dealt with in the very next
section.)
3. o, o
If the sound ‘a‘ is made and allowed to continue to sound while the
mouth is slowly closed, the sound made before the lips come together is
‘u‘. If these two sounds are made together or, more practically speaking,
if the sound corresponding to the mid-point between these two is made,
the sound that emerges is ‘o‘ (as in ‘boat’). Since you are reading this
book, you are presumably a spiritual seeker and your aim in life is

therefore Self-realization, enlightenment or liberation. The Sanskrit for
‘liberation’ is mokSha.
4. au, au
In a similar way to that described above for ai, if the mouth moves from
the ‘a‘ (open-mouthed) position to the ‘o‘ (partially closed) position but
stops halfway, there is a sound similar to ‘ow’ in ‘town’. This is written
‘au‘ in ITRANS. Gaudapada was mentioned above as being the author of
the Mandukya Upanishad but I did not give the full transcription. Since
we have now covered all of the letters in his name, here it is –
gauDapAda, giving an example of this compound vowel as well as a long
and short ‘a’ and the two types of ‘d’.
5. M or .n, ṃ or ṁ
All of the 14 vowels have now been covered but there are two final
letters to be added to complete the group of 16 so-called mAtRRikA
(literally meaning ‘divine mothers’ but used in the sense of written
characters that have magical powers. The 16 vowels are also sometimes
called shakti, which also means ‘power’ or ‘strength’.) These are not
really vowels themselves but act as modifications to a preceding vowel.
Note that, because of this, if they are talked about as letters in their own
right, they assume an ‘a’ before rather than after.
The first of these is called an anusvAra, meaning ‘after sound’, and is
represented in Devanagari by a dot positioned above the preceding
vowel. It is written as ‘M‘ or ‘.n‘ and is sounded through the nose alone
(whereas the other nasal sounds are made with nose and throat). In
Romanized methods, it may be represented with a dot either above or
below the ‘m’. The best-known Sanskrit–nglish dictionary, by Monier-
Williams, uses the ‘below’ variant, while the Itranslator software
mentioned later uses the ‘above’ variant.

The ‘overdot’ is produced in ITRANS by either M or .n but the latter
should be used when the symbol is required in the middle of a word and
the following letter is a consonant other than a labial one, where the
former should be used. This helps us remember to sound it with the
correct nasal. I will normally use M in all cases, however, since the
dictionary software utility which I will tell you about later, for example,
does not recognize the .n construction.
The anusvAra is not a letter in its own right but a replacement for the
letter m at the end of a word or in special cases for m or n in the middle
of a compound. For the sake of euphonic harmony (called saMdhi, and
discussed later) the anusvAra is replaced by the nasal of the family of the
consonant that follows it. So the anusvAra at the end of a word will
change to ~N if the word following begins with a guttural letter, to ~n
if followed by a word beginning with a palatal letter, N if followed by a
word starting with a cerebral letter, etc. There are three letters that do
not require a change in the anusvAra: sh, Sh and s. If these follow, the
anusvAra remains in the form of an anusvAra and is sounded through the
nose only.
An example with which you will almost certainly be familiar is
saMsAra, referring to the ‘eternal round’ of birth and death that we
apparently endure in the phenomenal world.
6. H, ḥ
The other special letter that is not really part of the alphabet is called a
‘visarga‘, which means a ‘sending out’, ‘emission’ etc. It is represented by
two dots (like a colon) placed to the right of the associated letter in
Devanagari script. It is written ‘H‘ and it has the effect of adding a brief,
breathing out, ‘unvoiced’ sound after the vowel.
The visarga is a replacement for the letter ‘s’ at the end of a word and
is often changed to another letter depending on what precedes or
follows. In particular, you will find a visarga at the end of a sentence or

before the letters sh, Sh, s as well as k, kh, p, ph. In a number of
traditions the visarga is sounded as an echo of the vowel that precedes it
so rAmaH will be pronounced ‘rAmaha’, hariH as ‘harihi’, guruH as
‘guruhu etc. Before a p or ph, it takes on the sound of a gentle ‘f’ so that
pUrNamadaH pUrNamidam is sounded ‘pUrNamada-f-pUrNamidam’.
Before k or kh it takes on a sound a bit like hissing or gently clearing the
throat.
The Sanskrit for the overall ‘organ’ of mind, referring to the seat of
thought and feeling, is called antaHkaraNa. It consists of the intellect
(buddhi), responsible for discrimination and judgment; the memory
(chitta); the function (manas) responsible for transmitting information
from the senses and back to the organs of action; and the ego
(aha~NkAra).
So, to recap, the 16 mAtRRikA are as follows:
Table 2 – The 16 mAtRRikA
E. The Semi-Vowels
There are two small groups of consonants left. The first of these is the
group of four so-called ‘semi-vowels’ or antaHstha. They are formed by
combining the sound of each of the four main vowels other than ‘a’ with
the sound of ‘a’ itself. Each should be sounded at the appropriate mouth
position, corresponding to the vowel that forms its starting point.
1. y, y
If you sound ‘i‘ and then immediately change the mouth position to that
of the ‘a‘ sound while still making the sound, what emerges sounds like
‘ya’ and this is the first semi-vowel: ‘y‘ as in ‘yes’. This is the semi-vowel
at the palatal position. There is none at the guttural position since this is

the position of ‘a’ itself. Everyone will know the word yoga, even if not
spiritually inclined.
2. r, r
If you sound the vowel ‘RRi‘ in the cerebral position, with the tongue
towards the roof of the mouth, and combine it with the ‘a’ sound, you
get ‘r‘ as in ‘rat’. rajas is the second of the three guNa; the quality
associated with activity and passion.
3. l, l
If you sound the vowel ‘LLi‘ in the dental position and combine it with
the ‘a‘ sound, you get ‘l‘ as in ‘love’. The idea of God’s creating the
universe in order to ‘play’ or ‘amuse’ himself is called lIlA – two ‘l’ semi-
vowels together with dIrgha versions of ‘i’ and ‘a’.
4. v, v
Finally, if you sound ‘u‘ in the labial position and combine this with an
‘a‘, you get ‘v‘, which is sounded as the ‘w’ in ‘wag’. Note that Americans
seem to prefer to ignore this logical derivation and pronounce it as ‘va’
in ‘van’. But then it is also somewhat illogical to write it as ‘v’ while
sounding it as ‘w’. I must confess that, having started out pronouncing it
correctly, I now usually pronounce it as ‘v’, since most people don’t
understand you otherwise. (Not that most understand anyway!)
The word vedAnta, often written with a capital ‘V’, literally means
‘end’ or ‘culmination’ (anta) of the Vedas, since that is where most of the
Upanishads will be found. The four Vedas are the documents that form
the essence of Hindu philosophy. The first part of the Vedas – called
karmakANDa – relates to ritualistic teachings, which are given primacy
by pUrvamimAmsa philosophy. The last part is called j~nAnakANDa and

it is this that brings enlightenment according to Advaita. veda itself
actually means ‘knowledge’ but it is not really correct to say that
vedAnta means ‘end of knowledge’. The four Vedas are the documents
that form the essence of Hindu philosophy.
F. The Sibilants
Almost last of all in the Sanskrit alphabet are three sibilants or sss-
sounds. A sibilant is called UShman in Sanskrit, and the ‘Sh’ in the
middle of this word is the second of these three letters. They are in the
palatal, cerebral and dental positions, respectively. In theory, there are
also ones in the other two positions but these are so rare that they are
invariably ignored.
1. sh, ś
In the palatal position, there is ‘sh‘ sounded by making a shh sound in
that mouth position. It sounds like the ‘sh’ in ‘cash’. I have just
mentioned the Vedas as being the main source for Hindu philosophies.
These are often referred to as shruti, which literally means ‘hearing’ and
refers to the fact that they are essentially orally transmitted wisdom,
passed on from generation to generation.
2. shh or Sh, ṣ
The second, in the cerebral position, is ‘shh‘ or ‘Sh‘, similar to the ‘sh’
sound in ‘shall’ but with the tongue up to the roof of the mouth.
Continuing the theme of the Vedas, these ‘shruti‘ are said to be
‘apauruSheya‘, using this second sibilant in the middle of the word. This
literally means ‘not coming from human beings’ but is usually translated
as ‘unauthored’.
3. s, s

Finally, there is the dental ‘s’, sounding like the normal ‘s’ in ‘sand’. The
spiritual disciplines that we follow in search of our goal of Self-
realization are called sAdhana. This means ‘leading straight to a goal’
and is used to talk about any sort of spiritual path in this sense.
G. h, h
This brings us to the last letter in the alphabet, h, sounding as you would
expect, as ‘h’ in ‘hat’. It is sometimes considered another sibilant and is
also called UShman, which literally means ‘heated’. The word ‘aham‘,
meaning ‘I’, uses this letter. Note that in most Anglicized words where
an ‘h’ appears after another consonant, such as dharma, Shankara,
chakra, Katha Upanishad, there will not be a letter ‘h’ present in the
Sanskrit word. In these examples, the actual letters are ‘dh‘ in dharma,
‘sh‘ in sha~Nkara, ‘ch‘ in chakra and ‘th‘ in katha. It is in those words
where the ‘h’ appears, either on its own as in aham or before another
consonant, as in brahma, that it really will be a ‘h‘.
It should be noted that this letter also has characteristics of the semi-
vowels and is sometimes listed with those rather than with the sibilants.
You will see later that, in the shivasUtrANi, it is actually grouped with
the semi-vowels: ha-ya-va-ra-T.
H. The Complete Alphabet
The order of the alphabet, if you want to look up a word in the
dictionary, is as follows. The 16 mAtRRikA are at the beginning, in the
order as shown in Table 2 earlier. Next come the five main groups of
consonants, in the order guttural, palatal, cerebral, dental and labial.
Then come the four semi-vowels, the three sibilants and finally h, 49
characters in total. Table 3 summarizes the alphabet in columns of
similar sounds.
Table 3 – The Complete Alphabet

The ‘a‘ sounds, made almost in the throat, are called ‘guttural’ or
kaNThya. The ‘i‘ sounds, made a little further forward using the hard
palate, are called ‘palatal’ or tAlavya. The ‘RRI‘ sounds have the tongue
beginning near the roof of the mouth and are called ‘cerebral’ or
mUrdhanya. The ‘LLI‘ sounds are made behind the upper front teeth and
are called ‘dental’ or dantya. The ‘u‘ sounds are made with the lips
pouting in a small circle and are called ‘labial’ or oShThya.

Level 2 The Devanagari Script
This level will now repeat the previous material but introduce each of
the Sanskrit letters in the correct Devanagari script. We will also look at
some of the ways in which letter forms vary depending on their position
in the word and upon the nature of any adjacent letters.
A. The Five Basic (Simple) Vowels, Short and Long
1. a, a; aa or A, ā
(The heading here is the format that I will use for each letter in this
level. It should be understood as: a in ITRANS, a in Roman; aa or A in
ITRANS, ā in Roman) The Devanagari form of this letter was shown
earlier, the only one that we have met so far. When it appears at the
beginning of a word or when being written as a ‘stand-alone’ letter, it is
written as follows:
This is the simple, short (hrasva) form. The long (dIrgha) form looks very
similar:
You will probably have seen Sanskrit script at some time. If not, it would
be surprising that you are reading this book. This being the case, you
will have realized that, when characters are joined together to make a
word, there is a continuous line at the top of the word spanning all of
the characters. If you have looked at the scriptures, you may have
thought that some of the words are exceedingly long! In fact, words are
frequently joined together, depending on the nature of the sounds

ending one word and beginning the next. Also, many words are formed
as compounds, similar to those in the German language. In Sanskrit, this
is called samAsa and can result in very long words that are effectively a
mixture of nouns and adjectives.
Written Sanskrit is very efficient in its use of space and ‘shorthand’ is
frequently used. Accordingly, in the dIrgha form of a here, all that is
done is to add an extra downstroke to the hrasva form and extend the
bar at the top. Thus, you can see that the hrasva form has a single
downstroke and the dIrgha form has two downstrokes.
It has already been noted that all consonants, when sounded on their
own, are sounded with the vowel ‘a‘ by convention. In fact when writing
the consonant ‘m’ it is strictly written as follows (with the halanta stroke
beneath):
This cannot be pronounced until the letter a (or any other vowel) is
added. The effect of this is for the halanta sign to be removed. So ma
looks like this:
Thus, the word maha, for example, meaning ‘great’, ‘strong’, ‘abundant’
etc., is made up of the letters m + a + h + a.
It is the word that forms part of maharShi in Ramana Maharshi, for
example. Here, maharShi means maha RRiShi or ‘great sage or saint’. The
letters in maha will be sounded ma and ha.
The character for ma is: 
and that for ha is: 
so that the word maha is written: 
Another letter ahead of its place in the development is y or ya. This is
written:

To return to the discussion of a, we can now see the use of the extra
downstroke to lengthen the vowel in the word mAyA. This is usually just
written ‘maya’ in Anglicized texts. It refers to the force that is
supposedly wielded by Ishvara to create the universe. The Devanagari
representation is:
which should be understood as consisting of:
The single downstroke following a consonant (or a combination of
consonants) means that it/they is/are sounded with A, instead of just a.
Appendix 3 looks at each of the vowels and how a consonant changes
when used with them.
Before moving on, it must be mentioned that the principal Sanskrit–
nglish dictionary, by M. Monier-Williams, uses a rather different version
of this character. It is unfortunate that the very first letter to be
encountered should occur in variants but it is as well that you be warned
that this does occur for a few letters, though this does not usually cause
any problems. This alternative character for ‘a‘ looks like this:
And it adds a second vertical line at the right in just the same way when
made into the dIrgha vowel. Appendix 2 lists those letters that may be
found using alternative forms to those used in this book and shows these
different forms for comparison. In the main text, I will only show
variants where these are found in Monier-Williams, since this is a likely
reference for readers. The other source of variants is the School of
Economic Science in England. They do have a few variations on the
letter forms most commonly used elsewhere.
2. i, i; ii or I, Ī
The Devanagari form of the hrasva form of this character is:

 = i and the dIrgha form is  = ii or I.
The short form is like the letter ‘s’ hanging from the top bar, with a curl
in its tail. For lengthening the vowel, a ‘hook’ shape, open to the right, is
added to the top of the letter. It is this element that is taken and
modified in order to represent the use of this letter when it combines
with a consonant. An example of the short i in a word is milita, meaning
‘met, encountered’ or ‘connected, combined with’.
In combination with a consonant, short i –  – is written as 
 and
placed in front of the consonant.
Thus, milita is written:
The three consonants in this word – m, l, and t – will be encountered
later.
The significant point to glean from this example is the representation
of mi and li. What is done is to put a vertical line before the consonant,
and then join the top of the line to the top of the consonant by a ‘hook’
form similar to that which distinguishes the long vowel on its own.
There might be some concern at the apparent reversal of the symbols
here – the symbol of i being written before the symbols of m and l – so
that the mi and li appear to be read from right to left, as it were. The
simple explanation for this is that we need to distinguish the short i from
the long I in combination.
In combination  is written as  and placed after the consonant.
The word jIva is used to refer to what is often called the ‘embodied
Self’, the mistaken identification of our true nature with a limited body
and mind.
The letter j is obviously 

After this is added an extra vertical line which is then joined back to
the top of the j. Since the j is now sounded with a vowel, the halant sign
is dropped. The letter  is a simple (halanta) v joined to a short a.
3. R^i or RRi, ṛ; R^I or RRI, ṝ
The Devanagari forms of the hrasva and pluta versions of this letter are:
Here, the key part to remember is the ‘hook’ (or double-hook for the
dIrgha form) hanging down at the right of the letter. It is this part alone
that is used when the vowel appears in combination with a consonant.
Thus, if the vowel is attached to the consonant k to become kRRi, for
example, the Devanagari form changes as below:
 changes to 
i.e. a simple hook is added to the bottom of the vertical line of the main
character, k (and the halanta symbol dropped). The word kRRita means
‘done’, ‘performed’, ‘made ready’ etc. and is written:
The letter t – 
 – appears with a following (and its halanta sign
dropped), while the ‘hook’ at the bottom of the k indicates that it is
sounded with RRi.
It would be useful to add a warning here, incidentally. The vowel RRi
must not be confused with the semi-vowel r. There is a word kriyA for
example, which means ‘doing’, ‘performing’ etc. It has no RRi vowel
present at all but uses the consonant k and semi-vowel r together with
the vowel i. If ever in any doubt, this latter form is the more likely.
Remember that the vowel RRi is not very common, RRI is even less
common, LLi is hardly ever seen and LLI is never seen.
4. LLi or L^i, Ị; LLI or L^I, ḹ
The Devanagari forms of the hrasva and dIrgha versions of this letter are:

but, given what has been said above, I will not provide any examples. It
is sufficient to say that, in the unlikely event of these vowels appearing
in combination with a consonant, the entire letter is used beneath the
consonant. Thus, in combination with the letter k, for example:
 – k becomes 
 – kLLi
5. u, u; uu or U, ū
The Devanagari form of the hrasva form is:
 and the dIrgha form is: 
Here is another way of modifying the basic letter form to signify a
different vowel sound. When it comes to using this vowel in the middle
of a word, following a consonant, again we do not use the letter itself
but a shorthand version. The short u sound is represented by a ‘9’ shape,
lying on its back, as it were, beneath the preceding consonant. If it is a
long U sound, then the shape is inverted.
I will use the word guru as an illustration here because you will have
to find out eventually that the letter r does not always behave itself and
follow the rules. In the case of sounding with u (and U), instead of
adding the symbol beneath the letter like all of the other consonants, it
forms its own specially modified symbol. Thus, the gu part of the word is
as expected.
The letter g looks like: 
 as a pure consonant
and 
 if combined with u.
The letter r is written  as a pure consonant
but  with a u.
Thus the word guru is written: 
The classical five gross elements (ether, air, fire, water, earth) are
called the mahAbhUtAni (plural), with any one of them being a

mahAbhUta. The Devanagari for this is:
with the ‘9’ shape lying ‘face down’ underneath the bh character,
It is worth noting at this point the similarity of the symbol for halanta
and the symbol for long ‘U‘. The former doesn’t have a curl –  –
whereas the latter has: 
So make a note of the distinction between the pure consonant 
and the bh combined with long U – 
 – in which the halanta sign is
dropped and replaced by the symbol for U.
B. The Five Main Groups of Consonants
The Sanskrit term for consonants is vya~njana. One of the meanings of
this is simply ‘a consonant’ but it also has the sense of an ‘indication’ or
a ‘decoration’ (of the basic vowel sound). They are formed by
positioning the mouth (throat, tongue or lips) in such a way as to ‘stop’
or modify the sound of the vowel in various ways. These are called the
‘outer efforts’. There are more subtle changes to the body involved in
modifying the vowel. These are the ‘inner efforts’. To be able to discern
the difference requires very fine observation of the changes to the body.
Try this experiment: Shut your eyes and get poised to make the sound
ka. Without making even the slightest sound, note the slightly pinched
state of the throat; note how the tongue lies flat but is also tensed in
anticipation. Now observe the slight tension between the eyebrows and
forehead, and also observe what’s happening in the areas of the chest
and belly – how they are tensed in preparation for making the sound.
Relax, breathe out …
Now, without making a sound, change the set-up as though to make
the sound ga. Note the comparative relaxation of forehead and tongue.
Note how the bottom of the throat and chest seem to come into play and

the belly relaxes.
Relax, breathe out …
Go from ka to ga in this way until you are clear about what is
different.
The very set-up is the consonant. Looked at this way, we understand
the consonant to be merely the bodily condition through which we
sound the vowels. The consonant has no sound of its own. That’s why it
should strictly be written with the halanta or virAma symbol. Without
this symbol, we know that the short ‘a‘ has been added so that the
consonant can manifest.
1. The guttural or kaNThya consonants
The first group uses the same mouth position as a and takes place at the
back of the mouth where it becomes the throat – the ‘guttural’ or
kaNThya – position.
a) k, k
The first consonant of this group is written:
 (or 
 when a is added) – An example is kAma, meaning ‘desire’ or
‘longing’: 
 (Note the extra vertical line for the long A.)
Although it cannot be sounded on its own without a vowel, it could
occur at the end of the word (as ‘k’ in ‘rack’ for example). In this case, it
would have the virAma sign after it. This looks like:
 – The verb lak means to ‘taste’ or ‘obtain’: 
This use of the virAma applies to all consonants. Note, incidentally, that
it is the form of the letter + a that is used for a consonant being
pronounced when sounding the alphabet – this is by convention only
and has no other significance. From here on we will write the letters
with the ‘a’ added (and the halanta sign dropped).

b) kh, kh
The second consonant in the kaNThya group is the mahAprANa ‘k’ sound,
written:
An example of its use is given in connection with the next letter.
c) g, g
The third in this group is written:
The word khaga was given as an example of kh in Level 1. It means
‘moving in air’, or more specifically, ‘bird’:
Strictly speaking, when referring to nouns, account ought to be taken of
the fact that Sanskrit nouns have gender. khaga is in fact masculine and
would be written khagaH in the nominative case, with a visarga (see
Level 1 Section D 6):
It has to be recognized that Sanskrit is similar to languages such as Latin,
in the sense that nouns change their endings according to the part of
speech being played in the sentence. Verbs, too, conjugate in a similar
way with endings dependent upon tense and number (which can be
‘one’, ‘two’ or ‘more than two’). But I will not be addressing any of these
aspects in this book.
d) gh, gh
The fourth guttural consonant is written:
We have already met the word laghu, meaning ‘light’ or ‘short’ (and the

opposite of the more frequently encountered guru). It is written:
e) ~N, ṅ
The final consonant in this group is the nasal, anunAsika, ~N, and it is
written:
The word that is used to give a name to the way in which our true Self
becomes identified with something (object or idea) in the outside world
is usually written ‘ahankara’ in Anglicized texts. It is often used
interchangeably with our word ‘ego’. In fact it derives from two words –
aham meaning ‘I’ and kAra meaning ‘doer’ – the effective interpretation
being ‘I am the doer’.
Now you will see if you look at some Sanskrit sentences that many of
the words seem very long. This is because individual small words,
adjacent to each other in a sentence, are combined together unless a
spoken syllable naturally coincides with the end of a word. Also, there
are a number of rules governing the way in which various sounds
combine when they appear next to each other. These prevent, for
example, the situation where one word ends in a vowel and the next
word begins with one, by merging the two. For example, if the first ends
in a or A and the next begins with a or A then the two words are joined
with just one A. These rules are comprehensive and logical so that the
sorts of problems encountered in other languages are avoided. I will
mention a few of these rules later.
Accordingly, in this example, when aham and kAra come together, it
would not sound natural to make the ‘m’ sound and immediately follow
it with a ‘k’. The Sanskrit k is sounded at the back of the throat and it
sounds far more natural to sound the kaNThya ~N since it is the same
position. Try sounding them both and see. The resulting sound of the
two consonants combined is similar to the Egyptian ‘ankh’ sounded at

the back of the throat. So the resulting word is sounded aha~NkAra. In
fact, the Devanagari script is not usually written to reflect this, even
though it is, strictly speaking, the correct representation. This is because
of the anusvAra that was dealt with in Level 1 Section D 5. This is often
used in the middle of a word whenever we want to make an anunAsika
consonant whose precise sound will depend upon the consonant that
follows. And regardless of this sound, it can always be represented by
the dot placed above the preceding consonant. Devanagari is very
economical! Thus, this word appears as ahaMkAra. (ITRANS allows you
to represent this instead as aha.nkAra. This generates exactly the same
Devanagari but reminds us that this is an internal anunAsika followed by
a consonant which is not a labial.)
The first letter is a – 
which this time appears in its full glory since it is the first letter in the
word.
The next letter is h, briefly met earlier – 
followed by 
 giving us 
Next we have 
This is replaced by anusvAra and  gets a dot above:
The next letter is k – 
 which is followed by A to give kA, written:
Finally, the last letter, also encountered earlier, is the semi-vowel r,
followed by a and written:
which completes the word –
 (replaced by anusvAra) + 
 =
ahaMkAra – 
This then completes the first column of the 25 main consonants, the
sparsha vya~njana – the guttural or kaNThya family.

2. The palatal or tAlavya consonants
The second group forms the sounds in the back part of the mouth but
not the throat. Using the same tongue and mouth position as for the i
vowel, these use the back of the tongue and the rear of the mouth; they
are called ‘palatal’ or tAlavya. They follow the same pattern as the
previous group (as do all five of these groups of consonants) in that the
first and third members are alpaprANa, the second and fourth are
mahAprANa and the fifth is anunAsika.
a) ch (or c), c
The first, with the letter a appended, is written:
The word chit refers to pure awareness or Consciousness, as in the word
sat-chit-Ananda, more correctly written sachchidAnanda when the rules
for combining words are taken into account, referring to the being-
consciousness-bliss nature of the non-dual Absolute of Advaita. The word
chit is written:
The ch is followed by i and the virAma after the letter t indicates that it is
a pure consonant.
b) Ch (or chh), ch
The second character in the tAlavya group, Cha, is written:
In ‘everyday’ speech, even by those who actually have some knowledge
of Sanskrit, the difference in pronunciation between ch and Ch will
probably be indistinguishable. Ch should have a little more breath
following the un-aspirated ‘ch’ sound. Chid is spelt with a Ch and means

‘to cut’.
 – Chid
c) j, j
The third letter in this group (followed by a) is written:
A simple example is the word meaning ‘moving’ or ‘living’ but more
often used for ‘world’, ‘humankind’ or even ‘universe’ – jagat. This is
written:
Here you see ja and ga (both sounded with a) and a ‘halanta‘ t (i.e. with
a virAma since this is not sounded with a).
d) jh, jh
The fourth letter, not a very frequently occurring one, is written (with a
added):
and the example used in Level 1 was jhalA, meaning ‘girl’:
The letter form used by the Sanskrit–English dictionary looks rather
different:
– as used in Monier-Williams’ dictionary. [Note that there are a few
letter forms for which no computerized font could be found. This is one of
them. Accordingly, they have been hand-drawn and scanned as image
files and will not match the quality of the other characters.]

e) ~n (or JN or J), ñ
The final letter in this group, with a appended, is the nasal:
This is another infrequent letter. It is also one which rarely exists, except
in conjunction with another consonant. We can have the word meaning
‘the letter ~n’ as earlier:
 – ~nakAra
Although there is a separate section later on devoted to conjunct
consonants, it will do no harm to introduce one here. The word
kA~nchana means ‘gold’, ‘money’ or ‘wealth’ or, as an adjective, it
means ‘golden’. It is written:
 – kA~nchana and the structure is easily seen: 
 (kA) is followed
by 
 (~n) on top of 
 (cha) and then  (na) The ~n appearing above
cha is pronounced ~ncha. (If the ch were on top of the ~na, then it
would be pronounced ch~na).
3. The cerebral or mUrdhanya consonants
The third group forms the sounds with the tip of the tongue pointing up
to the roof of the mouth. With mouth and tongue position similar to that
for pronouncing the RRi vowel, they are called ‘cerebral’ or mUrdhanya.
All of this third (middle) group have a dot underneath the Romanized
character including the ṋ vowel if you remember – this makes it easy to
recognize the letter is mUrdhanya. None of the cerebral consonants are
very common. Two pages of the 1300+ pages of Monier-Williams cover
all of the words beginning with them. If ever in any doubt as to whether
a ‘t’, ‘th’, ‘d’ ‘dh’ or ‘n’ sound is cerebral or dental, put your bets on
dental every time!
a) T, ṭ

This (together with a – definitely not going to repeat this for later
consonants!) is written:
This is more common in the middle of words and especially after the
sibilant, Sh. Since the enjoyment of conjunct consonants is being
reserved for later, however, here is a word without any:
 – Tagara – three simple letters,  (Ta) 
 (ga) and  (ra), joined
together. Not a terribly useful word, though; it means ‘squint-eyed’.
b) Th, ṭh
This character is:
The Katha Upanishad, one of the ten major Upanishads, has this letter,
and its correct transliteration is kaTha and the Th is, in fact, a single
letter and not two. kaTha literally refers to the name of a sage and
founder of a school of philosophy. It is also worth mentioning here that,
when we speak of this document, it should not strictly be ‘Katha
Upanishad’ at all. It is normal for several successive words to be joined
together in Sanskrit and if a Sanskrit word ending in a vowel is followed
by one beginning with a vowel, there will usually be a change of some
sort. Here, the ‘a’ and the ‘u’ combine to make an ‘o’ sound and the
correct title is kaThopaniShad. The representation of this vowel will be
dealt with in the next section, when we have completed the five main
groups of consonants.
kaTha is written:
c) D, ḍ
This is written:

If you are extremely alert, you will immediately notice that this
character looks exactly like that for the nasal ~N in the first group
(kaNThya) except that the dot to the right is missing. The word Damaru
is a sacred drum, shaped like an hour glass, used by the god Shiva:
 – Damaru
d) Dh, ḍh
This is written:
The word DhAla means a ‘shield’ – 
e) N, ṇ
This is written:
Note that it has its own ‘built in’ vertical to the right, which has nothing
to do with its being sounded with an a.
 N;  – Na; 
 – NA; 
 – Ni and so on.
The word kaNa is an adjective relating to anything very small, such as
‘a grain of dust’, ‘a flake of snow’, ‘a drop of water’ or ‘a spark of fire’:
 – kaNa
This is another letter having an alternative form. Though less
frequently encountered, it is the one used in Monier-Williams so you
should learn to recognize it:
4. The dental or dantya consonants
a) t, t
This is written:

and was seen earlier in jagat and tagara. The word tad means ‘that’ and,
because a d frequently changes to a t at the end of a word (as will be
discussed later), this word often appears as tat:
 – tat
b) th, th
The mahAprANa tha is written:
The word thUthU means ‘the imitative sound of spitting’, while thaithai
means ‘the imitative sound of a musical instrument’ (one wonders
which!). We will meet the Devanagari representation for the complex
vowel ai in a minute but here it is shown in combination with a
consonant:
 – thUthU; 
 – thaithai
c) d, d
This is written:
not to be confused with the cerebral
 Dh
We have had the word Devanagari so many times now that it is about
time you saw the actual Devanagari for it!
Although we have not yet dealt with v and r in this section, we had v in
jIva and r in guru and kAra.
d) dh, dh

This is written:
and must not be confused with gh:
If you inadvertently close the loop, joining it up to the bar at the top,
thereby producing a gh when you really wanted a dh, then you can make
a little ‘knot’ or circle at the junction with the horizontal line and this is
then understood to be a dh. Some texts may use this variant, too, since it
can avoid confusion if the ink becomes smudged, for example.
The word dhana means ‘a prize’ or ‘any valued object’:
 – dhana
Thus, dhanakAma, for example, means ‘desirous of wealth’ or ‘covetous’
(kAma meaning ‘desire’, if you recall).
e) n, n
Finally, in this group, the anunAsika (sounded through the nose and
throat) na is written, as you know:
and I think we have already had sufficient examples of this already.
However, you might like to see what the word anunAsika looks like:
5. The labial or oShThya consonants
a) p, p
A very common letter. It is written:

The word para is translated as ‘far, distant, remote’ etc. and parama is the
superlative, meaning ‘most distant, remotest’ etc. or ‘best, most excellent’
(or, somewhat incongruously, ‘worst’). It appears in words such as
paramAtman, meaning the supreme spirit.
 – para;
 – parama;
 – paramAtman
(the tm bit will be explained later).
b) ph, ph
This is written:
 – a logical extension of p (for a change).
 phala
Pedantically, this means ‘fruit’ (though it can also mean the seed of a
fruit) but it more generally refers to ‘outcome’ or ‘consequence’ etc. This
example was used in the first level, where it was given as phalam, with
the additional example of karmaphalam, meaning specifically ‘fruit of
action’. Lest there should be confusion over endings here, it is worth
mentioning a little about gender, although I do not intend to go into any
detail.
There are three genders, as in languages like Latin and German –
masculine, feminine and neuter – and, as in Latin, the endings change
according to the part of speech. If you look up a word in the dictionary,
the gender ending is not given. Thus, phala is spelt thus and indicated as
‘n.’ for ‘neuter’. The ‘nominative’ case ending for this (i.e. the ending
taken if the noun is the subject of a sentence) is, in fact, am. So, if you
want ‘fruit’ to be the subject of a sentence (in the singular), the word to
use is phalam.

c) b, b
This is written:
An important word in Shankara’s Advaita philosophy is bAdha. This is
the process whereby a previously accepted point of view or way of
thinking is supplanted by a quite different one. The word used to
translate it is usually ‘sublation’ or ‘subration’. The classical example in
the scriptures is that of seeing a piece of rope in the dark and believing it
to be a snake. When a torch is brought to bear on the subject, the
mistake is realized. Realizing the lake in a desert to be merely a mirage
is an example of sublation:
 – bAdha
d) bh, bh
This is written:
This is another of those letters without a complete bar across the top.
The word bhagavat means ‘fortunate, prosperous, happy’ or ‘glorious,
divine’ or ‘holy’ when applied to gods etc. (bhagavad, as in bhagavad gItA
is the comparative form).
 – bhagavat
As with dh above, there is an option here to have the bar continuing
across the top (thus joining up and making the letter look like a m
below) and then drawing a loop or circle at the top. The presence of the
circle would make it clear that this is bh and not m.
e) m, m

Finally, the anunAsika in this group is written:
We have seen this in several words, such as maha, mAyA and Dam.
6. Table of main consonants and corresponding vowels Here is the
complete list of the five groups:
Table 4 – The Five Main Groups of Consonants (Devanagari)
C. The Remaining Vowels
The Sanskrit term for the complex vowels (e, o, ai, au) is saMyukta svara-
s. saMyukta means ‘joined together’ or ‘combined’.
1. e, e
If you look back to the first level to remind yourself, you will recall that
five more compound vowels are formed by combining the sounds of the
three main ones, a, i and u . The first of these, e, is formed when a
combines with i. It is written:
and the word eka, meaning ‘one’, as a (declining) adjective, is:

You can probably guess that, like the other vowels, this changes its
appearance when following a consonant. With i and I, an extra vertical
line was added to the left or right respectively and joined up to the
preceding consonant. With u and U we had the figure 9 lying prone or
supine respectively underneath the letter, and so on. In this case, the
sign used to indicate e is a single left-tending mark above the letter,
often called a ‘flag’. ke, for example, is:
The kena Upanishad, then, is:
2. ai, ai
The further combination of e with a gives rise to ai, written:
which can easily be seen as being identical to the character for e with
the addition of a single ‘flag’. It can further be seen that this ‘flag’ is
identical to the one used in conjunction with a consonant to indicate
that it is sounded with e. It is logical therefore that, when we want to
sound a consonant with ai, we simply use two flags. kai is then formed
as follows:
The word shaiva means ‘relating to or belonging to the god Shiva’ or ‘a
worshipper or follower of Shiva’. We haven’t met the Devanagari for sh
yet but it should pose no obstacle as long as you note that the single
vertical on the right of the letter is part of the letter and not an
indication that it is sounded with A:
3. o, o

This is the vowel resulting from the combination of a with u and is
written:
(Note that, because this letter uses the same basic character form as for a
– A, it appears differently in Monier-Williams, having the different
version of A with a flag added.) The letter is rarely seen in this form
since there are few words beginning with o. One obvious exception
might be thought to be the word om, which most people, not just
‘spiritual seekers’, will have heard of. Occasionally, this will be seen in
this form:
Strictly speaking, this ought to be written:
with the
sign indicating that the o should be sounded as ‘prolonged’ (pluta) and
not simply as two measures but you are unlikely to meet it in this form.
This word is so important that it actually has its own symbol, called the
praNava shabda (shabda means ‘word’ or ‘sound’):
You will probably recognize it (certainly Indians will since it is
prominently displayed in India on all of the buses, among other things!).
This symbol is generated in ITRANS by the characters OM.
praNu means ‘to make a humming or droning sound’. If you have
heard monks repeating it, you will understand why – the ‘m’ sound at
the end is continued with a resonating humming sound. OM is the
symbol for God and its purpose is to convey the sense of God’s
universality. Names are used to represent those objects, concepts etc.

about which we wish to speak. All words are necessarily limited – after
all, they invariably contain only a few letters of the alphabet. The name
we give to God would ideally contain all letters and all ways of sounding
them. OM achieves this by utilizing the scientific way in which the
Sanskrit language is constructed. As has already been pointed out, all of
the sounds originate with the basic sound of ‘a’, sounded by simply
moving the vocal cords with the mouth wide open. All of the remaining
letters use this with the mouth, tongue and lips being progressively
modified. In fact, only the vowels actually sound; the purpose of the
consonants is to curtail the sounding of the vowels in different ways.
Now, if the sound ‘a’ is made and continues to sound while the mouth
is slowly closed, the sound made at the ‘mid-point’, as it were, is ‘u’. If
these two sounds are made together or, more practically speaking, if the
sound corresponding to the mid-point between these two is made, the
sound that emerges is ‘o’ (as in ‘boat’). If the mouth continues to close
while still making the basic sound, the ultimate sound when the lips
come together is ‘m’. Thus, bringing all of these aspects together, the
sound that encompasses the entire range of possible sounds is ‘a – u – m’.
When sounded in practice, this is ‘OM’.
It is not just a word, devised by someone in antiquity to represent a
concept so that he or she could speak about it to another. It is THE
word, as in ‘In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God,
and the Word was God’ (Gospel of John 1:1). One of the major
Upanishads – the mANDUkya – has the whole of its few 12 verses about
this word. It says that the syllable OM is Brahman, reality itself. Each
part of the word is identified with a different aspect of consciousness. a
is the waking state, u the dreaming state and m the deep-sleep state.
Together, OM represents that consciousness that forms the substratum of
all three, effectively a fourth ‘level’ of consciousness called turIya. The
word also represents the union of the three gods vishNu (a), shiva (u) and
brahmA (m) in the Hindu religion.

Because the sound includes all possible sounds, it is present in or
behind all other words – it can be regarded as the source of all other
words; the seed from which they arise. This single word has the capacity
to create all other words and thus represents the capacity of God to
create all things in the world. It is a universal sound, not restricted to
any religion. It is the ‘AMEN’ in Christianity. If you listen to the word
being correctly sounded, the vibration continues after the sound of the
word itself ends. This ‘unspoken’ sound is always there in the absence of
other sounds (and of mental activity of any kind!) – prANa, the basic
vitality of life itself. It is the sound at the end of meditation when the
mind is perfectly still; the sound to which T. S. Eliot refers in his
magnificent work ‘The Four Quartets’ (Ref. 13):
At the source of the longest river
The voice of the hidden waterfall
And the children in the apple-tree
Not known, because not looked for
But heard, half-heard, in the stillness
Between two waves of the sea.
But what happens when o appears in the middle of a word, as is much
more common? Well, in common with what has been found throughout
the language so far, we look for the distinguishing feature of the letter
on its own. This looks like the letter A but has a single ‘flag’ added. We
know how to make a consonant sound with the vowel A – we add a
single vertical line to the right. Therefore, in order to make it sound with
o, we add a single vertical line and a single flag.
We mentioned the word yoga in the first level as an example of the letter
y. The Devanagari for this is:
4. au, au

This results from the further combining of o with a and, in just the same
way as ai was a sort of ‘step further’ than e, so au is formed by further
modification of o. This modification is done in exactly the same manner
– a second ‘flag’ is added to the character:
(Again this uses the different form of a in the Monier-Williams
dictionary.)
means ‘aquatic’ or ‘watery’.
Following the example of e – ai, it should come as no surprise at all that,
when au is joined to a consonant we drop the virAma sign and add a
vertical bar and two ‘flags’ after the consonant to represent the au:
The word mauna means ‘silence’:
5. M or .n, ṃ or ṁ
aM and aH, the anusvAra and the visarga, though two of the 16
mAtRRikA, are not really vowels but neither are they consonants. They
are sometimes called ayogavAha, which means ‘not belonging to’, though
paradoxically, since they actually need another ‘real’ letter in order to be
able to sound them at all, they are also sometimes called yogavAha,
‘belonging to’.
The anusvAra is written:
When it appears in conjunction with a consonant, this dot is how it is
represented:

The anusvAra which is pronounced through the nose only is a
replacement for m at the end of a word when the following word begins
with a consonant other than the sibilants – sh, Sh, s, h. Sometimes it
replaces the ‘m‘ within a compound.
The word saMyoga, for example, meaning ‘conjunction’ or
‘combination’, began as sam-yoga. The m is replaced by an internal
anusvAra and is written as a dot above the sa:
(We met y in mAyA and s in anunAsika but will deal with them more
fully shortly.) Remember from Level 1 that the anusvAra is optionally
replaced by the anunAsika from the same family as the consonant that
follows. Thus, if the consonant is p, ph, b or bh it will be replaced by m.
If the consonant is k, kh, g or gh, it will be replaced by ~N; if ch, Ch, j,
jh, it will be replaced by ~n; if T, Th, D, Dh, it will be replaced by N; if t,
th, d, dh, it will be replaced by n. If the next word begins with a sibilant,
then the anusvAra stays as it is, and when followed by y, l, v has the
effect of nasalizing these consonants. The correct ITRANS representation
is .n for all cases except the dental consonants.
The anusvAra is also a replacement for ‘n‘ when it is followed by ch,
Ch, t, th, T, Th. Thus, it is not an independent nasal sound – it is an
alternative sound for m or n in the circumstances described above.
6. H, ḥ
The visarga is written as a colon, usually after a vowel. Here it is shown
after the letter a:
It was mentioned earlier that the ending of many masculine nouns, in
the nominative case, is aH. Thus, the word bAlaka, for example, meaning
‘child, boy or youth’, is written bAlakaH if it is the subject of a sentence:
visarga, like anusvAra, is not an independent sound. It is essentially the

replacement for the final letter s of a word in certain circumstances –
always, for example, if the word is the last in the sentence. Or you see it
if the word is followed by sh, Sh, s as well as k, kh, p, ph.
7. guNa and vRRiddhi
When an a is ‘added’ to a simple vowel (a, i, RRi, LLi or u) the resulting
vowel is said to be ‘stronger’ and is called guNa. [It is actually more
complicated than this but the detail is beyond the scope of this book.]
We saw above how i became e when added to a, and u became o. We
also saw these being combined a second time with a to give ai and au,
respectively. These second forms are even ‘stronger’ and are called
vRRiddhi. The other simple vowels also have guNa and vRRiddhi forms,
as shown in the following table. These become important when
considering how part-words combine to form words. (This so-called
‘internal saMdhi‘ is discussed shortly.) Panini tells us that guNa is the
name of the letters a, e and o; and vRRiddhi is the name for the letters A,
ai, au.
Table 5 – guNa and vRRiddhi Form of Vowels
D. Table Showing the 16 mAtRRikA
Table 6 – The 16 mAtRRikA (Devanagari)

The Devanagari letters appear in the first row in the form in which they
would be written on their own or if appearing at the beginning of a
word. In the second row is the ITRANS equivalent. In the third row is
how they normally appear, when combined with a consonant, in this
case k.
E. The Remaining Letters (semi-vowels, sibilants and h)
I will not repeat the discussion of the sounding of these letters and most
of them have now been encountered earlier as part of other words.
Instead I will simply give the Devanagari form of each letter and provide
some more examples of their use. The Sanskrit for the semi-vowels
incidentally is antaHstha and for the sibilants UShman, which also
includes the letter h (which is called the ‘aspirate’). antaHstha means
‘being in the midst’ or ‘between’, i.e. standing between the vowels and
the consonants. UShman means ‘heat’, ‘steam’ or ‘vapor’, perhaps
because these letters sound like escaping steam.
1. y, y
This is written:
We have seen this in words like
yoga 

and mAyA 
2. r, r
This is written:
and it behaves very well some of the time as in, for example, the word
meaning ‘delighted’:
 rata
There are a number of situations, however, in which it insists on forming
special forms of its own. When sounded with u or U, it does not use the
‘9’ shape underneath the letter as other consonants do. Instead, it takes
new forms:
Note that the virAma appears underneath the r since it would cause
confusion if attached directly to the ending of the r. The additional
ornamentation to signify the u ending is similar to that used to change
the vowel u to U – this may help you to memorize this special character.
Here, the extra element added to r is the same as that used to signify U
endings for other consonants (i.e. the prostrate ‘9’) but moved up to the
right of the letter instead of being underneath. An important concept in
Advaita philosophy, applied to the visible, material universe, is that it is
only ‘name and form’, nama and rUpa. rUpa is simply written:
(This noun is neuter, so you will also sometimes see it given as rUpam.)
r behaves the same as other consonants when followed by other
vowels.

3. l, l
This is written:
and we saw it in laghu and DhAla and phalam. The word laya means
‘dissolution’; pralaya refers to the destruction of the world at the end of
the Hindu kalpa (4320 million-year period):
Note that, in kalpa, some of the right-hand section of the distinctive part
of la disappears when it forms a conjunct with p. We will look at the
topic of conjuncts very soon now. This is a foretaste!
4. v, v
This is written:
We saw it in shaiva and Devanagari. The name given to the character
that appears under halanta consonants is virAma and is written:
5. sh, ś
The first of the sibilants, in the palatal position, is written:
and it is another of the letters that has a vertical line as part of the letter,
not as an indication that it is sounded with A. It was seen in shaiva and
is the halanta character in the verb ‘to see, look at or observe’:
6. Sh (previously shh), ṣ
This cerebral sibilant is written:

ShaSh is the number 6 – 
This means ‘sphere’ or ‘territory’, ‘period’ or ‘duration’ but is used in the
scriptures in the sense of the five ‘objects of sense’: shabda, sound, for
the ears; sparsha, touch, for the skin; rUpa, form, for the eyes; gandha,
odor, for the nose; rasa, taste, for the tongue.
7. s, s
The last sibilant, in the dental position, is written:
and is a very common letter. The word sat is the present participle of the
verb as, ‘to be’, and is translated as ‘being’, ‘existing’, etc.
 – sat
8. h, h
The last letter of the alphabet, the ‘aspirate’, is written:
 and it is seen clearly in
 meaning ‘I’.
F. The Complete Alphabet
Table 7 – The Complete Alphabet (Devanagari)

G. Conjunct Consonants
As we have seen above, consonants have no sound of their own and need
to be joined to a vowel in order for a sound to become manifest.
The pure consonant k cannot be heard on its own, but here are the
various vowels when sounded through the consonant k: k (no sound), ka,
kA, ki, kI, ku, kU, kRRi, kRRI, kLLi, ke, kai, ko, kau
The consonant can also become manifest in two ways without being
followed by a vowel: it can be preceded by a vowel or it can be followed
by another consonant. Examples of the first of these are: ak, it, uk, etc:

This section provides some examples of the second type.
When two consonants combine without an intervening vowel, we
need to write the combined letter in such a way as to know which of the
consonants is ‘pure’ (halanta).
There are two main ways in which consonants join together. In the
first of these the halanta consonant is ‘cut’ and positioned first (i.e. to the
left); in the second way, it is placed on top.
When it is positioned on the left of the combination, it loses a bit of
its right-hand side. Those consonants which have a vertical bar on the
right-hand side simply lose this. Look at Table 7 to see how many this
covers. In the first column, for example, we have kha, g, gh. When they
lose their right-hand vertical, they look like this when combined with
another consonant:
Guess what the following are:
Those without right-hand verticals are just chopped off if possible.
Examples of this truncation are k, ph:
Thus, you see, it is not nearly so bad as you might first think! Many do
not change at all and, once you have realized which are the
distinguishing features of each letter, you will easily see how just those
parts are used in letter combinations. (Note that semi-vowels, sibilants
and h are all regarded as consonants in this context.) If you have learned
the basic letter forms, there is not much more to learn. You do not have
to remember all of the possible conjuncts. If you are translating from
Devanagari, you can see the conjuncts and work out what they are
without too much difficulty. If you are writing Devanagari and using a
tool such as Itranslator, it will generate the conjuncts for you.
Examples of the second type are where the halanta letter is placed at
the top of the stack. See the following:

You can recognize two consonants, k and l – one without the vowel a
and the other followed by a – but you need to know how to pronounce
it. Is it kla or lka? The answer is kla because the halanta consonant goes
on top.
1. Vertical conjunct – pa~nchadashI
As an example of the second type of consonant conjunction, we will look
at pa~nchadashI. This is a philosophical treatise on Advaita, based upon
the Upanishads. The word itself literally means ‘fifteen’, because that is
how many chapters it contains. The letter ~n is immediately followed by
a ch so the characters combine to form a conjunct consonant. The
Devanagari for this word is therefore:
This may look very complicated initially but is really quite
straightforward. The first letter is
 sounded after it. Then comes the conjunct.
You can see the letter
~n, 
 on top and
cha,  beneath.
The conjunct is followed by a and sounded ~ncha – because the
halanta consonant is the one on top, namely ~n. Next comes the letter d
followed by a:
Then comes sh, which you recall has a vertical line that does not mean it
is sounded with A. This letter is joined by a ‘hook’ to another vertical
line, meaning that it is sounded with I instead of a, i.e. shI.
At this juncture we can make another point about pronunciation. This
is easier to do using the transliterated form of the word, pa~nchadashI.
Break up the sound into its individual component letters as follows:
p a ~n ch a d a sh I
As we have said many times, the pure consonant needs to be appended
to a vowel in order to be manifest. So far we have assumed that this can

only take place if the vowel follows, but it can be achieved with a
preceding vowel too. Looking at the letters above, we can join the p with
the a to give pa. Then we have ~n which is not followed by a vowel, so
the only option is to join it to the preceding a. This now gives us pa~n.
The next three consonants are each followed by a vowel to which they
join; so the overall pronunciation is:
pa~n cha da shI
2. Vertical conjunct – sha~Nkara
The name of Shankara has been mentioned several times now. His name
begins with the sh just mentioned. Though usually written as above in
Anglicized form, the ‘n’ is not the dental variety. Since it is followed by
ka (without an intervening vowel), it is going to be the anunAsika in the
same group – the guttural ~N:
Note that the ~Nka conjunct has a vertical format, with the halanta ~N
on top of the ka and the natural form of both characters still visible. Also
note that this word is quite often found in the form shaMkara, which is
not strictly accurate. Though it is probably encountered more often in
this latter form, it does not tell you how to pronounce it correctly. To
stress the pronunciation rule, the nasal ~N will need to join its nearest
vowel, which happens to precede it, to become manifest as a sound. So
we pronounce the word:
sha~N ka ra
3. Horizontal conjunct – mithyA
As an example of conjunction, where the halanta consonant appears to
the left instead of above the consonant that is followed by a vowel, look
at the word mithyA. This literally means ‘incorrectly’ or ‘improperly’ and
is often used to refer to objects in the world. According to Advaita
philosophy, we take these as being real and existing in their own right

when, in fact, their assumed separate existence is the result of our
imposing name and form upon what is really the undifferentiated Self.
So they do exist at one level but are dependent for their existence on the
existence of something else; i.e. they are not absolutely real. A metaphor
often used is our thinking of a wave and water. Does the wave exist?
Yes. Can it exist apart from water? No. Can water exist apart from the
wave? Yes. Water is real; wave is mithyA.
mithyA is written 
 in Devanagari.
mi will be recognized at the beginning of the word from the example
of milita that was given when the letter i was introduced. The conjunct
that follows is:
i.e. the upright supporting the characteristic part of the letter th is
dropped and the remainder of the letter is attached to the side of the
next letter.
Although, from a visual perspective, the th is joined to the yA, from a
pronunciation perspective it needs to be attached to the preceding ‘i‘:
4. The special case of r
It was seen earlier how r does not follow the rules when used with the
letters u and U. That is not its only exceptional behavior. When it forms
conjuncts in which it is the final letter of a group of consonants, it
indicates its presence by the use of a short right-sloping diagonal under
the left-hand side of the adjacent letter, e.g.
For example, prANa, meaning literally ‘breath of life’ and encountered in
the breathing exercises called prANayAma, is written:
Note that, although in this combination the p looks ‘full’ and the r looks
truncated, it is the p (being the letter ‘on top’) which is the halanta

consonant and it is the r which is followed by the long vowel A. Lesson:
don’t be tricked by appearances!
When r forms a conjunct with t, both letters get adjusted from what
one would expect. Take the example of the word putra, meaning ‘son’:
It is pronounced put-ra. The t is halanta. If we remember the above rules
regarding the form that halanta consonants take when they join other
consonants, we would expect the t to simply drop its right-hand vertical
and appear:
But it has had to be truncated even further in order to be on top of the
letter r with which it is conjoined:
This is a good point at which to mention that halanta t does sometimes
truncate in this way when followed by ta, as in sattva, meaning ‘truth’:
Note that, here, there are three consonants joining: t, t, v (see point 5
below). Accordingly, sattva will be pronounced:
sat tva
With some letters, this simple diagonal is deemed insufficient or liable to
lead to ambiguity, so another slight variant is used that looks like a
French circumflex with the point touching the bottom of the conjunct.
Examples are:
When the r is the first letter of a conjunct consonant, there is another
non-standard behavior. We met the word kAma when we looked at k in
the first level of the book. It means ‘desire’ and should not be confused
with the word karma, meaning ‘action’ (although kAma undoubtedly
often does leads to karma in many cases!). The conjunct mra is written:
as in dhUmra:
meaning ‘smoky’, as you would have expected from what we have just

discussed. The conjunct rma, however, is written:
and the word karma is:
the r part is signified by the ‘curl’ shape, open to the right, above the
consonant that follows it.
5. Conjuncts with more than two letters
The technical term for a conjunct consonant is saMyoga, which literally
means ‘joined together’. Although all of the ones encountered so far have
been formed from just two consonants, there can be more than this. The
same principles are used in constructing them. Thus, achintya, for
example, meaning ‘inconceivable’, contains the conjunct nty, which is
written:
The significant part of n is attached to that of t, in turn attached to the y,
which is the consonant followed by a.
To return to the discussion of the letter r, if it begins a conjunct of
more than one other consonant, the ‘curl’ appears over the final one:
If the r appears in the middle of a group of consonants, the short,
diagonal stroke or ‘circumflex’ is used in the appropriate place:
It is worth noting, incidentally, that a tool such as Itranslator will not
always produce the conjunct form that you expect. There are some that
are really quite complicated, such as that for ~Ngya, for example: It is
understandable that there were insufficient codes available in a single,
non-Unicode font to cope with all possible combinations. Accordingly,
what was done was to break the conjunct up into parts. This one is
reproduced as:

instead of a single character. The conjunct gya is simply preceded by
halanta ~N.
An example of a word with more than three consonants conjoined is
kArtsnya, which has five. It means ‘entirely’:
6. Special conjunct forms
A few letter combinations do not follow the general rules outlined
above. Instead they form a unique character of their own.
We had the word j~nAna in the first level. It is one of the words
encountered very frequently by the spiritual seeker, and one of the most
important ones, so we will look at it in more detail now. It means
‘knowledge’. It is found in the ‘yoga of knowledge’ – j~nAna yoga – in,
for example, the Bhagavad Gita. It is also found as j~nAnI, referring to
one who practices j~nAna yoga or, more generally, to a ‘person of
wisdom’ or ‘sage’, meaning one who has realized the Self.
ITRANS also allows you to represent the j~n conjunct by either GY or
dny. Thus j~nAna may be written GYAna or dnyAna if you prefer. This is
probably because some people actually pronounce the word in that way.
Because ~n can also be represented by JN or J, there are two more ways
of writing this word: jJNAna or jJAna. (Note that Itranslator Software
1.2.0.83 will not translate this last form correctly.)
bhakti yoga is the spiritual path whereby a god is worshipped and one
who follows this path is called a bhakta. bhakta can mean ‘served’ or
‘worshipped’ but in this context means rather ‘serving’ or ‘worshipping’.

The bha part is straightforward but k and t form another special conjunct
consonant. We have already seen t as the first half of a conjunct, where
the left-hand part was simply tagged on to the following letter. Thus, if
the conjunct here were tka, it would be written:
However, this is the wrong order for bhakta and the conjunct must be
different:
This is not altogether intuitive and it is one of the conjuncts that just
have to be remembered. The reason is simply that the right-hand curve
of the k would interfere with the left-hand curve of the t if it were
constructed in the usual horizontal combination and t does not lend itself
to a vertical construction. Fortunately, although you might not be able to
remember what the character is if you are trying to translate from
Roman to Devanagari, when you see the word in Devanagari, you can
usually work out what the character must be. Anyway, the complete
word bhakta is written:
c) Conjuncts of sh
As with g and N, the Devanagari form of sh has a vertical line at the right
so it would not be surprising to find that, when in conjunction with
another consonant, it drops this vertical in the same way. Thus, in
shyAma, meaning ‘dark’, this is what it does:
Unfortunately, this is one of the few situations where this happens (shsh
is another). More frequently, it assumes a single ‘twist’ shape as a
‘characteristic part’ and uses this in its conjuncts as shown below:
which means ‘lame’ or ‘limping’. NB: It would not be wrong, however, to

write this:
one of the schools of Jain philosophy. This shape is retained when
combined with ra, too, where the diagonal line form of the latter is used:
the ‘revealed’ truths of the Vedas, and with na:
meaning ‘pierced’ or ‘transfixed’. Note that here the horizontal bar of the
na has been pushed downwards. You may also see this with the bar still
horizontal but lower down the stem. This script was, after all,
handwritten and not generated by computerized typefaces when it was
current and variations were inevitable. Again, the normal format, just
dropping the vertical from sh, would not be wrong:
d) Conjuncts of Sh
The key part of Sh is quite distinctive and it forms a number of
conjuncts where the diagonal line simply fills in the ‘unused loop’ of the
other character:
which means ‘eight’:
But Sh is also another one of the characters that forms special conjuncts
in some cases, which cannot be worked out using the usual rules – you
simply have to learn them. One of these occurs after k:
the warrior class of the caste system in ancient Indian tradition. If this

conjunct added another consonant, it would then drop the right-hand
vertical:
Another well-known example of the conjunct kSh is in
meaning ‘enlightenment’ or, more accurately, ‘liberation’ in the sense
of release from worldly existence. Because the conjunct sounds a bit like
‘x’, ITRANS allows you to use this instead and the word can be written
moxa.
e) Conjuncts of h
Some of the conjuncts of h follow the usual pattern:
 is hma, and 
 is hya for example.
However, because of the unusual shape of the letter, it is clearly possible
to put some ‘key’ letter elements inside the lower part of h to create some
special ‘vertical’ conjuncts:
 – hNa; 
 – hna; 
 – hva; 
 – hra.
You may also see hra with the diagonal to the left of the letter in the
more usual way but this should pose no problem by now.
7. Table showing some common conjuncts
Table 8 – Some Examples of Conjuncts
Initial Letter Some Conjuncts


H. Some Special Characters
There are several special characters that you will also see when you look
at Sanskrit texts. Two of these have already been dealt with, namely the
virAma to signify a ‘halanta‘ consonant and the praNava shabda as the
mystical symbol ‘OM’. The single dot of the anusvAra above a consonant
sounded with M and the double dot of the visarga after one sounded with
H may also be regarded as special characters.
The praNava shabda itself is produced in ITRANS by either OM or
AUM. The latter has the advantage of reminding us of the origin and
symbolism discussed earlier when introducing the character o.
The sign over the OM symbol
which looks like a shallow concave bowl containing a dot, is called a
chandra-bindu, meaning literally ‘moon-like spot’. It is a sign that the
vowel over which it appears should be nasalized, e.g.
which is written a.N in ITRANS and aṃ in Romanized transliteration.
The concave shape on its own may also sometimes be seen in old

manuscripts where it functions the same as the anusvAra. It is called an
ardhachandra, meaning ‘crescent-shaped’, and can be generated in
ITRANS by writing ‘.c’. For example: 
(Note that this second word uses a different font – Mangal – because the
one used for everything else (Sanskrit 98) will not reproduce the
ardhachandra.) The chandra-bindu is also used (in Panini’s book of
grammar, the aShTAdhyAyi) in conjunction with the first letter of one of
the five groups of consonants to indicate that the whole group is being
referred to. Thus,
 – tu.N – is an abbreviation used to refer to 
 – pu.N – is an abbreviation used to refer to 
A special case of the chandra-bindu occurs in conjunction with a virAma,
with no apparent associated letter at all. This is called the ‘Vedic
anusvAra‘. An example of this is found in the first sutra of the Isa
Upanishad (IshopaniShad):
I will not translate this in detail here. You will be able to work out the
beginning, however – OM IshA – and the next word appears to be
vAsyamida followed by a peculiar symbol. In fact, the ITRANS code for
this word is vAsyamida{\m+} and the ‘{\m+}’ code generates the
chandra-bindu over a virAma instead of an anusvAra. This signifies a
special pronunciation – the ‘Vedic pronunciation’ – and, instead of
pronouncing the word vAsyamidaM, if we simply used an anusvAra, it is
pronounced vAsyamidag~N, i.e. the word is sounded with the halanta,
guttural nasal sound instead of the generic, labial ‘m’.
You should also note the single vertical line at the end of the first line
of script and the two sets of double lines at the end of the second. The
single line is called, somewhat confusingly, a virAma. It marks the end of
a sentence or half-verse of a sUtra. The double line is called a
pUrNavirAma and it marks the end of the sUtra or the end of a

paragraph. These lines are generated by a full stop in ITRANS (i.e. one
full stop produces one line). These are, in fact, the only punctuation
marks in Sanskrit. There are no equivalents of semi-colons, question
marks, exclamation marks or even quotation marks.
The complete ITRANS for generating the above sUtra is:
OM IshA vAsyamida{\m+} sarvaM yatkiJNcha jagatyAM jagat.
tena tyaktena bhu~njIthA mA gRRidhaH kasyasviddhanam.h .. 1 ..
You can see now that the other symbol that you probably did not
recognize, between the two sets of double lines on the second line, is
simply the numeral ‘1’. These are dealt with in Section I. (Note also that
it is an accepted convention to use the ‘.h’ variation of ITRANS to
indicate a halanta consonant, when this occurs at the end of a sentence,
even though the same Devanagari script is generated.) The other special
character, which you will see occasionally, is called an avagraha and is
written:
The avagraha indicates that an a letter has been dropped, in the same
way as the apostrophe in English indicates that either ‘o’ or ‘i’ has been
dropped, e.g. don’t or it’s. Observation will show that the letter
preceding the dropped a is likely to be o or e. This is due to the
requirement for euphonic flow, which will be dealt with later. The
Roman transliteration in Sanskrit uses an apostrophe in just the same
way as English to represent the avagraha. An example of an avagraha is
found in the second line of the next mantra of the isopaniShad:
On the second line, you should be able to read the words quite easily
now. The first three are evaM tvayi nAnyatheto. Then there is an avagraha
followed by sti na karma lipyate nare. Then there are two sets of double
lines either side of the character for ‘2’, identifying that this is the
second sUtra. The reason for the avagraha is that the word actually

following this symbol is asti, the third person singular of the verb ‘to be’
or ‘to exist’. It means <the subject of the sentence> ‘exists’. Because the
preceding word is nAnyatheto, Sanskrit, always striving for the optimum
efficiency in sound, does not want to sound o followed by a. There is no
option available for combining the sounds, since o is itself already a
combination. Accordingly, the a of asti is dropped and, to signify in the
written version that this will occur when it is spoken, the avagraha is
inserted. [Note that the word nAnyatheto began its life as na anyathA
itaH but the words merge and the combined letters are forced to change
as you will find out on the next Level when we discuss saMdhi.]
This second line, then, is written:
evaM tvayi nAnyatheto.asti na karma lipyate nare .. 2.. in ITRANS, with
the ‘.a’ generating the avagraha. In Romanized transliteration, it would
be written: evaṃ tvayi nānyatheto’sti na karma lipyate nare || 2 ||
A point to note here is that, just as one does not pronounce the missing
‘o’ in ‘doesn’t’ so too one does not pronounce the missing ‘a‘ in the above
verse. That’s why the apostrophe route is preferable in transliteration to
prevent the temptation to reinsert the missing ‘a‘ sound.
I. The Numerals
Roman numerals actually derive from the Sanskrit originally so that
some similarity of the figures can easily be recognized. The principal
situation in which they will be needed is in Devanagari references to
sUtra-s in some scriptural texts. They are shown in the following table:
Table 9 – The Devanagari Numerals


Level 3 Some Practical Examples
A. shivasUtrANi
(These are also sometimes called the ‘maheshvarANi sUtrANi‘.)
*
Do not be apprehensive about the Sanskrit text that appears below!
There are no words or pronunciation to be worked out. Each verse only
contains a short string of the letters that you have just learned in Level 2
but in a particular, meaningful sequence. And all will be explained!
Furthermore, you do not need to know anything about the shivasUtrANi
in order to learn the Sanskrit language. If you prefer, you may learn the
rules for sandhi as a list of do’s and don’ts. I am introducing these partly
because they are a useful reinforcement for letter recognition and partly
for interest.
*
Another very helpful way to gain familiarity with the alphabet is to learn
by rote a set of short verses (sUtra-s) that contain all of the letters. These
are very special verses in that the ordering of the letters within them
enables groups of letters quickly and easily to be identified in a
shorthand way. Then it is possible to apply a set of rules that determine
such things as how letters at the end of a word will combine with those
at the beginning of the next.
This is best understood by seeing (and learning!) the sUtra-s and
seeing how they operate. Otherwise, the abstract concept may be

difficult to grasp. The sheer ingenuity and cleverness with which they
and their associated rules were constructed is quite staggering. The
system was developed by the Sanskrit grammarian Panini in his book
aShTAdyAyI, about 2,500 years ago. There are about 4,000 sutras
covering the entire grammar. The specific verses relating to the letter
groupings are called the maheshvarANi sutras because Panini is supposed
to have had a dream in which maheshvara, referring to the ‘great Lord or
God’ was playing the sutras on a drum. There are 14 sutras or sUtrANi –
sUtrANi is the plural of sUtra. They are all very short, since they are
made up not of words but of the letters of the alphabet. Two of them
contain only two letters. Consequently, they are relatively easy to learn.
(The word maheshvara is itself a good example of the application of one
of the rules to be described below regarding the changing of vowels at
the end/beginning of words when they are adjacent. It derives from the
two separate words maha, meaning ‘great’ and Ishvara, meaning ‘Lord’.
When maha joins with Ishvara, the a + I becomes e.)
Each sUtra consists of one or more ‘active’ letters of the alphabet and
terminates in an ‘inactive’ letter, referred to as an ‘it‘ varna (varna means
‘letter’ or ‘sound’). The key feature of these it letters is that they are not
seen (although still exerting some influence). For this reason, they are
also called ‘indicatory’ letters – they indicate something, but are distinct
from what they indicate.
1) 
 – a-i-u-N – i.e. the main vowels (a, A, i, I, u, U) (active)
terminating in the (inactive) halanta cerebral nasal N
2) 
 – RRi-LLi-k – i.e. the (active) vowels at the cerebral and dental
positions terminating in the (inactive) halanta consonant, k
3) 
 – e-o-~N – i.e. the two (active) compound vowels, made by
combining a with i and u respectively, terminating in the (inactive)
halanta consonant ~N
4) 
 – ai-au-ch – i.e. the remaining compound vowels (active),
made by combining a with e and o respectively, terminating in the

(inactive) halanta consonant ch
5) 
 – ha-ya-va-ra-T – i.e. three of the four semi-vowels, together
with the ‘aspirate’ h (all active), terminating in the (inactive) halanta
T
6) 
 – la-~N – i.e. the remaining semi-vowel (active), terminating in
(inactive) halanta ~N
7) 
 – ~na-ma-~Na-Na-na-m – i.e. the five anunAsika
consonants (active), terminating in (inactive) halanta M
8) 
 – jha-bha-~n – i.e. the second mahAprANa consonants in the
palatal and labial groups (active), terminating in (inactive) halanta
~n
9) 
 – gha-Dha-dha-Sh – i.e. the second mahAprANa consonants in
the other three groups (guttural, cerebral and dental) (active),
terminating in (inactive) halanta Sh
10) 
 – ja-ba-ga-Da-da-sh – i.e. the second alpaprANa consonants
in each of the five groups of consonants (active), terminating in
(inactive) halanta sh
11) 
 – kha-pha-Cha-Tha-tha-cha-Ta-ta-v – i.e. the first
mahAprANa consonants in each of the five groups and three of the
first alpaprANa ones (active), terminating in the (inactive) halanta v
12) 
 – ka-pa-y – i.e. the remaining two first alpaprANa consonants
(active), terminating in the (inactive) halanta y
13) 
 – sha-Sha-sa-r – i.e. the three sibilants (active), terminating in
the (inactive) halanta r
14) 
 – ha-l – i.e. the aspirate (active), terminating in (inactive)
halanta l
Learning this will take some effort but can be used to great advantage
for those wishing to study Panini’s grammar, because he used this
version of the alphabet to create a shorthand way of expressing his
grammatical rules. If written, it will help tremendously in learning the
alphabet. If spoken, it will quickly be realized that this requires
considerable agility of the tongue and is excellent for learning correct

pronunciation. Naturally this does necessitate that you have at least a
recording of how it should sound and preferably someone who can
listen to you and correct mistakes.
Below is the complete set of
 (shivasUtrANi) or 
 (maheshvarANi sUtrANi):
and now we’ll have a brief look at the purpose of combining the
letters in this way, and the role of the indicatory ‘it‘ letters.
Specific groups of letters can be identified by a two-letter code. Thus,
for example:
a) 
 – aN is shorthand for the first three primary vowels. It is derived
from the first maheshvarANi sUtra, ‘a-i-u-N‘. The first letter of this
sUtra is a and the last is N. Thus the whole batch can be indicated by
the shorthand, which starts with the first and ends with the last letter
of the batch: aN. As we have said, the letter N is called ‘it‘ and this
means that it is not seen. What this unseen letter means is that the
batch being indicated are the letters a, i, u. That is how it comes to
be a shorthand for ‘the three principal vowels’. NOTE: there are
seven syllables in saying ‘the-three-prin-ci-pal-vow-els’ and only one
in saying ‘aN’. We have therefore saved six syllables by using this
shorthand. In Panini’s day, the grammarian’s art was to express their
rules in the most succinct way and so the saving of even a single
syllable was valued; it is said, as highly as the birth of a son! Saving
six must be a great achievement.
b) 
 – ak similarly is shorthand for ‘the five simple vowels’. The
batch starts with ‘a‘ and ends with the unseen indicatory letter ‘k‘
with the unseen indicatory letter ‘N‘ in between. So, discounting the
unseen letters, ak is the shorthand for a, i, u, RRi, LLi.
c) 
 – ach – identifies all vowels. The letter a begins the first sUtra
and it halanta ‘ch‘ occurs at the end of the fourth sUtra. Discounting
all of the ‘inactive’ or ‘it’ letters (i.e. those at the end of each sUtra),
the (active) letters are: a, A, i, I, u, U (first sUtra); RRi, RRI, LLi, LLI

(second); e, o (third); ai, au (fourth).
d) 
 – al – identifies all of the letters from a at the beginning of the
1st sUtra to h in the last (excluding all inactive letters). The shorthand
‘al‘, therefore, stands for the whole alphabet.
e) 
 – hal – identifies all of the consonants, from h at the beginning of
the fifth sUtra to h (again) at the beginning of the final sUtra (again,
as always, excluding inactive letters). Now you can see the reason for
the word halanta. This refers to the situation in which a consonant
(i.e. hal) occurs at the end (i.e. anta) of a word.
f) 
 – yaN – refers to the semi-vowels, from y as the second letter in
the fifth sUtra to l as the only active letter in the sixth.
g) 
 – ech identifies the compound vowels, from e as the first vowel
in the third sUtra to au as the last active letter in the fourth.
h) 
 – shar – identifies the three sibilants, from the thirteenth sUtra.
i) 
 – shal – identifies the four UShman letters (three sibilants + h).
j) And so on! Each of these two-letter abbreviations is called a
pratyAhAra in Panini’s book on grammar and there are 42 of them
altogether. In fact, another name for these sutras is pratyAhAra
sUtrANi.
(If you are inordinately alert, you may have realized that aN could refer
either to a, i, u> or to a, i, u, RRi, LLi, e, o, ai, au, h, y, v, r, l>. In fact,
Panini explains, in a note to one of his sutras, that it should always be
interpreted as the former, except in the sutra to which the note refers.
Also, if alert, you will notice that one ‘active’ letter occurs twice: the
letter ‘h‘. This might explain its double status – sometimes grouped with
the semi-vowels and sometimes with the sibilants.)
B. Words and Sandhi
1. Words
All Sanskrit words derive from short ‘root’ words, each of which is called
a dhAtu, and there are only about 2,000 of these. When looking up a

word in the dictionary, its origins will often be identified as a dhAtu and
this will be specified by a ‘square-root’ sign √ appearing in front of it.
The dhAtu itself appears in the Monier-Williams dictionary in slightly
larger, bolder font than other words and is in Devanagari form (whereas
derived words are shown in Roman transliterated form). The dhAtu-s are
quite fundamental and many of our own English words can be traced
back to them. An example is sthA, meaning ‘to stand’, ‘take up a
position’, ‘remain’, ‘persevere’ etc. If you know Latin, you will probably
recognize sto, stare, steti, statum – the verb ‘to stand’. English words such
as ‘stay’, ‘station’ and so on derive from this.
In order to form meaningful words from the dhAtu, ‘affixes’ are added
– i.e. prefixes and suffixes – usually only of one or two syllables. These
endings (prefix or suffix) are called pratyaya-s. How these syllables are
added, and what effect this has on existing vowels, is very precisely
codified in the grammar.
The dhAtu-s are grouped into ten families, and the way in which the
evolution of each dhAtu takes place will be according to the rules
applying to the family in which they occur. For example, in some
families the vowel is replaced by its guNa or vRRiddhi form before the
addition of affixes. In other cases there is a duplication of a particular
letter, and so on. These changes to the dhAtu produce the stem form of
the word, the prAtipadika, the form that will be found in the dictionary.
It has also been mentioned, however, that these stem forms need to go
through one more set of changes before they become a word, pada,
which is a meaningful unit in a sentence.
Words are formed by adding further endings to the prAtipadika. These
endings are of two types: one set of endings gives us verbs and their
derivatives, and the other set gives us nouns. Here is where the
proliferation begins!
Let us start with nouns: These are divided according to gender
(feminine, masculine and neuter), according to number (singular, dual,

plural), and according to case, i.e. the role in the sentence.
There are seven case endings accounting for the noun’s role in the
sentence. The noun could be the subject of the action (doer), object of
the action, instrument by which the action is accomplished, that to
which the action is directed, that from which it proceeds, that in which
the action is located, or it could be that which possesses another noun in
the sentence (as in the student’s headache, where the headache created
by all this proliferation is possessed by the student).
This is not where the proliferation ends. The fixed set of 21 case
endings will depend not only on the gender of the noun, but also on the
letter with which the prAtipadika ends. In respect of basic noun endings,
if the prAtipadika ends in a, the noun is likely to be masculine, in which
case the standard ending will be modified in a particular way. The
nominative (subject) endings of these nouns, for example, are likely to
be aH. If, however, the prAtipadika ending in a happens to be neuter
gender, then the nominative form will end in am. Thus, phala is phalam
(neuter) while nara (meaning ‘man’ and clearly masculine) is naraH. The
prAtipadika-s (in the dictionary) ending in A or I are almost always
feminine, e.g. mAyA, nAdI (a river). The nominative singular of mAyA is
mAyA and of nadI is nadI so there is no confusion here at least. Then we
can also have prAtipadika-s ending in i or u or RRi, which could be any
gender. And, of course prAtipadika-s can end in a variety of consonants:
Atman is an example of the prAtipadika ending in n, where the
nominative singular is AtmA.
If we next turn to verbs, we have an equivalent list of factors that
influence the verb endings. First, there are number (singular, dual,
plural), and person (first, second, third). These two in combination give
us a table with 3 × 3 = 9 forms. This then doubles to 18, because verbs
can be in two main classes: directed towards the other, parasmaipada, or
directed towards oneself, Atmanepada. These 18 forms will then vary
according to time (present, past and future – plus subtle variations of

these latter two) and mood (e.g. command, request, option, etc).
This is how, with a handful of seeds and a handful of laws, Sanskrit
manages to grow a vocabulary that is massively rich in meaning and
lawful in its development.
Incidentally, the 21 case endings of nouns are called sup-vibhakti or
namavibhakti (name-endings) and the 18 verb endings are called ti~N-
vibhakti or kriyAvibhakti (action-endings).
As an example, the dhAtu ‘nI‘ means ‘lead, guide, direct’ etc. The
preposition (called an upasarga in Sanskrit) ‘apa‘ means ‘away, back, off’.
Thus the verb apanI means to ‘lead away, lead off’ or ‘rob, steal’ etc. If
this occurs in a sentence such as ‘he leads away’ for example, it then
adds the appropriate kriyAvibhakti ending and becomes ‘apanayati‘. Thus
rAjAnamapanayati – ‘he leads away the king’. rAja is the prAtipadika form
found in the dictionary, meaning ‘king’. Since it is in the accusative (the
king is the object of the leading away), it adds the second, singular
namavibhakti ending and becomes rAjAnam.
This book assumes that you really do not want to go into this level of
detail. The section on ‘Resources on the Internet’ will provide
information on how to pursue this study further.
2. Pronunciation
Having learned how to pronounce each letter, the pronunciation of
words follows naturally. Letter sounds do not change when they are part
of a word as they often do in English. The sounds are always distinct and
discrete even when in combination with other letters. Thus, for example,
there are no situations such as an ‘s’ sound and a ‘h’ sound becoming a
‘sh’ sound when they occur together. They will retain their own unique
sound and simply follow one another.
Stressing certain syllables within words when they are spoken is as
critical in Sanskrit as it is in English. The rule is straightforward and
depends upon whether a syllable is ‘light’ (laghu) or ‘heavy’ (guru). Long

vowels (dIrgha) or any vowels immediately preceding a cluster of
consonants, a visarga or an anusvAra are heavy, and the stress is placed
on these. Short vowels that are not one of the special cases just
mentioned are light and no stress is placed on them. Thus: anúsvÁra,
visárga, sáMyúkta, prátyÁhÁra, prÁtipadika, mahéshvara, avágraha,
upániShat. To understand the difference, take any of these words and
pronounce them according to your inclination; then pronounce them by
laying the stress on the syllables with the acute accent. One way to get
the textural variation is to sound the unstressed syllables softly and the
stressed ones loudly one at a time and then, once you have the stresses
in the right places start to close the gap, e.g.
A nús vÁ ra, vi sár ga, sáM yúk ta, prát yÁ hÁ ra.
Other commonly mispronounced words are:
ar ju na, ma hA bhA ra ta, pra kRRi ti (no stresses at all)
When a mantra text is chanted, a secondary factor is added, namely
accent. There are three main accents: high, udAtta; low, anudAtta; raised,
svarita. Below is an example of an annotated text. The underlined letters
are sounded low (anudAtta); the unmarked should be sounded higher in
relation to them (udAtta); and those with a single vertical line above
them are the highest of the three notes (svarita). In some places there is a
double vertical above a letter (dIrgha svarita): this is sounded with a high
followed by a low note. The safest way to understand all of this is to
work with a traditional teacher.

3. Joining words and part-words
When speaking or writing Sanskrit, words are joined wherever possible
within a sentence or line of poetry. Pauses in speech or breaks in written
words within a sentence normally only occur when a word ends in a
vowel, a visarga or an anusvAra and the next word begins with a
consonant. Go back to the invocation mantra above and note where the
breaks are. A good example is the famous saying (mahAvAkya) from the
Chandogya Upanishad ‘tat tvam asi‘, meaning ‘that thou art’. The first
word ends in a consonant, the second begins with a consonant; so no
break. The second ends in a consonant, the third begins with a vowel; so
no break: it is therefore written:
 – i.e. as one continuous expression, tattvamasi.

Note that the word for ‘that’ is actually tad but for the sake of euphonic
flow, saMdhi, it is changed to tat because it is followed by t.
Sandhi (actually saMdhi) refers to the way in which letters (i.e.
sounds) change when they are joined together in a continuous flow of
speech. It is also sometimes called ‘euphony’ because the purpose of the
whole exercise is to end up with a harmonious-sounding sentence.
Panini also uses the word saMhitA for this, defined as ‘the closest
drawing together of sounds’.
If the letters in question are at the end of one word and the beginning
of the next, the joining is referred to as ‘external sandhi’. If they refer to
the joining of parts of a word, it is called ‘internal sandhi’. Unless you
are studying the language seriously, it is the external variety that is most
important, since written words can be difficult to decipher without an
understanding of how the component words may have changed. There
can also be sandhi of vowels or of consonants. The former is called ach
saMdhi (ach being the pratyAhAra for all the vowels, as explained above);
the latter is called hal saMdhi, since hal identifies all consonants. A third
set of rules come into play when a visarga is followed or preceded by
various letters.
It is worth remembering that the sole purpose of sandhi is to make
the language sound as harmonious as possible. This is not a phenomenon
restricted to the Sanskrit language. In English, for example, it is so much
easier to say ‘an apple’ than ‘a apple’.
Internally, too, English has sandhi. The letter ‘s’ is pronounced ‘sss’.
When appended to the word ‘cat’ – cats – it retains its ‘sss’ sound. But
when appended to ‘dog’ – dogs – the s is pronounced ‘z’: dogz. When
appended to horse – horses – not only is the ‘s’ pronounced ‘z’ but the ‘e’
of horse is sounded as though it is ‘i’: horsiz. In English we make these
changes in pronunciation only and not in writing. In Sanskrit, we change
both the spelling and the pronunciation. If the English grammarians
were formulating spelling rules, they might have one that says: when ‘s’

follows ‘d’, it is replaced by ‘z’, but retains its true nature when
following ‘t’.
Where the conjunction of two letters makes the words difficult to
pronounce or if the result sounds awkward, there will be a rule for
combining the letters to get around the problem. Knowing this can
sometimes enable you to make a good guess at what is needed, if you are
forming the word, or at what has happened, if you are trying to read it.
Not all of the Sanskrit rules of euphonic harmony are being given here –
there are quite a lot of them, including exceptions and special cases. But,
unless you are seriously studying the language, it is not necessary to
learn them anyway. Once the principles have been understood, much of
it becomes common sense. Very often, you can hear what the result
should be simply by speaking the two separate words quickly in
succession.
Sandhi can be analyzed into three categories: vowel, visarga and
consonant. In each category, a number of rules can be specified to
enable one to determine what will happen when a word or part-word
ending in a specific letter joins with another word or part-word
beginning with a specific letter. Many of the rules have sub-rules to
cover special cases and exceptions. After a particular rule has been
applied and the end character of the first word, say, has been changed
accordingly, it may then happen that another rule comes into play for
this new character and a further change must take place. Thus, several
stages may be involved in the progressive modification of endings until a
result is reached which sounds ‘harmonious’. For you to learn all of these
rules and become familiar with their operation is not the intention of
this book. The following paragraphs merely offer a flavor of the topic
and a later section will refer you to other resources that you can follow
up if you wish to.
The WebPages on Rules of Sandhi, from the Argentinian site (see
‘Resources on the Internet’, Section B) list 7 primary and 7 secondary

rules for the joining of vowels, 10 rules involving visarga endings and 24
rules for joining consonants, some of which have anything up to 6 sub-
rules. (Incidentally, I cannot recommend these WebPages too highly.
Although Panini is not mentioned, all of the rules are presented in a very
methodical and detailed manner with many examples. It is very readable
and easy to understand.)
4. Some examples of vowel sandhi
a) Coalescence of similar vowels
This is the simplest form of sandhi, showing what happens when a
word ending in one of the five main vowels (short or long) joins a word
beginning with the same vowel. There is a sutra in Panini’s book of
grammar to describe this: akaH savarNe dIrghaH (Literal translation: ‘In
place of ak when followed by savarNa there is a long measure.’)
It says that whenever an ak sound (i.e. a, A, i, I, u, U, RRi, LLi) is
followed by a savarNa sound (meaning ‘of the same family’ i.e. a similar
sound), the two vowels are replaced by the dIrgha form, i.e. the long
form of the vowel. Thus, if a word ending in a or A is followed by one
beginning with a or A (the ‘similar’ sounds), they are joined and both of
the joining vowels are replaced by a single occurrence of A. If a word
ending in i or I joins one beginning with i or I, both joining vowels are
replaced by one I. And so on. Thus kapi means ‘monkey’ and indra means
‘prince’ (among other things). These join to become kapIndra (lord of
monkeys), with the two hrasva i-s becoming a dIrgha I. Similarly, kuru
refers to an ancient country or region, probably north of the Himalayas,
and uttama means ‘best, highest, greatest, chief, etc.’. These two combine
to produce kurUttama with the two hrasva u-s becoming a dIrgha U.
b) Coalescence of dissimilar vowels when the first is a or A
Providing that the last vowel of the first word is a or A, coalescence
with a beginning vowel of the second word occurs in a similar manner to

the table of guNa and vRRiddhi discussed earlier, except that, as in a)
above, the length of the two vowels does not matter. Thus a or A joining
with i or I produces e as in mahA (great) + Isha (lord) = mahesha (great
lord). a or A joining with RRi or RRI produces ar as in mahA (great) +
RRiShi (sage) = maharShi (great sage). a or A joining with e will produce
ai, and with o will produce au. If a or A joins with ai or au, it will
produce ai and au, respectively, since these are the ‘full extent’ of
coalescence, as it were.
c) Coalescence of dissimilar vowels when the first is not a or A
This is covered by the first of the sutras relating to the joining of
vowels in Panini’s book of grammar: iko yaNachi. (Literal translation: ‘In
place of ik letters there are yaN letters.’) Its meaning is as follows:
If a word ending in i, u, RRi or LLi is immediately followed by a word
beginning with any vowel other than itself (in the same sentence or in
the same line of a poem), then the i, u, RRi, LLi is replaced by y, v, r, l
respectively and the two words will then be written and sounded as if
they were one. Thus, vi and a~njana combine to form vya~njana. The i
is replaced by the semi-vowel in the same group (palatal). If you sound
the two words together, the i-a naturally turns into a y so it is all
perfectly logical.
d) Coalescence when first vowel is complex
The first Panini sutra relating to this situation is echo.ayavAyAvaH.
This is similar to iko yaNachi but now refers to a word ending in ech,
i.e. e, o, ai or au, joining a word beginning with ach, i.e. any vowel. The
ending vowel of the first word is replaced by ay, av, Ay or Av,
respectively. This is essentially what happens if this situation occurs
within a word, i.e. at the joining of two parts of a word. It is a little more
complex if there are two separate words. As has already been seen, for
example, if a word ending in e or o is followed by one beginning with a,
the a is dropped but the words remain separate and an avagraha is

inserted. Also, y’s and v’s produced as a result of this coalescence can
optionally be dropped.
Something very noticeable about the sutras in Panini’s grammar is
their extreme conciseness. This frequently seems to occur to an extreme
of 
complete 
unintelligibility. 
The 
brevity 
is 
intentional, 
the
incomprehensibility presumably not! The situation is not actually as bad
as it appears at first sight. What happens is that many of the sutras occur
in groups, each of which is called an adhikAra, meaning ‘topic’ or
‘subject’. The elements of the topic are introduced logically, one bit at a
time but, once a point has been made, it is not repeated. Entire words
introduced in a sutra earlier in the topic are assumed still to apply and
we have to mentally ‘bring them down’ from the earlier ones as
necessary. The principle is called anuvRRitti, which means the ‘continued
course or influence of a preceding rule on what follows’. The same
principle applies to Vyasa’s sutras in the Brahmasutras, for example.
5. Some examples of consonant sandhi
As mentioned above, there are many more of these. We will look at
just six main ones. These are applied in the order given so that, if after
applying one, a subsequent rule also becomes applicable, then it is
applied too. (We never go back to the beginning on reaching the end,
you will be glad to hear!)
The purpose of all of these rules of sandhi is to maximize the
harmony and avoid any inharmonious conjunction of sounds. Vowels
and consonants, in addition to the various categories already given
earlier, are said to be either ‘soft’ or ‘hard’. Another word for ‘soft’ is
‘unvoiced’, as compared to the ‘hard’ ones, which are ‘voiced’. This
categorization refers to the fact that the vowels (except for the visarga)
and consonants in the first two rows (k, ch, T, t, p, kh, Ch, Th, th, ph) do
not make the sound of a syllable. There is no soft resonance; they make a
hard, clipped sound and are therefore ‘unvoiced’ or aghoSha. The

remainder of the consonants (last three rows), together with H, all sound
like short syllables, soft or ‘murmuring’, and are said to be ‘voiced’ or
ghoSha. It is an aim of these saMdhi rules that conjunctions of hard and
soft should be avoided. For example, if a word ending in a hard sound is
followed by a word beginning with a soft one, the hard letter has to be
changed to a soft one so that the resultant joining sound is harmonious.
a) Word ending in any consonant other than a nasal or a semi-vowel
The pratyAhAra for ‘any consonant other than a nasal or a semi-
vowel’ is jhal, if you look back at the discussion of the maheshvarANi
sUtrANi. The rule relating to this is that, when a word ending in a jhal
consonant joins another word, the jhal consonant is replaced by the
corresponding jash consonant. jash is the pratyAhAra for j, g, b, D or d i.e.
a consonant from the third line of the five groups of consonants, the
second set of alpaprANa consonants. The sutra is:
 – jhalAM jasho.ante
An example would be:
Here, the first word ends in the dental t, which is a jhal consonant. Since
it is followed by another word, we have to replace it with the
corresponding jash consonant, i.e. the one in the same group as the t,
namely the dental d.
b) Joining of a dental consonant with a palatal
The Panini sutra relating to this situation is stoH shchunA shchuH and,
expanded into something vaguely meaningful, it says the following:
A 
 (stu.N),
when this joins with a 
 (schu.N),

is replaced by another 
 (schu.N)
The meaning of these terms was explained when we discussed the
chandra-bindu in Level 2 Section H:
 – tu.N – is an abbreviation used to refer to 
Therefore, stu.N in Panini’s system of abbreviations means ‘either an
halanta s or any of the tu.N letters’, i.e. any halanta dental consonant t,
th, d, dh, n. Similarly, shchu.N means halanta sh or any of the halanta
palatal consonants (ch, Ch, j, jh or ~n). So, if a word ending in halanta s,
t, th, d, dh, n is followed by a word beginning with sh, ch, Ch, j, jh, ~n,
the dental consonant is replaced by the corresponding palatal.
e.g. tapas (religious austerities) + shivaH (favorable, auspicious) =
tapashshivaH
The dental s, being followed by the palatal sh, is replaced by the
corresponding palatal, i.e. sh.
c) Joining of a dental consonant with a cerebral
The corresponding rule when a dental (including s) meets a cerebral
consonant (including Sh) is analogous. The Panini sutra is even more
terse, using anuvRRitti as discussed earlier: ShTunA ShTuH. Following the
same principle as before: when a word ending in halanta s, t, th, d, dh, n
is followed by one beginning with Sh, T, Th, D, Dh, N, the dental
consonant is replaced by the corresponding cerebral one. (Note that the
dental consonant is not mentioned at all in the sutra – this part is the
one that is ‘brought down’ from the earlier one. Note that it is the
‘meeting’ of the consonants that is being described. The same principle is
followed if the first word ends in a cerebral and the next word begins
with a dental.)
For example, rAmas + TIkate (Rama moves) becomes rAmaShTIkate
with the dental s being replaced by the cerebral Sh.
d) When the second word begins with a nasal

The sutra here is yaro.anunAsike.anunAsiko vA. Remember that the ‘.’
in the middle of a word in ITRANS refers to an avagraha, which means
that the ‘a’ following the ‘.’ is not sounded. This sutra states that, if a yar
letter occurs at the end of a word, when the following word begins with
a nasal consonant (anunAsika), then it can be (optionally) replaced by
another nasal. yar is the pratyAhAra for all consonants except h.
Thus, etad (this) + maya (‘made of, consisting of’, not to be confused
with mAyA) = etanmaya (‘consisting of this’). The d at the end of the
first word is a yar consonant so is replaced by the nasal in its same group
(i.e. dentals: t, th, d, dh, n), n.
e) When a jhal letter is followed by a khar
This sutra is khari cha and is understood as ‘Replace a jhal letter with
a char if it is followed by a khar.’ The jhal is ‘brought down’ from the
earlier sutra. khar refers to consonants excluding nasals, semi-vowels and
h. char covers ch, T, t, k, p, sh, Sh and s.
etad (this) + saMdhi (‘joining’ business that we are investigating) =
etatsaMdhi
The d of etad is a jhal consonant and is followed by s, which is a khar.
Accordingly, it is changed to t (being the first letter in the group to
which it belongs).
There was an example of this in Level 2 Section B 2a), when we saw
that the three words sat and chit and Ananda became sachchidAnanda.
The combination of the first two words is an example of the successive
operation of rules. Here, the t at the end of sat is a jhal letter (consonant
other than a nasal or a semi-vowel). Accordingly, it has to be replaced
by the corresponding jash consonant. The sat + chit then becomes sad +
chit. Now the second of the above rules comes into play. The d is a stu.N
consonant while ch is a schu.N. So the d has to be replaced by the

corresponding letter from the palatal group, which is j. Thus, sad + chit
has now become saj + chit. Finally, this situation corresponds to that
covered by the sixth rule. j is a jhal letter and ch is a khar. Therefore, the
j must be replaced by a ch, the first letter of the (palatal) group. Thus the
complete sequence is:
 becomes 
becomes 
 becomes 
6. Samasa (samAsa)
This was mentioned briefly at the beginning of Level 2, to give one of
the explanations for the very long ‘words’ that are often found in
Sanskrit. The word actually means ‘throwing or putting together’ but
also ‘succinctness, conciseness’. In the context of grammar, it is
understood to mean a ‘compound word’ but it probably has elements of
both the literal aspects. It is very common, to the extent that possibly
most sentences will contain at least one samAsa.
It may sometimes seem that many words, adjectives and nouns, are
‘thrown together’ to make an artificial new word but the fact that this
can be done freely makes the language extremely versatile and able to
express the most subtle ideas of an imaginative mind. The resultant word
can summarize exactly what the author wishes to say in a concise and
apt manner. And the resultant compound is treated as a word in its own
right, with only the part at the end of the compound (which is always
the principal word) needing to decline and change its endings.
Because all endings other than that of the principal noun (or
adjective) are dropped, it is the word order within the compound that
determines the relationship of one word to another, rather than the ‘part
of speech’. Normally just the ‘stem’ forms of words other than the
principal one are used. (Of course, the part-words join together
following the principles of sandhi.) An example given by Goldman and
Sutherland (Ref. 4) is as follows:

 janakatanayAsnAnapuNyodakan
This word will not be found in Monier-Williams! It is actually made
up of five words as follows:
 – janaka,
the famous king in Hindu mythology;
 – tanayA,
daughter (tanayaH is son);
 – snAna,
bathing, washing, anything used in ablutions;
 – puNya,
auspicious, pure, holy;
 – udakan,
water.
‘Water’ is the last word in the compound so this is the ‘principal’ word.
The order of ‘importance’ or applicability of the other words then passes
back one at a time. Thus the type of water that is being spoken of is
‘holy’ water; the type of holy water that is referred to is ‘that used for
bathing’. The provenance of this holy bathing water is ‘that belonging to
the daughter’ and, finally, it is ‘Janaka’ about whose daughter we are
speaking.
If this compound occurs in a sentence as an object, as for example,
‘He drank the holy bathing water of Janaka’s daughter’, then only the
last bit of the word would change its ending to the accusative (-udakam).
All of the rest of the word would remain unchanged.
C. The Four mahAvAkya-s
mahAvAkya means ‘great saying’ – maha = ‘great’, vAkya =
statement or assertion, and maha adds the extra a since vAkya is a
feminine noun and the endings have to agree. There are four ‘great
sayings’ from the Vedas that are said to encapsulate the teaching of

Advaita Vedanta. This is the non-dualistic philosophy that claims that
there are ‘not two things’, that there is only Brahman, the Absolute or
Consciousness, and we are that.
a) The first of these, from the aitareya Upanishad in the RRig Veda, is:
 – praj~nAnaMbrahma –
Consciousness is Brahman
praj~nAna is a neuter noun, hence the m ending (which changes to an
anusvAra because the next word begins with a consonant). brahma is
‘Brahman’ obviously. The two words are joined since the first does not
end on a syllable. The verb is omitted from the ‘sentence’ and, this being
the case, the word ‘is’ (asti) is understood.
b) The second, from the ChAndogya Upanishad in the sama Veda, has
already been mentioned in B 3:
 – tattvamasi –
Thou art That
The three pada-s tad (that), tvam (you), asi (second person singular
present indicative of the verb ‘to be’, i.e. ‘you are’) are joined into a
single spoken and written word. The use of the pronoun tvam is for
emphasis – You are That (i.e. Consciousness)
c) The third quotation is from the mANDUkya Upanishad in the atharva
or AtharvaNa Veda:
 – ayamAtmA brahma –
This Self is Brahman
ayam (this one), AtmA (the nominative singular ending of the
masculine noun Atman meaning the ‘individual self’). Again the verb

(asti – ‘is’) is omitted – this is very common in Sanskrit.
d) The fourth of the sayings is from the bRRihadAraNyaka Upanishad in
the yajur Veda:
 – ahaMbrahmAsmi –
I am Brahman
aham (personal pronoun ‘I’), asmi is the first person singular present
indicative of the verb ‘to be’ – ‘I am’. The use of aham is for emphasis – I
am Brahman. Again, the m of aham changes to M because the next word
begins with a consonant.
D. Some Vedic Prayers and Quotations
For practicing reading Sanskrit, any of the Upanishads or scriptures
such as the Bhagavad Gita are suitable. Many versions of these contain
the original Sanskrit, together with a transliteration and a literal
translation. Some even contain a breakdown of the Sanskrit with the
meanings of individual words.
(To my knowledge, there are several versions of the Bhagavad Gita
which provide word-by-word breakdown – Refs. 14, 15 and 16 but only
14 has the Devanagari; the others only provide transliteration. Refs. 14
and 16 only give translations, whereas Ref. 15 also has an extensive
commentary.)
It may be that you would prefer to study and learn a few key passages
of especial beauty and/or philosophical meaning. If this is the case, there
are quite a number of these and, of course, different people will point
you to their own favorites. Below are a few of my own favorites.
1. ‘Lead me from the unreal’ from the bRRihadAraNyaka upaniShad

Lead me from the unreal to the real,
Lead me from darkness into light,
Lead me from death to immortality.
sat has been met before. It is an adjective and means ‘real, being,
existing, true etc.’ The prefix a always negates the noun so that asat
means ‘unreal etc.’ ‘From’ the unreal means that the adjective has to take
the fifth case ending (called ‘ablative’, for those who studied Latin),
which would make it asataH. The personal pronoun aham – ‘I’ – changes
to mAm or ma in the accusative – ‘me’, the object of the verb ‘to lead’,
gam.
Because asataH is followed by an m, which is a ‘soft’ consonant (see
under B. 5 above), the visarga is changed to u, which immediately
combines with the preceding a to become o.
Accordingly, asataH mA becomes asato mA.
The verb is in the imperative – ‘Lead!’ and I want to be led ‘to the
real’, which is usually indicated by using the second case ending (i.e.
indirect object having the same ending as the direct object for verbs
expressing motion). ‘To the real’ is therefore sat but, this being followed
by gamaya, the t changes to d in accordance with the rule jhalAM
jasho.ante as described above. Thus asato mA sadgamaya.
tamas means ‘darkness, ignorance, illusion etc.’ I want to be led out of
this, so the noun takes the ablative case ending, tamasaH. This changes
in exactly the same way as did asataH above. This time I want to be led
‘into light’. The Sanskrit for ‘light’ is jyotis. The accusative case is jyotiH
but a rule of (visarga) saMdhi states that ‘when a visarga is preceded by
any vowel (except a or A) and followed by a vowel or a soft consonant,
it has to be changed into an r‘. Accordingly, with the jyotiH being
followed by gamaya, the combination becomes jyotirgamaya. Thus tamaso
mA jyotirgamaya.
The (masculine) noun for ‘death’ is mRRityu. Again this has to go into
the fifth case ending, which is mRRityoH. Thus, following the same rule

as before, when this combines with mA (‘me’), it becomes mRRityormA.
amRRita means ‘immortality’. This is a neuter noun and the accusative
case ending is – am so the pada is amRRitam. It has been mentioned
earlier that an m is usually changed into an M when it occurs at the end
of a word. The relevant Panini sutra is mo.anusvAraH. There is some
anuvRRitti involved as well, obviously, and the complete instructions are
that, in place of halanta m at the end of a fully inflected word when the
next word begins with a consonant, anusvAra is substituted. Since the
following letter is the g of gamaya, the m of amRRitam is therefore
changed to M. Thus mRRityormA amRRitaM gamaya. In addition, it is
pronounced the same as the anunAsika of the same group as the letter
beginning the following word, i.e. ~N. Because mRRityormA ends in A
and is followed by a word beginning with a, the a is elided and an
avagraha is inserted to show that this has happened.
2. ‘That is perfect’ from the IshA upaniShat
This is the very famous introductory ‘invocation’. The Upanishad
occurs in the initial section of the Yajur Veda, which is unusual in that
Upanishads normally occur at the end (hence vedAnta – veda anta – ‘end
of the Vedas’). The first sutra begins IshA vAsyamida{\m+}, if you recall
(the text was given in Level 2 H, when we looked at the chandra-bindu),
and the document is also sometimes called the Isavasya Upanishad.
This, then, is the ‘invocation’. It is often referred to as the ‘Perfect
Prayer’, for reasons that will become apparent.
There will be no difficulty with the first word, OM. This was
described in Level 2, C3 and H. The second word is pUrNamadaH. pUrNa
means ‘complete, entire, fulfilled etc’ and is often translated as ‘infinite’
or ‘perfect’, though neither of these words is actually given in Monier-

Williams. adas means ‘that’ as opposed to idam (which occurs in the next
word), which means ‘this’. As usual, the verb ‘to be’ is omitted
throughout and understood to be present wherever necessary, so that
this second word is translated as ‘this is complete’ (or ‘perfect’ or
‘infinite’). The first rule of visarga saMdhi is that words ending in s can be
changed to an H.
The next word, then, is pUrNamidaM and, as just explained, this
means ‘that is complete’. The m, being at the end of a word, is changed
to M, as was explained in asatoma above. (The m ending on the adjective
pUrNa is the neuter ending in the absence of any qualifying noun.)
The next word is pUrNAt. This is another example of the fifth
(pa~nchami) or ablative case, this time for the adjective pUrNa, in the
singular, masculine, meaning ‘from the complete’. Now perhaps we can
see why writers choose to use a word like ‘perfect’ or ‘infinite’ – ‘from
perfect’ will sound much better.
The last word on line 1 is pUrNamudachyate. The verb ach means ‘to
go or move’. The prefix ud means ‘up’ or ‘upwards’ in the sense of
superiority, so that udach would mean something like ‘to promote’. The
ending, however, is the passive voice, so it is translated as ‘is manifested’
or ‘comes out of’. The clause therefore means that pUrNam or ‘perfect’ is
manifested from perfect.
The next line begins with pUrNasya, the genitive case, meaning ‘of the
complete or perfect’. This is followed by pUrNamAdAya. AdAya at the
end of a word has the sense of ‘taking or seizing’ so the two words
together literally mean ‘taking the perfect of perfect’. Next comes
pUrNameva – just or exactly (eva) that same completeness or perfection
(pUrNam). avashiShyate comes from the verb avashiSh, meaning ‘to
remain’ and means ‘it remains’, being in what is called the ‘middle voice’
(Atmanepada or ‘word for one’s self’). This clause therefore means that,
when the ‘perfect of perfect’ is taken, perfect remains.
Altogether, then, the prayer can be translated:

This is perfect. That is perfect. Perfection is manifested from the
Perfect. When this perfection is taken from the Perfect, the Perfect still
remains.
3. ‘I do nothing at all’ from the bhagavadgItA
These are the eighth and ninth verses from chapter 5 of the Bhagavad
Gita. The length of the ‘words’ in the second and third lines might seem
to be enough to put anyone off the study of Sanskrit. In fact, they are
quite straightforward, as will be seen, and the overall profundity of these
verses makes them worth the effort.
The first word of line 1 is naiva. This is simply a combination of the
words na, meaning ‘not’ and eva, ‘truly’ or ‘even’. Then comes
ki~nchitkaromIti. kim + chid becomes kiMchid, meaning ‘somewhat’ or ‘a
little’. The alternative representation is because the M is spoken as
though it were the anunAsika of the same group as ch, i.e. ~n. karomi is
the first person singular present indicative of the verb kRRi, ‘to do’. iti
means ‘thus’, if anything, and is very frequently used in Sanskrit simply
to stress what has just been said or instead of quotation marks, since
these do not exist. Putting these together, karomi + iti = karomIti and
kiMchid + karomIti = kiMchitkaromIti. The d changes to a t in
accordance with the sutra khari cha as discussed in B 5e) above. The first
two words therefore translate as ‘I do not even a little’.
The next word is yukto, from the adjective yukta. This comes from the
same root as yoga and can mean ‘yoked’ or ‘joined’. Here, however, it
means ‘absorbed in abstract meditation’ and refers to a sage. It is the
subject of the whole sentence, in the nominative masculine singular,

yuktaH. The visarga changes to – u, because it is preceded by an a and
followed by a soft consonant, and then au changes to o, producing yukto.
Then comes manyeta from the verb man, ‘to think’, and is the ‘optative’
tense, meaning ‘he should think’. The next word is tattvavit. We have
already seen tad + tvam (that + you) in tattvamasi. Here, tattvavid
means ‘knowing the true nature of’. The ‘hard’ or ‘voiced’ d of tad has to
be replaced by the corresponding ‘soft’ or ‘unvoiced’ one, i.e. t since the
next word tvam begins with a soft consonant. tattvavid becomes tattvavit
for the same reason (this is the end of the sentence) and the rest of the
first line is therefore yukto manyeta tattvavit – ‘the sage, knowing the true
nature of (the Self), should think’.
The second line, though appearing as a single word, is obviously not.
The transliteration is:
pashya~nshRRiNvanspRRisha~njighrannashnangachChansv
apa~nshvasan
In fact, it is just a succession of present, active participles of verbs
describing what the speaker is (outwardly) doing when, in fact, the Self
is not doing anything at all. Each one is rendered in the masculine,
nominative singular:
pashyan – seeing (n changes to ~n on joining according to
stoH shchunA shchuH)
shRRiNvan – hearing
spRRishan – touching (n becomes ~n on joining according to
stoH shchunA shchuH)
jighran – smelling
ashnan – eating
gachChan – going
svapan – sleeping (n changes to ~n on joining according to
stoH shcunA shcuH)

shvasan – breathing
The double ‘n’ at the end of jighrann results from the following rule of
saMdhi: When ~N, N or n are at the end of a word and preceded by a
short vowel, they must be doubled if followed by a vowel.
The third line continues this list of ‘activities’:
pralapanvisRRijangRRihNannunmiShannimiShannapi
pralapanan – talking
visRRijan – sending or letting go
gRRihNan – seizing (with the mind)
unmiShan – the act of opening the eyes
nimiShan – closing the eyes
api – (emphasis) even or also
The double ‘n’ at the end of gRRihNann and nimiShann results from the
saMdhi rule given above. That at the end of unmiShann results from the
rule: ‘If a consonant (other than h) comes after a vowel and is not
followed by a vowel, it is optionally doubled.’
The last line is:
indriyANIndriyArtheShu vartanta iti dhArayan
The first part-word is indriyANi, the (nominative) plural of indriya,
referring to the five sense organs. The remainder of the word is from
indriyArtha, meaning a sense object. The ending is the seventh case,
plural (more than two, bahu-vachana) and indicates where the action of
the verb takes place, being translated as ‘in’, ‘at’ or ‘among’ etc. The next
word, vartanta, is the saMdhi change from vartante. Because vartante is
followed by a word beginning with a vowel other than a, the e changes
to ay and then the y is (optionally) dropped. vartante is the third person
plural present indicative from the verb vRRit meaning ‘to surround or
enclose’, usually referring to armies. Here, the subject of the verb is

indriya, the five sense organs – they are ‘surrounding’ the sense objects.
The role of iti, meaning ‘thus’ etc., has already been mentioned earlier.
dhArya means ‘maintaining, holding or possessing (the belief that)’.
Therefore, the Sage (who thinks ‘I do nothing at all’) maintains the belief
that the senses surround the sense objects.
Therefore, the complete translation is:
Believing that it is merely the senses surrounding the objects of sense,
though seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, eating, going, sleeping,
breathing, talking, mentally grabbing or letting go, even just opening or
closing the eyes, the Sage, knowing the true nature of (the Self) should
think, ‘I do nothing at all.’
4. ‘You are not the body’ from the aShTAvakra gItA
This is chapter 15, verse 3 of the Astavakra Gita, an uncompromising
treatise on Advaita Vedanta. Most of the words end on a syllable, so
there is much less saMdhi apparent than in the earlier examples.
 – na tvaM deho
na: not, nor, neither etc., used especially in repetition, as in this
sentence, ‘neither this, nor this etc.’
tvaM: tvam is the nominative singular of the personal pronoun ‘you’,
already met several times. The letter m at the end of a word is always
changed into an anusvAra when it is followed by a consonant.
deha is ‘the person or individual’, the ‘outward appearance or form’.
In the nominative singular, it is dehaH but, as was noted above, when
the visarga is preceded by a and followed by a soft consonant, it changes
to u and then the a and u combine to form o. This, then, simply means:
‘you (are) not the body’. The verb asi is, of course, omitted as usual.

 – na te deho
te is the sixth (genitive) case of tvam and means ‘of or belonging to you –
i.e. yours’. na and deho translate as before. This, then, means ‘nor (is) the
body yours’, asi again being understood.
 – bhoktA kartA na vA bhavAn
na vA is translated as ‘neither … nor’ though, unlike in English, vA
doesn’t usually come before the word to which it refers. bhoktA is the
nominative masculine singular of the word bhoktRRi, which means ‘one
who enjoys or experiences’. Similarly kartA is from kartRRi, ‘one who
makes or does’. bhavAn is another word meaning ‘you’, again nominative
singular, from bhavat. It is a much more formal version, though, often
being translated as ‘your honor’ or ‘your worship’. Perhaps there is an
intentional irony here. You, who think yourself an important ‘doer’ or
‘enjoyer’, are in fact not even a body. I’ll translate it with artistic license
as ‘Sir, you are neither an enjoyer nor a doer’.
 – chidrUpo.asi
chit means ‘pure thought, spirit, soul’ but in the context of Advaita is
usually translated as Consciousness, in the sense of Brahman. rUpa
means ‘form, outward appearance etc.’ The t at the end of chit becomes a
d in accordance with jhalAM jasho.ante. chidrUpa means ‘the Universal
Spirit as identified with pure thought’ and the nominative singular is
chidrUpaH. asi means ‘you are’. When the two words combine, the
visarga, being preceded and followed by an a, changes to u and, since
this is (still!) preceded by a, the a and u combine to form o. The a of asi
is now elided when speaking, but to show that it is still effectively
present, an avagraha is inserted when it is written. The phrase is
translated as ‘you are Consciousness itself’.

 – sadA sAkShI nirapekShaH
This is a continuing description of what you are. sAkShI is the masculine
nominative singular of sAkShin, meaning a ‘witness’ and this is qualified
by sadA, meaning ‘always, perpetually’ and nirapekShaH, meaning
‘desireless, indifferent’. asi is understood again. Overall translation: ‘you
are the eternal, disinterested witness’.
 – sukhaM chara
sukha means ‘comfortable, happy, prosperous’; the nominative singular
ending m is converted to M as before. The verb char can mean ‘to move
or travel through, to follow, behave, act, live etc.’ and chara is the
imperative. Exercising a little artistic license again, I would translate this
simply as ‘be happy!’
The complete translation, then, is:
You are not the body, nor is the body yours. Sir, you are neither an
enjoyer nor a doer; you are Consciousness itself – the eternal,
disinterested witness. Be happy!
5. ‘All beings exist in me’ from the bhagavadgItA
No apologies for this second extract from the Gita – this is another
famous passage. It is one constantly being quoted by a friend and I am
taking this opportunity to examine it in more depth!
This is chapter 6, verse 29.
The verb of the sentence is 
 – IkShate – third person, singular,
present indicative of the verb IkSh, ‘to see’.

 – sarvabhUtasthamAtmAnaM
There are only two words conjoined here, sarvabhUtastham and
AtmAnaM. sarva means ‘all, every, manifold’ etc. bhUta is ‘that which is
or exists, any living being (divine, human, animal or vegetable)’. stha
means ‘standing, staying, abiding, being situated in etc.’. There are not,
however, three separate words here. (If there were, you would be
wondering why the endings of words did not agree with apparent
adjectives or why nouns appeared to be in the wrong case.) The single
word sarvabhUtastha simply means ‘present in all elements or beings’.
Atman has been met already. AtmAnam is the singular, accusative, the
object of this clause; the -m ending changes to -M, as usual. So, the
ending of sarvavhUtastham indicates it applies to Atman and the
translation is therefore: ‘the Self, abiding in all beings’.
 – sarvabhUtAni chAtmani
Here there are four words, sarva, bhUtAni, cha and Atmani. This time,
Atmani is in the seventh case – ‘in the Self’. cha means ‘and, also,
moreover etc.’ cha + Atmani = chAtmani, in accordance with akaH
savarNe dIrghaH, the first rule of vowel sandhi given above. sarvabhUtAni
could have been either nominative or accusative plural. In the context of
the sentence, it is clearly the object of the verb ‘sees’ and translates as:
‘and all things (abiding) in the Self’.
 – yogayuktAtmA
This is the subject of the whole sentence. yogayukta means ‘immersed in
deep meditation, absorbed in yoga’. AtmA is the nominative singular of
Atman, used here in the context of the ‘individual soul’. Again, a + A =
A when the words join.
 – sarvatra samadarshanaH

sarvatra means ‘everywhere, at all times’; sama means ‘like, similar,
equal’ (our English ‘same’ clearly derives from it); darshanaH is the
nominative singular masculine of the participle ‘seeing, observing,
noticing etc.’ Again, however, there are not two separate words here. If
there were, sama would be expected to be in the accusative, being ‘what
is seen’. In fact, samadarshanaH is a single (compound) word, meaning,
when used with sarvatra, ‘looking on all (things or people) with equal or
indifferent eyes’. There is a great danger when trying to translate in this
way. We try to break up a word into its component parts when, in fact,
the whole word itself has a specific meaning and its components do not
separate into individually declined words.
The total translation is thus as follows:
In deep meditation, the sage, looking dispassionately on all things,
sees the Self abiding in all things, and all things abiding in the Self.
And that should be sufficient to give you the general idea. Internet
references are given in the next section for obtaining full details of the
rules of saMdhi and for downloading your own free digital Monier-
Williams, along with pointers to many other resources. With all of these
at your disposal and with the knowledge you have now gained, you
should be perfectly able to set off on your own path of discovery. To end
with, here is a further example for you to practice on, without any clues
as to its source or meaning other than to say that it is a sentiment that
we would all do well to feel towards our fellows on the planet, whatever
spiritual persuasion they may have.
If you really cannot work it out or want to check your answer, the
ITRANS and translation are provided in Appendix 5.

Resources on the Internet
A. General Resources
If you intend to utilize what you have learned from this book on your computer in any way, e.g.
incorporating Devanagari script into your own documents, then you will need appropriate fonts
and tools for generating the script.
The ITRANS scheme was devised by Avinash Chopde. The software, and details about the
system, may be downloaded from the website: http://www.aczoom.com/itrans/. It should be
noted that the site is no longer maintained or supported. The latest version is 5.32 as of Feb.
2011.
For easy ITRANS representation of Sanskrit, I recommend the use of the excellent software
package ‘Itranslator 2003’, developed by the Sannyasis of Omkarananda Ashram Himalayas,
Rishikesh, India. This program, compatible with Windows XP onwards, is freeware,
downloadable from
http://www.omkarananda-ashram.org/Sanskrit/Itranslt.html. Words can be typed in ITRANS
and converted into Devanagari and Roman diacritical forms. These can then be copied and
pasted into any Windows package. This version uses 16-bit Unicode-compatible fonts. Itranslator
99 is still available for 8-bit, non-Unicode, True Type fonts and works with earlier versions of
Windows.
Another utility for converting to Devanagari or Romanized transliteration from ITRANS (and
vice versa) has been provided from the Argentinian site (see below). This also includes a Monier-
Williams 
Dictionary 
facility. 
http://www.sanskrit-sanscrito.com.ar/en/essentials-software-
english-home-software-1/697.
http://sanskrit.gde.to/ is one of the main, general sites for Sanskrit-related information. Many
documents may be downloaded in a variety of formats: PDF, PS, ITX, GIF, TXT, Sanskrit98,
XDVNG. There are links to dictionaries and grammar-related tools and many exercises relating to
conversational Sanskrit. Fonts etc. are available for download and links are provided to ITRANS
and postscript tools. Finally, there are links to many other academic and personal Sanskrit-
related projects around the world. There are even news broadcasts in Sanskrit, in Real Audio
format.
Gerard Huet hosts the ‘Sanskrit Heritage Site’ site at http://sanskrit.inria.fr/ though many of
the resources, including a dictionary with HTML-browser search facilities, are in French-Sanskrit.
Many links are provided to other sites.
Finally, my own site has a section devoted to Sanskrit and many resources are listed there –
http://www.advaita.org.uk/sanskrit/sanskrit.htm.
B. Learning the Language

As you will certainly have realized quite early in this book, in order to learn how to sound the
letters and how correctly to pronounce words, you really need to listen to someone who knows.
Since it is unlikely that you will be sufficiently interested to go into it this deeply, however, just
follow the instructions and don’t worry about how it feels. We are unused to making full use of
our mouth and tongue in speaking and, since Sanskrit makes almost scientific use, we will find
much of it peculiar and initially uncomfortable. If you want a more thorough introduction to the
language, including writing and pronunciation, with little in the way of expense or commitment,
there is a truly excellent one available from the Internet. You can download this free of charge
and the only cost is the subsequent printing. It is called ‘A Practical Sanskrit Introductory’ and
was produced by Charles Wikner. Numerous versions of it, in different formats, may be
downloaded from the site mentioned above – http://sanskritdocuments.org/. This page has
dozens of links to related resources for learning – tutorials, grammar, dictionaries etc. I have not
looked at most of these so there are doubtless some gems to be found!
The site in Argentina – http://www.sanskrit-sanscrito.com.ar/en/ – is simply excellent. It
takes you from the basics, of learning to write and pronounce the letters, up to a very
comprehensive set of instructions and examples for combining letters (vowel, visarga and
consonant sandhi). There are translations of Patanjali’s Yoga Sutras and other scriptures and
audio files of Sanskrit pronunciation. A tremendous amount of effort has clearly gone into this
project and it shows. It is well presented and easy to read.
There 
is 
a 
very 
comprehensive 
set 
of 
online 
lessons 
to 
be 
found 
at
http://acharya.iitm.ac.in/sanskrit/lessons/lessons.html. These were produced between Oct. 1997
and Oct. 2001 by the Systems Development Laboratory at Chennai, India. Alternatively, lessons
may be downloaded for offline study. There is also a free multilingual editor, for use in
generating web pages containing Devanagari (and other) scripts. This is needed in order to be
able to make full use of the lessons. [Note that, as of Feb. 2013, there is a warning that the site is
in the process of being relocated but the resources still seem to be there.]
If you want to go on courses to study the language, there is the American Sanskrit Institute in
Connecticut – see http://www.americansanskrit.com/. There is a 14-hour weekend workshop,
but I could not find the cost given on the website. They also offer various courses on CD for
home-study. For example, ‘Sanskrit by CD 1 & 2’ is $295, as at Feb. 2013.
In the UK, courses are provided by http://www.sanskritcourses.co.uk/ in London and
Cambridge. There are beginner and intermediate levels and study for GCSE Sanskrit is also
possible.
Finally, if you are really serious about learning the language, I have already mentioned the
two-volume work by Thomas Egenes, Ref. 6. Just to repeat, Part 1 is available for free at
http://www.scribd.com/doc/32874508/Introduction-to-Sanskrit-by-Thomas-Egenes.
C. Dictionaries and Grammar Tools
Gerard Huet’s ‘Sanskrit Heritage’ site, mentioned in the first section, provides an online tool
whereby you can specify the stem of a noun (prAtipadika form), together with its gender, and it
will provide you with a tabular listing of all of the cases. There is also a ‘sandhi analysis’ utility
that will attempt to break a sentence into words. http://sanskrit.inria.fr/. Declensions of nouns

and conjugations of verbs can be found at http://sanskrit.inria.fr/DICO/grammar.html.
The University of Cologne has done an incredible job of digitizing much of the Monier-
Williams Sanskrit-to-English dictionary. This may be used online at http://www.sanskrit-
lexicon.uni-koeln.de/scans/MWScan/tamil/index.html.
However, it may be downloaded in its entirety (19Mb compressed to 7Mb) together with a
superb utility for accessing the content. This facility has been provided by Louis Bontes at
http://members.chello.nl/l.bontes/. NB: This has not been maintained since 2002 and is only in
Beta form – but it works!
D. Documents in Sanskrit
(In addition to sites already mentioned above, which may also contain downloadable
documents.)
Bhagavad Gita:
The Sanskrit original, together with verse-by-verse translation into many languages, is available
at http://www.bhagavadgita.org/ (with audio output too if you have the RealPlayer addon for
your browser).
Upanishads:
There are word-by-word translations, together with the original Sanskrit, for a number of the
main Upanishads at http://www.vidyavrikshah.org, although you may have to install some fonts
in order to see them. You can download all of the ITRANS for these from
http://sanskritdocuments.org/, and convert them to Devanagari using the resources mentioned in
Section A.
Chants:
If you would like to hear some Sanskrit being chanted, there are a number of sites which offer
such facilities, e.g. http://sanskrit.safire.com/. There are a huge number of documents in PDF
format which can be followed while you listen to them being read.
Miscellaneous:
Many additional and other resources, together with any updates or corrections to these links,
may be found at my own website – www.advaita.org.uk – under the Sanskrit menu.

Glossary of Sanskrit Terms
Note: A word will normally be given in typical English spelling (non-
italic) followed by the ITRANS representation (italic) in brackets, e.g.
‘Devanagari (Devanagari)’. For some definitions, no Sanskrit equivalent
is appropriate. In some cases, a word will never be encountered in
‘English’ form and only the ITRANS representation will be given, e.g.
ach.
ach – the pratyAhAra, from the maheshvarANi sUtrANi, used to
identify all the vowels.
ach saMdhi – (the rules relating to) the joining of vowels at the end
of one word and the beginning of the next. ach is the pratyAhAra for ‘all
vowels’.
adhikAra – means ‘topic’ or ‘subject’. The sutras in the maheshvarANi
sUtrANi, for example, occur within chapters. The main subject is
introduced at the beginning. Key words are assumed to apply to sutras in
the rest of the chapter and are not repeated. They have to be mentally
‘brought down’ from the earlier sutras as necessary (anuvRRitti).
aghoSha – refers to those letters that make a hard sound in their
pronunciation and could not really be regarded as sounding a syllable.
(By contrast, letters such as ‘b’, for example, might be written ‘ba’ or ‘bu’
or actually something in between the two). Monier-Williams defines
them as ‘non-sonant’, having ‘an absence of all sound or soft murmur’.
They are sounded by opening the mouth and allowing the basic a sound
to emerge, modified as necessary by altering the mouth (tongue, lips) as
necessary. The unvoiced or aghoSha letters are all the vowels (except for
the visarga) and the first two rows of the main set of consonants, i.e. k,

ch, T, t, p and kh, Ch, Th, th, ph), plus the sibilants (sh, Sh, s). See ghoSha,
unvoiced, voiced.
akShara – syllable or letter of the alphabet. The word literally means
‘imperishable’.
al – the pratyAhAra, from the maheshvarANi sUtrANi, used to identify
all the letters.
Alpaprana (alpaprANa) – describes a consonant that is sounded
without any additional expelling of air. It means ‘with little breath’.
Specifically, it is used for those consonants on the first and third rows of
the main groups, namely k, ch, T, t, p and g, j, D, d, b.
Antastha (antaHstha) – the Sanskrit term for the ‘semi-vowels’: y, r,
l, v. These are formed by combination of i, RRi, LLi and u, respectively
with the vowel a. The word literally means ‘stand between’.
Anunasika (anunAsika) – refers to one of the letters that is sounded
‘through the nose’, i.e. the last row of the main groups of consonants: N,
n, N, n, m.
Anusvara (anusvAra) – This literally means ‘after sound’. It is
represented as ‘aM‘ but is not actually a letter and does not occur on its
own. It changes the sound of a letter, causing the associated vowel to be
sounded through the nose. In ITRANS, it is represented by M or .n and in
Romanized transliteration by a dot, above or below the preceding
consonant. The precise nature of the sound is determined by the
consonant that follows. It will take on the sound of the anunAsika in the
same group as this consonant. E.g. in saMdhi, the sound will be that of n
while in shaMkara, it will be that of ~N.
anuvRRitti – literally means ‘the continued course or influence of a
preceding rule on what follows’. The sutras in the maheshvarANi sUtrANi,
for example, occur within chapters. The main subject is introduced at
the beginning. Key words are assumed to apply to sutras in the rest of
the chapter and are not repeated. They have to be mentally ‘brought
down’ from the earlier sutra as necessary.

Ardachandra (ardhachandra) – the concave shape sometimes used
in old manuscripts instead of the anusvAra but performing the same
function. It looks like the chandra bindu but without the dot. It means
‘crescent-shaped’ and can be generated in ITRANS by putting .c after the
related letter.
Ashtadyayi (aShTAdhyAyl) – the classic work on Sanskrit grammar
produced by Panini, circa 500 BC.
Avagraha (avagraha) – the special symbol used between a word
ending in e or o and one beginning with a to indicate that the a is not
sounded. It is similar to elision in French and is shown in Romanized
transliteration by dropping the a and inserting an apostrophe, again
similar to French. In ITRANS the a is left unchanged but a single full
stop is inserted instead of the space between the two words.
avyaya – ‘indeclinable’, applied to those prAtipadika-s that do not add
vibhakti endings.
Ayogavaha (ayogavAha) – term for the anusvAra and visarga, which
are not really vowels but are not consonants either. The word means ‘not
belonging to’. See yogavAha.
bahu-vachana – ‘plural’, with respect to ‘number’ of nouns or verbs.
chaturthI vibhakti – the fourth, dative case of nouns, i.e. the indirect
object, as in ‘he gives the letter to the postman‘.
Cerebral – mouth position used for speaking one of the main groups
of letters, the mUrdhanya group, with the tongue raised to the roof of the
mouth – RRi, RRI, T, Th, D, Dh, N, r, Sh.
Chandra-bindu (chandra bindu) – the name for the special symbol
(shallow, concave bowl, containing a dot) that sometimes appears above
a vowel. Its most frequent usage is as part of the special praNava shabda
symbol for OM. The literal meaning is ‘moon-like spot’ and it indicates
that the vowel over which it appears should be sounded through the
nose. It is represented in ITRANS by .N after the vowel.
chu.N – an abbreviation used to refer to the halanta palatal

consonants, i.e. ch, Ch, j, jh and ~n. The .N inserts a chandra bindu above
the chu and causes the u to be sounded through the nose.
Complex vowels – refers to e, o, ai and au, so-called because they are
formed by combining the simple vowels i and u with a. The Sanskrit
term is saMyukta svara.
Dantya (dantya) – mouth position used for speaking one of the main
groups of letters, the dental group, with the tongue touching the back of
the teeth – LLi, LLI, t, th, d, dh, n, l, s.
Dental – mouth position used for speaking one of the main groups of
letters, the dantya group, with the tongue touching the back of the teeth
– LLi, LLI, t, th, d, dh, n, l, s.
Devanagari (devanAgari) – the name given to the script used for
Sanskrit. It means ‘city of the gods’.
Dhatu (dhAtu) – the ‘root’ of a word. There are only about two
thousand of these and all Sanskrit words are derived from one or more.
Words are formed by adding prefix/suffix endings, called pratyaya, to
form stem-words, called prAtipadika. These are the form encountered in
the dictionary. They then add the appropriate endings (for nouns and
verbs), called vibhakti, to form actual ‘words’, called pada.
Diacritic or Diacritical (marks) – the correct name for the special
accents used in the Romanized transliteration of Sanskrit. They include
lines above some letters and dots above or below others. They are
needed because the Sanskrit alphabet has many more than the 26
characters of the English alphabet. See Transliteration.
dIrgha – refers to the long vowels: A, I, RRI, LLI and U, sounding for
two ‘measures’. The short form is hrasva. The complex vowels e, ai, o and
au are necessarily long since they combine other vowel sounds with a.
dvitIyA vibhakti – the second, accusative case of nouns, i.e. the direct
object, as in ‘he opens the box‘.
dvi-vachana – dual, with respect to ‘number’ of nouns.
eka-vachana – singular, with respect to ‘number’ of nouns.

External sandhi (saMdhi) – the joining of letters at the end of one
word and the beginning of the next.
ghoSha – refers to those letters that could be thought of as sounding a
syllable in their pronunciation. The voiced or ghoSha letters are all of the
consonants except for the first two rows of the main group, plus the
visarga and semi-vowels. i.e. g, j, D, d, b; gh, jh, Dh, dh, bh; N, n, N, n, m;
sh, Sh, s, h, H, y, r, l, v). See aghoSha, unvoiced, voiced.
Guna (guNa) – term used to refer to the ‘stronger’ vowels, formed by
adding a to the simple vowels. a remains as a, i becomes e, u becomes o,
RRi becomes ar, and LLi becomes al. When a further a is added, the guNa
forms become vRRiddhi. This principle becomes important when
considering how part-words combine to form words (so-called ‘internal
saMdhi‘).
Guru (guru) – In the context of Sanskrit pronunciation, this is used to
refer to a syllable that is stressed. guru means ‘heavy’. An unstressed
syllable is called laghu.
Guttural – mouth position used for speaking one of the main groups
of letters, the kaNThya group, involving the throat – a, A, k, kh, g, gh,
~N, h.
hal – the pratyAhAra, from the maheshvarANi sUtrANi, used to identify
all the consonants.
hal saMdhi – (the rules relating to) the joining of consonants at the
end of one word and the beginning of the next. hal is the pratyAhAra for
‘all consonants’.
Halanta (halanta) – a consonant that is not sounded with a vowel
after it. It is marked as such by the use of a virAma. The term derives
from the pratyAhAra ‘hal‘, which refers to ‘any consonant’, and anta,
which means ‘end’, since such consonants normally occur at the end of a
word.
hrasva – refers to the short vowels: a, i, RRi, LLi and u, sounding for
one ‘measure’. The long form is dIrgha.

Internal sandhi (saMdhi) – the joining of letters at the end of one
part-word and the beginning of the next within a single word.
It (it) – the term given to the final, halanta letters at the end of each
sutra in the maheshvarANi sUtrANi. They are used as indicator letters
only and are not themselves included in the letters defined by a
pratyAhAra. The correct term is it varna, where varna means ‘sound or
letter’.
ITRANS – the transliterated form of Sanskrit most commonly
encountered on the Internet. It uses only those characters that may be
typed easily on a computer keyboard so that Sanskrit words can be
communicated via email etc. See Transliteration.
jhal – the pratyAhAra for ‘any consonant other than a nasal or a semi-
vowel’.
Kanthya (kaNThya) – mouth position used for speaking one of the
main groups of letters, the guttural group, involving the throat – a, A, k,
kh, g, gh, ~N, h. kanthah means ‘throat’.
karman – the direct object of the verb in a sentence.
kartRRi – the ‘agent’ of the verb in a sentence, i.e. ‘subject’.
kriyA – the verb in a sentence.
kriyAvibhakti – number and tense endings added to verbs as part of
conjugation. Also called ti~N-vibhakti.
kriyA-visheShaNa – an adverb.
Labial – mouth position used for speaking one of the main groups of
letters, the oShThya group, involving the lips – u, U, p, ph, b, bh, m, v.
laghu – In the context of Sanskrit pronunciation, this is used to refer
to a syllable that is not stressed. laghu means ‘light’. A stressed syllable is
called guru.
Lexicographers (L) – the term used in the Sanskrit–English
dictionary of Monier-Williams to indicate that the related word has
never actually been found in any scriptural or historical text and is really
only of academic interest (to those who compile dictionaries).

li~Nga – gender of nouns.
madhyama-puruSha – ‘middle person’ of verbs – equivalent to
English second person, i.e. ‘you’.
Mahaprana (mahAprANa) – describes a consonant that is sounded
with additional expelling of air. It means ‘with much breath’.
Specifically, it is used for those consonants on the second and fourth
rows of the main groups, namely kh, Ch, Th, th, ph and gh, jh, Dh, dh, bh.
Maheshvarani Sutrani (maheshvarANi sUtrANi) – a set of 14 sutras,
each of which is actually just a group of letters from the alphabet. The
shorthand term of a single letter, together with one of the letters at the
end of one of the 14 groups, is then used to specify all of the letters
(excluding group terminating letters, which are called it) between those
two. In this way, collections of letters with specific properties may be
defined e.g. all consonants, all semi-vowels etc. The combination of two
letters used for this purpose is called a pratyAhAra. The system was
defined by Panini about two and a half thousand years ago. maheshvara
means ‘great lord’.
mAtrA – ‘measure’, in respect of the length of a vowel. Short (hrasva)
vowels such as a are sounded for one mAtrA, long (dIrgha) for two
mAtrA, and pluta vowels for three or more.
mAtRRikA – the name given to all of the vowel sounds plus the
anusvAra and visarga: a, A, i, I, RRi, RRI, LLi, LLI, u, U, e, o, ai, au, aM,
aH. The word literally means ‘divine mothers’ but is used in the sense of
written characters that have magical powers.
mUrdhanya – mouth position used for speaking one of the main
groups of letters, the cerebral group, with the tongue raised to the roof
of the mouth – RRi, RRI, T, Th, D, Dh, N, r, Sh.
nAman – a noun.
nAmavibhakti – number, gender and case endings added to nouns
and adjectives; also called sup-vibhakti.
napuMsaka-li~Nga – neuter gender of nouns.

oShThya – mouth position used for speaking one of the main groups
of letters, the labial group, involving the lips – u, U, p, ph, b, bh, m, v.
Pada (pada) – the term for a word that has added all necessary
endings for nouns/verbs, so that it can be used without further alteration
in a sentence. See dhAtu, prAtipadika.
Palatal – mouth position used for speaking one of the main groups of
letters, the tAlavya group, with the back of the tongue raised to the roof
of the mouth – i, I, ch, Ch, j, jh, ~n, y, sh.
pa~nchami vibhakti – the fifth, ablative case of nouns, indicating
‘from’ or ‘out of’ etc., e.g. she walks from the house.
Panini (pANini) – the Sanskrit grammarian, circa 500 BC, who
collated all of the rules for sandhi and grammar in a book called the
aShTAdhyAyI.
parasmaipada – active voice of verbs.
pluta – refers to a prolonged vowel (i.e. longer than the two measures
of dIrgha). It is represented by writing the (Sanskrit) number ‘3’ below
right or immediately after the letter to be sounded prolonged.
Pranava shabda (praNava shabda) – term for the special symbol for
the mystical word OM.
prathama-puruSha – ‘first person’ of verbs – equivalent to English
third person, i.e. ‘he, she or it’.
prathamA vibhakti – first, nominative case of nouns, i.e. the subject
of a sentence.
prAtipadika – the ‘stem-form’ of words, as found in the dictionary, i.e.
without endings for gender, number, case, tense etc. See dhAtu.
Pratyahara (pratyAhAra) – the term given to the two-letter (single
syllable), shorthand identifier used to define a group of letters in the
maheshvarANi sUtrANi. (The same technique is also used elsewhere and
is given the same name.)
pratyaya – prefixes or suffixes, added to a dhAtu, to form a
prAtipadika.

puM-li~Nga – masculine gender of nouns.
Purnavirama (pUrNavirAma) – the double vertical line used to mark
the end of a paragraph or verse of a sUtra. It is generated in ITRANS by
two full stops or two ‘shift + \’.
puruSha – ‘person’ in respect of verb-endings.
Romanized – the transliterated form of Sanskrit most commonly
encountered in books and, for example, PDF (portable document format)
files downloaded from the Internet. It uses the ‘English’ alphabet
together with ‘diacritical marks’ or accents such as dots above or below
letters. See Transliteration.
samAsa – a compound word. The word literally means ‘placed
together’.
saMbodhana – vocative case of nouns. Nouns are generally regarded
as having seven case endings but this is effectively the eighth. It is used
when addressing someone directly, e.g. ‘Boy, come over here!’
saMhitA – Panini’s alternative word for sandhi. It is defined as ‘the
closest drawing together of sounds’.
saMj~na – a proper noun.
Samyoga (saMyoga) – term for a conjunct consonant, i.e. two or
more consonants joined together without an intervening vowel sound.
The word literally means ‘joined together’.
Samyukta svara (saMyukta svara) – term for the complex vowels, e,
o, ai, au. saMyukta means ‘joined together’ or ‘combined’.
Sandhi (saMdhi) – a comprehensive set of rules governing the way in
which sounds combine when they appear next to each other. These
prevent, for example, the situation where one word ends in a vowel and
the next word begins with one, by merging the two. There are three
‘classes’ of sandhi: vowel, consonant, and visarga.
saptamI vibhakti – seventh, locative case of nouns, referring to the
time or place where the action takes place, e.g. they ate their picnic on
the lawn.

sarva-nAman – a pronoun. The word literally means ‘name of all’.
ShaShThI vibhakti – sixth, genitive case of nouns e.g. the dog‘s bone
(the bone belonging to the dog).
Savarna (savarNa) – refers to a ‘similar sound’ in the context of
sandhi. The word literally means ‘of the same family’. E.g. a and A are
savarNa.
Shakti (shakti) – another name (see mAtRRikA) given to all of the
vowel sounds plus the anusvAra and visarga: a, A, i, I, RRi, RRI, LLi, LLI,
u, U, e, o, ai, au, aM, aH. The word literally means ‘power’ or ‘strength’.
shar – the pratyAhAra, from the maheshvarANi sUtrANi, used to
identify the sibilants.
Sibilant – refers to the ‘ss’ sounds sh, Sh and s. The Sanskrit term is
UShman, though this also includes the letter h.
Sparsha (sparsha) – term for the 25 consonants, i.e. excluding semi-
vowels, sibilants and h. The term literally means ‘touching’ or ‘contact’
and refers to the fact that the underlying vowel sound is modified by
contact in the mouth in such a way as to ‘stop’ it in some way.
strI-li~Nga – feminine gender of nouns.
sup-vibhakti – number, gender and case endings added to nouns and
adjectives; also called namavibhakti. sup is a pratyAhAra.
Svara (svara) – Sanskrit term for a vowel, literally meaning ‘sound’.
tAlavya – mouth position used for speaking one of the main groups of
letters, the palatal group, with the back of the tongue raised to the roof
of the mouth – i, I, ch, Ch, j, jh, ~n, y, sh.
ti~N-vibhakti – number and tense endings added to verbs as part of
conjugation. Also called kriyAvibhakti. ti~N is a pratyAhAra.
Transliteration – a representation of the Sanskrit alphabet using
letters of the English alphabet, together with other special characters.
See Romanized, ITRANS.
tRRitIyA vibhakti – the third or instrumental case of nouns, e.g. ‘he
writes with a pen‘ or ‘she travels by bus‘.

tu.N – an abbreviation used to refer to the halanta dental consonants,
i.e. t, th, d, dh and n. The .N inserts a chandra bindu above the tu and
causes the u to be sounded through the nose.
Unvoiced – refers to those letters that do not sound like a syllable in
their pronunciation. A hard, clipped sound is made by opening the
mouth and allowing the basic a sound to emerge, modified by altering
the mouth (tongue, lips) as necessary. The unvoiced or aghoSha letters
are all the vowels (except for the visarga) and the first two rows of the
main set of consonants, i.e. k, ch, T, t, p and kh, Ch, Th, th, ph), plus the
sibilants (sh, Sh, s). See aghoSha, ghoSha, voiced.
Upasarga (upasarga) – a preposition. Often occurs as a prefix to a
verb and is separable.
Ushman (UShman) – the Sanskrit term for the sibilants, sh, Sh and s,
together with h. The word itself literally means ‘heat, steam or vapor’.
uttama-puruSha – ‘last person’ of verbs – equivalent to English first
person, i.e. ‘I’.
vachana – number of a noun, singular, dual or plural.
Vedic anusvAra – the symbol of a chandra bindu together with a
virAma appearing at the end of a word but not over/under a specific
letter. It means that the preceding word is not pronounced in the usual
way but in so-called ‘Vedic pronunciation’, presumably in order to
satisfy metrical requirements of the poetry. See example in Level 2
Section H.
Vibhakti (vibhakti) – number, gender and case endings added to
nouns and adjectives are called namavibhakti or sup-vibhakti. Similarly,
verb endings for tense and number are called kriyAvibhakti or ti~N-
vibhakti. Only when all such endings have been added to a prAtipadika
do we get a ‘word’ or pada.
Virama (virAma) – the diagonal mark underneath a consonant to
indicate that it is not to be sounded with a vowel after it. The literal
meaning is ‘cessation, termination or end’. (All consonants are sounded

with ‘a’ by default, unless indicated otherwise.) A consonant with such a
mark is called an halanta consonant. OR – the single vertical mark to
indicate the end of a sentence or single line of a verse of poetry.
Visarga (visarga) – this literally means ‘sending out’ or ‘emission’. It
is represented as ‘aH’ but is not actually a letter and does not occur on
its own. Its effect is to add a brief, breathing out sound after the vowel
sound associated with a consonant. It is represented by two dots placed
to the right of the associated letter.
visheShaNa – adjective.
Voiced – refers to those letters that make a syllable in their
pronunciation; a soft ‘murmuring’ sound unlike the hard, clipped sound
of the unvoiced letters. The voiced or ghoSha letters are all of the
consonants except for the first two rows of the main group, plus the
visarga and semi-vowels. i.e. g, j, D, d, b; gh, jh, Dh, dh, bh; N, n, N, n, m;
sh, Sh, s, h, H, y, r, l, v). See aghoSha, ghoSha, unvoiced.
Vriddhi (vRRiddhi) – term used to refer to the ‘strongest’ vowel
sounds, when a has been added a second time to the simple vowels.
(When a has been added once, the guNa form results.) The vRRiddhi form
of a is A, of i is ai, of u is au, of RRi is Ar and of LLi is Al. This principle
becomes important when considering how part-words combine to form
words (so-called ‘internal saMdhi‘).
Vyanjana (vya~njana) – Sanskrit term for a consonant, meaning a
‘decoration’ (of the basic vowel sound).
yaN – the pratyAhAra, from the maheshvarANi sUtrANi, used to
identify the semi-vowels.
yar – the pratyAhAra for all the consonants except h.
Yogavaha (yogavAha) – term for the anusvAra and visarga, which are
not really vowels but are not consonants either. The word means
‘belonging to’, since they need another ‘real’ letter in order to have any
meaning. See ayogavAha.

Dictionary of Common Sanskrit Spiritual Words
[Each word is given in the following format:
Typical English Spelling (ITRANS representation, Devanagari
Script) – meaning
(Words appear in order of the English (Roman) alphabet, not the
Sanskrit alphabet.)]
a (a, 
) – as a prefix to another word, it changes it into the negative.
e.g. vidya – knowledge, avidya – ignorance.
abhidharma (abhidharma, 
) – the metaphysical scriptures of
Buddhist philosophy.
acharya (AchArya, 
) – a spiritual guide or teacher. See
Shankaracharya.
achintya (achintya, 
) – inconceivable or beyond thought.
adhyaropa (adhyAropa, 
) – erroneously attributing one thing
to another.
adhyasa (adhyAsa, 
) – used to refer to the ‘mistake’ that we
make when we ‘superimpose’ a false appearance upon the reality or mix
up the real and the unreal. The classical example is when we see a snake
instead of a rope, which is used as a metaphor for seeing the world of
objects instead of the reality of the Self. This concept is fundamental to
Advaita and Shankara devotes a separate section to it at the beginning of
his commentary on the Brahmasutra.
Advaita (advaita, 
) – not (a) two (dvaita); non-dual philosophy.
agamin (AgAmin, 
) – that type of sanskara which is
generated in reaction to current situations and which will not bear fruit
until sometime in the future. It literally means ‘impending’,

‘approaching’ or ‘coming’. Also called kriyamANa, which means ‘being
done’. See prarabdha, sanchita, sanskara.
aham (aham, 
) – I am.
aham vritti (aham vRRitti, 
) – the thought ‘I am’ as opposed to
thoughts about objects, feelings etc. – idam vritti. See vritti.
ahankara (ahaMkAra, 
) – the making, kara (kAra), of the
utterance ‘I’, aham (aham); this is the equivalent of what we would call
the ‘ego’ but specifically refers to the identification or attachment of our
true Self with something else, usually the body or mind but can be much
more specific e.g. I am a teacher, I am a woman. It is one of the ‘organs’
of the mind in classical Advaita – see antakarana.
ajati (ajAti, 
) – a – no or not; jAti – creation; the principle that
the world and everything in it, including these mind-body appearances,
were never created or ‘brought into existence’. Most clearly stated by
Gaudapada in his karika on the Mandukya Upanishad.
ajnana (aj~nAna, 
) – (spiritual) ignorance. See jnana.
anadi (anAdi, 
) – without any beginning, often used to
describe ‘ignorance’.
ananda (Ananda, 
) – ‘true’ happiness; usually called ‘bliss’ to
differentiate it from the transient variety that always alternates with
pain or misery. It is an aspect of our true nature and is often combined
with the other elements of our real nature – sat and chit – into a single
word, satchidananda. See sat, chit and satchidananda.
anatman (anAtman, 
) – something other than spirit or soul
(not Self or atman); perceptible world. See atman.
anirvachaniya (anirvachanIya, 
) – unutterable, indescribable,
not to be mentioned. Used to ‘describe’ the nature of reality etc.
anitya (anitya, 
) – transient. Also anityatva (anityatva, 
) – transient or limited existence (mortality).
anta (anta, 
) – end, conclusion, death etc.
antakarana (antaHkaraNa, 
) – used to refer to the overall

‘organ’ of mind; the seat of thought and feeling. It consists of a number
of separate functions – see manas, buddhi, chitta and ahankara.
anubhava 
(anubhava, 
) 
– 
perception, 
understanding,
experience; knowledge derived from personal observation.
anumana (anumAna, 
) – inference (in logic); one of the six
means of obtaining knowledge. See pramana.
anupalabdhi (anupalabdhi, 
) – non-perception, non-
recognition; one of the six means of obtaining knowledge. See pramana.
apaurusheya (apauruSheya, 
) – literally ‘not coming from
human beings’; used to refer to the shruti – scriptural texts passed on
verbatim from generation to generation since their original observation
by realized sages. See shruti.
artha (artha, 
) – acquisition of wealth. See purushartha.
arthapatti (arthApatti, 
) – inference from circumstances,
presumption; one of the six means of obtaining knowledge. See pramana.
asat (asat, 
 – non-existent. See sat.
asparsha (asparsha, 
) – intangible, ‘touchless’; name given to
the ‘contentless’ yoga of Gaudapada in the Mandukya Upanishad.
Astavakra (aShTAvakra, 
) – the eponymous Sage of the
Astavakra Gita (or Samhita). The word literally means ‘twisted’ (vakra)
in ‘eight’ (aShTan) ways. Astavakra was so called because he was born
severely deformed after being cursed in the womb by his father (because
the unborn child had criticized him for making mistakes while reading
the scriptures!). (Later in life, after he had secured his father’s release
through defeating the court philosopher in debate, his father blessed him
and, after swimming in a sacred river, he was cured.) See gita, samhita.
astika (Astika, 
) – literally ‘there is or exists’; used to refer to
one who believes in the existence of God or, more specifically, one who
defers to the authority of the Vedas. See nastika, veda.
atma (Atma, 
) – see atman.
atmabodha (Atmabodha, 
) – knowledge of Self; a book

attributed to Shankara.
atman (Atman, 
) – the Self. Usually used to refer to one’s true
(individual) nature or consciousness but Advaita tells us that there is no
such thing as an ‘individual’ and that this atman is the same as the
universal Consciousness, Brahman. See also jiva.
atmavicara (AtmavichAra, 
) – vicAra in this context means
reflection or examination; upon the Atman, the Self. See atman.
avacheda-vada (avachCheda-vAda, 
) – theory that the
Self is limited by ignorance in the forms of upadhis. See upadhi.
avarana (AvaraNa, 
) – the ‘veiling’ power of maya. In the
rope–snake metaphor, this power prevents us from seeing the reality of
the rope. See maya, vikshepa.
avidya (avidyA, 
) – ignorance (in a spiritual sense) i.e. that
which prevents us from realizing the Self. See also maya.
avrita (AvRRita, 
) – covered or concealed.
badha (bAdha, 
) – sublation or subration. This is the process by
which an accepted point of view or understanding is superseded by a
totally different one when some new information is received. An
example is seeing a lake in the desert and then realizing that it is only a
mirage.
bandha or bandhana (bandha or bandhana, 
 or 
) –
bondage, attachment to the world.
bauddha (bauddha, 
) – in the mind, related to the intellect;
related to (the teaching of) Buddha.
Bhagavad (bhagavad, 
) – in the context of Bhagavad Gita (on
its own, the d would change to a t) it refers to the god Krishna, and
Bhagavad Gita means Krishna’s Song. (Bhagavat means ‘prosperous,
happy’ etc.) See gita.
Bhagavad Gita (bhagavadgItA, 
) – the scriptural text
forming part of the Hindu epic, the Mahabarata. It is a dialogue between
Krishna, the charioteer/God, and the warrior Arjuna, representing you

and me, on the battlefield of Kurukshetra prior to the commencement of
battle. The scripture is regarded as smriti. See Bhagavad, smriti.
bhakta (bhakta, 
) – one who practices bhakti yoga. See bhakti
yoga.
bhakti (bhakti, 
) yoga – devotion or worship. See also karma and
jnana.
bhashya (bhAShya, 
) – explanatory work, exposition or
commentary on some other scriptural document. Thus Shankara, for
example, has written bhashyas on a number of Upanishads, the
Bhagavad Gita and the Brahmasutra.
bhava (bhAva, 
) – condition or state of body or mind; continuity
of the thread of existence through successive births (Buddhism)
bhoktri (bhoktRRi, 
) – one who enjoys; an ‘experiencer’ or
‘feeler’.
Brahma (brahma, 
) – God as the creator of the universe in Hindu
mythology (the others are Vishnu, viShNu, the preserver and Shiva,
shiva, the destroyer). NB: Not to be confused with Brahman!
brahmacharya (brahmacharya, 
) – the first stage of the
traditional Hindu spiritual path, in which the Brahmin begins his life as
an unmarried, religious and chaste student. (charya means ‘due
observance of all rites and customs’.) See also grihasta, sanyasa,
vanaprastha.
Brahman (brahman, 
) – the universal Self, Absolute or God.
There is only Brahman. It derives from the Sanskrit root bRRih, meaning
to grow great or strong, and could be thought of as the adjective ‘big’
made into a noun, implying that which is greater than anything. See also
atman, Brahma, jiva, jivatman, paramatman.
Brahma Sutra (brahmasUtra, 
) – a book (in sutra form, which
is terse verse!) by Vyasa. This book is the best known of the third
accepted source of knowledge (nyaya prasthana). Effectively, it attempts
to summarize the Upanishads. It has been extensively commented on by

the three main schools of Vedanta philosophy: dvaita, advaita and
vishishtadvaita, and the proponents of each claim that it substantiates
their beliefs. Shankara has commented on it and provided extensive
arguments against any interpretation other than that of Advaita. See
bhashya, nyaya prasthana, sruti, smriti.
brahmavidya (brahmavidyA, 
) – knowledge of the one Self .
See brahman.
Brihadaranyaka (bRRihadAraNyaka, 
) – one of the major
Upanishads (and possibly the oldest). See Upanishad.
buddhi (buddhi, 
) – the organ of mind responsible for
discrimination and judgment, perhaps nearest equated to the intellect in
Western usage. See also, ahankara, antakarana, manas and chitta.
chakra (chakra, 
) – literally ‘circle’ or ‘wheel’; one of the points in
the spine through which energy is supposed to flow in kundalini yoga.
chatushtaya sampatti (chatuShTaya sampatti, 
) – the
fourfold prerequisites specified by Shankara as needed by a seeker before
he or she can successfully seek Self-knowledge. chatuShTaya means
‘fourfold’; sampatti means ‘success’ or ‘accomplishment’. See sadhana,
vairagya, viveka, mumukshutvam.
chetana (chetana, 
) – consciousness, intelligence etc.
chit (chit, 
) – pure thought or Consciousness. See ananda, sat,
satchidananda.
chitta (chitta, 
) – the organ (part) of mind responsible for
memory. See antakarana, ahankara, buddhi, manas.
dama (dama, 
) – self-restraint but understood as control over the
senses; one of the ‘six qualities’ that form part of Shankara’s chatushtaya
sampatti. See chatushtaya sampatti.
darshana (darshana, 
) – audience or meeting (with a guru);
viewpoint; system of philosophy (the six classical Indian philosophical
systems are: purvamimamsa, uttaramimamsa, nyaya, vaisheshika,
Sankhya, yoga).

dehatmavada (dehAtmavAda, 
) – materialism.
deha (deha, 
) – person, individual, outward form or appearance
(body).
dharma (dharma, 
) – customary practice, conduct, duty, justice
and morality. The favored meaning of most traditional teachers is,
however, ‘nature, character, essential quality’, which they often translate
as ‘essence’. Our own dharma (svadharma) is what we ought to do with
our lives in order to dissolve our accumulation of sanskara. See sanskara,
karma.
drishtanta (dRRiShTAnta, 
) – ‘the end or aim of what is seen’,
example or instance.
drishti-srishti-vada (dRRiShTisRRiShTivAda, 
) – the
theory that our mistaken view of the world arises from a mental image
(based on memory and sense data) superimposed upon the reality.
dRRiShTi means ‘seeing’; sRRiShTi means ‘creation’; vAda means ‘thesis’
or ‘doctrine’. See also adhyasa, ajati, srishti-drishti-vada.
dukha (duHkha, 
) – pain, sorrow, trouble.
dvaita (dvaita, 
) – duality, philosophy of dualism; belief that God
and the atman are separate entities. Madhva is the scholar most often
associated with this philosophy.
Gaudapada (gauDapAda, 
) – the author of the commentary
(karika) on the Mandukya Upanishad. He is said to have been the
teacher of Shankara’s teacher. See karika, Mandukya, Upanishad.
gita (gItA, 
) – a sacred song or poem but more usually refers to
philosophical or religious doctrines in verse form (gIta means ‘sung’).
The most famous are the Bhagavad Gita and Astavakra Gita. If the word
is used on its own, it will be referring to the former. See Bhagavad,
Astavakra.
grihasta (gRRihastha, 
) – this is the second stage of the
traditional Hindu spiritual path, called the period of the ‘householder’, in
which the Brahmin performs the duties of master of the house and father

of a family. See also brahmacharya, grihasta, sanyasa, vanaprastha.
guna (guNa, 
) – according to classical Advaita, creation can be
said to be describable by three ‘attributes’: sattva, rajas and tamas.
Everything – matter, thoughts, feelings – can be described as a mixture
of these three in varying degrees and it is the relative proportions that
determine the nature of the thing in question. In Sankhya philosophy,
these are actual substances, together constituting the total prakRRiti or
pradhAna that makes up the material universe. See sattwa, rajas and
tamas for more details.
guru (guru, 
) – literally ‘heavy’; used to refer to one’s elders or a
person of reverence but more commonly in the West to indicate one’s
spiritual teacher.
hetu (hetu, 
) – cause or reason; the logical reason or argument in a
syllogism.
idam vritti (idam vRRitti, 
) – thoughts of objects, concepts,
feelings etc., as opposed to aham vritti – the thought ‘I am’. See vritti.
Ishvara (Ishvara, 
) – the Lord; efficient and material cause of the
phenomenal universe. See saguna Brahman.
jagat (jagat, 
) – the world (earth), humankind etc.
jagrat (jAgrat, 
 – the waking state of consciousness. The ‘waker
ego’ is called vishva. See also sushupti, svapna turiya.
japa (japa, 
) – the simple repetition of a mantra; usually
associated with the initial stage of meditation. See mantra.
jiva (jIva, 
) – the identification of the atman with a body and
mind; ‘reflection’ of the atman in the mind (chidAbhAsa). See atman.
jivatman (jIvAtman, 
) – another word for atman, to
emphasize that we are referring to the atman in this embodied state, as
opposed to the paramatman, the ‘supreme Self’. See atman.
jnana (j~nAna, 
) yoga – yoga based on the acquisition of true
knowledge (j~nAna means ‘knowledge’) i.e. knowledge of the Self as
opposed to mere information about the world of appearances. j~nAna

yoga is the process of shravaNa, manana and nididhyAsana as part of Self-
inquiry. See also bhakti, karma, shravana, manana, nididhyasana.
jnani or jnanin (j~nAnI or j~nAnin
, or 
) – one who has
attained Self-knowledge (enlightenment) as a result of practicing jnana
yoga. (j~nAnin is the prAtipadika; j~nAnI is the nominative singular
pada.) See jnana yoga.
kali yuga (kali yuga, 
)– the present age (Iron age) in the
cycle of creation. See kalpa.
kalpa (kalpa, 
) – one ‘day’ in the life of Brahma, the Creator;
equal to 994 cycles of ages and 4,320,000,000 years (if you’re really
interested).
kama (kAma, 
) – desire, longing. Not to be confused with karma.
See purushartha.
kanda (kANDa, 
) – part or section, division of a work or book,
especially relating to the Vedas.
karika (kArikA, 
) – (strictly speaking) a concise philosophical
statement in verse. The best known is that by Gaudapada on the
Mandukya Upanishad. (Not to be confused with karika, which is an
elephant!) See Gaudapada, Mandukya, Upanishad.
karma (karma, 
) – literally ‘action’ but generally used to refer to
the ‘law’ whereby actions carried out now will have their lawful effects
in the future (and this may be in future lives). Note that karma yoga is
something different – see below. See also sanskara.
karmakanda (karmakANDa, 
) – that portion of the Vedas
relating to ceremonial acts, the rituals we should follow, sacrificial rites
and so on.
karma yoga (karma yoga, 
) – the practice of acting in such a
way as not to incur karma, by carrying out ‘right’ actions, not ‘good’ or
‘bad’ ones. See bhakti, karma, jnana.
kartri (kartRRi, 
) – one who makes, does or acts; the agent of an
action.

Katha Upanishad (kaThopaniShad, 
) – one of the 108+
Upanishads and one of the ten major ones. kaTha was a sage and
founder of a branch of the Yajur Veda. See Upanishad.
Kena Upanishad (kenopaniShad, 
) – one of the 108+
Upanishads and another one of the ten major ones. kena means
‘whence?’ (‘how?’, ‘why?’ etc.) and is the first word of this Upanishad.
See Upanishad.
kosha (kosha, 
) – literally ‘sheath’ as in the scabbard of a sword;
one of the five layers of identification that ‘cover up’ our true nature.
lakshana (lakShaNa, 
) – indicating or expressing indirectly;
accurate description or definition.
laukika (laukika, 
) – worldly, belonging to or occurring in
ordinary life. laukika anumAna is inference by scientific reasoning, based
on observation.
laya (laya, 
) – literally ‘dissolution’ (and the last stage in the
cycle of creation, preservation and destruction of the universe). It is also
used to refer to the four-stage process for dissolving ignorance described
in the Astavakra Gita. See Astavakra, Gita.
lila (lIlA, 
) – literally ‘play’, ‘amusement’ or ‘pastime’; the idea
that the apparent creation is a diversion for a creator – a means for Him
to enjoy Himself. He plays all the parts in such a way that they are
ignorant of their real nature and believe themselves separate.
loka (loka, 
) – world, universe, sky or heaven etc.
madhyama (mAdhyama, 
) – relating to the middle; central
(mAdhyamika is one of the principal schools of Buddhism.)
mahavakyas (mahAvAkya, 
) – maha means ‘great’; vAkya
means ‘speech, saying or statement’. The four ‘great sayings’ from the
Vedas are: ‘Consciousness is Brahman’, ‘That thou art’, ‘This Self is
Brahman’ and ‘I am Brahman’.
manana (manana, 
) – reflecting upon what has been heard
(shravana). This is the second stage of the classical spiritual path, to

remove any doubts about the knowledge that has been received via
shravana. See also jnana yoga, samshaya, shravana, nididhyasana.
manas (manas, 
) – the ‘organ’ of mind acting as intermediary
between the senses and the intellect (buddhi) on the way in and the
intellect and the organs of action on the way out. These are its primary
functions, and ‘thinking’ ought to consist only of the processing of data
on behalf of the intellect. Unfortunately, it usually tries to take on the
role of the intellect itself and this is when thinking becomes a problem.
See ahankara, antakarana, buddhi and chitta.
Mandukya (mANDUkya, 
) – one of the major Upanishads and
possibly the single most important, when considered in conjunction with
the karika written by Gaudapada. See Gaudapada, karika, Upanishad.
mantra (mantra, 
) – a group of words (or sometimes only one or
more syllables), traditionally having some mystical significance, being in
many religions an actual ‘name of God’. Often used in meditation
(always in Transcendental Meditation). See japa.
maya (mAyA, 
) – literally ‘magic’ or ‘witchcraft’, often
personified in Hindu mythology. The ‘force’ used to ‘explain’ how it is
that we come to be deceived into believing that there is a creation with
separate objects and living creatures etc. See also avarana and vikshepa.
mayakara (mAyAkAra, 
) – a maker of magic i.e. a conjurer or
magician. See maya.
mimamsa (mImAMsA, 
) – profound thought, reflection,
examination. See purvamimamsa, utteramimamsa.
mithya (mithyA, 
) – literally ‘incorrectly’ or ‘improperly’.
Ascribed to objects etc., meaning that these are not altogether unreal but
not strictly real either i.e. they are our imposition of name and form
upon the undifferentiated Self. See adhyasa.
moksha (moksha, 
) – liberation, enlightenment, Self-realization.
mukti (mukti, 
) – setting or becoming free, final liberation.
mumukshutvam (mumukshutvaM, 
) – the desire to achieve

enlightenment, to the exclusion of all other desires. See sadhana,
chatushtaya sampatti.
Mundaka Upanishad (muNDakopaniShad, 
) – another
one of the 108+ Upanishads and also one of the ten major ones – but
not to be confused with the Mandukya. muNDa means ‘having a shaved
head’ and the Upanishad is so called because everyone who
comprehends its sacred doctrine is ‘shorn’, i.e. liberated from all error.
See Upanishad.
nama-rupa (nAma-rUpa, 
) – name and form.
nastika (nAstika, 
) – atheist, unbeliever; strictly speaking,
refers to one who does not recognize the authority of the Vedas.
neti (neti, 
) – not this (na – not; iti – this). From the
Brihadaranyaka Upanishad (2.3.6). Used by the intellect whenever it is
thought that the Self might be some ‘thing’ observed e.g. body, mind etc.
The Self cannot be anything that is seen, thought or known. See
Brihadaranyaka, Upanishad.
nididhyasana (nididhyAsana, 
) – meditating upon the
essence of what has now been intellectually understood until there is
total conviction. The third stage of the classical spiritual path. See also
shravana and manana.
nidra (nidrA, 
) – sleep.
nirguna (nirguNa, 
) – ‘without qualities’; usually referring to
Brahman and meaning that it is beyond any description or thought.
Since there is only Brahman, any word would imply limitation or
duality. See Brahman, saguna, Isvara.
nirvikalpa (nirvikalpa, 
) – (referring to samadhi) ‘without’
division – not seeing the world as separate or different from oneself. See
savikalpa, samadhi, vikalpa.
nirvishesha (nirvisheSha, 
) – making or showing no
difference. nirvisheShaNa – attributeless.
niyama (niyama, 
) – restraining, controlling; any fixed rule or

law; necessity.
nyaya (nyAya, 
) – literally, ‘that into which a thing goes back’, a
‘standard’ or ‘rule’; one of the six classical Indian philosophical systems,
whose principal exponent was Gautama in the third century BC. It is so
called because the system examines all physical and metaphysical
subjects in a very logical manner.
nyaya prasthana (nyAya prasthAna, 
) – refers to logical
and inferential material based upon the Vedas, of which the best known
is the Brahmasutra of Vyasa (nyAya can also mean ‘method’, ‘axiom’,
‘logical argument’ etc.). See pramana, prasthana-traya, smriti, sruti.
Panchadashi (pa~nchadashI, 
) – literally means ‘fifteen’
because it has this many chapters – a book written by Vidyaranya
(vidyAraNya), based upon the Upanishads. It discusses many Advaitic
truths and uses some original metaphors to illustrate the concepts.
pandita (paNDita, 
) – literally ‘wise’ (as an adjective) or
‘scholar, teacher, philosopher’ (as a noun) and used in this way in the
scriptures.
papa (pApa, 
) – literally ‘bad’ or ‘wicked’ but used in the sense of
the ‘sin’ that accrues (according to the theory of karma) from performing
‘bad’ actions, i.e. those done with a selfish motive. See also punya.
paramatman (paramAtman, 
) – the ‘supreme Self’ as
opposed to the atman in the ‘embodied’ state, the jivatman. See atman.
paramartha (noun), (paramArtha, 
);
paramarthika (adj.), (pAramArthika (adj.), 
) – the highest
truth or reality; the noumenal as opposed to the phenomenal world of
appearances (vyavaharika). See pratibhasika and vyavaharika.
parampara (paramparA, 
) – literally ‘proceeding from one to
another’; ‘guru parampara’ refers to the tradition of guru–disciple
passing on wisdom through the ages. See also sampradaya.
phala (phala, 
) – fruit; often used in the context of the
consequences that necessarily follow as a result of action (karmaphala).

prajna (praj~nA, 
) – (verb) to know or understand, find out,
perceive or learn; (noun) wisdom, intelligence, knowledge. Not to be
confused with prAj~na below.
prajna (prAj~na, 
) – the ‘deep sleep ego’ in the deep sleep state
of consciousness, sushupti. Literally, ‘wise, clever’ (adj.) or ‘a wise
person’ or ‘intelligence dependent on individuality’. See also vishva,
taijasa.
prajnana (praj~nAna, 
) – consciousness.
pralaya (pralaya, 
) – the destruction of the world at the end of a
kalpa. See kalpa.
prakarana (prakaraNa, 
) – subject, topic, treatise etc. but
especially opening chapter or prologue.
prakriti (prakRRiti, 
) – literally the original or natural form or
condition of anything; generally used to refer to what we would call
‘nature’. In Sankhya philosophy, it is one of the two principles – puruSha
and prakRRiti (or pradhAna) – and is an actually existent, though not
conscious thing. In Advaita, it is mithyA.
pramana (pramANa, 
) – valid means for acquiring knowledge.
There are six of these in Vedanta: perception (pratyaksha), inference
(anumAna), scriptural or verbal testimony (shabda or Agama shruti),
analogy (upamAna), presumption (arthApatti) and non-apprehension
(anupalabdhi). The first three are the major ones referred to by Shankara.
prana (prANa, 
) – literally the ‘breath of life’; the vital force in
the body with which we identify in the ‘vital sheath’.
prarabdha (prArabdha, 
) – This literally means ‘begun’ or
‘undertaken’. It is the fruit of all of our past action that is now having its
effect. This is one of the three types of sanskara. See agamin, sanchita,
sanskara.
prasthana-traya (prasthAna traya, 
) – prasthAna means
‘system’ or ‘course’ in the sense of a journey; traya just means ‘threefold’.
It refers to the three sources of knowledge of the Self: nyaya prasthana,

sruti and smriti. See nyaya prasthana, shabda, sruti, smriti.
pratibhasa (noun) (pratibhAsa, 
);
pratibhasika (adj.) (prAtibhAsika, 
) – ‘appearing or
occurring to the mind’, ‘existing only in appearance’, an illusion. See
paramartha, vyavahara.
pratibimba-vada (pratibimba vAda, 
) – the theory that
the jiva is a reflection of the Atman, similar to the reflection of an object
in a mirror.
pratyaksha (pratyakSha, 
) – ‘present before the eyes, clear,
distinct etc.’ but particularly ‘direct perception or apprehension’ as a
valid source of knowledge. See pramana.
pratyaya (pratyaya, 
) – belief, firm conviction, certainty; basis
or cause of anything.
punya (puNya, 
) – literally ‘good’ or ‘virtuous’; used to refer to
the ‘reward’ that accrues to us (according to the theory of karma)
through the performing of unselfish actions. See also papa.
purna (pUrNa, 
) – full, complete, satisfied, perfect.
purushartha (puruShArtha, 
) – the general meaning of this
term is ‘any object of human pursuit’ but it is used here in the sense of
human (i.e. self) effort to overcome ‘fate’, the fruit of one’s past actions.
See karma, sanskara.
purva (pUrva, 
) – former, preceding.
purvapaksha (pUrvapakSha, 
) – the first objection to an
assertion in any discussion or, more generally, the ‘objector’ in a debate.
purvamimamsa, (pUrvamlmAMsA, 
) – the philosophical
system based upon the first part of the Vedas and attributed to Jaimini.
It relates to enquiries into the nature of dharma or right action. See
mimamsa, uttaramimamsa.
rajas (rajas, 
) – the second of the three gunas. Associated with
animals and activity, emotions, desire, selfishness and passion. Adjective
– rajassic or rajassika. See guna.

rishi (RRiShi, 
) – author or singer of sacred Vedic hymns but now
more generally used to refer to a saint or sage.
sadguru (sadguru, 
) – the ultimate guru – one’s own Self (sat =
true, real). See guru.
sadhana (sAdhana, 
) – literally ‘leading straight to a goal’;
refers to the spiritual disciplines followed as part of a ‘path’ towards Self-
realization. See also chatushtaya sampatti.
saguna (saguNa, 
) – ‘with qualities’. The term is usually used to
refer to Brahman personified as the creator, Ishvara, to symbolize the
most spiritual aspect of the world of appearances. See Brahman, Ishvara,
nirguna.
sahaja sthiti (sahaja sthiti, 
) – Once Self-realization has
been attained, there is full and lasting knowledge of the Self. ‘sahaja‘
means ‘state’ but this is not a state – it is our true nature. It is permanent
(‘sthiti‘ meaning ‘steady’ or ‘remaining’), unlike the earlier stages of
samadhi. See nirvikalpa, samadhi, savikalpa, vikalpa.
sakshibhava (sAkshibhAva, 
) – ‘being or becoming’
(bhAva) a ‘witness’ (sAkshI).
samadhana (samAdhAna, 
) – contemplation, profound
meditation; more usually translated as concentration; one of the ‘six
qualities’ that form part of Shankara’s chatushtaya sampatti. See
chatushtaya sampatti.
samadhi (samAdhi, 
) – the state of total peace and stillness
achieved during deep meditation. Several ‘stages’ are defined – see
vikalpa, savikalpa samadhi, nirvikalpa samadhi and sahaja sthiti.
samhita (saMhitA, 
) – a philosophical or religious text
constructed according to certain rules of sound. There are many of these
in the Vedas. The reference in this book is in conjunction with the
Astavakra Samhita or Gita. This book is not part of the Vedas. See
Astavakra, gita.
Sankhya (sAMkhya, 
) – one of the three main divisions of

Indian philosophy and one of the six darshanas; attributed to Kapila.
sampradaya (sampradAya, 
) – the tradition or established
doctrine of teaching from master to pupil through the ages. paramparA
refers to the general principle, whereas a sampradAya relates to a specific
historical sage, such as Shankara. See also parampara.
samsara (saMsAra, 
) – the cycle of death and rebirth,
transmigration etc. to which we are supposedly subject in the
phenomenal world until we become enlightened and escape. saMsArl –
one who is bound to the cycle of birth and death.
samshaya (saMshaya, 
) – uncertainty, irresolution, hesitation
or doubt. See manana.
sanatana (sanAtana, 
) – literally ‘eternal’ or ‘permanent’; in
conjunction with dharma, this refers to our essential nature. The phrase
sanAtana dharma is also used to refer to the traditional (also carrying the
sense of ‘original’ and ‘unadulterated’) Hindu practices or as a synonym
for ‘Hinduism’. See dharma.
sanchita (saMchita, 
) – one of the three types of sanskara,
literally meaning ‘collected’ or ‘piled up’. It refers to that sanskara which
has been accumulated from past action but has still not manifested. See
agamin, prarabdha, sanskara.
sanga (sa~Nga, 
) – assembly, association, company. See satsanga.
sanskara (saMskAra, 
) – Whenever an action is performed
with the desire for a specific result (whether for oneself or another),
sanskara is created for that person. These accumulate and determine the
situations with which we will be presented in the future and will
influence the scope of future actions. There are three ‘types’ – agamin,
sanchita and prarabdha. The accumulation of sanskara dictates the
tendencies that we have to act in a particular way (vasanas). This is all
part of the mechanism of karma. See agamin, karma, prarabdha,
sanchita, vasana and karma.
sanyasa (saMnyAsa, 
) – the final stage of the traditional Hindu

spiritual path; involves complete renunciation. The word literally means
‘putting or throwing down, laying aside’; i.e. becoming an ascetic. One
who does so is called a sanyasin (saMnyAsin). See also brahmacharya,
grihasta, vanaprastha.
sat (sat, 
) – existence, reality, truth (to mention a few). See also
ananda, chit, satchitananda.
satchitananda (sat – chit – Ananda or sachchidAnanda, 
) –
the oft-used word to describe our true nature, insofar as this can be put
into words (which it can’t). It translates as being-consciousness-bliss but
see the separate bits for more detail.
satsanga (satsa~Nga, 
) – association with the good; keeping
‘good company’; most commonly used now to refer to a group of people
gathered together to discuss (Advaita) philosophy or, increasingly, ‘self-
help’.
sattva (sattva, 
) – the highest of the three gunas. Associated with
stillness, 
peace, 
truth, 
wisdom, 
unselfishness 
and 
spirituality,
representing the highest aspirations of humankind. Adjective – sattvic or
sattvika. See guna.
sattvapati (sattvApatti, 
) – the (fourth) stage on a spiritual
path, after which there is no longer any need for effort to be made (so
called because there is now an abundance of sattva). Apatti means
‘entering into a state or condition’.
satya (satya, 
) – true, real; satyam – truth.
savikalpa (savikalpa, 
) – (referring to samadhi) with division
– still seeing the world as separate or different from oneself. See
nirvikalpa, samadhi, vikalpa.
shabda (shabda, 
) – sound, word or speech. shabda pramANa –
scriptural or verbal testimony. See pramana, nyaya prasthana,
prasthana-traya, sruti, smriti.
shama (shama, 
) – literally tranquillity, absence of passion but
more usually translated as mental discipline or self-control; one of the

‘six qualities’ that form part of Shankara’s chatushtaya sampatti. See
chatushtaya sampatti.
Shankara (shaMkara, 
) – eighth-century Indian philosopher
responsible for firmly establishing the principles of Advaita. Though he
died at an early age (32?), he commented on a number of major
Upanishads, the Bhagavad Gita and the Brahmasutras, as well as being
attributed as the author of a number of famous works, such as
Atmabodha, Upadesha Sahasri and Vivekachudamani.
Shankaracharya (shaMkarAchArya, 
) – the title given to
one of the teachers (see acharya) following the tradition in India
established by Shankara (see Shankara). He established these positions,
to be held by realized individuals who would take on the role of teacher
and could be consulted by anyone having problems or questions of a
spiritual nature.
sharira (sharIra, 
) – one’s body divided into gross, subtle and
causal aspects).
shastra (shAstra, 
) – order, teaching, instruction; any sacred
book or composition that has divine authority.
shraddha (shraddhA, 
) – faith, trust or belief (in the absence of
direct personal experience); the student needs this initially in respect of
what he or she is told by the guru or reads in the scriptures; one of the
‘six qualities’ that form part of Shankara’s chatushtaya sampatti. See
chatushtaya sampatti.
shravana (shravaNa, 
) – hearing the truth from a sage or
reading about it in such works as the Upanishads; first of the three key
stages in the traditional spiritual path. See also manana, nididhyasana.
shruti (shruti, 
) – refers to the Vedas, incorporating the
Upanishads. Literally means ‘hearing’ and refers to the belief that the
books contain orally transmitted, sacred wisdom from the dawn of time.
See nyaya prasthana, pramana, smriti.
siddhanta (siddhAnta, 
) – final end or purpose; conclusion of

an argument.
shubhecha (shubhechChA, 
) – ‘good desire’; the initial impulse
that starts us on a spiritual search. shubha means ‘auspicious’, ‘good (in a
moral sense)’ and ichChA means ‘wish’, ‘desire’.
smriti (smRRiti, 
) – refers to material ‘remembered’ and
subsequently written down. In practice, it mostly refers to books of law
(in the sense of guidance for living) which were written and based upon
the knowledge in the Vedas, i.e. the so-called dharma-shAstras – Manu,
Yajnavalkya, Parashara. In the context of nyaya prasthana, it is used to
refer to just one of these books – the Bhagavad Gita. See pramana, nyaya
prasthana, sruti.
srishti-drishti-vada (sRRiShTidRRiShTivAda, 
) – the
theory that the world is separate from ourselves, having been created
(by God or the big bang) and evolving independently of ourselves, i.e.
the ‘common sense’ view of things. See also adhyasa, ajati, drishti-
srishti-vada.
sthitaprajna (sthitapraj~na, 
) – meaning one ‘standing’
(sthita) in ‘wisdom’ (prajna); a person of steadiness and calm, firm in
judgment, contented. The name is used in the Bhagavad Gita to refer to
someone who is Self-realized.
sthula (sthUla, 
) – large, thick, coarse, dense; the gross body
(sthUla sharIra).
sukha (sukha, 
) – comfortable, happy, prosperous etc. sukham –
pleasure, happiness.
sushupti (suShupti, 
) – the deep-sleep state of consciousness.
The ‘sleeper ego’ is called prajna. See also, jagrat, svapna, turiya.
svadharma (svadharma, 
) – one’s own dharma. See dharma.
svapna (svapna, 
) – the dream state of consciousness. The
‘dreamer ego’ is called taijasa. See also, jagrat, sushupti, turiya.
taijasa (taijasa, 
) – the ‘dreamer ego’ in the dream state of
consciousness, svapna. See also vishva, prajna.

tamas (tamas, 
) – the ‘lowest’ of the three gunas. Associated
with matter, and having characteristics such as inertia, laziness,
heedlessness and death. Adjective – tamasic or tamasika. See guna.
tarka (tarka, 
) – reasoning, speculation, philosophical system or
doctrine.
tarkika (tArkika, 
) – logician or philosopher.
titiksha (titikShA, 
) – forbearance or patience; one of the ‘six
qualities’ that form part of Shankara’s chatushtaya sampatti. See
chatushtaya sampatti.
trikalatita (trikAlAtIta, 
) – that which transcends past,
present and future (describing the Self).
tripitaka (tripiTaka, 
) – the ‘three baskets’ or collections of
sacred writings of the Buddhists viz. sUtra, abhidharma, vinaya.
turiya (turIya, 
) – the ‘fourth’ state of consciousness (turiya
means ‘fourth’). It is actually not a state at all but our true nature, which
is prevalent throughout the other three. The waker is not the dreamer is
not the deep-sleeper but I am all three. See vishva, taijasa, prajna.
upadana (upAdAna, 
) – literally ‘the act of taking for oneself’;
used to refer to the ‘material cause’ in logic.
upadhi (upAdhi, 
) – Literally, this means something that is put
in place of another thing; a substitute, phantom or disguise. In Vedanta,
it is commonly referred to as a ‘limitation’ or ‘limiting adjunct’ i.e. one of
the ‘identifications’ made by ahankara that prevents us from realizing
the Self.
upamana (upamAna, 
) – comparison, resemblance, analogy.
One of the six pramanas.
upanishad (upaniShat, 
) – one of the (108+) books forming
part (usually the end) of one of the four Vedas. The parts of the word
mean: to sit (Shad) near a master (upa) at his or her feet (ni), so that the
idea is that we sit at the feet of a master to listen to his or her words.
Monier-Williams (Ref. 5) states that, ‘according to native authorities,

upanishad means “setting at rest ignorance by revealing the knowledge
of the supreme spirit”‘. Note that the d changes to a t at the end of a
word. See Vedanta.
uparama (uparama, 
) – See uparati.
uparati (uparati, 
) – desisting from sensual enjoyment;
‘reveling’ in that which is ‘near’ i.e. one’s own Self; also translated as
following one’s dharma or duty; one of the ‘six qualities’ that form part
of Shankara’s chatushtaya sampatti. See chatushtaya sampatti.
uttaramimamsa (uttaramImAMsA, 
) – the Vedanta
philosophy, based on the latter (uttara) part of the Vedas rather than the
earlier (purva). Its founder was Badarayana, who authored the
Brahmasutras. There are three main schools – dvaita, advaita and
vishishtadvaita. See Brahmasutras, mimamsa, purvamimamsa, Veda.
vada (vAda, 
) – speech, proposition, discourse, argument,
discussion, explanation or exposition (of scriptures etc.)
vairagya (vairAgya, 
) – detachment or dispassion; indifference
to the pleasure that results from success or the disappointment that
results from failure. See sadhana, chatushtaya sampatti.
vaisheshika (vaisheShika, 
) – one of the six classical Indian
philosophies, a later development of nyaya by the theologian, Kanada;
named after the nine ‘essentially different substances’ believed to
constitute matter. See darshana, vishesha.
vanaprastha (vanaprastha, 
) – the third stage of the
traditional Hindu spiritual path, in which the Brahmin retires from life
and becomes a ‘forest dweller’, living as a hermit. Traditionally
speaking, ‘a properly initiated dvija or twice-born’. See also
brahmacharya, grihasta, sanyasa, vanaprastha.
vasana (vAsanA, 
) – literally ‘desiring’ or ‘wishing’ – latent
behavioral tendency in one’s nature brought about through past action
(karma) and the sanskara that resulted from this. See karma, sanskara.
Veda (veda, 
) – knowledge, but the word is normally only used to

refer to one of the four Vedas (see Vedanta) and vidya is used for
knowledge per se. See vidya.
Vedanta (vedAnta, 
) – literally ‘end’ or ‘culmination’ (anta) of
the Vedas. Veda in this context refers to the four Vedas, the Hindu
equivalents of the Christian Bible (called Rig, RRig Veda; Sama, sama
Veda; Atharva, atharva Veda; Yajur, yajur Veda). Traditionally, the last
part of the Vedas is devoted to the Upanishads. See upanishad.
vidya (vidyA, 
) – knowledge, science, learning, philosophy.
Atma-vidyA or brahmavidyA is knowledge of the Self.
Vidyaranya (vidyAraNya, 
) – author of the Panchadashi
(pa~nchadashI).
vikalpa (vikalpa, 
) – doubt, uncertainty or indecision, division.
See savikalpa, nirvikalpa, samadhi.
vikshepa (vikShepa, 
) – the ‘projecting’ power of maya. In the
rope–snake metaphor, this superimposes the image of the snake upon the
rope. See avarana, maya.
vinaya (vinaya, 
) – the rules of discipline for Buddhist monks;
school of Buddhist philosophy emphasizing conduct as the means to the
end of suffering.
vishaya (viShaya, 
) – object of sensory perception; any subject
or topic; the subject of an argument.
vishesha (visheSha, 
) – literally ‘distinction’ or ‘difference
between’. The Vaisheshika philosophy believes that the material
universe is made up of nine substances, each of which is ‘essentially
different’ from any other. See Vaisheshika.
vishishta (vishiShTa, 
) – distinguished, particular, excellent.
vishishtadvaita (vishiShTAdvaita, 
) – qualified non-
dualism; the belief that God and the atman are distinct but not separate.
Ramanuja is the scholar most often associated with this philosophy. See
advaita, dvaita.
vishva (vishva, 
) – the ‘waker ego’ in the waking state of

consciousness, jagrat. See also taijasa, prajna.
viveka (viveka, 
) – discrimination; the function of buddhi,
having the ability to differentiate between the unreal and the real. See
sadhana, chatushtaya sampatti.
vritti (vRRitti, 
) – In the context of Vedanta, this means a ‘mood
of the mind’. In general, it can mean a mode of conduct or behavior,
character or disposition, business or profession etc, or simply a ‘thought’.
See aham vritti and idam vritti.
vyavahara (noun) (vyavahAra, 
);
vyavaharika (adj.), (vyAvahArika, 
) – the ‘relative’,
‘empirical’, or phenomenal world of appearances; the normal world in
which we live and which we usually believe to be real; as opposed to
paramarthika (real) and pratibhasika (illusory). See paramarthika and
pratibhasika.
yoga (yoga, 
) – literally ‘joining’ or ‘attaching’ (our word ‘yoke’
derives from this). It is used generally to refer to any system whose aim
is to ‘join’ our ‘individual self’ back to the ‘universal Self’. The Yoga
system pedantically refers to that specified by Patanjali and is one of the
six Indian philosophical systems, closely associated with Sankhya. See
bhakti, jnana, karma.
yuga (yuga, 
) – one of the four ages in the cycle of creation. See
kalpa, kali yuga.

Appendix 1 Transliteration Schemes
Table 10 – Transliteration Schemes 




Note: The characters ‘.h‘ may also be added after any consonant in ITRANS to generate a virAma;
however, since this will happen regardless if the consonant is not followed by a vowel, it is
usually omitted. E.g. k is the same as k.h.

Appendix 2 Alternative Letter Forms
As has been noted in the text, some of the letters have two or more differing representations in
Devanagari. A given source will normally be consistent in its use of a single variant but other
traditions and books may use one of the alternative forms. E.g. the Monier-Williams dictionary
uses the different variant of the letter a.
Table 11 – Alternative Letter Forms

Appendix 3 Vowel Forms, with and without Consonants
Table 12 – Vowel Forms 

Table 12 summarizes the use of vowels (+ anusvAra and visarga). Column 2 shows how they
appear when used on their own or at the beginning of a word. Column 3 shows how their
presence is signified when they appear after one or more consonants. Column 4 shows how the
letter k appears when used with that vowel.

Appendix 4 Writing the Script
You will have to learn the alphabet if you wish to become sufficiently familiar with the forms of
the letters to be able to read the words in the scriptures. This really means practicing writing the
letters as well as reading them. You will have seen that the Devanagari reproduced in this book
has been written in an italic script. Obviously it is not necessary to write it in this way in order
for it to be understood. (But then this is, after all, the prime purpose of any written language.)
However, if you are to learn the formally correct construction of each of the letters, you ought
really to practice it as an exercise in calligraphy.
Unfortunately, an ordinary italic nib on a fountain pen or even in a calligraphy set is unlikely
to be the correct shape. The edge of the nib should be angled. The pen is then tilted so that the
edge is flush with the page as characters are written. This generates the necessary angular finish
to the script. The nib must be cut away to the right for right-handed users and to the left for left-
handed ones.
With care, an ordinary italic nib could be filed down in this way, finishing off with fine ‘wet
and dry’ sandpaper. The width of nib depends upon the intended size of writing. If practicing
only, a broad tip is probably best (? 2.5mm); if you expect to write a lot at normal size, it will
need to be narrower since the proportions of the letters are important. It is possible to obtain
fountain pens with the correct nibs.
In 
the 
UK, 
fine 
or 
medium 
italic 
pens 
may 
be 
purchased 
from
http://www.sanskritcourses.co.uk/. A number of books (including Monier-Williams), CDs and a
pack of Sanskrit Alphabet Cards may also be purchased here. (This latter is invaluable for helping
you to learn the letters. You can also make them yourself from the freely downloadable Charles
Wikner book mentioned above.)

The proportions of the letters can be seen by dividing them into three as shown below:
The order in which the parts of each letter are constructed will depend upon the source of
instruction. I was taught (in England, by SES) that the top line of the letter should be constructed
first in all cases except for a, where the left-hand part should be produced first. Next, any vertical
line is drawn and finally, the key parts of the letter are drawn onto these. The American style
insists that the distinctive part of each letter should be drawn first, then the vertical line, and the
top line should always be done last, i.e. the exact opposite! Logically, the latter method seems
more sensible, since you cannot know how long the top line should be until a word is complete.
The Internet resources described earlier all recommend the latter style.
If you do seriously want to learn how to produce the script neatly and accurately, you should
seek out a school or someone who is skilled in the art. This is really an exercise in calligraphy
and cannot easily be learned from a book. If you are not interested in strict accuracy, just get
yourself an appropriate pen and modify the nib as shown above. (While searching for sites
earlier, I came across one which suggested that a right-handed person could use a left-hand italic
pen. Presumably the reverse also applies. I do not know first hand how well this might work.)
Then practice producing the letters in whichever way you like until you get a result that you find
acceptable. Finally, if you are not interested at all in the calligraphy element and are
unconcerned if the letter proportions are not strictly accurate, just dig out an old fountain pen or
even a felt-tip or ballpoint and practice. Above all, however, practice. This will prove invaluable
in helping you to learn the alphabet.

Appendix 5 Answer to Final Example
sarve bhavantu sukhinaH sarve santu nirAmayAH.
sarve bhadrANi pashyantu mA kashchid duHkhabhAgbhavet ..
Let everyone be happy; let them be free from illness.
May they experience prosperity and let sorrow not be the lot of anyone.

Bibliography
1. 
Transliteration 
of 
Devan?gar?, 
D. 
Wujastyk, 
1996
http://indology.info/email/members/wujastyk/. No ISBN.
2. A Practical Sanskrit Introductory, Charles Wikner, 1966. No ISBN.
3. laghusiddhAntakaumudI – The Laws of Grammar: A Short Elucidation, School of Economic
Science, 1997. No ISBN.
4. devavANIpraveshikA – An Introduction to the Sanskrit Language, Robert P. Goldman and
Sally J. Sutherland, Center for South and Southeast Asia Studies, University of California,
Berkeley, 1987. No ISBN.
5. A Sanskrit English Dictionary, M. Monier-Williams, Motilal Banarsidass, 1995. ISBN 81-208-
0065-6.
6. Introduction to Sanskrit Part 1, Thomas Egenes, Motilal Banarsidass, 1989. ISBN 978-81-
208-1140-9. 
This 
is 
also 
available 
electronically 
at
http://www.scribd.com/doc/32874508/Introduction-to-Sanskrit-by-Thomas-Egenes.
7. Introduction to Sanskrit Part 2, Thomas Egenes, Motilal Banarsidass, 1999. ISBN 978-81-
208-1693-0.
8. Sanskrit Manual: A quick-reference guide to the phonology and grammar of Classical
Sanskrit, Roderick S. Bucknell, Motilal Banarsidass, 1994. ISBN 81-208-1188-7.
9. The Student’s English-Sanskrit Dictionary, Vaman Shivram Apte, Motilal Banarsidass, 1920.
ISBN 81-208-0299-3.
10. A Concise Dictionary of Indian Philosophy: Sanskrit terms defined in English, John Grimes,
Indica Books, 2009. ISBN 81-86569-80-4.
11. The Wonder That Is Sanskrit, Sampad and Vijay, Sri Aurobindo Society Pondicherry, 2002.
ISBN 1-890206-50-4.
12. Language and Truth: A study of the Sanskrit language and its relationship with principles of
truth, Paul Douglas, Shepheard-Walwyn, 2010. ISBN 978-0-85683-271-0.
13. The Four Quartets, T. S. Eliot, Faber and Faber, 1944. ISBN 0-571-04994-X.
14. The Bhagavad Gita, Winthrop Sargeant, State Universtity of New York Press, 1994. ISBN 0-
87395-830-6.
15. Bhagavad Gita, Nitya Chaitanya Yati, D. K. Printworld (P) Ltd, 1981. ISBN 81-246-0010-4.

16. Srimad Bhagavad Gita, Kailash Nath Kalia, New Age Books, 2008. ISBN 978-81-7822-306-3.

Index
Note: bold page number = main entry;
italic page number = definition
, 18
n: Devanagari, 56; transliterated, 23
N: Devanagari, 52; transliterated, 20
Devanagari, 42; transliterated, 13
Devanagari, 42; transliterated, 31
h, 103
hintya, 87
dhikAra, 113
dvaita, 34
ghoSha, 114
ham, 14, 40, 52, 78
haMbrahmAsmi, 120
haMkAra, 52
: Devanagari, 66; transliterated, 34
kaH savarNe dIrghaH, 111, 131
 103
paprANa, 19
phabet: order, 41; table, Devanagari, 79; table, transliterated, 41
ternate letter forms, 179
mRRita, 122
ntaHkaraNa, 37
ntaHstha, 38, 74
nunAsika, 20, 53, 62, 116
nusvAra, 35, 53, 71; ITRANS
presentation of, 72

nuvRRitti, 113
auruSheya, 40
dhachandra, 95
, 78
at, 121
ShTAdhyAyi, 95, 100
ShTan, 91
ShTAvakra gItA, 31, 128
pirated sound, 19
tman, 31, 131
u: Devanagari, 70; transliterated, 35
udaka, 70
um, 67
agraha, 96, 116
idya, 34
yamAtmA brahma, 120
yogavAha, 71
Devanagari, 63; transliterated, 29
Adha, 63
Alaka, 72
h: Devanagari, 64; transliterated, 29
hagavad Gita, 125, 130, 136
hagavadgItA, 29
hagavat, 29, 64
hakta, 89
havat, 129
hoktRRi, 129
hUta, 130
uddha, 29
uddhi, 30
pital letters, 17

se (endings of nouns), 105
h: Devanagari, 54; transliterated, 21
h: Devanagari, 55; transliterated, 22
ha, 131
andra-bindu., 94
hants, 137
ar, 130
hid, 55
idrUpaH, 129
it, 55, 129
mplex conjuncts, 87
mplex vowels, 65
mpound words, 42, 117
njunct consonants, 79, 80
njuncts: complex, 87; h, 92; horizontal, 83; j~n, 88; kt, 89; sh, 90; Sh, 91; special, 88; vertical, 81
onsonant sandhi, 113
onsonants: cerebral, Devanagari, 57; cerebral, transliterated, 24;
njunct, 79, 80; dantya, Devanagari, 60; dental joining with cerebral, 116; dental joining with
palatal, 115; dental, Devanagari, 60; dental, transliterated, 26;
uttural, Devanagari, 50; guttural, transliterated, 18; kaNThya, Devanagari, 50; labial, Devanagari,
62; labial, transliterated, 29;
Urdhanya, Devanagari, 57;
ShThya, Devanagari, 62; palatal, Devanagari, 54; palatal, transliterated, 21; table of basic,
transliterated, 30; table, Devanagari, 65; tAlavya, Devanagari, 54; word ending in (sandhi), 114
eation myth, 10
Devanagari, 61; transliterated, 27
Devanagari, 59; transliterated, 25
am, 59
ama, 27
antya, 60
arshanaH, 131
va, 34

vanAgarI, 42, 61; software for generating script, 15
evanagari, 10
h: Devanagari, 61; transliterated, 27
h: Devanagari, 59; transliterated, 26
hAla, 59
hana, 61
harma, 27
hArya, 127
hAtu, 104
hUmra, 86
ctionaries, 44, 136
ctionary of Spiritual Terms, 150
rgha, 31, 107
ocuments in Sanskrit, 136
aita, 34
Devanagari, 65; transliterated, 34
h, 103
he.ayavAyAvaH, 112
a, 65
atsaMdhi, 117
uphony, 109
Devanagari, 51; transliterated, 20
m, 121
auDapAda, 25, 35
nder, 51, 63; endings of nouns, 105
h: Devanagari, 52; transliterated, 20
oSha, 114
tA, 29, 31
ossary of Sanskrit Terms, 146
rammar Tools, 136
Na, 26, 73

ru, 20, 48, 107
Y, 24
conjuncts, 92; Devanagari, 78;
ansliterated, 40
 Devanagari, 72; transliterated, 36
al, 103
alanta, 18, 103
ard vowels and consonants, 114
arvard-Kyoto, 174
asva, 31
Devanagari, 45; transliterated, 14
Devanagari, 45; transliterated, 31
o yaNachi, 112
Sh, 130
driya, 127
driyArtha, 127
ternet Resources, 133
avasya upanishad, 123
ha upaniShat, 95, 123
hvara, 100
, 14
RANS, 133, 174; representation of anusvAra, 72
ranslator 99, 15, 133
Devanagari, 55; transliterated, 22
~n, 88
~nAna, 24, 88
gat, 55
nakatanayAsnAnapuNyodakan, 118
pa, 22
: Devanagari, 56; transliterated, 23
al followed by khar, 116

alA, 23, 56
alAM jasho.ante, 114
alla, 23
va, 46
ining words, 108
otis, 122
Devanagari, 50; transliterated, 18
A~nchana, 57
alpa, 76
Ama, 50
aNa, 59
aNThya, 25, 50
apIndra, 111
Ara, 52
arma, 18, 86
armaphalam, 29
artRRi, 129
atha Upanishad, 58
na, 66
h: Devanagari, 51; transliterated, 19
haga, 51
hari cha, 116, 125
iyA, 47
RRita, 47
Sh, 91
Shatriya, 91
, 89
urUttama, 112
Devanagari, 76; transliterated, 38
ghu, 20, 52, 107
k, 50

ya, 76
arning Sanskrit, 134
tter forms, alternate, 179
xicographers (L), 21
gatures, 79, 80
A, 38
i: transliterated, 16
Li: Devanagari, 47
LI: Devanagari, 47
LI: transliterated, 32
: Devanagari, 64; transliterated, 30
: Devanagari, 71; transliterated, 35
aha, 43, 100
ahAbhUta, 48
ahAprANa, 19
aharShi, 43, 112
ahAvAkya, 108, 119
ahesha, 112
aheshvara, 100
aheshvarANi sUtrANi, 99
am, 121
anas, 30
ANDUkya, 69
andukya Upanishad, 25
AtrA, 31
AtRRikA, 35; table, 74
auna, 71
AyA, 44
ilita, 45
ithyA, 83
o.anusvAraH, 122

okSha, 5, 34, 92
onier-Williams, 44
outh position, 16
oxa, 92
RRityu, 122
Urdhanya, 57
Devanagari, 62; transliterated, 28
Devanagari, 59; transliterated, 26
a, 129
a tvaM deho, 128
aiva ki~nchitkaromIti, 125
Ama, 28
rapekShaH, 129
rvAna, 5
othing, I do, 125
umber (endings of nouns), 105
umerals, 98
Devanagari, 67; transliterated, 34
M, 67
ShThya, 62
Devanagari, 62; transliterated, 29
a~nchadashI, 81
a~nchami, 123
ANini, 100
Apa, 29
aramAtman, 62
ash, 77
erfect Prayer, 123
h: Devanagari, 63; transliterated, 29
hala, 63
halam, 29, 71

uta, 33
aj~nAnaMbrahma, 119
alaya, 76
ANa, 84
Anava shabda, 67
Atipadika, 105
atyAhAra, 103
olonged vowels, 33
onunciation, 12, 107
onunciation, 5
u.N, 95
uNya, 29
UrNamadaH pUrNamidaM, 123
UrNavirAma, 96
utraH, 85
Devanagari, 75; in conjunct, 84; in conjunct with many letters, 87; transliterated, 38
jas, 38
maShTIkate, 116
ta, 75
esources on the Internet, 133
oman, 174
ri: transliterated, 15
Ri: Devanagari, 46
RI: Devanagari, 46; transliterated, 32
, 75
U, 76
Upa, 76, 129
Devanagari, 78; transliterated, 40
chchidAnanda, 55, 117
dA, 129
dguru, 115

dhanA, 40
kShin, 129
ma, 131
mAsa, 42, 117
Mdhi, 109
Myoga, 72, 87
Myukta, 107
Myukta svara, 65
andhi: consonant, 113; jhal letter followed by khar, 116; joining a dental and a cerebral
consonant, 116; joining a dental with a palatal consonant, 115; second word beginning with
nasal, 116; vowel, 111; word ending in jhal, 114
anskrit Terms, 138
rva, 130
rvabhUtasthamAtmAnaM, 130
rvatra, 131
t, 78, 121
t + chit, 117
varNa, 111
hlavana, 90
hnathita, 90
hool of Economic Science, 12
mi-vowels: Devanagari, 74;
ansliterated, 37
ES, 12
: conjuncts, 90; Devanagari, 77;
ansliterated, 39
h: conjuncts, 91; Devanagari, 77;
ansliterated, 40
a~Nkara, 25, 83
aiva, 66
al, 103
ar, 103

haSh, 77
chu.N, 115
ivasUtrANi, 99
ruti, 39, 90
hTuna ShTuH, 116
vetAmbara, 90
yAma, 90
bilants: Devanagari, 77;
ansliterated, 39
ft vowels and consonants, 114
arsha, 49
pecial Characters, 94
ecial conjuncts, 88
ha, 130
hA, 104
hita, 27
oH shchunA shchuH, 115
ress, 107
u.N, 115
blation, 63
kha, 130
Utra, 32
ara, 13
Devanagari, 60; transliterated, 26
Devanagari, 57; transliterated, 24
agara, 58
lavya, 54
mas, 122
t, 26, 60
ttvamasi, 108, 120
ttvavid, 125

: Devanagari, 60; transliterated, 27
h: Devanagari, 58; transliterated, 25
UthU, 60
ansliteration, 6; ITRANS vs
omanised, 11
ansliteration Schemes, 174
N, 95, 115
Devanagari, 48; transliterated, 16
Devanagari, 48; transliterated, 32
nvoiced vowels and consonants, 114
panishads, 136
Shman, 39, 40, 74
Devanagari, 77; transliterated, 38
A, 129
rtante, 127
dAnta, 39, 123
dic anusvAra, 95
edic Prayers, 120
edic pronunciation, 95
elthuis, 174
dya, 34
rAma, 18, 50, 77
sarga, 36, 72
Shaya, 77
oiced vowels and consonants, 114
owel forms, 180
owels: basic, Devanagari, 42; basic, transliterated, 13; coalescence of dissimilar, 112; coalescence
of similar, 111; coalescence when first vowel complex, 112; complex, Devanagari, 65; complex,
transliterated, 33; long, transliterated, 31; pluta, 33; sandhi, 111
RRiddhi, 73
RRit, 127
a~njana, 17, 49, 112

ords, formation of, 104
riting, 182
Devanagari, 75; transliterated, 38
aN, 103
ar, 116
aro.anunAsike.anunAsiko vA, 116
ga, 38, 70
gavAha, 71
gayukta, 131

We publish books on Eastern religions and philosophies. Books that aim to inform and explore
the various traditions, that began rooted in East and have migrated West.

