Other books by Peter Kreeft from St. Augustine's Press 
The Philosophy of Jesus 
Jesus-Shock 
The Sea Within: Waves and the Meaning of All Things 
I Surf Therefore I Am 
If Einstein Had Been a Surfer 
Socrates' Children: Ancient 
Socrates' Children: Medieval 
Socrates' Children: Modern 
Philosophy 101 by Socrates 
Socrates Meets Descartes 
Socrates Meets Freud 
Socrates Meets Hume 
Socrates Meets Kant 
Socrates Meets Kierkegaard 
Socrates Meets Machiavelli 
Socrates Meets Marx 
Socrates Meets Sartre 
Sumrna Philosophica 
Socrates 'Students 
The Platonic Tradition 

Socratic Logic 
Edition 3.1 
by Peter Kreeft 
Edited by Trent Dougherty 
A LOGIC TEXT USING 
SOCRATIC METHOD, 
PLATONIC QUESTIONS, & 
ARISTOTELIAN PRINCIPLES 
Modeling Socratcs as the ideal teacher for the beginner 
and Socratic method as the ideal method 
Introducing philosophical issues along with logic 
by being philosophical about logic and logical about philosophy 
Presenting a complete system of classical Aristotelian logic, 
the logic of ordinary language and of the four language arts, 
reading, writing, listening, and speaking 
© 
ST AUGUSTINE'S PRESS 
South Bend, Indiana 

Copyright © 2004, 2005, 2008, 2010, 2014 by Peter Kreeft 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
without the prior permission of St. Augustine's Press. 
Manufactured in the United States of America 
3 4 5 6 
20 19 18 17 16 15 14 
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
Kreeft, Peter. 
Socratic logic: 
a logic text using Socratic method, Platonic questions & Aristotelian 
principles / by Peter Kreeft; edited by Trent Dougherty. - Ed. 3.1. 
p. cm. 
Previously published: 3rd ed. c2008. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 978-1-58731-808-5 (hardcover: alk. paper) 1. Logic. 
I. Dougherty, Trent. II. Title. 
BC108.K67 2010 
160 - dc22 
2010032937 
ooThe paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements 
of the American National Standard for Information Sciences - Permanence 
of Paper for Printed Materials, ANSI Z39.48-1984. 
ST. AUGUSTINE'S PRESS 
www. staugust ine. net 

Contents 
PREFACE 
ix 
INTRODUCTION 
1 
1. What good is logic? 
1 
2. Seventeen ways this book is different 
9 
3. The two logics (P)# 
15 
4. All of logic in two pages: an overview (B)* 
26 
5. The three acts of the mind (B) 
28 
I. T H E FIRST ACT O F THE MIND: UNDERSTANDING 
35 
1. Understanding: the thing that distinguishes man from 
both beast and computer (P) 
35 
2. Concepts, terms and words (P) 
40 
3. The "problem of universals" (P) 
41 
4. The extension and comprehension of terms 
43 
II. TERMS 
47 
1. Classifying terms 
47 
2. Categories (B) 
54 
3. Predicables (B) 
56 
4. Division and Outlining (B) 
62 
III. MATERIAL FALLACIES 
68 
1. Fallacies of language 
71 
2. Fallacies of diversion 
80 
3. Fallacies of oversimplification 
86 
4. Fallacies of argumentation 
92 
• 
"P" = "philosophical"; "B" = "basic." See p. 13, last paragraph. 

VI 
S O C R A T I C 
L O G I C 
5. Inductivc fallacies 
100 
6. Procedural fallacies 
104 
7. Metaphysical fallacies 
109 
8. Short Story: "Love Is a Fallacy" 
114 
IV. DEFINITION 
123 
1. The nature of definition (B) 
123 
2. The rules of definition (B) 
124 
3. The kinds of definition 
124 
4. The limits of definition 
129 
V. THE SECOND ACT OF THE MIND: JUDGMENT 
138 
1. Judgments, propositions, and sentences 
138 
2. What is truth? (P) 
143 
3. The four kinds of categorical propositions (B) 
145 
4. Logical form (B) 
147 
5. Euler's circles (B) 
152 
6. Tricky propositions 
153 
7. The distribution of terms 
163 
VI. CHANGING PROPOSITIONS 
166 
1. Immediate inference 
166 
2. Conversion (B) 
167 
3. Obversion (B) 
170 
4. Contraposition 
171 
VII. CONTRADICTION 
173 
1. What is contradiction? (B) 
173 
2. The Square of Opposition (B) 
174 
3. Existential import (P) 
179 
4. Tricky propositions on the Square 
181 
5. Some practical uses of the Square of Opposition 
183 
VIII. THE THIRD ACT OF THE MIND: REASONING 
186 
1. What does "reason" mean? (P) 
186 
2. The ultimate foundations of the syllogism (P) 
187 
3. How to detect arguments 
190 
4. Arguments vs. explanations 
193 
5. Truth and validity 
194 

Contents 
vii 
IX. DIFFERENT KINDS OF ARGUMENTS 
200 
1. Three meanings of "because" 
200 
2. The four causes (P) 
202 
3. A classification of arguments 
205 
4. Simple argument maps (B) 
206 
5. Deductive and inductive reasoning (B) 
210 
6. Combining induction and deduction: Socratic method (P) 211 
X. SYLLOGISMS 
215 
1. The structure and strategy of the syllogism (B) 
215 
2. The skeptic's objection to the syllogism (P) 
219 
3. The empiricist's objection to the syllogism (P) 
222 
4. Demonstrative syllogisms 
230 
5. How to construct convincing syllogisms (B) 
232 
XI. CHECKING SYLLOGISMS FOR VALIDITY 
237 
1. By Euler's Circles (B) 
237 
2. By Aristotle's six rules (B) 
242 
3. "Barbara Celarent": mood and figure 
257 
4. Venn Diagrams 
258 
XII. MORE DIFFICULT SYLLOGISMS 
264 
1. Enthymemes: abbreviated syllogisms (B) 
264 
2. Sorites: chain syllogisms 
275 
3. Epicheiremas: multiple syllogisms (B) 
279 
4. Complex argument maps 
282 
XIII. COMPOUND SYLLOGISMS 
289 
1. Hypothetical syllogisms (B) 
289 
2. "Reductio ad absurdum " arguments 
294 
3. The practical syllogism: arguing about means and ends 
296 
4. Disjunctive syllogisms (B) 
301 
5. Conjunctive syllogisms (B) 
303 
6. Dilemmas (B) 
306 
XIV. INDUCTION 
313 
1. What is induction? 
313 
2. Generalization 
315 
3. Causal arguments: Mill's methods 
319 

viii 
S O C R A T I C 
L O G 1 C 
4. Scientific hypotheses 
325 
5. Statistical probability 
328 
6. Arguments by analogy 
329 
7. A fortiori and a minore arguments 
335 
XV. SOME PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF LOGIC 
342 
1. How to write a logical essay 
342 
2. How to write a Socratic dialogue 
344 
3. How to have a Socratic debate 
348 
4. How to use Socratic method on difficult people 
350 
5. How to read a book Somatically 
355 
XVI. SOME PHILOSOPHICAL APPLICATIONS OF LOGIC 
358 
1. Logic and theology (P) 
358 
2. Logic and metaphysics (P) 
359 
3. Logic and cosmology (P) 
360 
4. Logic and philosophical anthropology (P) 
361 
5. Logic and epistemology (P) 
362 
6. Logic and ethics (P) 
362 
APPENDIX: PROBLEMS WITH MATHEMATICAL LOGIC 
364 
1. Basic modern logic 
364 
2. The paradoxes of material implication 
366 
3. Responses to the paradoxes of material implication 
367 
ANSWERS TO EVEN-NUMBERED EXERCISES 
370 
INDEX OF PRINCIPAL NAMES 
400 

Preface 
This book is a dinosaur. 
Once upon a time in Middle-Earth, two things were different: (1) most stu-
dents learned "the old logic," and (2) they could think, read, write, organize, and 
argue much better than they can today. If you believe these two things are not 
connected, you probably believe storks bring babies. 
It is time to turn back the clock. Contrary to the cliche, you can turn back 
the clock, and you should, whenever it is keeping bad time. (I learned that, and 
thousands of other very logical paradoxes, from G.K. Chesterton, the 20th-cen-
tury Socrates.) 
As I write this, it is the last Sunday of October, and we have just turned back 
our clocks from daylight savings time to standard time. This is a parable for what 
I am convinced we must do in logic. The prevailing symbolic/mathematical logic 
is a logic that a computer can do; it is artificial, like daylight savings time. It is 
very useful where there is already much intelligence (in the minds of geniuses, 
especially in science), just as daylight savings time is very useful in the summer 
when there is a plenitude of sunlight. But as the sunlight of clear thinking, writ-
ing, reading, and debating decreases in our society, it is time to make progress 
by turning back the clock from "daylight savings time" to real time, real lan-
guage, real people, and the real world. The old Socratic-Platonic-Aristotelian 
logic is simply more effective than the new symbolic logic in helping ordinary 
people in dealing with those four precious things. 
This text differs from nearly all other logic texts in print in the three ways 
suggested by the subtitle. It does this by apprenticing itself to the first three great 
philosophers in history, Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle. (Do we have better ones 
today?) 
(1) No other logic text explicitly sets out to train little Socrateses. 
(2) No other logic text in print is so explicitly philosophical in a classical, 
Platonic way. 
(3) And only two or three other, shorter, formal logic texts bypass mathe-
matical and symbolic logic for the "Aristotelian" logic of real people. 

X 
S O C R A T I C 
L O G I C 
real inquiry, and real conversations. (The only other alternative to sym-
bolic logic available today is "informal logic" or "rhetoric." This is use-
ful, but less exact and less philosophical.) 

Introduction 
Section 1. What good is logic? 
This section will give you 13 good reasons why you should study logic.1 
1. Order. You may be wondering, "What can I do with logic?" The answer 
is that logic can do something with you. Logic builds the mental habit of 
thinking in an orderly way. A course in logic will do this for you even if you 
forget every detail in it (which you won't, by the way), just as learning Latin will 
make you more habitually aware of the structure of language even if you forget 
every particular Latin word and rule. 
No course is more practical than logic, for no matter what you are thinking 
about, you are thinking, and logic orders and clarifies your thinking. No matter 
what your thought's content, it will be clearer when it has a more logical form. 
The principles of thinking logically can be applied to all thinking and to every 
field. 
Logic studies the forms or structures of thought. Thought has form and 
structure too, just as the material universe does. Thought is not like a blank 
screen, that receives its form only from the world that appears on it, as a movie 
screen receives a movie. This book will show you the basic forms (structures) 
and the basic laws (rules) of thought, just as a course in physics or chemistry 
shows you the basic forms and laws of matter. 
2. Power. Logic has power: the power of proof and thus persuasion. Any 
power can be either rightly used or abused. This power of logic is rightly used to 
win the truth and defeat error; it is wrongly used to win the argument and defeat 
1 
Making numbered lists like this is the first and simplest way we learn to order "the 
buzzing, blooming confusion" that is our world. Children, "primitive" peoples, and 
David Letterman love to make lists. Thus we find "twelve-step programs," "the Ten 
Commandments," "the Seven Wonders of the World" "the Five Pillars of Islam," "the 
Four Noble Truths," and "the Three Things More Miserable Than a Wet Chicken." To 
make a list is to classify many things under one general category, and at the same time to 
distinguish these things by assigning them different numbers. 

2 
INTRODUCTION 
your opponent. Argument is to truth as fishing is to fish, or war to peacc, or 
courtship to marriage. 
The power of logic comes from the fact that it is the science and art of argu-
ment. In the words of an old logic text, "Logick hath its name from logos ratio, 
because it is an Art which teacheth to Reason and Discourse." Thus beginneth 
Thomas Good's 1677 A Brief English Tract of Logick. 
"Dialecticke, otherwise called Logicke, is an arte which teacheth to dispute 
well." This is the first sentence of a 1574 book, Logicke, by Peter Ramus Martyr. 
Logic is so powerful that it can be dangerous to life. Socrates, the father of 
philosophy and the model for this book, was literally martyred for being logical 
- by the city of Athens, the ancient world's most famous and "civilized" democ-
racy. The Apology, Socrates' "swan song," is his defense of philosophizing, of 
his life of logical inquiry. It is one of the greatest speeches ever made. No one 
should be allowed to die without reading it.2 
Whether you use logic for right or wrong ends, it is a powerful tool. No mat-
ter what your thought's end or goal or purpose may be, it will attain that end 
more effectively if it is clearer and more logical. Even if you want to do some-
thing with logic rather than let logic do something with you - even if you want 
to deceive others, or "snow" them, or toy with them - you need to know logic in 
order to be a successful sophist. You must be a real logician even to be a fake 
•ne. 
3. Reading. Logic will help you with all your other courses, for logic will 
help you to read any book more clearly and effectively. And you are always 
going to be reading books; books arc the single most effective technological 
invention in the history of education. On the basis of over 40 years of full time 
college teaching of almost 20,000 students at 20 different schools, I am con-
vinced that one of the reasons for the steep decline in students' reading ability is 
the decline in the teaching of traditional logic. 
Mortimer Adler's classic How to Read a Book is based on the traditional 
common-sense logic of the "three acts of the mind" that you will learn in this 
book. If I were a college president, I would require every incoming freshman to 
read Adler's book and pass a test on it before taking other courses. (The most 
important points of that book are summarized in this book on p. 355.) 
4. Writing. Logic will also help you to write more clearly and effective-
ly, for clear writing and clear thinking are a "package deal": the presence or 
absence of either one brings the presence or absence of the other. Muddled writ-
ing fosters muddled thinking, and muddled thinking fosters muddled writing. 
Clear writing fosters clear thinking, and clear thinking fosters clear writing. 
2 
See Philosophy 
101 by Socrates: An Introduction 
to Philosophy 
via Plato's 
'Apology" 
by Peter Kreeft (St. Augustine's Press, 2002, 2014). 

What good is logic? 
3 
Common sense expects this, and scientific studies confirm it. Writing skills 
have declined dramatically in the 40 years or so since symbolic logic has 
replaced Aristotelian logic, and I am convinced this is no coincidence. 
There is nothing more effective than traditional logic in training you to be a 
clear, effective, and careful writer. It is simply impossible to communicate clear-
ly and effectively without thinking clearly and effectively. And that means logic. 
5. Happiness. In a small but significant way, logic can even help you 
attain happiness. 
We all seek happiness all the time because no matter what else we seek, we 
seek it because we think it will be a means to happiness, or a part of happiness, 
cither for ourselves or for those we love. And no one seeks happiness for any 
other end; no one says he wants to be happy in order to be rich, or wise, or 
healthy. But we seek riches, or wisdom, or health, in order to be happier. 
How can logic help us to attain happiness? Here is a very logical answer to 
that question: 
(1) When we attain what we desire, we are happy. 
(2) And whatever we desire, whether Heaven or a hamburger, it is more like-
ly that we will attain it if we think more clearly. 
(3) And logic helps us to think more clearly. 
(4) Therefore logic helps us to be happy. 
No other things that make us happy are contradicted or threatened by logic, 
though many people think they are: 
Beauty, for instance. There is nothing illogical about the beauty of a sunset, 
or a storm, or a baby. 
Take heroism, or even holiness. What's illogical about being very, very 
good? 
Even fantasy is not illogical. In fact, according to the greatest master of this 
art, J.R.R. Tolkien, "Fantasy is a rational, not an irrational, activity . . . creative 
fantasy is founded upon the hard recognition that things are so in the world as it 
appears under the sun; on a recognition of fact, but not a slavery to it. So upon 
logic was founded the nonsense that displays itself in the tales and rhymes of 
Lewis Carroll. If men really could not distinguish between frogs and men, fairy-
stories about frog-kings would not have arisen." ("On Fairy-Stories") The refer-
ence to Lewis Carroll (the author of Alice in Wonderland) is particularly telling. 
Lewis Carroll was a pseudonym or pen name for Rev. Charles Lutwidge 
Dodgson, an Oxford mathematician who wrote a textbook on logic. In fact, he 
was working on volume two when he died. 
6. Religious faith. All religions require faith. Is logic the ally or enemy of 
faith? 
Even religion, though it goes beyond logic, cannot go against it; if it did, it 

4 
INTRODUCTION 
would literally be unbelievable. Some wit defined "faith" as "believing what you 
know isn't true." But we simply cannot believe an idea to be true that we know 
has been proved to be false by a valid logical proof. 
It is true that faith goes beyond what can be proved by logical reasoning 
alone. That is why believing in any religion is a free personal choice, and some 
make that choice while others do not, while logical reasoning is equally com-
pelling for all. However, logic can aid faith in at least three ways. (And thus, if 
faith significantly increases human happiness, as most psychologists believe, it 
logically follows that logic can significantly increase happiness.) 
First, logic can often clarify what is believed, and define it. 
Second, logic can deduce the necessary consequences 
of the belief, and 
apply it to difficult situations. For instance, it can show that if it is true, as the 
Bible says, that "God works all things together for good for those who love 
Him" (Romans 8:28), then it must also be true that even seemingly terrible 
things like pain, death, and martyrdom will work together for good; and this 
can put these terrible things in a new light and give us a motive for enduring 
them with hope. 
Third, even if logical arguments cannot prove all that faith believes, they can 
give firmer reasons for faith than feeling, desire, mood, fashion, family or social 
pressure, conformity, or inertia. For instance, if you believe the idea mentioned 
above, that "all things work together for good for those who love God," simply 
because you feel good today, you will probably stop believing it tomorrow when 
you feel miserable; or if you believe it only because your friends or family do, 
you will probably stop believing it when you are away from your friends or fam-
ily. But if you have logical grounds for believing this, even though those grounds 
are not a compelling proof, they can keep your faith more firmly anchored dur-
ing storms of changing feelings, fashions, friends, etc. 
How could there be logical grounds for such a belief as this (that "all things 
work together for good") that seems to contradict common sense and experi-
ence? Some logical grounds might be the following: this conclusion can be log-
ically deduced from four premises which are much easier to believe: (1) that 
God exists, (2) that God is the Creator of the universe and thus all-powerful, (3) 
that God is the source of all goodness and thus all-good, and (4) that God is the 
source of all design and order in the universe and thus all-wise. A God who is 
all-powerful is in control of everything He created; a God who is all-good wills 
only good to everything He created; and a God who is all-wise knows what is 
ultimately for the best for everyone and everything He created. So to deny that 
all things are foreseen and allowed by God for the ultimate good of those He 
loves, i.e. wills goodness to, is to deny either God's existence, power, goodness, 
or wisdom. In a logical argument, you cannot deny the conclusion without deny-
ing a premise, and you cannot admit the premises without admitting the conclu-
sion. The logical chains of argument can thus bind our minds, and through them 
also even our feelings (to a certain degree), to God and to hope and to happiness. 

What good is logic? 
5 
And if these four more basic premises of God's existence, power, goodness, 
and wisdom are questioned, logic may also help to establish them by further rea-
sonable arguments (e.g. the traditional arguments for the existence of God); and 
perhaps logic can give good grounds for the premises of those arguments too. 
The point is not that logic can prove religious beliefs - that would dispense 
with the need for faith - but that it can strengthen them (and thus also the hap-
piness that goes with them). And if it does not - if clear, honest, logical think-
ing leads you to tftsbelieve something you used to believe, like Santa Claus — 
then that is progress too, for truth should trump even happiness. If we are hon-
est and sane, we want not just any happiness, but true happiness. 
7. Wisdom. "Philosophy" means "the love of wisdom." Although logic alone 
cannot make you wise, it can help. For logic is one of philosophy's main instru-
ments. Logic is to philosophy what telescopes are to astronomy or microscopes 
to biology or math to physics. You can't be very good at physics if you're very 
bad at math, and you can't be very good at philosophy if you're very bad at logic. 
8. Democracy. There are even crucial social and political reasons for 
studying logic. As a best-selling modern logic text says, "the success of democ-
racy depends, in the end, on the reliability of the judgments we citizens make, 
and hence upon our capacity and determination to weigh arguments and evi-
dence rationally." As Thomas Jefferson said, "In a republican nation, whose cit-
izens are to be led by reason and persuasion and not by force, the art of reason-
ing becomes of the first importance." (Copi & Cohen, Logic, 10th edition, 
Prentice-Hall, 1998). 
9. Defining logic's limits. Does logic have limits? Yes, but we need logic to 
recognize and define logic's limits. 
Logic has severe limits. We need much more than logic even in our think-
ing. For instance, we need intuition too. But logic helps us to recognize this dis-
tinction. 
In our lives, logical arguments are always embedded in a human context that 
is interpersonal, emotional, intuitive, and assumed rather than proved; and this 
colors the proper interpretation of a logical argument. For instance, in 1637 
Dcscartes said "I think, therefore I am"; 370 years later, a bumper sticker says 
"I bitch, therefore I am." The logical form of both arguments is the same, but the 
contexts are radically different. Descartes was seriously trying to refute skepti-
cism (the belief that we cannot be certain of anything) by a purely theoretical 
argument, while the bumper sticker was making a joke. We laugh at it because 
we intuitively understand that it means "Don't complain at my bitching; bitch-
ing makes me feel more 'real,' more alive." Logical thinking alone cannot know 
this, but it can know what its limits are: it can distinguish what it can understand 
from what it can't (non-logical factors such as humor and feeling and intuition). 

6 
INTRODUCTION 
10.Testing authority. We need authority as well as logic. But we need logic 
to test our authorities. 
We need authorities because no individual can discover everything 
autonomously. We all do in fact rely on the human community, and therefore on 
the authority of others - parents, teachers, textbooks, "experts," friends, history, 
and tradition - for a surprisingly large portion of what we know - perhaps up to 
99%, if it can be quantified. And that is another reason we need logic: we need 
to have good reasons for believing our authorities, for in the end it is you the 
individual who must decide which authorities to trust. It is obviously foolish to 
buy from every peddler of ideas that knocks on your mind's door. In fact, it is 
impossible, because they often contradict each other. 
11. Recognizing contradictions. One of the things you will learn in this 
course is exactly what contradiction means, how to recognize it, and what to do 
with it. Logic teaches us which ideas contradict each other. If we are confused 
about that, we will be either too exclusive (that is, we will think beliefs logical-
ly exclude each other when they do not) or too inclusive (that is, we will believe 
two things that cannot both be true). 
When we consider two different ideas which seem to contradict each other, 
we need to know three things: 
(1) First of all, we need to know exactly what each one means. Only then 
can we know whether they really contradict each other or not. 
(2) And if they do, we need to know which one is true and which is false. 
(3) And we do this by finding reasons why one idea is true and another is 
false. 
These are the "three acts of the mind": understanding a meaning, judging 
what is true, and reasoning. These are the three parts of logic which you will 
learn in this course. 
12. Certainty. Logic has "outer limits"; there are many things it can't give 
you. But logic has no "inner limits": like math, it never breaks down. Just as 2 
plus 2 are unfailingly 4, so if A is B and B is C, then A is unfailingly C. Logic 
is timeless and unchangeable. It is certain. It is not certain that the sun will rise 
tomorrow (it is only very, very probable). But it is certain that it either will or 
won't. And it is certain that if it's true that it will, then it's false that it won't. 
In our fast-moving world, much of what we learn goes quickly out of date. "He 
who weds the spirit of the times quickly becomes a widower," says G.K. Chesterton. 
But logic never becomes obsolete. The principles of logic are timelessly true. 
Our discovery of these principles, of course, changes and progresses 
through history. Aristotle knew more logic than Homer and we know more than 
Aristotle, as Einstein knew more physics than Newton and Newton knew more 
than Aristotle. 

What good is logic? 
Our formulations of these changeless logical principles also changc. This 
book is clearer and easier to read than Aristotle's Organon 2350 years ago, but 
it tcaches the same essential principles. 
Our applications of the timeless principles of logic to changing things are 
also changing. The principles of logic apply to many different and changing 
things, but the principles themselves are unchanging and rigid. They wouldn't 
work unless they were rigid. When we hear a word like "rigid" or "inflexible," 
we usually experience an automatic ("knee-jerk") negative reaction. But a 
moment's reflection should show us that, though people should not usually be 
rigid and inflexible, principles have to be. They wouldn't work unless they were 
rigid. Unless the yardstick is rigid, you cannot use it to measure the non-rigid, 
changing things in the world, like the height of a growing child. Trying to meas-
ure our rapidly and confusingly changing world by a "flexible" and changing 
logic instead of an inflexible one is like trying to measure a squirming alligator 
with a squirming snake. 
13. Truth. Our last reason for studying logic is the simplest and most impor-
tant of all. It is that logic helps us to find truth, and truth is its own end: it is 
worth knowing for its own sake. 
Logic helps us to find truth, though it is not sufficient of itself to find truth. 
It helps us especially (1) by demanding that we define our terms so that we 
understand what we mean, and (2) by demanding that we give good reasons, 
arguments, proofs. 
These are the two main roads to truth, as you will see more clearly when 
you read Chapter II, on the three "acts of the mind": understanding, judging, and 
reasoning. Truth is found only in "the second act of the mind," judging - e.g. the 
judgment that "all men are mortal." But two paths to truth are "the first act of 
the mind" (e.g. understanding the meaning of the terms "men" and "mortal") 
and "the third act of the mind" (e.g. reasoning that "since all men have animal 
bodies, and whatever has an animal body is mortal, therefore all men are mor-
tal"). These are the two main ways logic helps us to find truth. 
Truth is worth knowing just for the sake of knowing it because truth fulfills 
and perfects our minds, which are part of our very essence, our deep, distinctive-
ly human core, our very selves. Truth is to our minds what food is to our bodies. 
Aristotle pointed out, twenty-four centuries ago, that there are three reasons 
for pursuing truth and three corresponding kinds of "sciences" (in the older, 
broader sense of the word "sciences," namely "rational explanations through 
causes"). He called the three kinds of sciences (1) "productive sciences," (2) 
"practical sciences," and (3) "theoretical sciences." Each pursues truth for a dif-
ferent end: 
(I) We want to know about the world so that we can change it, improve it, 
and make things out of it (like rubber, or roads, or rockcts, or robots). 

8 
INTRODUCTION 
This is what Aristotle called "productive science? since its end is to pro-
duce things. We call it "technology" after the Greek word techne, which 
means approximately "know-how" knowing how to make or fix or 
improve some material thing in the world. "Productive scicnces" 
include things as diverse as engineering, surgery, auto repair, cooking, 
and cosmetics. 
(2) We also want to know about ourselves so that we can change and 
improve our own lives, our behavior, our activities. Aristotle called this 
"practical science," knowledge in practice, in action. "Practical sci-
ences" include ethics and politics as well as knowing how to do things 
as diverse as economics, singing, and surfing. 
(3) But most of all, we want to know simply in order to know, i.e. to become 
larger on the inside, as it were, to "expand our consciousness." Sciences 
that pursue this end Aristotle called "theoretical sciences," 
from the 
Greek word theoria, which means "looking" or "contemplating." 
("Theoretical" does not necessarily mean "uncertain" or "merely hypo-
thetical") Theoretical sciences include such diverse things as physics, 
biology, theology, mathematics, astronomy, and philosophy. These all 
have practical applications and uses, but they are first of all aimed at 
simply knowing and understanding the truth, even if there is no practi-
cal application of it. 
Many people today think that theoretical sciences are the least important 
because they are not practical. But Aristotle argued that the theoretical sciences 
were the most important for the same reason that practical sciences were more 
important than productive scienccs: because their "payoff" is more intimate, 
their reward closer to home. For they improve our very selves, while practical 
sciences improve our actions and lives, and productive sciences improve our 
world. All three are important, but just as our lives are more intimate to us than 
our external world, so our very selves are even more intimate to us than our lives, 
our deeds, and certainly more intimate and more important to us than the mate-
rial things in our world. As a very famous and very practical philosopher argued 
twenty centuries ago, "What does it profit a man to gain the whole world but 
lose his own self?" (Mark 8:36) 
The original meaning of a "liberal arts" education was this: the study of the 
truth for its own sake, not only for the sake of what you can do with it or what 
you can make with it. The term "liberal arts" comes from Aristotle: he said that 
just as a man is called "free" when he exists for his own sake and a "slave" when 
he exists for the sake of another man, so these studies are called "free" ("liber-
al" or liberating) because they exist for their own sake and not for the sake of 
anything else. 
Logic will prove very useful to you in many ways, but its most important 
use is simply to help you to sec more clearly what is true and what is false. 
Logic alone will not tell you what is true. It will only aid you in discovering 

Seventeen ways this book is different 
9 
truth. You also need experience, to get your premises; logic can then draw your 
conclusions. Logic will tell you that if all leprechauns are elves and all hobbits 
arc leprechauns, then it necessarily follows that all hobbits are elves; but logic 
will not tell you whether all leprechauns are elves, or even whether there are any 
leprechauns. (I once asked my very Irish neighbor whether she believes in lep-
rechauns and she answered, "Of course not But they exist all the same, mind 
you." Perhaps the Irish should write their own logic textbook.) 
To have logical clarity and consistency is admirable. But to have only logi-
cal clarity and consistency is pitiful. In fact, it is a mark of insanity, as G.K. 
Chesterton pointed out: 
"If you argue with a madman, it is extremely probable that you will get 
the worst of it; for in many ways his mind moves all the quicker for not 
being delayed by the things that go with good judgment. He is not ham-
pered by a sense of humour or charity, or by the dumb certainties of 
experience. . . . Indeed, the common phrase for insanity is in this 
respect a misleading one. The madman is not the man who has lost his 
reason. The madman is the man who has lost everything except his rea-
son . . . if a man says that he is the rightful King of England, it is no 
complete answer to say that the existing authorities call him mad; for if 
he were King of England that might be the wisest thing for the existing 
authorities to do. Or if a man says that he is Jesus Christ, it is no answer 
to tell him that the world denies his divinity; for the world denied 
Christ's . . . his mind moves in a perfect but narrow circle. A small cir-
cle is quite as infinite as a large circle; but, though it is quite as infi-
nite, it is not so large. In the same way the insane explanation is quite 
as complete as the sane one, but it is not so large.... 'So you are the 
Creator and Redeemer of the world: but what a small world it must be! 
What a little heaven you must inhabit, with angels no bigger than but-
terflies! How sad it must be to be God; and an inadequate God! Is there 
really no life fuller and no love more marvelous than yours? . . . How 
much happier you would be, how much more of you there would be, if 
the hammer of a higher God could smash your small cosmos, scatter-
ing the stars like spangles, and leave you in the open, free like other 
men to look up as well as down!'... Curing a madman is not arguing 
with a philosopher; it is casting out a devil." (Orthodoxy) 
(Especially for Teachers) 
Section 2. Seventeen ways this book is different 
There are literally hundreds of logic texts in print, and thousands more out of 
print. Why one more? How is this one different? How is it better? 
1. It's simple. It's better for most students because it's not the best, i.e. the 

10 
INTRODUCTION 
most advanced, sophisticated, state-of-the-art text. Most beginning students need 
a simpler, easier, basic logic text, just as most new computer owners would love 
to have a simple, "dumb," obedient computer that they can master and use quick-
ly and easily instead of one with so many "bells and whistles" that by the time 
you master it, it's obsolete. But no one makes a "dumb" computer; the geniuses 
who make them arc too proud to serve us "dummies." 
Well, I'm not. This is a "dumb" logic book: it's for beginners. 
For instance, its most basic points (which are summarized in Section 4 of 
this Introduction, "All of logic in two pages") are repeated so often that even the 
slowest and most confused students should not lose their way and lose hope. 
2. It's user-friendly. It is for two kinds of users: it is a classroom text for 
teachers and also a "do-it-yourself" text for individuals. 
The fact that it is simple enough for an intelligent "do-it-yourselfer" does 
not mean it is less useful for a teacher as a classroom text - unless obscure class-
room texts are more useful than clear and simple ones. 
3. It's practical. It covers topics in proportion to probable student use. E.g. 
it devotes more space than usual to topics like (1) Socratic method, (2) inter-
preting ordinary language and translating it into logical form, (3) constructing 
effective syllogisms, (4) material fallacies, (5) diagramming long arguments 
simply, and (6) smoking out hidden premises, because these are some of the log-
ical skills we need and use the most outside a logic class. 
Logic is like praying, fishing, or learning a language: you learn by doing. 
Much of the work is in the will, not the mind: in resolution and persistence and 
dogged honesty. Actually practicing a few basic logical principles will make you 
a far more effective arguer, evaluator, researcher, and writer than knowing ten 
times more and practicing it less. Most logic students learn too much, not too lit-
tle; instead of learning what they need to use, they learn what they neither need 
nor use. That is why this book contains many exercises on basics, and only a 
very introductory treatment of non-basics. 
When we actually argue, obeying a few basic rules well is much more rare, 
more difficult, and more adequate than we usually think. Just imagine for a 
moment how some of the arguments you have heard or read would have been 
different if both sides had only obeyed this one elementary principle: 
Don't ignore your opponent's arguments and counter with your own; 
don't just sit there waiting for your "turn" to attack. You must also 
defend by finding a logical fallacy, a false premise, or an ambiguous 
term in every single one of your opponent's arguments. 
Practical usefulness is the main reason for preferring classical Socratic, 
Aristotelian logic to modern symbolic logic, even if the latter may be more the-
oretically adequate. It is like the difference between Einsteinian physics and 

Seventeen ways this book is different 
11 
Newtonian physics, with its basic laws of motion and its principles of simple 
machines. Though Einstein is theoretically superior. Newton is still much more 
practical for beginners. I think I have never found anyone except a professional 
philosopher who actually used symbolic logic in actual conversation or debate. 
4. It's linguistic. It emphasizes the use and understanding of ordinary lan-
guage. E.g. it devotes considerable time to translating ordinary language into 
logical form (and it uses the logical form closest to ordinary language) because 
this is a skill teachers usually assume, but students usually lack (probably 
because of the decline in the teaching of grammar). I find today's students much 
more confused by language, and less by mathematical symbols, than previous 
generations. They are the digital generation, not the verbal. They need to re-learn 
the logic of language, for thought can no more escape words than fish can 
escape water. 
There is of course a need for new and specialized forms of mathematical 
logic too, but this need is being well supplied, while the more basic need for the 
more basic logic is not being well supplied. 
5. It's readable. Its linguistic style is popular, personal, informal, light, and 
sometimes even humorous. 
6. It's traditional. Its master is Aristotle, "the master of common sense," 
the man whose philosophy has become as embedded in the Western tradition as 
Confucius's became embedded in the Chinese. 
Aristotle's master was Plato. "All of Western philosophy is a series of foot-
notes to Plato," said Whitehead. In The Last Battle, C. S. Lewis has the old pro-
fessor say, "It's all in Plato, all in Plato: bless me, what do they teach them at 
these schools?" Lewis says of his own thought: "To lose what I owe to Plato and 
Aristotle would be like the amputation of a limb" (Rehabilitations, "The Idea of 
an English School"). 
Plato's master was Socrates, the most interesting philosopher who ever 
lived, and the father of the application of logic to philosophical questions. When 
Aristotle wrote the world's first logic text, he was reflecting on what Socrates 
had already done, defining the principles of Socrates' practice. Thus our title, 
"Socratic Logic." 
This book is also traditional in the sense that it uses many classic examples 
from history and the Great Books. A side benefit is thus the student's exposure 
to these many "nuggets" of traditional wisdom, any one of which may some day 
enable him to win a large amount of money on a quiz show somewhere down in 
Plato's cave. 
Since tradition (i.e. all of human history up until the present) has been much 
more religious than the present, many of the examples are about religious ques-
tions. There are at least five advantages to this. (1) Religious questions arc 

12 
INTRODUCTION 
intrinsically interesting. Only a fascinatingly dull mind is more fascinatcd with 
questions about life insurance rates than with questions about life after death. 
(2) They are not only subjectively interesting but objectively, intrinsically 
important, whether they are to be answered affirmatively or negatively. 
Religion is either humanity's most important wisdom or its most important illu-
sion. (3) They are by nature not culturally and temporally relative, like most 
questions of politics and ideology, but universally human. (4) They are close to 
philosophical questions, and lead naturally into them. (5) And they are difficult, 
challenging, and mysterious. 
Believers or nonbelievers in any religion should be able to use this book 
with profit. It makes no religious or antireligious assumptions. 
7. It's commonsensical. Logic is like psychoanalysis in that it does not 
impose anything upon you from outside but only clarifies what is already pres-
ent in you. Good logic never contradicts common sense, if we mean by "com-
mon sense" not something the polls determine (that's only "fashionable opin-
ions") but something naturally and innately present in every mind. The 
American philosopher C.I. Lewis wrote that "everyone knows the distinction of 
cogent reasoning from fallacy. The study of logic appeals to no criterion not 
already present in the learner's mind."3 If any principle in this book ever seems 
to contradict what you know by innate common sense, something is wrong with 
that principle. This is one of the main reasons for preferring traditional 
Aristotelian logic to the more fashionable modern symbolic logic. Aristotelian 
logic is far closer to common sense; that is why it is far easier to apply and use 
in ordinary conversations. 
We all have used logic already, unconsciously, many times every day. Even 
animals do that. Chrysippus, a Stoic philosopher of the 3rd century, watched a 
dog chasing a rabbit come to a fork in the road; the dog sniffed at two of the 
three paths and then ran down the third without taking the time to sniff at it. 
Even the dog instinctively used logic to catch a real-world rabbit! He used a dis-
junctive syllogism: Either the rabbit took road A or road B or road C; not A or 
B; therefore C. 
In one of Moliere's comedies, Monsieur Jourdain suddenly discovers, to his 
amazement, that he has been speaking in prose all his life. You have been think-
ing and speaking in "logic" all your life. This course helps you to "know thyself." 
3 
Interestingly, Christian apologist C.S. Lewis was once confused with C.I. Lewis, who 
went on to be an important developer of symbolic logic. When CS. Lewis saw a review 
of The Principles of Symbolic 
Logic which attributed the work to him, he wrote to his 
father "1 am writing back to tell them that they have got rather muddled. Symbolic Logic 
forsooth!" (Letters, 25 May 1919). 

Se\'enteen w ays this book is different 
13 
8. It's philosophical, both in its applications and in its foundations. Of all 
the applications of logic, philosophy is the most (subjectively) interesting and 
the most (objectively) important. Philosophy asks the Big Questions. 
This book exposes students to the ideas of the great philosophers all along 
the way by frequent quotations from them in its exercises, and ends with a series 
of chapters which use logic to introduce the fundamental questions of meta-
physics, philosophical theology, cosmology, ethics, anthropology, and episte-
mology. It prepares students for reading Great Books, not "Dick and Jane." 
Philosophy is not only an application of logic, but logic also has philo-
sophical foundations. 
Logic is not always philosophically neutral. DifTerent 
kinds of logic sometimes imply or presuppose importantly different philosophi-
cal positions. (See Section 3, p. 15.) 
This book's philosophy is Aristotelian realism. It dares to take a philosoph-
ical stand on controversial issues like truth, and certainty, and universals. (It 
affirms all three, by the way.) This stand is neither ideological nor religious but 
commonsensical and traditional; but precisely because it is commonsensical and 
traditional, it is counter-cultural and controversial in today's philosophical mar-
ketplace. 
9. It's constructive. It teaches how to make good arguments as well as how 
to refute bad ones, and such constructive lessons as how to use the Socratic 
method, how to write a good essay, how to read a book, how to organize an out-
line, how to debate, and how to argue logically with difficult people. For some 
mysterious reason these practical arts are usually neglected in logic books. 
10. It's clearly divided. There are 89 sections, or mini-chapters, in the 16 
chapters of the book, but most of them are very short. Each section teaches only 
one basic point. This enhances clarity for the beginning student. Some logic text-
books try to teach too many things in a single section, and the result is confu-
sion. This book does only one thing at a time. 
The sections arc determined by content, not by length. Since there is only 
one basic point per section, and since some points are easier than others, some 
sections are much shorter than others. (Why not? Why should quantity deter-
mine quality? Why should the accidental determine the essential?) 
11. It's flexible. The division into so many sections gives the teacher the 
option to select a "mix and match" of sections in many different ways, depend-
ing on the emphasis desired. 
There are four kinds of sections: basic logic, advanced logic, practical appli-
cations, and philosophical logic. The Table of Contents marks the basic sections 
"(B)", marks the philosophical sections "(P)", and puts the practical application 

14 
INTRODUCTION 
sections in Chapter 15. This allows the book to be used in at least ten different 
ways, ranging from the very short to the very long: 
(1) the bare basics only 
(2) the basic sections plus the philosophical sections 
(3) the basic sections plus the more advanced sections in logic 
(4) the basic sections plus the practical application sections 
(5) the basic sections plus any two of these three additions 
(6) all of the book 
(7) all or some of it supplemented by a text in symbolic logic 
(8) all or some of it supplemented by a text in inductive logic 
(9) all or some of it supplemented by a text in rhetoric or informal logic 
(10) all or some of it supplemented by readings in and applications to the 
great philosophers 
The first option should take about half a semester, (2) through (6) a whole 
semester, and (7) through (10) up to two semesters. In a one-semester, 14-week, 
one-class-a-week course, you can combine any or all of the following chapters 
into single-class lessons: (1) the Introduction and chapter 1; (2) chapters 6 and 
7; (3) chapters 8 and 9; (4) chapters 10 and 11; (5) chapters 15 and 16. 
12. It's short. The first few options above give you a short, basic, no-frills, 
no-fat logic text. 
13. It's selective. It emphasizes a relatively small number of "big ideas" 
that the student will always need and use and remember, rather than the usual 
logic text's many "bells and whistles" that students will rarely use. 
14. It's innovative where it needs to be. It includes some specific things 
most other logic texts do not, such as: 
• a clear distinction between six quite different kinds of induction 
• a unique explanation of the Square of Opposition that is much cleaner 
and simpler than any other 
• a simple, streamlined solution to the problem of existential import 
• an overview of the difference between the two logics and its philosoph-
ical significance 
• practical advice on Socratic method, Socratic debates, and writing 
Socratic dialogues 
• many interfacings with philosophy 
-A- practical applications of logic to writing and debating 
• an expanded list of material fallacies (49) divided into seven categories. 
(This is the most complete list of material fallacies 1 know of, except for 
two books entirely devoted to fallacies, Fallacy; The Counterfeit 
of 
Argument by Fernside & Holthcr [Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-

The too logics 
15 
Hall, 1959], which lists 51, and Historians' Fallacies by David H. 
Fischcr [New York: Harper & Row, 1979], which lists 112.) 
15. It's interactive. It includes many exercises, because this is how a logic 
course "takes" in students' minds and lives. It is more effective to master a few 
important principles, by much practice, than to be exposed to so many principles 
and so little practice that you cannot remember and apply the principles after the 
course is over. We remember general principles only by particular experiences 
in applying them. (This "practical empiricism" is part of the Aristotelian her-
itage behind the book.) 
A suggestion for teachers: Instead of lecturing on the text, which would 
probably be only rehashing it, let it teach itself, but leave plenty of time for stu-
dent questions on it. 
A suggested class format: (1) first, discuss all student questions about the 
pages that were assigned, including exercises; (2) then, a short quiz (weekly or 
even daily); (3) then go over the correct answers to the quiz, so students can 
immediately learn from their mistakes; (4) then introduce the next assignment. 
One more suggestion: If there are not enough questions, and only a small 
number of students, require at least two written questions from each student at the 
very beginning of each class, for you to answer (or have other students answer). 
16. It's holistic. It emphasizes the whole, the "big picture," the structure 
and outline of the whole of logic. It repeatedly situates each topic within the 
"three acts of the mind" overview of the course, so that the student has a sense 
of where everything fits, and does not feel lost. (Teachers tend to underestimate 
this need for a continual orientation check, and how much confidence it gives 
the confused student.) 
17. It's classroom-tested, based on the experience of teaching many kinds 
of logic in many kinds of ways to many kinds of students at many levels of intel-
ligence and background at many kinds of schools over many years. 
Section 3, The two logics (P) 
(This section can be omitted without losing anything you will need later on in the 
book. It's here both to satisfy the advanced student's curiosity and to sell the 
approach of this book to prospective teachers who may question its emphasis on 
Aristotelian rather than symbolic logic, by justifying this choice philosophically.) 
Almost four hundred years before Christ, Aristotle wrote the world's first 
logic textbook. Actually it was six short books, which collectively came to be 
known as the Organon, or "instrument." From then until 1913, when Bertrand 
Russell and Alfred North Whitehead published Principia Mathematical the first 

16 
INTRODUCTION 
classic of mathematical or symbolic logic, all students learned Aristotelian logic, 
the logic taught in this book. 
The only other "new logic" for twenty-four centuries was an improvement on 
the principles of inductive logic by Francis Bacon's Novum Organum ("New Or-
ganon"), in the 17th century, and another by John Stuart Mill, in the 19th century. 
(Inductive reasoning could be very roughly and inadequately defined as 
reasoning from concrete particular instances, known by experience, while 
deduction reasons from general principles. Induction yields only probability, 
while deduction yields certainty. "Socrates, Plato and Aristotle are mortal, there-
fore probably all men are mortal" is an example of inductive reasoning; "All 
men are mortal, and Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is mortal" is an exam-
ple of deductive reasoning.) 
Today nearly all logic textbooks use the new mathematical, or symbolic, 
logic as a kind of new language system for deductive logic. (It is not a new logic; 
logical principles are unchangeable, like the principles of algebra. It is more like 
changing from Roman numerals to Arabic numerals.) There are at least three 
reasons for this change: 
(1) The first and most important one is that the new logic really is superior 
to the old in efficiency for expressing many long and complex arguments, as 
Arabic numerals are to Roman numerals, or a digital computer to an analog 
computer, or writing in shorthand to writing in longhand. 
However, longhand is superior to shorthand in other ways: e.g. it has more 
beauty and elegance, it is intelligible to more people, and it gives a more per-
sonal touch. That is why most people prefer longhand most of the time - as most 
beginners prefer simpler computers (or even pens). It is somewhat similar in 
logic: most people "argue in longhand," i.e. ordinary language; and Aristotelian 
logic stays close to ordinary language. That is why Aristotelian logic is more 
practical for beginners. 
Even though symbolic language is superior in sophistication, it depends on 
commonsense logic as its foundation and root. Thus you will have a firmer foun-
dation for all advanced logics if you first master this most basic logic. Strong 
roots arc the key to healthy branches and leaves for any tree. Any farmer knows 
that the way to get better fruit is to tend the roots, not the fruits. (This is only an 
analogy. Analogies do not prove anything - that is a common fallacy - they only 
illuminate and illustrate. But it is an illuminating analogy.) 
Modern symbolic logic is mathematical logic. "Modern symbolic logic has 
been developed primarily by mathematicians with mathematical applications in 
mind." This from one of its defenders, not one of its critics (Henry C. Baycrly, 
in A Primer of Logic. N.Y.: Harper & Row, 1973, p.4). 
Mathematics is a wonderful invention for saving time and empowering sci-
ence, but it is not very useful in most ordinary conversations, especially philo-
sophical conversations. The more important the subject matter, the less relevant 

The two logics 
17 
mathematics seems. Its forte is quantity, not quality. Mathematics is the only 
totally clear, utterly unambiguous language in the world; yet it cannot say any-
thing very interesting about anything very important Compare the exercises in 
a symbolic logic text with those in this text How many are taken from the Great 
Books? How many are from conversations you could have had in real life? 
(2) A second reason for the popularity of symbolic logic is probably its 
more scientific and exact form. The very artificiality of its language is a plus for 
its defenders. But it is a minus for ordinary people. In fact, Ludwig Wittgenstein, 
probably the most influential philosophical logician of the 20th century, admit-
ted, in Philosophical 
Investigations, that "because of the basic differences 
between natural and artificial languages, often such translations [between natu-
ral-language sentences and artificial symbolic language] are not even possible 
in principle." "Many logicians now agree that the methods of symbolic logic are 
of little practical usefulness in dealing with much reasoning encountered in real-
life situations" (Stephen N. Thomas, Practical Reasoning in Natural Language, 
Prentice-Hall, 1973). 
- And in philosophy! "However helpful symbolic logic may be as a tool of 
t h e . . . sciences, it is [relatively] useless as a tool of philosophy. Philosophy aims 
at insight into principles and into the relationship of conclusions to the princi-
ples from which they are derived. Symbolic logic, however, does not aim at giv-
ing such insight" (Andrew Bachhuber, Introduction to Logic (New York: 
Appleton-Century Crofts, 1957), p. 318). 
(3) But there is a third reason for the popularity of symbolic logic among 
philosophers, which is more substantial, for it involves a very important differ-
ence in philosophical belief. The old, Aristotelian logic was often scorned by 
20th-century philosophers because it rests on two commonsensical but unfash-
ionable philosophical presuppositions. The technical names for them arc "epis-
temological realism" and "metaphysical realism." These two positions were held 
by the vast majority of all philosophers for over 2000 years (roughly, from 
Socrates to the 18th century) and are still held by most ordinary people today, 
since they seem so commonsensical, but they were not held by many of the 
influential philosophers of the past three centuries. 
(The following summary should not scare off beginners; it is much more 
abstract and theoretical than most of the rest of this book.) 
The first of these two presuppositions, "epistemological realism," is the 
belief that the object of human reason, when reason is working naturally and 
rightly, is objective reality as it really is; that human reason can know objective 
reality, and can sometimes know it with certainty; that when we say "two apples 
plus two apples must always be four apples," or that "apples grow on trees," we 
are saying something true about the universe, not just about how we think or 
about how we choose to use symbols and words. Today many philosophers arc 

18 
INTRODUCTION 
skeptical of this belief, and call it naive, largely because of two 18th-century 
"Enlightenment" philosophers, Hume and Kant. 
Hume inherited from his predecessor Locke the fatal assumption that the 
immediate object of human knowledge is our own ideas rather than objective 
reality. Locke naively assumed that we could know that these ideas "corre-
sponded" to objective reality, somewhat like photographs; but it is difficult to 
see how we can be sure any photograph accurately corresponds to the real object 
of which it is a photograph if the only things we can ever know directly are pho-
tographs and not real objects. Hume drew the logical conclusion of skepticism 
from Locke s premise. 
Once he limited the objects of knowledge to our own ideas, Hume then dis-
tinguished two kinds of propositions expressing these ideas: what he called 
"matters of fact" and "relations of ideas." 
What Hume called "relations of ideas" are essentially what Kant later called 
"analytic propositions" and what logicians now call "tautologies": propositions 
that are true by definition, true only because their predicate merely repeats all or 
part of their subject (e.g. "Trees are trees" or "Unicorns are not non-unicorns" 
or "Unmarried men are men"). 
What Hume called "matters of fact" are essentially what Kant called "syn-
thetic propositions," propositions whose predicate adds some new information 
to the subject (like "No Englishman is 25 feet tall" or "Some trees never shed 
their leaves"); and these "matters of fact," according to Hume, could be known 
only by sense observation. Thus they were always particular (e.g. "These two 
men are bald") rather than universal (e.g. "All men are mortal"), for we do not 
sense universals (like "all men"), only particulars (like "these two men"). 
Common sense says that we can be certain of some universal truths, e.g. 
that all men are mortal, and therefore that Socrates is mortal because he is a 
man. But according to Hume we cannot be certain of universal truths like "all 
men are mortal" because the only way we can come to know them is by gener-
alizing from particular sense experiences (this man is mortal, and that man is 
mortal, etc.); and we cannot sense all men, only some, so our generalization can 
only be probable. Hume argued that particular facts deduced from these only-
probable general principles could never be known or predicted with certainty. If 
it is only probably true that all men are mortal, then it is only probably true that 
Socrates is mortal. The fact that we have seen the sun rise millions of times does 
not prove that it will necessarily rise tomorrow. 
Hume's "bottom line" conclusion from this analysis is skepticism: there is 
no certain knowledge of objective reality ("matters of fact"), only of our own 
ideas ("relations of ideas"). We have only probable knowledge of objective real-
ity. Even scientific knowledge, Hume thought, was only probable, not certain, 
because science assumes the principle of causality, and this principle, according 
to Hume, is only a subjective association of ideas in our minds. Because we have 
seen a "constant conjunction" of birds and eggs, because we have seen eggs 

The two logics 
19 
follow birds so often, we naturally assume that the bird is the cause of the egg. 
But we do not see causality itself, the causal relation itself between the bird and 
the egg. And we certainly do not see (with our eyes) the universal "principle of 
causality." So Hume concluded that we do not really have the knowledge of 
objective reality that we naturally think we have. We must be skeptics, if we are 
only Humean beings. 
Kant accepted most of Hume's analysis but said, in effect, "I Kant accept 
your skeptical conclusion." He avoided this conclusion by claiming that human 
knowledge does not fail to do its job because its job is not to conform to objec-
tive reality (or "things-in-themselves," as he called it), i.e. to correspond to it or 
copy it. Rather, knowledge constructs or forms reality as an artist constructs or 
forms a work of art. The knowing subject determines the known object rather 
than vice versa. Human knowledge does its job very well, but its job is not to 
learn what is, but to make what is, to form it and structure it and impose mean-
ings on it. (Kant distinguished three such levels of imposed meanings: the two 
"forms of apperception": time and space; twelve abstract logical "categories" 
such as causality, necessity, and relation; and the three "ideas of pure reason": 
God, self, and world.) Thus the world of experience is formed by our knowing it 
rather than our knowledge being formed by the world. Kant called this idea his 
"Copernican Revolution in philosophy." It is sometimes called "epistemological 
idealism" or "Kantian idealism," to distinguish it from epistemological realism. 
("Epistemology" is that division of philosophy which studies human know-
ing. The term "epistemological idealism" is sometimes is used in a different way, 
to mean the belief that ideas rather than objective reality are the objects of our 
knowledge; in that sense, Locke and Hume are epistemological idealists too. But 
if we use "epistemological idealism" to mean the belief that the human idea (or 
knowing, or consciousness) determines its object rather than being determined 
by it, then Kant is the first epistemological idealist.) 
The "bottom line" for logic is that if you agree with either Hume or Kant, 
logic becomes the mere manipulation of our symbols, not the principles for a 
true orderly knowledge of an ordered world. For instance, according to episte-
mological idealism, general "categories" like "relation" or "quality" or "cause" 
or "time" are only mental classifications we make, not real features of the world 
that we discover. 
In such a logic, "genus" and "species" mean something very different than 
in Aristotelian logic: they mean only any larger class and smaller sub-class that 
we mentally construct. But for Aristotle a "genus" is the general or common part 
of a thing's real essential nature (e.g. "animal" is man's genus), and a "species" 
is the whole essence (e.g. "rational animal" is man's species). (See Chapter III, 
Sections 2 and 3.) 
Another place where modern symbolic logic merely manipulates mental 
symbols while traditional Aristotelian logic expresses insight into objective real-
ity is the interpretation of a conditional (or "hypothetical") proposition such as 

20 
INTRODUCTION 
"If it rains, I will get wet." Aristotelian logic, like common sense, interprets this 
proposition as an insight into real causality: the rain causes me to get wet. I am 
predicting the effect from the cause. But symbolic logic does not allow this com-
monsensical, realistic interpretation. It is skeptical of the "naive" assumption of 
epistemological realism, that we can know real things like real causality; and 
this produces the radically anti-commonsensical (or, as they say so euphemisti-
cally, "counter-intuitive") "problem of material implication" (see page 23). 
Besides epistemological realism, Aristotelian logic also implicitly assumes 
metaphysical realism. (Metaphysics is that division of philosophy which inves-
tigates what reality is; epistemology is that division of philosophy which inves-
tigates what knowing is.) Epistemological realism contends that the object of 
intelligence is reality. Metaphysical realism contends that reality is intelligible; 
that it includes a real order; that when we say "man is a rational animal," e.g. we 
are not imposing an order on a reality that is really random or chaotic or 
unknowable; that we are expressing our discovery of order, not our creation of 
order; that "categories" like "man" or "animal" or "thing" or "attribute" are 
taken from reality into our language and thought, not imposed on reality from 
our language and thought. 
Metaphysical realism naturally goes with epistemological realism. 
Technically, metaphysical realism is the belief that universal concepts corre-
spond to reality; that things really have common natures; that "universals" such 
as "human nature" are real and that we can know them. 
There are two forms of metaphysical realism: Plato thought that these uni-
versals were real things in themselves, while Aristotle thought, more common-
sensically, that they were real aspects of things which we mentally abstracted 
from things. (See Chapter II, Section 3, "The Problem of Universals") 
The opposite of realism is "nominalism " the belief that universals are only 
man-made nomini (names). William of Ockham (1285-1349) is the philosopher 
who is usually credited (or debited) with being the founder of nominalism. 
Aristotelian logic assumes both epistemological realism and metaphysical 
realism because it begins with the "first act of the mind," the act of understand-
ing a universal, or a nature, or an essence (such as the nature of "apple" or 
"man"). These universals, or essences, are known by concepts and expressed by 
what logic calls "terms." Then two of these universal terms are related as sub-
jects and predicates of propositions (e.g. "Apples are fruits," or "Man is mor-
tal"). 
"Aristotle never intended his logic to be a merely formal calculus [like 
mathematics]. He tied logic to his ontology [metaphysics]: thinking in concepts 
presupposes that the world is formed of stable species" (J. Lenoble, La notion de 
/'experience, Paris, 1930, p. 35). 
Symbolic logic is a set of symbols and rules for manipulating them, with-
out needing to know their meaning and content, or their relationship to the real 
world, their "truth" in the traditional, commonsensical sense of "truth." A 

The two logics 
21 
computer can do symbolic logic. It is quantitative (digital), not qualitative. It is 
reducible to mathematics. 
The new logic is sometimes called "prepositional logic" as well as "mathe-
matical logic" or "symbolic logic" because it begins with propositions, not 
terms. For terms (like "man" or "apple") express universals, or essences, or 
natures; and this implicitly assumes metaphysical realism (that universals are 
real) and epistemological realism (that we can know them as they really are). 
Typically modern philosophers criticize this assumption as naive, but it 
seems to me that this is a very reasonable assumption, and not naive at all. Is it 
too naive to assume that we know what an apple is? The new logic has no means 
of saying, and even prevents us from saying, what anything is! 
And if we cease to say it, we will soon cease to think it, for there will be no 
holding-places in our language for the thought. Language is the house of 
thought, and homelessness is as life-threatening for thoughts as it is for people. 
If we should begin to speak and think only in nominalist terms, this would be a 
monumental historic change. It would reverse the evolutionary event by which 
man rose above the animal in gaining the ability to know abstract universals. It 
would be the mental equivalent of going naked on all fours, living in trees, and 
eating bugs and bananas. (Could monkeys have evolved by natural selection 
from nominalists?) 
While it may be "extremist" to suggest it, such a mental "devolution" is not 
intrinsically impossible. And changes in logic are not wholly unrelated to it. 
Already, "internet logic," or the logic of spontaneous association by "keywords," 
is replacing "genus and species logic," or the logic of an ordered hierarchy of 
objectively real categories. To most modern minds, those last seven words sound 
almost as archaic as alchemy or feudalism. Many criticize them as ideological-
ly dangerous. These critics dislike categories because they "feel that" (that 
phrase is a category confusion, by the way) classifications, and universal state-
ments about classes such as "Hittites could not read Hebrew," constitute "preju-
dice," "judgmentalism," "oppression," or even "hate speech." 
Logic and social change are not unrelated. Not only our logicians but also 
our society no longer thinks primarily about the fundamental metaphysical ques-
tion, the question of what things are, the question of the nature of things. 
Instead, we think about how we feel about things, about how we can use them, 
how we see them behave, how they work, how we can change them, or how we 
can predict and control their behavior by technology. But all this does not raise 
us above the animal level in kind, only in degree. The higher animals too have 
feelings, and things to use, and sight, and action, and even a kind of technology 
of behavior prediction and control. For the art of hunting is an art of predicting 
and controlling the behavior of other animals. What do we have that no mere ani-
mal has? The thing that many modern philosophers vilify: abstraction. We have 
the power to abstract and understand universals. This is the thing traditional 
logic is founded on, and this is the thing symbolic logic ignores or denies. 

22 
INTRODUCTION 
Logic is deeply related to moral and ethical changes in both thought and 
practice. All previous societies had a strong, nearly universal, and rarely ques-
tioned consensus about at least some basic aspects of a "natural moral law," 
about what was "natural" and what was "unnatural." There may not have been a 
greater obedience to this law, but there was a much greater knowledge of it, or 
agreement about it. Today, especially in the realm of sex (by far the most radi-
cally changed area of human life in both belief and practice), our more 
"advanced" minds find the old language about "unnatural acts" not only "polit-
ically incorrect" but literally incomprehensible, because they no longer accept 
the legitimacy of the very question of the "nature" of a thing. Issues like homo-
sexuality, contraception, masturbation, pedophilia, incest, divorce, adultery, 
abortion, and even bestiality are increasingly debated in other terms than the 
"nature" of sexuality, or the "nature" of femininity and masculinity. It is not an 
unthinkable suspicion that one of the most powerful forces driving the new logic 
is more social than philosophical, and more sexual than logical. 
Symbolic logic naturally fosters utilitarian ethics, which is essentially an 
ethic of consequences. The fundamental principle of utilitarianism is that an act 
is good if its probable consequences result in "the greatest happiness for the 
greatest number" of people. It is an "if. . . then . . ." ethics of calculating con-
sequences - essentially, "the end justifies the means" (though that formula is 
somewhat ambiguous). Symbolic logic fits this perfectly because it is essential-
ly an " i f . . . then . . . " logic, a calculation of logical consequences. Its basic unit 
is the proposition (p or q) and its basic judgment is "if p then q." In contrast, 
Aristotelian logic naturally fosters a "natural law ethic," an ethic of universal 
principles, based on the nature of things, especially the nature of man. For its 
basic unit is the term, a subject (S) or a predicate (P) within a proposition (p); 
and its basic judgment is "all S is P" - a statement of universal truth about the 
nature of S and P. 
The very nature of reason itself is understood differently by the new sym-
bolic logic than it was by the traditional Aristotelian logic. "Reason" used to 
mean essentially "all that distinguishes man from the beasts," including intu-
ition, understanding, wisdom, moral conscience, and aesthetic appreciation, as 
well as calculation. "Reason" now usually means only the last of those powers. 
That is why many thinkers today who seem at first quite sane in other ways actu-
ally believe that there is no fundamental difference between "natural intelli-
gence" and "artificial intelligence" - in other words, you are nothing but a com-
puter plus an ape. (Having met some of these people at MIT, I must admit that 
their self-description sometimes seems quite accurate.) 
Aristotelian logic is not exact enough for the nominalistic mathematical logi-
cian, and it is too exact for the pop psychology subjectivist or New Age mystic. 
Out at sea there between Scylla and Charybdis, it reveals by contrast the double 
tragedy of modern thought in its alienation between form and matter, structure 

The two logics 
23 
and content, validity and meaning. This alienated mind was described memo-
rably by C.S. Lewis: "the two hemispheres of my brain stood in sharpest con-
trast. On the one hand, a glib and shallow rationalism. On the other, a many-
islanded sea of myth and poetry. Nearly all that I loved, I believed subjective. 
Nearly all that was real, I thought grim and meaningless" (Surprised by Joy). 
Neither mathematical logic nor "experience" can heal this gap; but Aristotelian 
logic can. It is thought's soul and body together, yet not confused. Mathematical 
logic alone is abstract and "angelistic," and sense experience and feeling alone 
is concrete and "animalistic," but Aristotelian logic is a human instrument for 
human beings. 
Aristotelian logic is also easier, simpler, and therefore time-saving. For 
example, in a logic text book misleadingly entitled Practical Reasoning in 
Natural Language, the author takes six full pages of symbolic logic to analyze a 
simple syllogism from Plato's Republic that proves that justice is not rightly 
defined as "telling the truth and paying back what is owed" because returning a 
weapon to a madman is not justice but it is telling the truth and paying back what 
is owed. (pp. 224-30). Another single syllogism of Hume's takes eight pages to 
analyze (pp. 278-86). 
I have found that students who are well trained in Aristotelian logic are 
much better at arguing, and at understanding arguments, than students who are 
trained only in symbolic logic. For Aristotelian logic is the logic of the four most 
basic verbal communication arts: reading, writing, listening, and speaking. It is 
the logic of Socrates. If you want to be a Socrates, this is the logic you should 
begin with. 
The old logic is like the old classic movies: strong on substance rather than 
sophistication. The new logic is like typically modern movies: strong on "spe-
cial effects" but weak on substance (theme, character, plot); strong on the tech-
nological "bells and whistles" but weak on the human side. But logic should be 
a human instrument; logic was made for man, not man for logic. 
The Problem of "Material Implication" 
The following issue is quite abstract and difficult, though I shall try to make it 
as simple as possible. It is included because I believe it shows that "something 
is rotten in the state of Denmark" at the very heart of the new logic. (For a fuller 
treatment of the new logic see the Appendix, p. 364.) 
Logic is most especially about reasoning, or inference: the process of think-
ing by which we draw conclusions from evidence, moving from one proposition 
to another. The proposition we begin with is called a "premise" and the propo-
sition we move to, or infer, or reason to, is called a "conclusion." 
The simplest and most straightforward kind of reasoning is to move from a 
true premise (or, more usually, from a number of true premises together) to a 

24 
INTRODUCTION 
true conclusion. But we can also use false propositions in good reasoning. Since 
a false conclusion cannot be logically proved from true premises, we can know 
that if the conclusion is false then one of the premises must also be false, in a 
logically valid argument. 
A logically valid argument is one in which the conclusion necessarily fol-
lows from its premises. In a logically valid argument, if the premises are true, 
then the conclusion must be true. In an invalid argument this is not so. "All men 
are mortal, and Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is mortal" is a valid argu-
ment. "Dogs have four legs, and Lassie has four legs, therefore Lassie is a dog" 
is not a valid argument. The conclusion ("Lassie is a dog") may be true, but it 
has not been proved by this argument. It does not "follow" from the premises. 
Now in Aristotelian logic, a true conclusion logically follows from, or is 
proved by, or is "implied" by, or is validly inferred from, only some premises and 
not others. The above argument about Lassie is not a valid argument according 
to Aristotelian logic. Its premises do not prove its conclusion. And common 
sense, or our innate logical sense, agrees. However, modern symbolic logic dis-
agrees. One of its principles is that "if a statement is true, then that statement is 
implied by any statement whatever." Since it is true that Lassie is a dog, "dogs 
have four legs" implies that Lassie is a dog. In fact, "dogs do not have four legs" 
also implies that Lassie is a dog! Even false statements, even statements that are 
self-contradictory, like "Grass is not grass," validly imply any true conclusion in 
symbolic logic. And a second strange principle is that "if a statement is false, 
then it implies any statement whatever." "Dogs do not have four legs" implies 
that Lassie is a dog, and also that Lassie is not a dog, and that 2 plus 2 are 4, and 
that 2 plus 2 are not 4. 
This principle is often called "the paradox of material implication." 
Ironically, "material implication" means exactly the opposite of what it seems to 
mean. It means that the matter, or content, of a statement is totally irrelevant to 
its logically implying or being implied by other statements. Common sense says 
that Lassie being a dog or not being a dog has nothing to do with 2+2 being 4 or 
not being 4, but that Lassie being a collie and collies being dogs does have 
something to do with Lassie being a dog. But not in the new logic, which departs 
from common sense here by totally sundering the rules for logical implication 
from the matter, or content, of the propositions involved. Thus, the paradox 
ought to be called "the paradox of wort-material implication." 
The paradox can be seen in the following imaginary conversation: 
Logician: So, class, you see, if you begin with a false premise, anything fol-
lows. 
Student: I just can't understand that. 
Logician: Are you sure you don't understand that? 
Student: If I understand that, I'm a monkey's uncle. 
Logician: My point exactly. (Snickers.) 
Student: Whats so funny? 

The two logics 
25 
Logician: You just can't understand that. 
The relationship between a premise and a conclusion is called "implica-
tion," and the process of reasoning from the premise to the conclusion is called 
"inference" In symbolic logic, the relation of implication is called "a tnith-func-
tional connective," which means that the only factor that makes the inference 
valid or invalid, the only thing that makes it true or false to say that the premise 
or premises validly imply the conclusion, is not at all dependent on the content 
or matter of any of those propositions, but only whether the premise or premis-
es are true or false and whether the conclusion is true or false. 
That last paragraph was cruelly abstract. Let's try to be a little more specif-
ic. In symbolic logic, 
(1) If the premise or premises (let's just say "the premise" for short) are true 
and the conclusion is true, then the " i f . . . then" proposition summariz-
ing the implication is true. If p is true and q is true, then "if p then q" is 
true. So "if grass is green, then Mars is red" is true. 
(2) If the premise is true and the conclusion is false, then the " i f . . . then" 
proposition summarizing the implication is false. If p is true and q is 
false, then "if p then q" is false. So "if grass is green, then Mars is not 
red" is false. 
(3) If the premise is false and the conclusion is true, then the " i f . . . then" 
proposition summarizing the implication is true. If p is false and q is 
true, then "if p then q" is true. So "if grass is purple, then Mars is red" 
is true. 
(4) If the premise is false and the conclusion is false, then the " i f . . . then" 
proposition summarizing the implication is true. If p is false and q is 
false, then "if p then q" is true. So "if grass is purple, then Mars is pur-
ple" is also true! 
In this logic, if the premise and the conclusion are both false, the premise 
implies the conclusion (this is #4), and if the premise is false and the conclusion 
is true, the premise also implies the conclusion (this is #3). So if the moon is 
blue, then the moon is red (#4); and if the moon is blue, then the moon is not 
blue (#3)! This may make some defensible sense mathematically, but it certain-
ly does not make sense commonsensically, for it does not seem to make sense in 
the real world. 
Logicians have an answer to the above charge, and the answer is perfectly 
tight and logically consistent. That is part of the problem! Consistency is not 
enough. Logic should be not just a mathematically consistent system but a 
human instrument for understanding reality, for dealing with real people and 
things and real arguments about the real world. That is the basic assumption of 
the old logic. If that assumption is naive and uncritical, unfashionable and unin-
telligent - well, welcome to Logic for Dummies. 

26 
INTRODUCTION 
Section 4. All of logic in two pages: an overview (B) 
This is one of the shortest and simplest sections in this book, but it is also one 
of the most important, for it is the foundation for everything else in logic. If you 
do not understand it clearly, you will be hopelessly confused later on. (It is 
explained in more detail in the next section, Section 5.) 
The ancient philosophers defined Man as the "rational animal." To be 
human is (among other things) to reason, to give reasons for believing things to 
be true. 
We can see common forms, or structures, in all human reasoning, no mat-
ter what the contents, or objects, that we reason about. Logic studies those 
structures. 
The fundamental structure of all reasoning is the movement of the mind 
from premises to a conclusion. The conclusion is what you are trying to prove 
to be true; the premises are the reasons or evidence for the truth of the conclu-
sion. 
The two basic kinds of reasoning are inductive and deductive. Inductive 
reasoning reasons from particular premises (e.g. "I'm mortal" and "You're 
mortal" and "He's mortal" and "She's mortal"), usually to a more general or 
universal conclusion (e.g. "All men are mortal"). Deductive reasoning reasons 
from at least one general, or universal premise (e.g. "All men are mortal") usu-
ally to a more particular conclusion (e.g. "I am mortal"). Inductive reasoning 
yields only probability, not certainty. (It is not certain that all men are mortal 
merely on the basis that four men, or 4 million, are.) Deductive reasoning, 
when correct, yields certainty. (It is certain that if all men are mortal, and if I 
am a man, then I am mortal.) 
A deductive argument succeeds in proving its conclusion to be true if and 
only if three conditions are met. These are the three check points of any 
deductive argument. 
(1) First, all the terms must be clear and unambiguous. If a term is 
ambiguous, it should be defined, to make it clear. Otherwise, the two parties to 
the argument may think they are talking about the same thing when they are 
not. 
(2) Second, all the premises must be true. You can (seem to) "prove" any-
thing from false premises: e.g. "All Martians are infallible, and I am a Martian, 
therefore I am infallible." 
(3) Third, the argument must be logically valid. That is, the conclusion 
must necessarily follow from the premises, so that if the premises are true, then 
the conclusion must be true. 

All of logic in two pages: an overview 
27 
(1) A "term" in logic is the subject or the predicate of a proposition (a 
declarative sentence). Terms are either clear or unclear. Terms cannot be either 
true or false. E.g. "mortal" is neither true nor false. The proposition "All men 
are mortal" is true, and the proposition "Some men are not mortal" is false. 
(2) Propositions are declarative sentences. They are either true or false. 
"True," in commonsense usage, means "corresponding to reality," and "false" 
means the opposite. There is no one simple and infallible way of telling whether 
any proposition is true or false. 
(3) There is, however, a fairly simple and truly infallible way of telling 
whether an argument is valid or invalid: the laws of logic, which you will learn 
in this book. 
A deductive argument is logically valid if its conclusion necessarily fol-
lows from its premises, invalid if it does not. There are various forms of argu-
ment, and each form has its own inherent rules for validity. 
All the rules for each form of argument are natural to that form of argu-
ment and to the human mind. If at any point in this book you think that any of 
its logical laws contradict what you already implicitly know by innate common 
sense, please stop and check; for you must be misunderstanding either the laws 
of logic or what you think common sense tells you, for logic does nothing more 
than make explicit the rules everyone knows innately by common sense. 
Arguments are made up of propositions (premises and a conclusion), and 
propositions are made up of terms (subject and predicate). Terms are either 
clear or unclear. Propositions (whether premises or the conclusion) are either 
true or false. Arguments are either logically valid or invalid. Only terms can be 
clear or unclear; only propositions can be true or false; only arguments can be 
logically valid or invalid. 
So the three questions you should habitually ask of yourself when writ-
ing or speaking, and of others when you are reading or listening to them, are: 
(1) Are the terms all clear and unambiguous? 
(2) Are the premises all true? 
(3) Is the reasoning all logically valid? 
If the answer to all three of these questions is Yes, then the conclusion of 
the argument must be true. 
So in order to disagree with any conclusion, you must show that there 
is either (1) an ambiguous term, or (2) a false premise, or (3) a logical fal-
lacy in the argument such that the conclusion does not necessarily follow from 
the premises. (You will soon learn the rules forjudging that.) If you cannot do 
any of these three things, then honesty demands that you admit that the con-
clusion has been proved to be true. (All this applies to deductive arguments 
only; inductive arguments do not claim certainty.) 

28 
INTRODUC1TON 
Section 5. The three acts of the mind (B) 
This section gives you the outline for all of logic. It is an expansion of the pre-
vious section (Section 4) and a summary of the rest of the book. 
The basis for the science and art of logic is two facts: the fact that human 
beings think, and the fact that thought has a structure. That structure can be clas-
sified from various points of view and for various purposes. For instance, a 
physiologist or physician might distinguish brain activity of the autonomic nerv-
ous system (e.g. breathing) from activity of the frontal lobes (self-conscious 
thought). A moralist might distinguish thoughts that are voluntary, and under our 
control, from those that are involuntary, since we are responsible only for what 
is under our control. A Marxist would distinguish thoughts supposedly produced 
by a Capitalist system from those produced by a Communist system. But from 
the viewpoint of logic, we distinguish three kinds of thoughts, three "acts of the 
mind": 
1. Simple apprehension 
2. Judging 
3. Reasoning 
"Simple apprehension" is a technical term. It means basically "conceiving," 
"understanding," or "comprehending" one object of thought, one concept, such 
as 'mortal* or 'man' or 'triangle' or 'triangle with unequal angles.' Animals 
apparently cannot perform this act of understanding; if they can, they do not 
express it in words. Computers certainly cannot do this; a computer no more 
understands what you program into it than a library building understands the 
information in the books you put into it. 
Judging is more complex than simple apprehension. Instead of just thinking 
one concept, like 'man,' it relates two concepts, like "man" and "mortal," to each 
other by predicating one term (the predicate) of the other (the subject) in judg-
ing that, e.g. "Man is mortal" or "Man is not a triangle." 
As judging is more complex than simple apprehension, reasoning is more 
complex than judging. As judging moves from one act of simple apprehension 
(the subject) to another (the predicate), reasoning moves from two or more judg-
ments (the premises, or assumptions) to another (the conclusion) in arguing that 
if the premises are true, then the conclusion must be true. E.g. "All men are mor-
tal, and I am a man, therefore I am mortal," or "A man is not a triangle, and that 
is a triangle, therefore that is not a man." 
The mental products produced in the mind by the three acts of the mind are: 
1. Concepts (the products of conceiving) 
2. Judgments (the products of judging) 
3. Arguments (the products of reasoning, or arguing) 
Distinguishing between the acts and their objects is not crucial for logic. 
What is crucial is distinguishing the three acts, and the three objects. 

The three acts of the mind 
29 
These three mental entities (concepts, judgments, and arguments) are 
expressed in logic as: 
1. Terms 
2. Propositions 
3. Arguments (the most usual form of which is the syllogism) 
They are expressed in language as: 
1. Words or phrases (less than a complete sentence) 
2. Declarative sentences 
3. Paragraphs, or at least two or more declarative sentences connected by 
a word like 'therefore' which indicates an argument 
Examples: 
1. "Man" 
2. "Socrates is a man." 
3. "All men are mortal, and Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is 
mortal." 
(Logic does not deal with interrogative sentences (questions, like "What 
time is it?"), imperative sentences (commands or requests, like "Pass the mus-
tard, please"), exclamatory sentences (like "Oh! Wow! What a hit!"), or perfor-
mative sentences (like "I dub thee knight"), but only with declarative sentences, 
sentences that claim to state a truth.) Non-declarative sentences are not proposi-
tions. 
The difference between logic and language is (1) that languages are man-
made artifices and therefore (2) there are many languages that are different in 
place and time, while (1) logic is not made but discovered, and (2) there is only 
one logic. There is no "Chinese logic" or "American logic," no "19th-century 
logic" or "20th-century logic," or even "masculine logic" or "feminine logic," 
just logic. (What is often called "feminine logic" is intuition rather than logic: a 
formidable and invaluable power of the mind but not teachable by textbooks.) 
Like mathematics, logic is objective, universal, and unchangeable in its basic 
laws or principles. But the forms in which these unchangeable laws of logic are 
expressed are linguistic forms, and these forms are changing and varied. 
A term has no structural parts. It is a basic unit of meaning, like the num-
ber one in math or like an atom in the old atomic theory (when they believed 
atoms were unsplittable and had no parts). 
A proposition has two structural parts: the subject term and the predicate 
term. The subject term is what you 're talking about. The predicate term is what 
you say about the subject. The word "subject" and "predicate" mean the same 
thing in logic as in grammar. 
An argument has two structural parts: the premises and the conclusion. The 
premises are the propositions that are assumed. They are the reasons or evidence 
for the conclusion. The conclusion is the proposition that you are trying to prove. 

30 
INTRODUCTION 
For instance, in the classic example "All men are mortal, and I am a man, 
therefore I am mortal," the argument is everything inside the quotation marks. 
The two premises are (a) "All men are mortar' and (b) "I am a man." The con-
clusion is "I am mortal." The subject of the first premise is "men" and the pred-
icate is "mortal"; the subject of the second premise is "I" and the predicate is "a 
man"; and the subject of the conclusion is "I" and the predicate is "mortal." 
Structural parts of a term: none 
Structural parts of a proposition: subject term & predicate term 
Structural parts of an argument: premises & conclusion 
We can think of the subject and predicate terms as two rooms which togeth-
er make up one floor of a building (say, a town house). Each floor is a proposi-
tion. A syllogism is a building with three floors. The rooms are the parts of the 
floors, and the floors are the parts of the building. 
1 st premise 
2nd premise 
v 
argument 
conclusion 
J 
These three logical entities answer three different questions, the three most 
fundamental questions we can ask about anything: 
1. A term answers the question what it is. 
2. A proposition answers the question whether it is, 
3. An argument answers the question why it is. 
1. "What are we talking about?" "Man." 
2. "What are we saying about it?" "That man is mortal." 
3. "Why is it mortal?" "Because man is an animal, and all animals are mor-
tal, therefore man is mortal." 
Terms, propositions, and arguments reveal three different aspects of reality: 
1. Terms reveal essences (what a thing is). 
2. Propositions reveal existence (whether it is). 
3. Arguments reveal causes (why it is). 
This (above) is the theoretical basis for the practical art of logic. The prac-
tical art consists in discriminating between clear and unclear (ambiguous) terms, 
true and false propositions, and logically valid and invalid arguments. 
Logic is a (practical) art as well as a (theoretical) science. Therefore it does 
not only tell us what is but also what should be; it not only reveals these three 
fundamental logical structures but also judges and tries to improve them. For all 
three can be either logically good or logically bad: 
1. Terms are either clear or unclear (ambiguous). 
2. Propositions are either true or false. 
3. Arguments are either valid or invalid. 
Subject term 
Predicate term 
Subject term 
Predicate term 
Subject term 
Predicate term 

The three acts of the mind 
31 
You will be hopelessly confused for the rest of this book if you do not clear-
ly understand this. 
Terms are never true or false in themselves; the propositions they are in arc 
true or false. 
Terms are never valid or invalid. Only arguments are valid or invalid. 
Terms are only either clear or unclear. 
Propositions are never clear or unclear; the terms in them are clear or 
unclear. 
Propositions are never valid or invalid in themselves; the arguments they are 
parts of are either valid or invalid. 
Propositions are only either true or false. 
Arguments are never clear or unclear; each of the terms in an argument is 
clear or unclear. 
Arguments are never true or false. Each of the propositions in an argument 
is true or false. 
Arguments are only either valid or invalid. 
Most (but not all) of logic consists of deciding when arguments are valid. 
"Valid" is a technical term in logic. It does not mean just "acceptable." An argu-
ment is logically valid when its conclusion necessarily follows from its premis-
es. That is, "if the premises are all true, then the conclusion must be true" - that 
is the definition of a valid argument. An invalid argument is one in which the 
conclusion does not necessarily follow even if the premises are true. 
For instance, this argument is valid: 
All men are mortal. 
And I am a man. 
Therefore I am mortal. 
But this argument is not valid: 
All men are mortal. 
And all pigs are mortal. 
Therefore all pigs are men. 
It is invalid not just because the conclusion is false but because the conclu-
sion does not follow from the premises. The following argument is also invalid, 
even though the conclusion (and also each premise) is true: 
All men are mortal. 
And Socrates is mortal. 
Therefore Socrates is a man. 
For this argument has the same logical form as the one above it; it merely 
replaces "pigs" with "Socrates." 
An argument may have nothing but true propositions in it, yet be invalid. E.g.: 

32 
INTRODUCTION 
I exist. 
And grass is green. 
Therefore Antarctica is cold. 
An argument may have false propositions in it and yet be logically valid. E.g.: 
I am a cat. 
And all cats are gods. 
Therefore I am a god. 
For if both those premises were true (that I am a cat and that all cats are 
gods) it would necessarily follow that I was a god. 
An argument that has nothing but true propositions and also is logically 
valid is the only kind of argument that is worth anything, the only kind that con-
vinces us that its conclusion is true, and the only kind that we can use to con-
vince others that its conclusion is true. 
If an argument has nothing but clear terms, true premises, and valid logic, 
its conclusion must be true. If any one or more of these three things is lacking, 
we do not know whether the conclusion is true or false. It is uncertain. 
If the terms arc 
Clear 
Clear 
Clear 
Clear 
Unclear 
Unclear 
Unclear 
and (he premises arc 
true 
true 
false 
f a l s e 
true 
true 
false 
and the logic is 
valid 
invalid 
valid 
invalid 
valid 
invalid 
valid 
then the conclusion is 
true 
uncertain 
uncertain 
uncertain 
uncertain 
uncertain 
uncertain 
(See also p. 194 for more on the relation between truth and validity.) 
Logic gives us rules for deciding when an argument is valid or invalid. It 
also gives us ways of defining terms so as to make them clear and unambigu-
ous. Unfortunately, logic cannot give us any one way to tell whether any propo-
sition is true. There are many ways of finding truth: sensation, intuition, reason-
ing, experimentation, authority, experience, etc. 
(By the way, "what is truth?" is a very easy question to answer, as we shall 
sec in Chapter VI, Section 2. We all know what the word means: it means know-
ing or saying what is. Aristotle defined truth in words of one syllable: "If a man 
says of what is that it is, or of what is not that it is not, he speaks the truth; if he 
says of what is that it is not, or of what is not that it is, he does not speak the 
truth" Defining truth is easy, finding it is harder.) 
Because there are three acts of the mind and three corresponding logical 
entities (terms, propositions, and arguments), there are three basic questions we 
should habitually ask in each of the four basic language arts of reading, writing, 
listening, and speaking. The more we habitually ask these three questions, of 
ourselves (when speaking or writing) and of others (when listening or reading), 
the more critical and logical our thinking is. The questions are: 

The three acts of the mind 
33 
1. What do you mean? (Define your terms.) 
2. What's the point? (What's your conclusion?) 
3. Why? (Prove it.) 
When you want to make an unanswerable argument, you must be sure of 
three things: 
1. Be sure your terms are clear. 
2. Be sure your premises are true. 
3. Be sure your logic is valid. 
If you fulfill all three conditions, you have proved your conclusion. 
If you want to answer someone else's argument, you must find in it one of 
the three following errors: 
1. a term used ambiguously 
2. a false premise 
3. a logical fallacy, an invalid argument, a conclusion that does not neces-
sarily follow from the premises 
If you cannot find any one of these three, you must admit that the conclu-
sion is true. For this is the power of logic: if the terms are unambiguous and the 
premises are true and the logic is valid, then the conclusion really is true and has 
been proved to be true. 
I ST ACT OF MIND 
2 N D ACT OF MIND 
3RD ACT OF MIND 
NAM!- OF ACT 
Understanding 
Judging 
Reasoning 
LOGICAL EXPRESSION 
Term 
Proposition 
Argument 
(usually syllogism) 
LINGUISTIC 
EXPRESSION 
Word or Phrase 
Declarative 
Sentence 
Paragraph 
EXAMPLE OF EACH 
"Man," "Mortal" 
"Socrates is a 
man." 
All men arc mortal. 
And Socrates is a man. 
Thus Socrates is mortal. 
STRUCTURAL 
PARTS 
None 
Subject Term & 
Predicate Term 
Premises and 
Conclusion 
QUESTION 
ANSWERED 
What it is 
Whether it is 
Why it is 
ASPECT OF 
REALTTY 
Essence 
Existence 
Cause 
GOOD WHEN 
Clear or 
unambiguous 
True 
Valid 
HOW ACHIEVED 
Definition of 
terms 
No one way 
Rules of Logic 
BAD WHEN 
Unclear or 
ambiguous 
False 
Invalid 
QUESTION TO 
HABITUALLY ASK 
What do you 
mean? (Define 
your terms.) 
What is your point? 
(State your 
conclusion.) 
Why? (Prove IL) 

34 
INTRODUCTION 
Exercises 
A. (easy) Identify each of the following as a term, a proposition, an argu-
ment, or none of the above. 
1. Everyone 
2. Everyone in America 
3. Everyone in America and in the rest of the world as well 
4. I think, therefore I am. 
5. Are you mad? 
6. You won't pass. 
7. You won't pass because you haven't studied. 
8. Don't take this logic course. 
9. Please be quiet. 
10. A falsity so obvious that it couldn't fool a child 
11. God exists. 
12. It ain't broke, so it don't gotta be fixed. 
13. You're weird. 
14. Everything in the kitchen sink except the sink itself 
15. Ouch! 
B. (harder) Use the chart on page 32 to tell whether the following statements 
are true or false. Assuming all terms are clear and unambiguous, 
1. If an argument is logically valid, its conclusion must be true. 
2. If an argument's conclusion is true, it must be logically valid. 
3. If an argument's conclusion is not true, it cannot be logically valid. 
4. If an argument's conclusion is not true, its premises cannot be true. 
5. If an argument's premises arc true and it is invalid, its conclusion must be 
false. 
6. If an argument's premises are true and its conclusion is true, it must be 
valid. 
7. If an argument's premises are true and its conclusion is false, it must be 
invalid. 
8. If an argument's premises are true and it is valid, its conclusion must be 
true. 

I: The First Act of the Mind: 
Understanding 
Section 1. Understanding: the thing that distinguishes 
man from both beast and computer (P) 
(This section is more philosophical than logical, but it is important because it 
fleshes out the positive alternative to nominalism and provides the essential 
philosophical foundation for Aristotelian logic.) 
As we have already reported, a new species of human has appeared: one that 
does not know the difference between a human mind and a computer, between 
"natural intelligence" and "artificial intelligence." Some of these people even 
teach philosophy! 
For centuries there have also been some people - many of them philoso-
phers - who say they do not know what the difference is between a human being 
and an ape. After all, apes seem to reason quite well sometimes. If you put an 
ape in a pit with a dozen wooden crates, he might figure out how to get out by 
piling up the crates against a wall in the form of a stairway, whereas some 
humans would not figure that out. 
But there is one simple, observable behavior that clearly distinguishes 
humans from both computers and animals: asking questions. Computers never 
question their programming (unless they have been programmed to do so); com-
puters never disobey. They have no will, therefore no will to know. And animals, 
though curious, cannot ask formulated questions; their language is too primitive. 
There is a story that Aristotle, after one of his lectures, was disappointed 
that his students had no questions afterwards, so he said, "My lecture was about 
levels of intelligence in the universe, and I distinguished three such levels: gods, 
men, and brutes. Men are distinguished from both gods and brutes by question-
ing, for the gods know too much to ask questions and the brutes know too little. 
So if you have no questions, shall I congratulate you for having risen to the level 
of the gods, or insult you for having sunk to the level of the brutes?" 
Logic specializes in questioning. The three most basic questions humans 

36 
I. THE FIRST ACT OF THE MIND: UNDERSTANDING 
ask arc: What, Whether, and Why, i.e. What is it? Is it? and Why is it? These are 
dealt with in the three parts of logic. 
The part that most clearly distinguishes humans from computers is the first: 
understanding a "what," an "essence," the nature of a thing. Computers under-
stand nothing; they merely store, process, relate, and regurgitate data. You don't 
really think there is a little spirit somewhere inside your hand-held calculator, do 
you? But the world's most complex computer has nothing qualitatively more in 
it than that, only quantitatively more. An amoeba is closer to understanding than 
a computer, for it has some rudimentary sensation of feeling (e.g. it detects 
food). 
A baby often goes around pointing to everything he1 sees, asking "What's 
that?" The baby is a philosopher. "What's that?" is philosophy's first question. 
(Look at any Socratic dialogue to see that.) 
The act of understanding, or "simple apprehension" as it is technically 
called produces in our minds a concept. (Sometimes we use the word "idea" as 
synonymous with "concept," but at other times we use the word "idea" more 
broadly, to include judgments and arguments as well as concepts.) 
We do not merely understand concepts, we understand reality by means of 
concepts. Our concept of a house is our means of understanding the real house. 
The real house is physical, but our concept is not. The house is independent of 
our mind, but the concept of it is not: it is in our mind. If all we understood was 
our own concepts, we would not understand objective reality. 
Concepts are amazing things. They can do what no material thing in the uni-
verse can do. They can transcend space and time. No body can be in two places 
1 
The use of the traditional inclusive generic pronoun "he" is a decision of language, not 
of gender justice. There are only six alternatives. (1) We could use the grammatically mis-
leading and numerically incorrect "they." But when we say "one baby was healthier than 
the others because they didn't drink that milk," we do not know whether the antecedent 
of "they" is "one" or "others," so we don't know whether to give or take away the milk. 
Such language codes could be dangerous to baby's health. (2) Another alternative is the 
politically intrusive "in-your-face" generic "she," which I would probably use if I were 
an angry, politically intrusive, in-your-face woman, but I am not any of those things. (3) 
Changing "he" to "he or she" refutes itself in such comically clumsy and ugly revisions 
as the following: "What does it profit a man or woman if he or she gains the whole world 
but loses his or her own soul? Or what shall a man or woman give in exchange for his or 
her soul?" The answer is: he or she will give up his or her linguistic sanity. (4) We could 
also be both intrusive and clumsy by saying "she or he." (5) Or we could use the neuter 
"it," which is both dehumanizing and inaccurate. (6) Or we could combine all the lin-
guistic garbage together and use "she or he or it," which, abbreviated would sound like 
" s h . . . it." 
I believe in the equal intelligence and value of women, but not in the intelligence or 
value of "political correctness," linguistic ugliness, grammatical inaccuracy, conceptual 
confusion, or dehumanizing pronouns. 

Understanding 
at the same time, but a concept can. Suppose someone asks you whether you 
think San Francisco or Boston is the more beautiful city. You understand the 
question, and you answer it. Your mind compared (and therefore was present to) 
two cities 3000 miles apart - at once! Your concepts did what your body cannot 
do. 
Though your body is unimaginably tiny compared with the universe, your 
concept of the universe is greater than the universe! For if you understood the 
word "universe," your thought 'surrounded' the universe - the same universe 
that surrounds your body. You did that by having a concept of the universe. 
Concepts have at least five characteristics that material things do not have. 
They are spiritual (or immaterial), abstract, universal, necessary, and unchanging. 
1. Concepts are spiritual (immaterial, non-material). Compare the con-
cept of an apple with an apple. The apple has size, weight, mass, color, kinetic 
energy, molecules, shape, and takes up space. The concept does not. It is "in" 
your mind, not your body. It is not in your brain, for your brain is part of your 
body. It has no size, so it cannot fit there. (If you say that it does have size, the 
size of an apple, then you must say that your brain must get as big as an elephant 
when you think of an elephant.) It has no weight, for when you stand on a scale 
and suddenly think the concept "tree," you do not gain the slightest amount of 
weight. 
In contrast to the concept "apple," the word "apple" is just as physical as an 
apple. It takes up space on the page, and it is made of molecules. The spoken 
word also is made of molecules: wave-vibrations of sound of a certain size and 
shape. But between these two material things - the apple and the word "apple" 
- there is the concept. That is the only reason why we can use the word "apple" 
to mean the physical apple we eat. We use one physical thing (the word "apple") 
as a symbol of another physical thing (the apple we eat), and that mental act, or 
mental relation, that we set up is not a third physical thing. It is a concept, and 
its meaning is the real apple even though its being is not the being of an apple. 
(It is not in space, has no molecules, etc.) The concept's meaning is "a physical 
fruit that grows on apple trees, has red or green skin, etc.," but the concept's 
being is not physical (material), but spiritual (immaterial). 
Our having the concept of an apple is dependent on our having a physical 
body, of course: it is dependent both on the eye, which perceives the apple, and 
on the brain, which works whenever we have a concept. If we had never seen 
an apple, we would never have a concept of one, and if we had no brain we 
could not think the concept of an apple. But the concept is not just the physical 
apple or the visible word or even the sense image, which is somewhere between 
a physical and a spiritual thing. (We will see the difference between a concept 
and a sense image more clearly in the next few paragraphs.) The sense image 
is like a scouting report sent out by the intellect. The intellect is like a king who 
stays in a soul-castle and sends out scouts (the senses) to report to him what^s 
going on in his kingdom. Or, to change the image, the intellect is like a para-

38 
I. THE FIRST ACT OF THE MIND: UNDERSTANDING 
lytic in a wheelchair who directs a blind man where to push him. (In this image, 
the intellect is symbolized paradoxically, by the physically sighted paralytic and 
the senses by the blind pusher.) The two are interdependent. 
When a thing is known, it acquires a second existence, a mental existence; 
the thing becomes a thought. If familiarity did not dull us, we would find this 
utterly remarkable, unparalleled in all the universe. No galaxy, no physical ener-
gy, no cell, no animal can do this; only a mind can give a thing a second life. 
Every language speaks of the human mind or intellect, as doing something 
more than the (animal) senses do: as going "deeper" or "below the surface" or 
"penetrating" what is sensed like an X-ray; as going beyond appearances to 
reality, beyond seeing to understanding. (Thus the irony in a blind poet or "seer" 
like Homer, John Milton, or Helen Keller "seeing" more than sighted people.) 
Only because we distinguish between appearance and reality do we ask ques-
tions. There would be no philosophy and no science without this distinction. 
2. Concepts are abstract. The English word "abstract" comes from the 
Latin abstraho, "to draw (traho) from (ab(s))" or "to drag out of." Our mind 
extricates, or separates, something from something else. What is this something? 
When we form a concept, we abstract one aspect of a concrete thing from 
all its other aspects - e.g. the size of a flower (when we measure it), or its color 
(when we paint it). No one can physically or chemically separate the size from 
the color, or either one from the whole flower; but anyone can do it mentally. 
We can abstract, or mentally separate, adjectives from nouns. Animals sim-
ply perceive "green-grass," but even the most primitive men mentally distin-
guished the green from the grass; and this enabled them to imagine green skin, 
or red grass, even though they had never seen it. And once they imagined these 
things, they set about making them, e.g. by dying their skin green from the juice 
of grasses, or painting pictures of red grass with dye made from beet juice. 
(When he was two, my son made the thrilling discovery that he could make "pur-
ple doo-doo" by mixing up blue and red Play-DohR in the shape of a hot dog.) 
Technology and art both flow from this human power of abstraction. 
The most important act of abstraction is the one by which we abstract the 
essential from the accidental. By having a concept we can focus on the essence 
and abstract from the accidents. Some people are reluctant to do this. Their con-
versation is utterly concrete - and utterly boring. You want to scream at them, 
"Come to the point!" These people have few friends, for to have friends you 
must learn to abstract, i.e. select, set apart, or pick out, the things that interest 
both them and you. Abstraction fosters friendship - a concrete payoff! 
Abstractions have received bad press in the modern world. Too bad. The 
next time you hear someone say "I'm a concrete, practical person, and I hate 
abstractions," remind them that babies are very concrete - and uncivilized. 
Abstract ideas do not move us as much as concrete things do. Intellectuals, 
who live with abstractions, are often practically ineffective dreamers and rarely 
"movers and shakers" of men, because men will not usually live and die for 

Understanding 
39 
abstractions that move only our mind - even stirring abstractions like "liberty, 
equality, fraternity" or "democracy" or "freedom" - but for concrete things that 
move their loves, like their families or their buddies next to them in the trenches. 
3. Concepts are universal. Ask a child what he wants and he may answer, 
"Everything!" He has formed a universal concept. (Most concepts are only rel-
atively universal, not absolutely universal like "everything" or "something" or 
"being") 
E.g. "tree" is a universal concept because it is a concept of not only that one 
tree in your yard, but of all trees. "Beauty" is a universal concept, and when we 
judge whether San Francisco or Boston is more beautiful, we judge both cities 
by the universal concept "beauty" (or "beautiful city"). 
The literal meaning of "universal" is "one with respect to many" (unum ver-
sus alia). This means that a concept, while remaining one - one essence, one 
meaning - nevertheless is true of many things, predicable (sayable) of many 
things, applicable to many things. This oak and that oak and that maple are all 
"trees." We can truly apply the concept "tree" to any and every possible and 
actual tree that ever was, is, or will be. 
The concept signifies something common to many different things. This 
oak and that oak are different in size, and oaks and maples are different in shape 
of leaves and taste of sap, but all are trees. All share the same common essence, 
or essential nature. That is what we are seeking to know when we ask "What is 
that?" 
Only the concept gets at this one-in-many, this common essence in many 
different things. It is not in sense perception that we see this universal. We per-
ceive only individual men and women, who are either tall or short, either old or 
young, but "human being" is neither male nor female, neither tall nor short, nei-
ther old nor young. "Human nature" does not look male or female, tall or short, 
old or young. It does not "look" at all; it "means." Appearances are particular; but 
essences, or meanings, or the natures of things, are universal. You cannot touch 
them or feel them; you can only understand them. They are known by concepts. 
4. Relations between concepts are necessary. Every tree necessarily has 
leaves; every triangle necessarily has three sides. A tree may or may not have 
many leaves, but it must have leaves. A triangle has to have three sides; that is 
dictated by its essence, which is grasped in the concept. 
Thus we can be certain of relations between concepts, as we cannot be cer-
tain of material things. We can be certain that a triangle will have 180 degrees 
in its three angles, but we cannot be certain how tall a tree will be. 
5. Concepts are unchanging. Two plus two can never become other than 
four, but two bunnies plus two bunnies can become more than four bunnies. The 
concept "blue" can never become not-blue, but the blue sky can become not-
blue. The nature of a thing, which is known by a concept, is unchanging; but 
things, which are known by sense experience, are changing. Humans change; 
essential human nature does not. 

40 
I.THERRST ACT OFTHE MIND: U N D E 1 1 
The most important o f t h e s e c h a r a c t e r i s t i c s 
o f " 
p 
their universality. " U n i v e r s a l " m e a n s 
u o n e - i n - m a r ^ i M i | » 
K 
many-diverse-somethings" ( " u n i - v e r s a " ) , o n e n a t u r e 
mfauiK 
^ 
different concrete individuals. A s i n g l e c o n c e p t 
u n 1 
|g 
under one idea. With o u r s e n s e s w e p e r c e i v e h o u s e s i i i i i l p a 
and colors, but with o u r m i n d 
w e 
u n d e r s t a n d 
| 
"house." We see many i n d i v i d u a l h o u s e s a n d 
m a n > r | i M | | - | i 
^ 
doors, roofs, windows, a n d p o r c h e s — b u t w e d o n o t 
$ 
of the house, the " h o u s e n e s s . " It i s o n l y t h e u n d e r s t a»ilfcl 
f 
houses under the single c o n c e p t " h o u s e / ' T h e c o n c e f i # j « i 
ligible. It brings order out o f c h a o s . 
51fl 
Without it, m e t a p h y s i c s w o u l d b e i m p o s s i b l e . 
^ 
damental branch of p h i l o s o p h y ; it i s t h e s t u d y 
o f 
« 
study of the laws or p r i n c i p l e s t h a t a r e t r u e u n i v ^ e r s a M i g l t a 
K 
universal concept of all is " b e i n g . " E v e r y t h i n g 
i s 
ifMfcte 
n 
"being" is the most f u n d a m e n t a l c o n c e p t . 
B e f o r e 
what a thing is, we k n o w t h a t it is a b e i n g . T h e r e 
i s 
w 
The concept of b e i n g is i m p l i c i t i n e v e r y o t h e r 
\ 
what a house is, we k n o w w h a t a h o u s e 
w e 
(K 
reality, its substance. 
K 
The concept of b e i n g is l i k e t h e g e n i e i n t h e 
fc>otrti 
WMwi 
(j 
it grows so large that it fills t h e w h o l e s k y . 
^ 
This is crucial to logic a s w e l l a s p h i l o s o p h y . tf 
two words, two very c o m m o n y e t v e r y p r o f o u n d 
1 i itwskWSi- 
g 
fore." "Is" is the first w o r d t h a t r e l a t e s t w o c o n c e p t s r t i i p 
^ 
tion (the subject and the p r e d i c a t e ) : " M a n is: m o r t a l 
iftttuntf 
4 
"Therefore" is the word that r e l a t e s t w o o r m o r e 
p> 
the conclusion) in an a r g u m e n t : " A l l m e n a r e m o r t a l 
^ 
tal," or "Tomatoes are v e g e t a b l e s , a n d v e g e t a b l e s 
^ 
toes are not fruits." 
U 
t 
Is 
Section 2. Concepts, t e r m s , an<zl*flt(F| 
A concept exists only privately, in a n i n d i v i d u a l 
m 
domain. A term expresses o b j e c t i v e l y w h a t 
i s k n o w 
a concept is a person's s u b j e c t i v e k n o w l e d g e o f " t h e 
•ni'ctai 
A word (or group o f w o r d s f o r m i n g a p h r a s e 
idlisbkMqte ft 
sentence) is the linguistic e x p r e s s i o n o f a t e r m . T
h
g 
and a word is the difference b e t w e e n w h a t i s corrirricz»tt5llli|ft>i!i!J fa 
is different in different l a n g u a g e s ; f o r t h e s a m e t e r m 
.tattlmiE 
[j 
is expressed in different w o r d s b y d i f f e r e n t 
l a n ^ i j . « l f p » 
n 
made, conventional, and c h a n g e a b l e . T e r m s a r e n o t . 
Ttespp&H 
6 

Concepts, terms and words / The "problem of universals " 
41 
translate between different languages: because the same stable term, or unit of 
meaning, anchors many different words in many different languages. E.g. 
"love" "carit as" "agape," "lieb," "amor," and "amour" are the same term in six 
different words. 
A word is physical and sensible (to the eyes or the ears, or to the touch, in 
Braille). A concept is not. A term mediates between a concept and a word: inso-
far as it is a unit of meaning, it is not something made of matter or perceivable 
with the senses; insofar as it is expressed by a word, in any language, it is per-
ceivable by the senses, like the word "word" in this sentence. 
The difference between a term and a concept, and the difference between a 
term and a word, may be difficult to grasp, and it is not crucially important from 
a practical point of view for the logic student to understand it; but it is crucially 
important to understand the difference between a concept, a judgment, and an 
argument; or between a term, a proposition, and a syllogism; or between a word, 
a sentence, and a paragraph. 
A term is the most simple and basic unit of meaning. A term is simply any 
word or group of words that denotes an object of thought. The English word 
"term" comes from the Latin "terminus," which means "end" A term is one of 
the two "ends" of a proposition, as the first and last points on a line are the two 
ends of the line; for a term is either the subject (the beginning) or the predicate 
(the end) of a proposition, when it is in a proposition. Whether a term is inside 
a proposition or not. a term is whatever can be used as the subject or the predi-
cate of a proposition. "Apples" has the same meaning whether it is in the propo-
sition "Apples are fruits" or whether it is outside the proposition and merely 
"apples." A term is simply any word or group of words that denotes one object 
of thought. 
Terms are never either true or false. Only propositions are true or false. 
"Apple" is neither true nor false. The proposition "Apples are fruits" is true, and 
the propositions "Apples are vegetables" is false. Instead of being true or false, 
terms are unambiguous or ambiguous, clear or unclear. Propositions are 
ambiguous or unambiguous only insofar as their terms are ambiguous or unam-
biguous. You will learn how to change ambiguous terms into unambiguous 
terms in the chapter on defining terms. 
Section 3. The "problem of universals" (P) 
The fact that most terms are universal (predicable of many things) has given rise 
to one of the classic problems in the history of philosophy, the so-called "prob-
lem of universals." First raised by the ancient Greek logician Porphyry, the prob-
lem arises when we ask this question: What is there in reality that universal 
terms refer to - especially abstract universal terms like "beauty" or "humanity**? 
It is clear that concrete singular terms like "Socrates" or "the moon" refer to 

42 
I. THE FIRST ACT OF THE MIND: UNDERSTANDING 
concrete individual entities that exist in a particular space and time; but where 
and when do we find beauty or humanity, as distinct from this beautiful thing or 
that human being? 
We have said that terms express concepts, that concepts arc universal, and 
that concepts refer to the essences or natures of things. Are these essences uni-
versal, like the concepts we have of them? 
If they are not, then it seems that our concepts of them are not accurate, for 
they do not correspond to their objects. And in that case, our concepts would dis-
tort rather than reveal the true nature of things. 
But are universals then real things? Is beauty real as well as beautiful 
things? Does humanity or human nature or the human species really exist in 
addition to the 6+ billion human beings that have the same essential human 
nature? 
Plato thought they did. He called these universals "Forms" or "Ideas" - not 
ideas in minds but Ideas outside minds, objective Truths; not thoughts but the 
objects of thoughts. He believed there were two kinds of reality, two "worlds": 
a world of concrete, material individual things in space and time that we know 
by our bodily senses, and another world of immaterial universal Forms that we 
know with our minds through concepts. 
The "two worlds theory" seems fantastic to common sense and an example 
of what one philosopher (Alfred North Whitehead) calls "the fallacy of mis-
placed concreteness," treating an abstracted aspect of a thing (its essential 
nature) as if it were another concrete thing. This theory of Plato's is sometimes 
called "Extreme Realism" because it claims that universals are "extremely real," 
so to speak - just as real as individual things, in fact more real since they arc 
timeless and immortal and unchangeable. A beautiful face changes with age, but 
beauty does not. 
The theory most totally opposed to Plato's is called Nominalism. The 14th-
century medieval philosopher William of Ockham is usually credited for invent-
ing the theory, and modern philosophies such as Empiricism, Pragmatism, 
Marxism, and Positivism have embraced it and made it popular. Nominalism 
claims that universals are only names (nomini) that we use as a kind of short-
hand. Instead of giving each individual tree a separate proper name, we group 
together, for our own convenience, under the one vague name "tree," all those 
things that resemble each other in certain ways (e.g. having trunks and branch-
es and leaves). But in reality, all trees are different, not the same; not one-in-
many ("uni-versal"), but only many. 
Nominalism seems logically self-contradictory, for if all trees are different, 
how can it be true to call them all "trees"? The very sentence that says all trees 
are not really the same presupposes that they are! If universals are only our 
names for individuals that resemble each other in certain ways, those "certain 
ways" must be really universal (e.g. all have trunks, branches, and leaves); so we 
have eliminated one universal ("tree") only by appealing to three others ("trunk," 

The extension and comprehension of terms 
43 
"branches," and "leaves"). Something in trees must justify our use of a universal 
term "tree." What is this? Is it their "resemblance" or "similarity"? But they 
must resemble each other in something. What could this be but their nature, their 
essence, their treeness, what-trees-really-are? 
Aristotle, as usual, takes a middle position between these two extremes, 
and his view accords best with common sense. His position was developed by 
the Arabic philosopher Avicenna and by St. Thomas Aquinas in the Middle 
Ages. It is called "Moderate Realism," and it holds that essences are objec-
tively real (contrary to Nominalism) but not real things (contrary to Extreme 
Realism). They are the essential "forms" or natures of things. Forms exist in 
the world only in individual material things, but they exist in our minds as uni-
versal concepts when our minds abstract them from things. It is the very same 
nature (e.g. humanness) that exists in both states; otherwise our concept of it 
would not be accurate, would not be a concept of it, of what really is in the 
things. A universal form such as humanness exists in the world only individu-
ally, but the same form or nature exists in the mind universally, by "abstrac-
tion" from individuals. 
So according to Aristotle the Nominalist is right to say that universality is 
only in the mind, not in things, but wrong to say that there is nothing in reality 
that is the object of universal concepts. And the Extreme Realist is right to 
affirm that universals are objectively real and not just names, but wrong to think 
they are "substances." (Aristotle s technical term for concrete individual things 
was "substances") They are the "forms" of substances (e.g. the treeness of trees, 
the humanness of humans, the beauty of beautiful things, the redness of red 
things). Some are essential forms (like "humanness") which a thing must have 
in order to be what it is, others are accidental forms (like "redness") which a 
thing can gain or lose and still remain what it is, as when a tomato changes from 
green to red. 
This apparently very technical, abstract, logical dispute has great practical 
consequences. If universals are more real than individuals, then individuals, and 
human individuals too, are not primarily important - a convenient philosophy 
for totalitarians! And if individual things are less real than universals, then the 
senses do not reveal anything very important, and only the few "brains" who can 
think very abstractly are wise. On the other hand, if universals are not real at all, 
then we have the even more radical consequence of skepticism: reality is an 
unknowable chaos, and all so-called universal truths arc merely subjective and 
man-made, including all principles of science and ethics. 
Section 4. The extension and comprehension of terms 
Every term (and the concept it expresses) has both an extension and a compre-
hension. 
The extension of a term is simply all the real things the term refers to - the 

44 
I. THE FIRST ACT OF THE MIND: U N D E R S T A N D I N G 
"population" of the term, so to speak, in the world. E.g. t h e e x t e n s i o n o l 
is the 6+ billion men who exist. Or, if " m a n " is t a k e n e x c l u s i v e l y i n s 
inclusively, then its extension is 3 + billion males. 
The "comprehension" of a term m e a n s the t e r m ' s i n n e r m e a n i n g , a s 
from its external "population." T h e word " c o m p r e h e n s i o n " h e r e d o e s n 
to our mind's act of comprehending, i.e. u n d e r s t a n d i n g , t h e t e r m , b u t r z 
the meaning that the term " c o m p r e h e n d s " or includes w i t h i n i t s e l f . E . g . t l 
prehension of "man" is "rational animal." 
Sometimes the words "extension" a n d "intension" 
a r e 
u s e d 
i n s 
"extension" and "comprehension." D o not c o n f u s e " i n t e n s i o n , " w h i c l 
objective meaning of a term, with "intention," w h i c h is t h e s u b j e c t i v e m 
a person. 
Another set of two words s o m e t i m e s used to m a k e t h e s a m e d i s t i n 
"denotation" and "connotation." T h e denotation o f a t e r m is t h e r e a l fcj 
refers to; the connotation is all the attributes or qualities o r c h a r a c t e r i s t i c 
by it. However, "connotation" is s o m e t i m e s used in a d i f f e r e n t a n d 
n 
sense, as meaning only those characteristics r e f e r r e d to implicitly, 
o r " I 
the lines," as nuances or shades of m e a n i n g that a r e n o t e x p l i c i t l y p a r 
term's comprehension. "Con" m e a n s " w i t h " a n d " n o t a t i o n " m e a n s 
so literally, "connotation" means a " m e a n i n g - a l o n g - w i t h . " 
Another set of two words s o m e t i m e s used to m a k e t h e s a m e d i s t i n 
"meaning" (comprehension) and " r e f e r e n c e " ( e x t e n s i o n ) . A t e r m ' s " r e f 
is all the real things the term refers to. T h e s e t w o w o r d s a r e u s u a l l y u s e d 
the point that a term can have a m e a n i n g yet n o r e f e r e n c e at a l l , e . g . t 
"unicorn." 
QUALITATIVE 
Q U A N T I T A T I V E 
Comprehension 
Extension 
Intension 
Extension 
Connotation 
Denotation 
Meaning 
R e f e r e n c e 
The two aspects of terms: 
The extension (or denotation or reference) o f a t e r m is q u a n t i t a t i v e , 
count all the individual beings the term refers to. T h e c o m p r e h e n s i o n ( o 
sion or connotation or meaning) of a term is qualitative, n o t q u a n t i t a t i 
cannot count a term's inner meaning. 
Logical divisions, or outlines, analyze the extension 
o f a t e r m . L o g ! 
in it ions analyze the comprehension 
of a term. 
The Principle of Inverse Relation between E x t e n s i o n a n d C o m p r e h 
Extension and comprehension usually vary inversely. 
( " U s u a l l y " b e c a u : 

The extension and comprehension of terms 
45 
are rare and technical exceptions.) As comprehension increases, extension 
decreases; as comprehension decreases, extension increases. When we add 
attributes to increase the comprehension of a term, we add to its meaning but 
decrease its reference. E.g. "animal" has more extension than "man," for there 
are only 6+ billion men but trillions of animals, including both rational animals 
(men) and irrational animals ("brutes"). But "animal" has less comprehension 
than "man," for "animal" means only "a living and sensing thing" while "man" 
means "a living and sensing thing with reason." 
"Beer" has more comprehension than "drink," for it means "drink made 
from malt and hops." But "drink" has more extension than "beer" for that exten-
sion includes milk, water, wine, etc. 
As terms become more abstract, they lose comprehension and gain exten-
sion. 
Common misunderstandings come about from confusing comprehension 
with extension. E.g. when we judge that "males are taller than females," or "fish 
gotta swim, birds gotta fly," we are speaking of the comprehension of the sub-
ject term "males" or "fish," not the extension. Not all 3+ billion human males 
are taller than all 3+ billion human females, of course, but the nature of males 
is on average to be taller than females. 
Another example: Aristotle's famous first line of his Metaphysics, "All men 
by nature desire to know," is not disproved by the fact that some men are in fact 
uncurious, lazy couch potatoes. Even the couch potato by nature desires to 
know; he is suppressing his nature at the moment by being hypnotized into 
thoughtless stupefaction by the boob tube. 
Perhaps "boob tube hypnosis" is the reason why so many people today will 
immediately and thoughtlessly reject all "generalizations" like "men are more 
aggressive than women" as "stereotypes." They are confusing comprehension 
and extension. They are misinterpreting a statement about comprehension as if 
it were one about extension, and that is why they think that the fact that Mrs. X 
is more aggressive than Mr. X disproves the statement that "men are more 
aggressive than women." They cannot or will not rise to the original statement's 
level of abstraction and argue with it on its own level. The statement is not about 
all the individuals that have the nature of male and the nature of female, but 
about those natures in abstraction from the individuals that have them. Those 
who reject all generalizations because they can find some exceptions to them are 
thinking only on the concrete sense level of extension, not on the abstract con-
ceptual level of comprehension; they are operating like cameras (sense experi-
ence) plus computers (calculating the quantities of extension), but not like 
human minds (understanding essences, natures, "whats"). 
The point is important enough philosophically to justify going through it 
again. When I say "all my books are paperbacks," I am not speaking of the com-
prehension of "book," only the extension; for there is nothing in the essential 
nature of a book that requires it to be a papcrback. But when I say "all men are 

46 
I. THE FIRST ACT OF THE MIND: UNDERSTANDING 
mortal," I am speaking of the comprehension of "man" and seeing "mortal" in 
it, for man by nature has an animal body and thus is subject to death. When I say 
"all my books are paperbacks," I am simply reporting on what my senses tell me 
about all the concrete individual books I own; and what makes that proposition 
true or false is not the essential nature of the things it refers to (i.e. books qua 
books, the essential nature of books), but something accidental, contingent, 
uncertain, and unpredictable. But when I say "all men are mortal," I am abstract-
ing the essential nature of men from the individual men I have met and making 
a statement about its comprehension that is universal. 
Universally and necessarily true statements like "all men are by nature mor-
tal" are not tautologies. Tautologies are mere repetitions, like "x=x" or "x is 
either y or not y," or "whatever has legs and toes has toes." "Rational animals are 
animals" is a tautology; a computer can tell that it is self-evidcntly true. But "all 
men are mortal" is not a tautology; it requires insight into the comprehension of 
"man" to know that "all men are mortal" is necessarily true, and some people 
have that insight while others do not. 
Computers do not have the power of insight. We need more than computer 
logic because we are more than computers. There are enough logics around for 
computers, and not enough for humans. 

II: Terms 
Section 1. Classifying terms 
From the viewpoint of practical logic, the most important distinction between 
two kinds of terms is the distinction between ambiguous terms and unambigu-
ous terms. However, there are also other distinctions between different kinds of 
terms. Terms are either 
(1) unambiguous or ambiguous 
(2) clear or unclear 
(3) exact or vague 
(4) univocal, analogical, or equivocal 
(5) literal or metaphorical 
(6) positive or negative 
(7) simple or complex 
(8) categoregmatic or syncategorcgmatic 
(9) universal, particular, or singular 
(10) collective or divisive 
(11) concrete or abstract 
(12) absolute or relative 
(1) Terms are either unambiguous 
or ambiguous. "Ambiguous" means 
"having more than one meaning." Strictly speaking, no term as such is ambigu-
ous until it is used ambiguously. "Good" is not ambiguous when I use it in only 
one way - e.g. "A saint is a very good person" and "St. Francis was a very good 
person." But it becomes ambiguous when I use it with two different meanings -
e.g. "That is a good axe" and "A murderer is not a good person" - for the bad 
murderer needs a good axe to do the bad deed of chopping off his victim's head. 
If a term is used ambiguously, we are misled; we do not know what we are 
talking about. Worse, we think we do. Most ambiguity is hidden. We do not real-
ize we arc using terms ambiguously, unless we arc deliberately trying to deceive 
or making a pun. 
We will say more about ambiguity in the chapter on definitions. Defining a 
term is the way to heal the disease of ambiguity. 

48 
II. TERMS 
(2) Terms are either clear or unclear. Clarity is not quite the same as unam-
biguousness. A term is clear in the way light is clear: it "comes through" to the 
mind. Unambiguousness means a lack of confusion between two meanings. 
Unless a term is first of all clear, it cannot be either ambiguous or unambiguous. 
Until there is light, it cannot be either one color or two colors. 
Whether a term is clear or not depends not only on the term but also on the 
mind that tries to think it. The term "quasar" is clear to those who know modem 
astronomy but not to those who do not. 
Rene Descartes, often called "the father of modern philosophy," said that we 
could not be sure any proposition was true or false unless its terms were "clear 
and distinct (unambiguous)." "Clear and distinct ideas" was his criterion for cer-
titude that any proposition is true. It is not a criterion of truth, for a proposition 
with ambiguous terms can still be true (e.g. "Life is good"). It is not even a suf-
ficient criterion for certitude, for many uncertain and even false propositions can 
have clear and distinct terms. But it seems to be a necessary criterion for certi-
tude, a minimum, a beginning. 
(3) Terms are either vague or exact. Vague terms are not necessarily 
ambiguous or unclear. "Tall" is a vague term ("six feet tall" is an exact term) but 
"tall" is neither ambiguous nor unclear. 
There is nothing necessarily wrong with a vague term. We often need vague 
terms rather than exact terms; they are very useful. For much of our knowledge 
is not exact, so the terms that express that knowledge rightly cannot be exact 
either. We often need a "fuzzy logic" in our terms. 
But although there is room for "fuzzy logic" in terms, there is no room for 
"fuzzy logic" in propositions or arguments. Propositions are either true or false 
and arguments are either valid or invalid; and there is no third possibility and no 
fuzziness or sliding scale or matter of degree between true and false, or between 
valid and invalid. 
However, we often cannot be certain whether a given proposition is true or 
false; and that dimension (namely, probability) can sometimes be "fuzzy." At 
other times, that dimension can be exact, as in statistics. In statistics, even inex-
actness can be exact: e.g. a "5% margin of error." 
(4) Terms are either univocal, equivocal, or analogical. A univocal term has 
one and only one meaning. An equivocal term has two or more quite different 
and unrelated meanings. An analogical term has two or more meanings that are 
(a) partly the same and partly different, and (b) related to each other. 
When I say "I ate two apples" and "You ate two hamburgers," I use "ate" 
and "two" univocally. When I say "The river has two banks" and "The town has 
two banks," I use "banks" equivocally, for there is no connection between a river 
bank and a money bank. When I say "The good man gave his good dog a good 
meal," I use "good" analogically, for there is at the same time a similarity and a 

Classifying terms 
49 
difference between a good man, a good dog, and a good meal. All three are desir-
able, but a good man is wise and moral, a good dog is tame and affectionate, and 
a good meal is tasty and nourishing. But a good man is not tasty and nourishing, 
except to a cannibal; a good dog is not wise and moral, except in cartoons, and 
a good meal is not tame and affectionate, unless it% alive as you cat it 
Strictly speaking, a term is never univocal, equivocal, or analogical in itself; 
it is only used univocally, equivocally, or analogically. The phrases "bark of a 
dog" and "bark of a tree" use "bark" equivocally; the phrases "bark of an oak" 
and "bark of a maple" use "bark" univocally. (So do "bark of a hound" and "bark 
of a poodle.") "Healthy food" and "healthy exercise" use "healthy" univocally 
(for both mean something that causes health in a human body), but "a healthy 
climate," "a healthy body" and "a healthy sweat" use "healthy" analogically, for 
a healthy climate is a cause of a healthy body, while a healthy sweat is an effect 
of a healthy body. 'Exercise* is an action, 'sweat' is a substance, 'climate' is nei-
ther. 
One of the things computers cannot do is understand and use analogies. One 
of the things philosophers and poets do especially well is to understand and use 
analogies. See also "arguments by analogy," p. 329. 
Exercises: Classify each of the underlined terms as univocal, equivocal, or ana-
logical. 
1. I love ice cream and I love you too. 
2. To murder is evil, and to be murdered is also evil. 
3. A litter of pups was living in the street in the middle of a pile of litter. 
4. Two customers paid two hundred dollars each for two chairs two days ago. 
5. After I digest this logic course, I'm going to digest my dinner. 
6. Macbeth murdered Banquo, but he didn't murder the English language as 
you do. 
7. Water is heavier than air* and the air is very fresh today. 
8. I will air my opinions after I air this room. 
9. The candidate who is running for governor was running after a bus. 
10. With my hands I changed the hands of the clock. 
11. Poetry is an art, and painting is also an art. 
12. "Death is a great change, and it would be no surprise if a man were unpre-
pared for it." "Nonsense! Throughout his life man has experienced change 
of many kinds every day." 
13. Christian: "We call God the Father and Jesus his Son." 
Muslim: "For a father to have a son, he must first have a wife. Who is God's 
wife?" 
Christian: "God has no wife." 
Muslim: "Then God has no son " 
(Which of the three underlined words is used univocally by both sides here? 
Which is not?) 

50 
II. TERMS 
14. "Christians believe God is three persons." "Then he must be triplets. Three 
persons make triplets." 
15. "Buddhists seek Enlightenment. Only a few attain it." "Oh, 'the 
Enlightenment' - we Westerners went through that once, back in the 18th 
century." "What are you two talking about? Enlightenment happens every 
morning when the sun rises." 
16. "I have to change the change I gave you for your dollar; 1 made a mistake." 
(5) Terms are either literal or metaphorical. 
A metaphor is not the same as 
an analogy. When I call my dog an "affectionate" dog, I am using an analogy; 
for the dog shows some but not all of the signs of the kind of human love we call 
"affection," and we think the dog feels some but not all of the same emotions we 
feel when we are affectionate to other human beings. But even though I am using 
the term "affectionate" analogically rather than univocally, I am using it literal-
ly, not metaphorically. But when Jesus calls wily King Herod a "fox" or St. Peter 
a "rock" or God a "good shepherd," he is using metaphors. The word "good" in 
"good shepherd" is not metaphorical but analogical (for "good God," "good 
man," "good dog," "good meal," and "good shepherd" are all good in different 
ways). But the word "shepherd" is metaphorical, for God is not literally a man 
with sheep at all. A metaphor is literally false; an analogy is not. 
(6) Terms are positive or negative. It is usually easy to tell the difference 
between a positive term and a negative term simply by looking for a negative 
syllable at the beginning, like "un-" or "non-" or "in-." But this is not always so. 
Some terms that begin with these syllables are not negative, like "underwear" or 
"interference." And some terms have an essentially negative meaning without a 
negative syllable, like "absence" or "blindness" or "evil." Some words are both 
positive and negative at the same time, like "inconvenience," which means a 
(negative) absence of convenience but also a (positive) presence of trouble. 
(7) Terms are simple or complex. A single object of thought, like "apple," is 
a simple term; two or more objects of thought which could be either together or 
apart, like "green apple," constitute a complex term. No matter how long or 
complex it is, if it is not a complete sentence, it is only a term. "Everything in 
the kitchen sink except the kitchen sink itself, including all the garbage from last 
night's steak dinner for four and all the dirty forks, knives, and spoons" is still 
only one complex term. As a term, the whole complex phrase in quotes can be 
the subject of a proposition with a predicate such as "can be thrown away." 
(8) Terms are categoregmatic or syncategoregmatic. 
A categoregmatic term 
can stand by itself as a unit of meaning, like "apple" or "green" and thus can be 
a subject or predicate. A syncategoregmatic term (mainly articles, prepositions, 
and conjunctions, like "the" or "on" or "when") cannot. In the strict sense, a 

Classifying terms 
51 
syncategoregmatic term is not a term at all, only a word, because it cannot be a 
subject or a predicate. In another sense, it is a term because it has a definite 
meaning, though one that is totally relative to another word. There is no such 
thing as "the," only "the something," e.g. "the apple." But there is such a thing 
as "apple." 
(The term "syncategoregmatic term" will probably be less practically use-
ful to you for doing logic than for doing a vocabulary "snow job") 
(9) Terms are universal, particular, or singular. A universal term designates 
all members of a class of things, as in 44all men are mortal." A particular term 
designates some members of a class, as in "some men are blind." A singular term 
designates only one member, as in "Socrates is dead." 
When we get to propositions and arguments, this distinction among terms 
will be the one we will be using the most 
There are other words besides "all" that indicate that the subject of a propo-
sition is being used universally, such as "every," "each." "no," "none," "never" 
"always." And other words besides "some" indicate that it is particular, such as 
"a few," "few," "not all." "sometimes." "occasionally." "seldom. " 
In ordinary language (as distinct from logical form, which we will learn 
soon) we often imply rather than state whether we are using a term universally 
or particularly. "Triangles have three sides" means 44All triangles have three 
sides"; but "Vacations are disappointing" means "Some vacations are disap-
pointing." When there is no word like "all" or "some" before the subject of a 
proposition to indicate whether the subject term is universal or particular, a good 
rule is to interpret it as universal if the predicate belongs to the subject by nature, 
i.e. by the nature of the subject, and to interpret it as particular if not. E.g. "men" 
is universal in "men are mortal" because mortality belongs to the essence or 
nature of man, but "men" is particular in "men are unreliable" because "unreli-
able" does not belong to the essence of man. (See "indesignate propositions" on 
p. 154.) 
Exercise: Tell whether the subject of each of the following propositions is uni-
versal, particular, or singular. 
1. Only a few planes came back. 
2. The whole air force failed. 
3. Several planes crashed. 
4. The pilot brought no parachute. 
5. Nobody could have survived. 
6. Every plane with two engines had trouble. 
7. Without exception everyone experienced multiple troubles. 
8. Some pilots did not pass any of their tests at all. 
9. None of those planes was in the air for the last two weeks. 

52 
II. TERMS 
(10) Terms designating groups of things are used either collectively or divi-
sively. When I use a term collectively, I mean the group as a whole; when I use 
a term divisively, I mean each individual member of the group. A collective term 
refers to a number of individuals looked at as a single group, like the soldiers in 
an army or the crew of a ship. 
Only terms designating groups can be either collective or divisive. Which 
of the two it is, is determined by use, by how the term is used in a sentence. For 
instance, "library" is used collectively in the sentence "This library is composed 
of ten thousand books," but the same term is used divisively in the sentence 
"This town has three libraries." When I say "this class is the smartest logic class 
I've ever taught," I use "class" collectively, because I don't mean that every sin-
gle member of the class is smart, only that the class as a whole is. But when I 
say "all men are mortal," I use "men" divisively because I mean that every sin-
gle man is mortal, not just that the species homo sapiens, or humanity, is mortal 
as a species. 
Exercise: Tell whether each underlined term is used collectively or divisively. 
1. That is a tall pile of bricks. 
2. The trees on Holly Hill make a fine sight. 
3. None of my philosophy courses is easy. 
4. The marbles in this bag weigh five pounds. 
5. Men have a soul. 
6. The United Nations decided to censure Israel yesterday. 
7. Mankind survives by the skin of its teeth. 
8. Native Americans arc disappearing, and you arc a Native American, there-
fore you are disappearing. 
9. The Cubs have lost for over 80 years in a row, and Sosa is a Cub, there-
fore Sosa has lost for over 80 years in a row. 
(11) Terms are concrete or abstract. "Concrete" does not necessarily mean 
something you can touch or see, and "abstract" does not necessarily mean some-
thing you cannot touch or see. Terms that mean physical things can be either 
concrete or abstract: "red" and "hard" are concrete, while "redness" and "hard-
ness" are abstract. Terms that mean nonphysical things can also be either con-
crete or abstract: "equal" and "spirit" are concrete, while "equality" and "spiri-
tuality" are abstract. An abstract term is the expression of a mental act of 
"abstracting," in which we have "abstracted" or mentally "taken out" some 
aspect or quality from a real thing and placed that quality itself before the mind. 
Whenever we make an adjective into a noun, it becomes abstract: "hot" becomes 
"heat" and "true" becomes "truth." Whenever we add "ness" to an adjective, it 
becomes abstract: "dry" becomes "dryness" and "kind" becomes "kindness." 
(12) Terms are absolute or relative. "Absolute" comes from "ab-solutus," 
which is Latin for "loosed-from." What is absolute is thought of as loosed from 

Classifying terms 
53 
connection or relationship with something else. By contrast, what is relative can-
not be thought without relation or reference to something else. 
"Father," "higher," "king" "shepherd," and "winner" are relative terms. 
"Father*' means "father-q/^a-child." "Higher" means "higher-z/uz/i-something-
lower." "King" means "king-over-some-kingdom ." "Shepherd" means "herder-
o/-sheep." "Winner" means "winner-o/-a-contest" or "winner-over-someone-
else" (the "loser"). 
"Man," "mortal," "ball," "triangle," and "grass" are absolute terms because 
they do not require the kind of additions and qualifications given in the previ-
ous paragraph. The concept "winner" is a relative term because it is meaning-
less without the concept of a game or a loser. "Winner" means '"winner over a 
loser" or "winner of a game." But the concept "man" is still meaningful even if 
you do not think the concept "mother" or "air," even though no man can physi-
cally come to be without a mother or survive without air. Mankind is in reality 
physically dependent on mothers and air, but the concept "man" is not logically 
relative to the concept "mother" or "air." 
Exercises: Explain and resolve the ambiguities in the following (see also pp. 
71-73): 
1. The end of a thing is its purpose and perfection, and death is the end of 
life, therefore death is lifes purpose and perfection. 
2. Cancer is made of human cells, and whatever is made of human cells is 
human, and what is human should not be killed, so cancer should not be 
killed. 
3. Innuendo is an Italian suppository. 
4. Condemned prisoner to judge: "But I don't feel guilty." 
5. Condemned prisoner to judge: "You're a bad man, judge; you're terribly 
judgmental." 
6. Condemned prisoner to judge: "You're supposed to do justice, judge. But 
you've just done a bad thing, and a bad thing can't be just, because justice 
is a good thing, not a bad thing." "What bad thing have I done?" "You've 
lowered my self-esteem in declaring me guilty. Self-esteem is good, and 
you've taken away something good, so you're bad. You should be punished 
instead of me." 
7. There shouldn't be laws against drugs, because the people who use drugs 
don't believe there should be laws against them, and that means the coun-
try doesn't have consensus about it, and laws should reflect the people's 
consensus. 
8. Philosophy is a kind of love - the love of wisdom. Therefore philosophy 
teachers who accept salaries are mercenary lovers. They're intellectual 
prostitutes; they sell their love for money. 
9. Antigravity should be easy. We disobey all kinds of laws, even the law of 
non-contradiction, so we should be able to disobey the law of gravity. 

54 
II. TERMS 
10. How can we claim to define ambiguity? It can't be done, because to define 
anything is to take its ambiguity away. But if you take the ambiguity away 
from ambiguity, it won't be ambiguity any more. 
Section 2. Categories (B) 
To order and classify things in our mind is to put them into categories or gener-
al classes of things. One of the most important disputes in philosophy is about 
whether all categories are simply inventions of the human mind for the sake of 
convenience or whether they are based on objective reality. Are they merely 
"conventional" or are they "natural"? E.g. are animals really different from 
plants and also from human beings, or is that just the way we think? As we saw 
in the section on the "problem of universals," this is the dispute between meta-
physical realism and nominalism. 
Obviously, some categories are merely conventional; e.g. "those things that 
smell worse than a dead yak," or "all the students in the class with grades lower 
than 70." But the fact that we can identify these categories as conventional cate-
gories means that we are judging them as not being natural categories, and thus that 
we have in our mind the concept of the natural category. We may not be certain 
whether a given category is natural or conventional, but the very distinction pre-
supposes that some categories are natural, i.e. based on the real nature of things. 
If categories categorized only subjective thoughts and not objective things, 
then those (categorized) thoughts would not correspond to (uncategorized) 
things. Then we could never be sure of the objective truth of our judgments that 
used these categories. But all judgments use categories. So all our judgments 
would be like a dream, or a game. As G.K. Chesterton says, it is simply an 
"attack on thought" to say "that every separate thing is unique, and there are no 
categories at a l l . . . a man cannot open his mouth without contradicting it. Thus 
when Mr. Wells says (as he did somewhere), 4A11 chairs are quite different,' he 
utters not merely a misstatement, but a contradiction in terms. If all chairs were 
quite different, you could not call them 'all chairs.'" (Orthodoxy) 
If reality is ordered and not chaotic, categories constitute one of its most 
basic kinds of order. We have seen that universals, or class concepts, can be 
arranged in a hierarchical order of extension and comprehension, and that as 
either extension or comprehension increases, the other decreases. This naturally 
leads to the question: what are the largest, most extensive, most general of all 
categories? 
Aristotle came up with ten categories which he thought were the most fun-
damental, in the sense of the most broad, the most general, the most generic. 
These categories are called the sumrna genera, the general classes that are the 
greatest in extension. Everything real, Aristotle thought, must be in one of these 
ten categories: 

Categories 
55 
"For there is (1) substance, in the common understanding of the term, such 
as man or horse; (2) how much, e.g. as being of two or three cubits; (3) of what 
kind, e.g. as being white or being grammatical; (4) being related to something, 
e.g. as double, half, or greater; (5) where, e.g. as being in the grove or market 
place; (6) when, e.g. as tomorrow or the day before yesterday; (7) having a pos-
ture, e.g. as one is reclining or standing; (8) to be equipped, e.g. as one is shod 
or armed; (9) to act, e.g. as a thing cuts or burns; (10) to receive, e.g. as a thing 
is cut or burned." 
The traditional terms for the ten categories are; 
1. substance (an individual thing or entity, not a kind of matter, like "salt") 
2. quantity 
3. quality 
4. relation 
5. place 
6. time 
7. posture (the internal order of a thing's parts) 
8. possession 
9. action 
10. passion (being acted upon) 
"Relation" seems to be more fundamental than Aristotle thought, and "pos-
ture" and "possession" less fundamental, but the rest of the list seems as fixed 
as the structure of language itself. For the parts of speech in language corre-
spond to this list of categories; nouns and pronouns usually express substances, 
adjectives express qualities or quantities, prepositions and conjunctions express 
relations, verbs express actions or passions, and adverbs express times or places 
(or, more often, qualities or quantities of actions or passions). 
Exercises: Identify the category of each categoregmatic term (see p. 50) in the 
following sentences: 
1. In the square sat seven skinny soldiers stuck in the stocks at six o'clock. 
2. Near the blasted heath at midnight, the three Weird Sisters stood, gleeful-
ly stirring the round, black witches' pot filled with three tiny broken frogs. 
3. Politically proper Professor Pete, painted partly pink, proffered puzzling 
paradoxes of pop psychology, ponderously pontificating. 
4. Pooping on pieces of pork in the park is proper performance for perky pel-
icans. 
5. Sam was struck Saturday by scads of silver saliva spat by six scraggly 
singers sitting stupidly on solid seats simultaneously singing scary seven-
syllable songs. 
6. Categories are used to classify things. 

56 
11. TERMS 
7. *(H) Comment on the following passage (explain the last paragraph in 
different words): 
And what did it profit me that when I was barely twenty years 
old there came into my hands, and I read and understood, alone and 
unaided, the book of Aristotle's Ten Categories - a book I had longed 
for as some great and divine work because the master who taught me 
Rhetoric at Carthage, and whom others held to be learned, mouthed 
its name with such evident pride? I compared notes with others, who 
admitted that they had scarcely managed to understand the book 
even with the most learned masters not merely lecturing upon it but 
making many diagrams in the dust; and they could not tell me any-
thing of it that I had not discovered in reading it for myself. For it 
seemed to me clear enough what the book had to say of substances, 
like man, and of the accidents that are in substances, like the figure 
of a man, what sort of man he is, and of his stature, how many feet 
high, and of his family relationships, whose brother he is, or where 
he is placed, or when he was born, or whether he is standing or sit-
ting or has his shoes on or is armed, or whether he is doing some-
thing or having something done to him - and all the other countless 
things that are to be put either in these nine categories of which I 
have given examples, or in the chief category of substance. 
Not only did all this not profit me, it actually did me harm, in 
that I tried to understand You, my God, marvelous in Your simplici-
ty and immutability, while imagining that whatsoever had being was 
to be found within these ten categories - as if You were a substance 
in which inhered Your own greatness of beauty, as they might inhere 
in a body. But in fact Your greatness and Your beauty are Yourself; 
whereas a body is not large and beautiful merely by being a body, 
because it would still be a body even if it were less large and less 
beautiful. 
(St. Augustine, Confessions IV, 16) 
Section 3. Predicables (B) 
To "predicate" is to affirm or deny a predicate of a subject. E.g. the proposition 
"Blueberries are red" predicates "red" of "blueberries." The proposition "swal-
lowing a whale is not easy" predicates "not easy" of "swallowing a whale." 
There are five possible relationships that any predicate may have to its sub-
ject. A predicate may be a genus, specific difference, species, property or acci-
dent of its subject. These are called the five "predicables," or predicate possi-
bilities, the five things a predicate can predicate of its subject. 
The ten categories are a classification of (a) all terms, (b) absolutely, or 
(H) designates an unusually hard exercise; (E) an unusually easy one. 

Predicates 
57 
simply, or in themselves, (c) whether they are in a proposition or not. But the 
five predicates 
are a classification of (a) only predicate terms, (b) relatively, in 
relation to their subjects, (c) in a proposition. 
Symbolic logic has no room for the predicables because the predicables pre-
suppose the forbidden idea of nature, or essence, or whatness. The five predica-
bles are a classification of predicates based on the standard of how close the 
predicate comes to stating the essence of the subject: 
(1) The species (not a biological species) states the whole essence of the 
subject. In the proposition "Man is a rational animal," "rational animal" is the 
species of "man." In the proposition "A triangle is a three-sided plane figure," 
"three-sided plane figure" is the species of "triangle." In the proposition 
"Democracy is government by the people," "government by the people" is the 
species of "democracy." 
(2) The genus states the generic or general or common aspect of the essence 
of the subject. (This is to define "genus" in terms of comprehension; to define 
it in terms of extension, a genus is a more general class to which the subject 
essentially belongs.) "Animal" is a genus of "man." "Plane figure" is a genus of 
"triangle." "Government" is a genus of "democracy." Note that the genus is part 
of the species, i.e. part of the species' comprehension. (In modern logic we usu-
ally say a species is part of a genus because modem logic thinks in terms of 
extension rather than comprehension.) 
(3) The specific difference states the specific, or differentiating, or proper 
aspect of the essence of the subject, the aspect of its essence that differentiates 
it from other members of the same genus. "Rational" is the specific difference 
of "man." "Three-sided" is the specific difference of "triangle." "By the people" 
is the specific difference of "democracy." 
(4) A property or "proper accident" is any characteristic that is not the 
essence itself but "flows from" the essence, is caused by the essence, and there-
fore is always present in the subject because the essence is always present. A 
property is necessarily connected with the essence and therefore inseparable from 
it. "Able to speak," "able to laugh," and "mortal" are properties of "a man." 
"Having its three interior angles equal to two right angles" is a property of "tri-
angle." "Able to change laws by popular consent" is a property of "democracy." 
(5) An accident is any characteristic of the subject that is not essential (nei-
ther the essence nor necessarily present as "flowing from" or caused by the 
essence), and therefore can come and go, is sometimes present and sometimes 
not. "Bald" and "Athenian" are accidents of "man." "Equilateral" and "tiny" are 
accidents of "triangle." "Modern" and "bicameral" are accidents of "democra-
cy." In ordinary language any attribute, essential or accidental, is often called a 
"property," but in logic "accidents" are distinguished from "properties." 
A technical point about singular terms: the purists among Aristotelian 
logicians say that predicables are only relations between universal terms; more 

58 
II. TERMS 
pragmatic logicians allow them to be applied also to singular terms like 
"Socrates" - e.g. "rational" is the specific difference of "Socrates" as well as the 
specific difference of "man." The theoretical dispute seems unimportant for pur-
poses of practical logic. 
A clarification regarding the two uses of the term "accidentThe 
same 
word, "accident," is used in logic both for nine of the ten categories (all of them 
except "substance" are "accidents") and for one of the five predicables. Do not 
confuse categories with predicables; remember that the categories classify terms 
absolutely, in themselves, while the predicables classify terms relatively, as rela-
tions of a predicate to a subject in a proposition. 
However, individuals cannot be predicate terms in strict logical form, since 
the predicate is some aspect of the nature of the subject, and individuals are not 
(universal) natures. They have natures. Thus, "The murderer is Lucretia" must 
be translated into "Lucretia is the murderer" before we can speak of a predica-
t e relationship (here, accident). "Clark Kent is Superman" is not a proposition 
with a predicable relationship at all but an equation between two names. Here 
"is" is the same as "=" in math. That is not its usual meaning: see p. 140. 
A clarification regarding the two uses of the terms "genus " and "species ": 
The words "genus" and "species" are used in popular speech, and often in sci-
ence, to mean any larger or smaller classes, relative to each other (a "genus" con-
tains a "species" or subclass) and relative to the mind that classifies them. That 
is, these classes of things arc thought of as mere conventional concepts that a 
mind arranges at will without reference to the essence or nature of anything, 
since "essence" and "nature" are philosophical concepts about which there is 
much confusion and skepticism today. But in Aristotelian logic, genus and 
species presuppose the notion of essence because they are relative to the essence 
of the subject of a proposition. They are relative not to the subjective will or pur-
poses or interests of the classifier, but to the objective nature of the subject. 
We can also speak of genus and species outside propositions. When we do 
this, we are usually treating genus and species in terms of extension (larger or 
smaller classes, classes and subclasses). We repeat, because the point can be con-
fusing: in terms of comprehension, a genus is part of a species; in terms of exten-
sion, a species is part of a genus. In terms of the inner meaning of a term (com-
prehension), a genus (e.g. "animal") is part of the meaning of a species (e.g. 
"man," who is "the rational animal'). But in terms of the population designated 
by the term (extension), a species (e.g. "man") is part of a genus (e.g. "animal"). 
in terms of COMPREHENSION 
in terms of EXTENSION 
Genus is part of species 
The concept "animal," which is man's 
genus, is part of the concept "rational 
animal," which is man's species. 
Species is part of genus 
The class "man" is only a part of the 
class "animal." 

Predicables 
59 
A clarification about two meanings of "essence": The word "cssence" also 
has two meanings. (1) It could mean simply what a thing is, the whole nature 
of a thing. It is then contrasted with existence or with activity or with appear-
ance. For instance, unicorns and cows both have an essence, but unicorns do 
not exist, while cows do. Cows act in certain ways (e.g. they make calves and 
give milk) because of their essence, their cowness. And cows may appear to be 
unappetizing but are really very tasty by their nature. (2) "Essence" can also 
have a more restricted meaning: the fundamental and unchangeable nature of a 
thing, as contrasted with its changeable accidents. For instance, a cow is not 
essentially a brown cow or a healthy cow, but it is essentially a mammal. It 
could become a white cow or a sick cow, but it could never become a reptile or 
a fish. 
In this second, restricted meaning, essences are often hard to define exact-
ly when it comes to things in nature like cows, as distinct from man-made 
objects like democracy or cathedrals or corkscrews. The reason is obvious: we 
designed democracy, cathedrals, and corkscrews, so we know clearly what their 
essence is. But we did not design cows. Presumably the Creator knows the 
essence of a cow as clearly as we know the essence of a corkscrew. 
Yet we have some knowledge of the essence of a natural thing like a cow. If 
we didn't, we couldn't make the distinctions above - e.g. we are not surprised to 
see a change of health or color in a cow because we know that that does not 
change the essence of a cow; but we would be amazed to see a cow become a 
reptile or become a fish, because that would be a change of essence. 
It is much easier to distinguish the essence of a thing in nature from its acci-
dents than from its properties. Is mass the essence of matter and energy a prop-
erty of matter, or is it the other way round? Is taking-up-space a property of mat-
ter? Is it a property of energy? Is three-sides the essence of a triangle and three-
angles a property or is it the other way round? The chemical elements are dis-
tinguished by their atomic weights, not by their essence, because we simply do 
not know what it is in the essence of any element that determines it to have the 
atomic weight it has. We may not know why it is that water boils at 212 degrees 
Fahrenheit at sea level, but there must be something in the very nature of water 
that makes it do that, for all water does it and nothing else does. We know our-
selves better than we know water, so we know what there is in us that accounts 
for our properties - it is our ability to understand that accounts for our ability to 
laugh, and to use language, and it is our ability to freely choose that accounts for 
our moral responsibility. But whether we know its essence or not, a thing acts as 
it is ("operatio sequitur esse")', its observable activity flows from its being, its 
nature, its essence. A cow does bovine things because it is a cow. What could be 
more commonsensical than that? 
Even though it is no longer fashionable to do so in modern philosophy or 
modern logic, the human mind by nature (i.e. by its essence!) still meaningful-
ly asks the question of the essence of anything. I remember our son at age 2 

60 
11. TERMS 
running around the house pointing to each object and demanding, "Wot dat? W o t 
dat?" 
We have an intuitive, commonsensical knowledge of essences which is u s e -
ful enough for everyday conversation, but not clear enough for scientific p u r -
poses. Because science cannot usefully deal with this implicit, everyday, i n t u -
itive, commonsense knowledge of essences, science has rightly put aside t h e 
notion and demanded more empirically verifiable and "operational" d e f i n i t i o n s 
of things. Things are defined by scientists in terms of what we can see t h e m d o , 
rather than in terms of what they are. Medieval science did not clearly take t h i s 
useful step. 
However, the mistake typically made by medieval science, in c o n f u s i n g 
common sense (which knows essences), with science (which does not), is still 
with us, but in its opposite form: where the medievals reduced science to c o m -
mon sense, we reduce common sense to science if we reject the notion o f 
essences entirely. And since logic and philosophy (at least any logic and p h i l o s -
ophy applicable to the humanities) are based on common sense rather t h a n o n 
the scientific method, it is a mistake to drop the commonsense notion o f 
essences - and to drop from logic the doctrine of the predicables, which is b u i l t 
on it. 
Because it has dropped the notion of essence and therefore has no d o c t r i n e 
of the predicables, modern logic has difficulty answering the question o f t h e 
ancient skeptic Antisthenes, who claimed that every proposition was a s e l f - c o n -
tradiction because it asserts that one thing, the subject, is another 
thing, 
t h e 
predicate. He argued that on the basis of the law of non-contradiction, w e s h o u l d 
only say that S is S, not that S is P. In terms of modern logic, Antisthenes' a r g u -
ment is a dilemma: either the proposition is a mere tautology (if P is i d e n t i c a l 
with S), or it will be self-contradictory (if P is not identical with S). E . g . 
Antisthenes argued, "How can you say a cloud is white? A cloud is one thing a n d 
whiteness another. To say that a cloud is white is saying a cloud is not a c l o u d . 
That is a contradiction." If you have understood the doctrine of the p r e d i c a b l e s 
above, you will be able to answer Antisthenes easily. But not by the law o f n o n -
contradiction alone, not by "computer logic" alone. 
The "Tree of Porphyry": The ancient Greek logician Porphyry a r r a n g e d t h e 
basic genera and species in the universe into a kind of upside down tree, a s s e e n 
on page 61. 
The Tree is useful for a number of things. For one thing, it helps us to s e e 
the inverse relationship between extension and comprehension. As you m o v e 
down the tree, each successive branch has more comprehension (more p r o p e r -
ties) but less extension (fewer members). It also helps us to see the categories a s 
the "summa genera," highest genera, most general classes. It gives us a m e t a -
physical road map, a basic map of being. With this map, we at least k n o w w h a t 
continent we are on; without it, we are lost: we do not know where or even w h a t 
we are. 

Predicables 
61 
The Tree of Porphyry 
Being 
Substance 
Accidents 
(that which 
(that which 
exists in 
exists only 
itself) 
in a substance) 
Immaterial 
Material 
(pure spirits) 
Inorganic 
Organic 
Non-sentient 
Sentient 
(plants) 
(animals) 
Non-rational 
("brutes") 
Rational 
(man) 
Exercises: Identify the predicable in each of the following propositions: 
1. Regicide is murder of a king. 
2. Regicide is murder. 
3. Predicables are relations between terms. 
4. Purple is a color. 
5. Men are often hot-tempered. 
6. To be human is to have a temper. 
7. Justice is more profitable than injustice. 
8. Justice is a virtue. 
9. Justice gives to each his due. 
10. Justice will improve your soul. 
11. Justice was done to Socrates. 

62 
II. TERMS 
12. Biology is the science of living things. 
13. Biology studies mammals. 
14. Biology is hard for me. 
15. Logic is an art. 
16. Logic is a science. 
Section 4. Division and outlining (B) 
This is one of the simplest but also most practical sections. It is simplest because 
its rules are commonsensical. It is practical because the only alternative to out-
lining is confusion, whether in life or in writing. If we do not distinguish things 
(in the world) or points (in our thought or writing or speech), we confuse them; 
and if we confuse them, we are confused. To have a clear idea, the idea must also 
be distinct. 
Modern minds often have a vague ideological aversion to distinctions; they 
think they arc "discriminatory." In other words, they fail to distinguish three 
very different kinds of distinctions: (1) distinctions between thoughts, which are 
always helpful, (2) just and reasonable distinctions between things and people, 
such as distinguishing between medicines and poisons, or between students who 
pass and who fail, and (3) unjust and unreasonable distinctions between people, 
"discrimination" in the ideological sense, e.g. basing salaries on gender or race 
instead of performance. 
Outlining is the most practical application of logical division. Like most 
teachers in the humanities, I have read tens of thousands of student essays and 
papers. No matter what the content of those papers, no matter what is said, those 
that are not outlined, or not clcarly or intelligently outlined, always receive a 
lower grade than those that are. 
We can (1) divide terms or we can (2) divide something more complex than 
terms: propositions, points, theses, or topics in a discourse, by outlining it. The 
two kinds of division have somewhat different rules. 
Dividing terms 
When we divide a term, we divide the extension of the term. When we define a 
term, we define the comprehension of the term (see page 43). There are three 
rules: the division must be exclusive, exhaustive, and use only one standard. 
1. The division must be exclusive; i.e. the things divided must be really 
distinct, and not overlap. 
Dividing political systems into monarchical, constitutional, and democratic 
violates this rule because a regime could be both monarchical and constitution-
al, as well as both democratic and constitutional. 
Dividing regimes into totalitarian and democratic also violates this rule, for 

Division and outlining 
63 
the two could overlap. You could have a totalitarian democracy. For totalitarianism 
and democracy are not two mutually exclusive answers to the same question, but 
answers to two different questions. Democracy is an answer to the question of 
sovereignty: who ultimately holds the power? Its answer is: the demos, the peo-
ple at large, or the majority. Totalitarianism is an answer to the question of quan-
tity: how much power, or power over how much of human life, especially private 
life, is there? Its answer is: total, unlimited power. Brave New World is a totali-
tarian democracy; so is Rousseau's idea of "the general will" as infallible (vox 
populi, vox dei: "The voice of the people is the voice of God"). 
Dividing attitudes into loving, hating, and indifferent also violates this rule 
because although love and hate both exclude indifference, they do not exclude 
each other. Though an attitude cannot be loving and indifferent at the same time, 
it can be loving and hating at the same time. 
Dividing attitudes into amoral, moral, and hateful also violates this rule 
because an attitude of hatred toward evil - evil that harms persons - is quite 
moral. The division should be between the amoral, the moral, and the immoral. 
One simple way of obeying this f rst rule is to divide in an "either/or" way, 
into only two subclasses, one of which negates the other. For instance, "loving 
and non-loving" are exclusive, while "loving and hating" are not. "Democratic 
and non-democratic" are exclusive, while "democratic and totalitarian" are not. 
Such a division is called dichotomous (literally, "cut in two"). 
2. The division must be exhaustive; i.e. the divided parts should add up to 
a whole. 
This rule must always be obeyed in dividing terms, but not always in out-
lining. Dividing the term "meat" into beef and lamb violates this rule because it 
omits pork. But we can divide "examples of healthy meats" in an outline into 
beef and lamb if we wish, omitting pork. 
Dividing tools into hand tools and electrical tools is a non-exhaustive divi-
sion, thus violates this rule because it omits tools that use power sources such as 
gas or steam. Such non-exhaustive divisions are sometimes useful, though, 
because they often do exhaustively divide a part of the class, the part we are con-
cerned with. For instance, in the above division, "tools" may be shorthand for 
"the tools at hand" or "the tools in my house" or "the tools I can afford," and 
electrical and hand tools may be the only two kinds of those tools. 
Dividing the parts or aspects of a person into head and body violates this 
rule because it omits the soul or mind. Even dividing a person into body and soul 
might be said to omit the spirit, if spirit is distinguished from soul, as it some-
times (but not usually) is. But "head and body" do exhaustively divide a person's 
body, in the narrower sense of "body" as "what's below the head." 
3. The division should have only one basis or standard. We should not 
divide people simultaneously by their race and by their intelligence, e.g. or 
books by their objective truth and their subjective appeal. One of the things we 

64 
II. TERMS 
should clearly divide and distinguish is the basis or standard by which we divide 
and distinguish. 
Exercise: Evaluate the following divisions of terms and tell which, if any, of the 
three rules they violate: 
1. women into blondes, brunettes, and redheads 
2. men into bald and hirsute 
3. parts of speech into nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs 
4. cats into tailless and those with tails 
5. animals into reptiles, mammals, amphibians, marsupials, birds, and fish 
6. regimes into popular and totalitarian 
7. human acts into those that are morally good and those that cause pain 
8. human beings into male and female 
9. animals into rational animals ("men") and irrational animals ("brutes") 
10. organisms into plants and animals 
11. things ("substances") into physical things and spiritual things 
12. reality into that which is real in itself and that which is real only relative 
to something else 
13. beings into mental beings and objectively real beings 
14. musical keys into major and minor 
15. (H) "All Gaul is divided into three parts. The Belgians inhabit one part, the 
Aquitanians another, and those who call themselves Celts - in our lan-
guage, Gauls - inhabit the third." (Julius Caesar) 
16. (H) "Democracy has therefore two excesses to avoid: the spirit of inequal-
ity, which leads to aristocracy or monarchy, and the spirit of extreme 
equality, which leads to despotic power, as the latter is completed by con-
quest." (Montesquieu) 
17. (H) "Let me ask you now: How would you arrange goods? Are there not 
some which we welcome for their own sakes, and independently of their 
consequences, as for example harmless pleasures and enjoyments, which 
delight us at the time though nothing follows from them?" 
"I agree in thinking that there is such a class," I replied. 
"Is there not also a second class of goods, such as knowledge, sight, 
health, which are desirable not only in themselves but also for their 
results?" 
"Certainly," I said 
"And would you not recognize a third class, such as gymnastic and the 
care of the sick, and the physician's art; also the various ways of money-
making? These do us good but we regard them as disagreeable, and no one 
would choose them for their own sakes." (Plato, Republic, Book II) 
18. (H) "Now order can be compared to reason in four ways. There is a cer-
tain order which reason docs not make but only considers, such as the 

Division and outlining 
65 
order of natural things. There is another order which reason in carrying on 
its considerations makes in its own proper act, as when, for example, it 
orders its own concepts and the signs of these concepts in so far as these 
are significant sounds. There is a third order which reason makes in the 
operations of the will. There is a fourth order which reason makes in exter-
nal things of which it is the cause, as for example in a chest or in a house." 
(St. Thomas Aquinas) 
19. (H) "Before the end of the present century, unless something unforesee-
able occurs, one of three possibilities will have been realized. These three 
are: I. The end of human life, perhaps of all life on our planet. II. A rever-
sion to barbarism after a catastrophic diminution of the population of the 
globe. III. A unification of the world under a single government, possess-
ing a monopoly of all the major weapons of war." (Bertrand Russell) 
20. (H) Plato's division of states into (a) aristocratic (rule by "the best"), (b) 
timocratic (rule by "the brave"), (c) plutocratic (rule by the rich), (d) dem-
ocratic (rule by the masses), and (e) despotic (rule by a tyrant) 
21. (H) Aristotle's division of states into (a) monarchies, (b) despotisms, (c) 
aristocracies, (d) oligarchies, (e) democracies, and (f) anarchies. (What 
are the bases for his division? How many bases does he use? Is this one 
division or two?) 
22. (H) From the Catholic point of view there are thirteen religious options. 
First, there is Agnosticism, or Skepticism, which is the negative answer to 
the question: Is there any hope of finding the truth about religion? All 
twelve other options answer Yes. Second, there is Atheism, which is the 
negative answer to the question: Is there any kind of God, any ontologi-
cally superhuman mystery that justifies the fundamental religious attitude 
of piety? All eleven other options answer Yes. Third, there is Polytheism, 
which is the negative answer to the question: Is there an ultimate oneness 
to this mystery? All ten other options answer Yes. Fourth, there is 
Pantheism, which is the negative answer to the question: Is this mystery 
transcendent and distinct from the universe and human consciousness, 
rather than simply the sum total of all being, or another word for 
Everything, or that which everything really is? All nine other options 
answer Yes. Fifth, there is Vague Philosophical Theism, which is the neg-
ative answer to the question: Is this mystery a Person, an "I" who could 
say "I AM," rather than a Force or a Principle? All eight other options 
answer Yes. Sixth, there is Non-religious Philosophical Theism, which is 
the negative answer to the question: Did this "I AM" reveal Himself 
through prophets? All seven other options answer Yes, and stem from the 
Hebrew Bible. Seventh, there is Judaism, which is the negative answer to 
the question: Did this "I AM" send any prophet greater than Moses? All 
six other options answer Yes. Eighth, there is Islam, which is the negative 

66 
II TERMS 
answer to the question: Is this greatest prophet Jesus rather than 
Muhammad? All five other options answer Yes. Ninth, there is 
Unitarianism, which is the negative answer to the question: Is Jesus a 
divine person as well as a human person, and is God three Persons rather 
than one? All four other options answer Yes. Tenth, there is Protestant 
Christianity, which is the negative answer to the question: Did this Jesus 
establish a single, visible, infallible Church with authority to teach in His 
name? All three other options answer Yes. Eleventh, there is Eastern 
Orthodox Christianity, which is the negative answer to the question: Is the 
Pope in Rome the present universal head of this Church? The two other 
options answer Yes. Twelfth, there is orthodox Catholicism, which is the 
negative answer to the question: May I pick and choose which teaching of 
the Church to believe and obey? The other option answers Yes, and this is 
the thirteenth option, which is "cafeteria Catholicism." 
• (1) Diagram this, (2) evaluate it, and (3) if you think you can, give an 
alternative classification of religions. 
23. (H) Do the same for philosophies, political systems, or moral systems as 
#22, above, did for religions. 
Outlining 
The principles of outlining are like the principles of morality in that they are 
usually simple and easy to understand but hard to obey. They are not hard in 
themselves; we are just lazy! But their practice has a big payoff. Few things clar-
ify and improve writing and thinking more. By far the most important rule about 
outlining is: JUST DO IT! 
The basic rules are these: 
1. Titles and subtitles are not parts of the outline but placed above it. 
2. Use Roman numerals for main topics, capital letters for main subtopics, 
then Arabic numerals for sub-subtopics, then small letters, then Arabic numer-
als in parentheses, then small letters in parentheses. 
3. For each number or letter there must be a topic. Each must stand on a line 
by itself. E.g. never write "AI" or "IA." 
4. There must always be more than one subtopic under any topic. (No A 
without a B, no 1 without a 2.) 
5. A subtopic must be placed under the main topic which it qualifies. This 
is the rule that gives many students the most trouble: distinguishing the relative 
rank of each point, deciding which are coordinate with which, and which are 
subordinate to which. This is an ability that is more intuitive than teachable; but 
it can be greatly improved by practice, and cannot be greatly improved without 
practice. 
6. Subtopics are indented, so that all numbers or letters of the same kind 
comc directly under each other vertically. 

Division and outlining 
67 
7. Begin each topic with a capital letter, even if they are not complete sen-
tences. 
8. Do not include Introduction or Conclusion as points within the outline. 
Outlining is not simply putting numbers and letters in order before sen-
tences or before headings. They must be in logical order and logical subordina-
tion. 
Students usually dislike outlining because they find it mechanical and 
inflexible. But when we construct any work of art with a complex structure, 
whether a garage or a symphony, there is simply no comparison between having 
a plan or outline and not having one. 

Ill: Material Fallacies 
First, we must distinguish material fallacies, which are covered in this chapter, 
from formal fallacies, which are covered later. Formal fallacies are mistakes in 
reasoning, errors in the operation of the third act of the mind. For instance, 
"Some men are mortal, and some mortals are fish, therefore some men are fish" 
commits a formal fallacy. "Some men are fish" does not logically follow from 
the two premises that "some men are mortar' and "some mortals are fish," even 
though both the premises are true. There is no ambiguity or wrong use of terms 
in this argument, only bad reasoning. We will learn the rules of good logical rea-
soning in the third section of this book, which covers the third act of the mind. 
Material fallacies, on the other hand, are treated here, in the section of the 
book which covers the first act of the mind, because they are mistakes in under-
standing the meaning or use of terms, errors in the operation of the first act of 
the mind. These material fallacies are found in the course of an argument, so 
they are called "fallacies," or mistakes in reasoning; but they are not mistakes in 
the logical form but mistakes in the content or matter or meaning. 
Most of the errors and misunderstandings that plague our conversation and 
argumentation come from a loose use of language rather than from formal fal-
lacies. Formally fallacious arguments don't deceive us as often as materially fal-
lacious arguments do. Therefore we have made this section, on material falla-
cies, longer than it is in most logic texts. Most logic texts do not do this because 
they specialize in what they do best: the clear, black-or-white formal fallacies, 
as distinct from the more messy and intuitive material fallacies. But the topics 
in a practical text should be determined not by the topic's clarity but by its prac-
ticality, i.e. by human need and use. 
How many material fallacies are there? There is an exact number of formal 
fallacies, but no exact number of material fallacies, because they often overlap, 
because the list can always be added to, and because they can be classified in 
different ways. Most logic texts list only a dozen or two; we list 49, because the 
more we know, the more we can avoid. Like sins, fallacies are easier to avoid if 
they are labeled. "It would be a very good thing if every trick could receive some 
short and obviously appropriate name, so that when a man used this or that par-
ticular trick, he could at once be reproved for it" (Arthur Schopenhauer, The Art 
of Controversy). 

Material fallacies 
69 
Students have more legitimate arguments about the right answers to test 
questions on the material fallacies than on any other topic in logic, since the fal-
lacies often overlap and in some cases more than one fallacy is present. It is less 
important to distinguish them from each other than to distinguish them from 
good reasoning, less important to "get the answer right" to the question "Which 
fallacy is present here?" than simply to be aware of them and on the watch for 
them. This is why we do not include a set of exercises after this section. 
For each of the 49 fallacies, we will give (1) a definition, (2) an explana-
tion, and (3) some typical examples of it. 
Here is a systematic outline of the 49 fallacies, grouped under seven differ-
ent kinds, each of which happens to have seven major fallacies under it; and in 
each of the seven kinds, the most important and most common fallacy is 
placcd first. 
Many have Latin names. This is not a reason for panic or attacks on histo-
ry or Western civilization. Knowing a few Latin terms does not make you a snob 
or a showoff. 
1. Fallacies of language 
A. Equivocation 
71 
B. Amphiboly 
74 
C. Accent 
75 
D. Slanting 
76 
E. Slogans 
78 
F. Hyperbole 
78 
G. "Straw Man" 
79 
2. Fallacies of Diversion 
A. Ad hominem (The Appeal to the Person), including 
80 
"Poisoning the Well," 
Tu quoque ("You Too"), and 
"The Genetic Fallacy" 
B. Ad verecundiam (The Appeal to [Illegitimate] Authority) 
82 
C. Ad baculum (The Appeal to Force) 
83 
D. Ad misericordiam (The Appeal to Pity) 
84 
E. Ad ignominiam (The Appeal to Shame) 
84 
F. Adpopulum 
(The Appeal to the Masses), including 
85 
Flattery (or "The Appeal to the Gallery"), 
Identification ("I'm one of you!"), 
"Everybody Docs It," 
"The Polls Say," 
The Appeal to Prejudice, 
"Snob Appeal," and 
"The Big Lie" 
G. Ad ignorantiam (The Appeal to Ignorance) 
86 

70 
lit. MATERIAL FALLACIES 
3. Fallacies of Oversimplification 
A. Die to simp liciter 
86 
B. "Special Case" 
87 
C. Composition 
87 
D. Division 
88 
E. "The Black-and-White Fallacy" 
89 
F. Quoting out of Context 
90 
G. Stereotyping 
91 
4. Fallacies of Argumentation 
A. Non sequitur ("It Does Not Follow") 
92 
B. Ignoratio Elenchi (Irrelevant Conclusion, or "Ignorance 
of the Chain" connecting premises and conclusion) 
94 
C. Petitio principii ("Begging the Question") 
94 
D. "Complex Question" 
95 
E. Arguing in a Circle 
95 
F. Contradictory Premises 
97 
G. False Assumption 
99 
5. Fallacies of Induction 
A. Hasty Generalization 
100 
B. Post hoc, ergo propter hoc ("After this, therefore caused by this") 100 
C. Hypothesis Contrary to Fact 
101 
D. False Analogy 
102 
E. Argument from Silence 
103 
F. Selective Evidence 
103 
G. Slanting the Question 
104 
6. Procedural Fallacies 
A. "Refuting" an Argument by Refuting its Conclusion 
104 
B. Assuming that Refuting an Argument Disproves Its 
Conclusion 
105 
C. Ignoring an Argument 
106 
D. Substituting Explanations for Proof 
106 
E. Answering Another Argument than the One Given 
107 
F. Shifting the Burden of Proof 
108 
G. W inning the Argument but Losing the Arguer, or Vice Versa 
108 
7. Metaphysical Fallacies 
A. Reductionism or "Nothing Buttery" (especially, Confusing 
Form with Matter) 
109 
B. The Fallacy of Accident (Confusing the Accidental 
with the Essential) 
110 
C. Confusing Quantity with Quality 
111 

Fallacies of language 
71 
D. The Fallacy of Misplaced Concreteness (Confusing the 
Abstract with the Concrete) 
111 
E. Confusing the Logical, Psychological, and Physical "Because" 112 
F. The Existential Fallacy (Confusing Essencc and Existence) 
112 
G. Confusing the Natural with the Common 
113 
Short Story: "Love Is a Fallacy" by Max Schulman (from The Many 
Loves of Dobie Gillis) 
114 
Section I. Fallacies of language 
I A, Equivocation 
Equivocation is the simplest and most common of all the material fallacies. It 
means simply that the same term is used in two or more different senses in the 
course of an argument. 
Fallacies, in the logical sense, occur only in arguments. In ordinary lan-
guage the word "fallacy" is often used for any kind of mistake, but in logic a fal-
lacy is a mistake in argument. A fallacious argument is one that seems to prove 
its conclusion but does not, for one of two reasons: material (the use of terms) 
or formal (the reasoning process). Almost any terms, except numbers, have the 
potential to be used equivocally. But no term is equivocal in itself; a term is only 
used equivocally. This happens when it changes its meaning in the course of an 
argument. 
Concepts are not equivocal, only terms (i.e. the words that express them). 
To have a concept in your mind is to know what it means. If your mind holds 
two meanings, it holds two concepts, not one. But you may be using only one 
term to express the two concepts. E.g. you may use the term "pen" to express 
both the concept "ink writing instrument" and also the concept "pig enclosure." 
But the two concepts are clear and distinct: the first concept is just what it is and 
nothing else; and the second concept is just what it is and nothing else. The dis-
ease of equivocation is in the term, not the concept. 
When two people use the same word in two different senses, they are said 
to be "quibbling" over the term. We remove the quibble by exposing the double 
identity of the term, i.e. by showing how the same term (word or phrase) 
expresses two different concepts. "Quibbling" usually means deliberate equivo-
cation: e.g. "Since "automobile* means 'self-mover,' locomotives must be auto-
mobiles." Or "Mom told us not to go swimming right after lunch, but I'm not 
swimming; I'm on a bodyboard." 
To expose the equivocation or double identity of the equivocal term, use 
these two steps: 
(1) First identify the word or phrase that shifts its meaning. 
(2) Then identify the two different meanings by using two different 
words or phrases. 

72 
III. MATERIAL FALLACIES 
The golden rule here is: To unmake an ambiguity, make a distinction. 
Medieval "Scholastic" philosophy was famous for making many distinc-
tions. People today tend to think of this as artificial and overdone; but that is 
because, with one exception, people today do not like to take the time and care 
to think clearly and exactly. The one exception is in the sciences - and it is no 
coincidence that science is the most spectacular success story of modern civi-
lization. 
Making distinctions is not the vice of verbalism or "getting hung up on 
words." It is exactly the opposite: it is the way to avoid "getting hung up on 
words" being victimized by words. The reason we make distinctions (and also 
definitions [Chapter V]) is because we insist on going beyond unclear words to 
clear concepts. 
A term used analogically, a term used metaphorically, or a term used vague-
ly ("fuzzily") is not necessarily one used equivocally. (Sec above, page 48 on 
analogy and fiizziness. And for a very clear account of metaphor, sec Practical 
Logic by Monroe Beardsley [Prentice-Hall, 1950], ch. 4.) 
Many jokes, and all puns, depend on equivocation. 
Exercises: Explain and remove the ambiguity in the following examples of 
equivocation by using the two-step procedure on page 71. NB: some of these are 
single propositions rather than arguments; in this case, identify two possible 
meanings for the potentially equivocal terms. 
1. (E) Only men are rational, and women are not men, therefore women are 
not rational. 
2. (H) Those who are the most hungry, eat the most. Those who eat the least, 
are the most hungry. Therefore those who eat the least, eat the most. 
3. All laws require lawgivers, and the laws of nature are laws, therefore the 
laws of nature require a lawgiver. 
4. Like most ten-year-olds, Sam was bored with church services. He over-
heard his parents worrying about this: his father said, "I'm afraid Sam is 
just about bored to death in church." Being very literal, this worried Sam. 
Later that day, Sam asked his minister who were all those names on the 
church's war memorial plaque. The minister replied that they were "all the 
people that died in the service." Sam asked, "Was it the morning service 
or the evening service?" (Find two ambiguous terms here.) 
5. (H) The more you study, the more you learn. The more you learn, the more 
you know. The more you know, the more you forget. The more you forget, the 
less you remember. The less you remember, the less you know. So why 
study? 
6. "Who s on first?" (from the famous Abbot and Costello routine) 
7. A logician, walking past a library at 6 A.M., heard a man call out from one 
of the windows, "Help! I've been locked inside here all night by mistake!" 
The logician replied with this argument: "The sign says that no one can be 

Fallacies of language 
73 
in the library all night. You arc someone. Therefore you have not been in 
the library all night." And he walked away. 
8. G.K. Chesterton, visiting New York City for the first time, saw two women 
screaming at each other from the windows of their 4th floor apartments, 
which were directly across a narrow alley from each other. He comment-
ed, "Those women will never agree because they are arguing from differ-
ent premises." 
9. (E) "What is the highest form of animal life?" "The giraffe." 
10. (E) "Your argument is sound. In fact, it's nothing but sound." 
11. A Russian-English language translator computer was tested by being 
given this sentence, "The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak," to trans-
late into Russian, and then back into English. It came out: "The vodka is 
agreeable but the meat is too tender." 
12. Foreign language teacher informing a student that he had failed a test on 
pronunciation: "I will now pronounce your sentence." 
13. "Oh, I am very fond of children," said the Giant to Jack. 
14. "He cares for her." 
15. (E) "I couldn't work for NASA because safety regulations demand that 
some missions be aborted, and I don't believe in abortion." 
16. (E) "The English don't drive on the right side of the road. Therefore they 
drive on the wrong side." 
17. The 9th-century philosopher John the Scot Eriugena was sitting at dinner 
with the rude, racist, and very drunken king Charles the Bald, who said to 
him, in a feeble attempt at humor, "Tell me, John, what separates a Scot 
from a sot?" The philosopher answered, "Only the width of the table. 
Sire." (What word's ambiguity is the point of John's riposte?) 
18. "Why do you love violence?" "Because I am pious." "That's ridiculous." 
"No, that's logical. To be like what God is, is to be Godlike, and what God 
is, is love, therefore to love is Godlike. To be Godlike is to be pious, there-
fore he who loves is pious. He who loves violence, loves, therefore he who 
loves violence is pious. I love violence. Therefore I am pious." 
19. (H) "If you move, you're dead. If you're dead, you can't move. Therefore 
if you move, you can't move." (Which word is equivocal here? Hint: 
unpack the contractions.) 
20. (H) President Clinton, responding to a question from a prosecutor who 
was investigating whether he had engaged in illegal activities: "That 
depends on what you mean by 'is.'" Could this be a reasonable, intelligent, 
and honest answer? Can "is" be equivocal? 
21. (H) "Evil makes you think; thinking makes you wise; being wise is good; 
therefore evil makes you good." 
22. (H) "Nothing is more expensive than diamonds. But paper is more expen-
sive than nothing. Therefore paper is more expensive than diamonds." 

74 
ill. MATERIAL FALLACIES 
IB, Amphiboly 
An "amphiboly" is not an ambiguous word (or phrase) but ambiguous syntax 
(word order or grammatical structure). Simple puns are based on equivocation; 
slightly longer "language jokes" are usually based on amphiboly, e.g.; What 
word is pronounced incorrectly by nearly all English people? Answer: the word 
"incorrectly." 
Here is an example of amphiboly that is not a joke, just an ambiguity: 
"Aristotle the peripatetic (i.e. the 'walker') taught his students walking." There 
are two ambiguities here. First, who was walking, Aristotle or his students? 
Second, did he teach them the art of walking or did he teach them something else 
while he was walking? 
The 18th-century philosopher Berkeley was trying to prove his conclusion 
that esse est percipi, "to be is to be perceived," i.e. that there is no "material 
world," no objective reality independent of perception or awareness, whether 
mental or sensory. He used this argument: "Is it not a great contradiction to think 
a thing exists when you do not think it?" The ambiguity here comes from the fact 
that the adverbial phrase "when you do not think it" can modify either the verb 
"think" or the verb "exists." Only the first interpretation is "a great contradic-
tion," for it means "to think . . . when you do not think." But the second is no 
contradiction, for it means "to believe the following idea: that a thing will not 
stop existing when I stop thinking about it." 
Most of Jay Leno's "headlines" are examples of amphiboly. The New Yorker 
magazine used to collect humorous amphibolies, or (as they used to be called) 
malapropisms (after Mrs. Malaprop, a character in an old comedy). E.g.: 
(1) "WENCH FOR SALE, complete with rope. For further information call 
3081." (advertisement in the Fairmont West Virginian, reprinted in The New 
Yorker 3/6/54, p. 104) 
(2) "SUMMER RENTAL: 5-room house with wood paneling plus small 
guest and garage in rear." (advertisement in Princeton Town Topics, reprinted in 
The New Yorker 6/12/54) 
(3) "It won't be a real New England clam chowder unless you put your heart 
into it." (New England Homestead, reprinted in The New Yorker 6/12/54) 
(4) "Although slightly hazy around the city this afternoon, weather bureau 
officials claimed that no fog was imminent." (Hartford Times, reprinted in The 
New Yorker 5/15/54) 
(5) "GUEST FOR LUNCH ONE WAY TO SOLVE EATING PROBLEM" 
(headline in the Providence Bulletin, reprinted in The New Yorker 5/8/54) 
(6) "I shall lose no time in reading your manuscript." (Samuel Johnson) 
(7) "Sir: I have your manuscript before me. 1 am sitting in the smallest room 
in my house. Soon I shall have your manuscript behind me." (Samuel Johnson) 
(If you don't get it, ask yourself what is the smallest room in your house.) 
(8) Alice: "Would you - be very good enough - to stop a minute - just to 
get - one's breath again?" White King: "I'm good enough, only I'm not strong 

Fallacies of language 
75 
enough. You sec, a minute goes by so fearfully quick. You might as well try to 
stop a Bandersnatch." (Lewis Carroll) 
(9) "The duke yet lives that Henry shall depose." (Shakespeare, Henry VI, 
Part II, Act I, scene 4) 
(10) "Would you rather a cannibal ate you or a shark?" 
(11) (title of article in student newspaper): "How To Cook Yourself" 
(12) (TV commercial): "Drive this 4x4 fully loaded." 
(13) (Advertisement): "Dogs bathed, fleas removed and returned to your 
house for $40." 
(14) "And the skies are not cloudy all day" ("Home on the Range") 
(15) "Most men love cigars more than their wives." 
(16) (newspaper advertisement): "For Sale: Antique desk suitable for lady 
with curved legs and large drawers, also mahogany chest" (reprinted in the 
Journal of the American Medical Association, 9/19/53) 
(17) "The cook opened the oven stuffed with sausages." 
(18) "George, you are being selfish and rude to your sister in calling her stu-
pid. Tell her you're sorry." "O.K., Mom. Hey, Sis, I'm sorry you're stupid." 
(19) "I'm not myself today." "I see you have revoked the Law of Non-con-
tradiction." 
Exercise: Expose the ambiguity in each of the above examples by the two steps 
on p. 71. 
1C, Accent 
Here the ambiguity comes from voice inflection, ironic or sarcastic tone, or even 
facial expression, or innuendo. (If you don't know what "innuendo" means, look 
it up. Every literate person should have - and more importantly, use - a dic-
tionary.) Accent and amphiboly are the two fallacies that are almost always 
humorous, usually ironic, and often sarcastic. 
Notice, in the following two examples, how the same sentence can have 
many significantly different meanings by implication if different words are 
emphasized: 
"/ do not choose to run at this time." (But perhaps he will.) 
"I do not choose to run at this time." (no ambiguity) 
"I do not choose to run at this time." (But I can be forced.) 
"I do not choose to run at this time." (But I can be drafted.) 
"I do not choose to run at this time." (But I may do it tomorrow.) 
Another, similar example: 
" We don't have to tell the whole truth, you know." (But others do.) 
"We don't have to tell the whole truth, you know." (You only think we do.) 
"We don't have to tell the whole truth, you know." (It's optional.) 

76 
III. MATERIAL FALLACIES 
"We don't have to tell the whole truth, you know." (But we should know it.) 
"We don't have to tell the whole truth, you know." (Half truths are OK.) 
"We don't have to tell the whole truth, you know." (Tell myths or evasions 
instead.) 
"We don't have to tell the whole truth, you know." (But no one else does.) 
More examples of ambiguity by accent: 
(1) Aristotle was a good logician, (but not a good physicist) 
(2) "Mr. Benchley, that whiskey you are drinking is a slow poison." Robert 
Benchley: "That's O.K., I'm in no hurry." 
(3) John Austin, the prestigious English logician, was explaining to a Sidney 
Morgenbesser, a skeptical New Yorker, that in the English language a double 
negative could mean something positive but a double positive could not mean 
something negative. He concluded, "You understand that, don't you?" 
Morgenbesser replied sarcastically, "Yeah, yeah." 
(4) The old King James Bible used italics for words that were not literally 
in the original Hebrew or Greek text but had to be added to make sense in 
English. But italics in English usually means emphasis. Thus the ambiguity of 
the following: "And he said 'Saddle me an ass.' And they saddled /i/ro." (The 
humor depends on two fallacies: accent, and equivocation on the word "ass.") 
(5) A famous example of accent by sarcasm or irony is Marc Antony's 
funeral oration in "Julius Caesar." It is also a sarcastic undermining of the argu-
ment from authority, the authority of Brutus as an honorable man: 
Come I to speak in Caesar's funeral. 
He was my friend, faithful and just to me; 
But Brutus says he was ambitious; 
And Brutus is an honorable man . . . 
He hath brought many captives home to Rome, 
Whose ransoms did the general coffers fill; 
Did this in Caesar seem ambitious? 
When that the poor have cried, Caesar hath wept: 
Ambition should be made of sterner stuff. 
Yet Brutus says he was ambitious; 
And Brutus is an honorable man. 
ID, Slanting 
Slanting is sometimes called the fallacy of the "question-begging epithet" 
because it is really a form of "begging the question" (fallacy 4C, below) in a sin-
gle word. "Begging the question" means assuming what you're supposed to 
prove, and the use of "slanted" language "begs the question" by telling you 
whether to like or dislike the thing the word describes. Instead of proving that 
the thing it describes is good or bad, it assumes its value or disvalue in the very 

Fallacies of language 
77 
description of it - e.g. calling an idea "up-to-date" or "wild," "traditional" or 
"stagnant" "flexible" or "fickle." This is equivocation or double meaning 
because it both describes and evaluates at once, in a single word. It both denotes 
a fact and connotes an evaluating attitude toward the fact. That is why it is clas-
sified under the heading of fallacies of equivocation. 
The most obvious and egregious examples of slanting are in propaganda 
(which has been defned by a famous punster as the proper mate for a proper 
goose). But slanting can also be done negatively, by omitting relevant informa-
tion, and by selecting only favorable, or only unfavorable, data. This form of 
slanting is much subtler and harder to detect The old U.S.S.R.'s official news-
paper Pravda was full of blatant propaganda; but even ("even"?) American 
newspapers habitually slant by omission, sometimes as part of deliberate edito-
rial policy, e.g. by giving candidates of its favored political party more coverage, 
and the opposing candidates less, and reversing this when it comes to scandals 
or accusations. Newspapers also have linguistic policies on divisive issues like 
abortion: one paper will label the two sides "pro-choice" and "anti-choice" 
another paper will label the same sides "pro-abortion" and "anti-abortion," and 
a third paper will label them "pro-life" and "anti-life." For papers of the Left, 
there are no "left-wing extremists ," and for papers of the Right, there are no 
"right-wing extremists." What the Left calls "centrist" the Right calls "left-
wing" and what the Right calls "centrist" the Left calls "right wing." 
One of the most common forms of slanting is the euphemism: the Holocaust 
was called "the final solution to the Jewish problem," and the slaughter of civil-
ians in war is called "collateral damage." Slavery was defended by some such 
linguistic indirection as the following: "Since a gradation of human enterprise is 
necessary for the optimal functioning of human society, there must be a lowest 
position on the spectrum; and since this position is odious to the majority of 
humankind, it is necessary to enforce its occupation by establishing appropriate 
civil structures to protect it." 
The above was written by an obscure legal writer; but the following was 
written by one of the most famous judges in American history: "We have seen 
more than once that the public welfare may call upon the best citizens for their 
lives. It would be strange if it could not call upon those who already sap the 
strength of the state for these lesser sacrifices, often not felt to be such by those 
concerned, in order to prevent our being swamped with incompetence. It is bet-
ter for all the world if instead of waiting to execute degenerate offspring for 
crime or to let them starve for their imbecility, society can prevent those who are 
manifestly unfit from continuing their kind. The principle that sustains compul-
sory vaccination is broad enough to cover cutting of the Fallopian tubes" (Justice 
Oliver Wendell Holmes, U.S. Supreme Court, upholding the Virginia 
Compulsory Sterilization Law, 1927 [274 US 200]). 
A long list could be made of slanted adjectives. Each of the following sets 
of three terms means the same thing, but with three different connotations: 

78 
III. MATERIAL FALLACIES 
"I am firm, you are stubborn, he is pigheaded." (Bertrand Russell) 
"I am open-minded, you are flexible, he is a waffler." 
"I am righteously indignant, you are annoyed, he is whining." 
"I am a public servant, you are a government official, he is a bureaucrat." 
The reader is invited to add many more examples. For example, Benjamin 
Disraeli distinguished "lies, damned lies, and statistics." 
Here is a famous "slanted" passage by a famous philosopher, David Hume: 
"If we take into our hand any volume, of divinity or school metaphysics, for 
instance, let us ask: Does it contain any abstract reasoning concerning quantity 
or number? No. Does it contain any experimental reasoning concerning matter 
of fact and existence? No. Commit it then to the flames, for it can contain noth-
ing but sophistry and illusion" (David Hume, Enquiry Concerning 
Human 
Understanding, XII, 3). 
Hume may be exaggerating here for rhetorical effect, but if what he says is 
true, most of the history of philosophy, including most of the thinking of 
Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, is "sophistry and illusion" because it is neither 
mathematical nor empirical. Hume's critique is also an example of a self-con-
tradiction (fallacy tt D6), for his statement about philosophical statements being 
meaningless ("sophistry and illusion") is itself a philosophical statement. And if 
all statements that are neither mathematical nor empirical are meaningless, then 
that very statement (that all statements that are neither mathematical nor empir-
ical are meaningless) is meaningless, because it is neither mathematical nor 
empirical. It therefore deserves only to be "committed to the flames." 
IE, Slogans 
There is no fallacy in a slogan as such, but in its use as a substitute for argument, 
e.g. "I'm pro-life." "Why?" "Because of that bumper sticker: 4A Child, Not a 
Choice."' "Well, I'm pro-choice." "Why?" "Because of that bumper sticker: 
'Every Woman's Right To Choose.'" 
Or: "Why are you voting for the incumbent?" "You know the saying: 'Don't 
change horses in the middle of the stream.' And 'If it ain't broke, don't fix it.'" 
"Why are you voting for his opponent?" "Because I believe in Progress. I'm pro-
gressive." 
Almost any expression can become a slogan when it is used to produce a 
thoughtless knee-jerk reaction of agreement or disagreement simply on the basis 
of the familiarity of the words rather than on the basis of reason. The words 
function like the logo of the local football team. 
IF, Hyperbole 
"Hyperbole" means "exaggeration." This is routinely done by "media hype." For 
instance, note every occurrence of the word "crisis" in your daily newspaper. 
How may are really crises and how many are only "a tempest in a teapot"? Do 

Fallacies of language 
79 
the same with the word "shocking." Surely it is highly ironic that this word is 
used more and more as Americans find less and less to be shocked at. 
Another form of hyperbole is the "absurd extension" of the other speaker's 
claim. Children often do this: 
"You need to clean up your room." "Oh, so you want me to be your slave." 
"You shouldn't drink so much." "You're always harping on that." (A wimpy 
once-a-month reminder becomes "harping.") 
"You can't stay out all night. You're only sixteen." "My life is ruined. I'm a 
prisoner in my own home forever." 
"Oh, so you're against pornography. You must be against freedom of 
speech." 
"Absurd extension" must be distinguished from the legitimate form of argu-
ment called "reduction to absurdity," or reductio adabsurdum, which consists in 
proving that if you accept a certain proposition as a premise, that premise nec-
essarily leads to a conclusion which is "absurd," i.e. one which everybody knows 
is false, and therefore the premise cannot be accepted. It is not fallacious to 
argue that "If p were true, then q would be true. But q is not true, for it is absurd. 
Therefore p is not true." One of the two premises of this argument may be false 
- it may be false that q follows p, or that q is absurd - but there is no formal or 
material fallacy in the argument. 
1G, "Straw Man" 
The "straw man" fallacy consists in refuting an unfairly weak, stupid, or ridicu-
lous version of your opponent s idea (either his conclusion or his argument) 
instead of the more reasonable idea he actually holds. You first set up a "straw 
man," or scarecrow, then knock it down, since a straw man is easy to knock 
down. 
One of the rules of medieval debate was designed to block "straw man" 
arguments: you must first state your opponent's idea in your own words (to be 
sure you understand the idea instead of just parroting the words), to his satis-
faction, before you go on to refute it. 
Even great philosophers often fall into the "straw man" fallacy. E.g. the 
optimist may "refute" the pessimist by noting that "not everything" is bad, and 
the pessimist may "refute" the optimist by noting that "not everything is good." 
Rationalists have "refuted" empiricists by noting that man is not merely a clever 
animal, the eye is not merely a camera, and the brain is not merely a computer. 
Only an extreme empiricist would hold that. And empiricists have "refuted" 
rationalists by noting that man is not a god or an angel and that babies arc not 
born with innate ideas. Only an extreme rationalist would hold that. E.g. there is 
a story that the poet Shelley, converted to Platonic rationalism by reading Plato's 
dialogues, rushed out of his house onto London Bridge, snatched the first baby 
he saw from its mother's arms, and demanded of it an account of all the innate 
ideas it had been born with. Alas, the baby only cricd. 

80 
III. MATERIAL FALLACIES 
That great paragon of common sense, Samuel Johnson, according to his 
biographer Boswell, "refuted" Berkeley's philosophical claim that so-called 
material things were really ideas (i.e. that matter does not exist independent of, 
or outside of, mind) by kicking a stone, and saying "Thus I refute Berkeley." 
(But Berkeley did not say that we could not kick stones.) 
Section 2. Fallacies of diversion 
The next group of seven fallacies are fallacies of distraction or diversion - ways 
of diverting attention away from the argument, the point, the issue. Instead of an 
argumentuni ad rem ("argument to the point" or "argument addressed to the real 
thing"), we have argumentum ad seven other things with Latin names: person-
ality, authority, threat, pity, shame, popularity, or ignorance. 
Fallacies of equivocation look with double vision, so to speak, at a set of 
words and see two different things, confusing two meanings. Fallacies of diver-
sion, in contrast, turn our attention away from the facts, from reality, to some-
thing else. They are diversionary tactics, as in battle. 
2 A, Ad horninem 
The most common of these fallacies of diversion is the argumentum ad hominem 
(or simply "ad hominem" for short), which means an "argument addressed to the 
person" (or the personality) instead of to the issue. In other words, a personal 
attack, attacking the person instead of attacking the issue. 
"Poisoning the Well" is the direct attack on the trustworthiness of the per-
son making a statement instead of addressing the statement, e.g.: "How can you 
believe anything he says? He .. "The fallacy does not consist in criticizing the 
person's character or reliability; that is certainly a relevant consideration, and it 
would be a fallacy to suppress it, or any other relevant evidence. The fallacy con-
sists in substituting the personal attack for facing the person's argument or truth-
claim, using it as a "reason" for not looking at the facts or reasons. 
"Poisoning the Well" usually (but not always) involves another fallacy also, 
viz. slanting or name-calling within the attack on the person's character, the use 
of "question-begging epithets" or insulting labels instead of facts and reasons 
for doubting his reliability. If you believe your opponent's character or reliabili-
ty is questionable, it is legitimate to say so, but reasons must be given for that 
belief too. not just insults. 
"Tu quoque" (literally, "you too") consists of accusing your critic of the 
same thing your critic accuses you of, rather than defending yourself against the 
criticism. "I've just proved that you're a liar. Refute my argument." "Well, you're 
just as much a liar as I am." Perhaps he is, but that does not refute his argument. 
The most common form of ad hominem today is "the genetic fallacy," 
which consists in "refuting" an idea by showing some suspicious psychological 

Fallacies of diversion 
81 
origin of it. There is nothing wrong with looking at an idea's psychological ori-
gin, but this is the task of the psychologist, not the logician. The "genetic falla-
cy" is a fallacy not because it is psychological but because it is a confusion, and 
an extremely common one, between logic and psychology. It is a confusion 
between the two fundamental meanings of the word "because." "Because" can 
mean (1) a cause of an effect, or it can mean (2) a reason or premise or evidence 
for a conclusion. If it means (I) a cause, then in turn that cause can be either (la) 
an external, objective, physical cause of a physical effect, like heavy objects 
falling down because of gravity, or paper towels absorbing water because of their 
capillary action; or (lb) an internal, subjective, psychological cause of a belief, 
like believing in Santa Claus because it makes you happy, or fearing large black 
dogs because one bit you once when you were a child. "The genetic fallacy" 
consists in substituting (lb) for (2), substituting a personal motive for a logical 
reason - e.g. "you believe that only because you've never grown up" or "you just 
can't admit I'm right because you're jealous of my intelligence" or "Your con-
clusion is false because you don't understand my feelings." 
The Freudian emphasis on the subconscious has made this fallacy popular 
today. E.g. it is often thought that monarchists believed in God because they sub-
consciously wanted the universe to be hierarchical in order to justify their hier-
archical society. But it is just as "reasonable" to argue that egalitarians opt for 
atheism for the same "reason" in reverse. 
Arguments about gender issues frequently use this fallacy: "You say that 
just because you're a man." "And you deny it just because you're a woman." The 
two suspicions cancel each other out, and the real argument, the argumentum ad 
rem, can then begin. (But it rarely does.) 
No matter how egregious the psychological origins of a belief may be, the 
logic of the argument for it is independent of the psychology. If Einstein had 
been a vicious Nazi and had discovered the Theory of Relativity only in order to 
give Hitler the atom bomb to kill his enemies and conquer the world, that would 
not prove that E does not equal MC2. 
If the genetic fallacy were not a fallacy, we would have to reject our model 
for the benzene molecule because it came from its founder's dream of a snake 
eating its own tail. 
Examples of ad hominem: 
(1) (Tu Quoque): Judge: "You have just been convicted of petty larceny." 
Prisoner: "Your honor, I just looked up your salary; you get $200,000 a year. If 
I'm a thief, you're a bigger one." 
(2) (Tu Quoque): "St. Augustine led a wild life himself as a youth, so what 
right does he have to tell us we should be saints?" 
(3) "Your preaching is worthless." "Why?" "Because you don't you practice 
what you prcach." 
(4) Modern version of the above: "Papa, don't preach." ("Madonna") (Note 
that this is also self-contradictory: preaching against preaching.) 

82 
III. MATERIAL FALLACIES 
(5) "O.J. Simpson was innocent because Mark Fuhrman, the cop who gath-
ered the evidence, was proved to be a racist, which means that we cannot believe 
his claim that the DNA evidence proves O.J.'s guilt." 
(6) "How could you possibly counsel married couples? You've never been 
married." 
(7) "What do you know? You're only a teenager." 
(8) "What do you know? You're not a teenager." 
2B, Ad verecundiam 
"Ad verecundiam" means "the appeal to reverence," i.e. reverence for authority. 
The fallacy is the illegitimate appeal to authority, or the appeal to illegitimate 
authority. Appeal to authority is not in itself fallacious. For "authority" does not 
mean "might" but "right." In fact, most of what we know, we have learned by 
trusting authorities: First of all our parents, then our teachers and textbooks. No 
one can learn everything first-hand; most of what we know comes to us second-
hand, with many other human links in the chain. 
G.K. Chesterton satirizes the uncritical refusal to accept anything on 
authority in the first sentence of his autobiography: "Bowing down in blind 
credulity, as is my custom, before mere authority, and the tradition of the elders, 
superstitiously swallowing a story 1 could not test at the time by experiment or 
private judgment, 1 am firmly of the opinion that I was born on the 29th of May, 
1874, on Campden Hill, Kensington, and baptized according to the formularies 
of the Church of England in the little church of St. George opposite the large 
Waterworks that dominated that ridge." 
However, humans are fallible, and therefore, according to the medieval 
maxim, "the argument from (human) authority is the weakest of all arguments." 
As we grow, we question our authorities and test them by reason and try to learn 
more and more on our own (though no one ever gets to the point where he no 
longer needs to rely on any authorities at all). 
The appeal to authority becomes fallacious when the authority is (1) irrel-
evant (e.g. when a movie star is taken as an authority on science, or a priest on 
how to make a lot of money); or (2) unreliable (e.g. the "National Enquirer" or 
"Pravda"); or (3) unnecessary, since there is an argument from reason instead 
that is easy, clear, and readily available; or (4) when the appeal is dogmatic, i.e. 
closed rather than open, claiming certainty rather than probability; when men 
are treated as gods; or (5) when the appeal is uncritical, when there is no good 
reason why this authority should be trusted. This latter form includes such forms 
as the "snow job," the "appeal to the expert" and the "appeal to Big Names." 
Examples: (Which, if any, of the five errors above does each of the follow-
ing commit?) 
(1) "The doctrine of Aristotle is the supreme truth, because his intellect was 
the limit of the human intellect. It is therefore rightly said that he was created 

Fallacies of diversion 
83 
and given to us by divine providence so that we might know all that can be 
known" (Muslim philosopher Averroes, quoted by Etienne Gilson in History of 
Christian Philosophy in the Middle Ages, p. 220). (This was not the typical 
medieval attitude toward Aristotle!) 
(2) "There must be something to astrology; my mother swears by it" 
(3) "Ho Chi Minh was not a tyrant." "How do you know that?" "Jane Fonda 
said so." 
(4) "According to 75% of all convicted felons, the American justice system 
is unjust." 
(5) "Euclid said that the square of the hypotenuse of a right triangle is equal 
in area to the sum of the squares on the other two sides, so it must be tme." 
(6) "It must be true; I got it right from my philosophy professor." 
(7) "Don't touch that!" "Why not?" "It's hot It burns. It hurts." "How do you 
know? Did you try it? Did you get a boo-boo on it?" "No, but Mommy said so." 
(8) "Evolution is probably true because nearly all scientists believe it." 
(9) "Mary was assumed into Heaven." "How do you know?" "The Church 
says so." 
(10) "Allah hates the aggressor." "How do you know what Allah thinks?" 
"It's in the Qur 'an." 
(11) "There probably are billions and billions of extraterrestrial life forms. 
Carl Sagan says so." 
2C, Ad baculum 
This is the appeal to force ("baculum" means "stick"), i.e. to fear (the fear of 
force) instead of reason. 
The "other side of the coin," or correlative, of the appeal to fear is the appeal 
to desire. This has not yet received a separate technical name; yet the thought 
that "It's true because I want it to be true" is perhaps the commonest fallacy of 
all. Freud would certainly say so. (Is that an argumenturn ad verecundiaml) 
Examples: 
(1) "Of course there's a real Santa Claus, but he doesn't bring presents to 
children who don't believe in him." 
(2) "Before you answer, remember who pays your salary." 
(3) Chairman of the Board: "All those in favor of my proposal, say i agree'; 
all those opposed, say *1 resign.'" 
(4) "Thomas, if you could only see your way clear to agree with King 
Henry's theology, you would be Chancellor of England for life." 
(5) "If you just can't agree with the reasonableness of company policy on 
this issue, you can start looking for another job." 
(6) "It is reasonable to believe in God because if you believe in God, you 
have your best chance to be rewarded with Heaven. If you do not, you have a 
good chance to be punished with Hell." (Is "Pascal's Wager" a fallacy?) 

84 
III. MATERIAL FALLACIES 
(7) "If you adopted the belief that everywhere is Heaven, even here, and 
everyone is God, even you, you would be blissfully happy and free from fear. For 
what is there to fear in Heaven, and what does God have to be afraid of?" 
(8) (Advisors to their campaigning politician): "The best argument we know 
for changing your mind on this controversial issue is the polls, which tell us that 
your constituents will not re-elect you unless you agree with them about it." 
2D, Ad misericordiam 
The fallacy of "ad misericordiam" 
or "appeal to pity" is the perversion of some-
thing that is perfectly legitimate in itself, just as is the "appeal to authority." Pity 
is usually a good thing, often appropriate and sometimes ncccssary; but it can-
not be a substitute for argument. 
The commonest form of this fallacy in teachers' experience is students' 
attempt to "buy" higher grades or more time to complete late assignments, 
because of the supposed suffering that they experienced either before the test or 
assignment ("Give me an A even though I scored a 70% on your test because I 
studied terribly hard all night") or afterwards ("If you flunk me, my parents will 
be devastated. They sacrificed all their savings on my tuition."). 
Examples: 
(1) "I do not think that when you have to look at the painful, lingering death 
of someone you love, you will still believe that euthanasia is morally wrong." 
(But the moral question is not whether such a death is painful and pitiable but 
whether it is man or God who has authority over man's life. In the words of the 
title of a pro-euthanasia movie, "Whose Life Is It, Anyway?" Pity no more 
refutes the traditional religious answer to that question than it proves it.) 
(2) "If you don't commit adultery with me, I will despair and kill myself" 
(3) "If you have tears, prepare to shed them now." (Mark Antony, in 
Shakespeare's "Julius Caesar") 
(4) "Officer, I don't deserve a speeding ticket: my dog just died, my moth-
er-in-law moved in, and my tax return is being audited!" 
2E, Ad ignontiniam 
This is the "appeal to shame." Shame, like fear and pity, is another emotion that 
is often appropriate but never a valid substitute for a reason. To believe or dis-
believe an idea, or to choose to do or not do a deed, only because you do not 
want to experience shame, is to substitute emotion for reason, and that is clear-
ly just as unreasonable as substituting reason for emotion. 
Shame itself is not a fallacy; but deciding what to do or say by appealing 
only to shame is a logical fallacy because it is a diversion from objective truth, 
facts, and evidence. For shame is subjective, or intcrsubjective; it is dependent 
on other people's minds: we feel shame only when others see or know us. E.g. 

Fallacies of diversion 
85 
we are not ashamed to be naked in the shower, but in the street. Shame is essen-
tially social and relative to social expectations, which change with time, place, 
and culture. What is shameful in one society is not shameful in another. Guilt, 
by contrast, we can feel when we are alone, and it is relative not to other peo-
ple's feelings but to our own beliefs about moral rightness, or what we think we 
truly ought to do. So an appeal to guilt can be quite rational. It can also be irra-
tional, of course, if the guilt is pathological, overdone, or inappropriate. 
Examples of the "appeal to shame": 
(1) "You're going to talk to teenagers about chastity? You'll be a laughing 
stock. They'll call you a Puritan behind your back, and a weirdo. Prepare for a 
big blush." 
(2) "What? You're going to be a lawyer^ Is it because you want people to 
tell jokes on you?" 
(3) "There is nothing to feel guilt for except guilt feelings." 
(4) St. Augustine said he stole some pears with some friends at the age of 
16 because "Someone said, "Let's do it,' and I was ashamed to be ashamed." 
(5) "What! You still have heroes? In this day and age? You're the only per-
son I know who will admit that. Don't you feel like a naive little kid?" 
2F, Adpopulum 
This fallacy is especially popular today, in what some sociologists call an "other-
directed" age, when the need for acceptance by others is felt so strongly; it is the 
fallacy of believing or doing something only because it is popular, or getting 
someone else to believe or do something only because other people do. It is 
called the "appeal to the populace," or the "appeal to the masses," but sometimes 
the appeal is only to a select group of people, by implying "I'm one of your kind; 
trust me." This is sometimes called "snob appeal," and usually is negative rather 
than positive, e.g. ""Can anything good come out of Nazareth?" (John 1:46) 
As with the other fallacies in this group, the fallacy consists not in the feel-
ing itself (the desire to be accepted), but in appealing to it instead of to reason, 
as a diversion from facts and evidence. 
Examples: 
(1) "I am no orator, as Brutus is; but as you know me all, a plain blunt man. 
. . . For I have neither wit, nor words, nor worthy Action, nor utterance, nor the 
power of speech,/ To stir men's blood; I only speak right on." (Mark Antony in 
Shakespeare, "Julius Caesar" III, 2) 
(2) ('"The Big Lie") "The magnitude of a lie always contains a certain fac-
tor of credibility, since the great mass of the people . . . , in view of the primi-
tive simplicity of their minds, more easily fall a victim to a big lie than a little 
one, since they themselves lie in little things, but would be ashamed of lies that 
were too big. Such a falsehood will never enter their heads." (Adolf Hitler, Mein 
KampJ) ""The Big Lie" appeals to this process of unconscious reasoning: "If 

86 
111. MATERIAL FALLACIES 
most of 'my kind of people' believe an idea that seems absurd the idea must be 
true, for people like me would never fall for that big a lie." 
(3) "Capital punishment can't be wrong; 75% of the people support it." 
(4) "If you let this man go, you are no friend of Caesar's" (John 19:12) 
(This is a good example of a fallacy that can be classified in more than one way; 
it is also an argumentum ad baculum.) 
(5) "Forty million Frenchmen can't be wrong." 
(6) "In Philadelphia, nearly everybody reads the Bulletin(Philadelphia 
Bulletin ad) 
(7) "Evil spirits? Who believes in that today?" 
(8) "The notion of timeless truth is based on an outmoded Greek meta-
physics that we moderns have rejected." 
2G. Ad Ignorantiam 
The "appeal to ignorance" consists in arguing that an idea must be true because 
we do not know that it is not. It is a fallacy because ignorance can never be a 
premise or reason. Premises must express knowledge-claims. Nothing logically 
follows from nothing, i.e. from no-knowledge. 
Examples: 
(1) "He can't prove he earned that money, so he must have stolen it." 
(2) "Aristotle? Never heard of him. So he can't be important." 
(3) "We know of no natural cause that could have produced that effect. So 
it must have been a miracle." 
(4) "How could there be a war going on? I haven't seen any evidence of it." 
(5) "God must exist because I've never seen any proof that he doesn't." 
Section 3. Fallacies of oversimplification 
3 A, Dicta Simpliciter 
We now move to seven fallacies of oversimplification. The most obvious and 
direct of these is called "dicto simpliciter ," which means saying something too 
simply, absolutely, or unqualifiedly; that is, applying a general principle to a spe-
cial case without the needed qualification. It consists in ignoring the facts about 
the special case that requires the principle to be qualified. 
Examples: 
(1) Man is a rational animal. Therefore even an idiot can pass a logic course. 
(2) "According to the Greek saying, water is best (ariston to hudor). So I'll 
swap you some water for those diamonds and you'll come out ahead." 
(3) "Dicto simpliciter is a fallacy. Therefore don't read this logic textbook; 
it's too simple. It gives you only basics." 

Fallacies of oversimplification 
87 
(4) "Man has been progressively more lenient, first to citizens, then to 
slaves, then to animals, and then (presumably) to plants. 1 think it wrong to sit 
on a man; soon, I shall think it wrong to sit on a horse; eventually (I suppose) I 
shall think it wrong to sit on a chair" (G.K. Chesterton, Orthodoxy) 
3B, Special Case 
This is exactly the reverse of dicto simpliciter: Dicto simpliciter argues that 
something is true simply, therefore it is true in some special case. "Special case" 
argues that something is true in some special case, therefore it is true simply. 
Both fallacies ignore the specialness of the special case. 
The saying "the exception proves the rule" is a (rather sloppy and mislead-
ing) way of refuting this fallacy. What that saying really means is not, literally, 
that an exception like "some triangles are not three-sided" proves the rule that 
"all triangles are three-sided," or that "this man is ten feet tall" proves the truth 
of the rule that "no man is ten feet tall." That would be absurd and self-contra-
dictory. What it means is that the exception or special case presupposes the rule. 
If there is no rule, there can be no exceptions to it. Most rules are generaliza-
tions that are only usually true, and admit exceptions or special cases; e.g. "It's 
wrong to take another man's property against his will," which is not true when 
the other man is about to commit suicide with his own gun. "Boston gets more 
snow than Charlotte, North Carolina" is true only 99 years out of 100, but not 
always. 
Examples: 
(1) "The Vatican allowed a convent of nuns in Italy who knew they were 
about to be raped by Nazi soldiers to take birth control pills to protect them from 
getting pregnant. Therefore the Church doesn't really think contraception is 
wrong." 
(2) "There arc a lot of idiots who can't pass a logic course. Therefore man 
is not rational." 
(3) "Why don't you get under the covers and go to sleep? What are you 
doing?" "I'm making lizard check." "Do you do that often?" "I've done it every 
night for forty years." "Why?" "When I was a kid in Boy Scout camp, somebody 
put a lizard in my bed, and it bit me. I want to catch the next lizard before that 
happens again." 
(4) "If women ran the world, we'd have fewer wars." "Oh yeah? Lizzie 
Borden was a multiple axe murderer. That goes to show you how aggressive 
women are." 
3C, Composition 
This fallacy consists in arguing from the part to the whole, ignoring the fact that 
what is true of the part is not necessarily true of the whole. 

88 
111. MATERIAL FALLACIES 
It can be done with either groups or single things. "This member of the 
Professor's logic class is smart, therefore that must be a smart class" docs it for 
a group. "That chapter was fascinating. The whole book must be fascinating 
too" does it for a thing. 
Examples: 
(1) Mark Twain said to his minister, "I enjoyed your service this morning. I 
welcomed it like an old friend. I have, you know, a book at home containing 
every word of it." 
"You have not," the minister protested. 
"I have so." 
"Well, you send that book to me. I'd like to see it." 
"I'll send it" promised Twain. The next day, he sent the minister an 
unabridged dictionary. 
(2) Texas has more millionaires than any other state, therefore Texas is the 
richest state. 
(3) Every one of the actors in this movie is great, so it must be a great movie. 
(4) "An arrow that appears to be in flight must really be at rest, for when a 
thing occupies a space equal to itself, it is at rest. Since the arrow never occu-
pies a space greater or smaller than itself, it is always at rest. Since the arrow is 
at rest at each moment of flight, it can never move." (Zeno the Eleatic) (Math 
majors should explain how the infinitesimal calculus answers Zeno's puzzle.) 
(5) "There's a bug on this blade of grass." "My goodness, you certainly have 
a buggy lawn." 
3D, Division 
This is the reverse of Composition; it consists in arguing from whole to part, 
ignoring the fact that what is true of the whole is not always true of the part. 
It too can be done either with single things ("That book is fascinating, there-
fore each chapter must be") or with groups ("That class is smart, and he's a 
member of it, therefore he must be smart"). 
Examples: 
(1) If ten glasses of wine per meal is harmful to health, then one glass of 
wine per meal must also be harmful to health, for it cannot be that many good 
things make one bad thing. 
(2) Irishmen are scattered all over the world. Pat is an Irishman. Therefore 
Pat is scattered all over the world. 
(3) "A frugal shepherd will buy only black sheep, not white sheep" "I did 
not know that. Why is that so?" "Because white sheep eat more than black 
sheep." "I did not know that either. Why is that so?" "Why, it's obvious. White 
sheep eat more than black sheep because there are more white sheep than black 
sheep " 

Fallacies of oversimplification 
89 
(4) "Muslims are moving into France. He is a Muslim. Therefore he must 
be moving into France." 
(5) We ought to use missionaries as foreign relations experts, because any-
one who has gone to every nation on earth would make a good foreign relations 
expert, and missionaries have gone to every nation on earth. 
(6) The average American male now has a life expectancy of 75 years. We're 
all average American males, so we will all live for 75 years. 
(7) Asians score higher than Americans in math. She is Asian and I am 
American. Therefore she must score higher than I do in math. 
(8) He'll make a great president: he comes from a good family. 
(9) All the works of Shakespeare cannot be read in a single day. "Macbeth" 
is one of the works of Shakespeare. Therefore "Macbeth" cannot be read in a 
single day. 
(10) The people of Ethiopia are suffering from famine, and Clement is one 
of the people of Ethiopia, therefore Clement must be suffering from famine. 
(11) "All these fish weigh four hundred pounds." "You must have caught 
nothing but sharks." 
3E, The Black and White Fallacy 
This is similar to dicto simpliciter but the fallacy here consists in not allowing 
for gradations or means between extremes; dicto simpliciter consisted in not 
allowing for exceptions to a simple rule. There are blacks and whites, but there 
are also grays. Not everything is an "either-or."The fallacy here consists in argu-
ing "it is not this one extreme, therefore it must be the opposite extreme." 
Examples: 
(1) "Do you hate me?" "No." "How wonderful! You love me!" 
(2) "If the arrow moves, it must move either where it is or where it isn't. But 
it cannot move where it is; it simply is where it is. Nor can it move where it isn't, 
because it cannot move where it does not exist. Therefore it cannot move." (Zeno 
the Eleatic) 
(3) "Why did you beat me up?" "Hey, shut your mouth. You're lucky we did-
n't kill ya." 
(4) "No man is perfect, therefore all men are wicked." 
(5) "Few men are wicked, therefore most men are innocent." 
(6) God was seeking a man to be His mouthpiece, or prophet, to mankind. 
He first interviewed a philosopher, and asked, "I need a man who knows him-
self, to be my prophet. So tell me, what are you? What is man?" The philosopher 
replied, "Man is sweetness and light. Man is truth, goodness, and beauty. Man is 
a fragment of the divine mirror." God interrupted, "Don't call me, I'll call you," 
and went off to interview a barbarian warrior. He asked the same question, and 
the barbarian said, "Man is an animal. Man is a wolf, a shark, a bear. Man is a 

90 
III. MATERIAL FALLACIES 
set of teeth ready to chew and destroy." "Thanks," interrupted God, "Don't call 
me, I'll call you." Then he interviewed Abraham, and asked the same question, 
and Abraham replied, "Oh, God, don't ask me. I don't know what man is. I look 
into myself and sometimes I see light and sometimes darkness, sometimes an 
angel and sometimes an animal. In fact I seem to be a whole zoo of animals, 
some tame and some wild." "You shall be my prophet," said God. (God docs not 
commit the black or white fallacy.) 
3F, Quoting Out of Context 
The meaning of this fallacy is quite clear from its name. It comes in two main 
forms: the context that is ignored can be either literary or real. In the literary 
form, it is simply the text before and after the quoted part that is the context 
ignored. In the other form, it is the real, lived situation surrounding the spoken 
words. What is ignored are relevant facts such as who the speaker was address-
ing, the relationship between the two, what issue they were discussing, and what 
else was said. 
"Fundamentalists" are famous for quoting scripture out of context. The 
term "Fundamentalism" in its proper sense is theological, not logical; it arose in 
early 20th-century Protestant theology as a reaction to "Liberalism" or 
"Modernism," which denied the supernatural and the miraculous; and 
"Fundamentalism" as first coined and defined by the scholarly Princeton the-
ologian Benjamin Warfield meant simply belief in five fundamental miracles of 
traditional Christianity such as Christ's bodily Resurrection. But the popular 
meaning of the term nowadays has broadened to mean any simple-minded liter-
alism, especially in interpreting the Bible, including insensitivity to symbolic 
language and quoting "proof texts" out of the textual context that would have 
significantly changed their meaning. If this were done consistently, it would pro-
duce absurdities such as the idea that the Bible teaches, in Ecclesiastes, that "all 
is vanity" (Eccl. 1:3; 12:7) and even that we should hang ourselves, for it says 
both that "Judas went and hanged himself" (Matthew 27:5) and "Go and do thou 
likewise." (Luke 10:37). 
Theological arguments about "justification" which oppose Paul's teaching 
that "we are justified by faith" (Romans 3:28) to James's statement that "by 
works a man is justified and not by faith alone" (James 2:24) ignore the context 
of the two different problems the two writers were addressing: Paul was attack-
ing legalism and James was attacking antinomianism. 
Mystics, like lovers and poets, often "stretch" language in trying to describe 
the nearly-indescribable; and their language should not be interpreted without 
sensitivity to this context. For instance, when a mystic says, "I looked into 
myself and saw nothing but God," he is not claiming that he is literally God, any 
more than when a lover poetically addresses his beloved as "my whole life," he 
means it literally and biologically. 

Fallacies of oversimplification 
91 
Some of the most egregious examples of quoting out of context consist sim-
ply in dropping the quotation marks or a phrase like "he said," thus making it 
seem as if the writer approves a quotation he really disapproves. For instance, 
Thomas Aquinas begins each "article" of the Summa Theologica by summariz-
ing objections to the thesis he will defend; and students (and sometimes even 
scholars) sometimes quote these objections as if they were Aquinas's own posi-
tion. 
Some other examples of the fallacy of quoting out of context: 
(1) "Kennedy said, 'Ask not what your country can do for you; ask what you 
can do for your country/ Therefore he must have been against federal public 
health care." 
(2) "I am the Great Truth-Teller. No one can make me tell a lie." "I can. 
Watch me. Tell me, is it bad to lie?" "Yes." "So I should avoid it?" "Yes." "In 
order to avoid it, I must know what it is, right?" "Of course." "But I am confused 
about what it is to tell a lie. Please teach me." "How?" "I learn best by examples. 
So give me an example." "All right. I am a Martian." "Aha! The Great Truth-
Teller has told a lie." 
(3) "Milton wrote, 'Better to reign in Hell than serve in Heaven.' So he must 
have agreed with the Devil." 
(4) "The manager is a thief. He told his baserunner to steal whenever he 
could." 
(5) "Shakespeare was a nihilist. He wrote, 'Life's but a walking shadow, a 
poor player that struts and frets his hour upon the stage and then is heard no 
more. It is a tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, signifying nothing.'" 
3G, Stereoty ping 
Like the fallacy dicto simpliciter, stereotyping makes no room for the exception. 
Stereotypes are not the same as archetypes. Stereotypes are artificial, 
socially fabricated, and changeable. Archetypes are givens in the "collective 
unconscious." "Women are weak and inferior" is a stereotype; '"the sea is a 
woman" is an archetype. "The Jewish mother" is a stereotype; "Mother Earth" 
is an archetype. G.I. Joe is a stereotype; Ares, or Mars, the god of war, is an 
archetype. 
Not all generalizations are stereotypes. In fact, one of the most misused 
stereotypes in modern discourse is that of the stereotype, for it is fashionable to 
call every generalization a stereotype. 
Here are some real examples of stereotypes: 
"You're tall; you must play basketball." 
"You're Black; you must dance well." 
"You're a man; you must throw your socks on the floor." 
"You're a woman; you must get bad PMS." 
"You're an American; you must be rich." 

92 
111. MATERIAL FALLACIES 
"You're fat; you must be happy." 
"You're a cannibal; you must be primitive." (The movie "The Silence of the 
Lambs" shredded that stereotype.) 
Section 4. Fallacies of argumentation 
We now turn to seven fallacies in the course of arguing that could be called fal-
lacies of logical strategy. They are analogous to bad military strategies. They too 
are material fallacies rather than formal fallacies, but they are close to formal 
fallacies, and it may be difficult to distinguish them from formal fallacies at this 
point in the course since we have not yet studied formal fallacies. We could dis-
tinguish the two kinds of fallacies this way: a computer could infallibly detect 
formal fallacies but not material fallacies. Formal fallacies arc fallacies in logi-
cal form, e.g. in the relationship or the placement of the terms, rather than the 
meaning or use of the terms and propositions. 
4A, Nort sequitur 
This is the master fallacy of this group of seven and by far the commonest one. 
In fact, it is so common that I once had a rubber stamp made up to save time in 
commenting on student papers and tests; the stamp said, "This is a non sequitur. 
(Look it up.)" (I also had two other rubber stamps that I got a lot of use out of. 
One said, "Please answer the question asked rather than another of your own 
devising," and one said simply "grammatically unintelligible." I found these 
were three of the commonest problems in essay tests and papers.) 
"Non sequitur" means "it does not follow." The conclusion simply does not 
logically follow from the premises or reasons or evidence given. Of course, 
every invalid argument is a non sequitur, since that is what "an invalid argu-
ment" means: an argument in which the conclusion does not logically, necessar-
ily, follow from the premises; an argument in which it is possible that the prem-
ises be true yet the conclusion false. But this specific fallacy of non sequitur is 
a material fallacy, not a formal one. It depends on the content of the proposi-
tions, not the logical form. E.g.: 
The sky is blue. 
The sea is blue. 
Therefore the sky is the sea. 
is a formal fallacy. But 
Grass is green. 
I feel depressed today. 
Therefore the grass is to blame for my depression. 
is a non sequitur. 

Fallacies of argumentation 
93 
All courthouses are buildings. 
Therefore all buildings are courthouses. 
is a formal fallacy. But 
I hate courthouses. 
Therefore you will lose your case in court today. 
is a /ion sequitur. 
C.S. Lewis illustrates non sequitur, in satirizing the supposedly scientific 
atheism of the "Enlightenment" (the "Landlord" in the following conversation 
symbolizes God): 
"But how do you know there is no Landlord?" 
"Christopher Columbus, Galileo, the earth is round, invention of printing, 
gunpowder!" exclaimed Mr. Enlightenment in such a loud voice that the pony 
shied. 
"I beg your pardon," said John. 
"Eh?" said Mr. Enlightenment. 
"I don't quite understand," said John. 
"Why, it's as plain as a pikestaff," said the other. "Your people in Puritania 
believe in the Landlord because they have not had the benefits of a scientific 
training. For example, now, I dare say it would be news to you to hear that the 
earth was round - round as an orange, my lad!" 
"Well, I don't know that it would," said John, feeling a little disappointed. 
"My father always said it was round." 
"No, no, my dear boy," said Mr. Enlightenment, 'You must have misunder-
stood him. It is well known that everyone in Puritania thinks the earth flat. It is 
not likely that I should be mistaken on such a point. Indeed, it is out of the ques-
tion. Then again, there is the palcontological evidence." 
"What's that?" 
"Why, they tell you in Puritania that the Landlord made all these roads. But 
that is quite impossible, for old people can remember the time when the roads 
were not nearly so good as they are now, and what is more, scientists have found 
all over the country traces of old roads running in quite different directions. The 
inference is obvious." 
John said nothing. 
"I said," repeated Mr. Enlightenment, "that the inference was obvious." 
"Oh, yes, yes, of course," said John hastily, turning a little red. (Pilgrims 
Regress) 

94 
111. MATERIAL FALLACIES 
4B, Ignoratio elenchi 
This fallacy is usually called the fallacy of "irrelevant conclusion" or the falla-
cy of "false refutation." It means literally "ignorance of the chain" - that is, the 
chain of reasoning. It consists in giving reasons that prove a different conclusion 
than the one the argument purports to prove. The premises, like a misdirected 
arrow, hit another target than the one aimed at. You could thus also call this the 
fallacy of "missing the point." It could be called a form of non sequitur. 
For example, it may be argued that socialized medicine is necessary because 
many poor people die due to lack of adequate basic medical care. The premise 
is true, and certainly proves something in the area of social needs, but it does not 
prove that socialized medicine is necessary or even useful to attain this end. 
Neville Chamberlain argued for England's appeasement of Hitler on the grounds 
that peace was preferable to war. The premise is true, but did not support his 
conclusion; in fact, his appeasement encouraged Hitler to go to war. 
4C, Begging the Question 
"Begging the question" means assuming what you set out to prove, smuggling 
the conclusion back into the premises, usually under different words. This is a 
very common fallacy, and even great philosophers occasionally commit it. For 
instance, Descartes's famous "cogito ergo sum" ("I think, therefore I am") is 
really an example of begging the question. For what he wants to prove is that he 
exists, that there is an "I"; but he assumes that there exists this "I" behind the 
thinking and puts it into his premise. This is not clear in Latin, where the "I" is 
not separate from the verb; but it is clear in English, or in French Cje pense, 
done je suis"), and Dcscartes quickly amended his argument, changing it from a 
syllogism to a single supposedly self-evident proposition ("I think," or "I am"). 
Some other examples: 
(1) Moliere's doctor, asked "Why does opium make one sleepy," answered, 
"Because it possesses dormativc [sleep-inducing] virtue [power]." 
(2) "The accused will be given a fair trial before he is hanged." 
(3) "Since everything that God wills is just for the very reason that He wills 
it, the terrible fate of the non-elect docs not violate the principle of justice." 
(John Calvin) 
(4) Mr. & Mrs. Strange were very proud of their son, for he was extremely 
intelligent, but he had one very strange belief: he believed he was dead. No kind 
of argument would convincc him that he was not. Finally, after unsuccessfully 
visiting many psychiatrists, they found one who guaranteed to cure him, but it 
would cost $200,000 and four years. Having tried everything else in vain, they 
agreed. The psychiatrist demanded that the boy go through four years of med-
ical school. After he graduated, he came to the psychiatrist's office for one last 
session. The psychiatrist asked, "Now that you have graduated from medical 

Fallacies of argumentation 
95 
school with straight A*s, and learned everything that anyone else learned there, 
tell me this: Do dead men bleed?" "No," he answered. "Are you sure?" "Yes." 
"Good. Now watch - " and he took a pin and pricked the boy's hand. "What do 
you see?" "I'm bleeding" said the boy. "Yes. So what is your logical conclu-
sion?" "Doctor, you are a genius! You have taught me that I was wrong all my 
life! Dead men do bleed after all." 
(5) "Good sense is, of all things among men, the most equally distributed; 
for everyone thinks himself so abundantly provided with it that even those who 
are the most difficult to satisfy in everything else do not usually desire a larger 
measure of this quality than they already possess. Since it is unlikely that all men 
should err in such a matter, we may take it as assured . . 
(Rene Descartes, 
Discourse on Method) 
(6) "You can't help believing in free will; you're predestined to think that 
way." 
4D, Complex Question 
This fallacy consists of asking a question which cannot be answered without 
"begging" another question. You're "damned if you do and damned if you don't." 
The classic example is: "Have you stopped beating your wife?" Whether you 
answer Yes or No, you implicitly admit that you have beaten your wife. 
A question often has a hidden assumption. E.g. "Who made God?" assumes 
that God has been made (an assumption only a pagan believes): and the question 
"what happened before time began?" assumes that there was time before time 
(which is logically self-contradictory). 
Usually, a complex question has a personal agenda, e.g.: 
(1) "Do you think we should keep having these useless meetings or not?" 
(2) "How could it be a good idea to reject my good idea? That's self-con-
tradictory." 
(3) "Are you more hopelessly stupid today than yesterday, or not?" 
4E, Arguing in a Circle 
This fallacy consists in using a conclusion to justify a premise after having used 
that premise to justify that conclusion. Thus it is really another version of beg-
ging the question, assuming what you arc supposed to prove (namely, the con-
clusion) - but this time not just assuming it but also using it as a premise to 
prove your other proposition. 
Examples: 
(1) "All the precepts of the Qur'an are true." 
"Why?" 
"Because they are the word of Allah." 

96 
III. MATERIAL FALLACIES 
"How do you know they are the word of Allah?" 
"Because the Prophet Muhammad says so." 
"How do you know Muhammad tells the truth?" 
"Because he is Allah's prophet, and Allah's prophet cannot lie." 
"How do you know Muhammad is Allah's prophet?" 
"The Qur'an says so." 
(2) "Why are you studying so hard?" 
"To pass this test." 
"Why do you want to pass this test?" 
"To pass the course." 
"Why do you want to pass the course?" 
"To graduate with a high grade point average." 
"Why do you want to graduate with a high grade point average?" 
"To get a good job." 
"Why do you want a good job?" 
"To make money." 
"Why do you want to make money?" 
"To raise a family and have kids." 
"Why do you want to raise a family and have kids?" 
"So that they can go to college and be successful." 
"What will make them successful in college?" 
"Studying hard for their tests." 
(3) "There is a story of a sane person being by mistake shut up in the wards 
of a lunatic asylum, and when he pleaded his cause to some strangers visiting 
the establishment, the only remark he elicited in answer was, 'How naturally he 
talks! You would think he was in his senses.'" (John Henry Newman, Apologia 
pro vita sua, ch. 1) 
(4) "The world must be well-ordered." 
"Why?" 
"Because it is the work of divine wisdom." 
"How do you know it is the work of divine wisdom?" 
"How can you doubt divine wisdom? Look how well His world is 
ordered." 
(5) Descartes proved the existence of God from the clear and distinct idea 
of God that he found in his mind; for that idea was the idea of a being contain-
ing all conceivable perfections; and real, objective existence is one conceivable 
perfection. He then argued that he could trust all his clear and distinct ideas 
because God is no deceiver, and the Creator of the mind would not allow us to 
be deceived if we used our mind properly. 
(6) "Somehow or other an extraordinary idea has arisen that the disbeliev-
ers in miracles consider them coldly and fairly, while believers in miracles 
accept them only in connection with some dogma. The fact is quite the other 

Fallacies of argumentation 
97 
way. The believers in miracles accept them (rightly or wrongly) because they 
have evidence for them. The disbelievers in miracles deny them (rightly or 
wrongly) because they have a doctrine against them. The open, obvious, demo-
cratic thing is to believe an old apple-woman when she bears testimony to a mir-
acle, just as you believe an old apple-woman when she bears testimony to a mur-
der. The plain, popular course is to trust the peasant's word about the ghost 
exactly as far as you trust the peasant's word about the landlord. . . . If I say, 4a 
peasant saw a ghost,' I am told, 4But peasants are so credulous.' If I ask,4 Why 
credulous?' the only answer is - that they see ghosts." (G.K. Chesterton) 
4F, Contradictor}' Premises 
The meaning of this fallacy is so obvious that nothing needs to be added to its 
name. It is, of course, usually camouflaged rather than clearly evident, as in the 
following examples, most of which are variations on the basic self-contradiction 
of using reason to attack reason. It is a surprisingly common fallacy among 
philosophers. 
(1) "Our reason is capable of nothing but the creation of a universal con-
fusion and universal doubt: it has no sooner built up a system than it shows you 
the means of knocking it down. It is a veritable Penelope, who unpicks during 
the night the tapestry that she has woven during the day. Accordingly, the best 
use that one can make of philosophical studies is to recognize that it is a way that 
leads astray." (Pierre Bayle) 
(2) 44My propositions are elucidatory in this way: he who understands me 
finally recognizes them as senseless, when he has climbed out through them. 
(He must so to speak throw away the ladder after he has climbed up on it.) He 
must surmount these propositions; then he sees the world rightly. Whereof one 
cannot speak, thereof one must be silent." (Ludwig Wittgenstein, Tractatus) 
(3) "The only thing we have to fear is fear itself." (Franklin Roosevelt, First 
Inaugural Address) 
(4) "The only thing to feel guilty about is feeling guilty." 
(5) i4I will not tolerate intolerance!" 
(6) "You can't be dogmatic!" 
(7) "There are absolutely no absolutes." 
(8) "It is a universal truth that there are no universal truths." 
(9) "We can know nothing." 
(10) "All truths are culturally relative, despite the fact that no other culture 
outside our own believes that." 
(1 l)44Words like 'should' and 'ought' are not permitted in these conversa-
tions." 
(12) "Truth is subjective." 
(13) "Truth changes." 

98 
III. MATERIAL FALLACIES 
(14)"There are only two kinds of people in the world: those who say there 
are only two kinds of people in the world and those who don't. And I'm in the 
second class." (Robert Benchley) 
(15)"The trouble with people like you is that you're always stereotyping 
people like us." 
(16)"One thing only do I know for certain and that is that man's judgments 
of value follow directly his wishes for happiness - that, accordingly, they are an 
attempt to support his illusions with arguments." (Sigmund Freud, Civilization 
and Its Discontents) 
(17)"Why have you come to me, O seeker?" 
"To hear your wisdom, O Enlightened One." 
"What wisdom?" 
"The wisdom of life. Tell me, what is life? What is the meaning of 
life?" 
"Life is suffering. To live is to suffer." 
"This is true wisdom, O Enlightened One. But can you also teach me 
how to escape suffering?" 
"I can. If you desire to escape suffering, you must know its cause and 
cure." 
"I await your wisdom, O Enlightened One. What is the cause of suffer-
ing?" 
"The cause of suffering is desire." 
"And what is its cure?" 
"Its cure is the extinguishing of desire. For to take away the cause is to 
take away the effect." 
"This is truly wisdom, O Enlightened One. And how can I attain this 
extinguishing?" 
"Only by the Noble Eightfold Path." 
"And is this path an easy one?" 
"No, it is a very demanding one." 
"And what will bring me success on this path, O Enlightened One?" 
"What do you think?" 
"I know not. Is it family connections, or fame, or money, or intelli-
gence?" 
"None of these will bring you success, O seeker." 
"What will bring me success, then?" 
"Only perseverance will bring you success on this path." 
"But what is perseverance? Is it not great desire?" 
(18) "Even if a fetus is a person, I still believe in abortion because I believe 
in every person's right to control her own body." (Do you see the self-contradic-
tion there? If not, why not?) 
(19)"It is useless to argue at all if all our conclusions are warped by our 
conditions. Nobody can correct anybody's bias if all mind is all bias. . . . The 

Fallacies of argumentation 
99 
man who represents all thought as an accident of environment is simply smash-
ing and discrediting all his own thoughts - including that one.... When people 
begin to say that the material circumstances have alone created the moral cir-
cumstances, then they have prevented all possibility of serious change; for if my 
circumstances have made me wholly stupid, how can I be certain even that 1 am 
right in altering those circumstances?" (G.IC Chesterton) 
(20) "A Socialist Government is one which in its nature does not tolerate 
any real opposition. For there the Government provides everything; and it is 
absurd to ask a Government to provide an opposition." (G.fcL Chesterton) 
(21) "The worship of will is the negation of will. To admire mere choice is 
to refuse to choose. If Mr. Bernard Shaw comes up to me and says,4 Will some-
thing,' that is tantamount to saying, 4I do not mind what you will,' and that is tan-
tamount to saying, 4I have no will in the matter'. . . . He rebels against the law 
and tells us to will something or anything. But we have willed something. We 
have willed the law against which he rebels." (G.K. Chesterton) 
(22) 'They have invented a phrase, a phrase that is a black and white con-
tradiction in two words - 'free love' - as if a lover ever had been, or ever could 
be, free. It is the nature of love to bind itself, and the institution of marriage 
merely paid the average man the compliment of taking him at his word." (G.K. 
Chesterton) 
4G, False Assumption 
This fallacy is similar to "begging the question," but the false assumption is 
more covert. It is the basis for many jokes. E.g.: 
(1) Two old men, Seth and Jed, lived next to each other in the Maine woods 
for fifty years without ever speaking to each other. Seth had often thought of 
breaking the ice, but he had always been afraid to go on Jed's property because 
of an enormous, fierce-looking dog that was always on Jed's porch. One day he 
called out, "Jed, kin I come into yer yard?" "Yep." "But Jed, if I come into yer 
yard, won't yer dog bite me?" "Nope." So Seth ventured into Jed's yard - and 
was promptly torn in pieces by the dog. "You said yer dog wouldn't bite me!" 
"That ain't my dog." 
(2) A monk found another smoking while saying the Rosary. "Did the abbot 
give you permission to do that?" he asked. "Yes," replied the second monk. The 
first monk was upset. "Then why did the abbot say no to me when I asked him 
the same question?" "What did you ask him?" said the first monk. "I asked him 
if it was all right to smoke while I prayed." "Oh," said the second monk, "That 
explains it. I asked him if it was all right to pray while I smoked." (What is the 
hidden assumption of each question?) 
(3) ''Life is not a problem, so why are you asking for a solution?" (Alan 
Watts) 
(4) "I can turn my bedroom light off and leap into bed before the room is 

100 
III. MATERIAL FALLACIES 
dark; yet my light switch is 20 feet away from my bed." "How do you do that?" 
"I wait till it's daytime." 
(5) "When you sold me this parrot you told me it could repeat every word 
it heard." "That's right." "Well, I've been talking to it all day and it hasn't said a 
word yet. That's false advertising." "No it isn't. The parrot's deaf." 
(6) The starship Enterprise has a crew of 300 humans, one non-human 
Klingon, and one half-human, half-Vulcan, Mr. Spock. If we call the Klingon 
human, how many humans do we have on the Enterprise? Answer: 300. Calling 
a Klingon human doesn't make it human. 
Section 5. Inductive fallacies 
(If you are not clear about the differences between deductive and inductive rea-
soning, first review this point on page 26.) 
5A, Hasty Generalization 
This is the commonest and simplest fallacy of induction, and it occurs in the 
commonest and simplest form of induction, the inference from some specific 
examples to a general principle. Mere examples never conclusively prove a gen-
eral principle, of course; they only render it more probable as the examples are 
more numerous, more diverse, and more representative. So whether or not an 
inductive generalization is "hasty," and thus fallacious, is a matter of degree and 
a common-sense "judgment call." 
Some examples of hasty generalization: 
(1) "We went to three ball games this year and the home team lost each one. 
They're losers." 
(2) "We went to three ball games this year and the home team lost each one. 
We're their jinx." (Here we have not a hasty generalization but a hasty causal 
induction.) 
(3) "All the swans we've ever seen were white, so all swans must be white." 
("All swans are white" was a classic logic textbook example of a universal 
proposition - until a species of black swan was discovered.) 
(4) "Modern philosophers are all atheists. Look at Machiavelli and Hobbes 
and Hume and Mill and Russell and Marx and Nietzsche and Sartre." 
5B, Post Hoc 
The full name for this fallacy is "post hoc ergo propter 
which means "after 
this, therefore caused by this." It is a fallacy of causal induction (that form of 
induction which consists in reasoning to a cause), and it consists in inferring that 
one thing is the cause of another simply because the first thing is observed to 

Inductive fallacies 
101 
occur before the second thing. The fact that A is observed to occur before B may 
be a clue, and it is reasonable to follow this clue further to determine whether A 
is the cause of B; but the mere temporal proximity is not a sufficient reason by 
itself for concluding that A is the cause of B. It may be, or it may not. It may be 
a mere coincidence, or it may be that A and B are both caused by a third thing, 
C, or it may be that B causes A. 
Examples of post hoc: 
(1) The rooster thinks his crowing brings up the sun each morning because 
each morning the sun rises shortly after he crows. 
(2) "I ain't niver had a axydent cuz I alius cairy mah lucky rabbit's foot" 
(3) "My doctor asked me whether I drank two hot scotches every night, and 
I answered him that I did, but only as a preventative of toothaches. I have never 
had a toothache." (Mark Twain) 
(4) "Why are you putting all those little pieces of lemon around your yard?" 
"To keep the alligators away" "But there are no alligators within a thousand 
miles of here." "See? It works." 
(5) "And the sailors said to one another, 4Come, let us cast lots, that we may 
know on whose account this evil (storm) has come upon us.' So they cast lots, 
and the lot fell upon Jonah." (Jonah 1:7) 
5C, Hypothesis Contrary to Fact 
This could be called the "if only" fallacy, for it consists in arguing that if only x 
were true, which it isn't, then y would be true. E.g. "if only you had studied hard-
er, you would have passed this test." Perhaps so, but perhaps not. We cannot 
know what isn't, only what is. 
It is a fallacy of causal induction because it claims to know that non-x is the 
cause of y. Since x does not exist, x is called "contrary to fact"; and since x is 
used as a hypothesis ("//x ..."), it is a "hypothesis contrary to fact." 
Here is a rather extreme but memorable example of hypothesis contrary to 
fact: If the Italians had believed in clocks, their trains would have run on time. 
If their trains had run on time, they would not have thought Mussolini was a god 
for his miracle of making the trains run on time. If they had not thought 
Mussolini was a god, they would never have let him become dictator. If he had 
not been dictator, Hitler would not have had him as his ally. If Hitler had not had 
him as his ally, he would not have had to bail him out when he invaded Greece 
and Yugoslavia. If he had not had to do that, Hitler could have invaded Russia 
earlier. If he had invaded Russia earlier, he would have conquered Russia. If he 
had conquered Russia, he could have fought a one-front war instead of a two-
front war. If he had fought a one-front war, he could have invaded England. If 
he had invaded England, he would have conquered it. If he had conquered 
England, he would have ruled all Europe. If he had ruled all Europe, he would 

102 
III MATERIAL FALLACIES 
have ruled the world. If he had ruled the world, we would all have been brought 
up under Nazi propaganda and would have been Nazis. So the only reason we 
are not Nazis is because the Italians did not believe in clocks. 
5D, False Analogy 
Another form of induction is the argument from analogy. Analogies are extreme-
ly useful, even essential to human thinking. Analogies are comparisons between 
two things that are related or similar in some way; they are similes. Maps, for 
instance, are analogies to landscapes, and physical events (like a person entering 
a room) are analogies to nonphysical events (like an idea "entering" a mind). 
Arguments from analogy are classified as inductive arguments because they 
begin with concrete, observed particulars rather than general principles. 
Analogies are rightly used to suggest or stimulate the mind to move from one of 
two similar things to the other, just as similes do, and also metaphors, which are 
implicit similes, without the word "like." Analogies also arc rightly used to illus-
trate general principles (e.g. conceiving ideas is like conceiving babies). But 
analogies do not prove anything; and the fallacy of "false analogy" assumes that 
they do. The fallacy consists not in using an analogy, but either in (1) using a 
false analogy, one that is not a real resemblance, or in (2) using an analogy false-
ly, by assuming that when two things are similar in one way they will also be 
similar in another way. 
Examples of false analogy: 
(1) "The Stoical scheme of supplying our wants by lopping off our desires 
is like cutting off our feet when we want shoes." (Jonathan Swift) 
(2) "The only proof capable of being given that an object is visible is that 
somebody sees it . . . similarly, the only proof capable of being given that an 
object is desirable is that someone desires it." (John Stuart Mill, Utilitarianism) 
(The suffix "able" in "desirable" means "deserving of being desired," while the 
same suffix in "visible" means "capable of being seen." This fallacy could also 
be labeled as an amphiboly.) 
(3) "The only freedom which deserves the name is that of pursuing our own 
good in our own way, so long as we do not attempt to deprive others of theirs, or 
impede their efforts to obtain it. Each is the proper guardian of his own health, 
whether bodily or mental and spiritual." (John Stuart Mill, On Liberty) 
(4) "No body can be healthful without exercise, neither natural body nor 
politic; and, certainly, to a Kingdom or estate, a just and honourable war is the 
true exercise. A civil war, indeed, is like the heat of a fever; but a foreign war is 
like the heat of exercise, and serveth to keep the body in health; for in a slothful 
peace, both courage will effeminate and manners corrupt." (Francis Bacon) 
(5) "You can't turn back the clock." 
(6) Jesus once deliberately committed a fallacy of false analogy to test a 

Inductive fallacies 
103 
woman's faith, and he was pleased when she detected and refuted his fallacy by 
extending his analogy: 
"And Jesus went away from there and withdrew to the district 
of Tyre and Sidon. And behold, a Canaanite woman from that region 
came out and cried, 'Have mercy on me, O Lord, Son of David; my 
daughter is severely possessed by a demon.' But he did not answer 
her a word. And his disciples came and begged him, saying, 'Send 
her away, for she is crying after us.* He answered,41 was sent only to 
the lost sheep of the house of Israel.' But she came and knelt before 
him, saying, "Lord, help me.' And he answered, "It is not fair to take 
the children's bread and throw it to the dogs.' She said, 'Yes, Lord, 
yet even the dogs eat the crumbs that fall from their master's table.' 
Then Jesus answered her, "O woman, great is your faith! Be it done 
for you as you desire.' And her daughter was healed instantly." 
(Matthew 15:21-28) 
5E, The Argument from Silence 
When a speaker or writer is silent about x, we cannot conclude that he does not 
believe in x, or that there is no x. The fallacy called the '"argument from silence" 
does just that. E.g.: ""Notice that this author never once refers to her husband. 
And there is no evidence whatever of any reference to her husband in any doc-
uments of her time or later, by her friends or by her enemies. Therefore she must 
have been unmarried." 
Western legal systems recognize this fallacy in the principle that ""silence 
betokeneth nothing" (used by Thomas More in his trial: see A Man For All 
Seasons) and in the Fifth Amendment (the accused is allowed to refuse to answer 
a question, and this cannot be used as positive evidence against him). 
Historical textual scholars often commit this fallacy, arguing from a text's 
silence. From the fact that Descartes does not mention anything about the 
Masons or the Rosicrucians, some conclude that he could not have belonged to 
these societies, as some claim he did. Others argue that his silence is evidence 
that he did belong to them, since they are secret societies and silence is exactly 
what we would expect to find in their members! (This is arguing in a circle, a 
form of begging the question.) Both arguments, of course, are fallacious and 
prove nothing. 
5F, Selective Evidence 
This extremely common fallacy consists simply in referring only to the evidence 
that tends to support your hypothesis and ignoring the evidence that tends to 

104 
III. MATERIAL FALLACIES 
refute it. Pessimists will point to many ways in which life is getting worse: 
increased rates of suicide, divorce, depression, new diseases, teenage crime, 
domestic violence, etc.; while optimists will point to many ways life is getting 
better: increased wealth, medical discoveries, treatment of the handicapped, 
technological efficiency, communications, etc. The fallacy is so common and so 
simple that it is pointless to multiply examples. It is perhaps the most basic of 
all mistakes for a scientist: letting his hypothesis control his data rather than vice 
versa. 
5G, Slanting the Question 
This is a fallacy that occurs especially in polls. Pollsters can obtain almost any 
result they want if only they slant the question in a certain way. E.g. one pollster 
will ask: "Do you support the right of a woman to freely choose whether or not 
to carry her pregnancy to term?" Another will ask: "Do you support the right to 
life of all human beings at all stages of development from conception to natural 
death?" 
Individuals, of course, also frequently slant the question in conversation. 
E.g. "Don't you think people are entitled to basic health care?" vs. "Do you 
think we should be forced to pay for socialized mcdicine?" Or: "Does a good 
society give all children a free basic public education?" vs. "Should our children 
be propagandized in government schools?" 
Section 6. Procedural fallacies 
We now turn to fallacies of procedure, or logical protocol. They all violate basic 
logical justice. The arguments may be formally valid, but they are used, or treat-
ed, wrongly. These fallacies are just as common in argument as others, but less 
often recognized in logic textbooks. They do not have technical titles. 
6A, "Refuting" an Argument by Refuting Its Conclusion 
We do not refute an argument simply by refuting its conclusion. What refutes an 
argument is an analysis of the argument that finds in it a term used ambiguous-
ly or a false premise or a logical fallacy, thus showing how the argument went 
wrong and why it does not prove its conclusion. What refutes an argument's con-
clusion (which is a single proposition) is another argument proving the contra-
dictory of that conclusion. Arguers often assume that they have completed their 
job when they only refute a conclusion and do not refute the argument that sup-
posedly proves it. But they have not. For they have only put forth an apparently-
equal ly-good argument to prove the opposite conclusion; they have only 
engaged in offensive logical warfare and not defensive; they have left the origi-
nal argument still standing. The result of this is not to prove or convince, but to 

Procedural fallacies 
105 
paralyze the mind of a rational and objective listener, for the listener now finds 
himself suspended between two arguments, and two conclusions, that seem 
equally convincing. 
The 18th-century philosopher Immanuel Kant thought this was all that 
could ever be done with regard to metaphysical questions. He thought that "pure 
reason," i.e. the use of reason beyond sense experience, always resulted in logi-
cal standoffs or "antinomies" where equally good and equally irrefutable argu-
ments for two contradictory propositions could be found. He called these "antin-
omies of pure reason." For instance, that space and time are infinite and that they 
are finite; or that the human will is free rather than necessitated or determined, 
and that it is necessitated or determined rather than free. Kant thought this situ-
ation showed that we should be skeptical of the possibility of metaphysics. 
But this conclusion need not follow. First, even if metaphysical arguments 
did lead to antinomies, that would not prove the questions are somehow wrong: 
that is a non sequitur. Second, the antinomies might be psychological rather than 
logical, subjective rather than objective. Third, the antinomies can be answered; 
mistakes can be found in at least one of the arguments on each side in any 
"antinomy," usually an ambiguous term. Fourth, they must be answerable, in 
principle. For two contradictory conclusions cannot both be true, therefore they 
cannot both be proved by perfectly good arguments. 
But when you leave an argument "hanging" instead of showing its weak-
ness, and then go off and create another one, you neglect half your work. That is 
like sending good batters to the plate but no fielders to the field, hoping that you 
score more runs than your opponent even without any defense. That might pos-
sibly win a baseball game but not a logical debate, for you do not win a logical 
debate by simply scoring the most runs, so to speak, i.e. inventing the largest 
number of arguments. 
6B, Assuming that Refuting an Argument Refutes Its Conclusion 
This is the opposite error from the previous one. Fallacy 6A was "all offense and 
no defense"; fallacy 6B is "all defense and no offense." Fallacy 6A was offering 
a counter-argument without showing an error (ambiguous term, false premise, 
or logical fallacy) in your opponent s argument; fallacy 6 is showing the error in 
your opponent's argument and thinking that settles the matter, thinking that 
refutes your opponent s conclusion. It docs not. Just because someone offers a 
weak argument for a conclusion, that does not show that the conclusion is false. 
There are weak as well as strong arguments for atheism, e.g. and also for the-
ism. The weakness of a weak argument for atheism ("if God existed my puppy 
wouldn't have died") does not prove theism, and the weakness of a weak argu-
ment for theism ("God must exist because the universe is very big and power-
ful") does not prove atheism. There will always be some bad arguments for true 
conclusions. 

106 
III. MATERIAL FALLACIES 
6C, Ignoring the Argument (Arguing "Beside the Point") 
More radical, even, than giving only half a refutation (6A and 6B) is giving none 
at all, ignoring your opponent's argument altogether and, after politely waiting 
until he is finished, starting up as if he had not said anything at all. People often 
do this bccause they are poor listeners; they just wait their turn to speak, and 
then speak without responding to what was already said. 
E.g. a Protestant propagandist might "refute" the Catholic argument for 
papal infallibility by pointing to the corrupt Borgia popes. This not only con-
fuses moral infallibility (which is not claimed) with doctrinal infallibility (which 
is) but ignores the Catholic argument whose premises are tradition and the 
authority of the Church, and turns to another issue instead. Or a Catholic pro-
pagandist might "refute" the Protestant argument for Justification by Faith 
Alone by pointing out that belief in that doctrine would encourage him, person-
ally, to commit crimes since good or evil works do not contribute to one's justi-
fication, ignoring the Protestant argument from Biblical exegesis of Romans and 
Galatians. 
Here is a famous philosophical example of ignoring the argument: Samuel 
Johnson's "refutation" of Berkeley's argument against the existence of matter: 
"We stood talking for some time together of Bishop Berkeley's ingenious 
sophistry to prove the nonexistence of matter and that everything in the universe 
is merely idea. I observed that though we are satisfied his doctrine is not true, it 
is impossible to refute it. I shall never forget the alacrity with which Johnson 
answered, striking his foot with mighty force against a large stone, till he 
rebounded from it,41 refute him thus.'" {Bo swell's Life of Johnson) 
Ignoring the argument is obviously a weakness, but an unscrupulous sophist 
can sometimes turn this weakness into an apparent strength if he has enough 
chutzpah to do it with an arrogant, sneering rhetorical flourish. For instance, 
Karl Marx, in The Communist Manifesto, replies to the ten commonest charges 
against communism (such as "it abolishes families," "it abolishes nationality," 
"it abolishes effort") not by answering them but by simply claiming that capi-
talism is guilty of all these charges (which is the tu quoque fallacy), and then 
concludes, "As for the charges brought against communism from a religious, 
philosophical, and in general, an ideological viewpoint, docs it take much intel-
ligence to realize that they are not worthy of consideration?" 
It is an old preachers trick: "When your point is weak, holler like hell." 
6D, Substituting Explanations for Proofs 
When we give a proof, we claim to have slammed the door shut, so to speak: we 
claim to prove that our conclusion must be true and its contradictory cannot be 
true. When wc give an explanation, we claim only to have opened the door, so 
to speak: to open the mind to the likelihood that x is the explanation for y. Since 

Procedural fallacies 
107 
explanations claim less than proofs, they are less controversial, less threatening, 
less confrontational; so it is tempting to use them instead of proofs. This is not 
a fallacy, if we know what we are doing; but it is a fallacy when we confuse the 
two and think that our explanation amounts to a proof. 
E.g. Darwinian Natural Selection explains the fossil record, and does so 
more scientifically than any other hypothesis. However, Natural Selection is an 
explanation, not a proof. First of all, it is not put forward as a proof of the fossil 
record (for no one questions that record; it is not controversial; it is not a con-
clusion of an argument, but it is data). It is put forward as a hypothesis that 
explains the fossil rccord. Second, the Darwinian argument for Natural 
Selection, including the evidence of the fossil record, amounts to a probable 
argument, but not a "door-shutting" proof - at least so far. Copernicus's helio-
centric hypothesis too was only an explanation, not a proof, until subsequent 
observations refuted the alternative Ptolemaic geocentric hypothesis. 
Similarly, the Freudian explanation of religion as fear-induced father-fig-
ure-fantasy does not prove religion is an illusion, any more than the religious 
explanation of Freud's atheism as his own Oedipus complex proves that Freud 
was wrong about God. 
6E, Answering Another Argument than the One Given 
Students on tests often change the question given to them from one that they 
cannot answer to one that they can, and then answer it. Similarly, in the middle 
of an argument we often hear someone come up with a brilliant refutation - of 
an argument that was not given. He has slain the enemy, but the wrong enemy. 
Perhaps he hopes that the brilliance of his refutation will distract attention away 
from his sidestepping the original argument. 
An example: "Slavery is morally wrong. It violates a basic human right." 
"Oh, I know that argument. You think it's always wrong to have a slave, because 
it's always harmful, and makes for suffering and misery. But it doesn't. 
Sometimes some people are happier as slaves. Sometimes the relationship to a 
master is a good one. And sometimes slavery is the only alternative to death -
for captured soldiers in war, for instance, in many parts of the ancient world. 
Your argument ignores special cases like that." (But the original argument was 
not that slavery was wrong because it always made slaves unhappy, but because 
it violated a universal human right.) 
Another example: "Plato argued against democracy in this way: he said a 
just state is like a just soul, and a just soul is not a democracy but an aristocra-
cy, with reason ruling desires and necessary desires counting for more than 
unnecessary ones." "What a silly argument! 'Old Plato said it, so it must be 
true,' right? Hey, haven't you ever heard of the fallacy of the appeal to authori-
ty?" 

108 
III. MATERIAL FALLACIES 
6F, Shifting the Burden of Proof 
The "burden of proof" or "onus of proof" is a matter of protocol, or interper-
sonal rules in debate. The one who has this "burden of proof" has to prove his 
case; if he does not, he loses the debate. 
Who has the burden of proof? This varies with the situation. Sometimes it 
is the one who denies, sometimes the one who affirms. Sometimes it is the first 
to speak, sometimes the second. 
In science, an idea is "guilty until proved innocent," so to speak: a crucial 
principle of the scientific method is to accept no idea until you have adequate 
proof for it. (What counts as "adequate proof" also varies with the situation.) 
But in ordinary conversation, an idea is "innocent until proved guilty," so to 
speak: we believe what our friends say until we have good reason to disbelieve 
it. If a physicist says he has discovered how to make cheap cold fusion, or if a 
theologian says he has discovered the date of the end of the world, the burden of 
proof is on him, and our rightful reply is, "Prove it!" But if Aunt Harriet says the 
dirty little diner downtown serves the best apple pic you've ever tasted in your 
life, or if your brother says he saw a policc car crash into the front door of the 
city library, you don't say "Prove it." The burden of proof is on you if you doubt 
it. This is not a matter of logic but of personal protocol. 
It becomes a matter of logic when, in debate, the original strategy is implic-
itly changed. E.g. in court a prosecuting attorney may badger the defense to 
prove its case as if the accused were guilty until proved innocent rather than 
innocent until proved guilty; or a moralist crusading for prohibition may demand 
proof that alcohol contributes to the health of bodies or societies. In a debate 
about a controversial practice that used to be illegal or unavailable, such as 
cloning or surrogate motherhood, the one who attacks the new procedure often 
assumes that the burden of proof is on the "new kid on the block," on the new 
permissiveness, while the one who defends it often assumes that any practice, 
like a person, is innocent until proved guilty. Who has the burden of proof here 
is itself a matter of serious argument, but this should be agreed on before argu-
ment proceeds, and whoever assumes the burden of proof should not "cop out" 
on giving such a proof (i.e. proving his case) by simply accusing his opponent 
of not proving his case. 
6G, Winning the Argument but Losing the Arguer - or Vice Versa 
"Winning the argument but losing the arguer" means ignoring the personal, psy-
chological factor and ending up being distrusted and treated as an enemy or a 
threat by the person you wanted to persuade. Good logic is an instrument of per-
suasion; it is only one ingredient in a larger interpersonal situation; and those 
who love logic and arc good at it often forget this context. Intelligent people's 
minds arc not changed by bad logic, but they are not changed by bad personal 
tactics cither. 

Metaphysical fallacies 
109 
The more common mistake today is probably the opposite of this fallacy: 
using tactics of personal appeal such as friendliness to substitute for good rea-
sons, using the subjective element as a substitute for the objective element in 
dialogue. There is a brilliant example in "A Man for All Seasons," where the 
Duke of Norfolk is trying to persuade Thomas More to approve King Henry 
VIII's divorce, as the Duke and all his friends have, even in violation of 
Thomas's own conscience: "Couldn't you see your way clear to come with me, 
Thomas - for friendship's sake?" And Thomas replies, "And when you go to 
Heaven for obeying your conscience, and I go to Hell for disobeying mine, will 
you come with me - for friendship's sake?" 
Both the personal and the impersonal dimensions are necessary as two parts 
of all interpersonal argument, and neither one can make up for the lack of the 
other. 
Section 7. Metaphysical fallacies 
These are not included in most logic textbooks, but since this one is more philo-
sophical than most, and since these fallacies are quite common and quite 
destructive, and since metaphysics is at the root of all the other divisions of phi-
losophy, it is fitting to briefly expose beginners to a few of the most common of 
these fallacies so that they will be forewarned and forearmed if and when they 
meet them in more advanced studies. 
7A, Reductionism, or "Nothing Buttery" 
This is probably the most pervasive metaphysical fallacy of modern thought: 
love is nothing but lust, mind nothing but brain, philanthropy nothing but 
enlightened self-interest, man nothing but an ape, an ocean nothing but trillions 
of tons of hydrogen, oxygen, and sodium chloride, and thinking nothing but 
cerebral biochemical computing. Whenever we hear the phrase "nothing but" a 
bell of suspicion should ring. 
Its most usual form is the reduction of form to matter. This is common in 
our materialistic age. The above examples are only six out of thousands. In all 
these cases, the predicate is only the matter or raw material that the subject is 
made of, not its form or essence or nature. 
Some examples of reductionism: 
"Words are nothing but wind, and learning is nothing but words, therefore 
learning is nothing but wind." (Jonathan Swift, A Tale of a Tub) 
"What do you read, my lord?" "Words, words, words." ("Hamlet") 
"Why are you so surprised?" said the retired star to the children. "Because 
in our world a star is only a big ball of gas." "Even in your world, that is not 
what a star is, only what it is made of." (C.S. Lewis, The Voyage of the Dawn 
Treader) 

110 
111 MATERIAL FALLACIES 
7B, The Fallacy of Accident: 
Confusing the Accidental with the Essential 
An obvious example of this fallacy is racism, which takes an accident of the per-
son (his race) and treats it as essential, as if different races were different 
species. It is equally possible, and more fashionable today, to commit the falla-
cy in reverse: to take something essential and treat it as accidental. For instance, 
the hetcrosexuality of the family, the competitiveness of a game like soccer, or 
the objectivity and universality of moral law. Whether or not it is good for two 
homosexual (or heterosexual) adults of the same gender to raise children, a 
"family" without any father or without any mother docs not possess the whole 
essence of a family. Whether or not it is beneficial to children's self-esteem for 
adults to remove the concept of "winning," "losing," and "points scored" from 
soccer, if you do that then what you have left is not soccer. Whether the idea of 
real universally binding and unchanging moral obligations is an enlightened or 
an unenlightened idea, and whether it makes us happy or miserable, a "morali-
ty" without real universals, or absolutes, is simply not morality,; it is utility or 
psychological integration or something else. 
The field of Biblical interpretation shows how both forms of the Fallacy of 
Accident are equally possible. An example of absolutizing the relative would be 
insisting that no woman may ever appear in church without a hat because St. 
Paul told the Corinthian women to wear one. (In ancient Corinth, prostitutes 
advertised themselves by letting their hair hang loose in public.) An example of 
relativizing the absolute would be insisting that the divine commandment 
against adultery could not apply to those who felt "truly in love." 
Examples of the Fallacy of Accident: (NB: many of these are also non 
sequiturs.) 
1. "A great nose indicates a great man." (Cyrano de Bergcrac) 
2. "How can Van Gogh be a good painter? Look how immoral a life he led." 
3. "There is an incredible amount of empty spacc in the universe. The dis-
tance from the sun to the nearest star is about 4.2 light years, or 25 followed by 
12 noughts miles. . . . And as to mass: the sun weighs about 2 followed by 27 
noughts tons, the Milky Way weighs about 160,000 times as much as the sun 
[sic] and is one of a collection of galaxies of which, as I said before, about 30 
million are known [sic]. It is not very easy to retain a belief in one's own cosmic 
importance in view of such overwhelming statistics." (Bertrand Russell, 
Unpopular Essays, pp. 85-86) 
4. A refutation of Russell's fallacy above: "We have discovered our own 
insignificance in discovering how tiny the earth is and how utterly immense the 
universe is." "In that case, we have also discovered that an elephant is somewhat 
more significant than a man, and a tall man is slightly more significant than a 
short man." (This is an example of refutation by reductio ad absurdum: 
see 
p. 294.) 
5. "This medicine must be good for me; it tastes awful." 

Metaphysical fallacies 
111 
7C, Confusing Quantity' with Quality 
This confusion can also work both ways. Quality may be quantified by the claim 
that I.Q. tests (or multiple choice exams in a philosophy course!) measure wis-
dom, or that statistics can measure exactly how much better Pepsi tastes to peo-
ple than Coke, or that all of a painting can be expressed in a digital mathemati-
cal formula without omitting anything. (This last example comes from the para-
ble of French philosopher Henri Bergson (1859-1940) about mathematical 
bees.) The qualification of quantity occurs when it is claimed that numbers have 
personalities, colors, sounds, moral values, or inherent but inexpressible mysti-
cal significance. The quantification of quality is much more fashionable today; 
the qualification of quantity was more fashionable in ancient times. Each era, 
like each person, tends to overemphasize what they are good at. 
7D, "The Fallacy of Misplaced Concreteness": 
Confusing the Abstract with the Concrete 
The concepts in metaphysics are very abstract. These abstractions (such as 
"being," "causality," and "essence") are usually expressed by nouns. Nouns also 
express concrete individual things. It is easy to confuse these two kinds of 
nouns, and treat an abstraction as if it is a concrete reality. This is "the fallacy of 
misplaced concreteness." (Whitehead coined the phrase.) 
** Two famous examples of this fallacy1 are Plato's Theory of Forms and 
Humanism's worship of "humanity." Plato believed that abstract essences or 
Forms like beauty, justice, horseness, redness, goodness, and the like were a 
whole other realm or "world" of real things (this is the "Extreme Realism" 
defined on page 42) rather than aspects of things abstracted from those things 
by the mind. He noted that red things change, while redness does not; that beau-
tiful things arc mixed with ugliness, while beauty is not; that just actions are rel-
ative, but justice is absolute; and he taught that true wisdom was the knowledge 
of this higher world of unchangeable, perfect, absolute realities. 
It is reasonable to hold that these Forms exist, indeed, as ideas in the mind 
of God; but not in themselves, as independent entities or substances. It is also 
superfluous, as Aristotle pointed out, to suppose that whenever there exist two 
of any kind of thing (e.g. two men) there exists also a third thing, viz. the com-
mon essence. There is indeed a common essence, but that essence is not a "third 
man." If it were, there would have to be a fourth "man" common to the "third 
man" and the other two men, et cetera et cetera ad infinitum. 
"The love of Humanity" can also be a fallacy of misplaced concreteness if 
the abstraction "humanity" substitutes for concrete individuals as objects of 
love. This is what Dickens calls "telescopic philanthropy" (in Bleak House), 
1 
Though both are controversial, and some would defend these two examples as not falla-
cious at all. 

112 
III. MATERIAL FALLACIES 
substituting concern for faraway groups like "the poof' and abstractions like 
"justice in the Near East" for concrete human beings and problems in our own 
families and lives. As Linus says in a "Peanuts" comic strip, "I have no problem 
with Humanity. It's people I can't stand." Or as G.K. Chesterton put it, 
O how I love Humanity 
With love so pure and pringlish, 
And how I hate the horrid French, 
Who never will be English! 
When we treat abstractions like "causality" and "substance" as concrete 
entities, we become subject to critiques like Hume's, in which he points out that 
no one ever observed "causality," or "substance," only particular things and 
events. Even the self is not an observable object that we can catch by a kind of 
inner observation. Hume erroneously deduced from this premise the conclusion 
that there was no such thing as causality or substance or even any substantial 
self This is itself a fallacy: a non sequitur. But his error was provoked by the 
fallacy of misplaced concrctcncss on the part of those who thought of causality 
as a kind of river of force, or substance as a kind of foundation for the building 
of accidents, or the self as a kind of ghost or "little man inside pulling strings." 
(Thus Hume's critique was also an example of the "straw man" fallacy.) 
7E, Confusing Logical, Physical, and Psychological Causes 
Sec p. 81, paragraph 1, for this fallacy. 
7F, Confusing Essence and Existence (The Existential Fallacy) 
One example of this fallacy is rather rare and esoteric: Sartre's claim that man's 
essence is simply to exist, that we arbitrarily construct our own essence. 
Another, broader example is the claim that a thing has no essence, that it simply 
exists as an unintelligible, absolutely indefinable something. A thing may be 
unintelligible to us, but nothing can be unintelligible in itself. Even God is fully 
intelligible - to God. There is a difference between saying that God has no 
essence and saying that God's esscnce is existence, or not distinct from exis-
tence. The latter is simply to say that God exists necessarily, without needing a 
cause. 
An opposite form of this metaphysical fallacy is the attempt to think about 
existence as if it were an essence. (This is the metaphysical mistake made, e.g. 
in one version of St. Anselm's "Ontological Argument," treating the predicate 
"existence" as if it were an essence or quality or definable perfection. If you 
have never heard of this argument, see page 284 or ask your teacher.) Since all 
that is conccivablc is essence, we have no concept of existence. Existence 

Metaphysical fallacies 
113 
appears only in a judgment ("that is" "this is that"). It is a metaphysical fallacy 
to treat existence as an essence. 
The confusion between essence and existence can be logical as well as 
metaphysical: see the discussion of existential propositions on page 150. We will 
see later how modern logic's unnecessary assumption that all particular propo-
sitions assert existence and all universal propositions are only about essences 
has provoked modern logicians to reject the traditional Square of Opposition 
(page 179). 
7G, Confusing the Natural with the Common 
The natural is inherent and unchangeable; the merely common is accidental and 
changeable. It is human nature to want property; it is common in our age to want 
a lot more than we can use. It is natural to wear clothes; it is common in our day 
to wear jeans. It is natural (in accord with human nature) to love beauty; it is 
common, in some cultures, to be fascinated with ugliness for its shock value. 
Here too the confusion can work either way. Reducing the natural to the 
common is the more fashionable fallacy in our society, since the very concept of 
a nature, and of human nature, is rejected by skepticism and nominalism. 
Treating the common as the natural was the more common (but not more natu-
ral!) fallacy of past generations: e.g. assuming that it was simply part of human 
nature to have a social class system, or kings. Many of today's controversies are 
about whether some practice or desire is unnatural or just uncommon, or even 
whether there is any meaning at all to the concept 'unnatural.' 
• 
• 
• 
* 
• 
There are no exercises at the end of this long chapter on the 49 fallacies. 
Examples have been integrated into the text instead. Why? Because it is the 
hardest topic in logic for fair and useful quizzes and tests, since there is almost 
always some overlapping among the fallacies, especially if there are a large 
number of them to learn. (And 49 is a large number!) Very often, when one pri-
mary fallacy is committed, another, secondary fallacy is too, at least in an 
implicit way. Often there are three or four good answers to the question "identi-
fy the fallacy." So the correct answer is often a matter of interpretation, with 
some reasonable doubt as to which is the best. "Name the fallacy" exercises 
often resemble the game "Pin the Tail on the Donkey." This stands in striking 
contrast to the rest of logic, where the correct answers are almost always "black 
and white" and unarguable. 
So, instead of the pain of exercises, we have included the pleasure of an old. 
charmingly out-of-date, satirical short story entitled "Love Is a Fallacy." It will 
stick with you, as a "big picture," longer than many little flea-like exercises. 

114 
111. MATERIAL FALLACIES 
"Love Is a Fallacy" 
by Max Schulman (from The Many Loves of Dobie Gil lis) 
Cool was I and logical. Keen, calculating, perspicacious, acute and astute-
I was all of these. My brain was as powerful as a dynamo, as precise as a 
chemist's scales, as penetrating as a scalpel. And - think of it! - I was only eight-
een. 
It is not often that one so young has such a giant intellect. Take, for exam-
ple, Petey Bellows, my roommate at the university. Same age, same background, 
but dumb as an ox. A nice enough fellow, you understand, but nothing upstairs. 
Emotional type. Unstable. Impressionable. Worst of all, a faddist. Fads, I submit, 
are the very negation of reason. To be swept up in every new craze that comes 
along, to surrender yourself to idiocy just because everybody else is doing it -
this, to me, is the acme of mindlessncss. Not, however, to Petey. 
One afternoon I found Petey lying on his bed with an expression of such 
distress on his face that I immediately diagnosed appendicitis. "Don't move," I 
said. "Don't take a laxative. I'll get a doctor." 
"Raccoon," he mumbled thickly. 
"Raccoon?" I said, pausing in my flight. 
"I want a raccoon coat," he wailed. 
I perceived that his trouble was not physical, but mental. "Why do you want 
a raccoon coat?" 
"I should have known it," he cried, pounding his temples. "I should have 
known they'd come back when the Charleston came back. Like a fool I spent all 
my money for textbooks, and now I can't get a raccoon coat." 
"Can you mean," I said incredulously, "that people are actually wearing rac-
coon coats again?" 
"All the Big Men on Campus are wearing them. Where've you been?" 
"In the library," 1 said, naming a place not frequented by Big Men on 
Campus. 
He leaped from the bed and paced the room. "I've got to have a raccoon 
coat," he said passionately. "I've got to!" 
"Peter, why? Look at it rationally. Raccoon coats are unsanitary. They shed. 
They smell bad. They weigh too much. They're unsightly. They - 44 
"You don't understand," he interrupted impatiently. "It's the thing to do. 
Don't you want to be in the swim?" 
"No," I said truthfully. 
"Well, I do," he declared. "I'd give anything for a raccoon coat. Anything!*' 
My brain, that precision instrument, slipped into high gear. "Anything?" I 
asked, looking at him narrowly. 
"Anything," he affirmed in ringing tones. 
I stroked my chin thoughtfully. It so happened that I knew where to get my 
hands on a raccoon coat. My father had had one in his undergraduate days; it lay 

"Love Is a Fallacy" 
115 
now in a trunk in the attic back home. It also happened that Petey had something 
I wanted. He didn't have it exactly, but at least he had first rights on it. I refer to 
his girl, Polly Espy. 
I had long coveted Polly Espy. Let me emphasize that my desire for this 
young woman was not emotional in nature. She was, to be sure, a girl who excit-
ed the emotions, but I was not one to let my heart rule my head. I wanted Polly 
for a shrewdly calculated, entirely cerebral reason. 
I was a freshman in law school. In a few years I would be out in practice. I 
was well aware of the importance of the right kind of wife in furthering a 
lawyers career. The successful lawyers I had observed were, almost without 
exception, married to beautiful, gracious, intelligent women. With one omission, 
Polly fitted these specifications perfectly. 
Beautiful she was. She was not yet of pin-up proportions, but I felt sure that 
time would supply the lack. She already had the makings. 
Gracious she was. By gracious I mean full of graces. She had an erectness 
of carriage, an ease of bearing, a poise that clearly indicated the best of breed-
ing. At table her manners were exquisite. I had seen her at the Kozy Kampus 
Korner eating the specialty of the house - a sandwich that contained scraps of 
pot roast, gravy, chopped nuts, and a dipper of sauerkraut - without even getting 
her fingers moist. 
Intelligent she was not. In fact, she veered in the opposite direction. But I 
believed that under my guidance she would smarten up. At any rate, it was worth 
a try. It is, after all, easier to make a beautiful dumb girl smart than to make an 
ugly smart girl beautiful. 
"Petey," I said, "are you in love with Polly Espy?" 
"I think she's a keen kid," he replied, "but I don't know if you'd call it love. 
Why?" 
"Do you," I asked, "have any kind of formal arrangement with her? I mean 
are you going steady or anything like that?" 
"No. We see each other quite a bit, but we both have other dates. Why?" 
"Is there," I asked, "any other man for whom she has a particular fondness?" 
"Not that I know of. Why?" 
I nodded with satisfaction. "In other words, if you were out of the picture, 
the field would be open. Is that right?" 
"I guess so. What arc you getting at?" 
"Nothing, nothing," I said innocently, and took my suitcase out of the closet. 
"Where you going?" asked Petey. 
"Home for the weekend." I threw a few things into the bag. 
"Listen," he said, clutching my arm eagerly, "while you're home, you could-
n't get some money from your old man, could you, and lend it to me so I can 
buy a raccoon coat?" 
"I may do better than that," I said with a mysterious wink and closed my bag 
and left. 

116 
III. MATERIAL FALLACIES 
"Look," I said to Petey when I got back Monday morning. I threw open the 
suitcase and revealed the huge, hairy, gamy object that my father had worn in his 
Stutz Bearcat in 1925. 
"Holy Toledo!" said Petey reverently. He plunged his hands into the raccoon 
coat and then his face. "Holy Toledo!" he repeated fifteen or twenty times. 
"Would you like it?" I asked. 
"Oh yes!" he cried, clutching the greasy pelt to him. Then a canny look 
came into his eyes. "What do you want for it?" 
"Your girl," I said, mincing no words. 
"Polly?" he said in a horrified whisper. "You want Polly?" 
"That's right." 
He flung the coat from him. "Never," he said stoutly. 
I shrugged. "Okay. If you don't want to be in the swim, I guess its your 
business." 
I sat down in a chair and pretended to read a book, but out of the corner of 
my eye I kept watching Petey. He was a torn man. First he looked at the coat with 
an expression of a waif at a bakery window. Then he turned away and set his jaw 
resolutely. Then he looked back at the coat, with even more longing in his face. 
Then he turned away, but with not so much resolution this time. Back and forth 
his head swiveled, desire waxing, resolution waning. Finally he didn't turn away 
at all; he just stood and stared with mad lust at the coat. 
"It isn't as though I was in love with Polly," he said thickly. "Or going steady 
or anything like that." 
"That's right," I murmured. 
"What's Polly to me, or me to Polly?" 
"Not a thing," said I. 
"It's just been a casual kick - just a few laughs, that's all." 
"Try on the coat," said I. 
He complied. The coat bunchcd high over his ears and dropped all the way 
down to his shoe tops. He looked like a mound of dead raccoons. "Fits fine," he 
said happily. 
I rose from my chair. "Is it a deal?" I asked, extending my hand. 
He swallowed. "It's a deal," he said and shook my hand. 
I had my first date with Polly the following evening. This was in the nature 
of a survey; I wanted to find out just how much work I had to do to get her mind 
up to the standard I required. I took her first to dinner. "Gee, that was a delish 
dinner," she said as we left the restaurant. Then I took her to a movie. "Gee, that 
was a marvy movie," she said as we left the theater. And then I took her home. 
"Gee, I had a sensaysh time," she said as she bade me good night. 
I went back to my room with a heavy heart. I had gravely underestimated the 
size of my task. This girl's lack of information was terrifying. Nor would it be 
enough merely to supply her with information. First she had to be taught to think. 
This loomed as a project of no small dimensions, and at first I was tempted to 

"Love Is a Fallacy" 
117 
give her back to Petey. But then I got to thinking about her abundant physical 
charms and about the way she entered a room and the way she handled a knife 
and fork, and I decided to make an effort. 
I went about it, as in all things, systematically. I gave her a course in logic. 
It happened that I, as a law student, was taking a course in logic myself, so I had 
all the facts at my finger tips. "Polly," I said to her when I picked her up on our 
next date, "tonight we are going over to the Knoll and talk/* 
"Oo, terrif," she replied. One thing I will say for this girl: you would go far 
to find another so agreeable. 
We went to the Knoll, the campus trysting place, and we sat down under an 
old oak, and she looked at me expectantly. "What are we going to talk about?" 
she asked. 
"Logic." 
She thought this over for a minute and decided she liked it. "Magnif," she 
said. 
"Logic," I said, clearing my throat, "is the science of thinking. Before we 
can think correctly, we must first learn to recognize the common fallacies of 
logic. These we will take up tonight." 
"Wow-dow!" she cried, clapping her hands delightedly. 
I winced, but went bravely on. "First let us examine the fallacy called Dicto 
Simpliciter." 
"By all means," she urged, batting her lashes eagerly. 
"Dicto Simpliciter means an argument based on an unqualified generaliza-
tion. For example: Exercise is good. Therefore everybody should exercise." 
"I agree," said Polly earnestly. "I mean exercise is wonderful. I mean it 
builds the body and everything." 
"Polly," I said gently, "the argument is a fallacy. Exercise is good is an 
unqualified generalization. For instance, if you have heart disease, exercise is 
bad, not good. Many people are ordered by their doctors not to exercise. You 
must qualify the generalization. You must say exercise is usually good, or exer-
cise is good for most people. Otherwise you have committed a Dicto Simpliciter. 
Do you see?" 
"No," she confessed. "But this is marvy. Do more! Do more!" 
"It will be better if you stop tugging at my sleeve," I told her, and when she 
desisted, I continued. "Next we take up a fallacy called Hasty Generalization. 
Listen carefully: You can't speak French. I can't speak French. Petey Bellows 
can't speak French. I must therefore conclude that nobody at the University of 
Minnesota can speak French." 
"Really?" said Polly, amazed. "Nobody?" 
I hid my exasperation. "Polly, it's a fallacy. The generalization is reached too 
hastily. These are too few instances to support such a conclusion." 
"Know any more fallacies?" she asked breathlessly. "This is more fun than 
dancing even." 

118 
III. MATERIAL FALLACIES 
I fought off a wave of despair. I was getting nowhere with this girl, absolute-
ly nowhere. Still, I am nothing if not persistent. I continued, "Next comes Post 
Hoc. Listen to this: Let's not take Bill on our picnic. Every time we take him out 
with us, it rains." 
"I know somebody just like that," she exclaimed." A girl back home - Eula 
Becker, her name is. It never fails. Every single time we take her on a picnic 
"Polly," I said sharply, "it's a fallacy. Eula Becker doesn't cause the rain. She 
has no conncction with the rain. You are guilty of Post Hoc if you blame Eula 
Becker." 
"I'll never do it again," she promised contritely. "Are you mad at me?" 
I sighed. "No, Polly, I'm not mad." 
"Then tell me some more fallacies." 
"All right. Let's try Contradictory Premises." 
"Yes. let's," she chirped, blinking her eyes happily. 
I frowned, but plunged ahead. "Here's an example of Contradictory 
Premises: If God can do anything, can He make a stone so heavy that He won't 
be able to lift it?" 
"Of course," she replied promptly. 
"But if He can do anything. He can lift the stone," I pointed out. 
"Yeah," she said thoughtfully. "Well, then I guess He can't make the stone." 
"But He can do anything," I reminded her. 
She scratched her pretty, empty head. "I'm all confused," she admitted. 
"Of course you are. Because when the premises of an argument contradict 
each other, there can be no argument. If there is an irresistible force, there can 
be no immovable object. If there is an immovable object, there can be no irre-
sistible force. Get it?" 
"Tell me some more of this keen stuff," she said eagerly. 
I consulted my watch. "I think we'd better call it a night. I'll take you home 
now, and you go over all the things you've learned. We'll have another session 
tomorrow night" 
1 deposited her at the girls' dormitory, where she assured me that she had 
had a perfectly terrif evening, and I went glumly home to my room. Petey lay 
snoring in his bed, the raccoon coat huddled like a great hairy beast at his feet. 
For a moment I considered waking him and telling him that he could have his 
girl back. It seemed clcar that my project was doomed to failure. The girl sim-
ply had a logic-proof head. 
But then I reconsidered. I had wasted one evening: I might as well waste 
another. Who knew? Maybe somewhere in the extinct crater of her mind a few 
embers still smoldered. Maybe somehow I could fan them into flame. 
Admittedly it was not a prospect fraught with hope, but I decided to give it one 
more try. 
Seated under the oak the next evening I said, "Our first fallacy tonight is 
called Ad Misericordiam." 

"Love Is a Fallacy" 
119 
She quivered with delight. 
"Listen closely" I said. "A man applies for a job. When the boss asks him 
what his qualifeations are, he replies he has a wife and six children at home, the 
wife is a helpless cripple, the children have nothing to eat, no clothes to wear, 
no shoes on their feet, there are no beds in the house, no coal in the cellar, and 
winter is coming." 
A tear rolled down each of Polly's pink cheeks. "Oh, this is awful, awful," 
she sobbed. 
"Yes. it is awful," I agreed "but it's no argument. The man never answered 
the boss's question about his qualifications. Instead, he appealed to the boss's 
sympathy. He committed the fallacy of Ad Misericordiam. Do you understand?" 
"Have you got a handkerchief?" she blubbered. 
I handed her a handkerchief and tried to keep from screaming while she 
wiped her eyes. "Next," I said in a carefully controlled tone, t4we will discuss 
False Analogy. Here is an example: Students should be allowed to look at their 
textbooks during examinations. After all, surgeons have X rays to guide them 
during an operation, lawyers have briefs to guide them during a trial, carpenters 
have blueprints to guide them when they are building a house. Why, then, 
shouldn't students be allowed to look at their textbooks during an examination?" 
"There now," she said enthusiastically, "is the most marvy idea I've heard 
in years." 
"Polly," I said testily, "the argument is all wrong. Doctors, lawyers, and car-
penters aren't taking a test to see how much they are learned, but students are. 
The situations are altogether different, and you can't make an analogy between 
them." 
"I still think it's a good idea," said Polly. 
"Nuts," I muttered. Doggedly I pressed on. "Next we'll try Hypothesis 
Contrary to Fact." 
"Sounds yummy," was Polly's reaction. 
"Listen: If Madame Curie had not happened to leave a photographic plate 
in a drawer with a chunk of pitchblende, the world today would not know about 
radium." 
"True, true," said Polly, nodding her head. "Did you see the movie? Oh, it 
just knocked me out. That Walter Pidgeon is so dreamy. I mean he fractures me." 
"If you can forget Mr. Pidgeon for a moment," I said coldly, "I would like 
to point out that the statement is a fallacy. Maybe Madame Curie would have dis-
covered radium at some later date. Maybe somebody else would have discovered 
it. Maybe any number of things would have happened. You can't start with a 
hypothesis that is not true and then draw any supportable conclusions from it." 
"They ought to put Walter Pidgeon in more pictures," said Polly. "I hardly 
ever sec him any more." 
One more chance, I decided. But just one more. There is a limit to what 
flesh and blood can bear. "The next fallacy is called Poisoning the Well." 

120 
III. MATERIAL FALLACIES 
"How cute!" she gurgled. 
"Two men are having a debate. The first one gets up and says* 4My oppo-
nent is a notorious liar. You can't believe a word that he is going to say.'... Now, 
Polly, think. Think hard. What's wrong?" 
I watched her closely as she knit her creamy brow in concentration. 
Suddenly a glimmer of intelligence - the first I had seen - came into her eyes. 
"What chance has the second man got if the first man calls him a liar before he 
even begins talking?" 
"Right!" I cried exultantly. "One hundred per cent right. It's not fair. The 
first man has poisoned the well before anybody could drink from it. He has ham-
strung his opponent before he could even start. . . . Polly. I'm proud of you." 
"Pshaw" she murmured, blushing with pleasure. 
"You see, my dear, these things aren't so hard. All you have to do is con-
centrate. Think - examine - evaluate. Come now, let's review everything we 
have learned." 
"Fire away," she said with an airy wave of her hand. 
Heartened by the knowledge that Polly was not altogether a cretin, I began 
a long, patient review of all I had told her. Over and over and over again I cited 
instances, pointed out flaws, kept hammering away without letup. It was like 
digging a tunnel. At first everything was work, sweat, and darkness. I had no 
idea when I would reach the light, or even if I would. But I persisted. I pounded 
and clawed and scraped, and finally I was rewarded. I saw a chink of light. And 
then the chink got bigger and the sun came pouring in and all was bright. 
Five grueling nights this took, but it was worth it. I had made a logician out 
of Polly; I had taught her to think. My job was done. She was worthy of me at 
last. She was a fit wife for me, a proper hostess for my many mansions, a suit-
able mother for my well-heeled children. 
It must not be thought that I was without love for this girl. Quite the con-
trary. Just as Pygmalion loved the perfect worman he had fashioned, so I loved 
mine. I decided to acquaint her with my feelings at our very next meeting. The 
time had come to change our relationship from academic to romantic. 
"Polly," I said when next we sat beneath our oak, "tonight we will not dis-
cuss fallacies." 
"Aw, gee." she said, disappointed. 
"My dear," I said, favoring her with a smile, "we have now spent five 
evenings together. We have gotten along splendidly. It is clear that we are well 
matched." 
"Hasty Generalization," said Polly brightly. 
"I beg your pardon," said I. 
"Hasty Generalization," she repeated. "How can you say that we arc well 
matched on the basis of only f ve dates?" 
I chucklcd with amusement. The dear child had learned her lessons well. 

"Love Is a Fallacy" 
121 
"My dear," I said, patting her hand in a tolerant manner, "five dates is plenty. 
After all, you don't have to eat a whole cake to know that it's good." 
"False Analogy," said Polly promptly. "I'm not a cake. I'm a girl." 
I chuckled with somewhat less amusement. The dear child had learned her 
lessons perhaps too well. I decided to change tactics. Obviously the best 
approach was a simple, strong, direct declaration of love. I paused for a moment 
while my massive brain chose the proper words. Then I began: 
"Polly, I love you. You are the whole world to me, and the moon and the 
stars and the constellations of outer space. Please, my darling, say that you will 
go steady with me, for if you will not, life will be meaningless. I will languish. 
I will refuse my meals. I will wander the face of the earth, a shambling, hollow-
eyed hulk." 
There, I thought, folding my arms, that ought to do it. 
"Ad Misericordiam," said Polly. 
I ground my teeth. I was not Pygmalion; I was Frankenstein, and my mon-
ster had me by the throat. Frantically I fought back the tide of panic surging 
through me. At all costs I had to keep cool. 
"Well, Polly," I said, forcing a smile, "you certainly have learned your fal-
lacies." 
"You're darn right," she said with a vigorous nod. 
"And who taught them to you, Polly?" 
"You did." 
"That's right. So you do owe me something, don't you, my dear? If I hadn't 
come along you never would have learned about fallacies." 
"Hypothesis Contrary to Fact," she said instantly. 
I dashed perspiration from my brow. "Polly," I croaked, "you mustn't take 
all these things so literally. I mean this is just classroom stuff. You know that the 
things you learn in school don't have anything to do with life." 
"Dicto Simpliciter," she said, wagging her finger at me playfully. 
That did it. I leaped to my feet, bellowing like a bull. "Will you or will you 
not go steady with me?" 
"I will not," she replied. 
"Why not?" I demanded. 
"Because this afternoon I promised Petey Bellows that I would go steady 
with him." 
I reeled back, overcome with the infamy of it. After he promised after he 
made a deal, after he shook my hand! "The rat!" I shrieked kicking up great 
chunks of turf. You can't go with him, Polly. He's a liar. He's a cheat. He's a rat." 
"Poisoning the Well," said Polly, "and stop shouting. I think shouting must 
be a fallacy too." 
With an immense effort of will, I modulated my voice. "All right," I said. 
"You're a logician. Let's look at thing logically. How could you choose Petey 

122 
111. MATERIAL FALLACIES 
Bellows over me? Look at me - a brilliant student, a tremendous intellectual, a 
man with an assured future. Look at Petey - a knothead, a jitterbug, a guy who'll 
never know where his next meal is coming from. Can you give me one logical 
reason why you should go steady with Petey Bellows?" 
"1 certainly can," declared Polly. "He's got a raccoon coat." 

IV: Definition 
Section 1. The nature of definition (B) 
Definition is crucial to logic. For a definition tells us what a thing is; and if we 
do not know what a thing is, by the first act of the mind, we cannot know what 
to predicate of it in the second act of the mind, and thus we have no premises for 
our reasoning (the third act of the mind). 
This is the most important chapter of the first third of this book, for the first 
third is about terms, and the main problem with terms is ambiguity, and defini-
tion is the way to clear up ambiguity in our terms. 
It is also the simplest chapter of the first part of this book, for the principles 
of good definitions are very simple. The practice of these principles, however, 
is not simple. Most of our problems in communication come here: in trying to 
understand what we mean by our terms, trying to "come to terms" with each 
other. 
Definition is crucial to the "Socratic Method." The archetypal philosopher, 
Socrates, usually spent more than half of each of his dialogues defining terms. 
The most famous and influential book in the w hole history of philosophy, Plato's 
Republic, spends most of its time in defining just one term, "justice." Book I of 
the Republic is an excellent reading exercise for the student of definitions; it 
consists in Socrates evaluating three definitions of justice and finding them 
wanting. He does this by increasingly complex arguments. (Arguments can be 
means to the end of constructing a good definition, just as good definitions can 
be means to the end of constructing good arguments.) 
Definition is to comprehension what division is to extension. A definition 
analyzes, or takes apart, the comprehension of a term, by subdividing the aspects 
of its essential meaning ("species") into genus (the common aspect) and specif-
ic difference (the specific, proper aspect); while a division analyzes the exten-
sion of a term, in subdividing its population into sub-groups. 
A definition tells us what a thing is. The ideal definition, an "essential def-
inition," tells us the thing's essence, by giving its genus and specific difference. 
That is the maximum for a definition. The minimum for an acceptable defini-
tion is that it at least distinguishes the thing defined from all other things, so that 

124 
IV. DEFINITION 
we will not confuse it with other things. The maximum, or perfect, idea of a 
thing is both clear and distinct; but if we cannot have perfect clarity, we should 
at least have perfect distinctness. If we cannot know exactly what a thing is, we 
should at least know what it isn't, that is, know its limits. "Definition" comes 
from de-finio, which means to set limits around a thing. 
The importance of definition can hardly be overestimated. It perfects the 
first act of the mind in telling us what a thing is. If we do not know what a thing 
is, we simply do not know what we are talking about. 
This is the most basic reason why symbolic logic alone is radically inade-
quate for philosophy: it cannot deal with what a thing is. It is at least implicitly 
Nominalist (sec Chapter I, Section 3, pages 41-43): it excludes the very notion 
of essences. 
Section 2. The rules of definition (B) 
There are six rules for a logically acceptable definition: 
1. A definition should be coextensive with the thing defined: neither too 
broad nor too narrow. (This is the most important rule, and the hard-
est to obey. It concerns the extension of the term rather than the com-
prehension.) 
2. A definition should be clear, not obscure. 
3. A definition should be literal, not metaphorical. 
4. A definition should be brief, not long. 
5. A definition should be positive, not negative, if possible. (Only nega-
tive realities call for negative definitions.) 
6. A definition should not be circular. (The term defined cannot appear in 
the definition.) 
These six rules can be condensed to three: 
A definition must be: 
1. coextensive 
2. clear, literal, and brief 
3. not negative or circular 
Section 3. The kinds of definition 
Here is a division of (good) definitions: 
I. Nominal 
II. Real 
A. Essential 
B. Non-essential 
1. by properties 
2. by accidents 
3. by causes 
a. by efficient cause 

The rules of definition 
125 
b. by final cause 
c. by material cause 
4. by effects 
Thus, the kinds of definitions are: 
1. nominal (a definition of the word rather than the thing designated by the 
word) 
2. essential (genus plus specific difference) 
3. by properties (in the technical sense of the predicate 
'property' [see 
page 57)) 
4. by accidents (the difficulty here is piling up enough accidents to limit the 
extension so that the definition is not too broad). 
5. by efficient cause or agent (often called a "genetic" definition): e.g. "A 
solar eclipse is an astronomical event caused by the moon blocking the 
sun's light from some part of the earth by coming between the sun and the 
earth." "An acorn is a seed produced by an oak tree." "Anthrax is the dis-
ease caused by the bacteria anthracisV 
6. by final cause or purpose: e.g. "A house is a machine for living." (Le 
Corbusier) "An eye is an organ for seeing." "A pen is an instrument for 
writing with ink." 
7. by the material cause or contents: "Water is two parts hydrogen and one 
part oxygen." "Fish are animals with gills." "The helium atom has two 
protons and one neutron in its nucleus." 
8. by effects: e.g. "A carcinogen is any thing or event that tends to cause can-
cer." 
The "four causes" are explained more extensively on pages 202-5. One of 
the four causes, the formal cause, is omitted in this list because a definition by 
formal cause would be the same thing as an essential definition. 
Nominal definitions are definitions of a name, or a word, not necessariLy 
of a reality. They answer the question, "How is this word used?" rather than 
"what is this thing?" Dictionary definitions are usually intended only to be nom-
inal definitions. 
Nominal definitions can be subdivided into (a) definitions that give the 
usual or conventional meaning of the word and (b) those that give a specialized 
meaning, often a meaning suggested or stipulated by the writer, such as: "Let us 
define a 'socially acceptable practice' as any practice that over 50% of the soci-
ety approves." (These are called "stipulative definitions") Nominal definitions 
can also define a word by giving (c) a synonym, (d) the etymology of the word, 
or (e) examples of its use - though giving examples is not, strictly speaking, def-
inition at all. In Plato's Meno, Socrates shows how inadequate it is to try to give 
a definition by examples only, in criticizing Meno's attempts to define "virtue" 
in general by giving examples of particular virtues. 

126 
IV. DEFINITION 
Since nominal definitions are not, strictly speaking, definitions of things at 
all, but only of words, we cannot strictly apply to them the rules for definitions. 
Even so, they should at least avoid the two most important errors in definitions, 
"too broad" and "too narrow." 
It is sometimes difficult to decide whether a given definition is nominal or 
real. If you are intending to give a nominal definition, it is good to clarify this 
intention by italicizing or putting quotation marks around the word you arc 
defining. 
Essential definitions. The ideal definition gives the essence or whatness or 
nature of the thing defined by analyzing the meaning (or comprehension) of this 
essence into two parts: (1) the generic or general or common part and (2) the 
specific or differentiating or proper part. These two parts are both "compre-
hended by" (included in) the "comprehension" (inner meaning) of the term. 
The generic part tells us what general class the thing essentially belongs to: 
Man is an animal, triangles are plane figures, hammers are tools, monarchy is a 
form of government, Christianity is a religion. 
The genus given should be the "proximate genus" the narrowest genus: not 
"substance" or "organism" but "animal" for "man"; not "figure" but "plane fig-
ure" for "triangle"; not "society" but "government" for "democracy." 
The specific difference tells us how the thing defined differs from all other 
members of its genus: man is rational, triangles are three-sided, hammers strike 
nails, monarchy is rule by one, Christianity believes that "Jesus is Lord" 
(divine). An essential definition, thus, gives the species (= genus + specific dif-
ference) of the thing defined. 
Properties can substitute for specific differences, but then we have a defi-
nition by property instead of by essence: e.g. "Man is the animal that writes"; 
"triangles are plane figures whose interior angles add up to 180 degrees" 
A review of the predicables (page 56) may be necessary here. It is essential 
to remember that "species" does not mean "any man-made classification at all 
in which a more general class is subdivided into more specific classes." A thing's 
"species" is its essence, or, in Aristotle's words, "what is predicated essentially 
of many different individuals": e.g. Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle are all men. 
(They arc all Greeks too, but that is not essential.) 
And a "genus" is not just "any man-made general class," but the common 
part of the essence, or in Aristotle's words, "what is predicated essentially of sev-
eral things that differ in species": men, monkeys, dogs, sharks, guppies, clams, 
robins, hawks, snails, possums, alligators, and snakes are all animals. 
Finally, a "specific difference" is the differentiating part of the essence, or, 
in Aristotle's words, "what makes one species different from another within a 
genus." Man is the only rational animal; triangles the only three-sided enclosed 
plane figures, etc. 
The species is the complete essence, including both the genus and the specific 
difference. In terms of a term's comprehension, the genus is one part of the 

The rules of definition 
127 
spccics. (Animality is part of humanity.) In terms of extension, a species is part 
of a genus. (Humanity is part of the animal kingdom.) 
Most arguments about definitions are about whether or not the definition is 
too broad or too narrow. This is one of the most important first steps in any 
philosophical argument, as can be seen by reading the dialogues of Plato. Such 
arguments arc not only about words but about reality, since definitions, like any 
propositions, are either true or false. However, one cannot argue about nominal 
definitions except in terms of usage: is this how the term is in fact usually used? 
Nominal definitions, like languages, are man-made, socially constructed con-
ventions rather than universal objective truths; they are invented rather than dis-
covered. Especially, one cannot argue about stipulative definitions, for they are 
neither true nor false, not acts of intellect that claim to discover objective truths, 
but proposals of will ("Let us use the term X to designate Y and Z"). Stipulative 
definitions simply create new nominal definitions. And one can argue about 
nominal definitions only in terms of practicality of usage. 
Socrates always preferred ordinary language definitions to technical or stip-
ulative ones. Most subsequent philosophers (and "experts" in every field) have 
tended to prefer what a populist might call "witch doctor languages," technical 
terminologies understood only by the elite, the inner circle in power. It is a very 
good exercise to translate "witch doctor languages" into ordinary language. This 
is both useful for others, who do not understand the terminology, and useful for 
ourselves, since translating is a test as to whether we understand the concept or 
only the words. Great philosophers like Aristotle can define difficult terms by 
one-syllable words. (See Aristotle's definition of truth on page 144.) 
The following chart provides examples of each kind of definition for three 
simple concepts. 
KIND OF 
DEFINTION 
too broad 
too narrow 
obscurc 
O F ' M A N ' 
OF 'TRIANGLE' 
OF 'DEMOCRACY' 
two-legged animal 
plane figure 
male rational 
animal 
an ontological 
synthesis of 
molccular and 
self-referential 
intentionality 
enclosed plane 
figure with three 
equal sides 
the two-dimen-
sional figural 
gcstalt for 
geodesic domes 
form of 
government 
government by 
direct popular rule 
participatory or 
sem i-participatory 
plebiscitarianism 

128 
IV. DEFINITION 
KIND OF 
DEF1NTION 
metaphorical 
too long 
negative 
circular 
nominal 
essential 
by property 
by accidents 
OF 'MAN' 
a ghost in a 
machine 
the most para-
doxical and multi-
dimensional 
creature in nature, 
exhibiting both 
visually detectable 
physical attributes 
and that form of 
consciousness 
which can bccome 
progressively 
more aware of a 
plurality of 
propositional 
truths by 
reasoning 
neither ape nor 
angel 
OF TRIANGLE' 
OF 'DEMOCRACY' 
the creature with 
human attributes 
the species called 
"homo sapiens " 
rational animal 
the animal that 
speaks 
the animal with 
two legs and no 
feathers 
the geometrical 
image of the Holy 
Trinity 
a two-dimensional 
geometrical figure 
composed of no 
more and no less 
than three finite 
straight lines all of 
whose end points 
touch those of 
another, thereby 
enclosing a finite 
space 
neither a one-
dimensional line 
nor a three-
dimensional solid, 
and neither a 
square nor a 
circle 
the shape of any 
triangular object 
English word for 
the following 
figure: A 
three-sided 
enclosed plane 
figure 
enclosed plane 
figure with 180° 
in its three interior 
angles 
favorite 
geometrical figure 
of the late 
medieval mystics 
a bunch of blind 
bats discussing the 
definition of 
daylight 
that form of 
government 
whose essential 
features include 
popular recall of 
elected officials, 
referenda on 
selected issues, 
majority rule, and 
legal equality of 
essential rights for 
all citizens 
"the most 
imperfect form of 
government ever 
invented except 
all the other 
ones" (Winston 
Churchill) 
government by 
democratic 
process 
English word for 
arc he by 
demos 
government by 
popular 
sovereignty 
form of 
government in 
which laws are 
determined by 
popular consent 
form of govern-
ment most preva-
lent in 20th-century 
Europe 

The limits of definition 
129 
KIND OF 
DEFINTION 
by efficient cause 
by final cause 
OF'MAN' 
creature whose 
soul is directly 
created by God 
the creature who 
seeks Truth, 
Goodness, and 
Beauty as ends 
OF TRIANGLE' 
OF 'DEMOCRACY' 
by material cause 
the creature 
composed of an 
animal body and a 
rational soul 
from effects 
creature who 
produces culture 
enclosed plane 
figure generated 
by the meeting of 
three straight lines 
geometrical figure 
providentially 
designed to image 
the Trinity in two 
dimensions 
two-dimensional 
figure that contains 
a finite space, three 
straight lines, and 
three angles 
the geometrical 
figure that caused 
Hegel to invent 
his dialectic 
form of govern-
ment created by the 
American 
"Founding Fathers" 
and ancient Greeks 
government 
designed for the 
most participation 
by the most people 
government com-
posed of enfran-
chised populace 
and their elected 
representatives 
government that 
makes all its 
citizens responsible 
for governing 
Section 4. The limits of definition 
At least five things cannot be properly defined (although we can still say true 
and useful things about them, and distinguish them from things with which they 
might otherwise be confused): 
(1) What is infinite cannot be defined, for a "definition" (de-finio) of a thing 
means telling the limits or boundaries of that thing, and what is infinite has no 
limits or boundaries. The only definition possible for something infinite is a 
negative one. Thus "eternity" means "not-time," and "infinity" itself means 
"not-finitude." It is, of course, impossible to define God, if God is infinite being 
or an infinite being or the infinite being. (However, it is possible to define finite 
gods, like the Greek Olympians. But see point 2 below.) 
As far as God is concerned, we can only say (a) what God is not or (b) what 
God is like. But this is not to define God, for each of these two choices violates 
a rule of definition, (a) If we use literal, univocal language, we can only say what 
God is not, not what God is. (E.g. God is not a man, God is not a body. God is 
not in time.) But God is not a negative thing, like nonbeing or death or evil. So 
a negative definition of God would violate one of the rules of definition (rule 
#5). (b) If we use analogical or metaphorical language, we can speak positively, 
but only to say what God is like, not what God is, literally. (E.g. we can say that 
God is a Father, God is Love, God is a King. But God is not a human biological 
father or the changeable human passion of love, or an earthly political ruler.) 
And of course non-literal language violates another rule of definition (rule #3). 

130 
IV. DEFINITION 
(2) Individuals cannot be defined by essential definitions, only species can. 
For there is no specific difference to distinguish one individual from another; the 
specific difference differentiates one species from another. Thus, a description 
that puts together enough accidents to distinguish the individual from all others 
is used as a substitute for a definition: e.g. "the tall, thin, brown-haired 
Dutchman who taught in the philosophy department at Boston College in 1978" 
(3) The summa genera or highest genera - i.e. the categories (sec page 54) 
- cannot be properly defined because there is no genus for them, no higher class 
above them. 
(4) Being itself, which is not contained in any of the categories and is uni-
versal in them all (for they all are), cannot be defined for the same reason. 
(5) And the "transcendentals," the absolutely universal properties of all 
being, cannot be properly defined any more than being can. These are tradition-
ally listed as (a) something, (b) one, (c) true, (d) good, and (e) beautiful. (Others 
should probably be added, e.g. "able to act" and "related") Everything that is, is 
(a) something (that's obvious!); (b) one (even if it is one group, one class, or one 
pair); (c) ontologically true, i.e. intelligible or knowable; (d) ontologically good 
(for it is desirable, valuable, willable, for something); and (e) beautiful (for it 
pleases, by its goodness, the consciousness of one who knows it in its truth). 
We can describe the transcendentals but not define them. E.g. the transcen-
dental "one" means "not divided in itself and divided from others" and "beau-
ty" means "that which, being seen, pleases" (id quod videtur placet). 
Exercises: We include a plethora of exercises on definitions because they are 
fundamental to philosophy, bccausc they involve not only issues of logical form 
but also substantive issues of content, and because they are fun and profitable to 
argue over. 
I. 
Give a good definition for each of the following. Label what kind of defini-
tion you are giving. Try to give an essential definition if possible. If possi-
ble. have others evaluate and argue about your definitions. 
1. logic 
2. science 
3. induction 
4. deduction 
5. reasoning 
6. proposition 
7. term 
8. (H) abstraction (noun) 
9. (H) concrete (adjective) 
10. accident 
11. property 
12. definition 

The limits of definition 
131 
13. (H) religion 
14. (E) truth 
15. fate 
16. essence 
17. (E) courage 
18. angel 
19. plant 
20. planet 
21. (E) square 
22. noun 
23. abortion 
24. death 
25. charity 
26. money 
27. (H) eggbeater 
II. First classify, then evaluate, each of the following definitions. If it is too 
broad or too narrow, say why: what is there in the subject that is not in the 
predicate if the predicate is too narrow, and what is there in the predicate that 
is not in the subject if the predicate is too broad? The definitions quoted 
from literary sources (section B) especially are designed to stimulate fruit-
ful philosophical arguments. 
A. Shorter, easier exercises: 
1. Life is the most vivid of all dreams. 
2. Marriage is a voluntary, lifelong, monogamous covenant relationship 
between a man and a woman. 
3. "A man's religion is what he does with his solitude." 
4. A bishop is a clergyman who exercises episcopal functions. 
5 Trade is the interchange of goods. 
6. (E) Love is "a something we know not what." 
7. Life is the sum of vital forces. 
8. Life is the opposite of death. 
9. (E) Life is a bowl of cherries. 
10. (E) Life is when you Ye breathing. 
11. Life is what happens between birth and death. 
12. Memory is the storehouse of the mind. 
13. A university is a placc for acquiring a great deal of knowledge on a great 
deal of subjects. 
14. Security means contentment. 
15. (E) A separation is not a divorce. 
16. "Personality is the ability to say Yes; character is the ability to say No." 
(Ann Landers) 
17. (E) Personality is the quality of being a person. 

132 
IV. DEFINITION 
18. Personality is what makes friends. 
19. "A person is the non-objectifiable subject of all objectification, such as 
knowing, doubting, believing, wondering, loving, hating, choosing, desiring, 
feeling, or sensing an object; and since a subject is not an object, it cannot 
be an object of definition.*' 
20. A circle is something round. 
21. A school is a means of transferring words from a teacher to a student in 
lectures and from the student back to the teacher in tests without either of 
the two necessarily knowing what they are saying. 
22. A "MaeWest" is an inflatable life preserver for pilots who fall into the sea. 
23. A tiger is a large feline mammal with transverse, tawny stripes. 
24. A plant is a non-sentient organism. 
25. A clock is an artificial device for telling time. 
26. "Effervescent" means "bubbling." 
27. A honeycomb is a structure of adjoining hexagonal cells made of wax by 
bees for storing honey. 
28. A saddle is a seat for a rider on an animal. 
29. (E) Man is an animal endowed with the faculty for articulate speech. 
30. (E) Arteriosclerosis means hardening of the arteries. 
31. (E) A wound is a physical injury caused by breaking the skin. 
32. A policeman is a watchdog for criminal activities. 
33. A vice is a bad habit. 
34. Economic solvency is not having any debts. 
35. A student is one who studies. 
36. (E) Man is a mortal being. 
37. Man is the animal which can go to Heaven. 
38. Man is the only animal which can be insane. 
39. Man is the animal that produces 3.141 pounds of dung per pound of body 
weight annually. 
40. Virtue is the ability to control passions. 
41. A body is a material substance. 
42. A body is a substance made of extended parts. 
43. (E) Goodness is whatever makes you happy. 
44. (E) Goodness is what the lawmaker defines as acceptable. 
45. (E) Goodness means kindness. 
46. (E) Reality is whatever I know. 
47. (E) A logroller is a roller of logs. 
48. (E) Being is what bees do. 
49. (E) "Architecture is frozen music." 
50. (E) "Philosophy" means "the love of wisdom." 
B. Quotations 
1. "Philosophy is unintelligible answers to insoluble problems." (Henry 
Adams) 

The limits of definition 
2. (E) "A philosopher is a blind man in a dark room looking for a black cat 
that isn't there." (Lord Bowen) 
3. (E) "A philosopher is one who contradicts other philosophers." (William 
James) 
4. (E) "Philosophy is common sense in a dress suit." (Oliver S. Braston) 
5. (E) "Religion is the opiate of the people." (Marx) 
6. "Love is nothing else but an insatiate thirst of enjoying a greedily desired 
object." (Montaigne) 
7. (E) "Law is whatever is boldly asserted and plausibly maintained." (Aaron 
Burr) 
8. "Law is . . . an ordinance of reason for the common good, promulgated by 
him who has care of the community." (Thomas Aquinas) 
9. "A figure is that which is enclosed by one or more boundaries." (Euclid) 
10. "Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not 
seen." (Hebrews 11:1) 
11. "Faith is when you believe something that you know ain't true." (attributed 
to a schoolboy by William James in "The Will to Believe") 
12. (E) "Economics is the science which treats of the phenomena arising out 
of the economic activities of men in society." (John Maynard Keynes. 
Scope and Methods of Political Economy) 
13. "Justice is health of soul." (Plato) 
14. "Justice, for each part of the soul or the state, is doing one's own proper 
work." (Plato) 
15. (E) "We see that all men mean by justice that kind of state of character 
which makes people disposed to do what is just and makes them act just-
ly and wish for what is just." (Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics) 
16. '"The true,' to put it very briefly, is only the expedient in the way of our 
thinking, just as 'the right' is only the expedient in the way of our behav-
ing." (William James, "Pragmatism's Conception of Truth") 
17. (E) "By good, I understand that which we certainly know is useful to us." 
(Spinoza, Ethics) 
18. "Happiness is the satisfaction of all our desires." (Kant, Critique of Pure 
Reason) 
19. (E) "The word happiness indicates the extent to which the innate and 
acquired components of sensory-motor function approach an optimum 
relationship between the antagonistic processes of individualization and 
socialization so that the movements of the individual are contributing 
directly or indirectly to larger and more complex electron-proton aggre-
gates or larger and more complex social organizations." (A.P. Weiss, A 
Theoretical Basis of Behavior) 
20. (E) "Inquiry is the controlled or directed transformation of an indetermi-
nate situation into one that is so determinate in its constituent distinctions 
and relations as to convert the elements of the original situation into a uni-
fied whole." (John Dewey, Logic: The Theory of Inquiry) 

134 
IV. DEFINITION 
21. "Grief for the calamity of another is pity, and ariseth from the imagination 
that the like calamity may befall himself." (Hobbes, Leviathan) 
22. "Conscience is an inner voice that warns us somebody is looking." (H.L. 
Mencken) 
23. (E) "Religion is a complete system of human communication (or a 'form 
of life') showing in primarily 'commissive,' 'behabitive,' and 'exercitive' 
modes how a community comports itself when it encounters an 'untran-
scendable negation of possibilities."' (Gerald James Larson, "Prolego-
mena to a Theory of Religion," Journal of the American 
Academy 
of 
Religion) 
24. "When we talk of any particular sum of money, we sometimes mean noth-
ing but the metal pieces of which it is composed; and sometimes we 
include in our meaning some obscure reference to the goods which can be 
had in exchange for it, or to the power of purchasing which the possession 
of it conveys." (Adam Smith) 
25. "But in practice a citizen is defined to be one of whom both the parents 
are citizens; others insist on going further back, say to two or three more 
ancestors. This is a short and practical definition; but there are some who 
raise the further question how this third or fourth ancestor came to be a 
citizen. Gorgias of Lcontini, partly because he was in a difficulty, partly in 
irony, said: 'Mortars are what is made by mortar-makers, and the citizens 
of Larissa are those who are made by magistrates; for it is their trade to 
make Larissaeans.'Yet the question is really simple, for, if according to the 
definition just given they shared in the government, they were citizens. 
This is a better definition than the other. For the words 'born of a father 
and a mother who is a citizen'cannot possibly apply to the first inhabitants 
or founders of a state." (Aristotle) 
26. "By liberty is understood, according to the proper signification of the 
word, the absence of external impediments." (Thomas Hobbes) 
27. (E) "We are willing to treat the term 'religious sentiment' as a collective 
name for the many sentiments which religious objects may arouse." 
(William James) 
28. (E) "It is almost a definition of a gentleman to say that he is one who never 
inflicts pain." (Newman) 
29. "Man is a thinking reed." (Pascal) 
30. "Knowledge is true opinion." (Plato, Theaetetiis) 
31. "The Master said 4Yu, shall I teach you what know ledge is? When you 
know a thing, to recognize that you know it, and when you do not know a 
thing, to recognizc that you do not know it: that is knowledge."' (Confu-
cius, Analects) 
32. "The word body, in the most general acceptation, signifieth that which fil-
leth, or occupieth some certain room, or imagined place, and dependeth 

The limits of definition 
135 
not on the imagination, but is a real part of that we call the universe." 
(Hobbes, Leviathan) 
33. "War . . . is an act of violence intended to compel our opponent to fulfill 
our will." (Von Clausewitz, On War) 
34. (E) "Political power, properly so called, is merely the organized power of 
one class for oppressing another." (Karl Marx & Friedrich Engels, The 
Communist Manifesto) 
35. "To sneeze is to emit wind audibly by the nose." (Samuel Johnson, 
Dictionary) 
36. "I would define 'political correctness* as a form of dogmatic relativism, 
intolerant of those, such as believers in 'traditional values,' whose posi-
tions are thought to depend on belief in objective truth." (Philip Devine, 
Proceedings of the American Philosophical Association June, 1992) 
37. (E) "The word 'reality* has whatever significance we choose to give it." 
(Reuben L. Goodstein, "Language and Experience") 
38. (E) "Truth is whatever my colleagues in my department let me get away 
with saying." (Stanley Fish) 
39. "The meaning of a statement is the method of its verification." (Friedrich 
Waismann, Erkenntnis I) 
40. "Evolution is an integration of matter and concomitant dissipation of 
motion, during which the matter passes from an indefinite, incoherent 
homogeneity to a definite, coherent heterogeneity, and during which the 
retained motion undergoes a parallel transformation." (Herbert Spencer, 
Principles of Biology) 
41. "A friend is a person with whom I may be sincere." (Emerson) 
C. Chestertonianisms. Some of these are definitions, others are critiques of def-
initions, perhaps some are neither, but all are provocative. Chestertonisms 
have been described as verbal potato chips: you can't eat just one. 
1. "There is above all this supreme stamp of the barbarian: the sacrifice of 
the permanent to the temporary." 
2. "It is not bigotry to be certain we are right; but it is bigotry to be unable 
to imagine how we might possibly have gone wrong." 
3. "Bigotry may roughly be defined as the anger of men who have no opin-
ions." 
4. "Bigotry is an incapacity to conceive seriously the alternative to a propo-
sition." 
5. "Shakespeare has been optimistic when he felt pessimistic. This is the def-
inition of a faith. A faith is that which is able to survive a mood." 
6. "What we suffer from today is humility in the wrong place.... A man was 

136 
IV DEFINITION 
meant to be doubtful about himself, but undoubting about the truth; this 
has been exactly reversed 
7. "The false theory of progress . . . maintains that we alter the test instead 
of trying to pass the test. . . . If the standard changes, how can there be 
improvement, which implies a standard? . . . Progress itself cannot 
progress.... Progress should mean that we are always changing the world 
to suit the vision. Progress does mean (just now) that we are always chang-
ing the vision." 
8. "Art is limitation.... If, in your bold creative way, you hold yourself free 
to draw a giraffe with a short neck, you will really find that you are not 
free to draw a giraffe.... You can free things from alien or accidental laws 
but not from the laws of their own nature. You may, if you like, free a tiger 
from his bars, but do not free him from his stripes. . . . Do not go about as 
a demagogue encouraging triangles to break out of the prison of their three 
sides." 
9. "Tradition is only democracy extended through time. It is trusting to a 
consensus of common human voices. . . . Tradition may be defined as an 
extension of the franchise. Tradition means giving votes to the most 
obscure of all classes, our ancestors. It is the democracy of the dead. 
Tradition refuses to submit to the small and arrogant oligarchy of those 
who merely happen to be walking about." 
10. "Obviously a suicide is the opposite of a martyr. A martyr is a man who 
cares so much for something outside him that he forgets his own personal 
life. A suicide is a man who cares so little for anything outside him that he 
wants to see the last of everything." 
11. "They have invented a phrase that is a black-and-white contradiction in 
two words - 'free-love,' as if a lover ever had been, or ever could be, free. 
It is the nature of love to bind itself, and the institution of marriage mere-
ly paid the average man the compliment of taking him at his word." 
12. "Strictly speaking, there is no such thing as a . . . . Peasant. Indeed the type 
can only exist in community.... One must not think primarily of a French 
Peasant, any more than of a German Mcasle. The plural of the word is the 
proper form; you cannot have a Peasant till you have a peasantry The 
essence of the Peasant ideal is equality; and you cannot be equal all by 
yourself." 
D. Evaluate the following evaluation of a definition: 
"What is a fairy-story? In this case you will turn to the Oxford English 
Dictionary in vain . . . its leading sense is said to be (a) a tale about fairies . . . 
(b) an unreal or incredible story, and (c) a falsehood. The last two senses . . . 
[are] hopelessly vast. But the first sense is too narrow. . . . Especially so if 
we accept the lexicographer's definition of fairies', 'supernatural beings of 
diminutive size'. . . . Supernatural is a dangerous and difficult word in any 

The limits of definition 
137 
of its senses, looser or stricter. But to fairies it can hardly be applied 
For 
it is man who is, in contrast to fairies, supernatural (and often of diminutive 
stature); whereas they are natural, far more natural than he. Such is their 
doom." (J.R.R. Tolkien, "On Fairy Stories") 
E. Explain the following argument about a definition of justice by Plato: "But 
take this matter of doing justice. Can we say that it really consists in noth-
ing more nor less than telling the truth and paying your debts? Are not these 
acts sometimes just and sometimes unjust? Suppose, for example, a friend 
who has lent us a weapon were to go mad and then ask for it back. Surely 
everyone would say that we ought not to do that; it would not be just to do 
it, or to tell the whole truth to the madman. Acting justly, then, cannot be 
defined as telling the truth and paying your debts." 
F. What is the implied definition of "miracle" in the following? "The story of 
the whale swallowing Jonah, though a whale is large enough to do it, bor-
ders greatly on the marvelous; but it would have approached nearer to the 
idea of miracle if Jonah had swallowed the whale." (Thomas Paine, The Age 
of Reason) 
G. Plato having defined man as a featherless biped, Diogenes ran to the mar-
ketplace, bought a chicken, plucked out all its feathers, ran back into Plato's 
classroom, threw the plucked chicken at Plato's feet, and said to the class, 
"Behold Plato's man!" On which account Plato added to the definition: 
"with broad, flat nails." (Diogenes Laertius) 

V. The Second Act of the Mind: 
Judgment 
Section 1. Judgments, propositions, and sentences 
It is very useful at various points in this book, especially at the beginning of a 
new section such as this one, to go back and review the Introduction, Section 4 
(all of logic in two pages, pp. 26-27) or Section 5 (the Three Acts of the Mind, 
pp. 28-34). For that is like a road map that tells you where you are, how every-
thing in the landscape is related to everything else, where it all fits. Without this 
sense of place, without this outline, you may feel lost and confused, and this 
feeling will permeate every new detail you learn. 
We now begin exploring the second act of the mind, judgment, and its log-
ical product, the proposition, which is expressed linguistically in a declarative 
sentence. The distinction, within the second act of the mind, between judgments, 
propositions, and sentences is not absolutely crucial, but what is absolutely cru-
cial for all subsequent progress in logic is the distinction between judgment and 
the other two acts of the mind: the distinction between judgments and concepts 
and the distinction between judgments and arguments - or, in terms of the prod-
ucts of these three acts of the mind, the distinction between propositions and 
terms and the distinction between propositions and syllogisms. These two dis-
tinctions are expressed in language, respectively, in the distinction between sen-
tences and words and in the distinction between sentences and paragraphs. If this 
paragraph was at all confusing to you, please reread pp. 28-34. 
Propositions are most clearly and sharply distinguished from both terms 
and arguments by the fact that only propositions can be either true or false. 
Terms are only clear or unclear, whether these terms stand by themselves or 
form parts of propositions. Propositions arc either true or false, whether they 
stand by themselves or form parts of arguments. Arguments as a whole are nei-
ther true nor false; each proposition within an argument is either true or false. 
Arguments as a whole are either logically valid or logically invalid, depending 
on whether or not the conclusion necessarily follows from the premises. 

Judgments, propositions, and sentences 
139 
The individual mind's inner, private judgments are expressed in proposi-
tions, which are universal and public statements that might be thought of as 
photographs of judgments or footprints of judgments or fossils of judgments. 
A single proposition is the meaning common to all the different languages* 
declarative sentences that express that proposition. "Being is good," "Ens est 
bonum," "Das Sein ist gut" "L'Etre est bon" and "Ousia ariston estinare 
all the same proposition in five different sentences, in five different lan-
guages. 
There are four other kinds of sentences, which are not declarative sentences 
and do not claim to be true. These are not propositions. They are: (1) interrogative 
sentences, which ask questions (e.g. "What time is it?"), (2) imperative sentences, 
which issue commands or requests (e.g. "Please pass the mustard"), (3) exclama-
tory sentences, which directly express emotion (e.g. "Ouch! Good grief!"), and (4) 
performatory sentences, which act to effect changes ("I baptize you ..."). 
The Importance of Propositions 
This second third of this logic text is shorter than the first or third thirds, 
but it is just as important. For propositions, and only propositions, contain truth; 
and truth is the aim and end and goal of reason. The first and third acts of the 
mind are means to the end of truth; only the second act of the mind contains or 
attains that end. One means to this end is clarifying and defining terms, under-
standing the terms which make up the content of a proposition. Another means 
to truth is arguing, trying to prove new propositions (conclusions) from other 
propositions (premises). Since the end is more important than the means, truth 
is more important than definitions and arguments. And it is here, in the second 
act of the mind, that we find truth. 
When we hear others speaking, or when we read what others have written, 
we notice two things present in our consciousness: the objective and the sub-
jective, the things said and our emotional reactions to these things. We are 
bored, interested, moved, scared, irritated, depressed, cheered, disgusted, threat-
ened, or attracted by what we hear or read. It is absolutely essential - not only 
for logic but for all education and in fact for civilization, honesty, and sanity -
that we distinguish these two things, the objective and the subjective; that we 
understand, and conccntratc on, not only our own feelings and reactions to what 
is said but also what is said, what is given to us, our verbal data. We cannot 
justly and intelligently react to what is said if we do not understand what is said, 
what is objective to us; or if we cannot distinguish the objective from the sub-
jective, distinguish what is said from our personal reaction to it. So the first 
thing we must do is to find out what is said, what truth-claims are contained in 
this discourse that is spoken or written - that is, what propositions are being 
uttered. 

140 
V. THE SECOND ACT OF THE MIND: JUDGMENT 
This is the simple and obvious core of the art of reading, and this is one of 
the most useful parts of logic. For the complaints that students can no longer 
read seem to be increasing every generation. After a century of universal public 
education, Americans do not know how to read or write as well today as they did 
a hundred years ago. If you doubt this, compare newspapers or elementary read-
ing textbooks for any grade a century ago with those today. 
One of the best remedies for bad reading and writing is good logic, espe-
cially the analysis of propositions. For thinking clearly, expressing your thoughts 
clearly (in writing or speaking), and interpreting another's expressions (written 
or spoken) clearly are three arts that are very closely allied; no one of them can 
be done well without doing the other two. And the part of logic that is most 
directly related to this is the part that studies propositions. 
Subjcct and Predicate 
After the mind has understood the nature or essence or "whatness" of some-
thing by forming a conccpt, it then goes on to relate two of these concepts to 
each other by making a "judgment." We judge that "all men are mortal" or that 
"apples are fruits" or that "apples are vegetables." (False judgments are judg-
ments too.) 
The mind's act of judgment, expressed in the logical structure callcd a 
"proposition" and in the linguistic structure called a "declarative sentence," 
always has two parts, for it relates to each other two concepts which are 
expressed in two terms and two words or phrases. One is the "subject" and the 
other is the "predicate 
The subject is what we arc talking about. The predicate is what we say 
about it. 
It is easy to identify the subject and predicate of a proposition if you know 
grammar. For the logical subject and predicate are always the same as the gram-
matical subject and predicate. 
The subject and predicate of a proposition arc not interchangeable, like the 
two parts of an equation on the two sides of the equal sign. "2+2=4" means the 
same thing as "4=2+2"; but "God is love" docs not mean the same thing as 
"Love is God." There is no subjcct or predicate in an equation, but there is 
always a subject and a predicate in a proposition, and they perform different 
functions. 
To see this, remember that a declarative sentence is an act of communi-
cation between two people, the speaker (or writer) and the listener (or read-
er). What the speaker says to the listener in a proposition is this: I am going 
to say something about subject S. I assume you already know something 
about S; that you know what S means. S is old, S is behind us. And now I am 
going on to something new, I will say something new about S, I will predi-
cate (affirm or deny) P of S. Perhaps you did not know before that S is P. In 

Judgments, propositions, and sentences 
141 
other words, S is my "sermon topic" and P is my "sermon." S is my title and 
P is my essay. 
Thus "God is love" means: "1 will tell you something new or remarkable or 
worth saying about God - the God I assume you know something about already. 
And what I will tell you is that God is love." This is news. This is controversial, 
and arguable. This may be true or it may be false. But whether it is true or false, 
its meaning is not the same as the meaning of "Love is God." "Love is God" 
means: "I will tell you something about love, the love you already know (pre-
sumably the human love we all experience): this is God, this is ultimate reality, 
seek no further. That is my news, that is my controversial and arguable sermon." 
You can see that these two propositions, "God is love" and "Love is God," say 
something very different, in fact two different religions. The first is a form of 
Theism, the second is a form of Humanism. No matter which of these two may 
be true or false, they mean very different things. Perhaps both are true (though 
they seem to contradict each other), perhaps both are false (some atheists would 
say so), perhaps the first is true and the second is false (most theists would say 
so), and perhaps the first is false and the second is true (most humanists would 
say so); but they are different propositions. 
The Kinds of Propositions 
We have been speaking only of simple propositions, with one subject and 
one predicate. These are called categorical propositions in logic. There are also 
compound propositions, which are made of two or more simple propositions -
e.g. "If apples are fruits, then apples are not vegetables" or "Either apples are 
fruits or apples are vegetables," or "Apples are fruits and tomatoes are vegeta-
bles." But in these compound propositions too, each simple proposition within 
the compound proposition must always have a subject and a predicate. We will 
study compound propositions a few chapters later. There are three kinds: hypo-
thetical ("if. . . then . . ."), disjunctive ("either . . . or . . ."), and conjunctive 
("both . . . and . . ." or "not both . . . and . . ."). 
Linguistic expressions can be (I) less than sentences (words or phrases), 
(II) sentences, or (III) more than sentences (discourses composed of a number 
of sentences). 
Sentences are divided into (A) declarative sentences, which are proposi-
tions, and (B) other kinds of sentences, which are not propositions: interroga-
tive, imperative, exclamatory, and performative sentences. 
Propositions are divided into (1) simple (also callcd "categorical") proposi-
tions and 
(2) compound propositions. 
Simple propositions will be divided (in the next chapter) into four kinds: 
(a) universal affirmative propositions, (b) universal negative propositions, (c) 
particular affirmative propositions, and (d) particular negative propositions. 

142 
V. THE SECOND ACT OF THE MIND: JUDGMENT 
Compound propositions will be divided into (a) hypothetical ("if... then...") 
propositions, (b) disjunctive ("either... or...") propositions, and (c) conjunc-
tive ("both . . . and . . o r "not both . . . and ...") propositions. 
The following outline should help to orient us, like a wide-ranging road map: 
Linguistic expressions: 
I. Less than sentences (terms) 
II. Sentences 
A. Declarative sentences (propositions) 
1. Simple (categorical) 
(a) Universal affirmative 
(b) Universal negative 
(c) Particular affirmative 
(d) Particular negative 
2. Compound 
(a) Hypothetical 
(b) Disjunctive 
(c) Conjunctive 
B. Non-declarative sentences 
1. imperative 
2. interrogative 
3. exclamatory 
4. performative 
III. More than sentences (arguments) 
There arc other possible divisions of propositions. The most important divi-
sion of all is the division into true and false. Each kind of proposition above can 
be either true or false. We may not know whether a given proposition is true or 
false, but every proposition must be either true or false. Either there are cxactly 
91,199 craters on the moon larger than Meteor Crater in Arizona, or not. Either 
the Chicago Cubs are under a curse, and will never win a World Scries until the 
end of the world, or not. 
Because we sometimes do and sometimes do not know whether a proposi-
tion is true or false, we can also divide propositions into three kinds, (a) true (i.e. 
known to be true), (b) false (i.e. known to be false), and (c) unknown. This divi-
sion violates one of the rules of logical division, since it simultaneously uses two 
standards: true vs. false and known vs. unknown. (See p. 64, rule 3.) However, 
in dealing with the Square of Opposition (Chapter VII, Section 2) the classifi-
cation of propositions into true, false, and unknown, which results from doing 
two different divisions at once, is very useful and time-saving. 
Aristotelian vs. Modern Logic on What Propositions Do 
What, cxactly. does a proposition do? It affirms or denies one term (the 

What is truth ? 
143 
predicate) of another (the subject). It asserts that all or some of the subject is or 
is not the predicate. 
There are two ways to look at this. Modern logic texts look at it in terms of 
extension, and of class inclusion. This is why they call simple propositions "cat-
egorical" propositions: because they relate two "categories" to each other. In 
modern logic, "categories" is meant in the broad sense of any classes or sets of 
things. But in traditional, Aristotelian logic, "categories" is meant in the more 
restricted sense explained above in Chapter II, Section 2 (page 54). In Aristo-
telian logic, categories are objectively real kinds, not man-made sets; natural 
rather than artificial. 
They are not just any classes but only the ten highest genera (substance, 
quality, quantity, relation, time, place, action, passion, posture, possession). 
But in modern logic, any things in the world can simply be classified at will 
into mental boxes, and then those boxes are compared as to population (exten-
sion, not comprehension). Thus in modern logic "all men are mortal" means 
"the set of beings that we classify as men is included in the larger set of beings 
that wc classify as mortals." This is a perfectly legitimate thing to do, but in 
Aristotelian logic a proposition does more than that. It deals also with the real 
natures of things, our knowledge of these natures, and the expression of that 
knowledge and those natures in the meanings (comprehension) of terms. Thus 
"all men are mortal" means that all beings that have the essence of humanity 
have the property of mortality as part of that essence, or a consequence of that 
essence. 
The two significant differences here are (1) that modern logic deals with 
extension, not comprehension; class inclusion, not essences or natures of things; 
because it tends to be nominalistic and skeptical of "essences" or "natures" (see 
pages 19-23 and 43-46); and (2) that in modern logic these "classes" of things 
that are related in a proposition as subject and predicate are thought to be con-
structed rather than discovered. They arc created by our act of classifying, for 
whatever purposes we may have. Modern logic manipulates class concepts; tra-
ditional logic explores the natures of things. 
Section 2. What is truth? (P) 
Truth is the point and purpose and goal of propositions. But what is truth? 
This question "What is truth?" is really one of the easiest of all philosoph-
ical questions to answer. We all know what truth is, and where it is. The difficult 
thing is not to define or locate truth, but to pursue it and find it. Truth is like a 
Siberian tiger: wc all know what Siberian tigers arc and where they live, but 
actually hunting and capturing one is disconccrtingly difficult. 
Let us begin with the question of where truth is. Where docs truth live? 
What is the house of truth? What sort of things can have "truth'7 
We say ccrtain "ideas" arc true or false or that certain "thoughts" are true 

144 
V. THE SECOND ACT OF THE MIND: JUDGMENT 
or false. The words "ideas" and "thoughts" are rather vague and generic, and 
from a logical point of view we must distinguish three different kinds of "ideas" 
or "thoughts." namely the three acts of the mind (conceiving, judging, and rea-
soning), their three mental products (concepts, judgments, and arguments), their 
three logical expressions (terms, propositions, and syllogisms), and their three 
linguistic expressions (words or phrases, declarative sentences, and paragraphs). 
Truth and falsity reside only in the second of each of these sets of three things. 
As we have already seen, truth does not reside in concepts or in arguments 
but only in judgments. The terms that express concepts are either unambiguous 
or ambiguous, but never true or false. Only when two terms are combined in a 
proposition can there be truth or falsity. The syllogisms that express arguments 
are either logically valid or invalid, but never true or false. Each proposition in 
a syllogism is either true or false, but the syllogism as a whole is not. 
Modern logic obscures this distinction because it reduces validity to truth. 
It interprets a syllogism like "all A is B and all B is C, therefore all A is C" as 
simply the claim that the following proposition is true: "All cases of proposition 
p (that all A is B) being true together with proposition q (that all B is C) being 
true are also cases of proposition c (that all A is C) being true." 
Truth does not reside in any other logical entities than propositions, but it 
does reside elsewhere than in propositions. For example, we use the word "true" 
to refer to a quality that resides in some things, insofar as they conform to a stan-
dard by which the mind judges them. We say "This is true money, but that is 
counterfeit." "This is a true (original) Van Gogh, but that a copy." "The publican 
had true piety, but the Pharisee had false piety." "He is true to his promises." 
"What the prophet says will come true." This kind of truth — the truth in things, 
ontological truth - is the conformity of the thing to the mind, to an idea or design 
or standard in a mind, human or divine; whereas logical truth, i.e. propositional 
truth, as we shall sec, is the conformity of the mind to the thing. 
According to religious Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, the ultimate "house 
of truth" is the mind of God. God invents the truth of the universe, as His art; 
man discovers it, as his scicnce. Human science is the indirect reading of the 
divine mind. 
We also use the word "true" to refer to a quality that resides in persons, 
insofar as they are authentic, reliable, and honest. "He's a true man; she's a true 
woman." "True" here means "true to his word, trustable, faithful." (There is a 
distinctive Hebrew word for this: emeth.) God is called "faithful and true" 
(emeth) in the Hebrew scripturcs. 
Once we have our answer to where truth is, it becomes easier to answer our 
second question, what truth is, especially if we confine our answer to logical 
truth. Aristotle defined truth, and what everyone does in fact mean by truth, in 
the most simple and commonsensical possible way when he said, "If a man says 
of what is that it is, or of what is not that it is not, he speaks the truth, but if he 
says of what is not that it is, or of what is that it is not, he does not speak the 

The four kinds of categorical propositions 
145 
truth." There you have it: the answer to "What is truth?" in one 48-word sen-
tence, and not one word of more than one syllable! The ability to speak advanced 
wisdom in words of one syllable is a true test of a philosopher, or at least a good 
philosophy teacher. As G.K. Chesterton says, "Most of the machinery of mod-
ern language is labour-saving machinery; and it saves mental labour very much 
more than it ought... . Long words go rattling by us like long railway trains 
It is a good exercise to try for once to express any opinion one holds in words of 
one syllable. If you say, 'The social utility of the indeterminate sentence is rec-
ognized by all criminologists as a part of our sociological evolution towards a 
more humane and scientific view of punishment,' you can go on talking like that 
for hours with hardly a movement of the gray matter inside your skull. But if you 
begin 'I wish Jones to go to gaol [jail] and Brown to say when Jones shall come 
out,' you will discover, with a thrill of horror, that you are obliged to think." 
(Orthodoxy) 
Telling the truth means "telling it like it is," and knowing the truth means 
"knowing what is." Truth is the conformity of thought to thing, mind to reality, 
thought's subject to thought's object. And we express what-is in true proposi-
tions (and what-is-not in false propositions). 
Even if you say (as some philosophers do) that truth is what works 
(Pragmatism), or that truth is the ontological size of an idea (Monism), or that 
truth is the coherence of an idea with other ideas (Idealism), you are still always 
presupposing Aristotle's commonsensical definition (often called "the corre-
spondence theory of truth") by saying that this (your definition) is in fact what 
truth really is; you are trying to "tell it like it is": that truth really is what works, 
or ontological size, or coherence. 
(A technical point, but an important one: to speak accurately, Aristotle's the-
ory is more sophisticated than the one modern philosophers often call the "cor-
respondence theory" [usually associated with Locke]. Locke's is a "picture the-
ory" while Aristotle's is a "formal identity theory." Locke believed that our ideas 
are copies of reality and that what we know immediately and first of all is our 
own ideas. This logically leads to skepticism [though Locke did not draw this 
consequence], for if we never know reality directly and immediately, we can 
never be sure which pictures of it truly correspond to it and which do not. In con-
trast, Aristotle taught that the very same identical "form" or essence [e.g. apple-
ness] that exists in reality [in the apple] materially and individually and con-
cretely, is abstracted by the mind and exists in the mind immaterially and uni-
versally and abstractly.) 
Section 3. The four kinds of categorical propositions (B) 
Every proposition has a matter, or content, and a form. The matter of a propo-
sition is its two terms, its subject term and its predicate term. The content of 
these two terms is almost infinitely variable. Propositions can say anything 

146 
V. THE SECOND ACT OF THE MIND: JUDGMENT 
about anything. But the form of a simple (categorical) proposition consists in 
only two variables: the "quantity" and the "quality." 
The "quantity" of a proposition means how much of the subject we are talk-
ing about, all or some. The quantity is either universal (all) or particular 
(some). 
The "quality" of the proposition means whether it is affirmative or nega-
tive, whether the predicate is affirmed of the subject or denied of the subject. 
The "matter," then, is the two terms, and the "form" tells how these two 
terms (the subject and the predicate) are related to each other. 
Since a proposition can be either universal or particular in quantity and 
either affirmative or negative in quality, there are four possibilities: 
A: universal affirmative propositions (e.g. "All men are mortal") 
E: universal negative propositions (e.g. "No men are mortal") 
I: particular affirmative propositions (e.g. "Some men are mortal") 
O: particular negative propositions (e.g. "Some men are not mortal") 
The four logical forms of categorical propositions are called A, E, I, and O 
for short. This tradition comes from medieval Latin: A and I are the first two 
vowels in the Latin word afprmoy which means "I affirm." An A proposition is 
universal and affirmative (all S is P) and an I proposition is particular and affir-
mative (some S is P). E and O arc the first two vowels in the Latin word nego, 
which means "I deny." An E proposition is universal and negative (no S is P), 
and an O proposition is particular and negative (some S is not P). 
Singular Propositions 
There are really six kinds of propositions rather than four because there are 
really three kinds of quantity: universal, particular, and singular. Singular 
propositions do not talk about cither all of a class or some of a class because 
they do not talk about a class at all, but about an individual. E.g. "Socrates was 
bald," or "The next sound you hear will be the hyena." Since we cannot divide 
the extension of a concrete individual thing or person, as we can divide the 
extension of a class, there can never be a singular proposition that begins with 
"some." That is. singular propositions are not particular propositions. The ter-
minology of logic at this point can be misleading, since in ordinary language 
"particular" has two meanings: "some members of this class" and "this one con-
cretc individual." In logic we use "particular" only in the first sense. 
Instead of treating singular propositions as a third kind of quantity, neither 
universal nor particular, wc can treat them all as universal propositions, since 
they always refer to all of the individual they refer to. An individual cannot be 
divided. "Socrates is mortal" means "Socrates as a whole is mortal, all Socrates 

Logical form 
147 
is mortal." (You might think that only part of Socrates is mortal since his body 
can die but his soul cannot. But even so, the concrete individual person Socrates, 
who has both a body and a soul, is mortal, i.e. can die, because his body and soul 
can be divided from each other.) So we will not need six forms of propositions 
(universal affirmative, universal negative, particular affirmative, particular neg-
ative, singular affirmative, and singular negative) but only four, since we can 
treat singular propositions as universal propositions. 
Only Four Forms of Propositions 
We also need not subdivide particular propositions, though we could. More 
precise specifications of "some," such as "most" and "many," can all be includ-
ed under "particular," rather than multiplying the forms of propositions to more 
than four. 
There is an immense advantage in reducing all simple propositions to only 
these four forms. For if we have only four forms, we have a very limited num-
ber of possibilities for combinations and relations among them, and thus we 
have only a small number of simple rules about them. Fitting the infinitely var-
ied content of ordinary-language propositions into one of four and only four log-
ical forms is like fitting millions of soldiers into only four ranks, or millions of 
people into only four sizes of T-shirts. It is a "Procrustean bed." 
The price we have to pay for this simplification is that just as some people 
just don't fit into Small, Medium, Large, or Extra Large T-shirts, some parts of 
the meaning of some ordinary-language propositions occasionally cannot be put 
into the simplified scheme of four forms. Sometimes this missing meaning can 
be put into the matter, or content, and sometimes it has to be ignored and omit-
ted for the time being. The two most usual losses are "certainly" vs. "probably" 
and "many" vs. "few." For instance, in the proposition "Man is certainly mortal," 
"certainly" is not part of the subject or the predicate, but expresses the necessi-
ty of the relationship between man and mortality. This is dealt with in an 
advanced form of logic called "modal logic," but not here in this elementary 
treatment. "Only a few men arc heroes" loses part of its meaning (the specifica-
tion of quantity) when translated into "some men are heroes" or into "some men 
are not heroes," or even into both. 
Section 4. Logical form (B) 
We need to translate or re-express ordinary language propositions into a stricter 
logical form for two reasons: (1) to more clearly understand what they say and 
(2) to calculate whether arguments that contain these propositions are valid or 
invalid. 

148 
V. THE SECOND ACT OF THE MIND: JUDGMENT 
All propositions must fit into one of the four following molds: 
(1) Universal affirmative (A) proposition: All |S| is |P| 
(2) Universal negative (E) proposition: No |S) is |P) 
(3) Particular affirmative (I) proposition: Some |S] is |P| 
(4) Particular negative (O) proposition: Some |S| is not |P] 
Here are a few examples of the difference between ordinary language and 
logical form. 
Ordinary language: "Birds fly." 
Logical form: All [birds] arc [things that fly] 
Ordinary language: "Absolute perfection no mortal will ever attain." 
Logical form: No [mortals] are [ones who will ever attain absolute perfection] 
Ordinary language: "Not all is gold that glitters." 
Logical form: Some [that which glitters] is not [gold] 
Before you have taken a logic coursc it is almost impossible to understand 
why it is so important to put propositions into such strict logical form. It seems 
clumsy, artificial, and "picky." Why then must we use logical form? The useful-
ness of logical form is similar to the usefulness of numbers. Once things are 
reduced to quantity, many calculations can be made about them with great effi-
ciency, clarity, and certainty. It is similar to the binary, zero-sum language of 
computers: translating everything into this digital format gives us great power 
and efficiency in calculating. (Symbolic logic is all calculating; Aristotelian 
logic, however, is not no calculating.) In a much more modest way, once we (1) 
separate the form from the matter by putting the matter inside the square brack-
ets, and (2) reduce the forms of propositions into four and only four, we can then 
calculate many things on the basis of the form alone. 
For instance, oncc we reduce "all men arc mortal," and "all pigs are green" 
to the same form, the "universal affirmative" proposition All [S| is |P|, we can 
then tell that the argument "All pigs are green and all philosophers are pigs, 
therefore all philosophers are green" is logically valid, formally valid, even 
though all of its propositions arc false. It has the exact same logical form as the 
argument "All men are mortal, and all Greek philosophers are men, therefore all 
Greek philosophers are mortal," all of whose propositions are true. 
When we determine whether an argument is logically valid or invalid (in 
Part III), we do so on the basis of the form alone, abstracted from the truth of the 
content or matter. In order to do that, we need to distinguish the form and the 
mancr, by translating the ordinary language propositions into logical form, so 
that wc can see these two things, the form and the matter, distinctly. Once a 
proposition is in logical form, we can see at a glance what is its matter and what 
is its form. For logical form puts all its matter, its content, i.e. the subject and 
predicate terms, inside square brackets and puts all its form outside the brackets. 

Logical form 
149 
In order lo put all the complcx variety of ordinary language propositions 
into only four rigid logical forms, leaving no room for variation, all the variation 
has to go into the matter, the S and P terms inside the brackets. It is an enor-
mously elTicient simplification. 
Though it seems "picky" it is important to use brackets when writing 
propositions in logical form - much more important than you probably think. If 
you "cheat" and drop them, you will almost inevitably make many sloppy mis-
takes later. Insistence on being careful about this tiny and nitpicking detail will 
probably make a surprising difference in clarity later in dealing with complex 
arguments. They are like curbs at the sides of streets or frames around pictures. 
We have four forms because we have two variables with two possibilities for 
cach: two possible quantities (universal or particular) and two possible qualities 
(affirmative or negative). 
The quantity is indicated by the quantifier, which is the word before the 
subject in logical form. "All" and "No" are universal quantifiers; "Some" is the 
particular quantifier. 
The other variable in a proposition's form is the quality: a simple proposi-
tion is either affirmative or negative, depending on whether it affirms its predi-
cate of its subject (S is P) or denies its predicate of its subject (S is not P). 
The quality is indicated by the copula, which is the "is" or "is not" (for sin-
gular subjects), "are" or "are not" (for plural subjects). The copula comes 
between the subject and the predicate in logical form. 
No other verb can be a copula, only "is" or "is not" (or "are" or "are not") 
The copula is almost more like an equal sign than like a word; it expresses the 
relation between the subject and the predicate, as an equal sign expresses the 
relationship between the two sides of an equation. However, remember that in 
ordinary language "is" does not mean the same thing as an equal sign: see above, 
page 140, "Subject and Predicate." 
When the main verb of an ordinary-language proposition is "is," that verb 
can be used as the copula in our logical-form translation of the proposition. But 
when the main verb is not "is" (or "is not"), wc need to insert an "is" into the 
logical form to make the copula. Every logical-form proposition needs a copu-
la, and no other word is allowed as the copula, for that would give us more than 
two copulas and thus more than four forms, and that would make subsequent 
calculations based on the form alone much more complex. 
So "Some men arc mortal" translates word for word into logical form, but 
"A few bad apples corrupt the whole barrel" docs not. "A few" becomes "some," 
and "corrupts the whole barrel" becomes the predicate. ("Corrupts" is not a cop-
ula; it is part of the predicate term.) But if we were then simply to insert the 
affirmative copula, we would get the grammatically unintelligible "Some bad 
apples are corrupts the whole barrel." What can we do to amend that? 
Here is what we must do. In strict logical form, each term, predicate as well 
as subject, needs to be a noun, a noun phrase, or a pronoun. The reason for this 

150 
V THE SECOND ACT OF THE MIND: JUDGMENT 
is so that each term can be independent, and shift positions if necessary, from 
subject to predicate or from predicate to subject. (And this will be necessary 
later, when dealing with arguments.) But a verb or an adjective cannot be a sub-
ject. Only a noun (or a noun phrase or a pronoun) can be a subject. Since every 
predicate must be able to be used also as a subject, it must be changed into a 
noun. So "corrupts the whole barrel" is changed into "that which corrupts the 
whole barrel." 
We will be using "that which" so often in this way that it is convenient to 
use the abbreviation "tw" for it. We need to add **that which" before a verb, 
when the predicate is a verb, and "that which is," or "twi" before an adjective, 
when the predicate is an adjective. But we do not need to use "twi" before a term 
that is already a noun. 
IF PREDICATE IS . . . 
a verb 
e.g. "X grows y" 
an adjective 
e.g. "X is large" 
U S E . . . 
tw (that which) 
All [X] is [tw grows y] 
twi (that which is) 
All [X] is [twi large] 
When translating from ordinary language to logical form, the basic and uni-
versal rule is that we may change the wording if necessary but never the mean-
ing. When we change "A few apples corrupt the whole barrel" to "Some [apples] 
are [that which corrupt the whole barrel]" we have changed the wording (in two 
places) to get the proposition into logical form, but we have not changed the 
meaning. 
Existential propositions. Some propositions do not relate two terms, subjcct 
and predicate, but simply assert the existence of the subject: e.g. "God is," or 
"Santa Claus doesn't exist," or "There are four kinds of propositions." When we 
say "God is," we arc not using "is" as a copula, for there is no predicate after it, 
but we are using it to assert existence and deny nonexistence. The simplest way 
to treat existential propositions at this point is to reduce them to standard-form 
propositions with "that which exists" as their predicate. However, if we get into 
more advanced logic we will see that these existential propositions have impor-
tantly different meanings and obey different rules than others. 
So the four (and only four) strict logical forms for all simple propositions 
arc: 
A: All [S] is [P] 
E: No [S] is [P] 
I: Some [S ] is [P] 
O: Some [S] is not [P] 

Logical form 
151 
The Ambiguity of "All S is not P" 
The form for the E, "No S is P," docs not begin with cither **alF or "some" 
but with "no." The word "no" does double duty: it indicates both universality of 
quantity and negativity of quality. Thus in the logical form for the E, the appar-
ently-affirmativc copula "is" is really negative. 
Why don't we use "all S is not P" for our logical form for the E proposi-
tion? That would conform to the form of the other three kinds of propositions, 
where the only quantifiers are "all" or "some" and where "is" is always the affir-
mative copula while "is not" is always the negative copula. 
The answer is that in the English language, "all S is not P" is ambiguous. It 
has two very different meanings. Only one of these two meanings is that of an E 
proposition, that every S fails to be a P. The other meaning of "All S is not P" is, 
very strangely, that some S is not P. In the ordinary English that we all speak every 
day without thinking about it, "all S is not P" often means "some S is not P." 
This sounds confusing or even ridiculous only in a logic course; outside the 
classroom we all understand it intuitively without hesitation. When I say, "All 
lawyers are not crooks," I am not saying that no lawyers are crooks. I am 
responding to a prior assertion or belief, implied or expressed, that all lawyers 
are crooks, and I am denying that. How do I deny the idea that all lawyers are 
crooks? There are three ways to express this denial: 
(1)1 can say "Some lawyers are not crooks." 
(2) I can say "Not all lawyers are crooks." 
(3) I can say "All lawyers are not crooks." 
In the first case, my proposition is a straightforward O proposition. 
In the second case, I insert a "not" before "all lawyers are crooks." "Not all 
lawyers are crooks" means "It's not true that all lawyers are crooks." If I can find 
some lawyers who are not crooks. I have disproved the idea that all lawyers are 
crooks. But instead of saying "some lawyers are not crooks," I express the very 
same meaning in these different words: I say, "Not all lawyers are crooks." This 
is really an O proposition, and we can call it the "tricky O" proposition. It is an 
O that looks a bit like an E. 
The third case is even trickier, because it looks even more like an E, and can 
be called the "very tricky O." When I accent the "all" in "all lawyers are not 
crooks," I mean the same thing as in the two cases above. The meaning is an O. 
So we need one totally unambiguous logical form for the E proposition, and 
"all S is not P" is not unambiguous (since it may mean either the E or the "very 
tricky O"), so we use the unambiguous "no S is P" instead. 
The logical form for an O proposition is "some S is not P," and this can also 
be ambiguous if we accent the word "some," thereby implying that "some and 
only some S is not P." We do not use acccnts, or anything ambiguous, in logical 
form. In logical form, "some " does not mean "only some," or "some but not all" 

152 
V. THE SECOND ACT OF THE MIND: JUDGMENT 
(we could call this the strong meaning of "some ") but "at least some " (wc could 
call this the weak meaning of "some"). 
Euler's Circles are a useful visual image for the four kinds of categorical propo-
sitions. They were invented by the 18th-century Swiss mathematician Lconhard 
Euler, who drew four different circle diagrams for the four different kinds of 
propositions to show the different relations between S and P that each of these 
four assert. These circles are useful both for understanding just what is asserted 
by each of the four kinds of propositions and also for a very quick and easy way 
of checking syllogisms for validity (page 237). 
Just what does each of these four propositions mean? 
The A proposition affirms that every S is a P. that all S's are P's, that if it's 
S it must be P. In terms of comprehension, the A proposition means that P is part 
of the meaning of S. In terms of extension, the A proposition asserts that the 
whole class of S's, or the whole population of S's, is included in the class of P s. 
To understand "all stallions arc horses " imagine the population of each term 
inside a fenced-in corral. "All stallions arc horses" asserts that the corral con-
taining stallions is contained by the corral containing horses. The circumference 
of the circles are like the fences around the corrals. 
The particular affirmative proposition (I) asserts that some S is P. In terms 
of comprehension, this means that P is part of the meaning of some S's. In terms 
of extension, it means that some S's are included in the class of P's. 
Remember that "some" here docs not mean "some and only some, but not 
all." It means simply "some," that is, "at least some," or "some and perhaps all, 
but perhaps not." When you say "some" in logic, you do not commit yourself to 
cither "all" or "not all." You do not "read between the lines." "Some" means sim-
ply "some" and nothing more, in logical form. 
But if someone else has accented the word "some" in ordinary language, 
this implies "only some," or "some and not all." When someone says, "Well, 
some lawyers are honest." he implies that only some but not all lawyers are hon-
est. In ordinary language the main thrust of "Some lawyers are honest" (with an 
accented "some") is really negative, though it looks like an 1. This ambiguity 
Section 5. Euler's Circles (B) 
Interpreting the Four Forms 
A: 

Euler s Circles / Tricky propositions 
153 
could be classified under the "fallacy of accent.** (See above, page 75.) The only 
way to reveal the negative aspect is to add a second proposition, an O, So the 
sentence "Some lawyers are honest" with accent is really equivalent to "Some 
lawyers are honest (I) and Some lawyers are not honest (O).** 
The Euler diagram for an I proposition puts part of the S circle, or S class, 
into P, and leaves the rest of it in dotted lines outside P. The dotted lines signify 
the unknown. When we know only that "some S is P," we know only that some 
S is within P, we do not know whether or not some S is also outside P. But we 
make room for that possibility by the dotted lines. 
The universal negative proposition (E) asserts that no S is P. In terms of 
comprehension, P does not belong to S; in terms of extension, the populations 
of P and S exclude each other, so that there is nothing that is a member of both 
classes, S and P. Thus the circles are exclusive, neither inclusive, as with an A 
proposition, nor partly overlapping, as with an I proposition. 
© 0 
The Euler diagram for an O puts part of the class (or circle) of S outside P 
(i.e. in "not-P"), but leaves the other part dotted or unknown. If we know only 
that "some S is not P" (i.e. that some S is outside P), we do not know whether 
or not it is also true that some S is P (i.e. that some S is also inside P). 
O: 
Section 6. Tricky propositions 
Besides the "tricky O," there are other forms of propositions that are tricky: 
Exclusive propositions begin with the word "only." The main thrust of such 
propositions is negative, even though there is no "no" in the ordinary language. 
The "only" functions negatively. E.g. "Only men are allowed into the men's 
room" means not merely that all men are allowed into the men's room, or that 
some men are allowed into the men's room, but that no one but men is allowed 
into the men's room, that no non-men are allowed into the men's room. 
There are two equally good ways to translate an exclusive proposition: (1) 
we could translate "Only men are allowed into the men's room" into "No non-

154 
V THE SECOND ACT OF THE MIND: JUDGMENT 
men are allowed into the men's room," in the form of an E proposition; (2) or we 
can translate it into an A proposition as follows: "Only men are allowed into the 
men's room" becomes "All who are allowed into the mens room arc men." 
"Only S is P" can be reworded as "All P is S." The rule is always that we may 
change the wording but never the meaning. 
Another, different kind of exclusive proposition begins not with "only" but 
with "the only." These are easy to reword. "The only S is P" means simply "All 
S is P." ("The only" = "all") E.g. "The only good Yankee is a dead Yankee" 
means that "All good Yankees are dead Yankees." "The only ones allowed into the 
men's room are men" means "All who are allowed into the men s room are men." 
Exceptive propositions begin with "all except...." These propositions real-
ly say two things and should be translated into two propositions. "All humans 
except the first humans had human parents" means both that "All humans who 
were not the first humans had human parents" and that "The first humans did 
not have human parents." "Every animal exccpt man lacks reason" means both 
that "All non-human animals lack reason" and that "Man does not lack reason." 
Indesignate propositions. 
Some propositions have no words to indicate 
quantity, and we have to intuit whether they are meant as universal or particular. 
E.g. "people are fickle," or "cliffs arc dangerous." or "fans swarmed the field." 
Clearly, "cliffs are dangerous" is an A and "fans swarmed the field" is an I, but 
"people are fickle" might be meant either universally ("All people are fickle") 
or particularly ("Some people are fickle"); it is hard to tell which. One helpful 
rule here is that if the predicate belongs to the subject by nature (or essentially), 
the proposition is universal; if only by accident, the proposition is particular. 
Thus cliffs are by nature dangerous, and since all cliffs have the nature of cliffs, 
all cliffs are dangerous. But fans do not swarm the field by nature, just bccause 
they are fans, so that proposition is particular. As to "People are fickle," if "fick-
le" means "somewhat fickle" or "capable of being fickle," this belongs to man 
by nature and thus to all men, so the proposition is universal; but if "fickle" 
means "very fickle" or "surprisingly fickle" or "unusually fickle," this is acci-
dental and the proposition is particular. 
So to dccidc whether indesignate propositions are universal or particular, 
we must look at the comprehension. If the predicate belongs to the subject nec-
essarily, bccause of the nature of the subject as such, it is universal; if not, it is 
particular. Thus the meaning of maxims like "Great books deserve to be taught" 
is universal, while the meaning of rough generalizations like "White men can't 
dance" is not. 
Note that we are only speaking of meaning here, not truth. Do not try to 
determine the meaning of someone else's proposition by imposing what you 
believe is true onto it. That would be confusing interpretation 
(of what the 
proposition means) with beliefs what you think is true). (See page 355, point A.) 
More specific quantifiers: Sometimes, we cannot fit all the quantitative 
meaning into our strict logical form. "A few," "many," "most," "a small quantity 

Tricky propositions 
155 
of" and "a fairly large percentage of" all have to bccome "some" What do wc 
do with cxacl numbers, e.g. "Three ships took Columbus to America"? "Three" 
cannot become "all"; and we cannot have more than two quantities, "all" and 
"some," or else wc would multiply our logical forms so much that wc could not 
make simple rules about them, as we will be doing for the rest of the book. We 
could just say "Some" instead of "three," but that would lose an important part 
of the meaning. So it is best to put exact numbers into the matter or contcnt of 
the term, with an "all" added: e.g. "Three ships took Columbus to America" 
becomes: "All [three ships] are [tw took Columbus to America].** 
"Few " vs. "A fewPropositions 
beginning with "a few" are straightforward 
I propositions, but propositions beginning with "few" are usually O proposi-
tions, bccause their main intent is negative. "Few Hittites could read" means to 
say something about Hittite illiteracy more than Hittite literacy, so it is best to 
translate it as "some Hittites are those who could not read." Yet it seems to imply 
that some Hittites could read, so it also implies an I. It is really two propositions. 
Other quantifiers: sentences beginning with "every," "each," "everyone," 
"anyone,'* "whoever," "any," "everything," "one who," "that which," "anything," 
and the like are obviously universal. Sentences beginning with "a few," "few," 
"many," "most," "a group of," and the like are particular. 
Temporal quantifiers. 
Sometimes time words do the job of quantifiers, 
"never" indicating an E. "always" an A. and "sometimes" or "occasionally" an I 
or an O. E.g. "Hyenas never really laugh" becomes "No [hyena] is [tw really 
laughs]" and "Water is always H 20" becomes "All [water] is [H20]." But some-
times the temporal word is part of the meaning of a term. e.g. "Socrates is the 
philosopher I always teach first to beginners." 
Compound propositions. We do not have strict logical forms for compound 
propositions yet, and the forms we will use for them are more symbolic and 
quasi-mathematical than those for simple propositions. (In fact, symbolic logic 
is much more useful there than Aristotelian logic.) But even at this point we 
should be able to rccognize them, their distinction from simple propositions, and 
the three kinds of them: hypothetical ("if... then ...") propositions, disjunctive 
("either . . . or . . .") propositions, and conjunctive ("both . . . and . . ." or "not 
both .. . and . . .**) propositions. 
When a single compound sentence contains more than one simple proposi-
tion without being either hypothetical or disjunctive, it is usually conjunctive: 
e.g. "To be a philosopher is not merely to have subtle thoughts, nor even to 
found a school, but so to love wisdom as to live according to its dictates." 
(Thoreau, Walden) 
Exercises: Identify each of the following as (a) not a proposition at all. (b) a sim-
ple (categorical) proposition, or (c) a compound proposition. If it is a simple 
proposition, put it into strict logical form. 

156 
V. THE SECOND ACT OF THE MIND: JUDGMENT 
The clearest way to do this is in three steps: 
First, decide whether it is a proposition. 
Second, if it is, decide whether it is an A, E, I, or O. 
Third, write down the logical form for whichever type of proposition you 
have decided it is. A, E, I, or O, with the brackets empty. 
Fourth, put the words for the subject and the predicate into the brackets. 
There is a veritable plethora of exercises here, as there were for definitions 
and as there will also be for enthymemes (abbreviated syllogisms: page 264), 
since these are the three most useful and basic exercises in logic, one for each of 
the three acts of the mind. To do the basics well is more useful than to do every-
thing else but to do it poorly: and you learn to do the basics well only by habit, 
which comes from much practice. Most of the 174 propositions that follow are 
a treasure trove of wisdom as well as good exercise. 
A. Some relatively easy propositions: 
1. Some sentences can't be classified as any kind of proposition at all. 
2. Every single person in this room and in the room next door too - you 
know, that big ugly room with the air conditioner in it. 
3. Come here, you ungrateful cur! 
4. Socrates was a philosopher. 
5. All philosophy professors aren't absent-minded. 
6.1 itch. 
7. Nothing matters. 
8. Everything except the observer of every thing in the universe is a thing in 
the universe. 
9. Mad Cow Disease is no myth. 
10. Some gamblers are just lucky and some aren't. 
11. The fish does not exist that I can't catch. 
12. Alexander the Great was Aristotle s student. 
13. Not one of the Greeks at Thermopylae escaped. 
14. Everyone who knows that everyone is a fraud, is a fraud. 
15. Not everyone worth meeting is worth befriending. 
B. Some famous quotations: 
1. "Many a wit is not a whit wittier than Whittier." 
2. "Charity begins at home." 
3. "A thousand Swedes ran through the reeds chasing one Norwegian." 
4. "I hereby dub thee Knight of the Round Table." 
5. "Every little breeze seems to whisper 'Louise'." 
6. "Halt! Who goes there?" 
7. "I love you." 
8. "If you continue to turn the crank of that torture rack, you will in all prob-
ability detach all four of my limbs from their sockets." 

Tricky propositions 
157 
9. "Black, black, black is the color of my true lovers hair." 
10. "He jests at scars who never felt a wound" 
11. "No one is free who does not command himself" 
12. "Every man is a good judge of his own interests." 
13. "Familiarity breeds contempt." 
14. "Loose lips sink ships." 
15. "Damn the torpedoes; full speed ahead!" 
16. "What this country needs is a good five cent cigar" 
17. "A chicken in every pot" 
18. "History never repeats itself." 
19. "Happy the country that has no history." 
20. (Chinese curse:) "May you live in interesting times." 
21. "Now fades the world with all its glamour." 
22. "What man has done, man can do." 
23. "He who is not with me is against me." 
24. "He who laughs last, laughs best." 
25. "Uneasy lies the head that wears the crown." 
26. "Nothing that is morally wrong can be politically right." 
C. Quotations from the classics: 
1."They also serve who only stand and wait" (John Milton, "On His 
Blindness") 
2. "A good talker, even more than a good orator, implies a good audience." 
(Leslie Stephens) 
3. "None think the great unhappy but the great." (Edward Young) 
4. "We make a ladder of our vices if we trample those same vices underfoot." 
(St. Augustine) 
5. "No person except a natural born citizen shall be eligible to the office of 
President." (U.S. Constitution) 
6. "Those who do not complain are never pitied." (Jane Austen) 
7. "If an angel were to tell us anything of his philosophy, I believe many 
propositions would sound like 2 x 2 = 1 3 " (George Lichetenberg) 
8. "The world is a looking glass and gives back to every man the reflection 
of his own face" (William Makepeace Thackeray) 
9. "No man can live without joy." (St. Thomas Aquinas) 
10. "Only the adventurous can understand the greatness of the past." (Alfred 
North Whitehead) 
11. "1 know no thought that more wonderfully concentrates a man's mind than 
the thought that he must hang tomorrow morning." (Samuel Johnson) 
12. "Born of the sun, they traveled a brief while toward the sun, and left the 
vivid air singed with their honour." (Stephen Spender) 
13. "It is useless to attempt to reason a man out of a thing he was never rea-
soned into." (Jonathan Swift) 

15X 
V. THE SECOND ACT OF THE MIND: JUDGMENT 
14. "Work is the curse of the drinking class." (George Bernard Shaw) 
15. "Man is neither angel nor brute, and the unfortunate thing is that he who 
would act the angel acts the brute." (Pascal) 
16. "Some books are to be tasted, others to be swallowed, and some few to be 
chewed and digested." (Francis Bacon) 
17. "Abandon all hope, ye who enter here." (Dante) 
18. "Cleopatra's nose: if it had been shorter, the whole history of the world 
would have been changed." (Pascal) 
19. "The mass of men lead lives of quiet desperation." (Thoreau) 
20. "All happy families resemble one another; every unhappy family is unhap-
py in its own fashion." (Tolstoy) 
21. "For all have not the gift of martyrdom." (John Dryden) 
22. "What is the use of running when you are on the wrong road?" (John Ray) 
23. "Nothing is demonstrable unless the contrary implies a contradiction." 
(Hume) 
24. "Either death is a state of nothingness and utter unconsciousness, o r . . . there 
is a change and migration of the soul from this world to another." (Plato) 
25. "The moving finger writes; and, having writ, moves on; not all your piety 
nor wit shall lure it back to cancel half a line, nor all your tears wash out 
a word of it." (Edward Fitzgerald) (There are 4 propositions here!) 
26. "Twas brillig, and the slithy toves did gyre and gimble in the wabe; AH 
mimsy were the borogoves, and the mome raths outgrabe." (Lewis Carroll) 
27. "If thy Superior drawl or hesitate in his words, pretend not to help him out 
or prompt him." (The School 
of Manners, 
or Rules for 
Children's 
Behaviour, 1701) 
28. "The only thing necessary for the triumph of evil is for good men to do 
nothing." (Edmund Burke) 
29. "Industrious and intelligent boys who live in the country arc mostly well 
up in the cunning art of catching small birds at odd times during the win-
ter months." (A Plain Cookery Book for the Working Classes by Charles 
Elme Francatelli, 1861) 
30. "Fear God. Honour the King. Reverence thy Parents. Submit to thy 
Superiors. Despise not thy inferiors. Be courteous with thy Equals. Pray 
daily and devoutly. Converse with the Good. Imitate not the wicked. 
Hearken to Instruction. Be desirous of Learning. Love the School. Be 
always cleanly. Study Vertue. Provoke no Body. Love thy Schoolfellows. 
Please thy Master. Let not play entice thee. Restrain thy Tongue. Covet 
future Honour, which only Vcrtuc and Wisdom can procure. (The School 
of Manners, 
1701) 
31. "'Bah!' said Scrooge, 'Humbug!'" (Dickens) 
32. "The silken, sad, uncertain rustling of each purple curtain thrilled me." 
(Edgar Allen Poe) 

Tricky propositions 
159 
33. "In the beginning there was no baseball.'* (J.B. Phillips) 
34. "I ain't ever had a job; I just always played baseball." (Leroy Robert 
"Satchel" Paige) 
35. "God crcated man in his own image and man has been returning the com-
pliment ever since." (George Bernard Shaw) 
36. "Man was created a little lower than the angels, and has been getting a lit-
tle lower ever since." (Josh Billings) 
37. "Through love all things become lighter which understanding thought too 
heavy." (Hatif) 
38. (An extremely difficult proposition to put into logical form is Churchill's 
famous praise of the pilots of the Royal Air Force): "Never has so much 
been owed by so many to so few." 
D. From the Dhammapada 
(the sayings of Gautama Siddhartha, the Buddha) 
1. "Whatever we are is caused by what we think." 
2. "Speak or act with an impure mind and trouble will follow you as the 
wheel follows the ox that draws the cart; speak or act with a pure mind 
and happiness will follow you as your shadow" 
3. "In this world hate never yet dispelled hate." 
4. "The fool who knows he is a fool is that much wiser, the fool who thinks 
he is wise is a fool indeed." 
5. "It is better to conquer yourself than to win a thousand battles." 
6. "Be quick to do good; if you are slow, the mind delighting in mischief, 
will catch you." 
7. "He who seeks happiness by hurting those who seek happiness will never 
find happiness." 
8. "Hurt rebounds." 
9. "The world is on fire, and are you laughing? You are deep in the dark, and 
will you not seek light?" 
10. "An ignorant man is an ox; he grows in size, not wisdom." 
11. "Consider the world: a bubble, a mirage." 
12. "If you let go of winning and losing, you will find joy." 
13. "How easy it is to see your brother's faults, how hard to face your own." 
14. "The way is not in the sky, the way is in the heart." 
15. "The mind speaks but the body knows." 
E. From Shakespeare 
1. "What's done cannot be undone." (Macbeth V ,1) 
2. "Sweet are the uses of adversity." (-4$ You Like It II ,1) 
3. "All's Well That Ends Well" (title) 
4. "Cowards die many times before their deaths; the valiant never taste of 
death but once." (Julius Caesar II, 2) 
5. "Crabbed age and youth cannot live together." ("The Passionate Pilgrim") 

160 
V. THE SECOND ACT OF THE MIND: JUDGMENT 
6. "Fair is foul, and foul is fair." (Macbeth 
I, 1) 
7. "Halt! Who goes there?" '4Nay, answer m e " (Hamlet 
I, 1) 
8. "To thine own self be true, and it must follow, as the night the day, thou 
canst not then be false to any man." (Hamlet I, 3) 
9. "Some rise by sin, and some by virtue fall." (Measure for Measure 
11,1) 
10. "Golden lads and girls all must, as chimney-sweepers, come to dust." 
("Cymbeline" IV, 2) 
11. "Ah, what a sign it is of evil life, where death's approach is seen so terri-
ble!" (Henry VI Part //, III, 3) 
12. "Our remedies oft in ourselves do lie, which we ascribe to heaven" (All's 
Well That Ends Well I, 1) 
13. "How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable seem to me all the uses of this 
world!" (Hamlet I, 2) 
14. "Lord, what fools these mortals be!" (A Midsummer 
Night 's Dream 
HI, 2) 
15. "The fool doth think he is wise, but the wise man knows himself to be a 
fool" (As You Like It V, 1) 
16. "The course of true love never did run smooth." (A Midsummer 
Nights 
Dream I, 1) 
17. (H) "In the most high and palmy state of Rome, a little ere the mightiest 
Julius fell, the graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead did squeak 
and gibber in the Roman streets." (Hamlet I, 1) 
18. (H) "There are more things in heaven and earth than are dreamed of in 
your philosophy, Horatio." (Hamlet I, 1) 
19. "If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark." (Romeo and Juliet II, 1) 
20. "The man that hath no music in himself, nor is not moved with concord of 
sweet sounds, is fit for treasons, stratagems and spoils." (The Merchant of 
Venice \y 1) 
21. "O that this too, too solid flesh would melt, thaw, and resolve itself into a 
dew! Or that the Everlasting had not fix'd His canon 'gainst self-slaugh-
ter!" (Hamlet I, 2) 
22. "Angels and ministers of grace defend us!" (Hamlet I, 4) 
23. "Something is rotten in the state of Denmark." (Hamlet I, 4) 
24. "Who steals my purse steals trash." (Othello III, 3) 
25. "Love's not Time's fool." (Sonnet 116) 
26. "Once more unto the breach, dear friends, once more, or close the wall up 
with our English dead!" (Henry V Ml, 1) 
27. "By the pricking of my thumbs, something wicked this way comes." 
(Macbeth IV, 1) 
28. "A horse! A horse! My kingdom for a horse!" (Richard III V, 4) 
29. "A rose by any other name would smell as sweet." (Romeo 
and Juliet 
II, 2) 

Tricky propositions 
161 
30. "The serpent that did sting thy father's life now wears his crown." (Hamlet 
1. 5) 
31. "If this be error and upon me proved, I never writ, nor no man ever loved." 
(Sonnet 116) 
32. "For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds; lilies that fester smell far 
worse than weeds." (Sonnet 94) 
33. "Had I but served my God with half the zeal I served my King, He would 
not in mine age have left me naked to mine enemies." (King Henry VI11 
111,2) 
34. "For God's sake, let us sit upon the ground and tell sad stories of the death 
of kings." (King Richard II III, 2) 
35. "Poor and content is rich, and rich enough." (Othello III, 3) 
36. "If it be now, 'tis not to come; if it be not to come, it will be now; if it be 
not now, yet it will come." (Hamlet V, 2) 
37. "A great while ago the world begun, with hey, ho! the wind and the rain." 
(Twelfth Night V, 1) 
38. "To gild refined gold, to paint the lily . . . is wasteful and ridiculous 
excess." (King John IV ,2) 
39. "All that glisters is not gold." (The Merchant of Venice II, 7) 
40. "Not all the water in the rough, rude sea can wash the balm off from an 
anointed king." (King Richard II III, 2) 
41. "That man that hath a tongue, I say, is no man if with his tongue he can-
not win a woman." (Two Gentlemen of Verona III, 1) 
42. "Now the hungry lion roars, and the wolf behowls the moon." (A 
Midsummer 
Nights 
Dream V, 1) 
43. "O all you host of heaven! O earth! What else? And shall I couple hell? O, 
fie! Hold, hold, my heart; and you, my sinews, grow not instant old, but 
bear me stiffly up." (Hamlet I, 5) 
44. "To be or not to be: that is the question." (Hamlet III, 1) 
45. "My words fly up, my thoughts remain below; words without thoughts 
never to heaven go." (Hamlet III, 3) 
46. "Alas, poor Yorick!" (Hamlet V, 1) 
47. "To err is human; to forgive, divine." (though sometimes attributed to 
Shakespeare, this is really from Alexander Pope, Essay on Criticism) 
48. "Horatio, I am dead." (Hamlet V, 2) 
49. "Good night, sweet prince, and flights of angels sing thee to thy rest." 
(Hamlet V, 2) 
F. From G.K. Chesterton: 
1. "As long as you have mystery, you have health; when you destroy mystery 
you create morbidity." (Orthodoxy) 
2. "Thoroughly worldly people never understand the world." (Orthodoxy) 
3. "If a thing is worth doing, it's worth doing badly." 

162 
V. THE SECOND ACT OF THE MIND: JUDGMENT 
4. "Men did not love Rome because she was great. She was great bccause 
they had loved her." (Orthodoxy) 
5. "The man who makes a vow makes an appointment with himself at some 
distant time and place." ("A Defense of Rash Vows") 
6. "A great classic means a book which one can praise without having read." 
("Tom Jones and Morality") 
7. "The only two things that can satisfy the soul are a person and a story; and 
even a story must be about a person " ("The Priest of Spring") 
8. "Logic is a machine of the mind, and if it is used honestly it ought to bring 
out an honest conclusion." (Varied Types) 
9. "There is a very real thing which may be called the love of humanity; in 
our time it exists almost entirely among what are called uncducatcd peo-
ple, and it does not exist at all among the people who talk about it." 
(Tremendous Trifles) 
G. From the Bible: 
1. "No one can serve two masters. For either he will hate the one and love the 
other, or he will be devoted to the one and despise the other. You cannot 
serve God and mammon." (Matthew 6:24) 
2. "Blessed are the poor in spirit." (Matthew 5:3) 
3. "Great is Diana of the Ephesians!" (Acts 19:28) 
4. (H) "If God so clothes the grass of the field, which today is alive and 
tomorrow is thrown into the oven, will he not much more clothe you, O 
men of little faith?" (Matthew 6:30) 
5. "Those who take the sword shall perish by the sword." (Matthew 26:52) 
6. "Whatever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." (Galatians 6:7) 
7. "A soft answer turneth away wrath." (Proverbs 15:1) 
8. "He who is not with me is against me" (Matthew 12:30) 
9. "And at noon Elijah mocked them, saying, 'Cry aloud, for he is a god; 
either he is musing, or he has gone aside, or he is on a journey, or perhaps 
he is asleep and must be awakened."' (I Kings 18:27) 
10. "A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit." (Matthew 7:18) 
11. "Whoever brings back a sinner from the error of his way will save his soul 
from death and will cover a multitude of sins." (James 5:19) 
12. "If I speak with the tongues of men and of angels but have not love, 1 am 
a noisy gong or a clanging cymbal." (I Corinthians 13:1) 
13. "My beloved is mine, and 1 am his." (Song of Songs 2:16) 
14. "Who is she that looketh forth as the morning, fair as the moon, clear as 
the sun, terrible as an army with banners?" (Song of Songs 6:10) 
15. "Love is strong as death." (Song of Songs 8:6) 

The distribution of terms 
16. "O that his left hand were under my head and his right hand embracing 
me!" (Song of Songs 8:3) 
17. "Some boast of chariots, some of horses, but wc boast of the name of the 
Lord our God " (Psalm 20:7) 
18. "All things work together for good for those who love God." (Romans 
8:28) 
19. "Even though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I fear no 
evil." (Psalm 23:4) 
Section 7. The distribution of terms 
Each term in a categorical proposition - the subject and the predicate - is either 
distributed or undistributed. A term is distributed if it is universal; that is, if 
the proposition claims to know something about all of the class of things 
referred to by the term. A term is "undistributed" if it is particular, i.e. if the 
proposition claims to know only about some of the class. 
We need to know whether each term is distributed or undistributed in order 
to test arguments for validity (which we will learn in Chapter XI), since some of 
the rules for validity depend on the distribution of the terms. This knowledge is 
also illuminating for other reasons; e.g. it shows us that an E proposition claims 
the most knowledge because it distributes both its terms, and an I proposition 
claims the least because both its terms are undistributed. 
It is very easy to see whether the subject term is distributed or undistributed, 
because once the proposition is in logical form the quantifier tells us this explic-
itly. The subject of a universal proposition (A or E) is always distributed (uni-
versal), and the subject of a particular proposition (I or O) is always undistrib-
uted (particular). When we say "all men are mortal." we are obviously claiming 
to know something about all men; when we say "some men are heroes," we are 
claiming to know something about only some men, not necessarily all. 
The predicate term is also either distributed or undistributed, for we are 
claiming to know something about either all or some of the class of things 
referred to in that term. But there is no quantifier word ("all," "no," or "some") 
before the predicate to tell us, as there is before the subject. It is the copula, i.e. 
the quality of the proposition (affirmative or negative), that tells us the distribu-
tion of the predicate. (Remember, the copula in an E, "no S is P," is really neg-
ative even though it seems to be affirmative. It is written as "is" instead of "is 
not" because the initial "no" makes the copula to mean "is not." We would have 
used the form "all S is not P" for the E proposition if it were not for the confu-
sion with the "very tricky O." See page 151 above.) 

164 
V. THE SECOND ACT OF THE MIND: JUDGMENT 
The predicate of an affirmative proposition is always undistributed; the 
predicate of a negative proposition is always distributed. That is the simple, 
universal rule. 
SUBJECT 
PREDICATE 
affirmative A: 
Distributed 
Undistributed 
UNIVERSAL < ^ 
negative 
E: 
Distributed 
Distributed 
affirmative I: 
Undistributed 
Undistributed 
PARTICULAR < — negative 
0: 
Undistributed 
Distributed 
Here is the explanation. An affirmative proposition /'//eludes its subject in 
its predicate, as can be seen from its diagram in Euler's circles. But when wc 
include S in P, wc include S in part of P, as we include a necklace in part of a 
jewelry box. This is true whether we are talking about all S (an A) or some S (an 
I). Whether it is a whole necklace or part of a necklace, we include it in part of 
the box. So we are referring to only part of the box, part of the predicate. An A 
or an I proposition claims to know only some of its predicate. 
But a negative proposition excludes its subject from all of its predicate. "No 
S is P" means "No S is any kind of P at all." When we exclude a necklace from 
a jewelry box, we exclude it not only from one corner of the box, but from the 
whole box. 
This is true even if the subject is only particular. In an O proposition ("some 
S is not P") the subject ("some S") is particular, but that particular part of S is 
excluded from all of P, like part of a necklace being excluded from all of the box. 
It will be useful to symbolize the distribution of terms by writing little d*s 
and us above them and to the right like exponents in math (d for distributed and 
u for undistributed) when we use logical form. That way, wc can see the distri-
bution of terms at a glance, and this will save us time later when we examine 
arguments for validity. For three of the six formal fallacies in syllogisms depend 
on the distribution of terms. 
A: All Sd is Pu 
E: No Sd is Pd 
I: 
Some Su is Pu 
O: Some Su is not Pd 
Exercises on distribution of terms: 
1. Which one of the following propositions has a distributed predicate? (a) 
Some planets aren't life-supporting, (b) Every nation is mortal, (c) Some 
life-supporting bodies are parents, (d) All these yaks are diseased, (e) 
Socrates was mad. 

The distribution of terms 
165 
2. Which one of the following propositions has an undistributed predicate? 
(a) No A proposition has a distributed predicate, (b) Some I propositions 
do not have distributed predicates, (c) Every E proposition must have an 
undistributed predicate, (d) E propositions don't have undistributed pred-
icates. (e) Some O propositions don't have distributed predicates. 
3. Which of the following five sentences above, in question 2, is false? 
4. Which of the following propositions has an undistributed subject? (a) Man 
as such is not mortal, (b) None of the suspects told the tnith. (c) All men 
are mortals, (d) Some good things are bad for you. (e) Socrates was not 
mad. 
5. The predicate of an O proposition is (a) always distributed (b) always 
undistributed (c) sometimes distributed and sometimes undistributed (d) 
there is no way to tell. 
6. The distribution of the subject of an A proposition is (a) always less than 
that of the predicate (b) always more than that of the predicate (c) always 
the same as that of the predicate (d) sometimes more and sometimes less 
than that of the predicate. 
7. The distribution of the subject of an I proposition is . . . (same four options 
as question 6). 
8. The distribution of the subject of an O proposition is . . . (same four 
options as question 6). 

VI. Changing Propositions 
Section 1. Immediate inference 
Inference is the third act of the mind: moving from premise or premises to con-
clusion, drawing a conclusion from one or more premises. It is a synonym for 
reasoning or arguing. What an inference or argument claims is that if the prem-
ised) is (are) true, then the conclusion must be true; that its conclusion must 
logically follow from its premises. 
When there is only one premise, we have immediate inference. When there 
are two or more premises, wc have mediate inference, since the conclusion is 
drawn not from the first premise alone, immediately, but only through the medi-
ation of at least one other premise. 
But why are we studying a kind of inference ("immediate inference") here 
in the unit on the second act of the mind? 
Bccause "immediate inference" is not really inference at all! Inference 
means moving from one piccc of knowledge (the premises) to another (the con-
clusion). But in immediate inference, the single premise and the conclusion are 
not really different. The conclusion is not new knowledge. It only rearranging 
what we already knew in the premise, stating the same content in a different 
form. 
To see the difference, compare the following two arguments. The first is an 
immediate inference, and the second is a mediate inference. 
(1) No apes are angels. 
Therefore no angels are apes. 
(2) Angels are pure spirits. 
Pure spirits are not confined by space. 
Therefore angels arc not confincd by space. 
When we know that no apes are angels, we already know that no angels are 
apes. An E proposition mutually excludes its subject and predicate. We see 
immediately that if the subject is excluded from the predicate, that means that 

Immediate inference / Conversion 
167 
the predicate is excluded from the subject We do not really infer a new conclu-
sion; we only express the knowledge we already had - that S and P are exclud-
ed from each other - in different words. 
But in the second example we might know both of the premises without 
ever bringing them together in our mind and drawing the conclusion. We might 
have thought that angels are confined by space, that only a certain finite num-
ber of angels could dance on the head of a pin, because we never noticed that 
the two premises necessarily prove the conclusion that angels are not confined 
by space. We may have known that angels are pure spirits rather than things with 
material bodies, and also that pure spirits without bodies are not confined by 
space, since space is an aspect of bodies only - we may have known both of 
these premises to be true without knowing the conclusion to be true until this 
argument was presented to us. Quite often we do not realize the logical implica-
tions of what we already know or believe. In fact, argumentation usually consists 
in trying to convince someone of a conclusion he does not yet accept on the 
basis of premises that he already does accept. If he already accepted the con-
clusion, you would not need to prove it to him; and if he did not accept the prem-
ises, you could not prove it to him. 
But what "immediate inference" really is, is merely changing a single 
proposition in form. There are two ways of doing this: conversion and obver-
sion. 
It may be useful at this point to remind and reorient ourselves by an outline: 
I. 
Terms 
II. Propositions 
III. Arguments (inferences) 
A. Immediate inference (only one premise, and only two terms) 
1. Obversion 
2. Conversion 
3. Combined forms 
B. Mediate inference (more than one premise, and more than two terms) 
1.Deductive (usually syllogism) 
a. Simple 
b. Compound 
(1) hypothetical 
(2) disjunctive 
(3) conjunctive 
2. Inductive 
Section 2. Conversion (B) 
When we "convert" a proposition, we interchange the subject and the predicate. 
For instance, "No man is an island" becomes "No island is a man " and "Some 

168 
VI. CHANGING PROPOSITIONS 
marriages are mistakes" becomes "Some mistakes are marriages." If wc look at 
the Euler circles for either of these two propositions, the E or the I, wc will sec 
at a glance that the conversions are valid: that if it is true that no man is an island 
it must be true that no island is a man; and that if it is true that some marriages 
are mistakes, it must be true that some mistakes are marriages. (Wc can speak 
of "valid" and "invalid" inferences even in immediate inferences, for the truth 
of the conclusion either necessarily follows from the truth of the premise, or not; 
if so, the inference is valid, and if not, it is invalid.) 
E and I propositions both convert validly, simply by interchanging the sub-
ject and predicate. However, A propositions do not. From "all men are mortal" 
it does not validly follow that "all mortals are men." (Apes and roses arc mortal 
too, but they are not men.) The rule for converting an A proposition is that it con-
verts only to an I: if all men are mortal, it follows that some mortals are men. 
The reason for this has to do with the distribution of terms. In the E and I 
propositions, the distribution of the subject and of the predicate is the same. 
Both are distributed in the E, and both are undistributed in the 1. But in the A, 
the two terms are different in distribution: the subject is distributed and the pred-
icate is undistributed. So to convert an A simply to another A would violate a 
basic rule of inference, which is that no term that is undistributed in the 
premise may be distributed in the conclusion. For if it is undistributed in the 
premise, that means that we know only some of it, only part of the class. That is 
not sufficient reason for drawing a conclusion about all of it, about all of the 
class. Our knowledge of only some of this term in the premise docs not warrant 
our claiming to know all of it in the conclusion. But that is what would happen 
if wc converted an A simply, moving from "AH (S) (distributed) is P (undistrib-
uted)" to "All P (distributed) is S (undistributed)." 
In fact, this is a very common formal fallacy, the fallacy of an illicit con-
version of an A proposition. It is usually clothed with other words and is not 
naked and obvious. For instance, an advertisement like "All great models use 
Rich-Bitch Kitsch-Stitch Lipstick. What about you?" implicitly argues that "All 
great models use Rich Kitsch Lipstick, therefore All who use Rich Kitsch 
Lipstick are great models." 
Here is a famous argument from a major philosopher, John Stuart Mill, that 
may be interpreted as an example of the fallacy of an illicit conversion of an A 
proposition: 
"The only proof capable of being given that an object is visible, is that peo-
ple actually see it. The only proof that a sound is audible, is that people actual-
ly hear it; and so of the other sources of our experience. In like manner, I appre-
hend, the sole evidence it is possible to produce that anything is desirable, is that 
people do actually desire it." 
Perhaps Mill is offering only an analogy rather than an argument. But if it is 
an argument, it seems to be that "Everything desirable is desired, therefore every-
thing desired is desirable." And that is an invalid conversion of an A proposition. 

Conversion 
169 
(Perhaps a better way of exposing Mill's fallacy here is to say that he is 
equivocating on the term "desirable." "Desirable" can mean either44capable of 
being desired" or44worthy of being desired." In the premise, Mill uses the first 
sense of "desirable." and in the conclusion he uses the second. Sec page 102.) 
It is sometimes difficult to distinguish between an illicit conversion of a 
simple A proposition and a compound conjunctive ("and") proposition in which 
subject and predicate exchange places. Here are four famous cases, in which the 
connective "and" might or might not be interpreted as an inference (implying 
"and therefore"), thus giving us the fallacy of an illicit conversion of an A: 
(1) "What is rational is actual, and what is actual is rational." (Hegel) 
(2) "What is fitting is honorable, and what is honorable is fitting." (Cicero) 
(3) "What's thine is mine, and all mine is thine." (Plautus) 
(4) "Beauty is truth, truth beauty." (Keats) 
An O proposition cannot be validly converted either, for the same reason an 
A cannot. It sounds right to say "Some S is not P, therefore Some P is not S," in 
a dreamy sort of way, as if it were a kind of justice or equal treatment But a 
glance at the Euler circle diagram for the O shows us why this is a fallacy: 
"Some birds are not robins" does not mean that "Some robins are not birds." 
When we argue "Some S is not P, therefore Some P is not S," we violate the rule 
of distribution, for S was undistributed in the premise ("Some S") but distributed 
in the conclusion. For in the conclusion "Some P is not S " S is the predicate of 
a negative proposition. This gives us a second fairly common fallacy, the illicit 
conversion of an O proposition. 
In the premise "Some S is not P" (above) the lines around S are partly dot-
ted lines, symbolizing what is unknown. There are three possibilities about S: we 
don't know whether it (1) stops outside the border of P, (2) extends into part of 
P, or (3) extends into all of P. If the third possibility is true, then it is not true that 
some P is not S. 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
An E also validly converts to an O: if no S is P, then (at least) some P is not 
S. So the valid conversions are: E to E, I to I, A to I, and E to O. We can diagram 
them with arrows. Let an arrow represent an inference, with the premise at the 
beginning (the bowstring end of the arrow) and the conclusion at the end (the 
point of the arrow): 

170 
VI. CHANGING PROPOSITIONS 
Table of Valid Conversions: 
E-> E 
I 
I 
A—> I 
E—» O 
It is especially necessary in conversion to be sure all our terms, even the 
predicates, are nouns when we have translated into logical form, because in con-
version the original predicate moves to the subject position, and only nouns can 
be subjects. "Sheep can't swim" can't convert into "Swim can't sheep," but con-
verts into "No [things that can swim] are [sheep]." But this is clear only after 
putting "Sheep can't swim" into logical form first: "No [sheep] are [things that 
can swim].'* 
Section 3. Obversion (B) 
Obversion is based on the principle that two negatives make a positive and can-
cel each other out. In obversion, we take the original proposition (the premise) 
and change it by doing two things: we (1) negate the copula and (2) negate the 
predicate. That is, we (I) change the quality of the proposition, 
from affirma-
tive to negative or from negative to affirmative; and wc also (2) changc the qual-
ity of the predicate from P to non-P or from non-P to P. 
Thus, when we obvert "All men are mortal" we get "No men arc immortal." 
When we obvert "Every genius is a nonconformist" wc get "No genius is a con-
formist." A's become E's in obversion. 
And E's become A's: "No lakes are oceans" obverts to "All lakes are non-
oceans"; and "No man is an island" obverts to "All men are non-islands." 
I's become O's: "Some old ladies are gracious" obverts to "Some old ladies 
are not ungracious"; and "Some gases are noninflammable" obverts to "Some 
gases arc not inflammable 
And Os become I's: "Some puddings are not chocolate" obverts to "Some 
puddings are non-chocolate"; and "Some teams are not unbeatable" becomes 
"Some teams are beatable." 
When we negate the predicate, we must be sure to negate the whole predi-
cate and not just part of it. 
Table of Valid Obversions: 
A—> E 
E—> A 
I - > o 
0 - > I 

Obversion / Contraposition 
Section 4. Combined Forms: Contraposition and Inversion 
Wc do not need to learn any new rules for contraposition, since it is nothing but 
a three-step process combining obversion and conversion: first obvert, then con-
vert (this is a "partial contraposition "), then obvert again (this is a "full con-
traposition "). 
(A) Beginning with "All S is P," we obvert to "No S is non-P," then convert 
that to "No non-P is S," then obvert that to "All non-P is non-S." 
(E) Beginning with "No S is P," we obvert to "All S is non-P, then convert 
to "Some non-P is S," then obvert to "Some non-P is not non-S." 
(I) Beginning with "Some S is P," we obvert to "Some S is not non-P," but 
this is an O and we cannot convert an O. So there is no contrapositive to an I. 
(O) Beginning with "Some S is not P," we obvert to "Some S is non-P," then 
convert to "Some non-P is S," then obvert to "Some non-P is not non-S. 
Thus the end results of contraposition are: 
(A) "All S is P" is "All non-P is non-S." 
(E) "No S is P" becomes "Some non-P is not non-S." 
(0) "Some S is not P" also becomes "Some non-P is not non-S." 
We also need no new rules for inversion, which is either partial (first con-
vert, then obvert) or full (first convert, then obvert, then convert): 
(A) Beginning with "All S is P," we convert to "Some P is S," then obvert to 
"Some P is not non-S" (partial inversion). But we cannot convert this because it 
is an O. 
(E) Beginning with "No S is P," we convert to "No P is S," then obvert to 
"All P is non-S" (partial inversion), then convert to "Some non-S is P" (full 
inversion).. 
(1) Beginning with "Some S is P," we convert to "Some P is S," then obvert 
to "Some P is not non-S" (partial inversion). But we cannot convert this because 
it is an O. 
(O) Beginning with "Some S is not P," we cannot convert this because it is 
an O. 
It is not necessary to learn separate rules or tables for contraposition or 
inversion, for two reasons. First, contraposition and inversion is too complex to 
be practically useful in most ordinary-language situations. Second, there is noth-
ing more in them than successive obversions and conversions, so the rules for 
conversion and obversion suffice. 
Similarly, it is not necessary to learn rules or tables for inversion, which is 
only: first convert, then obvert (= "partial inversion"), then convert again (= 
"full inversion"). 
Exercises: 
A. Convert each of the following if possible. First, translate into logical form. 
1. "God helps those who help themselves." 

/ 72 
VI. CHANGING PROPOSITIONS 
2. "Bigger fish eat little fish." 
3. "All who are not for us are against us." 
4. "No man is a hero to his valet." 
5. "Some books are to be chewed and digested." 
6. (H) "Not all is gold that glitters." 
7. "Beauty is truth." 
8. "Love never ends." 
For additional practice, add the propositions in Exercises A-G on pages 
156-63. 
B. Obvert each of the above propositions. 
C. Give the partial contrapositive, full contrapositive, partial inverse, and full 
inverse for each of the above propositions. 
D. Explain the following, from Samuel Taylor Coleridge. (Watch out for the 
"very tricky O.") 
"Sir, I admit your general rule 
That every poet is a fool, 
But you yourself may serve to show it, 
That every fool is not a poet." 
E. Evaluate the following inferences: First, find out what kind of inference it is. 
(If you do not translate the propositions into logical form, you probably 
will not be able to do this clearly.) Then determine whether the inference 
is valid or invalid by applying the appropriate rules. 
1. "If God is male, then male is God." (Mary Daly) 
2. No unintended inference is pernicious. Therefore all unintended infer-
ences are non-pernicious, and so, some non-pernicious things must be un-
intended inferences. 
3. No snarks are boojums. Therefore no boojums are snarks. Therefore all 
boojums are non-snarks. Therefore some non-snarks arc boojums. There-
fore some non-snarks are not non-boojums. 
4. Not all lawyers are Republicans, therefore not all Republicans are lawyers. 
5. At least one being is not temporal, therefore some being is atemporal. 
6. At least one red thing is rotten, therefore at least one rotten thing is red. 

VII. Contradiction 
Section 1. What is contradiction? (B) 
In logic, "contradiction" does not mean the subjective, psychological relation 
between two human beings who disagree with each other, but the objective, log-
ical relation between two propositions that cannot both be true at the same time 
and also cannot both be false at the same time. 
For instance, suppose you and your spouse are discussing the fact that your 
son's career makes it necessary for him and his wife to live in separate cities for 
a few weeks. You evaluate the situation pessimistically by repeating the proverb 
"Out of sight, out of mind," while your spouse evaluates the same situation opti-
mistically by repeating the proverb "Absence makes the heart grow fonder." Arc 
the two of you contradicting each other or not? If one is right, must the other be 
wrong? 
Or, as you pitch in to help cook a Thanksgiving turkey, someone in the 
kitchen tells you, "No, no; for 'too many cooks spoil the broth.'" But someone 
else says, "Yes, yes, for 'many hands make light work.'" 
Or, as you wonder whether or not to rush into something new, one person 
advises you, "Look before you leap," while another says, "Strike while the iron 
is hot," and "He who hesitates is lost." 
Proverbs often seem to contradict each other when they do not if they refer 
to different situations. They are not as universal as they seem, and two non-uni-
versal propositions do not contradict each other. "Out of sight, out of mind" is 
true of weak relationships, "absence makes the heart grow fonder" is true of 
strong ones. "Too many cooks spoil the broth" is true in skilled work, but "many 
hands make light work" is true in unskilled work. 
The reason these proverbs do not contradict each other is that they do not 
cover the same territory, so to speak; each one is speaking about a different thing 
or a different set of things or a different situation. If one person says "many 
lawyers are crooks" and the other says "many lawyers are not crooks," they do 
not contradict each other, because both subclasses of lawyers exist. But if one 
says "all lawyers are crooks" and the other says, "no, at least some lawyers are 
not crooks," those two propositions contradict each other. 

174 
VII. CONTRADICTION 
It is crucially important in logic to know when two propositions contradict 
each other and when they do not. One of the most common reasons why debates 
and arguments fail to resolve a controversial issue and reveal the truth is a lack 
of clarity about what really contradicts what. 
The conditions for contradiction arc very simple, very stringent, and very 
limited. Two propositions contradict each other only when the truth of 
either one necessarily means the falsity of the other, and the falsity of either 
one necessarily means the truth of the other. And this happens only between 
propositions that (a) have the same subject and predicate, and (h) differ in 
both quantity and quality. 
There are only two sets of contradictory propositions: (1) propositions with 
the form "All S is P" and "Some S is not P," and (2) propositions with the form 
"No S is P" and "Some S is P." The only sets of propositions that contradict each 
other are an A and an O, or an E and an /, with the same subject and predicate. 
Exercises: Put each proposition into logical form and write its contradictory also 
in logical form. 
1. "No man is a hero to his valet." 
2. "Full many a flower is born to bloom unseen." 
3. "Nobody doesn't like Sara Lee." 
4. "A thing of beauty is a joy forever." 
5. "It's a dirty bird that fouls its own nest." 
6. "A fair face may be a foul bargain." 
7. "Red sky in the morning, sailors take warning; red sky at night, sailor's 
delight." 
8. "There's many a slip 4twixt the cup and the lip." 
9. "A good conscience is your best pillow." 
10. "None but the brave deserve the fair." 
11. "Sometimes a man's gotta do what a man's gotta do." 
12. "Not all mistakes arc stupid ones." 
Section 2. The Square of Opposition 
Which propositions contradict each other is made clear by the "Square of 
Opposition": 
A 
E 
I 
O 

The Square of Opposition 
175 
"Opposition" is a special, technical term in logic. It means the relation 
between any two propositions that have the same subject and the same 
predicate hut differ in quality or quantity or both. Two propositions that do 
not have the same subject, or do not have the same predicate, are not in any kind 
of "opposition." Opposition exists only between two propositions with the same 
subject and the same predicate. 
There are four different kinds of opposition: contradiction, contrariety, sub-
contrariety, and subalternation/superalternation: 
The most important kind of opposition is contradiction, the relation 
between opposed A and O propositions, or between opposed E and I proposi-
tions. (The relation is called "contradiction" and the two propositions are called 
"contradictories") This is the relation diagrammed by the two diagonal lines 
across the center of the Square. Of two contradictories, if one is true the other 
is false and if one is false the other is true. If "all lawyers are crooks" is true, 
"some lawyers are not crooks" is false, and if "all lawyers are crooks" is false, 
"some lawyers arc non-crooks" is true. (Apologies to lawyers, but stock exam-
ples stick in memory.) 
There are also three other kinds of opposition besides contradiction. The 
most important of these is contrariety. The only two propositions that arc con-
traries are an A and an E in opposition (i.e. with the same subject and predi-
cate). "All S is P" and "No S is P" are contraries. 
Contraries cannot both be true, but they can both be false. If "All lawyers 
are crooks" is true, then "No lawyers are crooks" must be false, and if "No 
lawyers are crooks" is true, then "All lawyers arc crooks" must be false. However, 
both propositions can be false, if some lawyers are crooks and some are not. 
The practical application of the distinction between contraries and contra-
dictories is this: To refute an A or E proposition, you do not need to prove its 
contrary, only its contradictory. You need to show only some counter exam-
ples, in fact only one, to refute a universal. An A proposition is an affirmative 
universal, and an O is sufficient to refute it. If someone says "All lawyers are 
crooks," you have refuted him if you show that "some lawyers arc not crooks." 
You do not need to show that "No lawyers are crooks." Similarly, an I proposi-
tion is sufficient to refute an E. If someone says "No lawyers are crooks," you 
j SUBCONTRARIEIY Q 

176 
VII. CONTRADICTION 
have refuted him if you show that "some lawyers are crooks." You do not need 
to show that "All lawyers are crooks" 
The relation between two opposed particular propositions. I and O, is callcd 
subcontrariety, and the propositions are called subcontraries. Subcontraries 
can both be true. This is why proverbs that seem to contradict each other often 
do not: because their meaning is often particular rather than universal. Two par-
ticulars do not contradict each other. 
Subcontraries can both be true, but subcontraries cannot both be false. If 
"Some lawyers are crooks" is true, it may be that "some lawyers are not crooks" 
is also true, and vice versa. But if "some lawyers are crooks" is false, then "some 
lawyers are not crooks" cannot also be false. For if "some lawyers are crooks" 
is false, this can be only because no lawyers are crooks. If an I is false (e.g. 
"Some lawyers are crooks"), then its contradictory E must be true: "No lawyers 
are crooks." The only thing that would make it false that even some lawyers are 
crooks is that no lawyers at all are crooks. So if an I is false, its opposed E (its 
contradictory) must be true. (Remember, with contradictories, if one is false, the 
other must be true, and if one is true, the other must be false.) But if the E is true 
- if it is true that "No lawyers arc crooks" - then it is certainly true that at least 
some lawyers are not crooks, and that is the O. 
The relation between opposed A and I propositions, and between opposed 
E and O propositions, is called subalternation. and the propositions are called 
subalternates. 
Among subalternates, if the universal proposition is true, then the particu-
lar that comcs under it (i.e. its subalternatc) must also be true. And if the partic-
ular is not true, then the universal cannot be true. 
If "All lawyers are crooks" is true, then "Some lawyers are crooks" must be 
true. (Remember, in logic "some" docs not mean anything more than it says; it 
does not mean "only some" but "at least some") And if "No lawyers are crooks" 
is true, then certainly "Some lawyers arc not crooks" must be true. 
Also, among subalternates, if the particular proposition is false, the univer-
sal must be false. If it is false that even some lawyers are crooks, it must be false 
that all lawyers are crooks. And if it is false that even some lawyers are not 
crooks, it must be false that no lawyers are crooks. 
All of this works only for propositions in opposition, not for any other 
propositions. The Square of Opposition is a very productive "machine " but its 
products arc limited. 
Instead of memorizing all four of these technical terms (contradiction, con-
trariety, subcontrariety, and subalternation) and their definitions, and then apply-
ing them, it is quicker and easier to memorize the following version of the 
Square of Opposition, which includes everything you will need to know for 
practical purposes: 

The Square of Opposition 
177 
On this Square, arrows represent valid inferences. E.g. if an A proposi-
tion is true, then its opposed I must be true too. Thus, there is an arrow going 
down from A to I as T to T, from a true A to a true I. (Again, remember that this 
all works only for propositions that are in opposition, i.e. that have the same sub-
ject and predicate. You must first find out whether you have opposition before 
you can use the Square of Opposition.) But there is no arrow going up from a 
true I to a true A; so that is not a valid inference. There is an arrow going up from 
a false I to a false A, so that is a valid inference. If you know an I is false, you 
know its opposed A is also false. 
Notice that the relationship of contradiction is the most important and the 
most fruitful, i.e. the one that tells you the most. 
Here is another way of summarizing the Square: when you have two 
opposed propositions, 
A is 
E is 
I is 
O is 
If A is true 
true 
false 
true 
false 
If E is true 
false 
true 
false 
true 
If I is true 
unknown 
false 
true 
unknown 
If 0 is true 
false 
unknown 
unknown 
true 
If A is false 
false 
unknown 
unknown 
true 
If E is false 
unknown 
false 
true 
unknown 
If I is false 
false 
true 
false 
true 
If O is false 
true 
false 
true 
false 
The Square is a very effective machine, but it runs only on the proper fuel: 
two propositions in opposition and in logical form. There are three ways the 
Square of Opposition is useful: 
(1) The cross lines tell you what proposition contradicts any given proposi-
tion. So if you need to refute any proposition (i.e. prove it to be false), you can look 
at the square to see what proposition you need to prove to be true. E.g. to refute 
"all lawyers are crooks" you need to prove that "some lawyers are not crooks." 

178 
VII. CONTRADICTION 
(2) The arrows tell you which inferences are valid (but only between two 
opposed propositions). All inferences (between two opposed propositions) that 
are on this square are valid; all inferences (between two opposed propositions) 
that are not on this square are invalid. If someone has made an inference from 
one opposed proposition to another, you can instantly see whether it is a valid 
inference or not. 
(3) The arrows also tell you how to complete a valid inference yourself from 
one opposed proposition to another. Just follow any of the arrows on the square. 
Thus there arc three kinds of questions, or exercises, for the Square: 
(1) "Tell what proposition needs to be proved in order to disprove the fol-
lowing proposition." That is, "give the contradictory of the following proposi-
tion." The answer to this question is a proposition. 
(2) "Tell whether the following completed inference is valid or invalid." The 
answer to this question is "valid" or "invalid." 
(3) "If you know that the following proposition is true, or false, as given, 
what do you know about the following second proposition: is it true, false, or 
unknown?" The answer to this question is "true," "false," or "unknown" because 
you are here completing the inference and declaring the proposition which is the 
conclusion of your inference to be true, false, or unknown. (If unknown, this 
means you do not claim you can make an inference at all.) 
Exercises: 
A. To disprove each of the following propositions, what proposition must be 
proved? In other words, give the contradictory of each of the following 
propositions. 
1. "Man was born free and is everywhere in chains." (Rousseau) 
2. "There is nothing new under the sun." (Ecclesiastes) 
3. "I alone have escapcd to tell you." (Job, quoted in Moby Dick) 
4. "Some hate by morning what they love by night." 
5. "All evil is not rooted in the love of money." 
B. Evaluate the following inferences: 
1. Since it's true that some banks are not safe, it must be true that some banks 
are. 
2. It's false to say that no man ever lost money underestimating the intelli-
gence of consumers. Therefore it must be true that some men did lose 
money underestimating consumer intelligence. 
3. It must be true that not all truths are true, because it's false that every truth 
is true. 
4. If love never fails, then it can't be true that some love fails. 
5. If it's false that some philosophers are insane, it must be false that all 
philosophers are insane. 
6. Since some students are good debaters, some students are not good 
debaters. 

Existential import 
179 
C. If you know that the proposition in column I is true or false as indicated, what 
do you know about the corresponding proposition in column II? Is it true, 
false, or unknown? 
Column I 
1. All snarks are boojums: false. 
2. Some snarks are boojums: false. 
3. No snarks are boojums: false. 
4. Some snarks are not boojums: false. 
5. Some snarks are not boojums: true. 
6. Some snarks are boojums: true. 
7. No snarks are boojums: true. 
8. All snarks are boojums: true. 
Column II 
1. Some snarks are boojums. 
2. All snarks are boojums. 
3. All snarks are boojums. 
4. Some snarks are boojums. 
5. No snarks are boojums. 
6. No snarks are boojums. 
7. Some snarks are not boojums. 
8. All boojums are snarks. 
Section 3. Existential import (P) 
A proposition has "existential import" if it means to claim the existence (or non-
existence) of something. For instance, "There is no Santa Claus," "God exists," 
"Unicorns are not real," and "Some of the events in the popularly believed story 
of George Washington's life never really happened, such as his cutting down the 
cherry tree." 
An explicitly existential proposition has no predicate distinct from its cop-
ula. It simply says that its subject exists, or does not exist. 
But what of ordinary subject-predicate propositions? Do they have existen-
tial import or not? 
Consider the following propositions: 
1. All witches are dangerous. 
2. Some witches are dangerous. 
3. All leprechauns are tricky. 
4. Some leprechauns are not tricky. 
5. All fish have gills. 
6. Some fish have gills. 
Everyone knows fish exist, and everyone knows leprechauns don't, but 
some people think witches exist and some think they don't. But we cannot 
decide whether or not a proposition in itself has existential import (meaning) by 
taking polls to see how many people believe that the subject of that proposition 
exists. The objective meaning of a proposition is one thing; whether someone 
subjectively believes it to be true or false is another thing. 
So how do we decide whether propositions that are not explicitly existential 
propositions have existential import or not? All modern logic texts solve this 
problem by claiming that all universal propositions lack existential import and 
all particular propositions have it. This is not what traditional Aristotelian logic 

ISO 
VII. CONTRADICTION 
assumes, and it seems (to this writer, anyway) a wholly unnecessary, arbitrary, 
and confusing assumption. For how could the proposition "all witches are dan-
gerous" lack existential import and "some witches are dangerous" have it? 
Either witches exist, or not. In either case, it might be that none are dangerous, 
or that all are, or that some are and some are not - whether we are talking about 
real beings or only fictional beings. Exactly the same thing is true of lep-
rechauns, which all of us believe are fictional, and of fish, which all of us 
believe are real. This is the simplest way of dealing with existential import for 
ordinary propositions: that none of them have it, that only explicitly existential 
propositions have it, that only explicitly existential propositions mean to assert 
the existence of the subject. 
Modern logic texts always assume that particular propositions have existen-
tial import. But if I say "Some unicorns are fierce and some are gentle," I do not 
mean to assert the existence of unicorns. I only mean to distinguish, among 
these unicorns (all of whom have the essence of unicorns but no existence), 
between those that have the accident "fierce" and those that have the accident 
"gentle." Modern logicians could not have missed such a simple point unless 
they had abandoned or forgotten the elementary metaphysical distinctions 
between essence and existence, and between esscnce and accidcnt. 
Every modern logic text I can find simply asserts, without proof, that par-
ticular propositions have existential import and universal propositions do not. 
For instance, the latest edition (the tenth) of the world's best-selling logic text, 
by Copi, brings up a "difficulty" with the standard Square of Opposition: "The 
difficulty can be appreciated by reflecting upon I and O propositions, which 
surely (s/'c!) do have existential import. Thus the I proposition 'Some soldiers 
are heroes' says that there exists at least one soldier who is a hero. . . . But if this 
is so . . . we are forced to confront some very awkward consequences. [So why 
not question your assumption then?] 
"(1) Earlier we said that an I proposition follows validly from its corre-
sponding (opposed) A proposition by subalternation. . . . But if I and O propo-
sitions have existential import, and they follow validly from their corresponding 
A and E propositions, then A and E propositions must also have existential 
import." And the idea that universal propositions have existential import has 
already been denied. 
"(2) Furthermore, if both universal and particular propositions have exis-
tential import, then we could never formulate a negative existential proposition. 
"(3) Finally, the inference from a true A to a true I would be invalid if par-
ticulars have existential import and universals do not, for it is fallacious to derive 
more from less, to deduce an existential conclusion from a non-existential prem-
ise." The modern interpretation makes the Square of Opposition invalid. And yet 
wc know commonsensically that the Square is correct, and the greatest minds 
since Aristotle have never thought otherwise until the advent of symbolic logic. 

Tricky propositions on the Square 
181 
But no modern logic text considers denying its presupposition that I and O 
propositions always have existential import and A and E propositions never do, 
since all symbolic logic texts follow the interpretation of George Boole, the 
English mathematician who is one of the founders of modern symbolic logic: 
"In the Boolean interpretation, universal propositions are interpreted as having 
no existential import, while particular propositions are not interpreted in this 
way." (Copi, op. cit., p. 201) 
Yet clearly, in ordinary language, particular propositions sometimes do and 
sometimes do not have existential import. Just as "some" sometimes, in some 
contexts and tones of voice, implies "some but not all," while at other times it 
does not, so the initial word "some" in an I or O proposition sometimes, in some 
contexts, implies "some of these really existing things" while at other times it 
does not. "Some of our ballplayers are sick" does imply that our ballplayers 
exist, but "Some elves are heroic" does not imply that elves exist. 
The same is true for universal propositions: sometimes there is an implica-
tion of existential import, sometimes not, and sometimes there is neither impli-
cation. Whoever says "All of our ballplayers are sick" implies real ballplayers, 
but whoever says "All fictions are subjective" implies that fictions are fictional! 
And there is a third case, which makes neither of the above implications: "All 
nuclear terrorists who hold the whole world hostage will be instantly executed" 
does not imply that there are or ever will be any such beings - nor does it imply 
that there are not. 
By the simple and commonsensical device of not making the gratuitous 
assumption that all A and E propositions must lack existential import and all I 
and O propositions must have it, we preserve the traditional commonsensical 
Square. Common sense comes to the aid of common sense. 
Section 4. Tricky propositions on the Square 
The easiest way to deal with tricky propositions is simply to translate them into 
standard logical form and then to put them onto the Square. However, they can 
also sometimes be put directly onto the Square, as follows: 
Propositions that use temporal designations like "always," "never," and 
"sometimes": "S is always P" is treated as an A; "S is never P" as an E; and "S 
is sometimes P" as an I. 
Propositions that use modal designations like "necessary," "impossible." 
and "possible": 
"It is necessary that S is P" is treated as an A; "It is impossible that S is P" 
is treated as an E; and "It is possible that S is P" is treated as an I. 
There arc also synonyms for these three modal designations, such as "it 
must be" for "necessary," "it can't be" for "impossible," and "it might be" for 
"possible." 

182 
VII. CONTRADICTION 
Exceptive, exclusive, and other tricky propositions need no new Square to 
accommodate them; all that needs to be done is to translate them into standard 
form (A, E, I, or O) and proceed as usual. 
Compound propositions (hypothetical, disjunctive, and conjunctive) simply 
cannot be dealt with by the Square, and there is no need to try to invent complex 
new Squares for them. It would be like trying to fit a large truck into a garage 
designed for a small car. 
Singular propositions (like "Socrates is fat") can go on the Square by being 
translated into universals ("All Socrates is fat"), as we have already done. But 
there are no particular singular propositions; we cannot talk about "Some 
Socrates " In this case, and in this case only, the A and the E are contradictory: 
If it is true that Socrates is fat, then it is false that he is not; If it is false that he 
is fat, then it is true that he is not; If it is true that he is not, then it is false that 
he is; and If it is false that he is not, then it is true that he is. 
The same is true of explicitly existential propositions 
with singular sub-
jects: there are only two possibilities, that it is, or that it is not; and these two are 
contradictory. 
But explicitly existential propositions whose subjcct is not singular but 
either particular or universal can go on the square just as other propositions do, 
for they too are cither A, E, I, or O, even though they have no predicate distinct 
from the copula (except "real" or "unreal"). 
Tricky Exercise: Where is the fallacy in the following nine-step inference? Each 
step is either an obversion, a conversion, or an opposition, and each single step 
seems valid. Yet the first premise is obviously true and the final conclusion is 
obviously false. We cannot validly prove a false conclusion from premises that 
arc not false, so where is the erroneous step? (Hint: page 170, last paragraph.) 
1. Let us assume that all men arc mortal. 
2. Since wise men are part of the class "men," it follows that wise men are 
mortal. You may consider this an immediate inference from an A to an I, 
from "all men" to "some men," or else as an implied syllogism. You have 
not yet learned the rules of the syllogism, but obviously it is valid to argue 
that "all men are mortal, and wise men are men, therefore wise men are 
mortal." 
3. And if all wise men are mortal, then no wise men are immortal, by obver-
sion. 
4. And if no wise men are immortal beings, then no immortal beings are wise 
men, by conversion. 
5. And if it is true that no immortal beings are wise men, it is false that some 
immortal beings are wise men, by contradiction on the Square of 
Opposition. 
6. And this conclusion, that "some immortal beings arc wise men," says the 

Some practical uses of the square of Square of Opposition 
183 
same thing as "some immortal beings are not unwise men," by obversion. 
So if 5 is false, 6 is false also. 
7. But if it is false that some immortal beings are not unwise men, then it 
must be true that all immortal beings are unwise men, by contradiction on 
the Square of Opposition. 
8. And i f it is true that all immortal beings are unwise men, then it is true that 
some unwise men are immortal beings, by conversion. 
9. Thus we have proved that some unwise men are immortal beings, i.e. that 
some students who flunk logic will never die. 
Section 5. Some practical uses of the Square of Opposition 
Squares structurally similar to the Square of Opposition can be made for a vari-
ety of things other than A, E, I, and O propositions in opposition, to classify and 
summarize possibilities at a glance. Of course, the rules of the Square of 
Opposition do not apply in the same way to these "squares," since they have at 
their four corners not opposed A, E, I, and O propositions but instead variables 
such as "yes" and "no" to two different questions or "more" and "less," or "time" 
and "space," or "past" and "future," or "east" and "west." 
Take the "square" in which the four corners represent opposite answers to 
two different questions. These answers can be either an absolute, simple Yes and 
No, or a more relative and gradual More and Less. The famous argument called 
"Pascal's Wager" is an example of a "square" with simple Yes or No answers to 
two questions. Pascal argued as follows: In objective fact, either God exists, or 
not. And in any individual's subjective choice, either he chooses to believe in 
God, or not. So there are four possibilities: (1) God exists and I believe in Him; 
(2) God exists and I don't believe in Him; (3) God doesn't exist and I believe in 
Him; and (4) God doesn't exist and I don't believe in Him. 
S 
U 
B 
J 
(1) Gain: Everything 
(3) Gain: Nothing 
God exists 
OBJECTIVELY 
God does not exist 
E 
1 believe 
C 
T 
Loss: Little or Nothing 
Loss: Nothing 
(2) Gain: Nothing 
(4) Gain: Nothing 
k 
I do not believe 
L 
Y 
Loss: Everything 
Loss: Nothing 
Once these four possibilities are set up, Pascal calculates the possible gain 
and loss in each case. We want to gain two things, he argues: truth and happi-

184 
VII. CONTRADICTION 
ness, the two absolute desires of everyone. But we cannot be sure which of these 
two propositions is true: that God exists or that He does not. We gain the truth 
in two of the four cases: (I) and (4), for our belief matches reality in both cases. 
We lose the truth in the other two cases, (2) and (3), since our belief fails to 
match reality in those cases. But if we believe that we cannot know which is 
more likely, we cannot decide whether or not to believe on this basis. We have a 
50-50 chance of winning the truth no matter whether we choose Yes or No. So 
far we have no clear reason for "betting" for God or against Him. But if wc turn 
to our other goal, happiness, we have good reason for "wagering" that God 
exists rather than not. For if God does not exist, there is no meeting Him after 
death, no Heaven or Hell, no infinite and eternal gain or loss; thus there is little 
difference between believing and not believing, since there is in the end nothing 
to gain or to lose. But if God does exist and I must believe in Him and accept 
His gift of Heaven in order to attain Heaven, then believing in Him (possibility 
#1) gives me infinite gain but little or no loss; while not believing in Him (pos-
sibility #2) gives me little or no gain but infinite loss. Thus my only chance of 
winning is the combination (I) and my only chance of losing is the combination 
(2). So belief is a very reasonable "wager." 
Here is an example of the other kind of "square," with gradual or relative 
answers, "more affirmative" vs. "more negative." Avery Dulles has proposed a 
classification of four ideological attitudes toward Church and State in contem-
porary America. "Traditionalism" is more positive toward the Church and more 
negative toward the current State; "Neo-conservatism" is more positive toward 
both; "Liberalism" is more positive toward the State and negative toward the 
Church and "Radicalism" is more negative toward both. 
Toward the Church 
Toward the State 
Positive 
Negative 
Positive 
Nco-conscrvat ism 
Liberalism 
Negative 
Traditionalism 
Radicalism 
Sometimes the traditional Square is useful, without modification, in distin-
guishing four possible positions. For instance, in the debate about abortion, one 
may believe that (A) all fetuses are persons, (I) at least some fetuses are persons, 
(E) no fetuses are persons, or (O) at least some fetuses are not persons; and this 
would give us four different positions on abortion if we assumed that persons 
may not be killed but non-persons may: (A) that all abortions are wrong, (I) that 
at least some are wrong, (E) that none are wrong, and (O) that at least some are 
not wrong. 
Alternatively, if we assumed that fetuses are persons, we could then go on 
to distinguish four beliefs about a right to life: (A) that all persons have the right 

Some practical uses of the Square of Opposition 
185 
to life (and therefore all abortions are wrong), (I) that at least some persons have 
the right to life (and therefore that at least some abortions are wrong), (E) that 
no persons have the right to life (and therefore that no abortions are wrong), and 
(0) that at least some persons do not have the right to life (and therefore that at 
least some abortions are not wrong). 
Those who debate important and divisive moral issues like abortion often 
do not clearly distinguish what propositions they claim are true, or claim to 
know arc true. It is often assumed that there are only two possible positions 
when there arc in fact four because there are two variables, not one. A "square" 
can reveal this. Sometimes the variables are the same as they are on the real 
Square, viz. universal vs. particular and affirmative vs. negative. At other times, 
the two variables are different (as in the Avery Dulles example). 
Contradictions with Sets of Propositions 
Do sets of propositions, like political party platforms, contradict opposite sets of 
propositions, like opposing party platforms? Is it logically possible to agree with 
both Democrats and Republican platforms? 
Obviously, the answer is: in part but not wholly if some of the planks in one 
platform (i.e. some propositions) contradict some in the opposing platform and 
others do not. e.g. it is logically possible to agree with the Democratic platform 
about stricter laws to protect the environment and with the Republican platform 
about lowering taxes. But because we vote for one party or the other, we some-
times assume it's a "package deal" with no "line-item veto." 
When asked for our opinion on some controversial issue, we often fail to 
make distinctions but instead just "feel" that one side is right in toto and the 
other side wrong. But there may be multiple propositions, or a set of proposi-
tions, held by each side. e.g. when we are asked "how we feel" about homosex-
uality, we should first demand of ourselves that feelings be based on thinking. 
And since thinking makes distinctions, while feelings do not, we might insist on 
distinguishing between attitudes toward people and attitudes toward actions, and 
between legality and morality, and thus favor laws to protect homosexuals from 
discrimination while also believing that homosexual acts are immoral, without 
any logical contradiction. 
Sometimes people do not notice that a set of propositions, all of which they 
believe, contains a contradiction between two of these propositions, or, more 
hiddenly, between one proposition and two others taken together, e.g. according 
to polls, about two-thirds of Americans believe that abortion is the killing of an 
innocent human life, and about two-thirds of Americans believe that abortion 
should be legal, yet well over two-thirds believe that all human lives should be 
protected by law. But any two of those three propositions, taken together, con-
tradict the third one. The logic is like that of the stock insult: "You can be hon-
est, or intelligent, or (fill in your favorite villain: Fundamentalist, Liberal, 
Capitalist, Socialist, ctc.), or any two of them, but not all three." (Work it out.) 

VIII. The Third Act of the Mind: 
Reasoning 
Section 1. What does "reason" mean? (P) 
"Man is a rational animal." That was the classical definition of man. The mod-
ern mind tends to object to two things in this definition: (1) its larger meaning 
of "man" and (2) its larger meaning of "rational." 
(1) In all books written in English until fairly recently we find the larger, or 
inclusive, use of "man" to mean both men and women equally. But current fem-
inist fashion insists on an exclusively masculine meaning to "man" (which this 
author would call not "inclusive" but "exclusive," in fact "male chauvinism"). 
They would use not "man" but "humanity" to designate both males and females 
equally. But this is a confusion, bccause "humanity" is an abstract term, desig-
nating a quality, as in "humanity vs. divinity," while "man" is a concrete term, 
as in "God and man" or "a man or an animal"). The new usage, which is exclu-
sive and "sexist," calls itself "inclusive" and it accuses the traditional inclusive 
usage of exclusivism and sexism!? (See also page 36, footnote 1.) 
(2) The larger, older meaning of "rational" includes wisdom, intuition, 
understanding of the nature or essence of a thing (the "first act of the mind"), 
self-knowledge, moral conscicncc (awareness of good and evil), and the appre-
ciation of beauty, as well as reasoning and rational calculation (the "third act of 
the mind"). 
Even in this larger, ancient sense of "reason," human reason has weakness 
as well as power. Compared with angels (pure spirits), we are like slowly crawl-
ing insects: we must gather all our data from our five senses, and we must usu-
ally proceed slowly, step by step, deducing or inducing one thing from another. 
In these two ways our rational knowledge is indirect: it depends on prior sense 
experience and it depends on prior knowledge. Angels, in contrast, have some-
thing like direct mental telepathy with the mind of God, or at least with the 
essences of things as God knows them, immediately and intuitively.1 
I 
This is simply the definition of an angel, whether or not angels are real, whether or not 
there is good reason for believing they arc real, and whether or not those reasons amount 

What Joes "reason " mean?/The ultimate foundations of the syllogism 187 
On the other hand, the human mind has a remarkable power compared with 
even the highest animal intelligence. Human reason surpasses animal intelli-
gence in at least three ways: 
First, though all human knowledge begins in experience, we can acquire 
knowledge beyond experience, and even with certainty, through deductive rea-
soning. For instance, 
• If we know that everything that has atoms must be able to reflect light, 
• And if we know that all little green men on Mars have atoms (i.e. if there 
are little green men on Mars, they must have atoms), 
• Then wc know with certainty that all little green men on Mars (if there are 
any) must be able to reflect light, even though we have never seen little 
green men on Mars, and even though we do not know whether or not there 
are little green men on Mars. This is quite remarkable. 
Second, we can know not only particular truths beyond our immediate expe-
rience, but also universal truths, such as "2+2=4" or "all men are mortal." This 
power presupposes the first power, the power to know beyond experience, for 
experience never presents universals, only particulars. We can know universals 
by abstracting them from the particulars that we experience, e.g. "human nature" 
from human beings or "life" from living things. 
Third, we can know necessary and unchangeable truths; we can know not 
only that such and such happens to be the case, but also that it must necessarily 
and always be the case. If A is B and B is C, then A must necessarily be C. This 
is even more than the power to know universal truths. Not all universal truths are 
necessary. "All human babies come from human mothers" is a universal truth 
(so far) but not a necessary truth, and it will cease to be true when someone 
clones a human being. "All my ties are four-in-hand" is true but not necessarily 
true, since I could have had some bow ties too, and probably will have some in 
the future. But "all men are mortal" or "all triangles have 180 degrees in the sum 
of their three interior angles" are not only universal truths (true of all men or all 
triangles) but also necessary truths, truths that must be so and cannot ever cease 
to be so. 
Section 2. The ultimate foundations of the syllogism (P) 
The power of deduction to give us certain knowledge, as expressed in a syllo-
gism such as the classic "All men are mortal and2 Socrates is a man, therefore 
Socrates is mortal," comes from the inherent, self-evident, and necessary truth 
of the following principles: 
to proofs. Wc are not assuming the existence of angels, or of God, but using the concept 
of an angel to understand the nature of human reason by contrast. 
2 
1 And* often indicates a relation between two premises. 

188 
VIII. THE THIRD ACT OF THE MIND: REASONING 
(1) "Whatever is universally true of a subject must be true of everything 
contained in that subject" - that is, if x must be true of all S, then x must be true 
of every single S. This is known technically as the dictum de omni% or "the law 
about all." Because of this principle, we can be certain that if all men are mor-
tal, and Socrates is a man, Socrates must be mortal. Whatever is true of a uni-
versal is true of all its instances, for a universal is "uni-versa," "onc-in-many," 
one and the same in all its instances. It is the universal that is the foundation of 
the syllogism.3 
(2) "Whatever is universally false of a subject must be false of everything 
contained in that subject" - that is, if x is not-true of all S. of S as such, then x 
must not be true of any single S. This is called the dictum de nullo, or "the law 
about none." It is the negative version of principle (1). Because of this principle, 
we can be certain that if no men are angels, and Socrates is a man, Socrates must 
not be an angel. 
(3) Now combinc these two principles with the third principle that "two 
things identical with one and the same third thing are identical with each other" 
and you get the syllogism. For the "third thing" is the "middle term," the com-
mon term with which the other two terms arc compared. In the classic example 
above, "Socrates" and "mortar' are both compared with a common third term, 
or "middle term," "men." (Sec below, pages 215-19 on the importance of the 
middle term.) If all men are mortal and Socrates is a man, then Socrates must be 
mortal. 
(4) The negative corollary of principle (3) is that if there arc two things, one 
of which is identical with a third thing and the other of which is not, then those 
two things are not identical with each other. In the syllogism "No men are angels, 
and Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is not an angel," "Socrates" and "angel" 
are both compared with the common third term, or "middle term," "men." 
(5) Principles (3) and (4), in turn, assume the Law of Identity ("a thing is 
what it is"). 
(6) And the negative corollary of the Principle of Identity is the Law of Non-
Contradiction (" a thing is not what it isn 7; .r is not non-x"). 
(7) Finally, it also assumes that a thing is either x or not x. A predicate must 
be either affirmed or denied of a subject; there is no third possibility. A propo-
sition is either true or false, there is no third possibility. This is the Law of 
Excluded Middle. (All these principles, especially this last one, assumes no 
ambiguity of terms.) 
On these principles, all of which are logically self-evident "tautologies," the 
syllogism rests. 
3 
This is why modern logicians, who arc usually nominalists, do not think much of syllo-
gism. Nominalism is the denial of any real universals. See also the next chapter for more 
historical and logical detail on this controversy (pages 219-30). 

The ultimate foundations of the syllogism 
189 
Tautologies 
A "tautology" is a proposition that does not need to be proved because it is 
logically self-evident. It "proves itself," so to speak, because if you deny it, you 
must contradict yourself. Examples are: "Frogs are frogs," "Whatever animal 
has teeth and claws, has claws," "If I exist, I exist," and "Nothing that is divisi-
ble is indivisible at the same time." A tautology can be defined in three ways: (a) 
a proposition that is true because of its logical form, whatever its content, (b) a 
proposition whose contradictory is self-contradictory, or (c) a proposition whose 
predicate is necessarily contained in its subject. 
Though a proposition may be self-evident objectively, in itself, it may not 
be self-evident subjectively, to a given human mind. For instance, "angels are 
not confined to space" and "whatever has color must have size" are both self-
evident in themselves, but not to a person who does not understand the nature of 
angels and space, color and size well enough to know that these connections are 
necessary. 
Sometimes the term "tautology" is used for any objectively self-evident 
proposition, but more usually it is used in a narrower sense, only for propositions 
that are explicitly self-evident, verbally self-evident, independent of the meaning 
of the terms. If we use this narrower sense, "All red ties are red," "All red X's are 
X's," and "All red gloms are gloms" are tautologies, but "no angels have bodies" 
and "All men have bodies" are not. 
What about a proposition like "You will pass this course if you work hard 
enough"? This is a tautology if "hard enough" means "hard enough to pass"; for 
then the proposition means "If you work hard enough to pass, you will pass," or 
"If you pass because you work hard enough, then you will pass." And that is 
clearly a tautology. However, if "hard enough" means "hard enough to satisfy 
the teacher," then it is not a tautology. 
A tautology tells us no new information. "This candidate will be elected if 
there is sufficient support" is a tautology, like "you will pass if you work hard 
enough," though it sounds as if it is saying something informative. It says only 
that if there is sufficient support for him to be elected, then there will be suffi-
cient support for him to be elected. If you contradict the proposition, you con-
tradict yourself: it cannot be true that the candidate will be elected even if there 
is not sufficient support for him to be elected. 
Tautologies are necessarily true. Their contradictories are necessarily false, 
logically impossible. Other propositions are true (or false) only because of some 
other things being true; that is, they are contingently true (or false). "Water runs 
downhill" is contingently true, true only because of gravity. In a universe where 
matter repels instead of attracts, it would not be true. Necessary truths are truths 
that arc true in all possible worlds. 
We cannot imagine or conceive the opposite of a necessary truth. For 
instance, we cannot imagine, or conceive, or tell a story about, a world in which 
2+2=5. We can, however, imagine the opposite of any contingent truth if we have 

190 
VIII. THE THIRD ACT OF THE MIND: REASONING 
a lively enough imagination - like a world without gravity. "Dead bodies decay 
(when there is normal heat and air) and do not come back to life" is a truth about 
all dead bodies; but it is a contingent truth, and we can imagine (and even 
believe) a miracle happening, in which a dead body does not decay but comes 
back to life. That would be a violation of physical law, but physical laws arc only 
contingent truths, true only because something else is true in this particular 
world, which might not be true in some other possible world. But we cannot even 
conceive, and therefore we literally cannot believe, any violation of a logical law, 
since logical laws are necessary truths, true of all possible worlds, so that a 
proposition that violates a logical law is strictly meaningless. 
For instance, "A man walked on water" may be a miracle, but it is not a self-
contradiction. "A man walked on water and didn't walk on water at the same 
time" is a self-contradiction, if there is no ambiguity in the terms. (Of course, 
surfers walk on water in a sense. But though that may be almost as wonderful as 
what Jesus did, it's not quite the same.) "God can give man free choice, so that 
man is free to choose between good and evil, and at the same time withhold free 
will from man, so that man never chooses evil" is a self-contradictory and thus 
strictly meaningless proposition. It does not become meaningful because it is 
predicated of God. God, if He exists and created the physical universe, can over-
ride its physical laws; but even God cannot violate logical laws, because these 
laws are not dependent on the temporal nature of the creation but on the eternal 
nature of the Creator. 
If, of course, God exists. It is not clear what reality these laws are depend-
ent on if there is no God; but in any case they are eternal, unchangeable, neces-
sary truths. If God exists, these laws are descriptions of the nature of God. This 
is a useful explanation of the distinction between necessary and contingent 
truths even for atheists, for it is the meaning of "God," or the concept of God, 
that is relevant here. The distinction holds conceptually whether there is a real 
God or not. 
Section 3. How to detect arguments 
We can evaluate arguments as valid or invalid only after we find them. Not all 
written or spoken discourse contains arguments, and discourse that does contain 
arguments is usually like a tide pool containing crabs: you have to hunt for them 
to find them. 
Detecting arguments is like crabbing. Suppose we are fishing for crabs with 
a net. We must (1) First detect the presence of a crab before we can hope to (2) 
get it into our net; and we usually must get it into our net before we can (3) tell 
whether it is one of the edible kind of crabs or not. These three steps apply to 
arguments as well as crabs. The critical question about any argument is (3) 
whether it is logically valid or not, whether the mind can accept it, whether it is 
mentally edible, so to speak. But before we can determine that (3), we must first 

How to detect arguments 
191 
(2) be clear about what the argument is saying, and we do this by putting it into 
logical form, especially the form of a syllogism. That corresponds to the net. 
(Advanced fishermen might do without a net, and advanced logicians can 
bypass the step of putting ordinary-language arguments into logical form, but 
beginners in logic definitely need to put an argument into logical form before 
they can see whether it is valid or not, just as beginning crabbers need to get the 
crab in the net before they can see whether it is edible or not.) But even before 
we can do this (2), we must first (1) detect the presence of an argument, as wc 
detect the presence of a crab. If we wave our net of syllogism randomly, we will 
probably not find an argument in it. For there is much more in human linguistic 
communication than arguments, just as there is much more in the sea than crabs. 
Detecting the presence of an argument is not something that can be taught 
mechanically. It is intuitive "seeing." There are mechanical principles for testing 
the validity of an argument, and we will learn these shortly; but there are no 
mechanical principles for testing for the presence of an argument. 
However, there are indicators. One is the presence of the essential structure 
of an argument, and another is certain key words. 
(1) The essential structure of every argument consists of a relationship 
between its two parts: premises and conclusion. The conclusion is what you are 
trying to prove; the premises are your reasons, your evidence, your proof. The 
relationship between them can be put in different ways: we can say that the con-
clusion "follows from" the premises, or that the premises "entail" the conclu-
sion, or "prove" the conclusion, or that the premises are the "reasons" for the 
conclusion, or that the conclusion is true because the premises are true, or that 
(in a deductive argument but not an inductive one) if the premises are true, then 
the conclusion must be true. 
In "All men arc mortal and Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is mortal" 
the conclusion is "Socrates is mortal" because that is what you are trying to 
prove; and the premises are "All men are mortal" and "Socrates is a man" 
because that is your reason for believing that Socrates is mortal, that is your 
proof that Socrates is mortal, that is your evidence that Socrates is mortal. The 
word "therefore" asserts your claim that the premises have this logical relation 
to the conclusion, that they prove the conclusion to be true. 
(2) There is usually a key word indicating this premise-to-conclusion rela-
tion. "Therefore" is the formal, proper word, but there are many others. The fol-
lowing is a list of "conclusion indicators." The proposition that follows these 
words is usually the conclusion of an argument; and the proposition that pre-
cedes these words is usually a premise (thus argument-indicator words usually 
indicate both the conclusion and a premise): 
"therefore" 
"hence" 
"it follows that" 

192 
VIII. THE THIRD ACT OF THE MIND: REASONING 
"consequently" 
"in consequence" 
"which shows that" 
"so" 
"then" (after "if") 
"indicates that" 
"implies that" 
"entails that" 
"so you can see that" 
"we can conclude that" 
4Sve can infer that" 
"we may deduce that" 
"points to the conclusion that" 
"which means that" 
"which shows that" 
"leads one to believe that" 
"bears out the point that" 
"proves that" 
"thus" 
"as a result" 
"accordingly" 
"for this reason" (followed by a comma) 
The following words arc premise-indicators. The proposition which follows 
any one of them is usually a premise of an argument; and the proposition which 
precedes them is usually the conclusion: 
"because" 
"since" 
"for" 
"as" 
"on the assumption that" 
"if" 
"if we assume that" 
"if we suppose that" 
"in view of the fact that" 
"let us assume that" 
"may be inferred from" 
"may be deduced from" 
"follows from" 
"as shown by" 
"inasmuch as" 
"as indicated by" 

Arguments vs. explanations 
193 
"the reason is that" 
"for the reason that" 
"for this reason" (followed by a colon) 
There could be a very short third list of double-premise-indicators. There 
would be only two words on this list: 'but' and 'and,' both of which are often 
used to connect two premises (e.g. "No angel is mortal, but he is mortal, there-
fore he is not an angel," or "All men are mortal and Socrates is man, therefore 
Socrates is mortal"). But 'but' and 'and* have so many other functions that they 
do not usually function as double-premise-indicators, while the words on the 
other two lists do usually function as conclusion-indicators or premise-indica-
tors. 
Section 4. Arguments vs. explanations 
Most of the words in the two lists above could also indicate the presence of 
explanations rather than arguments, so we must distinguish these two things. 
Compare the two following: 
(1) "He must be guilty because he has shifty eyes." 
(2) "He is absent because he is ill." 
(1) is an argument (a weak one), but (2) is an explanation, not an argument. 
In (1), we try to prove that he must be guilty, and the evidence we use to prove 
it is that he has shifty eyes. In (2), we do not try to prove that he is absent; we 
already know that to be true. That is not controversial, or in question; there is no 
need to prove it. Instead, we try to explain, or give the cause of his absence. We 
say that cause is his illness. But in (1), we do try to prove that he is guilty, for 
that is in question, that is controversial, not agreed, or not known. And his shifty 
eyes are brought up as evidence that supposedly proves that he is guilty. The 
implied syllogism is: 
All who have shifty eyes are guilty. 
And he has shifty eyes. 
Therefore he is guilty. 
It is a weak argument because the first premise, which was implied rather 
than stated, is pretty obviously not true. But if instead we use the true premise 
that"Some who have shifty eyes are guilty," the resulting syllogism is formally 
invalid or fallacious: 

194 
VIII. THE THIRD ACT OF THE MIND: REASONING 
Some who have shifty eyes are guilty. 
And he has shifty eyes. 
Therefore he is guilty. 
It is a mistake to do that kind of thing with "He is absent bccause he is ill," 
to express it as a syllogism, for it is not trying to prove that he is absent, as a 
controversial, arguable proposition, at all. Instead of proving that he is absent, it 
assumes it, and then explains it by giving its cause. 
How do we recognize this difference between arguments and explanations? 
We just "see" it, intuitively or instinctively, by understanding the meaning of the 
words and the context. There is no better explanation. Outside of logic classes, 
few people ever have any trouble making that distinction; only in logic classes 
do students get confused about it. The best way to distinguish them is simply to 
drop the context of "a logic textbook" and imagine you are talking to a friend. 
Section 5. Truth and validity (B) 
Arguments are either logically valid or logically invalid. If they are logically 
invalid, they contain a logical fallacy. The word "fallacy" has a specific and nar-
row meaning in logic. Not every mistake is a fallacy. An error of fact, like the 
belief that the earth is flat, is not called a fallacy in logic, though sometimes it 
is called that in ordinary language. Only an argument can be fallacious, not a 
proposition. A fallacy is a mistake in reasoning. A fallacy makes an argument 
logically "invalid." An argument without any fallacies is logically valid: its con-
clusion follows necessarily from its premises. 
To review the threefold structure of logic once again: 
Terms are never true or false, and never logically valid or invalid (falla-
cious), but only clear or unclear (ambiguous). 
Propositions are never valid or invalid (fallacious), but only true or false. 
And each term within a proposition is either clear or unclear. 
Arguments are either valid or invalid (fallacious). Each proposition in an 
argument is either true or false, and each term is either clear or unclear. 
So a good argument is one whose terms are all clear, whose propositions are 
all true, and whose logic is valid. A bad argument is one with an unclear term or 
a false proposition or a logical fallacy. 
Truth is a relationship between a single proposition and the real world, or 
the nature of things, or "objective reality," or what is "outside of" (independent 
of) the proposition and the mind that expresses it. Validity is a relationship 
between propositions: between the premises of an argument and the conclusion 
of the argument. 
We have already studied "material fallacies" fallacies of content, wrong 
uses of the content in arguments. Wc are now about to study "formal fallacies," 
fallacies of logical form. Logical form is the relationship between, or arrange-
ment of, terms and propositions (that is, the content, or matter) in an argument. 

Truth and validity 
195 
To understand what makes an argument invalid, wc need to understand what 
makes one valid. An argument (we speak only of a deductive argument here) is 
valid if the premises necessitate the conclusion, if they prove the conclusion, if 
their being true makes it necessary that the conclusion be true. So in a valid 
argument, the premises cannot be true without the conclusion being true. If we 
know that the premises are true, we can be sure that the conclusion is true. This 
is the point of "validity": it assures us that it is safe to move to the conclusion if 
we have already moved to, or occupied, the premises - like a step across a river 
in a battle. 
A valid argument gives us certainty about its conclusion. It is not absolute 
certainty but relative certainty, that is, certainty relative to the premises. It is 
conditional certainty or hypothetical certainty: certainty that if the premises are 
true, then the conclusion must be true. But it is certainty, which is a currently 
unfashionable thing; it is "rigid" and iron and awful and unchangeable. If all A 
is B and all B is C then all A must be C, necessarily and everywhere, for every-
one and forever. At no time or place or culture or world can it change. Changes 
might take place in the laws of physics: water might run uphill tomorrow, or a 
galaxy of antimatter and antigravity might be discovered; but in all possible 
worlds the fundamental laws of logic must hold. Miracles might happen; the 
fundamental laws of the universe might be set aside by the Creator of the uni-
verse; but even the Creator cannot violate logical laws. If God exists, logical 
laws are the laws of the divine nature. Even God cannot both exist and not exist 
at the same time. A meaningless self-contradiction does not suddenly become 
meaningful because you add the words "God can do this" to it. And this is so not 
because we say so, because the human mind has legislated these laws. The laws 
of logic are not invented, they are discovered; they are objective truths. (Of 
course, the language systems we use to formulate them are invented, and our 
process of coming to learn them is subjective.) 
In a previous chapter, we made the point (which some will find startling and 
even offensive) that it is very easy to define "truth." However, it is far from easy 
to find it, and to be sure when you have found it. We now make another point 
some will find surprising: it is easy to know with certainty whether an argument 
is valid. However, this is not enough: an argument is totally satisfactory only if 
it meets three criteria, and it is far from easy to know whether an argument is 
good by the other two criteria: whether all the terms are unambiguous and 
whether all the premises are true. 
In any deductive argument, assuming the terms are clear, there are four pos-
sibilities: 
(1) The premises are true and the logic is valid. 
(2) The premises are true and the logic is invalid. 
(3) At least one of the premises is false and the logic is valid. 
(4) At least one of the premises is false and the logic is invalid. 

196 
VIII. THE THIRD ACT OF THE MIND: REASONING 
Only in the first case can we know that the conclusion is true. In the other 
three cases, we do not know whether the conclusion is true or false. 
LOGIC 
VALID 
INVALID 
TRUE 
PREMISES 
Conclusion true 
Conclusion unknown 
FALSE 
Conclusion unknown 
Conclusion unknown 
We can also know that an argument whose conclusion is false and whose 
logic is valid must have at least one false premise. 
LOGIC 
VALID 
INVALID 
TRUE 
CONCLUSION 
Premises unknown 
Premises unknown 
FALSE 
At least one premise 
must be false 
Premises unknown 
This is equally important for practical purposes, since we often argue "back-
wards," so to speak, proving that a premise must be false from the fact that the 
conclusion is false (if the logic is valid), instead of "forwards " proving that a con-
clusion must be true from the fact that the premises are all true (if the logic is 
valid). These are the two most usual strategies in arguing: reasoning backwards, or 
"upstream" from pollution downstream (a false conclusion) to pollution upstream 
(a false premise); or reasoning forwards, or "downstream" from unpolluted (true) 
premises to an unpolluted (true) conclusion. And both strategies depend on this 
principle about the relationship between truth and validity in an argument. 
We cannot validly argue in any other way. e.g. we cannot validly argue that 
if the premises of a valid argument are false, then the conclusion must be false 
too; that pollution upstream proves pollution downstream, so to speak; that if the 
argument is consistent, false premises must lead to a false conclusion just as 
surely as true premises lead to a true conclusion. That mistake comes from 
thinking of an argument as a sort of mathematical equation, with the premises 
on one side and the conclusion on the other. But a mathematical equation is 
reversible, while an argument is not. (Neither is a proposition simply reversible, 
as we have seen previously (page 140): the subject and the predicate are not 
interchangeable, but perform different functions.) In a valid argument, true 
premises entail a true conclusion (arguing "downstream"), but a true conclusion 
does not necessarily entail true premises. And a false conclusion entails false 
premises (arguing "upstream") but a false premise does not necessarily entail a 
false conclusion. The conclusion might be true by accident. 
So only the two following inferences arc corrcct: 

Truth and validity 
197 
1. If the argument is valid and the premises are true, then the conclusion 
must be true. (This is one mode of correct argument; we could call it 
"arguing forward?) 
2. If the argument is valid and the conclusion is false, then at least one 
premise must be false. (This is the other mode of correct argument; we 
could call it44arguing backward?) 
Here arc two examples of valid arguments with false premises but a true 
conclusion: 
All evil spirits are birds. 
The earth is a star. 
And all sparrows are evil spirits. 
And no stars are fish. 
Therefore all sparrows are birds. 
Therefore the earth is not a fish. 
In both cases above, the premises are false, and the argument is valid, yet the 
conclusion happens to be true (by accident). 
The practical point of this is that you do not refute a conclusion by showing 
that it follows from false premises. 
Suppose someone has just given a logically valid argument for a conclusion 
you disagree with, but this argument has one or more false premises in it. You 
point out these false premises. What have you accomplished? Something, but 
not everything. You have refuted his argument but not his conclusion. You have 
only shown that your opponent's argument has not proved his conclusion, as he 
claimed. His argument is inconclusive because it has a false premise. The con-
clusion is still in doubt. It is neither proved to be true, as your opponent has 
claimed nor is it proved to be false. 
And just because a valid argument has a true conclusion, that does not mean 
it has true premises. We must be careful not to think of an argument as a 
reversible equation. Like a river, an argument carries us in one direction, down-
stream: wc can move from true premises to a true conclusion - we can know that 
if the premises are true, then the conclusion be true - but we cannot reverse this 
and know that if the conclusion is true the premises must be true. (We can, how-
ever, deduce that if the conclusion is false, at least one of the premises must have 
been false, just as wc can deduce that if garbage is flowing down the river, some-
one must have unloaded it upstream.) 
The practical point in strategy of arguing here can be summed up as the fol-
lowing: 
(1) 
You do not prove that a premise is true by showing that from it a true con-
clusion logically follows. 
(2) 
You do not prove that a conclusion is false by showing that it logically fol-
lows from a false premise. 
(3) 
You do prove that a premise is false by showing that from it a false con-
clusion logically follows. 
(4) 
You do prove that a conclusion is true by showing that it logically follows 
from true premises. 

/ 98 
VIII. THE THIRD ACT OF THE MIND: REASONING 
These situations all concern valid arguments. Here are some other situations 
with invalid arguments. When you have an invalid argument, you know nothing 
about truth and falsity: 
(5) 
You do not prove that a conclusion is false by showing that the argument 
is invalid An invalid argument can have a true conclusion: 
The sky is blue 
And grass is green 
Therefore man is mortal 
(6) 
You do not prove that an argument is invalid by showing that its conclu-
sion is false. A false conclusion can emerge from a valid argument if it has 
false premises: 
All pigs are purple 
And all purple things are immortal 
Therefore all pigs are immortal 
(7) 
You do not prove a conclusion is true by showing that the argument is 
valid. The premises must also be true. The example above (6) is a valid 
argument but has a false conclusion. 
(8) 
You do not prove an argument valid by showing that its conclusion is true. 
Example (5) above has a true conclusion but it is an invalid argument. 
Arguing "Forward" 
If Premises Are . . . 
And Argument Is . . . 
T h e n Conclusion Is . . . 
T R U E 
VALID 
T R U E 
T R U E 
INVALID 
U N K N O W N 
FALSE 
VALID 
U N K N O W N 
FALSE 
INVALID 
U N K N O W N 
Arguing "Backward" 
If Conclusion Is . . . 
And Argument Is . . . 
T h e n Premises Are . . . 
T R U E 
VALID 
U N K N O W N 
FALSE 
VALID 
ONE FALSE4 
T R U E 
INVALID 
U N K N O W N 
FALSE 
INVALID 
U N K N O W N 
Imagine a spy trying to get out of East Berlin into West Berlin. In order to 
succeed in getting to West Berlin, he has to pass three checkpoints: Able, Baker, 
and Charlie. If he fails at any of one or more of the checkpoints, he fails to get 
out. The spy symbolizes an argument, and escape to West Berlin symbolizes 
proving its conclusion to be true. The three checkpoints arc the three questions 
of logic, one for each of the "three acts of the mind" (see the charts on pages 
32-33). Checkpoint Able checks for ambiguous terms. Checkpoint Baker 
checks for false premises. Checkpoint Charlie checks for logical fallacies. 
4 
At least one, possibly more. 

Truth and validity 
199 
We can know (1) that if the spy passes all three checkpoints, he succeeds 
(this is arguing "forward"); and that (2) if he does not succecd, he has failed at 
least one chcckpoint (this is arguing "backward"). (3) We also know that if he 
has passed two of the three checkpoints and yet has not succeeded in getting to 
West Berlin, he must have failed the remaining checkpoint. 
Thus wc know (1) that if an argument has no ambiguous terms, false prem-
ises, or logical fallacies, its conclusion must be true; and that (2) if the conclu-
sion is not true, it must have failed at least one of the three checkpoints. (3) We 
also know that if the argument with the false conclusion has passed any two of 
the three checkpoints, it must have failed the remaining one. 
Exercises on the relationship between truth and validity: 
Which of the following statements can we know to be true, assuming unam-
biguous terms? (This is probably the dullest, most abstract, and least interesting 
exercise in this book.) 
1. If a premise is false and the argument is invalid, the conclusion must be false. 
2. If a premise is false and the argument is invalid, the conclusion must be true. 
3. If a premise is false and the argument is valid, the conclusion must be true. 
4. If a premise is false and the argument is valid the conclusion must be false. 
5. If a premise is false and the conclusion is false, the argument must be 
invalid. 
6. If a premise is false and the conclusion is false, the argument must be valid 
7. If a premise is false and the conclusion is true, the argument must be invalid 
8. If a premise is false and the conclusion is true, the argument must be valid. 
9. If the premises are true and the argument is valid the conclusion must be true. 
10. If the premises are true and the argument is valid the conclusion must be 
false. 
11. If the premises are true and the argument is invalid the conclusion must be 
false. 
12. If the premises are true and the argument is invalid the conclusion must be 
true. 
13. If the premises are true and the conclusion is true, the argument must be valid. 
14. If the premises are true and the conclusion is true, the argument must be 
invalid. 
15. If the premises are true and the conclusion is false, the aigument must be valid. 
16. If the premises are true and the conclusion is false, the argument must be 
invalid. 
17. If the argument is valid and the conclusion is false, at least one premise 
must be false. 
18. If the argument is valid the conclusion is false, and one premise is true, the 
other premise must be false. 
19. If the conclusion is false, then either the argument is invalid or a premise is 
false. 
20. If one premise is false, the conclusion true, and the argument valid the other 
premise must be true. 

IX: Different Kinds of Arguments 
Section 1. Three meanings of "because" 
In distinguishing arguments from explanations, it is necessary to distinguish 
three different meanings of the word "bccause" (and sometimes also the word 
"cause") which arc often confuscd: 
(1) the physical relation between cause and effect 
(2) the logical relation between premise and conclusion 
(3) the psychological relation between motive and act 
(1) The relation between cause and effect is easily understood. When we say 
"I will die because of cancer" wc point to death as the effcct and canccr as the 
cause. When we say "The Red Sox did not win a World Series for 86 years 
because of the Curse of the Bambino " we point to their 86-year drought as the 
effect and the Curse as the cause. (More prosaic minds can substitute weak 
pitching as the cause.) 
(2) The relation between premise and conclusion is different. It is a logical 
relation, not a physical (#1) or psychological (#3) relation. When we say "I will 
die bccausc all men die and I am a man," I point to the truth of "I will die" as the 
conclusion that is proved, and I point to "all men die and I am a man" as the two 
premises which together prove that conclusion. When we say "Since the Red Sox 
finally defeated the Yankees in the playoffs, God must have converted and is not 
a Yankee fan any more," we point to God's conversion as our conclusion and the 
Red Sox victory as our reason for believing that conclusion. When we say "He 
believes in Heaven bccausc there has to be perfect justice in the end," we point 
to his conclusion that Heaven exists and to the fact (or claim) that there must be 
pcrfect justice in the end as his premise or logical reason for believing it. 
(3) "Because" can also indicate a psychological motive for a mental or 
physical act. When I say "I think I will die today because I am feeling despair," 

Three meanings of "because " 
201 
I point to my belief that I will die today as my mental act and to my feeling of 
despair as my motive, or moving force leading me to this belief. It is not a phys-
ical cause, nor is it a logical reason. I am giving the subjective cause for my 
believing it rather than the objective cause of its really happening. I am giving a 
motive for the subjective, psychological act rather than cither a logical reason 
proving the conclusion or a physical cause causing the event. When I say "I 
always expect the Red Sox to blow a lead because I'm a New England pes-
simist," I'm pointing to my pessimism as the psychological motive or moving 
cause for my belief. When 1 say "He believes in Heaven because he's afraid to 
die," I'm pointing to his fear of death as the subjective, psychological moving 
cause of his belief in Heaven. I'm not saying his fear of death is a logical proof 
of Heaven, nor that it is the physical cause or creator of Heaven. 
The psychological "because" is the reason children first give, since we 
know our own subjective feelings most easily. The causal "because" is the next 
reason we give, for physical sensations of physical things come easy and early 
to us. The logical "because" is the last and most advanced reason we give, for it 
is the most abstract and difficult The first "because" is subjective and immate-
rial, the second is objective and material, the third is objective and immaterial. 
A very common fallacy today is to confuse two of these "becauses," to sub-
stitute the psychological "because" for the logical "because." (This is essential-
ly the "genetic fallacy": see page 81.) We live in the psychological era. We think 
we refute an idea when we uncover its psychological origins. For example, if 
belief in God can be shown to be motivated by fear (as Freud says), we think that 
proves the belief is false. But this is a confusion. The objective logical proof, rea-
son, or evidence for a belief is independent of the believer's subjective psycho-
logical motives. You do not logically refute an idea by pointing to suspicious 
motives, but by pointing to inadequate evidence. Freud's critique of religion is a 
long, complex, clever, and detailed version of exactly this fallacy. It amounts to: 
"God docs not exist because people are terrified of a universe without a father-
figure." After wc know an idea is false, we naturally wonder what psychological 
motives could have led people to believe it, and then we rightly point to the psy-
chological motive. Pointing to the motive instead of to the reasons, "refuting" 
the motive instead of the idea, is a form of "the genetic fallacy." 
Note that both "because" #2, the logical reason, and "because" #3, the psy-
chological motive, are causes of thinking, while "because #1" is a cause of being. 
When someone says "It's going to rain because the sky is full of dark clouds," he 
is giving a cause of the being of the rain; when he says "It must be raining 
because the streets are wet," he is only giving a cause of his thinking that it is rain-
ing; for the wetness of the streets does not cause the rain to be. And when some-
one says "I think it must be raining, because everything else has gone wrong in 
my day so far," he is giving a merely psychological and subjective "because " an 
irrational cause of his believing that it is raining rather than a rational one. 

202 
IX. DIFFERENT KINDS OF ARGUMENTS 
The difference between motives ("because" #3) and reasons ("bccausc" #2) 
is that motives are psychological "efficient causes" of beliefs while reasons arc 
"formal causes." To see what this means, we need to look at one of the most use-
ful ideas ever discovered, Aristotle's notion of the "four causes." It is an idea that 
is so basic that it is a criterion of being educated, a condition for being civilized. 
Section 2. The four causes (P) 
Be sure you understand the above explanation of the distinction between argu-
ments and explanations before reading this section. 
Causes can be used either (1) as arguments, to prove some controversial 
idea which some people think to be true and others false, or to predict some as-
yet-unsecn and unknown future event, or (2) as explanations for an idea that is 
not controversial because it is already known or admitted to be true, or for an 
event that is past or present and already seen or known. 
There are four kinds of causes, therefore four kinds of causal explanations, 
as well as four kinds of causal arguments. 
Two of the four causes, the "efficient cause" and the "final cause," are 
extrinsic to the effect. The other two causes, the "formal cause" and the "mate-
rial cause," are intrinsic to the effect. What we mean by "cause and effect" in 
ordinary language today is usually restricted to the efficient cause, or at most to 
the efficient cause and the final cause. However, we still use the word "bccause" 
for all four causes, whether in causal explanations or causal arguments. 
We take the two intrinsic causes (or "becauses") first. The formal cause is 
the essence, or essential nature, of a thing, what it is. This is expressed in a def-
inition, most perfectly in an essential definition (see page 123). The formal 
cause of an acorn is to be the seed of an oak tree. The formal cause of an oper-
ation is to be a surgical intervention into a human body. The formal cause of this 
book is to be an elementary Aristotelian logic text. The formal cause of a river 
is to be a large body of water flowing between two banks. The formal cause of 
"butterflies in the stomach" is to be a feeling of agitation in the lower abdomen. 
The material cause is the contents or raw material of a thing: what it is 
made of. The material cause of an acorn is pulp and shell. The material cause of 
an operation is an incision and the repair of some body part. The material cause 
of this book is all its words, topics, and chapters. The material cause of a river 
is water. The material cause of "butterflies in the stomach" is palpitation of the 
nerves. 
Now the two extrinsic causes. The efficient cause is the agent that makes, 
moves, or changes the effect. The efficient causc of an acorn is an oak tree. The 
efficient cause of an operation is a surgeon. The efficient cause of this book is 
its author. The efficient cause of a river is centuries of erosion. The efficient 
cause of the feeling of "butterflies in the stomach" can be fear, or falling in love, 
or hearing transccndently beautiful music, or indigestion. 

The four causes 
203 
The final cause is the end goal, or purpose of something, whether this pur-
pose is conscious or not. and whether the thing is artificial or natural. The final 
cause of an acorn is to grow into an oak tree. The final cause of an operation is 
to heal a disease. The final cause of this book is to teach logic. The final cause 
of a river is to How to the lowest possible point The final cause of "butterflies 
in the stomach" is to warn the body to act differently somehow, e.g. to avoid 
foods that cause indigestion. 
A historical sidebar on final causes: Modern philosophy tends to be very 
suspicious of final causcs or "teleology" (from telos, the Greek word for pur-
pose) anywhere except in consciously purposive human activity. (Some philoso-
phers even deny it there and say man is just a complex machine.) But it is rea-
sonable and commonsensical to believe that "there is a purpose for everything," 
even though that purpose is not always known or present to human minds (as 
distinct from the mind of God). The reason for thinking that everything must 
have a final cause is that just as the efficient cause of any thing is the reason why 
its matter is now determined to have this form rather than another, so the final 
cause is the reason why the efficient cause acts as it does, toward this determi-
nate end and not randomly. E.g. the words in this book (its content, raw materi-
al, or "matter") are formed into a logic text (its "form" or essence) because of 
the purpose of this text: to teach logic. It has seemed reasonable and "common-
sensical" to almost all people in all times, places, and cultures to believe in real 
teleology even for mindless things in nature; for these things, after all, move in 
regular and predictable ways, like arrows directed to targets: dogs have puppies 
and puppies become dogs. The fact that we do not know the purposes of natural 
things nearly as well as we know the purposes of the artificial things we 
designed does not mean that there are no such natural purposes. (Unless every-
thing we don't know can't be!) 
There were two main reasons why belief in final causes declined in the 
modern West. The first was the confusion of science with scient/sm. Early mod-
ern physical scientists discovered that when we use the scientific method final 
causality was useless for its explanatory purposes (naturally, since these final 
causes or natural purposes are not clearly known by the human mind since we 
did not design nature). But scientism was the philosophical (not scientific) belief 
that only science provided objectively reliable knowledge. 
The second reason for the declinc of belief in final causes was a decline of 
belief in religion. Obviously, natural design and a cosmic Designer of nature nat-
urally (but not necessarily) go together. 
So the four causes, (1) formal, (2) material, (3) efficient, and (4) final, tell 
us a thing's (1) identity, (2) contents, (3) origin, and (4) destiny; or (1) what it is, 
(2) what it's made of, (3) where it came from, and (4) where it's going. 
Obviously, the most important application of these four questions is to our-
selves. If we were to fulfill Socrates' (and Apollo's) first law, "know thyself," we 
would have to know the answers to these four questions about ourselves and our 

204 
IX. DIFFERENT KINDS OF ARGUMENTS 
life. And of the four questions, the fourth is the most important, for the question 
of the final cause of human life is the question of the "meaning of life" or the 
"purpose of life" or the summum bonum (greatest good, ultimate end). 
The four questions are obviously connected: if our origin is merely dust and 
chance, our essence is also merely dust and chance, and so is our destiny. If our 
origin is more heavenly, so is our essence and our destiny. 
All four causes arc always connected, since they are not merely artifices, 
humanly-invented methods for explaining things, but real aspects of real things. 
The final cause is the reason why the efficient cause imposes the formal cause 
on the material cause. To shelter a family is the reason why a carpenter shapes 
wood into a house. To teach logic is the reason why an author forms words into 
a logic textbook. 
The four causes may be used as arguments or as explanations. We consider 
arguments first. Arguments, in moving from premises to conclusion, may move 
either from cause to effect or from effect to cause. When an argument moves 
"forward," from cause to effect, it deduces the effect from the cause, in any one 
of the four senses of "cause": 
"The castle is made by a great artist, therefore it will be great art." This is 
deducing the effect from the efficient cause. 
"The castle is square, therefore it will have four 90-degree interior angles." 
This is deducing the effect from the formal cause. 
"The castle is made of strong stone, therefore it will last for centuries." This 
is deducing the effect from the material cause. 
"The castle is designed to hold many people, therefore it will be large." This 
is deducing the effect from the final cause. 
When an argument moves "backward," from effect to cause, it dcduces the 
cause from the effect, in any one of the four senses of "cause": 
"The castle is great art, therefore it must have been made by a great artist." 
This is deducing the efficient cause from the effcct. 
"The castlc has four 90 degree interior angles, therefore it is square." This 
is deducing the formal cause from the effect. 
"The castle has lasted for centuries, therefore it must be made of strong 
stone." This is deducing the material cause from the effect. 
"The castle is large, therefore it must be designed to hold many people." 
This is deducing the final cause from the effect. 
Explanations, as distinct from arguments, always explain the effect by the 
cause and not vice versa. 
Explanations can use any one of the four causes: 

A classification of arguments 
205 
"Man is morally responsible because he is rational." (explanation by formal 
cause) (Reason is not the efficient cause of moral responsibility, for reason does 
not act on man as a carpenter acts on wood. Rather, moral responsibility is due 
to man being the kind of being he is, namely rational.) 
"I am reading this logic book to become a more critical thinker." (explana-
tion by final cause) 
"This book is abstract because it is written by a philosophy professor." 
(explanation by efficient cause) 
"This book is long because it includes all of traditional logic." (explanation 
by material cause) 
Exercises: Identify which of the four causes is used in each of the following 
explanations or arguments; and tell whether it is an explanation or an argu-
ment: 
1. I'm getting a college degree to get a better job. 
2. It's loud because it's a rock concert 
3.1 study logic because I think it will raise my grade point average in other 
courses. 
4. He's throwing the textbook at the wall in frustration because he's studying 
logic. 
5. Toilet paper is absorbent because of its capillary structure. 
6. This footprint must be that of a six-toed sloth, because that's the only ani-
mal with six toes. 
7.1 play tennis just to relax. 
8. Stadiums are strong because they're made with steel-reinforced concrete. 
9. Men pitch baseballs faster than women because they have more upper 
body muscle strength. 
10. Women's voices are higher than men's because their vocal cords are dif-
ferent. 
11. The ball will land in the seats because the home run hitter is up. 
12. Children ask questions because the reason we're here is to know truth. 
13. The tide is high because the moon is full. 
14. The iron filings are moving because there's a magnet here. 
15. It's water because it's two parts hydrogen and one part oxygen. 
16. E.T. is a person because he can communicate. 
Section 3. A classification of arguments 
We can classify arguments by different standards: 
(1) By form: Arguments may be cither immediate inference (Chapter VII) 
or mediate inference. Immediate inference contains only one premise and only 

206 
IX. DIFFERENT KINDS OF ARGUMENTS 
two terms; mediate inference contains at least two premises and at least three 
terms. 
Immediate inference includes opposition, obversion. conversion, and con-
traposition. 
Within mediate inference, arguments may be cither deductive or inductive. 
Deductive arguments begin with a general, or universal, premise and usually 
apply it to a particular case in the conclusion. Inductive arguments begin with 
particular, individual, specific cases and usually generalize to a more universal 
conclusion. Deductive arguments claim certainty; inductive arguments claim 
only probability. We will deal with induction in Chapter XIV. 
Deductive arguments are usually syllogisms, either simple syllogisms, com-
posed only of simple (categorical) propositions, or compound syllogisms, 
which contain at least one compound proposition. There are different rules for 
each kind of syllogism. We will deal with syllogisms in Chapters X, XI, and XII. 
Within compound syllogisms, there arc three basic types: hypothetical, dis-
junctive, and conjunctive. We will deal with them in Chapter XIII. 
(2) By causality: Any kind of deductive argument may also be divided into 
arguments from cause to effect, or arguments from effect to cause. Both of 
these in turn can be divided into four kinds depending on which of the four caus-
es is used: formal, material, efficient, or final. 
(3) By direction of movement: We may move from an argument's premise 
to its conclusion, or we may move from a conclusion back to its premise. The 
objective logical structure of the argument is the same in each case, but our sub-
jective psychological process is different. Sometimes we deduce a new conclu-
sion from a given premise, and sometimes we trace a given conclusion back to 
its not-given but implicit premise, arguing that in order to reach a given conclu-
sion you need to assume such and such a premise. 
(4) By length: Any of the above kinds of arguments may also be divided into 
one-step arguments and multiple arguments. Multiple arguments are simply 
chains of simple arguments, where the conclusion of the first step becomes a 
premise for the second step. 
(5) By strategy: Multi-step arguments can be put together cither linearly or 
cumulatively. A linear argument is like a river that begins at one place, with 
one premise, and takes a number of turns, adding other premises, like tributar-
ies. usually using multiple arguments in a chain, and finally reaching one desti-
nation, the conclusion. Socrates' arguments are usually of this nature and usual-
ly contain many steps. A cumulative argument is like a number of rivers all 
running into the same lake. It uses different premises, and different, independ-
ent arguments, often of different types, all to establish the same conclusion. This 
is the kind of argument most often used in debate or in informal conversation. 
Scction 4. Simple argument maps (B) 
The patterns of arguments can be made clear by a very simple form of argument 

Simple argument maps 
207 
map, in which the movement from premises to conclusion is symbolized by an 
arrow, with the conclusion at the point of the arrow and a premise at the feath-
ered end of the arrow. Two premises joined together in a syllogism look like a 
marriage in a genealogical table. For instance, take the classic 
All men are mortal. 
Socrates is a man. 
Therefore Socrates is mortal. 
The argument map for this argument would be the following: 
The horizontal line between the two premises is like a marriage: only when con-
joined together do these two premises produce the legitimate child, their con-
clusion. 
At some point in the future it may be useful to save time by the abbreviation 
of using symbols for whole propositions instead of writing them out; but at this 
point, to avoid any possibility of confusion, you should take the time to patient-
ly write out the whole proposition in each box when using argument maps. 
Take the following linear argument: 
All that is material is extended in space. 
And all that is extended in space can be divided. 
Therefore all that is material can be divided. 
And all that can be divided can be destroyed. 
Therefore all that is material can be destroyed. 
The argument map here is simply: 

208 
IX. DIFFERENT KINDS OF ARGUMENTS 
Now take the following cumulative argument: "There must be a life after 
death, becausc life would be unendurable otherwise, and because nearly every 
culture in history teaches it, and because there has to be a final judgment, and 
also because we're not just bodies but spirits too." 
Here, four different premises all are brought up to prove the same conclu-
sion. The argument map for this argument would be: 
Life would not be 
endurable otherwise 
Nearly every culture 
in history teaches it 
There has to be 
a final judgment 
We're not just 
bodies but spirits 
There is no horizontal line between the premises because each one is 
"unmarried," so to speak: independent. 
In the next few chapters we will learn how to judge how strong each of these 
arguments is. An argument map does not evaluate the strength of an argument, 
but only diagrams its strategy. The strength of an argument depends on three 
things: whether the terms are clear, whether the premises are true, and whether 
the logical progressions are logically valid. We have already studied terms and 
the technique for making them clear: definition. We will soon study the rules for 
judging whether any given argument is logically valid or invalid. But there is no 
one technique or set of rules forjudging whether any given proposition is true 
or false. 
The following argument is more complex: 
"If there were a God, the world would be perfect, and this world is 
far from perfect. Besides, science can explain everything real with-
out God. And psychology can explain all our subjective fantasies 
and fallacies and faiths without God, bccause it can trace them all 
back to fear or ignorance - for instance, ignorance of the forces of 
nature led the Greeks to believe that a god made thunder. So it seems 
more rational to me to be an atheist." 
The first thing to do in approaching any argument is to find its conclusion. 
This is usually intuitively obvious, but even if it is not, there is usually a "con-
clusion indicator" (see the list above, on pages 191-92). Here, it is the word 
"so." The conclusion also usually comes either last or first. Here the conclusion 
is that "it is more rational to be an atheist." Each of the three separate arguments 
that come before this conclusion is a different reason for believing it. Thus, the 
overall argument is cumulative. However, the last of the three separate argu-
ments is itself linear. For it supports its point with a "because" and a "for 
instance," a premise and an example. (Examples often function as premises for 
inductive arguments.) So our argument diagram here would be more complex: 

Simple argument maps 
209 
This argument is more complex for a number of reasons. 
For one thing, it is a combination of a cumulative argument (overall struc-
ture) and a linear argument (third reason, on the right). 
For another thing, the first argument (on the left) has two premises, the sec-
ond argument (in the middle) has only one, and the third argument (on the right) 
has three. 
The two premises of the first argument fit together to prove the conclusion 
that "it is more rational to be an atheist." 
The second argument has a hidden premise that is not expressed, "If science 
can explain everything without God, then it's more rational to be an atheist." We 
will learn how to "smoke out" these hidden premises later. 
The third argument offers the proposition "psychology can explain all our 
fantasies and fallacies and faiths without God" as a reason for the conclusion "it 
is more rational to be an atheist," identifying this proposition about psychology 
as a premise by putting the word "because" before it; then it offers a reason for 
believing this premise, namely that "it (psychology) can trace them (all our fan-
tasies, fallacies, and faiths) back to fear and ignorance." (This becomes clearer 
when we translate pronouns into the nouns they stand for - one of the techniques 
we will utilize when we learn to put arguments into logical form.) Then it gives 
a reason for believing that "it can trace them back to fear and ignorance" by the 
example of the Greeks believing that a god made thunder. 
When we are confronted with a complex argument, consisting of a series of 
separate arguments, it is always best to use an argument map first. It is like con-
sulting a road map before going on a trip to a place you have never visited 
before. Each arrow on the argument map will be a separate logical argument 
which you will have to (1) identify (locate), then (2) classify (as inductive or 

210 
IX. DIFFERENT KINDS OF ARGUMENTS 
deductive, simple syllogism or something else), and then (3) evaluate (as logi-
cally valid or invalid). Argument maps help you to do the first of these three 
steps. You identify each separate argument, and its relation to the other separate 
arguments, as well as its place in the overall argument, by such argument maps. 
Only then are you ready to classify and evaluate each of these separate argu-
ments without confusing one with another. You will learn the rules to use in eval-
uating each kind of argument (the third step) in the following chapters. You will 
also learn the forms and structures of each kind of argument (the second step), 
so that you can identify which kind of argument you have. You cannot apply the 
rules for inductive arguments to arguments that are deductive, for instance, or 
vice versa. You cannot apply the rules that distinguish valid from invalid simple 
syllogisms if you have a compound syllogism. Each kind of argument has a dif-
ferent set of rules, so you must (1) first identify each distinct argument, then (2) 
classify it (determine what kind of argument it is), and then (3) evaluate it by its 
appropriate set of rules. More complex arguments maps arc presented on page 
282. You might be able to do a few of the exercises on these more complex argu-
ments, on page 285. Try them. 
Section 5. Deductive and inductive reasoning (B) 
There arc two fundamentally different kinds of reasoning, deductive and induc-
tive. One of the differences between them is their premises: inductive reasoning 
uses particular or specific or individual premises and usually moves to a more 
general conclusion, while deductive reasoning begins with a general, or univer-
sal, premise and usually moves to a less general conclusion. 
This general rule needs to be qualified, however. It does not mean that in a 
deductive argument the conclusion must be an I or an O proposition; it is often 
an A or an E proposition. But it is always an application of one of the premises, 
which acts as a principle, to a case in point of it; and this usually makes the con-
clusion less universal, but not always. In the classic syllogism 4tAll men arc mor-
tal, and Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is mortal" the conclusion is less 
universal than one of the premises (the first one). In the following syllogism, the 
conclusion, though an A, is also less universal than the first premise: 
All men are mortal. 
And all Irishmen arc men. 
Therefore all Irishmen are mortal. 
(For "all men" is more universal than "all Irishmen.") But in the following syl-
logism, the conclusion is just as universal as the premise: 
All bachelors are unmarried men. 
No unmarried men arc men who have wives. 
Therefore no bachelors are men who have wives. 

Deductive & inductive reasoning / Combining induction & deduction 2/1 
The clearest difference between deduction and induction is that the premis-
es of induction come from sense observation, which is always of individual 
cases; while at least one of the premises of deduction comes from intellectual 
understanding, which always includes something universal. 
Just as deduction does not always move from the universal to the more par-
ticular, induction does not always move from the more particular to the more 
universal. Some kinds of inductive argument do not end in a general conclusion: 
e.g. many arguments from analogy and causal arguments. 
Here is another kind of inductive argument with a singular conclusion: 
I am a professor and I am absent-minded. 
And she is a professor and she is absent-minded. 
And they are professors and they are absent-minded. 
And he is a professor. 
Therefore he is probably absent-minded. 
A second difference between induction and deduction is that deduction 
always claims certainty for its conclusion, while inductive reasoning claims only 
probability. Obviously, if all A is B, then this A is B too (deductive); while if this 
A is B, it does not follow with certainty that all A is B (inductive). An inductive 
argument claims to give good reasons for its conclusion, but they are not good 
enough for certainty, only some degree of probability. Thus deductive arguments 
are either simply valid or simply invalid, while inductive arguments are better or 
worse, more or less probable. 
An inductive argument can claim certainty only if it is a "complete induc-
tion," that is, covers all cases. If I know there are only ten people in my class, 
and if I have examined each one and determined that he is over 18,1 can con-
clude with certainty that all the people in my class are over 18. 
Deductive and inductive arguments have totally different sets of rules. The 
rules for deductive arguments are "tight," certain, and infallible. (Obviously, the 
people who use the rules are not!) A computer can determine whether any 
deductive argument is formally valid or invalid. But the rules for inductive argu-
ments are not "tight" but "loose." An inductive argument is like a plane that is 
flown "by the scat of your pants" while a deductive argument is like a plane 
flown by instruments. 
Section 6. Combining induction and deduction: Socratic method (P) 
Socrates was the first person who seemed to know exactly what he was doing in 
using both inductive and deductive reasoning together. His typical method of 
arguing combined the two as follows: 
(1) First, a question arises: e.g. Is it true that political justice is simply 
whatever is in the interest of the stronger, as Thrasymachus the Sophist main-
tains in Book I of the Republic? 

212 
IX. DIFFERENT KINDS OF ARGUMENTS 
(2) We begin by making relevant sense observations of examples of justice. 
A just doctor heals and improves the weaker man, the patient who is sick; a just 
teacher of horse handling teaches and improves the weaker man, the man who 
does not know how to handle horses; and so with other cases. 
(3) We then make an inductive generalization on the basis of these exam-
ples (and this is inductive reasoning): it seems that justice is in the interest of the 
weaker rather than the stronger. 
(4) The fourth step is understanding the necessity of this universal which 
we have arrived at, by understanding the reason for it: justice is always in the 
interest of the weaker because of what justice essentially is, by its own nature. 
In step three we know the fact; in step four we understand the reason for it. 
(5) We can then proceed to the application of the universal to the partic-
ular by deduction. We apply our general principle to the specific example 
under discussion, political justice, by deductivc reasoning: Since justice is in the 
interest of the weaker, not the stronger; and since political justice is a form of 
justice; therefore political justice too must be in the interest of the weaker, not 
the stronger. 
4. 
3. InductivelReasoning 
5. Deduetivef Reasoning 
Sense 
XXXX 
X 
Examples 
Further Example(s) 
Observation 
1. Questioning 
Step 4 is crucial bccause inductive reasoning alone cannot prove its gener-
al conclusion with certainty. So if the general principle that has been arrived at 
by induction is not known with any more certainty than the inductive argument 

Combining induction and deduction: Socratic method 
213 
gives it (in step 3), then when we use it as the premise of a deductive argument 
(in step 5), that premise will still only be probably true, and the conclusion of 
the deductive argument will also be only probably true, even though its connec-
tion with its premises is certain. It is certain that if all swans are white and this 
is a swan, this is white; but if it is not certain that all swans are white, then it is 
not certain that this swan is white. 
The step in Socratic method between the inductive reasoning and the deduc-
tive reasoning is not a step of reasoning but understanding; a first-act-of-the-
mind insight into the universal that has been discovered by inductive reasoning. 
And only when this insight understands the necessity of this universal principle 
can that principle be known with certainty and not only with probability, which 
is all that induction gives. Only then can that principle yield certainty in the con-
clusion that follows from it by deductive reasoning. For instance: 
(1) We wonder whether we are going to die. 
(2) We look around for relevant evidence and we observe in experience that 
each individual human being that we know of who has lived in the past has died. 
We know a few of these deaths from direct experience, and we know most of 
them through authorities like obituary columns and history books. We also know 
that each individual living in the present believes himself to be mortal. 
(3) From this data base, we arrive by induction at the principle that "all men 
are mortal." So far this is only probable, its probability increasing as the data 
base increases. 
(4) Then we come to understand that mortality is a property, and not just an 
accident, of man; that man is mortal by nature, since man by his nature has an 
animal body, which is an organic, interdependent system of material organs all 
of which are needed in order for it to live, and any one of which can be destroyed 
simply by separating some of its material parts from others by a rock or a knife 
or a fire. 
(5) Having understood that "all men are mortal" by necessity, our deduction 
that "all men are mortal, and I am a man, therefore I am mortal," can give us a 
conclusion we can be certain is true, for it not only validly follows from its true 
premises but validly follows from its certainly true premises. 
This is the overall epistemological pattern of the logic of the Socratic 
Method. What is more famous, and more typically associated with Socrates, is 
the methodological format within step five, the famous art of cross-examination 
(probably imitated from Athenian court cases) in which Socrates (a) does not 
lecture but asks his opponent questions, eliciting "yes" or "no" answers, (b) does 
so in a "dialectical" way, that is, in the form of "either-or" dilemmas, and (c) uses 
long, multi-step reductio ad absurdum arguments to refute one horn of the 
dilemma, thus proving the other. These are the "signature" details of Socratic 
method, and the larger context of the five steps is usually forgotten; but that larg-
er context is Socrates' even more fundamental contribution to the art of philo-
sophical argument. Aristotle, who disagrees with much of Socrates' (or Plato's) 

2 / 4 
IX. DIFFERENT KINDS OF ARGUMENTS 
philosophy (e.g. the metaphysical Theory of Forms, the anthropological dualism 
of body and soul, and the epistemological rationalism and theory of knowledge 
as "recollection" of innate ideas), agrees with and uses these five steps himself. 
In fact, these five steps are not some specialized, esoteric method proper to 
Socrates alone, or the Greeks alone, but they constitute the most natural and 
complete movement of human knowledge. 
From the Aristotelian point of view, seven alternative theories of knowledge 
can be seen to exaggerate one of the steps, or to omit one of the steps, or to 
wrongly order the steps, of this Socratic scheme. (1) Dogmatism (in the popular 
sense) omits step one, the question, or the questionableness of the question. 
(2) Skepticism denies that we can go beyond Step 1 and have any reliable knowl-
edge even in Step 2, sense perception. (3) Radical empiricism denies that we can 
go beyond Step 2. (4) Moderate Empiricism denies that we can go beyond Step 
3, reliable but only probable generalizations from sense experience. (5) Extreme 
Rationalism claims that Step 4, understanding essences, is innate rather than 
dependent on experience. (6) Rationalism claims that Step 5, deductive reason-
ing, can be certain without depending on Step 2, sense perception. And (7) Kant-
ian Idealism gets all the parts together but orders them wrongly, working the cir-
cle backwards, imposing categories (essences) on experience rather than deriv-
ing them from it. 
The reason why Socrates' argument in Book I of the Republic is not satis-
fying to him (see the last paragraph of Book I), and why it should not be satis-
fying to us, is that Step 4 is missing (an understanding of the essential nature of 
justice); and this is supplied by the rest of the Republic. The argument in Book 
I is formally valid (and, by the way, very complex; an argument map of all its 
steps would look like an archery contest), and its observational data base and its 
inductive reasoning (Steps 2 and 3) are sound. But that is all. This example (the 
difference between Book I and Books 11—X of the Republic) illustrates the infe-
riority of modern symbolic logic to classical Socratic-Aristotelian logic. Correct 
manipulation of symbols according to computer-like rules of consistency, plus 
empirical evidence, is not enough to convince human beings of a truth, even if 
expressed in all the complex and sophisticated techniques of symbolic logic, 
because human beings are "rational," and "rational" means not merely calculat-
ing but understanding; not merely the third act of the mind but the first; not 
merely the fifth step of the Socratic Method but the fourth. That is why Plato put 
this step at the top of his "divided line" in Book 6 of the Republic, which sum-
marizes the steps of the education of the philosopher. 

X. Syllogisms 
Section 1. The structure and strategy of the syllogism (B) 
The syllogism is the heart of logic. It is the easiest, most natural, and most con-
vincing form of argument. Its structure is so simple and perfect that to everyone 
it is convincing and to some it is even beautiful. Consider the classic example: 
All men are mortal. 
And Socrates is a man. 
Therefore Socrates is mortal. 
(We keep using the same simple, well-known examples not out of a lack of 
imagination but out of compassion for beginners, because they are simple, clear, 
and easily remembered.) We can see from this example the essential ingredients 
in the structure of a syllogism: 
There are three propositions: two premises and one conclusion. 
There are three terms. Each term is used twice. 
The subject of the conclusion is called the minor term. 
The predicate of the conclusion is called the major term. 
The term which appears in each premise but not in the conclusion is called 
the middle term. 
The premise containing the major term is called the major premise. 
The premise containing the minor term is called the minor premise. 
You cannot tell which premise is the major premise and which is the minor 
premise until you have first identified which term is the major term and which 
is the minor term. And you do this only by looking at the conclusion. So to ana-
lyze a syllogism, 
(1) First identify the conclusion. 
(2) Then identify the minor and major terms. (They are, respectively, the subject 
and the predicate of the conclusion.) 
(3) Then identify the major and minor premises. (They contain, respectively, the 
major and minor terms.) 

216 
X. SYLLOGISMS 
(4) Finally, identify the middle term as the term that is left, the term that is not 
in the conclusion but is in each premise. 
From now on we will use the following standard abbreviations: 
S = the minor term 
P = the major term 
M = the middle term 
We use S for the minor term because it is always the subjcct (S) of the con-
clusion. It is not always the subject of the minor premise, however. Sometimes 
it is and sometimes it is not. But even when it is the predicate of the minor prem-
ise. we will use the symbol S for it, since it is always the subject of the conclu-
sion. 
We use P for the major term because it is always the predicate (P) of the 
conclusion. It is not always the predicate of the major premise, however. 
Sometimes it is and sometimes it is not. 
We use M for the middle term no matter where it appears in the premises. 
It may be the subject of both premises, or the predicate of both, or the subject of 
one and the predicate of the other. 
(All this technical terminology is necessary if we want to analyze arguments 
clearly and judge them as valid or invalid.) 
It is conventional to place the major premise first, then the minor premise, 
and last the conclusion, when putting a syllogism into logical form. But in ordi-
nary language, the three propositions in a syllogism can occur in any order what-
soever. In fact, one of them is often omitted, and implied or "kept in mind." (This 
kind of syllogism is called an "enthymeme," from the Greek word for "kept in 
mind." It is the commonest form of all in ordinary language.) The order of the 
premises is not important. When you put in a syllogism in logical form, the only 
rule about the order of the three propositions is that the conclusion is always put 
last. The major premise does not have to be put first, unless your instructor is 
very picky. (But there are often good reasons for being picky.) 
Using this terminology, we can now understand the strategy of the syllo-
gism. It can be summarized in the following diagram: 
The conclusion is what we are trying to prove. It is a single proposition, 
with a subject and a predicate, S and P. We want to prove that P can be affirmed 
of S, that S and P belong together (if the proposition is affirmative); or that P 
must be denied of S, that S and P do not belong together (if the proposition is 

The structure and strategy of a syllogism 
217 
negative). To do this, we relate both S and P to the same common third term, M. 
The middle term is the touchstone; we test whether or not S and P belong togeth-
er by touching both to M, as we would test whether two magnets have the same 
polarity by touching them both to the same third magnet to see whether they 
react to it in the same way or in opposite ways. 
Imagine a bridge over a river. The middle term is the middle of the bridge. 
S and P are the two ends of the bridge, where it touches the land. The major and 
minor premises are the two halves of the bridge: the major premise connects M 
(the middle of the bridge) with P (one end of the bridge) and the minor premise 
connects M with S (the other end of the bridge). It is M that either holds the 
bridge together or makes it fall apart. The middle term is the center and key of 
the syllogism, the hinge on which it turns. 
Let us look at two different cases: a syllogism with an affirmative conclu-
sion and a syllogism with a negative conclusion. 
Case #1: an affirmative conclusion. If both S and P are related affirmative-
ly to M in the premises, then S and P must be related affirmatively to each other 
in the conclusion. It is an axiom in algebra that two quantities equal to a com-
mon third quantity are equal to each other. Although S and P are not quantities, 
and the copula ("is") is not the same as the equal sign in mathematics, yet the 
axiom is applicable here too: if S and M agree, and if M and P agree, then S and 
P agree. 
(2) Case #2: a negative conclusion. If S and P are related to M in opposite 
ways in the premises - if one of them is related to M affirmatively and the other 
negatively - then S and P must be related to each other negatively in the con-
clusion. The axiom here is that "Two quantities, one of which is, and the other 
of which is not, equal to a common third quantity, are not equal to each other." 
There are two forms of the negative syllogism, since it may be either S or P 
that agrees with M. 
(2A) If S and M agree, but M and P do not, then S and P do not: 

218 
X. SYLLOGISMS 
For example: 
No mortals are gods. 
And all men are mortals. 
Therefore no men are gods. 
(2B) And if S and M do not agree, but M and P do, then S and P do not: 
For example: 
Computers are machines. 
And humans are not machines. 
Therefore humans are not computers. 
(3) What if S and P are both related to M negatively? Then we know noth-
ing about how they are related to each other. We cannot prove a negative con-
clusion from two negative premises. For instance, 
No men are insects. 
And no insects write logic books. 
Therefore no men write logic books. 
is obviously an invalid argument. Its premises are both true, but its conclusion 
is false. 
Imagine S, M, and P as warring nations, which can be cither allies or ene-
mies. (In affirmative propositions the two terms are like allies; in negative 
propositions they are like enemies.) Let us look at three possible cases: (1) no 
negative premises, (2) one negative premise, and (3) two negative premises. 
(1) If S and M are allies, and M and P are allies, then S and P must be allies. 
(E.g. if France and England are allies, and England and America are allies, then 
Francc and America must be allies.) 
(2A) If S and M arc enemies, and M and P are allies, then S and P must be 
enemies. (E.g. if America and Germany arc enemies, and Germany and Italy are 
allies, then America and Italy must be enemies.) 
(2B) If S and M are allies, and M and P are enemies, then S and P must be 
enemies. (E.g. if England and America are allies, and America and Japan are 
enemies, then England and Japan must be enemies.) 
(3) If S and M are enemies, and M and P are enemies, then S and P may be 
allies or enemies. (E.g. if America and Germany are enemies, and Germany and 
Russia arc enemies, then America and Russia may be either allies or enemies.) 
The saying is not always true that "the enemy of my enemy is my friend." But 
the ally of my enemy must be my enemy. 

The skeptic s objection to the sy llogism 
219 
Exercises: True or false? 
1. The middle term always appears once in the major premise. 
2. The middle term always appears once in the minor premise. 
3. The minor term is always the predicate of the minor premise. 
4. The middle term is never the predicate of two premises. 
5. No syllogism can have only two terms. 
6. No one syllogism can have four terms. 
7. The major term can never be the subject of the conclusion. 
8. In the syllogism "no A is B and some C is B, therefore some C is not A," 
the major premise comes first. 
9. (H) In the syllogism "You smell and I don't, therefore I'm not you," the 
middle term is "one who smells." 
10. "All cardinals are red, therefore some red things are cardinals" is a syllo-
gism. 
Section 2. The skeptic's objection to the syllogism (P) 
A classic objection to the syllogism comes from ancient skeptics, who argued 
that every syllogism rests on its unproved premises; these need to be proved by 
other syllogisms, which in turn rest on unproved premises, et cetera et cetera ad 
infinitum. 
Take our old friend "All men are mortal, Socrates is a man, therefore 
Socrates is mortal." It claims that we can know that Socrates is mortal because 
this conclusion necessarily follows from the two premises. But, the skeptic 
points out, these premises may be false. Just because the syllogism is logically 
valid docs not mean that its conclusion must be true. "All trees are cats, Socrates 
is a tree, therefore Socrates is a cat" is logically valid, but its conclusion is false 
because its premises are false. So, the skeptic argues, we need to prove that the 
premises are true before wc can know that any conclusion is true. How shall we 
prove the two premises? We need two more syllogisms. But the syllogism that 
proves each premise is subject to the same problem as the initial syllogism: its 
premises are either unproved (in which case we do not know that its conclusion 
is true), or have to be proved by other syllogisms with other premises, which in 
turn are either unproved or need to be proved by assuming other premises, et 
cetera, et cetera ad infinitum. We have an infinite regress of premises. 
Aristotle answered this argument very simply: there is no infinite regress of 
premises. The regress stops because all proof depends on self-evident, "self-
proving" premises. These are of two kinds: direct sense experiences and tau-
tologies (see page 189). We know that some fire is hot (by sense experience) and 
that 2+2=4 (by reason) not because wc prove cither of these two things but 
because we directly experience them. We experience the heat of fire with our 
senses and we experience the self-evident truth of 2+2=4 with our intelligence. 

220 
X. SYLLOGISMS 
We do not deduce the rest of our knowledge from tautologies; they are not 
the starting points of our learning. Sense experience is. Tautologies are the final 
court of appeal, so to speak: if any argument violates a tautology, a self-evident 
logical law, that fact alone shows that the argument is invalid. This is how we 
ultimately prove that a given argument is valid or invalid if challenged. 
For instance, suppose someone challenges the syllogism "All men are mor-
tal, and Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is mortal." Suppose someone says, 
"Why can't the premises be true and the conclusion false?" Our reply is that if 
you say this is so, you are contradicting yourself, for you arc saying both that 
Socrates is mortal and that he is not. If Socrates is not mortal - if the conclusion 
is false - then at least this one man is not mortal. (For you have already admit-
ted that Socrates is a man.) But the admission that at least one man is not mor-
tal contradicts the other premise you admitted namely that all men are mortal. 
So you are contradicting yourself. The law of non-contradiction is the ultimate 
tautology in logic, the ultimate court of appeal. 
All men are mortal 
1 
And Socrates is a man 
CONTRADICTION 
Therefore Socrates is mortal. If Socrates is not mortal 
And Socrates is a man 
Then not all men are mortal 
(1) The Law of Non-contradiction can be formulated in various ways. 
Aristotle's formulation is that "The same property cannot both belong and not 
belong to the same subject at the same time in the same respect." A tree cannot 
be at the same time taller than a cat and not taller than a cat. Aristotle's formu-
lation is in terms of the relation between the two terms (subject and predicate) 
of a simple proposition. Modern symbolic logic usually formulates it in terms of 
the relation between two whole propositions in a compound hypothetical propo-
sition: "If p is true, then p is not false." Or "No proposition can be true and false 
at the same time." 
In terms of real beings, the law states that nothing can both be and not be 
(at the same time). In terms of terms, it states that S cannot both be P and not 
be P. In terms of propositions, it states that a proposition p cannot be both 
true and false. The general formulation which covers all three is that* is not 
non-x, whether x is a term, a proposition, or a real thing. 
(2) The Law of Identity says that x is x. In terms of real beings, whatever 
is, is. In terms of terms, whatever is x, is x. In terms of propositions, if p is true, 
p is true. 
(3) The Law of Excluded Middle says that either x or non-x. In terms of 
real beings, everything must either be or not be. In terms of terms, S must be 

The skeptic s objection to the sy llogism 
221 
cither P or non-P. In terms of propositions, either p or non-p; every proposi-
tion must be either true or false. There is no third, middle possibility between 
true and false. 
These are the three tautologies which, together with direct sense experience, 
constitute Aristotle's answer to the skeptical objection to syllogism. 
These "Laws of Thought" are not merely imperatives or ideals or principles 
which we ought to follow in our thinking; they are also facts, statements about 
the real world, in fact about everything that exists. The Greeks would call them 
logoi rather than nomoi: unchangeable and necessary laws of the very nature of 
things, objective truths that we discover, rather than normative laws that we 
make and can disobey. "Thou shalt not kill" is a normative law, an imperative, 
an ideal; and it can be and is disobeyed. But the Law of Non-Contradiction is a 
necessary law, a fact rather than an ideal, and it can never be disobeyed. Insofar 
as the law of non-contradiction is a normative law for thought ("Thou shalt not 
contradict thyself"), it is not always obeyed by us, by our minds, by "subjective 
reality;" for we often commit fallacies of contradiction. But the Law of Non-
Contradiction (x is not non-x) is always and necessarily obeyed by objective 
reality, by things - all things. It is in fact true of all things. Nothing ever is what 
it is not. The same is true of the Law of Identity: it is always in fact true of all 
things. Nothing ever fails to be what it is. And it is also true of the Law of 
Excluded Middle: everything either is, or is not. These are not just laws of 
thought, they are laws of things. They are metaphysical laws, ontological laws. 
We sometimes say things that seem to contradict these laws, but they never 
do. For instance, we say, "He's not himself today," which seems to contradict the 
law of identity. But we are equivocating: we mean that "his felt self is not his 
ideal self today," or that "his de facto self is not his de jure self today." 
We might want to follow Leibniz's suggestion and add a fourth law, the 
"Principle of Sufficient Reason": everything that is has a sufficient reason 
why it is-both why it exists and why it is what it is, why it is that something 
rather than something else. 
Also, every thing that acts or changes has a reason or cause why it acts 
or changes. This "Principle of Causality" is a corollary of the "Principle of 
Sufficient Reason." In other words, everything that has existence, essence, and 
activity or change has a reason for its existence, its essence, and its activities or 
changes. Nothing is arbitrary, meaningless, and irrational in itself. Though wc 
obviously do not know the reason for everything, there is a reason for every-
thing. 
One simply cannot think coherently without believing this principle. If 
things could exist or change without any reason, something could simply pop 
into existence in front of you right now - a tiny green tiger, for instance - for ab-
solutely no reason at all. It could come to be without anything at all causing it 
to come to be. No sane human being in the history of the world ever believed in 
this "pop theory." Only a madman or a philosopher could dream of defending it. 

222 
X . SYLLOGISMS 
The puzzling question then arises: How do we know these four principles, 
the heart of reason itself? By reason? Or by "faith"? Or by something else? 
From the time of Descartes, philosophers for two centuries have tried to 
prove them, to rationally validate reason itself. Most philosophers today believe 
the attempt is intrinsically impossible, and begs the question, for it would have 
to use reason to prove reason, thus assuming the validity of the reason it uses. 
Is the alternative faith? Aldous Huxley wrote: "All science is based on an 
act of faith - faith in the validity of the mind's logical processes, faith in the 
explicability of the world, faith that the laws of thought are laws of things." 
Pascal put the puzzle in a theological context: our minds are like comput-
ers, and their innate hardware, including these Laws of Thought, have been pro-
grammed into us either by a wise and unstable intellect (God), or by an unwise 
and/or untrustworthy intellect (anything from a brilliant but fallible extraterres-
trial to the Devil), or by no intellect at all but by blind chance. If either of the 
two latter possibilities is the true one, then our intellect is not to be totally trust-
ed. Therefore the rationalist, who wants to trust reason above all else, must begin 
not with reason and proof but with an act of faith. 
Perhaps what Huxley and Pascal call "faith" is not the opposite of reason 
but the heart of reason: a direct insight into the necessary truth of the self-evi-
dent. If "reason" means only calculation and proof, as it does for Descartes and 
his successors, including symbolic logicians, this insight is not "reason." But if 
"reason" means what it did to Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, then this is the most 
rational knowledge possible. 
Philosophers of a Kantian type maintain that this not an insight into truth at 
all but simply a psychological fact about how our minds have to work. But is it 
then a limitation that we cannot believe in mcaninglcssness, irrationality, and 
self-contradiction? "Romanticists" like Walt Whitman and Nietzsche seem to 
have believed just that. Whitman wrote, in "Song of Myself," "Do I contradict 
myself? Very well, then, I contradict myself. I am large. I contain multitudes." 
And Nietzsche encouraged potential "overmen" to "have chaos in yourselves." 
But surely this is self-defeating, for if the laws of non-contradiction and identi-
ty are not true, then "I contradict myself" means "I do not contradict myself," 
and "Have chaos" means "Do not have chaos." 
Section 3. The empiricist's objection to the syllogism (P) 
A second objection to syllogism has become so common that it is often taken for 
granted in modern philosophy. It comes from two main modern sources: David 
Hume, the 18th-century Scottish philosopher, and John Stuart Mill, the 19th 
century English philosopher, both of whom were nominalists in metaphysics, 
(probably) atheists in theology, dcterminists in cosmology, materialists in 
anthropology, empiricists in epistemology, and utilitarians in ethics. (These six 
positions tend to go together as part of a single "package deal") 

The empiricist s objection to the sy llogism 
223 
The objection is that the syllogism is a fake, to put it bluntly; that it claims 
to yield new knowledge but does not and cannot; that deduction never proves 
anything at all. For either the conclusion merely repeats in different words what 
has already been stated in the premises, or not. If it does merely repeat the prem-
ises, then it is like immediate inference, in which the original proposition or 
premise is merely reworded or changed around; no new knowledge is gained-
There is no more in the conclusion than in the premises. If it does not merely 
repeat the premises, it commits the fallacy of non sequitur, "it does not follow" 
for there is more in the conclusion than in the premises. 
So if there is not more in the conclusion than in the premises, the syllogism 
is a tautology; and if there is, then it is a non sequitur. Thus the syllogism is 
either a trivial tautology or an invalid non sequitur. 
Take the classic case, "all men are mortal, and Socrates is a man, therefore 
Socrates is mortal." Mill argues that we could never know the premise that all 
men are mortal unless we already knew that Socrates was mortal. For (assuming 
that Socrates is a man) if Socrates is not mortal, then not all men are mortal. So 
instead of the universal premise being evidence or reason for the particular con-
clusion, it is the other way round: the universal premise actually presupposes the 
truth of the particular conclusion. The conclusion is the premise, and the prem-
ise is the conclusion. Syllogisms really work backwards. That is Mill's objection. 
Here is our answer to Mill's objection. It comes from experience, from data, 
from the way we all actually do in fact reason. Let's look at a very ordinary, typ-
ical case of reasoning by syllogism. Suppose you the student now say, "I hate 
logic." I ask you why. You say, "Because it's confusing, and I hate confusing sub-
jects." You are giving me a syllogism to justify not thinking about the problem 
of the syllogism. Your syllogism is: 
All confusing subjects are subjects I hate. 
And logic is a confusing subject. 
Therefore logic is a subject I hate. 
John Stuart Mill would not accept your argument. He would say, How can 
you know that every confusing subject is one you hate (your major premise) 
unless you had first experienced every single confusing subject in the world 
including logic? 
The answer, of course, is that we learn not only by experiencing particulars 
but also by understanding universals. Once we have experienced some confus-
ing subjects, we can abstract the universal principle from the particular case. We 
understand that every confusing subject will be unattractive precisely because it 
is confusing. This is not an accident, it is a property. 
The same is true regarding the "all men are mortal" syllogism. We under-
stand that all men must be mortal because they must have organic bodies, 
although not all men must be white or between three and seven feet tall. We 

224 
X. SYLLOGISMS 
understand the difference between a property and an accident; we understand 
what necessarily follows from the essence because we understand the essence. 
A similar dilemma may be raised against any single proposition: that either 
the predicate merely repeats the subject, or not. If it does, if S and P are the 
same, then the proposition is a mere tautology: if it does not, if S and P are not 
the same, then the proposition is false when it says that S "is" P. In fact it vio-
lates the law of identity, for it says that "S is not S." (If S is P and P is not S, then 
S is not S!) At this point perhaps we need a devious but clever President to 
remind us that "it all depends on what the meaning of 4is' is." 
The answer to this dilemma is that P is neither identical with S nor contrary 
to S but one of the aspects of the meaning of S: cither its genus (that aspect of 
its essence which it has in common with other things) or its specific difference 
(that aspect of its essence which distinguishes it from the rest of its genus) or its 
species (the whole essence, genus plus specific difference) or a property (an 
aspect of its nature which necessarily and always follows from its essence, but 
which is not the very essence) or an accident (which is neither an aspect of its 
essence nor necessarily and always follows from its essence, thus is sometimes 
present and sometimes not). In other words, the doctrine of the predicables is our 
answer to this dilemma, and it will be our answer to the Hume-Mill objection too. 
"S is P" is not like "2+2=4", since P can reveal five different aspects of the 
comprehension of S. But modern symbolic logic has no doctrine of the predica-
bles. It ignores the comprehension of a term, for this means its nature or essence, 
and this notion conflicts with nominalism. It also ignores the distinctively 
human power to comprehend a term's comprehension, and uses only those data-
processing and calculating powers of the mind that we share with a computer, 
thus in practice reducing the human mind to a computer, "natural intelligence" 
to "artificial intelligence." There is, thus, an important human and philosophical 
issue at the heart of the divide between classical and modern logic. Whether this 
last sentence is true or not is precisely one of the issues that divide the two log-
ics. But modern logic cannot help us argue about that issue! A merely formal, 
algebraic, computer-language logic cannot deal with the issues about the nature 
of man and knowledge that are part and parcel of the very essence of philoso-
phy, because it cannot deal with essences, natures, universals. 
Mill intended his dilemma against syllogism to show the superiority of 
induction to deduction: but in fact it is equally fatal against induction. For an 
inductive argument which draws a universal conclusion from particular 
instances is also subject to the same dilemma of "tautology or non sequiturIf 
it is a complete induction, i.e. if the premises cover all instances of the univer-
sal conclusion, then it is a tautology; if not, it is a non sequitur. "John, Jim, Joe, 
and Jeb are each members of the Issaquah Barbershop Quartet, and each one is 
male, therefore all members of the I.B.Q. are male" is a tautology (since a quar-
tet by definition has only four members). But "John and Jim are members of the 
I.B.Q, and each is male, therefore all members of the I.B.Q. are male" is a non 

The empiricist s objection to the sy llogism 
225 
sequitur. How could science generalize from a few observations of a few falling 
bodies to the universal rule that"all freely falling bodies accelerate at the rate of 
32.2 feet per second per second" without committing a non sequitur? And it is 
impossible to observe all freely falling bodies in the world. The larger the num-
ber of instances observed, the more probable is the universal conclusion, of 
course; but it is merely probable. What makes it more than probable? It is only 
probable that a coin will come up heads half the time; but it is more than prob-
able that falling bodies will accelerate at 32.2 feet per second per second. What 
is only probably true is also possibly false. The truth of an A proposition is ren-
dered probable if its opposed I proposition is true (and this is induction); but the 
truth of an O is also compatible with the I being true; and if the O is true then 
the A is not true, since the A and the O are contradictory. 
It is a common misunderstanding that modern science relies on induction 
rather than deduction and therefore is impervious to Mill's critique of deduction. 
It is true that modern science is vastly superior to pre-modem science partly 
because it relies on experience and observation rather than authority, tradition, 
and speculation. But science is not identical with induction. It depends on 
deduction as well as induction. For science is predictive, and all prediction is 
deductive and syllogistic. 
Prediction is syllogistic because it is like mathematics. When the scientist 
predicts, he is using his equations and formulas as a major premise, and the spe-
cific material and natural forces that he observes as a minor premise, i.e. an 
instance or example of the formulas. To take a very simple example, "2+2=4" 
could be a major premise, and then it could be applied to apples as follows: 
Any two things, if added to two things of the same kind, will be four things of 
that kind. 
Two apples added to two apples are two things added to two things of the same 
kind. 
Therefore two apples added to two apples will be four apples. 
Mill's critique of the syllogism applies just as much to this syllogism as to 
any other. Modern science, with its emphasis on mathematics, induction and 
concrete experience, is no more exempt from Mill's critique than ancient phi-
losophy, with its emphasis on syllogism, deduction, and abstraction. 
To understand this, we must understand the analogy between inductive rea-
soning and abstraction. Induction, like deduction, is reasoning, and therefore 
comes under the third act of the mind, not the first; while abstraction comes 
under the first act of the mind, not the third; yet there is an analogy between the 
two. 
Abstraction is the process by which we form a universal concept on the 
basis of experiencing a number of particular instances of it - for instance, under-
standing "man" or "human nature" from having experienced some individuals 
of this species. Aristotle gives this famous image for it: "It is like a rout in bat-

226 
X. SYLLOGISMS 
tie stopped by first one man making a stand and then another, until the original 
formation has been restored. When one of a number of logically indiscriminable 
[identical in essence] particulars has made a stand [in the mind], the earliest uni-
versal is present in the soul" (Posterior Analytics 100a). Abstraction mentally 
separates this universal, common essence from the individuating accidents such 
as gender, race, height, age, clothing, etc. Intelligent minds do it quickly, after 
only a few examples; slower minds take longer and need more examples, more 
experience. 
Induction: Just as abstraction is the power of the mind to move from sensed 
particulars to an understood universal (e.g. from men to Man) in the first act of 
the mind (understanding), so induction is the power in the third act of the mind 
(reasoning) to move from a number of singular propositions, which are the 
reports of sense observations, to a universal proposition - e.g. from "these men 
are mortal" to "all men are mortal." 
How is this done? Let us look at a specific instance. There are two peasants 
on a medieval feudal manor. Neither has ever been away from his little bit of 
land; neither has ever seen more than 500 different human beings; but one (let's 
call him Odo) has a bright and quick mind while the other (Bozo) has a dim and 
slow one. One day both see something they never saw before: slave traders with 
black men on chains, coming to the manor to sell the black men as slaves. Odo 
says: "What a terrible thing to do: treating those humans like animals!" Bozo 
replies, "What do you mean, human beings? They have black skin. They can't 
be human beings. They must be animals. And it's perfectly all right to chain ani-
mals and sell them, so it's not a terrible thing at all." 
Note that both Odo and Bozo use the same logical principles of the syllo-
gism. Odo is implicitly arguing: 
Treating humans like animals is wrong. 
Chaining and selling humans is treating humans like animals. 
Therefore chaining and selling humans is wrong. 
Chaining and selling humans is wrong. 
What those traders are doing is chaining and selling humans. 
Therefore what those traders are doing is wrong. 
Bozo agrees with Odo's first syllogism, but not with the second premise of 
his second syllogism, because he does not recognize that these black men are 
human beings. Why not? Because he did not abstract as well as Odo. All Bozo 
did was to abstract the sensed constants from the sensed variables. All humans 
he ever saw had two legs, two eyes, hair, white skin, the power of speech, and a 
Frankish accent. Some were male, some female; some old, some young, some 
tall, some short. So he knew that not all humans were male, or old, or tall. But 
he did not know that not all humans were white, or Frankish. Odo, however, not 
only abstracted the sensed constants from the sensed variables, like Bozo, but 

The empiricist s objection to the syllogism 
227 
also abstracted the essence from the accidents among the sensed constants. He 
understood that the power of speech was part of the human essence but the color 
of skin was not. 
Odo 
\ / 
/ \ 
The materialist and empiricist and nominalist ignores this distinctively 
human power, the power not shared by animals, cameras, or computers: the 
power to abstract and understand essences. In other words, the modern nomi-
nalist logician has no doctrine of the predicables; he cannot distinguish an acci-
dent from an essential property. 
Finally, let us answer Mill logically, in his own terms, about the syllogism. 
He claims that all syllogisms really beg the question, and work backward, from 
conclusion to premise. Let us look at two kinds of syllogisms. In the first kind 
all the predicates are accidents. In the second some are properties. 
First kind of syllogism: 
Second kind of syllogism: 
All the books in my bookcase are paperbacks. All men are mortal. 
That book is a book in my bookcase. 
Socrates is a man. 
Therefore that book is a paperback. 
Therefore Socrates is mortal. 

228 
X. SYLLOGISMS 
Mill is right about the first kind of syllogism but wrong about the second. 
There is no way to know that all the books on your bookcase are paperbacks 
without first looking at each one, including this one. So the conclusion ("this 
book is a paperback") must be known to be true before the premise ("all the 
books in my bookcase are paperbacks") can be known to be true. For all of the 
predicates in this syllogism are accidents of their subjects. It is accidcntal to a 
book to be a paperback or a hardcover. It is accidcntal to a book to be on my 
bookcase or not. If a proposition has an accident as its predicate, the only way 
to be sure it is true is by experience, by observation. The mind cannot tell, just 
by understanding the essence of a book, whether it is a paperback or not and 
whether it is on my bookcase or not. We know this not a priori, prior to sense 
experience, but only a posteriori, posterior to experience. 
But the opposite is true of the second syllogism. We have a priori knowl-
edge that all men are mortal; we can know that all men are mortal before we 
experience all men, i.e. every single man. (We can never experience every sin-
gle man, of course; there are over 6 billion of them alive, and many dead, and 
many not yet born.) We can know that all men are mortal by understanding the 
essence of the subject "man." Man is a rational animal, with a rational soul and 
an animal body. This is his essence. Wc can understand the animal part of his 
cssence well enough to understand why everything with an animal body must be 
mortal. We know that all men are mortal not by examining every individual man 
with our senses but by examining the universal essence of man with our mind. 
Until modern times, the word "reason" meant that power of understanding (the 
first act of the mind) as well as the power of computer-like deduction (the third 
act of the mind). 
The source of Mills error is his Nominalism. It is only through the univer-
sal - specifically, through the middle term - that syllogism works. And in every 
syllogism the middle term must be universal ("distributed") at least once; other-
wise we have the fallacy of Undistributed Middle. (Sec pages 246-48.) 
Nominalism denies universals; no wonder it denies syllogism. 
Nominalism also undermines induction, for nominalism reduces universals 
to man-made groupings of individuals into artificial classes set up for acciden-
tal purposes. According to Nominalism there is no objectively right or wrong 
way of grouping many individuals into a class, since there is no common nature 
or essence in the individuals that really and objectively constitutes that class. All 
we can do is whatever we desire to do: e.g. we can classify men and trees togeth-
er as "tall" or "handsome" or "things that make me smile"; or we can classify 
men and mud and marshmallows together as "soft" or "things that begin with the 
letter 4m/" Reason is a servant of desire - and this is another, connected, doc-
trine of this philosophical school that includes Hobbes, Hume, Mill, Freud, 
Darwin, and Marx. Aristotle offers us the alternative in the famous formula that 
"one can know a universal without knowing all its particulars" (Posterior 
Analytics 71a, 26ff). 

The empiricist s objection to the syllogism 
229 
Nominalism amounts to denying that we can know what an apple is. All 
human thought and speech use universal concepts. The only exceptions are prop-
er names; all other names are "common," and Aristotelian realism (the alterna-
tive to Nominalism) is "common sense." The denial of this common sense has 
permeated modern philosophy. Especially in the 20th century, the dominant phi-
losophy in all English speaking countries has been some form of Positivism. 
This is a word with many meanings, but essentially it designates the constella-
tion of six "isms" already enumerated: nominalism in metaphysics, atheism in 
theology, determinism in cosmology, materialism in anthropology, empiricism 
in epistemology, and utilitarianism in ethics. 
Its logical form was first called "Logical Positivism" in its landmark mani-
festo Language, Truth and Logic by A.J Ayer (1926); then "analytic philosophy," 
when it was softened and modified a bit, since the fundamental claim of this 
manifesto was not only mistaken but self-refuting, self-contradictory. The basic 
claim was that the only two kinds of meaningful propositions were tautologies 
and empirically verifiable or falsifiable propositions (essentially, what Kant 
called "analytic a priori judgments" and "synthetic a posteriori judgments"). 
This claim is immediately self-contradictory, for it itself is neither a tautology 
nor empirically verifiable, therefore meaningless by its own criteria. 
What is relevant here is to see that nominalism naturally results in such a 
narrow either/or. If there are no real universals, then all knowledge of objective 
reality is of concrete individuals, knd this comes only by sense observation. Man 
is essentially reduced to an animal plus a computer in his powers of knowing. 
The distinctively human dimensions of reason have been abolished - by human 
reason! This is not intellectual humility; it is intellectual suicide. 
A popular argument of the modern Nominalist against the old notion of rea-
son is that it was arrogant and aprioristic, that it ignored experience and held 
back the progress of science, and that the modern concept of reason is more 
humble and scientific. The history of science, the Nominalist argues, is a 
garbage can full of abstract "essences" which have been discarded. For instance, 
Aristotle thought that fire rose because it was the essence of fire to move toward 
the heavens. 
It is true that the knowledge of universal essences by abstraction is by its 
very nature (i.e. its essence!) subject to error, and history is full of errors that 
came from its misuse. But "the misuse of a thing does not take away its proper 
use." {Abusus non tollit usum.) All human knowledge is subject to error, and its 
history is full of examples of them. But at least metaphysical realism explains 
why abstraction can be valid; Nominalism cannot explain even that. Realism is 
embarrassed by reason's errors, but Nominalism is embarrassed by reason's suc-
cess! 
Much of the progress of science consists in a better understanding of the 
nature of things. For instance, modern physicists no longer claim that it is fire's 
essence to move toward the heavens, because they claim to know more about the 

230 
X. SYLLOGISMS 
nature of fire, and other bodies, than Aristotle did - and this claim itself cannot 
be made by a Nominalist. 
Section 4. Demonstrative syllogisms 
Some syllogisms leave us uncertain about the truth of their conclusions even 
when there is no ambiguous term, no false premise, and no fallacy, because we 
are uncertain about the truth of one of the premises. 
Sometimes this is simply because one of the premises, though necessarily 
true in itself, is not known with certainty but only with "right opinion," as Plato 
put it. Sometimes it is because the premise is in itself only probable, not ccrtain 
- in which case the conclusion too can be only probable, not certain. For 
instance, 
Traveling faster than light is impossible. 
And getting to another galaxy in a single lifetime is traveling faster than light. 
Therefore getting to another galaxy in a single lifetime is impossible. 
Is this conclusion absolutely certain? Many things deemed "impossible" by sci-
ence in one age have been proven possible in a later age. Do we know with cer-
tainty that both the premises are true? The first premise rests on the nearly unan-
imous authority of current scientists, but that is only human authority, and not 
absolutely certain. The second premise rests on the assumption that the human 
life-span can never be radically expanded - and that is even less certain. So the 
conclusion, while very probable, is not ccrtain. 
But even when both premises are known to be certainly true, our mind (and 
not just our feelings) is more totally satisfied by one kind of syllogism than by 
another. For one syllogism may give the real reason why the conclusion is true 
(this reason resides in the middle term), while another may not. Both kinds of 
syllogism can be logically valid, but only the first kind is called a "perfect 
demonstration," or an argument propter quid ("because of this"), since it gives 
the real causc of the conclusion being true. 
To see this distinction, contrast the following two syllogisms: 
(1) Whatever is composed of parts is destructible. 
Whatever is material is composed of parts. 
Therefore whatever is material is destructible. 
(2) Whatever is material is able to reflect light waves. 
Consciousness is not able to reflect light waves. 
Therefore consciousness is not material. 
Both syllogisms are logically valid, and both have true premises, but (1) is 
more convincing than (2). Why? 

Demonstrative syllogisms 
231 
Because in (1), the middle term is the real reason or cause for the conclu-
sion being true, while in (2) it is not. Matter is in reality destructible because it 
is composed of parts; its parts actually make it destructible, decomposable, split-
table. But consciousness is not immaterial because it cannot reflect light waves. 
The inability to reflect light waves does not actually cause the immateriality of 
consciousness. Rather, it is an effect of it. 
Take another example: 
Whatever is material is able to be moved from one place to another. 
Numbers are not able to be moved from one place to another. 
Therefore numbers are not material. 
It is not the absence of being able to be moved from one place to another 
that makes numbers immaterial. The middle term does not give the real reason 
for the conclusion. 
When the middle term does give the real reason or cause for the conclusion 
being true, we have what is classically called a "demonstrative syllogism." It is 
also sometimes called a "perfect demonstration" - perfect because our mind is 
satisfied, since we know not only the fact (the conclusion) but also the reason 
for it (the middle term). In a non-demonstrative syllogism, we have indeed 
proved the fact (the conclusion), and we can be certain that it is true if we are 
certain that the premises are true; but not why. we do not yet know the real rea-
son or cause why it is true. So our mind is not totally satisfied. 
A classic example of the difference between a valid non-demonstrative 
argument and a valid demonstrative argument is the difference we have already 
referred to (page 214) between Book 1 of Plato's Republic and Books 2 through 
10. Socrates is dissatisfied at the end of Book 1 because although he has proved 
that justice is more profitable than injustice, he does not yet know why, since he 
does not yet know the essence of justice, what justice is. He has not yet deduced 
justice's "profitability" from its essence. Only after finding the essence of jus-
tice (a long process in the Republic) can he know that this essence of justice is 
the real reason why justice must always be more profitable than injustice. This 
essence, expressed in his definition of justice, is the middle term of his basic syl-
logism. (It is basically that justice is that virtue in a soul or in a state by which 
each part performs its natural function with its proper particular virtue, in har-
mony with the other parts. Justice is to the soul or the state what health is to the 
body.) 
The most practical application of this distinction between demonstrative 
and nondemonstrative syllogisms comes when we arc trying to construct syllo-
gisms. To make a syllogism, you must find an appropriate middle term. To make 
a demonstrative syllogism, you must find a middle term that tells us the real rea-
son for the conclusion. For instance, suppose you wanted to prove to someone 
who admired Hitler that Hitler was not a great man. You could argue this way: 

232 
X. SYLLOGISMS 
Hitler was hated by nearly all the world. 
Whoever is hated by nearly all the world was not a great man. 
Therefore Hitler was not a great man. 
But the middle term here is not the cause of Hitler's lack of greatness, so 
you have not constructed a demonstrative syllogism, though it is a valid one. It 
would be better to use instead a syllogism whose middle term gives the actual 
cause, e.g.: 
Hitler was a tyrant. 
A tyrant is not a great man. 
Therefore Hitler was not a great man. 
Still another reason why some syllogisms are more convincing than others 
- this time a purely psychological reason - is bccause their arrangement of terms 
is clearer and stronger. Affirmative propositions are clearer and stronger than 
negative ones, and universal propositions are clearer and stronger than particu-
lar ones, so the most convincing and simple form of syllogism is one with three 
A propositions, arranged in perfect order like the circles on a dart board. It could 
be called a "bull's eye syllogism." E.g.: 
All men are mortal. 
All sages are men. 
Therefore all sages are mortal. 
This is more convincing than 
All sages are men. 
No men are immortal. 
Therefore no immortals are sages. 
Yet the second syllogism is just as valid as the first, and comcs to the same con-
clusion. (The two conclusions arc partial contrapositives.) It does give the real 
reason for the conclusion, so it is a demonstrative syllogism. But it is not a per-
fect one because it docs not give this reason as clearly as the "bull's eye syllo-
gism" does. 
Classic logic texts usually included a chapter on "reducing to the first fig-
ure" (see pages 257-58), i.e. changing a syllogism around so that the order of 
terms was that of a "bull's eye syllogism " because we arc more easily persuad-
ed by a perfectly-formed argument. 
Section 5. How to construct convincing syllogisms (B) 
Constructive logic is as important as critical logic; making your own good syllo-
gisms is as important as evaluating others' syllogisms. Fortunately, this is quite easy 
to do - so much so that it is often omitted entirely in logic texts. The basic steps are: 

How to construct convincing sy llogisms 
233 
1. Know what conclusion you want to prove. 
2. Put your conclusion into logical form. This will give you your two terms, 
S and P. 
3. The key step in constructing a convincing syllogism is to fnd a good mid-
dle term, one that naturally joins the other two terms. This is best done by 
instinct and intuition, by imitation and practice and habituation. Since the 
middle term is really the reason for the conclusion, all you have to do is 
ask yourself what is the reason for your conclusion, and you will have your 
middle term. Ask yourself what is the real reason for your conclusion, and 
you will make a demonstrative syllogism. 
4. Finally, check your syllogism for validity. (The fastest way is by Euler's 
circles, page 237.) 
Suppose you want to prove that "you should never trust a pit bull." First, put 
it into logical form. You're really trying to prove something about pit bulls, not 
about "you," so you need to reword your proposition. You could put it into a neg-
ative logical form ("No pit bulls are to be trusted") or an affirmative form ("All 
pit bulls are untrustworthy"). All other things being equal, the affirmative form 
is easier and clearer. 
Now you ask yourself "Why?" Why do you believe all pit bulls are untrust-
worthy? You will probably immediately come up with a reason, e.g. "They're all 
aggressive by nature, even when tamed." So there is your middle term: 
All pit bulls are aggressive by nature even when tamed. 
Whatever is aggressive by nature even when tamed is untrustworthy. 
Therefore all pit bulls are untrustworthy. 
Pit bull owners will still disagree with you, but at least you have something 
to argue about. Your conclusion is now based on two premises, not just feeling 
or prejudice. And the premises are a bit harder to refute than the conclusion. At 
least, more people agree with the premises than with the conclusion. That's the 
whole strategy of the syllogism: to lead people from premises they already 
believe to a conclusion they do not. 
Or suppose you want to prove that Utopianism is an illusion, that a perfect 
society can never exist on earth. First, formulate your conclusion: "No perfect 
society is something that can exist on earth." Then ask yourself "Why?" What is 
there about a perfect society that makes it impossible, or what is there about 
things on earth that make them all imperfect? Formulating the question in the 
first way might give you a syllogism like 
No perfect society is something that can be made by imperfect people. 
Everything that can exist on earth is something made by imperfect people. 
Therefore no perfect society is something that can exist on earth. 

234 
X. SYLLOGISMS 
Or if you formulate the question in the second way, you might come up with a 
syllogism like 
All things on earth are infected with weakness, ignorance, and death. 
Nothing infected with weakness, ignorance, and death is a perfect society. 
Therefore nothing on earth is a perfect society. 
The more you do it, the more easy and natural it becomes. Appropriate middle 
terms begin to leap out at you; and this clarifies your own reasons as well as fur-
nishing you with arguments to persuade others. 
Exercises 
A. Test your intuitive sense of valid and invalid arguments by telling whether 
you think each of the following syllogisms is valid or invalid. 
1. 
All dead men are men. 
Some men bleed. 
Therefore some dead men do not bleed. 
2. 
No dead men are live men. 
All live men bleed. 
Therefore no dead men bleed. 
3. 
Only live men bleed. 
Dead men are not live men. 
Therefore dead men don't bleed. 
4. 
All who bleed are alive. 
Dead men aren't alive. 
Therefore dead men don't bleed. 
5. 
Dead men don't hiccup. 
Whoever doesn't hiccup, doesn't bleed. 
Therefore dead men don't bleed. 
6. 
John is a dead man. 
John does not bleed. 
Therefore some dead men do not bleed. 
7. 
All who bleed have bodies that are doing something. 
Most dead men do not have bodies that are doing something. 
Therefore dead men do not bleed. 
8. 
Dead men don't stop their own bleeding. 
Those who stop their own bleeding do not bleed. 
Therefore dead men do not bleed. 

How to construct convincing sy llogisms 
235 
9. 
All men who don't bleed are impervious to hemophilia-
Dead men are impervious to hemophilia. 
Therefore dead men are men who don't bleed. 
10. 
Some dead men are not yet in rigor mortis. 
Some who arc not yet in rigor mortis bleed. 
Therefore some dead men bleed. 
B. For each of the following conclusions, construct a valid syllogism without 
any obviously 
false premises, by finding an appropriate (realistic, convinc-
ing) middle term. Make it a demonstrative syllogism if possible. Though you 
have not yet learned the rules for discriminating valid from invalid syllo-
gisms, you have an innate, intuitive sense of that, which you used in evalu-
ating the syllogisms in exercise A; use it again here in constructing syllo-
gisms. 
1. Courage is a virtue. 
2. Not all great men are patriotic. 
3. Giving makes you happy. 
4. Somebody farted. 
5. Slavery is morally wrong. 
6. Whatever has color, has size. 
7. Power is not happiness. 
8. All men by nature desire to know. 
9. Some valid syllogisms do not convince anyone to believe their conclusion. 
C. The following exercises are more difficult because they require you to see 
both sides of a controversial issue. Construct convincing syllogisms to prove 
both of each pair of contradictory conclusions. This is a good exercise not 
only in logic but also in practical psychology, "getting into" other minds. 
IA. Some things that cause contentment are harmful. 
IB. No things that cause contentment are harmful. 
2A. Beauty is in the eye of the beholder. (Beauty is subjective.) 
2B. Beauty is not in the eye of the beholder. (Beauty is not subjective.) 
3A. The human soul is immortal. 
3B. The human soul is not immortal. 
4A. Moral Tightness changes with time and place. 
4B. Moral Tightness docs not change with time and place. 
5A. God exists. 
5B. God does not exist. 

236 
X. SYLLOGISMS 
6A. Man is essentially good. 
6B. Man is not essentially good. 
7A. Democracy is the best form of government. 
7B. Democracy is not the best form of government. 
8A. Capital punishment is morally right. 
8B. Capital punishment is not morally right. 
9A. All abortions are morally wrong. 
9B. Not all abortions are morally wrong. 
D. Whenever we have two apparently good syllogisms which prove conclusions 
that contradict each other, which you constructed in exercise C, we must 
have in at least one of each pair of syllogisms either a term used ambigu-
ously, or a false premise, or a logical fallacy. In this exercise you arc to find 
one of these three possible weaknesses in both arguments of each pair. You 
probably consider the syllogism that proves the conclusion you agree with 
to be the stronger one, so it is a challenging and useful exercise to try to find 
the weakness that your opponent will find in that one, i.e. in your own argu-
ment, as well as the weakness in his. 

XI. Checking Syllogisms for Validity 
There are four ways to check syllogisms for validity: Euler's Circles, Aristotle's 
six rules of the syllogism, Venn diagrams, and "Barbara Celarent." We will 
explore them in order of difficulty, starting with the easiest 
Euler's Circles are (1) not always reliable, for there is no clear way to use 
them on some syllogisms that contain I or O propositions. However, they are (2) 
the easiest of all four methods, and (3) they do give a graphic explanation of why 
any syllogism is valid or invalid. 
Aristotle's six rules are not only the oldest but also the best way of judging 
syllogisms, for (1) they are always reliable, (2) they are easy to understand and 
remember, and (3) they explain why each invalid syllogism is invalid, which fal-
lacy is committed. 
Venn diagrams are (1) always reliable, and (2) fairly easy to learn; howev-
er, they (3) do not show why any syllogism is valid or invalid. It is not absolute-
ly necessary to learn Venn diagrams, since Aristotle's six rules do all that Venn 
diagrams do and more; but they are a useful second way of checking. 
"Barbara Celarent" is the first line of a medieval list of artificial names 
which is a clever and charming but complicated and cumbersome way of judg-
ing the validity of a syllogism by its structure of mood and figure. (This will be 
explained shortly.) It is (1) universally reliable, but (2) the most difficult of all 
to use, and (3) it does not show why any syllogism is valid or invalid. This his-
torical curiosity will be explained briefly, but it is an unnecessary extra, useful 
mainly for mental exercise. 
Section 1. Euler's Circles (B) 
Not only can most syllogisms be checked for validity by Euler's Circles, but the 
strategy of the syllogism can be seen most clearly by this method. However, it 
will not give a clear result for some syllogisms with I or O premises (perhaps 
5-10% of the syllogisms you will meet). 
If your memory is a little dim, you should first review the four Euler dia-
grams for the A, E, I and O propositions. (See page 152.) 
The technique for evaluating syllogisms by Euler's Circles is very simple: 

238 
XI. CHECKING SYLLOGISMS FOR VALIDITY 
just diagram both premises by Euler diagrams, superimposing one on the other. 
This is possible because there is always a common term to any two propositions 
in a syllogism. A syllogism has only three terms, remember; if there are more 
than three, we have either no syllogism at all, or a syllogism with "the Fallacy of 
Four Terms," or perhaps two syllogisms in a chain. (We will soon learn how to 
detect these patterns.) 
Take the easiest case first, our old friend "All men are mortal, and Socrates 
is a man, therefore Socrates is mortal 
We first diagram "all men are mortal" in 
Euler circles: 
Then we superimpose the diagram for the second premise, "Socrates is a 
man," on our diagram for the first premise, like a double exposure in photogra-
phy, thus showing how the two premises look together. The circle for "man" is 
already there, so all we have to do is to include the term "Socrates" in it. For in 
an A proposition (such as "Socrates is mortal"), the subject is included in the 
extension of the predicate, as a sub-population is included in a population. (In 
terms of comprehension, on the other hand, the predicate is part of the (meaning 
of the) subject). 
the diagram of the premises. For the conclusion does not add any new data to 
the premises. The premises by themselves supply all the data, or information; 
and the conclusion only reveals the truth that is already implicit in the premises. 
So if a syllogism is logically valid, we can see the conclusion in the premises 
simply by looking at the Euler diagram of the two premises superimposed on 
each other. In this case, we sec that "Socrates is mortal" necessarily follows. 
Now let's take an example of a syllogism with a negative premise and a neg-
ative conclusion: 
No creatures are perfect. 
And all angels are creatures. 
Therefore no angels are perfect. 

Euler's Circles 
We first diagram the first premise, "no creatures arc perfect": 
239 
Then we add to this "all angels are creatures": 
"no angels are perfect." It does. 
When we have a syllogism with a particular proposition in it, Euler's Circles 
become a bit harder to use; for the diagram for a particular proposition has a dot-
ted line in it, signifying that we do not know how far this class extends. For 
instance, suppose we have the syllogism 
Some fish have teeth. 
Whatever has teeth can bite you. 
Therefore sonic fish can bite you. 
We first diagram "whatever has teeth can bite you." (Always diagram the uni-
versal premise first.) 
Then we add the I proposition "some fish have teeth": 

240 
XI. CHECKING SYLLOGISMS FOR VALIDITY 
The dotted line signifies that we do not know whether or not some fish do 
not have teeth. (Remember, "some" must be interpreted to mean "at least some," 
that is, "some and perhaps all" rather than "only some, some and not all" -
unless there is some clear indication, in the words that we are given, that it is 
meant in the second, stronger sense. We must not "read between the lines" or 
"read into" the data we are given.) 
Euler's Circles show that this conclusion necessarily follows. 
However, suppose we have the syllogism: 
Some fish have teeth. 
And all fish have gills. 
Therefore some things that have teeth have gills. 
These two premises are more difficult to diagram together, because the rela-
tion between the terms "things that have teeth" and "things that have gills" is not 
clear. (Try it.) You probably cannot tell just from your attempt to diagram these 
two premises together that the conclusion does indeed necessarily follow. 
Sometimes we can handle syllogisms with I or O propositions in Euler's cir-
cles if we draw not just one but a number of dotted lines to show that there are 
a number of possibilities. For instance, take the syllogism 
Some good generals are not good politicians. 
This man is a good politician. 
Therefore this man is not a good general. 
First, diagram the universal premise, the second one: 
Then, superimpose the other premise, the first one It is an O, and can be 
drawn with just one dotted line, as follows: 
But it can also be drawn with as many as three other dotted lines, because 
we do not know what part of P ("good politicians") the rest of S ("good gener-
als") takes up: 

Euler's Circles 
241 
It may be (1) that there are no good generals that are good politicians; or it 
may be (2) that the line goes somewhere partially through "good politicians," so 
that there are some good generals outside good politicians, some good generals 
inside good politicians, and some good politicians outside good generals; or it 
may be (3) that S ("good generals") totally surrounds P ("good politicians"), so 
that all of "good politicians" is inside "good generals." We do not know which 
of these three possibilities is the case just from knowing that "Some S is not P." 
So wc do not know the relation between "this man" and "good generals." The 
syllogism is invalid. 
(I) 
(2) 
0 ) 
good politicians 
When using Euler's Circles to check a syllogism, if one of the premises is 
an I or an O proposition, we should include all the possible dotted lines for all 
the possibilities when we diagram the I or O. For if there is any possibility that 
the premises can be true without the conclusion being true, the argument is 
invalid. 
Take, for instance, the following syllogism: 
Some persons are handicapped. 
And no Greek gods are handicapped. 
Therefore some Greek gods are not persons. 
Let us begin by diagramming the E premise (the second one): 

242 
XI. CHECKING SYLLOGISMS FOR VALIDITY 
Now we superimpose the I premise. But where does the dotted line go, the 
line that contains the persons that are not handicapped? It might go (1) nowhere 
at all outside the class of the handicapped and thus overlap no part of the class 
"Greek gods." In other words, it might be true that there are no non-handicapped 
persons. (In fact this is true if we do not limit "handicapped" to overt physical 
disabilities; and we can all learn this important lesson about ourselves from 
more obviously handicapped people!) Or (2) the dotted line might overlap part 
of the class "Greek gods"; it might be that there are some non-handicapped per-
sons who are Greek gods and some who are not. Finally, (3) it might be that 
"non-handicapped persons" totally encompass the class "Greek gods." 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
Since we do not know, just from the I proposition, which of these three pos-
sibilities is the case, we should diagram all three of them and then see whether 
the conclusion necessarily follows in all three cases - which it does not here, and 
so the syllogism is invalid. 
Section 2. Aristotle's six rules (B) 
These are the oldest and also the most helpful of all the ways of checking 

Aristotle's six rules 
243 
syllogisms. They were discovered by the same genius who first clearly discov-
ered the theory of the syllogism itself. 
To be valid, any syllogism must obey all six of these rules. If it disobeys any 
one, it is invalid. 
You need not memorize the numbers of the rules, or even the exact words 
of the rules themselves; for you will quite quickly remember them just by using 
them over and over again in doing many exercises. By the way, one of the ways 
logic (and philosophy) is unlike languages is that deliberate memorization is 
almost never useful. For you either understand what you are memorizing, or not 
If you do, then you need not try to memorize it because you will remember it 
naturally and spontaneously by the mere fact of understanding it If you do not 
understand it, then it will be very difficult for you to remember it So it is almost 
always more time-efficient, as well as more pleasant, to spend your time trying 
to understand rather than trying to memorize. 
The Rules 
Rule 1: A syllogism must have three and only three terms. The usual vio-
lation of this rule is called The Fallacy of Four Terms. 
Rule 2: A syllogism must have three and only three propositions. There 
is no named fallacy for the violation of this rule. 
Rule 3: The middle term must be distributed at least once. The violation 
of this rule is called The Fallacy of Undistributed Middle. 
Rule 4: No term that is undistributed in the premise may be distributed 
in the conclusion. The violation of this rule is called The Fallacy of Illicit 
Minor or The Fallacy of Illicit Major, depending on whether it is the minor 
term or the major term that contains the fallacy. 
Rule 5: No syllogism can have two negative premises. The fallacy here is 
called simply the fallacy of Two Negative Premises. 
Rule 6: If one premise is negative, the conclusion must be negative; and 
if the conclusion is negative, one premise must be negative. (No name for this 
fallacy; just the rule.) 
In addition to these six rules, there are two corollaries, which are not nec-
essary to know but are very helpful. They are not necessary to know because 
every syllogism which violates one of the two corollaries also violates one of the 
six rules. They are very helpful because sometimes the violation of one of the 
two corollaries is more obvious and quickly detectable than the violation of one 
of the six rules. 
Corollary One: No syllogism may have two particular premises. 
Corollary Two: If a syllogism has a particular premise, it must have a 
particular conclusion. 
The first two rules concern the essential structure of the syllogism. 
The next two rules concern the distribution of terms. 
The last two rules concern negative propositions. 
And the two corollaries concern particular propositions. 

244 
XL CHECKING SYLLOGISMS FOR VALIDITY 
Explanations of the Rules 
Rule 1 can be readily understood by remembering our triangle diagrams of 
the syllogism above, which show the importance of the middle term (pages 
216-18). If we have fewer than three terms, we do not have a middle term at all. 
If we have more than three terms, we have more than one middle term, and then 
we do not have a single standard of comparison for the other two terms, the 
major and minor terms. 
The Fallacy of Four Terms can be either explicit or implicit. It is explicit 
when there arc four explicitly different terms. For instance. 
Whatever is in sense experience is material. 
And all knowledge comes from sense experience. 
Therefore all knowledge is material. 
Both premises are true, and the syllogism seems formally valid - in fact it 
seems to be a "bull's eye syllogism** — yet the conclusion is false. The fallacy 
here consists in the fact that there are two middle terms: "what is in sense expe-
rience" and "what comes from sense experience." The two are not the same. 
Wisdom, e.g. comes partly from wide experience, but does not reside in experi-
ence; while time, e.g. is in experience but does not come from it. 
The other form of the Fallacy of Four Terms is more common because it is 
more hidden. Here, the middle term is explicitly one but implicitly two because 
it is ambiguous. In fact, there is a special name for the fallacy. The Fallacy of 
Ambiguous Middle, For instance, 
"All power tends to corrupt" (Lord Acton) 
"Knowledge is power." (Francis Bacon) 
Therefore knowledge tends to corrupt. 
It takes some understanding, or intuition, or "reading between the lines" to 
see this point, but once it is made it seems fairly obvious: that when Lord Acton 
said that "all power tends to corrupt," he meant political power, whereas when 
Francis Bacon said that "knowledge is power," he meant not political power but 
intellectual power, especially scientific knowledge that led to technological 
power over the forces of nature. 
Rule 2, that there must be three and only three propositions in each syllo-
gism, needs no explanation. This rule flows from the essential structure of the 
syllogism. Any argument that violates this rule is not a syllogism at all. 
Therefore you will never find a syllogism that violates this rule, so there is no 
named fallacy for it. 
An argument with four or more propositions is usually a chain of syllogisms 
called an "epicheirema." (Vou will learn about these later.) 
Arguments with only two propositions (one premise and one conclusion) 
and only two terms arc immediate inferences: conversion, obversion, or contra-
position. 

Aristotle s six rules 
245 
Arguments with only two propositions stated but with three terms arc usu-
ally "enthymemes," abbreviated syllogisms. One of the three propositions of the 
syllogism is "kept in mind" (the meaning of "enthymeme"), or implied rather 
than expressed. These are genuine syllogisms, and they are in fact the common-
est of all forms of argument in ordinary language. The next chapter will explore 
them in depth. 
Enthymemes do not violate rule 2 even though they contain only two 
expressed propositions, for the third proposition is implied. It is really there and 
operating on an unconscious level, just as many things do in your life. For 
instance, "Man is mortal because he is material" is an enthymeme, an abbrevi-
ated form of 
All that is material is mortal, (implied premise) 
Man is material, (expressed premise) 
Therefore man is mortal, (expressed conclusion) 
And "No mere man can know everything, so you can't either" is an enthymeme, 
an abbreviated form of 
No mere man can know everything, (expressed premise) 
You are a mere man. (implied premise) 
Therefore you can't know everything, (expressed conclusion) 
When we study how to find the implied, missing premise in any given 
enthymeme, you will come to recognize the structure of an enthymeme very 
clearly, so that you will not confuse it with a violation of Rule 2. When you see 
two propositions with a premise indicator or a conclusion indicator, and a total 
of three terms in the two propositions, you probably have an enthymeme. 
Rules 3 and 4 concern the distribution of terms. Since we need to know 
whether each term is distributed (universal) or undistributed (particular), it is a 
useful and time-saving device to write a little "u" for "undistributed" or a little 
"d" for "distributed" after each term, where we write an exponent in math, a lit-
tle above and to the right, so that we can check at a glance for violations of rules 
3 and 4. 
It may be useful at this point to review the distribution of terms: 
Universal propositions have distributed subjects 
Particular propositions have undistributed subjects 
Negative propositions have distributed predicates 
Affirmative propositions have undistributed predicates 
Proposition 
Subject Predicate 
A 
d 
u 
E 
d 
d 
I 
u 
u 
O 
u 
d 

246 
XI. CHECKING SYLLOGISMS FOR VALIDITY 
(At this point, if you arc not sure you understand what it means for a term 
to be "distributed" or undistributed," or how to recognize in any given case 
whether any particular term is distributed or undistributed, review pages 163-65 
before going on with this chapter.) 
Rule 3 concerns the hinge and center of the syllogism, the middle term. 
The reason the middle term must be distributed at least once is this: if it is 
not, then the minor term and the major term may be related to two totally dif-
ferent parts of the extension of the middle term, thus giving us the equivalent of 
the fallacy of four terms. It is the relationship which the major and minor terms 
bear to the middle term (in the major and minor premises) that justifies the rela-
tionship they bear to each other in the conclusion. If they are related to different 
middle terms (the Fallacy of Four Terms explicitly), or if they are related to a 
middle term with two different meanings (the Fallacy of Four Terms implicitly), 
or if they are related to different parts of (the extension of) the middle term (the 
Fallacy of Undistributed Middle), we have essentially the same fallacy: the mid-
dle term is not functioning as it must. 
Let us begin with an example of a syllogism whose middle term functions 
correctly: 
Babies are not sages. 
And saints are sages. 
Therefore babies are not saints. 
The first premise excludes babies from the whole extension of sages. Then 
the second premise includes all saints in some part of the class of sages. It does 
not matter how large or small that part is; all saints are in it. And no babies are. 
Therefore no babies can be saints. The Euler diagram shows this: 
There are no dotted lines, no particular propositions, no uncertainties. We are 
sure about the relationship of the other two terms to the middle term, and thus 
to each other. 
Contrast now an invalid syllogism, which uses its middle term wrongly, 
committing the fallacy of Undistributed Middle: 
All dogs are animals. 
And all cats arc animals. 
Therefore all dogs are cats. 

Aristotle s six rules 
247 
No one would be fooled by this argument, because everyone knows the conclu-
sion is false, though both premises are true. But people might be fooled by an 
argument with the same logical form but a different content, such as: 
All Communists insist on the abolition of private property. 
This candidate insists on the abolition of private property. 
Therefore this candidate must be a Communist. 
No, he might be against private property for other reasons. He might be an anar-
chist, or a spiritualist who wants to deny all material property because he 
believes matter is an illusion; or a monk who wants the whole world to live in a 
global monastery, or a tyrant who wants to possess all property himself. 
But the form of this deceptive argument is exactly the same as the form of 
the first one (about cats and dogs), which is not deceptive because of its clearer 
content. The common form is: 
All P is M 
And all S is M 

248 
XI. CHECKING SYLLOGISMS FOR VALIDITY 
P and S are not necessarily compared with, or related to, the same part of 
the extension of M here. Perhaps S is one kind of M and P is another. Or per-
haps they arc the same. We do not know from this syllogism, because neither 
premise has a distributed (universal) middle term. 
This pattern will be found very frequently. Undistributed Middle is proba-
bly the most common violation of the rules of the syllogism, and this pattern 
(two A premises with the same predicate) is the most common pattern for it. 
Rule 4 could be called the No Trespassing rule. Think of the line between 
the premises and the conclusion as a property line. Only those who belong on 
the property may enter it; only those terms which have produced their creden-
tials can cross over into the conclusion. If a term is so weak, so to speak, that it 
is undistributed in the premise, it cannot suddenly become strong and distributed 
in the conclusion. If all we know about a term in the premise is a partial knowl-
edge, a knowledge of some of its extension (and that is what "undistributed" 
means), then that is all we are justified in claiming to know in the conclusion 
when that term reappears. To go from undistributed to distributed would be like 
a magician pulling a live rabbit out of a dead hat. It would be a trick. And there 
are no tricks in logic. 
For instance, take the following syllogism: 
Compassion is a virtue. 
Justice is not compassion. 
Therefore justice is not a virtue. 
Let's first test this syllogism by Euler circles, and then by the six rules. The 
Euler diagram shows how both premises can be true without the conclusion 
being true, for there are two possibilities: 
And Euler circlcs must be drawn for all possibilities to sec whether there is any 
possibility that the premises can be true without the conclusion being true. (For 
this reason, it is sometimes easier to use the six rules than to use Euler circles.) 
The six rules reveal the fallacy here as "illicit major": the major term, 
"virtue," moves from being undistributed in the major premise to being distrib-
uted in the conclusion. The predicate of the conclusion is the major term. This 

Aristotle s six rules 
249 
is "a virtue." This same term occurs also in one of the premises, which makes 
that premise the major premise. The premise is: "Compassion is a virtue." This 
is an A proposition. The predicate of an A proposition is undistributed. But this 
same term ("a virtue") is distributed in the conclusion. The syllogism thus vio-
lates Rule 4: no term undistributed in the premises may be distributed in the con-
clusion. The syllogism is fallacious: Illicit Major. 
Another example of the same fallacy (Illicit Major) shows how Euler's 
Circles can be more difficult to use than the six rules: 
A healthy life is worth living. 
Some lives are not healthy. 
Therefore some lives are not worth living. 
Here is one possible diagram for the premises, which seems to show that the syl-
logism is valid: 
But here is another possible diagram of the premises, which shows that it is 
invalid: 
For if there is any possibility of the premises being true without the conclusion 
being true, the argument is invalid. 
Consider the following syllogism: 
No violence is just. 
All violence is aggression. 
Therefore no aggression is just. 
Perhaps all three propositions are true, but the syllogism is invalid because the 
minor term, "aggression," moves from being undistributed in the minor premise 

250 
XI. CHECKJNG SYLLOGISMS FOR VALIDITY 
to being distributed in the conclusion. The Euler diagram here again also shows 
the fallacy, but only if we draw both possible diagrams for the premises: 
When it crosses the line from premises to conclusion, a term may move 
from distributed to undistributed, or it may remain undistributed or it may 
remain distributed but it may not move from undistributed to distributed. From 
distributed to distributed from undistributed to undistributed and from distrib-
uted to undistributed are all OK, but not from undistributed to distributed. From 
distributed to undistributed is OK - a term may move from being distributed in 
the premise to being undistributed in the conclusion - bccausc if we know about 
all of the term in the premise (which is what "distributed" means), we arc justi-
fied in claiming to know about some of that term (undistributed) in the conclu-
sion; from "all" we can infer "some." But from "some" we cannot infer "all." 
OK 
OK 
OK 
invalid 
Term in the premise 
d 
i 
u 
i 
d 
1 
u 
1 
Same term in the conclusion 
t 
d 
• 
u 
• 
u 
• 
d 
Rule 5 forbids two negative premises, and the reason is again the middle 
term. When both the major and minor terms are related negatively to the middle 
term, we do not know how they are related to each other. Remember, it is not 
necessarily true that "the enemy of my enemy is my friend" or (analogously) it 
is not necessarily true that two things that do not "match" a common third thing 
do not "match" each other. They may, or they may not. 
For instance, take the following two syllogisms, both having the same logi-
cal form: 
Odd numbers are not even numbers. 
Birds are not fish. 
Three is not an even number. 
Humans are not fish. 
Therefore three is not an odd number. 
Therefore humans are not birds. 
The conclusion of the second happens to be true, but its premises do not 

Aristotle's six rules 
251 
prove it. The conclusion of the first is obviously false, and it is easier to see why 
its premises do not prove it. But the first syllogism is in exactly the same logi-
cal situation. They have the same logical form: 
No P is M 
No S is M 
Therefore no S is P 
Rule 6 is similar to Rule 4 in that it is a kind of "No Trespassing" rule. Rule 
4 state that if a term is undistributed in the premise, it must also be undistributed 
in the conclusion. Rule 6 states that if the premises contain a negative proposi-
tion, the conclusion must also be negative, and vice versa. (There is no "vice 
versa" clause in Rule 4.) There will also be a third "No Trespassing" rule, 
Corollary 2, which states that if one premise is particular, the conclusion must 
also be particular. 
Consider these two syllogisms, which violate Rule 6 as well as Rule 5: 
No dogs arc angels. 
No philosophers are angels. 
And no mammals are angels. 
And no lawyers are angels. 
Therefore all dogs are mammals. 
Therefore all philosophers are lawyers. 
The first conclusion happens to be true, and the second false, but exactly 
the same logical form is used: 
No S is M 
And no P is M 
Therefore All S is P 
That this syllogistic form is invalid, can be seen by the Euler Circle dia-
gram: 
Remember, if there is any way we can diagram the premises without having the 
conclusion, the argument is invalid. Both of the two diagrams above have faith-
fully diagrammed the two premises, but the second one does not yield the con-
clusion. 
(1) 
(2) 

252 
XI. CHECKING SYLLOGISMS FOR VALIDITY 
Corollary I forbids any syllogism to have two particular premises. Any syl-
logism that violates this rule will also violate Rule 3 or 4. For example: 
Some swans are white. 
Some jewels are green. 
And some white things are beautiful. 
And some green things are alive. 
Therefore some swans are beautiful. 
Therefore some jewels are alive. 
Here again we have the same logical form, and both syllogisms contain two true 
premises, but only the first has a true conclusion. The conclusion is true "by 
accident," so to speak; it does not necessarily follow from the premises. The fal-
lacy is Undistributed Middle. Or consider the following: 
Some onions are not smelly. 
Some sheep are not black. 
And some smelly things taste good. 
And some black things are animals. 
Therefore some onions do not taste good. Therefore some sheep are not animals. 
Here again in both cases we have true premises but only in the first case do 
we have a true conclusion, by accident. It does not follow from the premises. The 
two syllogisms have the same logical form and both commit the fallacy of Illicit 
Major: 
Some S is not M 
And some M is P 
Therefore some S is not P 
The corollary is a useful time-saver bccausc the fallacy of two particular 
premises can be detected at a glance, while you have to mark each term with a 
"d" or a "u" before you can tell whether a syllogism commits the fallacies of 
Undistributed Middle, Illicit Major, or Illicit Minor. 
Corollary 2 ("If one premise is particular, the conclusion must be particu-
lar") is another "No Trespassing" rule. The "weakness" of particularity in the 
premise must be reflected in the conclusion. The conclusion always follows the 
weaker premise: particular or negative. 
Any syllogism that violates Corollary 2 will also violate cither Rule 3 or 
Rule 4, and commit Undistributed Middle, Illicit Major, or Illicit Minor. E.g.: 
All dogs are animals. 
Some dogs are poodles. 
Therefore all poodles are animals. 
All three propositions arc true, but the conclusion does not follow from the 
premises: there is Illicit Minor. If the terms in the conclusion were reversed it is 
still Illicit Minor: 
All dogs are animals. 
Some dogs are poodles. 
Therefore all animals are poodles. 

Aristotle's six rules 
It is a little easier to spot the fallacy of a particular premise without a particular 
conclusion than to spot Illicit Major or Illicit Minor, so this corollary too is a 
time-saving device. 
Exercise A: Test each of the following syllogisms and the ones on page 234 by 
the six rules: 
1. 
Some children smoke. 
Some who smoke get cancer. 
Therefore some children get cancer. 
2. 
Saints are never joyless. 
Some joyless people are popes. 
Therefore some popes are not saints. 
3. 
Peace is good. 
War is not peace. 
Therefore war is not good. 
4. 
Some people are magnets for trouble. 
No ombudsmen are magnets for trouble. 
Therefore some ombudsmen are not people. 
5. 
Everything in Massachusetts is in America. 
Everything in Boston is in America. 
Therefore everything in Boston is in Massachusetts. 
6. 
No one who does not wonder philosophizes. 
Conformists do not wonder. 
Therefore conformists do not philosophize. 
7. 
Whatever is divine is supernatural. 
Whatever is supernatural can perform miracles. 
Therefore whatever is divine can perform miracles. 
Man cannot perform miracles. 
Therefore man is not divine. 
8. 
All mortal things are made of parts. 
The soul is not made of parts. 
Therefore the soul is not mortal. 
9. 
Nothing immortal is made of parts. 
Man is made of parts. 
Therefore man is not immortal. 

254 
XI. CHECKING SYLLOGISMS FOR VALIDITY 
10. 
Whatever docs not listen to reason, cannot be governed by reason. 
Falling in love does not listen to reason. 
Therefore falling in love cannot be governed by reason. 
11. 
A john is a toilet. 
No toilet is an apostle. 
Therefore John is not an apostle. 
12. 
Fools are never blessed. 
But some fools arc lucky. 
Therefore not all lucky people are blessed. 
13. All bachelors are unmarried men. 
No married woman is a bachelor. 
Therefore no married woman is an unmarried man. 
14. Constancy is confidence. 
Constancy is a virtue. 
Therefore confidence is a virtue. 
15. Foolhardiness is virtuous. 
Foolhardiness is confidence. 
Therefore some confidence is not virtuous. 
16. Some books arc sources of amusement. 
All logic books are books. 
Therefore some logic books are sources of amusement. 
17. 
Whoever intentionally kills another should die. 
Soldiers intentionally kill another. 
Therefore soldiers should die. 
18. John loves Jesus. 
Jill loves John. 
Therefore Jill loves Jesus. 
19. 
Gorillas arc nonhumans. 
Humans can speak. 
Therefore gorillas can't speak. 
Exercise B: The following syllogisms need to be translated into strict logical 
form first. All three propositions are stated but in ordinary language, as in 
"real life." Remember to identify the conclusion first, and put all three 
propositions in the syllogism into logical form. Then check for validity. 

Aristotle's six rules 
255 
1. No one philosophizes who can not wonder, and computers cannot wonder, 
therefore no computer philosophizes. 
2. "Objection 1: ft seems that mercy cannot be attributed to God, for mercy is 
a kind of sorrow, as Damascene says, but there is no sorrow in God; and 
therefore there is no mercy in Him." (St. Thomas Aquinas, ST 1,21,3) 
3. Not all syllogisms are silly, for only persons are silly, and nothing but non-
persons are syllogisms. (Hint: reword the more complex proposition, which 
is more flexible and changeable, to conform to the terms of the more simple 
propositions, which are less flexible and changeable. Remember that you 
may never change the meaning of a proposition, only the wording.) 
4. Most subjects that tend to withdraw the mind from pursuits of a low nature 
are useful. But classical learning does not do this, and therefore it is not use-
ful. 
5. Bacon was a great statesman. He was also a philosopher. We may infer from 
this that any philosopher can be a great statesman. 
6. Happiness is always desired for its own sake and never as a means to any-
thing else. Pleasure is always desired for its own sake and never as a means 
to anything else. Therefore happiness is identical with pleasure. 
7. All immoral companions should be avoided, and some immoral companions 
are intelligent persons, therefore some intelligent persons should be avoid-
ed. 
8. Apes are never angels, and philosophers are never apes, therefore philoso-
phers are never angels. 
9. Mathematics improves the reasoning powers. But logic is not mathematics. 
Therefore logic does not improve the reasoning powers. 
10. "Is a stone a body? Yes. Then is not an animal a body? Yes. Are you an ani-
mal? I think so. Therefore you are a stone, being a body." (Lucian) (There 
are two syllogisms here.) 
11. "His imbecility of character might have been inferred from his proneness to 
favorites, for all weak princes have this failing." (De Morgan) 
12. Rational beings arc responsible for their actions. Brute animals are not 
responsible. Therefore they are not rational. 
13. Any honest man admits his rival's virtues. Not every scholar does this. 
Therefore some scholars are not honest. 
14. "Since all knowledge comes from sensory impressions, and since there's no 
sensory impression of substance itself, it follows logically that there is no 
knowledge of substance." (Robert Pirsig, Zen and the Art of Motorcycle 
Maintenance, paraphrasing Hume.) 
15. "Because intense heat is nothing else but a particular kind of painful sensa-
tion; and pain cannot exist but in a perceiving being; it follows that no 
intense heat can really exist in an unperceiving corporeal substance." 
(George Berkeley, Three Dialogues between Hvlas and Philonous) 
16. "Since fighting against neighbors is an evil, and fighting against the 

256 
XI. CHECKING SYLLOGISMS FOR VALIDITY 
Thcbans is fighting against neighbors, it is clear that fighting against the 
Thebans is an evil." (Aristotle, Posterior Analytics) 
17. "Whenever I'm in trouble, I pray. And since I'm always in trouble, there is 
not a day when I don't pray." (Isaac Bashevis Singer) (Hint: you will need to 
change the wording of these three propositions, without changing their 
meaning, to put the argument into the form of a three-term syllogism.) 
18. "The after-image (idea) is not in physical space. The brain process is. So the 
after-image is not a brain-process." (J.J.C. Smart, "Sensations and Brain 
Processes " Philosophical Review 4/59) 
19. "According to Aristotle, none of the products of Nature are due to chance. 
His proof is this: That which is due to chance does not reappear constantly 
nor frequently, but all products of Nature reappear either constantly or at 
least frequently." (Moses Maimonides, Guide of the Perplexed) 
20. "No man can be a rhapsode who docs not understand the meaning of the 
poet. For the rhapsode ought to interpret the mind of the poet to his hearers, 
but how can he interpret him well unless he knows what he means?" (Plato, 
Ion) (This syllogism too needs rewording first.) 
21. "What is simple cannot be separated from itself. The soul is simple; there-
fore, it cannot be separated from itself." (Duns Scotus, Oxford Commentary) 
22. "Since morals have an influence on the actions and affections, it follows that 
they cannot be derived from reason, because reason alone, as we have 
already proved, can never have any such influence." (David Hume, A 
Treatise of Human Nature) 
23. "No man should fear death, for death is according to nature, and nothing is 
evil which is according to nature." (Marcus Aurelius) (Hint: can you get 
these four terms reworded into three without changing the meaning? Is this 
the fallacy of four terms? Is it two syllogisms?) 
24. "We define a metaphysical sentence as a sentence which purports to express 
a genuine proposition but docs, in fact, express neither a tautology nor an 
empirical hypothesis. And as tautologies and empirical hypotheses form the 
entire class of significant [meaningful] propositions, we are justified in con-
cluding that all metaphysical assertions are nonsensical [not meaningful]." 
(A.J. Ayer, Language, Truth and Logic) 
25. "You cannot recognize non-being, nor speak of it, for that which can be 
thought and that which can be are the same." (Parmenides) (Is there an 
implied premise at work here?) 
26. "Since the act of friendship is love, there are thus three kinds of friendship, 
according to the three objects of love: (1) friendship because of virtue, 
which is true and essential good, (2) friendship because of something pleas-
ing to the senses, (3) friendship because of utility." (Aquinas) 
27. "Then what are we to say about that which is holy, Euthyphro? According to 
you, is it not that which is loved by all the gods?" "Yes." "Just because it is 
holy, or for some other reason?" "No, it is just for that reason." "And so it is 

"Barbara Celarentmood 
and figure 
257 
bccause it is holy that it is loved; it is not holy because it is loved." "So it 
seems." "On the other hand, a thing is beloved and pleasing to the gods just 
because they love it." "No doubt of that." "So what is pleasing to the gods is 
not the same as what is holy, Euthyphro, nor, according to what you say, is 
the holy the same as what is pleasing to the gods. They are two different 
things." "How is that so, Socrates?" "Because we are agreed that the holy is 
loved just because it is holy, and is not holy just because it is loved. Isn't that 
so?" "Yes." "Whereas what is pleasing to the gods is pleasing to them just 
because they love it." (Plato, Euthyphro) (Hint: this is just one single syllo-
gism, with just three terms.) 
28. God must exist bccause God, by definition, lacks no perfection, and exis-
tence is a perfection. 
29. "And how do you know that you're mad?" "To begin with," said the Cat, "a 
dog's not mad. You grant that?" "I suppose so," said Alice. "Well, then," the 
Cat went on, "you see a dog growls when it's angry and wags its tail when 
it's pleased. Now I growl when I'm pleased and wag my tail when I'm angry. 
Therefore, I'm mad." (Lewis Carroll) 
30. You hear "south-west" or "south-east" but never "south-north," because that 
would be a contradiction. So south cannot be north. But if what is south can 
at the same time be west, and west can be north, it logically follows that 
south can be north. 
Section 3. "Barbara Celarent"; mood and figure 
There is no need to learn this method of checking syllogisms. It is mentioned 
here only as a historical curiosity, like the Stanley Steamer or the catapult. It is 
the clumsiest and slowest way to check syllogisms for validity. But it does work. 
The one thing that should be mastered in this section is the concept of the 
mood and Figure of a syllogism, and the simple three-letter abbreviation for the 
"mood" of each syllogism. For we need to know this in order to find the miss-
ing premise of an abbreviated syllogism, or "enthymeme" (next chapter), which 
is one of the most practically useful techniques in all of logic. 
"Barbara Celarent" is a list of valid moods for each of the four possible fig-
ures of a syllogism, in the form of a medieval list of Latin names, so that if you 
know the mood and the figure of any syllogism you simply consult the list to see 
whether the syllogism is valid. 
The mood of a syllogism is the quality and quantity of its three proposi-
tions. AAA is the mood of a "bull's eye syllogism" such as the classic "all men 
are mortal," etc. EIO is the mood of "No dinosaurs are alive, and some dinosaurs 
are bigger than elephants, therefore some things bigger than elephants are not 
alive." 
We said earlier that it was not necessary, when using Aristotle's six rules of 
the syllogism to check for validity, to obey the convention of always placing the 

258 
XI. CHECKING SYLLOGISMS FOR VALIDITY 
major premise first. But when using "Barbara Celarent" it is, for the mood of a 
syllogism is always expressed in a three-letter summary that is in this order: first 
the major premise, then the minor premise, then the conclusion. 
The figure of a syllogism is the placement of the middle term. There are 
four possibilities: the middle term can be 
(1) the subjcct of the major premise and the predicate of the minor premise 
(= the "first figure") 
(2) the predicate of both premises (= the "second figure") 
(3) the subject of both premises (= the "third figure") 
(4) the predicate of the major premise and the subject of the minor premise 
(= the "fourth figure") 
"Barbara Celarent" is a mnemonic device to remember the valid moods for 
each figure. The vowels of the names make up the mood (e.g. "Barbara" = 
AAA) and there are four lines of names for the four figures: 
Barbara, Celarent, Darn, Ferio (AAA, EAE, All, EIO) 
Camestres, Cesare, Baroko, Festino (AEE, EAE, AOO, EIO) 
Darapti, Disamis, Datisi, Felapton, Bokardo, Ferison (AAI, IAI, All, EAO, 
OAO, EIO) 
Bramantip, Camenes, Dimaris, Fesapo, Fresison (AAI, AEE, IAI, EAO, 
The medievals loved these lines, for they were a key (though a slow one) 
that opened up all valid syllogisms and locked away all invalid ones. They also 
knew and used Aristotle's six rules, but the Latin verses seemed more elegant, 
almost a magical formula or incantation. Tastes change; the laws of logic do not. 
The list of names includes other devices as well. E.g. the letter "s" after the 
vowels "E" or "I" indicates that when the E proposition can be converted sim-
ply ("s"), the syllogism is transformed, or "reduced" into one of the first figure, 
the figure which Aristotle and the medievals regarded as the most clear, simple, 
natural, and direct. There are also other details in the scheme, e.g. using the same 
initial consonant for syllogisms that can be "reduced" to each other. All this 
elaborate logical dancing was done naturally, easily, and without reference to a 
text by medieval debaters. 
M — P 
S — M 
First 
Figure 
P — M 
S — M 
Second 
Figure 
M — P 
M — S 
Third 
Figure 
P — M 
M — S 
Fourth 
Figure 
EIO) 
Section 4. Venn Diagrams 
Venn Diagrams are quite efficient in distinguishing valid and invalid syllogisms: 
however, they do not reveal the fallacy, the reason for the invalidity. Like 

Venn Diagrams 
259 
"Barbara Celarent" they are not necessary to learn, for they are superfluous; 
they do not do anything that Aristotle's six rules do not do. 
Furthermore, they presuppose and use Boole's rather than Aristotle's inter-
pretation of all universal propositions: as lacking existential import and all par-
ticular propositions as having it. This Boolean interpretation, used in all sym-
bolic logic, invalidated the Square of Opposition (see pages 179-81), and we 
gave reasons there why it is quite natural and proper to reject it. 
However, sincc Venn diagrams have become as fashionable today as 
"Barbara Celarent" was in the middle ages, we should briefly summarize them, 
as a present historical curiosity. 
First, we must learn how to symbolize A, E, I and O propositions in a total-
ly new way. As with Euler's circles, each term is diagrammed by a circle. 
However, instead of relating the terms by including or excluding the S and P cir-
cles, these circles always overlap, giving us 4 possible classes: S, P, both S and 
P, and neither S nor P. 
Shaded lines are used to designate which of the areas is not "occupied." 
Thus an A proposition, "All S is P" is interpreted to mean that there are no real 
beings that are S and not P - i.e. "No S is not P": 
An asterisk designates which of the areas is "occupied." Thus an I proposi-
tion has an asterisk in that part of S that is P: 
Note that the universal proposition is interpreted as not implying that any 

260 
XI. CHECKING SYLLOGISMS FOR VALIDITY 
S's exist (all it does is to deny that there are any S's that are not P), while the par-
ticular proposition is interpreted as implying that some S's exist (thus the aster-
isk). This is the assumption we have questioned above. 
The E proposition, "No S is P," shades out the overlapping part, to show that 
there are no S's that are also P's: 
And the O proposition has an asterisk in the part of S that is nor P (also 
implying that such S's exist): 
Now when we test a syllogism by Venn diagrams, we use one of the same 
principles as we used in Euler's circles: superimpose diagrams of the two prem-
ises on each other, and then look to see whether the conclusion necessarily fol-
lows. We do this by constructing a three-c\xc\c diagram for each syllogism (one 
circle for each term), as follows: 
Let us now diagram an AAA syllogism such as "All men are mortal, and 
Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is mortal" - or any syllogism of the form 
"All M is P, all S is M, therefore all S is P." 
We first shade out Ms that are not P, to diagram the major premise "all M 
• r>«« 
is P : 

Venn Diagrams 
26 J 
Then we add the minor premise "all S is NT by shading out all S's that arc 
not M: 
Then we look to see whether the conclusion follows, that "all S is P." All S's 
that are not P have been shaded out, so this does follow. It is valid. 
Take an EIO syllogism (a common form, the only mood which is valid in 
all four figures). 
No M is P 
Some S is M 
Therefore some S is not P 
First we write down the three rings, empty: 
Then, diagram the major premise "No M is P" by shading out all M's that 
are P: 
Then add the minor premise "Some S is M" by inserting the asterisk in S's 
M-overlapping area: 

262 
XI CHECKING SYLLOGISMS FOR VALIDITY 
And now we see that "some S is not P" necessarily follows. 
It does not matter whether we diagram the major or minor premise first, but 
we must always diagram the universal premise before the particular premise; 
otherwise, the diagram will leave some uncertainty. 
Sometimes we need to diagram uncertainties as two possibilities in Venn 
diagrams, just as in Euler s circles. Take, for instance, this syllogism: 
All P is M 
Some S is M 
Therefore some S is P 
First, write the three rings 
Then diagram the major premise, "All P is M" by shading out all P that is 
not M: 
But when we come to diagram "Some S is M," we are still uncertain where 
to put the asterisk for S. So we have to insert two of them, since there are two 
possibilities. We connect them with a dotted line to show this Oust as we use a 
dotted line for what is uncertain in Euler's circles): 
We can sec that this syllogism is not valid because we can see a possibility 
for both premises being true yet the conclusion false. 
Sometimes there is a discrepancy between Aristotle's six rules and Venn 
diagrams about whether the same syllogism is valid or invalid, because Venn 
diagrams use the Boolean interpretation of all particular propositions as 

Venn Diagrams 
263 
existential and all universal propositions as non-existential, so that under this 
assumption a particular proposition can claim more than a universal. So because 
of the basic rule (common to both Aristotelian and Boolean logic) that there may 
not be more in the conclusion than in the premises, the Venn-Boolean system 
has the opposite rule from Aristotle's system: in Aristotelian logic it is fallacious 
to derive a universal conclusion from a particular premise; in the Venn (Boolean) 
system it is fallacious to derive a particular conclusion from universal premises. 
A particular conclusion from two universal premises is not necessarily a fal-
lacy by Aristotle's rules. Take the following syllogism: 
All leprechauns are green. 
All leprechauns are clever. 
Therefore some green things are clever. 
This violates none of Aristotle's six rules because if we interpret all propo-
sitions as existentially neutral, the validity of this syllogism does not depend on 
whether leprechauns exist or not. The term "green things" in the first premise 
("all leprechauns are green") is no more nor less existential than the same term 
"green things" in the conclusion ("some green things are clever"). 
There arc three reasons we do not insist on Venn diagrams for beginners: 
our preference for the Aristotelian over the Boolean interpretation of proposi-
tions; the fact that both Aristotle's six rules and Euler's circles reveal more sim-
ply and clearly why a syllogism is fallacious; and the fact that Aristotle's rules 
(and certainly Euler's circles) are simpler and easier to use. Aristotle's six rules 
may not be easier to learn than Venn diagrams, but once learned they are easier 
and quicker to use than Venn diagrams. You will eventually be able to recognize 
violations of the six rules at a glance, even in ordinary language, without trans-
lating into strict logical form, while this is not true of Venn diagrams. 

XII. More Difficult Syllogisms 
Section 1. Enthymemes: abbreviated syllogisms (B) 
An enthymcme is a syllogism with one of its three propositions implied but not 
stated. The word "enthymcme" comes from the Greek "en-thymos" which 
means "in mind," since one of the three propositions is "kept in mind" rather 
than being explicitly stated in writing or speech. 
This is a time-saving device, an abbreviation; and we all do it all the time. 
The fact that we all use enthymemes in ordinary speech shows that we all have 
a working knowledge of the principles of syllogistic logic in our unconscious 
minds. A book like this one merely brings our unconscious knowledge to con-
sciousness, like psychoanalysis. 
"The search for the tacit premise is excellent intellectual training . . . [for] 
most arguments are enthymemes, because almost all arguments entail unex-
pressed premises or assumptions. And in this broader sense the habit of search-
ing for the tacit assumptions which are the silent determinants of one's thoughts 
takes on an extremely important aspect; it should be consciously cultivated." 
(Parker & Veatch, Logic as a Human Instrument) 
First, Second, and Third Order Enthymemes 
Enthymemes are of three types, depending on which of the three proposi-
tions is implied, or kept in mind. In "first order enthymemes" it is the major 
premise; in "second order enthymemes" it is the minor premise; and in "third 
order enthymemes" it is the conclusion. Third order enthymemes are relative-
ly rare, and usually rhetorical devices, implying "draw your own conclusion." 
For instance, "Any candidate who can't manage his own finances, can't manage 
the nation's either. And this candidate can't manage his own finances." Or, "No 
mere mortal is infallible, and I'm only a mere mortal. (So what did you 
expect?)" (It is not necessary, for practical purposes, to distinguish between First 
and second order enthymemes, just as it is not practically necessary to distin-
guish between the major and minor premise.) 
We deal with enthymemes in three steps: 

Enthymemes: abbreviated syllogisms 
265 
(1) recognition that wc have an enthymeme, 
(2) finding the missing premise, and 
(3) testing for validity. 
To do the third step is simply to repeat what we have learned in the previ-
ous chapter; for once an enthymeme has its missing premise supplied, it is sim-
ply an ordinary syllogism. 
The frst step is identical with recognizing a syllogism, even though one of 
the three propositions is missing. How do we recognize a syllogism? (1) First of 
all, we recognize the presence of an argument of some kind by the presence of 
an argument indicator (a "therefore" word or a "because" word). (2) Then, we 
recognize the presence of a syllogism by the syllogistic pattern of (a) three 
propositions and (b) three connected terms, each of which is used twice. With 
an enthymeme, we will find only (a) two propositions, not three; so (b) only one 
of the three terms will be found twice (once in each of the two propositions). 
It is much easier to learn this pattern by examples than by abstract general 
principles. So let us begin with this example: "Teenagers can't legally buy beer 
in this state because they are minors." 
The overt text contains two propositions: "Teenagers can't legally buy beer 
in this state" and "They are minors." These two propositions are joined by the 
premise indicator: "because." The two propositions have one common term: 
"teenagers" - but this becomes clear only if we translate the pronoun "they" into 
its noun, "teenagers." The pattern of an enthymeme becomes even more recog-
nizable once you translate the two propositions into logical form: 
All [teenagers] arc [minors] 
No [teenagers] are [those who can legally buy beer in this state] 
The proposition that comes after the premise indicator "because" is the 
premise, and the proposition that comes before "because" is the conclusion. We 
all understand this instinctively outside of a logic course, i.e. we understand that 
the reason why teenagers can't buy beer is because they're minors, not vice 
versa. Only in a logic course do we ever confuse premise with conclusion, and 
this happens only when we forget our instinctive common sense. 
Finding the Missing Premise 
Now we must do the remaining step, finding and supplying the missing 
premise. This is extremely important for two reasons. First, we cannot test the 
argument for validity unless all its parts arc in place. Second, there is no more 
practical skill you can learn from a logic course than this: how to smoke out an 
arguer s hidden assumptions. For that is how one arguer most often succeeds in 
persuading another: by exposing the other's hidden assumption, the assumption 
that is logically necessary for the argument to be valid. Even if A's logical analy-
sis does not persuade B to change his opinion, at least it will cause B to under-

266 
XII. MORE DIFFICULT SYLLOGISMS 
stand his own argument better, by exposing its necessary assumption. Then, 
though A and B may still disagree, their disagreement has moved to a more basic 
level, the level of the assumption. The dialogue can then focus on arguments for 
and against that assumption. In other words, deductive arguments in lived con-
versation often move "backward" from conclusion to premise rather than "for-
ward." 
Here is a seven step method for finding the missing premise. After a little 
practice, you will recognize familiar patterns and instinctively go through all 
seven steps quickly, almost simultaneously. 
(1) Be sure you have an enthymeme. Look for (a) an argument indicator 
word (premise indicator or conclusion indicator) and (b) two propositions, with 
one common term between them. In our example the argument indicator is 
"because," and the common term is "teenagers." 
(2) Identify 
the conclusion 
first. 
(It is usually stated. Third order 
enthymemes are fairly rare, and usually obvious.) In our example, the conclu-
sion is: "Teenagers can't buy beer in this state." 
(3) Put it into logical form'. "No [teenagers] are [those who can buy beer in 
this state]." 
(4) Identify the expressed premise'. "They arc minors." 
(5) Put it into logical form: "All [teenagers] arc [minors]." (Translating the 
pronoun "they" into its noun, "teenagers") 
(6) If you already have a common term, proceed to step (7). If you do not 
have an explicit common term (i.e. a word or phrase used once in each of the 
two propositions without any word change), and yet you sense that there is an 
argument here (i.e. a connection between the premise and the conclusion such 
that the premise is some sort of reason for the conclusion), then try rewording 
one of the propositions to conform to the other one, thus getting an explicit com-
mon term. The basic rule is that you may change the wording but not the mean-
ing. Here are some of the most common wording changes: 
(6a) All pronouns should be changed to the nouns they refer to. 
(6b) If you have two words or phrases that mean exactly the same thing, 
they are synonyms. Synonyms should be changed into each other. E.g. in "Holy 
people aren't gloomy; that's why Stoics aren't saints," "saints" and "holy people" 
are synonyms. 
(6c) Word order can be changed, e.g. passive voice and active voice can be 
interchanged. E.g. "I love you, therefore you cannot die" can be changed to "You 
are loved by me, therefore you cannot die," thus giving us the common term 
"you." 
(6d) Possessives can be reworded as independent nouns. E.g. "Since he's a 
doctor, his bag probably contains drugs" can be changed to "He is a doctor, 
therefore he is one whose bag probably contains drugs." 
(6e) If a short term appears alone as a complete term in one proposition and 
reappears as part of a longer term in another proposition, change the wording of 

Enthymemes: abbreviated syllogisms 
267 
that other proposition as follows: extract the short term from the longer term, 
make it the subject, and without changing its meaning, reword the rest of the 
proposition to fit into the predicate. (Predicates are flexible; subjects arc not.) 
E.g. "The man who killed Kennedy must have been a sharpshooter because 
Kennedy was moving fast" can be changed to "Kennedy must have been killed 
by a sharpshooter bccause Kennedy was moving fast." Or "Mothers who have 
more than one child in China are forced to kill their second child by abortion or 
infanticide; therefore China is a tyrannical regime" can be changed into "China 
is a place where mothers who have more than one child are forced to kill their 
second child by abortion or infanticide, therefore China is a tyrannical regime." 
(7) Once you have a common term, and the two expressed propositions are 
written out in logical form, it is fairly simple to find the missing premise: 
(7a) First, write down the mood (A, E, I, or O) of each of the two expressed 
propositions, e.g. AA or IO. 
(7b) From the mood of the two propositions that are already expressed, you 
can tell what must be the mood of the implied but unexpressed proposition has 
to be if the syllogism is not to violate rule 5 or 6 or one of the two corollaries. 
For instance, if the expressed premise is an E and the conclusion is an E, the 
implied premise must be an A. For if it were an E or an O, the syllogism would 
violate rule 5 (two negative premises), and if it were an I, the syllogism would 
violate Corollary 2 (a particular premise with a universal conclusion). 
If the expressed premise is an A and the conclusion is an A, the implied 
premise must be an A. This is the most common form of all, the "bull's eye syl-
logism." 
In our example above, the premise is an A ("all teenagers are minors") and 
the conclusion is an E ("no teenagers can legally buy beer in this state"), so the 
kept-in-mind premise must be an E. An A or an I would give us a negative con-
clusion without a negative premise (violating rule 6); an O would give us a par-
ticular premise without a particular conclusion (violating corollary 2). 
We express the mood of a syllogism by writing the mood of each proposi-
tion in order, with the conclusion last. (It is conventional to write the major 
premise first, but not necessary in practice; reversing the order of the two prem-
ises does not change anything.) 
The following list is a streamlined version of the clumsy old "Barbara 
Celarent" list of valid moods. (See page 257.) Unlike the medieval list, this one 
does not require you to take the figure of the syllogism into account at all (i.e. 
the placement of the middle term). Only the following moods are valid, all oth-
ers are invalid. The list need not be memorized; it is just an application of rules 
5 and 6 and two corollaries.) 
AAA 
AEE 
EIO 
AA1 
EAE 
IEO 
All 
AEO 
AOO 
IAI 
EAO 
OAO 

268 
XII. MORE DIFFICULT SYLLOGISMS 
And since we can reverse the order of the premises without changing any-
thing, we can omit five of the twelve above, resulting in only seven valid moods: 
AAA 
AEE 
EIO 
AAI 
AEO 
AOO 
All 
For only the following combinations of premises, in either order, can be 
valid (by rules 5 and 6): 
AA 
AE 
AI 
AO 
EI 
And the conclusion that must follow each of these five, must be as follows 
(by rules 5 and 6): 
AAA (or I) 
AEE (or O) 
All 
AOO 
EIO 
The reason for this limit, the reason all other moods of the syllogism are 
invalid, is the "no trespassing" rule: no "weakness" in the premises can cross 
over the line into the conclusion without being reflected in the conclusion. There 
are two such "weaknesses": negativity and particularity. You cannot have more 
in the conclusion (the effect) than you had in the premises (the cause). 
(7c) Now that you have the mood of the missing premise, write out the 
"empty" logical form for that mood, with brackets around the yet-to-be-supplied 
subject and predicate terms. In our example, the missing premise is an E, so the 
empty logical form is: No [ ] is [ ]. 
(7d) Next, find the fuo terms that are to be joined in this missing premise. 
They are the two terms that have been used only once. One of them will be the 
middle term, which you can identify at a glance by the fact that it is the only 
term not in the conclusion. In our example, the two terms to be joined in the 
missing premise are "minors" and "those who can legally buy beer in this state." 
(7e) Once you have the two terms, the only decision remaining is which of 
these two terms will be the subject and which the predicate. Try both arrange-
ments, and if one of them gives you a fallacy, drop it and use the other. 
Do not think: I will use whatever order of terms gives me a true premise; 
for there can be dispute about what is true, but there is no question about what 
is fallacious. You want to supply whatever missing premise will make the syllo-
gism valid. For even if you are arguing against an opponent, you want to be fair 

Enthymemes: abbreviated syllogisms 
269 
to him and not saddle him with a fallacy he did not explicitly commit. Give him 
the benefit of the doubt. 
If the missing premise is an E or an I, it does not matter which order the 
terms come in, since both the E and the I proposition can be converted. 
Let's take another example: 
"Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth." (Matthew 5:2) 
First, we determine that we have an argument. We do this both by intuition, 
or common sense, and by observing the presence of an argument indicator, the 
word "for." 
Next, wc identify the conclusion. 
This can be done in two ways: by common sense and by looking at the clue, 
the argument indicator. 
Common sense tells us that the speaker is trying to get across the conclu-
sion that the meek are blessed, and that his reason for this rather strange and con-
troversial conclusion is that they will inherit the earth. That is what makes them 
blessed: that is why they are blessed. If this point does not immediately register 
on your logical intuition, go to the argument indicator. (Go to it anyway, to check 
your intuition.) 
The word "for" is a premise indicator: it points to a premise, introduces a 
premise; a premise comes after it. So the conclusion must come before it. So the 
conclusion is: "blessed are the meek." The remaining proposition must be a 
premise: "they shall inherit the earth." 
(Remember, every argument indicator indicates two propositions: a con-
clusion indicator indicates not only a conclusion after it but also a premise 
before it, and a premise indicator indicates not only a premise after it but also a 
conclusion before it.) 
We have, now, an enthymeme with one premise expressed, one premise 
implied, and the conclusion expressed. 
Now we translate the two expressed propositions into logical form. 
Take the conclusion first. "Blessed are the meek." We have here a reversed 
word order, with the predicate first. For the subject of a proposition is what you 
are talking about and the predicate is what you say about it. The speaker is not 
saying: "I am going to tell you something about blessed. That is my sermon 
topic. And what I will say about it is that it is, or are, the meek" That simply 
makes no sense. Rather, he is talking about the meek and saying that they are 
blessed. The meek are blessed: that is the point. He uses reversed word order for 
poetic or rhetorical purposes. 
Clearly the proposition is affirmative. But is it universal or particular? Is he 
saying that some of the meek are blessed or that all are? Neither "some" nor 
"all" is used, but "all" is implied. Why? Because it is a general and unqualified 
statement. Also, because the statement implies that the meek are blessed simply 
by being meek, simply because they are meek. So if the meek are blessed 

270 
XII. MORE DIFFICULT SYLLOGISMS 
bccause they are meek, then all the meek are blessed since all the meek are 
meek. 
Thus we have our conclusion, in logical form: "All [the meek] are [those 
who are blessed]." 
"Blessed" is an adjective, and cannot stand alone as a subject, so we add the 
words "those who are," changing the wording without changing the meaning. 
Remember, in logical form, each term must be able to stand alone as a subject 
or a predicate, so each term must be a noun or noun phrase, since only a noun 
or noun phrase can be a subject. There will be quite a few occasions where you 
will have to take the predicate term and put it into the subject position when you 
supply the missing premise; this is the main reason why logical form requires all 
noun terms. 
Now look at the expressed premise: "They shall inherit the earth." 
First, we change the pronoun to its noun, to get a common term. Who are 
"they"? The meek, of course, the subjects that the speaker is speaking about. 
This proposition is affirmative, obviously, but is it an A or an I? Will all the 
meek, will the meek as such, inherit the earth? Will the meek inherit the earth 
because they are meek, and thus all of them will inherit the earth? That is clear-
ly what is implied. It is an unqualified alTrmation. So it is an A, just as the con-
clusion is. 
Next, we need to change the predicate ("shall inherit the earth") to a noun 
phrase ("those who shall inherit the earth") 
Now we have the expressed premise in logical form: "All [the meek] are 
[those who shall inherit the earth]." 
We have a common term between the two expressed propositions. It is "the 
meek." So we do not have the problem of finding or making a common term. 
The next step is to write down the logical form the missing premise has to 
have. Is it A, E. I, or O? Since both of the two expressed premises are A, the 
missing premise will have to be A to avoid violating rule 5 or 6. So it will be the 
most typical form of syllogism, AAA, a "bull's eye syllogism." So we write out 
the logical form for the implied A: "all [ ] are [ ] " 
Now wc need to find the two terms. How? Look at the terms in the two 
propositions we have already written out in logical form. Remember the struc-
ture of a syllogism: Each term must be used twice. And "the meek" has already 
been used twice, while "those who are blessed" and "those who shall inherit the 
earth" have both been used only once. So each of these two terms must be used 
one more time, by being joined in the missing premise. 
Next, we need to find what order to put them in. There are two possibilities: 
"All [those who shall inherit the earth] are [those who are blessed]," or "All 
[those who are blessed] are [those who shall inherit the earth]." Which is it? 
Common sense might click in at this point and tell us the answer; but sup-
pose it docs not. In that case, let us try both possibilities, and see which one 
gives us a valid syllogism. 

Enthymemes: abbreviated syllogisms 
271 
If we try as our missing premise "all [those who shall inherit the earth] are 
[those who are blessed]," wc have the following syllogism: 
All [those who shall inherit the earth] are [those who are blessed] 
And all [the meek] are [those who shall inherit the earth] 
Therefore all [the meek] arc [those who are blessed]. 
This is a perfect bull's eye syllogism, and valid. But if we had used the other 
possibility for our missing premise, namely "All [those who are blessed] are 
[those who shall inherit the earth]," we would have had: 
All [those who are blessed] are [those who shall inherit the earth] 
All [the meek] are [those who shall inherit the earth] 
Therefore all [the meek] are [those who are blessed] 
And this gives us Undistributed Middle. 
Now there is absolutely no reason to saddle the speaker with this missing 
premise ("all the blessed shall inherit the earth"), which would make his argu-
ment fallacious, since he did not commit himself to this premise. Clearly, he is 
implying the other premise, the one that would make his argument valid. So that 
is the missing premise ("all who shall inherit the earth are blessed"). 
Remember, if you want to criticize another person's enthymeme, it is not 
fair to saddle him with a premise that would make his argument invalid if there 
is another premise that would not. Even if you think the premise that makes his 
argument invalid is true, and the premise that makes his argument valid is false, 
not everyone will agree as to which propositions are true and which are false, 
but everyone will agree as to which arguments are valid and which are invalid. 
After showing that he needs such-and-such a premise to make his argument 
valid, then and only then is it the time to argue that this necessary missing prem-
ise is in fact false. 
Exercises on enthymemes: Put each of the following enthymemes into logical 
form, including the missing proposition. (It will usually be a missing prem-
ise, but it could be the conclusion that is missing and implied.) Identify the 
missing proposition with an arrow, or by enclosing it in an oval, like a car-
toon "balloon" surrounding a character's thoughts. Then check the syllogism 
for validity. (NB: There are more exercises on enthymemes than on anything 
else in this book because enthymemes are the most frequent form of argu-
ment found in ordinary conversation. In fact, that very sentence was an 
enthymeme! Can you put it into logical form?) 
1. "Rational beings are accountable for their actions; irrational brutes are 
therefore exempt from this responsibility." 
2. "Love makes the world go round so that means it doesn't make it go flat." 
3. (E) "Love is a virtue, therefore hate is not." 
4. (E) "Love is an act of will, therefore it is not an emotion." 

272 
XII. MORE DIFFICULT SYLLOGISMS 
5. (E) "Everything is changeable, therefore nothing is necessary." 
6. "No one can move mountains; mountains have no wheels." 
7. "Only the brave deserve the fair. Therefore you are not brave." 
8. "Only the brave deserve the fair, and you're not brave." 
9. "Logic stinks." "Why?" "Because 1 hate it, that's why." 
10. "Dinosaurs cannot have been warm-blooded animals because they did not 
have enough food to fill the needs of such an animal." 
11. (E) "All treaty violations are dangerous to peace, for all things dangerous to 
peace are potential causes of war." 
12. "Marxists have always been social radicals, since their views were always 
incompatible with those of the existing societies which they wanted to over-
throw." 
13. "You're allowed to visit the battleship on holidays, so you can see it today." 
14. "Every conclusion of Bull's Equation will always be a null set, because no 
matter how exhaustively you search, in history or in books or in your expe-
rience or in your own imagination, you will never find a null set that is a 
Bull-friendly set." 
15. "Not all is gold that glitters, for tin glitters sometimes." 
16. "Bub must be the quarterback because the center is hiking the ball to him." 
17. "Shooting a pheasant is properly pleasant, since a pheasant is pleasingly 
plump." 
18. "God loves me, so 1 guess I ain't junk." 
19. "Extra-mental existence is a conceivable perfection. Therefore God must 
have extra-mental existence." 
20. "How could it be right to restrict abortion? Any restriction on a woman's 
right to control her own body is wrong." 
21. (E) "He was not burned, therefore he did not play with fire." 
22. "Not all the rich are happy. Many commit suicide." 
23. (E) "Corporations cannot be outlawed, since they have no souls." 
24. "How could you believe God gave the Jews the Ten Commandments?" 
"Why not?" "Because Moses gave them." 
25. "You bug me." "Why?" "Because I hate your dog." 
26. "All conifers are trees, therefore all pines are conifers." 
27. "God does not exist because you can't find Him in a test tube." 
28. "Not all snakes slither, since there are a lot of green things that don't slith-
er." 
29. "Heaven is not in Boston because Fenway Park is in Boston." 
30. (H) "I can personally guarantee that St. Thomas loved God because for the 
life of me I cannot help loving St. Thomas." (Flannery O'Connor) 
31. (H) "Good sense is of all things in the world the most equally distributed, for 
everybody thinks himself so abundantly provided with it that even those 
most difficult to please in all other matters do not commonly desire more of 
it than they already possess." (Descartes, Discourse on Method 1,1) 

Enthymemes: abbreviated syllogisms 
273 
32. "Forbear to judge, for we are sinners all." (Shakespeare, Henry VI, Part II, 
111,3) 
33. (H) "The criminal law forbids suicide . . . the prohibition is ridiculous, for 
what penalty can frighten a person who is not afraid of death itself?" 
(Schopenhauer, "On Suicide") 
34. "Wisdom is the principal thing; therefore get wisdom." (Proverbs 4:7) 
35. "He who disobeys us is, as we maintain, thrice wrong: first because in dis-
obeying us he is disobeying his parents; secondly, because we arc the 
authors of his education; thirdly, because he has made an agreement with us 
that he will duly obey our commands." (Plato, Crito, imagining the laws of 
the state arguing for themselves) 
36. (H) "One may be subject to laws made by another, but it is impossible to 
bind oneself in any matter which is the subject of one's own free exercise of 
will. . . . It follows of necessity that the king cannot be subject to his own 
laws." (Jean Bodin, Six Books of the Commonwealth (1576)) (Hint: take 
"matters which are the subject of one's own free exercise of will" as the sub-
ject of a premise and reword the argument accordingly.) 
37. (H) "Our ideas reach no farther than our experience. We have no experience 
of divine attributes. I need not conclude my syllogism; you can draw the 
inference yourself." (David Hume, Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion) 
38. "As a matter of fact, man, like woman, is flesh, therefore passive, the play-
thing of his hormones and of the species, the restless prey of his desires." 
(Simone De Beauvoir, The Second Set) 
39. (H) "Although these textbooks purport to be a universal guide to learning of 
great worth and importance, there is a single clue that points to another 
direction. In the six years I taught in city and country schools, no one ever 
stole a textbook." (W. Ron Jones, Changing Education) 
40. "He would not take the crown. Therefore 'tis certain he was not ambitious." 
(Shakespeare, Julius Caesar. 111,2) 
41. "We possess some immaterial knowledge. No sense knowledge, however, 
can be immaterial. Therefore, etc." (Duns Scotus, Oxford Commentary on 
the Sentences) 
42. "A nation without a conscience is a nation without a soul. A nation without 
a soul is a nation that cannot live." (Winston Churchill) 
43. (H) "The man who says that all things comc to pass by necessity cannot crit-
icize one who denies that all things come to pass by necessity, for he admits 
that this too happens of necessity." (Epicurus, Fragment 40) 
44. (H) "We can explain nothing but what we can reduce to laws whose object 
can be given in some possible experience. But freedom is a mere idea, the 
objective reality of which can in no way be shown according to natural laws 
or in any possible experience." (Kant) 
45. (H) "Since no man has a natural authority over his fellow . . . we must con-
clude that conventions form the basis of all legitimate authority among 

274 
XII. MORE DIFFICULT SYLLOGISMS 
men." (Rousseau) (Hint: this enthymeme is most easily expressed in a dis-
junctive syllogism, a form you have not yet learned. But it is quite simple 
and commonsensical. Try "all authority is either natural or conventional" as 
the missing premise.) 
46. "Since evil occurs, God must be willing that it should occur." (William P. 
Montague) 
47. (E) "Because you have done this, cursed are you." (Genesis 3:14) 
48. "I will fear no evil, for thou art with me" (Psalm 23) 
49. "An electron, when studied, had an electric charge. It has mass. It had an 
angular momentum. It had a magnetic moment. It had position and veloci-
ty. And these things seemed to justify the designation of it by the term 'par-
ticle.'" (W.V. Houston) 
50. (H) When asked whether the Vatican should be invited to an international 
conference, Stalin replied, "How many legions does the Pope have?" 
Construe this as an argument by interpreting Stalin's question as a "rhetori-
cal question," i.e. a declarative sentence (and therefore a proposition) 
masked in an interrogative form. 
51. (H) "For an idea to be fashionable is ominous, since it must afterwards be 
always old-fashioned." (George Santayana) 
52. (H) "Art indeed copies life in not copying life, for life copies nothing." (G.K. 
Chesterton) (Warning: this one will need some creative but faithful reword-
ing. Give it two or three tries before looking up the answer; the effort will 
make you feel good afterwards, whether you get it right or not.) 
53. "The most sentimental thing in the world is to hide your feelings; it is mak-
ing too much of them." (G.K. Chesterton) [Hint: what is the subject, or 
topic, of the first proposition?] 
54. "Of the two sexes the woman is in the more powerful position. For the aver-
age woman is at the head of something with which she can do as she likes; 
the average man has to obey orders." (G.K. Chesterton) 
55. (H) "It is idle to talk of the alternative of reason and faith. Reason itself is a 
matter of faith. It is an act of faith to assert that our thoughts have any rela-
tion to reality at all." (G.K. Chesterton) 
56. "What things may be in themselves, I know not, because a thing is never pre-
sented to me otherwise than as a phenomenon." (Kant) 
57. "Love looks not with the eyes but with the mind,/ And therefore is wing'd 
Cupid painted blind" (Shakespeare, A Midsummer Night's Dream, 1,1) 
58. (E) "Metaphysical propositions are neither true nor false because they assert 
nothing." (Rudolf Carnap) 
59. "Definitions cannot, by their very nature, be cither true or false, only more 
useful or less so. For this reason it makes relatively little sense to argue over 
definitions." (Peter Berger, The Sacred Canopy) It is a good exercise to 
argue for a little while about whether Berger is right here; cf. page 127.) 
60. (H) "The materials of nature (air, earth, water) that remain untouched by 

Sorites: chain syllogisms 
275 
human effort belong to no one and are not property. It follows that a thing 
can become someone's property only if he works and labors on it to change 
its natural state." (Locke, Of Property) 
61. "The fact that any individual's scientific activities are socially conditioned 
entails that science cannot achieve objectivity." (Richard Rudner, 
Philosophy of Social Science) 
62. "Be glad of life because it gives you the chance to love and to work and to 
play and to look up at the stars." (Henry Van Dyke) 
63. "Spinoza argued that since God is the only thing that is ultimately real, the 
soul could be nothing else than a mode of God." (S.E. Frost, The Basic 
Teachings of the Great Philosophers) 
64. (H) "Thou hast made us for Thyself, and [therefore] our hearts are restless 
until they rest in Thee." (St. Augustine, Confessions 1, 1) 
65. (E) "A machine can handle information. It can calculate, conclude, and 
choosc. It can perform reasonable operations with information. A machine, 
therefore, can think." (Edmund C. Berkeley) 
66. "Man is the only animal that laughs and weeps, for he is the only animal that 
is struck by the difference between what things are and what things ought to 
be." (William Hazlitt) Also identify what kind of "because" this is: argument 
or explanation? Which of the four causes? 
67. "The value of any commodity to the person who wants to exchange it for 
other commodities is equal to the quantity of labor which it enables him to 
purchase or command. Labor, therefore, is the real measure of the exchange-
able value of all commodities." (Adam Smith) 
68. "The good is not the same as the pleasant, my friend, nor is the evil the same 
as the painful. For we cease from the one pair at the same time, but not from 
the other." (Plato, Gorgias) (Hint: make "good and evil" one term and "plea-
sure and pain" a second.) 
69. "Only man has dignity; only man, therefore, can be funny." (Ronald Knox) 
70. "God must have loved the plain people; He made so many of them." 
(Abraham Lincoln) 
71. (H) "Whatsoever we imagine is finite. Therefore there is no idea or concep-
tion of anything we call infinite." (Thomas Hobbes) 
Section 2. Sorites: chain syllogisms 
In ordinary conversation we often string syllogisms together to make longer 
arguments. The two most common forms of these strings of syllogisms are 
sorites and epicheiremas. The latter arc both more difficult and more common, 
so wc shall take the easier and less common form first. 
A sorites (sore-eye-tees) is a polysyllogism, i.e. a multiple syllogism, two or 
more syllogisms in direct scries. E.g., 

276 
XII. MORE DIFFICULT SYLLOGISMS 
Moby Dick is a whale. 
All whales are mammals. 
All mammals sleep. 
Therefore Moby Dick sleeps. 
A sorites is a single argument in some kind of syllogistic form, yet it has 
more than three terms without therefore being invalid. It is really an abbreviat-
ed multiple syllogism. E.g. the above is an abbreviated form of: 
Moby Dick is a whale. 
And all whales are mammals. 
Therefore Moby Dick is a mammal. 
Moby Dick is a mammal. 
And all mammals sleep. 
Therefore Moby Dick sleeps. 
The only difference between the first and second versions above is that the 
first version omits a step, viz. the conclusion of the first syllogism in the two-
syllogism version: "Moby Dick is a mammal." 
A sorites may be only two syllogisms together, as in the above example, or 
more than two, up to any number. E.g. "all A is B and all B is C and all C is D 
and all D is E and all E is F therefore all A is F." For instance, "suffering produces 
endurance, and endurance produces character, and character produces hope, and 
hope does not disappoint us" (Romans 5:3-5). We can translate this into: 
All who suffer, endure. 
All who endure, develop character. 
All who develop character, have hope. 
All who have hope will not be disappointed. 
Therefore all who suffer, will not be disappointed. 
The final conclusion is implied in the quotation, as in a third order 
enthymcmc. St. Paul seemed to be attached to this kind of sorites. There is anoth-
er one in Romans 8:29-30. (Look it up. If you don't have a Bible, steal one.) 

Sorites: chain syllogisms 
277 
A sorites can be diagrammed most simply by Euler's circles. It is a waste of 
;ime to break a sorites down into separate syllogisms and test each one by the 
six rules. 
There are two kinds of sorites, affirmative and negative. The affirmative 
form (called an "Aristotelian sorites") is simply a "bull's eye syllogism" with 
more than two circles around the "bull's eye," so to speak, as in the previous 
example. (The negative form is at the bottom of page 278.) 
Most sorites are affirmative. Even when they are long, they are simple 
"bull's eye syllogisms." The long ones simply put more circles around the bull's 
eye. E.g.: 
He who drinks, gets drunk. 
He who gets drunk, sleeps. 
He who sleeps, does not sin. 
He who does not sin, goes to Heaven. 
Therefore he who drinks, goes to Heaven. 
Obviously there is some ambiguity operating in the terms here. (Where? 
Find it.) But formally the argument is valid and looks like this in Euler's circles: 
Sometimes the terms need a little rewording to go into logical form. E.g.: 
"Since happiness consists in peace of mind, and since durable peace of mind 
depends on the confidence we have in the future, and since that confidence is 
based on the science we should have of the nature of God and the soul, it fol-
lows that that science is necessary for true happiness" (Leibniz). Putting the 
propositions into more logical form, this becomes: 
(1) All happiness is peace of mind 
(2) All peace of mind depends on the confidence we have in the future 
(3) Whatever depends on the confidence wc have in the future, depends on that 
which is based on the science of God and the soul 
(4) Therefore all happiness depends on that which is based on the science of 
God and the soul. 

278 
XII. MORE DIFFICULT SYLLOGISMS 
When a sorites gets this long, it is a useful and time-saving device to abbre-
viate the terms when drawing the Euler diagram. (However, be sure the terms 
are exactly worded first, before using the abbreviations, for most mistakes in 
sorites come from the fallacy of four terms during one of the steps, stemming 
from sloppy use of terminology.) 
(1) All happiness (H) is peace of mind (P) 
(2) All peace of mind (P) depends on the confidence we have in the future (DCF) 
(3) Whatever depends on the confidence we have in the future (DCF), depends 
on that which is based on the science of God and the soul (DBSGS) 
(4) Therefore all happiness (H) depends on that which is based on the science of 
God and the soul (DBSGS) 
Here is another, even longer sorites from Leibniz. To save time and space, 
we add abbreviations for the terms as wc go along. "The human soul (A) is a 
thing whose activity is thinking (B). A thing whose activity is thinking (B) is one 
whose activity is immediately apprehended and without any representation of 
parts therein (C). A thing whose activity is immediately apprehended without 
any representation of parts therein (C) is a thing whose activity does not contain 
parts (D). A thing whose activity does not contain parts (D) is one whose activ-
ity is not motion (E). A thing whose activity is not motion (E) is not a body (F). 
What is not a body (F) is not in space (G). What is not in space (G) is insuscep-
tible of motion (H). What is insusceptible of motion (H) is indissoluble (I) (for 
dissolution is a movement of parts). What is indissoluble (I) is incorruptible (J). 
What is incorruptible (J) is immortal (K). Therefore the human soul (A) is 
immortal (K)" (from H.W.B. Joseph's An Introduction to Logic). 
Though large, the Euler circle diagram for this is as simple as the last two. 
The negative sorites (called the "Goclenian sorites") has only one negative 
premise, which is always placed last in the argument, for the sake of clarity. 
Socratcs is a man. 
And all men are mortal. 

Epicheiremas: 
multiple syllogisms 
279 
Rarely do we find a fallacious sorites, since they come in only these two 
clearly valid forms. This is another reason for not wasting time using the six 
rules or Venn diagrams on them. The main difficulty with a sorites is usually 
translating it from ordinary language into logical form. 
And no gods are mortals. 
Therefore Socrates is not a god. 
It would not be fallacious 
to place the negative premise first, but it would 
be more confusing and hard to follow, therefore it is rare. One could, however, 
argue this way, e.g.: "No gods are mortal, and all men are mortal, and Socrates 
is a man, therefore Socrates is not a god" and the Euler diagram would be the 
same. 
Section 3. Epicheiremas: multiple syllogisms (B) 
An epicheircma is a syllogism with an enthymeme attached to one or both of its 
premises to justify those premises. Like a sorites, it is a chain syllogism; but 
unlike a sorites, it is not a direct progression of circles in a Euler diagram, so it 
must be checked by using the six rules on each of its constituent syllogisms. 
For instance, "Minds do not take up space, since they are not composed of 
particles of any size. Therefore they cannot be confined in prisons." 
The final conclusion is that "they (minds) cannot be confined in prisons," 
and the (expressed) premise that justifies this conclusion is that "minds do not 
take up space." So the main syllogism is an enthymeme with the implied prem-
ise "whatever does not take up space cannot be confined in prisons." 
All minds are things that do not take up space, (expressed premise) 
All things that do not take up space are things that cannot be confined in 
prisons, (implied premise) 
Therefore all minds are things that cannot be confined in prisons. 

280 
XII. MORE DIFFICULT SYLLOGISMS 
Or: 
No minds are things that take up space, (expressed premise) 
All things that can be confined in prisons are things that take up space, 
(implied premise) 
Therefore no minds arc things that can be confined in prisons. 
(When there is a choice like this, it is usually easier to reword the proposi-
tions so that you have negative terms and affirmative propositions rather than 
affirmative terms and negative propositions. Most syllogisms can be reworded 
into the AAA "bull's eye" format.) 
However, the argument is not just a single syllogism but an epicheirema 
because it adds another proposition, "they are not composed of particles of any 
size," and connects that proposition to the proposition "minds do not take up 
space" by a premise indicator, "since." This creates another enthymemc on top 
of the first one, and this is called an epicheirema, after the Greek preposition 
"epi," "on top of." (Epicheiremas can be made up of either enthymemes or full 
syllogisms.) 
Minds are not composed of particles of any size (expressed premise of syl-
logism # 1) 
Whatever is not composed of particles of any size does not take up space 
(implied premise of U\) 
Therefore minds do not take up space (conclusion of syllogism U1 and 
expressed premise of #2) 
What does not take up space cannot be confined in prisons (expressed prem-
ise of #2) 
Therefore minds cannot be confined in prisons (conclusion of #2, final con-
clusion) 
Sometimes both premises of the last syllogism arc expressed and reasons 
are added to both premises, as in the following: "Love is a virtue, because it is 
a deliberate choice. But compassion is not a virtue, because it is a spontaneous 
feeling. Therefore compassion is not love." 
Whatever is a deliberate choice is a virtue, (implied premise of enthymemc 
#1) 
Love is a deliberate choice, (expressed premise of cnthymeme #1) 
Therefore love is a virtue, (conclusion of cnthymeme # 1 and expressed 
major premise of main syllogism) 
Whatever is a spontaneous feeling is not a virtue, (implied premise of 
cnthymeme #2) 
Compassion is a spontaneous feeling, (expressed premise of cnthymeme #2) 

Epicheiremas: 
multiple syllogisms 
281 
Therefore compassion is not a virtue, (conclusion of enthymeme #2 and 
expressed minor premise of main syllogism) 
Main syllogism: 
Love is a virtue, (conclusion of enthymeme #1 and expressed major premise 
of main syllogism) 
Compassion is not a virtue, (conclusion of enthymeme tt2 and expressed 
minor premise of main syllogism) 
Therefore compassion is not love, (conclusion of main syllogism) 
Argument maps are often very useful for making clear the "strategy" and 
order of the propositions in long epichciremas like this. (See next section.) 
Take one more epichcirema, which is more complex because it requires 
some rewording to get it into logical form with the proper number of terms: 
"Truth must necessarily be stranger than fiction, for fiction is the creature of 
the human mind and therefore congenial to it." (G.K. Chesterton) 
It should be clcar that the first proposition is the conclusion, since the prem-
ise indicator "for" comes after it. 
However, there is a "therefore" near the end of the quotation, which may 
lead you to think (mistakenly) that what follows this "therefore" is not just a pre-
liminary conclusion but the final conclusion. We have two conclusions: the one 
before "for" (remember, premise indicators always reveal conclusions, which 
come before them, as well as premises, which come after them) and the one after 
"therefore." How do wc tell which is the final conclusion? By intuitively under-
standing the point and content of the argument, and also by the form: one for-
mal clue is the fact that what follows "for" is another whole syllogism, in the 
form of an epichcirema, thus indicating that this syllogism is the reason attached 
on top of the premise of the main syllogism. 
Thus: 
Fiction is the creature of the human mind. 
Whatever is the crcature of the human mind is congenial to the human mind. 
Therefore fiction is congenial to the human mind. 
But truth is not congenial to the human mind. 
Therefore truth is not fiction. 
What is not fiction is stranger than fiction. 
Therefore truth is stranger than fiction. 
The best way to find your way through the complex jungle of propositions 

282 
XII. MORE DIFFICULT SYLLOGISMS 
in longer arguments such as multiple epicheiremas is by first making argument 
maps, which function like road maps. To this topic we next turn. 
Exercises on cpicheiremas: Put each of the following epichciremas into logical 
form. Supply and circle the missing, implied proposition for each cnthymeme. 
Then check each syllogism for validity. 
1. Mere matter cannot think, since it is the objcct of thinking. But we think, 
since we are thinking about thinking. Therefore we arc not mere matter. 
2. Not all snakes bite. For there are many reptiles that don't bite. For some 
lizards don't bite, and lizards are reptiles. 
3. Courage is a virtue because it is a good habit. But foolhardiness is not a 
good habit. Therefore it is not a virtue. 
4. She loves me because she laughed at my bad puns. Therefore my life is 
meaningful. 
5. No one will ever solve the problem of evil because it's a mystery rather than 
just a problem. And the reason it's a mystery is that we're so involved in it 
that we can't be objective about it. 
6. Angels do not occupy space since they are pure spirits and thus not com-
posed of atoms. Therefore you can't confine angels in prisons. 
7. No rabbit is safe, since foxes and wolves hunt them. But some Easter bun-
nies are safe, since they're inedible. Therefore not all Easter bunnies are rab-
bits. 
Section 4. Complex argument m a p s 
Arguments in practice are often long and complex, consisting of more than one 
or two syllogisms. Even the relatively simple, short, and straightforward patterns 
of enthymemes, sorites, and epicheiremas that we have just studied do not come 
close to exhausting the possible patterns of argument. So we need a kind of log-
ical road map for longer and more complex arguments, to see the overall strate-
gy of the argument, to break it down into those smaller arguments that arc its 
parts and to see how those parts are related to each other. Only then will we be 
in a position to evaluate each smaller argument one by one. 
Here arc the three steps in mapping a long argument. 
(1) First, read it through slowly and carefully. This is the step that you will 
be tempted to overlook or to take for granted or to do too quickly. But this is the 
opportunity to use your strongest logical weapon, your innate logical intuition, 
your ability to "see" what the point is, what the final, basic conclusion is, and 
what the argument is that supports it, and why it seems strong. Everyone has this 
innate, intuitive ability; that is the only reason logic textbooks and courses are 
possible - just as the fact that everyone has a moral consciencc is the only rea-
son moral systems, commandments, and ideals are possible. 

Complex argument maps 
283 
When you read over the passage, do it slowly and patiently. This will actu-
ally save you time in the long run. 
You are reading the argument for its logic, so you must ignore your feelings 
of agreement or disagreement, of interest or boredom, of attraction or repulsion. 
You need to find the formal logical structure. 
Perhaps the most common cause of misunderstandings and of our inability 
to see eye to eye with each other is our hurry to evaluate before we receive, to 
talk back before listening. Premature criticism is always unfair criticism; anoth-
er word for it is "prejudice," which means "premature judgment." 
(2) Step two is to break the argument down into its steps. To do this, a good 
visual method is to mark the original text of the argument as follows: 
(a) Identify each proposition that seems to be part of the argument by under-
lining it and putting a number before it. 
(b) Circle each premise indicator or conclusion indicator. (Do not worry 
about rewording the propositions to get common terms yet. Our first task is to 
find the propositions and their logical relation to each other.) 
(c) Now copy the propositions (or their numbers) onto a logical map, with 
arrows leading from premises to conclusions. Wc now have an overview of the 
strategy of the argument, so to speak. 
The strategy will be cumulative, linear, or both. A cumulative argument will 
have many separate arguments (usually enthymemes) all leading to the same con-
clusion. (E.g. page 208.) A linear argument will be a multi-layered epicheirema 
(these will also usually be enthymemes), with premises attached to premises, and 
further conclusions following from conclusions. (E.g. page 284.) 
(3) Only now are you in a position to evaluate the overall argument by eval-
uating each smaller argument that makes it up. Because you have the logical 
map, you may not need to take the time to do a three-step evaluation of every 
single argument step, checking for ambiguous terms, false premises, and falla-
cies. Rather, if you doubt the conclusion, the logical map will make it easier and 
clearer for you to spot where you think the overall argument's weakness is. It 
will usually be a premise that can be disputed; but the premise will often be the 
hidden and implied premise of an enthymeme, so you will have to write out each 
enthymeme, including the missing (implied) premises. 
All arguments can be put into argument maps, no matter what rules apply 
in evaluating their validity. There are still three forms of deductive argument 
which we have not covered: hypothetical, disjunctive, and conjunctive syllo-
gisms, i.e. syllogisms that begin with an " i f . . . then . . " premise, an "either . . 
. o r . . p r e m i s e , or a "both . .. and . . o r "not both . .. and . . . " premise. The 
rules for these syllogisms are different from those for simple ("categorical") syl-
logisms; but even without having studied these rules, you can do argument maps 
for these syllogisms just as for categorical syllogisms. 
Take the following example, from Plato's Republic. (We identify the propo-
sitions by number, as suggested above.) 

284 
XII. MORE DIFFICULT SYLLOGISMS 
(1) "A bad soul must rule badly, but a good soul well." 
"Yes, it must be so." 
(2) "Now did we not agree that a bad soul is an unjust soul and a good soul a 
just soul?" 
"We did." 
(3) "Then the just soul must rule well and the unjust soul badly." 
"So it seems by your reasoning." 
(4) "But further, one who rules well is blessed or happy, and one who does not 
is miserable." 
"Of course." 
(5) "Then the just soul is happy and the unjust miserable." 
"Let it be so." 
(6) "But to be miserable is not profitable, and to be happy is." 
"Of course." 
(7) "Then, O Thrasymachus, blessed among men, the just is always profitable 
and the unjust unprofitable." 
Here we have a rather simple, though long, argument. What makes it sim-
ple is two things: it is linear, and it consists in complete syllogisms rather than 
enthymemes. 
Let's write out the argument map for this argument in full verbal form. It is 
two cxactly parallel arguments, one about injustice and the other about justice. 
We write out only the half about injustice: you can easily do the other half: 
( I ) 
All bad souls rule badly. 
(2) 
All bad souls are unjust souls. 
(3) 
All unjust souls rule badly 
(4) All who rule badly arc miserable. 
(5) 
All unjust souls are miserable. 
(6) Nothing miserable is profitable 
(7) 
No unjust souls are profitable. 
When we put this argument into logical form, the thing that may make it 
confusing is that two arguments are going on at once: one about the just being 
profitable and the other about the unjust being unprofitable. It is difficult to put 
both parts of the argument (the one about justice and the other about injustice) 
into each proposition. But it is easy to make two overall arguments out of it, one 
about justice and the other about injustice. 
Here is a somewhat more difficult long argument to map. It is St. Thomas 
Aquinas *s restatement of the most argued-about argument in the entire history of 
philosophy, St. Anselm's famous "ontological argument," which attempts to 
prove that God must exist, in fact that "God exists" is a self-evident proposition. 
Once again, we number the propositions. The logical connector words are our 
clues. 

Complex argument maps 
285 
"(1) Those propositions are self-evident which are known to be true as soon 
as their terms are understood. (2) But as soon as the terms 'God' and 'exists' are 
understood, the proposition 4God exists* is known to be true. For (3) 'God* 
means 'that than which nothing greater can be conceived'; and (4) that which 
exists only mentally but not actually is not that 
than which nothing greater can be conceived, 
because (5) that which exists both mentally 
and actually is greater than that which exists 
only mentally. Therefore (6) God does not 
exist only mentally, but actually. Thus (7) the 
proposition 'God exists' is known to be true as 
soon as its terms are understood. (8) It is there-
fore a self-evident proposition." 
Each arrow on the map - that is, each syl-
logism - in this argument still must be put into 
logical form. But the argument map aids that 
process, for it tells you what propositions 
make up the premises and conclusions of each 
argument, and whether each syllogism is a 
simple syllogism, an epicheirema, or an 
enthymeme. For if two connected, "married" 
arrows lead to it, it is a simple syllogism rather 
than an enthymeme, since the two horizontal arrows symbolize its two premis-
es, showing that it does not have any missing premise. If it has an arrow from 
only one premise to a conclusion, it is probably an enthymeme. If it has an arrow 
leading to one of its premises from one or more other premises, this shows that 
it is an epicheirema. 
Exercises: Make argument maps for each of the following. Some of them are 
very difficult, especially the first two. Proposition numbers arc supplied for 
some of them. Before you focus on the logical form, read each one slowly 
and thoughtfully, since understanding the logical form depends on under-
standing the content, the meaning and "point" of the argument. 
1. (H) "In a well-ordered republic it should never be necessary to resort to 
extra-constitutional measures; for although they may for the time be benefi-
cial, yet the precedent is pernicious, for if the practice is once established of 
disregarding the laws for good reasons, the laws will in a little while be 
changeable under that pretext for evil reasons. Thus no republic will ever be 
perfect if she has not by law provided for everything, having a remedy for 
every emergency, and fixed rules for applying it. And therefore I will say in 
conclusion that those republics which in time of danger cannot resort to a 
dictatorship, or some similar authority, will generally be ruined when grave 
occasions occur." (Machiavelli, The Prince) 

286 
XII MORE DIFFICULT SYLLOGISMS 
2. "A question arises: whether it is better to be loved than feared, or feared than 
loved? One should wish to be both, but because (I) it is difficult to unite 
them in one person, (2) it is much safer to be feared than loved, when of the 
two one must be dispensed with. Becausc (3) this is to be asserted in gener-
al of men: that they are ungrateful, fickle, false, cowards, covetous . . . (4) 
Men have less scruple in offending one who is beloved than one who is 
feared, for (5) love is preserved by the link of obligation, (6) which, (7) 
owing to the baseness of men, (6) is broken at every opportunity for their 
advantage; but (8) fear preserves you by a dread of punishment which never 
fails." (Ibid.) 
3. (H) "There are some philosophers who imagine wc are every moment inti-
mately conscious of what we call our self; that we feci its existence and its 
continuance in existence, and are certain, beyond the evidence of a demon-
stration, both of its perfect identity and simplicity. . . . Unluckily, all these 
positive assertions are contrary to that very experience which is pleaded for 
them, nor have we any idea of self after the manner it is here explained. For 
from what impression could this idea be derived? This question it is impos-
sible to answer without a manifest contradiction and absurdity; and yet it is 
a question which must necessarily be answered if we would have the idea of 
self pass for clear and intelligible. It must be some one impression that gives 
rise to every real idea. But self or person is not any one impression but that 
to which our several impressions and ideas arc supposed to have a reference. 
If any impression gives rise to the idea of self, that impression must contin-
ue invariably the same, through the whole course of our lives, since self is 
supposed to exist after that manner. But there is no impression constant and 
invariable. Pain and pleasure, grief and joy, passions and sensations succeed 
each other and never all exist at the same time. It cannot therefore be from 
any of these impressions, or from any other, that the idea of self is derived; 
consequently there is no such idea." (David Hume, Treatise on Human 
Nature) 
4. "I know that nothing good dwells within me, that is, in my flesh. I can will 
what is right, but I cannot do it. For I do not do the good I want, but the evil 
I do not want is what I do. Now if I do what I do not want, it is no longer I 
that do it but sin which dwells in me." (St. Paul, Romans 7:18-20) 
5. "We observe that rust destroys iron, mildew corn, blindness the eye, but rust 
and mildew do not destroy the eye, nor do blindness and rust destroy com, 
nor do mildew or blindness destroy iron. Thus we see that it is the natural 
evil of each thing that destroys it, and only this; that is, if this natural evil 
does not destroy it then nothing can. For what is good cannot destroy it 
(since destruction is not the work of goodness), nor can what is neither good 
nor evil for it (for destruction is not the work of the neutral either, but only 
of the evil), nor can what is evil for something else, as we have seen in the 
examples above. If, then, there is something whose own natural evil cannot 

Complex argument maps 
287 
destroy it, it is indestructible. The soul is such a thing, for its natural evils, 
vicc and ignorance, do not ever wholly destroy it, but only weaken it 
Nothing, therefore can destroy the soul. If nothing can destroy it, it is inde-
structible and everlasting/' (summary of Plato's argument for immortality in 
Book X of the Republic) 
6. "Wc cannot define 'religion' narrowly, as 'belief in Godf because Buddhism 
is a religion but does not believe in God. Nor can we define religion more 
broadly, as 'belief in some absolute,' without God, because atheism can 
believe in an absolute too, but atheism is not a religion. But religion must be 
defined either as the belief in God or as something like an absolute without 
reference to God. Therefore religion cannot be defined." (from a student 
paper) 
7. "We must explain then that Nature belongs to the class of causes which act 
for the sake of something. . . . A difficulty presents itself: Why should not 
nature work, not for the sake of something, nor because it is better so, but 
just as the sky rains, not in order to make the corn grow but of necessity? 
What is drawn up must cool, and what has been cooled must become water 
and descend, the result of this being that the corn grows. Similarly if a man's 
crop is spoiled on the threshing-floor, the rain did not fall for the sake of this 
- in order that the crop might be spoiled - but that result just followed. Why 
then should it not be the same with the parts in nature, e.g. that our teeth 
should come up of necessity - the front teeth sharp, fined for tearing, the 
molars broad and useful for grinding down the food - since they did not 
arise for this end, but it was merely a coincident result; and so with all other 
parts in which we suppose that there is purpose? Wherever, then, all the 
parts came about just as they would have been if they had come to be for an 
end, such things survived, being organized spontaneously in a fitting way; 
whereas those which grew otherwise perished and continue to perish. . . . 
Such are the arguments (and others of the kind) which may cause difficulty 
on this point. Yet it is impossible that this should be the true view. For teeth 
and all other natural things either invariably or normally come about in a 
given way; but of not one of the results of chance or spontaneity is this true." 
(Aristotle, Physics II, 8) 
8. (E) "All men by nature desire to know. An indication of this is the delight we 
take in our senses; for even apart from their usefulness they are loved for 
themselves; and above all others the sense of sight. For not only with a view 
to action, but even when we arc not going to do anything, we prefer seeing, 
one might say, to everything else. The reason is that this, most of all the sens-
es, makes us know and brings to light many differences between things." 
(Aristotle,Metaphysics I, I) 
9. (E) "Whoever kills a tyrant kills not a man but a beast disguised as a man. 
For, being deprived of all natural love for their fellow creatures, it follows 
that tyrants are without human sympathies, and hcnce are not men but wild 

288 
XII. MORE DIFFICULT SYLLOGISMS 
animals. Thus, it is clear that whoever kills a tyrant is not committing homi-
cide, sincc he kills a monster and not a man." (Michelangelo, Great 
Conversations, ed. Louis Biancolli (N.Y.: Simon & Schuster, 1948), p. 281) 
10. "// seems that God does not exist. For if one of two contraries be infinite, the 
other would be altogether destroyed. But the word 4God* means that he is 
infinite goodness. If, therefore, God existed, there would be no evil discov-
erable. But there is evil in the world. Therefore God docs not exist. (St. 
Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica I, 2, 3, objection 1) 
11. "We see that things which lack intelligence, such as natural bodies, act for 
an end, and this is evident from their acting always, or nearly always, in the 
same way, so as to obtain the best result. Hence it is plain that not fortu-
itously, but designedly, do they achieve their end. Now whatever lacks intel-
ligence cannot move towards an end unless it be directed by some being 
endowed with knowledge and intelligence, as the arrow is shot to the mark 
by the archer. Therefore some intelligent being exists by whom all natural 
things are directed to their end; and this being we call God. (St. Thomas 
Aquinas, Summa Theologica 1,2,3, the "fifth way") 
12. "I answer that: It is impossible for any created good to constitute man's hap-
piness. For happiness is the perfect good, which satisfies the desire alto-
gether; else it would not be the last end, if something yet remained to be 
desired. Now the object of the will, i.e. of man's desire, is the universal good, 
just as the object of the intellect is the universal true. Hence it is evident that 
naught can satisfy man's will save the universal good. And this is to be 
found, not in any creature, but in God alone; because every creature has 
goodness by participation. Wherefore God alone can satisfy the will of man, 
as is said in the words of Psalm 102:5, "Who satisfieth thy desire with 
good." Therefore God alone constitutes man's happiness. (St. Thomas 
Aquinas, Summa Theologica I-II, 2, 8) 
13. "Life is meaningless, since it ends in death, and death is meaningless. Death 
is meaningless because it is nothingness, and nothingness is the nothingness 
of meaning. But everything is either life or death. Therefore everything is 
meaningless. My proof that everything is meaningless is therefore also 
meaningless." (student essay) 
14. "Happiness is the perfect good. But power is imperfect. For as Boethius 
says, 'the power of a man cannot relieve the gnawings of care, nor can it 
avoid the thorny path of anxiety'; and, further on, he says, 'Do you think a 
man is powerful who is surrounded by attendants whom he may inspire with 
fear but whom he fears even more than they fear him?" Therefore, happiness 
does not consist in power. Two reasons, in addition, show that this is true. 
First, because power has the character of a beginning, but happiness has the 
nature of an end. Secondly, because power is open to either good or evil, 
while happiness is man's supreme and proper good." (St. Thomas Aquinas, 
Summa Theologica I-II, 2, 4) 

XIII. Compound Syllogisms 
Compound syllogisms begin with a compound proposition. 
Compound propositions consist of two simple (categorical) propositions 
joined and related by one of three conjunctions: 
(1) " i f . . . then . . ( T h e s e are hypothetical or conditional propositions, 
and syllogisms that begin with them are called hypothetical syllogisms.) 
(2) "either . . . o r . . . " (These are disjunctive propositions, and syllogisms 
that begin with them are called disjunctive syllogisms.) 
(3) "both . . . and . . . " or "not both . . . and . . ( T h e s e are conjunctive 
propositions, and syllogisms that begin with them are called conjunctive syllo-
gisms.) 
Compound syllogisms have a wholly different structure and wholly differ-
ent rules from simple syllogisms. We cannot use Euler's circles, Aristotle's sue 
rules, Venn diagrams, or "Barbara Celarent" in checking them. They do not have 
mood or figure. They do not have major, minor, and middle terms, or major and 
minor premises. In fact, they do not necessarily have only three terms. When 
they are invalid, they do not commit any of the fallacies already defined by the 
six rules. Virtually the only thing common to simple and compound syllogisms 
is the basic structure of two premises and one conclusion. To understand and 
evaluate them, we must begin afresh. 
Section 1. Hypothetical syllogisms (B) 
There are two forms of hypothetical syllogisms (i.e. syllogisms that begin with 
a hypothetical ("if. . . then . ..") proposition: pure hypothetical syllogisms and 
mixed hypothetical syllogisms. The first form is fairly rare, the second form is 
very common. 
In a pure hypothetical 
syllogism, 
all three propositions are hypothetical 
propositions. E.g., 
If it rains, I will get wet. 
And if I get wet, I will be cold. 
Therefore if it rains, I will be cold. 

290 
XII! COMPOUND SYLLOGISMS 
This is really a simple (categorical) syllogism, in fact a "bulls eye" syllo-
gism, in disguise, with propositions in place of terms: 
All cases of it raining are cases of my getting wet. 
All cases of my getting wet are cases of my being cold. 
Therefore all cases of it raining are cases of my being cold. 
In a mixed hypothetical syllogism (which is the more common kind), only 
the first premise is hypothetical. The other premise and the conclusion are sim-
ple (categorical) propositions. E.g. "If you are carrying a gun, they will not let 
you in. And you are carrying a gun. Therefore they will not let you in." 
Before we go on to distinguish the different forms of mixed hypothetical 
syllogisms (there are only four) and the rules for validity (they are much simpler 
than the rules for simple syllogisms), we should first make things shorter and 
easier by using a new symbol system. It is taken from modern symbolic logic, 
but it does not carry any philosophical baggage; it is just a much shorter and 
clearer way to formalize conditional syllogisms than writing out all the words. 
(It will not work for simple syllogisms.) 
Each simple proposition will be symbolized by a single lower case letter, 
beginning with p, then q, then r, etc. 
Until you have more practice with compound syllogisms, you should write 
out a "key" for each compound syllogism, i.e. write out the actual, fully-word-
ed proposition next to each "p" or "q" or "r" symbol with the equal sign (=) 
between them. Later, you will be able to omit this on paper if it is perfectly clear 
in your mind, and then you can use letters alone, without the worded key. 
A hypothetical proposition is two simple propositions joined by "if. . . then 
. . S o it is symbolized by two letters (symbolizing the two simple propositions) 
joined by a sideways horseshoe ( 3 ), symbolizing the "if. . . then . . "relation-
ship. Thus "if it rains, I will get wet" is symbolized by "p z> q," and the key 
reminds us that p = "it rains" while q = "I will get wet." 
The horseshoe is also called the "implication" sign. "If p then q" means 
that "p implies q," that is, that if p is true, then q is true. Do not confuse 
"implies" with "infers." "Implies" is an objective logical relationship between 
propositions; "infers" is a subjective mental act made by a human mind. My 
mind infers a conclusion from premises, perhaps validly and perhaps invalidly. 
But it is propositions that imply other propositions. (We also use the word 
"imply" in ordinary language to mean something quite different: to make a 
veiled suggestion rather than an overt statement. Do not confuse that with logi-
cal implication.) 
The proposition following the "if" is called the antecedent, since it ante-
cedes, or comes before, the other proposition. The proposition following the 
"then" is called the consequent, since it is the consequent of the antecedent; it 
is said to be true if the antecedent is true. ("If it rains, I will get wet" means that 
if it is true that it rains, then it is true that I will get wet.) 

Hypothetical syllogisms 
291 
Wc negate a proposition by putting a tilde, or curl ( - ) before it. 
There is no Square of Opposition in compound propositions. However, 
there is the relationship of contradiction: p and ~p are contradictories. 
Here arc some hypothetical syllogisms in ordinary language to show how 
we symbolize them. (The first two are valid, the last two invalid.) 
(1) "If even Socrates lacks wisdom, then no man is wise. And even Socrates 
lacks wisdom. Therefore no man is wise." 
Key: p = "Even Socrates lacks wisdom." 
Symbolization: 
p 
q 
q = "No man is wise" 
p 
q 
Note that even a negative proposition ("No man is wise") can be symbol-
ized by a single letter without a tilde. The symbol p or q stands for any proposi-
tion whatever, no matter what its content 
(2) "If there is radioactivity here, it appears on this Geiger counter. And it 
does not appear on this Geiger counter. Therefore there is no radioactivity here." 
Key: p = "There is radioactivity here." 
Symbolization: 
p z> q 
q = "It appears on this geiger counter." 
~q 
.\ ~p 
(3) "If we are in a tornado, the house is falling apart. And the house is 
falling apart. Therefore we are in a tornado " 
Key: p = "We are in a tornado." 
Symbolization: 
p ID q 
q = "The house is falling apart." 
q 
P 
(4) "If we're lottery winners, we're rich. We're not lottery winners. 
Therefore we're not rich." 
Key: p = "We're lottery winners." 
Symbolization: 
p 3 q 
q = "We're rich." 
- p 
- q 
These four forms of mixed hypothetical syllogisms are called, respectively, 
(1) Affirming the Antecedent 
(2) Denying the Consequent 
(3) Affirming the Consequent 
(4) Denying the Antecedent 

292 
XIII. COMPOUND SYLLOGISMS 
They are named by what is done in the second premise. The first premise is 
identical in all four cases: p z> q. The second premise can say one of four things: 
p, ~q, q. or ~p. That is, the second premise can either affirm or deny either the 
antecedent (p) or the consequent (q). 
"Affirming the Antecedent" and "Denying the Consequent'' are the two 
valid forms of hypothetical syllogisms. "Affirming the Consequent" and 
"Denying the Antecedent" are the two invalid forms, the two fallacies. 
The reason for this rule is simple: more than one cause can produce the 
same effect. So the mere fact that the house is falling apart does not prove that 
a tornado is causing it (# 3 above). The house might be falling apart due to an 
earthquake, or termites. And the mere fact that we're not lottery winners (#4 
above) does not prove that we're not rich. Wc might get rich through another 
cause, e.g. inheriting money from a dead relative, or working hard. 
However, the first two forms are valid: 
(1) If p is true and p's truth implies, or entails, q's truth, then q must be true. 
If whenever p is true, q is true too, then if p is true now, q is true now. 
(2) If p implies q, and q is not true, then p is not true. If we have q whenev-
er we have p, then when we do not have q we do not have p. For if we did have 
p, we would have q too. 
Let us go through all four forms of a hypothetical syllogism with the same 
content. Let us begin with this p D q proposition: "If the wind blows, the paper 
falls off the desk." Now let us add the four possible second premises. 
(1) Let us begin by adding p ("The wind is blowing") to p z> q; i.e. let us in 
the second premise affirm the antecedent of the first premise. What follows? 
That the paper falls off the desk, q. For whenever the wind blows, the paper falls. 
The argument is valid. 
p=>q 
P 
.*. q 
The first premise, the hypothetical proposition, may in fact be false. It 
claims that whenever the wind blows, the paper falls; and that is probably not 
true, since we could nail the paper down to the desk, so that even if the wind 
blows the paper would not fall. But //it is true that whenever the wind blows the 
paper falls, and if it is also true that the wind is blowing, then it must follow that 
the paper falls. "Affirming the Antecedent" is a valid form of argument. 
(2) Now let us add ~q ("The paper does not fall off") instead as a second 
premise to the same first premise ("If the wind blows, the paper falls"). What 
logically follows? That the wind is not blowing, -p. For if the wind were blow-
ing, the paper would fall olf. Another valid form: "Denying the Consequent." 
p=>q 
/. ~p 

Hypothetical syllogisms 
293 
(3) But suppose wc follow "If the wind blows, the paper falls" with "The 
paper falls" in the second premise, and then draw the conclusion that "The wind 
blows." This is invalid because the conclusion does not necessarily follow. Just 
bccause the paper falls, it docs not mean the wind blows; another cause could 
producc the same cfleet, such as a person blowing it off, or flipping it off - or 
even an earthquake. "Affirming the Consequent" is an invalid form: 
pz>q 
q 
••• P 
(4) And "Denying the Antecedent" in the second premise is also invalid. "If 
the wind blows, the paper falls, and the wind does not blow, therefore the paper 
docs not fall" forgets all those other possible causes of the paper falling that 
were mentioned above. 
p ^ q 
- p 
~q 
Both fallacies make the same mistake: they begin with p z> q and then pro-
ceed as if it were q 3 p. We can no more "convert" a hypothetical proposition 
than we can validly convert a simple A proposition. "Whenever the wind blows, 
the paper falls" docs not say the same thing as "Whenever the paper falls, the 
wind blows." "All cases of A are cases of B" does not say the same thing as "all 
cases of B are cases of A." 
A hypothetical syllogism can be an enthymeme, omitting any one of its 
three propositions, just as a simple syllogism can. And it can also be an 
epicheirema, adding a reason to one or both of its premises. 
Thus there are three valid forms of hypothetical syllogisms and two falla-
cious forms. The valid forms are: 
(1) the pure hypothetical syllogism: 
p=>q 
q 3 r 
p z> r 
(2) Affirming the Antecedent: 
p=>q 
P 
q 
(3) Denying the Consequent: 
p=>q 
~q 
~P 
And the two invalid forms, or fallacies, are: 

294 
XIII. COMPOUND SYLLOGISMS 
(1) Denying the Antecedent: 
p=>q 
~p 
••• ~q 
(2) Affirming the Consequent: 
pz>q 
q 
P 
If you like mnemonic devices, you could think of the abbreviations AA and 
DC for the two valid forms and DA and AC for the two invalid forms. Alcoholics 
Anonymous (AA) and Direct Current (DC) are straight (valid), while District 
Attorneys (DA) and Alternating Current (AC) can be crooked (invalid). If this 
sounds silly, forget it. 
Section 2 "Reductio ad absurdum " arguments 
In Denying the Consequent, when the consequent (q) is absurd, or obvious-
ly false, we have a reductio ad absurdum. This is a very common and effective 
strategy in argument. It is especially associated with Socrates and the "Socratic 
method." "Reductio ad absurdum" consists in showing that if your opponent's 
idea were true, absurd consequences would logically follow. Thus it is really 
Denying the Consequent: "if p (your idea) were true, then q (its logical conse-
quent) would be true. But q is not true; in fact, it is obviously not true, it is 
absurd. Therefore p (your idea) is not true." (This argument is the more effective 
the more obvious it is that q is not true, i.e. the more absurd it is.) 
The reductio is a very effective form of argument in practicc bccausc it docs 
not begin with a premise your opponent may deny bccause it comes from your 
mind and your opinions, but it begins with your opponent's own idea or opinion, 
p. It says, in effect, "let us look at your idea (p); let us explore it further; let us see 
what consequences and conclusions it logically entails." It seems to be a "friend-
ly" form of arguing. But if q is as "absurd" as the name claims, and if p really 
docs imply q, the argument is really quite devastating. The only arguable question 
in reductio ad absurdum arguments usually is whether p really implies q. 
There are only three ways to answer any argument - to find a formal logi-
cal fallacy, an informal fallacy or ambiguous term, or a false premise. But the 
logical form of the reductio ad absurdum (Denying the Consequent) is valid and 
contains no formal logical fallacy. So unless you can find an ambiguous term 
(i.e. an ambiguously used term), the only way to answer a reductio ad absurdum 
argument is to deny one of the two premises. This will probably be the first, 
hypothetical premise which states that p (your idea, which you think is true) 
entails q (the absurd consequence, which you will have to admit is false if it 

"Reductio ad absurdum " arguments 
really is absurd). In some eases, however, you might want to deny that q is 
absurd and false, and this would be to deny the second premise. 
The reductio form can be used satirically. E.g. "The government in its wis-
dom considers ice a 4food product/ This means that Antarctica is one of the 
world's foremost food producers*' (George Will). 
The full symbolization of this argument would be: 
Key: p = Ice is a food product. 
Symbolization: 
p D q 
q = Antarctica is one of the world's 
~q 
foremost food producers. 
/. ~p 
Another example of a satirical reductio is Samuel Johnson's famous refuta-
tion of moral relativism: "If he [the moral relativist] does really think that there 
is no distinction between virtue and vice, why, sir, when he leaves our houses let 
us count our spoons." 
Another example is G.E. Moore's commonsensical refutation of Hume's 
skepticism: "I do know that this pencil exists; but I could not know this if 
Hume's principles were true; therefore, Hume's principles . . . are false." Here 
the order of the premises is reversed in the ordinary language, but we have the 
same logical form when we symbolize it: 
Key: p = Hume's principles are true. 
Symbolization: 
p D q 
q = I do not know that this pencil exists. 
~q 
Another way to symbolize this argument would be as follows: 
Key: p = Hume's principles are true. 
Symbolization: 
p z> ~q 
q = I do know that this pencil exists. 
q 
••• ~P 
The example above shows that we can symbolize a negative proposition in 
two ways: by having the letter stand for an affirmative proposition and by put-
ting a tilde before the letter, or we can keep the letter without a tilde and use our 
key to make clear that the letter symbolizes a negative proposition. 
Here is a very abstract, high-level philosophical argument that takes the 
form of a reductio ad absurdum. It is an argument for the conclusion that num-
bers are objective realities rather than subjective ideas. "If number were an idea, 
then arithmetic would be psychology. But arithmetic is no more psychology 
than, say, astronomy is. Astronomy is concerned, not with ideas of the planets, 
but with the planets themselves, and by the same token the objects of arithmetic 
are not ideas either" (Gottlob Fregc, The Foundations of Arithmetic). 
This is an epicheirema because it begins with a single hypothetical syllo-
gism but adds an additional argument (from analogy with astronomy) to support 
that syllogism's second premise (i.e. the categorical premise). 
Not every hypothetical syllogism in the Denying the Consequent form is a 

296 
XIII. COMPOUND SYLLOGISMS 
reductio ad absurdum. But the borders between a reductio and any other 
Denying the Consequent are not sharp. It depends on how "absurd" q is, and this 
is often a matter of opinion. The arguments above are reductios. The following 
argument is not: "If Albert De Salvo is not the Boston Strangles then he could 
not know such intimate details as these about each murder. But he does know 
these details. (And this is not absurd, but only surprising.) Therefore he is the 
Boston Strangler." But the following is a borderline case: "It is clear that we 
mean something, and something different in each case, by such words (as "sub-
stance," "cause," and "change"). If we did not, we could not use them consis-
tently, and it is obvious that on the whole we do consistently apply and withhold 
such names" (C.D. Broad, Scientific Thought). Here the conclusion comes first. 
The argument can be symbolized as follows: 
Key: p = We do not mean anything by the words 
'substance,' 'cause,' and 'change' 
q = Wc do not use these words consistently 
Symbolization: 
p D q 
~q 
~P 
Or: 
Key: p = we do mean something by such words 
q = We use such words consistently 
Symbolization: ~p => ~q 
q 
/. p 
Section 3. The practical syllogism: 
arguing about means and ends 
There are three reasons we seek knowledge by reason, Aristotle noted: (1) 
simply to know, for its own sake; (2) to know for the sake of doing something, 
for some action or practice; or (3) to know for the sake of making something, 
changing something, or repairing something. The first he called "theoretical" 
reasoning; the second, "practical" reasoning; and the third "productive" reason-
ing, reasoning directed toward what wc now call "technology." These three 
motives for reasoning produce the three kinds of "sciences" that he distin-
guished: "theoretical scicnces," "practical sciences," and "productive sciences." 
Reasoning with a purely theoretical (or "speculative" or "contemplative") 
end comes in many different forms, and we have been exploring these different 
forms throughout this book. Practical reasoning, however, is much simpler: its 
form is usually a pure or mixed hypothetical syllogism. E.g.: 
If I am to get to England by tomorrow, I must take a plane. 
If I take a plane, I must buy a ticket now. 
Therefore if I am to get to England by tomorrow, I must buy a ticket now. 
Or simply: 

The practical syllogism: arguing about means and ends 
297 
If I am to get to England by tomorrow I must buy a tickct today. 
I want to get to England by tomorrow. 
Therefore I must buy a ticket today. 
This is "practical" reasoning in the modern sense of the word "practical": 
pragmatic, instrumental, useful. But "practical" can also mean "moral," and this 
moral dimension of human practice also is often expressed in the form of hypo-
thetical syllogisms: 
If you want to be blessed or happy or perfect, you must practice all the 
virtues. 
You do want to be blessed or happy or perfect. 
Therefore you must practice all the virtues. 
Some will object that this sounds too much like "the end justifies the 
means." But of course it does! What else could possibly justify a means? That's 
what "means" means. When we say "the end does not justify the means" we 
mean that a good end does not justify an evil means. But it surely justifies a good 
means. Even if you accept Kant's famous criticism of this "teleo logical" or "end-
oriented" morality and insist that we should will our moral duty rather than our 
happiness, that we should try to simply "do the right thing" because it's right, it 
remains true that our moral reasoning usually takes the form of a hypothetical 
syllogism: 
We must always do the right thing. 
If we tell a lie, we do not do the right thing. 
Therefore we must not tell a lie. 
Or: 
If I lie, I violate the moral imperative (the "Golden Rule" "Do as you would 
be done to"). 
I must not violate the moral imperative. 
Therefore I must not lie. 
Pragmatic practical reasoning differs from moral practical reasoning in two 
ways. First, in pragmatic reasoning there is no absolute good or final end (except 
perhaps happiness, interpreted in a purely subjective, psychological sense rather 
than the older, moral sense). Second, there are often many steps in pragmatic 
reasoning, so we often have multiple-step epichciremas. Moral reasoning, on the 
other hand, usually (but not always) consists in a single syllogism. 
That syllogism can be a simple syllogism: 
Lying on your tax form is injustice. 
Injustice should not be done. 
Therefore lying on your tax form should not be done. 
Or it can be a hypothetical syllogism: 

298 
XIII. COMPOUND SYLLOGISMS 
If I lie on my tax form, I commit an injustice. 
I should not commit an injustice. 
Therefore I should not lie on my tax form. 
In both forms, there is one factual premise and one moral premise; one "is" 
premise and one "ought" premise. It is their combination that makes moral rea-
soning. 
For instance, the essential "pro-life" argument against abortion contains a 
moral premise and a factual premise; and there are two different "pro-choice" 
replies to it depending on which of the two premises is denied: 
All innocent human persons have a right to life and may not be killed. 
And all unborn human babies are innocent human persons. 
Therefore all unborn human babies have a right to life and may not be killed. 
It makes a very significant difference whether one denies the first (moral) 
premise or the second (factual) premise: it is the difference between a dispute 
about a philosophical principle and a dispute about a scientific fact. 
Perhaps the most famous pragmatic practical syllogism of all time is 
"Pascal's Wager." Pascal argues that it is a most practical "wager" to believe in 
God, for: "Let us weigh gain and loss in calling heads that God is. Reckon these 
two chances: if you win, you win everything; if you lose, you lose nothing. Then 
do not hesitate: wager that He is." The argument is essentially this: 
If I wager that God is (by believing in God), I can win everything and I can 
lose nothing. 
I want to win everything and lose nothing. 
Therefore I should wager that God is. 
But notice that the syllogism is invalid in this form, for it is Affirming the 
Consequent. This reveals an important difference between a practical syllogism 
and a theoretical one: the "if" means something quite different. In the theoreti-
cal syllogism, "if. . . then . . ." refers to cause and effect. But in the pragmatic 
practical syllogism, " i f . . . then ..." refers to action and consequence, 
or means 
and end. In a theoretical hypothetical syllogism, the consequent does not justi-
fy the antecedent - you cannot affirm the consequent and thus affirm the 
antecedent: that is a fallacy. But in a practical 
(pragmatic) hypothetical syll0^ 
gism, the consequent does justify the antecedent, because the consequent is thQ 
end and the antecedent is the means, and the end does justify the means in th^ 
practical order. (And if both are morally good, then the end justifies the mear^ 
is the moral order too). 

The practical syllogism: arguing about means and ends 
299 
Exercises on hypothclical syllogisms: Put into correct symbolic form and test 
for validity. If there is a fallacy, name it. Remember, there may be a few 
enthymemes or cpicheircmas too. There are no practical syllogisms here. 
1. "There is no case known (neither is it, indeed, possible) in which a thing is 
found to be the efTicient cause of itself; for in such a case it would be prior 
to itself, which is impossible." (St. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica I, 
2 ' 3 ) 
2. "If light consisted of material particles, it would possess momentum. It can-
not therefore consist of material particles.'" 
3. "If the mountain will not come to Muhammad, Muhammad will come to the 
mountain. But Muhammad will come to the mountain. Therefore the moun-
tain will not come to Muhammad." 
4. "If the objective of marriage were contentment, then the discontent of either 
party would be a sufficient reason for annulling it." 
5. "If there is such a thing as space, it must be in something. For all being is in 
something, and that which is in something is in space. So space will be in 
space, and so on ad infinitum. Accordingly, there is no such thing as space." 
(Zeno the Eleatic) 
6. St. Augustine argued, against the skeptic: If you arc deceived, you must 
exist. But you say you are deceived, therefore you can be certain you exist. 
But if you can be certain you exist, you can be certain of something, and if 
you can be certain of something, you are no longer a skeptic. 
7. "But if art passes from mind to mind, it would leave one mind and abide in 
another; in this case, nobody would teach an art except by losing it." (St. 
Augustine) 
8. "Total pacifism might be a good principle if everyone were to follow it. But 
not everyone does, so it isn't." (Gilbert Harman, The Nature of Morality) 
9. "If a man could not have done otherwise than he in fact did, then he is not 
responsible for his action. But if determinism is true, it is true of every 
action that the agent could not have done otherwise. Therefore, if determin-
ism is true, no one is ever responsible for what he does." (Winston Nesbit 
and Stewart Candlish, "Determinism and the Ability to Do Otherwise," in 
Mind, July 1978) 
10. "When we regard a man as morally responsible for an act, we regard him as 
a legitimate object of moral praise or blame in respect of it. But it seems 
plain that a man cannot be a legitimate object of moral praise or blame for 
an act unless in willing the act he is in some important sense a 'free' agent. 
Evidently free will in some sense, therefore, is a precondition of moral 
responsibility." (C. Arthur Campbell, In Defense of Free Will) (Is this the 
same argument as ft9 or not?) 
11. "If there were no Un-causcd Cause (First Cause), there could be no caused 

300 
XIII. COMPOUND SYLLOGISMS 
causcs (second causes). But there are caused causes. Therefore there must 
be an Un-caused Cause." 
12. "As everyone knows, beauty is in the eye of the beholder. But if beauty were 
an objective reality, it would be in the reality of the beheld rather than in the 
eye of the beholder. Therefore beauty is not an objective reality." (How 
would someone answer this argument?) 
13. "If an intelligent Creator existed, we would find design throughout the uni-
verse. We do find design throughout the universe. Therefore an intelligent 
Creator exists." (If this argument is invalid how can it be changed to make 
it valid?) 
14. "If God did not exist, we would feel so alone that we would be unable to 
endure a universe without Him. And this feeling can be observed to exist. 
Therefore God does not exist." 
15. "If Papa comes home today, you will be in big trouble!" "That's true, but 
Papa won't come home today, so I won't be in big trouble." 
16. "Whenever I cat chocolates, I get migraines. I got migraines today, so I must 
have eaten chocolates today." 
17. "If Dr. X did not kill the officer, then he didn't kill the deputy either. And 
wc proved that the officcr was not killed by Dr. X. Therefore the deputy was 
not either." 
18. "Confidence in promises is essential to the intercourse of human life, for 
without it the greatest part of our conduct would proceed upon chance. But 
there could be no confidence in promises if men were not obliged to perform 
them. The obligation, therefore, to perform promises is essential." (Stanley 
Jevons) 
19. "'If anyone knows anything about anything,' said Bear to himself, 'it's Owl 
who knows something about something,' he said, 'or my name's not Winnie-
thc-Pooh,' he said. 'Which it is,' he added. 'So there you are.'" (Winnie the 
Pooh) 
20. "Mankind, judging by their neglect of him, have never, I think, at all under-
stood the power of Love. For if they had understood him they would surely 
have built noble temples and altars and offered solemn sacrifices in his 
honor; but this is not done." (Plato, Symposium) 
21. "If space is finite, it must be bounded. But space cannot have a boundary, 
bccause a boundary can only separate one space from another space. What 
separates space from non-space is not a spatial boundary; it is a logical 
boundary. Therefore space is infinite." (Compare this with US.) 
22. "'To be great is to be misunderstood.' I am misunderstood. Therefore I am 
great." 
23. "Hitler knows that he will have to break us in this island or lose the war. If 
we can stand up to him, all Europe may be free, and the life of the world may 
move forward into broad, sunlit uplands; but if we fail, then the whole world, 
including the United States, and all that we have known and cared for, will 

Disjunctive syllogisms 
sink into the abyss of a new dark age made more sinister, and perhaps more 
prolonged, by the lights of a perverted science. Let us therefore brace our-
selves to our duty and so bear ourselves that if the British Commonwealth 
and Europe lasts for a thousand years men will still say: This was their finest 
hour." (Winston Churchill, speech to the House of Commons, June 18, 
1940) 
24. "If men were angels, no government would be necessary." (James Madison) 
(Hint: this is an enthymeme with two propositions implied.) 
25. "If Christ is not risen, then our preaching is in vain and your faith is in vain. 
And we are even found to be misrepresenting God, because we testified of 
God that he raised Christ, whom he did not raise if it is true that the dead are 
not raised. . . . If Christ has not been raised, your faith is futile and you are 
still in your sins. Then those also who have fallen asleep in Christ have per-
ished. If for this life only we have hoped in Christ, we are of all men most 
to be pitied." (St. Paul, I Corinthians 15:14-19) 
26. "If I had cherished iniquity in my heart, the Lord would not have listened. 
But truly God has listened; he has given heed to the voice of my prayer." 
(Psalm 66:18-19) 
Section 4. Disjunctive syllogisms (B) 
Disjunctive syllogisms begin with a disjunctive ("either... or...") proposition. 
This is symbolized by "p v q," with the "v" standing for the disjunction ("or"). 
Like hypothetical syllogisms, disjunctive syllogisms have four possible sec-
ond premises: p, ~p, q, or ~q. Thus the four forms (which do not have names) 
are: 
( l ) p v q 
( 2 ) p v q 
(3) p v q 
( 4 ) p v q 
p 
q 
~p 
~q 
.*• ~q 
~p 
.% q 
p 
However, there are really only two forms, since p and q are reversible and 
interchangeable in a disjunctive proposition, as they are not in a hypothetical 
proposition. "Either p or q" says exactly the same thing as "either q or p." But 
"if p then q" does not at all say the same thing as "if q then p." 
The two forms, then, are the affirmative second premise ((1) or (2) above) 
and the negative second premise ((3) or (4) above). 
The affirmative form is invalid and the negative form is valid. 
Here's why: "Either p or q" does not necessarily imply anything more than 
it says. It does not say "either p or q hut not both." "Either p or q but not both" 
is called a "strong disjunction." Simply "either p or q" is called a "weak dis-
junction." "Either p or q" means that at least one of these two, p or q, must be 
true. At least one, maybe both. So from the affirmative second premise, which 
claims that one of the two alternatives is true, we cannot deduce that the other 

302 
XIII. COMPOUND SYLLOGISMS 
alternative could not be true as well. That is why the affirmative form is invalid 
(i.e. the form that has an affirmative second premise). 
Some examples: Suppose someone has done something very bad. We think: 
this must be due to either moral wickedness (villainy) or intellectual wickcdncss 
(folly). So we say: 
Either he is a villain or a fool. 
But he's no fool. 
Therefore he must be a villain. 
This is a valid argument. If at least one of the two causes, moral or intel-
lectual badness, must have been present to account for what he did, and if one 
of those two was not present, then the other must have been. If the first premise 
is right in saying that there are only two possible causes, and if the second prem-
ise is right in saying that one of those two causes was not present, then the other 
cause must have been present. 
But it is fallacious to argue that: 
Either he is a villain or a fool. 
and he is a villain. 
therefore he is not a fool. 
For he could be both a villain and a fool; both causes might be operative; 
intellectual defects and moral defects might both have helped account for the 
effect. 
Only when the first, disjunctive, proposition is a strong disjunction - only 
when p and q exclude each other - can we validly argue from an affirmative sec-
ond premise. For instance, 
This fingerprint was made by either a man or a woman. 
It was a man. 
Therefore it was not a woman. 
Since no one is both a man and a woman (though there are some confused 
people who sincerely believe they are), p and q here are exclusive, and the pres-
ence of one entails the absence of the other just as much as the absence of one 
entails the presence of the other. If and only if we know that the first premise is 
a strong disjunction, we can affirm in the second premise and validly argue to a 
negative conclusion. 
Exercises: Symbolize the following disjunctive arguments and test for validity. 
Remember, some may be enthymemes. 
1. "You must be either a liar or a fool, and you're not a fool, so you must be a 
liar." 

Conjunctive syllogisms 
303 
2. "Either the professor's Theory of General Insanity is true, or I'm insane. But 
the theory is not true. Therefore I am not insane." 
3. "Either the theory is insane, or I am. But I am not insane. Therefore it isn't 
either." 
4. (H) "Since no man has a natural authority over his fellows . . . we must con-
clude that conventions form the basis of all legitimate authority among 
men." (Rousseau) (This is an enthymeme with an implied disjunctive prem-
ise about authority.) 
5. "Either God or nature causes disasters. Nature causes disasters. Therefore 
God does not." 
6. "Why, what's happened to your tail?" he said in surprise. 
"What has happened to it?" said Eeyore. 
"It isn't there!" 
"Are you sure?" 
"Well, either a tail is there or it isn't there. You can't make a mistake about 
it." (Winnie the Pooh) 
Section 5. Conjunctive syllogisms (B) 
Conjunctive syllogisms begin with a conjunctive proposition. There are two 
forms of conjunctive propositions, affirmative and negative. The affirmative is 
"both p and q" and the negative is "not both p and q." In symbolizing these we 
use an ampersand ("&") for "and." 
The affirmative conjunctive proposition "p & q" is true only if both p is true 
and q is true. E.g. "both Socrates and Marx were Communists" is not true, even 
though Marx was a Communist, because Socrates was not. In a true/false ques-
tion, if any part of the statement is false, you must mark it false as a whole. 
The negative conjunctive proposition "not both p and q" is symbolized as 
follows: ~-(p & q). The tilde (negation sign) negates the whole of the parenthe-
ses that follow it, i.e. it negates the affirmative conjunctive proposition "p & q". 
So "~(p & q)" means "it is not the case that both p and q are true." At least one 
of them is false, perhaps both. 
There is no common form of syllogism that begins with an affirmative con-
junctive proposition; but the conjunctive syllogism beginning with a negative 
conjunctive proposition is quite common. Its valid form is: 
~(p & q) 
P 
/. ~q 
And since p and q are here reversible, the following is also valid: 
~(P & q) 
q 
••• ~p 

304 
XIII. COMPOUND SYLLOGISMS 
However, the following form is invalid: 
"~(p & q) 
••• q 
And this is really the same as: 
-(p & q) 
••• p 
So the only conclusion we can validly prove with a conjunctive syllogism is 
a negative one, just as the only conclusion we can validly prove with a disjunc-
tive syllogism is an affirmative one. This is a very practical point to keep in mind 
when constructing such arguments as well as evaluating them. 
Some examples: "You can't both have your cake and eat it too. And you're 
eating it. Therefore you can't have it." This is valid. So is: "You can't both have 
your cake and eat it too. And you have it. Therefore you did not eat it." 
"Two bodies can't both occupy the same space at once. And body #1 is in 
this space now. Therefore body #2 is not." This is valid. 
But "You can't both have your cake and eat it too. And you do not have it. 
Therefore you ate it" is invalid. Perhaps you don't have your cake bccause you 
gave it away, or lost it. 
"Two bodies can't both occupy the same space at once. And body U\ is not 
in this space now. Therefore body U2 is." This is obviously invalid. 
But sometimes the fallacy is not so obvious: "No one can be stupid and be 
a philosopher. And he is not stupid. Therefore he is a philosopher." This is more 
likely to mislead because of its content. "Stupid" and "a philosopher" might be 
misunderstood as a strong disjunction or a complete division (see pages 62-63), 
i.e. both exclusive (you can't be both) and exhaustive (everyone has to be one or 
the other) - in which case the absence of either one would entail (imply) the 
presence of the other and the presence of either one would entail (imply) the 
absence of the other. But one can be a stupid philosopher, and one can be nei-
ther stupid nor a philosopher, so that division is neither exclusive nor exhaustive. 
Transforming Syllogisms into Different Forms 
The same syllogism can often be expressed in hypothetical, disjunctive, or 
conjunctive form. And these forms can also be interchanged with simple syllo-
gisms. Take. e.g. the classic simple syllogism "All men are mortal, and Socrates 
is a man, therefore Socrates is mortal." In hypothetical form, this becomes: 
If Socrates is a man, then he is mortal. 
And Socrates is a man. 
Therefore he is mortal. 

Conjunctive syllogisms 
305 
In disjunctive form, it becomes: 
Either Socrates is not a man, or he is mortal. 
But he is a man (he is not not-a-man) 
Therefore he is mortal. 
And in conjunctive form, it becomes: 
Socrates cannot both be a man and not be mortal. 
But Socrates is a man. 
Therefore Socrates is not not-mortal (he is mortal). 
If we begin not with a simple syllogism but with a compound one, we get 
the same exchange possibilities: 
If it rains, we will get wet. 
And it will rain. 
Therefore we will get wet. 
AH occasions of it raining are occasions of our getting wet. 
This is an occasion of it raining. 
Therefore this is an occasion of our getting wet. 
Either it will not rain, or we will get wet. 
It will not not-rain. (It will rain.) 
Therefore we will get wet. 
It can't be true both that it will rain and that we will not get wet. 
It is true that it will rain. (It will rain.) 
Therefore it is not true that we will not get wet. (We will get wet.) 
Exercises on Conjunctive Syllogisms: Put into symbolic form, test for validity, 
and imagine how you might reply to each of the following. Some may be 
enthymemes or epicheiremas, and these may require a more complex sym-
bolization. For an additional exercise, also transform each into disjunctive, 
hypothetical, and categorical forms. 
1. "You can't be both you and somebody else. That's why you're not somebody 
else." 
2. "Vampires are 'the undead.' But nothing can be both dead and undead. 
Therefore vampires are not dead. And nothing can be both dead and alive. 
Therefore vampires arc alive." 
3. "You can't both have your cake and eat it too. That's why you can cat your 
cake." 
4. (A student's critique of Plato's attempt to write a philosophical dialogue on 

306 
XIII. COMPOUND SYLLOGISMS 
love:) "Since the objective and the subjective attitudes are opposites, it is 
impossible for us to objectively reason about and subjectively experience the 
same thing at the same time. And you, Plato, are now objectively reasoning 
about love, since you are philosophizing about it. Therefore you cannot be 
experiencing love. But what we do not experience, we have no right to phi-
losophize about. So you have no right to philosophize about love" (How 
would you answer this argument?) 
5. "There is a disjunction between disjunction and conjunction; no proposition 
can be both. But this is a disjunction. Therefore it is not a conjunction." 
6. "There is a disjunction between conjunction and disjunction. But disjunction 
is exclusive. Therefore conjunction is not." (Hint: this argument comes 
clearer when we translate it into a simple syllogism.) 
Section 6. Dilemmas (B) 
It is instructive to begin by quoting a typical modern logic text s attitude toward 
dilemmas: "The dilemma, a common form of argument in ordinary language, is 
a legacy from older times when logic and rhetoric were more closely connccted 
than they are today. From a strictly logical point of view the dilemma is not of 
special importance. But rhetorically the dilemma is one of the most powerful 
instruments of persuasion and a devastating weapon in controversy" (Copi & 
Cohen, Op. cit., p. 330). 
Note first the relationship between the two reasons given for minimizing 
dilemmas: they are "a common form of argument in ordinary language" and 
they are "a legacy from older times." Note also that the author offers us a dilem-
ma between logic and rhetoric, between "a strictly logical point of view" (i.e. a 
strictly formal, symbolic-logic point of view sundered from actual human use 
and practice), on the one hand, and "rhetoric" on the other. "Rhetoric" means 
"the art of persuasion," and this can be done by good logical reasoning without 
the sophistic tricks or emotional appeal which make up the negative connotation 
of the term "rhetoric" today. So it is a false dilemma; logical and psychological 
persuasiveness can and should be 
combined. 
And a dilemma can do this. 
A dilemma is a syllogism 
with a disjunctive ("either-or") 
premise and two hypothetical 
("if-then") premises, one for 
each of the two alternatives of the 
disjunction. The disjunction sets 
up the two "horns" of the dilem-
ma, and the hypothetical premis-
es follow the two "horns" to their 
conclusion. 

Dilemmas 
307 
An example: Socrates, asked by a disciple whether he thought it a good idea 
get married, replied Yes, because: 
If you have a happy marriage, you will attain happiness. 
If you have an unhappy marriage, you will attain wisdom. 
You must either have a happy marriage or an unhappy one. 
Therefore you will attain either happiness or wisdom. 
The Four Forms of Dilemmas 
A dilemma can be either simple or complex, and either constructive (affir-
mative) or destructive (negative). This gives us four forms: Simple Constructive, 
Simple Destructive, Complex Constructive, and Complex Destructive. Here are 
their forms: 
Simple Constructive: 
(p 3 q) & ( r 3 q) 
If p, then q; and if r, then q 
p v r 
q 
Complex Constructive: ( p D q ) & ( r D s) 
p v r 
q v s 
Simple Destructive: 
(p 3 q) & (p 3 r) 
~q v ~r 
Complex Destructive: (p 3 q) & (r 3 s) 
~q v ~s 
~p v ~r 
Either p or r 
Therefore q 
If p, then q; and if r, then s 
Either p or r 
Therefore either q or s 
If p, then q; and if p, then r 
Either not q or not r 
Therefore not p 
If p, then q; and if r, then s 
Either not q or not s 
Therefore either not p or not r 
The names are taken from the conclusion: A Simple Constructive 
Dilemma's conclusion is simple (categorical) and constructive (affirmative). 
A Complex Constructive Dilemma's conclusion is complex (disjunctive) 
and constructive (affirmative). 
A Simple Destructive Dilemma's conclusion is simple (categorical) and 
destructive (negative). 
A Complex Destructive Dilemma's conclusion is complex (disjunctive) 
and destructive (negative). 
Some examples: 
Simple Constructive Dilemma: "If 1 know any certainty, I must certainly 
exist; and if I am ignorant of any certainty, I must certainly exist. But 1 must 
either know some certainty or not. Thus in either case I must certainly exist." 

308 
XIII. COMPOUND SYLLOGISMS 
(This is a dilemma to refute skepticism. It is essentially Descartes's "1 think, 
therefore I exist") 
Complex Constructive Dilemma: "If God exists, then unbelievers are 
insane, like children who deny the existence of their own parent; and if God docs 
not exist, then believers are insane, like adults who still believe in an invisible 
playmate. But either God exists, or he does not exist. Therefore either believers 
or unbelievers are insane." 
Simple Destructive Dilemma: "If there were benevolent aliens from 
another planet trying to contact us, they would leave some messages; and if they 
were there trying to contact us, we would be intelligent enough to be worth con-
tacting. But either they have not left any messages, or we are not intelligent 
enough to be worth contacting. Therefore there are no benevolent aliens from 
another planet trying to contact us." 
Complex Destructive Dilemma: "If Jesus told the truth, then he did not 
deceive the world about whether he was divine. And if he was sane, then he was 
not deceived about whether he was divine. But either he was a deceiver or 
deceived about whether he was divine. (For a mere man who says he is divine is 
either a deceiver, if he knows this is not true, or deceived, if he thinks it is true.) 
Therefore Jesus either did not tell the truth or was not sane. He was either a liar 
or a lunatic, if he was a mere man and not the Lord." 
You can see from the last two examples how much more difficult and unnat-
ural destructive dilemmas are to construct or to follow. This is why in practice, 
most dilemmas are constructive, since these arc much simpler and more direct. 
Many dilemmas are also enthymemes, often with both the disjunctive prem-
ise and the conclusion omitted, since the whole argument is usually clear from the 
double hypothetical premise that sets up the two horns of the dilemma. And some-
times dilemmas are epicheiremas. E.g. the following dilemma is both 
enthymcmic and epicheiremic: "If you try to steal home with the winning run, you 
will regret it, since you will fail. But if you do not try, you will regret it too, since 
you will never know whether you could have won the game if only you tried." 
The power of a dilemma resides more in the matter than in the form. A 
dilemma is convincing as an argument to the extent that all its premises are con-
vincingly true. A dilemma is stronger if the disjunctive premise is a tautology 
("Either p or non-p" rather than "either p or q"), since "escaping between the 
horns" (sec pages 309-10) is then impossible. And constructive dilemmas are 
psychologically stronger than destructive dilemmas because they are more sim-
ple, direct, and easy to follow. 
The use of dilemmas is one of the fundamental features of the Socratic 
Method. Socrates first (1) provisionally accepts the student's opinion as an 
assumption, then, (2) within the horizon of this assumption, gives the student a 
"dialectical" choice between two horns of a dilemma, (3) then shows the student 
the 4if... then .. ."consequences of his own choice. (4) If the student then choos-
es the other "horn" of the dilemma, Socrates shows its logical consequences 

Dilemmas 
309 
(5) If the consequences of both horns of the dilemma are unacceptable, the stu-
dent realizes that there is probably something wrong with his original assump-
tion, and is led backwards, so to speak, to question this previously unquestioned 
assumption. It is a double reductio ad absurdum, which is even more effective 
than a single one because the student is given a choice. The dilemma leads the 
student to see for himself where his own premises take him. This is more effec-
tive than directly arguing against the student, which might threaten, alienate, or 
embitter him and put him in an adversary relationship with his teacher. (See also 
pages 211-14 and 350-55 on Socratic method.) 
How to Construct a Dilemma 
It is important in practice to know how to construct arguments as well as to 
deconstruct them (i.e. to analyze and criticize them). 
We saw earlier that there are essentially three steps to constructing a good 
categorical syllogism: 
(1) Formulate the conclusion you want to prove. 
(2) Find an appropriate middle term to connect the subject and predicate of 
your conclusion. 
(3) Formulate the two premises. 
Constructing a good dilemma involves three steps too; the last two are sim-
ilar and the first is identical to the three above. 
(1) Formulate the conclusion you want to prove. 
(2) Find two appropriate "horns" for your dilemma, the two alternatives 
which both lead to your conclusion. These should ideally be mutually exclusive 
and jointly exhaustive statements, x or non-x 
(3) Formulate the two premises, (a) The two "horns" are your double "if.. 
. then . .." premise, (b) And the disjunctive ("either . . . or ...") premise forces 
your opponent to choose between these two "horns." 
For instance, suppose you want to prove that "God exists." You might use 
these two "horns": "You must be either a theist or an atheist." Then develop the 
"if. . . then . . 
conscquences of the two horns as follows, one quickly and the 
other through a long chain of consequences: "If you are a theist, you admit that 
God exists. If you are an atheist, you claim to know that God does not exist; and 
if you claim to know that God does not exist, you claim to know that God does 
not exist anywhere in all reality; and if you claim to know that Goes does not 
exist anywhere in all reality, you claim to know all reality; and if you claim to 
know all reality, you claim you are omniscient; and if you claim you are omnis-
cient, you claim you are God; and if you claim you are God, you claim God 
exists. Therefore, if you are an atheist, you claim God exists." 
The above argument is probably not going to convince many people. But it 
is a clever debating device. Dilemmas are usually more "fun" than serious. The 
above dilemma can easily be answered by escaping between the horns and 
embracing agnosticism. 

310 
XIII COMPOUND SYLLOGISMS 
Three Ways to Answer a Dilemma 
Very rarely do dilemmas ever commit a formal fallacy. The four forms 
above are all valid; so if there are no ambiguous terms, the only way to respond 
to a dilemma is to deny one of the premises. Denying the hypothetical premise 
is called "taking if by (he horns." Denying the disjunctive premise is called 
"escaping between the horns." A third way of replying to a dilemma is called 
"rebuttal" and consists in constructing a counter dilemma which proves the 
opposite (i.e. contradictory) conclusion. However, this leaves the original dilem-
ma untouched. 
Even though it does not refute the original dilemma, rebuttal is the most 
interesting and amusing way to answer a dilemma, and history provides some 
famous examples. For instance, an Athenian mother tried to persuade her son not 
to enter politics by the following argument: "If your speech is just, men will hate 
you; and if is unjust, the gods will hate you. But your speech must be either the 
one or the other. Therefore you will be hated " The son replied, "If I say what is 
just, the gods will love me; and if I say what is unjust, men will love me. I must 
say either the one or the other. Therefore I shall be loved." 
One of the most famous suits of all time was brought by the Sophist teacher 
Protagoras against one of his students, Euathlus. Protagoras taught the art of 
pleading in courts, but he charged a high fee for his instruction; and Euathlus, 
being clever but poor, had made a legal agreement with Protagoras that he would 
pay his teacher his full tuition fee only after Euathlus won his first case in court. 
He then delayed going to court, and Protagoras sued for his money, so Euathlus 
had to appear in court to defend himself against Protagoras's suit. Protagoras's 
argument was this: "If Euathlus loses this case, he must pay me, according to the 
judgment of the court. But if he wins this case, he must pay me, according to the 
terms of our contract. And he must either lose or win this case. Therefore he 
must pay me in any case." Euathlus replied: "If I win this case, I will not have 
to pay Protagoras, according to the judgment of the court. But if I lose this case, 
I will not have to pay Protagoras, according to the terms of our contract. I must 
cither win or lose. Therefore I do not have to pay in cither case." (Protagoras for-
got the adage that a lawyer who tries his own ease has a fool for a client.) 
All three ways of answering a dilemma use the image of the "horns," as if 
a wild bull were charging at you. If the bull succceds, you are pinned by his 
horns. (1) To "take the bull by the horns" is to remove or weaken at least one 
horn, which then becomes harmless - that is, to dispute the truth of one or both 
of the two hypothetical premises. Your opponent (the "bull") has claimed that if 
p, then q: you reply that this is not tme: p does not necessarily imply q. (2) To 
"escape between the horns" is to find a safe refuge from both horns benveen 
them. i.e. a third possibility in addition to the two in the disjunction. It is to deny 
the disjunctive premise that says you must embrace one or the other of the two 
horns. (3) To "rebut" is to create a dilemma (a "bull") yourself, with its own 
horns, which pins your opponent as he pinned you. 

Dilemmas 
311 
Exercises: Put each of the following dilemmas in symbolic form, then answer 
each one. 
1. "An unhappy alternative is before you, Elizabeth. From this day you must be 
a stranger to one of your parents. Your mother will never see you again if you 
do not marry Mr. Collins, and I will never see you again if you do." (Jane 
Austen, Pride and Prejudice) 
2. "Culture is on the horns of this dilemma: if profound and noble, it must 
remain rare; if common, it must become mean." (George Santayana) 
3. "Pain is unavoidable, for if we satisfy our desires we feel satiation and 
boredom; and if we do not, we feel restlessness and discomfort." (Arthur 
Schopcnhauer) 
4. (H) "A man cannot inquire either about that which he knows, or about that 
which he does not know. For if he knows, he has no need to inquire; and if 
not, he cannot inquire, for he does not know the very thing about which he 
is to inquire." (Plato, Meno) 
5. King Henry VI Fs tax collector collected enormous amounts of taxes from the 
people, arguing that "If you have been spending little, you must be rich 
through your savings; and if you have been spending much, you must be rich 
in order to spend so much." 
6. Caliph Omar justified burning the world's greatest library, at Alexandria, by 
this dilemma: "These books either agree with the Qur'an or they do not. If 
they agree, they are superfluous. If they disagree, they are heretical. In either 
case, they should be burned." 
7. Socrates argued that evil is only ignorance, that no one could knowingly and 
deliberately choose evil. For either he knows that the act he is choosing is 
evil, or he does not. If he knows it is evil, he will not choose it, for no one 
chooses what is harmful to himself, and evil is always harmful to oneself, in 
body or soul. If he does not know the act is evil, then if he chooses it he will 
not be choosing it knowingly but unknowingly. 
8. "Mortimer Adler wrote a great book on how to read great books, entitled 
How to Read a Book. But this book must be worthless, for either the reader 
already knows how to read a book before reading How to Read a Book, or 
not. If he does already know this, Adler's book is superfluous to him; if not 
- that is, if he does not know how to read a book - then he will not be able 
to read How to Read a Book, for How to Read a Book is a book." 
9. Each religion claims to teach the most important truth in the world, the truth 
that is most worthy of belief. If the claim of any religion is true, then all who 
do not believe it are fools for not believing the thing most worthy of belief. 
If the claim is untrue, then all believers are fools for believing what is not 
believable. But each truth claim must be either true or untrue. Therefore in 
any case, billions of people are fools: either the believers or the unbelievers. 
10. Hume argued against deduction by this dilemma: If the conclusion of a 
deduction does not contain anything new that is not already given in the 

312 
XIII. COMPOUND SYLLOGISMS 
premises, the deduction is useless, for it yields no new knowledge; but if the 
conclusion does contain something new that is not in the premises, the 
deduction is logically invalid, for there can be no more in a conclusion than 
in its premises. (How would you answer this argument philosophically?) 
11. "All political action aims at either preservation or change. When desiring to 
preserve, we wish to prevent a change to the worse; when desiring to change, 
we wish to bring about something better. All political action is then guided 
by some thought of better and worse." (Leo Strauss, What Is Political 
Philosophy?) 
12. "If freedom of speech is restricted, we will cease to be a democracy. If it is 
not restricted, wc will be at the mercy of demagogues and fanatics." 
13. "Death is not to be feared, for if you are dead you cannot fear, and if you are 
living you are not dead." 
14. "If a thing moves, it must move either in the place where it is or in the placc 
where it is not. But it cannot move in the place where it is, for it remains 
therein; nor in the place where it is not, for it does not exist therein. 
Therefore a thing cannot move." (Scxtus Empiricus, Against the Physicists, 
quoting Zeno the Eleatic) 
15. "If Socrates died, he died either when he was living or when he was dead. 
But he did not die while living, for assuredly he was living, and as living he 
had not died. Nor when he died, for then he would be dead twicc. Therefore 
Socrates did not die." (Sextus Empiricus, Against the Physicists) 
16. If the citizens arc good, laws are unnecessary to prevent evil; and if they arc 
bad, laws are impotent to prevent evil. Therefore laws are either unnecessary 
or impotent. 
17. [Jesus to the Pharisees:] "Whence was the baptism of John? From Heaven 
or from men?" [Pharisees among themselves:] "If we say, 'from Heaven,' he 
will say to us, 'Why then did you not believe him? [And then we fear that 
the people will hate us.] But if wc say, 'from men,' we fear the people, for 
all regard John as a prophet." 

XIV. Induction 
Section 1. What is induction? 
Induction is not a single form of argument. There are at least six different kinds 
of induction: 
(1) generalization from experience 
(2) arguments to establish a cause 
(3) scientific hypotheses 
(4) arguments of statistical probability 
(5) arguments from analogy 
(6) a fortiori and a minore arguments 
What unites them all as "inductive"? 
A common but inadequate definition of induction and of its distinction 
from deduction is that "deduction is reasoning from the universal to the partic-
ular, while induction is reasoning from the particular to the universal." This is 
usually but not always true. There are forms of induction which remain at the 
level of the particular, and there are forms of deduction which remain at the level 
of the universal (e.g. "All bachelors are unmarried men and no unmarried men 
are married men, therefore no bachelors are married men"). Valid deductive 
arguments can also begin with a particular premise (though they must always 
add at least one universal premise), e.g. "Some men are bald men, and no bald 
men shampoo, therefore some men do not shampoo." 
There are also inductive arguments that have universal premises as well as 
universal conclusions, e.g. "All poodles are dogs and bark; all hounds are dogs 
and bark; all spaniels are dogs and bark; therefore it is probable that all dogs 
bark." And there are inductive arguments that have particular conclusions as well 
as particular premises, e.g. "Thomas was a saint and happy; Francis was a saint 
and happy; Theresa was a saint and happy; Catherine was a saint and happy; and 
John was a saint; therefore probably John was happy." 
A second common definition of an inductive argument is "an argument 
whose premises are discovered by sense experience " The premises of deduction, 
since they must include at least one universal premise, are not all known by 

314 
XIV INDUCTION 
sense experience, since sense experience knows only particulars, not universals. 
For instance, we sense a man or men, not "man" or "all men." 
However, this distinction between induction and deduction also does not 
always hold true. Many deductive arguments also discover their premises by 
sense observation: e.g. "I have observed that all the houses on Main Street are 
white, and #24 Main Street is a house on Main Street, therefore #24 Main Street 
is white." And induction also can use more than sense observation alone to find 
its premises. E.g. "I feel my life is meaningful, and you do too, and so do 90 out 
of 100 of the people I know. Therefore it is probable that most people feel their 
lives arc meaningful." 
The most unexceptionable definition of an inductive argument is one which 
does not claim to prove its conclusion with certainty, even if its premises are 
true, but only with probability. This is true of all six forms of induction men-
tioned above. 
All deductive arguments are either logically valid or logically invalid by 
their logical form alone. Valid deductive arguments prove their conclusions with 
certainty (assuming the truth of the premises). But all six forms of inductive 
arguments fall somewhere between the two extremes of simply valid and simply 
invalid, and their strength derives from their matter rather than from their form. 
They all offer only probable reasons for their conclusions, ranging from highly 
probable to slightly probable. 
Deduction Dependent on Induction 
All of our knowledge is dependent on its beginning: our experience and 
observation. As Aristotle said, there is nothing in the intellect that was not first 
in the senses, or derived from sensation. We infer happiness from smiles, wind 
from leaves moving, universal human mortality from observing many individual 
deaths, God from observed cosmic order, or the absence of God from observed 
human disorder. And since experience is the basis of all our knowledge, and 
since induction reasons from experience, induction is the chronologically first 
step in reasoning. Deduction comes later and presupposes a prior induction. 
Abstraction is similar to induction. Abstraction is the operation of the first 
act of the mind which leads us from a sensory awareness of particular things to 
an intellectual awareness of a universal nature or essence. Induction is the oper-
ation of the third act of the mind which usually leads us from a knowledge of 
particular truths known by experience (which make up the premises of the 
induction) to a know ledge of a universal truth or principle (which is the conclu-
sion of the induction). The induction itself is an operation of the third act of the 
mind, reasoning, which is expressed in an argument; the knowledge of its con-
clusion is an operation of the second act of the mind, judgment, which is 
expressed in a proposition. 
Both abstraction and induction are like a hunter (the mind) entering a jungle 

Generalization 
315 
(reality) to find a tiger (a universal). As the tiger lives in the jungle, the univer-
sal exists in its particulars: justice exists in just persons and acts, redness in red 
things, humanity in humans. As the hunter immobilizes and cages the tiger and 
takes it out of the jungle into a city zoo, the mind abstracts the unchanging uni-
versal from the changing concrete things and events it is involved in (the jungle), 
confines it to a concept (the cage), and places it in the mental realm (the city 
zoo, full of caged beasts) where it can be safely and objectively studied and com-
pared with other universals. 
Zoos cannot create tigers, only receive them from jungles. Deduction 
receives all its data from induction. Deduction presupposes induction because 
no syllogism can prove its own premises. If the premises are proved by another 
deductive syllogism, rather than by induction, this second syllogism will also 
need to prove its premises, and the process will go on ad infinitum with the 
result that no premise will be certain, since it depends on prior premises - in 
which case no conclusion will be certain either. (This fact was the basis of some 
ancient skeptics' objection to the syllogism; see page 219.) 
This process of questioning premises and tracing them back to prior prem-
ises stops in two ways. First, it stops at sense experience (and the two processes 
that come from it: the first-act-of-the-mind abstraction of a universal form from 
particular material instances of it, and the third-act-of-the-mind inductive rea-
soning to a universal conclusion from particular premises which are instances of 
it). Second, it also stops at tautologies or self-evident propositions which prove 
themselves, so to speak, and need no prior premises. Wc "just see" that 2 + 2 = 4, 
or that a whole cannot be smaller than its parts, because we understand what a 
whole is and what a part is. 
But the fact that such principles are self-evident does not mean that we did 
not learn them through experience, inductively. Even the law of non-contradic-
tion itself is gradually discovered, like all universals, in and through experienc-
ing cases of it. But we do not argue to its truth merely from our observations of 
some instances of it, inductively. At some point in our experience we understand 
that "x 
non-x," like "2 + 2 = 4" and unlike "The sky is blue," is necessary, not 
accidental; it not only is true but must be true and cannot not be true - really, 
objectively, in fact, always and everywhere. 
Section 2. Generalization 
Generalization is the first and simplest of the six forms of induction. Abstraction 
(in the first act of the mind) and inductivc generalization (in the third act of the 
mind) both reach the universal through the particular. In abstraction, the intel-
lect sees the universal nature (e.g. "redness") in and through a number of par-
ticular examples (e.g. "this red apple" and "that red sunset"). In generalization, 
the reason arrives at a conclusion (a proposition, the expression of the second 
act of the mind) through a proccss of reasoning (the third act of the mind) which 

316 
XIV. INDUCTION 
begins with a number of particular truths as premises and ends with a universal 
truth as a probable conclusion. E.g. "This swan is white, and that swan is white, 
and so is that swan and that one, therefore probably all swans are white." 
This form of inductive reasoning is also called "induction by simple enu-
meration." It is the simplest form of induction. It obviously can only arrive at a 
probable conclusion unless we have a "complete induction," in which we are 
sure that we have examined all the cases, i.e. each of the members of the class 
which is the subject of our conclusion (e.g. "Rose passed and Tim passed and 
Tom passed and Barbara passed and Ruth passed, and these five arc the only 
members of the class, therefore all the members of the class passed"). 
The probability of the conclusion being true increases in proportion to each 
of the following factors: (1) How many observations, how many cases or exam-
ples are there? (2) More important, what proportion of the whole class do the 
cases observed constitute? If there are only 100 swans but there are 800 ducks, 
observing 90 swans yields more probability than observing 400 ducks. (3) How 
representative is the sample? Is it a fair cross-section? 
There are other factors to be factored in too, such as time: Is there past 
precedent? Are there historical data? And will things change in the future? 
The probability of a generalization increases when we add other factors to 
distinguish coincidences from causal laws. Superstitions often come from the 
confusion between coincidences and causal laws; e.g. someone probably 
observed 10 people walk under a ladder, observed that all 10 had bad luck short-
ly afterwards, and concluded that walking under a ladder causes bad luck - but 
it was just a coincidence. (See page 100 on the post hoc fallacy.) 
No inductive argument can be evaluated in the same way as deductive argu-
ments. A deductive argument is either simply valid or simply invalid; it is either-
or, zero-sum, as far as logical validity is concerned. The other two factors in a 
deductive arguments do not usually have this zero-sum character: the truth or 
falsity of the premises and the meaning of the terms. Unless the premises are 
self-evidently true tautologies or sclf-evidently false self-contradictions, they are 
usually uncertain and disputable (though in objective fact each proposition is 
either true or false). And the clarity and meaning of the terms is always poten-
tially "gray." But in an inductive argument, even the "third-act-of-the-mind" 
logic of the argument is "gray." Even if the premises are true, the conclusion fol-
lows only with probability, not certainty. 
The strength of an inductive argument is not usually quantifiable (except for 
statistical probabilities). However, the argument bccomes stronger, and the prob-
ability of its conclusion being true increases, when we apply standards such as 
the three factors mentioned four paragraphs above. Generalizations, like 
abstractions, always retain something of the character of "flying by the seat of 
your pants." Generalizing is much more subjective, i.e. relative to different indi-
viduals' abilities. Some people seem to have a better intuitive ability than others 
to generalize accurately and quickly. And one person will "just see" the truth of 

Generalization 
317 
a generalization from a few instances, while another, slower person will require 
more examples. One person will leap to conclusions too quickly (the fallacy of 
hasty generalization - see page 100) while another will be more careful and 
discriminating. And one person will be good at inductive generalizations in one 
field (a field familiar to him) while another will excel in another field. The same 
person may be quick and accurate at one time and too slow or hasty at another. 
The point here is not to classify people but to avoid the expectation that induc-
tion can be as precise and impersonal as deduction. 
Aristotle used the analogy of a formation in battle arising from a number of 
individual soldiers making a stand together, to show that the human mind is 
capable of this process of seeing the universal (the general principle) in the par-
ticular. "We conclude that these states of knowledge (knowing the universal 
from experience) are neither innate . . . nor developed from other states of 
knowledge, but from sense perception. It is like a rout in battle being stopped by 
first one man making a stand and then another, until the original formation has 
been restored. The soul is so constituted as to be capable of this process" 
(Posterior A nalytics, 1 OOa-b). 
Exercises: Evaluate the following generalizations: 
1. "The man of the machine age is a calculating animal. We live in a welter of 
figures, cookery recipes, railway timetables, unemployment aggregates, 
fines, taxes, war-debts, overtime schedules, speed limits, bowling averages, 
betting odds, billiard scores, calories, babies* weights, clinical temperatures, 
rainfall, hours of sunshine, motoring records, power indices, gas-meter read-
ings, bank rates, freight rates, death rates, discount, interest, lotteries, wave-
lengths, and tire pressures." (Lancelot Hogben) 
2. "After this I inquired in general into what is essential to the truth and cer-
tainty of a proposition; for since I had discovered one which I knew to be 
true, I thought that I must likewise be able to discover the ground of this cer-
titude. And as I observed that in the words M think, hence I am,* there is 
nothing at all which gives me assurance of their truth beyond this, that I see 
very clearly that in order to think it is necessary to exist, I concluded that I 
might take, as a general rule, the principle that all the things which we very 
clearly and distinctly conceive are true." (Descartes) 
3. "The demand for certainty is one which is natural to man, but is nevertheless 
an intellectual vice. If you take your children for a picnic on a doubtful day, 
they will demand a dogmatic answer whether it will be fine or wet, and be 
disappointed in you when you cannot be sure." (Bertrand Russell) 
4. "Freeman and slave, patrician and plebeian, lord and serf, guild-master and 
journeyman, in a word, oppressor and oppressed, stood in constant opposi-
tion to one another." (Karl Marx and Friedrich Engcls, The Communist 
Manifesto, claiming to show that all pre-communist human relationships 
have been oppressive) 

318 
XIV. INDUCTION 
5. Summarize and evaluate the point of the following passage: "I have never 
understood why there is supposed to be something crabbed or antique about 
a syllogism: still less can I understand what anybody means by talking as if 
induction had somehow taken the place of deduction. The whole point of 
deduction is that true premises produce a true conclusion. What is called 
induction seems simply to mean collecting a large number of true premises, 
or perhaps, in some physical matters, taking rather more trouble to see that 
they arc true. It may be a fact that a modern man can get more out of a great 
many premises, concerning microbes or asteroids, than a medieval man 
could get out of a very few premises about salamanders and unicorns. But 
the process of deduction from the data is the same for the modern mind as 
for the medieval mind. . . . It was the misfortune of medieval culture that 
there were not enough true premises, owing to the rather ruder conditions of 
travel or experiment. But however perfect were the conditions of travel or 
experiment, they could only produce premises; it would still be necessary to 
deduce conclusions. But many modern people talk as if what they call 
induction were some magic way of reaching a conclusion without using any 
of those horrid old syllogisms. But . . . induction leads us only to a deduc-
tion. . . . Thus the great nineteenth century men of science . .. went out and 
closely inspected the air and the earth, the chemicals and the gases, doubt-
less more closely than Aristotle or Aquinas, and then came back and embod-
ied their final conclusion in a syllogism: 'All matter is made of microscop-
ic little knobs which are indivisible. My body is made of matter. Therefore 
my body is made of microscopic little knobs which arc indivisible.' They 
were not wrong in the form of their reasoning, because it is the only way to 
reason. In this world there is nothing cxcept a syllogism - and a fallacy. But 
of course these modern men knew, as the medieval men knew, that their con-
clusions would not be true unless their premises were true. And that is where 
the trouble began. For the men of scicnce, or their sons and nephews, went 
out and took another look at the knobby nature of matter, and were surprised 
to find that it was not knobby at all. So they came back and completed the 
process with their syllogism: 'All matter is made of whirling protons and 
electrons. My body is made of matter. Therefore my body is made of 
whirling protons and electrons.* And that again is a good syllogism, though 
they may have to look at matter once or twice more before we know whether 
it is a true premise and a true conclusion. But in the final process of truth 
there is nothing else except a good syllogism. The only other thing is a bad 
syllogism, as in the familiar fashionable shape: 4A11 matter is made of pro-
tons and electrons. I should very much like to think that mind is much the 
same as matter. So I will announce . . . that my mind is made of protons and 
electrons.*" (G.K. Chesterton, St. Thomas Aquinas) 
6. "Everyone has heard people quarrelling. Sometimes it sounds funny and 
sometimes it sounds merely unpleasant; but however it sounds, I believe we 

Causal arguments: Mills methods 
319 
can Icarn something very important from listening to the kind of things they 
say. They say things like this: 4How'd you like it if anyone did the same to 
you?* - That's my seat, I was there first* - 'Leave him alone, he isn't doing 
you any harm' - 4 Why should you shove in first?' - 'Give me a bit of your 
orange, I gave you a bit of mine' - 'Come on, you promised.' People say 
things like that every day, educated people as well as uneducated, and chil-
dren as well as grown-ups. 
"Now what interests me about all these remarks is that the man who 
makes them is not merely saying that the other man's behaviour does not 
happen to please him. He is appealing to some kind of standard of behav-
iour which he expects the other man to know about. And the other man very 
seldom replies: 'To hell with your standard.' Nearly always he tries to make 
out that what he has been doing does not really go against the standard, or 
that if it does there is some special excuse. He pretends there is some spe-
cial reason in this particular case why the person who took the seat first 
should not keep it, or that things were quite different when he was given the 
bit of orange, or that something has turned up which lets him off keeping his 
promise. It looks, in fact, very much as if both parties had in mind some kind 
of Law or Rule of fair play or decent behaviour or morality or whatever you 
like to call it, about which they really agreed. And they have. If they had not, 
they might, of course, fight like animals, but they could not quarrel in the 
human sense of the word. Quarrelling means trying to show that the other 
man is in the wrong. And there would be no sense in trying to do that unless 
you and he had some sort of agreement as to what Right and Wrong are; just 
as there would be no sense in saying that a footballer had committed a foul 
unless there was some agreement about the rules of football." (C.S. Lewis, 
Mere Christianity) (Find an inductive generalization, a hypothetical syllo-
gism, and an argument from analogy here.) 
Section 3. Causal arguments: Mill's methods 
This is the most well-known kind of induction, the one whose rules are found in 
most logic texts and used most often in the sciences. 
"Explaining things by discovering their causes" was Aristotle's definition of 
science; and modem sciencc, in spite of its much "tighter" method, has not 
essentially altered that definition. Scicnce seeks to explain things by discover-
ing their causes (this is "pure science" or "theoretical sciencc"), and to change 
things by changing their causes (this is "applied science" or "practical science": 
technology). 
But what kinds of causcs? There are at least five distinctions we need to 
make among causes. 
(a) We have already (page 193) distinguished (1) real causes from logical 
"becauses" i.e. causes of a thing's being from causes of our knowledge of it. 

320 
XIV. INDUCTION 
Science seeks real causes. (Even psychology seeks the real causes of knowing, 
feeling, etc.) 
(b) We have also distinguished the four causes (page 202). Modern science 
seeks efficient causes and material causes, not formal causes or final causes. 
This is part of the narrowing of focus (like laser light) that distinguishes mod-
ern science from ancient science and accounts for much of its power and suc-
cess. 
(c) We also have distinguished reasoning from cause to effect from rea-
soning from effect to cause (page 204). Science usually reasons from effect to 
cause. (However, it also predicts effects from causcs.) We perceive the effect, 
and want to find the cause: e.g. Why do 1 get headaches? Why arc there tides? 
Why did this plane crash? 
(d) We also need to distinguish between necessary cause and sufficient 
cause. A necessary cause is a cause without which the effect cannot happen. A 
sufficient cause is a cause with which the effect must happen. Remove the nec-
essary cause, and you remove the effect. Produce the sufficient cause, and you 
produce the effect. 
This distinction (d) is closely related to the one before it (c), for wc can infer 
the cause from the effect only with necessary causes, and we can infer the effect 
from the cause only with sufficient causes. E.g. when we infer the presence of a 
foot from the presence of a footprint, we infer that a foot is a necessary cause 
for a footprint. (The inference is only probable, for footprints can also be made 
artificially.) And when we infer and predict future beach erosion from a hurri-
cane, we infer that a hurricanc alone is sufficient to cause beach erosion. Science 
usually seeks necessary causes, since it usually reasons from cffcct to cause. 
(e) Finally, we must also distinguish between ultimate and proximate 
causes, or remote and immediate causes, or first and second causes. The ulti-
mate cause of evolution may be (according to thcists) divine providence, but the 
proximate cause may be (according to Darwin) Natural Selection. The ultimate 
cause of a murder may be the murderer's choice, but the proximate cause was 
the poison he put in the victim's food. Science seeks only proximate causes. This 
is one of the ways it differs from philosophy. 
Mill's Five Canons of Causal Induction 
In A System of Logic (1843) John Stuart Mill proposed five "methods of 
inductive inference." These are very useful practical rules for finding causes. 
They do not yield certainty (for we arc dealing with induction here, not deduc-
tion), but they add to probability. 
First Canon: Method of Agreement 
"If two or more instances of the phenomenon under investigation have only 
one circumstance in common, the circumstance in which alone all the instances 
agree is the cause (or effect) of the given phenomenon." 

Causal arguments: Mill 's methods 
321 
Second Canon: Method of Difference 
If an instance in which the phenomenon under investigation occurs, and an 
instance in which it does not occur, have every circumstance in common save 
one, that one occurring only in the former; the circumstance in which alone the 
two instances differ is the effect, or the cause, or an indispensable part of the 
cause, of the phenomenon." 
Third Canon: Joint Method of Agreement and Difference 
"If two or more instances in which the phenomenon occurs have only one 
circumstance in common, while two or more instances in which it does not occur 
have nothing in common save the absence of that circumstance, the circum-
stance in which alone the two sets of instances differ is the effect, or the cause, 
or an indispensable part of the cause, of the phenomenon" 
Fourth Canon: Method of Residues 
"Subduct [subtract] from any phenomenon such part as is known by previ-
ous inductions to be the effect of certain antecedents, and the residue of the phe-
nomenon is the effect of the remaining antecedents" 
Fifth Canon: Method of Concomitant Variations 
"Whatever phenomenon varies in any manner whenever anolherphenome-
non varies in some particular manner, is either a cause or an effect of that phe-
™ r d,t= 
,h, 
> « < • « 
This is translated into scientific languag 
y 
observing a nam-
ly observable, namely the constant and the - " t t T o d u c i n g those different 
ral phenomenon under different circums 
• 
^ 
s c i e n t i s t ^ 5 to find the 
circumstances through a controlle 
expe 
> p h e n o m e n o n . The philosopher 
common cause of all different occurrences of 
^ 
l h c 
would say that he is trying to 
from 
tj, e contingent. But these 
essential from the accidental, or 
^ empirically) observable, 
abstract metaphysical terms are no 
h e r v at,le terms, or "operational terms, 
so the scientist translates them 
of the constant (or permanent or regular) 
The Method of Agreement 
e n t w a s u s c d 
Around the middle of the ^ f ^ ^ c a u s c s a dccrease m .he^ncidencc 
to make an important discovery^ ^ 
f o u n d t o be ^ ' ^ ^ " h a t one cir-
of dental decay. The r 
known; and investiga 0 - 
level 
than others; the cause was m>t ^ 
decay 
^
£
£
£
3 
L n d e 
cumstance common to all cue> w 
|c[, t o , h c susp,c.on that mere 
of fluoride in their water supply. 

322 
XIV. INDUCTION 
caused decreased decay, and to the practice of fluoridating water supplies, with 
the result that dental decay was significantly decreased throughout the world. 
The Method of Agreement, though its name is affirmative, is really nega-
tive: what it does is to eliminate circumstances present in some but not all cases 
of the phenomenon whose cause we are seeking. This can never be done com-
pletely, of course. This is one reason why neither this Method nor the other four, 
nor all five together, can yield certainty, as deduction can. Another reason is 
because the use of this method presupposes a judgment about which of many 
circumstances we should focus on as likely causes of the phenomenon; and this, 
in turn, requires an insight into the nature of things, the nature of the supposed 
causc and the effect. This is illustrated by a famous example of the misuse of the 
Method of Agreement: "When I drank scotch and soda, I got drunk; when I 
drank bourbon and soda, I got drunk; when I drank gin and soda, I got drunk. I 
gotta stop drinking that soda!" 
The Method of Agreement can give more conclusive evidence for what is 
not a cause than for what is. For instance, it is constantly assumed that more 
money spent on public education causes better results, as measured by SAT 
scores; yet this assumption is not borne out by data. For instance, in 1992-1993 
the 15 states with the top SAT scores did not includc any one of the five with the 
highest teacher salaries, and only one of the states with the highest SAT scores 
was one of the ten with the highest expenditures per pupil. Four of the ten states 
with the highest SAT scores were among the 10 states with the lowest per-pupil 
expenditures. New Jersey had the highest per-pupil expenditures but was 39th in 
SAT scores. South Dakota was third in SAT scores and dead last in teacher 
salaries. All this data does not prove that being cheap causes SAT scores to 
increase, or that putting more money into education is a total waste; but it does 
help us to save time by sending us elsewhere to look for the main causes of pupil 
achievement. 
The Method of Difference 
This method doubles the data, so to speak, compared with the Method of 
Agreement. For instance, if half the passengers on an airplane got sick to their 
stomach, and all those who got sick chose the chicken for dinner while all those 
that did not get sick chose lasagna, we can be fairly sure the chicken, or some-
thing that came with the chicken, caused the stomach upset. 
An example of the use of this method is a study of whiplash (neck pains) 
after rear-end auto collisions in different countries. A Norwegian researcher 
found that Lithuanian drivers had just as many serious accidcnts as drivers in 
other countries, but almost no whiplash. Finally, the cause of the difference 
emerged: Lithuanians had no personal injury insurance, very few lawyers, and 
free socialized medicine, so nothing could be gained by a claim of whiplash. 
(The Lancet. London. 5/4/96) 

Causal arguments: Mill s methods 
323 
The Joint Method of Agreement and Difference 
This is essentially the first two methods used together, thus increasing the 
probability of the conclusion. Pharmaceutical companies often use this method 
in testing new drugs. Two similar and typical groups of people are found. First, 
the first group is given the drug while the second is not. Then, after a time, the 
second group rcccivcs the drug while the first does not. Pasteur used this method 
to discover that increased temperature increased resistance to some infections, by 
injecting chickens with anthrax and putting some of them in a cold bath. These 
caught the disease and died, while the others did not Then, when he took one 
chicken out of the cold bath before it died and heated it, it completely recovered. 
None of the methods can infallibly or automatically distinguish real causes 
from coincidences, and these must be eliminated by common sense. One study 
tried to find out where to put advertising inside a large one-floor discount 
department store by testing whether most people turned to the right or to the left 
first when entering the store. They arranged everything inside the store perfect-
ly symmetrically, and they found no difference between the left-handed and the 
right-handed customers; but they found that while half the women turned to the 
left and half turned right, most of the men turned to the left. Only later did they 
find the cause: the prettiest female cashiers were all on the left. 
The Method of Residues 
This method is useful when we cannot simply and totally produce or remove 
the supposed cause of a phenomenon, but only produce a partial change. The 
simplest example I know of is the way the local dump charges me for disposing 
rubbish. I drive into the dump with a loaded car, get my car weighed on a scale, 
unload my rubbish, then drive onto the scale again where the car is re-weighed. 
The difference in weight is the weight of the rubbish. My vet weighs my cat the 
same way. The cat will not stay still on the scale, so first they weigh me holding 
my cat, then without her. The cause of the difference in weight is the weight of 
the cat. 
A famous example of the use of this method was the discovery of the plan-
et Neptune, which had never been observed visually, by the calculation that 
Uranus, whose orbit is next to Neptune's, moved in a slightly irregular way, with 
a residue of perturbation deviating from the simple elliptical orbit that all the 
other known planets had. This deviation could not be explained by any known 
visible bodies. The Method of Residues predicted that some not-yet-discovercd 
body had to cause the residue of motion, and this body was soon discovered: the 
planet Neptune. 
Another scientific example of the use of this method was Pascal's simple 
argument for the then-controversial thesis that air has weight. He wrote: "A bal-
loon is heavier when inflated than when empty . . . if the air were [not heavy but] 
light, the more the balloon was inflated the lighter the whole would be, sincc 

324 
XIV INDUCTION 
there would be more air in it. But since, on the contrary, when more air is put in, 
the whole becomes heavier, it follows that each part has a weight of its own, and 
consequently that the air has weight." (Pascal, Treaties on the Weight of the Mass 
of the Air) 
The Method of Concomitant Variations 
The first four methods all eliminate some circumstances as possible causcs 
of a given phenomenon. When this cannot be done, the circumstance is modified 
instead of eliminated. For instance, increasing or decreasing certain foods or 
vitamins can increase or decrease certain diseases: e.g. eating one fish per week 
or taking one baby aspirin a day seems to decrease the risk of heart attack. A 
farmer finds that the more fertilizer he uses, up to a certain point, the higher or 
faster his crops grow. A businessman tests the efficiency of different advertising 
campaigns by correlating them with sales during the times he uses each one. 
Coincidences can always be mistaken for causes. Yet occasionally the oppo-
site mistake can also be made: circumstanccs that are apparently only coinci-
dences can turn out to have a roundabout causal conncction. For instance, a cor-
relation was found between the years when the most spiders were found on 
banana boats from Latin America and the years when there were the most 
sunspots on the sun. Later, a causal connection was found: the sunspots, mani-
festations of electrical storms on the surface of the sun. produced electrical con-
ditions in earths atmosphere that were conducive to the fertility of banana spi-
ders. 
Another such example was a correlation between the number of storks and 
the number of babies in English villages. The more storks, the more babies. A 
direct causal connection was not suspectcd, even by the most bizarre sex educa-
tion programs. When the real cause was finally uncovered, it was closer to 
babies causing storks than storks causing babies. Villages with high birth rates 
and more newlyweds had more new home construction, and storks always pre-
fer to nest in a new chimney that has never been used by another stork. (See J.L. 
Casti, Searching for Certainty [New York: William Morrow, 1991]) 
The Limitations of Mill's Methods 
Mills methods are not methods of proof. They help us to discover causes 
and test causal hypotheses, but they do not turn induction into deduction, prob-
ability into certainty. There are two reasons for this: one quantitative, one qual-
itative. 
First, the number of circumstances is potentially infinite, so there is no case 
that literally matches Mill's description of "having only one circumstancc in 
common," and no case of "having every circumstance in common save one." We 
cannot examine an infinite set of circumstances. 

Scientific hypothesis 
325 
The more important limitation of Mill's methods is qualitative: they do not 
tell us how to judge which of the many circumstances are relevant, i.e. likely to 
be causcs. We must know that by intuition, understanding, experience, and com-
mon sense - something impossible to reduce to quantity and the mathematical-
ly measurable or to the empirically observable. Although the scientific method 
(of which Mill's five rules arc an important part) appeals ultimately to mathe-
matical and empirical standards, all great scientists must presuppose and use 
something more fundamental than either: human intuitive understanding. 
Many times, it is this intuition more than the most explicit use of Mill's 
methods that finds the cause. E.g. the following example includes only a very 
"thin slice" of one of the five methods (which one?) but a very "thick slice" of 
understanding: 
"Beasts do not read symbols; that is why they do not see pictures. We are 
sometimes told that dogs do not react even to the best portraits because they live 
more by smell than by sight; but the behavior of a dog who spies a motionless 
real cat through the window glass belies this explanation. Dogs scorn our paint-
ings because they see colored canvases, not pictures. A representation of a cat 
does not make them conceive one." (Suzanne IC Langer) 
Another example, typical of the "hunch" common among detectives: "'How 
did you know that I did manual labor? It's true as gospel, for I began as a ship's 
carpenter.' 'Your hands, my dear sir. Your right hand is quite a size larger than 
your left. You have worked with it and the muscles are more developed.'" 
(Arthur Conan Doyle, "The Red Headed League") 
Section 4. Scientific hypotheses 
The "scientific method" is probably the greatest single discovery in the history 
of science, for it is like a skeleton key that enables us to open countless other 
doors of scientific knowledge. It is much broader than Mills methods of causal 
induction; in fact, it deserves a whole text by itself. What follows is the briefest 
of introductions. 
Science is not esoteric. It is only an extension of principles of common 
sense, and the scientific method is only a refinement of the method we all use 
every day when we try to find a lost pet, the cause of an electrical failure, the 
identity of a hit-and-run driver, or the reason a friend is suddenly hostile. 
The basic steps are as follows: 
(1) A problem arises. Scientific thought, like philosophical thought, arises 
only when a challenge stimulates the mind to respond, like a gadfly stimulating 
a horse (to use Socrates' famous analogy). 
(2) Before anything else, a decision is made, at least unconsciously, to 
address the problem critically and scientifically, i.e. to demand proof, to treat 
answers as false until they are proven true. This is a neccssary and distinct step 
because we use the exact opposite of this "method of doubt" in ordinary life: we 

326 
XIV. INDUCTION 
trust books, people, sense perception, tradition, etc. until they are proved false, 
and wc treat accused people as innocent until proved guilty. But science requires 
what Descartes calls "universal [or nearly universal] methodic doubt." We must 
assume nothing, question every thing. This opens up the mind to possibilities 
we would otherwise not consider. The doubt is universal (or as nearly universal 
as possible) but only methodic. That is to say, it is only theoretical, not practical 
and lived. (In fact it is unlivable. Imagine a conversation in which everyone 
demanded proof for everything!) And it is a beginning, not an end; it is not a 
recipe for skepticism but for inquiry. 
(3) A preliminary hypothesis is set up, a possible explanation. This pre-
cedes the collection of data (the next step), for we search for data only after we 
know where to search, what kind of data to search for, which data are relevant. 
Understanding counts more than logic here. If computers performed all the steps 
of the scientific method, this would be the hardest one to program them to do. 
Hypotheses are only sometimes causal. That is why Mill's methods arc only 
one part of the scientific method. Sometimes we want to know what rather than 
why. For instance, the hypothesis that light is composed of particles concerns the 
matter or content or composition of light rather than the efficient cause of it. 
Which hypotheses are worth testing? What makes a hypothesis likely? We 
can list a number of factors, all of which are matters of practical and common-
sensical judgment: (a) relevance to the problem, (b) simplicity, (c) testability 
by data (verifiability and falsifiability), (d) compatibility with everything else 
we know, both proven facts and probable theories, and (e) power to explain or 
predict future data. 
From the viewpoint of the logic of science, testability is perhaps the most 
important factor. If an idea is not in principle verifiable or falsifiable by data 
gathered by any of the scienccs, then that idea is not scientifically testable. It 
may still be meaningful, it may still be true, and there may still be other ways of 
testing it, but it cannot be called a scientific idea. The Freudian theory of id, ego, 
and super-ego, e.g. as the structure of the psyche has been criticized as an unsci-
entific hypothesis because it excludes falsifiability in principle. If a Freudian 
can explain any possible observed psychic event as caused by id, ego, or super-
ego, then the hypothesis is not testable because no observation can be specified 
that could refute it. It is more like a religious faith, which is not in principle fal-
sifiable (disprovable) by any empirical data; e.g. no amount of injustice, or 
suffering would disprove God's goodness, for God's ways are by definition 
above full human understanding. The believer will not say, e.g. that a Holocaust 
of 6 million Jews does, but 600 does not, disprove the existence of the God of 
Israel. This may be reasonable, but it is not scientific. It is like trusting a friend, 
while science is like fingerprinting a suspect. Friendship and religion use a kind 
of methodic faith; science uses methodic doubt. People should be treated as 
innocent until proved guilty, but scientific ideas should be treated as guilty 
(false) until proved innocent (true). 

Scientific hypothesis 
327 
Another philosophically-important feature of a good scientific hypothesis is 
simplicity. Simplicity in explanation is always preferable for sciencc. If we can 
explain the rise of Nazism in Germany by economics, resentment at the 
Versailles Treaty, and the fear of Communism, it is unscientific to speak of 
divine providence, fate, or demons, just as it is unscientific and unnecessary to 
speak of the soul when doing brain surgery. But simplicity is not always desir-
able when our aim is not science but philosophy, or even common sense. 
Sometimes, more complex explanations are more adequate to the total data (e.g. 
the dualism of spirit and matter rather than either materialistic monism or spiri-
tualistic monism). "Ockham's Razor," the principle that tells us to "always pre-
fer the simpler hypothesis," has proved very fruitful and creative in sciencc, but 
often fruitless and destructive in philosophy. Its natural logical consequence 
seems to be skepticism. (See page 112 on the fallacy of Reductionism, or 
"Nothing Buttery") 
(4) Relevant data are then collected to test the hypothesis. This is the most 
time-consuming and uncertain step - and usually the most important from a 
practical point of view. Most of the work in science today is done by millions of 
researchers, lab workers, and assistants rather than a few super-intelligent cre-
ative geniuses. 
The data must be collected honestly and open-mindedly, not slanted to any 
hypothesis. The data must control the hypothesis, not the hypothesis control the 
data. This can be notoriously difficult when we have a personal stake in the out-
come, yet it is all the more necessary then if we are to learn anything new. 
For instance, a sociologist who was committed to the value of education in 
softening our aggressive animal instincts did research on the Germans who vol-
untarily performed torture and killing in the Nazi concentration camps, corre-
lating the amount of education to the willingness to perform torture and killing, 
and found that there was indeed a correlation, but it was directly rather than 
inversely proportional. 
The philosophy that labels itself "deconstructionism" challenges the funda-
mental principle of traditional literary criticism. Traditionally, good reading 
means that the text (the data) must determine and judge the readers interpreta-
tion rather than the interpretation judge the text. Deconstructionism says it is the 
other way round. I will say nothing more about this philosophy bccause my 
mother would not like it; she always told me, "If you can't say anything nice 
about someone, don't say anything at all." 
(5) The hypothesis is refined and made exact enough to be tested by the 
data. This is done in two major ways. First, the hypothesis is made testable by 
deducing consequences from it. Second, these consequences are quantified if 
possible. ("Exact sciences" are those where this is possible; "mathematically 
measurable" is the scientific meaning of "exact") 
For example, it was deduced that if Einstein's theory of Relativity were true, 
light should be curved by mass to a measurable extent such that a distant star's 

328 
XIV. INDUCTION 
image would be displaced so many degrees if it passed close to the mass of the 
sun. Exactly this amount of displacement was observed during a solar eclipse, 
which made the stars along the line of sight near the sun visible during the 
eclipse. 
(6) And this is step six: the hypothesis is tested by observation of the pre-
dicted consequences. This step can often be done in a much more quick and effi-
cient way by controlled experiment than by simple observation. 
Obviously, if the predicted consequences are not observed to occur, the 
hypothesis is shown to be inadequate. But even if the predicted consequences 
are observed, this does not prove the hypothesis. (To claim that would be to com-
mit the fallacy of Affirming the Consequent.) However, it makes the hypothesis 
much more probable. 
(7) What increasingly verifies the hypothesis is success in predicting and 
controlling what could not otherwise be predicted or controlled. At a certain 
point the hypothesis is verified and becomes a scientific law. There is some dis-
agreement about where that "certain point" lies. We usually distinguish a 
hypothesis, as possible, a theory, as probable, and a law, as verified (proved). 
Section 5. Statistical probability 
Students will be relieved to discover that this section is very short. (Courses on 
statistics are usually one of the most dreaded.) But it must be mentioned, how-
ever briefly, because it constitutes one of the main kinds of inductive argument. 
The two fields that spawned probability theory, and still rely on statistics the 
most, are gambling and insurance. Pascal - a 17th-century gambler, mathemati-
cian, and philosopher - worked out the frst probability theory for gambling. (He 
also invented the first working computer, an adding machine.) 
All forms of inductive arguments are only probable. But there are two dif-
ferent kinds of probability, or meanings of the word "probable," and only one of 
them is quantifiable statistically. (1) The probability of a penny coming down 
tails on any one toss is 50%. And the probability of living longer than 75 years 
in a time and place where the average life expectancy is 75 is slightly less than 
50%. (These two examples are instances of two different kinds of quantitatively 
measurable probability, but we will not go into this distinction here.) (2) It is also 
very probable, on present evidence, that the Big Bang happened 15 billion years 
ago, but we cannot quantify this probability. It is probable that a certain build-
ing will not collapse, that your teacher will not pull out a gun and shoot you, and 
that little green men will not land a flying saucer on the White House lawn, but 
we cannot quantify any of these probabilities (all of which, in turn, are also dif-
ferent kinds of probability). If there are inductivc arguments for these conclu-
sions, the arguments can be only probable, since the conclusion of an inductive 
argument "follows" from its premises only with probability, not certainty. Some 
inductive arguments can be assigned a quantitative degree of probability; others 
cannot. 

Statistical probability / Arguments by analogy 
329 
Wc must distinguish the probability of an argument from the probability of 
an event. We can calculate the quantitative probability of an event if we can cal-
culate the probability of each of the simpler elements of which it is made. If 
these component events occur independently, we simply multiply the probabili-
ty of cach component event to get the probability of the composite event. 
However, this is only one of two meanings of "statistical probability," name-
ly the number of ways an event can occur divided by the number of equipossi-
ble outcomes. The other is the relative frequency with which the members of a 
specified class exhibit a specified attribute. 
Section 6. Arguments by analogy 
Many analogies are not meant as arguments at all but only as illuminating and 
explanatory: something within the first act of the mind, not the third. E.g. "the 
third base coach is called 'Windmill* because that's what he looks like when he 
wildly waves runners home." When analogies are used as arguments, they never 
prove their conclusion, only make it probable. They are more powerful as expla-
nations than as arguments. 
Arguments from analogy are probably the most widely used of all kinds of 
inductive arguments. Most of our everyday inferences are by analogy. E.g. we 
reason that we will enjoy a certain musician's newest song, and thus we buy her 
latest album, because we have enjoyed all her previous songs; or we reason that 
we can drive a golf ball farther if we swing the club in the same way we see the 
pros swing. 
Arguing by analogy is really an abbreviated form of induction and deduc-
tion together. Take the classic case we have used a number of times already, 
Socratcs' argument against Thrasymachus in Book I of Plato's Republic. 
Thrasymachus has maintained that justice is merely "the interest of the 
stronger"; that is, whatever the person in power judges to be in his best interest, 
he labels "just." Socrates argues against this by (1) first observing people who 
practice other arts: the horseman, the doctor, the music teacher. (2) On the basis 
of this observation, he makes an inductive generalization: what is just, or right, 
or good in all these cases is that the one in power work in the best interest of the 
weaker: the doctor heals the weakened sick patient, the teacher instructs the 
ignorant, the horseman trains the untrained horse or rider. The fact that the doc-
tor, teacher, or horseman is paid for his service confirms this: justice demands 
he be compensated for aiding the weaker party. (3) In a perfect argument, we 
would then understand why this is not just something we happened to observe at 
the time but is necessary and unchangeable; we would have an insight into the 
essence involved. This step is supplied in the rest of the Republic, but it is not 
present in Book I, and that is why the argument there is only probable rather than 
certain, and why Socrates is not satisfied with it. (4) Having arrived at our gen-
eral principle through "induction by simple enumeration" (step 2), whether we 
include or omit step 3, wc then (4) deduce from our general principle an 

330 
XIV. INDUCTION 
application to the case we are arguing about. The general principle is that jus-
tice, or righteousness, is the advantage of the weaker, and the application is that 
moral and political justice too must be not the advantage of the stronger but of 
the weaker. If Socratcs had shortened and simplified this already-abbreviated 
argument (minus step 3) to a one-step argument by analogy, it would consist in 
arguing from the cases of the doctor, teacher, and horseman to the similar case 
of the politician. 
Here is another example: I am lost in a jungle, very hungry, and have no 
food. I wonder which of the unfamiliar fruits I see is safe to eat. I observe mon-
keys eating a certain fruit that looks a little like a mango, so I eat it too, since 
monkeys are more similar to man than any other animal is. Instead of reasoning 
in the four steps above, I have taken a short cut and reasoned directly from what 
I know of mangoes (that they are safe to eat) to this mango-like fruit (that it is 
too), and from monkeys to men, intuiting (or hoping) that they are similar 
enough. 
3. Understanding the 
/ 
universal principle 
( 
as essential and 
V 
J . 
necessary 
jt- 
\ . 
^ 
\ 
2. Inductive reckoning to 
4. Deductivorreasoning 
a universal principle 
from thc/(iniversal to 
\ 
anothe/concrete 
\ 
particular instance 
1. Observation of 
X X X X 
X 
concrete parti-
X X X X 
X 
cular instances 
\ 
, 4 
Four Steps (1. to 4. above) 
Short cut by analogy 
Obviously some arguments from analogy are better than others. Why? To 
find the criteria that make arguments from analogy more or less probable, we 
need to specify as exactly as possible what are the structural elements of this 
argument. 
The premises of the argument from analogy are the observed similarities 
between two or more things in one or more ways or attributes. The conclusion is 

Arguments by analogy 
331 
that these things will also be similar in another way. Schematically, the argument 
from analogy looks like this: 
Entities I, II, III, and IV all have attributes A, B, and C. 
Entities I, II, and III also have attribute D. 
Therefore entity IV will probably also have attribute D. 
The criteria that make an argument from analogy more probable are: 
(1) The number of entities observed in the premises. 
(2) The variety of entities observed in the premises. 
(3) The number of attributes in which the entities are similar. 
(4) The relevance of these known attributes (in which the entities are simi-
lar) to the unknown one (in which we hope they are also similar). 
"Relevance" here means "some kind of causal connection " 
(5) The number, variety, and importance of dissimilarities between the enti-
ty we are reasoning about in the conclusion and the ones we see as ana-
logical to it in the premises. Dissimilarities weaken analogies. 
(6) The boldness of the conclusion s claim, in terms of either exactness or 
certainty or both. The bolder the claim, the stronger the premises must 
be for a good argument; the weaker the claim, the weaker the premises 
may be. 
These criteria are not usually applicable in simple, short analogies that do 
not distinguish or specify a number of entities (criteria 1 and 2) or attributes (cri-
teria 3 and 5) or the degree of exactness or certainty claimed (criterion 6). In 
such cases, the following two criteria suffice: 
(1) How similar are the two cases? Is the similarity essential or accidental? 
(2) How dissimilar are they? All analogies are similar in some ways and dis-
similar in other ways. The dissimilarities will not usually be specified in the 
argument, since they count against the analogy, so you must look for them in the 
world. Arc these dissimilarities essential or accidental? 
Extending an Analogy 
An argument from analogy can often be countered by "extending the anal-
ogy," i.e. showing that the analogy counts against the conclusion it is supposed 
to support. Here is a famous example from the Gospels (Matthew 15:21-28): 
And Jesus went away from there and withdrew to the district of Tyre 
and Sidon. And behold, a Canaanite woman from that region came 
out and cried, 'Have mercy on me, O Lord, Son of David; my daugh-
ter is severely possessed by a demon.' But he did not answer her a 
word. And his disciples came and begged him, saying, *Send her 

332 
XIV. INDUCTION 
away, for she is crying after us.' He answered 'I was sent only to the 
lost sheep of the house of Israel.' But she came and knelt before him, 
saying, 4Lord, help me.* And he answered, 4It is not fair to take the 
children's bread and throw it to the dogs/ She said, 'Yes, Lord, yet 
even the dogs eat the crumbs that fall from their master's table.'Then 
Jesus answered her, 40 woman, great is your faith! Be it done for 
you as you desire.' And her daughter was healed instantly. 
Here, Jesus praises the Gentile woman for refuting his analogy by extend-
ing it, for the analogy (the "chosen people" = the children; the Canaanite 
Gentiles = the dogs) was designed to test her faith and her humility, by his cal-
culated insult, and she passed the test. It is one of the only two times Jesus ever 
lost an argument. See John 2:1-11 for the other. (This same example appears on 
page 103 as an example of the fallacy of false analogy.) 
A second form of "extending the analogy" consists in extending it to 
absurdity. The earliest memory I have is winning an argument with my mother, 
who was showing me how to wipe my bum after potty training. She said, "There! 
See? Now it's as clean as a pillow case." I replied, "Well, why don't you sleep on 
it then?" Even a three-year-old knows some basic logic. 
Extending an analogy to absurdity can be either a form of reductio ad 
absurdum (page 294) or a form of the fallacy of hyperbole (page 78), depending 
on whether the extension reasonably follows from the original analogy or not. 
And this is a matter of intuitive common sense, not logical rules. 
Refutation by Logical Analogy 
A common form of refutation is the 44refutation by logical analogy." The 
analogy here concerns the logical form rather than the matter or content of the 
argument refuted. The strategy is to show that the argument is invalid by show-
ing another argument of exactly the same logical form that is obviously invalid 
because it has obviously true premises and an obviously false conclusion. For 
instance, suppose someone has argued that 
All Fascists used torture in interrogating suspects. 
And the Israeli army used torture in interrogating suspects. 
Therefore the Israeli army were Fascists. 
The refutation of this argument would begin with some phrase like 4iYou 
might as well argue that" or 44If you argue that way, you can also argue that," and 
then say 
All Fascists breathed. 
And all the Israeli army breathed. 
Therefore the Israeli army were Fascists. 

Arguments by analogy 
333 
For both arguments have the same fallacious form of Undistributed Middle. 
The underlying principle of this kind of refutation is that an argument is 
valid or invalid by its logical form alone, irrespective of content, and that any 
argument with true premises and a false conclusion is invalid. 
Refutation by logical analogy may also focus on the content rather than the 
form of the argument refuted, by exposing the argument's implied premise (for 
most everyday arguments are enthymemes) and showing how false it is by 
deducing an obviously false consequence from it in the same field or subject 
matter as the original argument. E.g. "Islamic culture was imposed on Africa 
from abroad. Therefore it is only a veneer there, and alien." "So whatever cul-
ture is imposed from abroad is only a veneer, and alien? Then Christian culture 
is only a veneer and alien to Italy, because it was imposed from abroad." When 
the general principle that is the implied premise in the first sentence of the refu-
tation ("So whatever culture . . " ) is omitted, we have then the "short cut" of an 
argument by analogy. 
Exercises: Evaluate the following analogies. First determine whether they are 
meant as arguments or merely as explanations. (Sometimes they can be 
interpreted either way.) If they are arguments, evaluate them by the six cri-
teria on page 331 if possible, or at least by the two simpler criteria immedi-
ately after them, as well as by intuition and common sense. 
1. "It is true that we don't have a great deal of direct evidence about what hap-
pens to a nation which continues to leave its budget unbalanced over a long 
period. But it is imperative for us to know whether we are running into 
national disaster by piling up our national debt, instead of cutting it down 
and making the budget balance. Without direct evidence, our best method is 
to turn to the closest thing we do know about, and that is the family budget. 
We know that a family cannot run up its debts forever, it will sooner or later 
lose the confidence of tradesmen, it will owe more than it could pay even by 
selling all its household goods, and it will go into bankruptcy when the cred-
itors become insistent. This is reason enough for predicting national insol-
vency if we go on the way we have been going." 
2. " T m not anti-Semitic, I'm just anti-Zionist* is the equivalent of T m not 
anti-American, I just think the United States shouldn't exist.'" (Netanyahu) 
3. "Thinking is an experimental dealing with small quantities of energy, just as 
a general moves miniature figures over a map before setting his troops in 
action." (Sigmund Freud) 
4. "Wittgenstein used to compare thinking with swimming: just as in swim-
ming our bodies have a natural tendency to float on the surface so that it 
requires great physical exertion to plunge to the bottom, so in thinking it 
requires great mental exertion to force our minds away from the superficial, 
down into the depth of a philosophical problem." (George Pitcher, The 
Philosophy of Wittgenstein) 

334 
XIV. INDUCTION 
5. "Running a government is like running a ship; we need a strong hand at the 
tiller." (Thomas Carly Ie) 
6. "A government run by the people is as impossible as a theater managed by 
the audience." (G.B. Shaw) 
7. "Medicine, to produce health, must examine disease; and music, to create 
harmony, must investigate discord." (Plutarch, Demetrius) 
8. "That the universe was formed by a fortuitous concourse of atoms, I will no 
more believe than that the accidental jumbling of an alphabet would fall into 
a most ingenious treatise of philosophy." (Jonathan Swift) 
9. "'This is a matter of national spirit,' said Maijorie Wilson, coordinator of the 
Kangaroo Protection Cooperative, an Australian wildlife group. 'We believe 
here that we have enough meat in this country to satisfy people without them 
having to cat their national symbol. You Americans don't cook your bald 
eagles, do you?'" (New York Times, 7/10/95) 
10. "Just as the bottom of a bucket containing water is pressed more heavily by 
the weight of the water when it is full than when it is half empty, and the 
more heavily the deeper the water is, similarly the high places of the earth, 
such as the summits of mountains, are less heavily pressed than the lowlands 
are by the weight of the mass of the air. This is because there is more air 
above the lowlands than above the mountain tops; for all the air along a 
mountain side presses upon the lowlands but not upon the summit, being 
above the one but below the other." (Pascal, Treatise on the Weight of the 
Mass of the Air) 
11. "What is prudence in the conduct of every private family can scarce be folly 
in that of a great kingdom. If a foreign country can supply us with a com-
modity cheaper than we can ourselves make it, better buy it from them with 
some part of the produce of our own industry." (Adam Smith, The Wealth of 
Nations) 
12. "A few dead flies make the perfumers ointment give off an evil odor; so a 
little folly outweighs wisdom and honor." (Ecclesiastes 10:1) 
13. Baby's implicit reasoning: "Daddy looks a lot like Mommy, so he probably 
has milk for me too." 
14. "The having of the idea of any thing in our mind no more proves the exis-
tence of that thing, than the picture of a man evidences his being in the 
world." (John Locke, Essay Concerning Human Understanding) 
15. "Compromise makes a good umbrella but a poor roof; it is a temporary 
expedient." (James Russell Lowell) 
16. "By good works a lively faith may be as evidently known as a tree discerned 
by the fruits." (Anglican 39 Articles of Religion) 
17. "Reason can no more influence the willing than the eyes which show a man 
his road can enable him to move from place to place, or than a ship with a 
compass can sail without a wind." (Richard Whately, Elements of Rhetoric) 
18. "A woman without a man is like a fish without a bicycle." (feminist slogan) 

A fortiori and a mi no re arguments 
335 
19. "As a wall'd town is more worthier than a village, so is the forehead of a 
married man more honourable than the bare brow of a bachelor" 
(Shakespeare, As You Like It 3,3) 
20. Judith Jarvis Thompson, defending abortion, used the analogy between a 
woman who is unwillingly pregnant and a woman who is kidnapped, tied to 
a hospital bed, and hooked up to a famous violinist, who needs her rare blood 
type, by continuous intravenous blood transfusion. If she pulls the plug, the 
violinist will die. But this act is morally legitimate. Therefore so is abortion. 
Section 7. A fortiori and a minore arguments 
These are really forms of argument by analogy. The a fortiori ("all the stronger") 
argument reasons that if something is true in one case, it is probably true in a 
second, similar case in which the reason for it being true is even stronger. For 
instance, "What father among you, if his son asks for a fish, will instead of a 
fish give him a serpent; or if he asks for an egg, will give him a scorpion? If you 
then, who are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much 
more will the heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him!" (Luke 
11:11) (Jesus had a penchant for a fortiori arguments.) 
The a minore ("all the less") argument is simply the negative version of the 
a fortiori, and the two are convertible. For instance, the above a fortiori argu-
ment could have been transformed into an a minore argument if it had conclud-
ed. "how much less will the heavenly Father give you evil instead of good?" 
Here is an a minore argument from the rocket scientist Wernher von Braun: 
"Scientists now believe that in nature matter cannot be destroyed without being 
converted to energy. Not even the tiniest panicle can disappear without a trace. 
Nature does not know extinction - only transformation. Would God have less 
regard for His masterpiece of creation, the human soul?" (The Miami News, 8/6/66) 
Sometimes a given argument can be interpreted either as an a fortiori or a 
minore argument or as a simple argument from analogy. E.g. "Whoever does not 
bear his own cross and come after me, cannot be my disciple. For w hich of you, 
desiring to build a tower, docs not first sit down and count the cost, whether he 
has enough to complete it? Otherwise, when he has laid a foundation, and is not 
able to finish, all who see it begin to mock him, saying, 'This man began to build 
and was not able to finish/ Or what king, going to encounter another king in war, 
will not sit down first and take counsel whether he is able with ten thousand to 
meet him who comes against him with twenty thousand? And if not, while the 
other is yet a great way off, he sends an embassy and asks terms of peace. So 
therefore, whoever of you docs not renounce all that he has cannot be my disci-
ple." (Luke 14:27-33) 
The criteria for evaluating an a fortiori or a minore argument are common-
sensical and essentially the same as those for evaluating any argument from 
analogy. 

336 
XIV. INDUCTION 
An Exercise on Nearly Everything 
The following argumentative dialogue tests your ability to integrate the 
whole of this book in a practical way: to know which logical tools are needed to 
evaluate each step of the long argument, and to use them. 
The topic is deliberately controversial (feminism, gender, and women's 
"roles") to test your ability to be objective and logical even about an emotional-
ly volatile issue. 
The numbers in the margin arc for easy reference. They correspond to dis-
tinct steps in the conversation, each requiring its own logical analysis and eval-
uation, as well as being related to its preceding and following steps. 
You may not be able to see how all 71 distinct steps can be explained and 
evaluated by some specific point in this book, but the more you can do, the bet-
ter. This would be a good exercise to work on with one or two other students, to 
multiply the angles of vision and to discuss each point together. 
Fatima is a very conservative Iraqi Muslim. Tiffany is a very "liberal" 
American. Socrates is - well, Socrates. He enters the conversation near the end 
and produces some consternation in both his dialogue partners, as is his wont. 
1 Tiffany: 
2 Fatima: 
3 Tiffany: 
4 Fatima: 
Tiffany: 
5 Fatima: 
Tiffany: 
6 Fatima: 
Tiffany: 
7 Fatima: 
8 Tiffany: 
Fatima: 
9 Tiffany: 
10 Fatima: 
Tiffany: 
11 Fatima: 
12 Tiffany: 
Fatima: 
You know, Fatima, you're a swell person even though you were 
brought up in an awfully repressive society. I guess that proves 
free will is stronger than social conditioning. 
How dare you insult my people by complimenting me! They are 
part of me. They are my family. 
I'm sorry; I didn't mean to insult your people - I mean the indi-
viduals. I meant your social system. 
What's wrong with our social system? 
All the injustices, of course. 
Why do you say that? 
Everybody knows your society is full of injustices. 
Well, I don't. And I lived there. Did you? 
No. .. 
In fact, I believe my society is one of the most just societies on earth. 
You sound so certain! Well, I guess that's true for you. 
How can something be "true for you" unless it's true? 
Look, let's not argue, OK? You love your society, and that's great; 
because love is always great, even though "love is blind." 
No it isn't! 
Of course it is: look at you. Look at what it's done to you: it's 
made you blind to injustice. 
Either Iraq is one of the most just societies on Earth or I'm as 
blind to injustice as a bat is to the sun. And I am not that blind. 
OK, prove it. Prove Iraq is one of the most just societies on Earth. 
Iraq is an Islamic society. And Islamic society is formed by 
Islamic law. And Islamic law is the most just law on Earth. 

An exercise on nearly everything 
337 
13 Tiffany: 
But how can your society be just if it oppresses women? 
14 Fatima: 
It couldn't possibly oppress women, because oppression is unnat-
ural, and our law. Islamic law, is the true natural law. 
15 Tiffany: 
Natural? Just? When it doesn't even allow a woman to vote or 
appear in public without a veil? You gotta be kidding. 
16 Fatima: 
You don't understand. That's not injustice; it's letting women be 
in their proper place. 
17 Tiffany: 
You sound like some male chauvinist pig! Do you really think 
you should be kept in your "proper place" like a dog in a cage or 
a baby in a crib? 
No, like a woman in a family. What's wrong with that? Do you 
think it's unjust to have a proper place? 
That's not our definition of justice. We believe justice is equality. 
If that's so, then you must believe it's unjust that men can't have 
babies. 
So your definition of justice is putting everyone in their so-called 
proper place? Even if some tyrant defines your "proper place"? 
No. That wouldn't be justice. Tyranny can't be justice. 
Why not? It fits your definition. 
Because it's disharmony. Justice is proper place, and that always 
means harmony. 
But not equality? 
No. Justice is harmonious order among unequals. 
That's a terrible definition! Slavery could be just then. 
No. Slavery isn't just because slavery isn't harmony. 
But what if it is? What if the slaves are brainwashed into behav-
ing harmoniously and even being contented? 
No, no. Justice and slavery can't match. Slavery isn't justice 
because justice isn't slavery. 
That doesn't prove anything. I still want to know how you can 
call your society's oppression of women "harmonious order" or 
"justice." Oppressing any people isn't "harmonious order" or 
"justice." And women arc people, you know. Or is that fact news 
to you, maybe? 
29 Fatima: 
We don't oppress women; we liberate women. You can't be both 
oppressed and liberated at the same time. 
30 Tiffany: 
You still haven't proved anything yet. You're just shifting words 
around. 
31 Fatima: 
What's wrong with my argument? 
Tiffany: 
I think there's something wrong with the arguer. Anyone who 
defends oppression must be oppressed herself. And you're defend-
ing oppression. 
32 Fatima: 
Then I will show you another argument. Tell me. Tiffany, does 
oppression make you happy? Can the oppressed by happy? 
18 Fatima: 
19 Tiffany: 
20 Fatima: 
21 Tiffany: 
22 Fatima: 
23 Tiffany: 
Fatima: 
24 Tiffany: 
Fatima: 
Tiffany: 
25 Fatima: 
26 Tiffany: 
27 Fatima: 
28 Tiffany: 

338 
XIV. INDUCTION 
Tiffany: 
Of course not. 
Fatima: 
But our women arc happy. That proves they're not oppressed. 
33 Tiffany: 
Who says they're happy? 
34 Fatima: 
They do! We do! And if they say they're happy, then they're 
happy. How could you be mistaken about that? 
35 Tiffany: 
You can't be as happy as American women are. Look at all the 
things we have that you can't have . . . 
36 Fatima: 
Don't bother listing the things. Things can't make you happy. 
37 Tiffany: 
Well, we've go/ the happiness and we've got the things; don't you 
think that shows there's a connection? 
38 Fatima: 
You don'/ have the happiness. You're not as happy as we arc. 
39 Tiffany: 
Wait a minute. You just said no one could be mistaken about 
whether she's happy or not. Now you're saying we're mistaken 
about being happy. 
40 Fatima: 
No, I'm saying you're unhappy and you know it. The polls show 
it. The statistics show it. The suicides show it. 
41 Tiffany: 
And does Iraq have polls and statistics? Can we compare? 
42 Fatima: 
We can compare us, anyway. You are an American woman, aren't 
you? And I am an Iraqi woman, right? 
Tiffany: 
Yes. 
Fatima: 
And which one of us is smiling and which one frowning now? 
Tiffany: 
B u t . . . 
Fatima: 
Please answer my question, and then I will answer yours. 
Tiffany: 
You're smiling and I'm frowning. B u t . . . 
Fatima: 
And do people smile when they're unhappy? And do they frown 
when they're happy? 
Tiffany: 
No. but.. . 
Fatima: 
See? American women are unhappy and Iraqi women are happy. 
43 
What makes the difference? What's the missing factor in America 
that's present in Iraq? Islamic law. Islamic law makes us happy. 
The proof of the pudding is in the eating - isn't that what you 
44 
say? And may I also tell you why you are unhappy? 
Tiffany: 
Why? 
Fatima: 
Because you are oppressed. 
Tiffany: 
What? We 're oppressed? 
Fatima: 
Which one of us is frowning and complaining and unhappy? 
Tiffany: 
I am. Because . . . 
Fatima: 
And which one of us is happy? 
Tiffany: 
You are. Because .. . 
Fatima: 
And which kind of person is happy: the oppressed or the free? 
Tiffany: 
The free. 
Fatima: 
See? We are the free. You are the oppressed. 
45 Tiffany: 
This is ridiculous. Why are we oppressed, according to your 
wacky perspective? 

An exercise on nearly everything 
339 
Fatima: 
46 Tiffany: 
Fatima: 
47 Tiffany: 
48 Fatima 
Tiffany: 
Fatima 
49 Tiffany: 
Fatima: 
50 Tiffany: 
51 Fatima: 
52 Tiffany: 
Fatima: 
Tiffany: 
53 Fatima: 
Tiffany: 
54 Fatima: 
55 Tiffany: 
56 Fatima: 
Tiffany: 
Fatima: 
57 Socrates: 
Both: 
58 Socrates: 
I think your unhappiness began after you started insisting on 
equal rights, defining justice as equality instead of harmonious 
order. So I think that is the cause of your unhappiness. 
Fatima, you have been brainwashed. 
Well, thank you. Tiffany. Pd rather have a brain that's washed and 
clean than one that's dirty. 
I guess our minds are just so totally different that we'll just have 
to agree to disagree about everything. 
Even that? 
What do you mean? 
Isn't that a self-contradiction? 
Where do you think we are, in a logic book or something? 
So you are giving up on the argument? 
No! It's my turn to cross-examine you now. Tell me, if justice is 
"harmonious order among zz/zequals," does that mean that women 
are not equal to men? 
Of course women are not equal to men. Everyone knows we're 
different. And if we're different, we're not equal. And it's either 
"equal" or "unequal." Thus, it's "unequal." 
But unless you're either superior or inferior, you're not unequal. 
So you must think we women are either superior or inferior to 
men. Do you think we are superior? 
No - not socially. 
Then we must be inferior to men. 
Yes, socially, our nature and our place is to submit to our men. 
You simply cannot believe that, can you? 
Absolutely not! 
So you must therefore believe that we are by nature equal. 
Of course! Our social inequalities all come from society, from 
oppressive societies, like yours. 
So you are saying that society invented wombs? 
Of course not. Why would I say that? 
Because our wombs are certainly one of our biggest differences, 
one of our biggest "social inequalities." If our inequalities come 
from society, then our wombs come from society, which is 
absurd. 
Excuse me, ladies, but I have been listening to your argument for 
quite a while now, and I'd like to try to help you both by asking 
one wee little question. Do you both see that you are assuming 
the same highly questionable premise? 
No. What is it? 
I'd really rather let you find it. Answering questions has always 
seemed to me a less effective way to train minds than asking 
them. Don't you see it? 

340 
XIV INDUCTION 
59 Tiffany: 
60 Socrates: 
61 Tiffany: 
62 Socrates: 
63 Tiffany: 
64 Socrates: 
Tiffany: 
65 Socrates: 
Tiffany: 
66 Socrates: 
Tiffany: 
67 Socrates: 
Tiffany: 
Socrates: 
Tiffany: 
68 Socrates: 
69 Fatima: 
Socrates: 
70 Fatima: 
71 Socrates: 
All I see is that Fatima here is buying into the old, repressive 
stereotypes like "a woman's nature" and "a woman's place" and 
"the feminine mind ." 
So you believe there is no such thing as a woman's nature? 
Doesn't everything we can speak about meaningfully have some 
sort of nature? 
Yes, but surely you don't believe there is such a thing as "the fem-
inine mind." Obviously there is a biological difference in our 
bodies, but "the feminine mind" is a social convention. In fact, 
"the feminine mind" is a fiction invented by the masculine mind! 
I think you may have a self-contradiction there . . . 
I was only kidding, not literal. 
Tell me, Tiffany: do you agree with my disciple Plato that a 
human being is essentially a mind? Or with his disciple, 
Aristotle, that a human is essentially what psychologists call a 
psychosomatic unity, one substance with two dimensions, mate-
rial and mental, rather than two substances? 
Aristotle, I think. He sounds much more commonsensical. 
And that "psychosomatic unity"-does it mean that any essential 
and innate quality that pervades all of either of these two dimen-
sions must have some natural effect in the other? 
That seems true. 
And are masculinity and femininity essential and innate and all-
pervasive qualities of the body? Or docs our biological gender 
come from social convention too, as "the feminine mind" docs? 
It's by nature. I wouldn't call it "all-pervasive" though. That's sexism. 
I don't know what you mean by "sexism," but our identity as mas-
culine or feminine pervades every cell in our bodies, doesn't it? 
Yes. 
So it seems to follow then that it must have some effect on our 
other dimension, according to the principle of the psychosomat-
ic unity that you believe. 
I guess that follows. 
Does it not also follow, then, that there is some truth to the old 
idea of a "feminine mind" and a "masculine mind"? 
Congratulations, Socrates. So you agree with me in seeing that 
women are quite naturally and quite happily inferior. 
I did not say that, Fatima. Nor do I believe it. 
But you must see that that logically follows, Socrates. You are the 
father of logic, after all. 
Yes, and you two are the mothers of the same unquestioned 
assumption from which both of your opposite conclusions follow. 
Don't you see it? You really should take a logic course some time, 
and pay close attention to enthymemes! 

An exercise on nearly every thing 
341 
Texts for Logical Analysis 
Here arc a few suggestions of philosophical texts for longer, more ambi-
tious, and more advanced logical analysis of philosophical arguments. Some are 
much longer than others; the longer ones can be divided further and done in part. 
I. relatively easy 
1. St. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica i-ii, 1, 2, "Those Things In Which 
Happiness Consists," in eight articles (all easy syllogisms but good practice 
and profoundly practical content) 
2. Plato, the part of Apology of Socrates that contains Socrates' dialogue with 
Mcletus 
3. Peter Kreefl, Between Heaven and Hell, the first half (the dialogue between 
C.S. Lewis and J.F. Kennedy) 
4. Kreeft, The Unaborted Socrates, the first dialogue 
5. Kreeft, Socrates Meets Jesus, any of the dialogues, especially "Candy 
Confessions" 
6. Kreeft, The Best Things in Life, any of the dialogues, especially #6 or #12 
7. Kreeft, Ecumenical Jihad, the Luther-Aquinas-C.S. Lewis trialogue 
8. Kreeft, Socrates Meets Machiavelli, any of the chapters 
9. Kreeft. Socrates Meets Marx, any of the chapters 
10. Kreeft, Socrates Meets Sartre, any of the chapters 
11. Kreeft, Socrates Meets Descartes, any of the chapters 
12. Kreeft, Socrates Meets Hume, any of the chapters 
13. Kreeft, Socrates Meets Kant, any of the chapters 
II. Intermediate 
1. St. Thomas Aquinas, almost any of the articles in the Summa Theologica 
2. Boethius, The Consolation of Philosophy, Book 4 
3. Plato. Republic, Book I, the dialogues between Socrates and Cephalus and 
between Socrates and Polymarchus 
4. Plato, Meno 
5. Plato, Euthvphro 
6. Plato, Phaedo, the three arguments for immortality 
7. Plato, Crito 
8. Plato, Gorgias, the first half, the dialogues between Socrates and Gorgias 
and/or between Socrates and Polus 
III. Harder 
1. St. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica i, 2, 3, the "five ways" 
2. C.S. Lewis, Miracles, chapter 3 
3. Plato, Republicy Book 1, last half, the dialogue between Socrates and Thra-
symachus 
4. Plato, Gorgias, second half, the dialogue between Socrates and Callicles 
5. Berkeley, Three Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous 

XV. Some Practical Applications 
of Socratic Logic 
Section 1. How to write a logical essay 
Students are required to write essays throughout their educational career. This 
ability can even determine whether or not you get into a good college or gradu-
ate school, or get good enough grades to stay in. The simple, three-acts-of-the-
mind structure of Socratic-Aristotelian logic gives us an ideal simplified form 
for writing an effective, clear, and persuasive essay. 
What follows is certainly not the only good way to write a persuasive essay. 
But it is a simple and effective way, and many intelligent students today have 
never been taught even this simple form. That is why it may seem at first artifi-
cial and confining, or "picky" and over-strict. However, following this seven-
step guideline in each detail can make a tremendous difference: the difference 
between a vague, weak, rambling, disordered, confusing, and therefore non-per-
suasive essay and a sharp, strong, economical, orderly, clear, and convincing 
one. 
It will feel rigid at first, but rigid forms are necessary for beginners in every 
field. Aspiring poets should first learn to write sonnets before writing free verse. 
Pianists must master scales and chords and Bach's two-part Inventions. Babies 
need walkers, and the lame need crutches, and sinners need "organized reli-
gion." 
The principles below can apply to argumentative essays of any length but 
especially to a medium length essay in the neighborhood of 3-6 pages. 
HOW TO WRITE A LOGICAL (ARGUMENTATIVE) ESSAY 
1. Choose a good topic. A good topic for a logical essay has all three of the fol-
lowing qualities: 
(a) It is controversial, that is, argued-about, not obvious. "War is painful" is 
not controversial; "all wars are unjust" is. "Man is mortal" is not contro-
versial; "man can be made immortal" is. 

How to write a logical essay 
343 
(b) It is specific. "Philosophers have helped humanity" is not specific; 
"Aristotle's philosophy helped the progress of science more than 
Descartes's philosophy did" is specific. 
(c) It is an either/or. a single question with only two possible answers, as in 
formal debates. "What is God?" is not a good topic; "Is God unchanging?" 
is. 
2. Explain the importance of your question, to motivate the reader's interest. 
What difference is made by answering it in one way vs. the other way? 
3. Give your answer (thesis, conclusion). This is the "point" of your whole 
essay. This tends to come at the end in a Socratic dialogue, but it should usu-
ally be "upfront" and come at the beginning in an essay. 
4. Define your terms. Terms need defining if they are 
(a) ambiguous (can be taken in two or more different senses); or 
(b) obscure or technical to some readers; or 
(c) controversial (i.e. imply a presupposition that not everyone agrees with, 
like "anti-life" or "anti-choice" in an essay on abortion. Avoid such terms 
in an essay unless you need them and will defend them). 
5. Prove your thesis. Give one or more reasons (arguments) for it. These rea-
sons will be either inductive (from specific examples) or deductive (from a 
general principle) or both. 
If they are deductive, your reasons will be either linear (A, therefore B, 
therefore C, therefore D) or cumulative (D is true bccause of A, and also 
because of B, and also because of C). 
Each of your arguments should have 
(a) no ambiguous terms, 
(b) no false premises, and 
(c) no logical fallacies (i.e. the conclusion should follow necessarily from the 
premises) 
6. Summarize and then answer your opponent's arguments, i.e. the 
strongest and most commonly given arguments for the opposite position. 
(Remember, since you formulated your thesis in an either/or, yes-or-no 
form, there are only two possible answers to your question.) 
To refute an argument, you do not merely find a counter argument to 
prove the opposite conclusion, but you must 
(a) first summarize the argument honestly and fairly; 
(b) then analyze (take apart) the argument and explain what is wrong with it. 
That is, you must find and show the presence of one of the only three 
things that can go wrong with an argument: 

344 
XV. SOME PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF SOCRATIC LOGIC 
(1) a term used ambiguously (Which term? Distinguish its two meanings. 
Show how it has changed its meaning in the course of your opponent's 
argument.); or 
(2) a false premise (Which premise? Is it stated or implied? If implied, 
prove that it is necessarily implied. Whether stated or implied show 
that it is false; give reasons for disagreeing with it.); or 
(3) a logical fallacy. (Which fallacy? Use the principles in this book to 
show that the conclusion does not logically follow from the premises.) 
7. Anticipate and answer objections. To be maximally complete and fair, add 
one more step: 
(a) imagine the strongest way your opponent would try to refute your argu-
ments (that you gave in part 5) in one of the three ways above, and then 
(b) defend your argument against these criticisms. 
Section 2. How to write a Socratic dialogue 
I have written and published about a dozen full-length books of Socratic dia-
logues, and judging by reader reactions, they are the most successful and appre-
ciated of my 50-odd published books. So I want to spread the secret (which is 
no secret at all, as far as I can see). 
Like most philosophy students, I loved reading Plato and found the dramat-
ic form of dialogue much more engaging than the monologue. A monologue is 
more likely to commit the one unforgivable sin of any writer, boring the reader, 
because it has only one voice, it is impersonal, and it usually lacks drama. I won-
dered why so few other philosophers copied Plato's dialogue form, and why even 
when they did the dialogues were not really Socratic. I still don't know. 
(Augustine's On the Teacher and Berkeley's Three Dialogues Between Hylas and 
Philonous are the only two lasting philosophical classics I know in dialogue form, 
unless you count Boethius's The Consolation of Philosophy as a dialogue too). 
No one knows how closc Plato's Socrates is to the actual historical Socrates, 
but Plato surely included some invented fiction, however closely based on 
Socrates' historical character; so I could think of no reason why we today could 
not extend the historical figure of Socrates through our own imagination. I asked 
many people why we couldn't, but no one gave me an answer. So I tried a sim-
ple experiment, with my students as the guinea pigs. 
I always introduce students to philosophy first through Socrates, and I 
encourage original essays, so I suggested that the students write their essays by 
imitating Plato's form and writing Socratic dialogues. Many tried it, and almost 
all succeeded both by their own estimation and by mine. If students can do it, 
why can't teachers? I couldn't imagine why. So to find out why it can't be done, 

How to write a Socratic dialogue 
345 
I did it. And the answer is simply that there is no reason why it can't be done. 
Furthermore, I think I can even give at least a few pieces of pretty obvious and 
commonsensical advice to others now about how to do iL Here they are: 
A. Points of personal advice to the writer 
1. As with most enterprises, the Frst and necessary step is: "Begin!" "Just do 
it." "Try." For "well begun is half done" (ancient Greek proverb) and 
"whatever is worth doing, is worth doing badly" (G.K. Chesterton). 
2. Don't be afraid to imitate. Apprenticeship by imitation was the primary 
method of teaching almost anything (and it worked!) until the modem cult 
of individuality and originality. You can never be as creative or original by 
trying to be original as you can by forgetting all ^bout originality and just 
"doing your thing." 
And if anyone is imitable and worth imitating, it's Socrates. 
3. So immerse yourself in Socrates. Read all Plato's earlier dialogues, up to 
Republic, Book I. (After that, the personality of Socrates recedes and Plato 
the professor emerges. He may be an excellent professor, and a great 
philosopher, and his system may be a valid extension of Socrates' begin-
nings, but he's just not Socrates, as St. Paul may be a profoundly wise and 
great Christian but he's just not Jesus.) 
4. Instinctive and inward imitation is better than contrived and external imi-
tation. Let the spirit of Socrates get under your skin, so that you can use 
your imagination and ask yourself: What would the real, historical 
Socrates have said here? Socrates' method is only partially technical and 
able to be formulated objectively and impersonally. Leam both parts, but 
don't neglect the inner spirit. 
5. There are two ways to write a Socratic dialogue: (a) You can simply use 
your imagination, be Socrates and his dialogue partner (let us call him "O" 
for "other"), and let the argument and the two personalities carry you 
wherever they naturally go, like a river, (b) Or you can make a logical map 
of the argument before you begin, and add the dramatic and personal 
dimension to it as you write. If (b) proves too un-Socratic and artificial, 
try (a). If (a) proves to be too unstructured, use (b) at least for a while. 
After some practice with (b) you may be able to transition to (a). 
6. Whether you use (a) or (b) above, you must know logic, naturally and 
instinctively. Don't think you can master this section without mastering 
the rest of this book. 
7. In the process of arguing, use the rules for Socratic debate on pages 
348-50. Also see pages 211-14. 
B. Points of advice in constructing the dramatic character of Socrates: 
1. Confine yourself to only two characters, Socrates and "0." Perhaps later 
you can add other characters, as Plato docs, but even then each should take 

346 
XV. SOME PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF SOCRATIC LOGIC 
his turn: do not put three or more people into the conversation at once 
(except perhaps very briefly). If you do, that will loosen its logical struc-
ture, and argument will turn into conversation. 
2. The initial question should arise naturally from an ordinary situation or 
conversation. It should not be artificial or imposed, but arise from "O's" 
interests. 
3. Like Plato, you might want to add the little trick of placing a veiled clue 
to the central point of the dialogue in the very first line. 
4. Socrates asks the questions rather than giving the answers (except, per-
haps, in response to his dialogue partner's questions). Remember, Socrates 
is not a preacher. (This is easy to understand, but surprisingly hard to 
obey.) 
5. There is always an ironic contrast between Socrates' knowing that he does-
n't know and "O's" not knowing that he doesn't know. The one who seems 
to know, doesn't; and the one who seems not to know, does. The one who 
seems to be the student (Socrates) is really the teacher, and vice versa. 
6. This irony may emerge in the interaction between the characters if "O" is 
a bit arrogant - in which case Socrates gets a chancc to use his (always 
light and subtle) ironic wit and humor. But "O" should never be unfairly 
treated, put down, or preached at; and neither should the reader. 
7. The personal, psychological struggle is as much a part of the Socratic dia-
logue as the struggle of ideas. A Socratic dialogue is a form of spiritual 
warfare, therapy, or doctoring to the spirit of the student. Yet paradoxical-
ly, it is for this reason that you must avoid direct personal confrontation 
and let the argument always be the object of attention. Socrates sees him-
self and "O" not as a winner and a loser but as two scientists mutually 
seeking the truth by testing two alternative hypotheses. Whichever one 
finds the truth, both are winners. 
8. Socrates' goal is always ultimately somehow moral (though this is not 
always apparent at first). For he has only one lifetime, and it is too pre-
cious to waste on issues that are not somehow connected to the most 
important purpose of human life, becoming more wise and virtuous. 
9. Socrates' aim is not to harm but to help "O." Sometimes, this involves 
shame, but it never involves a conflict of interests - at least not from 
Socrates' point of view. "O" may or may not understand this, but Socrates, 
like Jesus, is altruistic in his very offensiveness. He believes, as Aquinas 
says, that "there is no greater act of charity one can do to his neighbor than 
to lead him to the truth." Socratic dialogue is ultimately missionary work. 
C. Points of advice about the logical method: 
1. The question must be defined early on. 
2. The question should be formulated disjunctively, so that it has only two 

How to write a Socratic dialogue 
347 
possible answers. Otherwise, an infinite number of arguments, and of dia-
logues, will be necessary. In the Republic, e.g. the question "What is jus-
tice?'* quickly becomes "Is justice the interest of the stronger or not?" and 
"Is justicc always more profitable than injustice or not?" 
3. Potentially ambiguous terms must be defined by mutual agreement. 
4. Like a psychoanalyst, Socrates does not give his opinion unless it is 
demanded, but asks "O" what he believes. 
5. Once he gets an answer from "O," Socrates may now use one or more of 
the following strategies: 
(a) Ask "O" why he believes this, and examine "O's" argument, looking 
for an ambiguous term, a false premise, or a logical fallacy; or 
(b) Tracc "O's" premises back to further premises, either by showing what 
missing premises "O's" enthymemes must presuppose or else asking 
"O" to prove his premises, and then examining that proof; or 
(c) Draw out the consequences of "O's" belief, in a (usually multi-step) 
reductio ad absurdum, or 
(d) Construct an argument whose conclusion will be the contradictory of 
"O's" belief. If Socrates does this, his argument should begin well 
"upstream" from the falls where "O" will come to grief. It should usu-
ally be a long, linear epicheirema, whose first premise "O" will agree 
to, like a man who puts his boat into a calm, inviting river upstream, 
and then fnds that the river takes him downstream to rapids and water-
falls - and sinking. However, sometimes this argument is short, often 
an argument by analogy. 
6. After the "sinking" the dialogue can end. or begin again with another 
attempt. 
7. Socrates rarely uses cumulative arguments for the same conclusion, pre-
ferring one very sure and carcfully worked out argument rather than a 
larger number of weaker arguments that need reinforcements. When he 
does use a number of cumulative arguments (e.g. in the Phaedo to prove 
the immortality of the soul) they are usually surprisingly unconvincing. 
(Contrast Republic X's more convincing single argument for immortali-
ty) 
8. See pages 294, Section 2, and 308, last paragraph, on the use of hypo-
thetical reasoning. 
9. The dialogue ends either with closure and proof (as in the Republic) or not 
(as in the Meno). If with closure, "O" may accept this (as in the Republic) 
or not (as in the Gorgias). If the dialogue does not end with closure, a bet-
ter answer may be suggested (as in the Meno) or it may not (as in the 
Euthyphro). 
10. If Socrates interacts with modem people, remember that he is not a typi-
cally modern person - in his personality, in his assumptions, in his style 
of speech, or in his unlimited patience. 

348 
XV. SOME PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF SOCRATIC LOGIC 
Section 3. How to have a Socratic debate 
The Middle Ages "institutionalized" two forms of Socratic debate. One was the 
"Scholastic Disputation," an elaborate, demanding, and (to modern minds) arti-
ficial form. The subject was usually a highly technical philosophical or theolog-
ical question, and the format was confined to strictly labeled syllogistic forms. 
The other was the written form of the "article" in a Summa, a collection of 
abbreviated summaries of such a disputation, the most famous of which was the 
Summa Theologica of St. Thomas Aquinas. 
Neither form is ideal for debate today without revision, for the Scholastic 
Disputation is too long (they often lasted for half a day), and the Summa article 
too short (it is often only one page or less). But the basic principles that gov-
erned such debates can be summarized and used to good effect in a modern, 
more informal (and thus more Socratic) dialogue. 
Some of these rules were explicitly stated, some assumed and implied, by 
medieval debaters. The reader will notice the similarity of many of the follow-
ing points to those that we have already listed as governing a Socratic dialogue; 
for in a sense both the Scholastic Disputation and the Summa were systematiza-
tions of the Socratic dialogue. 
A. Some rules about attitudes and presuppositions: 
1. Total honesty is presupposed. This means (a) that the aim of both parties 
must be simply to seek and find the truth; (b) that this truth is the truth, 
not "my" truth or "your" truth - i.e. objective and universal truth; and (c) 
that personal victory or defeat should be purely incidental and not the goal 
aimed at. (This will be difficult. What does that tell you about yourself?) 
2. Neither party to the debate should be either a skeptic (who believes that 
no one can hope to know anything) or a personal dogmatist (who believes 
that he already knows it all). A skeptic thinks he can't be right and a dog-
matist thinks he can't be wrong. Neither has a reason to inquire. 
3. Both the fear of reason (which Socrates calls "misology" in the Phaedo) 
and scorn of anything other than pure reason ("rationalism" in the worst 
sense) are rejected at the outset. 
B. Some rules about protocol and procedures: 
1. Reasons must always be given when asked for. "Why?" is always a legiti-
mate question. 
2. "Follow the argument wherever it goes." Reason is the common master. 
The two debaters are like rafts, and the argument is like a river. 
3. The river has both calm and turbulent parts, and perhaps rocks and water-
falls. But the aim is to find the sea, not to tip your opponent's raft over. 
4. Always listen before you respond, so that you respond to what was actual-
ly said. In fact, no one has the right to respond to his opponent's argument 

How to have a Socratic debate 
349 
until he has first restated that argument, in his own words (to prove that he 
understands the meaning, not just the words), to his opponent % satisfaction. 
5. The order must always be: first data (what, exactly, was actually said?), 
then interpretation of the data (what the speaker meant, not what the hear-
er would have meant), then evaluation and argument (is he right or 
wrong?). This might be called "constructionism," for it is in explicit con-
tradiction to the method that calls itself "Deconstructi on ism," perhaps the 
most polar opposite to a Socratic debate in the entire history of philosophy. 
6. Two formats are possible, (a) In the formal one, each debater is given a set 
amount of time to state, and his opponent to try to refute, his argument, 
tum by turn. E.g. A summarizes his argument in 5 minutes, then B has 5 
minutes to respond, then A has 5 minutes to respond to B, then B gets 
another 5 minutes, etc., either for a pre-set amount of time or until the 
moderator (or both debaters) decide they are "debated out." (b) In the 
informal format, pre-set time structures are not imposed. 
7. Whether the time is explicitly counted and monitored or not, in both for-
mats each debater must be given approximately equal time, or at least 
enough time to satisfy him and his need to explain himself. 
8. The debate will usually work better with an impartial moderator, but it can 
sometimes work without one, if both parties adhere conscientiously to all 
the rules. Any two people can start a debate club, or a "Saint Socrates 
Society." Try it! You might begin a Quiet Revolution 
C. Some rules about arguing logically: 
1. Arguments must be stated explicitly, preferably (though not necessarily) in 
syllogistic form. 
2. When confronted by an argument, there are only four legitimate responses: 
a. "I do not accept your conclusion because you have used a term 
ambiguously (and I will point out which term that is and show how 
you have used it ambiguously)"; or 
b. "I do not accept your conclusion because you have assumed a false 
premise (and I will show [1] which premise it is, [2] why it is logical-
ly necessary for you to assume it, and [3] why it is false)"; or 
c. 
"I do not accept your conclusion because your argument contains a 
logical fallacy (and I will point out this fallacy in your argument)"; or 
d. "I can find no ambiguous term, false premise, or logical fallacy in 
your argument, therefore I must acccpt your conclusion as true (since 
I am an honest, intelligent, open-minded seeker of objective truth 
rather than a dishonest, stupid, closed-minded seeker of personal vic-
tory)." 
There is no fifth option, "I can find none of these three errors in 
your argument; you have proved your conclusion to be true; but I do 

350 
XV. SOME PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF SOCRATIC LOGIC 
not accept it. I will not tell you why. Instead, this conclusion you have 
proved to be objectively true I will label 4your* truth, as I hug 4my' 
truth to myself like an auto-erotic intellectual security blanket." 
3. When your opponent finds an ambiguously-used term, you must redefine 
it and reword your argument without ambiguity, or else abandon your 
argument and find another one. When he claims to find a false premise, 
you must prove that it is not false, or else that you do not need to assume 
this premise. When he claims to find a logical fallacy, you must show that 
he has misunderstood your argument, or else reword your argument to 
avoid the fallacy. 
4. Do not leave arguments " h a n g i n g D o not respond to his argument prov-
ing x simply by an argument proving non-x. 
5. One long, linear, many-step argument is preferable to many cumulative 
arguments bccause this "backs up" the discussion onto more and more 
fundamental premises, so that even if no one "wins" the debate, both see 
more clearly the more basic reasons behind their disagreement. 
6. Be honest enough to change your mind if your opponent convinces you. 
Remember, no one loses a Socratic debate except ignorance, and no one 
wins except truth. If no one finds truth, both lose. If one finds it, both win. 
These many points of advice will seem very complex and difficult if you 
have no experience of reading Socratic dialogues, but quite simple, easy, and 
obvious if you have - which shows that induction, starting with concrete expe-
rience, is a much more effective method of learning than deduction, starting 
with abstract principles. The same holds for learning ethics as for learning 
Socratic method, by the way. (Saints teach it more effectively than philosophers.) 
Section 4. How to use Socratic method on difficult people 
Although not effective in dealing with homicidal maniacs or people in a state of 
panic, the Socratic method is ideally suited for dialogue with "difficult people," 
or threatening people, people with whom we are not in friendly debate but in 
confrontation. The method emerged from the confrontations in ancient Athenian 
law courts, especially the technique of cross-examination, when Socrates began 
to cross-examine ideas, not just people. It was difficult for these people to real-
ize that Socrates' confrontational arguments were not directed against them, as 
if they were in court, but against their ideas. 
The essence of the Socratic method is this logical cross-examination of an 
idea, following the argument wherever its inner logic takes it. Thus, the imper-
sonal laws of logic become a "common master" rather than either person mas-
tering the other, and the argument is not "me vs. you" but "us vs. ignorance"; 
not "wc are not together because we differ about what is true" but "let us try to 
find the truth together." The personal confrontation is thus defused. 

Haw to use Socratic method on difficult people 
351 
But a "difficult person" (let us call him DP) is difficult precisely bccause he 
or she re/uses this attitude of "let us try to find the truth together" Either DP 
does not believe in objective truth at all, and is a principled subjectivism or else 
he cannot or will not believe that he lacks this truth and his opponent has it (i.e. 
he is an egotist - which is usually a cover-up for a very fragile and threatened 
ego, as the bully is the cover-up for the coward). The charm of the Socratic 
method is that it seems tailor-made for such people. For (1) it allows the truth to 
seep in under their defenses like subterranean water as they are busy erecting 
walls against the army of opposing ideas on the surface; and (2) it allows DP to 
be his own corrector, thus saving his ego. When you play Socrates you do not 
define the truth; you only ask questions and let DP define the truth with his 
answers, which then become your teacher which you explore and examine 
humbly, on the assumption that it is true, not false. (In the course of your exam-
ination, of course, you discover that this assumption is questionable, and let us 
hope that DP discovers this too.) 
The art of Socratic dialogue resists being put into a universal and unchange-
able formula, since you as Socrates must be flexible enough to follow DP wher-
ever he takes you. And this is one of the keys to its usefulness with difficult peo-
ple: it is in thus serving DP that you become the master, or rather allow truth to 
become the master. 
Thus the Socratic method, used with a "difficult person," is an illustration 
of the irony of Hegel's famous "master-slave dialectic," in which the master is 
really the slave, enslaved to the slave he needs, while the slave is free and thus 
is really the master, for he does not need the master while the master needs him. 
To say the same thing in a different way and using a different historical ref-
erence, it is an illustration of the Taoist principle that the humble, yielding water-
like attitude is the one that conquers the proud, "difficult," self-assertive, rock-
like one - ultimately because the first attitude corresponds to the nature of ulti-
mate reality, and thus is, ultimately, the most "realistic." 
Still another historical reference to the same mysterious principle is the 
Christian one: he who would be last becomes first and he who would be first 
becomes last. In the Kingdom, the greatest is the servant of all, since this 
Kingdom is nothing less than the epiphany or manifestation of the divine King 
whose eternal and essential nature is revealed by the King's Son to be self-giv-
ing love. Thus the Socratic method, like the Taoist and Zen arts, is ultimately 
rooted in the nature of God, if Christianity is true. 
Taoists* favorite symbol for this art is water. By its softness it wears away 
hard rock. It seeps in under walls and defenses precisely because it seeks the 
lowest, humblest places. Water has no form itself; that is why it can conform to 
any form, fill containers of any size and shape. 
However, there is an intrinsic structure to water (H20), and to the Socratic 
method even when used with "difficult people." As soon as the "Socrates" and 

352 
XV. SOME PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF SOCRATIC LOGIC 
the DP are engaged in conversation about whether some idea is true or not, that 
conversation must follow certain essential logical principles, even when the topic 
of the conversation is charged with "personal particles" as a dynamo is charged 
with electricity. And we can analyze the conversational process into steps and 
thus prepare its strategy beforehand. Those steps would be the following: 
1. From the outset you must establish the Socratic relationship: you are the 
listener, not the teacher; the disciple, not the opponent; the one who needs 
to be shown the right, not the one who is in the right, or knows the right, 
or has the right while DP is the one who is wrong. 
The next three steps correspond to the three acts of the mind: first, the 
thesis (proposition), then the definition (terms), then the reasons (argument). 
2. First, get clear what DP's basic contentious contention is. Find his thesis, 
or conclusion, or "bottom line." ("What, then, are you saying?") 
3. Next, be sure you understand it as DP does. Ask for DP's definition of his 
terms. ("What, exactly, do you mean?") 
4. Then, find DP's reasons, or evidence - not in the spirit of the inquisitor 
about to pounce on it and refute it, but in the spirit of the apprentice being 
led and instructed by the master. Ask "why?" in this spirit, like a good psy-
choanalyst. 
5. After DP's thesis, terms, and reasons are clear, be sure to express your 
understanding of them, repeating them in your own words, so that it is 
clear to DP that there is at least one other person in the world who under-
stands "where he's coming from." Difficult people often feel lonely and 
isolated, as if "no one else understands." 
6. Once DP sees you are on his "side," you can begin the next step: explo-
ration either "upstream" or "downstream" on the river of DP's original 
argument, i.e. the exploration either of DP's premises (and perhaps also 
their premises) or of the consequences of DP's conclusion. 
You have already taken care of the terms; you have "come to terms" 
with DP, so there is no misunderstanding and no ambiguity. 
You have also seen and stated DP's argument (though informally) to 
determine that there is no logical fallacy. Even difficult people rarely com-
mit logical fallacies. And you should hope that DP has not done so, for it 
is rather embarrassing and insulting for anyone to be shown that his argu-
ment is fallacious; and (more to the point practically) being shown that his 
argument is fallacious will probably not change or convince DP, for he will 
still believe his conclusion. Everyone knows, instinctively, that showing 
that a given argument for a certain conclusion is weak or fallacious does 
not disprove that argument's conclusion. Everything is still "up for grabs." 
However, if there is a fallacy in DP's argument, you may still be able to 

How to use Socratic method on difficult people 
353 
show DP his fallacy in such a way that it disarms his hold on the conclu-
sion. E.g. "Yes, he said this terrible thing to you yesterday. But it docs not 
necessarily follow that he still feels the same way today; he may be feel-
ing remorse." Or "Yes, he is a cannibal. But he doesn't want to eat every-
body, so maybe he doesn't want to eat you." Or "Yes, he did a terrible job 
at X, and it is natural for you to conclude that he just doesn't care about 
X, or about you; but is it not possible that he cares too much about X, and 
had performance anxiety? Or that he has a mental block, or even a mental 
defect, that we do not know about? Perhaps it is his mind rather than his 
will that has the defect. Or perhaps there is some other cause we don't 
know about. Maybe his dog just died, or his mother-in-law just came back 
to life. Isn't it true that people sometimes do a terrible job at X ev en when 
they care?" 
7. Suppose you are now convinced that it is not the terms or the logic of the 
argument, but the propositions that remain to be investigated. You believe 
that DP's thesis or conclusion is false, and you want to serve DP and the 
truth by opening up DP's mind to this possibility in a personally non-
threatening way, so that DP sees it for himself. There are two paths, logi-
cally: "upstream" or "downstream": (A) to show DP what questionable 
premises are necessary to prove his thesis, or (B) to show DP what ques-
tionable conclusions his thesis necessarily entails when that thesis is taken 
as a premise. Both investigations can be undertaken nonthreateningly, for 
DP should be personally interested in his thesis, and therefore also in its 
premises and in its conclusions, or corollaries. 
Although the "upstream" strategy (A) may be logically easier and more 
conclusive, the "downstream" strategy (B) is psychologically preferable. 
For it is easier to win DP's sympathy and attention with strategy (B), draw-
ing out the further conclusions logically entailed by DP's thesis, because 
DP is already attached to his thesis and therefore suspicious of investigat-
ing its possibly-weak foundations (premises), which is what the 
"upstream" strategy does. Further, even if you do show DP the falseness 
of some of his premises, and thus the weakness of his argument, this may 
not wean him from his conclusion if he is attached to it; he can simply find 
another argument for it. 
The "downstream" strategy is really reductio ad absurdum, for you 
show that if DP's thesis is true, it logically entails a conclusion that is so 
absurd that even DP must rethink his thesis. If you do this, be sure you do 
not give DP the impression that you think he believes this absurd conclu-
sion that you dcduce from his thesis, but rather that he does not. You will 
insult him if you seem to assume that he is stupid enough to believe an 
absurdity; you will compliment him if you seem to assume that he is intel-
ligent enough to refuse to believe an absurdity. When you show DP that 
his wisdom in rejecting the absurd conclusion necessarily entails also 

354 
XV. SOME PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF SOCRATIC LOGIC 
rejecting his original thesis which logically entails that absurd conclusion, 
you enable DP to save face by correcting himself by his own wisdom 
instead of being corrected by yours. 
8. Use options, dialectical (disjunctive) arguments, as much as you can, to 
give the difficult person a choice. 
Use dilemmas, but constructive rather than destructive dilemmas, so 
that DP does not feel "destroyed." 
9. As a concrete example, watch how Socrates deals with Cephalus, 
Polemarchus, and above all, Thrasymachus, in Book I of the Republic, or 
with Gorgias, Polus, and Callicles in the Gorgias. Five or these six (not 
Polymarchus) are difficult people in different ways, and Socrates matches 
his style to their personalities, instinctively. 
10. Reflect on the wisdom of Kierkegaard in The Point of View for my Work as 
an Author, in which he reflects upon and interprets all his previous books, 
and on the Socratic method he has used in them. He speaks here of "dis-
pelling an illusion." which was Socrates* lifelong task. 
. . . A direct attack only strengthens a person in his illusion, 
and at the same time embitters him. There is nothing that requires 
such gentle handling as an illusion, if one wishes to dispel it. If 
anything prompts the prospective captive to set his will in oppo-
sition, all is lost. And this is what a direct attack achieves, and it 
implies moreover the presumption of requiring a man to make to 
another person, or in his presence, an admission which he can 
make most profitably to himself privately. This is what is 
achieved by the indirect method which, loving and serving the 
truth, arranges everything dialectically for the prospective cap-
tive, and then shyly withdraws (for love is always shy), so as not 
to witness the admission which he makes to himself alone before 
God - that he has lived hitherto in an illusion. 
. . . if real success is to attend the effort to bring a man to a 
definite position, one must first of all take pains to find him 
where he is and begin there. This is the secret art of helping oth-
ers. Anyone who has not mastered this is himself deluded when 
he proposes to help others. In order to help another effectively I 
must understand more than he - yet first of all surely I must 
understand what he understands. If I do not know that, my greater 
understanding will be of no help to him . . . all true effort to help 
begins with self-humiliation: the helper must first humble him-
self under him he would help, and therewith must understand that 
to help does not mean to be a sovereign but to be a servant, that 
to help does not mean to be ambitious but to be patient, that to 

How to read a book Socratically 
help means to endure for the time being the imputation that one 
is in the wrong and does not understand what the other under-
stands. 
Take the case of a man who is passionately angry, and let us 
assume that he is really in the wrong. Unless you can begin with 
him by making it seem as if it were he that had to instruct you, 
and unless you can do it in such a way that the angry man, who 
was too impatient to listen to a word of yours, is glad to discov-
er a complaisant and attentive listener - if you cannot do that, you 
cannot help him at all . . . if you cannot humble yourself, you are 
not genuinely serious. Be the amazed listener who sits and hears 
what the other finds the more delight in telling you because you 
listen with amazement. . . 
If you can do that, if you can find exactly the place where the 
other is and begin there, you may perhaps have the luck to lead 
him to the place where you are. 
For to be a teacher does not mean simply to affirm that such a 
thing is so, or to deliver a lecture, etc. No, to be a teacher in the 
right sense is to be a learner. Instruction begins when you, the 
teacher, learn from the learner, put yourself in his place so that 
you may understand what he understands in the way he under-
stands it. 
The point is (1) very simple, (2) very obvious, (3) and very rarely practiced. 
Apparently there are more than just intellectual difficulties in the way of prac-
ticing this method, since it is (1) simple to understand and (2) obviously correct. 
Why then is it (3) rare? 
We learn the answer to this question when we learn the identity of the "dif-
ficult person." And we learn that by looking into a mirror. This is the most 
Socratic thing we can do: "know thyself" 
Section 5. How to read a book Socratically 
This section is basically a very short sample and summary of just a few of the 
most important ideas in Mortimer Adler's book How to Read a Book. This is an 
extremely useful book and highly recommended as a supplement to this one. 
The following principles apply especially to nonfiction books, especially 
books designed to convince the reader of something. How to Read a Book shows 
how analogous principles apply to other kinds of books. 

356 
XV. SOME PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF SOCRATIC LOGIC 
A. Distinguish data, interpretation, 
and criticism. You cannot intelligently 
agree or disagree until you have correctly interpreted a book, and you can-
not interpret it until you have read it. First listen, then understand, then talk 
back. Do not interpret any book in light of your beliefs; that is putting these 
three steps backwards. Interpret a book in light of the author's beliefs. And 
when you do, base all your interpretations on the data, the text itself. Many 
misunderstandings come from simply not paying attention to the text. 
Data, interpretation, and criticism are like fact, faith, and feeling. As 
long as faith keeps its eyes on fact, all three move ahead; but if faith takes 
its eyes off fact and turns around to be guided by feeling, both faith and feel-
ing fall (though fact never does). As long as interpretation keeps its eyes on 
data, it and the criticism that follows from it will be just; but if interpreta-
tion takes its eyes off data and turns to be guided by pre-existing criticism 
(i.e. ideology), both it and its criticisms will become unjust and ridiculous; 
in other words, Deconstructionism. 
B. Read actively. A book is like a ghost: it is almost a person, it talks back to 
you, you can have a conversation with it. If you have never done this, it may 
startle you almost as much as a ghost does to find that a book talks back to 
you and you can talk back to it. A book is not merely an object, it is also 
something like a subject, a person; it is a person's communication to you. 
(Authors speak to readers, after all, not to the air.) It asks you questions, and 
you must respond. After you listen (to the data), you must interpret it by ask-
ing it the right questions (see below) and by understanding its answers. Then 
you must respond to its arguments, evaluate it, agree or disagree with it. It 
challenges you. It is not like a piece of prerecorded music to listen to pas-
sively, but like a piece of sheet music which you must perform yourself. It 
is directions for some interactive thinking with its author. 
C. The questions you ask the book are not random, nor are they personal and 
subjective. They have a common structure. Here are the main questions you 
should ask about any book: 
(1) Classification: What kind of book is it? Classify the book. To interpret a 
book correctly, you must know what kind of book it is, and what the 
author's intentions were. Interpreting Darwin as religion or Genesis as sci-
ence has caused immense confusion. So has interpreting Plato's Republic 
as practical politics or Machiavelli's The Prince as ethical philosophy. 
(2) Summary: What is it about? What is its main theme? 
(3) Outline: How do its subordinate themes or points relate to the main one? 
Give a basic outline of the book. 

How to read a book Socrntically 
357 
(4) Argument: What are its contents, its main terms, propositions, and argu-
ments? 
(5) Evaluation: Is it true or not, and why? Use the principles you have learned 
in this book to summarize and then evaluate the book's argument. 
(6) Application: What of it? What follows? What difference does it make? 
Here we look not just at the book but along it or with it, like a telescope, 
at the world, at reality, at ourselves and our lives. 
Some recommended philosophical classics that reward a Socratic Logical 
Analysis: 
Plato: Ion, Meno, Republic Bk. I, Gorgias 
Aristotle: Nicomachean Ethics 
St. Augustine: De Magistro (On the Teacher); De Ordine (On Order) 
Boethius: The Consolation of Philosophy 
St. Anselm: Proslogium 
St. Thomas: any excerpts, e.g. from Summa of the Summa (edited by Peter 
Kreeft) 
Descartes: Meditations 
Berkeley: Three Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous 
Hume: An Enquiry concerning Human Understanding 
Kant: Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals 
Kierkegaard: Philosophical Fragments 
Ayer: Language, Truth and Logic 
Some examples of Socratic Analysis of Great Books (by the author of this 
one, all from Ignatius Press): 
Philosophy 101 by Socrates (on the Apology) 
Socrates Meets Machiavelli (on The Prince) 
Socrates Meets Marx (on The Communist Manifesto) 
Socrates Meets Sartre (on Existentialism and Human Emotions) 
Socrates Meets Descartes (on Discourse on Method) 
Socrates Meets Hume (on An Enquiry concerning Human Understanding) 
Socrates Meets Kant (on Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals) 

XVI. Some Philosophical 
Applications of Logic 
Logic is not philosophy, but it is an excellent preparation for it. Logic is to phi-
losophy what a telescope is to astronomy or a cookbook to a meal. It is an instru-
ment. It is no substitute for the real thing, but it makes "the real thing" work 
much better. 
What follows is the briefest sample of the interface between logic and each 
of the basic systematic divisions of philosophy: philosophical theology, meta-
physics, cosmology, philosophical anthropology, epistemology, and ethics. 
These divisions correspond to basic questions: about God, or the Ultimate 
Reality; about reality as such, universally; about the visible universe; about 
human nature; about how we know; and about good and evil, the good life and 
the good society. The following is only a sketchy sample of how logic can make 
a difference to each of these kinds of questions. 
Section 1. Logic and theology (P) 
In principle, what could possibly be a more important application of logic than 
its application to the ultimate question, the question about ultimate reality? 
Whether there is an ultimate being, an absolute reality, and what it is, must make 
a difference to everything, for it is the ultimate standard or reference point for 
everything, and also the ultimate end, "meaning of life," summum bomtm, or 
greatest good. Even if this is only pleasure or survival or money or sex or power 
- well, then, that is God and that is the ultimate and everything else is relative 
to it. Even if it is nothingness, or meaninglessness - well, then, everything else 
is relative to that. 
Is it logically provable that there is a God, i.e. a being with at least some of 
the attributes ascribed to God by the world's religions? An Infinitely Perfect 
Being? An Uncaused Cause? A Creator? Can the use of the principles of formal 
logic that must be admitted by everyone plus sensory data available to everyone 
together supply premises from which the existence of God can be validly 
deduced in a way that should convince everyone? The most famous arguments 

Logic and theology / Logic and mathematics 
359 
for the existence of God, such as Aquinas's "five ways," try to show that the 
answer is yes. 
But can any sense data prove or disprove the existence of a God who by def-
inition cannot be sensed? Modern empiricists claim that the answer is no; that 
God's existence cannot in principle be proved. 
Can formal logic alone disprove atheism - i.e. is atheism logically sclf-con-
tradictory? St. Anselm's famous "ontological argument" answers yes. 
Does the existence of evil (which by definition is the opposite of good) dis-
prove an infinitely good God? The most famous argument for atheism answers 
yes. 
Whatever your answer is, it must answer the arguments of the other side. 
The debate over the existence of God is not merely one about faith, it is one 
about logic too. It is not just "sharing personal feelings" but a hard look at facts 
and arguments. In fact, one argument for God (used by thinkers as diverse as 
Pascal, Chesterton, and C.S. Lewis) argues that logic itself would be worthless 
if it were not God but mindless chance that caused our minds to be as they are. 
A good sample of how contemporary philosophers on both sides argue this 
issue can be found in Does God Exist? by J.P. Moreland & Kai Nielson. 
Section 2. Logic and metaphysics (P) 
Metaphysics is not "mushy." It is not the occult flakiness you find under that title 
in California bookstores; it is the study of being as such, i.e. of whatever totally 
universal laws there may be. An excellent introduction to this subject is The One 
and the Many by W. Norris Clarke. 
Many modern philosophers believe that metaphysics is impossible. Most 
classical philosophers disagree. They hold commonsensically, that the basic 
"laws of thought" (page 188) are laws of being, of reality; they tell us not only 
how we all have to think, but how all being has to be. The universe and every-
thing in it, and also the self, (1) can't ever be what it isn't (the Law of Non-
Contradiction), (2) always must be what it is (the Law of Identity), and (3) 
always either is or isn't (the Law of Excluded Middle). Also, (4) all that comes 
into being - i.e. all changing being - has a cause (the Principle of Causality), 
and (5) everything that is has a sufficient reason why it is and is what it is (the 
Principle of Sufficient Reason). If these arc laws of being, are there others? E.g. 
can we say that all that is (6) has some nature or essence, (7) has a unity, (8) does 
something or is in some way active, (9) is in some relation to other things, (10) 
is in principle intelligible to some mind (11) desirable to some will, and (12) 
pleasing to some feeling or sensibility? If so, we have seven universal qualities 
of all being: something, one, active, related true, good and beautiful. 
Or arc such laws mere words, mere man-made games, mere tautologies? 
This is the case if Nominalism is true (the position that only individual entities 
are real, and that universals are mere words, not realities). For "being" and "the 

360 
XVI. SOME PHILOSOPHICAL APPLICATIONS OF LOGIC 
laws of all being" are universals. But isn't the very question of Nominalism a 
metaphysical question? Aren't you doing metaphysics when you deny meta-
physics? 
Kant argued that metaphysics is impossible because it transcended the pos-
sible limits of what we could know, since all we could know was appearances 
("phenomena") and not "things-in-themselves" or "noumena" (i.e. objective 
reality). But this seems to be logically self-contradictory, for Kant seems to be 
saying that he really knows, as an objective fact, that we cannot really know 
objective facts. As Wittgenstein put it, "to draw a limit to thought, you must 
think both sides of the limit." 
If metaphysics is legitimate, all the rest of philosophy depends on it, some-
what as an I proposition falls under an A proposition on the Square of 
Opposition. If x is true of all of reality, then it must be true of each part of real-
ity. Take, e.g. the following dispute among three different philosophical posi-
tions. Note how the disagreement in every other field logically follows from the 
disagreement in metaphysics: 
Platonic Realism 
(Extreme of excess) 
Aristotelian 
Moderate Realism 
Nominalism 
(Extreme of defect) 
Metaphysics 
Universals are the 
supreme realities; 
the -Forms" arc 
independent entities. 
Universals are real (so 
arc individuals); they 
arc the forms of 
individual entities. 
Universals arc not 
objectively real. 
Epistemology 
Reason, which 
knows the Forms, 
knows reality; the 
senses know 
shadows. 
Reason knows 
reality - form and 
matter - by abstracting 
and inferring from 
sensation. 
Reason is deceptive 
when it tries to go 
beyond sensation. 
Anthrvjwlogy 
Man = soul 
Man = soul/form + 
body'mattcr 
Man = body with a 
brain 
Ethics 
The supreme good 
for man is know ledge 
of the Forms. 
The supreme good for 
man is happiness, per-
fection of soul & body 
The supreme good 
for man universally 
is unknowable. 
Politics 
Priority of the com-
mon (universal) good 
Balance of the com-
mon good with the 
private good 
Priority of the private 
(individual) good 
Section 3. Logic and cosmology (P) 
Many of the questions about the cosmos, or material universe, that used to be 
dealt with by philosophers are now dealt with by modern science, but not all of 

Logic and cosmology / Logic and philosopihcal anthropology 
361 
them. E.g. science's presupposition that the fundamental laws of the universe are 
the same throughout all time and space (the "uniformity of nature") must be 
assumed rather than proved by scicncc; can philosophy prove it? Science 
explains things by causes; can philosophy prove that causality is real rather than 
merely mental, as is held by some philosophers (like Hume and Kant, in differ-
ent ways)? Arc final causes as real as efficient causes? Is it logically necessary 
that the universe had a beginning? These are some of the questions about the 
cosmos that philosophers still argue about, and some of the arguments seem to 
be able to be settled logically, in principle if not in practice. For instance, take 
Kant's notion that our concept of causality comes not from the real world and 
our discovery of it, but from the inherent, necessary structure of our conscious-
ness and our unconscious projection of that concept onto our sensations so as to 
organize them and make them intelligible - is this not logically self-contradic-
tory? For it claims that on the one hand causality is not real and on the other 
hand that our unconscious mind really causes us to think the way we do, causes 
our sensations to be orderly. 
Section 4. Logic and philosophical anthropology (P) 
"Know thyself," said Socrates at the beginning of Western philosophy, echoing 
the inscription on the Delphic oracle's temple. Is this possible? Can the subject 
of knowing become its own object without falsifying itself? 
And if it can, what does it find? Is the "self" something that stands behind 
or above all it can know, of both soul and body? Or is it soul and body? Or is it 
just soul? Or is it just body? 
And if it is soul and body, how can these two be one? How can they inter-
act? How can a ghostly spirit push the buttons of a machine-like body? 
Are we complex machines, chemical equations, clever apes, ghosts in 
machines, angels in drag, chunks of God with amnesia, or none of the above? 
Obviously, much hangs on which way we answer this question. Your self-image 
influences everything you do and think. What logical evidence stands behind 
each answer? Could a machine, a chemical, or an ape stand above itself or out-
side itself and look at itself as an object? 
How can we do that? If the knowing subject must transcend the known 
object, how can the self that knows be the self that is known? And if it can't, how 
can I know myself? Is there a logical contradiction whichever way we answer 
this question? 
Another classical question in philosophical anthropology is the question of 
free will. Most of us have a strong sense of both fate and free will, destiny and 
choice. All our stories presuppose both. Yet these two ideas seem contradictory. 
Can logic help sort out and clarify this puzzle? 
Still another classical question in this field is the relationship among intel-
lect, will, and feelings. Which rules? Is reasoning really rationalization of 

362 
XVI. SOME PHILOSOPHICAL APPLICATIONS OF LOGIC 
desires? Does the will command the mind or the mind command the will, or 
both? What is the relationship between "I think," "I want," and "I feel"? 
Section 5. Logic and epistemology (P) 
Some questions in epistemology (theory of knowledge) are: 
How do we come to know anything? Is sensation inherently deceptive? Is 
reason? If both reason and the senses know truly, how do they interact? Here 
more than anywhere else in philosophy the need for logic is obvious. 
It is also obvious that epistemology also colors everything else, for it con-
cerns our instrument, knowledge: and your attitude toward and use of your 
instrument shapes everything you do with that instrument. 
What reasons are there for each of the three epistemologies distinguished on 
page 360? What are the logical consequences of each? What data are left unex-
plained by each? Compare the six alternatives to Aristotle on page 214. 
Logic can help explore these questions. 
Section 6. Logic and ethics (P) 
What the good for man is (ethics) depends on what man is (anthropology). And 
how we know what this good is depends on our epistemology. And what good is, 
and what man is, and what knowledge is, all depend on what is (metaphysics). 
Is "the practical syllogism" (page 296) the right way of ethical reasoning? 
Or is it too pragmatic, implying that "the end justifies the means"? 
How can we come to know our true good, our moral duties, or our moral 
rights? How can we prove them? How can wc argue about them? We know how 
people do in fact behave by sense observation (and by its refinement in the sci-
ences of psychology and sociology); but how do we know how people ought to 
behave? 
Are moral values objective facts? Are they subjective feelings? What kind 
of reality might they have if they are neither? 
Can man be good without God? Is morality dependent on religion? Is a 
thing good ultimately because God wills it, or does God will it because it is 
good? 
Ethics is the most important part of philosophy - the only part Socrates ever 
explored. If logic is irrelevant to ethics, then both logic and ethics become 
almost trivial: logic because it cannot help us with life's most important ques-
tions, and ethics bccause it cannot be logical and is rcduccd to being illogical, 
sentimental, uncritical, subjectivistic, self-deluding, self-justifying, rationaliza-
tion instead of reason. If logic is to be more than a clever game with words, and 
if ethics is to be more than a pretty game with rules, then we must do what 

Logic and epistemology / Logic and ethics 
363 
Socrates did and take both seriously, subjecting ethical questions to the most 
demandingly honest logical reasoning. 
His example was meant to continue. 
THE BEGINNING 

Appendix: Problems with 
Mathematical Logic 
BY T R E N T D O U G H E R T Y 
1. Basic modern logic 
At several points in this book comments have been made about "symbolic" or 
"mathematical" logic ranging from the suspicious to the downright derogatory. 
Lest the reader suspect that such negative evaluations stem from ignorance, we 
set forth here, briefly, what we find objectionable about modern mathematical 
logic. One reason we feel this is important is that modern logic is quite sophis-
ticated. This can be attractive (but don't forget who the sophists were!). There is 
a certain lure to the formality of modern logic. It is also so complex that the 
uninitiated can be intimidated. We hope that there will be no need for the read-
er to be intimidated by or over-impressed by modern mathematical logic. 
The best place to start is usually in the beginning. Modern logic got its real 
start1 in the early 20th century when Bertrand Russell and Alfred North 
Whitehead published their Principia Mathematica 
in three volumes in 1910, 
1912. and 1913. The name of their work (Principia) is the same as Sir Isaac 
Newton's famous book in which he set forth his laws of motion. Presumably 
they thought their book would be pretty important with a title like that. However, 
some of their thunder was stolen when Albert Einstein published a little paper 
called "General Relativity" in 1915. At any rate, one effect of the work was to 
solidify in the minds of "up to date" logicians a certain treatment of condition-
al (hypothetical) statements.2 This treatment is usually called the "truth-func-
tional" interpretation. 
A truth-functional statement is one whose truth can be calculated from (is 
a function of) its parts. All you need to know are the values of the parts. For 
1 
Though important work was pioneered by George Boole, Augustus De Morgan, and 
Gottlob Frege. 
2 
The conception of conditional to be considered was already present in the literature on 
the subjcct, but there was no uniform agreement. For an interesting account of some rel-
evant discussions see Lewis Carroll's Symbolic Logic, pp. 444 49. 

Basic modern logic 
365 
example, consider the simple mathematical equation x 2 ^ . This is a truth func-
tional statement. All you need to know, to know if it's true, is the value of x. And 
if you do know the value of x, then you can tell whether the statement is true. So 
knowing the value of x is both necessary and sufficient to know the truth of the 
equation. If x=l, then the statement is false; the same goes for x=2. If x=3, how-
ever, the statement is true. 
Now consider a logical claim that two statements (let's pick two arbitrary 
statements and call them 4p' and 'q') are true. So the claim is "p and q". All we 
need to discover to know the truth of "p and q" are the individual truth values of 
4p' and 4q\ Clearly, if either *p' or 4q' are false, then their conjunction 44p and q" 
will be false. It will be true only when they both are. This fact about conjunc-
tions is usually represented in a truth table. 
P 
q 
p and q 
ease 1 
T 
T 
T 
case 2 
T 
F 
F 
case 3 
F 
T 
F 
case 4 
F 
F 
F 
The chart represents the four possible cases with respect to the truth value of the 
constituent parts (4p* and 4q') of the complex expression 44p and q'\ They can 
both be true, one can be true and the other false, one can be false and the other 
true, or they can both be false. The only case in which the conjunction is true is 
the case in which both its parts, its conjuncts, are true. 
An even simpler truth-functional logical connective is negation. Letting 4~' 
represent the word 'not*, we get the following truth table for negation. 
P 
"P 
case I 
T 
F 
case 2 
F 
T 
Here the atomic statement is p and the compound composed out of4^* and 'p' 
is "~p". Now if we let 4p' be any meaningful assertion, then p must be either true 
or false. Whichever it is, we can immediately figure out the value of 4'~p". It is 
always the opposite of 44p'\ So negation is also truth functional. 
It would be natural at this point to wonder whether all logic is truth-func-
tional. A consideration in favor of an affirmative answer is the fact that other 
logical expressions can be built out of the previous two (in fact, in most mathe-
matical logic textbooks all are). Consider the logical connective 4or\ Taking 4or' 
in the inclusive sense, that is, as a "weak disjunction" (see page 301), the state-
ment 44p or q" is true if either 4p' or 4q4 is, that is if either disjunct is. The only 
case in which an inclusive disjunction is false is that in which both its disjuncts 
are. Now we might represent that with the table following on page 366. 
But there is no need to take 4or' as atomic. It can be built out of 'and' and 
4not\ To say that at least one of 4p* or 4q' is true is to say that it's not the case 

366 
APPENDIX: PROBLEMS WITH MATHEMATICAL LOGIC 
P 
q 
porq 
case 1 
T 
T 
T 
case 2 
T 
F 
T 
case 3 
F 
T 
T 
case 4 
F 
F 
F 
that both are false. Let's represent that last statement in a truth table, building its 
parts progressively. 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
P 
q 
~P 
~q 
-p&-q 
-(-p & ~q) 
case 1 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
T 
case 2 
T 
F 
F 
T 
F 
T 
case 3 
F 
T 
T 
F 
F 
T 
case 4 
F 
F 
T 
T 
T 
F 
The expression we are interested in is at the top of column six. It reads, "It is not 
the case that p is false and q is false," or in more natural English, "p and q are not 
both false." This is obviously equivalent to "either p or q is true," which was rep-
resented in the previous truth table. Note that the two expressions are true in exact-
ly the same cases. They can both be true in every case except number four in 
which both p and q are false. Thus we can define 'or' in terms of'not' and 'and'.3 
This seems so promising for logical atomism that it leads philosophers to 
try to represent 'if...then...' statements in truth tables. As we will see, this cre-
ates problems, problems which seem to us insurmountable for logical atomism. 
One fact about any universally true *if...then...' statement is that the pres-
ence of the item following the 'if' is always followed by the item following 
'then'. The 'if* clause is called the antecedent and the 'then' clause is called the 
consequent. In ordinary English, if we say "If it rains, then I'll get wet" we imply 
that there's no way, given present circumstances, for it to rain without my get-
ting wet. We can represent this implication, letting 'p' be "It will rain" and 'q' 
be "I will get wet" as ~(p & ~q). So according to modern logic, which presup-
poses logical atomism, the ordinary English conditional can be reduced to the 
elements 'not* and 'and'. Here is where the problems begin. 
2. The paradoxes of material implication 
The above treatment of the conditional results in what is called the material con-
3 
To follow the truth table fully, notice that column three is calculated from column one in 
accordance with the truth table definition of negation. Likewise for columns four and 
two. Then column five is calculated from columns three and four in accordance w ith the 
truth table definition of conjunction. Finally, column six is calculated from column five 
in accordancc with the truth table definition of negation. 

The paradoxes of material implication / Responses to these paradoxes 367 
ditional. The problems that result are called the paradoxes of material implica-
tion. They are easy to see once we represent material implication with a truth table 
(wc will use 4-»' to represent the conditional, so p -» q reads "If p, then q").4 
P 
q 
p-*q 
ease 1 
T 
T 
T 
case 2 
T 
F 
F 
case 3 
F 
T 
T 
case 4 
F 
F 
T 
Notice that the only case in which the material conditional is false is where 
the antecedent is true and the consequent false. This case is certainly correct, but 
each of the other cases reveals problems with this treatment of conditional state-
ments.5 
In case one, we see that any two true statements can be linked in a condi-
tional. Take any two true statements you want and according to the theory of 
material implication they will imply one another. Thus, according to this theory, 
"Grass is green" implies that "Snow is white." So the conditional "If grass is 
green, then snow is white" comes out true. Again, "Abe Lincoln was the 16th 
president" implies that "The Sun is a star." Case four has it the other way: any 
two false statements imply one another. So "Fire is cold" implies "The Earth is 
flat," and "All rocks are soft" implies "The Moon is made of green cheese." 
Similar implications result from case three. 
Looking at the cases in pairs we see that cases one and three have the 
result that every true statement is implied by any statement at all, regardless of 
truth value. So "1+1=3" implies "1+1=2" i.e. according to logical atomism the 
statement "If 1 + 1=3, then 1 + 1=2" is true! Similarly, cases three and four have 
the result that a false statement implies any statement. Finally, the modern treat-
ment of conditionals has the surprising result that for any two statements, one of 
them implies the other. That is, regardless of whether either is true or false, it 
will turn out that one of them implies the other. This will hold for a pair of true 
statements, a pair of false statements, or a mixed pair. We'll leave it to you to 
come up with your own examples in each variety. 
3. Responses to the paradoxes of material implication 
There have been two main ways of responding to the paradoxes of material 
implication. One, as might be anticipated, is to stubbornly refuse to admit that 
there is a real problem and defend the system at all costs. The other, more rea-
4 
To sec that this is the truth table for material implication, construct the truth tabic for *~p 
& ~q)' using the methods exemplified earlier in the appendix. 1 leave this as homework. 
5 
One of the very first to express dissatisfaction with the mathematical treatment of con-
ditionals due primarily to Boole was Scottish logician Hugh MacColI. See his 
"Symbolical Reasoning," published in the journal Mind volume five, 1880. 

368 
APPENDIX: PROBLEMS WITH MATHEMATICAL LOGIC 
sonable but ambitious approach, has been to try and keep the baby while dump-
ing the bath water. 
This strategy involves either strengthening or weakening the basic logical 
system. Modal logics pioneered by MacColl in the 19th century and extensively 
developed in early to mid 20th century by C.I. Lewis6 take the problem with the 
basic logic to be one of weakness. That is, the connection between statements in 
a conditional is stronger than the material conditional implies; the connection 
should be necessary. So modal logic adds operators for necessity and possibili-
ty, the two modes a statement can be in. When a necessity operator is attached 
to a material conditional, the new conditional is called strict implication. The 
good news for modal logic is that the paradoxes of material implication tend to 
go away. The bad news is that they reappear in most systems as the paradoxes of 
strict implication. For example, an impossible statement implies any statement. 
Also, any statement implies a necessary statement. This does not seem to be 
much of an improvement. There are replies that interpret strict implication as a 
deducibility relation, which some think neutralizes the paradoxes. This debate, 
however, is far beyond the scope of this book. 
We will end our discussion of modal logic with two observations. First, 
whether or not modal logic is burdened by similar paradoxes, it is clearly a depar-
ture from the attempt to have a purely truth functional logic. You cannot neces-
sarily infer the truth value of "p is necessary" from knowing whether p is true or 
false. For example, "You are now reading a logic book," is true, but it didn't have 
to be. You could have gone on a walk instead (and perhaps should have).7 
Secondly, modal logic turns out to support the basis of traditional logic. 
Modal logician Alvin Plantinga, considering W.V.O. Quine's accusation that 
modal logic implies "Aristotelian essentialism," the view that things actually 
have essences, says that "Quine seems to be right ... [it] clearly does imply the 
truth of that ancient doctrine."8 
The second way of responding to the paradoxes involves weakening the 
standard logic. It removes ccrtain principles from basic modern logic, insisting 
that there must be some relevant connection between the antecedent and the con-
sequent. This family of logics are thus callcd relevance logics. Like modal log-
ics, relevance logics are not purely truth functional. 
There are many other kinds of systems of intensional logic: temporal logic, 
epistemic logic, deontic logic, intuitionist logic et al. It is important to point out 
that whenever philosophers use advanced logical techniques to attempt to solve 
complex philosophical problems they always use one or more of these inten-
sional systems. For every proposed solution on the basis of a system of inten-
6 
That's the C.I. Lewis with whom C.S. Lewis was once confused (see page 12). 
7 
There is also ineliminable intensionality in the semantics of modal logic. 
8 
Alvin Plantinga, The Nature of Necessity (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1979), last 
page. 

Responses to the paradoxes of material implication 
369 
sional symbolic logic there is a philosophical dispute over its basic principles. 
Though making extensive use of symbols and formal procedures, they arc not 
truly systems of mathematical logic in that they are not purely truth-functional. 
The literature on these logical systems is vast and highly technical. One thing is 
sure: the attempts on the part of some modern logicians to remove substantive 
metaphysical content from logic has failed. Aristotelian logic not only recog-
nizes the contribution of metaphysics to logic, it is based on it. Once again, mod-
ern man, through his greatest intellectual and "scientific" endeavors, has con-
firmed ancient truth. 

Answers to Even-Numbered Exercises 
(NB: Teachers seeking answers to odd-numbered exercises should e-mail 
St. Augustine's Press at bruce@staugustine.net.) 
Page 34 
A 
2: term 
4: argument 
6: proposition 
8: not a proposition; an imperative sentence 
10: term 
12: argument ("so" = "therefore") 
14: term 
B 
2: false 
4: false 
6: false 
8: true 
Page 49 
2: analogical (moral evil vs. physical evil; sin vs. suffering; doing harm vs. suffer-
ing harm) 
4: univocal (numbers are the most univocal language there is) 
6: analogical 
8: analogical 
10: analogical 
12: univocal (or perhaps analogical, since death is not an accidental change but a 
substantial [essential] change) 
14: analogical (ask a theologian to explain this) 
16. equivocal 
Page 51 
2: universal 
4: singular 
6: universal 
8: particular 

A timers to pages 34-61 
371 
Page 52 
2: collective 
4: collective 
6: collective 
8: ambiguously used: first collective, then divisive 
Page 53 
2: "Human" is used ambiguously, first as an adjective and then as a noun. Parts or 
products of human beings are "human" but they are not humans. 
4: Guilt feelings, like all feelings, are subjective. Courts try to judge real guilt, 
objective and impersonal truth about whether the accused is guilty in fact of vio-
lating a law. Judges deal with real guilt, by punishment; psychologists deal with 
guilt feelings, by therapy. 
6: "Good" is used ambiguously. Self-esteem may be psychologically good, in aid-
ing happiness; but a judge's verdict is legally and morally good if it is legally and 
morally just. Was it "good" that Hitler had so much self-esteem? 
8: "Love" is analogical. Love of wisdom is not the same kind of love as sexual love. 
(However, Socrates would probably still press the point that the two have some 
principles in common, one of which is that pure love of any kind should not "sell 
itself" for money.) He would probably call professional philosophers prostitutes. 
10: "Ambiguity" is ambiguous: first it is used nominally, then really; it refers first 
to the word 'ambiguity' and then to real ambiguity. 
Page 55 
2: "Near" = relation; "blasted" = passion; "heath" = substance (or "near the blasted 
heath" = place); "midnight" = time; "three" = quantity; "Weird" = quality; 
"Sisters" = substance (but in relation); "stood" = posture; "gleefully" = quality; 
"stirring" = action; "round" = quality; "black" = quality; "witches"' = possession; 
"pot" = substance; "filled" = passion; "three" = quantity; "tiny" = quantity (even 
though not mathematically measured); "broken" = passion; "frogs" = substance. 
4: "Pooping" = action; "on" = relation; "pieces" = quantity (fraction); "pork" = sub-
stance; "in the park" = place; "is" = no category but a copula (see page 149); 
"proper" = quality; "performance" = action; "perky" = quality; "pelicans" = 
substance. 
6. "Categories" = substance; "are" = a copula (page 149); "used" = passion; "clas-
sify" = action; "things" = substance. 
Page 61 
2: genus 
4: genus 
6: property (or accident if "temper" is taken to mean "an unusually hot temper") 
8: genus 
10: property 
12: species 
14: accident 
16: genus 

372 
ANSWERS TO EVEN-NUMBERED EXERCISES 
Page 64 
2: OK (although it is a matter of degree) 
4: OK 
6: Not exclusive (some totalitarians are very popular); and not exhaustive (it omits 
unpopular non-totalitarian regimes); and two different standards (popularity and 
power) 
8: OK 
10: OK (if "man" is included in "animals") 
12: OK 
14: OK 
16: Not exhaustive; not only are there other "excesses" but even if the class to be 
divided is taken to be "excesses concerning equality," there could be other 
excesses concerning equality. 
18: OK 
20: Uses two standards at once: how many and how qualified the rulers are; com-
pare n21. Also not exhaustive. 
22: OK logically, though some would find it controversial religiously; a good divi-
sion to outline as an exercise. 
Page 72 
2: "The most hungry" is temporally ambiguous: those who arc the most hungry 
before they cat, will usually then eat the most, but those who arc the most hun-
gry after they cat, have usually eaten the least. 
4: There are two ambiguities: Sam interprets "bored to death" literally, while his 
father means it figuratively, and Sam interprets "the service" as "the church 
service" while the minister means "the military service." 
6: The question can mean "who's the (offensive) baserunncr on first?" or "who's 
the (defensive) first baseman?" And in the Abbot & Costello routine, "Who" is 
also the player s last name. 
8: "Premises" can mean "logical assumptions" or "living quarters." 
10: "Sound" can mean "logical valid" or "physical noise." 
12: "Pronounce your sentence" can mean "utter your proposition" or decree your 
punishment. 
14: "Cares for" can man "physically takes care of" or "is emotionally attached to." 
16: "Right" can mean the opposite of "left" or the opposite of "wrong." 
18: To "love" violence is to enjoy it, even though it harms persons. To "love" in the 
religious sense (charity, agape) is to will good, not harm, to other persons. 
20: "Is" can be multiply equivocal: e.g. a copula ("Socrates is mortal"), an equation 
("2+2 is 4"), a tautology ("x is not non-x"), a timeless truth ("justice is more 
profitable than injustice"), a temporal truth ("Bush is President"), an assertion 
of existence ("Though he died, he still is"), a fictional identity ("Hamlet is the 
Prince of Denmark"), and many more. 
22: The first "nothing" means "There is no thing that is . . ." The second "nothing" 
means "nothingness" or "nothing at all." The first "nothing" begins a universal 
negative proposition, the second "nothing" is a term. 

Answers to pages 64-131 
Page 83 
2: dogmatic 
4: uncritical and unreliable 
6: uncritical appeal to the "expert" 
8: reasonable if not dogmatic 
10: reasonable on Islamic premises 
Page 130,1 (These arc not, of course, the only possible good definitions, but samples.) 
2: "an ordered body of knowledge through causes"; or "systematic, rational expla-
nation through evidence" 
4: "reasoning from a universal premise to a conclusion that necessarily follows" 
6: "the logical expression of judgment"; or "a statement with a subject and predi-
cate which can be true or false" 
8: "an object of knowledge which in reality is an aspect of things rather than a thing, 
but is considered by the mind apart from the real things in which it inheres" 
10: as a category, "that which that exists only in a substance (thing) and not in 
itself": as a predicable, "any predicate which is not the essence of its subject or 
a necessary property of it" 
12: "a statement of what a thing is, which distinguishes it from everything else" 
14: "the mind's conformity to reality" 
16: "the universal nature of a thing" 
18: "a created spirit without a body" 
20: "a large natural satellite of a star" 
22: "part of speech designating a person, place or thing"; or "the subject of predi-
cation" 
24: "the cessation of life" 
26: "an artificial means of exchange of goods and services" 
Page 131, II 
A 
2: essential, good 
4: circular: "episcopal" is simply the adjective formed from "bishop" 
6: negative and far too broad 
8: negative 
10: no genus (never define by "is when") and too narrow (some living things don't 
breathe) 
12: metaphorical 
14: nominal, but too narrow (some people, though really secure, do not feel content) 
and too broad (some people feel content without being secure) 
16: metaphorical (literally, anyone can pronounce those two words) and too narrow 
(is that all personality is? Is that all character is?). Clever, though. 
18: too broad 
20: circular ("round" means "circular" and "circular" means "round"), no genus (should 
be "geometrical figure"), and too broad (wheels are not circles but arc round) 
22: nominal; OK 

374 
ANSWERS TO EVEN-NUMBERED EXERCISES 
24: OK; it distinguishes plants from animals, as the lack of reason distinguishes 
brutes from humans 
26: nominal; OK 
28: OK (Is it essential or by final cause? Or both? Is its final cause an artifact's 
essence?) 
30: nominal; OK 
32: metaphorical 
34: no genus, negative, and too broad (also too narrow) 
36: too broad 
38: OK by property, since insanity is a disease of reason, which is proper to man 
alone. However, animal psychologists speak of "psychosis" and "insanity" also 
in higher animals using these words more broadly; and in this sense the defini-
tion is too broad. 
40: too narrow; only one virtue (temperance, self-control, or moderation) does that 
42: OK, by material cause 
44: too broad (are there no bad laws from bad lawmakers?), too narrow (there are 
some goods that bad lawmakers do not find acceptable, and some goods that are 
irrelevant to lawmakers), and no genus 
46: much too narrow (unless you are God) 
48: a joke 
50: nominal; OK 
B (Page 132) 
2: metaphorical 
4: metaphorical 
6: too narrow, also too broad (is addiction love?) 
8: OK (by both efficient and final causc) 
10: metaphorical and too broad (but it is probably not meant as a definition) 
12: circular 
14: within the context already defined in the Republic, OK; out of that context, too 
broad 
16: too broad and too narrow: the idea that there is a tunnel under the prison may be 
true but quite inexpedient to the jailer; the idea that "everything is going to be 
all right" may be expedient to a worried man yet untrue 
18: too narrow; it excludes partial happiness ("all our desires"?), undesired happi-
ness ("surprised by joy"), and objectively real but not subjectively experienced 
blessedness (like the wisdom that comes through suffering) 
20: needlessly complex, long, and obscure 
22: metaphorical 
24: nominal 
26: Too narrow, for nothing except God has liberty by this definition. If "impedi-
ment" is taken to mean "harmful impediment," the definition is too broad, for it 
applies even to planets, raindrops, and fingernails. 
28: Too broad: corpses, wimps, and hermits may also not inflict pain. Also too nar-
row: does it not inflict emotional pain to be told in a discreet and gentlemanly 
way, "Excuse me sir, but your fly is open"? 

Answers to pages 131-156 
375 
30: OK; but "knowledge" is also sometimes distinguished from "opinion" by Plato 
himself (e.g. in the Meno). 
32: Not, as it seems, nominal but real and even essential, if we use Einstcinian rather 
than Newtonian physics. If gases and liquids are also "bodies," OK. 
34: circular, also too narrow 
36: too broad in principle but accurate in practice in America in 1992 
38: if serious, too broad and too narrow (unless the colleagues in his department 
consist of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit) 
40: obscure and complex and also too broad, since evolution applies only to living 
matter 
C (page 135) 
2: The first definition is rightly rejected as too broad (is it bigotry to be ccrtain that 
2 + 2 = 4?); the second gives a property of bigotry but is probably too broad, 
since it also covers a weak imagination. 
4: This is similar to 2 and seems too broad because it also is true of intellectual 
weakness, and even is true of certainty about self-evident propositions. 
6: If this is a critique of a popular definition of humility, it is on target: humility is 
a moral virtue, not an intellectual weakness (skepticism, or doubt about truth). 
The popular notion of humility has the wrong genus, and confuses a moral 
virtue with the lack of an intellectual virtue. However, "doubt about oneself" is 
too broad to be a good definition of humility. Some self-doubt is extreme and 
pathological: an emotional disorder at the opposite extreme from bigotry or 
arrogance. 
8: GKC shows that "limitation" is a property of art, and that "freedom" is ambigu-
ous: freedom from external, alien laws is compatible with art but "freedom" 
from intrinsic, essential laws is not. But it is not a definition. No one of the three 
concepts discussed (limitation, freedom, art) is a genus or a specific difference 
of any other one. 
10: In differentiating suicide and martyrdom by motive, this seems accurate. 
However, if they are meant as definitions, the second seems too broad; for care 
about someone outside himself may motivate a man to suicide, however fool-
ishly: e.g. the desire that his family get rich from his life insurance. 
12: A valid critique of the attempt to conceive a "peasant" individualistically, but 
this is not usually an error in definition but in sociology. 
Pages 156-63 
A (Page 156) 
2: not a proposition, only one long term (no predicate) 
4: All [Socrates] is [tw was a philosopher] We need to add the "tw" ("that which") 
only because we need to include the past tense in the predicate; ordinarily we do 
not need to add "tw" or a "twi" (that which is") if we already have a noun. 
6: AH [I] am [tw itches] 
8: All [things which are not the observer of every thing in the universe] are [things 
in the universe] and No [observer of every thing in the universe] is [a thing in 
the universe] 

376 
ANSWERS TO EVEN-NUMBERED EXERCISES 
10: Sonic [gamblers] arc [tw are just lucky] and Some [gamblers] are not [tw are 
lucky] 
12: All [Alexander the Great] is [tw was Aristotle's student] 
14: All [tw know that everyone is a fraud] are [frauds] 
B (Page 156) 
2: All [charity] is [tw begins at home] 
4: not a proposition; a performative sentence 
6: not a proposition: an imperative followed by an interrogative 
8: If all [you] are [tw continues to turn the crank of that torture rack], then all [you] 
are [tw will in all probability detach all four of my limbs from their sockets]. The 
ncxt-to-last words of the Stoic philosopher; his words were "Sec? I told you so." 
10: All [he who jest at scars] is [he who never felt a wound] 
12: All [men] arc [good judges of their own interests] 
14: All [loose lips] arc [tw sink ships] 
16: All [tw this country needs] is [a good five cent cigar] 
18: No [history] is [tw ever repeats itself] 
20: not a proposition; a performative sentence 
22: All [tw man has done] is [tw man can do] 
24: All [he who laughs last] is [he who laughs best] 
26: No [tw is morally wrong] is [tw can be politically right] 
C (Page 157) 
2: All [a good talker] is [tw implies a good audicncc even more than a good orator 
does] 
4: If All [we] arc [tw trample our vices underfoot] then All [we] are [tw make a lad-
der of our vices] 
6: No [tw do not complain] arc [tw are ever pitied] OR: 
All [tw do not complain] are [tw arc never pitied] 
8: All [the world] is [a looking glass] and All [the world] is [tw gives back to every 
man the reflection of his own face] 
10: All [tw can understand the greatness of the past] are [the adventurous] OR: 
No [tw are not adventurous] are [tw can understand the greatness of the past] 
12: All [they] are [tw were born of the sun] and All [they] are [tw traveled a brief 
while toward the sun] and All [they] arc [tw left the vivid air singed with their 
honor] 
14: All [work] is [the curse of the drinking class] 
16: Some [books] are [tw is to be tasted] and Some [books] arc [tw is to be swal-
lowed] and Some [books] arc [tw is to be chewed and digested] 
18: If All [Cleopatra's nose] is [tw had been longer] then All [the history of the 
world] is [tw would have been changed] 
20: All [happy families] arc [tw resemble one another] and All [unhappy families] 
are [tw are unhappy in their own fashion] 
22: No [running when you are on the wrong road] is [tw is of use] (This is a rhetor-
ical question, which is really a proposition, a declaration, not an interrogative.) 

Answers to pages 156-159 
377 
24: Either All [death] is [a state of nothingness and utter unconsciousness) or All [a 
change and migration of the soul from this world to another] is [rwi real]. 
(Existential proposition; no predicate, unless we add 'real/) 
26: All [it] is [tw was brillig] and All [the slithy toves] are [tw did gyre and gimble 
in the wabe] and All [the borogoves] are [tw were mimsy] and All [the mome 
raths] arc [tw were outgrabe] 
28: All [tw is necessary for the triumph of evil] is [for good men to do nothing] 
30: No propositions; all imperatives (commands), except the last: All [rw can pro-
cure future Honor] is [Virtue and Wisdom] 
32: All [the silken, sad, uncertain rustling of each purple curtain] is [tw thrilled me] 
34: All [1] am [tw never had a job] and All [I] am [tw just always played baseball] 
36: All [man] is [tw was created a little lower than the angels] and All [man] is [tw 
has been getting a little lower ever since] 
38: No [time before this time] is [one in which so much has been owed by so many 
to so few] 
D (Page 159) 
2: All [tw speak or act with an impure mind] are [tw are followed by trouble as the 
ox that draws the cart is followed by the wheel] and All [tw speak or act with a 
pure mind] are [tw are followed by happiness as you are followed by your shad-
ow] OR: 
If All [you] are [tw speak or act with an impure mind] then All [you] are [tw 
will be followed by trouble as the ox that draw the cart is followed by the 
wheel] and if All [you] arc [tw speak or act with a pure mind] then All [you] 
are [tw will be followed by happiness as you are followed by your shadow] 
4: All [the fool who knows he is a fool] is [tw is that much wiser] and All [the fool 
who thinks he is wise] is [a fool indeed] 
6: All [tw are slow to do good] are [tw are caught by the mind delighting in mis-
chief] OR: 
If All [you] are [twi slow to do good] then AH [the mind, delighting in mischief] 
is [tw will catch you] "Be quick to be good" is am imperative. 
8: All [hurt] is [tw rebounds] 
10: All [ignorant men] are [oxen]; All [ignorant men] are [tw grow in size, not wis-
dom] (This is two propositions connected not by "if" or "either" or "and" but by 
an implied "bccause." It is an abbreviated form of argument, called an cnthy-
meme, which you will Icam to evaluate later.) 
12: If All [you] are [tw let go of winning and losing] then All [you] are [tw will find 
joy] OR: 
All [tw let go of winning] are [tw will find joy] 
14: No [the way] is [twi in the sky] and All [the way] is [twi in the heart] OR: 
All [the way] is [twi not in the sky] and All [the way] is [twi in the heart] OR: 
All [the way] is [twi not in the sky but in the heart] 
E(Page 159) 
2: All [the uses of adversity] arc [twi sweet] 
4: All [cowards] are [tw die many times before their deaths] and All [the valiant] 

378 
ANSWERS TO EVEN-NUMBERED EXERCISES 
are [tw never taste of death but once] OR: 
All [cowards] are [tw die many times before their deaths] and No [the valiant] 
are [tw die many times before their deaths] 
6: All [twi fair] is [twi foul] and All [twi foul] is [twi fair] OR: 
All [fairness] is [foulness] and All [foulness] is [fairness] 
8: If All [you] are [twi true to yourself] then All [you] arc [tw cannot then be false 
to any man] OR: 
All [tw are true to themselves] are [tw cannot be false to any man] 
10: All [golden lads] are [tw must come to dust, as chimney sweepers] and All 
[golden girls] are [tw must come to dust, as chimney sweepers] OR [All golden 
lads and girls] are [tw must come to dust, as chimney sweepers] 
12: Some [remedies which we ascribe to heaven] are [tw lie in ourselves] 
14: All [these mortals] are [fools] 
16: No [course of true love] is [tw ever ran smooth] 
18: All [the things in heaven and earth] are [twi more than are dreamed of in your 
philosophy] 
20: All [men that have no music in themselves and arc not moved with concord of 
sweet sounds] arc [tw arc fit for treasons, stratagems and spoils] 
22: not a proposition: a command, wish, exclamation, or imprecation 
24: All [tw steal my purse] are [tw steal trash] 
26: not a proposition; a command 
28: not a proposition; a wish 
30: All [the serpent that did sting thy father's life] is [tw now wears his crown] 
32: All [sweetest things] are [tw turn sourest by their deeds]; All [lilies that fester] 
arc [tw smell far worse than weeds] (The second proposition is an example of, 
or evidence for, the first, so they arc logically connected, but not by "if," "either," 
or "and") 
34: not a logical proposition but a proposal "proposition." 
36: If All [it] is [twi now] then No [it] is [twi to come] and if No [it] is [twi to come] 
then All [it] is [tw will be now] and if No [it] is [twi now] then All [it] is [tw will 
come] 
38: All [gilding refined gold, painting the lily] is [wasteful and ridiculous excess] 
40: No [the water in the rough rude sea] is [tw can wash the balm off from an anoint-
ed king] 
42: All [the hungry lion] is [tw now roars] and All [the wolf] is [tw now behowls the 
moon] OR: 
All [now] is [the time when the hungry lion roars and the wolf behowls the 
moon] 
44: All [to be or not to be] is [the question] 
46: not a proposition; an exclamation 
48: All [I] am [twi dead] (But this is an existentially self-contradictory proposition; 
if you can say you're dead, you're not dead! Cf. Descartcs's proof that he exists: 
"I think, therefore I am." His point is that "I AM" is existentially [or practically 
or psychologically] self-evident, for its contradictory "I am not," or "I am dead," 
is existentially [or practically or psychologically] self-contradictory. "I AM" is 

Answers to pages 159-172 
379 
not, however, a logically self-evident proposition, a tautology, since the predi-
cate is not essential to the subjcct unless the subject is God. Perhaps Descartes 
harbored this minor confusion!) 
F (Page 161) 
2. No [thoroughly worldly people] are [those who ever understand the world] 
4. No [men] are [those who loved Rome because she was great] and All [Rome] is 
[tw was great bccausc they had loved her] 
6. All [great classics] arc [tw one can praise without having read] 
8. All [logic is [a machine of the mind] and if All [logic] is [twi used honestly], 
then All [logic] is [tw ought to bring out an honest conclusion] 
G (Page 162) 
2. All [the poor in spirit] are [tw arc blessed] 
4. If All [God] is [tw so clothes the grass of the field . . .] 
then All [God] is [tw will much more clothe you] 
(The proposition is a "rhetorical question.") 
6. All [tw a man sows] is [tw he shall also reap] 
8. All [tw are not with me] are [tw are against me] 
10. No [good tree] is [tw can bring forth evil fruit] 
12. If all [1] am [tw speak with tongues of men and of angels but have not love] 
then All [I] am [a noisy gong or a clanging cymbal] 
14. This interrogative sentence is not a proposition, but it contains a proposition: 
All [she] is [tw lookcth forth as the morning, etc.] 
16. not a propositon; a wish 
18. All [things] are [tw work together for good for them who love God], OR 
All [tw love God] are [those for whom all things work together for good] 
Page 164 
2: c 
4: d 
6: b 
8: a 
Pages 171-72 
A 
2: Some [tw eat little fish] are [bigger fish] 
4: No [hero to his valet] is [a man] 
6: You can't validly convert an O. 
8: No [tw ends] is [love] 
B 
2: No [bigger fish] are [tw do not cat little fish] 
4: All [men] are [non-heroes to their valets] 
6: Some [tw glitters] is [non-gold] 

380 
ANSWERS TO EVEN-NUMBERED EXERCISES 
8: All [love] is [tw never ends] OR, if this was your original form. No [love] is [tw 
ever ends] 
2. Partial contrapositive: No [tw do not eat little fish] arc [bigger fish]; Full contra-
positive: All [tw do not eat little fish] arc [twi not bigger fish]. Partial inverse: Some 
[tw cat little fish] are not [twi not bigger Fish]; Full inverse: O does not convert. 
4. Partial contrapositive: Some [twi not heroes to their valets] are [men]; Full con-
trapositive: Some [twi not heroes to their valets] are not [non-men]. Partial 
inverse: All [heroes to their valets] are [non-men]; Full inverse: Some [non-men] 
are [heroes to their valets]. 
6. Partial contrapositive: Some [non-gold] is [tw glitters]; Full contrapositivc: 
Some [non-gold] is not [tw does not glitter]. No inverses; O does not convert. 
8. Partial contrapositive: No [tw ever ends] is [love]; Full contrapositive: All [tw 
ever ends] is [non-love]. Partial inverse: Some [tw never ends] is not [non-love]; 
no full inverse; O does not convert. 
E 
2: valid: first an obversion, then a conversion (thus a partial contraposition) 
4: invalid conversion of an O 
6: valid conversion of an I 
Page 174 
2. Some [flowers] are [twi born to bloom unseen] vs. No [flowers] arc [twi bom to 
bloom unseen] 
4: AH [things of beauty] are [a joy forever] vs. Some [things of beauty] arc not [a 
joy forever] 
6: Some [fair faces] are [tw may be a foul bargain] vs. No [fair faces] are [tw may 
be a foul bargain] 
8: Some [slips between the cup and the lip] are [twi real] vs. No [slips between the 
cup and the lip] arc [twi real] (Existential propositions can also contradict each 
other.) 
10: all [tw deserve the fair] are (tw are brave] vs. some [tw are non-brave] are [tw 
deserve the fair]. 
12. All [tw deserve the fair] arc [twi brave] vs. Some [tw deserve the fair] are not 
[twi brave]. 
Pages 178-79 
A 
2: Some [thing new under the sun] is [twi real] OR: Some [thing under the sun] is 
[twi new] 
4: No [men] are [those who hate by morning what they love by night] 
B 
2: valid 
4: valid 
6: invalid 
C 
2: false 

Answers to pages / 72-235 
381 
4: true 
6: false 
8: unknown (not an opposition; an illicit conversion) 
Page 199 
2: false 
4: false 
6: false 
8: false 
10: false 
12: false 
14: false 
16: true (for in a valid argument, true premises necessitate a true conclusion) 
18: true 
20: false 
Page 205 
2: formal (argument or explanation) 
4: efficient (explanation) 
6: material (argument) 
8: material (explanation) 
10: material or efficient (explanation) 
12: final (explanation) 
14: final (explanation) [a magnet does not push but pulls, by attraction] 
16: formal (argument) 
Page 219 
2: true 
4: false 
6: true 
8: true 
10: false (only 2 terms and 2 propositions) 
Page 234 
A 
2: invalid 
4 valid 
6: valid 
8: invalid 
10: invalid 
Page 235 
B 
2: Some great men are political nonconformists. 
No political nonconformists are patriotic. 
Therefore some great men are not patriotic. 
4: Somebody passed wind. 
All who passed wind, farted. 
Therefore somebody farted. 

382 
ANSWERS TO EVEN-NUMBERED EXERCISES 
6: Whatever has color, has molecules. 
Whatever has molecules, has size. 
Therefore whatever has color, has size. 
8: All who by nature need to know, by nature desire to know. 
All men by nature need to know. 
Therefore all men by nature desire to know. 
Page 236 
C 
2 Whatever can be created by our imag-
ination is subjective. 
Beauty can be created by our imagi-
nation. 
Therefore beauty is subjective. 
4: Whatever is defined differently by 
different societies, changes with time 
and place. 
Moral rightness is defined differently 
by different societies. 
Therefore moral Tightness changes 
with time and place 
6: Man is created by God 
Whatever is created by God is essen-
tially good 
Therefore man is essentially good 
8: Capital punishment is a practice of 
justice 
Whatever is a practice of justice is 
morally right 
Therefore capital punishment is 
morally right 
What is argued about is not subjec-
tive. 
Beauty is argued about. 
Therefore beauty is not subjective. 
What Hows from man's essence does 
not change with time and place. 
Moral rightness flows from man's 
essence. 
Therefore moral rightness does not 
change with time and placc. 
Man is naturally selfish. 
What is naturally selfish is not essen-
tially good. 
Therefore man is not essentially good. 
Capital punishment harms its victims. 
Whatever harms its victims is not 
morally right. 
Therefore capital punishment is not 
morally right. 
Page 253 
A 
2: valid 
4: invalid: Illicit Major 
6. valid (if you obvert one of the premises to avoid two negative premises) 
8: valid 
10: valid (translate the second premise as an A, not an E, both to avoid two negative 
premises and to get a common term with the first premise) 
12: valid 
14: invalid: Illicit Minor 
16: invalid: Undistributed Middle 
18: invalid: four terms (Jill, John, tw loves John, and tw loves Jesus) 

Answers to pages 235-254 
383 
Page 254 
B 
2: All [mercy] is [sorrow] 
No [sorrow] is [twi in God] 
Therefore no [mercy] is [twi in God]: valid 
"But 'sorrow' is used ambiguously: there is the act of sorrow (a will) in mercy, 
but here is no passive sorrow (a passion, or emotion) in God," Aquinas explains. 
4: Some [subjects that tend to withdraw the mind from pursuits of a low nature] are 
[twi useful] 
No [classical learning] is [a subject that tends to withdraw the mind ... etc.] 
Therefore no [classical learning] is [twi useful]: invalid; Illicit Major 
6: All [happiness] is [twi desired as an end and never as a means] 
All [pleasure] is [twi desired as an end and never as a means] 
Therefore all [happiness] is [pleasure] : invalid: Undistnbuted M.ddle 
8: No [apes] are [angels] 
SSSSBSS- 
~ — 
10: All [animals] are [bodies] 
All [you] arc [an animal] 
Therefore All [you] are [a body]: valid 
All [you] are [a body] 
.x 
And all [stones] arc [bodies] (first premise mentioned) 
Therefore all [you] are [a stone] : invalid; Undistributed Middle 
12: All [rational beings] are [responsible beings] 
No [brute animals] are [respons.ble beings] 
Therefore no [brute animals] are [rational beings]. valid 
14: All [knowledge] is [tw comes from s e n s o r y impression ] 
No [sensory impression] is [twi o su s^a 
; invalid: four terms ("That 
Therefore no [knowledge] is [twi o s 
"sensory impres-
which comes from sensory impressions is not the sam 
16: AnTfighting against neighbors;| is 
e v J 
jns, n c i g h b o r s ] 
All Ifi&hting against the ThebansJ is [\ i 
b 
AM [fighting a'gainst the Thebans] is [tw. evil]: valid 
18: No [after-image] is [twi in physical space] 
^ 
All [the brain process] is [twi in p y 
t 
c s s ] ; valid 
Therefore no [the after-image] is Ih 
o f t h c poct to their hearers] 
sode] : valid 
„nn,-ncc on the actions and affections] 
22: All [morals] are [tw have an i 
t h e ac,i0ns and affections] 
No [reason alone] is [tw has an influcncc o 

384 
ANSWERS TO EVEN-NUMBERED EXERCISES 
Therefore no [morals] are [twi derived from reason] : Invalid: four terms (That 
which is derived from reason is not the same as reason alone.) 
24: No [metaphysical sentence] is [either a tautology or an empirical hypothesis] 
All [significant, meaningful propositions] arc [either tautologies or empirical 
hypotheses] 
Therefore no [metaphysical sentences] are [significant, meaningful proposi-
tions] : valid 
(But this "verification principle" of "Logical Positivism" is self-contradictory, 
for it itself is neither a tautology nor an empirical hypothesis, therefore it is by 
its own criterion meaningless and insignificant.) 
26: All [friendship] is [love] 
All [love] is [tw has three objects] 
Therefore all [friendship] is [tw is of three kinds] : Invalid, four terms as it 
stands. 
However, it is an enthymeme with the implied premise "Whatever has three 
objects, is of three kinds," and when this is added, we have two valid syllogisms. 
28: AH [existence] is [a perfection] 
No [perfections] are [twi lacking in God] 
Therefore no [existence] is [twi lacking in God] : valid 
OR: 
All [God] is [tw lacks no perfection] 
All [tw lacks no perfection] is [tw docs not lack existence] 
Therefore all [God] is [tw does not lack existence] : valid 
However, the argument merely proves that if the concept, or nature, or defini-
tion, of God is to lack no perfection, and therefore not to lack existence either, 
then we can conclude only that the concept of God cannot lack existence; we 
cannot conclude that God in fact exists. If wc begin only with a concept (4God*), 
we end only with a concept ('God'); if wc want to end with more than a concept 
(God without the quotation marks), we must begin with more than a conccpt 
(God without the quotation marks), but that would be begging the question in 
assuming a real God. You cannot prove God from 'God' without committing the 
fallacy of four terms. You need other facts to prove the fact of God. A second 
problem w ith the argument is the confusion of existence with essence: perfec-
tions are qualities of an essence. Existence is not a perfection but the precondi-
tion for or actualization of all perfections. 
30: Some [twi south] is [twi west] 
And some [twi west] is [twi north] 
Therefore some [twi south] is [twi north] : invalid. Undistributed Middle and 
two particular premises. ("Can be" means "Some is.") 
Page 271 
2: All [tw makes the world go round] is [tw does not make it go flat] 
All [love] is [tw makes the world go round] 
Therefore all [love] is [tw does not make it go flat] : valid 

Answers to pages 254-271 
385 
OR: 
No [tw makes the world go round] is [tw makes it go Hat] 
All [love] is [tw makes the world go round] 
Therefore no [love] is [tw makes it go flat] : valid 
4: No [act of will] is [an emotion] 
All [love] is [an act of will] 
Therefore no [love] is [an emotion] : valid 
6: No [tw has no wheels] is [tw can be moved] 
All [mountains] are [tw have no wheels] 
Therefore no [mountains] are [tw can be moved] : valid 
8: All [tw deserve the fair] are [twi brave] 
No [you] are [twi brave] 
Therefore no [you] are [twi deserve the fair] 
valid (third order enthymemc) 
10: No [tw did not have enough food to fulfill the needs of a warm blooded animal] 
is [a warm blooded animal] 
All [dinosaurs] are [tw did not have enough food to fulfill the needs of a warm 
blooded animal] 
Therefore no [dinosaurs] are [warm blooded animals] : valid 
12: All [those whose views were always incompatible with those of the existing 
societies which they wanted to overthrow] are [those who have always been 
social radicals] 
All [Marxists] are [those whose views were always incompatible with those of 
the existing societies which they wanted to overthrow] 
Therefore all [Marxists] are [those who have always been social radicals]: valid 
14: All [Bull-friendly sets] are [conclusions of Bulls equation] 
No [null sets] are [Bull-friendly sets] 
Therefore all [conclusions of Bulls equation] are [null sets] : invalid; affirma-
tive conclusion from negative premise, whichever implied premise we add 
16: All [the one to whom the center is hiking the ball] is [the quarterback] 
All [Bub] is [the one to whom the center is hiking the ball] 
Therefore all [Bub] is [the quarterback] : valid 
18: All [I] am [twi loved by God] 
No [twi loved by God] is [junk] *<-
No [I] am [junk] : valid 
20: All [restrictions on abortion] are [restrictions on a woman's right to control her 
own body] 
All [restrictions on a woman's right to control her own body] are [twi wTong] 
Therefore all [restrictions on abortion] arc [twi wrong] : valid 
(NB most of these arguments can be put into valid form; the main practical use 
of doing so is not find fallacies, since these are relatively rare, but to smoke out 
the logically necessary assumptions. The first premise here implies that abortion 
is controlling the mother's body, not the baby's.) 
22: No [tw commit suicide] are [twi happy] 
Some [twi rich] are [tw commit suicide] 
Therefore some [twi rich] are not [twi happy]: valid 

386 
ANSWERS TO EVEN-NUMBERED EXERCISES 
24: No [twi given by Moses] is [twi given by God] 
All [the 10 Commandments] are [twi given by Moses] 
Therefore no [the 10 Commandments] are [twi given by God] : valid, but only 
with this questionable premise. 
26: All [pines] are [trees] 
All [conifers] are [trees] 
Therefore all [pines] are [conifers] : invalid. Undistributed Middle, OR, with 
another premise. 
All [trees] are [pines] 
All [conifers] are [trees] 
Therefore all [pines] are [conifers] : invalid. Illicit Minor. No missing premise 
can make it valid. 
28: All [green things] are [snakes] 
Some [green things] are not [tw slithers] 
Therefore some [snakes] are not [tw slithers]: valid, but only with this obvious-
ly false premise. If we use "all snakes are green things" as our premise instead, 
we have Undistributed Middle. 
30: All [those who are loved by me] are [those who loved God] 
All [St. Thomas] is [one who is loved by me] 
Therefore all [St. Thomas] is [one who loved God] : valid 
32: As it stands, it is not a syllogism, since the "conclusion" is an imperative. 
However, 
All [sinners] are [tw should forbear to judge] 
All [we] are [sinners] 
Therefore all [we] are [tw should forbear to judge] : valid 
34: All [the principal thing] is [tw should be gotten] 
All [wisdom] is [the principal thing] 
Therefore all [wisdom] is [tw should be gotten] : valid, cf. #32 
36: All [matters which are the subject of one's own free exercise of will] are [mat-
ters in which it is impossible to bind oneself] 
All [the king's own laws] arc [matters which are the subject of one's own free 
exercise of will] 
Therefore all [the king s own laws] are [matters in which it is impossible to bind 
oneself] : valid 
38: All [flesh] arc [twi passive, the plaything, etc.] 
All [man] is [flesh] 
Therefore all [man] is [passive, the plaything, etc.] : valid 
40: No [one who would not take the crown] is [one who was ambitious] 
All [he] is [one who would not take the crown] 
Therefore no [he] is [one who was ambitious]: valid 
42: All [nations without consciences] arc [nations without souls] 
All [nations without souls] arc [nations which cannot live] 
Therefore all [nations without consciences] arc [nations which cannot live] 
valid (third order Enthymeme) 

Answers to pages 271 f . 
387 
44: All [tw wc can explain] is [tw we can reduce to laws whose object can be given 
in some possible experience] 
No [freedom] is [tw we can reduce to laws whose object can be given in some 
possible experience] 
Therefore no [freedom] is [tw we can explain] 
valid 
46: All [tw occurs] is [tw God wills to occur] 
All [evil] is [tw occurs] 
Therefore all [evil] is [tw God wills to occur]: valid (But which term is ambiguous?) 
48: All [those with whom Thou art] are [ones who will fear no evil] 
All [I] am [one with whom Thou art] 
Therefore all [I] am [one who will fear no evil] : valid 
50: All [tw should be invited to international conferences] are [tw have legions] 
No [the Pope] is [tw has legions] 
Therefore no [the Pope] is [tw should be invited to international conferences] : 
valid 
Or, more simply (nearly every syllogism can be recast into an AAA syllogism): 
All [tw have no legions] are [tw should not be invited to international confer-
ences] 
All [the Pope] is [tw has no legions] 
Therefore all [the Pope] is [tw should not be invited to international confer-
ences] : valid 
52: All [tw copies nothing] is [tw copies life] 
All [art] is [tw copies nothing] 
Therefore all [art] is [tw copics life] : the main syllogism is valid 
It is, however, very difficult to put the rest of the argument into a syllogism. 
Clearly, the fact that "life copies nothing" is the reason why "That which copies 
nothing, copies life" And the point seems right. But if we put it into a syllogism 
it will come out fallacious. 
All [life] is [tw copies nothing] 
Therefore all [tw copies nothing] is [tw copies life] 
We already have an illicit minor. We also need to connect the two terms "life" 
and "tw copies life" in the implied premise. But Chesterton's point is that life 
does not copy life. It is a clever logical paradox that will apparently not go into 
a valid syllogism. Can you make it do so? 
54: All [tw are at the head of something with which she can do as she likes] are [tw 
arc in the more powerful position] 
All [women] arc [tw are at the head of something with which she can do as she 
likes] 
Therefore ail [women] are [tw are in the more powerful position] : valid 
56: All [things that arc never presented otherwise than as a phenomenon] are [things 
I know not] 
All [things in themselves] are [things that are never presented otherwise than as 
a phenomenon] 
Therefore all [things in themselves] are [things I know not]: valid 

388 
ANSWERS TO EVEN-NUMBERED EXERCISES 
58: All [tw assert nothing] are [twi neither true nor false] 
All [metaphysical propositions] are [tw assert nothing] 
Therefore all [metaphysical propositions] are [twi neither true nor false]: valid 
(NB in this case it is the expressed premise rather than the implied premise that 
is false.) 
60: This is not a syllogism but an immediate inference, a contraposition (assuming 
that 'belonging to no one' and 'not property' are the same term): 
No [twi untouched by human work] is [property] 
Therefore all [property] is [twi is touched by human work] 
62: All [tw gives you the chance to love, etc.] is [tw you should be glad of] 
All [life] is [tw gives you the chance to love, etc.] 
Therefore all [life] is [tw you should be glad of]: valid (Literally, the conclusion 
is an imperative, not a declarative, sentence. But it is argued for: it is followed 
by the premise indicator 'because.') 
64: All [tw God has made for Himself] are [those whose hearts are restless until they 
rest in God] 
All [we] are [tw God has made for Himself] 
Therefore all [we] are [those whose hearts are restless until they rest in God] : 
valid, but explanation not argument (like #57) 
66: All [animals that laugh and weep] are [animals that are struck by the difference 
between what things are and what things ought to be] 
All [animals that are struck by the difference between what things are and what 
things ought to be] are [men] 
Therefore all [animals that laugh and weep] arc [men] : valid; explanation by 
efficient cause (being struck by this difference moves us to laugh and weep) 
68: All [pleasure and pain] are [tw we cease from at the same time] 
No [good and evil] are [tw we case from at the same time] 
Therefore no [pleasure and pain] are [good and evil] : valid 
70: All [tw made many plain people] is [tw loves plain people] 
All [God] is [tw made many plain people] 
Therefore all [God] is [tw loves plain people] : valid; OR: 
All [twi many] is [twi loved by God] 
All [plain people] arc [twi many] 
Therefore all [plain people] are [twi loved by God] : valid 
Page 282 
2. Some [lizards] are not [tw bite] 
All [lizards are [reptiles] 
Therefore Some freptiles] are not [tw bite] 
<C£nd All [reptiles] are fsnakesQ 
Therefore Some [snakes] are not [tw bite] 
Valid bill OP'Y " ' T H 
GILDED PREMISE wh' r h 
4<^irftvvlaugh at my bad puns] are [tw love meT!II> 
All [she] is [tw laughed at my bad puns] 
Therefore all [she] is [tw loves me] 

Answers to pages 271-285 
389 
in) Ml [!] aw [*" ' loved by h<*r] 
-All [twi 1oveA hv her] arc [those whose lives arc meaninCfiiTp> 
Therefore All [I] am [one of those whose lives are meaningful] 
Valid, but only with the two circled premises. 
6 All [anggls} -nr fr" r" zpidts] 
CAjifnure spirits] are [twi not composed of atomiH^ 
Thuj fnrr tS, finrrh] nrr [tvi n - eet»pese4 n f , " H 
<ST[uvi not composed of atoms] are [tw does 
^ " p v 
Th^fore ah [nrr*1*] 'm* f t i r 
n n t ™^"nv  
<CAIT[tw does not occupy space] are [tw cannot be confined in prisonsLl> 
Therefore All [angels] are [tw cannot be conf ined in prisons] 
Valid. 
Page 285 
2: 
I
4: 

390 
ANSWERS TO EVEN-NUMBERED EXERCISES 
6: 
8: 
10: 

Answers to pages 285-299 
391 
12. 
14: 
Page 299 
2: Denying the Consequent; a valid enthymemc, with the implied premise "light 
does not possess momentum" 
4: An enthymeme with the second premise and the conclusion implied. Valid, 
Denying the Consequent: 
If [the objective of marriage were contentment then the discontent of either 
party would be a sufficient reason for ending it 
But it is not true that the discontent of either party is a sufficient reason for end-
ing it 
Therefore it is not true that the objective of marriage is contentment 

392 
ANSWERS TO EVEN-NUMBERED EXERCISES 
6: p = you arc deceived 
q = you exist 
r = you can be certain you exist 
s = you can be certain of something 
t = you are not a skeptic 
p D q 
q=>r 
TDS 
sz>t 
p 
q 
r 
s 
q 
r 
s 
t 
8: If [everyone followed total pacifism] then [total pacifism is a good principle] 
But it is not true that [everyone follows total pacifism] 
Therefore it is not true that [total pacifism is a good principle]: invalid: Denying 
the Antecedent 
10: p = a man is morally responsible for an act 
q = a man is a legitimate object of moral praise or blame for an act 
r = a man is in some important sense a free agent 
p=>q 
qi>r 
.'.pDr valid: a pure hypothetical syllogism 
12: p = Beauty is an objective reality 
q = Beauty is in the eye of the beholder 
p 3 - q 
q 
~p valid: Denying the Consequent 
14: p = God docs not exist 
q = we feel so alone that we arc unable to endure a universe without Him 
p=>q 
q 
p invalid: Affirming the Consequent 
16: p = I eat chocolates 
q = I get migraines 
pz>q 
q 
p invalid: AfTirming the Consequent 
18: p = there is confidence in promises 
q = the greatest part of our conduct proceeds upon chance 
r = men are obliged to perform their promises 
~p=>q 
-v z> ~p 
~ r D q valid: pure hypothetical syllogism 
20: p = mankind understands the power of love 
q = man builds noble temples and altars and offers solemn sacrifices in his honor 

Answers to pages 299-302. 
393 
pz>q 
~q 
~p valid: Denying the Consequent 
22: p = I am great 
q = I am misunderstood 
pz>q 
q 
/. p invalid: Affirming the Consequent 
NB this can also be put into a categorical syllogism as follows: 
All [twi great] are (twi misunderstood] 
All [I] am [twi misunderstood] 
Therefore all [I] am [twi great] invalid: Undistributed Middle 
24: p = men are angels 
q = no government is necessary 
p=>q 
~P 
~q invalid: Denying the Antecedent (But perhaps it is not meant as an 
cnthymeme, i.e. not an argument at all, but as an explanation of why government 
is necessary by contrasting the real situation and an ideal situation, in which men 
are angels). 
26: p = I cherished iniquity in my heart 
q = God listened to my prayer 
p=>~q 
q 
-p valid: Denying the Consequent 
Page 302 
2: p = the professor's Theory of General Insanity is true 
q = I am insane 
pvq 
~P 
~q (invalid) 
4: p = human authority is natural 
q = human authority is conventional 
pvq 
~P 
•\ q (valid) 
6: p = a tail is there 
q = a tail isn't there 
p v q 
~P 
q (valid) 

394 
ANSWERS TO EVEN-NUMBERED EXERCISES 
Page 305 
2: p = vampires are undead 
q = vampires are dead 
r = vampires are alive 
-[p & q] 
P 
^q (valid) 
- [ q & r ] 
r (invalid) "Dead" and "alive" may not be the only two possibilities. 
4: p = Plato is objectively reasoning about love 
q = Plato is subjectively experiencing love 
r = Plato has a right to philosophize about love 
~[P & q] 
p 
~q (valid) 
^qD~r (You could argue that this is a false premise.) 
~q 
-T (valid: Affirming the Antecedent) 
6: No [disjunction] is [conjunction] 
All [disjunction] is [twi exclusive] 
No [conjunction] is [twi exclusive] invalid: illicit major 
Page 311 
2: p = culture is profound and noble 
q = culture remains rare 
r = culture is common 
s = culture becomes mean 
(p => q) & (r z> s) 
p v r (implied premise of the enthymeme) 
q v s (implied conclusion) 
Answer: One could take it by the horns and deny that common culture must 
become mean. Or one could escape between the horns and embrace a sort of 
compromise culture just common enough to escape rarity and just noble enough 
to escape meanness. 
4: p = a man knows what he is inquiring about 
q = a man has need to inquire 
r = a man can inquire 
(p 3 -q) & (~p 3 ~r) 
p v~p 
v ~r 

Answers to pages 305-311 
395 
Plato himself escapes between the horns of this dilemma in the Meno by con-
tending that a man can inquire by "remembering" what he has forgotten. We 
might call this making implicit knowledge explicit, or raising unconscious 
knowledge to the level of consciousness. "Know" is ambiguous. 
6: p = these books agree with the Qur'an 
q = these books are superfluous 
r = these books are heretical 
s = these books should be burned 
(p => q) & (~p 3 r) 
p v - p 
.'.q v r 
(q => s) & (r 3 s) 
q v r 
s 
One could take it by a horn: a book can "agree with" the Qur'an without being 
superfluous: e.g. helpful commentaries on it. One can also escape between the 
horns: a book of geography, e.g. neither agrees nor disagrees with the Qur'an. 
Finally, one can take the second dilemma by the horns and say that there are bet-
ter things to do with superfluous or heretical books than burning them: e.g. 
heretical books can be argued against and refuted. Muhammad would not have 
approved Omar's act or his reason for it. 
8: p = the reader knows how to read a book before reading How to Read a Book 
q = How to Read a Book is superfluous 
r = How to Read a Book is unreadable 
(p => q) & (~p => r) 
P v - p 
q v r 
Adler himself would escape between these horns. His book is not for those who 
cannot read at all, nor is it for those who can read as well as he can, but for those 
in the middle. In other words, the term 'read' is used ambiguously. 
10: p = the conclusion of a deduction contains something new that is not in the 
premises 
q = the deduction is useless 
r = the deduction is logically invalid 
(~p => q) & (p 3 r) 
- p v p 
q v r 
One could escape between the horns since a conclusion can be validly implied 
by the premises but not explicitly known until deduction shows it. It can be psy-
chologically new without being logically new. See also pages 222-30. 

396 
ANSWERS TO EVEN-NUMBERED EXERCISES 
12: p = freedom of speech is restricted 
q = wc will cease to be a democracy 
r = we will be at the mercy of demagogues and fanatics 
(p 3 q) & (-p 3 r) 
P v ^ P 
q v r 
Either horn can be denied. Every democracy restricts some speech. (This 
"some" means, in effect, escaping between the horns.) And if speech is not 
restricted demagogues and fanatics will speak but we need not be at their mercy. 
14: p = a thing moves 
q = a thing moves where it is 
r = a thing moves where it isn't 
p => [q v r] 
~[q v r] 
This is really a hypothetical syllogism. Denying the Consequent. We can answer 
it by denying the first (hypothetical) premise, for a thing moves from one place 
to another, not cither where it is or where it isn't. 
16: p = the citizens arc good 
q = laws are unnecessary to prevent evil 
r = laws are impotent to prevent evil 
(p z> q) & (~p => r) 
p v ~ p 
.'. q v r 
The second horn seems weak and "takeable." Laws obviously make a potent dif-
ference and deter many evil men from many evil deeds by threat of punishment. 
Page 317 
2: Descartes s data base for his generalization is extremely tiny: only one example! 
4: First, it is not at all clear, or agreed, that these are relevant examples of oppres-
sion. Most individuals in these relationships did not feel oppressed. Second, they 
are only professional and economic relationships: there are many other kinds. 
6: The inductive generalization can be corroborated by ordinary experience. Its 
conclusion is put in the sentence beginning with "It looks, in fact, very much as 
if. . ."The following hypothetical syllogism beginning with "And there would 
be no sense . . i s illustrated, in the same sentence, by the analogy of football, 
and the analogy specifics the common principle: agreement about the rules. This 
too seems corroborated by experience. 
Page 333 
2: Relevant differences include the following: 1) "Semitic" is a racial adjective; 
"American" is not. 2) "Anti-Zionism" does not always seek the abolition of Israel: 
sometimes it seeks only equal sovereignty for Palestine. 3) No one makes any 

Answers to pages 311-333 
397 
important distinction between "America" and "the United States" as they do 
between Zionism and Israel. Relevant similarities include the following: 1) Both 
nations came into existence through military force against another nation's will and 
territory. 2) Both were based on beliefs or ideology. 3) Precisely bccause there is no 
parallel here to people who want the US. to not exist, the analogy is powerful in 
opening American's eyes to how Israelis feel: "how would you feel if you . . . ?" 
4: This is not an argument but an illuminating illustration. Both the experience of 
difficulty and the objective reason for it seem similar. By the way, all or nearly 
all thought about immaterial things rests on analogies with material things. 
Wittgenstein also said, startlingly, that "the best picture of a human soul that we 
can imagine is a human body." 
6: Obviously, the former has worked many times, while the latter has not. A theater 
is a specialty that requires specialized competence, while a democratic govern-
ment governs not some specialty but human life as a whole in its public domain; 
so the analogy seems superficial. 
8: This is a very c o m m o n and commonsensical argument from analogy. A text, 
composed of different letters, and a universe, composed of different things, are 
both diverse matter formed into a unified order (a wn/'-verse), things of different 
natures working together for a c o m m o n result. This can be done only by a plan-
ning intelligence. This analogy is one form of the most popular of all arguments 
for a God, the "argument from design," and the version given here seems intu-
itively convincing, especially because its conclusion is not bold but claims very 
little, and its claim is negative, not positive: it does not claim to know who or 
what the intelligence behind the universe is, only that it is not just blind chance. 
10: If water and air are in all relevant ways similar, this is a convincing analogy. It 
is also verifiable by experiment and measurement. 
12: This is probably not an argument 
but an explanation showing how in both cases, 
physical and mental, a tiny amount of evil can corrupt a large amount of good. 
14: The analogy holds only on the questionable assumption that ideas are pictures. 
16: A fruitful analogy ("by their fruits you shall know them"), based on the common 
principle that "action follows being" (operatio sequitur 
esse); i.e. the activity, or 
work, of any thing reveals its nature. 
18: The fact that the analogy strikes one as ridiculous does not disqualify it, for that 
is precisely its point: that the thought that women need men is ridiculous, that 
there is no natural or necessary relation between women and men, that women 
have no more need or use for men than fish have for bicycles. The point, of 
course, is simply false: no fish ever used a bicycle to become happy, pregnant, 
protected, loved, honored, or even sexually stimulated. A piece of ideological 
fantasy, not a real analogy. 
20: If you think this is a fair analogy for pregnancy, you probably believe in the 
stork. The only abortion thiis analogy could possibly justify is the abortion of a 
baby whose conception was due to violence and rape. Even there, the violinist 
is not the woman's child: surely a relevant consideration. And it is questionable 
whether even in this strange case it is justifiable to kill the violinist if he is inno-
cent. Almost as bizarre as the fish and the bicycle. 

398 
ANSWERS TO EVEN-NUMBERED EXERCISES 
Pages 336-341 
Sample of Logical Analysis of the "Exercise on Nearly Everything" 
1. Ts conclusion ("I guess that proves ...") is a non sequitur and a hasty general-
ization (look them up). 
2. The implied syllogism here is: 
All (part of me) is (my people). 
All (my people) are (insulted by your complimenting me). 
Therefore all (part of me) is (insulted by your complimenting me). 
3. T distinguishes individuals from the "system"; and implicitly accuses F of the 
fallacy of division (predicating of individuals what is said of a group); but a 
"system" is not a group of individuals but a set of laws and customs. 
4. This is simply a direct question and a direct answer. It might be accused of beg-
ging the question though. 
5. T's "everybody knows" is an argurnentum adpopulam. 
6. F's reply is an ad hominem. 
7. This is F's thesis, or conclusion, which F and T will argue about. 
8. "True for you" is meaningless patronizing, as F shows with her argument: 
If something is not true, it cannot be true for you. 
And this is not true. 
Therefore it cannot be "true for you." 
9.T's syllogism is: All love is great; 
All your love for your society is love; 
Therefore all your love for your society is great. 
Perhaps implied is also: 
Some love is blind; 
All love is great; 
Therefore some of what is blind is great. 
10. F disagrees with T's "love is blind" premise. 
T tries to prove it with the following sylloism: 
Whatever makes you blind to injustice, is blind. 
Your love of your society makes you blind to injustice. 
Therefore your love of your society is blind. 
And your love of your society is love. 
Therefore some love is blind. 
11. F uses a disjunctive syllogism. 
p = Iraq is one of the most just societies on Earth. 
q = I'm as blind to injustice as a bat is to the sun. 
p vq 
not q 
therefore p 

Answers to pages 336-341 
12. To T's challenge to prove p, T responds with a sorites: 
All (Iraq) is (an Islamic society). 
All (Islamic societies) are (societies formed by Islamic law). 
All (societies formed by Islamic law) are (societies formed by the most just law 
on Earth). 
All (societies formed by the most just law on Earth) are (one of the most just 
societies on Earth). 
Therefore all (Iraq) is (one of the most just societies on Earth). 
13. Ts rhetorical question is the premise of an cnthymeme: 
No (society that oppresses women) is (one of the most just societies on Earth). 
All (Iraq) is (a society that oppresses women). 
Therefore no (Iraq) is (one of the most just societies on Earth). 
14. F tries to disprove the second premise of T's syllogism with the following 
enthymemic epicheirema: 
All (Iraq) is (a society formed by Islamic law). 
All (societies formed by Islamic law) are (societies formed by the true natural 
law). 
Therefore (Iraq) is (a society formed by the true natural law). 
No (socicty formed by the true natural law) is (an oppressive society). 
Therefore no (Iraq) is (an oppressive society). 
15. T disputes the second premise of the above argument and tries to refute it thusly: 
All (Iraq) is (a society that doesn't even allow a woman to vote or appear in pub-
lic without a veil). 
No (society that doesn't even allow a woman to vote or appear in public without 
a veil) is (a socicty formed by the true natural law). 
Therefore no (Iraq) is (a society formed by the true natural law). 

Index of Principal Names 
Adlcr. Mortimer. 2, 311. 355. 395 
Anselm, St., 113, 284, 359 
Aquinas, St. Thomas, 43, 65, 91, 133, 157, 
255, 272, 284, 287-88, 299, 346, 348, 
359, 386 
Aristotle, ix, 6-8, 11, 15, 19-20, 32, 35, 43, 
45, 54-56, 65, 74, 78, 83, 110, 126-27, 
144-45, 180, 202, 213, 219-23, 225, 
228-30, 237-38, 242-59, 262-63, 289, 
296,314.317-19. 340. 362 
Averroes. 83 
Aviccnna, 43 
Ayer, A.J., 229, 256 
Bacon, Francis. 
Bergson. Henri, 112 
Berkeley, George. 74. 80, 106, 255, 344 
Boole. George. 181, 259. 364n., 367n. 
Broad. C.D.. 296 
Calvin. John, 94 
Carroll, Lewis, 3, 362n, 368n 
Chesterton, G.K., ix, 6, 9, 54, 73, 82. 87, 97, 
99, 110, 135-36, 145, 162. 274, 281,318, 
345, 359, 387 
Darwin, Charles, 228. 320, 356 
De Moran. Augustus. 364n 
Descartes. Rene, 5.48,94-96,103, 222,308, 
326, 343, 378, 396 
Dickens, Charles, 110 
Dulles, Avery Cardinal. 184-85 
Einstein. Albert. 364 
Fregc. Gottlob. 295. 364n. 
Freud. Sigmund. 83. 98. 107. 210, 228, 333 
Gilson, Eticnne. 83 
Hegel, G.W.F., 351 
Hobbcs. Thomas. 100. 134. 228. 275. 
Holmes. Oliver Wendell. 77 
Hume. David 17-19, 23, 78, 100, 110, 222, 
224,228. 255-56.273, 286.295. 311. 361 
Huxley. Aldoux. 222 
Jefferson. Thomas. 5 
Johnson, Samuel, 74—75, 80, 106, 135, 157, 
295 
Kant, Immanuel, 17-19, 105, 229, 297, 
360-61 
Kierkegaard, Soren, 354 
Leibniz. Gottfried 221, 278 
Lewis. C.I.. 12. I2n.. 368, 368n 
Lewis, C.S., 11, I2n., 22, 93, 112, 319, 359, 
368, 368n. 
MacColl. Hugh, 367n. 368 
Machiavelli. 100, 356 
Marx, Karl, 100, 106, 135,228, 303, 317 
Mill, John Stuart. 15, 100, 102, 168-69. 
222-25, 227-28,319-26 
Moore, G.E., 295 
More, St. Thomas, 103, 109 
Newton. Isaac. 364 
Nietzsche. Friedrich, 100, 222, 298, 323, 328, 
359 
Pascal, Blaise, 183, 222 
Platinga, Alvin, 368, 368n 
Plato, ix, 11, 15, 20, 22, 42, 65, 78-79, 110, 
123,125,137,213-14,222,230-31,283, 
286, 305-6, 329, 340, 344-46, 356, 374, 
394 
Protagoras. 310 
Quinc. W.V.O., 368 
Russell, Bertrand 15, 65, 76, 100, 111, 317, 
364 
Sartre, Jean-Paul. 100. 112 
Shakespeare, William, 84-85, 89, 159-62 
Socrates, ix. 2, 11, 15, 17-18, 23, 78, 123, 
125-27, 203, 206, 211. 213-14. 222. 231. 
294, 308,311, 325, 329, 344-48, 350-51, 
354,361-63, 371 
Whitehead, Alfred North. 15, 42, 157, 364 
Whitman. Walt, 222 
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 16. 97. 360, 397 

