Copyright © 2000 by
University Press of America,@ Inc.
4720 Boston Way
Lanham, Maryland 20706
12 Hid's Copse Rd.
Cumnor Hill, Oxford OX2 9JJ
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
British Library Cataloging in Publication Information Available
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Grunfeld, Joseph.
Soft logic: the epistemic role of aesthetic criteria / Joseph Grunfeld.
p.
em.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Knowledge, Theory of-Miscellanea. 2. Logic, Modem-20th century-Miscellanea.
3. Aesthetics, Modem-20th century-Miscellanea.
1. Title.
BD161.G78
1999
12l-dc21
99-051871 CIP
ISBN 0-7618-1577-5 (pbk: alk. ppr.)

Introduction
You don't see something until you have the right metaphor to let you
perceive it, Robert Shaw said, echoing Thomas S. Kuhn. l Whereas for
the critics ofNewton gravity was some sort of magical force operating
at a distance, Einstein was guided by the metaphor "field of gravity" to
develop his theory of relativity. Similarly, unlike Aristotle, Darwin
perceived nature as a process and assumed that in order for something
to be real, it has to opt for survival. While all such analogical
reasoning remains inconclusive, it provides an impulse for further
exploration. Aesthetic criteria playa crucial role in all such thinking.
Mathematicians are guided by a feeling for fit, order, symmetry and
simplicity. You cannot derive such norms from the facts, but they must
be relevant, and what is relevant depends at least partly on the
circumstances and the intentions of the speaker. That is why philo-
sophers have had a hard time resisting the transition from talking
about how things are to how they ought to be. Since there is usually
more than just one way to describe a situation, what governs such
discourse is rarely recognized as logic at all. As in a game or an
artwork, what constitutes a problem in science remains open-ended.
Since we are dealing in all such cases with strands of overlapping
similarities that
make
only for
family
resemblances,
standard
Aristotelian logic and its principle of noncontradiction do not apply in
the usual manner. Whether something constitutes a problem, or
whether it is real, cannot be settled without reference to context. A
"problem situation" is not something "seen" literally; rather it is a
manner of speaking, a metaphor. Tomas Kulka points out that the
oddity of metaphor is shown to derive from the fact that metaphorical

x
Soft Logic
truth has no counterpart in metaphorical falsehood. 2 Instead of a
universal system of valid rules, we get merely limited and contextual
similarities. There may be no wrong answer to the question of what is
going on in a painting or picture. Aesthetic judgments are based on
such partial analogies, which render their conclusions nontransitive.
We assinli1ate a new style by analogy with what we are already
fanliliar, as we do in translation.
What renders language a means of communication is indeed
logic but this does not amount to a system of universally valid rules.
Rather it is a network of specific conventions that change with context
and time. Thus denouncing logocentrism, Derrida does not give up
logic altogether. What he questions rather is the existence of a
universally binding body of valid rules. Unlike Kratylus who denied
the very possibility of telling the truth because you cannot step even
once into the same river, Derrida goes on talking, or rather writing.
Yet, what is conveyed by such writing is open to endless and
conflicting interpretation, and is therefore devoid of precise decidable
meaning. We retain the capacity to communicate, but there is no
overarching metadiscourse to pinpoint the truth. Since many ofthe key
terms in philosophical discourse, such as time, reality, change, and
knowledge, do not attain closure, arguments involving them remain
inconclusive. Importantly what is lost in such reasoning is the transit-
ivity of inference. IfA merely resembles B, and B resembles C, it does
not follow that C will always resemble A. And judging by resemblance
is much more common than has generally been realized. There is no
universal logic anymore than there is one uniform reality to which
everything can be reduced. The positist quest for a unified science
reflects a craving for simplicity and uniformity that largely ignores the
analogical nature of all actual reasoning. Symbolic and metaphorical
modes ofthinking, which are largely analogical, playa significant role
in the interpretation of formal systems. Deductive consistency and
precision are due to abstraction from specific content, as are all
concepts to some degree. Thus, whether something is true or real can
only be decided in context. The more open the concept, the more
restricted its relevance. When we follow Wittgenstein's advice to look
and see what the word game means, we discover that is has diverse
uses. As we actually apply such words as art or science, they are not
merely descriptive but evaluative. There is no definite set of criteria
separating art from nonart or science from mere opinion. A theory of

Introduction
xi
art or of science as the true statement of their necessary and sufficient
properties, their essence or their common denominator is not merely
difficult to formulate, it is altogether impossible, since it attempts to
state definite criteria of a concept whose very use depends on there
being no such set. The concept of science, as its use reveals, is open to
diverse contextual and historical
interpretations;
it reflects the
organization of the new, which remains unpredictable. When the role
of conceptual innovation was recognized in science, it was also
realized that what passes for scientific method changes over time.
While Aristotle considered physical motion in the sublunar world to be
erratic and unpredictable, for Descartes and Newton it became subject
to precise mathematical calculation and measurement.
Scientists believe in binary logic and linear mathematics because
they work. They enable us to calculate and reason much more
accurately and efficiently than is possible by means of ordinary
language. Scientists have learned to trust their mathematics more than
their intuition as they discovered that truth in science is not
infrequently counterintuitive. Thus, there need be no similarity of
structure between the neat world of mathenlatics and the messy world
of facts. Logic is normative: it does not tell us how the world is but
how we ought to reason and calculate. Kosko's strategy to legitimize
inconsistencies by means of fuzzy logic reduces the effectiveness of
such reasoning rather than increasing it. But for binary logic there
would be no defuzzification, for fuzzy things are not anymore real
than are well-defined precise things. How accurately we define our
entities depends on the purpose at hand as well as on our conventions.
The language, however, in which we defme and interpret any formal
system is always a natural language - that is to say, a collection of
fuzzy sets that is nonlinear to boot. In such an aggregate, the subsets
behave quite differently from the global set, and as a consequence we
do not usually know how to solve the nonlinear equations that define
the parameters. This also explains why a verbal text permits more than
just one interpretation. Stressing the inadequacy of standard mathe-
matics to do justice to the complexities of our world, Kosko proposes a
nonlinear version and a fuzzy logic that presumably yields a better fit.
But to make a convincing case, he must show how to solve these
nonlinear equations. Rejecting the randomness with which probability
theory allegedly has filled the world, he substitutes fuzziness. But by
ignoring the normative character of logic, he in effect equates fuzzy

xii
Soft Logic
logic with fuzzy thinking. While he realizes that fuzzy logic won't
help us in ethics, he somehow assumes that it is the key to how we
ought to reason.
A painting resembles its object but there is no precise point at
which this ceases to be the case. Analogy gives us only partial
consistency as does metaphor, yet they are also instrumental in
changing our intuitions. Resemblance is no less a matter of degree
than is relevance, and both are not simply discovered; rather they are
established by a particular speaker on a specific occasion. There need
not be a similarity ofstructure between facts and norms, but there must
be relevance for an argunlent to be possible, and what is seen to be
relevant on one occasion changes with perspective. Metaphorical truth
has no counterpart in metaphorical falsity because metaphors, like
analogies, permit us to be inconsistent. The logic of a situation is not
something we derive from the facts - it is a norm relevant to the facts,
and what is relevant depends on how we view the situation. What we
consider to be literal truth on one occasion may become subject to
diverging interpretations. Our attempts to settle such ambiguities and
inconsistencies lead us to further distinctions in our terminology or
notation, and in this manner increase their accuracy. Language is "in
order" as long as we take the relevance of our own logic for granted,
and novel insights have the potential to modify what we take to be
rational or logical. With the invention ofnon-Aristotelian logics in the
twentieth century, our understanding of what constitutes logic has
undergone significant change. We have come to realize that all logic is
potentially metaphorical and analogical, and that what passes for
standard logic is only a special case in a vastly more extensive field of
analogical and metaphorical reasoning. Being altogether counter-
intuitive, Cantor sets or the Heisenberg uncertainty principle can no
longer be treated as clear and distinct ideas in the Cartesian manner.
One major way of being innovative is to establish relevance by means
of analogy and metaphor, and in this manner artists, no less than
scientists and mathematicians, invite their respective audiences to
notice and take interest in new objects, situations or problems for
either aesthetic enjoyment or further research.

Introduction
Reasonableness
xiii
Gelemter argues that the conventional cognitive science view of
thought - that thought is merely mental modeling, that it centers on
analysis, abstraction, logic, reasoning and problem solving - is drama-
tically incomplete. The spectrum idea puts emotion at the center ofthe
cognitive universe by making it a glue of thought, the force that
engenders creativity. If we add simulated emotion to a computer
program, we might arrive at a very close approximation of human
thought. Kosko claims that the neat world of binary logic and
mathematics does not fit the messy world to which it refers. Scientific
claims and statements are inexact because they depend on simplifying
assunlptions, on a particular choice of words, or on "all things being
equal." But logic is normative and there need not be a similarity of
structure between the language or mathematical notation we use and
the world to which they refer. Logic tells us about how we ought to
reason, not about how the world is. By the time a scientist masters his
way of thinking, becoming comfortable with the hard practice of
calculus, he is likely to have lost sight ofthe fact that most differential
equations cannot be solved at all. With computers, trial and error
geometry becomes possible, a finer grid giving a sharper picture at the
expense of longer computation. The traditional models are betrayed by
their linear bias. Amsterdamski emphasized that our idea of rationality
is not purely epistemological and descriptive but that it is historically
relative and evaluative. The more we know about the world, about
ourselves, and about how we come to know anything, the more
difficult it is to believe that our knowledge is independent of our
biological makeup, the specific functioning of our brains, the language
we use, the culture we inherit, and the social institutions in which we
live.
We are not in charge of language, Gadamer and Derrida agree.
Gadamer, however, conceives the original phenomenon of language as
dialogue, whereas Derrida questions Gadamer's claim that hermen-
eutics is independent of metaphysics. He calls attention to something
Gadamer takes for granted, namely the willingness of each partner to
be open to what the other has to say. Indeed both Gadamer and
Derrida stick to their own language. Derrida's position amounts to a
rejection of the very possibility of dialogue, but what he would put in

xiv
Soft Logic
place of Gadamer's "good will" to be understood is never made clear.
In rendering what we say intelligible, we must make it accord with
some of our beliefs for only through them can we understand at all.
Gadarner criticizes traditional hermeneutics for fixing arbitrarily the
horizon by which we understand a text. His own horizon metaphor, by
contrast, seeks to do justice to the largely unconscious character of all
hermeneutical understanding. The problem is that such unconscious
behavior does not provide us with any detailed explanations in
semantics, history, or hermeneutics. Thus, his "fusion of horizons" is
merely a metaphor for denying our ability to understand a text
literally. While he emphasizes the metaphorical character of language
use, this inevitably remains parasitic on literal meaning. Hermeneutic
thinkers can be characterized by their common concern to resist the
idea of the human intellect as a wordless and timeless source of
insight. They insist that language and history are always both
conditions and limits of understanding. But this is not to say that our
reflective understanding can never break through a specific linguistic
tradition and criticizes it incisively. In rejecting coherence theories of
truth, hermeneutical thinkers undermine our ability to render such
criticism conclusive. Neither translation across different cultures nor
interpretation ofancient texts would be possible at all were it not for a
species-specific human nature. While we cannot subject all our beliefs
to critical examination at the sanle tinle, we do not thereby have
reason to discard the ideal ofobjectivity as one worth pursuing.
Ricoeur denies that there is a general hermeneutics, and holds
that each hermeneutic description is only valid in its particular
domain. But there can be no conflict of interpretations unless all these
domains are subject to the same logic. Quine's empiricism is "soft"
because he can never reliably identify the stimulus that prompts assent
or dissent by direct observation or in an inductive manner. Responsible
beliefs grade off into irresponsible ones, and Quine's empirical checks
are unable to draw the line between them. Science and philosophy are
artforms, argues Feyerabend, much like painting and literature. All
scientists produce works of art, he states, the difference being that
their material is thought, not paint, or melodious sound. But while
claiming that arguments in favor of a certain world view depend on
assumptions that are accepted or rejected for subjective reasons, he
himselftries to convince us by argument that a pluralistic and tolerant
attitude would be more reasonable. Polanyi's analysis of tacit knowing

Introduction
xv
provides examples of an extension of logic into the informal and
contextual. All logical reasoning contains informal elements by means
ofwhich it establishes coherence and provides genuine explanations of
what is accepted perceptually as well as conceptually. Goodman and
Elgin's contention that there are many worlds, is prompted by the
discovery of separately adequate but irreconcilable descriptions and
depictions. For them, a ''world'' is an intended manner of speaking or
depicting, and what holds such a world together is conceptual
relevance. The "rightness" of a world version is a species of soft logic,
but beyond calculable fuzzy logic we lose our ability to delineate such
constructions. Their relevance is no less metaphorical than is the
"given" world that Goodman and Elgin reject.
Metaphor
Metaphor could be defined as figurative language, which has the effect
of drawing our attention to non-encoded similarities. Since there is a
simultaneous awareness of both the language and what it represents,
metaphor enables us to conceive more than we can currently say. The
subsidiary subject "organizes" one's thought about the principal
subject in a new way, and this operation makes metaphor irreducible
to anyone literal formulation. We need metaphor because in some
~ases it is the only way of saying what we mean. Lakoff and Johnson
argue that our ordinary conceptual system, in terms of which we both
think and act, is fundamentally metaphorical. Metaphors playa crucial
role in the construction of our social and political reality, yet they are
typically viewed within philosophy as matters of mere language.
Metaphor is one of our most important tools for understanding
partially what cannot be understood totally: our feelings, aesthetic
experiences, moral practices, and spiritual awareness. Truth does not
form a conceptual system but emerges from more or less local
coherences. Kittay's perspectival interpretation of metaphor does not
permit her to decide which terms are to be understood metaphorically
and which are to be taken literally. She speaks of the "furniture of our
mind" to illustrate the weakly cohesive set to which such relations
belong. But she admits that the various relations she describes cannot
be regarded as definite, and this makes her theory of metaphor
inoperative. It amounts to taking metaphorical understanding as the
model
for
scientific
knowledge.
The
problem
with
Kittay's

xvi
Soft Logic
metaphorical theory of language and of metaphor in general is that
they are literally false and logically inconsistent. Hausman believes
that appropriateness
in metaphors cannot be justified by mere
acceptability offurther linguistic data or perspectives. Given the strong
sense of "creativity" on which he insists, his realism is designed to
explain the continuity of reference through time. But while he focuses
on the conditions of intelligibility that render future growth possible,
this can only be realized by hindsight. Creativity remains relative to a
historical tradition, and all that metaphors finally accomplish is a
modification, however radical, ofsome discourse or style.
Deconstruction
By deconstructing
the
either/or
logic
of noncontradiction
that
dominates the Western trad.ition, Derrida attempts to elaborate the
"other" logic. Debunking the old traditions, however, he becomes
victim of the restrictive binary logic he likes to belittle. Thus,
deconstruction's inability to monitor the quality of criticism turns out
to be a serious omission. Ashmore argues that a deconstruction of
deconstruction does not just cancel things out but throws doubt upon
the notion of an objective world. Experimentation with self-referential
techniques has been a staple of twentieth-century avant-gardes in
literature, painting, drama, and film. His concern is to deconstruct the
theory and practice of level separation, emphasizing the fundamental
uncertainty of discourse. He prefers to cultivate this limitlessness as a
new pragmatic pluralism: a pluralism that recognizes itself Derrida
questions the tradition ofphilosophy as an autonomous discipline, the
pursuit
of a
timeless
self-validating
truth.
But
attempting
to
deconstruct the rationalist philosophical tradition, he wants at the
same time to retain its critical authority. Since deconstruction does not
amount to a method, he is incapable of preferring one reading of the
text to another. When deconstruction sets itself up as the antithesis of
philosophical
reason,
it
becomes
self-destructive
and
pointless.
Although displacement is not explicitly discussed
in
Derrida's
writings, it is central to his de-centering mode of critique. Displace-
\
ment is above all about women, the unconscious and Jewishness, for
these are all exemplary instances of the marginal. His own writing
Iproceeds by means ofcontamination, a discontinuous model of innova-
Ilion and change, as happens when the analogy is weak. Lines of binary

Introduction
xvii
logic that had been associated with writing are loosened up by the
vagueness of style. Since all communication is necessarily modeled in
the decoder's way, Derrida's theory of deconstruction makes no sense
unless some network of difference is already in place. The problem
then becomes to demonstrate that anyone established scheme for
analyzing or interpreting familiar phenomena is more adequate than
another. While opposing the pretensions of totalizing any system of
differences imposed on the ever-changing human experiences, he fails
to show that such a difference makes a difference.
Postmodernism
Spariosu clainls that a proper understanding of the concepts of power
and play reflects the polarized character of Western mentality, which
since its origin in ancient Greece has altered between a prerational and
a rational meaning. Prerational thought conceives of playas a
manifestation of power in its innocent form, with its sheer delight· in
emotional
release
and
raw
arbitrary
violence.
The
prerational
mentality does not disappear with the emergence of the rational one
but becomes submerged and repressed. Spariosu admits, however, that
society has a vested interest in rational thought because it assures
order, stability, predictability, and facility of communication. Megill
shows how, under modem conditions, Nietzsche's will to power
becomes self-defeating. His approach to Nietzsche, Heidegger, and
Foucault is a product of his reading of Derrida. Nietzsche and his
followers call certainty into question, and return us to a situation
where there is no longer one, single, literal truth, that is, one privi-
leged meaning. We ought to look with suspicion at the notion of a
single, privileged truth and the corresponding distinction between
possessors of such truth - the chosen - and those who are not chosen.
Such exclusion becomes unbearable when each community has the
power to destroy the other as increasingly is becoming the case.
Cahoone argues that modernity is eroding its own foundations, and he
identifies this self-negating strain with subjectivism, which he believes
we must overcome. Preferring the Aristotelian tradition, according to
which the knower and the known exhibit an internal relation, he
realizes that subjectivism cleared the way for modern science by
separating science from religion, and by making possible their
simultaneous retention. What he seems to forget, however, is that

xviii
Soft Logic
Aristotelianism was defeated by modern science - and by the subject-
ivism that made it possible - for good reasons. Postmodemism implies
a contradiction ofthe modem without any transcendence of it. In such
contexts everything becomes surface, and objectivity and authority are
lost: even grammar falls apart. Fashion is now an overriding subjective
code. It provides the dream images of the objective, albeit in the
repressed and distorted form available in a commodity society. The
televised and the untelevised are inseparable, and filming becomes a
postmodern displacement of metaphysics. Decentered, allegorical,
schizophrenic - however we choose to diagnose its symptoms - post-
modernisnl is usually treated, by its protagonists and antagonists alike,
as a crisis in Western European institutions. Symptoms of our loss of
mastery are apparent everywhere in cultural activity today, and
nowhere more than in the visual arts. Collage's heterogeneity produces
a signification that can be neither univocal nor stable; each cited
element breaks the continuity or the hierarchy of discourse. This leads
to a double meaning: That of fragment perceived in relation to its text
of origin, and that of the same fragment as incorporated into a new
whole, a different totality. The increase in fragmentation and privat-
ization of modem literature - its disintegration into a host of distinct
styles and mannerisms -
foreshadows deeper and more general
tendencies in social life.
Aesthetics
Gadamer is concerned with the sense we might speak ofas "truth" in a
work of art. Art is encountered in a form that resists pure concept-
ualization; the ambiguity ofart answers to the ambiguity ofhuman life
as a whole, and therein lies its unique value. The experience of art
should not be viewed in epistemological terms. It is related, rather to
the broader category ofthe imagination, it its "free" play and product-
ivity. By means of art, we are able to look at the productivity of the
imagination and its interplay with understanding. The world apart
from value is a theoretical construct devised for political purposes as
much as for scientific ones, and obviously not only the really real
world. The language of aesthetics is designed to shield the initiated,
disarm the critics, and exclude the vulgar, but internalized canons of
taste are necessarily unstable. Even if a painting cannot depict
perception, it can allude to or intimate facts about perception in a

Introduction
xix
metaphorical fashion. Taste judgments are not merely capricious and
idiosyncratic, and giving reasons for them is legitimate. There is a way
to be found to speak oferrors and lapses oftaste. In failing to make the
proper response, one is not so much wrong as different, and it is a
difference that leaves one outside a vital community. We are dealing
here with a species of "soft" logic. To reduce art to its presumed
biological foundations, as Scharfstein does, fails to do justice to either
the complexity of art or its diversity. I-Iunlan art presupposes a specific
cultural context - a web ofassociations and memories, that provides it
with its unique meaning.
The word "art" has a complicated variety of uses that reflects a
complex logic: unforseeable novel conditions are always forthcoming
or envisageable. Whether something is art is not a factual but a
decision-related problem, where the verdict turns on whether or not we
enlarge our set of conditions for applying the concept. The object
becomes a work of art by resembling sufficiently an established
artwork. Art is not a natural kind, it is a cultural kind, and a feature of
our cultural conventions is that they exhibit arbitrariness. Roberts
argues that the radical impulse of modernism and its critical
dominance had to succumb to its own contradictions. The predicament
of contingency in modern art signals the need for a change of
paradigm. But where there is no depth, there can be no signifying
surface either, and such nihilism means the collapse of all criteria for
judging an artwork. We have learned that meaning is unstable and
that the reign of enlightenment was ephemeral. McEvilley rejects the
modernist beliefin progress, the idea that all past ages were essentially
aspiring to become what we are now. But this involves the difficult
ideal of letting things be what they are before being appropriated into
categories not their own. He himself admits that multiculturealism
cannot be the end of history as it contains countless unsolved themes
and issues. While agreeing with the subjectivists, that feeling is
natural in the arts, Best insists that aesthetic appreciation is not
unreasoned, a matter of irrational or non-rational feelings and
attitudes. One can disagree only if there is something to disagree
about, and if we can recognize contradictory reasons as reasons. But
even ifwe grant Best the view that not everything goes in art, this does

xx
Soft Logic
not provide us with valid criteria for judging specific responses in the
arts as appropriate. The assumption that the object to be interpreted
has, or could have, a single meaning in relation to which the
interpretation is correct or incorrect, no longer holds firm in the
context of art. It is regarded as a merit, not a deficit, in a work ofart, if
it is replete with an abundance of meanings that are only gradually
discovered. The arts bring back into life the richness and variety that
scientific understanding has abstracted from the world.
Berleant emphasizes that artists have altered our very ability to
identify what art is and our capacities for experiencing it. The
developments of the past century are part of a transformation in
perception and understanding that compels us toward a different
aesthetic. Interpretation is ubiquitous, and this is as true of the social
and cultural areas, of fact and perception, as it is of texts. Artistic
problems are hard to state and most ofthem are dealt with intuitively.
The aesthetic merit of a thing depends on the degree to which it
satisfies our desire to make sense of the world perceptually and
conceptually in a fOffil that is appropriate to our cognitive faculties.
Art can bring unknown or half-known areas of experience home to us,
but it has only a weak link with the observable facts. Danto adopts the
Hegelian view that regards history as the drive to break through to the
consciousness of itself But while Hegel believed this to have been
attained in his own philosophy, Danto does not accept that the history
ofphilosophy came to a final end with Hegel. He does, however, adopt
an eschatological view of art. Viewing the history of art from his New
York vantage point during the last two decades, Danto concludes that
further breakthroughs are unthinkable.
Yet breakthroughs come
always as a surprise, and the notion ofhistory coming to an end is not
one with which he himself is comfortable. Contrary to Wittgenstein,
Mitchell concludes that it is futile to attempt to purge the world of
images. Our ideas of what vision is and what is worth looking at are
all deeply embedded in social and cultural history.
Philosophy
Rorty's pragmatism is unable to account for the success of astrophysics
and the failure of astrology. Any pragmatism that renounces prediction
and control will have a hard time distinguishing between what works
and what doesn't. What he calls pragmatism is largely a disinclination

Introduction
xxi
to deal with certain traditional philosophical problems. He is a
philosopher who claims a novelist's privileges, yet isn't content to
offer his own pragmatism as mere fiction. Wood emphasizes that what
cannot be said in one language-game may well be expressible in
another, since there are no a priori limits to what can be said. In
philosophy the claim of truth is underpinned by a whole system of
concepts and values, not just a single concept of truth in the abstract.
The product is a philosophy that contests its own possibility, while at
the same time never quite destroying it. The breakthrough to a
philosophical "beyond" is a mirage. Nielsen rejects coherence as a
weaker form offoundationalism, but on his own terms he cannot know
that epistemology is not a viable enterprise, or that there is no point in
metaphysical
inquiry.
Ignoring
the
historical
impact
of
the
philosophical tradition in science, art, morality, and politics in
Western civilization, Rorty and Nielsen nevertheless remain part ofit.
Notes
1 James Gleick, Chaos, Making a New Science, New York, NY: Penguin
Books, 1987, p. 262.
2 Iyyun 42, July 1993, p. 456.

Section 1
Reasonableness

Chapter One
Smart Machines
Gelemter argues that, up to a point, reasoning is understood by
philosophers and psychologists, and computers can fake it. But there is
one big piece of practice that goes by many names -
creativity,
intuition, insight, metaphoric or holistic thinking - that all boils down
to drawing analogies for which we are unable to provide a convincing
mode1. 1 Inventing a new analogy - hitching two thoughts together,
sometimes two superficially unrelated thoughts - brings about a new
metaphor and, it is generally agreed, drives creativity as wel1. Studies
and intuition suggest that creativity hinges on seeing an old problem
in a new way. How such analogical thinking works is the great
unsolved problem. The way in which a person happens to be thinking
at a given moment depends on a characteristic "mental focus." At the
high end, thought is analytic and penetrating; it deals in abstractions
and displays a demythologizing intelligence, and it is dominated by
linked facts. Almost all attempts to simulate thought on a computer
have dealt exclusively with this narrow, high-focus brand at the top of
the spectrum. As we set off down the spectrum, thinking becomes less
penetrating and more diffuse, consciousness gradually spreads out, and
emotion starts to replace logical problem solving as the glue of
thought. The unexpected transitions from a thought A to a seemingly
unrelated thought B are precisely the occasions on which analogies are
discovered and metaphors emerge. Affect linking is responsible for
bringing these leaps about; they are not random but come about when

2
Soft Logic
two recollections engender the same emotion, and they only happen
towards the low-focus end of the spectrum.2 Thought processes tinged
with the hallucinatory are also associated with ancient man. In nlore
ways than one, dream thought traffics in associations, in unexpected
connections, and it is remarkable that childhood thought does too. A
common characteristic of young preschool children's conversation is
chaining - that is, free-associating,3 and a series of studies have shown
young children to be startlingly good at metaphor. Metaphor brings on
meaningful but nonobvious connections.4 Logic and analysis are not
childhood specialties, and children tend to be poor at manipulating
abstractions. But adults can also be conspicuously incompetent at
logic, analysis and abstraction, for example, when they are sleepy.
Adults are bad at logical thought when they are asleep. A certain
amount ofproblem solving can occur in a dream, but dream thought is
notably not logical and not analytical, nor is it abstract. Logic,
analysis, and abstraction are nonspecialities ofancient man as well.
In modem psychology, an "analytic" or "rational" or "conver-
gent" style is contrasted with something called "divergent" or "pro-
ductive" or "lateral" or "metaphoric" thought. Sometimes "left brain"
thinking is contrasted with "right brain" in a broadly similar way.
What these dichotonlies nliss, in the opinion of Gelemter, is the crux
of the matter: that these two styles are connected. Lower mental focus
causes all these latter processes t9 occur.5 The mainstream sees
thought as reasoning, problem solving, analysis, and mental modeling,
with an occasional dash ofcommon sense, but thinking is vastly richer
than that. As focus falls, attention becomes more diffuse, and creativity
centers, according to a fairly solid consensus, on restructuring:6 on
fmding unexpected analogies that allow a person to see old problems
in a new light. We say that inspiration "hits us," that is, happens
unsought, and creative states presumably do not happen to everybody.
The conventional philosopher's and computer scientist's view of
thought as a keen docile instrument is a mere reflection ofour rational
bias. But the conventional cognitive science view of thought - that
thought is merely "mental modeling," that it centers on analysis,
abstraction, logic, reasoning, and problem solving - is dramatically
incomplete. An abstraction is defined by a few traits shared by many
substances; it is merely a branch of related memories examined as a
single bundle. As they mature, children move their cognitive grounds
inexorably up the spectrunl -
and gradually language becomes
possible. Memories formed at high focus are easily recalled, whereas

Smart Machines
3
the breadth and inclusiveness of memories formed at low focus make
them slippery. What emerges isn't detail but ambiance; childhood
memories are hard to recall as are dreams. As the gravity of logic
slackens, the objects dissolve into disconnected floating images.
Thinking is primarily and overwhelmingly remembering; mental
models are created in order to solve problems, but direct problems
disappear as focus diminishes. The "restructuring" to which creativity
is attributed centers on metaphorical linking. Affections are the key;
"happy" and "sad," "angry" and "scared" are emotions, yet it is crucial
that the list not stop there but that it also encompass what are
sometimes called the "aesthetic" enlotions. It is hard to understand
precisely such mental states -
what a person might feel on an
unexpectedly warm spring morning, or an empty beach in winter, or
driving past a childhood home, or hearing a clock ticking loudly in the
silence. Such occasions might evoke an emotional response, even
though they are a far cry from "happy" or "sad." They are subtle and
idiosyncratic, blended for a particular occasion, and they have no
names.7 For the affect link to work, the thinker must "re-experience,"
feel his memories, because as focus sinks, logic starts to dissolve, and
we start to feel our recollections. Sloppy thinkers are especially prone
to draw conclusions from stereotyped examples. A low-focus train of
thought is not logical and tolerates contradictions; it has no concept of
contradiction. It has no direction, no premises, no goals, no con-
clusions. Yet low-focus trains are not random; they are thematic, and
these themes are emotional themes. The theme is latent and plays no
role in the manifest content of the thinker's recollections. Ancient
texts like the Bible and Iliad were routinely produced at lower settings
of the focal dial than we are used to, and dreams have something of
the same character.
Gelemter wants to study mind as if it were art. Thought science
centers mainly on learning and problem solving, while emotion,
"alternate" thought styles, and the cognitive past are of no great
concern. But what is more puzzling about the higher cognitive mind is
its creativity, its holism, and its passion for the analogical.8 Thought is
usually confused within reasoning, and rationality (that is, logical
cogency) is accepted as the touchstone of good thinking. The field
recognizes the existence of "nonrational" thought styles; you can be a
good divergent thinker but not too smart (as intelligence tests define
"smart") and vice versa. Thought scientists tend to be obsessed with
computers, since they are their chief source of mind metaphors and

4
Soft Logic
their models for human thought, and aspects of the mind that don't fit
the computer model are (unintentionally) lopped off An unsurprising
result is the tendency to downplay or wholly ignore the role of emotion
in cognition.9 Our culture wrongly teaches us that thoughts and
feelings lie in almost separate worlds. Io Emotion itself is a form of
cognition,Il but artificial intelligence researchers and cognitive scien-
tists have generally tended to avoid the subject of emotion. Creativity
can only emerge, Gelemter believes, as a byproduct of affect linking in
low-focus thought, and no existing computer program has ever
grappled with low-focus thought. 12 Emotions are fundamental to
thought; when you get hold of a bunch of memories, similarities
reinforce each other, and aspects that aren't shared fade quietly into
the background. 13 The overlay model accounts for an interesting fact
that emerges from Wittgenstein's observation; we may have a clear
idea ofsome concept without being able to point to even one paradigm
example. 14 Your mental focus governs your relationship not merely to
your thoughts but also to your perceptions. 15 Only at high focus does
the thinker control his thought stream and his perceptions; when he
sees something interesting, he proceeds to investigate. Low-focus
thinking, on the other hand, is accompanied by an unraveling of
control and the onset of an all-inclusive passivity. Everyone is capable
of a wide range of focus settings, but thinkers with a relatively high-
focus gait approach the world on radically ,different terms from low-
focus thinkers. As focus declines, you might not understand the input
of phrases exactly, you might forget the precise context, and you tend
merely to skim the text. At the lower focus, you are paying no
attention to the text at all. We expect'children who are good readers to
show a decently developed capacity for high-focus thought, but there is
a role for low-focus reading in poetry, for example. You have far more
experience stored in your memory than you will ever see at high-
focus. 16 The observer perceives more than he knows.
Sustained high-focus thought makes possible logic, analysis,
rationality -
science, mathematics, engineering, and all rigorous
cogent scholarship. These are the achievements that defme the modem
mind. I7 Sustained high-focus thought becomes a settled habit as
rigorous analytic thinking yields reliable benefits that are far nlore
tangible and useful than the vague and elusive results that low-focus
thinking offers. A world of exclusively low-focus thought would be a
world without abstractions. It would presumably have no concept ot:
but would have a feeling for, ''truth.'' True things would have some

Smart Machines
5
characteristic emotional tone, There is a lot more to the complex
process we call "reasoning" than merely formulating and applying
syllogisms. But the manipulating of these rules is the heart of logic,
the basis for reasoning. Grasping word meanings and thinking
deductively are two names for the same phenomenon, and that
phenomenon is high-focus thought. I8 Empiricist science is, at base, a
high-focus approach to the world. Approaching the world of your
thoughts at high focus means that you fasten on details and probe
deeper,
picking
out
the
shared
particulars
and
operating
by
abstractions. The likeness principle tends to be obscured when we
think ofremembering in terms of"associations," but any computer can
behave as if attraction existed between the data items it stores
internally, ifyou program it to do so. There is a gradual and continuos
transition ofknowledge from episodic to semantic,I9 but as you accum-
ulate similar memories, you tend to confuse them. Focusing has the
side effect of causing you to disregard context and ambiance: making
high-focus thought the norm, setting it at the center of your cognitive
universe, is the supreme and defining achievement of the modern
mind.20
The affect link allows us to associate two memories that
seemingly share nothing. The ability to think metaphorically or in
analogies - to recognize that one entity is, in some way, like a super-
ficially very different other - is a supremely valuable accomplishment.
Restructuring the problem clearly has to do with finding analogies. If
the solution to a hard problem eludes you, inspiration takes the form of
an analogy that allows you to see the problem in a new light. The
creative thinker comes up with useful combinations of ideas that are
already in his repertoire but which have not been previously brought
together.21 Restructuring and analogy finding are crucial to creativity,
but they renlain mysterious. The more obvious the analogy, the more
likely you are to discover it, yet it is precisely the less obvious
analogies that interest us if we care about insight and creativity.
Today, the logical or analytical component of modern thought is
understood, at least to some extent, whereas analogy finding is
understood much less. Emotion is a content transcending abstraction,
and hence emotion can link memories whose content are completely
different.22 The affect link isn't sufficient but it is necessary to
understand creativity and obviously some people are better at low-
focus thought or affect linking than others. They have grater emotional
acuity. The essence of spirituality might be a sense of connectedness, a

6
Soft Logic
sensation that "all life is linked," and this in turn motivates sustained
low-focus thought. But any attempt to give it a definite positive
content in ordinary language is bound to fail because ordinary
language can deal only with ordinary life, while the transcendent is
precisely what stands out of the ordinary.23 Not every affect link
reveals a fact of scientific value, or of practical use, but every affect
link indicates a truth. The emergence of childhood and of mankind
both revolve about the emergence of language, and an ever more acute
self-consciousness seems to accompany the emergence of the modem
mind.
Gelernter concludes that ancient man must not only have lived
but have thought differently from us. Hallucinations were more
common in former times, even thought the transition from ancient
thought styles to modern ones lasted many centuries and may even
today not be conlplete. Hallucination and illogic are both characteristic
of low-focus thought. Infancy and childhood entail sharp limits on the
capacity for logic and reasoning, i.e. on the ability to manage
abstractions.24 You see connections and resemblances, but at nlinimum
focus you make no choices: you are powerless to decide. Something
may occur that you know perfectly well stands for or really means
something else, for there may be separate images linked together by
shared emotional content. Dream thought isn't logically constructed
and abstract, but emotionally produced and concrete; it is outside your
control, not merely vivid but hallucinatory. As your mental focus
sharpens, you beconle adept at new thought techniques. But simul-
taneously you have grown accustomed to experiencing the world in
low-focus terms, terms under which the world is full of strange, deep,
unexpected connections. As human knowledge deepens and narrows,
nlodem minds and habits of thought are simply unable to see what
ancient man saw.25 A software metaphor of the mind underlies and
reinforces the field's most basic and damaging bias: to be aware only
of the highest-focus sliver of the cognitive spectrum, and to mistake
the abstract, logical, analytical sliver for the whole of thought. The
lllind is an abstraction that can be described without reference to its
implenlentation, without reference to the hunlan physiology. But in
order to think, you must have emotions, and in order to have emotions,
you nlust have a body. The body, of course, is not mere information
processing machine; it is a complex assemblage ofsensors, transducers
and moving parts. In order to respond directly to the real world,
software isn't enough. You have to stimulate not only the body but its

Smart Machines
7
environment,.and the amount of information obtainable in short order
by an inquisitive human being is staggeringly large.
A real memory has relevance and it has structure. A memory
isn't merely a bag of features; the elements relate to each other, often
in the sense of the features of an image relating to each other. And a
real memory is "multimedia." It may involve sights, sounds, and
smells, and crucially emotions. In the spectrum view, logic isn't a
matter of abstract rules, it grows out of memory sandwiching at high-
focus. Thus, the probe blue brings blue-related memories to mind, and
blueness is the characteristic they share. This sort of reasoning is
informal; it is provided not by rules and principles but directly by
memories. The FGP computer program Gelernter has developed works
not by deploying abstract rules but by using memory sandwiches as if
they were rules. The result is a system that is capable of venturing
some opinions, potentially interesting ones, on the diagnosis of a
medical case, or a law case or the prognosis of a business situation.26
Lots of such "expert systems" have been developed, but most of them
work not on the basis of "memories," but on the basis of abstract rules.
These rules generally take the form of assertions like "if conditions A,
B, C prevail, then draw the conclusions X, Y, Z with the degree of
certainty P." The FGP program, on the other hand, reflects its
"memories" and develops as they collectively evolve. Whenever you
describe a new case in the program, it retains that case as a "memory."
When you enter a new inquiry, the program might respond, in effect,
This new set of facts reminds me of a patient who was described
to me three weeks ago. I didn't know the diagnosis then, but it
now occurs to me that perhaps the right answer should have been
x.
As the number and variety of its memories grow, the program's
behavior becomes more nuanced and sophisticated. Eventually it may
be in a position to comment intelligently on rare or peculiar cases on
the basis of its own "experience" along the lines of "I don't know what
the diagnosis is, but I did see something once that may be relevant.,,27
Whenever the program reaches a conclusion, it is in a position to cite
specific cases to support that conclusion, and as a result, it can explain
and defend its behavior not merely by stating ''that's what the rule
says" but by citing specific cases. The program even makes inter-
mediate judgments on the data as they are presented.

8
Soft Logic
The program's behavior is limited by the quality of its memories.
These descriptions are invariably somewhat vague and will never be
perfectly consistent, but over the course of thousands of such
descriptions, consistent patterns should emerge. The computer is now
in a position to explain to its human users what it is "feeling." The
human trainer needs to impart to the computer, roughly speaking,
which emotions are best and which are worst. We cannot expect
hunlan-like thinking if the computer has no tendency to prefer happy
thoughts to sad ones.28 If the user is looking for insights by operating
the machine at low-focus, as certain degree of drifting concentration
and free association is inevitable. When we have added emotion, then
and only then will our computer be capable of surprising us with an
occasional genuine insight. It will be capable of citing a medical or
legal or financial precedent that seems, at fITst sight, to come out of
left field, but proves upon inspection to have deep relevance to the case
at hand. Such feats aren't likely to occur often, but the computer,
compared to a human expert, for all the crudity of its simulated
emotions, has the interesting advantage of having a perfect memory,
and that memory is vast.29 A sophisticated "emotional" computer
would largely control its own focus settings. The spectrum idea puts
emotion at the center of the cognitive universe; it makes emotion the
glue of thought, the force that engenders creativity. In the course of
normal conversation, a person is entitled to lots of slack, for humans
say things all the time that are meaningful only against the
background of the fact they are humans. Normal human conversation
doesn't probe for these assumptions because normal conversation takes
place only among humans. The question is no longer, as in the Turing
test, whether a computer can pass itselfoffas a person. The question is
whether there are grounds for intelligent communication with a
computer despite the fact that it is a computer. The question is the
computer intelligent? reduces itself to the question is it like us? To
simulate intelligence is to simulate humanness.3o French notes that
analogy fmding is considered by many to be the sine qua non of
intelligent behavior.3! Thinking and having a mind translate into the
practical skill of understanding. You believe that some other entity
understands some utterance (gesture, and so forth) exactly to the
extent that you believe the utterance arouses in this other entity the
same emotions that it arouses in you. Under the right circumstances,
we can be convinced that an infant understands us, or for that matter,
that a dog does. I am convinced that you have grasped the import of

Smart Machines
9
my statements just insofar as I believe that your emotional reaction is
like mine. That ifI am horrified, surprised, amazed, amused, so too, at
least to some extent, are you. A perception of shared emotion is what
convinces me that communication has succeeded. Where sympathy
exists, no purely "intellectual" test is needed or matters, and where it
doesn't, no strictly intellectual test will convince you that you are in
the presence of understanding. To see you mean understand, but we
also say that idea has touched me, it smells wrong, or doesn't sound
right. Consciousness doesn't happen at any particular point (there is
no theater and no stage): it consists instead of a bunch of separate
discontinuous events. Simple brained creatures are likely to experience
the world as fragmentary and they are not bothered by the illusion of
an observer-self Ifwe add simulated emotion to a computer, we might
arrive, Gelemter argues, at a very close approximation of human
thought. Such a computer might seem to us as if it understands - as if
it has a mind.
Ancient pieces of literature capture a particular kind ofthinking.
The ancient narrator perceives the real world as ordered, sometimes by
what we would call dream logic; he is a lower-focus thinker than we
are apt to be. If what he says doesn't fit logically, it fits emotionally,
and such low-focus thought trains have a quality that makes them
strange to the modern mind. These themes are not to be understood,
they are to be felt, and once you feel the theme, the thinking begins to
cohere. The mind of these ancient times is quite capable of logic and
reasoning, and orderly coherent narrative. But it remains comfortable
too in cognitive neighborhoods where we no longer go, except in our
dreams. Modem minds ask constantly, "given these circumstances,
what follows logically?" - but never "given these circumstances, what
follows emotionally?" The brain hasn't changed but our cognitive
habits have and what ties the pieces together isn't logic but emotion
and shared imagery. Stories that share no relationship in substance -
they are not about the same thing at all - may well include the same
image, for one reason or another. But that shared image may reveal
emotional linkage; the imagery of passages isn't identical, it merely
has the same feel. An underlying emotion can generate a whole series
of dream-stories that share little or no manifest content; that merely
represent successive embodiments of the same emotional theme. It is
not a logical sequence of stories but an echo-chamber, a mirror image,
a resonating system. We don't understand certain characteristics of
ancient thought, and laid out flat, ancient texts are deceptively

10
Soft Logic
intelligible, merely doltish. But ifwe walk away satisfied on that basis,
we have no hope of grasping this literature in its real beauty and
depth.32 Scolnic's discussion of a well-known obscure passage in
Exodus (was Moses "homed?,,)33 emphasizes the impossibility of
pinning down the biblical text as if it were a modem logical narrative.
These are the honestly bewildered judgments ofhigh-focus man on the
low-focus worlds of antiquity and childhood and his own dreams.34 We
ought not to be surprised that young children use metaphor before they
have mastered abstract thought - before they are able to explain what
they are doing. Children's thought streams will typically be richer
than adult's in low-focus thought.35
Notes
1 David Gelemter, "The Muse in the Machine," Computerizing the
Poetry ofHuman Thought, New York, NY: The Free Press, Macmillan, 1994,
p.3.
2 Ibid., p. 7.
3 1. Garbarino, F. M. Stott, and the faculty of Erikson Institute, "What
Children Tell Us: Eliciting, Interpreting, and Evaluating Information from
Children," San Fransicso, CA: Jossey-Bass, 1989.
4 Gelernter, "The Muse in the Machine," p. 12.
5 Ibid., p. 14.
6 K. J. Holyoak, "Problem Solving," Thinking:
An Invitation
to
Cognitive Science, vol. 3, eds. D. N. Osherson and E. E. Smith, Cambridge,
Mass: MIT Press, 1990.
7 Gelemter, "The Muse in the Machine," p. 28.
8 J. A. Fodor, "Precis of the Modularity of Mind," The Behavioral and
Brain Sciences 8 (1), p. 4.
9 Gelemter, "The Muse in the Machine," p. 42.
10 M. Minsky, The Society ofMind, New York, NY: Simon & Schuster,
1986.
11 H. Leventhal, "The Integration of Emotion and Cognition: A View
from the Perceptual-Motor Theory of Emotion," eds. M. S. Clarke and S.
Fiske, Affect and Cognition: The Seventeenth Annual Carnegie Symposium on
Cognition, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1982.
12 Gelernter, "The Muse in the Machine," p. 46.
13 Ibid., p. 50.
14
L.
Wittgenstein,
Philosophical
Investigations,
Oxford:
Basil
Blackwell, 1953, p. 32.

Smart Machines
11
15 Gerlemter, "The Muse in the Machine," p. 53.
16 Ibid., p. 63.
17 Ibid., p. 65.
18 Ibid., p. 72.
19 Ibid., p. 75.
20 Ibid., p. 76.
21 K. J. Gilhooly, Thinking, Directed, Undirected, and Creative, New
York, NY: Academic Press, 1988, p. 86.
22 Gelernter, "The Muse in the Machine," p. 87.
23 L. Dupre, The Other Dimension, Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1972,
p.16.
24 Gelemter, "The Muse in the Machine," p. 107.
25 Ibid., p. 112.
26 Ibid., p. 137.
27 Ibid., p. 138.
28 Ibid., p. 144.
29 Ibid., p. 146.
30 Ibid., p. 155.
31 R. M. French, "Subcognition and the Limits ofthe Turing Test," Mind
99 (393), 1990, p. 64.
32 Gelernter, "The Muse in the Machine," p. 187.
33 B. E. Scolnic, "Moses and the Horns ofPower," Judaism 40 (4),
1991, pp. 569-579.
34 Gelernter, "The Muse in the Machine," p. 188.
35 Ibid., p. 191.

Chapter Two
Fuzzy Logic
Kosko emphasizes that all facts are matters of degree: the facts are
always fuzzy or vague or inexact to some degree. Only mathematics is
black and white, and it is just an artificial system ofrules and symbols.
Science treats the gray and fuzzy facts as if they were black and white
facts of mathematics. The rapid spread of fuzzy ideas in the Far East
and the opposition to them in the West show that the opposition to
them is a philosophically and culturally conditioned world view. We
can put black and white labels on these things but the labels will pass
from accurate to inaccurate as the things change. More precision does
not take the grayout of things. Yet in much of our science,
mathematics, logic and culture we have assumed a world of black and
whites that does not change. The digital computer, with its high-speed
binary strings of 1s and Os stands as the emblem of black and white
logic and its triumph. This faith in bivalence reaches back in the West
to the ancient Greeks. Aristotle's binary logic conles down to one law:
A or not-A; the sky is blue or it is not blue; it can't be both. Aristotle's
"law" defined what was philosophically correct for over two thousand
years, even though binary truth has always faced doubt. Thus, the
Buddha lived in India almost two centuries before Aristotle, and the
first step in his belief system was to break through the black and white
world of words, pierce the bivalent veil, and see the world as it is, see
it filled with "contradictions," with things and nothings, with A and
not-A. 1 You find this fuzzy and gray theme in Eastern belief systems
from Lao Tzu's Taoism to Zen Buddhism in Japan. More recently, in

14
Soft Logic
the West, Werner Heisenberg showed physicists that not all scientific
statements are true or false; many, if not most, statements are
indeterminate, uncertain, gray - fuzzy. The world ofmathematics does
not fit the world it describes, for the two worlds differ. One neat and
the other messy, it takes faith in language, a dose of make-believe to
make the two worlds nlatch.2 Statements of fact are not all true or all
false; they are imprecise and vague. While in theory philosophers
could tell matters oflogic from matters offact, in practice they ignored
the split and treated the messy matters of fact as if they were neat
matters oflogic.
Probability does not solve this mismatch problem, for it fills the
world with the phantom of "randomness," a concept mathematicians
for years have tried to define.3 Probability has turned modern science
into a truth casino. It has proved a powerful tool for social prediction
and control but, in the opinion of Kosko, this does not soften the
mismatch between logic and fact. 4 He points out that most people, at
the same time, are both satisfied and dissatisfied with their jobs.
Scientists believe in bivalent logic and mathematics because they
work; yet they work, of course, only to some degree. So fuzzy logic
says that logic itself is a matter of degree, and in the fuzziest case the
thing equals its opposite: the glass of water is both half-empty and
half-full. Whether it is one or the other depends on how we look at it,
our values, and whether we are optimists or pessimists. Scientists beg
the question of bivalence, but any criticism of it nlust fail without a
working alternative, and Kosko proposes fuzzy logic as such an
alternative. He argues that while Western scientists and engineers
ignored or attacked fuzzy logic, their Eastern counterparts largely
applied it and launched the long-awaited era of commercial machine
intelligence. No human brain works with Aristotle's syllogisms or
with computer precision: it is messier than that. Some things, of
course, are not fuzzy, no matter how closely you look at them. These
things tend to come from the world of mathematics, but when you
move out of this artificial world, fuzziness reigns. Fuzziness means
multivalence. It means there is more than one option, perhaps an
infinite spectrum of them.
It llleans analog
instead of binary
procedures, infinite shades of gray between black and white. Logicians
in the 1920s and 1930s first worked out nlultivalued logic to deal with
Heisenberg's uncertainty principle
in
quantum
mechanics.
The
principle suggests that we really deal with three-valued logic:
statements that are true, false, or
indeterminat~ __ Ai~C!1~!19~_jr'lde~

Fuzzy Logic
15
accuracy for simplicity, for it requires some force of fitting and
rounding oft: as when you state whether you are for or against a
politician or satisfied with your job.5
The lnformation Age presupposes bivalence because it rests on
the "digital revolution" in signal processing and microprocessor
computer chips. Such digitalization imposes a grid on the curve, and
then the system discards reality and keeps only the digitized numbers
(the black dots on the grid). If the computer answered "more or less,"
we would not think that the computer meant it, that it spoke the truth.
We expect every "well-formed" statement to be true or false, not true
more or less, or false somewhat. The villain of bivalence is logical
contradiction" A and not-A,6 for in bivalent logic contradiction
implies everything, it allows you to prove and disprove any statement.
But so far no one has proved that the axioms of modern mathematics
do not lead to statements that contradict one another. Still there is
little tolerance for views that admit contradictions or overlap between
things and nothings. Fuzzy logic confronts this intolerance head on,
influenced perhaps by Eastern mysticisnl. Fuzziness or multivalence
holds everywhere in between the corners of the number line or cube.
But you can work with fuzzy units just as you can work with binary
units, and you don't have to round otI7 The fuzzier the answer, the
more A and not-A look alike, and at the midpoint you cannot tell a
thing from its opposite, just as you cannot tell a half-empty glass of
water from a half-full one. As we gain more information, we get a
clearer, more accurate picture ofthe world: we get a better view of the
facts. But this does not take the fuzziness out of the facts, and the
question
Where
do
we draw the line? haunts black-and-white
reasoning in a world of grays. The split between thing and nothing
grows still more complicated when the thing is reactive. Objects and
behavior are, to some degree, art and nonart depending on tastes,
tradition and whim. Beauty is both fuzzy and reactive; it depends on
the speaker and on the culture. Beauty lies not solely in the eye of the
beholder; it lies there only to some degree.8 Legal decisions are also
fuzzy and relative; courts convict persons who commit crimes with
enough intent and acquit those who commit them with enough
diminished capacity. Judges, legal scholars, and the rest of us search
for borders between personal freedom
and government control,
between man and state, choice and command. Jokes shade into insults
or slander or harassment. Legal concepts vary among cultures and
with them. The great increases in information in the twentieth century

16
Soft Logic
have not helped us draw lines between justice and injustice, fairness
and unfairness, right and wrong. In many ways the future looks fuzzy.9
Kosko claims that
fuzziness
has reduced the ancient and
undefined concepts of "randomness" and "probability"
that hold
between the sets. Fuzzy logic has added to machine intelligence by
showing us how to make machines reason more as we do, with
common sense learned from experience. IO But common sense is some-
thing we take for granted, not something we know explicitly how to
defme. Most scientists still attack fuzzy logic as being against the
bivalent faith, and only the commercial success of fuzzy products has
made it an issue. At root fuzzy logic or multivalence is a world view or
ideology, but so, of course, is bivalence, and we often use probability
talk when we are not sure of something. Randomness is everywhere
but we fmd only the footprints of it; we never catch probability in the
act. II We "tend" to observe the most probable event, and we expect the
most probable outcomes to occur, even though we silently buy a lottery
ticket or play the slot machine or smoke a cigarette. Science plays the
percentages too; it holds the maximum likelihood view as the grand
organizing principle ofthe scientific world view. Kosko concludes that
we need a gray or fuzzy science in order to model our gray world
better. 12 But logic is normative and neither our mathematical symbols
nor the natural language we use need to have the same structure as the
world they refer to. Probability attempts to make the bivalent package
reasonable, but it has its psychological roots in our ganlbling hunches,
and so far it has no logical justification. Probability is a psychological
side effect of forward-looking creatures, just as free will is, and that
really means that probability is built into our minds, that it is part of
science's infrastructure. We see probability everywhere because it lies
in our glasses. 13 Kosko regards probability or randomness as a psychic
construct or a Jlmgian archetype or a mental trend that helps us to
organize our perceptions and memories, and most of all our expect-
ations. Probability gives structure to our competing casual predictions
about how the future will unfold. It ranks or weights future alternatives
and has its powerful psychological reality rooted in our neural
microstructure. 14 The widespread garrlbling and games of chance in
primitive as well as modern cultures suggest that probability reasoning
may be a cultural constant like hero worship, fertility rituals, or incest
and adultery taboos. It allows us to bet before we act and to improve
the outcome of acting, and natural selection favors a brain mechanism

Fuzzy Logic
17
that helps the organism make its next move In a changing and
dangerous world.
Kosko concludes that the universe, if gray, is not random but
detemlinate - all things are a matter of degree. Russell's logic and
Heisenberg's quantum mechanics shook science and forced scientists
to rethink mathematics and science. Aristotle's logic and scientific
bent have shaped much of the modern Western mind and defmed its
range of parameters, its boundary, its list of the correct and incorrect.
To a large degree, Aristotle still defines what is philosophically correct
in logic and reasoning. The Buddha, on the other hand, refused to get
caught up in words: he tolerated A and not-A. He seems the first nlajor
thinker to reject the black-white world of bivalence. That alone took
great insight and detachment and tenacity in an age with no formal
analysis. The Buddha refused to let words get in the way of what
matters to a living and dying organism. The bivalence of science
denies gray truth, and that tactic leads to paradoxes and self-
contradictions. The fuzzy view emphasizes that almost all truth is
gray, partial, and fractional; it lets mathematical truths remain black
and white as extreme cases of gray.15 Bivalent science denies that
truths are gray and maintains they are tentative, while fuzzy logic
agrees that scientific truths are tentative but still claims they are gray.
The focus on statements has reduced the analysis of truth to the study
of language. Fuzzy theorists have done the same but they allow more
scores; they allow an infinite continuum of gray scores between 0 and
1. Philosophers distinguish logical truth from factual truth. Logical
truth comes from symbols and their formal relationships; it does not
depend on how the world is. 16 They follow Aristotle in calling factual
truth contingent and logical truth necessary; a logically true statement
is a statement true in all possible worlds. In this view, the way we add
and multiply numbers should work in all possible worlds. Mathematics
is a formal system, since we can manipulate mathematical symbols
and not understand what they mean. We can just apply the syntax
rules as a computer does when it adds up numbers or proves a
theorem. The computer shows the truth of the theorem but it does not
''understand'' its meaning. 17 All formal systems work that way; you
don't have to interpret to apply them. Fuzzy logic views truth as
accuracy, and accuracy is clearly a matter of degree. The precise but
artificial statements ofmathematics are always 1DO-percent accurate or
O-percent accurate, whereas statements about the world have accuracy
scores between these two extremes. You can prove only mathematical

18
Soft Logic
and logical coherent statements in an arbitrary formal systenl of made-
up nLles. You cannot guarantee what you can test, and you cannot test
what you can guarantee; the logical and the factual do not meet.
Ironic as it sounds, inaccuracy is the central assumption of
science. Only the "empty" tautologies of mathematics and logic enjoy
the status of accuracy. Scientific claims and statements are inexact and
provisional; they depend on simplifying assumptions or on a particular
choice of words, on "all things being equal." When you speak, you
simplify, and when you simplify, you lie. I8 Scientists are trying to fmd
the mathematics that best fits the world, and while they work in
nlathematics
and
test
in
mathematical
formulations
of
their
experiments, they never achieve the logical certainty of mathematics.
Scientists tend to believe they do mathematics when they do science,
and this holds particularly in advanced science like physics or at the
theoretical frontier of any science whose claims come as mathematical
clainls. What was inaccurate or fuzzy truth all along gets presented in
the all-or-none status of binary logic. Positivist philosophers and
scientists make all statements certain by giving factual statements the
status of logical statements, and, in effect, they try to make fact fit
their binary mathematics. And they cover up or cloud the whole issue
with probability disclaimers that all such black-white talk holds only
with "some probability." Rounding off lies at the heart ofworking with
symbols and speech, for it compresses information. It simplifies
matters by reducing the many to the few, the complex to the
manageable. Bivalence or rounding off trades accuracy for simplicity,
but if your round off too much, you pay the penalty of bivalent self-
contradiction and land in paradox: then the water glass is both half
empty and half full. Heisenberg's quantum uncertainty principle
ended, or at least dented, our blind faith in the certainty of science and
factual truth. This faith had grown since the days of Isaac Newton to
the status of religious dogma. But up close it could provide only
partial, uncertain and fuzzy truths. It took the new mathematics of
Russell and the new quantum mechanics of Heisenberg to make us
first really doubt the logic that we inherited from Aristotle.
Paradoxes of self-reference have the same form; they both assert
and deny themselves. They have the logical form of a contradiction, A
and not-A, and they vex mathematicians and Western philosophers. At
the same time many mathematicians dismiss the paradoxes as word
play and few mathematicians lose sleep over Russell's paradoxes even
though every branch of mathematics depends on set theory. The set or

Fuzzy Logic
19
collection or class is the fundamental structure in mathematics, since
nothing, too, is a set; the empty set. 19 No one wanted to give up
consistency altogether for this is essential for rational communication.
So the fuzzy view nlaintains that paradoxes of self-reference are half-
truths, fuzzy contradictions. The truth lies in the middle; you cannot
round off the midpoint to anyone comer. Paradoxes are the rule and
not the exception; rather pure black and white is the exception.
Paradoxes also show how bivalence costs; you trade accuracy for
simplicity. Heisenberg demonstrates that even in physics the tnlth of
statements is a matter of degree; he made people question bivalent
logic by showing that in quantum mechanics there are some things we
can never know. The more you pin down the velocity of an electron,
the less you can pin down its position, and vice versa. In a nonlinear
theory the parts do not add up to the whole, and groups do not behave
as their members do. But scientists try to make things simple, and that
is in good part why they stuck with bivalence. Their first instinct is to
fit the linear model to a nonlinear world. We know much more linear
mathematics than nonlinear mathematics, but the nonlinear theory fits
the facts better, and that is why we revert to ordinary language in
explaining what the mathematical notation means. A nonlinear
quantum mechanics may not lead to an uncertainty principle, for
wherever you have linear theories you will have uncertainty relations;
you cannot pin down a signal completely in time and frequency. We
inherited from the Pythagoreans a belief in absolutes and pure forms,
in the white and black, and the true and the false.20 But most of our
words stands for fuzzy sets, while most of modem science stands
against the logic of fuzzy sets.2l Everything is vague to a degree you
do not realize till you have tried to make it precise.22 In all such
borderline cases "doubtful objects" are easily found about which we
are unable to say either that the class name does or does not apply.23
The noun house stands for a fuzzy set ofhouses, since some structures
are more "a house" than others. Old House stands for a smaller set of
houses, but how old is old? It is a matter of degree. We think in fuzzy
sets and we each define our fuzzy boundaries in different ways and
with different examples. Thought is set play, and fuzzy logic is
reasoning with fuzzy sets.24 Nunlbers are fuzzy too; there are numbers
close to zero or nearly zero; there are nUlTlbers, like big numbers, or
very small numbers which are fuzzy numbers. The closer a small
number is to zero, the more it belongs to the fuzzy set of small
numbers. We might draw the fuzzy number zero as a bell curve

20
Soft Logic
centered on the exact number 0.25 Mathematics, as we know, it is but a
special case of fuzzy mathematics, a special limiting case - the degen-
erate case of black and white extremes in the mathematical world. of
grays. We can draw the fuzzy number ofzero in infinitely many ways.
In practice fuzzy logic means making computers reason with
fuzzy numbers in the form of if-then statements or rules of thUITlb.
Every traffic is heavy to some degree, and every green light stays on
long to some degree. The knowledge or intelligence comes from asso-
ciating these two events. Fuzzy sets arise when borders blur, when
thing overlaps nothing, when A overlaps not-A. But this state of
overlap or contradiction cannot hold in bivalent logic. A set is fuzzy
when elements belong to it to some degree; only an arbitrary line can
be drawn between happy and not-happy, honest and dishonest, young
and not-young. A fuzzy logic does not draw hard lines between
opposites, and we live with a mix of happiness and unhappiness,
honesty and dishonesty. Fuzzy sets exist outside of mathematics; to
some degree, we all belong to every grouping and belief system, fad,
cult, or trend. We all subscribe, to some degree, to every political
party, every sexual orientation, every lifestyle, every side of the
argument. We grow and learn as we age, and that just means that our
fuzzy units change as we move from belief to disbelief and back again.
Fights break out when some person, group, or government tries to
round us off their way, tries to make us all A or not-A, to turn our
fuzzy units into binary units and squash our fuzziness. In this sense
voting asks for trouble.26 Everything reduces to subsethood but the part
contains the whole only to some degree; a "concept" is not only its
luminous center but also the surrounding sphere of meaning and
influence to some degree. The hard and abrupt contours of our
ordinary conceptual system does not apply to reality. The world is thus
a bivalent abstraction constituted of entities that are discontinuous
with nothing between them. And in order to bring relations into the
scrap heap ofdisconnected entities, the mind has to conjure up spirits,
forces and whatnot from the vast deep of its own imagination. All this
is due to the initial mistake of enclosing things or ideas or persons (or
sets) in hard contours that are purely artificial, and not in accordance
with the natural shading of continuities that are or should be well
known to science and philosophy alike.27
Critics demanded that Lofti Zadeh, who coined the term "fuzzy
logic," show that fuzziness was not probability in disguise. Zadeh did
not bother with the fight, for he saw that as the system gets more

Fuzzy Logic
21
complex, precise statements had less meaning. There are those who
feel that the gap between precise mathematical language and a messy
world reflects the fundamental inadequacy of conventional mathe-
matics - the mathematics of precisely defined points, fractions, sets
and probability measures. For coping with the analysis of: say,
biological systems, and for dealing effectively with systems that are
generally orders of magnitude more complex than man-made systems,
we need a radically .different mathematics, a mathematics of fuzzy or
cloudy qualities that are not describable in terms of probability
distributions. Indeed the need for such mathematics is becoming
increasingly apparent even in the realm of inanimate systems, for in
most practical cases the a priori data, as well as the criteria by which
the performance of man-made systems is judged, are far from being
precisely specified or having accurately known probability distri-
butions.28 The notation, however, is what we lack, and the verdict of
mere feeling is liable to fluctuate. Zadeh used the fuzzy set as a chunk
of common sense; the old view of tall was bivalent but tallness, like
most properties of the world, is a matter of degree. He chose the word
"fuzzy" because of its ties with common sense. As the complexity of a
system increases, our ability to make precise and significant statenlents
about its behavior diminishes until a threshold is reached beyond
which precision and significance (or bivalence) become almost
mutually exclusive. The closer one looks at a real-world problem, the
fuzzier becomes its solution; indeed, precision increases fuzziness. 29
Most of the critics dismissed fuzziness as randomness in disguise,
whereas Zadeh focused on the expressive power of fuzzy sets, and how
well it fits with our words. For Zadeh to be right or even plausible,
Aristotle had to be wrong, and that meant things did not have to be
black and white. Kosko regards bivalent truths just to be conditioned
reflexes but he fails to explain why bivalent logic and mathematics
work after all. Bivalent logic not only runs computers but has served
us well for thousands of years; it may come with some costs but it is
simple and it works. Quine champions that claim; he thinks you can
live with a floating boundary. He also suggests that everything is
convention - so why argue? But Kosko points out that scientists work
in narrow specialties, and that they fear the whole of science, too. And
bivalence is one of the deepest key ideas of science; it is so deep that
we take it for granted in our attempts at scientific reasoning. What we
largely ignore is that words stand for sets of things, and that these

22
Soft Logic
things are fuzzy; the things belong to words to some degree, and this is
how a group ofsentences gives a fuzzy system.
Japanese fuzzy-system researchers expect that fuzzy logic will
enable development of computer science that adjust to people rather
than the reverse. Fuzzy logic is capable of expressing linguistic terms
such as "maybe false" or "sort of true." In general, fuzzy logic, when
applied to analog computers, allows them to evaluate the human
reasoning process, quantify imprecise information, make decisions
based on vague and incomplete data, yet - by applying a "defuzzi-
fication" process - arrive at definite conclusions.30 The problem of
teaching computers "common sense" is that what we take to be
conlnl0n sense is taken for granted; it is by definition something we do
not know how to define or make precise. A fuzzy system can model or
approximate any system. It is just a branch of fuzzy if-then rules, and
all such rules define patches that try to cover some wiggly curve. The
better the patches cover the curve, the smarter the system, and the
more uncertain the rules, the bigger the patches. If the rules are so
precise they are not fuzzy, then the patches collapse to points and they
don't cover much of anything.31 Leibniz dreamed of symbolic logic
and ars combinatoria or computer language that could put all our
rules in symbols and reason from them to reach mathematical truths
and daily facts. Today computer scientists have created the field of
artificial intelligence, or AI, based on belief that knowledge is rules,
and that you can write down rules in the black and white language of
computers and symbolic logic. But after 30 years of research and
billions of dollars in funding, Artificial Intelligence has so far not
produced smart machines or smart products. The AI fans claim this is
only because they can't yet put enough rules in computers. But fuzzy
researchers have build hundreds of smart machines and think they
know why the AI engineers have failed. While you need rules, you
don't need a lot of rules for many tasks; you need fuzzy rules.32 A
fuzzy rule relates fuzzy sets. Sense is common only to some degree,
even if we see and hear and taste and touch the same things. The
world hits us with signals and we sense them through the unique eyes
and ears and tongue and skin that our DNA gives us. The world hits
each of us with a unique set of signals, and that is why each word
. stands for different fuzzy sets ofthings to each of us. A child's idea of
large or slow orfair changes as she grows older.33 The fuzzy view was
just common sense. It was considered daring and novel at the time
because you first had to get your university degrees in the old black

Fuzzy Logic
23
and white school, and then doubt that school and rediscover what any
layman could have told you about common sense; that it is vague and
fuzzy and hard to pin down in words and numbers.34 But that still does
not persuade scientists, and you have to show them the mathematics
before they will accept such an idea.
The fuzzy system Kosko proposes is nonlinear but it approaches a
linear system, as you can always cover a curve with a fmite number of
fuzzy patches. The less you know about a problem, the sloppier your
rules as you use fewer fuzzy sets to stand for more things and cases.
The fuzzy sets lose their fuzziness as the triangle widths by which we
define them shrink, and along the way they lose their common-sense
meaning. Such fuzzy orders can also model dynamic systems that
change with time. But in practice no one knows how to write down the
equations for most systems because they are too nonlinear. Fuzzy
systems guess at the equations for you; they let you express what. you
know in a nonmathematical language. The main advantages of this
approach are in inlplementing "rules of thumb" experiences, intui-
tions, hunches, and the fact that it does not need a nl0del of the
process.35 You find good mathematical models only in textbooks and
classrooms; they are toy answers to toy problems, and the real world
pays no attention to most ofthem. Scientists often respect mathematics
more than truth, and they do not mention that a mathematical guess is
no less a guess than a guess in everyday language. A mathematical
guess has more dignity the less mathematics you know. Fuzzy systems
let us model systems in words, and you can use thenl in physics or
communications or neuroscience. You can use fuzzy systems any place
we today use brains, and you can use them in places where even brains
don't work. In fuzzy system rules "frre" all the time; they fire in
parallel, and all rules fITe to some degree. They fire partially, and that
is how associative memory works. The result is a fuzzy weighted
average. You defuzzify a set when you replace it with a number or a
centroid.36 You add up a lot of things and weigh each thing to some
degree; you do it by feel, and this picks answers but it does not explain
them.37 Each reason you give is a matter of degree, each has a fuzzy or
gray weight. No one reason throws the decision; rather they all add up
to a decision and your choice depends on complex and nonlinear
processings in your brain. What really counts with fuzzy systems is the
tie between words and sets, for unlike rules, principles are vague and
abstract and full of exceptions. They change slowly with time as
culture evolves.

24
Soft Logic
Real problems are unique and sloppy and hard to pin down in
exact mathematical terms. Thus, fuzzy theory has emerged as a means
suited to represent uncertainty contained in the meaning ofeach word.
Fuzzy artificial intelligence as an application ofthis theory is expected
to play an important role in the future establishment of an intimate
relationship between men and computers. We seek a system that learns
fuzzy rules from experience, that turns expert behavior into fuzzy
rules. You don't find violinists, woodcarvers, or aerobic teachers who
can explain how they do what they do. We learn a new idea or pattern
only if it resonates with what we expect to see or hear or think.38 Since
fuzzy rules are patches, with enough data the fuzzy system can learn
any system,39 and real data clusters need not fall neatly into the patch
cells defmed by the fuzzy set triangles. You quantify when you round
offor when you pick an example. At first adaptive quantifier points do
not spread out well, and that gives a small number of bad rules. Then
with more training data, the adaptive quantifier points spread out and
track the facts. That gives more and better rules, and at this point we
can drop the expert and just work with fuzzy rules. In practice, we
then polish these rules by playing with the size and position of the
fuzzy sets or by letting a "supervised" neural set tune in. A fuzzy
cognitive map draws a casual picture; it ties facts and processes to
values and policies and objectives, and it lets you predict how complex
events interact and play out.40 A fuzzy cognitive map lets everyone
pack her own wisdom and nonsense into a mathematical picture of
some place in the world. But once packed in, the fuzzy cognitive maps
predict outcomes, and we can compare these with data to test them.
The outcome of large fuzzy cognitive maps may surprise you, for the
best .most of us can do is argue about single arrows, and we do less
well when we try to reason with the large set of connected concepts.
Fuzzy cognitive images help us to see the big picture and do
something with it. They thrive on feedback and they show globaJ
patterns, but as the fuzzy cognitive maps grow more complex, the
hidden patterns become harder to see. They lay bare our beliefs and
biases and our grasp ofthe world. Thus, the fuzzy cognitive map gives
us a new way to represent knowledge.
Philosophically interesting terms such as life invariably are
fuzzy, as they shade smoothly into not-life or death. The either-or
choice lies at the heart of the abortion debate. We can just as well call
growth death and say that death begins at conception. Some humans
end up in comas, and their family, friends, physicians, and insurers

Fuzzy Logic
25
have to think about where to draw the death line. Life is fuzzy, and the
lines we draw will be arbitrary.41 Life is a matter of degree, and so is
death, but such fuzzy curves have considerable problems too: there are
infinitely more curves and each person can draw her own curve and no
two curves may ever be the same. Still, such a curve helps us to argue,
even if it does not give us a line, and does not lead to either-or action.
There is no hard line when a cell dies, for all our cells are living or
dying to some degree.42 A million forces in our brains, bodies and
genes shape our thoughts, choices and behavior. Each day it gets
harder to call one thing, event, or act good or bad or call it right or
wrong. The truth can be a matter of degree yet that does not help
ethics.43 But neither, of course, does it help logic, for logic, too, is
normative. Logical truth is empty, and in the end it is just symbol
pushing, but scientists believe in binary logic and mathematics because
they work. They enable us to calculate and infer much more effectively
than is possible by means of ordinary language. Every day scientists
make their favorite claim that ''the data suggests such and such," and
they do not, or maybe cannot, explain this suggestion. If the words tie
to blobs, the claim is true to some degree, and the tighter the tie the
truer the claim. Most of us think the universe is not fuzzy, but a set of
things may belong to a universe merely to some degree. An electron or
electron cloud belong to a region of space-time only to some degree,
and what this suggests to Kosko is that logic does not differ fron1 fact,
His alleged mismatch problem assumes that there need to be a
similarity of structure between the mathematics we use and the world
it refers to. Logic, however, is normative; it does not refer to the world
but to the manner we ought to reason and calculate.
Notes
1 Bart Kosko, Fuzzy Thinking, The New Science ofFuzzy Logic, New
York, NY: Hyperion, 1993, p. 6.
2 Ibid., p. 8.
3 Ibid., p. 11.
4 Ibid., p. 12.
5 Ibid., p. 21.
6 Ibid., p. 23.
7 Ibid., p. 25.

26
Soft Logic
8 Ibid., p. 36.
9 Ibid., p. 38.
10 Ibid., p. 41.
11 Ibid., p. 47.
12 Ibid., p. 49.
13 Ibid., p. 53.
14 Ibid., p. 54.
15 Ibid., p. 80.
16 Ibid., p. 82.
17 Ibid., p. 84.
18 Ibid., p. 86.
19 Ibid., p. 99.
20 Ibid., p. 115.
21 Ibid., p. 119.
22 Bertrand Russell, The Philosophy ofLogical Atomism, La Salle, ll:
Open Court, 1985.
23 Max Black, "Vagueness: An Exercies in Logical Analysis,"
Philosophy ofScience, vol. 4,(1937), pp. 427-55.
24 Kosko, Fuzzy Thinking, p. 123.
25 Ibid., p. 124.
26 Ibid., p. 127.
27 viz. Jan Christiann Smuts, Holism and Evolution, London: Macmillan,
1928.
28 Lotti Zadeh, "From Circuit Theory to System Theory," Proceedings of
the IRE, 1962.
29 Kosko, Fuzzy Thinking, p. 148.
30 Fuzzy Logic: A Key Technologyfor Future Competitiveness, U.S.
Department ofCommerce, November 1991.
31 Kosko, Fuzzy Thinking, p. 158.
32 Ibid., p. 159.
33 Ibid., p. 160.
34 Ibid., p. 161.
35 Ebrahim Mamdani, "Application ofFuzzy Logic to Approximate
Reasoning Using Linguistic Synthesis," IEEE Transactions ofComputer C-
26, December 1977, pp. 1182-91.
36 Kosko, Fuzzy Thinking, p. 172.
37 Ibid., p. 176.
38 Stephen Grossberg, Studies in Mind and Brain, Reidel, 1982.
39 Kosko, Fuzzy Thinking, p. 215.
40 Ibid., p. 222.
41 Ibid., p. 246.
42 Ibid., p. 250..

43 Ibid., p. 256.
Fuzzy Logic
27

Chapter Three
Chaos
Gleick argues that clouds represent a side of nature that the
mainstream ofphysics had passed by, a side that was at once fuzzy and
detailed, structured and unpredictable. For as long as the world has
had physicists inquiring into the laws of nature, it has suffered a
special ignorance about disorder in the atmosphere, in the turbulent
sea, in the fluctuations ofwildlife populations, in the oscillations ofthe
heart and the brain. The irregular side ofnature, the discontinuous and
erratic
side
-
these
have
been
puzzles
to
some,
or
worse,
monstrosities. 1 But in the 1970s, a few scientists in the United States
and Europe began to find a way through disorder. They were
mathenlaticians,
physicists,
biologists,
chemists
-
all
seeking
connections between different kinds of irregularity. Physiologists
found a surprising order in the chaos that develops in the human heart,
the prime cause of sudden unexpected death. Ecologists explored the
rise and fall of gypsy moth populations; economists dug out old stock
price data and tried a new kind of analysis. The insights that emerged
led directly into the natural world - the shapes of clouds, the patterns
of lightning, the microscopic interweaving of blood vessels, the
galactic clustering of stars.2 When Mitchell Feigenbaum began
thinking about chaos, he was one of a handful of scattered scientists,
mostly unknown to one another. A decade later, chaos had become a
shorthand name for a fast-growing movement that is reshaping the
fabric of the scientific establishment. At every major university and
corporate research center some theorists ally themselves first with

30
Soft Logic
chaos and only second with their nominal specialties. Now that science
is looking, chaos seems to be everywhere; it appears in the behavior of
the weather, in airplane flight, in oil flowing in under-ground pipes.
That realization has begun to change the way business executives
make decisions about insurance, the way astronomers look at the solar
system, the way political theorists talk about the stresses leading to
armed conflict.3 Chaos breaks across the lines that separate scientific
disciplines because it is a science ofthe global nature ofsystems. It has
brought together thinkers from fields that had been widely separated.
Chaos poses problems that defy accepted ways of working in science,
as it makes strong claims about the universal behavior ofcomplexity.
The first chaos theorists, the scientists who set the discussion in
motion, shared certain sensibilities. They had an eye for pattern,
especially patterns that appeared in different scales at the same time.
They had a taste for randomness and complexity, for jagged edges and
sudden bumps. Believers in chaos speculate about determinism and
free will, about evolution, about the nature of conscious intelligence.
They feel that they are turning back a trend in science towards
reductionism. Like relativity and quantum mechanics, chaos cuts away
at the truth of Newton's physics. Relativity eliminated the Newtonian
illusion of absolute· space and time; quantum theory eliminated the
Newtonian claim of a controllable measurement process; and chaos
eliminates the Laplacian fancy of determinate predictability. The
simplest systems are now seen to create extraordinarily difficult
problems ofpredictability. Traditionally, when physicists saw complex
results, they looked for complex causes. The modern study of chaos
began with the creeping realization in the 1960s that quite simple
mathematical equations could model systems every bit as violent as a
waterfall.
Tiny
differences
in
input
could
quickly
become
overwhelming differences in output. Weather had a flavor that could
not be explained by talking about averages. In theory, a computer
could let meteorologists do what astronomers had been able to do with
pencil and slide rule; reckon the future of their enterprise from the
initial condition and the physical laws that guide its evolution. But it
turned out that the weather was vastly more complicated. There was
always one small compromise, so small that working scientists usually
forgot it was there: measurements could never be perfect. The basic
idea of Western science is that the small differences can be neglected,
and there is a belief in convergence in the way things work. Economic
forecasters rely on this assumption, though their success is less

Chaos
31
apparent. Edward Lorenz saw that there must be a link between the
unwillingness of the weather to repeat itself and the inability of the
forecaster to predict it. In science, as in life, it was well-known that a
chain of events can have a point of crisis that would magnify small
changes.
But chaos meant that
such
points
were
everywhere.
Nonlinear relationships are not strictly proportional, and nonlinear
systems generally cannot be solved and cannot be added together. In
fluid and mechanical systems, the nonlinear terms tend to be the
features (such as friction) that people want to leave out when they try
to get good, simple understanding. Nonlinearity means that the act of
playing the game has a way ofchanging the rules.
Thomas Kuhn deflated the views of science as an orderly process
of asking questions and finding their answers. He emphasized a
contrast between the bulk of what scientists do -
working on
legitimate, well-understood problems within their disciplines - and the
exceptional, unorthodox work that leads to revolutions. Not by
accident he made scientists seenl less than perfect rationalists.4 Central
to Kuhn's ideas is the vision of normal science as solving problems,
the kind of problems that students learn the first time they open their
textbooks. Such problems defme an accepted style of achievement that
carries most scientists through graduate school, through their theses
work, and through the writing of journal articles that make up the
body of academic careers. Under normal conditions, the research
scientist is not an innovator but a solver of puzzles, and the puzzles
upon which he concentrates are those that he believes can be both
stated and solved within the existing scientific tradition. Then there
are revolutions; a new science arises out ofone that has reached a dead
end. Often a revolution has an interdisciplinary character. Its central
discoveries often come from people straying outside'the normal bounds
of their specialties. The problems that obsess these theorists are not
recognized as legitimate lines of inquiry. Shallow ideas can be
assimilated, but ideas that require people to reorganize their picture of
the world provoke hostility. To chaos researchers, mathematics has
become an
experimental
science,
with
the
computer replacing
laboratories full oftest tubes and microscopes. Graphic images are the
key. Thus, physical motion for Aristotle was not a quantity or a force
but rather a kind of change, just as a person's growth is a kind of
change. When Galileo looked at the pendulum, on the other hand, he
saw a regularity that could be measured. To explain it required a
revolutionary way of understanding objects in motion. Galileo's

32
Soft Logic
advantage over the ancient Greeks was not that he had better data;
rather he saw the regularity because he already had a theory that
predicted it. He understood what Aristotle could not; that a moving
object tends to keep moving, that a change in speed or direction could
only be explained by some external force, like friction. But the
regularity Galileo saw is only an approximation. Small nonlinearities
were easy to disregard; people who conduct experiments learn quickly
that they live in an imperfect world. In the centuries since Galileo and
Newton, the search for regularity in experiment has been fundamental.
An experimentalist looks for quantities that remain the same, or
quantities that are zero, and that means disregarding bits of nlessiness
that interfere with the neat picture. The story ofGalileo dropping balls
off the Tower of Pisa is a piece of myth inventing an ideal scientific
world where regularities can be separated from the disorder of exper-
ience.5
Students
learned
that
nonlinear
systems
were
usually
unsolvable, which is true, and that they tend to be exceptions, which is
not true. Traditionally, a dynamist would believe that to write down a
system's equations is to understand the system. But because of the
little bits of nonlinearity in these equations, a dynamist would find
himself helpless to answer the easiest practical questions about the
future of the system. The tiny imprecisions built into each observation
or calculation rapidly takes over because this is a systenl with a
sensitive dependence on initial conditions. Physicists assumed that any
behavior they could actually observe regularly would have to be stable,
whereas some systems are locally unpredictable yet globally stable.
Real dynamical systems play by a more complicated set of rules than
anyone had imagined; a complex system can give rise to turbulence
and coherence at the same time. If regular equations could produce
irregular behavior, to an ecologist that rang certain bells. Indeed the
complexity of the real phenomena studies in the life sciences out-
stripped anything to be found in a physicist's laboratory. Biologists'
mathematical models tended to be caricatures of reality, as did the
models
of economists,
demographers,
psychologists
and
urban
planners. The standards are different but none of the early ecologists
had the inclination or the strength to keep churning out numbers that
refused to settle down. The stable solutions were the interesting ones,
and the whole point ofoversimplifying was to model regularity.
James Yorke had given the science ofchaos its name; he felt that
physicists had learned not to see chaos. In daily life, the (Lorenzian)
quality of sensitive dependence on initial conditions lurks everywhere.

Chaos
33
Small perturbances in one's daily trajectory can have large con-
sequences. But it is no exaggeration to say that the vast enterprise of
calculus made possible most ofthe practical triumphs ofpost-medieval
science. So by the time a scientist masters this way of thinking about
nature, becoming comfortable with the theory and the hard practice, he
is likely to have lost sight of the fact that most differential equations
cannot be solved at all.6 If you can write down the solution of the
differential equation, Yorke said, then necessarily it is not chaotic
because to write it down, you must find regular invariants - things that
are conserved, like angular momentum. But this is exactly the way to
eliminate the possibility of chaos. The solvable systems are the ones
shown in textbooks, and confronted with a nonlinear system, scientists
would have to substitute linear approximations or some other backdoor
approach. Textbooks show students only the rare nonlinear systems
that would yield to such techniques, and do not display sensitive
dependence on initial conditions. Nonlinear systems with real chaos
were rarely taught or learned, and only a few were able to remember
that the solvable, orderly, linear systems were the aberrations. Only a
few, that is, understood how nonlinear nature really is. Yorke
understood that the fITst message is that there is disorder, whereas
physicists and mathematicians want to discover regularities. Beyond a
certain point, periodicity gives way to chaos, Le., to fluctuations that
never settle at all. Yet in the middle of this complexity, stable cycles
suddenly return. In the real world, an observer would see just the
vertical scale corresponding to one parameter at a time. He would only
see one kind of behavior - possibly a steady state, possibly a seven-
year cycle, possibly apparent randomness. He would have no way of
knowing that the same system, with some slight change in some
parameter, would display patterns of a completely different kind.7
Yorke had offered more than a mathematical result; he had shown that
chaos is ubiquitous, stable, and structured. Biologists have overlooked
bifurcations on the way to chaos because they usually lacked
mathematical sophistication, and because they lacked motivation to
explore disorderly behavior. Mathematicians had seen bifurcations but
had moved on. Robert May, a man with one foot in each discipline,
canle to realize that here was a domain that was both astonishing and
profound. May knew that the simple equations were just metaphors,
and so he wondered how widely the metaphors would apply. Simple
deterministic models would produce
what
looked
like random
behavior. As May looked at more biological systems through the prism

34
Soft Logic
of simple chaotic models, he continued to see results that violated the
standard intuitions of practitioners. In epidemiology, for example, it
was well-known that epidemics tend to come in cycles, regular or
irregular. Measles, polio, rubella - all rise and fall in frequency. May
realized that the oscillations could be reproduced by a nonlinear
model, and he wondered what would happen if such a system received
a sudden kick - a perturbation of the kind that might correspond to a
program of inoculation. Naive intuition suggests that the system will
change
smoothly
in
the
desired
direction,
but
actually,
May
discovered, high oscillations are likely to begin. Even if the long-term
trend was turned solidly downward, the path to new equilibriunl would
be interrupted by surprising peaks. In data from real progranls, such as
a campaign to wipe out rubella in Britain, doctors had seen oscillations
just like these predicted by May's model. Yet any heath official, seeing
a short-term
rise
in rubella
or
gonorrhea,
would
assume the
inoculation program had failed. 8
Each discipline considered its particular branch of chaos to be
special to itself But May realized that the astonishing structures he
had hardly began to explore had no intrinsic connection to biology. No
matter how elaborate linear mathematics would get, with its Fourier
transformations, its orthogonal functions, its regression techniques,
May argued that it inevitably misled scientists about their over-
whelming nonlinear world. The mathenlatical intuition so developed
ill equips the student to approach the bizarre behavior exhibited by the
simplest ofdiscrete nonlinear systems. Not only in research but also in
the everyday world of politics and economics, we would all be better
off if more people realized that simple nonlinear systems do not
necessarily possess simple dynamic properties.9 Economists generally
assumed that the price of a commodity like cotton changed in two
different ways, one orderly and one random. Over the long run, prices
would be driven steadily by real forces of the economy - the rise and
fall of the New England textile industry, or the opening of inter-
national trade routes - while over the short term, prices would bounce
around more or less randomly. But Hendrick Houthakker's data failed
to match these expectations. Most changes were small, of course, but
the rate of small changes to large ones was not as high as he had
expected. The standard model for plotting variations is the bell-shaped
curve. In the middle, where the bump of the bell rises, most data
cluster around average, and on the sides, the high and the low
extremes fall
off rapidly. The bell-shaped curve represents the

Chaos
35
standard, so-called Gaussian distribution of things or the normal
distribution. It makes a statement about the nature of randomness, but
as a means of fmding patterns of the economic data, the standard
notions left something to be desired. No matter how he plotted them,
Houtakker could not make the changes in cotton prices fit the bell-
shaped model. Benoit Mandelbrot was beginning to see a similarity in
surprisingly disparate places. Unlike most mathematicians, he con-
fronted problems by depending on his intuitions about patterns and
shapes. He already had the idea that other laws, with different
behavior, govern random, stochastic phenomena. Economists already
shared a conviction that small transient changes in price had nothing
in common with large, long-term changes. But Mandelbrot was
looking for patterns not at one scale or another, but across every scale.
The numbers that were aberrations from the point of view of normal
distribution produced symmetry from the point of view of scaling.
Each particular price change was random and unpredictable but the
sequence of changes was independent of scale; curves for daily price
changes and monthly price changes matched perfectly. Incredibly,
analyzed Mandelbrot's way, the degree of variation in prices has
renlained constant over a tumultuous sixty-year period that saw two
world wars and a depression.
Within the most disorderly reams of data lived an unexpected
kind of order. Scaling seemed to be a quality with a life of its own - a
signature. 10 Mandelbrot argued, contrary to intuition, that in the
electronic transmission of signals you never fmd a time during which
errors were scattered continuously. Within any burst of errors, no
matter how short, there would always be periods of completely error-
free transmission. He was duplicating an abstract construction known
as a Cantor set: a strange "dust" of parts, infinitely many yet infinitely
sparse. Mandelbrot was thinking oftransmission errors as a Cantor set
arranged in time. It meant that, instead of trying to increase signal
strength to drown out more and more noise, engineers should settle for
a modest signal, accept the inevitability of errors and use a strategy of
redundancy to catch and restrict them. Mandelbrot's scaling patterns
suggested that the noise could never be explained on the basis of
specific local events. 11 Prices can change in instantaneous jumps as
swiftly as a piece of news can flash across a teletype wire and a
thousand brokers can change their nlinds. A stock market strategy was
doomed to fail, Mandelbrot argued, if it assunled that a stock would
have to sell for $50 at some point in its way down from $60 to $10. 12

36
Soft Logic
Discontinuity, bursts ofnoise, Cantor dust - phenomena like these had
no place in the geometries of the past two thousand years. The shapes
of classical geometry are lines and planes, circles and spheres,
triangles and cones. They represent a powerful abstraction of reality,
and they inspired a powerful tradition of Platonic harmony. Euclid
made of them a geometry that lasted two thousand years, artists found
an ideal beauty in them; Ptolemaic astronomers built a theory of the
universe out of them. But for understanding complexity, they tum out
to be the wrong kind of abstraction. 13 Clouds are not spheres
Mandelbrot is fond of saying; mountains are not cones. The new
geometry mirrors a universe that is rough, not rounded, scabrous, not
smooth.
The
understanding
of nature's
complexity
brought
a
realization that the entanglements were not just random, not just an
accident. It inspired a belief that the interesting feature of a lightning
bolt's path was not its direction, but rather the distribution of zigs and
zags. Mandelbrot's work made a claim about the world, and the claim
was that such odd shapes carry meaning.
Wondering about coastlines and wiggly national borders, Lewis
Richardson checked encyclopedias in Spain and Portugal, Belgium
and the Netherlands, and discovered discrepancies oftwenty percent in
the estimated lengths of their common frontiers. In fact, Mandelbrot
argues, any coastline is, in a sense, infmitely long. In another sense,
the answer depends on the length of your measuring unit. Dividers
skip over twists and turns smaller than, say, one yard, but the surveyor
writes down the number anyway. Then he sets the dividers to a smaller
length - say, one foot - and repeats the process. He arrives at a
somewhat greater length because the dividers will capture more ofthe
detail. He writes this new number down, sets the dividers at four
inches, and starts again. This mental experiment, using imaginary
dividers, is a way ofquantifying the effect of observing an object from
different distances, at different scales. Common sense suggests that
these estimates should converge, and in fact, ifthe coastline were some
Euclidean shape, such as a circle, this method of summing fmer and
finer straight line distances would indeed converge. But Mandelbrot
found that as the scale of measurement becomes smaller, the measured
length of the coastline rises without limit, bays and peninsulas
revealing ever smaller subbays and subpeninsulas. 14 Since Euclidean
measurements of length, depth, and thickness failed to capture the
substance of irregular shapes, Mandelbrot turned to the idea of
dimension. The process of abstraction that allowed Euclid to conceive

Chaos
37
of one- or two-dimensional objects spills over easily into our use of
everyday things. Effectively, a road map remains two-dimensional
even if it is folded up. In the same way, a thread is effectively one-
dimensional and a particle has effectively no dimensions at all. 15 The
dimension ofa ball oftwine, Mandelbrot says, depends on our point of
view. From a great distance, the ball is no more than a point, with zero
dimensions. From closer, the ball is seen to fill spherical space, taking
up three dimensions. From closer still, the twine comes into view, and
the object becomes effectively one-dimensional, though the one
dimension is certainly tangled up around itself in a way that makes use
of three-dimensional space. The notion of how many numbers it takes
to specify a point remains useful. In macroscopic perspectives, twine
turns into three-dimensional columns,
and the columns resolve
themselves into one-dimensional fibers; the solid material dissolves
into zero-dimensional points. The effective dimension of an object
turns out to be different from its mundane three dimensions. Factual
dimensions become a way ofmeasuring quantities that otherwise have
no clear definition: the degree of roughness or brokenness or
irregularity of an object. The claim was that the degree of irregularity
remains constant over different scales. A Koch loop in which two sides
of a triangle are infinitely broken to form new triangles remains
continuos, never intersecting itself because the new triangles on each
side are always small enough to avoid bumping into each other. If you
draw a circle around the original triangle, the Koch curve would never
extend beyond it,16 yet the curve itself is infinitely long.
This
paradoxical result - infinite length in a fractal space - is contrary to
all reasonable intuitions about shapes. A simple, Euclidean, one-
dimensional line fills no space at all, but the outline of a Koch curve,
with infmite length crowding into a finite area, does fill space. It is
more than a line, but less than a plane. Mandelbrot could characterize
the fractal dimension precisely: for the Koch curve, the infinitely
extended multiplication offonr thirds gives a dimension of 1~2618.17
Intuition as it was trained by the hand, the pencil, and the ruler,
found these shapes quite monstrous and pathological. Intuition is not
something that is given once and for all. Mandelbrot says that he has
trained himself to accept as obvious shapes that were initially rejected
as absurd, and he believes that anyone can do the same. Above all,
fractal meant self-similar, and self-similarity is symmetry across scale;
it implies recursion, patterns inside patterns. The Koch curve displays
self-similarity,
for
it looks exactly the
same even
under high
-----------

38
Soft Logic
magnification. The same transformation is repeated under smaller and
smaller scales. The unifying idea of fractal geometry brought together
scientists who thought their own observations were idiosyncratic, and
who had no systematic way of understanding them. The insights of
fractal geometry helped scientists who study the way things meld
together, the way they break apart, or the way they shatter. It is a way
of looking at materials - the microscopically jagged surfaces, the tiny
holes and channels of porous oil bearing rock, the fragmental
landscapes of an earthquake zone. 18 Christopher Scholz found that
fractal geometry provided a powerful way of describing the particular
bumpiness of the earth's surface, and metallurgists discovered the
same for the surfaces of different kinds of steel. The fractal dimension
of a metal's surface often provides infornlation that corresponds to the
metal's strength. Fractal descriptions found immediate applications in
a series of problems connected to the properties of surfaces in contact
with one another. The contact between tire threads and concrete is
such a problem, and so is contact in machine joints, or electrical
contact. Contacts between surfaces have properties that tum out to
depend on the fractal quality of the bumps upon bumps upon bumps.
One simple but powerful consequence of the fractal geometry of
surfaces is that surfaces in contact do not touch everywhere. Even in a
rock under enormous pressure, at some sufficiently small scale it
becomes clear that gaps remain, allowing fluid to flow. It is why two
pieces of a broken teacup can never be rejoined, even though they
appear to fit together at some gross scale.
Size and duration, qualities that depend on scale, are qualities
that can help describe an object or classify it. A large earthquake is
just a scaled-up version of a small earthquake. That distinguishes
earthquakes from animals. A ten-inch animal must be structured quite
differently from a one-inch animal, and a one hundred-inch animal
needs a different structure still, if its bones are not to snap under the
increased mass. It is hard to break the habit of thinking of things in
terms of how big they are and how long they last. It happens that the
equations of fluid flow are in many contexts dimensionless, meaning
that they apply without regard to scale. Blood vessels, from aorta to
capillaries, form another kind of continuum, and the nature of their
branching if fractal. Just as the Koch curve squeezes a line of infinite
length into a small area, the circulatory system must organize a large
surface area into a limited volume. The fractal structure nature has
devised works so efficiently that, in most tissue, no cell is ever more

Chaos
39
than three or four cells away from a blood vessel. Yet the vessels and
blood take up little space, no more than about five percent of the body.
Typical human lungs pack in a surface bigger than a tennis court, but
anatomists are trained to look at one scale at a time, and thus the
language ofanatonly tends to obscure the unity across scales. For some
purposes categories prove useful, while for others they mislead. A
decade after Mandelbrot published his physiological speculations,
some
theoretical
biologists
began
to
find
fractal
organizations
controlling structures all through the body. The urinary collection
system proved fractal, as did the network of special fibers in the heart
that carry pulses of electrical current to the controlling muscles.
Mandelbrot's point is that the complications exist only in the context
oftraditional Euclidean geometry. DNA surely cannot specify the vast
number of bronchi, bronchioles, and alveoli, or the particular spatial
structure of the resulting tree, but it can specify a repeating process of
bifurcation and their development. Theoretical biologists argued that
understanding how such patterns were encoded and processed had
become a major challenge to biology. 19
Mathematics is full of channels and byways that seem to lead
nowhere in one era and become major areas of study in another. The
potential application of a piece of pure thought can never be predicted,
and that is why mathematicians value work in an artistic way, seeking
elegance and beauty as artists do. The term fractal came to stand for a
way of describing, calculating, and thinking about shapes that are
irregular and fragmented, jagged and broken up - shapes from the
crystalline curves of snowflakes to the discontinuous dust of galaxies.
Mandelbrot found his most enthusiastic acceptance among applied
scientists working with oil or rocks or metals, particularly in corporate
research centers. The structures that provided the key to nonlinear
dynamics proved to be fractal. The early sense of self-similarity as the
organizing principle
came
fronl
the
limitations
on
the
human
experience of scale. How else to imagine the very great and the very
small, the very fast and the very slow, but as an extension of the
known?20 This myth died hard even as the human vision was extended
by telescopes and microscopes. The first discoveries were realizations
that each new change in scale brought new phenomena and new kinds
of behavior, and scientists were beginning to talk in terms of theories
that used hierarchies of scales. In evolutionary biology it became clear
that a full theory would have to recognize patterns of development in
genes, in individual organisms, in species, and in families of species

40
Soft Logic
all at once. By the late twentieth century, in ways never before
conceivable, ranges of the incomprehensibly small and the unimag-
inably large became part of everyone's experience. As the culture
became familiar with photographs ofgalaxies and atoms, new kinds of
comparisons between large and small were inevitable - and some of
these were productive.21 Often the scientists drawn to fractal geometry
felt emotional parallels between their new mathematical aesthetic and
the changes in the arts during the second half ofthe twentieth century.
Architects no longer cared to build blockish skyscrapers like the
Seagram Building in New York, once much hailed and copied. To
Mandelbrot and his followers the reason was clear; simple shapes are
inhuman. They fail to resonate with the way nature organizes itself or
with the way human perception sees the world. Our feeling ofbeauty is
inspired by the harmonious arrangement of order and disorder as it
occurs in natural objects - in clouds, trees, mountain ranges or snow
crystals. To Mandelbrot, art that satisfied lacks scale, in the sense that
it contains important elements at all sizes. A Beaux-Arts paragon like
the Paris Opera has no scale because it has every scale, and an
observer seeing the building from any distance finds some detail that
draws the eye. The composition changes as one approaches and new
elements of the structure come into view.22 In ternls of aesthetic
values, the new mathematics of fractal geometry brought bland science
in tune with the peculiarly modern feeling for untamed, uncivilized,
undomesticated nature. A new-romantic trend was perceived not only
in the arts but also in science.
For most physicists, turbulence seemed almost unknowable.
Engineers have reliable techniques for calculated flow, as long as it
remains calm. The practical interest is usually one-sided; make
turbulence go away. When flow is smooth or laminar, small disturb-
ances die out, but past the onset ofturbulence, disturbances grow cata-
strophically. This onset - this transition - became a critical problem in
science. The onset of turbulence can even be seen and measured in
laboratory
experiments
but
its
nature
remains
obscure.
Even
supercomputers are close to helpless in the face of irregular fluid
motion.23 At each scale, as you look closer at a turbulent eddy, new
regions of calm come into view; thus, the convention of homogeneity
gives way to the assumption of intermittency. The intermittent picture,
when idealized somewhat, looks largely fractal, with intermixed
regions of roughness and smoothness ranging down from the large to
the small. The paradigm for how turbulence starts comes from Lev D.

Chaos
41
Landau's fluid dynamics. As new energy comes into the system, he
conjectured, new frequencies begin one at a time, each incompatible
with the last Physicists accepted that picture, but no one had any idea
how to predict when an increase in energy would create a new
frequency, or what the new frequency would be. There is no natural
deep theory for turbulence, and it is easy to see why turbulence resisted
analysis. The equations of fluid flow are nonlinear partial differential
equations, unsolvable except in special cases. Yet David Ruelle
worked out an abstract alternative to Landau's picture couched in the
terminology of Stephen Smale, with images of space as a pliable
material to be squeezed, stretched, and folded into shapes like
horseshoes. One advantage of thinking of states as points in space is
that it makes change easier to catch. A systenl where variables change
continuously up or down becomes a moving point, like a fly moving
around in a room. If some combinations of variables never occur, then
the scientist can simply imagine that part ofthe room is out ofbounds;
the fly never goes there. Spaces of four, five or more dimensions tax
the visual imagination of even the most agile biologist. Yet complex
systems have many independent variables, and at higher levels of
energy simulation the picture becomes quite dramatic; evidence of
complete disorder mixed with clear components of order, forming
shapes that suggest "islands" to the astronomers. Disorder was
channeled, it seemed, into patterns with some underlying common
theme.24
The idea ofunderlying unity and common form in nature had an
intrinsic appeal, but it had an also unfortunate history of inspiring
pseudoscientists and cranks. Much mathematical analysis and much
experience with real systems was needed to establish the power of the
scaling idea. There was a kind ofrelativity in which the position ofthe
observer, near or far, on the beach or in a satellite, affected the
measurement. As Mandelbrot had seen, the variation across scales was
not arbitrary; it followed rules. Information is stored in a plastic way,
allowing unexpected juxtapositions and leaps of the imagination. It is
possible that a system like the weather may never converge to an
average. Edward Lorenz recognized that the average too fluctuated
constantly, for when a parameter value was changed ever so slightly,
the average might change dramatically. The earth climate might never
readily settle into an equilibrium with average long-term behavior.25
An observer might see one kind of behavior over a very long time, yet
a completely different kind of behavior could be just as natural for the

42
Soft Logic
system. When order emerged, it suddenly seemed to have forgotten
what the original equation was. Something about these functions,
Feigenbaum realized, must be recursive, self-referential - the behavior
of the one guided by the behavior of another hidden inside it. Such
universality nleant that different systems would behave identically.
Feigenbaum was studying simple numerical functions but he believed
that his theory expressed a natural law about systems at the point of
transition between orderly and turbulent. The physical implication was
that real-world systems behave in some recognizable way, and
furthermore, that it would be recognizably the same. As nonlinear
science arose in odd comers of different disciplines, the flow of ideas
failed to follow the standard logic of historians. The emergence of
chaos as an autonomous entity was a story not only of new theories
and new discoveries but also ofthe belated understanding ofold ideas.
Scientists were biased by the customs of their disciplines or by the
accidental paths of their own educations. But Feigenbaum had
discovered the universality of fractal structures and created a theory to
explain it. This met with surprise, disbeliefand excitement. In the end,
in order to understand, you have to change gears; it requires a different
way of thinking about the problem.26 One has to look for different
ways ofhow the big issues relate to the small details. In one sense, art
is a theory about the way the world looks to human beings. What
artists have accomplished is realizing that there is only a small amount
ofstuffthat is important, and then managed to say what it is.
Nonlinearity can stabilize a. system no less than destabilize it.
Nonlinear feedback regulates motion, making it more robust. In the
presence of nonlinearity, a perturbation can feed on itself until it dies
away, and the system returns automatically to a stable state. Albert
Libchaber believed that biological systems use their nonlinearity as a
defense against disturbances such as noise. Flow was a Platonic idea,
assuming that change in systems reflected sonle reality independent of
the particular instant. Libchaber adopted Plato's sense that hidden
forms fill the universe. You can think of flow in many ways; flow in
economics or in history. First it may be laminal, then bifucatory to a
more complicated state, perhaps with oscillations; then it may be
chaotic.27 The universality of shapes, the similarity across scales, the
recursive power of flows within flows - all were just beyond reach of
the standard differential calculus approach to equations ofchange. But
that was not easy to see, for scientific problems are expressed in the
available scientific language. Libchaber and some other experimenters

Chaos
43
were convinced that dynamical shapes like leaves borrowed their form
from a not yet considered weaving of forces. Even when the flow itself
is past or invisible, the evidence of flow remains. As Theoder Schwenk
saw it, the rolling of eddies, the unfolding of organic forms, the
patterns of mountain ranges or of animal organs, all followed one
path. He argued by analogy, and his case finally came down to a
display of similarities. Apart form D'Arcy Thompson, not many
biologists had pursued the undeniable unity of living organisms (as
anticipated in Goethe's On the Transformation of Plants). Reduct-
ionism triumphed in nonlinear biology and everywhere else as well,
from evolution to medicine. How else to understand cells but to study
membranes and nuclei, ultimately proteins, enzymes, and chrom-
osomes? When astronomy and physics emerged as secular sciences, no
small part of the pain came from discarding arguments by design -
forward
looking teleology.
In
biology,
however,
Darwin frrmly
established teleology as the central mode of thinking about cause. An
adaptive explanation for the shape of an organism or the function of
an organ always looks not to its physical cause but to its fmal cause.
D'Arcy Thompson asked that biology remember physical cause as
well, mechanism and teleology together. Leaves come in just a few
shapes, and the shape of a leaf is not dictated by its function. 28 He
emphasized that neither accident nor purpose could explain the
striking universality of forms. Theorists adopted Feigenbaum's tech-
niques and found other mathematical routes to chaos, variants of
period doublings, such patterns as intermittancy and quasiperiodicity.
These
two
proved
universal
in
theory
and
experiment.
The
experimenters'
discoveries
set
in
motion
the
era
of computer
exploration; physicists discovered that computers produced the same
qualitative pictures as real experiments, and produced them millions of
times faster and more reliably. In 1980, a European group provided a
convincing mathematical explanation: dissipation deprives a complex
system ofmany conflicting notions, dramatically bringing the behavior
of many dimensions down to one.29 A computer model is just a set of
arbitrary rules chosen by programmers, whereas a real-world fluid,
even in a stripped-down millimeter cell, has the undeniable potential
for all the free, untrammeled motion of natural disorder. It has the
potential for surprise.30 It is hard to remember how easily nature can
confound an experimenter, and whenever a good physicist examines a
situation, he must wonder which bit of reality was left out, which
potential surprise was sidestepped.

44
Soft Logic
Many problems of abstract mathematics and real-world physics
tum out to create boundaries that are almost unimaginably complex;
magnified segments reveal a fractal structure, repeating the basic
pattern on smaller and smaller scales.31 The Mandelbrot set became a
kind of public emblem for chaos, appearing on the glossy covers of
conference
brochures
and
engineering
quarterlies,
forming
the
centerpiece of an exhibit of computer art that traveled internationally
in 1985 and 1986. Mandelbrot saw a seemingly smooth boundary
resolve itself into a chain of spirals like the tails of sea horses. The
activity of repeating a process indefinitely and asking whether the
result is infmite resembles feedback problems in the everyday world.
Unlike the traditional shapes of geometry,
circles, ellipses and
parabolas, the Mandelbrot set allows no shortcut. The only way to see
what kind of shape goes with a particular equation is by trial and
error, and the trial and error style brought the explorers of this new
terrain closer in spirit to Magellan than to Euclid. New geometries
always begin when someone changes a fundamental rule. Suppose a
space can be curved instead of flat, a geometer says, and the result is a
weird parody ofEuclid that provides precisely the right framework for
Einstein's relativity theory. Suppose space can have four dimensions,
or five, or six. Suppose the number expressing dimension can be a
fraction. Suppose shapes can be twisted, stretched, knotted. Or now,
suppose shapes can be defined, not by solving an equation once, but by
iterating it in a feedback loop.32 Standard geometry takes an equation
and asks for the set of numbers that satisfy it. But when a geometer
iterates an equation instead of solving it, the equation becomes a
process instead of a description, dynamic instead of static. A point is
plotted not when it satisfies an equation but when it produces a certain
kind of behavior; one behavior might be a steady state, another might
be a convergence to a periodic repetition of states. Another might be
an out-of-control case of infinity.33 With computers, trial and error
geometry becomes possible; a finer grid gives a sharper picture at the
expense of longer computation. Each foray deeper into the Mandelbrot
set brought new surprises, for no point ofthe set exactly resembles any
other part at any magnification.34
For H. O. Peitgen and P. Richter the Mandelbrot set held a
universe of ideas; a modem philosophy of art, a justification of the
new role of experimentation in mathematics, a way of bringing
complex systems before a large public. The subject is unstructured. In
a structured subject, it is known what is known and what is unknown,

Chaos
45
what people have already tried and doesn't lead anywhere. You have
to work on a problem that is known to be a problem, but a problem
that is known to be a problem must be hard, otherwise it would already
have been solved.35 Computer exploration was giving mathematics the
freedom to take a more natural path, Peitgen believed, the numerical
power of computation and the visual cues to intuition would suggest
promising avenues and spare mathematicians blind alleys. The people
who looked at such pictures saw that all the scales have similar
patterns, yet every scale was different. The study of fractal basin
boundaries was the study of systems that would reach one of several
nonchaotic final states, raising the question of how to predict which.
The boundary proves to be a fractal set, not necessarily self-similar,
but infinitely detailed. For some starting conditions, the outcome is
quite
predictable,
but
near
the
boundary,
prediction
becomes
impossible.36 Scientists studying fractal basin boundaries showed that
the border between calm and catastrophe could be far more complex
than anyone had dreamed. The system is determinate, but you can't
say what it's going to do next. The process of mixing - ubiquitous in
nature and industry, yet still poorly understood -proved ultimately
bound up with the mathematics of chaos. Some systems would create
disorder in one direction while remaining frrm and methodical in
another. It was as if the system had orderly impulse and a disorderly
one together, and they were decoupling.37 Information theory became a
handle for grasping how noise in the form
of random errors
intertwined with the flow of bits. It gave a way of predicting the
necessary capacity of con1nlunication lines or compact disks or any
technology that encoded language, sounds or images. It put teeth in
the crucial notion of"redundancy." In terms of Shannon's information
theory,
ordinary
language
contains
greater
than
fifty
percent
redundancy in the form of sounds or letters that are not strictly
necessary for carrying the message. Redundancy is a predictable
departure from the random. Part of the redundancy in ordinary
language lies in its meaning, and that part is hard to quantify,
depending as it does on people's shared knowledge of their language
and the world. Entropy is the name for the quality of systems that
increase under the Second Law of thermodynamics: mixing, disorder,
randomness. The concept is easier to grasp intuitively than to measure
in any real-life situation. Order intrudes in ways that defy any
straightforward counting algorithm. In the development of a person's
mind fron1 childhood, information is clearly not just accumulated but

46
Soft Logic
also generated - created from connections that were not there before.
An alternative approach would be to forget about the physics and look
only at the data, as though it were coming out of a black box. These
methods became critical to the application of chaos to real world
problems.38 Tiny random data remain spread out in an undefined
mass, but chaos - determinate and patterned - pulls the data into
visible shapes. Of all the possible patterns of disorder, nature favors
just a few. 39
You can make your model more complex and more faithful to
reality, or you can make it simper and easier to handle. To generalize
and abstract, mapmakers highlight such features as their clients
choose. Whatever their purpose, maps and models must simplify as
much as they mimic the world. In the 1980s, chaos brought to life a
new kind ofphysiology, built on the idea that mathematical tools could
help scientists understand global complex systems independent oflocal
detail. They studied chaos in respiratory disorders and psychiatrists
explored the multidimensional approach to the prescription of
antidepressant drugs. The normal cardiac regimen is periodic, but
there are many nonperiodic pathologies (like ventricular fibrillation)
that lead to the steady state of death. Researchers, using the tool of
chaos, began to discover that traditional cardiology was making the
wrong generalizations about irregular heart-beats, inadvertedly using
superficial classifications to obscure deep causes.40 Trial and error has
governed the design of artificial heart valves, and by changing the
patterns of fluid flow in the heart, artificial valves create areas of
turbulence and areas of stagnation. When blood stagnates, it forms
clots, and when clots break off and travel to the brain, they cause
strokes. Such clotting was the fatal barrier to making artificial hearts.
Instead of flowing over a rigid surface, like air over an airplane wing,
blood changes the heart's surface dynamically and nonlinearly.41 In
many cases, the onset of fibrillation remains mysterious; instead of
contracting and relaxing in a repetitive, periodic way, the heart's
muscle writhes uncoordinated, helpless to pump blood. Individual
muscle cells respond properly; the parts of the fibrillating heart seem
to be viorking as they should, yet the whole goes fatally awry. Fib-
rillation is a disorder in a complex system, just as mental disorders -
whether or not they have chemical roots. It appears that defibrillators
can be radically redesigned to improve their efficiency many times
over. Dynamical things were generally counter-intuitive, and the heart
is no exception, but physiologists have also begun to see chaos as

Chaos
47
health. It has long been understood that nonlinearity in feedback
processes serves to regulate and control, whereas a locking into a
single model can be enslavement, preventing a system from adapting
to change. When you reach equilibrium in biology, you are dead. A
physicist theory of ideas as regions with fuzzy boundaries, separate yet
overlapping, pulling like magnets, yet letting go, would naturally turn
to the image of a phase space with bases of attraction. Such models
seemed to have the right features of stability with instability, and
regions with changeable boundaries. The fractal structure offered the
kind of self-reflective quality that seems central to the mind's
functioning. Life and mind suck order from the sea ofdisorder.
It is generally assumed that complex behavior implies complex
causes. It was also taken for granted that different systems behave
differently. But now all that has changed; physicists, mathematicians,
biologists, and astronomers have created an alternative set of ideas.
Simple systems give rise to complex behavior, and complex systems
result in simple behavior. Most importantly, the laws of complexity
hold universally. More and nlore scientists realized that chaos offered
a fresh way to proceed with the old data. The general picture of
nonlinearity got a lot of people's attention - slowly at first, but
increasingly
nevertheless.
The
translation
from
mathematical
terminology is: behavior that produces information amplifies small
uncertainties but is not utterly unpredictable.42 Whatever their field,
scientists' task was to understand complexity itself. The Second Law
of thermodynamics is a rule from which there seems no appeal, but
this law has a life of its own in areas far removed from science. It has
been taking the blame for the disintegration of societies, economic
decline, the breakdown ofmanners, and other variants of the decadent
theme. The secondary, metaphorical incarnations of the Second Law
now seem especially misguided. In our world, complexity flourishes;
somehow as the universe ebbs towards its final equilibrium in the
featureless heat bath of maximum entropy, it manages to create
interesting structures.
Thoughtful physicists concerned with the
workings of thermodynamics realize how disturbing is the question of
a purposeless flow of energy producing life and consciousness.
Compounding the trouble is the slippery notion of entropy, reasonably
well-defined by thermodynamical purposes in terms of heat and
temperature, but devilishly hard to pin down as a measure of disorder.
Nature forms patters; some are orderly in space but disorderly in time,
others orderly in time but disorderly in space. Some patterns are

48
Soft Logic
fractal, exhibiting structures self-similar in scale; others give rise to
steady states or oscillating ones. The essence of chaos is a delicate
balance between forces of stability and forces of instability. The finest
scales proved crucial in the formation of snowflakes, for example, but
the laws of pattern formation are universal. Evolution is· chaos with
feedback, Joseph Ford says; the universe is randomness and dis-
sipation, but randomness with direction can produce surprising
complexity. And as E. Lorenz discovered, dissipation is an agent of
order.43 Ecology based on a sense of equilibrium seems doomed to fail.
The traditional models are betrayed by their linear bias. Although the
attractor is chaotic, some predictability becomes possible in light ofthe
deterministic nature of the model. The study of chaos reveals that it is
not featureless but structured in patterns ofinfmite complexity.
Notes
1 James Gleick~ Chaos, Making a New Science, New York~ NY: Penguin
Books, 1987, p. 3.
2 Ibid.~ p. 4.
3 Ibid., p. 5.
4 Ibid., p. 36.
5 Ibid., p. 41.
6 Ibid.~ p. 67.
7 Ibid., p. 73.
8 Ibid., p. 79.
9 Ibid., p. 80.
10 Ibid., p. 86.
11 Ibid., p. 92.
12 Ibid., p. 93.
13 Ibid., p. 94.
14 Ibid., p. 96.
15 Ibid.~ p. 97.
16 Ibid., p. 99
17 Ibid., p. 102.
18 Ibid., p. 104.
19 Ibid., p. 110.
20 Ibid., p. 115.
21 Ibid., p. 116.
22 Ibid., p. 117.

23 Ibid., p. 123.
24 Ibid., p. 152.
25 Ibid., p. 169.
26 Ibid., p. 185.
27 Ibid., p. 195.
28 Ibid., p. 202.
29 Ibid., p. 209.
30 Ibid., p. 210.
31 Ibid., p. 220.
32 Ibid., p. 226.
33 Ibid., p. 227.
34 Ibid., p. 228.
35 Ibid., p. 230.
36 Ibid., p. 235.
37 Ibid., p. 255.
38 Ibid., p. 264.
39 Ibid., p. 267.
40 Ibid., p. 281.
41 Ibid., p. 283.
42 Ibid., p. 306.
43 Ibid., p. 311.
Chaos
49

Chapter Four
The Rationality of Science
Amsterdamski points out that, in recent years, the landscape of
historical and philosophical interpretation ofthe evolution of scientific
knowledge has changed. Sociologists of knowledge analyze how
knowledge is produced within specific social settings, and the local
character ofthese studies raises the question of whether they can ever
produce generalizable epistemological claims. But there is some
theoretical, historically changing "background consensus," i.e., an
ideal ofscience, within which scientific research is done. 1 There is a
significant connection between the debates about the rationality of
science and those about the role of science in modem culture. The
question about the rationality ofscience and its development is not one
with which scientists engaged in the specific disciplines are concerned.
They know the "rules of the game," and rationality becomes
problematic only when scientists begin to reflect about the goals and
methods of these activities, and about their social functions. In the
methodology of science, its rationality is usually treated as un-
problematic; indeed science has, as a rule, been seen as the
embodiment of human rationality. It is, of course, true that philo-
sophers have long argued about the nature of this method (in philo-
sophical discourse the descriptive and the normative usually appear
together), but no one questioned the rationality of science. Even the
romantics, who were opposed to rationalism accepted science as the
bastion of rationality. Today, however, this has changed and the

52
Soft Logic
question of the rationality of science and its development has become
one of the most controversial topics in the philosophical reflection on
science.2 For the first time we are no longer certain that progress in
scientific knowledge and the technological progress linked with it are
indeed always beneficial. Technology's capacity to threaten the
continued existence of our species raises fundamental, moral, and
political questions. As Robert Oppenheimer said after the Con-
gressional hearings, "Physicists have now learned about sin." They
have ceased to occupy a privileged position in the world. The
prevailing accepted rules are themselves anlong the things that change
and require an explanation, and to explain them one has to appeal to
external, Le. sociological, historical, and psychological factors. Kuhn
points out that no methodology can provide criteria of choice among
competing theories.3 A thesis of the rationality of science in this sense
does not allow for changes in the ideal of science, and plays an
ideological role in defending the status quo. That is why the notion of
the rationality of science has itselfbecome problenlatic.
Amsterdamski argues that the concept ofrationality is not purely
epistemological and descriptive, but that it is historically relative and
evaluative. What we today consider to be science is rooted in types of
knowledge inherited from the past. There is no way to pinpoint when,
where, and how science began, and not because we lack sufficient
historical information. Rather, the root of the difficulty is that an
answer to this question always depends on an ideal of knowledge that
we accept. Those who treat ,science as a disinterested search for
universally valid rules will see its origins in· the cosmological and
philosophical investigations of the ancient Greeks. Those who see it
primarily as the ability to manipulate objects efficiently, may note its
similarity with magic and technology. Thus, whether we locate the
beginnings of science in the mathematical achievenlents of the
Babylonians, the philosophical and cosmological speculations of the
Greeks, or the mathematical and experimental models of Galileo - we
are always choosing a tradition. An accepted ideal of science
determines the answer to the question of where and how science
started, and decides what types of knowledge are to be considered
scientific. Such a classification is always normative, although every
such tradition usually wrongly assumes that its own ideal of science is
something obvious, unproblematic, and the only one possible. Thus,
despite
the
repeated
attempts
of methodologists
searching
for
universally valid criteria of demarcation, science can be distinguished

The Rationality ofScience
53
from other types of knowledge in a historically adequate manner only
conventionally and normatively. 1\10t everything that has ever been, or
might in the future be, considered science can be accomnlodated by
such
controversial definitions.
An
implicit assumption of some
normative idea of science is a necessary condition for the formulation
of all descriptive methodology. The question of whether other cultures
also have science depends on our acceptance of a given ideal of
scientific knowledge. Amsterdamski questions Kuhn's assumption that
the developed scientific models are at any given time governed by only
a single paradigm. The scientific revolution of the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries consisted not only of a number of discoveries
that radically modified the paradigms of astronomy (Copernicus,
Kepler, and Galileo), mechanics (Galileo and Newton), or chemistry
(Boyle and Lavoisier), but rather in the formation and institution-
alization of an altogether new scientific ideal, 'which made these
particular discoveries possible and which was fundamentally different
from the ideals that had guided research in antiquity and the Middle
Ages.
For Kuhn, science does not constitute a whole, but rather a col-
lection of various disciplines each defmed by its own paradigm.4 But
Amsterdamski
emphasizes
that
if modifications
of disciplinary
paradigms can occur without bringing about changes in the ideal of
science (as for example, the rejection of Cartesian in favor of New-
tonian physics), then the disruption of historical continuity in science
or the total collapse of consensus within a discipline occurs far less
frequently than Kuhn, and especially Feyerabend, suggest. One is no
longer justified in maintaining that a scientific revolution completely
destroys all possibilities of communication among those scientists who
accept the old paradigm and those who accept the new one. The
transition from one to the other is more in the nature of a conversion
to a new faith than the result of persuasion by rational argument. The
accepted ideal of science constitutes precisely this consensus, which
makes possible the conduct of rational discussion while a transition
from one paradigm to another is taking place.5 It is important to
realize that while changes from one descriptive paradigm to another
(local revolutions) are fairly frequent in science, changes in the ideal
of science (global revolutions) are rare. If one ignores the fact that the
development of knowledge is codetermined by socially accepted and
changing ideals, the history of science is presented as completely
autonomous and rational, and is explained in terms of an ahistorical

54
Soft Logic
"logic of development" or "rational method," or as the development of
an autonomous world of ideas and problems - ''world three," as
Popper has it.6 Whatever fails to comply with this logic is then
considered the result of extra-rational deviance or pathology. And as a
result, there is no common ground between the philosophy and the
sociology of science. But if the logic of science is a historic
phenomenon rather than a "necessity of reason," it explains why
certain rules for justifying claims will be considered rational, while
others will not. These rules cannot serve to demarcate science from
non-science once and for all, for they are accepted only on the basis of
a conceptual ideal of science. Both the received ideal of science and
the rules for pursuing science according to this ideal may become
subject to philosophical critique. Disputes among supporters of such
different systems are generally due to disagreements about basic
cultural values, which science is expected to realize. The ideal
determines which knowledge is considered scientific. The ancient
Greek ideal of science as certain knowledge (episteme) implied that
technological knowledge was not considered scientific, being neither
exact nor certain. As Alexandre Koyre convincingly argues, the
ancients did not have mathematical physics because they did not
consider it possible; they did not admit that precision applies to
terrestrial matter. 7 To create mathematical physics, it is necessary.to
believe that the book of nature is written in the language of straight
lines, circles, and triangles (Galileo), or that knowledge of the
sublunar world can be given the same constancy and precision as
knowledge of the heavens. The use of measuring instruments in
scientific investigations brought about a fundamental change in the
accepted image ofthe world.
The accepted ideal ofscientific knowledge constitutes a filter that
determines what research will be considered worthwhile, interesting,
and important. The range ofquestions formulated is always relative to
a given state of knowledge. Thus, Amsterdamski rejects Popper's
"world three," the world ofideas and problems. The logic ofa problem
situation specifies only the range of questions that can be posed, and
delineates the nunlber ofpossible directions for the further direction of
knowledge. If methodological rules are not historically invariant but
instead depend on an accepted ideal of science, then no methodology
can constitute a supra-historical means of distinguishing science from
other intellectual endeavors. Methodological rules turn out to be
inadequate because they do not cover everything that historically has

The Rationality ofScience
55
been considered science or that possibly might be considered science.
Popper's intuition about the goal of investigation or any socially
accepted ideal of science is neither eternal nor the only one possible.
He does not admit that the logic of scientific discovery may be
historically changing, or that it may be the result of a particular state
of culture; instead he presents it as a logical necessity. But under
changed social conditions science may well lose its autonomy.
Whether a given explanation will be considered adequate depends on
the accepted ideal ofscientific knowledge. An explanatory method that
appears adequate and rational in view of one ideal may be judged
unsatisfactory or even irrational from a different perspective. One
condition for resolving methodological disputes is a general consensus
that reflects a shared ideal of scientific knowledge. The development
of science from about 1700 to the 1870s was the realization of a
specific ideal, which turned out to be considerably different from that
of ancient or medieval science. The new science, as Bacon had said,
would equip man with new inventions, allowing hinl to control nature
and its forces. Such a science could overcome the ancient opposition
between episteme and techne, and incorporate both.8
But one need not assume that this advent of modem science was
inevitable. Anlsterdamski rejects the view that the emergence of
modem
science
was
due
to
an
abandoning
of philosophical
speculation. For while it paid lip service to radical empiricism, it was
practicing something quite different, as Feyerabend emphasizes.9 By
introducing such strange concepts as "momentary action
at a
distance," and by differentiating absolute time and space from relative
time and space that were only apparent, as well as by endowing the
whole of matter with characteristics such as gravitation, Newton was
not so much reporting on the experiments he had performed as
constructing a conceptual apparatus by means of which physical
experiments were henceforth to be interpreted. Newton's polemics
with the Cartesians and with Leibniz were no disagreements between
an empirical physicist and metaphysicians; rather they were a debate
between opposing philosophers of nature. What actually changed was
the very concept of experience by which scientists were attempting to
check their theoretical constructions with the facts, and it was this
change that allowed for the emergence of a new ideal of scientific
knowledge. 10 Phenomena are no longer explained by means of
everyday direct sensory experience, to what is visible,
but by
experiments, sometimes even thought experiments, which are used to

56
Soft Logic
investigate nature. This would be impossible without a questioning of
the credibility of common sense, for which everyday experience is
always the fmal authority. Instruments made it possible to study
empirically objects that previously could not have been observed.
Measuring instruments led to a separation of scientific knowledge
from common-sense knowledge, and this eliminated from science all
considerations of value and purpose. Instead of a world of objects
presented to the senses, science was dealing with abstract bodies
nloving in abstract geometrical space according to universal laws. The
world of sensual qualities accessible to direct perception was replaced
by signs and relations, open only to measurement. To hold that the
earth moves around the sun, common-sense experience had to be
disregarded, and it became necessary to accept that reality is not
necessary identical with what appears to our senses. In this matter
science was changing the idea of human rationality and its criteria. 11
The previous views now seem nonsensical as long as we remain
unaware of how our vision of the world and the ideal of science
associated with it differ from those of earlier visions we now reject.
The epistemological assumption that it is possible to engage in
cognition totally isolated from all external factors, and the related
notion ofthe autonomy ofscience as a social institution, reflected for a
time the actual historical situation of science in society. It eliminated
from science introspection, anthropomorphism and all ideas related to
value and purpose. It assumed a knowing subject who was capable
gradually to learn the truth that would be always and everywhere
valid, and science came to be regarded as precisely this kind of
knowledge. 12 It also brought about a strict separation between' the
realms of facts and that of values, which science could neither explain
in its own categories nor altogether ignore.
Scientific investigators became professionals only in the twen-
tieth century, reflecting a basic change in the role of science in society.
Up to that time science did not have an institutional patron, and
governments did not have a "science policy." Only in the last decades
of the nineteenth century did the demand for new theoretical
knowledge extend beyond the scientific community. The situation
where one wrote exclusively for one's peers began to change, as new
and powerful clients for such knowledge appeared on the scene.
Scientists increasingly became dependent on external support, and the
conviction that science has always a beneficial impact on social life
began also to be questioned. Science is no longer a source of

The Rationality ofScience
57
disinterested information and becomes the provider of goods and
services. The scientist beconles an expert whose function is not to
choose goals but to advise those in power how to achieve goals that
have already been chosen. It is realized that the biological features of
the knowing subject, the language he uses in articulating knowledge
and reporting on reality, the historical conditions under which science
is practiced, the culture of which it is a part, all play significant roles
that should not be ignored. If Popper treats science as a means of
biological adaptation, it cannot be said to be either true or false. As
various non-Euclidean geometries were discovered in the nineteenth
century, the Kantian notion that mathematics constitutes synthetic a
priori knowledge had to be abandoned, i.e., that only one such syntax
is possible. We can no longer say that in doing mathematics we are
reading the book ofnature as it was written. 13 But if all changes in our
knowledge can be presented as changes in the language used to
describe the world, everything that experience puts into question can
be saved by an appropriate linguistic interpretation. Such a view is
common to all versions ofradical empiricism in science. Ontologically
the subject belongs to the world he is investigating, while as a
knowing subject he treats himself as if he were an external observer
limited by no physical constraints and completely separate from the
world he is investigating. However, modem physics questions the
assumption of an autonomous subject; the theory of relativity pos-
tulates a temporal horizon beyond which the investigator cannot get
information, since all transfer of information takes time. These
possibilities are further restricted by Heisenberg's indeterminacy
principle; we always pay a price for obtaining information, as we
disturb the state of the system we are investigating. The subject's
knowledge is not independent of his physical characteristics, and
neither are his cognitive possibilities.
The theory of evolution and modern genetics likewise reveal a
biological basis to all human intellectual capacities. Sociology of
knowledge and anthropology have revealed the Eurocentric con-
ventions of nineteenth-century culture; and as a consequence this
culture can no longer be treated as the only possible or rational one.
The quite specific historical situation in which scientists lived and
worked until the last decades ofthe nineteenth century seemed to them
the only possible one. It made them believe that science is the only
disinterested search for truth rendered possible by a single method-
ology. As long as progress in knowledge and technology were treated

58
Soft Logic
as an unquestionable good, their ideal of science seemed unprob-
lematic. Thus, the victory of the Copernican theory was seen as the
triumph of the application ofthe rational method of investigation, not
as a revision of accepted criteria of rationality. It was believed that
Copernicus defended his theory by means of rational arguments
whereas, as a matter of fact, rational arguments tended to support his
opponents. 14 Thus, arguments against Copernicus, which appear
irrational to us today, were implicitly rational according to an ideal of
knowledge accepted at the time. It shows that the relevant ideal of
science is regarded as unproblematic since we are unaware of its
historical character. Thus, Popper in The Logic ofScientific Discovery
was convinced that modem science is the manifestation of human
rationality. By eliminating the knowing subject, he removes the
possibility that extra-rational, genetic, historical, or social conditions
have an impact on the development of scientific knowledge. 15
Revolutions in science bring about the replacement of one theory by
another, but these changes are always the result of the application of
the same rules by which choices are made anlong competing
theories. 16 The view that the criteria ofrationality are relative might be
taken to mean that the development ofknowledge cannot be treated as
a continuos process, and that there is no rational reconstruction ofthis
process even as an approximation. It was argued that the task of
philosophy is to study only the context ofjustification, and to disregard
all questions concerning the so-called context of discovery. Popper
defends the rationality of scientific development without getting
involved in the issue of to what extent the investigating subject can be
independent of all extralogical factors, and thus is able to formulate
statements that are valid always and everywhere. He claims that
although they are human products, the objects of the "third world" are
independent of man; they live their own life and evolve. Existing
theories give rise to new problems that are not intended or even
expected by their creators. And in this sense the third world transcends
its creators; it is at the same time a super-human world. 17
Amsterdamski points out, however, that in spite of some
important differences, Popper's claim of the ontological status of the
third world is remarkably similar to Plato's world of ideas and Hegel's
Objective Spirit. 18 To grant that culture affects physical reality through
us is not necessarily to assume the real existence of the world of
concepts and problems. The knowledge of the subject, as Popper now
admits, can never be free of various irrational and
extrc!:l],tiQI1~d_

The Rationality ofScience
59
constraints. The rational character of the development of science can
only be maintained by means of a complete elimination of the
investigating subject from epistemology. This permits Popper to argue
that the development of the third world can be fully rational despite
the fact that the knowing subjects are not fully rational as their
subjective knowledge is always affected by extra-rational factors. By
means of the distinction between the second (psychological) and the
third (logical) world, Popper separates the realm of biology from that
of logic. The way the third world functions is seen as a filter through
which the "natural selection" of ideas takes place. A rational
development of the third world is guaranteed by scientific criticism,
which is the cultural extension of the biological medium of natural
selection by trial and error. Objective knowledge is thus an improved
means of human adaption. 19 Such criticism is rational because it
allows for the elimination of errors and false beliefs without
eliminating the humans who hold them or make them. Error in the
animal world is usually fatal, whereas a human can correct his
opinions and survive. Rationality is thus ultimately grounded in
biological survival as scientific criticism is seen by Popper a cultural
extension of biological development. Such grounding of human
rationality in biology is also typical of the work of Piaget, Monod,
Konrad Lorenz, and Noam Chomsky, as well as in many attempts to
oppose historical relativism. Truth is made relative to species, and
scientific knowledge is seen as a tool facilitating the adaption of the
species to its environment. More recent studies prevented Popper to
hold the idea of a rational subject he had maintained in The Logic of
Scientific Discovery, and the source of these difficulties lies in the
ahistorial treatment of the concept of rationality. Even though
Amsterdamski finds Popper's ethics appealing, he does not believe
that it is possible to legitimize it by means of scientific theory, or that
the development of science provides such an unchanging model of
rational
attitude.20
Amsterdamski
emphasizes that
philosophical
problems cannot always be solved.
He rejects radical empiricism because no empirical fact can be
recognized independently of some prior theoretical views.
The
problem of choosing criteria for competing theories is identical with
the question of whether crucial experiments are possible in science.
Popper emphasized that conclusive verification is impossible but he
still believed in conclusive falsification. The logical asymmetry
between verification and falsification was the starting point for his

60
Soft Logic
doctrine of falsification in science. Subjecting a theory to the most
severe empirical tests constitutes the rationale of a scientific method
that becomes progressive by the elimination oferror. This method also
serves as the basis for a historical reconstruction of the process by
which we replace old theories by new ones. However, as Duhem points
out, testing an isolated hypotheses is impossible because there are
always some background assumptions that cannot be identified, and
that is why crucial experiments are impossible.21 It turns out that
falsification, as it actually takes place, is no more conclusive than
verification.22 Duhem's thesis was radicalized by Quine who points out
that a hypothesis can always be protected from falsification by the
introduction ofdifferent background assumptions and the modification
of background knowledge, and that these modifications might even
concern rules of reasoning. If we have to accept that there are no
rational rules for choosing among theories, then the development of
knowledge in this sense is not a rational process. Arguments that at
some point were considered conclusive later came to be regarded as
inconclusive, either because certain background assumptions were not
taken into account or because some possibilities of modifying the
theory had not been considered. Our knowledge is not transparent to
us, as some of our assumptions are taken to be obvious facts. Quine
holds that no statement in science is immune to revision; indeed
revision, even of the logical law of the excluded middle, has been
proposed as a means to sinlplify quantum mechanics.23 Our natural
tendency to disturb the total system as little as possible leads us to
focus our revisions upon specific statements. They seem to have a
sharper empirical reference than highly theoretical statements of
physics, or logic, or ontology, and the latter statements may be thought
of
as
relatively
centrally
located
within
the
total
network.
Amsterdamski concludes that since it is impossible to formulate
conditions for nontriviality, Quine's thesis remains undecided.24
Lakatos's methodology of research programs undermines, in
effect, the Popperian demarcation of science from nonscience.25 The
essential change from Popper's falsificationism comes with the idea
that as long as there is no theory that meets the condition of
"progressiveness," the previous theory is not to be considered falsified
even if many empirical facts that do not agree with it are known. In
cases of conflict between experience and theory, Lakatos offers theory
time to prove its mettle, and treats as rational all attempts to save the
theory in conformity with the basic assumptions ofthe program. There

The Rationality ofScience
61
is no way to establish how many unsuccessful attempts to save a
degenerating program are necessary before it becomes advisable to
abandon it. Even when there is already a competing research program,
there is always the possibility that the attempt to save the old program
will finally succeed, while the competing program faces degeneration.
Thus it turns out that the process of scientific development is not
altogether rational. According to this view, the methodology does not
specify specific selection criteria for choosing between competing
theories but merely indicates rational criteria for the investment of
resources in situations of risk. Discussions concerning the choice of
research programs will, in practice, be subject to quite different criteria
of rationality than those that are supported by methodology. They are
subject to criteria of rationality of the institutions making these
decisions.26 This
is precisely what
seems to be happening
in
contemporary science where claims concerning the choice of research
programs are subject to the rational criteria of "common sense" as
interpreted by the sponsoring institutions. It is no longer possible to
avoid sociological issues as science becomes part of these institutions
and their way of functioning. Scientists choosing between alternative
theories are guided by additional criteria such as theoretical simplicity,
precision, internal consistency, coherence with other accepted theories,
geniality, fruitfulness, and operational and practical utility. But it is
very doubtful whether any of these additional criteria can be
formulated unequivocally. It is certainly not possible to do so with
criteria such as simplicity, generality, or theoretical fruitfulness. 27 It is
equally impossible to rely on all these criteria together, as they may
come into conflict with one another. The choice ofthe simplest theory,
even if it were possible to formulate unambiguous criteria for
simplicity, need not necessarily mean the choice ofthe most fruitful or
the most general theory. We would still have to choose some criteria
over others, and no methodology would be able to justify any such
hierarchy ofcriteria.28
Amsterdamski agrees with Kuhn that in choosing among theories
scientists
rely
on
certain
values
rather
than
on
unequivocal
methodological criteria, and that these values can conflict with one
another.29 A demand for precision is characteristic only of some areas
in modem science, and it does not apply equally to all disciplines. It is
wrongly assumed that the development of scientific knowledge must
either take place according to unchangeable methodological rules or
that we have to admit, with Feyerabend, that "science is an essentially

62
Soft Logic
anarchistic enterprise."30 Science is seen by Feyerabend as a kind of
ideology, and since,the methodological norms change historically, it is
perhaps an illusion to believe in scientific progress. A critique of
theories in the light of accepted facts is not sufficient because these
facts are already fashioned by accepted theories that might require
revision. Radical empiricism wrongly assumes the existence of an
observation language that is neutral with respect to all theories. No
fragment ofour knowledge can be conclusively tested in isolation, and
we are unable to account for all the assumptions that are in fact part of
the testing procedure. Feyerabend emphasizes that we need a means of
criticizing the accepted theory that goes beyond the criteria provided
by the comparison ofthat theory with the facts. 3! An alternative theory
might provide such a means, for it is not the experiment alone but
theories alternative to the accepted ones - together with alternative
ontological
assumptions
implicit
in
the
accepted
observational
language - which can and should constitute the real basis for criticism.
A good empiricist must be a critical and inventive metaphysician.32 In
cases where we do not take such alternative points of view into
account, the success ofa theory, just as the success ofa myth, is simply
the construct ofits adherents.33
But Amsterdamski points out that no individual can consistently
and exhaustively implement the norms of theoretical pluralism.
Feyerabend believes that all individuals should at least strive to such a
position, for what the individual alone cannot accomplish, can be
attained by the scientific comnlunity. Moreover, the new theory may be
unable to explain everything that its predecessor explained. Such
partially or entirely incommensurable theories speak untranslatable (or
not fully translatable) languages, and there is consequently no fmal
criterion on the basis of which it would be possible to say that the
empirical content of the new theory is richer. If the conditions of the
invariance of meaning are not met, then we cannot say that
development ofknowledge takes place according to any set ofmethod-
ological rules. In this case, there is no formal criterion for theory
choice; science becomes no better than myth, and the replacement of
one theory by another incommensurable with it is the result of
persuasion and propaganda rather than rational argument.34 When a
new theory that is supposed to solve the enlergent difficulties ofthe old
theory is being formulated for the first time, it is usually unable to deal
even with the empirical facts that its predecessor explained quite well.
But Amsterdamski argues against Feyerabend that at least one

The Rationality ofScience
63
negative criterion always functions in science: the accomplishments of
preceding theories cannot simply be thrown out or invalidated for no
reason. The development of science is not a continuous process, but a
new theory must nevertheless somehow assimilate the accomplish-
ments of its predecessors. Lack of accumulative growth is a break with
all tradition: a process that is discontinuous in one respect nlay be
continuos in another. No revolution, not even the most radical one,
either in science or in social life, can ever remake the world from
scratch, as it were. But for this, the history of science would be a series
of completely independent episodes. Thus, every new theory faces the
problem of interpretation and of assimilation of results achieved in a
given discipline by its predecessors. Some "facts" can be disqualified,
but until this
has
happened,
they remain
facts.
There
is no
development in science without some inheritance of tradition, even if
such a tradition is treated selectively.35 Feyerabend's conclusion that
anything goes in science follows only from a rejection of the principle
of correspondence even in its weaker sense. But although he denied
that the process of scientific development is not rational in the way in
which his opponents believed it to be, he agrees with them that
increasing the empirical content of science is something we should
strive for, and that science, unlike mythology, ideology, or magic, is
able to realize this. Yet he rejects a philosophy that treats tech-
nological progress as the highest value.
Amsterdamski points out that a radical pluralism as advocated by
Feyerabend would destroy the consensus that renders a tolerant society
possible. Even if science is only one thread in our culture, and not the
dominant one, the question of its rationality addresses the issue of the
kind of science we need today, and not the question of whether or not
we need science at all.36 There is a difference between science and
politics, although there is no privileged position in which we do not
have to deal with disturbing factors. From Bacon to Descartes, to
Camap and Popper, the notion of the knowing subject has produced a
belief in scientific method that was supposed to be universally valid. It
also served as the philosophical justification for the authority of
science, its autonomy from philosophy, religion, and politics, as well
as its institutional independence. But society became increasingly
interested in the development of science as a result of its growing
importance in practical matters. In both the natural and the social
sciences, the knowing subject could no longer be treated as residing
outside the world he is investigating. Thus, his autonomy is effectively

64
Soft Logic
questioned not only in physics, biology, and neurophysiology, but also
in linguistics, cultural anthropology, sociology of knowledge and the
history of science and, of course, philosophy. The great achievements
of contemporary science - Einstein's theory of relativity, Heisenberg's
principle of indeterminacy, the Godel theorems - all seem to show that
the more we know about ourselves and about how we come to know
anything, the more difficult it is to believe that our knowledge is
independent of our biological makeup, the specific functions of our
brains, the language we use, the culture we inherit, and the social
institutions in which we live.37 The background consensus in science
is not a manifestation of incremental human rationality since it is not
historically stable, but it does reflect our human interest to find the
truth.
Notes
1 Stefan Amsterdamski, Between History and Method, Disputes about
the Rationality ofScience, Dordrecht/Boston/London: Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 1992, p. viii.
2 Ibid., p. 3.
3 Thomas S. Kuhn, The Structure ofScientific Revolutions, Chicago, IL:
University ofChicago Press, 1970.
4 Thonlas S. Kuhn, The Essential Tension, Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Presss, 1977.
5 Amsterdamski, Between History and Method, p. 16.
6 Karl, R. Popper, Objective Knowledge, Oxford: Claredon Press, 1972.
7 Alexandre Koyre, Etudes d'histoire de la pensee philosophique, Paris:
Colin, 1961, pp. 312-13.
8 Amsterdamski, Between History and Method, p., 47.
9 Paul K. Feyerabend, "Problems ofEmpiricisnl," Part I, in R. G.
Colodny (ed.), Beyond the Edge ofCertainty, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Princeton
Hall, 1956, p. 154.
10 Amsterdamski, Between History and Method, p. 47.
11 Ibid., p. 50.
12 Ibid., p. 56.'
13 Ibid., p. 87.
14 Alexandre Koyre, Etudes Galileenes, Paris: Hermmm, 1940, pp. 166-
171.

The Rationality ofScience
65
15 Karl R. Popper, Objective Knowledge; also, his Unended Quest, La
Salle, n: Open Court, 1976.
16 Amsterdamski, Between History and Method, p. 107.
17 Popper, Objective Knowledge, p. 159.
18 Amsterdamski, Between History and Method, p. 113.
19 Ibid., p. Ill.
20 Ibid., p. 121.
21 Pierre Duhem, The Aim and Structure ofPhysical Theory, Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1954, p. 187.
22 Amsterdamski, Between History and Method, p. 126.
23 W. V. Quine, From a Logical Point of View, New York, NY: Harper
& Row, 1961, p. 43.
24 Amsterdamski, Between History and Method, p. 138.
25 Imre Lakatos, "Falsification and the Methodology of Scientific
Research Programmes," in The Methodology ofScientific Research
Programmes. Philosophical Papers, vol. 1, Cambridge, MA: Cambridge
University Press, 1978, p. 93.
26 Amsterdamski, Between History and Method, p. 150.
27 Ibid., p. 154.
28 Ibid.
29 Kuhn, The Essential Tension, ch. 13.
30 Paul K. Feyerabend, Agianst Method: Outline ofan Anarchistic
Theory ofMethod, London:NLB, 1975, p. 10.
31 Paul K. Feyerabend, "How to be a Good Empiricist: A Plea for
Tolerance in Matters Epistemological," Philosphy ofScience, The Delaware
Seminar, vol. 2, New York, NY: Wiley, Interscience, 1963, p. 8.
32 Ibid., p. 37.
33 Amsterdamski, Between History and Method, p. 159.
34 Paul K. Feyerabend, "Consolation for a Specialist, " Problems of
Empiricism, vol. 2, Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press, 1981; see
also his "In Defense ofAristotle: Comments on the Conditions ofContent
Increase," in Progress and Rationality in Science, eds. Gerard Radnitzky and
Gunnar Anderson, Dordrecht: Reidel, 1978.
35 Amsterdamski, Between History and Method, p. 170.
36 Ibid., p. 176.
37 Ibid., 183.

Chapter Five
Limits of Language
Following Heidegger's lead, both Gadamer and Derrida deny the
possibility of a transcendental language-free standpoint for human
understanding. And both, like Heidegger, regard the relationship to
language as the primary philosophical issue, seeing language as the
sense of our finitude, the place where we encounter the limits of our
understanding.! However, their respective development of Heidegger's
position is fundan1entally different. For Gadamer, language is living
speech in the medium of dialogue, whereas Derrida claims that the
meanings generated by language always exceed our
intentions.
Language is presumed by him to be already writing, and the spoken
word an already lllterpreted sign, infiltrated by nonsense, whose
otherness lurks within meaning. Thus, for any particular concept,
there may not be the possibility ofdeciding fro01 among the competing
meanings one that is true and authoritative.2 In Gadamer, this leads to
an emphasis on the authority and truth of texts. In Derrida, on the
other hand, there is an underscoring of the irreducible equivocation
and undecidability of meaning, even apparently toward questioning
the concept of meaning itself3 On this basis, hermeneutics and
deconstruction seem to offer us extremely different views of language.
But in spite oftheir differences, they also have a common ground: both
Gadamer's philosophical hermeneutics and Derrida's deconstruction
present a significant challenge to the metaphysics of modernity whose
assumptions continue to dominate not only a good deal of thinking
within philosophy, but also within other interpreting disciplines such

68
Soft Logic
as literary criticism, theology, and the social sciences. We are not the
ones "in charge" of language, Gadamer and Derrida agree. Gadamer,
however, conceives the original phenomenon of language as dialogue,
and this entails a hermeneutical reorientation of dialectics. Derrida, on
his part, questions Gadamer's claim that hermeneutics is independent
of metaphysics; he calls attention to something that Gadamer takes for
granted, namely the willingness ofeach partner in a conversation to be
open to what the other has to say. He claims that even the later
Heidegger has
not really broken
through
the
logocentrism
metaphysics, for insofar as Heidegger asks about the essence of truth
or the meaning of Being, he still speaks the language of metaphysics
that looks upon meaning as something out there to be discovered.
When Gadamer wrote "Being which can be understood is language,"4
what really was implied is that it can never be completely understood.
The ideal of scientific knowledge that modem science follows
originated in a model of nature mathematically ordered (a model that
was fITst developed by Galileo in his mechanics). In this way natural
language lost its primacy, even though it did retain its own manner
speaking. A consequence of this was that in modern logic and the
theory of science the model of language was replaced by a model
universal notation. Both the Continental and the Anglo-American
tradition demonstrate the inevitability of the linguistic medium for
understanding, and as a consequence, the ideal of an ultimate
grounding over which apriorism and empiricism fought, loses its
credibility. Language is a domain that we cannot circumvent and in
which all consciousness and all knowledge articulates itself This is
how the concept of interpretation has become crucial, and starting
with Nietzsche, how it became a challenge to all positivism. It was he
who raised the radical question whether what we take as given is not
after all merely the result of interpretation. The faith in agreed-upon
observation-statements did not last long even in the Vienna Circle,
because it turned out that in the natural sciences knowledge cannot
avoid the heuristic implications, that the so-called given cannot be
separated from interpretation.5 Gadamer emphasizes that only in the
light of interpretation does something become a "fact," and that
as part of the process of interpretation can we legitimately even speak
of observation.6 Only when the process of understanding is disrupted,
that is, when understanding does not succeed, are questions asked
about the wording ofthe text. Whereas in living conversation one tries
to reach understanding through the give-and-take of discussion and

Limits ofLanguage
69
accompanies it with information and gesture, in writing, the openness
that is implied in seeking the words cannot be communicated.
Gadamer nevertheless maintains that the hermeneutical problem is
basically the same for oral and written discourse. Interpretation of a
text is no longer nlerely a means of getting back to an original
expression of something. The multiplicity of meanings found in word-
plays represents the deepest form in which speculative thinking comes
to appearance, a thinking that explores judgments that oppose each
other. Relations of meaning are recognized, even if vague and
fragmentary, which sets limits to all discourse about rules and
prescriptions when one is dealing with actual speaking.
In his reply to Derrida, Gadamer denies that the effect of under-
standing has anything to do with metaphysics or with the Kantian
concept of a good will. He insists that whoever opens his mouth wants
to be understood, otherwise he would neither speak nor write. Derrida,
however, questions this assumed total commitment to consensus when
we are trying to understand something. We never have the experience
ofbeing perfectly understood since the absence ofa common language
prevents a dialogue in Gadamer's sense from taking place. Indeed both
Gadamer and Derrida stick to their own language. The issue of
philosophical thinking for Derrida is not something that language can
put into words. Thus, he would agree with Gadamer that hermeneutics
and deconstruction do not stand for opposing positions, not because
they have so much in common but because they develop in different
directions. There cannot be a "ground" for deconstruction, since it is
not a set of ideas forming a philosophical position to begin with.7 ·
Derrida's non-engagement with Gadamer could thus be a refusal to
affirm the possibility not of dialogue itself but rather what Gadamer
perceives as the necessary condition for dialogue: speaking only one
common language.
Dallmayr points out that
interpretation has
emerged as a far-from-straightforward or unilinear enterprise. In large
measure the opposition between hermeneutics and deconstruction has
tended to amount to little more than coexistence without contact or
mutual agreement.s Whereas Gadamer's Truth and Method nlay be
said to integrate hermeneutics with existential analysis (as outlined by
Heidegger's Being and Time), Derrida pursues themes in Heidegger's
later work, where notions like "meaning" or "being" are already
problematic (though hardly abandoned). Behind these seemingly
esoteric questions of textual reading and exegesis, broader issues of a
practical political sort can be seen to emerge. Among other things, the

70
Soft Logic
Gadamer-Derrida exchange concerns political communication and
interaction appropriate to our "global city" or emerging cosmopolis.
Dallmayr points out that if there is a central focus or target to
Derrida's deconstruction, it is the notion of an unfolding meaning or
continuity of understanding. This target furnishes the critical impulse
in all of Derrida's writings and, in particular, his assessment of
Nietzsche. Spurs, subtitled Nietzsche's Styles, is an attack on the
search for continuous meaning, or what Derrida calls "onto-hermen-
eutics." Contrary to an essentialist ontology, and to a hermeneutics
wedded to stable meanings, there is for Derrida no such thing as the
essence of something (e.g., the essence of ''woman''), and that is why
he questions Heidegger's exegesis, his attempt to find a meaning or
the meaning of Nietzsche's writings. What surely has surfaced in his
view, is the multidimesionality ofthe issues at stake. Both in the Paris
exchange between Gadamer and Derrida, and in Truth and Method, a
crucial ambivalence concerns the role of "rupture" or transfonnative
change, and the relationship between continuity and discontinuity. In
contrast to the gradual transformation leading from one point to the
next, the transformation occurring in artworks is said to imply that
something turns suddenly and as a whole into something else.
Comments of this kind nevertheless do .not prevent Gadamer in the
end from reaffirming what he takes to be the inevitable primacy of
understanding or "hermeneutical consciousness." The question clearly
affects the status and range of hermeneutics for, needless to say,
hermeneutics
cannot
supply the
scope
and
possible
limits
of
understanding. In Truth and Method, Gadamer admits that we do not
have a standpoint that would allow us to see what limits and
conditions us. Deconstruction, by contrast, pinpoints the limits of an
intentional or existential hermeneutics - limits not externally imposed
but endemic to the endeavor of understanding itself: Dallmayr
criticizes a certain aloofness or nonengagement in Derrida's thought,
his tendency not to engage in traditional philosophy or divergent
views, but rather to circumvent and elude them. However, as he
himself realized in one of his earlier writings, the step "beyond" or
"outside" philosophy is much more difficult to take than is usually
imagined.9 There is no such thing as truth per se since truth is plural,
but even variegated truth is truth of some sort, and equally difficult is
the escape form "being." Contrary to Heidegger, Derrida discovers a
varied and refracted character in Nietzsche's elements. In seeking to
escape metaphysics, Spurs presents all traditional categories as

Limits ofLanguage
71
basically exchangeable or undecideable - including truth and non-
truth, meaning and non-meaning, being and nothingness - and by
implication, good and evil. It is here that Derrida's key notion of
difJerance converts into indifference, non-engagement and indecision.
By stressing rupture and radical otherness, Derrida seeks to dislodge
.and uproot the inquirer's comfortable self-identity, while his insistence
on incommensurability and non-understanding encourages mutual
disengagement
Gadamer shares with Derrida the conviction that a text is no
longer dependent on the author's intentions. He, too, holds that
understanding is always understanding differently (Andersverstehen).
What is pushed aside or dislocated when my word reaches another
person, and especially when a text reaches its reader, can never be
fixed in a rigid identity. For Gadamer, understanding nleans that one
is capable of stepping into the place of the other in order to say what
one has understood. Derrida, on the other hand, takes these to be
logocentric illusions, which even Heidegger failed to escape, as his
Nietzsche
interpretation
reveals.
Derrida's
misgivings
about
Gadamer's hermeneutics are that for all his efforts to recognize
otherness, Gadanler still concedes too nluch to reciprocal under-
standing and mutual agreement. Language, for Gadamer is always
what we speak to others, even though we are all familiar with how
difficult it is to have a conversation with someone when each speaks
his own language, and both only to some degree understand the
language of the other. 10 Gadanler is convinced that it is our historical
fate in the West to speak the language of concepts, and he reminds us
that this separation of poetry from thinking is what has made science
possible. He simply cannot see how - for either Nietzsche or Derrida
deconstruction can mean the repudiation of this heritage. 11 Gadamer
notices that Heidegger's breakthrough was achieved at almost the
same time the "linguistic tum" got under way in Anglo-American
philosophy. Before that, the role of language in philosophy had been
largely ignored. But Heidegger continued to wrestle with metaphysics
because if one gets back to the beginning, one becomes aware that
from the start one could have gone into a different direction, as
Eastern thought has done. This might well have been due to the
circumstance that
no
grammatical
construction
of subject
and
predicate was available to lead Eastern thought into the metaphysics of
substance and accident. It is consequently not surprising to find in
Heidegger's going back to the beginning of philosophy a fascination

72
Soft Logic
with Eastern thought. But language, and especially the basic structure
common to all languages in one's culture, are not easily circumvented.
What we mean by the language of metaphysics is that certain
conceptual formulation have imposed themselves on every language of
present-day speech communities.
In scientific and philosophical
discourse we call this the role of terminology, even though in
philosophy there are no generally accessible, that is to say, verifiable,
realms of experience, designated by prearranged terminology. In
philosophy, such concept words are never completely separate from
the semantic field in which they attain their full meaning. There is no
"language of metaphysics," there is only a metaphysical coinage of
concepts that have been lifted from common speech. Such coinage of
concepts may, as in the case of Aristotelian logic and ontology,
establish a fixed conceptual tradition, and in this manner lead to
alienation from living language. According to Gadamer, the logic of
question and answer opens up a dimension of communicative
understanding that goes beyond linguistically fixed assertion, and so
also
beyond
any all-encompassing
synthesis.
His
philosophical
hermeneutics, therefore, pays particular attention to the speculative
unity between the said and the unsaid. Contrary to Derrida, Gadamer
is convinced that the principle of deconstruction involves something
quite similar to what he himself is doing, since in carrying out what he
calls ecriture, Derrida, too, is trying to supersede the metaphysical
realm of meaning that governs words. Like Heidegger, Derrida
immerses himself in the mysterious multiplicity lodged in the word
and in the diversity of its meanings; in the indeterminate potential of
its differentiation of meaning. Gadamer, however, emphasizes that
whoever wants to take deconstruction
seriously and
insist
on
difference, stands at the beginning ofconversation, not at its end. 12
Gadamer rejects the accusation that either Heidegger or his own
philosophical hermeneutics can be accused of logocentrism in the
sense found in Derrida's critique of Husser!.l3 From the very
beginning, Heidegger sought to understand himself in terms of his
positive attitude to Christian faith, and this religious impulse led him
to criticize the Greek concept of being from the standpoint of
temporality. Futurity, not presence, characterizes the being of Dasein.
Like Kierkegaard, Heidegger insists that one must free oneself from
understanding only "at a distance," and this is how Gadamer made
dialogue central to understanding. Conversation defines itselfprecisely
by the fact that the essence of understanding and agreement are not to

Limits ofLanguage
73
be found in intended meaning. But in Gadamer's view, this does not
require any return to "ecriture" or writing, for writing is always
intended to be read. Gadamer maintains that one cannot read what is
written without understanding it,14 even though one can, of course,
recite Latin or Hebrew text in prayer without understanding the
language. Thus, Gadamer's hermeneutics is really the art of grasping
what someone has intended to say. He seeks to show that when it
comes to poetry or other literary arts, not the word, nor the sentence,
nor the discourse refers back to the intention of the author. Just as
conversation gets its illumination from the conversational situation, so
too, such a situative moment holds for all thinking. Even assertion
must be understood as the answer to a question, if it is to be
understood at all. The encounter between Gadamer and Derrida is not
just a matter of exposing arguments because, for any confrontation to
take place, one needs to have at one's disposal a fairly well-defined
common ground. Whereas Gadamer defends a unitary concept of
understanding, Derrida considers such linlits as ''philosophemes,''
themselves susceptible to deconstruction. Under such conditions, all
that remains is to observe how the hermeneutical "good will" actually
functions, and the Paris encounter between Gadamer and Derrida can
serve as an opportunity to do this. Gadamer bestows an ontological
dignity on prejudice, and that is how the prejudices of the individual,
rather than his judgments, constitute the historical reality of his
being. I5 But this also inlplies that prejudices should be dealt with on
the basis of a distinction between what is "legitimate" and "illegit-
inlate," and that ultimately some law can operate like a sieve to
separate one from the other. I6 Frank also emphasizes that disputants
must relate themselves to some issue, for otherwise they are not
disputing with each other but just expressing a variety of judgments.
The epistemological subject is no longer autononlOUS but acquires his
self-understanding in a semiotic context. Essentially deconstruction
and hermeneutics are philosophies of language; they realize that
conversation cannot be controlled and that the meanings on which we
agree need not be identical.
Until the mid-eighteenth century, exegesis (Auslegung) did not
play any role in relating forms of knowledge to language. It was taken
for granted that language rendered truth present as a logical form or as
a synthetic judgment related directly to facts. Thus, rational speech
(which by its nature is universal, true, and enlightening) was con-
sidered inherent in factual speech, and the problem of reaching

74
Soft Logic
agreement simply did not arise. Being a preestablished harmony,
grammatically correct speech became an immediate and reliable
representation of logically and correctly combined "ideas" (Vorstel-
lungen). All this changed with the Romantic age, for now a narrowed-
down community ofthought turned into an idealized abstraction. As a
consequence, language was seen as no more than a changeable
situation in the conversation of individuals communicating with each
other. There is no language as such, only the concreteness of real
conversation, and such interactive speaking not only confers validity
on language as a social fact but also imposes limits on it. What has
been called the "linguistic tum" in philosophy, seeks to replace the
world interpreted by the concept of reason (as it is represented in
universal grammar for the purpose ofcommunication) by the model of
a linguistic "code" (of grammar, of language game, of language
system, of structure, of evolutionary act, of consciousness formed by
tradition, etc.). As a consequence, individual occurrences of structured
speech are treated as special cases of a general rule. Scientific
linguistics presupposes that language events are subject to laws that
apply to systenls of convention or tradition. Gadamer, by contrast,
holds that conversation is not a representation of "truth" subsiding
above or beyond itself, but that the realization of truth resides in the
process of fusing two horizons - that of truth and that of tradition.
Meaning arises in the reciprocity of an agreement in understanding
that cannot be anticipated. Gadamer thus shares with Derrida the view
that self-consciousness presupposes an articulated world reflected in
tradition or symbolic order.
Derrida, however, questions John Searle's view that in a funct-
ioning grammar every representation of a sign is necessarily the
repetition of the self-same (Selbigen). There is, says Derrida, no
preestablished self-presence; indeed strictly speaking, the author is
never co-present with what he writes. Derrida speaks ofthe "re-mark,"
that is, of the constant possibility of the speaker/author/reader/
interpreter placing a new emphasis on the meaning of a word, a
sentence, a text, or a culture. 17 The sign that is repeated cannot
guarantee its identity, and the identity of a term can only be assumed
through a condition of closure and the invariability of the system.
Conversations are always transformations of other and earlier con-
versations, just as signs are always transformations ofother and earlier
signs. This is why Derrida draws back from Gadamer's eagerness for
conversation.
Gadamer emphasizes that we
are accustomed to

Limits ofLanguage
75
understand and to claim understanding; we are always presupposing
that there is something understandable. On the other hand, for
Derrida, following Nietzsche, understanding is the transition to what
is akin to one's own self; understanding appropriates. Gadamer
identifies "being" with what can be understood as language, and
implicit in this is also that which] can never be completely under-
stoOd. 18 What we find happening in language is not a mere reification
(Fixierung) of intended meaning, but an endeavor that routinely
transforms itself: or rather a continually recurring temptation to
engage oneself in something or to become involved with someone. 19
Derrida agrees with Gadamer in interpreting Nietzsche's "will to
power" as the impossibility of communicating and, therefore, of true
understanding, for it wills only to annex and appropriate the other.
Gadamer's ostensible "good will" to reach a comnlensurate under-
standing is, in Derrida's view, only a delusion. Understanding is
invariably imagining the other into one's own world-picture whose
coherence has been disturbed by the other. The presupposition of a
common understanding is, on this view, a means ofmaking one's own
understanding prevail. That there remains sonlething to be understood
constitutes, on the view of Derrida, a metaphysical interpretation of
the process ofunderstanding.
Thus, Derrida interprets Gadamer quite differently from the way
he wants to be understood.
Gadamer
implicitly suggests that
understanding is a progressive linear process leading to intelligibility.
Now, logically Derrida cannot wish to contest Gadanler because real
understanding is considered by him to be impossible anyway. He holds
that when using general concepts, one is always clearly following a
certain scheme ofunderstanding, and this means that one incorporates
or assimilates the other to oneselt:20 It was Nietzsche who first
recognized that metaphysics resides in language, and not primarily in
what one thinks and says in language. This is the deeper reason why
metaphysics resists "overcoming"
in the manner of Heidegger.
Language does not pernlit anything to be either thought or said that, as
Gadamer alleges, has nothing to do with metaphysics. The real
injustice towards the other, according to Nietzsche, does not reside in
the fact that one does not wish to understand him, but rather in the fact
that one must understand him in the only way one can. That is, one
invariably thinks about the other in concepts that occur to oneself: no
nlatter how fair one is trying to be the other. And this is something
that cannot be otherwise, for even Gadamer says that he "cannot

76
Soft Logic
imagine" that Derrida really means what he says?l So Derrida
concludes that "good will" to understand the other not only is useless,
but that speaking about it hides the fact that by using the concept of
"will" one is already assuming sonlething that in reality is not there,
not given (was es nicht gibt): namely a will common to all. The issue
between Gadamer and Derrida is whether even with good will there
can be true understanding. The presupposition here is that there exists
an objective truth unknown to us, so that it is precisely good will that
holds us together to seek it. But in some cases one refuses to take part
in certain discourses, and that means that under these circumstances
one does not want to be understood. The concept of interpretation is
restricted to situations about which a clear set of goals and a
rationality that corresponds to them are already agreed upon. Derrida's
deconstruction does not deem to be a position as such; it merely directs
our attention to what is unavoidably positional and metaphysical. That
is how he identifies the logocentrism of Gadamer who presupposes an
already existing community as an essential condition of under-
standing. Derrida emphasizes that whether such conditions really are
given must always first be shown. However, in the very drawing of a
boundary between what is comprehensible and incomprehensible,
Derrida, too, elicits the distinction between what is "essential" and
what is "inessential."
"Truth and Method" and "Text and Interpretation" are precisely
what hermeneutics and deconstruction have in common. For decon-
strllction, the text is everything and there is nothing outside the text.
But the concept of "text" is no longer simple and unproblematic once
the search for principles that would allow one to grasp the real
meaning of the text has been given up. The text is always open to
multiplicity since it is nothing but a systenl of arbitrary signs.
Differance invades the sign.22 Neither word nor concept, differance is
a paradoxical structure that plays its double meaning of difference and
deferral. It refers to the undecidable relation between the event and the
structure of language. Since nothing is simply present or absent, there
is no master text that stands given and the conclusion remains
deferred. For Gadamer the essential relationship is the event of
understanding itself: which is the mediation of difference lacking an
ultimate terminus within a historical horizon. The question that arises
in the exchange - the question that is stated by Gadamer but never
expressly stated by Derrida - is whether the interweaving of text and
interpretation in philosophical hermeneutics is merely one
mor~

Limi~ofLanguage
77
instance of logocentric metaphysics. This question inevitably comes up
in any hermeneutics that considers meaning as something to be
discovered. Gadamer's hermeneutics certainly accounts for inter-
pretation as a search for meaning, even ifhe does admit meaning to be
problematic. His own work is discussed by Gadamer as a "way back
from dialectic to dialogue and conversation." The fact that a potential
of otherness remains, suggests that for Gadamer the text is plural -
and not because of the ambiguity of its content, but by virtue of the
structure of interpretation itself23 Gadamer is convinced that without
the projection ofgood will one enters a circle ofhaving only one's own
prejudices confirmed, and he emphasizes that interpretation always
fails as a will to master. In order to understand at all, the reader
presupposes that the subject matter of a text has a presumed unity of
meaning. Naturally the text could be otherwise, but a text could not
say whatever the reader wanted it to say. Granted, however, that
Gadamer is not after meaning as such, i.e., that hermeneutics is not
deconstruction, it can nevertheless be said to be logocentric insofar as
Gadamer posits coherence and agreement in dialogue or conversation.
This is pointed out by Derrida who denies that dialogue is capable to
say one and the
same thing
under
any condition,
and
who
consequently concludes that agreement between partners is always an
illusion. For Gadamer, understanding is always a form of dialogue, a
coming to agreement within a structure of openness. Conversation is
not a talking of something that is already there, but has the structure of
an event that remains unfinished. Every reading that attempts to
understand is only a fITst step and never comes to an end. We
consequently need a continuing effort to fmd the common ground, and
Gadamer's logos remains in principle always unfmished.
Whereas Gadamer takes language to be a "bridge" allowing for
comnlunication, Derrida has sought to convince us that language is
precisely that which indefmitely defers meaningful understanding.24
However, Derrida's position is one that can neither be consistently
argued for nor deconstructed, and he, of course, is fully aware of this
fact. Philosophically his position is altogether inlpossible because a
philosophical argument or deconstruction is one that, by definition,
seeks by means of various argumentative procedures to persuade; it is
always
one
that
seeks
to
arrive
at
a
mutual
understanding.
Accordingly, Derrida abandons the usual philosophical procedures and
adopts what might be called an artistic approach. If the ''truth'' of his
position is one that cannot be argued for, cannot be said, it can

78
Soft Logic
perhaps nevertheless be shown or demonstrated,
Le., concretely
instanced, made manifest and pointed out (de-constrare) precisely by
means of a particular usage of language. The best way to show by
means oflanguage that understanding is not possible is to demonstrate
that, in effect, we do not understand; to show how all attempts at
dialogue inevitably result in failure to arrive at a meaningful mutual
accord. It is evident that Derrida is not seeking to engage in a normal
philosophical discussion. What he seems to be trying to say instead is
that one can, with good will, come to mutual agreement. But such
agreements are, in fact, forced by the concrete situation in which they
happen to occur.
The conversational
situation
is
one that
is
characterized by inequality of position and power, such as the
relationship between teacher and student, physician and patient,
employer and employee, elderly well-established philosopher and
younger contesting anti-philosopher. In cases such as these, the notion
of an open dialogue in which the interlocutors share an equal status
and seek to arrive at a pure disinterested agreenlent determined by
good will alone is altogether unrealistic. Thus~ the appeal to good will
is a diversion, a mask, a cover for the exercise of power, although
perhaps of an unconscious and non-deliberate sort.25 But Madison
makes the crucial point that what Derrida would put forward in place
ofGadamer's good will is never made clear.
One possibility of how to define the limits of dialogue is
pragmatically, and from this perspective Shusterman claims, Gadamer
and Derrida have actually a great deal in common. Shusterman
emphasizes that the issue of context is crucial to both Gadamer and
Derrida since both regard meaning as in some way context-dependent
and fluid. If understanding always depends on changing context, as
Gadamer maintains,26 how can we talk of such understanding as being
opposed to misunderstanding? Even two interlocutors in the same
concrete dialogical situation bring with them different contents or
horizons of understanding. For Gadamer, tradition prestructures and
thus unites the different understandings of its participants who are
both shaped by it and who, at the same time, extend and reshape it.
But since tradition is open-ended, this understanding is always a
relative and uncompleted movement.27 It raises serious doubts about
the universal scope that Gadamer accords to heuristic understanding.
This seems to be behind Derrida's question of whether "enlargement
of context" is simply a continual expression or a discontinuous
restructuring.28 Shusterman makes the interesting point that the

Limits ofLanguage
79
coherence necessary to speak of a common unifying tradition can be
one that embraces conflict and debate, even about the nature of that
tradition itself. Gadamer should have realized that the unity of
tradition in which we live is far from being complete and never
guaranteed. Tradition is more a motley patchwork of diverse practices
and divergent games with which we continually have to struggle to
consolidate and hold together, rather than Gadamer's unified and all-
embracing great tapestry that securely supports US.29 On the other
hand, Derrida ought to acknowledge that,
despite the obvious
discontinuities and pluralities in our tradition, there are also some
unities, some agreement and coherence of practice, .without which
effective communication and social interaction on which we all depend
would be impossible. Derrida is right that there is never one
maximally proper (completely comprehensive and unified) context for
interpretation, for what counts as the "proper" interpretative context or
"game" will itself obviously depend on the particular access of
understanding that the interpreter brings with him. These aims and
games are largely tradition influenced, and Gadamer may appeal to
Derrida's argument that we can make no sense of something being
intelligibly different without being able to map that difference on some
common background of coordinates. To try to understand the other, or
even recognize it as other, we must in some sense understand it on our
own terms.
In making it at all intelligible, we must make it accord
with some of our beliefs, for only through them can we understand it
al all. Schusterman suggests that it might therefore, seem more
convincing to take mutual agreement not as a foundational source of
understanding but as its desired end. Tradition has only succeeded in
preserving and extending understanding because of its internal
debates, whose factions it struggles to hold together in a partial unity
or coherence. Even if Gadamer is right that we always wish to be
understood (discounting that large area of the evasive and duplicious),
it clearly does not follow that we always seek people to agree with us.
Shusterman concludes that both Gadamer and Derrida concur that
understanding implies both difference and consensus, rupture and
continuity.
Derrida has frequently tried to disown the word "deconstruction"
and, particularly, the extension it has undergone in other hands. But
given the role he accords to the author's intentions, he knows as well
as anyone that such protestations carry little weight.30 Because Derrida
was particularly sensitive to the self-defeating nature of any simple

80
Soft Logic
opposition to previous history and philosophy, he was also largely
aware of the negative connotation of the French (and English) word
"deconstruction."
It
seems
that
misunderstandings
plague
the
encounter between Gadamer and Derrida, so that, at least on the basis
of their written words, the proper verdict would have to be that the
confrontation never took place.31 But Bernasconi rightly raises the
question of what a meaningful encounter would amount to in such a
context. A challenge of this sort would, from the start, have to be
designed to conform to Gadamer's belief in dialogue. It also seems
that Gadamer does not show himselfto be particularly conversant with
Derrida's thinking. For Gadamer, Derrida was originally a proper
name representing a position of critique of logocentrism. He attributes
to Derrida the argument that it is sufficient for someone to have used
certain key words
for
that
person to stand accused of being
metaphysical. Having identified Derrida in this way,
it is not
surprising that Gadamer seems to make metaphysical language the
issue between them. But Derrida's translation of the language of
philosophy resists the temptation to fix the meaning of words. Derrida
can never let himself be identified with a particular reading, whereas,
for Gadamer, agreement is crucially concerned with the maintenance
ofa common language. The difficulty is that in practice Gadamer, like
Hegel, tends to enclose otherness in the circle of self-recognition and
only rarely is otherness allowed to remain in its otherness.32
Bernasconi concludes that the hermeneutical notion of dialogue
opens the way to a reading of texts which goes beyond what is
expressly
said
in
them.
The
first
reading
will
frequently
be
characterized as "metaphysical" while also presenting
itself as
"beyond" metaphysics. It is therefore the task of the second reading to
draw it back within metaphysics, and the text is ultimately undecidable
between the two readings.33 The distinction between nletaphysics and
what is beyond it cannot be accorded a definite status. That is why
Heidegger concludes that a regard for metaphysics still prevails, even
in the intent to overcome metaphysics itselt:34 Derrida's notion of the
end of philosophy faces a similar dilemma; it turns out to be self-
destructive, a notion that, as it were, interrupts its own discourse.
Derrida's readers go astray when they identify one of the readings as
Derrida's own because in doing so they upset the logic that questions
such a procedure. From a historian's perspective, Derrida may appear
simply to have added one more reading to the catalogue of readings
that constitute the history of the text. But this would be to miss the

Limits ofLanguage
81
strategy by which Derrida brings the text to the so-called edge of
metaphysics (undecidable between inside and outside). There is not, as
it were, a single truth to each text, nor is there a single correct reading,
so that all others must be false and must, therefore, be rejected.35 For
Gadamer, this might well be an untenable heuristic conclusion,36 since
he seeks the truth encountered in the text, whereas Derrida draws
attention to the history of the text. The text is not a meaning hidden
behind the words that can by a strenuous effort be encountered. Every
text has a history constituted by its various persuasive and powerful or
influential readings. Before Gadamer is ready to take deconstruction
seriously, there must fITst be an agreenlent to continue the dialogue,
but agreement is not necessarily a goal or a precondition. It can also be
an illusion. Encounters are not limited to what the participants intend,
and much may be due only to accident. Indeed, ifwe focus on the truth
claims of Gadamer and Derrida, and set ourselves the task of
differentiating their standpoints, we will have to conclude that a true
encounter never really occurred.
Sallis, consequently, questions Gadamer's model of dialogue. It
is not, after all, an account of some natural understanding, and what is
often produced is hostility and confusion rather than openness .and
agreement.37 John Caputo also presents Gadamer as a "closet"
essentialist, and detects two contradictory languages in his hermen-
eutics: one for "deep" truths that are above all time, the other for a
model of interpretation rooted in our existential, historical, and fmite
existence. Breaking with Hegelian theology, Gadamer still seeks "deep
truth" in texts. His traditionalism holds that, while there are indeed
foundations
for
knowledge,
they cannot
be
directly
identified.
Gadamer claims that our foundations lie deeper than we can say, and
that
we
are
primordially
rooted
in
our
traditions.
Whereas
foundationalism demands a reasoned account, tradition is so deeply
lodged in our bones that it can only show up on the level of
prejudgement (Vorurtei/). The best we can do is unfold, lay-out
(auslegen) the ground upon which we stand. We will have to admit
that all questions are the issue of a will to power, and that is why in
his debate with Derrida, Gadamer keeps coming back to Nietzsche.
Gadamer has given up on the Hegelian notion of a definite historical
form of Geist, Le., of a pure form of reflective consciousness. He puts
in its place a pluralized, historicized, non-hierarchical multiplication
of historical forms and a concretely situated subject. He thinks of
multiple, different - not better - unfoldings of the tradition, and his

82
Soft Logic
only canon is the longevity and vitality of the tradition itself On the
other hand, the more radical, more critical side of Heidegger's
philosophy is just what Derrida wants to keep going. Ultimately
Heidegger's thinking is concerned not with meaning or the truth of
being, but with the giving or granting of meaning or truth. There is
only the manifold. Thus Gadamer's hermeneutics and Derrida's
deconstruction operate on different levels of meaning. Derrida's
deconstruction has taken the step into that which grants meaning and
delimits it. Deconstruction poses disturbing questions rather than
trusting what is handed down.
Derrida holds
that
languages,
traditions, meanings, truth, and Being are only more or less static
unities, effects that are held together in part by violence, in part by
coercion, and in part by their usefulness for life.38 By insisting on the
impossibility
of
circumventing
language
in
the
process
of
understanding, Gadamer fails to draw the inevitable conclusion. He
may idolize language, but Derrida suspects that deep truths are
purchased by excluding what contaminates the system of truth, and by
repressing what disturbs its unity. The unity of a tradition is in no
small part due to the fact that educational systems keep spinning out
the same yam, while no one is around to tell the other side ofthe story.
Deconstruction reveals that the deep unutterable truth of tradition is
the result of the fact that the traces of the dissenters have been erased
by the guardians of the truth, creating the illusion that we are dealing
with ageless essences.39
Derrida does not enter the discourse of Gadamer; he puts himself
outside its presuppositions, its conceptual frame, even though his own
thinking overlaps many of the same concerns. Gadarner believes in
truth that imposes itself on the mind as the immanent unity of
meaning in a text or the self-presentation of a work of art. By contrast,
Derrida's "writing," which acknowledges undecidability, voids the
notion normally considered necessary to any philosophical dialogue.
But while Derrida seems to disallow the conditions necessary for
dialogue that lead inevitably to metaphysics, he does acknowledge that
110 one can stand outside his own epoch. He seems thus to put himself
in a position of mastery - at least by assuming the privilege of
deciding what is and what is not metaphysical. Refusing to take up a
privileged position, such discourse could be characterized by the
absence of some fundamental source of authority given .to the speaker
alone. Such a model stands in radical contrast to Gadamer's paradigm
ofdialogical understanding as the very overcoming ofotherness and as

Limits ofLanguage
83
the way of reaching agreement in understanding. Derrida, however,
does inevitably assume authority to speak but, whereas Gadamer's goal
is shared understanding, in Derrida language appears as a territory
whose ownership is in constant dispute, and where, furthermore, there
are no essential contents of understanding to be shared.40 Eisenstein
plausibly argues that Gadamer and Derrida need not be taken as
debaters whose case is to be resolved, or between whom we nlust
choose sides. Although their roles are antagonistic, we need not
suppose that one is right and the other wrong. If Derrida could be
taken seriously, he would eliminate all authority in language, every
instance of true thinking and the very phenomenon of truth itself But
his point may well be that democracy, for example, is not just the
internal ordering of equal voices or interpretive contents bounded by a
single interpretive interest; it is rather the dynamic balancing among
unequal voices, not only disagreeing but often talking across one
another and aiming at different, occasionally overlapping goals. What
is said is often incommensurable, and the whole linguistic field is,
therefore, not subject to scientific or purely structural analysis. What
Derrida has identified as belonging to property, signature, etc. (Le., all
that is unique and privileged in meaning) can provide lessons in what
may be called the dynamics of inconlmensurability - getting used to
viewing language not as a homogeneous dialogical space but as
heterogeneous
narrative.
Rather
than
attempting
a
dialectical
resolution of authority and openness, or necessity and freedom, we
might look instead for a suitable interweaving of roles. Even the
privileged authority of any interpretive game should not suppress the
awareness ofthe incompleteness ofall narrative.
Notes
1 Diane P. Michelfelder and Richard E. Palmer, Dialogue and
Deconstruction, The Gadamer-Derrida Encounter, Albany, NY: State
University ofthe New York Press, 1989, p. 1.
2 viz. Derrida, "Plato's Pharmacy," La dissemination, Paris, Editions du
Seuil, 1972, pp. 69-167; trans. by Barbara Johnson under the title
Dissemination (Chicago, IL: University ofChicago Press, 1981), pp. 63-171;

84
Soft Logic
and "The Ends ofMan," Marges de la philosophie, Edition de Minuit, 1972,
pp. 129-164, trans. with notes by Alan Bass under the title Margins of
Philosophy, Chicago, IL: University ofChicago Press, 1982, pp. 109-136.
3 Michelfelder & Palmer, Dialogue and Deconstruction, p. 2.
4 Hans-Georg Gadamer, Wahrheit und Methode: Grundziige einer
philosophischen Hermeneutik, 2nd ed., Tubingen, J.C.B. Mohr, 1965, p. 450;
trans. by Ed Garrett Barden and John Cumming under the title Truth and
Method, New York, NY: The Seabury Press, 1975, p. 432.
5 Hans-Georg Gadamer, Text und Interpretation, ed. Philippe Forget,
Munich: Wilhelm Fink Verlag, 1984, p. 30.
6 Ibid., p. 32.
7 Michelfelder & Palmer, Dialogue and Deconstruction, p. 9.
8 Fred Dallmayr, "Hermeneutics and Deconstructoin: Gadamer and
Derrida in Dialogue," in Dialogue and Deconstruction, Michelfelder &
Palmer, p. 76.
9 J. Derrida, L 'Ecriture et la differance, Paris: Seuil, 1967, p. 416, trans.
by A. Bass under the title Writing and Difference,Chicago, IL: Univeristy of
Chicago Press, 1978, p. 284.
10 Hans-Georg Gadamer, "Letter to Dallmayr" (1985) in Dialogue and
Deconstruction, Michelfelder & Palmer, p. 98.
11 Ibid., p. 101.
12 Hans-Georg Gadamer, "Destruction and Deconstruction," in Dialogue
and Deconstruction, Michelfelder & Palmer, p. 113.
13 Hans-Georg Gadanler, "Hermeneutics and Logocentrism," in
Dialogue and Deconstruction, Michelfelder & Palmer, p. 115.
14 Ibid., p. 118.
15 Gadamer, Wahrheit und Methode, p. 261.
16 Phillippe Forget, "Argument(s)," in Dialogue and Deconstruction,
Michelfelder & Palmer, p. 137.
17 Manfred Frank, "Limits ofthe Human Control of Language: Dialogue
as the Place ofDifference between Neocronstructionalism and Hermeneutics,"
in Dialogue and Deconstruction, Michelfelder & Palmer, p. 159.
18 Gadamer, Text and Interpretation, p. 25.
19 Ibid., p. 26.
20 Josef Simon, "Good Will to Understand and the Will to Power:
Remarks on an Improbable Debate," in Dialogue and Deconstruction,
Michelfelder & Palnler, p. 168.
21 Ibid.
22 James Risser, "The Two Faces of Socrates: Gadamer/Derrida," in
Dialogue and Deconstruction, Michelfelder & Palmer, p. 177.
23 Ibid., p. 180.

Limits ofLanguage
85
24 G. B. Madison, "Gadamer/Derrida: The Hermeneutics ofIrony and
Power," in Dialogue and Deconstruction, Michelfelder & Palmer, p. 193.
25 Ibid., p. 197.
26 Gadamer, Text and Interpretation, p. 41; Hans-Georg Gadamer,
"Reply to Jaques Derrida," in in Dialogue and Deconstruction, Michelfelder
& Palmer.
27 Gadamer, Wahrheit und Methode, p. 446. English trans., p. 428.
28 Gadamer, "Reply to Jaques Derrida."
29 Gadamer, Wahrheit und Methode, p. 321. English trans., p. 302.
30 Robert Bernasconi, "Seeing Double: Destruction and Deconstruction,"
in Dialogue and Deconstruction, Michelfelder & Palmer, p. 234.
31 John Searle, "Reiterating the Differences: A Reply to Derrida,"
Glymph I, Baltimore, MD: The John Hopkins University Press, 1977, p. 198.
32 Bernasconi, "Seeing Double," p. 245.
33 Ibid.
34 M. Heidegger, Zur Sache des Denkens, Tiibingen: Niemeryer, 1969, p.
25, trans. by 1. Stambaugh under the title On Time and Being, New York, NY:
Harper & Row, 1972, p. 24.
35 Bernasconi, "Seeing Double," p. 247.
36 Gadamer, Wahrheit und Methode, p. 90. English trans., p. 85.
37 John Sallis, "Interruptions," in Dialogue and Deconstruction,
Michelfelder & Palmer, p. 254.
38 John D. Caputo, "Gadamer's Closet Essentialism: A Derridean
Critique," in Dialogue and Deconstruction, Michelfelder & Palmer, p. 263.
39 Ibid., p. 264.
40 Gabe Eisenstein, "The Privilege ofSharing: Dead Ends and the Life
ofLanguage," in Dialogue and Deconstruction, Michelfelder & Palmer, p.
270.

Chapter Six
Gadamer's Hermeneutics
Gadamer proposes to expand our prevailing views on scientific method
to cover the kind of knowledge we
gain
fronl
hermeneutical
experience. He criticizes Kant for modeling scientific knowledge on
the natural sciences and wants to augment it by both historical
awareness and the insights we gain from literature and art. Some of
this is in the tradition of Shaftesbury and Hume who emphasized that
moral and aesthetic judgments do not obey reason but have the
character of sentiment and taste. While such judgments do not enable
us to decide particulars under universal rules, they do make it possible
for us to know what is important and to see things from right and
proper points ofview. Taste is thus considered by Gadamer as a mode
of knowing that cannot, however, be separated from its immediate
situation, and cannot be reduced to rules and concepts. 1 Taste is
concerned with the surface of things, and it is testimony to the
changeability of all human judgments, as well as the relativity of all
human
values.2
Gadamer
emphasizes,
however,
that
aesthetic
experience reflects something fundamental in all human knowledge.
The ambiguity of meaning that we encounter in a work of art extends
to most symbolic expressions as well, and that is why one way of
understanding a text may be as legitimate as another. Gadamer rejects
this as an untenable hermeneutical relativism, and argues that we
should adopt a broader Hegelian concept ofaesthetic experience, Le., a
history oftruth as it is seen in the mirror of art. The concept of world-

88
Soft Logic
view acquires its proper significance only in aesthetics; for it is the
multiplicity of possible world views that has given this term its
familiar meaning. Indeed the history of art is the chief example of a
historical multiplicity that lacks the criterion of progress because it
does not converge upon one true model of art. Gadamer insists that the
only way to do justice to the notion of truth in art is to treat it
historically.
To accomplish this, it becomes necessary to free art from the
subjective connotations it has in Kant and Schiller and which have
since dominated aesthetics. Gadamer argues that art, like play, has an
objective reality in which it becomes meaningless to distinguish
between literal and metaphorical images.3 Whereas Kant denies that
taste is a form of knowledge, Gadamer claims that aesthetic awareness
is more than it explicitly knows ofitself Even the supposedly free and
spontaneous inventions of a writer or artist appeal to a common
tradition that they share with their public. They address an audience
that must be prepared to appreciate their work and speak their
language. They choose what they expect to have an impact on people,
even though they may not be aware of doing this deliberately, and
they, of course, cannot know what, if any, historical influence their
work is going to have. It is quite inevitable that subsequent readers of
a text appreciate it differently than what the author intended.
Literature is a tradition of intellectual presentation and, as such brings
with it its implicit history. But traditional hermeneutics was largely
unaware of this when it claimed to reveal the original meaning of a
text in both humanist literature and the Bible. Such literal meaning is
not readily available because it is the whole of the canon that is
supposed to guide the reader in his understanding of an individual
passage. Once this unity was being questioned, such interpretation
becomes impossible. It was Schleiermacher who first introduced the
method of psychological interpretation, and who claimed that our
object is to understand the author better than he is able to understand
himself: and this view has indeed dominated much of subsequent
hermeneutics. The artist is not necessarily the best interpreter of his
own work, and has no special priority in this respect over the art critic
or historian.
But it certainly makes a difference whether one is trying to
understand a text as a literary work in terms of its composition and
intention, or whether one sees it merely as a document in the
investigation of a larger historical context.
Gadamer treats all

Gadamer's Hermeneutics
89
historical reality as if it were a text, and he takes hermeneutics to be
the foundation of history.4 In the study of history, subsequent events
decide the importance of those preceding them, and success or failure
causes a whole series ofactions or events to have or lack meaning. No
such sequential order applies to the interpretation of a text, on the
other hand. Details ofhistorical understanding are decided by a largely
unconscious teleology that automatically disregards everything it
considers insignificant. Of course, the fmal goal towards which the
restless activity of mankind is directed cannot be discovered by means
of historical thinking. All we can discover is confmed by our horizon;
yet a horizon is not a rigid frontier but something that moves with one
and invites one to move further. Gadamer criticizes traditional
hermeneutics
for
arbitrarily
fixing
the
horizon
by
which
we
understand a text. By contrast, his own horizon metaphor seeks to do
justice to the largely unconscious character of our understanding of
how language works. He thus explains the taken-for-granted role of
language
in
semantics
as
due
to
a
submerged,
prescientific
categorization
in
our
terminology.
The
problem
is
that
such
unconscious behavior does not provide us with much of an explanation
in either history, semantics, or hermeneutics. On the other hand, he
stresses the fluid variety of all possible meaning, and at the same time
he insists that such categorization is not arbitrary after all. He seeks to
explain how, in the immense variety of what the reader can find to
have meaning and hence expect to discover, not everything has
meaning. What is said by Gadamer to limit this almost infmite
diversity in possible interpretation is the "prejudgment" (Vorurteil)
imposed by largely unconscious language categorization. But this
inevitably conflicts with the prevailing Cartesian ideal of knowledge,
which demands that we reject everything that can in any way be
doubted. Thus Gadamer's theory of interpretation falls short of the
Cartesian demands for valid knowledge and, since he is also unable to
provide us with explicit decision procedures in his hermeneutics, we
remain unable to settle differences in interpretation.
Gadamer claims that there are always legitimate prejudices,S but
it is· one thing to adnlit that this is to some extent unavoidable, and
quite another to accept any such particular prejudice as legitimate. If,
as he maintains, all tradition is beyond reason, no real progress in
hermeneutics is possible either. All understanding for him is merely a
play within tradition, and it becomes a game that we cannot win.
When we try to understand a text, we do not attempt to recapture the

90
Soft Logic
author's attitude of mind, but to regain the perspective within which
he has formed his view - yet Gadamer fails to show that this is any
more feasible in any literal sense. He argues that the anticipations of
meaning that govern our understanding of a text are not subjective but
proceed from our participation in a tradition. What belongs, however,
to a tradition is by no means easy to settle, and this is, of course, the
major cause for conflicting interpretations. That anyone who seeks to
understand a text must be related to the language and tradition to
which it belongs does not refute what Gadamer labels as hermen-
eutical nihilism. Only when we fail to accept what the text says do we
try to ''understand'' it either psychologically or historically, but this
does not provide Gadamer with any real comprehension as long as he
denies that there is such a thing as a literal understanding of the text.
He emphasizes that every age has to understand the transmitted text in
its own fashion since the meaning ofthe text always goes beyond what
the author intends. It is not just that the discovery of the true meaning
of the text is a task that can never be completed, but that there is no
such thing as a literal meaning of the text. What questions to ask is
part of our historical perspective, but there is no "method" for asking
questions either. Gadamer points out that the concept of "situation"
inevitably limits our possibilities of vision and literal understanding,
and this is what makes a metaphorical interpretation inevitable. An
essential part of any situation is its "horizon," which is the range of
vision or understanding that can be taken in from any particular
standpoint. He thus attempts to elicit literal meaning from such
metaphors as "narrowness of horizon," "expansion of horizon,"
"possible opening up ofnew horizons," and the like. He concludes that
a person who has no horizon is one who does not see far enough and
hence overrates what is nearest to him. Similarly, someone who has a
horizon presumably knows the relative significance of what is within
it. The problem is that Gadamer wants such visual figures of speech
also to cover historical, i.e., temporal processes and events. The person
who thinks historically comes to understand the true meaning of what
has been handed down, without necessarily agreeing with it or seeing
himself in it.6 But the text that is understood historically abandons its
claim ofexpressing something that is literally true.
Using the metaphor of "horizon" to emphasize the limits of all
historical knowledge, Gadamer concludes that it can never be
expressed by anyone standpoint, or have a truly closed horizon.
Horizons change for the person who is moving, and hence the horizon

Gadamer's Hermeneutics
91
ofthe past that exists in the form oftradition is also always in motion,
To acquire a horizon means for Gadamer that one learns to look
beyond what is at hand
not in order to look away from it, but to see it
better within the larger whole and in more accurate proportions. But
by the same token, there is for hinl no longer any isolated horizon of
the present or separate historical horizons - all understanding is a
fusion of horizons.7 This, however, is itself a nlixed metaphor that
attempts to explain our inability to understand anything literally.
Gadamer likens the way in which the interpreter belongs to the text to
the manner in which the vanishing point belongs to perspective. What
he wants to say is that the interpreter does not choose his point of view
arbitrarily, but fmds it already given, but Gadamer finds it difficult to
explain in this fashion why a philosophical text or a poem requires
special effort on the part of the reader and interpreter. One problem is
that we are not only supposed to adopt a historical distance towards
the text, but at the same time literally to reconcile this with what we
conceive to be its true meaning. This is something that Gadamer's
hermeneutics does not really know how to do. He merely requires that
every text should be appreciated from a perspective that is appropriate
to it, yet fails to specify which point of view is the appropriate one for
any given occasion. The historian, for example, may examine the text
to fmd something that it is not itself seeking to provide. What the text
expresses historically is not merely what is intended by it, but what it
"betrays," and there are no identifiable limits to what a text can reveal
in this manner. In coming to realize that future generations are going
to understand the text differently than the way we do, Gadamer
implicitly denies that there can be anything like a true meaning of the
text.
Gadamer's
fusion
of horizons
is
thus
really
a
metaphor
describing our inability to understand any text literally. Historical
relativity is taken by him as being equivalent to mere metaphorical
meaning and, in this manner, historical knowledge does not fmd its
fulfillment in any defmite understanding either, but is taken to be mere
"openness to experience."s Such experience is identified by him as
what runs counter to our expectations; it is thus not something we can
claim to know literally but is, strictly speaking, something we do not
know. While the nature ofthis experience reveals itselfto us by means
of questioning, he insists that there can be no procedure of learning to
ask such questions - and that is why there is no "method" to his
hermeneutics. Why any particular question arises and presses itself

92
Soft Logic
upon us remains a mystery. Gadamer considers it more than a
metaphor to describe the work ofhermeneutics as a "conversation with
the text,"9 but such feedback is merely imagined and cannot, in any
case, go beyond the predetermined language categories. From his
plausible thesis that all interpretation is to some extent metaphorical,
it does not follow that there can be no such thing as a literal meaning
ofa text. Since ''to acquire the horizon of a question" is not something
we can literally do, Gadamer's theory of interpretation turns itself into
a metaphor. His vision of horizons does not provide us with any
identifiable criteria for literal interpretation or conceptual relevance.
He claims that we can understand a text only when we have
understood the question to which it is the answer, yet he cannot tell us
in any particular case what would be the right question to ask. To
understand the logic of question and answer is merely to see that there
are no isolated problems like there are stars in the sky.
The problem is that when there is a fusion of horizons, we may
be left without any genuine questions to ask.
Whether people
understand each other can be discovered by inspection from their
subsequent behavior. On the other hand, whether they speak the same
language or whether a text has been understood cannot be settled in
this manner. One problem is that Gadamer rejects categorically any
possibility' of nonverbal understanding,IO yet it would seem that this
forms the inevitable background for language learning on the part of
the infant and for the general formation of new concepts. Contrary to
Gadamer, we are able to make our understanding explicit not only in
words, but also by means of musical and visual works of art. Indeed
words significantly fail to express how we feel, and that is why our
understanding frequently goes beyond any statement we can make.
That our experience is more than we can say is something for which
Gadamer's hermeneutics fails to account, and yet this is why our
experience requires interpretation to begin with. He emphasizes the
metaphorical character of language use, while this inevitably remains
parasitic on literal meaning. To show that our available methods of
analysis fall short of doing justice to the complexities of actual
language use is not to demonstrate that logic is alien to language, or
method to truth. It is only because he regards the metaphorical use of
language as its real oneIl that Gadamer takes the fusion ofhorizons in
interpretation as paradigmatic. But as all such understanding becomes
inconclusive, no convincing hermeneutical arguments can be made.
To say, as he does, that the world is linguistic in nature means to

Gadamer's Hermeneutics
93
contlate the process of understanding with what is to be understood.
What we accept as factual is not merely relative to the language we
speak, but is also due to the way the world is. The limits of possible
experience and the precise way the world is can never be fully
expressed in language, and neither can aesthetic or hermeneutic
insights. For Gadamer, all understanding is fundamentally translation,
yet what makes such translation adequate cannot be fully verbalized.
That is why theological, legal, philological, archeological, literary, and
aesthetic interpretations are so different from one another.
Notes
1 Hans-Georg Gadamer, Truth and Method, trans. by Sheed and Ward,
New York, NY: Crossroad, 1985, p. 36.
2 Ibid., p. 53.
3 Ibid., p. 94.
4 Ibid., p. 175.
5 Ibid., p. 239.
6 Ibid., p. 270.
7 Ibid., p. 273.
8 Ibid., p. 319.
9 Ibid., p. 331.
10 Ibid., p. 345.
11 Ibid., p. 389.

Chapter Seven
Hermeneutical Understanding
Hermeneutical thinkers can be characterized by their common desire
to resist the idea of the human intellect as a wordless and timeless
source of insight. What is distinctive about human understanding is
that it always exists in terms of some evolving linguistic framework
that has been worked out in terms of some historically conditioned set
of concerns and practices. Hermeneutic thinkers argue that language
and history are always both conditions and limits of understanding;
hermeneutics does not seek the conditions of intelligibility as such, as
if understanding were always and everywhere the same. 1 Although
new knowledge claims may evolve internally from previous knowledge
claims, they do not consistently move toward a better and better
ahistorical appreciation of reality. Instead we must rely on something
like an emerging consensus of scientists regarding the validity,
fruitfulness and cogency of new developments. That this is an
inherently fallible and historically mediated process has been shown
repeatedly by postempiricist philosophers of science like Kuhn,
Feyerabend, Polanyi, Lakatos, and others. By acquiring our native
tongue or by learning a specialized language of some field of study, we
inherit with it a past we have not shaped. The language in which we
participate unconsciously long before we begin to realize any of its
limitations, fashions our own attempts to understand in a variety of
ways. Language, so to speak, goes out ahead of our reflective
understanding and shapes our grasp of the subject matter. We are

96
Soft Logic
always already biased in our thinking and knowing in our linguistic
interpretation of the world. But this is not to say that our reflective
understanding can never break through a specific linguistic tradition
and criticize it incisively. It does mean that when we go beyond the
limitations of anyone mode of speaking, we never abandon the
fundamentally linguistic character of our understanding. Even our
most penetrating and radical critiques remain engaged in a language
that has
limitations and blind
spots,
and
awaits
its
critique.
Exchanging one language for another more critical and refmed
language never implies that we have somehow transcended our
inextricable belonging to language in general. It does imply that our
grasp of anything can never be final, exhaustive, or otherwise
unlimited. We always understand in terms of some historically shaped
language, for we always first understand by learning to get around in a
certain speech community. The test for such an understanding is not
whether we have learned how to associate certain words with certain
"inner" experiences, but rather whether we can successfully "do things
with words" in the communities in which we share the language.
Understanding is not shared in a private sphere before the "eye of the
mind," but is realized in the public sphere ofdiscourse.
Yet, some understanding seems to be acquired by nonverbal
skills like swinlnling or drawing that appear a function of our human
physiology rather than our language and history. Understanding
something is not just being able to talk about it, but is a skillful
performance that is nonlinguistic, no less than verbal. Since we grasp
linguistic and cultural meanings only within a given context,
hermeneutics rejects foundationalist epistemologies. Foundationalism
fails because we cannot make good its claim to have discovered a set of
fully self-evident truths; rather the validity of any truth claim depends
on an implicit context of meaning that is taken for granted. The
attempt to form a propositionless philosophy of science fails because
all meaningful statements have a deep linguistic history that makes
their interpretation an endless task. There is no bedrock of fITst truths
to discover, and the result is always just more interpretation or more
talk. What foundationalism amounts to is the idea that we can develop
a set of criteria, rules and categories that are sufficient to determine,
unequivocally and for all times and places, the difference between
meaningful and meaningless statements, valid and invalid inter-
pretations, and true or false knowledge claims. These rules would lead,
ifwe believe Descartes, to an indubitable knowledge ofreality, or ifwe

Hermeneutical Understanding
97
follow Kant, to an apodictic science of appearances, a sure and final
knowledge of our moral responsibilities, and a definite grasp of the
reasons for taste.2 Even in our own century, this CartesianlKantian
tradition of looking for the eternal noncontingent rules of all thought
remained strong,
particularly among the
followers
of Husserl's
phenomenology and the logical positivists. Hermeneutics, by contrast,
understands itself as a critique of this notion of a noncontingent
autonomous intellect. According to Heidegger and Gadamer, the
actual historical circumstances provide a set oftacit preunderstandings
and concerns, in terms ofwhich any act ofunderstanding is ultimately
made possible. This implies that understanding is never merely a
function ofwhat goes on in consciousness. When we understand, there
is always an unconscious element we take for granted, and this means
that understanding can never be exhaustively analyzed in terms of a
priori rules, which the intellect formulates autonomously and then
simply follows. Understanding always depends in part on social
standards that evolve historically, and which the individual neither
produces nor controls.
Hegel was the first to insist that ''the true is the whole," and to
suggest that the meaning of anything is inescapably contextual.
Reason cannot be understood apart from the past or in isolation from
the historically mediated language it speaks. But The Phenomenology
ofSpirit is also an attempt to show that history has its own logic: it is
not by means of introspection but only through history that we come to
know ourselves. According to Heidegger, likewise, it is not a set of
ahistorical rules and categories that makes understanding possible.
Rather, it is by means of different interests and practices, different
concerns and commitments that we experience reality and make it
intelligible. As these concerns and commitments change historically,
so does our apprehension of reality. Talk of an ahistorical cogito or a
transcendental ego obscures the way in which human beings are
always deeply rooted in their historical circumstances. We forever find
ourselves in a set of circumstances that are not of our own making and
that we cannot abandon at will. We cannot evade the fundamental
finitude and contingency of our lives, and even nature we come to
understand only through a historical matrix. Our understanding does
not rest on a priori rules or inherited structures of consciousness in
terms of which all knowledge can be organized. It is a continually
changing process that lacks an underlying identity, and only a gradual
modification of this process is possible. This is to say that the role of

98
Soft Logic
preunderstanding is never accidental or in any way optional for us,
since we have inherited ways oflooking at things long before we begin
to modify our ways of seeing and understanding. Our lives are defined
by our preunderstandings, for all new understanding depends on our
ability to relate new phenomena to our already existing set of
understandings and concerns, which we take for granted. But such
preunderstandings are not clear and well-defmed claims that we have
already established; rather they are claims that we take for granted and
treat in practice as being beyond the need for justification. All
understanding and explanation terminate in the taken-for-granted
preunderstandings of the context. Reality is not hiding behind our
historically nlediated understanding but instead reality shows itself
through our preunderstanding.3 Heidegger translated Husserl's thesis
that "consciousness is always consciousness of.." into the claim that
we are always in the world with others and with things.4 Reality does
not mean whatever I take it to mean; it does not permit us to avoid the
hard impersonal work of learning how things really are. Meaning is
neither arbitrarily imposed from without nor discovered as a brute fact;
rather it is worked out in a dialectical fashion in a finite historical
context. According to Heidegger, a very important source of these
preunderstandings is language, for it is language that makes possible
rationality by giving us the ability to understand things as some sort or
type of thing. Language allows us to grasp things in both their
complex similarity and their distinctiveness from other things.
Gadamer emphasizes that language is not like a tool we can pick
up and put down at will. We may choose a word or a phrase, but we do
not choose either to use or not to use language. Since all thought is in
language, we do not have pure wordless thought that is then acci-
dentally expressed in language. Rather, in "finding the right words,"
we have the thought (and hence an understanding ofthe object) for the
first time.5 It is only by articulating a thought in some language that
the
thought
itself becomes
distinct
and
understandable.
Our
consciousness of the world is a linguistic consciousness that we can
never leave behind.6 Yet while there is no thought that is altogether
beyond language, there are nonverbal skills, there is "knowing how"
(e.g. to ride a bicycle) no less than "knowing that" (verbal statements).
Gadamer insists that "all that can be understood is language,"7 but to
that extent, at least, he is still a Cartesian. Of course, all human
understanding is limited and finite, whether linguistic or nonverbal,
and every linguistic account is bound to be selective both in what it

Hermeneutical Understanding
99
emphasizes and in its clarity and suggestiveness. But having a
complex
and
nuanced
language
is
a
necessary
condition
for
understanding what something is and how it is related to other
realities. Indeed Gadanler's "preunderstanding" is essentially non-
verbal, and only when it becomes formulated in language does it tum
into part of our explicit verbal knowledge. OUf understanding of some
phenomenon will vary in sophistication and depth in propol1ion to the
number of different ways we have of speaking of it. Yet our ability to
relate these various ways of speaking to one another is itself
extralinguistic, as Gadamer admits.8 He seems to say that it is only
through language that we have a world, whereas we live in the same
world as infants even before we acquire language, and we remain
always capable of translating any human language into our own.
Indeed it is our nonlinguistic prejudgements as infants that make
language learning possible in the fITst place. Defmite ways ofspeaking
(e.g. in science), on the other hand, change historically, and that is
why deep adequate views cannot in the strict sense be guaranteed at
all.
Even practitioners of the same method have need of a genuine
exchange ofviewpoints ifthey are to secure a firm grasp ofthe subject
nlatter. Gadamer emphasizes that there is no one method on which all
our research can be modeled. The linguistic account always carries
with it unspoken meanings, and possibilities of understanding and
critique to be explored and articulated. Indeed language becomes a
theme of inquiry only when linguistic understanding breaks down or
becomes otherwise problematic. We tend to overlook the role of
language as such and focus our attention instead on realities it makes
manifest. Gadamer points out that language itself has a way of
carrying the participants along in a dialogue that exceeds their
subjective awareness. We never understand in a disinterested fashion,
for reason and judgment cannot function without making a type of
value
assessment
about
the
significance
and
importance of a
knowledge claim for the present circUlllstances. We are, therefore, not
asymptotically approaching the same body of universal truth, and
conflicts arise repeatedly because we are always confronted with a
variety of contradicting linguistic accounts that contain innumerable
nonverbal (Le. "practical") possibilities. Gadamer refers to the Aristo-
telian term phronesis to characterize this situation, that is, a fallible,
historically informed judgment of what is "best" now. The way such
disputes are settled is never by applying a set of ahistorical criteria, but

100
Soft Logic
by trial and error as reached in a sustained dialogue. That may be why
Gadamer's Truth and Method never discusses truth in any direct and
systematic fashion. His hermeneutics concerns itself with modes of
experience that lie outside natural science - i.e. with the experience of
art, history, and philosophy. These are all modes of experience in
which
a
truth
is
communicated
that
cannot
be
verified
by
methodological means proper to science.9 His position entails a
rejection of coherence theories of truth in these disciplines, but this in
tum
undermines
his
own
ability to
criticize
opposing
views
conclusively. When everyday speech and ordinary language are the
sources from which our understanding flows, this source cannot be
effectively criticized once coherence has been repudiated. Dialogue
picks up a topic always in the middle, that is, with a shared pre-
understanding, yet such preunderstanding is not in turn open to
effective criticism. The "logic" of conversation contains possibilities
that emerge only through converting prejudgements into reasoned
arguments. Gadamer owes a great deal to Heidegger's account of
human being as Dasein, that is, as a being emerging from historically
contingent possibilities and an open future. Since there are no external
verities about Dasein, this leaves us not only without method but also
without identifiable truth.
Gadamer follows Hegel in opposing the Cartesian strategy of
claiming
a
paradigmatic
privilege
for
mathematics
and
the
mathematico-experimental sciences. 10 Gadamer does not propose that
the sciences give up their Cartesian heritage, but he does want them to
become aware oftheir estrangement from natural consciousness and of
a necessary return to the larger context in which they are but one of
the
language
games
played. 11
Everything .is
under
the
strict
governance of method except the choice of question to be asked; thus,
what is established by statistics seems to be a language of facts,
whereas what questions these facts answer, and what facts would begin
to speak if other questions were asked, are hermeneutical questions. 12
Statistics are easily used for propaganda purposes because they seem to
let facts speak, and hence pretend to an objectivity that really depends
on the legitimacy ofthe questions asked. 13 There is no such thing as a
method of learning to ask questions. I4 Gadamer speaks of the logic of.
question and answer as the key to hermeneutics, yet the nature and
status of such a logic remain obscure. Westphal rightly suggests that
Gadamer's reference to a ''tacit dimension" indicates that more
attention needs to be given to the relation of Gadamer and Polanyi. 15

Hermeneutical Understanding
101
Understanding the text leads to a historical formulation of the
relationship between its time and the time of the investigator. The
historian may forget this in his drive for "objectivity," and his quest to
know "how things really happened." But such preunderstandings do
not provide answers ofan already determined content in the sense of a
prejudgement. In a successful conversation, the partners understand
one another without being obliged to articulate explicitly the compre-
hensive horizon within which their understanding takes place. Thus,
talk about the "question" the text poses can only be metaphorical.
Habermas points out that general linguistics immerses itself in
the prevalence of language games without being able to justify the
language game of analysis itself Apparently every ordinary language
grammar furnishes the possibility of transcending the language it
determines, that is, of translating it into other languages. Since
Humboldt, the sciences of language have been out to demonstrate a
close connection between linguistic forms and world-view. But since
we are never locked into a single grammar, Habermas concludes that
the relativism of linguistic world-views and the monadology of
language games are equally illusory. The concept of translation is
itself dialectical; it expresses in language a state of affairs that cannot
be literally expressed in it but can nevertheless be recalled "in other
words."
Gadamer
calls
this
the
hermeneutic
experience,
and
emphasizes that translation is necessary only when understanding is
disturbed. The role ofthe discussion partner includes virtually the role
ofthe interpreter, that is, of someone who can not only converse in one
language but can bring about an understanding between different
languages. Wittgenstein believed that learning a foreign language has
the same structure as growing up in one's own nl0ther tongue because
he lacked a dialectical concept of translation. For Gadamer, on the
other hand, horizons are open and they shift; we enter into them and
they in turn move with us. The life-worlds that determine the grammar
of language games are not closed forms of life, as Wittgenstein's
monadological conception suggests. 16 Wittgenstein showed how the
rules of linguistic communication are, at the same time, rules for the
instructional practice through which they can be internalized. But he
failed to appreciate that the same rules also include the conditions of
possibility of their interpretation. The limits of the world that a
language defines are not irrevocable, and translation is the medium in
which these revisions take place. Learning his mother tongue, the
infant acquires not only conditions of possible consensus but also

102
Soft Logic
conditions of possible interpretation. The pluralism of language games
constitute additional dimensions of interpretation, yet Wittgenstein
saw only invariant linkages between symbols and activities. He failed
thus to appreciate that the application of rules includes their
interpretation and further development. To be sure, Wittgenstein has
made us aware - contrary to the positivist bias - that the application of
grammatical rules cannot in turn be defmed at the symbolic level
according to general rules; it can be inculcated only as a complex of
language and practice, and internalized as a part ofa life-form. But he
remained enough of a positivist to conceive of this practice as the
reproduction of fixed patterns. I? Actually, however, language games
are not monadically sealed off; they are porous to both translation and
interpretation. The grammar of a language does not contain a rigid
design for its application, and whoever has learned to apply its rules
has not only acquired the ability to express himselfbut also to interpret
experiences in the language. Along with their possible application,
grammatical rules simultaneously imply the need for interpretation,
but Wittgenstein failed to see this, and as a consequence he conceived
the practice of language games unhistorically. While giving up on the
notion of an ideal language, the concept of a language game remains
indebted to an unacknowledged model of formalized languages. The
ambiguity ofordinary language and the imprecision of its rules are for
Wittgenstein only apparent; every language game is completely
ordered, and the language analyst can rely on this as a standard for
critique. Even though ordinary language cannot be reconstructed in
formal language, its grammar is still no less precise and unequivocal
than that ofa calculus.
Gadamer uses the image of a horizon to capture the basic
heuristic character of every concrete natural language. Far from
having a closed boundary, each such language can in principle
incorporate what is linguistically foreign and at first incompre-
hensible. We are always occupied with what is closest to us; thus, we
have continually to curb a too hasty assimilation ofthe past to our own
expectations of meaning. Historical events are constructed within the
reference system of a story; they cannot be presented without relation
to other, later events. The predicates with which a historical event is
invariably presented require the appearance of later events in the light
of which the event in question appears as a historical event.
Consequently the historical description of events becomes in the
course of time richer than is the empirical observation at the moment

Hermeneutical Understanding
103
of their happening. 18 The language in which the historian presents
events does not primarily express observations but the interrelations of
a series of interpretations. The historian is no mere chronicler
restricted to observation; he is engaged in communicative experiences,
for just to do history is to employ some over-arching conception that
goes beyond what is given. A series of events acquires the unity of a
story only from a point of view that cannot be taken from these events
themselves. As long as new points of view arise, the same events can
enter into other stories and acquire new meanings. Translation aims at
making what is alien our own; thus, hermeneutics is not to be viewed
as a mere subordinate discipline within the humanities (Geistes-
wissenschaften).19 The historical experience is prior to all method
because it is the matrix out of which arise the questions that it then
directs to science. Language is not simply a mirror; it is a game of
interpretation in which we are engaged. Even the language games of
the natural sciences remain related to the metalanguage presented in
the mother tongue. Gadamer argues that history precedes me and my
reflection, for I belong to history before I belong to myself: He
concludes that an exhaustive critique of prejudice and of ideology is
impossible because there is no zero point from which to proceed.20 For
Gadamer, prejudice is not the opposite of reason; it is a component of
understanding linked to the fmite historical character of the human
being. It is a mistake to believe that there are only unfounded
prejudices, and the project of a science free from prejudice is
impossible. The accord that does support us is the understanding
reached in dialogue, the question and answer relation.
There is the technical or instrumental interest that governs the
empirical-analytical sciences and that constitutes the modern ideology.
The humanities, by contrast, are essentially disciplines of culture and
tradition. For Habermas, the principal flaw ofGadamer's account is to
have ontologized hermeneutics. He insists that this experience cannot
be canonized, and that the gesture of hermeneutics is one of
acknowledging the historical conditions to which all human under-
standing is subject. The interpretation of a text cannot be treated as an
extension of the dialogical situation. Gadamer accepted Heidegger's
extension of the concept of hermeneutical understanding to cover and
defme human existence, and this made him go beyond method and
include in hermeneutics not only science but history as welL No
conceptual language constitutes a final constraint on thought as long
as the thinker engages in dialogue. When Gadamer wrote that "Being

104
Soft Logic
which can be understood is language," it was implied that anything
real can never be completely understood. What we find happening in
speaking is not a mere reification of intended meaning, but an
endeavor that continually modifies itself: Language is considered a
bridge rather than a barrier, and interpretation is more than a
technique of dealing with texts. In the twentieth century, both text and
interpretation have acquired a new importance, and the shift is
connected with the role that the phenomenon of language has come to
play in our thought. The ideal of scientific knowledge that modern
science follows came out of the model of nature as mathematically
ordered (a model that was first developed by Galileo in his
mechanics). In this way, ordinary language lost its primacy for
science, while still retaining its dominance outside the natural
sciences. In modern logic and scientific method, language was
replaced by mathematical notation, but more recently interest in
ordinary language has reemerged. Neither the neo-Kantians nor the
early phenomenologists were interested in language, which came to
play a pivotal role in the philosophy of Ernst Cassirer and Martin
Heidegger. From Nietzsche we learned to doubt the grounding oftruth
in self-certainty and self-consciousness, and Freud acquainted us with
the complexities of the unconscious. All this contributed to the
discovery ofthe priority of language, and worked against the apparent
evidence of self-consciousness and the positivist acceptance of "facts."
The validity ofprotocol-sentences as the foundation of knowledge was
abandoned even by the members of the Vienna Circle because it was
realized that the so-called given can never be separated from inter-
pretation. Thus, interpretation is not an additional superimposed
procedure of knowing but constitutes the original structure of "Being-
in-the-world.,,21 Indeed, what makes something a text shows itself only
by means ofinterpretation: preunderstanding, anticipation ofmeaning,
and, thereby, a great many circumstances that do not appear in the text
play a crucial role in the reading of the text. Every translation, even
the so-called literal translation, is a sort of interpretation,22 for it is
generally taken for granted that the text must be interpreted not only
literally.
Since Kant, epistemology has been taken as a foundationalist
enterprise - one that separates knowledge from other forms of belief:
Hermeneutics, on the other hand, rejects the idea that the primary task
of philosophy is to supply foundations and guarantee certainty. It
proclaims knowledge to be pragmatically relative to contexts of

Hermeneutical Understanding
105
understanding, and makes the interpretation oftexts a paradigm of the
phenomenon of understanding in general. Epistemology and hermen-
eutics
have
thus
evolved
into
competing
views
about
what
philosophical
theories
must
do.
Hermeneutics
maintains
that
understanding is always interpretive, that there is no uniquely
privileged standpoint, that reading rather than seeing is the paradigm
case, and that science, understanding, and interpretation require
periodical
reexaminations.
Both
Derrida's
grammatology
and
Gadamer's hermeneutics are theories ofunderstanding on the model of
reading. Instead of "interpretation," the grammtological investigation
is characterized as "deconstruction" or "dissemination," and there is
nothing like a hidden meaning that the heuristic interpretation must
uncover. Signs refer only to other signs, and the text, like all language,
is inherently discontinuous. Gadamer and Derrida de-emphasize the
biological factors in human understanding, but while what we see is
doubtless influenced by what we claim to know, human beings do
grow up to see basically sinlilar things across different languages,
cultures, and historical epochs. Neither translation nor interpretation
would be possible but for a species specific human nature. Indeed,
Gadamer's preunderstanding is essentially pre-linguistic, for only after
it has been formulated in language does it become historically or
culturally relative; history, after all, is based on the interpretation of
written texts. Many have come to suspect that the unity linking
historical events into causal chains is really more a tradition of the
historian's narrative than an observable empirical event.23 Tied to the
assumption that a tradition is essentially continuous is the beliefthat it
consists of entities that can be circumscribed in a communicative
discourse, no matter how diverse these entities are. But there must be
some shared belief: if there is to be understanding at all, and that
shared belief is represented in the assumption of a common human
nature.
Derrida's view seems to be that we cannot say what we mean
because intention is never fully presented to itself: and it is not
transparent even to the intender. Reality is for Derrida only a textual
activity because there is no "natural attachment" to the real referent
even for proper names. Hoy rightly points out, however, that the
historian and the philosopher, unlike the novelist, seem to write with
the commitment to the actual existence of real events and definite
truths.24 The more adequate response seems to be not to deny that
there are real objects but to point out that no event is ever captured in a

106
Soft Logic
description. Gadamer frequently reiterates that the historical problem
is not a problem of method at all. He points out that it has been the
obsession with Method and with thinking, i.e., that the primary task of
hermeneutics is to specify a distinctive method for the humanities
rivaling that of the natural sciences, that has plagued and distorted
nineteenth-century hermeneutics. This led to a view of understanding
as a primarily psychologic and subjective activity, involving some sort
ofempathy that enables us to identify with the intentions of the author
ofa text or of a historical personality. Hermeneutical understanding is
what Gadamer takes to be characteristic of our relations with works of
art, texts, and history. Contrary to Descartes and Hegel, Gadamer sees
this as a task that can never achieve fmality or closure. The meaning
of what we seek to understand is not self-contained and does not exist
in isolation; to understand is always to understand differently. The
historical movement of human life consists in its never being entirely
bound to anyone standpoint and hence, it can never have a truly
closed horizon.25 The primary intention of Truth and Method is to
defend and elucidate the legitimacy of speaking about the truth of
works of art, texts, and traditions. Gadamer tells us that it was his
intention to show that there is a different kind of knowledge and truth
that is not covered by the method of the natural sciences, and that is
only available to us through historical and hermeneutical under-
standing. At the same time, he rejects what Hegel took to be ground
for his conception of truth revealed in Wissenschajt, that "truth is the
whole," the absolute knowledge that completes and overcomes
experience.26 Bernstein points out, however, that Gadamer himself is
employing a concept of truth that he never fully makes explicit. His
typical phrasing is to speak of a "claim to truth" that works of art,
texts, and traditions make open to us. There is no objective or
ahistorical perspective from which we can evaluate such competing
claims to truth. There is no method that guarantees truth, but if there
are no methods or criteria, there is no truth either, for it means that we
can never verify what we claim to be true. When questions are asked
about the validity of standards or criteria that are to serve as the basis
for criticism, Gadamer tells us that they, too, are handed down to us
and need to be rec0vered from tradition. But Bernstein points out that
this response is not adequate because Gadamer does not fully realize
that we are living in a time when the very conditions required for the
exercise ofphronesis - the shared acceptance and stability ofuniversal
principles and laws - are themselves breaking down. Many critics of

Hermeneutical Understanding
107
Gadamer stress the conservative implications of his philosophical
hermeneutics.
A primary concern of modem philosophy that has persisted from
Descartes until the present has been to tum philosophy into a
"rigorous science," and to overcome a situation where philosophy
appears to be the endless battleground among competing opinions. It
presupposes that there are problems to be solved once and for all, and
that there is a systematic methodology for doing this. More recently
postmodemist writers like Rorty, Feyerabend, and Derrida have come
to question this. There is no Archimedian point, no fundamental
position,
no theoretical
perspective that
lies
outside
our
own
historicity. There is no absolute knowledge or final understanding, and
the point of philosophical hermeneutics is that it corrects the peculiar
falsehood
of modernity,
the
idolatry of scientific method
and
technology. It is all too frequently taken for granted that if we cannot
come up with universally fixed criteria to measure the plausibility of
competing interpretations, then this means that we have no rational
basis for distinguishing better from worse interpretations. Kuhn,
Lakatos, Feyerabend, Toulmin, among others, have demonstrated the
essential openness and indeterminacy of criteria in choosing among
rival theories, paradigms, and research programs. All of them would
agree with Kuhn's claim that there is no neutral algorithm for theory
choice, no systematic decision procedure that, properly applied, must
lead each individual scientist to the same conclusion.27 Kuhn himself
realizes that many claims he has been making bear a close affinity
with those that have been central to contemporary hermeneutics.28
Gadamer rejects the thesis that Popper calls "The Myth of the
Framework" - that we are prisoners caught in the framework of our
theories,
our expectations, and that there is no possibility of
discovering these limitations.29 We should not fool ourselves into
thinking that there are any a priori limitations or any hidden con-
straints on the invention of new vocabularies and forms of discourse.
Gadamer concludes that it is really philosophical hermeneutics rather
than epistemology, "Method," or science that can achieve what
philosophy has always promised us: some profound access to "truth."
He, too, wants the conlforts of consensus, even if it is only the
consensus of the community of interpreters.3o Thus, science is more
like hermeneutical understanding than Gadamer realizes, and disputes
about rival hermeneutical interpretations are more like "Method" than
Gadamer acknowledges.31

108
Soft Logic
Bernstein rightly points out that techniques of deconstruction can
be turned against themselves. When decoded, such relativism is more
honestly acknowledged by Feyerabend who tells us that, objectively,
there
is
not
much
choice
between
antisemitism
and
humani-
tarianism.32 The real issue is between those who think: our culture,
purposes, and institutions cannot be supported except conversationally,
and those who still hope for other sorts of support.33 Whereas
Gadamer is a representative of modernity - at least insofar as he
believes that philosophy (when properly reconstructed) still holds out
the promise of knowledge and truth, even when all necessary
concessions have been made - philosophers like Feyerabend, Rorty,
and Derrida are postn10demist thinkers who seek to root out the last
vestiges ofa "metaphysics ofpresence." One ofthe deepest aspirations
since Hegel -
including Kierkegaard, Nietzsche,
Marx,
Freud,
Heidegger, Wittgenstein, Foucault, and Derrida - has been to "end"
philosophy. It is Heidegger who gave the idea of hermeneutics its
maximal extension by characterizing hermeneutic understanding a
necessary feature of all human experience. It is this all-encompassing
sense of hermeneutics we find elaborated in Gadamer's Truth and
Method. 34 Larmore points out that one reaction to this conceptual
inflation may be to suspect that the term "hermeneutics" has lost any
specific sense and has become a mere slogan. This expansion of the
hermeneutical perspective to include all forms of knowledge and
experience stems from the realization that, epistemologically, the
interpretation of texts does not differ from the kinds of knowledge the
natural
sciences
give
us.
Larmore
argues
that
although
the
"historicity"
of all
knowledge
clain1s
does
undermine
certain
important epistemological views, it does not imply, either in textual
interpretation or elsewhere, the historical relativism that Gadamer in
fact embraces. He has a "contextualist" view ofjustification of belief:
we are never able to expose all our beliefs to scrutiny at the same time.
The critical examination of some beliefs must always take place
against the backdrop of other beliefs that, at least for the purpose at
hand, are held constant and immune to revision.35 Following Popper,
Larmore emphasizes that critical reflection proceeding in a piecemeal
fashion can attain at least relative objectivity. While we cannot subject
all our beliefs to critical examination, we do not thereby have reason to
discard that ideal as one worth pursuing as far as possible.
Even if the natural sciences are historically relative, there is
progress in an instrumental and technological sense that is hard to

Hermeneutical Understanding
109
explain away. The positions that Gadamer attacks are ones that most
ofus are naturally inclined to hold. They are that textual interpretation
is concerned with determining the meaning, and not the truth, of what
has been said or written; that it has as its object what the author
intended to say; and that it attempts to reconstruct the author's
meaning as it actually was, without confusing it with our own views
about the subject matter. What a text means need not, it is true,
coincide with everything the author had in mind. But if what the
author meant in the act of composing the text is altogether irrelevant
to what the text itself means, we would have no good reason to evoke
the known beliefs of the author to ascertain the meaning of this text.
Furthermore, iftextual meaning did not coincide with what the author
nleant to say, we would have no right to presume that one part of the
text illuminates the meaning ofanother part ofthe same text either. To
be sure, nothing guarantees that an author will prove to be the best
interpreter of his work, for it may contain meanings of which he is
unaware. But this only implies that in the writing of texts, as in our
other actions, we do not have an immediate and foolproof access to the
full range of our intentions. Our intentions are shaped in a large
measure by our beliefs, some of which remain beyond our critical
control. It is undeniable that the interpretation we give reflects our
historical and cultural situation, but it does not follow that objectivity
and history form antithetical forms ofknowledge.
Notes
1 Brice R. Wachterhauser, "History and Language in Understanding,"
Hermeneutics and Modern Philosophy, Albany, NY: State University ofNew
York Press, 1986, p. 6.
2 Ibid., p. 16.
3 Ibid., p. 26.
4 Martin Heidegger, Sein und Zeit, Tiibingen: Max Wiemeyer Verlag,
1977, p. 62; trans. by J. Macquarrie and C. Robinson under the title Being and
Time, New York, NY: Harper & Row, 1962, p. 89.
5 Hans-Georg Gadamer, Wahrheit und Methode, Tiibingen: J.C.B. Mohr
(Paul Siebeck), 1960, p. 394, trans. under the title Truth and Method, New
York, NY: Barden and Cumming, 1975, p. 377.
6 Wachterhauser, "History and Language," p. 31.

110
Soft Logic
7 Gadamer, Wahrheit und Methode, p. 450, Truth and Method, p. 432.
8Wachterhauser, "History and Language," p. 31.
9 Gadamer, Truth and Method, p. xii.
10 Merold Westphal, "Hegel and Gadamer," in Hermeneutics and
Modern Philoisophy, Wachterhauser, p. 72.
11 Hans-Georg Gadamer, Philosophical Hermeneutics, trans. David E.
Linge, Berkleley, CA: 1976, p. 30; Truth and Method, p. 407.
12Gadamer, Philosophical Hermeneutics, p. 11.
13 Truth and Method, p. 268.
14 Ibid., p. 329.
15 Westphal, "Hegel and Gadamer," p. 86 n77.
16 Jiirgen Habermas, "A Review ofGadamer's Truth and Method," in
Hermeneutics and Modern Philosophy, Wachterhauser, p. 247.
17 Ibid., p. 249.
18 Ibid., p. 256.
19 Hans-Georg Gadamer, "On the Scope and Function ofHermeneutical
Reflection," in Hermeneutics and Modern Philosophy, Wachterhauser, p. 278.
20 Paul Ricoeur, "Hermeneutics and Critique ofIdeology," in
Hermeneutics and Modern Philosophy, Wachterhauser, p. 308.
21 Hans-Georg Gadamer, "Text and Interpretation," in Hermeneutics and
Modern Philosophy, Wachterhauser, p. 388.
22 Ibid., p. 391.
23 Joseph Griinfeld, "On the Relations ofHume's Philosophical and
Historial Writings," Ph.D. Thesis, The Hebrew University, Jeruselen1, 1959.
24 David Couzens Hoy, "Must We Say What We Mean? The
Grammatological Critique ofHermeneutics," in Hermeneutics and Modern
Philosophy, Wachterhauser, p. 412.
25 Gadamer, Wahrheit und Methode, p. 288, Truth and Method, p. 271.
26 Gadamer, Wahrheit und Methode, p. 337, Truth and Method, p. 318.
27 Thomas Kuhn, The Structure ofScientific Revolutions (Chicago, IL:
Chicago Univesity Press, 1970), p. 200.
28 Thomas Kuhn, The Essential Tension (Chicago, IL: Chicago
University Press, 1977), Preface.
29 Karl Popper, "Normal Science and Its Dangers," in Criticism and the
Growth ofKnowledge, eds. Imre Lakatos and Alan Musgrave, Can1bridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1970, p. 56.
30 Richard J. Bernstein, "What is the Difference that Makes a
Difference? Gadamer, Habermas and Rorty," in Hermeneutics and Modern
Philosophy, Wachterhauser, p. 362.
31 Ibid., p. 363.
32 Paul Feyerabend, Science in a Free Society, London: 1978, pp. 8-9.
33 Richard Rorty, "Pragmatism, Relativism, and Irrationalism,"
Proceedings ofthe American Philosophical Association, 1980, pp. 727-28.

Hermeneutical Understanding
33 Richard Rorty~ "Pragmatism~ Relativism~ and Irrationalism~"
Proceedings ofthe American Philosophical Association, 1980, pp. 727-28.
I
34 Charles Larmore, "Tradition, Objectivity, and Hermeneutics," in
Hermeneutics and lv/odern Philosophy, Wachterhauser, p. 147.
35 Gadamer, Wahrheit und Methode, pp. 4263fI
111

Chapter Eight
Ricoeur's Conflict of Interpretations
Some Anglo-American philosophers of language have tended to treat
language as if it were a self-generating computing machine working
without the intervention of the human speaker. l Ricoeur, on the other
hand, is suspicious of formalistic approaches to language; instead he
proposes a hermeneutics that focuses on words that have a certain type
of multiple sense, a symbolic significance and a metaphorical
structure.
The
hermeneutic
task
is
to
decipher
this
multiple
significance, rejecting the quest for some pure and simple "given."
Ricoeur attempts to ground hermeneutics in phenomenology not by the
short route taken by Heideggar's ontology of understanding, but by
means of successive investigations into semantics and reflection.
Heidegger wanted to subordinate historical knowledge to ontological
understanding, but he gives us no sense in what way historical
knowledge is derived from this primordial understanding. Ricoeur's
approach is based on the semantic elucidation of the concept of
interpretation common to all heuristic disciplines; it is organized
around the central theme of multiple meaning or what he calls
symbolic sense. Exegesis has already accustomed us to the idea that a
text has several meanings and that these meanings have a tendency to
overlap. Interpretation for Ricoeur consists in deciphering the hidden
meaning in the apparent meaning, in unfolding the levels of meaning
implied in the literal meaning. There is interpretation wherever there
is literal meaning, and it is in interpretation that the plurality of
meaning is made manifest. Interpretation itself is composed of many

114
Soft Logic
different methods, but we have learned from exegetic disciplines (such
as psychoanalysis) that the so-called immediate consciousness is a
"false" consciousness. Thus, the logic of Ricoeur's hermeneutics is no
longer a formal logic but a transcendental one; he remains convinced
that a separate ontology is beyond our grasp because it is only through
the process of interpretation that we perceive the being we interpret.
For him, rival interpretations are not mere "language games," all
equally valid. Interpretation does not spring from nowhere; rather one
interprets in order to make explicit, to extend, and so to keep alive, the
tradition within which one always remains.
The symbol invites us to think, calls for an interpretation,
precisely because it means more than it says. An understanding of
structures is a necessary condition between symbolic naivete and
heuristic interpretation.2 In each heuristic discipline, interpretation is
at the borderline between language and lived experience, and what can
be symbolized is always found in nonlinguistic reality. Thus, multiple
meaning is a means of detecting a condition of being,3 and the
philosophical interest of symbolism is that it reveals by its structure
and meaning the equivocalness of being. Wilbur Urban has pointed
out that what makes language an instrument of knowledge is precisely
the fact that a sign can indicate one thing without ceasing to indicate
another.4 It is here that we grasp the effect of context, for when I
speak, I realize only part of the potentiality signified, while the rest of
the semantic possibilities continue to hover in the background. Since
polysemy and symbolism are part of all language, words have a mode
of presence other than the mode of existence of their structures. The
possibility of symbolism is rooted in the universal function of
language, namely the ability of lexenles to develop contextual
variations. The mystery of language is that it says something about
being. Speaker and hearer understand this relation immediately
because for them language aims at something; it has the double
function of saying something (meaning), and of saying something
about something (reference). It was Frege who showed that, besides
meaning (Sinn), it is reference (Bedeutung) that roots our sentences in
reality. It is only at the level of the sentence that language says
something, and short of this, it says nothing at all. The Chomskian
school of linguistics concerns itself with the nature and the problem
posed by the production ofnew sentences. Normal mastery of language
involves not only the ability to understand immediately an indefinite
number of entirely new sentences, but also the ability to interpret

Ricoeur '8 Conflict ofInterpretation
115
them. It is clear that a theory of language that neglects this "creative"
aspect of language can be only of marginal interest.5 The sentence is
an event, since it is transitory, passing, ephemeral, whereas the word
survives the sentence as a displaceable entity that holds itself available
for new uses. Words have more than one meaning, yet they do not
have infinity of meanings.6 The univocity or plurivocity of our
discourse is not due to our words but to the context in which they are
uttered. In univocal discourse, that is, discourse that permits only one
meaning, it is the context that expresses the semantic richness of the
words by establishing a frame of reference, a theme, or an identical
topic for all the words in the sentence. If the context tolerates or even
preserves several meanings at the same time, we deal with symbolic
language, which in saying one thing, says something else. More than
one interpretation is justified by the structure of the discourse because
the essential function of language is to be sought beyond the closure of
signs.
What Freud, Nietzsche, and Marx put in question is something
that appears to a phenomenologist as the origin of all meaning,
namely consciousness itself. Whereas immediate consciousness does
involve a kind of certainty, this certainty is not self-knowledge. Self-
counsiousness in the strong sense comes not at the beginning of our
investigation but at its end. It was Hegel who demonstrated that an
individual consciousness cannot be equated with its own content. It
belongs to the essence of consciousness never to be entirely explicit
and, through this failure, consciousness discovers that its immediate
self-certainty is mere presumption. The conscious is relative to the
system by which it is interpreted, Le., it is relative to its hermeneutics.
Consciousness is not a given but a task; we might say that whereas
consciousness is history, the unconscious is fate. Ricoeur rejects the
easy eclecticism in which the conscious and the unconscious are
vaguely complementary. We cannot simply add up Hegel and Freud;
and give to each one half of man because the two readings cover
exactly the same territory, and everything that can be said of the one
can also be said of the other. Freud teaches us that men are not gentle
creatures eager to be loved, but that they are essentially aggressive.
Religion gets its conflicting force from the most tenacious as well as
the most unrealistic of all desires - the desire for security. But Freud
never considered the limits of his interpretation, and it remains
unclear how psychoanalysis is to be coordinated with the sciences or
with interpretations other than itself Psychoanalysis has no means of

116
Soft Logic
resolving the problenl of what Leibniz called ''the radical origin of
things;"
all
it
can
do
is
unmask
the
infantile
and
archaic
representations that constitute this problem. While no one has done as
much as Freud to break the tyranny of supposed facts, he holds on to a
positivism that transcribes meanings into a language of mental
hydraulics.
First there was Copernicus, who destroyed the narcissistic
illusion by which the home of man was believed to be at rest at the
center of the universe. Then there was Darwin, who put an end to
man's illusion of being unconnected to the animal kingdom. And
fmally there was Freud, who discovered that man is not even master
over his own psyche. All these discoveries met with resistance by a
primitive and persistent narcissism. Freud made it clear that conflict is
inescapable in human life, since in addition to the problem of
becoming adult, there is the difficulty of attaining self-knowledge.
Between satisfaction and suppression there does indeed open up the
possibility of sublimation, but this is not enough to eliminate man's
delusions and dreams. It is, therefore, not by chance that Freud - the
materialist, determinist, scientist, and heir to the Enlightenment -
finally turns to the language of tragic myth to say the essential.
Ricoeur dwells on the ambivalent character of Freud's discourse who
discusses meaning (i.e. the meaning of dreams, symptoms, etc.)
together with force (repressions, conflicts, etc.). Freud can be read just
as philosophers read Plato, Descartes, and Kant, for Freud's writings
address themselves not just to professional psychiatrists but to the
public
at
large.
However,
besides
a
speculative
doctrine,
psychoanalysis involves a method of manipulating desire.
Such
analysis is ''work'' because it is a struggle against resistances. The
"facts" with which psychoanalysis deals are not verifiable by multiple
independent observers; it is unlike a theory in physics or biology since
the "work" involved is entirely within language. The result is that
psychoanalytic method is much closer to the historical sciences than to
the natural sciences. Ricoeur joins those logicians, semanticists, and
methodologists who deny the scientific status of psychoanalysis. He
emphasizes that psychoanalysis is limited by the very thing that
justifies it, namely its decision to discuss all cultural phenonlena
entirely in terms of desire and resistance. Freud teaches that merely to
know something will not make any real difference so long as the
underlying desire has not been altered.

Ricoeur's Conflict ofInterpretation
117
There is no real conflict of interpretation in Ricoeur between
psychoanalytical and religious discourse. He considers the concept of
original sin to be false knowledge, but maintains that this false
knowledge is at the same time also a true symbol. Each ofus discovers
evil, finds it already in himself: and in tracing back the origin of evil
to a distant ancestor, the myth discovers the situation of every man:
evil has already taken place. But Ricoeur denies the legitimacy of all
attempts to speculate about the concept of original sin as if it had
proper consistency. Unlike technical signs,
which
are perfectly
transparent, such symbolic signs remain partly opaque; what must thus
be scrutinized in the concept of original sin is not its false clarity but
its analogical richness. Its force lies in referring back to what is most
radical in the confession of sin, namely the fact that evil precedes
awareness. The .. only cognitive access to the experience of evil is
through symbolic expression, yet there does not exist a general
hermeneutics, only various separate domains.
Since one of the
essential characteristics ofthe symbol is that it is not arbitrary, Ricoeur
emphasizes that each hermeneutics remains legitimate in its own
context. But it should be noticed that there can be no conflict of
interpretations ifthey are not subject to the same logic. Indeed, neither
Hegel nor Freud would have admitted that they are in conflict with
each other. All they share is a denial that consciousness knows itself
completely, for after Hegel and Freud, consciousness is not immediate
but mediate; it is not a source but a task; the task of becoming
conscious. Ricoeur's reflection introduces a reductive and decon-
structive interpretation because he agrees with Freud and Hegel that
consciousness is originally false consciousness. At the same time, the
symbols that teach us the nature of evil are said by Ricoeur to be
resistant not only to factual knowledge but also to philosophical
understanding.7 Indeed both psychoanalysis and religion renlain
ultimately beyond Ricoeur's reflection; mere understanding remains
powerless against desire, and the nature of evil is finally never
understood. Even punishment defies his rational analysis because, if it
is taken for granted that the criminal is entitled to punishment
proportional to his crime, we can no longer accept original sin as
something in which humanity is collectively implicated. Evil shows
itself in false and violent synthesis, i.e. in political and ecclesiastic
institutions. That evil nlay work toward the advancement of the
Kingdom of Heaven is something the philosopher can never know.
The God whom he is seeking does not exist as a source of moral

118
Soft Logic
obligation, as the author of the commandments. Ricoeur himself
admits that, as a philosopher, he has no answer to these questions.
Notes
1 Paul Ricoeur, The Conflict ofInterpretations, ed. Don lhde, Evanston:
Northwestern University Press, 1974, p. x.
2 Ibid., p. 61.
3 Ibid., p. 66.
4 Stephen Ullman, The Principles ofSemantics, New York, NY:
Philosophical Library, 1957, p. 117.
5 Noam Chomsky, Current Issues in Linguistic Theory, New York, NY:
Humanities Press, 1964, pp. 7-8.
6 Ricoeur, The Conflicts ofInterpretations, p. 93.
7 Ibid., p. 332.

Chapter Nine
Quine's Soft Empiricism
In science it is common usage to say that what we predict are
observations. Theories are couched in sentences, and it is logic that
connects sentences to sentences, but what we need as critical links in
those connective chains are some sentences that are directly and firmly
associated with our stimulations. Unlike a report or a feeling, the
sentence must command the same verdict from all linguistically
competent witnesses of the occasion. Quine points out, however, that
such observability is vague at the edges, and that we fancy perspicuity
only by fancying boundaries. 1 The observation sentence is the means
of verbalizing the expectations that check on theory and the
requirement of intersubjectivity is what nlakes science objective.
Observation sentences are thus the vehicles of scientific evidence, but
they are also the entering wedge in the learning of language. For
Quine, observation sentences are the link between language, scientific
or not, and the real world that language is all about.2 It has now
become fashionable to question observation terms, and to claim that
the purportedly observable is theory-laden in varying degrees. Quine
admits that the notion of observation is relative to one or another
limited speech community. He claims, however, that since math-
ematics infiltrates all branches of our system, we shelter mathematical
truth by exercising our freedom to reject other beliefs. Even though he
denies that prediction is the ultimate purpose of science, his objective
is as much to choose the revision as it is to maximize further success
in prediction. Stimulation meanings have fuzzy boundaries, and in

120
Soft Logic
many cases no marshaling of tacit premises can quite define the
observation
category
because
of its
vagueness.
But
it
would
nevertheless seem that Quine's broadest scientific categories escape
empirical evidence altogether. He remains occupied with what has
been central to traditional epistemology, namely the relation of science
to sensory data, and the normative aspects of his epistemology get
naturalized into a chapter of engineering. The n10st notable norm of
Quine's naturalized epistemology coincides with Locke's saying that
there is nothing in the mind that has not been in the senses. This is a
prime specimen of naturalized epistemology, for it is the finding of
natural science itself, however fallible, that our information comes
only through impacts on our sensory receptors. Quine's point is
normative because it warns us against telepaths and soothsayers.
In a technical view, normative naturalized epistemology tangles
with margins of error, random deviation, and whatever else goes into
the applied mathematics of statistics.3 But Quine does not consider
predictions as checkpoints of science to be normative; rather he sees
them as defining the particular language-game of science, in contrast
to other good language-games such as fiction and poetry. Prediction. is
not the n1ain purpose ofthe science-game; it is what decides the game.
It is only occasionally the purpose, and in early times it gave primitive
science its survival value. But nowadays, the overwhelming purposes
of the science-game are technology and understanding.4 Quine is
within the pragmatist tradition, for he too rejects the notion of "deep"
truth and is content to "save the phenomena," not to postulate hidden
or deep entities within or behind them.
With our progressive
systematization of science, we have gone on to reify liquids and
invisible air, and we have integrated these things with bodies too small
to be detected. Abstract bodies have long since proved indispensable to
natural science - thus nun1ber, function, classes.5 At this point the
question arises of what to count as reification, and what to count as
just a useful but ontologically noncommittal tum of phrase. For the
idea that seemed to favor the reification of bodies, namely persistence
between exposures, makes no sense for abstract bodies. Quine argues
that the most decisive general mark of reification in our language and
kindred ones are pronouns. When a language is regin1ented in the
logical notation of a predicate calculus, the role of such pronouns is
played by bound variables. So he concludes that to be is to be the value
of a variable. Against Quine, it has been objected that what there is is
a question of fact and not of language. It has also been objected that

Quine's Soft Empiricism
121
the logical notation of quantification is an arbitrary and parochial
standard to adopt for ontological commitment.
Quine thinks of reference as relating names and other singular
terms to their objects, but he realizes that singular terms may fail to
refer to anything. Set theory also teaches that there are bound to be
individually unspecifiable objects - unspecifiable irrational numbers
notably - no matter how rich our notation and how cumbersome our
expressions. He believes that the question of ontological commitment
is parochial, though within a much broader range than is admitted by
symbolic logic. What particular there may be is, therefore, indifferent
to the truth of observation sentences. Once we have appropriately
regimented our system ofthe world or part of it, we can so interpret it
as to get by with only the slender ontology of whole numbers. Two
ontologies, if explicitly correlated one-to-one, are considered by Quine
to be empirically on a par, and there is no empirical ground for
choosing the one rather than the other. As wholes they are empirically
indistinguishable, but when we move beyond sensible bodies and
proceed to posit atoms, electrons, quarks, numbers, classes, and
relations, our imagination is bolstered by analogies in varying degrees.
Light waves, for example, rest on a tenuous analogy, for unlike water
waves, they are not waves on or in anything. It would seem then not
only that the elementary particles are unlike bodies, but that there are
no such entities to begin with. Theories can threaten not only the
cherished analogy of elementary particles but the very sense of Quine's
ontological question. On one reading, these deviations take the form of
probabilistic predictions whereas, on an alternative reading, they call
for basic departures from the logic oftruth functions.
Quine's notion of radical translation, according to which the
linguist tries to relate the native's behavior to his language from
scratch, as it were, turns out to be merely a thought experiment. Critics
have rightly argued that the thesis is a consequence of his behavior-
ism, and some have claimed that it anl0unts to a reductio ad absurdum
of behaviorism.6 But Quine insists that a behaviorist approach to
linguistics is mandatory. Whereas in psychology we mayor may not be
behaviorists, in linguistics we have no choice because each ofus learns
his language by observing other people's behavior, and having his own
faltering behavior observed and reinforced. 7 What is crucial, however,
in every case, is how such situations are interpreted, and Quine
admittedly has no theory of interpretation. The correctness of one's
language in a philosophical discussion of this sort is certainly not

122
Soft Logic
subject to external checkpoints that can be applied to particular
expressions. Quine insists that science is one language-gan1e, and
poetry and fiction quite another, yet his own philosophical language-
game participates in both without further discussion. What should
count as a shared situation is by no means obvious, and our mental life
in particular is largely a function of the language in which we describe
and discuss it. Quine's indeterminacy of translation demonstrates that
there is more to linguistic behavior than what is to be gleaned from
overt behavior in observable circumstances. Usually the concurrent,
publicly observable situation does not enable us to predict what a
speaker even of our own language is going to say, for utterances
commonly bear little relevance to the circumstances outwardly
observable at the time. Behaviorism is, therefore, not the only possible
theory in linguistics as Chomsky and the Cartesian linguistic tradition
demonstrate. There are always ongoing projects and unshared past
experiences, and there are no sentences that hinge strictly on the
concurrent publicly observable situation. Greetings, commands, and
questions play no less a role in a child's acquisition of language than
do declarative sentences. The radical translator can never be sure that
the native's utterance is linked to any specific situation, and this can,
therefore, not be settled conclusively by offering some sentences to the
native's assent or dissent. Reference becomes inscrutable to the degree
that there is more than one way of guessing the meaning of signs, yet
Quine insists that empiricism must be taken as the key operative in
language acquisition and in our interpretation of language generally.
Once it is realized, however, that there is no one situation to which the
native's observation sentence and the linguist's translation of it are
empirically linked, Quine's adoption of Locke's saying that there is
nothing in the mind that has not been in the senses becomes largely
metaphorical. He himself realizes that the notion of "satisfaction" is
far too vague to serve such a purpose, for what the relevant stimulus
meanings are is a function of our interpretation, and Quine has no
theory ofinterpretation. His empiricism is "soft" because we can never
reliably identify the stimulations that prompt assent or dissent by
direct observation or in an inductive fashion.
What either the linguist or the native "means" in radical trans-
lation is not subject to direct empirical verification, for Quine does not
know which stimulations are sufficiently similar to count as the same
response. Such a content does not exist even for the same speaker on
different occasions, let alone for speakers of alien languages and

Quine's Soft Empiricism
123
cultures. Quine defines a sentence as observational for a whole
community when it is observational for each member, but in radical
translation this, of course, never happens. A situation is not a sense
stimulus; rather it is a context taken for granted, and any two
individuals cannot be said to be in the same situation without further
ado. Quine assumes that they can do without intersubjective likeness of
stimulation by means of mere empathy, for he believes that empathy
dominates the learning of language both of the child and the field
linguist.s Empathy, however, is something assumed; it is not open to
direct behavioral inspection. We are said by Quine to have an
"uncanny knack" for empathizing another's perceptual situation, and
this is how we learn to speak the same language. But being ignorant of
the relevant physiological and optical mechanisms, this does not
amount to an empirical explanation in the required sense. Quine
compares this "knack" to our ability to recognize faces without being
able to describe them,9 and by means of such an intuition he attempts
to bridge the gap linking nerve endings to verbal behavior, or what
comes to the same thing, link the object with the meaning we give the
object. Success in communication is judged by smoothness in conver-
sation, by frequent predictability of verbal and nonverbal reaction, and
by the coherence and plausibility ofnative testimony. At the same time
Quine admits that empathy is unable to bridge the gap between rival
manuals of radical translation. While the fluency of conversation is
said to be factual, the "facts" referred to tum out to be psychological
and introspective. To account for communication, Quine theorizes that
we are dissimilar machines similarly programmed,1O yet we couldn't
be similarly programmed unless we were birds of a feather. Quine
locates the stimulations at the subject's surface, as it were, but
postulates a preestablished harmony between behavior and I ~1.guage
by means ofempathy.
Unlike observation sentences, utterances resist direct correlations
with concurrent stimulations. There is guesswork here, but revision
sets in, determining tentative translation of a potential infmity of
sentences. The routine of query and assent that had been the linguist's
standby in construing observation sentences continues to be available
at the higher and conjectural levels. II Linguists can usually avoid
radical translation by finding someone who can interpret the language,
however tentatively, into a somewhat familiar one. But it is only
radical translation that exposes the poverty of data for the individ-
uation of meanings. 12 Successive utterances may be expected to have

124
Soft Logic
some bearings on one another, but the translator depends on
psychological conjectures as to what the native is likely to believe. The
native's mind, failing evidence to the contrary, is presumed to be
pretty much like that of the translator's. What Quine calls "practical
psychology" proceeds on the assumption that one takes one's own
language and culture pretty much for granted. There are no rules for
deciding how much grotesqueness we may allow, and we cannot,
therefore, expect that two radical translators, working independently,
will come up with the same translation manual. Their manuals might
be indistinguishable in terms of the native's behavior that the two
translators have reason to expect, and yet each manual might prescribe
some translation that the other translator would reject. Quine directs
his indeterminacy thesis on a radically exotic language for the sake of
plausibility, but the principle applies equally to the translator's own
language. What the indeterminacy thesis is meant to bring out is that
the radical translator is bound to impose as much as he discovers. 13
The importance ofanalycity lapses in the light ofQuine's holism.
Dictionaries are occupied with explaining the meaning of words, and
the work is neither myth nor capriciousness. Quine points out that it is
not directed at cognitive equivalencies nor at synonymy of terms, and
that it presupposes no particular notion ofmeaning. The lexicographer
wants to improve his reader's chances at successful communication.
Often a dictionary entry neither paraphrases the word nor labels its
objects, but rather describes the use of the word in sentences. In
practice we credit someone with understanding a sentence if we are
not surprised by the circumstances of his uttering it or by his reaction
to hearing it. We suspect that he does not understand a sentence if the
event is dramatically at variance with these conditions. So no
boundary is evident, no general criterion, for deciding whether he
actually misunderstands the sentence or merely holds some universal
theory regarding the subject matter. 14 Understanding, behavioristically
viewed, is a statistical effect; it resides in multiplicities. Lexicography
has no need for synonymy nor for sharp distinctions between under-
standing and misunderstanding. The lexicographer does what he can
to adjust the reader's verbal behavior to that of the community as a
whole or some preferred part of it. This adjustment is a matter of
degree and a vague one; a nlatter of fluency and effectiveness in
dialogue.
Quine nevertheless insists that observation sentences, learned
ostensibly, are where our command of language begins because our

Quine's Soft Empiricism
125
learning them fron1 our elders depends heavily on their ability to guess
that we are getting appropriate perceptions. For Quine, learning a
language in the field and teaching it in the nursery are much the same
at the level of observation sentences: a matter of perceiving that the
subject perceives that p.IS But such ascription of perception always
calls for background knowledge and conjecture on the part of the
ascriber as we move away from observation sentences. Even though a
belief can have many believers, perceptions are tested as veridical,
whereas beliefs are not. Manifestations of belief vary extravagantly
with the beliefand the circumstances ofthe believer, and ascriptions of
belief run more tenuous as the supporting evidence becomes more
diffuse. By contrast, the construction "perceives that p" is essential to
the propagation oflanguage, and at the en1pirical level it is only partly
under control by the empirical evidence.
This
is because,
by
extrapolation and analogy, it has spawned a boundless and lawless
ascription of beliefs. Responsible ones grade off into irresponsible
ones, and Quine's empirical checks turn out to be incapable of
drawing a line between the twO. 16 Responsible belief is what can be
checked, and the checking is done by us, but there is no consensus on
how to draw a line between science on the one hand, and religion and
magic on the other. Empathy is a product of culture, and it is the base,
not only of belief: but also of "perceives that p" because the allowable
departures from direct quotation depend on what the ascriber deems
the quoted subject to have in mind. Bretano's notion of intentional
discourse, which Quine adopts, is not subject to the kind of empirical
checks on which Quine insists. There is consequently a lack of
standards in the evaluation of beliefs. Quine retains intentional
discourse because he believes that it is vital to communication and
harbors indispensable lore about human activity and motivation. While
he has no substitute for it, he does not consider it to be part of the
scientific language-game. What Quine is out to preserve is the
transparency and efficiently of classical predicate logic. He retains the
intentional mode of discourse even though he considers its mentalistic
strain archaic, a preference for final cause over efficient cause as a
mode of explanation. Purpose is one of the mentalistic notions drawn
from introspection, as are dispositions of capability. Quine realizes
that the idea of efficient cause, that is the root of science, is also
mentalistic in origin, since it is a projection of the subjective sense of
effort. It did, however, gain the upper hand over final cause with the

Quine's Soft Empiricism
125
learning them from our elders depends heavily on their ability to guess
that we are getting appropriate perceptions. For Quine, learning a
language in the field and teaching it in the nursery are much the same
at the level of observation sentences: a matter of perceiving that the
subject perceives that p.15 But such ascription of perception always
calls for background knowledge and conjecture on the part of the
ascriber as we move away from observation sentences. Even though a
belief can have many believers, perceptions are tested as veridical,
whereas beliefs are not. Manifestations of belief vary extravagantly
with the beliefand the circumstances ofthe believer, and ascriptions of
belief run more tenuous as the supporting evidence becomes more
diffuse. By contrast, the construction "perceives that p" is essential to
the propagation of language, and at the empirical level it is only partly
under control by the empirical evidence.
This
is because,
by
extrapolation and analogy, it has spawned a boundless and lawless
ascription of beliefs. Responsible ones grade off into irresponsible
ones, and Quine's empirical checks turn out to be incapable of
drawing a line between the twO. 16 Responsible belief is what can be
checked, and the checking is done by us, but there is no consensus on
how to draw a line between science on the one hand, and religion and
magic on the other. Empathy is a product ofculture, and it is the base,
not only of belief, but also of "perceives that p" because the allowable
departures from direct quotation depend on what the ascriber deems
the quoted subject to have in mind. Bretano's notion of intentional
discourse, which Quine adopts, is not subject to the kind of empirical
checks on which Quine insists. There is consequently a lack of
standards in the evaluation of beliefs. Quine retains intentional
discourse because he believes that it is vital to communication and
harbors indispensable lore about human activity and motivation. While
he has no substitute for it, he does not consider it to be part of the
scientific language-game. What Quine is out to preserve is the
transparency and efficiently of classical predicate logic. He retains the
intentional mode of discourse even though he considers its mentalistic
strain archaic, a preference for final cause over efficient cause as a
mode of explanation. Purpose is one of the mentalistic notions drawn
from introspection, as are dispositions of capability. Quine realizes
that the idea of efficient cause, that is the root of science, is also
mentalistic in origin, since it is a projection of the subjective sense of
effort. It did, however, gain the upper hand over final cause with the

126
Soft Logic
rise of physics in the Renaissance, as nlatter displaced mind in
successful prediction.
What is true or false, it will be widely agreed, are propositions,
yet the notion of proposition itself is ambiguous. Some understand the
word as referring to sentences meeting certain specifications, while
others understand it as referring rather to the meaning of such
sentences. A weakness ofthis second position is the tenuousness ofthe
notion ofsentence meaning, and this tenuousness reaches the breaking
point ifone accepts Quine's thesis on the indeterminacy oftranslation.
Ambiguity or vagueness of terms can cause the truth value of a
sentence to depend on the speaker's intentions. To ascribe truth value
to a sentence is to ascribe whiteness to snow. Ascription of truth just
cancels the quotation marks: truth for Quine, following Tarski, is
disquotation.17 It seems paradoxical that the truth predicate, for all its
transparency, should prove useful to the point of indispensability, but
truth is notoriously enmeshed in paradox. The lesson of the antinomy
is that if a language has at its disposal the innocent notations of
quoting and appending, and also the notations of elementary logic,
then it cannot contain also the truth predicate that disquotes its own
eternal sentences - on the pain of inconsistency. Its truth predicate, or
its best approximation to one, must be implicitly disquotational, and
specifically must not disquote all the sentences that contain it. Quine
concludes that the definition of satisfaction is inductive rather than
direct; the two-place predicate "satisfies" becomes well-defined in its
inductive way, but the grasp of the predicate and how to use it carries
no assurance of the existence of a corresponding distinct object.
Satisfaction, and truth along with it, retain the status that truth already
enjoyed under the disquotation account: clear intelligibility without
full eliminability.18 It would seem, however, that the assumed contrast
between object language and metalanguage in ordinary discourse is
not fully intelligible either.
Quine's solution of the truth problem thus involves interlocked
hierarchies. The paradoxes of set theory - Russell's, Burali-Forti's,
Cantor's -
have overruled the common-sense notion that clear
membership conditions assure the existence of a class or a set. The
class at each level admits members freely from all and only lower
levels. We get a self-contained language with a hierarchy of better and
better truth predicates, but no best truth predicate. Whereas it is quite
in order for a truth value of a sentence to remain an open question, it
is inconvenient to leave the very_l!!~Ein~M!!~s~9f ~ ~~njencefure,,-er - - - -

Quine's Soft Empiricism
127
unsettled. 19 One might accordingly relinquish the law of the excluded
middle, and opt rather for a three-valued logic recognizing a limbo
between truth and falsity as a third value rather than meaningfulness.
A price is paid in the curnbersomeness of the three-valued logic, for
when we move out of the two-valued truth functions (conjunction,
alteration, and their derivatives), proliferation runs amok. It can still
be handled, but there is an evident premium on our simple streamlined
two-valued logic.20 Quine realizes that those who ask what truth is,
seek something deeper than disquotation, and that this is the valid
residue of the correspondence theory of truth. His holism does not
settle which sentences should be retained as eligible for truth and
falsity, and while he insists that truth is one thing and warranted belief
another,
his
behaviorist
linguistics
renders
such
a
distinction
unwarranted.
Those parts of mathematics that share no empirical meaning
because they never get applied in natural science, i.e. the higher
reaches of set theory, are still seen as meaningful by Quine because
they are covered by the same grammar and vocabulary that generate
the applied parts of mathematics. We are just sparing ourselves the
unnatural gerrymandering of grammar that would be needed to
exclude them. On Quine's two-valued approach they qualify as true or
false, albeit inscrutably.21 They are not wholly inscrutable, however,
because the axioms of set theory are generalities already in the
applicable part ofthe domain. Quine defines empirical content only for
testable theories, and emphasizes that much solid experimental science
fails testabitly in the defined sense. This can happen because of vague
and uncalibrated probabilities in the backlog oftheory; it also happens
in more complex ways not clearly understood. But while he has no
definition of enlpirical content to offer for such theories, he does
believe that it makes sense to speak of empirical equivalence among
them. Thus what it means for a theory to vary in ontology is not at all
obvious. If this is just a question of words, as he maintains,22 then, in
the relevant sense, his whole pursuit of truth is just a question of
words. He believes that theories or theory formulations can be logically
incompatible and still be empirically equivalent. In this manner he
imagines a global system empirically equivalent to our own, but on
alien terms. As a staunch empiricist he wants to reckon both theories
true while realizing that this line is unattractive if the alien culture is
less "simple" or "natural" than our own. But there is no limit to how
grotesquely cumbersome a theory might be and still be empirically

128
Soft Logic
equivalent to an elegant one. He decides in such a case to bar the alien
terms from our language as meaningless since they do not add to what
our own theory can predict. Yet Quine has no solid empirical reasons
for consigning all contexts of such alien terms to the limbo of
nonentities. What he takes to be "simplicity" and "naturalness" do not
vindicate the difference between truth and warrantabilty on which he
insists. Since he cannot know that the theories in question are
empirically equivalent, his account of truth is merely sectarian, as he
himself realizes. But then irresolubly rival systems of the world are a
fantasy beyond linguistic usage. Limited to our human terms and
devices, we grasp the world variously, and its ''unity'' or "identity" are
forever beyond our grasp.
There is an evident parallel between the empirical under
determination of global science and the indeterminacy of translation.
In both cases the totality of possible evidence is insufficient to sustain
the system uniquely, yet Quine insists that indeterminacy oftranslation
has nothing to do with inaccessible facts and human limitations since
dispositions to observable behavior are all there is for semantics to be
right or wrong about. Only in the case of systems of the world is he
prepared to admit that reality exceeds the scope of the human
apparatus in unspecifiable ways.23 What, therefore, the empirical
underdetermination of the global science shows is that there are
various
defensible
ways of conceiving
the
world.24
What
the
indeterminacy of translation shows is likewise that the notion of
propositions as sentence meanings is untenable. Quine's sectarian
truth theory is unable to tell us why the understanding technology
provides is preferable to other alien systems.
Notes
1 w. V. Quine, Pursuit ofTruth, Cambridge, London: Harvard
University Press, 1990, p. 3.
2 Ibid., p. 5.
3 Ibid., p. 20.
4 Ibid.
S Ibid., p. 25.
6 Joseph Grlinfeld, Changing Rational Standards, Lanham, NY:
University Press ofAmerica, 1985, pp. 100-121.

Quine's Soft Empiricism
7 Quine, Pursuit o/Truth, p. 38.
8 Ibid., p. 42.
9 Ibid., p. 43.
10 Ibid., p. 44.
II Ibid., p. 45.
12 Ibid.~ p. 46.
13 Ibid., p. 49.
14 Ibid., p. 58.
15 Ibid., p. 63.
16 Ibid., p. 67.
17 Ibid., p. 80.
18 Ibid., p. 88.
19 Ibid., p. 92.
20 Ibid.
21 Ibid., p. 94.
22 Ibid., p. 96.
23 Ibid., p. 101.
24 Ibid., p. 102.

Chapter Ten
Feyerabend's Flight From Reason
Feyerabend rejects reason in favor ofdiversity; he is convinced that the
uniformity imposed by reason reduces our joys, and our intellectual
and material resources. 1 He believes that the quarrels ofprofessors and
the contortions of Western art shrink into insignificance when
compared with the steady expansions of Western "progress" and the
spreading of Western business, science, and technology. What is being
imposed is a collection ofuniform views and practices, which have the
intellectual and political support of powerful groups and institutions.
Cultural differences disappear as indigenous crafts, customs, and
institutions are being replaced by Western objects, customs, and
organizations. He argues that all this has been lost to the claims of
objectivity. To say that a procedure or a point of view is objectively
true is to argue that it is valid irrespective of human expectations,
ideas, attitudes, and wishes. This, of course, is the fundamental claim
today's scientists and intellectuals make about their work. Feyerabend
points out, however, that while formal procedures make sense in some
worlds, they become silly in others. Popper's demand to look for
refutations and to take them seriously leads to an orderly development
only in a world where refuting instances are rare. But this becomes
impossible if theories are surrounded by an ocean of anomalies, as is
the case in many social situations. The problem is that notions of
scientific objectivity were used not only in creating knowledge but also
to legitimize existing information. Feyerabend denies that there is just
one right way of living, or universally valid and binding standards of

132
Soft Logic
knowledge. Reason has been a great success only among philosophers
who dislike complexity and politicians who use it to justify their
claims for hegemony.
Feyerabend concludes that to make sense of cultural variety we
have to adopt relativism.2 Efficiency has become the dominate value in
Western civilization to such an extent that all moral objections to it
seem naive and ''unscientific.'' He insists that not values nor facts nor
methods support the claim that science and science-based technology
(IQ tests, science-based medicine and agriculture, and the like) over-
rule all other enterprises.3 It is to be expected that actions that seem
perfectly normal in one culture are rejected and condemned in another.
Our debates about abortion, euthanasia, gene manipulation, artificial
insemination, and the intellectual, political, economic, and military
exchanges between different cultures illustrate the way in which values
change opinions, attitudes, and actions. The tensions that remain are
between values, not between reason and irrationality. According to
Feyerabend, it is not really possible to separate facts, values, and
rationality in any strict manner because facts are constituted by
procedures.that contain values, and values change under the impact of
facts. All principles ofreasoning assume a certain world order, and the
law of noncontradition does not apply in an absurd world.4 Indeed,
non-scientific cultures may have a clearer idea of the dangers lurking
in radically new knowledge, the destructive forces inherent in
information that is separated from its specific circumstances, and the
repercussions likely to arise from changes in the course of nature. It
would be shortsighted to assume that only the champions of progress
now possess the key for survival. All we get, in the opinion of
Feyerabend, is a monolithic monster "science" that is said to follow a
single path and speak with a single voice.5 He considers knowledge a
local commodity designed to satisfy specific needs and solve restricted
regional problems. Orthodox science accordingly is merely one institu-
tion among many. Criteria of acceptance and of success may change
from case to case in accordance with the values of those interested in a
particular area ofknowledge.6 Decisions concerning the value and use
of science are not scientific decisions; they are moral or existential
choices to live, think, feel, and believe in a certain way. Feyerabend
emphasizes that since many once utterly ridiculous views are now
regarded a solid part of our knowledge, it makes sense to preserve
faulty points of view for possible future use. The history of ideas,
methods, and prejudices is an integral part of the ongoing practice of

Feyerabend's Flight from Reason
133
science, and this practice can change direction in surprising ways. 7
There are, therefore, plausible arguments in favor of a plurality of
ideas, unscientific nonsense and allegedly refuted facts included.
Science is to be treated as one tradition among many, not as a standard
for what is and what cannot be accepted.8 While the objectivist
illegitimately separates theory from practice, thought, .and emotion,
and nature from society, all we really have, according to Feyerabend,
is a variety of approaches based on different models and successful in
restricted domains.9
Since natural societies grow without much conscious planning,
experts are likely to be just as confused over fundamental issues as are
the rest of us. Feyerabend wants the citizens at large rather than
special groups to have the last word in deciding what is true or false,
useful or useless, for their society.IO Different societies look at the
world in dissimilar ways and regard diverse things as acceptable. The
attempt to enforce one unique truth has led to social disaster, and to
empty
formalizations
and
unfulfilled
promises
in
the
natural
sciences. 11 Feyerabend insists that global distinctions between what is
real and what is not are much too simplistic to captivate the complex-
ities of our world. Each society behaves in an intricate characteristic
way which, though conforming to pattern, continually reveals new and
surprising features that cannot be captured in a formula. "Problems of
realty" arise when ingredients of complex worlds are subsumed under
abstract concepts; they appear because delicate matters are compared
with crude ideas. I2 It was discovered that statements composed of
concepts lacking in detail could be used to tell a new kind of story
called "proof," whose truth "followed" from their inner structure and
needed no support from traditional authority. The discovery was
interpreted as showing that knowledge could be detached from
tradition and made "objective." It seemed all one had to do was to
accept what one had proved and reject the rest - and truth would
appear in a culture-independent way.13 But the fact that simple ideas
can be connected in simple ways gives the resulting propositions
special authority only if everything can be shown to consist of sinlple
things - which was precisely the point on which disagreenlents arose.
The discovery ofproof procedures increased cultural variety; it did not
replace it by a simple and true story.
Feyerabend,
therefore,
rejects
the
notion
that
tradition-
independent points of view can overrule traditions. There exist many
different ways of being and of knowing. Scientific theories branch out

134
Soft Logic
in different directions, use different and sometimes incommensurable
concepts and evaluate events in diverse ways. What counts as
evidence, or as an important result, or a "sound" scientific procedure
depends on attitudes and judgments that change with time, profession,
and even from one research group to the next. Nature can be
approached in many ways, and for every statement, theory or point of
view believed to be true with good reason, there exist conflicting
arguments. 14 Feyerabend repudiates the widespread philosophical
conviction that arguments must lead to unique conclusions. Since we
are dealing with feelings, faith, empathy, and not merely intellectual
matters, there is more than just one single medium of discourse. While
rationalist philosophers
tend to
define
relations
in
their
own
intellectual way, problems arise when different cultures or individuals
with different habits collide. What the early Western rationalists
invented was not argument as such but a special and standardized
form of arguing that disregarded and explicitly rejected all personal
elements. Thus, they claimed that they could offer procedures that
were valid independently ofhuman wishes and concerns. 15 The human
element, however, was not eliminated; it was nlerely concealed, and
the evaluation of success or failure remained relative to cultural and
subjective factors. Even what is considered a law of nature depends
crucially on
metaphysical
assumptions,
language,
mathematical
notation, and the like. The discovery and development of a particular
form of knowledge is a highly specialized and unpredictable process.
For if we replace some concepts by others, even only slightly different
ones, we become unable to state these results or to comprehend them.
We obtain different data and conflicting evidence at different stages in
the history of science. We take it for granted that our scientific laws
are real and that the Homeric gods are not, but this merely reflects our
own cultural bias in the opinion of Feyerabend. There is no
comprehensive theory that is valid beyond the mere enumeration of
detail, and that philosophers were traditionally seeking to grasp and to
express. The regional character of natural phenomena, no less than
social ones, was never overcome by either science or philosophy.
Uniformity was always inlposed by violence, not shown to be superior
by argument. 16
The
problem
is
that
Feyerabend's
own
thesis
of
incommensurabilty may not permit any such rational justification. We
have to realize that a unified view of the physical world simply does
not exist in his opinion. He agrees with Foucault that what passes as
---------------------

Feyerabend's Flight from Reason
135
truth in science is basically an issue of institutional power, and that
this is why science cannot afford to be tolerant of divergent opinion. It
is the same attitude that now destroys non-Western cultures under the
guise of "development." Feyerabend wants us to realize that not
everybody lives in the same world. The worlds in which cultures
unfold not only contain different events, they also contain them in
different
ways. 17
A
dancer
has
knowledge
of her
limbs,
an
experimenter in his hands and eyes, a singer in the tongue, throat, and
diaphragm. Knowledge resides in the ways we speak, and in the very
flexibility inherent in linguistic behavior. Such language skills are not
stable; they contain ambiguities and patterns of analogical reasoning.
Language
and
perception
interact,
and
the
process
of fitting
description to situation often modifies the situation as well. Features
lacking in a description tend to recede into the background, while
those prominent in the language or culture become more distinct. The
apparent familiarity of everyday "facts" is the result ofhabituation and
training. Events are arranged in the special ways that have gained in
popularity and have become routine. It is the routine that provides
them with a foundation and decides what is real. Feyerabend rejects
our educational system in which knowledge comes to be identified
with what can be extracted from the written page. Such an approach
mistakenly assumes
that
the
history of a
particular
piece
of
information has no relevance for the understanding of its content. It
goes without saying that he opposes the positivist distinction between
the context of discovery and the context ofjustification. Even the most
"objectively" written representation is comprehended by virtue of a
process of instruction that conditions us to interpret standard phrases
in standard ways. There is, therefore, no escape from either personal
contact or history. Knowledge orders events, and different kinds of
knowledge engender different ordering schemes that may create
incommensurable problems. Concepts introduced in this manner
remain adapted to the specific circumstances under which they were
originally introduced. Indeed, Feyerabend believes that stories are the
only form adapted to the complexities of human thought and action 18
but this is to ignore the power and precision that mathematical
formulas have exerted in science and technology.
Feyerabend thinks that rationalist philosophers simply refused to
accept the diversity of details at face value. They, therefore, came to
distinguish between the world of appearances and the real world,
which supposedly was simple, uniform, subject to stable universal laws

136
Soft Logic
and the same for all. To describe such a world, different concepts were
required and new·disciplines (epistemology and later the philosophy of
science) arose in the attempt to explain how it was related to
experience. An inferior sort of knowledge by acquaintance was
attributed to ''the many," that is, the common people and unphilo-
sophical artisans. Statements like ''this is red" or ''that moves," which
play such an important role in the lives or ordinary people were
summarily excluded from the domain of truth. 19 Intellectuals claimed
to possess insights unattainable to ordinary people and praised
"oneness," i.e. monotony. In this manner, rationalists led a battle
against traditional, undefined, and fairly irregular ways of thinking,
speaking, acting, and arranging public and private lives.20 By contrast,
stonemasons, metalworkers, painters, architects, and engineers left
buildings and artworks of all kinds, which shows that their knowledge
of space and materials was more progressive, fruitful, and vastly more
detailed than anything that emerged from the speculations of the
philosophers. Followers of the theoretical traditions identify know-
ledge with universality, regard theories as bearers of information, and
tend to reason in the st~ndardized "logical" way. The members of the
historical tradition, on the other hand, focus on what is particular.
They rely on lists, stories, and asides. They reason from example,
analogy, and free association, and use logical rules only when it suites
their purpose. Feyerabend emphasizes the diversity and history-
dependence of such logical standards.21 He argues that rationalists did
not introduce order and wisdom where before there was chaos and
ignorance; rather they imposed a special kind of order that was
different from the procedures of the historical tradition. But the
theoretical approach ran into difficulties when it attempted to
transform the historical traditions implicit in the crafts. While most
scientists believe that science and science alone establishes the truth
capable of surpassing all traditions, Feyerabend insists that all
statements are human products and that they reflect the peculiarities of
individuals, groups, and cultures. Science and its philosophical
predecessors are part of special social traditions, not entities that
transcend all history.22 The "reality" science allegedly defines and uses
to assimilate the more disorderly ingredients ofour world is constantly
being redefined to make it fit the fashion of the day. It is, of course,
true that the validity of Maxwell's equations is independent of what
people think about electrification. But it is not independent of the
culture that contains them, for it needs only a ~~~~]!!p~l!ip~!LoA_Qf__-

Feyerabend's Flightfrom Reason
137
our technologies, ways of thinking, or mathematics, and we can no
longer reason as we used to.
Feyerabend's flight from reason not surprisingly causes him to
denounce realism as well. Mimesis underlies the idea, widespread in
antiquity and still popular today, that the task of science is to "save the
phenomena," i.e. to present them as correctly as possible using the
available stereotypes. This theory of imitation survives in the popular
image of the unprejudiced scientist who avoids speculation and
concentrates on telling it as it is. The variety, however, of these ideas
and their complexity suggest that it may well be impossible to reduce
our ways ofbeing in the world to a few simple, context, and observer-
independent "objective" notions. Only philosophers who prefer simple,
clear, and easily definable ideas to complex, unclear, and undecidable
ones pretended by hindsight that there was essentially only one
concept of knowledge and of being. Such fictions are still believed
because of our cultural bias and, once introduced, they are not easily
dislocated by argument. But there is no monolithic entity "science,"
and scientists tl;1emselves have come to criticize the view that there
exists an "objective world" and a subjective domain, and that it is
imperative to keep them separate. One of our most advanced sciences,
elementary particle physics, has forced us to realize that it is
impossible to draw a sharp boundary between the observer and the
object observed. The role of qualitative ideas in the sciences and of
progress is often concealed by a concern with quantitative detail.
Feyerabend emphasizes that, in all such major 'scientific issues,
qualitative assumptions playa decisive though often unnoticed role.23
Even in ordinary counting we have first to decide what constitutes a
unit, and this may be quite different for different purposes. There is
more than just one answer to the question of how many constellations
there are in the sky. Only the positivist confusion of constant numbers
that seem clearly separable from each other and numbers of objects
that depend on qualitative circumstances could have induced us to
believe that numerical judgments are more "objective" than judgments
of quality, structure, and value.24 Feyerabend shows that the history of
art presents us with a variety of techniques and means of represent-
ation employed for a variety of reasons and adapted to different
purposes. The attempt to identify progress across all such reasons or
purposes is an illusion. Thought receives content only by being
connected with· the thinker, and that is why all thought is essentially

138
Soft Logic
subjective and incapable of producing universal and unchanging
results.
Philosophy is regarded as an art form like painting or literature
by Feyerabend, who emphasizes that different forms of life produce
different philosophies. Since such qualitative preferences have no
compelling order, the philosopher has not been successful in over-
coming relativism anymore than the artist. It does not nlake sense to
arrange philosophies on a single progressive line.25 The combination
of quality and quantity, which allegedly characterizes the sciences, is
itself qualitative and, therefore, subjective. A transition from one
theory to another sometimes also involves a change in what are taken
to be the facts and, if this happens, it becoDles impossible to compare
the facts of one theory with those of another. Qualitative elements in
the sciences, or what comes to the same thing - fundamental ideas of a
branch ofknowledge, are never uniquely determined by the facts. That
is why the battle between alternative quantitative points of view, being
redefined
whenever
new
ideas
and
instruments
(experimental
procedures, mathematical techniques) are introduced, never conles to
an end. Feyerabend denounces the neopositvist tendency to reduce
historical complexity to logical alternatives. Historical traditions like
the humanities and the arts produce knowledge that is restricted either
explicitly or by use to certain regions, and depends upon conditions
specific to those regions. They produce regional or relative knowledge
of what is good or bad, true or false, beautiful or ugly, and the rest.
There are different regions each characterized by its own special
"climate," yet all such views, Feyerabend insists, are nevertheless
worth considering since all such regions are fluid and overlapping.
Theoretical traditions, by contrast, seek to establish knowledge that no
longer depends on or is relative to these special conditions, and which,
therefore, is "objective." By now, many intellectuals regard theoretical
or objective knowledge as the only kind worth considering. But
Feyerabend emphasizes that the relativity of phenomena has never
been overcome by either philosophy or the sciences. All we have are
modest successes in narrow domains that may be incommensurable
with other regions. He denies that there exists a world independent of
us that we can explain in a critical way.
Yet the decision as to what is to be regarded as real is one of the
most important decisions we nlake. Feyerabend insists that there is no
idea so foolish that it may not some day lead to something of interest.
Darwin showed that life is unreasonable and wasteful, for it produces

Feyerabend's Flight/rom Reason
139
an immense variety of species and individuals, and leaves it for the
particular stage it has reached and the material surroundings to define
and eliminate failures. From this Mach, Boltzmann, and other
followers of Darwin inferred that the development of knowledge is
also not a well-planned and smoothly running process. Feyerabend
likewise concludes that scientists forge ahead and constantly redefine
science, knowledge, and logic in their work.26 He, therefore, considers
history an important part of scientific research, as it is in the
humanities and the arts, while neopositivism misused the name of
science to propagate a rigid, narrow,-minded, and unrealistic point of
view. For Feyerabend, science is a process of adapting ideas to facts
and to each other, and, as Mach has shown, in this process the results
are not unique.27 Like Mach, Feyerabend believes that common-sense
perceptions that arose in this manner are organically older and better
founded than is conceptual thought.28 A rational account explains an
idea by showing its logical connection with other uncontested views
without taking into account how these views arose or why they should
be accepted. This is why Planck talks about the irrational and
metaphysical character of the basic scientific principles, and why
Einstein discusses the religious dimensions of the scientific effort.
While a carefully conducted experiment provides us with many details,
the final secure support for the sciences comes form being related to
the
crude
experiences
of instinctive
practices.
Such
intuitive
knowledge, having been tested by a great variety of qualitatively
different experiences, overrules specific experiments based on narrow
assumptions in a restricted domain. There are thus many constraints
beyond those allegedly imposed by "logic."
Feyerabend regards the conflict between Galileo and the Church
as a clash between different traditions. He agrees with Cardinal
Bellarmino that questions of fact and reality are ultimately value
judgments. Accepting some phenomena as real and rejecting others as
deceptive means choosing one tradition over another. Feyerabend
points out that reality is a value-laden term, and that questions of
reality are closely connected with human concems.29 He argues that
scientific knowledge its too specialized and connected with too narrow
a vision ofthe world to be taken over by society without further ado. It
must be examined and judged from a wider perspective that includes
human concerns and values. He wants to temper the totalitarian and
dehumanizing tendencies ofmodem scientific objectivism by elements
taken directly from human life and to that extent "subjective.,,3o He

140
Soft Logic
dismisses the idea of a free and independent reason as a chimera, and
warns that a democracy cannot simply bow to the assertions of
scientists and philosophers. It must examine theln carefully, especially
when they touch upon such fundamental matters as what is reasonable
and what is real. We have no universal language governed by reason
but we can learn any specific idiom from scratch, as when a child
learns it without previous translation. We also can change our native
tongue so that it becomes capable of expressing hitherto alien notions,
and thus the criteria by which we identify any natural language are
subject to change. Every philologist, anthropologist, or sociologist who
presents an archaic (primitive, exotic, etc.) world view, and every
popular science writer who wants to explain scientific ideas in
ordinary English knows how to construct out of English words an
English-sounding model ofthe pattern of usage he needs for his novel
purposes. The English with which we start is not the English with
which we conclude our explanations.31 Concepts no less than percepts
obey figure - ground relations and are, therefore, liable to change. But
such an extrapolation does not void speech ofmeaning as long as there
exist analogies for what we are trying to express.
If we take the unchanged traditional concept of motion, we are
forced to say that Zeno's Achilles paradox is nonsense. Feyerabend, on
the other hand, emphasizes that measures of sense are not rigid and
unambiguous, and their changes are not so unfamiliar as to prevent
listeners from grasping what Zeno has in mind. Speaking a language
and explaining a situation means both following rules and changing
them.
Theoretical physicists not
infrequently play around with
formulas that do not yet make sense to them until a lucky combination
makes everything fall into place. These examples show, in the opinion
of Feyerabend, how it
is possible to assert without becoming
incoherent that the Galilean notions are "incommensurable" with our
own, and then go on to describe them in length.32 It is essential,
however, that such incommensurability be a rare event. It occurs only
when the conditions for meaningfulness ofthe descriptive terms of one
language (theory, point of view) do not permit the use of the
descriptive terms of another (theory, point of view). While not every
difference of meaning leads to incommensurability, incommensurable
languages (theories, points of view) are not completely unconnected
either. There·exists a subtle and interesting relation between these
conditions and meaningfulness. He believes that incommensurability is
a difficulty for philosophers but not for scientists, be~_~~~~R~~I~s~R~~~~

Feyerabend's Flight from Reason
141
insist on stability of meaning through an argument. Scientists, on the
other hand, being aware that speaking a language or explaining a
situation means both following rules and changing them, are experts
in the art of arguing across lines that philosophers regard as
insurmountable boundaries ofdiscourse.
Different cultures frequently establish some kind of contact but it
is not the case that in doing so they create or assume a common
metadiscourse or a common cultural bond. The connections may be
temporary, ad hoc, and quite superficial. One must not confound a
culture with its written manifestations (as, for example,Derrida does)
or with the products of its artists and thinkers. Feyerabend rejects the
view that the events and results that constitute the sciences have a
common structure or that there must be elements that occur in every
scientific investigation. Procedures that paid off in the past may crate a
lot oftrouble when imposed on the future. Successful research does not
obey general standards; it relies now upon one theory, now upon
another. A theory of science that devises standards and structural
elements for
all
scientific activities,
and authorizes them
with
reference to some rationality theory may impress outsiders - but it is
much too crude an instrument for the people on the spot, that is, for
scientists facing some concrete research problem. It is thus not quite
clear what Feyerabend's own philosophy of science is supposed to
accomplish. He thinks that only neopositivism still clings to the
ancient idea that philosophy must provide formal standards for
knowledge and action. The very search for new theories is thus not a
reasonable undertaking33 because some essential part ofthe knowledge
we need to understand and to advance the sciences can come only from
participation. Since such knowledge cannot be generalized, the very
possibility ofboth science and philosophy is que~tioned by Feyerabend.
At no time, of course, can scientists be sure that they already have the
correct research methods, but they nevertheless proceed on the
assumption that some ways of doing science are more adequate than
others. Even if the logic of scientific research does not yield unique
results, this does not seem to interfere with the pragmatic success of
science. What we come to know as the history of science is the record
of what has been considered successful, and the same is true of the
arts. But for Feyerabend, all this is merely a matter of fashion. On the
one hand, he maintains that apparently empirical facts are theoretical
through and through34 and, on the other, that the very search for such
theories is futile. Since change of theory or of interpretation is not

142
Soft Logic
something that admits rational explanation, there is nothing that can
be identified as progress in science. He admits that there are axiomatic
foundations and that some scientific ideas have been defined in a
precise way, but he emphasizes that they are nevertheless often used in
a loose manner. He believes that even logic has now reached a stage
when formalizations are being used in a freewheeling manner.35
Altogether the scientific enterprise seems to be much closer to the
arts than the older logicians and philosophers of science once thought.
Feyerabend concludes that all scientists produce are works of art, the
difference being that their material is thought, not paint or marble or
melodious sound.36 Yet while stressing the similarities between
science and art, Feyerabend seems to miss some crucial differences.
That science and technology have become prevailing forces
in
contemporary life is more than just a matter of fashion. Neither the
languages of modern sciences nor those of the arts are learned by
simple immersion, in the manner a child acquires his native tongue
without previous translation. Quantification and proof procedures
established standards of precision and scope unmatched by any
previous historical tradition, and those turned Western science and
technology into a dominant force. The contention that "science works"
does not remove Feyerabend's misgivings largely because,
like
Foucault, he regards science as a manifestation of institutional power
and impersonal politics. Since, like Mach, he views the growth of
knowledge in Darwinian terms, the fact that Western science and
technology prevailed because they produced superior weapons should
not upset Feyerabend. But it does, of course, and that is why he asks
for arguments establishing their qualitative superiority, even though he
also maintains that such arguments are impossible because of
incommensurability. Moreover, if there are no objective reasons for
preferring science and Western rationalism, this applies no less to his
own brand ofpluralism and tolerance.
Feyerabend holds science responsible for destroying the spiritual
values that give meaning to life and for poisoning the environment. He
realizes, however, that it is impossible for us to go back to a primitive
and innocent culture because these are not matters of conscious control
or of rational deliberation. Denouncing reason, Feyerabend never-
theless wants to convince us by argument that a more pluralistic and
tolerant
attitude would
be more reasonable.
Making
scientists
responsible for what he dislikes in modem culture, he fails to give
them credit for prolonging our lives and raising our standard of living.

Feyerabend's Flight from Reason
143
He identifies the claim for objectivity with a drive to get rid of all
human elements and, hence, with becoming inhuman. But this flight
from reason makes him ambivalent towards argument in general, for it
means that there is no argument that will work with everyone.
Arguments in favor of a certain world view (including his own)
depend on assumptions that are accepted or rejected on subjective
grounds and that lack general validity. What constitutes a problem is
likewise due to local circunlstances and is consequently culturally
relative. All solutions allow for many ways of living outside the
sciences, as is demonstrated by our artists and even by the wide
spectrum covered by apparently "objective" concepts such as health.
Nor does convergence of expert opinion establish an objective
authority, since we have many different authorities to choose from.
Thus, rationalists claiming for objectivity and universality are just
trying
to
sell
another
tribal
creed.
The
means
of refutation
(experimental equipment, the theories used for interpretation ofresults
obtained) constantly change, and with them the nature of the
arguments. The ways in which scientific problems are attacked and
solved depend on the specific circumstances under which they arose;
the formal, experimental, and ideological means available, and the
wishes of those dealing with them. Feyerabend denies that either
science or society conform to conditions that can be determined
independently of personal wishes or cultural bias. A merely intel-
lectual approach is, therefore, inadequate for understanding either
science or society. His main objection is that while such an approach
starts from a restricted context, it claims universal validity, and then
feels justified to impose itself on everybody. He rejects such sweeping
generalizations based on an alleged human nature in favor of personal
contact, and his "politics" is purely subjective.37 It would seem
however that such objectivity is a matter of degree, and that even in
the social sciences not everything goes. He is convinced that we cannot
trust our experts, philosophers, healers,· and educators - yet what he
himself offers is, after all, a philosophical program. The realization
that there are no objective solutions or progress, he hopes, should
make us tolerant. For he is convinced that most of the misery in our
world, the destruction of minds and bodies, the endless butcheries, are
caused by people who have objectified their personal wishes and
inclinations and thus have nlade them inhuman.38 He is impatient with
people who, though lacking experience with the complexities of

144
Soft Logic
scientific research, nevertheless claim that they know what it is all
about and how it could be improved.
But there remains the question of why Feyerabend is afraid of
reason. His real problem is with the validity ofargument and the status
of his own philosophical convictions, for in arguing against reason he
makes more than just local and subjective claims. The philosopher, of
course, need not be a rationalist, but he relies on argument to make his
case even when he denounces reason. He may not be successful in
convincing other people, but he goes on arguing as long as he is doing
philosophy. Feyerabend wants to be a philosopher of science and a
Dadaist at the same time. He fails to explain on what grounds we
should accept his own philosophical claims, for he is not just telling us
a story that demands only a willing suspension of disbelief In
criticizing science he takes his
inspiration from
the arts,
yet
contemporary science is much more of a success story than is modern
art, and why science has prevailed remains a mystery for Feyerabend.
His attempt to substitute the tacit reasoning in the arts for the precise
calculations of science can, at best, serve only as a correction. There is
no escape from reason for Feyerabend.
Notes
1 Paul Feyerabend, Farewell to Reason, London, England and New
York, NY: Verso, 1987, p. 1.
2 Ibid., p. 19.
3 Ibid., p. 24.
4 Ibid., p. 25-26.
5 Ibid.,p. 27.
6 Ibid., p. 29.
7 Ibid., p. 33.
8 Ibid., p. 39.
9 Ibid., p. 53.
10 Ibid., p. 59.
11 Ibid., p. 61.
12 Ibid., p. 64.
13 Ibid., p. 67.
14 Ibid., p. 76.

Feyerabend's Flightfrom Reason
IS Ibid., p. 87.
16 Ibid., p. 100.
17 Ibid., p. 105.
18 Ibid., p. 115.
19 Ibid., p. 116n21.
20 Ibid., p. 116.
21 Ibid., p. 118.
22 Ibid., p. 121.
23 Ibid., p. 146.
24 Ibid., p. 148.
25 Ibid., p. 155.
26 Ibid., p. 188.
27 Ernst Mach, Erkenntnis und Irrturn, Leipzig, 1917, p. 175.
28 Ibid., p. 151.
29 Feyerabend, Farewell to Reason, p. 254.
30 Ibid., p. 259.
31 Ibid., p. 268.
32 Ibid., p. 271.
33 Ibid., p. 284.
34 Ibid., p. 290.
35 Joseph Griinfeld, "Quasi-Empirical M.athematics," in Conceptual
Relevance, Amsterdam: Gruner, 1989, pp. 15-33.
36 Feyerabend, Farewell to Reason, p. 294.
37 Ibid., p. 306.
38 Ibid., p. 311.
145

Chapter Eleven
Polanyi's Tacit Knowledge
Polanyi had long been critical ofthe extreme positivist view ofscience.
The popular view seemed to imply that only scientific theories are
capable of verification, and that moral, political, religious, and artistic
ideas and principles are essentially unprovable, mere matters of
emotional preference. No one seemed to see the extent to which the
existence ofthis presumably verifiable science itself rested upon freely
held beliefs, ideas, and purposes that not only could not be proved, but
that could not even be made explicit. No one seemed to realize that the
unprovability of these beliefs did not render them intellectually
unacceptable or unworthy of being held. It was, therefore, necessary to
show people, philosophers included, why and how this was so. I The
recognition that science and fruitful, formal thought function by quite
different
principles
than
modem
man's
penchant
for
precise
statements seemed to allow, came to be the central interest in PolanyC.s
philosophy. The early scientists, from Bacon to Newton, all agreed
that knowledge must· be based on observations and experiment, and
that none of the traditional views should be accepted without critical
scrutiny. Thus, the ideal of a complete and perfect objectivism
emerged, which has prevailed down to our own day as the model of
science. All personal subjective elements came to be regarded as
obstacles to the attainment of such complete objectivity. Objectivism in
science holds that something is the case independently of our minds,
yet which is our business to come to know. The final arbiter of
scientific theory is taken to be the crucial test in which all relevant

148
·Soft Logic
factors are carefully controlled and which can, therefore, subject our
theory to conclusive verification. Proponents of scientific objectivism,
as a rule, disregard the fact that scientists were not actually
conforming to such procedures, since they insisted that logic was
logic, whether anyone followed it or not. Logical positivists denied to
those inquiries and beliefs that could not be established in a detached
manner the status of "knowledge." The notion that what counts as
knowledge must be true and detached objectively seems to be still the
basic creed ofepistemologists and philosophers ofscience.
Hardly anyone today supposes that values are objective, and thus
they are quite generally rejected as possible objects of knowledge. The
replacement ofmoral ideas by philosophically less vulnerable because
more basically vital objectives were carried out in all seriousness.
Since it was assumed that the more elemental interests ofmen, such as
their economic and power needs, would always exist, action based
upon such interests came to be thought the only kind of realistic
action. It was clear to Polanyi that scientists actually were not detached
and perfectly objective, no matter what any ofthem or their apologists
might say. He was not aware, at the time he was working on his ideas
for Personal Knowledge, that some of the continental phenomen-
ologists were developing ideas similar in many respects to his own.
The basic term of his new epistemology was "tacit 'knowing," and his
notion of tacit knowing was based on the views originally brought
forward by the gestalt psychologists. They pointed out that in
perception we perform an action: we accomplish a tacit integration of
sensations and feelings into a perceived object that then gives meaning
to these sensations and feelings, which they had not previously
possessed. Seeing objects is the result of mastering a skill, of learning
how to attain a meaningful (but inexplicit) integration of sensory clues
and, therefore, is neither a matter of formal inference from sense data
nor one ofdirect and immediate perception of objects.2 What we see in
a meaningful way is also influenced by what we have become used to
seeing in the past; so not only what is at the comer of our eyes but also
what is at the back of our minds functions as the background in
perception. Previous integrations of clues -
previously achieved
meanings - seep into the back of our minds and function there as part
ofthe subsidiary clues forming the background for new integrations of
clues with objects.3 We truly do, therefore, know more than we can
tell.4 If perception and knowledge were not intentional acts, truth
could not be understood to be an ideal toward which we aspire.

Polayni's Tacit Knowledge
149
"Truth" must then become a word we apply to whatever we are caused
or conditioned to think.
Part of the background operative in perception is due to
something other than simple physiologically built-in mechanisms.
Some of it is provided by what we think we know of the world, and so
is entangled with our intellectual and vital intentions. In a presen-
tational painting, brush strokes are meaningless except as they enter
into the appearance of the painting. It is the painting that is their
meaning.5 Meaning in these senses is something that must be grasped
or seen or created by a mind. For Polanyi, meaning is never devoid of
intention
to
find
or
achieve
a
comprehensive
and
intelligible
integration. "Meaning" is, therefore, a triadic term, in that, in addition
to the functionally different proximal and distal factors, there also
must always be a person, a user, an interpreter involved.6 A face does
not exist without its features, and its features are meaningless without
their being upon a face, even though neither can be reduced to the
other. Meaning, says Polanyi, is always lost, sometimes for good,
when in order to inspect the clues focally, attempts are made to
withdraw ourselves from these feelings or perceptions and turn them
into explicit existential objects. Brush strokes lose their meaning when
studied focally, as do words when looked at or listened to too:·long in
terms of their mere sound or shape. What is perceptually given is not
restricted entirely by our basic perceptual mechanisms; it is partly the
result of conceptual interpretation of which, however, we are aware
only in a subsidiary way, not focally. Assumptions guiding scientific
discoveries are, in the minds oftheir discoverers, fundamental guesses
concerning the nature ofthings,7 no mere summarizations of objective
correlations between bits of phenomena. Scientific propositions do not
refer definitely to observable facts, and there are no explicit rules by
which a scientific proposition can be obtained from observable data.
The operations of science have to be understood basically as skills
since there
are always
unspecifiable clues.
Once a
species
is
established, it is defined by the presence of certain distinctive features
that may be variable in shape. Maxims cannot be understood, still less
applied by anyone not already possessing a good practical knowledge
of the art or discipline. And so what our concept bears upon - what it
really means - is indeterminate and much richer than any formal
structure we could'give it. Taxonomy is based on connoissership, and
C.F.A. Pantin rightly considers this intuitive mode of identification,
what he calls "aesthetic recognition,"
in
contrast to the more

150
Soft Logic
systematic sort based on key features, to be the predominant mode of
recognition in field work.8
Yet the exercises of such skills today is not highly regarded by
scientific opinion.
Both the knowledge and the subject matter
established by such skills are disparaged by being regarded as the
result of "merely subjective imaginings." Knowledge that we hold to
be true and also vital is made light of because we cannot account for
its acceptance in terms ofa critical philosophy. We then feel entitled to
continue using this knowledge even while flatly disparaging it.
Instruments do not read themselves, but can only be read by
connoisseurs, and the quantitative results of such instruments are
meaningful only in terms ofthe particular theories and general notions
about the world that function as subsidiary clues in the mind of the
scientists who makes use of these results. Exact, quantitative, even
machine-recorded observations without mentalistic interpreters could
not operate either to substantiate or to refute any given hypothesis - let
alone to generate one. It is the theory that decides what can be
observed.9 Science shows itself to be guided throughout by acts of
personal judgment, as it establishes hitherto unknown coherences in
nature. Our recognition of these coherences is largely based, as
perception is, on clues of which we are not focally aware and that are
indeed often unidentifiable. From the recognition of a problem to the
ultimate decision of rejecting still conceivable doubts, factors of
plausibility are ever in our mind. Polanyi's analysis of the process of
discovery becomes the core of his philosophy of science. Copernicus,
he reminds us, was not trying to find a logically simpler way of
describing the heavenly phenomena; he understood that his discovery
amounted to a new and truer version of reality. Kepler, Galileo,
Dalton, Newton, the whole line of eminent scientists down to Bohr,
Planck, Heisenberg, and Einstein, were all endeavoring to discover
various aspects of reality, not simply more elegant logical correlations
ofphenomenal data. IO
Polanyi considered the problem of discovery as the central
problem in the philosophy of science long before Kuhn and Hanson
began to call into question the strict formalizations of the scientific
method. II To see the problem is to see something that is hidden; it is
to have an intimation of the coherence of hitherto not comprehended
particulars. Knowing a problem must be the kind of tacit knowledge
we have of a face or a class, a knowledge of which we cannot give a
fully explicit account, but which nevertheless is real. The intimations

Polayni's Tacit Knowledge
151
we have of a problem are akin to those we have ofthe fruitfulness of a
discovery we come to accept as the solution of a problem. Somehow
we are able to
appreciate the wealth of its yet
undiscovered
consequences. We cannot know these explicitly, of course, but we have
an anticipatory grasp of them. Facts do not force themselves on us
since what we call a "fact" always involves our judgment. No problem
is seriously taken up unless we feel that its possible solution would be
worth the effort and time. These perceptive anticipations of feasibility
are neither the result ofstrict rules nor ofchance. Theories ofscientific
method that ignore this whole fluid mechanism of tacit knowledge
deny the existence of a passionate personal commitment to one's
surmises, which characterizes the creative scientist as it does the artist.
That is why the scientist always attempts to prove his theories - never
to disprove them. There is no scientific method or recipe for making
good discoveries or good scientists. The power of such dynamic
intuitions, Polanyi maintained, is due to the feeling of a "deepening
coherence" we have all along the way to a discovery. That is also why
we can sometimes pursue scientific discovery without knowing
explicitly what we are looking for. It is a skill for guessing right,
which can be improved by schooling,12 but to know in this intuitive,
tacit, and unspecifable manner what to look for does not give us the
power to find it.
Basic agreement about the general shape of things in nature and
about the way in which nature operates is essential to the existence of
a community of cooperating scientists. What it is that has resulted
from an experiment cannot be known without interpretation. New
types of solution become acceptable because deepening coherence
enables us to see somewhat beyond where we are, to transcend
somewhat our present limitations, and we see that something makes
sense before we can make out just what it does. Science can never be
more than the affirmation of certain things we.b~lieve in. Whether a
particular instance contradicts a theory, or is to be thought of as due
merely to error, requires personal judgment. No event, until it has been
given meaning by a mind, is a contradiction of anything. Even
apparent agreement may leave some doubt, and the scientist must
decide whether or not he believes such doubt to be reasonable.
Contradiction to theories may often be explained away as due to
experimental
error,
or
simply
accepted
and
endured
as
an
unaccountable anomaly. 13 Personal judgment must decide what weight
to attach to any particular sort of evidence, and the real sanction of

152
Soft Logic
discovery lies in the detection of a coherence that we accept. It is
neither explicit theories, nor predictability, nor even manipulatability
that we seek in science -
it is understanding and explanation. 14
Polanyi's analysis of tacit knowing and of the relation between levels
of existence are examples of an extension of logic. 15 This logic proves
to be an informal one, but Polanyi insists that we call it logic rather
than psychology, for he calls "logic" the rules for reaching valid
conclusions from premises assumed to be true. Currently logic seems
to be defined as the rules for reaching strict conclusions from strict
premises, and he emphasizes that we should reject this definition since
no strict rules can exist for establishing empirical knowledge. 16 Even
formal logic must appeal to informalized supplements which, the
operator of the system takes for granted. Symbols must be identified
and their meaning known; axioms must be understood to assert
something; proofs must be acknowledged to demonstrate something;
and this identifying, knowing, understanding, acknowledging, etc., are
informal operations upon which the working of the formal system
depends. All formal systems in the end contain informal elements, for
only thus can they provide genuine explanations establishing logical
coherence in what is seen perceptually and conceptually. 17
To the objection that our system of naturalistic science is proven
(or at least rendered plausible) by the objective fact that it works - as
against magical systems that do not - Polanyi tells us that the studies
of Evans-Pritchard with the Zande show that their beliefs become just
as stable as our scientific beliefs. Their belief system does this by
denying to any rival system the grounds on which it could take root.
Each instance that might possibly refute the old system is explained by
some part ofthe old system as a nonrefuting instance. Such devices as
calling any exceptions to our theories "anomalies," or dismissing them
as due to possible experimental error are some of the features that
enable our own. scientific beliefs to possess the great stability they have
and to continue to be thought to work. I8 Yet Polanyi clearly accepted
scientific beliefs as true and rejected magic as false, while at the same
time holding that two alternative systems such as these cannot really
be argued, since they share no fundamental perceptions between them.
Refutation can only take place when there is a commitment to some
common principle to which disputants can appeaL So even if our
commitment to naturalistic explanations of science as opposed to
magical or theological ones is evident, we have no guarantee of their
truth. We can, therefore, ground ourselves on nothing but our beliefs

Polayni's Tacit Knowledge
153
resting upon our capacities to notice coherences by means of. our
imagination. And, of course, there are no better justifications for our
philosophical views: Polanyi is quite aware that in the last resort his
statements affirm his own personal beliefs. What we affirm as real,
however, is always richer in its capacities to manifest itself in the
future than we have grasped it to be in our explicit thought. World
views are imaginary projections; they are not products of scientific
investigation.
To realize that there is a problem and to understand its solution
is to see a range of potentialities for meaning that appear to be
accessible. A mind strives to apprehend that which it believes to be
comprehensible, but which it does not yet understand. Its choices are
hazardous. They might succeed or fail, yet they are not taken at
random, since they are controlled by our intentions. Such intentions do
not occur spontaneously either, for they are due to the actualization of
hidden potentialities. All knowing is a sort of doing and creating;
perception, ordinary as well as scientific knowledge, poetry, and
religion are all of this kind. There is no way to establish their truth or
reality in a thoroughly detached, impersonal, objective way. All our
integrations are believed to be realities, Le. to have existence not fully
determinate in our present grasp, and which we, therefore, expect to
become manifest in further, as yet indeterminate ways. We believe a
hydrogen atom is real, not merely a conceptual constraint, -because we
expect it to display qualities in the future that we cannot predict from
our present grasp ofit. We are supposing that the object of our concept
has some nature of its own into which we may penetrate further. 19
Science in the modern age has tended, at least tacitly, to claim to have
a monopoly on achieving knowledge of reality. This often unspoken
claim has led to our tendency to assign a honorific status to tangible
realities, since science appears to deal with them, and to regard all
other sorts of possible entities or meanings to be illusory. Polanyi
makes the startling counter-claim that a stone is, if anything, less real
than a mind or a problem because we expect a far narrower range of
indeterminateness in nature from a stone than we do from a mind. At
some point it was man's mind that created (tacitly at first) the
principles oftruth, beauty, and morality as norms that should guide his
behavior. Once brought into being, they have a structure and a thrust
oftheir own, and we find ourselves subject to their intrinsic standards,
just as we are in mathematics.20 Polanyi seemed to think that the
function ofthese realities is to create obligations binding upon us and,

154
Soft Logic
in this manner, to our direct lives. We in the modem world have
adopted, because of the advent of positivist science, a strange view of
the world and of our place in it that leads us to doubt the reality of
these obligatory realities created by man, and to attempt to undercut
them by reducing them to complex effects produced by the lower level
drives for profit and power.21 It seemed to be his hope that new insight
into epistemology, and into an ontology correlated with it, would lay
the foundation for the rebirth of faith in the reality of these "spiritual
entities," as he sometimes called them.
Polanyi made a case for our personal participation even in the
formal sciences of mathematics and symbolic logic. The acceptance of
a mark on paper as a symbol implies that we believe that we can
identify the mark in various instances of it, and that we know its
proper symbolic use. We expect to recognize things that satisfy a
formula as distinct from other things that fail to do so. Logical
symbols must tacitly be held to represent states of affairs, or logic can
have no application. We dwell in logical manipulation, projecting
ourselves through it to the concept for which it stands. The tacit
component of a formalized process is thus broadly analogous to that of
a denotation. Taking in such a logical sequence is grasping it as a
whole, a gestalt, ofwhich the parts are seen in a subsidiary way rather
than in a focal way. There are no proofs for solving problems; only
more or less vague maxims, and this tacit ability to anticipate a hidden
potentiality is essential both just to see the problem, and then to set out
to solve it.22 Polanyi generalized this recognition as the basis of all
discovery;23 he pointed out that the reductionisms currently in vogue
in biology, neurology, and psychological behaviorism are all logically
related to the basic assumption of a single-level universe of atoms
which alone are believed to possess true reality. Contrary to this, he
emphasizes that our understanding ofa living animal choosing food or
alertly listening, watching and reacting to what it notices, is an act of
personal knowing similar to the animal's own personal act that our
knowing appraises. It is achieved not by detached observation, but by
participation in what we observe, in our dwelling in it. Our knowledge
of such an active perceptive animal would altogether dissolve if we
entirely
replaced
it
by
our
focal
knowledge
of
its
several
manifestations.
Behaviorists teach that in observing an animal we must refrain,
above all, from trying to imagine what we would do if placed in the
animal's position. Polanyi suggests, on the contrary, that nothing at all

Polayni's Tacit Knowledge
155
could be known about the animal that would be ofthe slightest interest
to physiology, let alone psychology, except by identifying ourselves
with the center of action in the animal and criticizing its performance
according to standards set up for it by ourselves.24 The behaviorist
describes learning in objectivist terms such as "stimulus," "control,"
and "response," but these can be shown to apply to the process of
learning
only
because
their
meanings
are
understood
tacitly,
smuggling into them their bearing on mental events involved in
learning, which are all along kept covertly in mind. By dwelling on
their behavior and so understanding what orients its particulars, we
observe that animals are puzzled, that they try ways to solve their
problems, that they are seeking food or a mate, that they fear, and, in
higher animals, that they dream. We would be hard put to set out their
behavior into significant patterns even for the purpose of behaviorist
correlation, if we could not use our capacity for indwelling. The
feeling by which we appreciate the achievements ofbeings lower than
ourselves involves an extension ofourselves by which we participate in
their achievements. Modem biological thinking, attempting to confine
itself to physical and chemical forms and modes of operation, is left
with nothing but chance as the originator ofany particular structure of
the DNA molecule. But the probability that these molecules have
acquired their meaningful structure by mere chance is exceedingly
small. Polanyi, therefore, concludes that DNA and every organism
structured by it are meaningful organizations of essentially meaning-
less matter.
Evolutionary history demonstrates that the overall
direction in which evolutionary development has proceeded is that of
attaining ever greater meaningfulness in terms of both structure and
capacity to attain significance. There is a striking progress from the
one-celled plants, capable of little more than sustaining themselves
and ofreproducing their kind, through animals sensitive as individuals
to their surroundings, to more and more complex (and meaningful)
animals, to mammals, and finally. to man, whose capacity for
achieving meaning seems still to stretch limitlessly before us. Pure
chance mutations and natural structure would not appear to be able to
account for the direction that evolution has actually taken.25
Polanyi thought that belief in values and obligations are true
commitments, even if their truth cannot be objectively demonstrated.
A person must be "carried away" by a poem, a painting, or even a
religious ritual or object, even just to understand it. The semantic
process by which a clear and forceful metaphorical meaning is

156
Soft Logic
established is similar to that by which a flag is made to symbolize a
country. A poem is not a communication of facts, and we do not
respond to a stage murder as if were real. Art, even representational
art, has not been interested in creating the illusion that the objects it
represents are real. Ifwe make the canvas, the brush strokes, into focal
objects, we lose the meaning ofthe painting, for we then do not see the
story. Polanyi emphasizes that there is no scientific reason for
rejecting the religious hypothesis that the world is meaningful.
Developing an epistemology that is adequate to human thought, he
rejects the reductionist tendencies in psychology, sociology, and
biology in favor of an ontology of evolutionary achievement. But
toward the end of his life, Polanyi himself considered his work a
failure, for his purpose had been to restore the human mind to a
healthy confidence in its powers. Positivism, he believed, left the
sciences with nothing but arbitrary bases rather than commitment to
reason and truth. Most ofthe disputes with Polanyi's views proceeded
from a denial ofhis key contention that subsidiary-focal operations are
involved in every interpretation or recognition of meaning.26 Thus,
Harre argues that what is subsidiary in perception should not properly
be called ''knowledge.''27 Harre seems to argue that we know only what
we can tell;28 he does not accept as logical anything that is not a case
ofexplicit logic -logic is always explicit or it is not logic.
Polanyi, however, took issue with this prevalent view, and
emphasized that there was a logic of tacit coherence. It was not an
explicit logic, rather it was the way in which the mind dwells in
subsidiary clues to reach across explicitly logical gaps. One does this
in perception which, because the elements are not propositional, Harre
does not consider logical to begin with. Polanyi, on the other hand,
insists that we also do this in our scientific discoveries and in the
justification of them. While we can give a logically explicit definition
of what we mean by "meaning conditions," we cannot render explicit
our understanding of when these conditions have been met. We do
know - if we are a trained scientist - to make such judgments, but we
cannot reduce our judgment to a finite list of criteria. We never make
our judgments in this explicit manner -
not in the dynamics of
discovery nor in our justifications and criticisms. Yet we do not reach
our judgments illogically or merely subjectively, since we are able to
justify them by argument at least up to a point. We acquire a tacit
awareness ofmIes (much as we do when we learn to ride a bicycle), an
awareness that becomes more adequate as we become familiar with the

Polayni's Tacit Knowledge
157
context. The application of explicit logical rules always rest on
indeterminate, subsidiary elements in which we simply dwell. Thus,
what is involved in seeing an analogy is not merely noticing that two
things are the same, which might be done by an electronic device that
scanned each ofthe two cases point by point. Rather, it is determining
that two different things have a significant similarity - that they are
alike in respect to something. One has to come to any analogy with
something in mind, since what is to count as an analogy depends on
many tacit notions and clues. One could show Polanyi wrong only if
one could point to some knowledge that is wholly explicit - like what
comes out of a computer. But it seems patently obvious that'this is in
no sense "knowledge" until it has been interpreted as such by a mind
with reference to some purpose.
All our observations are theory laden. Every scientific theory,
Polanyi held, is fed by a vision of how things are, with the
understanding that the manifestation of things might prove the vision
wrong. The projection of entities into what exists beyond our grasp of
them is a most important part of Polanyi's thought, for without it all
things have only the reality of the meaning's focal integration we
happen to achieve. There is, however, no way to decide with logical
rigor that a given ontology about the world is true, since there is no
objective way to match the two. Thus, we do or we do not commit
ourselves to beliefs in certain existences. In art and religion we fmd we
are "carried away" by the object, and it is this capacity ofthe object of
our focal attention to carry us away, to move us deeply, that constitutes
our meaningful integration of it into a focal object valid for us.
Marjorie Grene believes that one of the chief values of Polanyi's
epistemology is the way in which it bridges the gap between scientific
and humanistic concerns by showing that all meaning or knowledge
requires subsidiary-focal poles, and so demands our personal part~~i­
pation in it. Polanyi has shown that the insidious distinction our epoch
has made between "science" and any other nonscientific activity or
discipline has no reasonable justification. No meanings are wholly
objective or wholly subjective; rather all are personal.29 But the binary
logic of natural science dealing with facts of experience is much more
specific than that ofmathematics, religion, or the arts. It is, therefore,
legitimate to speak of verification in science in a sense which does not
apply to other articulate systems. The two kinds of findings, the
religious and the natural, Polyani held, bypass each other. Ronald L.
Hall argues that the distinction made by Polanyi and by Prosch in

158
Soft Logic
Meaning between science and art hides a deep affinity between them,
namely that science is like the arts governed by aesthetic criteria and
norms.30 The scientist is not a robot; he is, just like the artist,
passionately and personally involved in making novel and imaginative
integrations. We argue as fully as we can for the positions we hold, but
since these arguments always have a tacit dimension embedded in
subsidiary clues, we can never demonstrate this. As Kant put it, we
cannot have rules for applying rules ad infinitum; somehow we must
simply see that what is present before us does satisfy our rule and is
true. Thus, we know more about our mathematical and logical systems
than is apparent from their notations; indeed more than we can ever
explicitly tell. The rules of logic that function as norms of our systems
of knowledge are due to assumptions that can never be fully
demonstrated. Polanyi's tacit knowledge proceeds by means of a "soft"
logic, i.e. one that is contextually relative and, therefore, only partially
consistent. There are no rules for making discoveries, merely a context
with which we can become familiar and in which solutions are tacitly
judged. But attempts to go beyond a given context playa crucial role
not only in the arts but also in science and philosophy. What we
consider possible may, therefore, undergo radical transformation. The
"other"
logic
may
not
provide
us
with
altogether
conclusive
arguments, yet in extending the range of the arguable, it makes
conceptual breakthroughs possible and becomes thus a necessary
condition for fu~e knowledge.
Notes
I Harry Prosch, Michael Polany;, A Critical Exposition, New York, NY:
State University ofNew York Press, 1986, p. 5.
2 Ibid., p. 54.
3 Michael Polanyi, Personal Knowlege, Chicago, IL: The University of
Chicago Press, 1958, p. 97.
4 Michael Polanyi, The Tacit Dimension, Garden City, NY: Doubleday,
1966, p. 4.

Polayni's Tacit Knowledge
159
5 Michael Polanyi, "What is Painting?" British Journal ofAesthetics, 10
July 1970, pp. 227-31; Michael Polanyi and Harry Prosch, Meaning, Chicago,
IL: The University ofChicago Press, 1975, pp. 86-92.
6 Michael Polanyi, "Logic and Psychology" in Knowing and Being,
Essays by Michael Polanyi, ed. Margorie Grene, Chicago, IL: The University
ofChicago Press, 1969, pp. 30-31; "Knowing and Being" in Knowing and
Being, pp. 181-2, 185-6.
7 Michael Polanyi, Science, Faith and Society, London: Oxford
University Press, 1946, pp. 42-5.
8 C. F. A. Pantin, "The Recognition ofSpecies," Science Progress,
1954, p. 587.
9 Michael Polanyi, "Genius in Science," Encounter 38, January 1972, p.
48.
10 Michael Polanyi, "Science and Reality," Knowing and Being, pp. 189-
96.
11 Prosch, Michael Polanyi, p. 95.
12 Ibid., p. 102.
13 Polanyi, Science, Faith and Society, p. 31; Personal Knowledge, pp.
292-3.
14 Polanyi, "Logic and Psychology," p. 37.
15 "Science, Tacit and Explicit," Paper presented at the International
Congress for the Philosophy of Science, Jerusalem, August 1964,
(unpublished).
16 "Polanyi, "Logic and Psychology," p. 42.
17 Prosch, Michael Polanyi, p. 113.
18 Polanyi, Personal Knowlege, pp. 287-94.
19 Ibid., pp. viii, 64, 117, 147, 189, 396.
20 Prosch, Michael Polanyi, p. 139.
21 Polanyi, Personal Knowledge, p. 364.
22 Ibid., pp. 127-8.
23 Prosch, Michael Polanyi, p. 143.
24 Polanyi, Personal Knowledge, p. 364.
25 Ibid., pp. 38, 384-6, 389, 400, 402.
26 Prosch, Michael Polanyi, p. 208.
27 Rom Harre, "The Structure ofTacit Knowledge," Journal ofthe
British Societyfor Phenomenology 8, October 1977, pp. 174-5.
28 Prosch, Michael Polanyi, p. 213.
29 Ibid., p. 238.
30 Ronald L. Hall, "Some Critical Reflection on Meaning," Zygon 17,
1982, p. 15.

Chapter Twelve
-Goodman's World Pluralism
Epistemology, as Goodman and Elgin conceive it, comprehends
understanding or cognition in all its modes - including perception,
depiction, and emotion - as well as description. 1 Our expectations and
beliefs about our situation affect the character of our experiences
concerning it; they guide our investigations and structure our
perceptual field. What attracts our attention is most often what defeats
or fulfills a hope or a fear, for what is routine often goes unnoticed. To
characterize what is perceived requires a good deal of background
knowledge of one sort or another, and the range of available
alternatives is a function
of the conceptual systems we have
constructed and mastered. Things do not present themselves to us in
any privileged vocabulary or system of categories; we have and use a
variety of vocabularies and system of categories that yield different
ways in which things can be faithfully represented or described. The
alternatives of which such a scheme consists .need not be mutually
exclusive. A scheme typically orders a domain in terms of implicit
altern8:tives, and such schemes do not provide different labels of the
same collection of objects, but rather sort the objects into different
collections or ''worlds.'' What counts as being the same thing varies
from one sort of object to another, since under different interpretations
the realm consists of quiet different elements. Such systems are not
identified by Goodman and Elgin with languages because not all
systems are linguistic. Among familiar nonlinguistic systems are
notations, interpretations, or pictorial schemes. But just what symbols

162
Soft Logic
make up a picture, or just what items constitute its reference is never
completely settled.
Goodman and Elgin emphasize that symbol systems are artifacts;
their syntactic or semantic features are not dictated by the domain, but
result from decisions we make about how the domain is to be
organized. The systems we construct determine the similarities and
differences we can recognize, the levels of precision we can produce,
and the degrees of determinateness we can achieve. Consistency is one
obvious constraint on the adequacy of the system, for no acceptable
system can permit the joint application of mutually inconsistent labels
to a single object, yet such consistency cannot be achieved by fiat. In
system building, we never start from scratch; inevitably we begin with
some conception of the objects in the domain and with some
convictions about them, and these guide our constructions. Since our
presystematic judgments constitute our best guesses about the subject
in question, they serve as touchstones against which to evaluate our
constructions. The presumption in favor of entrenched predicates lasts
only so long as their projection is inductively successful, for the bias in
favor
of entrenched
categories
does
not
preclude
conceptual
innovations. Different systems ofcategories serve different interests; in
fantasy, for example, employment of unentrenched predicates is an
effective literary device. Rightness, in this case, is a matter of
providing a novel organization of a (real or fictive) realm -
an
organization that highlights hitherto unnoticed and often overlooked
realms. Sometimes this forces us to reconsider the appropriateness and
adequacy of the categories we are accustomed to use.2 In metaphor, a
familiar scheme is implicitly applied to a new realm or to its old realm
in a new way. Typically the result is a novel organization ofthe realm,
for the metaphorical scheme classifies together objects in the realm
that are not classified together in the literal scheme. It: as seems likely,
the metaphor has no exact literal paraphrase, it captures a resemblance
that no literal predicate does. A metaphorical use of the term effects a
likening of objects in its literal and metaphorical extensions, enabling
us to recognize affinities across realms. Rightness of metaphorical
categorization
depends
on
whether
the
order
achieved
by the
metaphorical application of a scheme is useful, enlightening, and
informative. It also depends on whether the affinities it highlights
between the metaphorical and literal referents of its terms are
i?teresting, important, and otherwise apt.3

Goodman's World Pluralism
163
Systems are subject to multiple standards of rightness.
If
inconsistencies emerge, the system we construct must deviate from our
antecedent convictions, or it may modify the boundaries ofour original
classifications. The goals and interests we want a system to realize
may conflict as well, for other alternative resolutions are equally
reasonable4 and pluralism results. We trade cumbersome truth for
serviceable approximations, that is, exchange utility for truth, and the
choice depends heavily on what we want the system to accomplish. In
spite oftheir world pluralism, Goodman and Elgin are convinced that
the various systems complement each other, Le. constitute something
like a world ofworlds that yields a deeper understanding ofthe subject
than any single system alone provides. Conflicting, equally correct
accounts are possible, and physics alternates between incompatible
wave and particle theories. A variety of symbol systems can thus be
constructed that are neither reducible to, nor justifiable in, terms of a
single preferred base. These systems are subject to different standards,
and there is no neutral vocabulary from which they all can be
evaluated. But it does not follow that we can formulate statements in
any way we please, or so construct a system that any claim we like
turns out to be true.s World-versions can be right or wrong, and they
are
not
arbitrary.
Considerations
of consistency,
fidelity,
and
antecedent practice, satisfaction of our goals in systematizing, and
adequacy for purpose at hand admit different specifications, receive
different weightings, and are realized in different ways in the
construction of different symbol systems. The admission that there are
many right systems, and many standards of rightness thus does not
collapse the distinction between right and wrong.
Goodman
and
Elgin
reject
all
notions
of pure
giveness,
unconditional necessity, a single correct perspective, or system of
categories.6 To deny that there is any such thing as the world is not to
deny that there are worlds. Although "the earth is in motion" and ''the
earth is at rest"
apparent~y contradict .. each other, both are true.
Goodman and Elgin argue that such conflicting statements, iftrue, are
true of different worlds. A world in which the earth is in motion is not
a world in which the earth is at rest, for such worlds are heavily
dependent on our accounts. The mistake is to talk of such systems as
devices for representing an antecedent reality, because no sense can be
made of motion (or anything else) except relative to one or another
frame of reference.7 The apparent conflict between true descriptions
shows that they are not descriptions ofthe same thing. There are many

164
Soft Logic
worlds if any; Goodman and Elgin's talk of worlds amounts really to
talk about true or right world versions. For philosophers like RoTty,
Kuhn, and Feyerabend, loss of the world results in a skepticism that
despairs ofdistinguishing between what is true and what is false. It, in
effect, reduces science and inquiry to idle conversation. Once we
become aware, however, that a ''world'' is an artifact, we come to
notice the significant but often overlooked affinity among art, science,
perception, and the fashioning of our everyday worlds. Goodman and
Elgin's conclusion that there are many worlds, if any, is prompted by
the discovery of separately adequate bur irreconcilable descriptions
and representations. These grounds for world pluralism do not extend
to a like-minded pluralism about works ofart and literature. Goodman
and Elgin emphasize that however such works are identified, the
various interpretations in question are interpretations of a single text.
This text can be identified significantly without appealing to any ofthe
semantic and literary interpretations it hears, whereas there is no way
to identify a world except by means of version, hence no way to
identify a human subject to which such conflicting versions refer. A
world dissolves under conflicting accounts, while a text persists under
conflicting accounts. The identity ofa text is a matter pertaining tothe
syntax of a language - to the permissible configurations of letters,
spaces, and punctuation marks - quite apart from what the text says or
otherwise refers to.8 For Goodman and Elgin, figurative denotation is
no less genuine than is literal denotation. We can significantly talk
about mental images even though there are none,9 and while there are
no centaurs, there are descriptions, stories, and pictures of centaurs.
Centaur descriptions or Don Quixote pictures may be right or wrong,
and that indeed is all we have for discourse about natural objects as
well. Questions about Don Quixote'S life are as open to verification as
are questions about Napoleon.
Goodman and Elgin argue that all that can be done to comply
with the demand for ''facts'' is to say that the versions are versions ot:
that is, to give another version, even if the several versions remain at
odds with one another. For them, a ''world'' is an entrenched manner
of speaking or depicting, and what holds such a world together is
conceptual relevance. 10 The "rightness" of a world-version is a species
of soft logic, but there is a loss of simplicity in dealing with the
rightness ofa world version as compared with its truth because each fit
becomes virtually unique. Beyond calculable fuzzy logic,II we rapidly
lose our ability to identify world versions as a whole. The relevance

Goodman's World Pluralism
165
that holds together such a world version is no less metaphorical than
the "given" world that they reject. To say that we live in different
worlds is literally inconsistent, for a world is supposed to be a totality.
Metaphors, unlike literal statements, do not have to be consistent;
thus, whether a given metaphor is inappropriate or irrelevant is often
undecidable. But Goodman and Elgin convincingly argue against the
mutual indifference of linguistics and art theory. The linguistic
account does not explain our understanding of figurative language or
of locutions in which grammatical rules are deliberately violated. For a
literary work may achieve its effects not in spite of but because of its
odd ungrammatical constructions, and to force a grammatical reading
on such a text is to miss the point. Typically, the objects a term applies
to metaphorically are not in the term's literal extensions. It will not do
for the linguist to dismiss such cases as deviant - to contend that
metaphorical
sentences
are
strictly
false
or
that
stream-of-
consciousness locutions are strictly ill-founded.
Goodman
and Elgin
consider
it
crucial that
whether
we
characterize these sequences as true or false, we understand them as
words and sentences. Metaphors are ubiquitous, so the failure of
linguistic theory to explain our understanding of sentences containing
metaphors is a failure to explain a considerable proportion of its
subject matter. 12 What remains is an impoverished notion of linguistic
competence, in particular since the linguist model cannot be extended
to pictorial comprehension. Pictorial symbols belong to systems that
are syntactically dense, since there is no way to determine what symbol
a particular mark belongs to, or whether two marks constitute the
same symbol. Any difference between pictorial marks might, therefore,
be syntactically significant. Resemblance is often held to be that
connection,
and
in
the
opinion
of Goodman
and
Elgin
such
resemblance
is
discernible
even
to
the
uneducated
eye. 13
But
recognizing resemblance is no less problematic than comprehending
meaning, and Goodman is famous for insisting that there is no
innocent eye in interpreting a picture. We cannot tell what a picture
represents
just
by
looking,
for
anything
looks
many
ways.
Understanding a picture often involves knowing what the symbols
represent, figuratively as well as literally, and such knowledge is not a
native endowment but a complex constellation of acquired abilities. In
different pictorial systems, different devices are being used and some
learning
is required to
identify what
even
the
most
ordinary
photograph represents. Such pictorial learning involves acquiring a

166
Soft Logic
wide range of perceptual and conceptual skills as well as developing a
sensitivity regarding their exercise. The process is so automatic that
we are apt to forget that interpretation occurs. Moreover, interpretation
of a symbol depends on its place in the various symbol systems to
which it belongs: a symbol system is a scheme of implicit alternatives
to sort collectively the objects in a realm. But the same symbol can
belong to several systems and so participate in a variety ofsorting.
Goodman and Elgin admit that the resulting richness and
complexity is hard to square with our ordinary unsophisticated
comprehensions of pictures and sentences. 14 Understanding a symbol
is not a all-or-nothing affair, and a symbol need not have a single,
uniquely correct interpretation. The greater our store ofrelevant know-
ledge, the better our resources for (and, hence, prospects ot) under-
standing what the symbol represents.
Growth of understanding
involves the recognition of several admissible alternative interpre-
tations, and this occasions a reconsideration of some we have already
accepted. Likeness varies with the comparative importance among the
common properties, and thus with interest, context, and custom.
Degrees of resemblance and realism are transient properties that
fluctuate with practice. 15 What matters is not merely whether
differentiation is theoretically possible, but whether it can be accom-
plished by the means available and approximate to the use of a given
scheme. Thus, buildings are not texts or pictures, and usually do not
describe or depict. Goodman argues that exemplification is one of the
major ways in which architectural works mean. The ascription in such
cases is largely metaphorical, and he believes that metaphorical truth
is as distinct from metaphorical falsity, as is literal truth from literal
falsity.16 Strictly speaking, however, metaphors are not false, merely
inappropriate or irrelevant. Stripping off or ripping out all construals
(i.e. all interpretation and construction) does not leave a work cleansed
from all encrustation but demolishes it. 17 Goodman realizes that the
resolute deconstructionist will not flinch at this, for he dismisses
unconstrued works as will-o-the-wisps, and treats interpretation as
mere story telling. He is thus released from the hampering and
hopeless search for a single right interpretation. But such freedom is
bought at the price of inconsequence. That is why Goodman and Elgin
take deconstruction as a prelude to reconstruction, insisting that
among the many construals of a work some are right while others are
wrong. Their problem is that a work may be right or wrong in many,
sometimes radically different ways. Not only is the quest for a ready

Goodman's World Pluralism
167
and inclusive test for rightness (Le. for a key to all knowledge)
patently absurd, but even a pat and satisfying definition can hardly be
expected. 18 Thus, Goodman and Elgin declare themselves incapable to
tell us what rightness finally is. Judgments of rightness are often said
to be in terms of some fit, but whether it is a fit of parts together, or of
the whole to context and background, remains obscure. In any case, it
is not something that will tell us how to proceed.
Such rightness or fit are not cognitive categories, for Goodman
proclaims an unwitting bias in favor of stupidity to be characteristic of
both intemalist and extemalist theories of knowledge. 19 Apparently,
any true beliefcan be constituted as knowledge by suitably configuring
the range of relevant alternatives. As we refine our conceptual
schemes, we increase our chances of error, and Goodman's episte-
mology lacks the resources to discriminate between significant and
insignificant beliefs. His justification appeals mainly to community
standards, for he believes that a person's epistemic prospects are best
if his doxactic system includes no more than is necessary to justify his
beliefs. The blunt man of solid inspired common sense, being
untroubled by sublimities, may know what's what, while the more
sensitive, finely tuned intelligence is distracted by nuances. In this
manner,
Goodman
and
Elgin
conclude
that
knowledge,
as
contemporary theories conceive it, is not and ought not to be our
overriding cognitive objective. For to treat it as such is to disvalue
cognitive excellence such as conceptual and perceptual sensitivity,
logical acumen, breath and depth ofunderstanding, and the capacity to
distinguish important from trivial truth. All hope of arriving at
justified and certain truth vanishes largely because defeat
and
conclusion are built into the notions oftruth, certainty, and knowledge
from the beginning. Truth is conceived by Goodman and Elgin as an
excessively narrow notion, for its range is restricted to the verbal, and
within the verbal, to statements. Moreover, it pertains only to what the
statement says, taking no account ofwhat it may refer to in other ways
such as exemplification, expression, or allusion.20 And even within its
own narrow province, truth is not the only, and often not the
overriding consideration, for truth matters little in a statement not to
the point. Simple summaries and smooth curves become the facts and
laws by which we work and live.
By contrast, "right" and ''wrong'' are said by Goodman and Elgin
to apply to symbols of all kinds, nonverbal no less than verbal.
Rightness, unlike truth, is multidimensional; it is not only more

168
Soft Logic
complicated but also more volatile than truth. In this manner, truth
becomes one among the many factors - along with relevance, effect,
and usability - that enter into the rightness of what is being said or
depicted. Truth is considered to be no more than an occasional
ingredient of rightness;21 the different applications and procedures of
rightness are restricted to effecting a positive-negative dichotomy or a
grading on a preferential scale - not a specific and direct application
or reference. Rightness is said to be a matter of fitting and working,
but what fits or works may be quite different in each particular case.
Rightness is a fitting into a context or discourse or complex of other
symbols, but such fitting is not taken as coherence because other
factors such as seniority also count. Fitting is neither passive nor one-
way but an active process; the fit has to be made and the making may
involve minor and major adjustments to what is being fitted into, or
what is being fitted in, or both.22 The fitting is being tested by the
workings, and while the resultant work may be of any kind, Goodman
and Elgin are primarily concerned with cognitive work. Thus, while
their talk of working may echo pragmatism, they make a point not to
reduce rightness to practicality. For they emphasize that we can adopt
strategies, vocabularies, and styles no less than statements. To adopt a
symbol is to incorporate it into the apparatus in use, the fabric being
woven, the work in progress.
In some notable instances, a category or predicate or hypothesis
gains presence over others through entrenchment - the result of con-
tinued or repeated use. Entrenchment does not derive from rightness;
rather conversely, entrenchment is what, along with further' fitting and
working, makes for rightness.23 Making the fit may indeed call for
altering the background, even though the background yields less
readily than new proposals. Statements can be understood regardless
of their truth and regardless of belief in them; thus, we understand
requests and queries and works of art though they are neither true nor
false,
neither
believed nor
disbelieved,
and
subject
to
neither
demonstration nor refutation. Much as rightness is broader in scope
than
truth,
and
adaption
is
broader
in
scope
than
certainty,
understanding is broader in scope than knowledge.24 The process goes
on and on, for understanding remains always partial, and advancement
of understanding consists in the improvement of the relevant skills, or
in
applying
them
to
expand
or
refute
what
is
understood.
Understanding is what the cognitive process achieves, though what is
understood is not always believed or established as true.25 Goodman

Goodman's World Pluralism
169
and Elgin concur with the skeptical conclusion that transcendent truth
or certainty, Le. knowledge as traditionally defined, are unattainable.
The advancement of understanding starts from what happens to be
currently accepted and proceeds to integrate and organize -
to
construct something that works cognitively, that fits together and
handles new cases, and that may implement further inquiry and
invention. The test is whether the candidates for new adoption can be
made to fit and work, and what works at one time is not expected to
work forever and everywhere, nor is even a successful construction
taken to preclude further alternatives. This is why when truth and
rightness are at odds, Goodman and Elgin choose rightness.
Notes
1 Nelson Goodman and Catherine Z. Elgin, Reconceptions in Philosophy
and Other Arts and Sciences, Indianapolis/Cambridge: Hackett Publishing
Co., 1988, p. 5.
2 Ibid., p. 16.
3 Ibid., p. 17.
4 Ibid., p. 24.
5 Ibid., p. 26.
6 Ibid., p. 49.
7 Ibid., p. 51.
8 Ibid., p. 58.
9 Ibid., p. 85.
10 Joseph Griinfeld, Coneeptual Relevence, Amsterdam: B.R. GrUner
Publishing Co., 1989.
11 George J. Klir and Tina A. Folger, Fuzzy Sets, Uncertainty and
Information, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1988.
12 Goodman and Elgin, Reconceptions in Philosophy, p. 109.
l3 Ibid., p. 111.
14 Ibid., p. 119.
15 Ibid., p. 122.
16 Ibid., p. 40.
17 Ibid., p. 45.
18 Ibid., p. 46.
19
..
Ibid., p. 135.
20 Ibid., p. 154.
21 Ibid., p. 157.

170
22 Ibid., p. 158.
23 Ibid., p. 160.
24 Ibid., p. 161.
25 Ibid., p. 162.
Soft Logic

Metaphor

Chapter Thirteen
The Logic of Metaphor
I. A. Richards was the first to enunciate clearly what has become
known as the interactive view of metaphor, thus opening up the view
of metaphor as tension. He further reminded us that metaphor can
convey abstract ideas as well as pictorial, taking metaphor beyond the
domain of a purely ornamental or image-presenting entity. This, in
effect, is the preference ofthe cognitive over the semantic approach to
metaphor, the view that words obtain meaning only from their
connection with other words in a discourse. There is thus no standard
or scientific meaning for any word: sentences are not built up out of
fixed atomic units of meaning, and this makes metaphor a borrowing
between contexts. 1 The standard view takes its stand on a distinction
between literal and figurative usage oflanguage, in which literal usage
is to consist of the fixed meanings that Richards criticizes. The
standard view is also questioned by F. Moore for depending on a
notion of metaphor as a deviation from some supposed literal sense.
There are many different levels ofusage in language, not just two, and
figures of speech, including metaphor, will have to be regarded as part
of usage, not as deviations from it. Today's metaphor is tomorrow's
literal sense.2 The error is in the assumption that usage is, as it were,
one-dimensional. There is a temptation to say that rhetorical questions
are not questions at all, and that they are, therefore, deviant. But the
rhetorical question is really a higher order employment of the
conventions that enable us to ask questions to find out things we do
not know. The question does not cease to be a question; rather, because

174
Soft Logic
it is a question where there should be none, we set out to consider why
the speaker produced it.3 The argument is that if someone does not
mean to say what his utterance means, then he must mean to say
something else. But his intention may be to do something, namely to
produce a certain effect upon the hearer. Knowing the meaning of
words is at the base of our use of language, but it is this very capacity
that then makes possible the evocative use of language. Figures of
speech can be employed (among their various functions) to direct our
attention to a range of discovered, created, or creatable similarity and
associations that are, as it were, merely optional relative to a given
language (taken synchronically).4 Metaphor could be defined as
figurative language, which has the effect of drawing our attention to
non-encoded similarities; it is not so much a change of meaning as an
evocative exploitation of given meanings. By this evocative technique,
the audience is made to think ot: to explore, to recreate, a range of
similarities not encoded in our ordinary first-order language, not given
in the meaning ofwhat is now said.
There is no semantic criterion that alone can determine a
metaphor's reading. Even as familiar a metaphor as Plautus' "man is a
wolf' doesn't permit the direct transfer of our beliefs about woives to
men. We are quite flexible in how we categorize things; a ''heated
debate" isn't hot in the ordinary sense. The most common explanation
is that we recognize a metaphor when some sort of anomaly occurs.
Depending on how the metaphor juxtaposes the two systems, a literal
reading can be impossible, silly, irrelevant, or incomplete. Almost any
two subjects have something in common, but not any two subjects can
join to make a metaphor. Even a characteristic as abstract as rapacity
means one thing when it refers to wolves, and quite another when it
refers to men. We may reject the metaphor's picture ofmen, while still
being capable of interpreting it. Almost any subject can be seen from
more than one angle and the angle chosen influences the reading··of
the metaphor. Beliefs come in packages, and the packaging is partly
determined by the domains we see as relevant. We see the attributes of
''hunting for food" and "seeking advantage" as similar because we
have constructed an abstract structure ofwhat they share.5 As Aristotle
observes, a metaphor can go astray in at least two ways - it can be dull
or it can be incomprehensible. A novel metaphor can be innovative in
several ways; it may be phrased in an original way; it may offer an
original view of its subjects; or it may make us see the relations
between two domains in a new way.6 The speaker need not use

The Logic ofMetaphor
175
metaphor to characterize or set connections, but simply to present an
image, and this creative freedom enjoyed by the speaker is most clearly
visible in literary metaphors. For literal works are the natural
environment of figurative speech.7 Rhetoric features like economy,
epigrammatic memorableness, and sensuousness are in competition
with, and may be less important than, cognitive content. This is the
positivist assumption that underlies the British empiricist attitude
towards metaphor. There is, in principle, no limit to the number of
different descriptions that can be given to anyone object; nor is there
any limit to the range of attitudes a description can express. The
description under which a speaker conceives an object is not a once
and for all construction made by the speaker. The speaker can
entertain different conceptions of the same object at the same time,
and on different occasions. The assumption ofaesthetic purpose guides
the construction of an analo~ because some metaphors characterize
only in a weak sense.
The tendency has been to consider cognitive conflict or tension as
unpleasant and dysfunctional, to be resolved as soon as possible. But
increased cognitive activity or highlighted sensitivity might be
appreciated for their own sake. Metaphor is usually treated either
narrowly or as a type of literary device, or more generally (in the
context of structuralism and semiology) as an aspect of the way in
which people give meaning to the world and their place in it. Meaning
derives from "opposition," for to understand what something is, one
must also understand what it is not. Sometimes mutually exclusive
properties are expressed simultaneously in relation to the same
identity.
Logically,
of
course,
this
is
an
impossibility,
but
phenomenologically self-contradiction of this kind actually occurs.
The toy, for example, has two meanings, both ofwhich are essential; it
is a piece of plastic and also a horse. The "image" that such toys have
derives from the fact that the two identities are conceptually made to
overlap. The toy both is and is not what it purports to be, and both of
these aspects apply at the same time. Similarly, a representational
work of art derives its meaning as a work of art of this type and its
special fascination from the fact that it both is, and is not, what it
represents. In all these cases, as with toys, there is no real logical
connection involved, since the "superimposed" identity is only implied
or imagined. In the common definition of metaph~r, one thing is
treated as if it were another: the state is spoken ofas ifit were a ship, a

176
Soft Logic
woman as if she were a rose, a weapon as if it were a musical
instrument.
Awareness of the language itself in poetry will tend to alternate
between foreground and background.9 I. A. Richards and Philip
Wheelwright
have
argued
that
language
itself
is
inherently
metaphorical, since it involves reference to some kind of reality by
means of another. Since language is based on the bringing together of
opposites (the medium and the message, the words and what the words
stand for), in just the same way as a figurative painting does, it would
seem that language itself is essentially synergic. However, language is
normally "transparent": one typically "sees through it" rather than
being aware of it, and in this respect it tends to be unlike figurative
painting or sculpture. Language only becomes part of a synergy when
one is conscious ofthe language itself, so that there is a simultaneous
awareness of both the language and what it represents. For this to
occur, language must become "opaque" in some way, and this is one of
the functions of poetry: to draw attention to the message itself as well
as to the content ofthe message. An effective synergy will retain some
element of the unusual
and,
therefore,
unexpected,
and much
psychological
and
physiological
research
has
demonstrated
a
relationship between unexpected events and arousal level. This process
ofbringing different identities together in the same "conceptual space"
.may be involved in creative thinking ofall kinds. lo This is the state of
mind in which people generally do such things as going to the theater,
watching sports events, or reading novels and poetry. Usually the
physical setting of a work of art (such as an art gallery or theater)
helps to induce the secure playful state of mind, and the nature of the
work of art itself may also help to maintain this state. But if this state
cannot be induced or maintained, then the serious-minded state will
prevail and the synergies involved in the work of art will be felt as
irritating or upsetting. It may even elicit anger, and this is more likely
if the work of art is particularly unusual, so that it cannot be
assimilated to the individual's expectations (he cannot "make sense"
of it). Hence the anxiety and anger that new styles of art have tended
to evoke in some kinds ofpeople in recent history.
Nietzsche's writings offer a fascinating example of a uniquely
metaphorical style, which seems to hover on the borderline of
philosophy and poetry. As in many other areas, Nietzsche can be
viewed as anticipating a major shift in twentieth-century thinking
about metaphor, the breaking down of the clear distinction between

The Logic ofMetaphor
177
literal and figurative language. No such thing as unrhetorical
"natural" language exists that could be used as a point of reference;
language is itself the result of purely rhetorical tricks and devices.
Tropes are not something that can be added or abstracted from
language at will; they are its truest nature. 11 Nietzsche points out that
our common ways of speaking about things inevitably involve
transpositions and distortions, and that the full nature of things is
never grasped. There is no ''real'' expression and no real knowing
apart from metaphor. But deception on this point remains: the most
accustomed metaphors, the usual ones, pass for truths, and as
standards for measuring rarer ones. The only intrinsic difference here
is the difference between custom and novelty, frequency and variety.
Knowing is nothing but working with the favorite metaphors, an
imitation that is no longer felt to be an imitation.12 Instead of
regarding literal and figurative language as two distinct categories,
Nietzsche views them as ideal poles of a continuum. Our notion of
literal meaning reflects the power of creative artists to revive the
energy of language by using words in novel ways and contexts. All
language is a mixture of the literal and the figurative, since every
figurative utterance has some element ofthe customary in it, and some
element ofthe novel. For Nietzsche, literal andfigurative do not refer
to two different kinds of language but to opposed tendencies in all
languages. I3 Man becomes man only through a process of metaphor.
We misread ancient texts by trying to find a metaphorical depth
beneath their surface meaning. What is regarded as literal at one
moment may become figurative at another, and vice versa.
Nietzsche's purpose of undennining our naive faith in opposite
values - the beliefthat good is good, and evil is evil, is well served by
his principle ofthe continuity ofthe literal and figurative meanings. In
Nietzsche's view, all meaning is a making meaningful; there
i~}10
meaning apart from interpretation, the more or less willful forcing of
ideas into systems, that define their relations, and thus their signifi-
cance. One's choice of master metaphor will determine what one
regards as literal and what as figurative. What is figurative from one
perspective is literal from another. Meanings struggle with one an-
other for ascendancy because in Nietzsche's view, there is no natural
hierarchy of meanings. The centrality of the principle of metaphor in
Nietzsche's philosophy thus reflects his conviction that all meaning is
ultimately poetic, that is, all meaning is the result of human making.
By working to subvert the literal/figurative dichotomy, Nietzsche more

178
Soft Logic
basically undermines the distinction between natural speech and
poetry, and hence, more generally, the distinction between nature and
convention. For Nietzsche, to maintain that "there is no real knowing
apart form metaphor" is ultimately to claim that all truth is human
creation. 14 Nietzsche's Genealogy of Morals dwells on how man
becomes man by moving from the literal to the figurative. At the same
time, the tragedy ofNietzsche's account ofthe creative spirit in man is
the way the symbolic messages of great artists and teachers are taken
literally by their followers and hence distorted. Nietzsche sees
Christianity as arising from a misreading of Christ's teaching,· a
taking literally of what Christ meant only figuratively. Once one
understands that an expression like "kingdom of heaven" is a
metaphor, one realizes that it is not a literal place to be reached or
entered sometime in the future, but a spiritual state available right here
and now. 15 With every diffusion of Christianity to still broader, still
cruder masses of people, it becomes necessary to vulgarize it, to
barbarize Christianity.16 In the hands of the Church, Christ's spiritual
teaching was progressively reinterpreted in material terms, and thus
degenerated into dogma.
Nietzsche was acutely aware of how easily metaphors lose their
vitality, of how quickly they pass from the realm of vivid novelty to
that ofdull familiarity. More than in the case ofany other philosopher,
Nietzsche's metaphors are no rhetorical embellishment of his prose.
On the contrary, his metaphors are often the heart and the substance of
his thought. What is distinctive, then, about Nietzsche's style is that
one is never quite sure whether to take his language literally or
metaphorically. The kaleidoscopic shifting between literal and figur-
ative uses has the effect ofundennining the reader's naive faith that he
knows precisely what is real and what is symbolic. But by leaving the
metaphoric status of his expressions unclear, Nietzsche exposes
himself to the possibility of gross misinterpretations. In particular, he
makes it very easy to take the "wrong" metaphors in his prose literally.
Perhaps the most dangerous of Nietzsche's ambiguous figures of
speech is his use of the term war, which has made him seem the
intellectual ancestor of many forms of violence in the twentieth
century. Nietzsche certainly would have been repelled by the uses to
which his ideas have been put, but the fact remains that he often does
get carried away by his own military metaphors. His rejection of any
rigid formulation ofhis ideas has led him to express them in language
that hovers in a twilight between literal and figurative meaning.

The Logic ofMetaphor
179
Metaphor has been important not only in literature and philo-
sophy but also in science, where it performs an important role in the
development of new theories. Janet Martin and Rom Harre argue that
in science there is a need to make assertions about features of the
world that lie beneath any possible direct experience. Metaphor offers
us a terminology for such assertions that is both meaningful and able
to present novel meaning; it enables us to "conceive more than we can
currently say." If metaphor is just comparison, then the content of
scientific assertions involving metaphor will be confined to realities of
actual and possible experience. But it is basic to the position of the
gestalt theory of metaphor that what is expressed by metaphor can be
expressed in no other way. Black's contention is that each metaphor
has two distinct subjects, and that the principal subject acquires new
meaning through its involvement with the subordinary one. The
subsidiary subject "organizes" one's thought about the principal
subject in a new way, and this operation makes metaphor irreducible
to anyone literal formulation. Richards also emphasizes that metaphor
is an intercourse ofthoughts, as opposed to a mere shifting ofwords or
crude substitution as suggested by the ornamental view of traditional
rhetoric. It is thoughts (associated commonplaces) and not words that
interact; the contribution of metaphor is not that this is a new
description of a previously describable human condition, but that this
subject, this particular mental state, and these particular connotations
are revealed as such only through this metaphor. Thus, metaphor is
not an adornment to what one already knows, but a vehicle for a new
>
insight made available by this interaction of terms, leading to an
enrichment of the literal description. We need metaphor because in
some cases it is the only way to say what we mean.
The theoretical sciences experience crises in vocabulary owing to
the fact that they refer to as yet only partially understood natural
phenomena, and are capable offurther refinement and disambiguation
as a consequence of new discoveries.
Normally,
we introduce
terminology to presumed kinds of natural phenomena long before our
study of them has progressed to the point where we can specify for
them the sort of defining conditions that the positivist account of
language would require. The introduction of theoretical terms does
require, however, some tentative or preliminary indication of the
properties of the presumed kinds in question. I7 One must ask under
what conditions such terms can be introduced into a language so that
they may be intelligible. Thus, meaning theories that are essentially

180
Soft Logic
ostensive in character are excluded from a role in giving an account of
that kind of metaphor in which new meaning is created, and at most
they could explain how old meaning is reshutlled. In order to
understand metaphor, we shall have to turn to a different way of
conceiving meaning from whatever a term refers to. Simile, a simple
"same saying," cannot reveal the richer and more complex alternative
meaning ofmetaphor. Ifone does not wish to contemplate an infinitely
. complex world, and does not wish to treat science realistically, we
must introduce some other form of predicate. The metaphorical
employment of a term brings about a reordering of its semantic field,
so generating intentional contents, most of which are yet to be
explored.
Metaphoric thinking
can
foster
vagueness,
but
even
primarily incorrect analogies can lead to useful research. Complex
metaphors and analogies are treated as structure mappings between
domains. Typically, the target system to be understood is new and
abstract, and the base system in terms of which the target is classified
is familiar and visualizable. Overlap in relations is necessary for the
perception of similarity between two domains. A further complication
is
that
literal
similarity versus
metaphorical
relatedness
is
a
continuum, not a dichotomy. An example of a complex analogy is
RutherfordS' solar system model of the hydrogen atom. The analogy
conveys that the two domains, though composed of different objects,
share much of their relational structure. I8 In the atom/solar system
analogy we do not attempt to map the relation between the temperature
ofthe sun and that ofthe planet because it is considered irrelevant.
Before we check validity, we make implicit decisions concerning
what set of relationships is important. The better analyzed the base,
the clearer the candidate set of importable relations will be, and this is
one reason that the base is usually a familiar domain. However,
familiarity is no guarantee of specificity and it is possible to construct
a poor analogy using a well-specified base. The clarity of an analogy
refers to the precision with which the object mappings are defined,
that is, exactly how the base modes are mapped on the target modes,
and which set of predicates gets carried across. The richness of an
analogy is its predicate diversity, but the richness of an analogy, like
its clarity, can be defined before assuming its validity.19 In the
expressive analogy, there may be greater value in richness - in the
sheer number and diversity of relationships conveyed -
than in
assuming that all the mappings are clear and consistent. Expressive
analogies can fulfill their function without being clear and systematic,

The Logic ofMetaphor
181
whereas explanatory analogies cannot.20 Good science analogies are
rated high on clarity and low on richness, bad science analogies, low
on clarity and high on richness. In contrast, good literary metaphors
are rated high in richness, and poor literary metaphors low in richness.
The analogies of Paracelsus and Freud are far richer than those of
Galileo and Rutherford; their lack of clarity andsystematicity, though
it prevents making strict predictions, does not necessarily diminish the
aesthetic appeal ofthose analogies. Indeed, the presence of conflicting
interests can contribute to a feeling of challenging paradox.21 Such a
metaphor can be a good artistic metaphor, capable of reverberating in
interesting ways, of suggesting new associations, and of being called
forth
in
many
different
situations.
It
may
well
lead
to
new
understandings, but what it will not do is make the kind of strong new
predictions of a well-clarified analogy. When predictions are derived
from fuzzy analogies, they are often in remarkable close accord with a
priori intuitions. Only a well-clarified analogy possesses a firm enough
predicate structure to force a truly new and surprising prediction. The
journals of scientists like Kepler, Maxwell, Poincare, and Feynman
make it clear that they entertained initially unruly analogies. It may
well be that it is precisely in the process of focusing an initially vague,
rich, multipurpose feeling of analogy into a well-defined model that
much ofthe creative process in science takes place.22
Already Cicero, seeking to explain why a metaphorical term
might be preferred even when a proper one exists, points to the delight
of having one's thoughts led to something "other" without actually
going astray.23 In a theological context, however, the deviance or
wandering of metaphor makes it the emblem of the errancy of all
language. In the often repeated Pauline and Augustinian terms,
metaphor, like all ''figures,'' is the sign of exile from God into a
"region of unlikeness.,,24 The conception of the ''mists'' or "Painted
Glass" of metaphor and the project of eliminating its "error" united
Puritan theology and Baconian science, and gave to both their
apocalyptic drive. The older parousial or paradisal impulse has its
reflection in modern versions of the desire to purge language of its
error, to regain the purity, which may be simply that of the object.
Metaphor, which for the seventeenth century writers was a sign of
paradise lost, is described by Northrup Frye as the instrument of
analogy or "return." The multiplicity of plots contained within
metaphor
-
transference,
transgression,
alienation,
impropriety,
identity - suggest why metaphor can be at work in so many genres, not

182
Soft Logic
just as figure of speech or rhetorical errant, but as a structural
principle. So far, metaphor has not been mastered by any single
translation.
Notes
1 I. A. Richards, The Philosophy ofRhetoric, New York, NY: 1936, p.
94.
2 F. C. T. Moore, "On Taking Metaphor Literally," in Metaphor:
Problems and Perspectives, ed. David S. Miall, Sussex, NY: The Harvester
Press, 1982 and New York, NY: The Humanities Press, 1982, p. 3.
3 Ibid., p. 5.
4 Ibid., p. 9.
5 Roger Tourangeau, "Metaphor and Cognitive Structure," in Metaphor:
Problems and Perspectives, p. 26.
6 Ibid., p. 32.
7 Stein Haugom Olsen, "Understanding Literary Metaphors," in
Metaphor: Problems and Perspectives, p. 38.
8 Ibid., p. 50.
9 Michael Apter, "Metaphor as Synergy," in Metaphor: Problems and
Perspectives, p. 63.
10 Ibid., p. 70 n18.
11 Frederich Nietzsche, Ges mmelte Werke, vol. V, Munich, 1922, pp.
297-300, trans. by Paul de Man under the title Allegories ofReading, New
Haven and London, 1979, p. 105.
12 The Philosopher (The Philosophenbuch of1872), trans. and ed. by D.
Braezeale under the title Philosophy and Truth, Selection from Nietzsche's
Notebooks ofthe Early 1870s, Sussex and New Jersey, 1979, pp. 50-51.
13 Paul Cantor, "Friedrich Nietzsche: The Use and Abuse ofMetaphor,"
in Metaphor: Problems and Perspectives, p. 87 n5.
14 Ibid., p. 78.
15 Ibid., p. 79.
16 Friedrich Nietzsche, "Antichrist," in The Portable Nietzsche, trans.
·W. Kaufinann, New York, NY: 1954, p. 610.
17 J. Martin and R. Harre, "Metaphor in Science," in Metaphor:
Problems and Perspectives, p. 105 n8.
18 Dedre Gentner, "Are Scientific Analogies Metaphors?" in Metaphor:
Problems and Perspectives, p. 113.
19 Ibid., p. 114.

The Logic ofMetaphor
20 Ibid., pp. 131 n21.
2] Ibid., p. 127.
22 Ibid., p. 129.
23 De Oratore ill xl, 160.
24 Confessions VII x; XII xiii; 1 Cor 12.
183

Chapter Fourteen
Truth in Metaphor
Most traditional philosophical views permit metaphor little, if any,
role in understanding our world and ourselves. But linguistic evidence
shows that metaphor is pervasive in everyday language and thought.
Metaphor is for most people a device ofthe poetic imagination and the
rhetorical flourish - a matter of extraordinary rather than ordinary
language. It is characteristically viewed as a matter of language alone,
a matter of words rather than thought and action. George Lakoff and
Mark Johnson, on the other hand, emphasize that our ordinary
conceptual system, in terms of which we both think and act, is
fundamentally metaphorical. The way we think, what we experience,
and what we do every day is very much a matter of metaphor. I They
point out that our conceptual system is not something of which we are
normally aware. Thus, we don't talk about argument in terms of war,
even though we actually win and lose arguments. We see the person
with whom we are arguing as an opponent; we attack his position and
we defend our own; we gain and lose ground; and we' plan and use
strategies in argument. The essence of metaphor is understanding and
experiencing one kind ofthing in terms of another. Thus, time in our
culture is a valuable commodity; it is taken as a limited resource that
we use to accomplish our goals. Because of the way the concept of
work has developed in modem Western culture, where work is
typically associated with the time it takes, and time is precisely
quantified, it has become customary to pay people by the hour, week,

186
Soft Logic
or year. These practices are relatively new in the history of the human
race, and by no means do they exist in all cultures. They have arisen in
the industrialized societies and structure our basic everyday activities
in a profound way. That is how we understand and experience time as
the kind of thing that can be spent, wasted, budgeted, invested wisely
offoolishly, saved or squandered.2
In allowing us to focus on one aspect of a concept (e.g. the
battling aspects of argument), a metaphorical concept can keep us
from focusing on other aspects of the concept that are inconsistent
with
that
metaphor.
In this
way metaphor
permits
us
partly
inconsistent reasoning. Time isn't really money, but metaphorical
concepts can be extended beyond the range of ordinary literal ways of
thinking and talking into the range ofwhat is called figurative, poetic,
colorful, or fanciful thought and language. So when we say that a
concept is structured by a metaphor, we mean that it is partially
structured, and that it can be extended in some ways but not in others.
Though the polar opposites, up-down, in-out, etc. are physical in
nature, the orientational metaphors based on them vary from culture to
culture. Our values form a coherent, though not a consistent, system as
do our metaphors. There are indeed often conflicts among these
values, and hence contention among the metaphors associated with
them. What values are given priority is partly a matter of the
subculture one lives in, and partly a matter of personal predilection,
but there are cultures where balance and passivity are valued more
than in our culture. Human purposes typically require us to impose
artificial
boundaries
that
make
physical
phenomena
discrete.
Metaphors like these are so natural and pervasive in our thought that
they are usually taken as self-evident, direct descriptions of mental
phenomena. The fact that they are metaphorical never occurs to most
of us, and we take statements like "He cracked under pressure" as--
being directly true or false. We think of inflation as an adversity that
can attack us, hurt us, steal from us, even destroy us, and the "inflation
is the adversary" metaphor, therefore, gives rise and justifies political
and economic actions on the part of our government. What all these
metaphors have in common is that they allow us to make sense of
phenomena in the world in human terms - terms that we can under-
stand on the basis of our own motivations, goals, actions, and
characteristics.
What part we pick out detennines what aspects of the whole we
are focusing on, but it is easy to find apparent incoherence in everyday

Truth in Metaphor
187
metaphorical expressions. Time, in English, is structured in terms of
the "Time is a moving object" metaphor, with the future moving
towards us. The connections between metaphors are more likely to
involve coherence than consistency.3 If you say "The odds are against
us" or "We'll have to take our chances," you would not be viewed as
speaking metaphorically but as using normal everyday language
appropriate to the situation. Nevertheless, your way of talking about,
conceiving, and expressing your situation would be metaphorically
structured.4 Expressions like ''wasting time," "attacking positions,"
"going our separate ways" are reflections of systematic metaphorical
concepts that structure our actions and thoughts. The structure of our
spatial concepts emerges from our constant spatial experience, that is,
our interaction with the physical environment. But even what we call
"direct physical experience" is never merely a matter of having a body
of a certain sort; rather every experience takes place within a
comprehensive background of
cul~al presuppositions. It can be
misleading, therefore, to speak ofdirect physical experience, as though
there were some core of immediate experience that we can then
"interpret" in terms of our conceptual system. Cultural assumptions,
values, and attitudes are not a conceptual overlay that we mayor may
not place upon experience as we choose. It would be more correct to
say that all experience is cultural through and through, and, therefore,
that we experience our "world" in such a way that our culture is
already present in the very experience itselt:5 We experience ourselves
as entities, separate from the rest of the world and, when things have
no distinct boundaries, we often project boundaries upon them. We
typically conceptualize the nonphysical in terms ofthe more physical-
that is, \ve conceptualize the less clearly delineated in terms of the
more delineated.
When we live by metaphors like "labor is a resource" and "time
is a resource," as we do in our culture, we tend not to see them as
metaphors at all. These two substance metaphors present labor and
time as entities to be quantified - that is, measured, conceived as being
progressively "used up," and assigned monetary values. In viewing
labor as a kind of activity, the metaphor assumes that labor can be
clearly identified and distinguished from activities that are not labor. It
is assumed that we can tell work from play, and productive. activity
from nonproductive activity. The view of labor as merely a kind of
activity independent of who performs it, how we experience it, and
what it means, hides the issues of whether the work is personally

188
Soft Logic
meaningful, satisfying, and humane.6 The quantification of labor in
terms of time induces a notion of "leisure time" parallel to "labor
time," In a society like ours, where inactivity is not considered a
purposeful endeavor, a whole industry devoted to leisure activity has
arisen. As a result, "leisure time" has become a resource, too - to be
spent productively, used wisely, saved up, budgeted, wasted, lost, etc.
What is hidden by the "resource" metaphors for labor and time is the
way they turn our concept of "leisure" into something remarkably like
"labor." The "resource" metaphors for labor and time hide the idea
prevalent in other cultures and some subcultures of our own society
that work can be play, that inactivity can be productive, and that much
of what we classify as "labor" serves either no clear purpose or no
worthwhile purpose. It is by means of conceptualizing our experiences
in this manner that we pick out the "important" aspects of an
experience. While not anyone metaphor is sufficient to give us a
complete construct and comprehensive understanding of all aspects,
together they do the job of giving us a coherent understanding of what
a rational argument is. There is no single image that completely fits all
metaphors. Instead of consistency, we get partial coherencies and a
partial satisfaction ofour purposes.
We construct arguments when we need to show the connections
between things that we take for granted and other things that are not
obvious. There is no consistent image possible with any of the
"argument" metaphors, but though consistency is not possible, there is
metaphorical coherence.7 Metaphor pervades our normal conceptual
system. Because so many of the concepts that are important to us are
either abstract or not clearly delineated in our experience (the
emotions, ideas, time), we need to get a grasp on them by means of
other concepts that we understand in clearer terms, such as spatial
orientations and objects. It suggests that understanding takes place-in
terms of entire domains of experience and not in terms of isolated
concepts. They are the product of our bodies, our interactions with our
physical environment, and with other people within our culture. Even
some natural kinds of experience are partly metaphorical; thus, the
existence of time is a natural kind of experience that is understood
almost entirely in metaphorical terms (by means of the spatialization
of time, "time is a moving object," ''time is money" metaphors). The
standard view seeks to be objective, assuming that experiences and
objects have inherent properties, and that human beings understand
them solely in terms of true propositions. Against this, Lakoff and

Truth in Metaphor
189
Johnson argue that we comprehend, for example, love only partly in
terms of such inherent properties as fondness, attraction, sexual desire,
and the like. For the most part, our comprehension of love is
metaphorical. There must be no fixed
core of properties, and
categories can be systematically extended in various directions for
different purposes. Categories are open-ended, yet categorization is not
random.
Concepts are not defmed solely in tenns of inherent
properties; instead they are defined primarily in terms of interactional
properties. Since we speak in linear order, we constantly have to
choose which words to put first. Syntax is not independent ofmeaning,
especially metaphorical aspects ofmeaning. The "logic" of a language
is based on the coherence between the spatialized forms of the
language and the conceptual systems, especially the metaphorical
aspects ofthe conceptual system.8
Metaphors are appropriate because they sanction actions, justify
inferences, and help us to set goals; the meaning a metaphor will have
for one will be partly culturally determined and partly tied to one's
past experiences. The metaphor has the power to create reality rather
than merely give us a way to conceptualize a preexisting reality, but it
is by no means an easy matter to change the metaphors we live by.
Many of our activities (arguing, solving problems, budgeting time) are
metaphorical
in
nature,
and
the
metaphorical
concepts
that
characterize these activities structure our present reality.9 Much
cultural change arises from the introduction of new metaphorical
concepts and the loss of old ones. Yet the idea that metaphors can
create realities goes against most traditional views of metaphor.
Metaphor has traditionally been viewed as a matter of mere language
rather than a means ofstructuring our conceptual system and the kinds
of everyday activities we perform. But changes in our conceptual
system do modify what is real for us, and reflect how we perceive the
world and act upon these perceptions. lo The view that metaphor is just
a matter of language and can at best describe reality stems from the
idea that what is real is wholly external to, and independent ot: how
human beings conceptualize the world - as if the study of reality were
exclusively the study ofthe external world. Such a view ofreality - so-
called objective reality - leaves out the real perceptions, conceptual-
izations, motivations, and actions that constitute most of what we
experience. That is why different cultures have different conceptual
systems, even though each culture provides a more or less successful
way of dealing with its environment, both adapting to it and changing

190
Soft Logic
it. Not surprisingly, the social reality defined by culture affects its
conception of physical reality. What is real for one individual as a
member of a culture is a product both of his social reality and the way
in which that reality shapes his experience ofthe physical world. Since
much of our social reality is understood in metaphorical terms, and
since our conception of the physical world is partly metaphorical,
metaphor plays a very significant role in determining what is real for
us.
Many of the similarities that we perceive are the result of
conventional metaphors that are part of our conceptual system. New
metaphors are mostly structural and by virtue of their entailment pick
out a range of experiences by highlighting, downplaying, and hiding
aspects of reality. The primary function of metaphor is to provide a
partial understanding of one kind of experience in terms of another
kind of experience. This may involve preexisting isolated similarities
or the creation of new similarities. To an objectivist, it would make no
sense to speak ofmetaphors as "creating similarities," since that would
require metaphors to be able to change the nature of the external
world, bringing into existence objective similarities that did not
previously exist.ll Lakoff and Johnson argue that things in the world
do playa role in constraining our conceptual system, but they point out
that things play that role only through our experience of them. Our
experiences will differ from culture to culture and may depend on our
understanding of one kind of experience in terms of another; that is,
our experience may be metaphorical in nature.
Properties
and
similarities, they maintain, can be expressed only relatively to a
conceptual system. Metaphors have entailments through which they
highlight and make coherent certain aspects of our experience.
Metaphors may create reality for us, especially social reality;--a
metaphor may thus be a guide for future action, and people in power
get to impose their metaphors. New metaphors, like conventional
metaphors, can have the power to define reality, they do this through a
coherent network of entailments that highlight some features of reality
and hide others. The acceptance of the metaphor, which forces us to
focus only on those aspects of our experience that it highlights, leads
us to view the entailments of the metaphor as being true. Though
questions of truth do arise for new metaphors, the more important
questions are those of appropriate action. In most cases, what is at
issue is not the truth or falsity of a metaphor but the perceptions and
inferences that follow from it and the actions that are sanctioned by it.

Truth in Metaphor
191
In all aspects of life, not just in politics and love, we define our reality
in terms of metaphors, and then proceed to act on the basis of these
metaphors. We draw inferences, set goals, make commitments, and
execute plans, all on the basis of how we in part structure our
experience, consciously and unconsciously, by means ofmetaphor. 12
Metaphors play a central role in the construction of social and
political reality, yet they are typically viewed within philosophy as
matters of ''mere language." Philosophical discussions of metaphor
have not focused on their conceptual nature, their contribution to
understanding, or their function in cultural reality. The typical
philosophical conclusion is that metaphors cannot directly state truths
and that, if they can state truth at all, it is only indirectly, via some
nonmetaphorical "literal" paraphrase. 13 Truth is always relative to a
conceptual system that is defined in large part by metaphor. Most of
our metaphors have evolved in our culture over a long period, while
others are imposed upon us by people in power: political leaders,
religious leaders, business leaders, advertisers, the media. We base our
actions, both physical and social, on what we take to be true. Truth
matters to us because it has survival value and allows us to function in
our world. Most of the truths we accumulate - about our bodies, the
people we interact with, and our immediate physical and social
environments - play a role in daily functioning; they are so obvious
that it takes a conscious effort to become aware ofthem. Thus, a front-
back orientation is not an inherent property of objects like rocks, but
rather an orientation that we project into them, and the way we do this
varies from culture to culture. We perceive various things in the
natural world as entities, often projecting boundaries and surfaces on
them where no clear-cut boundaries or surfaces exist naturally. As is
typically the case in our daily lives, truth is relative to understanding.
In order to understand the world and function in it, we have to
categorize it in ways that make sense to us in terms of the things and
experiences that we encounter. Some of our categories emerge directly
from our experience, from the way our bodies are, and the nature of
our interactions with other people and with our physical and social
environments. A categorization is a natural way of identifying one
kind of object or experience by highlighting certain properties,
"downplaying others, and hiding still others. To highlight certain
properties is necessarily to downplay or hide others, since focusing on
one set ofproperties shifts our attention away from others.

192
Soft Logic
In making a statement, we make a choice of categories because
we have some reason for focusing on certain properties and down-
playing others. True statements made in terms of human categories
typically do not predicate properties of objects in themselves, but
rather in interactional properties that make sense only relative to
human functioning. 14 In making a true statement, we have to choose
categories of description, and that choice involves our perceptions and
our purposes in the given situation. What counts as an instance of a
property depends on our purpose in using the category.
Such
categories are not fixed but may be narrowed, expanded, or adjusted
relative to our purposes and other contextual factors. "Light consists of
particles" seems to contradict "light consists of waves," yet both are
taken as true by physicists relative to which aspects of light are picked
out by different experiments. Understanding always involves human
categorization, which is a function of interactional (rather than
inherent)
properties
and
dimensions
that
emerge
from
our
experience. 15 Categories are neither fixed nor uniform; they are
defined by prototypes, and are adjustable in context, given various
purposes. Whether a statement is true depends on whether the category
employed in the statement fits, and this in turn varies with human
purposes and other aspects of context. 16 To understand a sentence as
being true, we must first understand it. Thus, understanding that ''the
fog is in front of the mountain" is true is not merely a matter of
picking out preexisting and well-defined entities in the world (the fog
and the mountain), and seeing whether some inherent relation (inde-
pendent of the human observer) holds between the well-defined
entities. Instead, it is a matter of human projection and human
judgment relative to certain purposes. The sentence is virtually never
understood on its own terms without the evolution of some large
gestalt that specifies the normal range of natural dimensions (e.g.
purpose, stages, etc.). Whatever gestalt is evolved, we understand
much more than is given directly in the sentence. We understand the
sentence in terms of the way these gestalts fit together, and only
relative to such understandings do issues oftruth arise.
Getting a ''normal'' understanding of the sentence in terms of its
categories is defined by prototype. 17 Our understanding ofan argument
situation will involve viewing it simultaneously in terms ofboth of the
"conversation" gestalt and the ''war'' gestalt. In both the metaphorical
and the nonmetaphorical cases, our account of how we understand
truth depends on our account of how we understand situations.

Truth in Metaphor
193
Understanding life in terms of a story involves highlighting certain
participants and episodes while ignoring and hiding others. As the
circumstances ofour lives change, we constantly revise our life stories,
seeking new coherence. I8 Most ofthis background structure will never
be noted, since it is presupposed in so many of our daily activities and
experiences.
Most
of
our
indirect
understanding
involves
understanding one kind of entity or experience in terms of another
kind - that is, understanding by way of metaphor. Since any such
understanding is always partial, we have no access to "the whole
truth" or to any definite account of reality;19 thus truth will always
depend partly on coherence. Classical realism focuses on physical
reality rather than cultural or personal reality, but Lakoff and Johnson
emphasize that social, political, economic, and religions institutions,
and the human beings who function within them are no less real than
trees, tables, or rocks. Human concepts do not correspond to inherent
properties of things but only to interactional properties; meaning is
always meaning to someone. According to the objectivist approach,
myths and metaphors cannot be taken seriously because they are not
objectively true. Metaphors and other kinds of poetic, fanciful,
rhetorical, or figurative language can always be avoided in speaking
objectively, and they should be avoided since their meanings are not
clear and precise and do not fit reality in any obvious way. The myth
of subjectivism, on the other hand, holds that when important issues
arise, regardless ofwhat others may say, our own senses and intuitions
are our best guides. The most important things in our lives are our
feelings,
aesthetic
sensibilities,
moral
practices,
and
spiritual
awareness, and these are taken to be purely subjective. Art and poetry
transcend rationality and objectivity, and put us in touch with the more
important reality of our feelings and intuitions.
We gain this
awareness through our imagination rather than reason. The language
of imagination, especially metaphor, is necessary for expressing the
unique and most personally significant aspects of our experience. In
matters ofpersonal understanding, the ordinary agreed-upon meanings
that words have will not do.20 There are no objective and rational
means for getting at our feelings, our aesthetic sensibilities, and
religious intuitions.
The
portions
of our
lives
governed
by
objectivism
and
subjectivism vary greatly from person to person and from culture to
culture. In Western culture, objectivism is by far the greater factor,
claiming to govern, at least nominally, science, law, government,

Truth in Metaphor
193
Understanding life in terms of a story involves highlighting certain
participants and episodes while ignoring and hiding others. As the
circumstances ofour lives change, we constantly revise our life stories,
seeking new coherence. 18 Most ofthis background structure will never
be noted, since it is presupposed in so many of our daily activities and
experiences.
Most
of
our
indirect
understanding
involves
understanding one kind of entity or experience in terms of another
kind - that is, understanding by way of metaphor. Since any such
understanding is always partial, we have no access to "the whole
truth" or to any defmite account of reality;19 thus truth will always
depend partly on coherence. Classical realism focuses on physical
reality rather than cultural or personal reality, but Lakoff and Johnson
emphasize that social, political, economic, and religions institutions,
and the human beings who function within them are no less real than
trees, tables, or rocks. Human concepts do not correspond to inherent
properties of things but only to interactional properties; meaning is
always meaning to someone. According to the objectivist approach,
myths and metaphors cannot be taken seriously because they are not
objectively true. Metaphors and other kinds of poetic, fanciful,
rhetorical, or figurative language can always be avoided in speaking
objectively, and they should be avoided since their meanings are not
clear and precise and do not fit reality in any obvious way. The myth
of subjectivism, on the other hand, holds that when important issues
arise, regardless ofwhat others may say, our own senses and intuitions
are our best guides. The most important things in our lives are our
feelings,
aesthetic
sensibilities,
moral
practices,
and
spiritual
awareness, and these are taken to be purely subjective. Art and poetry
transcend rationality and objectivity, and put us in touch with the more
important reality of our feelings and intuitions.
We gain this
awareness through our imagination rather than reason. The language
of imagination, especially metaphor, is necessary for expressing the
unique and most personally significant aspects of our experience. In
matters ofpersonal understanding, the ordinary agreed-upon meanings
that words have will not do.20 There are no objective and rational
means for getting at our feelings, our aesthetic sensibilities, and
religious intuitions.
The
portions
of our
lives
governed
by
objectivism
and
subjectivism vary greatly from person to person and from culture to
culture. In Western culture, objectivism is by far the greater factor,
claiming to govern, at least nominally, science, law, government,

194
Soft Logic
morality, business, economics, and scholarship. But objectivism is a
myth.21 Since the time of the Greeks, there has been in Western
culture a tension between truth, on the one hand, and art, on the other
- art being viewed as illusion and rhetorical make-believe. Although
Aristotle's theory of how metaphor works22 is the classic view, his
claim that metaphor is able to induce insight has never been carried
over into modern philosophical thought. The fear of metaphor and
rhetoric in the empiricist tradition is a fear of subjectivism - a fear of
emotion and the imagination. Words are viewed as having "proper
meaning" in terms of which truths can be expressed. To use words
metaphorically is taken by the objectivist tradition as using them in an
improper sense, to stir up the imagination and, thereby, the emotions,
and thus to lead us away from truth and toward illusion. The Romantic
tradition,
by embracing
subjectivism,
reinforced
the
dichotomy
between truth and reason on the one hand, and imagination on the
other. By giving up on rationality, the Romantics played into the
hands of the myth of objectivism, whose power has continued to
increase ever since. Lakoff and Johnson show how metaphor combines
reason with imagination. In one of its aspects, imagination involves
seeing one kind of thing in terms of another - as it happens in
metaphorical thought, and metaphor is taken by them as imaginative
understanding. Since the categories of our everyday thought are
largely metaphorical, and since our everyday reasoning involves
metaphorical
entailment
and
inferences,
ordinary
rationality
is
imaginative by its very nature. Metaphor is one of our most important
tools for trying to understand partially what cannot be understood
totally; our feelings, aesthetic experiences, moral practices, and
spiritual awareness.
Truth is relative to understanding, which means that there is no
neutral standpoint from which to obtain absolute objective truth about
anything. But this does not mean that there are no truths; rather it
means only that truth is relative to our conceptual framework. The
system is grounded on, and constantly tested by, our experiences and
those of other members of our culture in their daily interactions with
other people, and with our physical and cultural environments.23 What
the myths of objectivism and subjectivisn1 miss is the way we
understand
the
world
through
our
interactions
with
it.
What
objectivism misses is the fact that understanding, and therefore truth,
is necessarily relative to our conceptual frameworks, and that it cannot
be treated in any absolute or neutral conceptual system. Objectivism

Truth in Metaphor
195
also misses the fact that conceptual systems are metaphorical in nature
and involve an imaginative understanding of one kind of things in
terms of another. Truth does not form a comprehensive system but
emerges from more or less local coherences. What subjectivism
specifically misses is that our understanding, even our most imagin-
ative understanding, is given in terms of a conceptual framework that
is grounded in our successful functioning in our physical and cultural
environments. It also misses the fact that metaphorical understanding
involves metaphorical entailment, which is an imaginative form of
rationality.24
The myth of objectivism has dominated Western culture, and in
particular Western philosophy, from the Presocratics to the present
day. The view that we have access to absolute and unconditional truth
about the world is the cornerstone of the Western philosophical
tradition. This myth of objectivity has flourished in both the rationalist
and empiricist traditions, which in this respect differ only in their
accounts of how we arrive at such absolute truth. By contrast, Lakoff
and Johnson declare metaphor as essential to human understanding,
and as a mechanism for creating new meaning and new realities in our
lives. It puts them at odds with most of the Western philosophical
traditions, which has regarded metaphor as an agent of subjectivism
and as subversive to the quest for absolute truth. They conclude· that
the meaning ofa sentence cannot be obtained from the meanings of its
parts and the structure of the sentence. Rather, the meaning of a
sentence is given in terms of a conceptual structure, and most of the
conceptual structures ofa natural language are metaphorical in nature.
According to the objectivist account of meaning, a person compre-
hends the objective meaning of a sentence if he understands the
conditions under which it could be true or false. 25 The objectivist
tradition views semantics as the study of how linguistic expressions
can fit the world directly, without the. intervention of human
understanding. This technique uses definition of truth in terms of
"fitting the world," which is technically defined by conditions of
satisfaction in a mathematical model, as it were. The objectivist
approach to truth requires that meaning, too, be objective, that it
exclude all subjective elements, i.e. anything peculiar to a particular
context, culture, or mode of understanding. Meaning is thus taken as
independent of use, for according to the objectivist myth, the world is
made up of objects that have well-defined inherent properties,
independent of any being who experiences them, and that there are

196
Soft Logic
fixed relations holding among them at any given time. These views
support a building block theory of meaning. Logical positivists, like
Camap, attempted to carry out an objectivist program by trying to
construct a universally applicable formal, logical, language that had
all the building-block properties. Quine, reacting to such universalist
claims, argued that each language has its own ontology built into it,
and what counts as an object, property, or relation may vary from
language to' language. It is possible to maintain such a thesis of
ontological relativity within the confines of the objectivist program
without having any recourse to human understanding or cultural
differences. This relativistic position gives up on the possibility of
constructing a single, universally applicable, logical language into
which all natural languages can be translated adequately. It clams,
instead, that each natural language carves up what is in the world in
different ways - always picking out objects and properties that are
really there.
But since different
languages may have different
ontologies built into them, there is no guarantee that any two
languages will be commensurable.26
The study of the building-block structure, the inherent properties
of the parts, and the relationships among them has traditionally been
called grammar.27 It follows from this view of linguistic expression. as
objects that grammar can be studied independently of meaning or
human understanding.28 This tradition is epitomized by the linguistics
of Noam Chomsky, who has steadfastly maintained that grammar is a
matter ofpure form, independent ofmeaning or human understanding.
On this account it is possible objectively to say what you mean, and
communication failures are matters of subjective errors. Objectivists
recognize, however, that a person may understand a sentence in a
given context as meaning something other than its literal objective
significance, and objectivists typically admit that any full account of
understanding
will
have
to
account
for·
these
cases,
toO.29
Exaggeration,
understatement,
hints,
irony,
and
all
figurative
language, in particular, are understood as cases where a speaker says
one thing and means something else. Lakoff and Johnson argue in the
Kantian manner that an adequate account of our experience, our
thought, and our language, requires viewing objects only as entities
relative to our interactions with the world and our projections on it.30
They view issues having to do with meaning in natural language, and
with the way people understand both their language and their
experience as empirical rather than matters of a priori philosophical

Truth in Metaphor
197
assumption and argumentation. In the objectivist tradition, metaphor
is seen as only marginally relevant to an account of truth,31 yet we
have found that metaphor is pervasive, not merely in our language, but
in our conceptual system as well. Metaphor is one of the most basic
mechanisms we have for understanding our experience.
Lakoff
and
Johnson
realize
that
a
lot
of
competent
mathematicians, logicians, linguists, psychologists, and computer
scientists have designed objectivist models for use in the human
sciences. But they point out that what is left out in those accounts are
the experimental bases of metaphors and, in particular, what these
metaphors hide. The natural question, to ask then, is whether people
actually think and act in terms of consistent sets of metaphors,
although a special case where they do is in the formulation ofscientific
theories. It is, moreover, comforting to have a consistent view of the
world, a clear set of expectations, and no conflict about what you
should do. Having a basis for expectation and action is important for
survival, but it is one thing to impose a single objectivist model on
some restricted situation and to function in terms of that model; it is
quite another to conclude that the model is an accurate ret1ection of
reality. The reason that our conceptual systenls have inconsistent
metaphors for the same concepts is that there is no one metaphor that
will do. Each metaphor gives us some understanding ofone or another
aspect of the concepts, but in doing so hides others. Thus, to operate
only in terms of a consistent set of metaphors is to suppress many
aspects of reality. Successful functioning in our daily lives, therefore,
requires a constant shifting of metaphors. Current formal techniques
in computer science show promise of providing representations of
inconsistent sets of metaphors. This could lead to an understanding of
the way people reason and function
in terms of coherent but
inconsistent
metaphorical
concepts.
The
objectivist
program
is
incapable of giving a satisfying account of human understanding, the
nature ofhuman rationality, human language and communication, the
human sciences, moral and aesthetic values, scientific understanding,
and the way in which the foundations of mathematics have a basis in
human understanding. Interactional properties, experimental gestalts,
and metaphorical concepts seem to be necessary for the adequate
treatment ofthese issues.32
Subjectivist positions maintain that meaning is private, that
experience is altogether holistic, that nleanings and contexts have no
natural structure, and that they cannot, therefore, be adequately

198
Soft Logic
represented. Against this, objectivism's focus on truth and factual
knowledge is based on the importance of such knowledge for
successful functioning in our physical and cultural environment.
Lakoff and Johnson conclude that truth is always relative to under-
standing and based on a nonuniversal conceptual framework. Where
objectivity is reasonable, it does not require an absolute, universally
valid point of view, for being objective is always relative to a
conceptual system and a set of cultural values. Reasonable objectivity
might be impossible when there are conflicting conceptual systems or
conflicting cultural values, and it is important to be able to admit this
and to recognize when it occurs. According to the experimentalist
myth, scientific knowledge is still possible, and the result would be a
more reasonable assessment of what scientific knowledge is and what
its limitations are.33 What legitimately motivates subjectivism is the
awareness that meaning.is always meaning to someone, and that what
is significant to one person depends not on rational knowledge alone,
but on past experiences, values, feelings, and intuitive insights.
Meaning is not cut and dried, it is a matter of the imagination and
coherence. Experimentalism diverges from subjectivism in its rejection
of the Romantic idea that imaginative understanding is completely
unconstrained.34 The experimentalist myth views interaction with the
environment as involving mutual change. When people who are
talking to each other do not share the same culture, knowledge, values,
and assumptions, mutual understanding can be especially difficult. But
such understanding is still possible through the negotiation of
meaning. To negotiate meaning with someone, you have to become
aware of and respect both the differences in your backgrounds and
where these differences are important. Such metaphorical imagination
is a crucial skill in creating rapport and in communicating the natur~
of unshared experience. This skill consists in large measure in the
ability to bend your world view and adjust the way you categorize your
experience. Problems of mutual understanding are not exotic; they
arise
in
all
extended
conversations
where
understanding
is
important.35 Where it really counts, meaning is almost never com-
municated according to the "conduit" metaphor, that is, where one
person transmits a fixed, clear proposition to another by means of
expressions in a common language, where both parties have all the
relevant common knowledge, assumptions, values, etc. In all interest-
ing cases, meaning is negotiated; you gradually figure out what you
have in common, what is safe to talk about, how you can communicate

Truth in Metaphor
199
unshared experience or create a shared vision. With enough flexibility
in bending your world view, and with luck, skill, and charity, you may
achieve some mutual understanding.36
Notes
1 George Lakoffand Mark Johnson, Metaphors We Live By, Chicago, IL:
The University ofChicago Press, 1980, p. 3.
2 Ibid., p. 8.
3 Ibid., p. 44.
4 Ibid., p. 51.
5 Ibid., p. 57.
6 Ibid., p. 67.
7 Ibid., p. 10l.
8 Ibid., p. 138.
9 Ibid., p. 145.
10 Ibid., p. 146.
11 Ibid., p. 154.
12 Ibid., p. 158.
13 Ibid., p. 159.
14 Ibid., p. 164.
15 Ibid., p. 165.
16 Ibid., p. 166.
17 Ibid., p. 169.
18 Ibid., p. 175.
19 Ibid., p. 180.
20 Ibid., p. 188.
21 Ibid., p. 189.
22 Rhetoric 1410 b.
23 Lakoffand Johnson, Metaphors We Live By, p. 194.
24 Ibid.
25 Ibid., p. 198.
26 Ibid., p. 203.
27 Ibid., p. 204.
28 ibid., p. 205.
29 cfH. P. Grice, "Meaning," Philosophical Review, 66 (1957), pp. 377-
88.
30 Lakoffand Johnson, Metaphors We Live By, p. 210.
31 ibid.
32 Ibid., p. 222.

200
33 Ibid., p. 227.
34 Ibid., p. 228.
35 Ibid., p. 23I.
36 Ibid., p. 232.
Soft Logic

Chapter Fifteen
Kittay's Theory of Metaphor
Kittay shows how philosophy has, in turn, rejected and embraced
metaphor.
Plato's
disapproval
prevailed
in
the
more
strictly
philosophical texts, and Locke's denunciation of figurative language
set the tone for the philosophical disregard for metaphor - a position
in
which
rationalists
and
empiricists
were
united.
Only
the
philosophers associated with the Romantic tradition realized its
importance. 1 To its distracters it was mere embellishment, the swaying
ofpassions, while to its champions its lack of utility, its sheer capacity
for delight, was reason for its privileged place in language. Today,
metaphor is experiencing a revitalized interest within philosophy,
especially among analytic philosophers, who value metaphor not
mainly for its affective and rhetorical efficiency but for its cognitive
contributions. This tradition goes back to Aristotle who stressed the
cognitive importance of metaphor, in particular metaphor based on
analogy. Metaphor provides us with a way of learning something new
about the world and about how the world may be perceived and
understood. He and the scholastic tradition relied on the coincidence of
language and reality. Distinctions in language were seen as captivating
ontological distinctions,2 and discovering analogical uses of language
can help us to discover analogical states of reality. Kittay emphasizes
the indispensability of analogical thinking for diverse areas of
cognition
and
its
relation
to
metaphorical
thinking.
Various
hypotheses are at once generated analogically and metaphorically from
current conceptualizations of the world, and metaphors result in
placing one object in two perspectives simultaneously. The view of
language and thought according to which metaphor appears as

202
Soft Logic
ornament or comparison presupposes the conception of mind
\.-3 a
passive receptacle of perceptions. These perceptions, when brought
together through proper rules ofinference and logical deduction, result
in knowledge only when not adulterated by the imperfect but
indispensable vehicle of language. Instead, we need to understand
language as an expressive medium that allows us to say what we think
in language, just as the artist expresses himself in paint.3 Still, it is the
view of language as conduit for our thought that has largely prevailed
in the dominant philosophical tradition.
Thus, the conception of thought and language necessary to move
beyond a restricted view of metaphor requires an understanding of
mind as active and creatively engaged in the forming of percepts and
concepts, as well as in unifying the diversity of the given. Metaphor is
the linguistic realization of this variety, since it does not record
preexisting similarities in things; rather, it is the linguistic process by
which we bring together diverse thoughts and thereby reform our
perception of the world. In turning away from ··logical positivism,
analytic philosophers have become impressed with the importance of
metaphor.
Models
in science must be understood as
extended
metaphors - not literally true but useful representations of phenomena,
which often lead to fruitful theoretic conceptions and new empirical
discoveries. Hesse4 showed that models are crucial for providing
theories with productive power, and that they figured not only
incidentally in the context of discovery but cognitively in the context
ofjustification. Models playa cognitive role in science, and yet they,
like the metaphors of our
language,
are
obviously false
and
unverifiable.5 Kittay stresses the bearing of metaphor on creativity in
language and science, on paradigm shifts in the history of science, and
on change in meaning. Thus, the very criteria by which metaphor was
dismissed as meaningless or non-cognitive are now considered
questionable. There is the recognition of prima facie meaningfulness
of metaphorical language and of the evident importance of models in
science. Once it is realized that science is a human activity rather than
the repository of ultimate truths, and that cognition is shaping our
conceptions of the world, the creative play of metaphor is seen as
characteristic not only of poetry but also of science. When we come to
realize that language is a chief element in world-making, metaphor
illuminates the creative contribution ofthe mind to knowledge, and its
study forces basic. revisions on our views on language and thought.
Kittay stresses that since metaphors do have meaning, they call for a

Kittay's Theory ofMetaphor
203
semantic account. but she admits that such a semantic account does
not give us a complete comprehension of the ways in which we
understand metaphor, and that this must, therefore, be supplemented
by pragmatic considerations. Since all language is understood context-
ually, there is no room for a rigid distinction between the semantic and
the pragmatic in our understanding ofmetaphor.
Kittay's theory of metaphor is perspectival: a language speaker
uses one linguistically articulate domain to gain an understanding of
another experimental or conceptual domain.6 The problem is that
gaining such a "perspective understanding" is itself a metaphorical,
i.e. non-literal, notion that becomes self defeating in a scientific
theory. Unless language is structured in specifiable ways, metaphor
would have no cognitive meaning. Concepts are not free-floating;7
they emerge from the articulation of contrasts and affmities in the
expressive medium. The key to Kittay's holding metaphor cognitive is
her
contention
that,
in
metaphor,
two
concepts
are
operative
simultaneously. Black8 has demonstrated that a metaphor is not an
isolated term, but a sentence, and that it involves not only two subjects
but a system of associated commonplaces. Kittay follows Saussure and
Black in holding all language contextually and systematically related.
Literal comparison takes place within
fixed
common or given
categories,
whereas
comparisons
in
metaphor
and
simile
cross
categorical boundaries. An expression is not metaphorical in an
absolute sense, but only relative to a set of beliefs and linguistic usages
that may change through place and time; it is relative to a given
linguistic community.9 Since in metaphor a new perspective is being
achieved, it is only in a sentence that we can tell whether a given word
is used literally or metaphorically. It is a unit of discourse in which
some conceptual or conversational incongruity emerges. Metaphors
involve some sort of rule breaking that takes place not arbitrarily, but
only in a certain specifiable fashion. Yet Kittay's perspectivism
remains analogical and often does not permit her to decide what terms
are to be understood metaphorically and which are to be taken
literally.lO This is also why her notion of metaphor is said to have a
referent only anaphorically, Le. in an indirect fashion.
Kittay emphasizes that her understanding of metaphor requires
that a label functions not in isolation, but as belonging to a family. She
defmes this set of alternatives in terms of a semantic field; a word's
meaning (e.g. "green") is partly determined by its position in the
semantic field. But no one statement will capture the full meaning of

204
Soft Logic
metaphor and, while we may give an exposition of metaphor, we
cannot paraphrase it completely. Metaphor is the primary way in
which we accommodate new experience, and it is at the source of our
capacity to learn and at the center of our creative thinking. Kittay
argues that how we identify metaphor has not been adequately dealt
with because writers have not correctly identified the unit of discourse
that constitutes a metaphor. This unit is not nlerely an isolated
sentence but a whole text, yet what constitutes such a text is, in tum,
problematic. To view metaphors as deviant is to condemn a substantial
part of both ordinary and specialized discourse as deviant. Speakers
are hardly aware of making default assumptions, and they become
conscious ofthem only when something occurs that jars them, such as
the use of "she" rather than "he" when the context does not indicate
the gender ofthe subject. Since variations of such default assumptions
are continuous, when physicists today speak of the atom, they do not
mean atom in the sense understood by Democritus. Considerations
such as these brings to the fore questions of analicity in language, and
the
validity
of the
distinction
between
a
dictionary
and
an
encyclopedia. A given utterance is not simply composed by one part
that is to be understood metaphorically, while the remainder terms are
taken literally. Kittay stresses that even literal statements are highly
context-dependent, and that for any given literal interpretation of an
utterance we make implicit or explicit use of context. Thus, in fairy
tales, we have to suspend disbelief and accept a world picture
substantially different from our usual ·one. A metaphorical interpre-
tation involves a more radical shift in the language use than when we
merely revise or suspend our empirical beliefs with some concomitant
semantic change. The reorganization that the conceptual oddity forces
may also, in the end, direct us to a new conception of the world-
either to new theories of the natural world or to a new vision of the
world as reflected in a poem or novel.
Davidsonll claims that both the idea of metaphorical meaning
and the concomitant belief that metaphors possess a special cognitive
content are mistaken. His argument is that meaning is context free and
that aspects of language that are not context free are pragmatic, not
semantic. Metaphorical interpretation is context-bound, and there is
no meaning of metaphorical utterance beyond the literal nleaning of
the terms employed. Kittay, however, points out that speech act theory
has taught us that contextual considerations can be systematic and,
hence rule governed. Virtually any word, phrase, sentence, or group of

Kittay's Theory ofMetaphor
205
sentences
could
reveal
metaphorical
meaning
under
right
circumstances and in the right context. The set of background
assumptions to which even the most evidently literal statements are
relative, are just those plain matters that escape our notice, but which
nonetheless are operative in our understanding of language. 12 It is not
the case that the literal meaning is always the preferred one, since for
most words in the language the number of possible meanings is
indefinitely large, and much of our language is polysemiotic, as even a
cursory examination of a good dictionary will reveal. Any context-free
meaning is no more than an abstraction which, at most, can have only
methodical significance. By investigating metaphor we learn that not
only does a word have meaning in the context of a sentence, but that a
sentence, too,
lacks definite meaning outside its linguistic and
situation context. 13 Kittay believes metaphor to be primary and
considers literal language, with its referential and logical impetus, to
be a pruning of this expressive medium, just as conscious thought is a
constraint and a pruning of the rich resources of the unconscious. 14 It
seems, however, that were it not for man's being conscious, it would
make no sense to ascribe to him unconsciousness, and that lacking
literal meaning, there would be no metaphor either. When a term is
read nletaphorically, a new sense is generated, but this would be
pointless without the original literal meaning. Kittay takes the primary
function of language to be not merely referential and communicative,
but expressive, delineative, and articulative. Metaphor is the means
available within natural language to extend such expressive capacity in
often radical ways. We use metaphor when the resources of literal
language are inadequate to articulate significant distinctions or
unities. 15
A sentence can carry information only if it is understood relative
to the hearer's knowledge of our general,
background,
default
assunlptions. Until words combine, they are only partly "digitized" (in
Dretske'sl6 terminology), and such information is left in analogical
form. But digitalization can take place in indefinitely many ways, and
that some information remains in analogical form is the source of
multiple ambiguities. This is a major reason why metaphor will not do
in the formation ofscientific theories, including the theory of language
and of metaphor as proposed by Kittay. Contextual considerations
remain secondary to language meaning, to meaning differentiation and
even to the expressive capacities of language. When words COITlbine,
their informative content is selectively pruned so that the resulting

206
Soft Logic
image is coherent and appropriately informative. But ultimately the
context cannot provide a term with contrasts and affmities not already
provided by the language. What counts as a shift in the specification of
meaning, and what as a transference, depends primarily on semantic,
and only secondarily on pragmatic, considerations. Since metaphor
involves systems and not just isolated ideas, the fIrst
step in
interpreting a metaphor requires us to recognize that the background
assumptions presumed by the context ofan utterance is in conflict with
such first-order interpretation. But to say that metaphorical meaning is
a second-order meaning is to leave much of the first order meaning
intact.
Kittay's strategy is to expand the sway of metaphor, for what is
required to constitute second-order discourse is not a single, sufficient
condition but a set of alternative conditions. Often, we will use
metaphor when there is no distinct form or even a distinctly articulated
semantic field for the topic. Kittay realizes that metaphorical analogies
are asymmetric for the reason that one side of the analogy has a
privileged status relative to the other. Yet she denies the primacy of
literal nleaning, claiming that first-order meaning need not necessarily
be literal since it ultimately never is. It is language'.s adaptability in
applying to fictive instances that is exploited in its accommodation to
changing circumstances. The default assumptions are altered and there
is a suspension of disbelief Some metaphors, particularly poetic ones,
leave the donlain of the topic somewhat indeterminate, since we have
here a figure operating on a figure. The metaphor nlay reveal nlore
than was intended by its author, for while he may have intended one
contrast, the hearer or reader may restore as many as will result in
interesting relations. The cognitive rewards of making metaphors lie
primarily in the spinning out of metaphorical implications made
possible by the conceptual connections effected within semantic
fields. 17 Kittay concludes that metaphor may violate certain linguistic
rules without forfeiting the goal of mutual understanding. The use of
metaphor exhibits the kind ofcreativity that consists in discovering the
possibilities implicit in our linguistic system not yet discovered and
known. Creativity in metaphor consists in the use of existing structure
to forge new ones. She claims that metaphorical use of language is
sometimes more valid than is literal use. The violation of conceptual
constraints brings about a new conceptualization, a new way of
conceiving some content domain. Indeed, most interesting metaphors
involve a great deal of strain in language and thought. While not all

Kittay's Theory ofMetaphor
207
judgments of similarity exhibit asymmetry, metaphor and simile
always do, and often there is only a thin line between a metaphor and
the creation of a fictional entity. That is why the temptation to regard
metaphor as semantically deviant is strong and persistent. There is no
apparent limit to possible innovative metaphorical uses.
Kittay emphasizes that, just as we require a relational theory of
word meaning, we require a relational theory of sentence meaning.
The language speakers share an understanding of what counts as a
salient differentiation within the conceptual frame of language. 18
Natural language depends on signs that are types and not merely
tokens. Without its relation to other specifically linguistic entities, the
term cannot function in a signifying fashion as a relation to the
nonlinguistic
entity.
The
poet
who
attempts
to
express
and
communicate a unique, perceptual experience, an imaginative vision,
charts out a new content domain. Likewise, when the new sciences of
electricity, magnetism, genetics, and nuclear biology emerged, they
were exploring previously inarticulated content domains. We identify a
phenr.llenon as distinct prior to gaining an understanding of it. Using
Dretske's terminology, we can say that a domain not articulated can at
best provide us with analogic information.
Or using epistemic
concepts, we may conclude that we have knowledge of without yet
having knowledge that, i.e. we have knowledge of x without realizing
that y may be predicated of x. To acquire digitized information or
prepositional knowledge, we require that the domain be articulated.
The notion ofa content domain may also be formulated as a related set
of beliefs, both actual and possible, attainable to a given language
community. 19 A.
Lehrer20 suggests that,
rather than
regarding
semantic fields as mosaics, we should see them as composed of terms
whose application to a content domain centers on certain foci. In such
a model, gaps and overlaps are to be expected and, while each concept
or term has a clear focus, it may, nevertheless, have indeterminate
boundaries. Kittay shows that 110 matter how far-fetched the examples
might be, it will always be possible to conjure up some content in
which we suspend our usual default assumptions to allow what
otherwise would seem incongruous and anomalous contrasts.21
For linguist philosophers who take the central questions of
semantics to be questions oftruth conditions, synonymy plays a central
role in the theory of meaning. But if the sense of a term is a function
of the way in which that term relates to other conceptually related
terms, then questions of sense are not reducible to questions of truth

208
Soft Logic
conditions, and meaning is simply that which fixes reference. Instead
of holding that the meaning of a sentence is dependent on its truth
conditions, the truth conditions are dependent on how the meanings of
the terms are established. They are due to contrastive relations with
other terms, and among these various relations synonymy plays only a
minor role. Kittay emphasizes that synonymy is always relative to a
given context
and,
following
Lyons,
she
adopts
a
broad and
encompassing notion of context. This involves the tacit acceptance by
both speaker and listener of all the relevant connections, beliefs, and
presuppositions taken for granted by members of a speech com-
munity.22 Kittay's default assumptions deny the possibility of absolute
synonymy and replace it with partial synonymy. She speaks of the
"furniture of our mind" to illustrate the weakly cohesive set to which
such relations belong, yet, at the same time, she admits that the
various relations she discusses cannot be regarded as definite.23 This
renders her theory of metaphor inoperative as a theory - by turning it
into a metaphor. It amounts to taking metaphorical understanding as
the model for scientific knowledge because considered as a theory, her
analysis ofmetaphor is literally false and logically inconsistent.
Notes
I Eva Feder Kittay, Metaphor, Its Cognitive Force and Linguistic
Structure, Oxford: Claredon Press, 1987, p. 1.
2 1. F. Ross, Portraying Analogy, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1981.
3 Ibid.
4 M. B. Hesse, Models and Metaphors in Science, Notre Dame: Notre
Dame University Press, 1966, pp. 157-177.
5 Kittay, Metaphor, p. 8.
6 Ibid., p. 14.
7 Joseph Griinfeld, Conceptual Relevance, Amsterdam: B. R. Gruner
Publishing Co., 1989.
8 M. Black, Models and Metaphors, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press, 1962.
9 Kittay, Metaphor, p. 20.
10 Ibid., p. 25.
1I D. Davidson, "What Metaphors Mean," in Inquiries into Truth and
Interpretation, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1984.

Kittay's Theory ofMetaphor
209
12 Kittay, Metaphor, p. 106.
13 Ibid., p. 115.
14 Ibid., p. 120.
15 Ibid., p. 125
16 F. 1. Dretske, Knowledge and the Flow ofInformation, Canlbridge,
Mass.: MIT Press, 1983.
17 Kittay, Metaphor, p. 172.
18 Ibid., p. 216.
19 Ibid., p. 228 nl0.
20 A. Lehrer, Semantic Fields and Lexical Structure, Amsterdam, North-
Holland, 1974.
21 Kittay, Metaphor, p. 234.
22 J. Lyons, Introduction into Theoretical Linguistics, London:
Cambridge University Press, 1968.
23 Kittay, Metaphor, p. 247.

Chapter Sixteen
Hausman's Metaphorical Realism
Hausman holds that the use of metaphor reflects a strong sense of
innovation or creativity. 1 The importance of metaphor extends beyond
literary criticism to the understanding and interpretation of nonverbal
arts as well. He considers metaphors to be integral not only to visual
art and music, but also to philosophical discourse and scientific
theorizing? But, in this manner, the very distinction between literal
and metaphorical use of language is blurred. The metaphorical
structure of nonverbal arts is illustrated by Hausman in paintings that
show us obvious distortions of conventional perspectives. He realizes,
however, that the paradox of creativity is not amenable to ready
resolution; indeed, he believes that the paradox of metaphorical
discourse cannot be resolved in principle.3 Still, he insists that there
are no substitute expressions for metaphor, for whereas analogies are
based on comparison, metaphor introduces new significance into the
world.
While the
distinction
between
literal
and
metaphorical
expressions may not be hard and fast, we need to acknowledge that the
function of some expressions can be distinguished as figurative from
others that are not figurative. Some metaphors create unique insights,
and these are irreducible with respect to the antecedents in their
context. Hausman's claim is that this amounts to regarding them as
creative constituents of the world.4 Metaphors, and more generally,
works of art, cannot be expressed without loss of significance in
paraphrase or analysis. The metaphor depends not only on similarities
but also on dissimilarities, and it is the role of disparities that extends

212
Soft Logic
the significance of metaphors. If creativity is nlerely making explicit
what is already implicit, there would be no generating in Hausman's
strong anti-Aristotelian sense.
Searle has challenged the suggestion that some metaphors create
new similarities.5 Hausman, on the other hand, holds that Searle's
notion of plausibility is based on a rationalism requiring explanations
to relate to something that is already antecedent and familiar.
Hausman argues that if such an assumption governs what is plausible,
then no view that advocates created newness has a chance. What is
new, he maintains, is a gestalt-like family resemblance in which the
outcome is more than a mere perspective.6 But when we say that some
expression or artwork is creative, we thereby indicate that we are
unable adequately to explain it, and Hausman's "realism" is designed
to account for this. He likens new creations to children who have
personalities of their own, and whose particular combination of
characteristics is unique. 7 What renders a person unique, however, is
that we take interest in him as a person, that is, that we consider not
only what makes him similar to other people, but also what makes him
different from thenl. Hausman cannot explain how autonomous
intelligibility is supposed to work because the future system or the
subsequent changes in the aesthetic tradition are never known in
advance; they are only discoverable by hindsight. A metaphor's
intelligibility is related to its components as something like a family
resemblance, and Hausman's realism turns out to be not much more
than that. He emphasizes that metaphors express meaning through a
tension, that is, some form ofopposition, strain, or conflict ofmeaning
within themselves or their context. As used here, such tension does not
specifically refer to a psychological but to a structural condition. A
metaphor brings together different kinds of meaning units, and they
may cover expressions that are literally false. While the expressions
may join incompatible and even inconsistent standard meanings, they
nevertheless interact to say something not otherwise said under
standard interpretation.8 Part of what is needed in generating novel
meaning is the tension in which it is seen as something that.is strange,
remote, or out of its category. But since the metaphor does not present
sheer nonsense, it is at once standard and nonstandard.
It is crucial to Hausman's conception of metaphor to avoid
understanding consequent meanings as paraphrases that could have
been possible to formulate prior to the metaphorical statement. He
argues that our inability to fmd a property common to all members ofa

Hausman's Metaphorical Realism
213
family does not necessarily mean that there is no identity or coherence
that enables us to recognize the family. A metaphor is comparable to
the overall character that identifies a family. 9 As a linguistic item, a
metaphor does not refer to a class of things already recognizable as a
cluster of resemblances. Rather, it posits an intelligible cluster of
clashing meanings, and that is how the new significance ofa metaphor
becomes unique. At the same time he emphasizes the paradoxical
nature of metaphors and the difficulty of understanding what is
radically new. Because understanding is tracing things to their
antecedents,
such
knowledge
and
what
is
really
new
seems
incompatible. The various theories either explicitly or implicitly treat
metaphorical meaning or sense in terms of other, antecedent meanings
or senses. Created metaphors are regarded by Hausman as naming or
reference-fixing expressions that "give birth" to the reference they fix.
In this manner, he is convinced, metaphors constitute reality, for they
can be correct or faithful, and in terms of such expectations they can
"convey" or "generate" insights, as Black10 has pointed out. But
Hausman goes beyond Black in insisting on conditions for metaphor
other
than
the
cognitive
framework
itself
He
denies
that
appropriateness can be ultimately justified by mere acceptability of
further linguistic data or perspectives to provide the larger system with
the needed objectivity. He believes that creative metaphors take a
fundamental responsibility for language as a whole, making language
responsive to something independent of itself: But from the fact that
creative metaphors bring about changes in the conventions of accepted
language,11 it does not follow that they are literally part of the world.
His referents are said to be unique events, moments, or centers of
relevance but this does not
establish
their
extraconceptual
or
extralinguistic nature. The individuals Hausman assumes to exists are
not deternlinably characterizable objects but merely foci of constraints
on the nleanings of intentional objects. He wants the conditions at
issue to function independently of thought itself while using them as
instruments for creation and discovery, yet the experimental encounter
need not signifY more than a cultural consensus that proves some
metaphors as faithful and others as less faithful or appropriate.
Hausnlan admits that apart from the network of meanings, a
metaphor would have neither the sense nor the reference it, in fact,
does have. 12 Given the strong sense of"creativity" on which he insists,
his realism is designed to explain why there is a continuity of
reference through time. He argues that such novel referents enter the

212
Soft Logic
the significance of metaphors. If creativity is merely making explicit
what is already implicit, there would be no generating in Hausman's
strong anti-Aristotelian sense.
Searle has challenged the suggestion that some metaphors create
new similarities.5 Hausman, on the other hand, holds that Searle's
notion of plausibility is based on a rationalism requiring explanations
to relate to something that is already antecedent and familiar.
Hausman argues that if such an assumption governs what is plausible,
then no view that advocates created newness has a chance. What is
new, he maintains, is a gestalt-like family resemblance in which the
outcome is more than a mere perspective.6 But when we say that some
expression or artwork is creative, we thereby indicate that we are
unable adequately to explain it, and Hausman's "realism'" is designed
to account for this. He likens new creations to children who have
personalities of their own, and whose particular combination of
characteristics is unique.7 What renders a person unique, however, is
that we take interest in him as a person, that is, that we consider not
only what makes him similar to other people, but also what makes him
different
frODl them. Hausman cannot explain how autonomous
intelligibility is supposed to work because the future system or the
subsequent changes in the aesthetic tradition are never known in
advance; they are only discoverable by hindsight. A metaphor's
intelligibility is related to its components as something like a family
resemblance, and Hausnlan's realism turns out to be not much more
than that. He emphasizes that metaphors express meaning through a
tension, that is, some form ofopposition, strain, or conflict ofmeaning
within themselves or their context. As used here, such tension does not
specifically refer to a psychological but to a structural condition. A
metaphor brings together different kinds of meaning units, and th~y
may cover expressions that are literally false. While the expressions
may join incompatible and even inconsistent standard meanings, they
nevertheless interact to say something not otherwise said under
standard interpretation.8 Part of what is needed in generating novel
meaning is the tension in which it is seen as something that.is strange,
remote, or out of its category. But since the metaphor does not present
sheer nonsense, it is at once standard and nonstandard.
It is crucial to Hausman's conception of metaphor to avoid
understanding consequent meanings as paraphrases that could have
been possible to formulate prior to the metaphorical statement. He
argues that our inability to fmd a property common to all members ofa

Hausman's Metaphorical Realism
213
family does not necessarily mean that there is no identity or coherence
that enables us to recognize the family. A metaphor is comparable to
the overall character that identifies a family.9 As a linguistic item, a
metaphor does not refer to a class of things already recognizable as a
cluster of resemblances. Rather, it posits an intelligible cluster of
clashing meanings, and that is how the new significance ofa metaphor
becomes unique. At the same time he emphasizes the paradoxical
nature of metaphors and the difficulty of understanding what is
radically new. Because understanding is tracing things to their
antecedents,
such
knowledge
and
what
is
really
new
seems
incompatible. The various theories either explicitly or implicitly treat
metaphorical meaning or sense in terms ofother, antecedent meanings
or senses. Created metaphors are regarded by Hausman as naming or
reference-fixing expressions that "give birth" to the reference they fix.
In this manner, he is convinced, metaphors constitute reality, for they
can be correct or faithful, and in terms of such expectations they can
"convey" or "generate" insights, as Black10 has pointed out. But
Hausman goes beyond Black in insisting on conditions for metaphor
other
than
the
cognitive
framework
itself:
He
denies
that
appropriateness can be ultimately justified by mere acceptability of
further linguistic data or perspectives to provide the larger system with
the needed objectivity. He believes that creative metaphors take a
fundamental responsibility for language as a whole, making language
responsive to something independent of itself: But from the fact that
creative metaphors bring about changes in the conventions of accepted
language,11 it does not follow that they are literally part of the world.
His referents are said to be unique events, moments, or centers of
relevance but this
does
not
establish
their
extraconceptual
or
extralinguistic nature. The individuals Hausman assumes to exists are
not determinably characterizable objects but merely foci of constraints
on the meaning~ of intentional objects. He wants the conditions at
issue to function independently of thought itself while using them as
instruments for creation and discovery, yet the experimental encounter
need not signify more than a cultural consensus that proves some
metaphors as faithful and others as less faithful or appropriate.
Hausman admits that apart from the network of meanings, a
metaphor would have neither the sense nor the reference it, in fact,
does have. 12 Given the strong sense of"creativity" on which he insists,
his realism is designed to explain why there is a continuity of
reference through time. He argues that such novel referents enter the

214
Soft Logic
world as new children enter their families. Each takes on character-
istics from his or her family and, in turn, contributes to its context. He
takes seriously Peirce's suggestion that individuals are determinate
without necessarily being spatial entities. He identifies new creative
metaphors as centers of relevance for qualities, but realizes that the
idea of relevance to extralinguistic conditions fails to ascribe truth
value to metaphor. It merely implies that creative metaphors are
performative instances of meaning, and thus they are said to have a
force of generating or bringing something into being. 13 However, to
name something as unique is not to bring it literally into existence.
Metaphors may invite us to view the primary object in a different way,
but the changes do not occur in the object itself, only in the viewing of
it. While he realizes that a metaphor's reference-fixing is not itself
true of false, he makes much of its being relevant or irrelevant and his
realism is designed to account for this. What the metaphor designates
as a matter of relevance constitutes the inclusion and exclusion of
senses. These, however, are not future attributions, as Hausman
claims,14 since they are invariably made by hindsight. While he
considers them conditions of intelligibility that render future growth
possible, all this is never realized in advance. In the domain of art,
likewise, what comes to be accepted as masterpieces and thus
standards for future development, is invariably a product of historical
judgment. Creativity can never be recognized per se, as Hausman has
it, but only relative to a tradition, and all that metaphors finally
accomplish is a modification, however radical, ofdiscourse or style.
Discussing nonverbal metaphors, Hausman admits that we
cannot say what their particular constraints are because we have no
ready-made language for this purpose. We have to discuss them in a
medium to which they do not belong. 15 But what· he defines as visual
or musical metaphors presupposes language. Criticism, likewise, can
accomplish it&; task only by being at least more literal than its subject
matter. He focuses on the metaphorical character of all interpretation,
and while he admits the epistemological dependence of a work of art
on the observer, he wants to preserve its ontological autonomy. Works
of art, however, do not impose themselves on us; they have to be
appreciated, and if they fail to be appreciated, they cease to be works
of art. The constraints encountered are due to language and tradition,
they are historical in character, and known only by hindsight. We can
learn whether a metaphor is creative only by its consequences which
may be long in coming. A metaphor or work ofart can surprise us, but

Hausman's Metaphorical Realism
215
what surprises us is relative to what we have come to expect. In spite
of his "realism," Hausman admits that, in the arts, significance is the
outcome ofan interplay of attention. 16 He identifies objective reality as
what is independent (at least in part) of interpretation and, therefore,
public and common to all. But metaphor and art do not refer to the
world in this straightforward fashion in terms ofstandard conventional
contexts. On the contrary, nleanings are brought together that appear
strange in relation to the literally understood. Hausman is unable to
spell out the nature ofthis controlling focus; he considers relevance to
be like a gravitational pull that remains open to changes that may
occur in the future,17 yet he fails to recognize its historical character.
He points out that the aesthetic and nonaesthetic functions of art
are not distinct; because what is said crucially depends on how it is
said. The ''truth,'' however, that art or metaphor convey is not literal,
for it is neither a correspondence to fact nor a full adherence to
established language or style. "Truth" is thus given by Hausman the
same weak, metaphorical sense that he ascribes to reality. Since
neither is in principle subject to verification, they remain undecidable
and subjective. This is the price he has to pay for his strong sense of
creativity. A unique object cannot be exhaustively described because
this is what we mean by being unique, yet if we adopt Hausman's
strong sense oforiginality, the wonder is that we are able to identify it
at all. He demands that identity be more than mere internal coherence
but is unable to specify the additional constraints. The metaphorical
structure he ascribes to reality lacks a discernible consistency to render
it adequately coherent. He wants to make referents at least partly
independent of thought, but what he calls "real" has to be created and
discovered at the same time. 18 He admits that he cannot justify the
validity of such constraints, but he believes that his own weak realism
coheres better with everyday experiences. Yet he realizes, at the same
time, the paradoxical character of individuals that are said to be
created and discovered. Such are the consequences of his strong sense
ofcreation ex nihilo. A novel style or a striking metaphor are creative
only relative to a given medium or language, and neither do works of
genius transcend their
specific
culture.
Originality in
writing,
painting, or composing is always relative to a tradition, and its
constraints are due to social convention. When an insight provided by
a metaphor or work ofart is said to be relevant to the world, it is really
a social reality shaped by specific historical conventions we are talking
about. What is interpreted, therefore, crucially depends on who is

216
Soft Logic
doing the interpreting and when. Nonverbal metaphors are relative not
only to their own artistic traditions, but also to the language into
which they are being translated and in which they are being discussed.
They do not literally form part of the world, but are merely a mode in
which the world is being peff~eived and represented. They are only a
manner of speaking and of depicting reality, and while they may
contribute to evolving intelligibility and advance novel understanding,
they remain tradition-bound, and that is how they are not arbitrary.
Creativity in the arts is not ex nihilo; the artist does not literally create
a new world, but only a manner of speaking, depicting, or composing.
Metaphors are a primary way ofidentifying and describing novelty, yet
it does not follow fron1 this that the world is literally a metaphor or a
work ofart.
Notes
1 Carl R. Hausman, Metaphor and Art, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1989, p. ix.
2 Ibid., p. 8.
3 Ibid., p. 10.
4 Ibid., p. 24.
5 John Searle, "Metaphor," in Expression and Meaning, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1979, pp. 76-116.
6 Hausman, Metaphor and Art, p. 45.
7 Ibid., p. 107.
8 Ibid., p. 65
9 Ibid., p. 79.
10 Max Black, "More about Metaphors," in Models and Metaphors:
Studies in Language and Philosophy, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press,
1962, p. 41.
11 Hausman, Metaphor and Art., p. 89.
12 Ibid., p. 104.
13 Ibid., p. 114.
14 Ibid., p. 115.
15 Ibid., p. 119.
16 Ibid., p. 137.
17 Ibid., p. 144.
18 Ibid., p. 185.

DECONSTRUCTION

Chapter Seventeen
Deconstructing Deconstruction
Ellis points out that the very language of criticism has been influenced
by deconstruction: talk ofprivileged ideas and of demystification is no
longer restricted to deconstructionists. I But deconstructionists have
generally reacted with hostility and even outrage to any serious
criticism of deconstruction, and thus to any possibility of an exchange
with their intellectual opponents. Given that kind of reaction, it is
almost inevitable that any response is aimed not at the argument that
has been made, but at the credentials and motives of opponents.
Scholars who have discussed deconstruction in a critical way have
generally elicited the response from its advocates that what they
discuss is not, in fact, deconstruction, because any statement or logical
analysis of what deconstruction is sins against its nature: it cannot be
described and stated as other positions can. It is claimed that
deconstruction cannot be discussed using tools of reason and logical
analysis because it functions in a different way, both embodying and
requiring a different logic, a kind of alternative or "other" logic. At
first sight, to say that a different kind of logic has been established is
to make a large and potentially very exciting claim. Its advocates,
nevertheless, seem more content to use it than to present it explicitly,
and reference to their new logic occurs mostly when deconstructive
writings are objected to as incoherent or illogical. Yet a logic must
work in some way, and it must be possible to describe that operation.
By deconstructing the either/or
logic
of noncontradiction
that

220
Soft Logic
dominates the Western
tradition,
Derrida's writings
attempt to
elaborate an "other" logic. But if all the positions concerned are
equally uninteresting or mistaken, what is gained is not genuine
sophistication but instead only an appearance of complexity. Binary
logic is needed to characterize deconstructive logic, and when it is
claimed that Derrida must be judged and evaluated by different logical
standards,
standards
uniquely appropriate to him,
there
is no
explanation of just what these standards are and how they are to be
justified. Ifthis were allowed to stand, neither debate nor evaluation of
different viewpoints would be at all possible. This claim, moreover,
regularly breaks down as advocates abandon it in order to discuss
Derrida in relation to other thinkers, and use terms and procedures to
discuss him that drop the claim for a separate linguistic and logical
world.2
The assumption inevitably seems to be that rational analysis is
inherently an inappropriate and unfair means of approaching decon-
struction. This no longer is an attempt to demonstrate a specific
alternative logic for deconstruction but, instead, a general attack on
clear
systen1atic argument.
The
positions
seen1
to
borrow the
traditional attitudes ofmysticism and other forms of irrationalism, yet
it should be noted that n10st other aspects ofwhat deconstructionists do
and say are quite consistent with the traditional positions. Advocates
see
no
problem
in
characterizing
deconstruction
correctly
in
opposition to an incorrect account by opponents, and all of this tends
to throw doubt on the claim that deconstruction is a position that
cannot be stated, or that any attempt to state it must, of necessity, be
reductive and distorting. And so the claim that deconstruction is a
special case, not to be judged or discussed by rational argument or
ordinary logic, is a claim that is neither explained nor really
consistently believed and acted upon by those who make it. Derrida
observes that the Western tradition has regarded writing as inferior to
speech and as mere representation of speech that was one stage
removed from the essence of language. He argues that the reverse
should be the case3 and that, far from being a system advanced to
record the already existing phenomena of language, writing is more
critical to language than speech itself. Ellis points out, however, that
traditional emphasis on written texts inevitably invokes a limited
ethnocentric perspective, since it restricts study to those cultures and
languages with a long written tradition like our own. Indeed, it is
easier to see in Derrida's position not a correction of ethnocentrism

Deconstructing Deconstruction
221
but instead a determined reassertion of it that Saussure sought to
correct and overcome. Speech quite clearly existed long before the
invention ofwriting, and there still exist languages that are spoken but
not written, whereas there are no natural languages that are written
without being spoken. Children everywhere, of course, learn to speak
before they are able to write.
What Derrida's argument really is concerned with is a much
more familiar issue: the relation of words to things, signs to
references, or, in its most traditional formulation, language to reality.
Logocentrism, as Derrida calls the error he wants to eradicate and
overcome; is not about the priority ofspeech over writing but about the
relationship of words to their referents.4 Since his intention is to
demonstrate the shortcomings of logocentrism rather than to develop
an alternative, Derrida is effectively prevented from focusing on the
choice between many possible alternatives to logocentrism. The fIrst
thing that is likely to be said is that the error of logocentrism consists
in subscribing to a belief in the "metaphysics of presence." As
portrayed by Derrida, the logocentric system always assigns the origin
of truth to the logos - to the spoken word, to the voice of reason the
voice of God.s There is a strong tendency for Derrida's advocates to
object that a demand for clarity begs the question at issue and violates
the spirit ofthe deconstructive enterprise. Logocentrism here turns out
to be much the same as the more familiar essentialism, the belief that
words simply label real categories of meaning existing independently
of language. A belief in immutable categories of meaning involves a
fixation on the words of the particular language spoken by the
believer, which he mistakes for the categories ofthe "real" world. We
can only wonder what a "natural" and direct relationship between
speech and meaning would be, for it is obvious enough that the actual
phonemic shape of speech is arbitrary and conventional. The logo-
centric error is the illusion that reality and its ultimate categories are
directly present to the mind passed on by language without being
shaped or altered by it in any way whatsoever. It allows the terms of a
given language to become so prominent in one's thinking that one can
neither conceive of any alternative to them nor of any analysis that
might question their coherence and sufficiency. One will inevitably
come to believe that the words of that language reflect the meaning
structure ofthe world.
Ellis points out that if the logocentric error were stated in any
clear way, it would be far too obviously an unoriginal discovery. The

222
Soft Logic
belief of deconstructonists that they are attacking a superstition that
still beguiles everyone seems quite out of touch with the reality of
twentieth century debate in the theory of language. Deconstruction
must find a prevalent unthinking beliefto explode, for if it cannot, the
special character of what it aspires to is rendered impossible.6 He
emphasizes that to pronounce sonlething "problematic" is not a
conclusion nor is it an intellectual achievement, for when we have
done so, all we have accomplished is to point the way to a need for
more thought and analysis of the issues involved. Derrida's approach
does not permit investigating alternatives to his own rejection of
logocentrism. Wittgenstein, for one, has shown that we decide that a
mark is meaningless neither by determining that it has no reference,
nor by looking at its own internal structure, but· rather when we
abandon any possibility of its belonging to an organized sequence of
other signs in a language convention. Saussure, likewise:J rejected the
notion that words simply reflect ideas by diagnosing two ways in
which linguistic signs are arbitrary. First, the particular phonetic
shape of a word is arbitrary, and the concept dog in English could
have been signaled by another combination ofphonetic sounds without
changing its meaning. But Saussure went on to say that the concept
itself is an arbitrary creation of a language and does not necessarily
exist outside that language. Since the facts of reality are infinitely
variable, language must organize and simplify them if it is not to have
one word for each new situation. Different languages group, organize,
and even interpret such situations in different ways, and there is no
possibility of avoiding arbitrariness in this process. Saussure argues
that because ofthis arbitrariness in the conceptual process oflanguage,
its concepts are not simple, positive terms but achieve their meaning
by the place they take within the system of concepts of the language
and, in particular, by their function in differentiating one category of
things from another. It is the system of differentiation, therefore, that
is the source ofmeaning.
What
then
becomes
important
is
the
particular
set
of
characteristics that are the causes of the differentiation introduced by
the set of concepts.7 Warm water is in one sense not a fact ofnature; it
represents instead a decision of the English language to cut up the
range of temperatures in a particular arbitrary way. There is no
concept of warmness outside language, and the meaning of that word
derives not primarily from its reflecting reality but rather from its
place in the system of terms - its differentiating warm from hot. The

Deconstructing Deconstruction
223
fact that warmness as a concept is a creation of the English language
does not mean that warmness has nothing to do with reality or that
statements that refer to warmness are only statements about the
English language, not about the world. On the contrary, variations in
temperature must exist and be perceptible to allow the contrast
between warm and hot to measure anything. It is just as wrong to say
that warmth is only a fact of nature as it is to say that warmth is
merely a fact about language. An equally wrong conclusion about
Saussure's position is that the arbitrariness ofthe sign makes meaning
indeterminate. On the contrary, it is precisely the fact that the
conceptual system of English is the common property of its speakers
(Le. that all, in a sense, agree to make the same arbitrary decision) that
gives its words any meaning at all. The individual speaker does not
have the power to change the meaning ofa sign in any way once it has
been established in the linguistic community. It does not mean that the
meaning of a given word is arbitrary, for unless that word has a place
in the system of terms, there is no system, no agreement, no meaning,
and
thus
no
language
and
no
communication.8
Derrida
uses
Saussurean
terminology to
develop
his
own
ideas;
preserving
especially Saussure's key terms difference, signifier, and signified. But
Derrida insists that nothing within the system is simply present or
.absent anywhere, since there are only differences and traces of traces
everywhere.9 In the absence of a center or origin, everything becomes
discourse: that is to say, a system in which the central signified, the
original or transcendental signified, is never absolutely present outside
the system of differences. The absence of the transcendental signified
extends the domain and the play ofsignification infmitely.lO
For Derrida, meaning is the infinite implication and indefinite
referral of signifier and signified. 11 The field is in effect that of play,
that is to say, one of infmite substitutions, and the distinction between
signified and signifier becomes problematic at its root. 12 Saussure had
argued that meaning is not a matter of sounds being linked to concepts
existing outside a given language but instead arises from specific
contrasts between terms that are differentiated in specific ways.
Derrida's move is to introduce the word play and substitute it for
contrast, so that we now have a· play of differences as the source of
meaning. Play is no longer a matter of specific constraints; it is
"limitless," "infinite," and "indefinite," and in this way meaning has
also become limitless, infinite, and indefinite. By playing on the two
meanings ofthe French verb differer - to differ and to defer - Derrida

224
Soft Logic
takes the play of difference to indicate that meaning is not present to
us but that it is deferred, i.e. postponed into the future rather than
being a presence. 13 Meaning is never present to us, no final act of
perceiving may be possible and everything becomes discourse. That is
to say, since we are cut off from ultimate referents, there is only
language. 14 By introducing the word play, Derrida suggests that the
mechanism ofdifferentiation is much less controlled and specific than
it was in Saussure. This amounts to a very radical change from
Saussure's position - and yet Derrida introduces his new terms play,
supplement, and trace as if they were merely linguistic flourishes, a
matter of style. Ellis points out that if we take Saussure's notion of
differences and try to combine it with the notion of a limitless,
indefinite play, we render it meaningless. If terms could play against
all other terms indiscriminately rather than specifically, the result
would be no specific contrasts that generate meaning, nothing
identifiable or recognizable, and hence no communication and no
meaning at all. To see a difference between things is to see specific
qualities uniquely contrasted with
each
other,
whereas to
see
unspecific, indeterminate differences is to see nothing. Derrida has
abolished language, not redefined it, for difference and differentiality
are inseparable from specific, finite decision making. The notion of
infinite and indiscriminate play is impossible in any context that
requires distinctiveness.
Ellis emphasizes that the notion that the passage of time is an
essential part of a word's achieving its meaning (Le. deferral of
meaning, postponing of meaning, indefmite extending of meaning)
rests on a misunderstanding of the process of making choices among
words. The problem is that Derrida has confused the process of
meaning with the analysis of that process. The meaning of one word
does indeed depend on the meaning of many others, but to choose one
word from a system is to employ all of the systematic contrasts with
other words at that very moment - the process of contrasting does not
stretch out into the future. When choosing one word, I have done all
the work involved in not choosing the other, and my act has all the
meaning it can have straight away. The full analysis of all the ways in
which a word functions in a language can indeed stretch out into the
future, and defining a word may take weeks of careful thought, but the
full use of it is achieved immediately upon that use. Analysis of an
action may run into a potentially infinite future but the action itself is
still made in its entirety at a specific moment in time. Its consequences

Deconstructing Deconstruction
225
and ramifications may belong to the future but its character is set once
it is made. All words are in a sense present for possible choice, and
then all but one are rendered absent by actual choice. That is how
language works. This absence is not something that requires a search
or a diagnosis of absent nleaning. Absence is meaning when a
systematic choice is being made. Ellis, therefore, concludes that
Derrida's ideas on meaning and language do not achieve any real
coherence and force. The free play of meaning is an incoherent idea,
and the same holds for logocentrism, long since discarded by
philosophers of language, for virtually all philosophers of language
have understood that the relationship between the vocal sound of
"apple" and the idea to which it refers is arbitrary. Saussure's
contribution was in something much more interesting and unique: he
saw a second arbitrariness, the arbitrariness of the structure of the
concept "apple" and its relation to physical objects. Yet a confusion
between these two ideas, and derivations from it, permeate most
deconstructive writings. The point of "difference" in Saussure lies in
the differentiation of words from other words and ideas from other
ideas - not in the trivial notion that a word is different from a thing.
Derrida's major thrust lies in his attack on the essentialist view
ofmeaning typified in logical positivism and going back all the way to
Platonism. The prevailing emphasis on the iconoclast character of
deconstruction prevents Derrida from facing the real task at hand: to
develop an alternative, not to logocentrism, but to the alternatives that
have already been developed to it by thinkers whom he does not
consider. IS As a result, he jumps from one extreme (meaning as a
fixed immutable concept) to the other (meaning as indeterminate,
infmite play of signs). Derrida fails to establish any coherent view of
meaning of the way language functions, yet his opinions have gained
considerable attention in literary criticism. His habit of denouncing
unexamined assumptions, his vocabulary of "putting in question,"
"problematizing," and his addiction to provocative statements have
proved to be most influential. To deconstruct a discourse is to show
how it undermines the philosophy it asserts. 16 Deconstruction performs
an operation that is variously described as undermining, subverting,
exposing, undoing, transgressing, or demystifying, and it performs this
operation on something variously described as traditional ideas, limits,
logic, authoritative or privileged readings, illusions of objectivity,
mastery or consensus, the referential meaning ofa text, or simply what
the text asserts or says.17 In deconstruction, the traditional idea is

226
Soft Logic
questioned, subverted, and undermined but then retained, so that we
can focus on the act of subversion itself- and this does not amount to
a final rejection of that idea.
Some deconstruction
is out to
demonstrate that what the text says is the opposite (or is also the
opposite) of what it seems to say.. Thus, the traditional version is the
reference point that deconstruction needs both during and after it has
done its work. 18 It is now commonplace that every interpreter learns
something about the text from interpretations he rejects, and, in this
sense, all language undermines to some extent what it asserts. But if
we say that a text often works on different levels, we are back in the
province
of
traditional
criticism.
The
radical
character
of
deconstruction requires that there always be a uniquely privileged
reading
sanctioned
by
authority
and
achieved
by
repression.
Deconstruction comes down heavily on the side of discord and
discrepancy as the universal result. Whatever the text, it must work
with the traditional, literal, authoritative, superficial, referential
meaning and cannot exist without it. But there is really no such thing
as a single traditional meaning of a literary work. There is no
privileged meaning of Hamlet or Moby Dick: on the contrary, there is
an extraordinary diversity of critical schools, and a near chaos of
conflicting interpretations.
To anyone who is familiar with the present critical scene, with its
countless different methodologies and ideological commitments, its
divergent readings that are Marxist or Freudian, semiotic or stylistic,
historical or New Critical, biographical or feminist, to anyone who
surveys this extraordinary scene, it will be obvious that there is no
single privileged reality. Ellis emphasizes that one should not both
reject a particular theory of language as inadequate and also accept it
to describe the surface meaning of the text that must then be
transcended. There is virtually no such thing as a literal reading of a
work of literature, for all readings are abstractive and interpretive to
some degree. Questions raised about the adequacy of readings always
concern the kind or degree of abstraction: to be sure, a critic will
sometimes claim that another's reading of a literary text is too literal.
But this really amounts to a denland for a more complex abstraction or
perhaps a different one. The critic attacked would hardly be worth
discussing had he not already made some sort of abstraction.
Deconstruction, on the other hand, requires us to give up our normal
practice ofdifferentiating between the various degrees of superficiality
or profundity that we experience. Some readings are obvious, while

Deconstructing Deconstruction
227
some are not. Yet some ofthose that are obvious to some writers seem
less obvious to others, and some obvious readings seem never to be
challenged. The deconstructionist, however, cannot admit any of this
without seriously compromising his radical position. He is forced to
deny that experience is variable, for he must hold that there is always
an obvious reading, which is then shown to be inadequate and subject
to undermining and reversal.
His problem is that whenever a
reasonable program for criticism is described, the deconstructionist
must reject it as part of the received opinion, since the word
"reasonable" for him is just a label for business as usual. But readings
vary enormously in their abstractness and complexity, and in the real
world of inquiry, undermining and ove11urning a traditional view
happens because a more defensible one has been set up to replace it.
While deconstruction puts its emphasis on debunking the old, it
inevitably becomes a victim of the restrictive binary logic that it likes
to belittle. Since old views are not allowed to be discussed and
replaced, the doctrine that the traditional and obvious must be
systematically opposed turns out to be pointless.
There is currently a widespread dissatisfaction with the state of
literary studies in the universities, and deconstruction gives both a
forum to that dissatisfaction and a sense that it is part of a bold move
to sweep aside what is conservative and deadening. But when
deconstruction
puts
such
heavy
emphasis
on
undermining
the
traditional view, it is giving that view a privileged status. It has
become popular because it adopts an ironic reading of the text, but
since it applies this to all texts indiscriminately, its irony becomes
vacuous and pointless. It tends to reduce myriad possibilities of
interpretation to only two: the traditional view and its polar opposite.
By now the view that all interpretation is misinterpretation, and all
reading misreading, has been around for a considerable time, and has
been debated and criticized thoroughly. There is by now a long history
and an extensive literature on whether clear and certain knowledge is
possible, and for some time now, the most common position in the
philosophy ofscience has been that this cannot be the case, and that all
knowledge is provisional. The criterion of validity lies not in the
psychological conviction of the researcher but in the always pro-
visional assent of the community of scientists to the arguments and
evidence in favor of an alleged "fact."
In the study of literature,
likewise, it is the majority view, and in fact commonplace, that
certainty is not available. If "all interpretation is misinterpretation" is

228
Soft Logic
merely making the point that there are no absolutes and no special
claims of unanswerable knowledge in criticism, then this is rather
uninteresting. That any assertion or claim to know something is open
to later rethinking is obvious enough, and has long been so. It doesn't
amount to a new view on interpretation. However, if there are never
any supportive reasons for any interpretation, the whole process
becomes undecidable. Advance in knowledge comes from a search for
a
specific new view,
not
from
obsession with the categorical
inadequacy of old views. "All interpretation is misinterpretation" is
not really a theoretical position but a slogan designed to strike an
attitude and to intimidate the opposition.
The notion of textuality has been introduced to question the
assumption that all texts should be interpreted according to the
intentions oftheir authors. The author may not grasp the full impact of
his writing, but for that reason a critic may be required. But the notion
oftextuality turns out to be considerably more radical than this, for by
severing the connection with the author, the implication oftextuality is
that we are denying the very possibility of a statable meaning. The text
is now assumed to have a life of its own, an endless series of possible
meanings that are no longer subject to control either by the author's
intentions or by the rules and conventions of language. Textuality,
therefore, links with Derrida's play of signs: the signs that make up
the text play infinitely against each other to defeat any possibility of
statable meaning. Attention now shifts to the role of the reader, and
common to all versions ofthis point ofview is the notion that the critic
is far more important than traditional criticism has usually assumed
him to be. There is no limit to these meanings since the mind fmds in
the text whatever it is looking for. 19 The statement that "authors make
meaning," thought not of course untrue, is merely a special case ofthe
more universal truth that readers make meaning - the number of
possible meanings of a poem is itself infinite.20 The idea that sigI1s
play infmitely and indiscriminately against each other is one that is
asserted without any real supportive argument, and it is inherently an
impossible one to justify. To be recognizable as anything, a sign must
have a distinctive shape and function that recognizably sets it apart
from other signs. To postulate a sign that simply plays indefinitely and
infinitely against other sings is to imagine one with no distinct
character at all, i.e. one not recognizable as having a shape or function
of its
own.
This produces not more
and richer
meaning,
as
deconstructionists like to think, but no meaning at all.

Deconstructing Deconstruction
229
Ellis points out that the prevalent error associated with the word
textuality lies in the failure to see that there are two steps, not one,
involved in the notion that a text must be liberated from its author to
mean whatever it is taken to mean. There is, first of all, liberation
from the author; but second, there is liberation from the rules and
conventions of the language in which it is written. These are logically
separable
ideas,
requiring
separate
justifications,
whereas
the
textuality argument always proceeds as ifthe two were really one, and
as ifa justification ofthe fITst were a complete justification for both. In
effect, the argument operates with just two alternatives: either a text
means what its author meant, or we have textuality and free play. In
doing so it jumps over an enormous middle ground as if it did not
exist. It was the argument over the intentional fallacy, as Wimsatt and
Beardsley termed it,2l that fITst raised doubts about the author's
intention as the ultimate appeal in deciding the meaning of a text. But
in the forty years since the fITst appearance of this article, the matter
has been discussed at length, and further explained and refmed by
scores of writers and critics. Ellis points out that the assumption to
liberate a text from the author is to liberate it from all constraints is a
mistaken one, for it leaps form one extreme to another: total constraint
or none at all. Any productive argument should by now have focused
on the kind of instrument at our disposal and how it operates. There is
indeed one obvious constraint that operates on all texts - the language
they are written in. Total freedom (and textuality if so understood) is,
therefore, an impossible notion.22 The reader-response argument
makes all mental processes arbitrary, so that no mental process has
any real connection with the text that provokes it, and it follows that
my meaning has no discernible connection to your meaning. But this
ignores the obvious fact that we are sharing common assumptions and
ways of interpretation due to a common language. Indeed it renders
communication literally impossible, for if there are no constraints, we
have to abandon meaning altogether.
The most widely held view is that all knowledge is in the nature
of a hypothesis, always open to be overturned and modified by later
insight. There is no knowledge such that its complete objectivity can
be the occasion for an inner conviction in the mind of the knower that
he could not possibly be mistaken. The judgment of the community of
scholars as to which of several competing views is currently the most
plausible one is the test ofany hypothesis, and that judgment is always
provisional. Knowledge then is neither completely objective, if by that

230
Soft Logic
is meant "incontrovertibly true," nor is it a matter of individually
arbitrary responses that are not answerable to anything but the
individual's current frame of mind. Progress is achieved through a
class of different views and conflicting opinions, not by individuals
stubbornly clinging to their first thoughts and not talking to others.
There is always modification and abandonment of ideas in the process
of discussion; some views are pervasive and grow in influence while
others are forgotten. The development ofknowledge is a social process
in which arguments count for a great deal and appeal to a text under
discussion may be an important part in such an argument in which we
have
to
distinguish
between
different
degrees
of plausibility.
Deconstruction's inability to monitor the quality of criticism is,
therefore, a serious omission, for we do not simply get a response from
the critic; we expect his or her reasoned argument. Reading a critic is
not just taking notice of his conclusions; it involves evaluating his
reasons and forming a judgment on their cogency. In all fields of
inquiry ideas are advanced and argued for, and the arguments are
weighted against those of competing positions.23 Ellis concludes that
textuality's infinity ofmeanings ofa text is a pernicious doctrine, for it
encourages us to stop discriminating, to cease thinking about
interpretations, their strengths and their weaknesses. Deconstruction is
right to stress the creativeness of the critic, but it is wrong to take
creativity as freedom from constraints or standards. We judge someone
to be creative only if he produces an idea that is both original and
valuable. To be creative is not to let one's imagination run free - it is
to use imagination productively. It follows from deconstruction and
reader's response theory that we can neither discriminate between
qualities of great writers, nor between great and poor writers, nor
between good and poor critics - and in this manner intellectual
laziness is encouraged.
Deconstruction invariably begins by focusing an the naive,
conlmon-sense viewpoint of each
particular issue in
order to
undermine it, to "put it in question," and to "problematize" it. When
discussing the issue of certainty in knowledge, deconstruction tends to
begin with the naive belief in clear, certain language, even though
current philosophy of science has generally abandoned this idea long
ago. The extended debate on the intentional fallacy in which the
majority view has been that the author's intent does not control the
meaning ofa literary work is likewise ignored.24 Ellis emphasizes that
whereas the so-called free play is an incoherent notion, deconstruction

Deconstructing Deconstruction
231
creates by means of it a sense of intellectual confrontation and the
illusion of progress. Formulations are chosen not for their logical and
intellectual appropriateness but mainly for their drama and shock. The
first step is to focus on the most literal surface meaning of the text,
disregarding any of its subtleties, and the second step is to show that
there is a larger ironic layer of meaning. Ellis concludes that
deconstructive logic is not conductive to productive original thinking,
nlerely to creating the illusion of it. Objections to deconstruction are
always assigned the role of the naive believer who has to be
denounced, but there is a tendency to resist any attempt to translate the
argument into existing forms· of scholarship for fear of revealing its
unoriginal character. When Culler explains that the shocking clainl
"all
interpretation
is
misinterpretation"
simply
means
that
no
interpretation can ever be final,
he is giving the game away.
Deconstruction makes its appeal not in any genuine logical fashion but
by psychological means; it offers its adherents a lot of psychological
satisfaction and, essential to its style is the sense of belonging to an
intellectual elite.
It is not difficult to see, however, that deconstruction has been
part of a larger movement in modern criticism. Whereas in France,
deconstruction is part of a revolt against a narrow rationalist tradition,
in America it represents only a new way to cling to an old set of
attitudes.25 The prevalent view has been that criticism is not like
science because it does not lead to clear and objective results; good
criticism is stimulating rather than true, and such stimulation may
occur in many different ways. This, in tum, meant that the critic's
individual character and personality are an important factor in
criticism. The point of good criticism lies not in discovering the
meaning of a text, for that would be a return to the unitary truths of
science. This produces a reluctance to say that one response to a text is
right and another simply wrong: instead, there is a tendency to allow
that each illustrates different aspects of the work. Criticism comes to
be judged less by the logic of its arguments than by the qualities of
discriminative imagination it displays, and by the stimulus it provides
to the reader's own imagination. With such an approach, attempts to
show that a particular piece of criticism does not meet accepted
standards of intellectual coherence or relevance to the actual terms and
emphases of the text under discussion are usually thought of as being
intolerant and dogmatic, especially since certainty is not available in
any case. The prevailing critical consensus has long insisted on

232
Soft Logic
pluralism; on the value of different critical views, and on criticism
lacking the character of science. But if no one defends standards, the
quality of particular criticism is likely to decline. The problem is that
deconstruction opposes explanation as such,26 whereas in theoretical
discourse, argument is invariably met by argument in a communal
process. There is no room in it for individual license, for claims to
exception, for appeals to a unique logical status, or for freedom to do
as one wishes. The most enduring fault of literary criticism as a field
of study has been its readiness to abandon the communal sense of a
shared inquiry in which individual perceptions are expected to be
sifted and tested by others. A shared inquiry means a commitment to
agreement and dialogue, whereas criticism that insist on the value of
each individual writer's perspective in effect refuses to make this
commitment. The result is apparent novelty that, looked at more
closely, consists in resistance to change and, more particularly, to that
change that is most urgently needed: the development of some check
on and control of the indigestible, chaotic flow of critical writing,
through reflecting on what is and what
is not,
in
principle,
worthwhile.
Notes
1 John M. Ellis, Against Deconstruction, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1989, p. vii.
2 Ibid., p. 9.
3 Jacques Derrida, OfGrammatology, trans. G.C. Spivak, Baltimore,
MD, 1976, p. 14.
4 Ellis, Against Deconstruction, p. 29.
5 Vincint Leitch, Deconstructive Criticism, New York, NY, 1983, pp.
24-25.
6 Ellis, Against Deconstructoin, p. 40.
7 Ibid., p.46.
8 Ibid., p. 50.
9 Jacques Derrida, Positions, trans. A. Bass, Chicago, IL, 1981, p. 26.
10 Jacques Derrida, Writing and DifJernce, trans. A. Bass, Chicago, IL,
1978, p. 280.
]] Ibid., p. 25.
12 Derrid~ Positions, pp. 19-20.

Deconstructing Deconstruction
233
13 Jacques Derrida, Speech and Phenomena, trans. D. Allison, Evanston,
1973.
14 Ellis, Against Deconstruction, p. 53.
15 Ibid., p. 66.
16 Johnathan Culler, On Deconstruction, Ithac~ NY, 1982, p. 86.
17 Ellis, Against Deconstruction, p. 69.
18 Ibid., p. 71.
19 Steven Rendall, "Mus in Pice: Montaigne and Interpretation," MLN
94 (1979), pp. 1056-71.
20 Robert Crosman, "Do Readers Make Meaning?" in The Reader in the
Text: Essays on Audience and Interpretaion, eds. Susan R. Suleiman and Inge
Crosman, Princeton, NJ, 1980, pp. 151 and 154.
21 William K .. Wimsatt and Monroe Beardsley, "The Intentional
Fallacy," in The Verbal Icon: Studies in the Meaning ofPoetry, Lexington,
KY,1954.
22 Ellis, Against Deconstruction, p. 120.
23 Ibid., p. 133.
24 Ibid., p. 138.
25 Ibid., p. 154 n1.
26 Ibid., p. 156 n3.

Chapter ,Eighteen
Paradoxes of Reflexivity
The central achievement of the sociology of scientific knowledge has
been the demonstration that even the most esoteric features of
scientific and mathematical knowledge can be understood as social
constructs. Scientific facts are not so much reflections of the world as
persuasive texts, accomplished within and shaped by a complex of
contingencies and circumstances. Ashmore asks what happens when
the power and success of the sociology of scientific knowledge is
turned
upon
itself: 1
In
this
treatment,
the
deconstruction
of
deconstruction does not just "cancel things out" but throws doubt upon
the notion of an objective world. The grounds for knowledge have
come
under
challenge
within
a
wide
range
of disciplines
-
anthropology, psychology, sociology, philosophy - and more recently
in a number of intellectual movements that share a concern for the
problem of representation and that cut across traditionally defined
disciplinary boundaries - poststructuralism, postmodernism, and the
theory of literature. Ashmore argues that reflexivity need not be
conceived as a "problem;" his strategy is to sustain and explore the
paradoxes that arise when we attempt to escape the inescapable, not to
attempt their resolution.2 This perspective in reflexivity is bound to
require modifications to expectations about what counts as an adequate
(''useful'') answer, and what counts as a serious approach to the
problem in the first place. The study proceeds to examine the various
ways in which practitioners conceive and subsequently manage the
reflexivity oftheir practice. The management strategies identified vary
from outright rejection through (in principle) acceptance, to explicit

236
Soft Logic
attempts at celebration. Reflexivity is an issue that is relevant to a wide
range of intellectual concerns from literature to logic, and from
physics to photography. It is an issue for all modes of representational
practice. To some it is a threat, while to others it is a crucial tool for
use only against opponents, and yet to others, still, it is an opportunity.
The interest in exploring the role of reflexivity in the sociology of
scientific knowledge is that all these management strategies coexist.
The intellectual tradition within which reflexivity and self-reference
have been objects of the most intense study is philosophical logic.
There have been periods in this extensive tradition when the self-
referential and paradoxical have been treated in a positive fashion. 3
But the approach, at least in the Anglo-American world, which has
been dominant throughout the modernist era, is that all phenomena
are
paradigmatically destructive
of rationality.
The
history
of
reflexivity in the arts and humanities is as extensive as it is in
philosophy, the difference is that the phenomenon has been more
frequently
thought
of
as
liberating
than
as
threatening.
Experimentation with self-referential techniques has been a staple of
the twentieth century avant gardes in literature, painting, drama, and
film.
The sociology of scientific knowledge has potentially the
interesting property ofbeing self-exemplifying. It is frequently thought
that there is something odd about such a procedure, for it appears to be
blatantly circular, and to introduce the specter of infmite regress. To
deal with the problem of the status of their work and its findings with
regard to contemporary debates in philosophy, sociologists of scientific
knowledge frequently tend to characterize their research in the
standard empiricist manner as providing essential support for those
epistemological theories they approve ot: such as the Duhem-Quine
view on underdetermination oftheory by evidence as well as doctrines
of the theory-Iadenness of observation. Equally, the fmdings of the
sociology of scientific knowledge are deemed to discomfirm less well-
liked philosophical schemes, such as Popper's falsificationism and
other forms of rationalism and empiricism.4 If physics can be
explained by sociology, this threatens to invert the hierarchy of the
sciences. Relativism is a feature of investigation that translates
"knowledge" into whatever counts as knowledge in any particular
society, culture, period, language, discipline, or group. Not so to
translate, say cognitive relativists, is to fall prey to an ethnocentric
view; it is to operate under the illusion that one can know which

Paradoxes ofReflexivity
237
beliefs are really true or false. In practice such a stance merely ends up
denigrating the beliefs of others, while celebrating one's own. But
even among the practitioners of the sociology of scientific knowledge,
there is a great diversity of views on the proper role of reflexivity.
Some seek to outlaw it, seeing it as a paralyzing influence on their
practice, and judge the assimilation between the object and the method
of investigation upon which a reflexive stand rests as arbitrary,
unnecessary, and undesirable.5 Others accept reflexivity in principle,
usually on grounds of full generality and self-consistency. However,
such programmatic advocacy is largely sterile and has little notable
effect on the outcome of these practitioners. While centered in the
sociology of scientific knowledge, such an approach ranges over
general
sociology,
anthropology,
psychology,
Marxist
studies,
philosophy,
fiction,
and
literary
studies
as
well
as
logic
and
mathematics. Ashmore wants to show that the negative evaluation that
the reflexivity of reflexivity elicits is neither singular nor necessary.
His concern throughout is to deconstruct the theory and the practice of
level
separation,
emphasizing
the
fundamental
uncertainty
of
discourse. He points out that what is meant by a reflexive individual,
reflexive interpretive procedures, a reflexive use of knowledge, and
reflexive practical accomplishment is by no means clear. This is
largely because in most social science, and indeed the majority of
discourses of all kinds, this self-referential aspect is latent, in that it
has no obvious or immediate consequences. But in ~etascience, and
especially in the sociology ofscientific knowledge, the consequences of
self-reference are manifest. It is the claim that knowledge is only
contingently valid that is likely to be found the most troublesome.
The position of the sociology of scientific knowledge is that
science's knowledge is a form of false consciousness, and that science
is deceived by its unproblematic realism. One of the things that
sociologists of scientific knowledge are becoming very skilled at is
suspending taken-for-granted ways of seeing. But a notion that can be
so easily applied to everything is not really a criticism of anything. It
is also argued that the exclusive concern with writing reflexive texts,
that is, texts which display their own modes of construction, reflects a
narrow and limited conception ofreflexivity. Reflexive fiction, though,
is not exclusively a modem phenomenon. Limiting ourselves to the
development of the novel, reflexivity was there at its birth in the
eighteenth century. Cervantes' Don Quixote and Sterne's The Life and
Opinions of Tristram Shandy are both reflexive, the latter extremely

238
Soft Logic
so. One feature ofthe general reflexive tenor of recent literary practice
and study is a move toward a blurring of genres with the effect of
deconstructing the distinction between literary practice and literary
study. This blurring of genres is evident, too, in the current interest
across a whole variety of scholarly disciplines in the analysis of their
rhetorics of inquiry. Indeed it seems as if"rhetoric" is taking the place
of epistemology as the all purpose metadiscipline. According to
Gruenberg, any sociology of science has a "critical obstacle" in the
shape of its self-referential aspects. It undermines the capacity of the
sociologist of science to define his subject matter independently of
methodology,·
because
the
specification
of
the
methodology
presupposes an understanding of the subject matter, which the
methodology itself is intended to provide.6 The empirical variety,
which treats science as an unalterable given that yields certified
knowledge, avoids the problem by simply denying its existence.
Interpretive sociology is deemed incapable of making any distinction
between rational and irrational beliefs and practices.7
The philosophy of science has gained its ideal of good science
from a particular reading of scientific history.8 But according to this
paradigm, the construction of the boundary between good and bad
science could not become a topic of investigation, and neither could
the boundary between science and philosophy.9 Thus, one should
beware of theories that naively assume the truth of one's own
knowledge and the falsehood of everyone else's. One should ignore
theories of knowledge that do not give proper explanation of why we
believe what we believe but merely explain it away.l0 For the new
sociological relativism, the metaphor must be that ofthe onion, which
has no kernel. We find ourselves rapidly moving from a critique of
others' knowledge toward an escalating reflexivity. The new relativists
speak of a theory and practice based, in the end, on personal
commitment. Examples of metaretlexive texts include Derridean
deconstruction, and in metareflexive writing of this sort, the necessary
reflexivity is achieved by applying principles of analysis that are self-
exemplifying.II This is done by multiplying genres, by getting on the
side of the known, and by refusing to build a metalanguage. 12
Ashmore argues, however, that Latour's tale of metareflexivity is a
romance,13 for findings cannot be regarded as valid until we have
satisfactory methodological theories.
These
are no
different
in
principle from other sociological theories in that they need the support
of firm methodological criteria. We appear, consequently, to be caught

Paradoxes ofReflexivity
239
in
an
infinite
regression,
which
effectively prevents
us
from
intellectual advance. 14 Banishment of self-reference was attempted in
the domain of language in the logical positivist movement. The
stratification of this domain into an object language and various
distinct metalanguages succeeded in getting rid of Grelling's and
similar self-referential paradoxes - by declaring such formulations
"heterological," Le. meaningless - at the immense cost of outlawing
ai/linguistic self-reference whether paradoxical or not. The final irony
of the scheme is that all discussions of it are, on their own terms,
meaningless because they could not take place on any of the levels of
language "internal" to the scheme. 15 Ashmore concludes that the
problem lies in the basic assumption of the program that no
contradiction can be true, and hence that the meanings which result in
the paradoxes must be fallacious. But there is an alternative - accept
the adequacy of the reasoning that leads to paradox and embrace
dialetheta: some things just are both true and false. 16 We should not
think of reflexivity as a ''problem,'' since it has no conceivable
solution. Yet Ashmore cannot know that a problem has no solution in
an a priori fashion either. Beyond truth and falsity there are many
fictions, some work and some do not. Ashmore prefers to cultivate this
limitlessness as a new pragmatic pluralism -
a pluralism that
recognizes
itself:
Some
philosophers
face. retlexivity head
on:
Nietzsche, Heidegger, and Derrida constantly control the negative
paradoxical deconstructive face of reflexivity and, while using it as a
weapon against the enterprise of knowledge, attempt to transform the
phenomenon into something positive. The move from Nietzsche
through Heidegger to Derrida is a move from the subject to the text.
The strategies they use for confronting their reflexivity are anarchic
assertion, endless postponement, and perpetual unraveling where
closure is the enemy.
The psychologist must also face the reflexivity of his practice, for
ifhe is unable or unwilling to do so, he pays the penalty offalling into
the paradoxes of self-reference. 17 The suggestion is that the winning
side does not posses truth, but rather that it has monopolized
plausibility.I8 We constantly make sense of the world and fashion
paths leading to one another, convincing people that a particular path
is more straightforward than any other. The ridicule of"navel-gazing"
expresses an uneasiness with all efforts at self-knowing and self-
reflection. All forms ofrationalism essentially appeal to the overriding
importance of the self-grounded ideal, insisting that the speaker be

240
Soft Logic
able to articulate the necessary and sufficient premises for his
argument
and
conclusion.
Critiques
of this
kind
tend
to
be
systematically ambiguous with respect to their ideal and authority. To
be doing reflexive sociology is to be rendering problematic the central
topic of inquiry, that very tradition in whose (unexplicated) terms
sociology is understood as what it is. 19 The concrete grasp ofthe world
does not include itself (in the act of grasping) as a topic of inquiry.
The tu quoque strategy only uses reflexivity against the discourses it
seeks to attack, and its unmasking of reflexive inconstancy is, finally,
only a strategic move played to discredit the target discourse on
grounds other than reflexive inconsistency itself. These grounds are,
more often than not, skepticism and/or relativism. On the latter
ground, the sociology of scientific knowledge is frequently the target
for tu quoque arguments.20 But Ashmore concludes that the problem of
reflexivity turns out to be the preserver of relativism and not its
destroyer.
One redeeming feature of the sociological perspective is that
relativizing analysis, in being pushed to its final consequence, leads
back upon itself: What follows is not, as some of the early sociologists
of knowledge found, a total paralysis ofthought.21 Logical positivism
demarcates meaningless from meaningful statements by the principle
of empirical verification: if a statement cannot (in principle) be
empirically verified, it is meaningless; if it can be, it is meaningful.
However, a statement of the verification principle cannot itselfbe so
verified, and is therefore meaningless.22 Ashmore rejects the historical
myth that suggests that logical positivism simply ceases to be as a
result ofthis inconsistency. As Gellner suggests,
making an exception on one's own behalf: having difficulty in
accounting for oneself: is the professional ailment ofphilosophers,
and is virtually written into the terms of reference under which
they work.23
The power ofthe tu quoque cannot reside in its logic, however perfect,
because logic in itselfdoes not compel. Getting beyond the tu quoque
is not and cannot simply be a matter of using the same form of
argument as a counteraccusation or a meta- tu quoque. Such self-
protective arguments are counterproductive because these researchers
implicitly assume that self-contradiction is unavoidable, but ·that it is
also something negative to get rid of. Both the tu quoque and its

Paradoxes ofReflexivity
241
counterargument share the
logician's prejudice against
paradox
grounded in a negative belief: in its evil power. Whereas in chess the
fear of being mated belongs to the essence of the game, contradictions
in the logic of natural language (but not in mathematics) can be
tolerated to some extent. What the limits are depends on context; a
language that lacks logic altogether becomes incoherent.
The major relevant features of Kuhn's historiography are that
scientific knowledge is non-accumulative across successive paradigms,
and that it is, therefore, historically and cognitively limited. However,
this
insight
is
generally unavailable
to
members
of scientific
communities working at their "puzzle solving," embedded in their
"disciplinary matrices," and articulating their particular exemplars.
This is because the historical succession of paradigms is made
invisible. Each paradigm constitutes a rewriting of scientific history
such that previous paradigms appear
as mistaken, and yet
as
historically inevitabl~ as the necessary path that has been traveled on
the way form yesterday's ignorance and error to today's (relatiye)
knowledge and truth. The history of science of paradigm-errlbedded
participants is progressive. Kuhn is at pains to emphasize that this
situation of historically false consciousnesses is beneficial and indeed
necessary for the very existence of the practice of science. as we know
it.24 We can say that each new historiography rewrites the history of
historiographies in a progressive fashion, and that the exposition and
criticism of the old is an essential part of the new.25 Kuhn and other
writers in the new historiography of science talk of their. immediate
predecessors' tradition and its way of doing history pejoratively as the
practice of "Whig history"26 which is glossed as the ''progressive
eradication
of error
and
revelatoin
of truth.,,27
But
the
new
historiographers and their supporters tum out to be no less Whig
historiologists.
In analyzing scientific knowledge
and scientists,
historians tell us that what they see is not visible·to the scientist -
participants. They implicitly exercise the time honored-privilege ofthe
accredited and competent observer: the ability to look at things in
perspective, to take the big picture, to tell the wood from the trees.
Ashmore suggests that Kuhn's insistence on limiting his thesis to
physics and similarly "mature" science asks to preserve the boundary
between his own practice and the practice he observes. This allows
Kuhn to argue that his theory of puzzle solving" constitutes a "less
equivocal and more traditional,,28 criticism of demarcation of true
science from pseudo-science than Popper's theory of falsification. 29

242
Soft Logic
Ashmore suggests that there must be something wrong with the
Kuhnian scheme: if one is a Kuhn fan, as many social scientists and
most sociologists of scientific knowledge seem to be, then this
conclusion must seem to be less than welcome. Kuhn's doctrine
contains a fair proportion of potential self-destructiveness.3o Kuhn is.
caught in his own relativism because the new historiography cannot,
on Kuhn's premise, properly claim any special status in relation to
other historiographies.3! The historiographer cannot at the same time
be both inside and outside history. The establishment of a connection
between
document
and
underlying
reality
is
a
back-and-forth
process,32 and thus a circular one. The independence of word and
world which is both a basic feature of "mundane reasoning" and the
minimal
necessity
for
an
adequate
rationality,
appears
to
be
compromised by ethnomethodolical reflexivity. On this account, the
facticity of the world - its out-thereness - is a paradoxical product of
reflexive and circular interpretive procedures. What the reflexivity of
reflexivity appears to do is to make ethnomethodology just another
life-form and its practioners just another group of special pleaders.
That these practitioners should find this position so uncomfortable is
both interesting and seemly. Puritanism (i.e. distrust of the messiness
of ordinary language, and desiring clarity and certainty) is a hallmark
of much of ethnomethodological discourse. Thus, such theories are
found to be tautological rather than explanatory.33 Tautology is
impossible to avoid, since reflexive circularity is the ground and
condition of all forms of sense-making. To find upon analysis that
Kuhn reasons in a circle is not, then, very surprising. The price paid
for ''using common-sense knowledge" is a total surrender to realism.
Ashmore's solution is turning the problem into a topic, and
resisting the terminology of fear ("specter," "abyss") by realizing that
this abyss is only a paper tiger. Another popular solution is to hold
that our knowledge and our epistemology have no absolute grounds
and, in fact, do not need them. Although we believe that there is a
limit to our inquiries, we will never find out what it is. The most
theoretically sophisticated solution strategy is McHoul's proposal for a
dual vision in ethnomethodology. The proposal affirms the reflexivity
of reflexivity, and recognizes that ethnomethodology can be a topic of
investigation for itself. However, in its other model of operation - in
its investigative mode - ethnomethodology might usefully rely upon
the research heuristic ("myth") that the phenomenon
it treats
comprises a real order of events, that they are objects in an

Paradoxes ofReflexivity
243
independently existing world.34 At this stage, then, McHoul's proposal
looks
like
a
pragmatic
compromise.
The
discourse
of
ethnomethodology is deconstructive even if it doesn't want to be. To
show how objectivities become objectivities is to show that they are not
objectivities. Ashmore claims that the initial answer to this question is
that self-destructiveness does not entail self-destruction. For self-
destruction, in this context, is the willful abandonment of speech on
the grounds that clear speech is both highly desirable and completely
impossible. Relativists know that the charge of unclarity can be
brought against all discourses, especially those whose speech seems
clearest, as in logic and the sciences. Every statement incorporates a
metastatement that asserts the truth of the statement. Problems of a
paradoxical nature arise within universal negative statements, such as
"nothing is true." The paradigm of such semantic paradoxes is the
paradox of the liar. It is paradigmatic in that it introduces explicitly
the notion of lying, that is, it points to the usually implicit element of
the metastatement, "It is true that ...," in all statements. There are
certain propositional statements that our language does not let us make
without contradicting the form in which all such statements must be
made. The major class of such nonstable statements are those that are
skeptical, relativistic, or agnostic about claims to knowledge, including
(paradoxically but necessarily) their own.35 The argument would
suggest that the problem of relativism is basically linguistic: language
is not an epiphenomenon that can be ignored or disposed of in favor of
more direct approaches to the (more) real. In the world according to
relativist discourse, no discourse has a firm grounding.36
Ashmore wants to persuade us that McHoul's nonprivileging
cognitive precariousness is more interesting than
the mindless
hankering for authority, status, and comfort that animates the tu
quoque. But in order to do so Ashmore has to deconstruct not just the
tu quoque but the way in which his own analysis appeals to the
authority of the lower level or the metadiscourse. Each move to a
higher level produces a domino effect on all levels below, since
deconstruction essentially means the subversion of a particular level of
self-understanding by a superior analytical level ofmetaunderstanding.
It represents the superior vantage point of the observer or the superior
knowledge of the expert. However, people have not always and
everywhere experienced the world in this way. Nonscientific cultures
(ifwe believe our historical anthropology) lived in the world, not off it.
People in such cultures are part ofthe world in a way that we find hard

244
Soft Logic
even to imagine. The world, to these others, was not a dead realm of
matter, moved but unmoved, incapable of action; the world of objects
is the result of, not the warrantfor science. The old pre-science reality
is deconstructed and replaced by a new contrast that to some, has been
there all along: the objective world. It is not a deficiency in the
personal intellectual capacity of the potential researcher that makes
metainquiry so comparatively rare and difficult. It is rather that there
is always a comparative paucity of paradigmatic environments (in the
Kuhnian sense) with which to undertake the inquiry. This is because
metainquiry is pervasive upon its objects: it requires for its existence
the prior development of the lower levels. This insight is based on the
recognition of the vulnerability of all discourses to metadiscourse
deconstruction, and this recognition, in tum, relies on the imagery of
the infmite regress for its plausibility. Moreover, an argument that
stresses the importance ofpragmatic limitations to regress can itselfbe
used for discourse-privileging purposes. Thus, there is indeed a
contradiction.37
The inside can only speak via the outside. To describe even one's
own skills as tacit knowledge is to produce public knowledge. In some
versions, only the participants are capable of knowing anything, but
insider epistemology has no credibility in (natural) science.38 Indeed
the hallmark of science is its belief in the virtue, and even the
necessity, of the outsider stance, which is called objectivity. To study
anything scientifically is thus to study it from the outside, whereas to
be scientific is to practice science, and to practice science is to be a
scientific insider. In the study of science (and knowledge practices
generally) the student cannot avoid being inside and outside at the
same time. Any particular stopping point will be arbitrary and
unjustified, since it is neither a matter of being correct nor a matter of
analysis.39 Rather, it constitutes a denial and a dissolution of its prime
assumption, which is at the root of the problem: that inquiry requires,
to be inquiry, a realist practice and a realist writing. In the opinion of
Ashmore, the way to solve the problem of realist inquiry is to
concentrate on textuality and by
artic~lating the practice he calls
''wrighting.'' It is not a matter of solving the problem; rather, it is
something to be shown, not to be told.40 Refutations share the deep
ground of that which they refute; the grounds for the tu quoque are a
design for certainty, straightforwardness, and clarity, a fear of regress,
paradox, and the loss of contro1.41 The tu quoque is preserved with the
aim oftranscendence. Science, unlike philosophy, is wrapped up in its

Paradoxes ofReflexivity
245
own way ofmaking things intelligible to the exclusion ofall others. Or
rather, it applies its criterion unselfconsciously, for to be self-conscious
about such matters is to be philosophicaL42 In the standard version, the
reproducibility
of
scientists'
fmdings
is
seen
as
a
major
epistemological guarantee of scientific validity. But since there are no
two .events that are totally identical, there is always a "space" for
negotiation of this sameness/difference. The success or lack of success
ofany replication claim can never rest, therefore, on the way the world
is; rather it must rest on social agreement in the relevant community.43
In the sciences, the apparent externality of things is reinforced by the
notion that anyone could see the same things ifthey looked at the same
place. Realists typically choose to study science only because it is
generally counted as the canonical example ofknowledge.
But a problem can arise for speakers in accounting for the fact
that it took some years before they publicly admitted that they had
accepted a newly proposed theory that they believe to be correct. One
way they can do so is to explain that the delay in adopting the theory
was to allow time for the confirmatory evidence to appear. However,
because of the massive, fundamental and irresolvable variability in
participants accounts on any given topic, traditional analysis is unable
to achieve the objective that it sets itself: that is, to tell it like it is.44
The
majority of researchers,
having
invested
their
careers
in
traditional analysis, talk more often about the essentially interpretive
nature of their kind of sociology, and the way in which their studies
are, of course, open-ended and revisable. Much of what passes for
sociological knowledge of science is merely contingent and incorrect.
Scientists do not agree about what constitutes a good argument, and it
has
become
increasingly
clear
that
participants
with
different
perspectives, different interests, and different technical backgrounds
interpret formulations differently. The same analyst fumish-es quite
different versions within a single context, and this provides a major
reason for not taking scientists' accounts of theory literally. Ashmore
argues that the resolution of paradoxes in Russell's theory of types is
simply not desirable. While the theory of types was at least workable
when confined to set theory, it was a thoroughly misguided product of
a mind obsessed with control. When it was taken over by the wider,
logical positivist movement and adopted for natural language, it
became not only pernicious but self-destructive in its unintended
consequences of ruling out all self-referential formulations however
innocent, such as any reference to the first person by that same first

246
Soft Logic
person, or any reference to a text or speech in the same text or speech.
It would thus fail to account for the very root of intelligence and
creativity, which is largely responsible for raising man above the level
of beast, namely his capacity to refer to himself and thus to know
himself as a speaking subject. It fails to assimilate man's capacity to
represent and to imagine, which js manifested throughout art, music,
literature, science, mathematics, and logic.
The world we live in is normally experienced as knowable (if not
entirely known in common by most of us), and as independent of our
accounting practices (except for the microscopic level of physical
reality and certain self-fulfilling or negating social phenomena). A
construction that refuses to remain content with its own formulations
is
especially difficult
to
read
"comfortably."
When
describing
"science," one unavoidably participates in traditional distortions,
which are embedded in the vernacular discourse. The language is,
however, not so fixed as to preclude disclosure through the use ot: for
example, tortured sentences that turn upon themselves. Any attempt to
discount the practical is interpretively problematic, given the wealth of
successful interpretations, adequate common-sense,
and practical
reasoning. As Derrida says of the power of reason, one cannot speak
against it except by being for it, and one can protest it only from
within, and within its domain.45 Some sociologists concede that
descriptions are essentially flawed, but their explanatory practice treats
this
point
as
a
mere
technical
difficulty.46
Descriptions
are
acknowledged to be unreliable, but the source of this unreliability is
located in the process whereby descriptions are generated. Indeed
Woolgar's "radical reading" of the problem treats attempts at
reformation as a fool's errand. The unreliability of descriptions is a
fundamental feature of discourse, and attempts to improve upon the
accuracy of descriptions are doomed. It is important to note that
explanatory work inevitably proceeds by ignoring the problem of
descriptions. That is, practical explanation has to treat the character of
entities as fixed for the practical purposes of explanatory argument.47
Woolgar attempts to preempt the tu quoque response by implicitly
claiming a relative immunity from the effect of his practice of
conceding
that
some
aspect
of analysis
must
always
remain
unexplicated. Many practitioners in the social study of science make
statements suggesting a wish to retain some role for the independent
existence ofobjects in the real world~ Dialectical literature strives to do
what it cannot do; it attempts to transcend its own limitations as a text

Paradoxes ofReflexivity
247
while never forgetting that these limitations cannot be transcended. It
makes a primary virtue of honesty, yet proves its virtue by means of
winning tricks. Like Sisyphus, it goes on trying.48 That is why
Ashmore concludes that the mistake is to seek for some way out.
One cannot get out ofhistory, for as structure it is always there as
the system of belief or truth that allows us to understand. Art is as
natural an artifice as nature; the truth of fiction is that fact is fantasy,
and that the made-up story is a model of the world.49 The distinction
between fiction and nonfiction is illusory since all writing is fiction.
Realist writing refuses to recognize its status as writing (fiction).
Science's lack ofreflexivity is well-known to metascientists, especially
in the sociology of scientific knowledge. But the solution to the
problem of reflexivity is not a simple matter of not making claims.
Rather, according to Ashmore, one has to realize that the subject and
the field are one and the same. Among students ofreflexivity there is a
great diversity ofviews on its proper role. Perception of similarity and
difference seem to be at the root of the construction of all knowledge.
But while a perceived difference is always highly visible, its evaluative
status is altogether uncertain. If it is possible to deconstruct one's own
knowledge claims - or the claims of one's own tradition of scholarly
praxis - than that is the truly hard case for a sociology of knowledge.
The problem of writing a valid conclusion to this thesis is an
exceedingly difficult one, but we would not have come this far if there
were nothing to be said.50
Notes
1 Malcom Ashmore, The Reflexive Thesis, Wrighting Sociology of
Scientific Knowledge, Chicago, IL and London: The University ofChicago
Press, 1989, p. xvii.
2 S. Woolgar, in The Reflexive Thesis, Wrighting Sociology ofScientific
Knowledge, p. xix.
3 Steve Fuller, "Making Reflexivity Save for Relativism," Presented at
the Society for Social Studies, Pittsburgh, PA, October 1986.

248
Soft Logic
4 Ashmore, The Reflexive Thesis, p. 6.
5 Harry Collins and Trevor Pinch, Frames ofMeaning: The Social
Construction ofExtraoridanry Science, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1982, p. 190.
6 Barry Gruenberg, "The Problem ofReflexivity on the Social Sciences,"
Philosophy ofthe Social Sciences 8, 1978, pp. 321-343.
7 Ibid., p. 336.
8 Thomas S. Kuhn, "The Relation Between the History and the
Philosophy ofScience," in The Essential Tension, Chicago, IL and London:
University ofChicago Press, pp. 3-20.
9 cf. Joseph Grlinfeld, "Science and Philosophy in Popper," in Science
and Values, Amsterdam: B.R GrUner Publishing Co., 1973, pp. 21-46.
10 John Dean. "Empiricism and Relativism - A Reappraisal ofTwo Key
Concepts in the Social Sciences," Philosophy ofthe Social Sciences, 8, 1978,
p.281.
11 Bruno Latour, "The Politics ofExplanation - An Alternative," in
Knowledge and Reflexivity: New Frontiers in the Sociology ofKnowledge, S.
Woolgar, Beverly Hills, CA and London, England: Sage, 1988, pp. 155-76.
12 Ibid., p. 174.
13 Ashmore, The Reflexive Thesis, p. 60.
14 Michael Mulkay, "Methodology in the Sociology ofScience: Some
Reflections on the Study ofRadio Astronomy," Social Science Information 13,
1974, pp. 107-19.
15 Ashmore, The Reflexive Thesis, p. 68.
16 Ibid., p.69.
17 Donald W. Olivier and Alvin W. Landfield, "Reflexivity: An Unfaced
Issue in Psychology," Journal ofIndividual Psychology, 18, 1962, p. 122.
18 Bill Harvey, "Plausibilty and the Evaluation ofKnowledge: A Case
Study ofExperimental Quantum Mechanics," Social Studies ofScience, 11,
1981, p. 124.
19 Barry Sandywell, David Silverman, Maurice Roche, Paul Filmer, and
Michael Phillipson, Problems ofReflexivity and Dialectics in Sociological
Inquiry: Language Theorizing Difference, London, England: Routledge and
Kegan Paul, 1975, p. 155.
20 Ashmore, The Reflexive Thesis, p. 86.
21 Peter Berger, A Rumour ofAngles, Harmondsworth, Middlesex:
Penguin Books, 1969, p. 59.
22 Malcom Ashmore, "A Question ofReflexivity: Wrighting Sociology of
Scientific Knowledge," Dphil Dissertation, University ofYork, 1985, p. 159.
23 Ernest Gellner, Legitimation ofBelief, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1974, p. 49.
24 Ashmore, The Reflexive Thesis, p. 89.

Paradoxes ofReflexivity
249
25 Arne Naess, The Pluralist and Possibilist Aspect ofScientific
Enterprise, London: George Allen and Unwin, 1972, p. 114.
26 Herbert Butterfield, The Whig Interpretation ofHistory, London: Bell,
1931.
27 David Thomas, Naturalism and Social Science: A Post-Empiricist
Philosophy ofSocial Science, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979,
p.175.
28 Thomas S. Kuhn, "Logic ofDiscovery or Psychology ofResearch?" in
Criticism and the Growth ofKnowledge, eds. Imre Lakatos and Alan
Musgrave, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1970, p. 7.
29 Ashmore, The Reflexive Thesis, p. 235 n8.
30 Naess, The Pluralist and Possibilist, p. 114.
31 Ibid., p. 117.
32 Steve Woolgar, "Critique and Criticism: Two Readings of
Ethnomethodology," Social Studies ofScience 11, 1981, pp. 504-14.
33 Ashmore, The Reflexive Thesis, p. 95.
34 Alexander McHoul, Telling How Texts Talk: Essays on Reading and
Ethnomethodology, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1982, p. 101.
35 Ashmore, The Reflexive Thesis, p. 101.
36 Ibid., p. 102.
31 Ibid., p. 105.
38 Ibid., p. 108.
39 Ibid., p. 110.
40 Ibid.
41 Ibid., p. 111.
42 Peter Winch, The Idea ofa Social Science and Its Relation to
Philosophy, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1958, pp. 102-3.
43 Ashmore, The Reflexive Thesis, p. 115.
44 Michael Mulkayu and G. Nigel Gilbert, "What Is the Ultimte
Question? Some Remarks in Defence ofthe Analysis ofScientific Discourse,"
Social Studies ofScience 12, 1982, p. 310.
45 Jacques Derrida, Writing and Difference, trans. A. Bass, London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1978, p. 36.
46 S. Woolgar, "Critique and Criticism," p. 509.
47 Ibid., p. 508.
48 Ashmore, The Reflexive Thesis, p. 192.
49 John Barth LETTERS, London: Secker and Warbung, 1979, p. 33.
50 David Silverman, Reading Castenada: A Prologue to the Social
Sciences, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1975, p. 111.

Chapter Nineteen
Derrida's Deconstruction
Derrida questions the tradition of philosophy as an autonomous
discipline, the pursuit of timeless self-validating truth having nothing
to do with either politics or everyday experience. 1 It was the intensive
reading ofHusserl that led him to perceive certain problems in the way
of phenomenal inquiry, problems that had to do with writing,
inscription, and what might be called the "literary" aspects of
philosophy. Deconstruction, he holds, is not a matter of philosophical
content but rather one that focuses on the frames of meaning,
institutional
structures,
and
rhetorical
and
pedagogical
norms.
"Differance" is a neologism Derrida coined to suggest how meaning is
at once "differential" and "deferred," the product of a restless play
with language that cannot be fixed or pinned down for the purposes of
conceptual definition.2 It is a cardinal discovery of contemporary
structural linguists that signs do not have meaning in and for
themselves, but only by virtue of their occupying a distinctive place
within the systematic network of contrasts and differences that make
up any given language. And this practice is complicated, in Derrida's
view, by the fact that meaning is nowhere practically present in
language but is always subject to a kind of semantic slippage or
deferral, which prevents the sign from ever being completely grasped.
Deconstruction is not, Derrida insists, a method, a technique, or a
species of critical judgment. Yet its moves do invoke the dismantling
of conceptual oppositions, the taking apart of hierarchical systems of
thought, which can then be reinscribed within a different order of

252
Soft Logic
signification. It is in the margins of the text that he discovers these
unsettling forces at work, questioning the assumption that meaning
can always be grasped in the form of some proper self-identical
concept.
This has the effect of undermining most of what passes for
"rigorous" thought in philosophy no less than literary theory. What
makes Derrida's work attractive, no doubt, is the implicit invitation to
new and more adventurous forms of interpretive criticism. But while
he rejects the notion of deconstruction as a kind of anti-philosophy, he
characterizes the traditional philosopher as one who habitually forgets
that he is writing. He concludes that all attempts to keep philosophy
separate from literature - to maintain it as a privileged truth seeking
discourse, immune from the vagueness of writing - are bound to fail.
That is why he rejects what he takes to be the "logocentric" bias in our
thinking about mind, language, and reality. At the same time he holds
that deconstruction should not be content to simply invert certain
cardinal oppositions (speech/writing, philosophy/literature) so as to
leave the "inferior" term henceforward firmly established at the top.
For this could be nothing more than a notational gesture and, at the
end of such a reading, philosophy would stand revealed as nothing
more than a particular literary genre. Derrida emphasizes that one
should respect the particular demands of philosophical writing,3 and
he implicitly invokes the normative standards of logic, consistency,
and noncontradiction to which he denies however any absolute binding
force. Yet he suggests that their authority rests on our not perceiving
the extent of the disseminating power of certain root metaphors raised
into concepts. They bring with them a whole network of articulated
theses and assumptions whose meaning anywhere links up with other
texts, other genres and topics of discourse. Writing is characterized by· .
Derrida as being altogether intertextual, i.e. connected to other texts,
while there is nothing outside the text pre sea Norris warns us that this
should not be taken as a license for that other kind of wholesale
"intertextuality" that rejoices in simply riding roughshod over all such
genuine distinctions. For it is precisely this stratified character of
language - the fact that it has been endlessly worked over by specific
genealogies and logics of science - that demands the effort of a
prudent, slow, and differentiated reading. And among these, as
Derrida argues, are the various "philosophemes" or ways of thinking,
which by now have impressed themselves so deeply on our language

Derrida's Deconstruction
253
that we take them as common-sense truth. and forget their specific
philosophical prehistory.4
In an interview given in 1984, Derrida revealed that he has
attempted to find a nonphilosophical site from which to question
philosophy, but that this does not amount to an antiphilosophical
stance.5 Yet by his own admission, all such attempts to go "beyond"
philosophy inevitably end up only in more philosophy. It is largely
because of such self-defeating gestures that Derrida has become
suspect to Anglo-American analytic philosophy. While he attempts to
"deconstruct" the rationalist philosophical tradition, he at the same
time appeals to its critical authority. But what is at work here does not
amount to a rigorous logic ofexclusion. It is a major point in Derrida's
argument that there can be no thinking back to origin and sources, no
escaping from the logic of supplementarity that he adopts. It is only in
terms ofa presence deferred, ofa truth that still awaits its fulfillment -
much like the character of writing - that Plato can explain the power
of dialectics to draw the philosopher endlessly on toward a vanishing
point of ultimate wisdom. These are not, Derrida argues, just casual
metaphors or accidental phrases. Rather they belong to a whole
intricate system of logical and semantic rules and entailments, which
must be taken into account by an adequate reading ofthe text. Derrida
emphasizes that there is a politics and an ethics that are bound up with
the insistence on speech as a model for the wise and responsible
conduct of human affairs. For with such a system, there would always
be the ultimate reference back to an authority residing outside and
beyond the specific differences of age, class, or political interest. Such
is the self-perpetuating logic that guarantees truth and social stability
alike. Derrida opposes that tradition by pointing out that certain forces
may
be
absent
yet
present
-
inscribed
through
a
different
supplementary order of necessity. It then becomes apparent that what
we call a word is far from determining the limits of imaginable sense.
The freewheeling.readings that some of Derrida's American followers
have adopted are, therefore, not mere misunderstandings of Derrida,
as Norris claims. Derrida is fully aware that any breaking with
philosophical language can only be selfdefeating, since there is simply
no alternative ground on which to stand, no language that has not been
endlessly worked over by the logical grammar of Platonism. The facile
strain in post-structuralist thinking that passes directly from the
"arbitrary" nature of the sign (the lack of any natural or determinate
link between signifier and signified) does lead to the inescapable

254
Soft Logic
conclusion that a text cannot possibly "refer" to any world outside its
theoretical domain. Derrida realizes that language is inherently
referential or mimetic, and that there is simply no way of breaking its
hold by mere deconstructionist fiat.
It is, nevertheless, precisely the correspondence theory of truth
that is chiefly under attack by Derrida's deconstruction. He holds that
deconstruction is always already at work even in those texts that would
seem
most
expressly
committed
to
a
"logocentric"
order
of
assumptions. It is, therefore, impossible for deconstructive readings to
escape that ubiquitous system of ideas, impossible to leap outside it
and land on some alternative ground. What Derrida is out to resist as
far as possible is the Platonizing drift that would restore interpretation
to a quest for self-present accuracy and truth. Even interpretation of
the kind that literary critics most commonly practice is itself caught up
in a structure of assumptions that philosophy continues to dominate.
Such is the effect of removing the privilege that allows criticism to
decide which terms shall be taken as key words of the text. Derrida
thinks that it is pointless to ask who is speaking in any given passage
of the text, for there is no last word, no metalanguage or authoritative
voice exercising control that could ultimately serve to adjudicate the
matter. Writing, he claims, is not a theme in any normal sense, even
though it is altogether impossible to conceptualize language without
falling back upon writing. Language is consequently not a theme
either, but then neither is deconstruction. He admits the de facto
priority of speech over writing, yet insists that this is not to be
confused with the de jure argument that would take it as a logical
necessity.
Typically Derrida focuses on metaphors, footnotes,
passing
analogies, or turns of argument, which philosophers would regard as
scarcely meriting such attention. His point is that philosophy has
maintained its long-standing prerogative by dictating in advance whai
shall count as worthwhile topics of debate. If the very idea of "literal
sense" is merely a metaphor, it follows inevitably that there is nothing
that is literally a metaphor either. Metaphorical meaning achieves its
effect by subverting the
established significance,
and
similarly
deconstruction presupposes a structure to be dismantled. Derrida has
consequently nothing resembling a theory or a method with which to
work, and all he can do is point to the ultimate undecidability of all
such conceptual differences. What is at stake here is not just a
generalized sense of metaphorical drift, but the attempt to reveal the

Derrida's Deconstruction
255
few tendencies in the text where writing resists this seductive process,
where something escapes, exceeds, or perplexes the sovereignty of
logocentric reason. Since he is not challenging this massive consensus
on grounds of factual or historical accuracy, deconstruction remains of
necessity marginal. It is a major precept of contemporary structural
linguistics that meaning is not a relation of identity between signifier
and signified but a product of the differences, the signifying contrasts
and relationships that exist at every level of language. To think
logocentrically is to dream
of a transcendental
signified,
and
deconstruction defines its project by contrast to this illusion, as a
perpetual reminder that meaning is always deferred, and that thought
cannot escape this logic of endless supplementarity. In this manner,
Derrida claims that writing is always at the origin of language, while
at the same time rejecting as illegitimate all references to origin. Since
there is no such origin, we need to understand "writing" not in the
narrow, familiar sense of graphic inscription or literal marks on a
page. But writing for Derrida is not just one metaphor among others,6
for there can be little doubt that he attaches to it a great deal of literal
meaning.
If the sign is indeed an arbitrary relation between signifier and
signified, this leaves room for all kinds of secondary elaboration in the
spheres of cultural and literal study. For Derrida, "difference" is not a
self-possessed concept; it is a fissile term that introduces all manner of
disturbing and contradictory effects into theoretical discourse. The
"logic of difference" is a non-self-identical logic, one that eludes all
the normative constraints that govern classical reason. It is not at all
clear, however, what such a logic working with nonidentical concepts
can accomplish, for to the degree it becomes incapable of prohibiting
inferences as illegitimate, it no longer does what logic has been
invented to do. Derrida's language is marked by the absence of
positive terms that permit conceptualization, and this inevitably
inhibits his ability to explain matters. He wants to grasp language as a
system of different yet non-self-identical terms, but it then becomes an
easy prey to
what
Norris
considers
"arbitrary"
practices
and
interpretations. Written signs have traditionally been thought of as
marks of difference, while Derrida's notion of writing extends far
beyond the standard intended sense of literal marks on a page. If
writing, however, is not treated as a concept, as a word to which
corresponds some fixed and definite meaning, the idea of writing
cannot be grasped either. Since writing is taken by Derrida as the very

256
Soft Logic
condition of knowledge, this renders knowledge as well into a
metaphor lacking literal meaning. Contrary to Norris, Derrida is,
therefore, incapable of performing a transcendental deduction in the
manner of Kant. Thought is said to be deluded if it attempts to
comprehend the nature ofwriting from a standpoint seemingly outside
or above it. And it is philosophy that most often falls prey to this
illusion, overlooking the fact that history itself is tied to the possibility
of writing.7 Derrida entertains a notion of writing that supposedly
precedes and delimits all oral language; yet the claim that speech
already belongs to writing8 is, in effect, counterfactual. That is why
Derrida is unable to tell us what writing is.
He rejects Rousseau's philosophy of origins that sets a cardinal
opposition between nature and culture with everything authentic and
original belonging to nature, and everything false and degenerative
being the result of culture. But no more than Rousseau is he himself
able to conceive of knowledge or writing except in terms of language
and structure. Ifthere is no such thing as literal meaning, there can be
no metaphorical meaning either and, hence, no deconstruction.
Derrida is incapable of explaining how writing ever got started; the
very distinction between speech and writing cannot be carried through,
for along with writing there comes a whole tacit system of meanings
and presuppositions that cannot be identified. What he wants to bring
out here is a different kind of logic; it turns out, however, that this
remains parasitic on our usual ways of talking and reasoning. Such
deconstruction by necessity presupposes standard norms of literal
meaning and coherence, and hence there remains an unbridgable gap
between what Derrida says and what he means to say. He claims that
there is no ultimate truth ofpsychological, historical, or any other kind
of discourse, yet proceeds to make an exception in his own case. If
texts do not yield any kind of authoritative truthful reading, this
applies a fortiori to his own notion of ''writing.'' Something always
escapes the reading of a text and, consequently, any commentary that
aims to speak the truth ofa text will find itselfoutflanked or outwitted
by a supplementary logic. It: however, nothing like a concept can be
said to exist, there is, by the same token, no argument Derrida can
, legitimately make. Writing for him is whatever escapes, unsettles, or
complicates the commonplace assumptions -
yet this
becomes
pointless if there is no literal meaning. Derrida rejects the idea of a
text that is opposed to the real world existing outside and beyond it.
What he is asking us to recognize is the radical instability, the strictly

Derrida's Deconstruction
257
undecidable character of any such metaphysical opposition. He
substitutes, however, for the difference between nature and culture his
own pivotal contrast between speech and writing.
When he attempts to think about the origin of writing, he is
caught up in a shifting exchange of priorities, which resists any form
ofcoherent theoretical grasp. Writing and deconstruction are governed
by counterfactual metaphors that defy consistent identification. He
realizes that metaphor and metaphorical truth cannot be sustained
without literal meaning,9 yet he somehow manages to forget this when
he discusses the role of writing and deconstruction. What is at issue
here is the status of explanatory theories, the question ofhow far or by
what conceptual logic reason can exercise its sovereign claims.
Claiming only marginality for his own deconstructive tactics, he in
effect decides in advance that they are going to fail. Since all such
alternative readings have no particular claim on either meaning or
truth, they cannot prevail in the long run. Attempting to undermine
the totalizing oftheories, his own brand ofdeconstruction is conceived
as a total and consistent strategy, but by adopting a logic ofchance and
of random anomalies, such an approach is no longer critical in the
required sense. Having renounced the quest for determinate structure,
Derrida lacks an effective defense against what Norris considers an
arbitrary misuse of language. Once deconstruction sets itself up as ~he
antithesis of philosophical reason, it becomes self-destructive and
pointless. Derrida cannot restrict deconstruction to the questioning of
"naive" ideas of reference that assume a straightforward matching up
of language and the world "outside." While attempting to resist and
deconstruct the antinomies of classical reason, his characterization of
"writing" does not escape the metaphysics of the reaL This is why
Derrida has been read by his Marxist critics as denying any reality
outside the text. When there is more than just one way to read a teXt,
the interpreter is more likely to make of it whatever he pleases. No
reading, however meticulous or prudent, can serve as an effective limit
on metaphorical proliferation once the existence of literal meaning has
been denied. When conflicting interpretations are left as undecidable
by Derrida, a close textual analysis becomes, in effect, pointless.
Debates like these are misconceived if philosophy is just another
kind of writing with no privileged access to knowledge or truth, and
deconstruction becomes futile by the same token. Derrida fails to show
that it is possible to make sense of any strategy that issues such a
radical challenge to prevailing ideas.
Contrary to his declared

258
Soft Logic
intentions, this amounts to the skeptical claim that we cannot know
anything at all. It is largely such self-defeating claims that have made
it difficult for philosophers in the Anglo-American analytical tradition
to take Derrida seriously. While some loosening of restrictions on
interpretation may he beneficial, there is no way of knowing what the
consequences are going to be. In the absence of metanarrative norms
and criteria, we can only take our bearing from shifting metaphors that
make up the currency of deconstruction and leave such questions as
beyond hope ofa definite answer. Norris, ofcourse, is quite right when
he points out that there is no "post-philosophical" realm of pure
textuality where truth and falsehood are mere words, and the principle
of reason no longer applies. IO The problem is that the logical bite of
such arguments has been lost to undecidabilty, and that such "post-
modem" musings no longer amount to either a rational critique or a
definite proposal of viable alternatives. Derrida cannot quite make up
his mind whether we have entered a ''post-modern'' era of forms of
legitimacy whose reason no longer exerts any general critical force.
But there can be little doubt that he lacks any effective defense against
the freewheeling American modes of deconstruction that take their
inspiration from his work. What Norris calls ''thinking through one's
own position"1! becomes altogether futile once logocentrism has been
renounced, appealing as it does to an implicit consistency without
which deconstruction lacks both target and method. Those who want
to adopt a critical stance in these matters cannot set themselves up in
opposition to reason or logic without, in effect, demolishing their own
case. Derrida regards rationality in its current technological and
communicative forms as a specific historical formation that cannot be
appealed to as some ultimate ground. But neither can he think the
limits of reason
without
invoking
what
he
denounces
as
the
logocentric tradition. Deconstruction remains wedded to this practice
of enlightened rational critique, and that is why Derrida's principle of
undecidability constitutes such a serious obstacle to his deconstructive
strategies. By suspending the power to decide between different
readings of a text, he is left without any real choice in his
deconstruction.
Derrida, nevertheless, claims that there is a sense in which
deconstruction is fitted to press beyond the present stalemate, the
paralysis of reason engendered by nuclear threat. He points out that
"deterrence" is a word for which there exists no adequate concept, no
place within a system of coherent intelligible theory that would make

Derrida's Deconstruction
259
proper sense of it in a given context. Competence is, therefore, no
longer exclusively vested in these experts - whether nuclear scientists
or strategic analysis - whose knowledge becomes increasingly obsolete
given the extraordinary complexity of the issues involved. Such
knowledge is neither coherent nor totalizable12 but neither, of course,
is Derrida's own brand of deconstruction.
While strategies of
deterrence may not he mere matters of applied expertise and rational
prevision, his own analysis fails to provide any alternative strategies
either. By focusing on the rhetorical dimension of the conflict, he in
effect renders it proof against reasonable resolution. If there is no
weakening of the multiple chances of error and misinterpretation that
are opened up at each new gambit in the nuclear game, Derrida has to
leave everything as it is. The situation, however, is not one of total
uncertainty and some strategies are more likely to be effective than
others. By treating nuclear reality as an apocalyptic fantasy, he in
effect removes it from the scope of rational deliberation and decision.
While it may be granted that questions of competence are not merely a
matter oftechnical know-how and strategic expertise, they are not just
a matter of literary style either. Derrida may plausibly argue that
nuclear confrontation is more complex than the facts of the matter
indicate, but by declaring these issues undecidable he becomes himself
unable to advocate any specific policy. By treating diplomacy as a
predominately rhetorical phenomenon and by stressing its irrational
and unpredictable consequences, he in effect reduces the chances for
any pragmatic resolution ofconflict.
Derrida lacks an effective defense against those modem literary
critics who want to tum the table on philosophy and argue that "all
concepts are metaphors." In "White Mythology," he emphasizes that
all our working definitions of metaphor since Aristotle have been
expressed in terms that ultimately derive from the language and the
conceptual resources of philosophy. 13 For it is only to the extent that
we have inherited certain ways of conceptualizing metaphors - i.e.
criteria and techniques for distinguishing between "literal" and
"figurative" language - that we can get any kind of argumentative
hold on
discussing these questions. 14 Rejecting
"logocentrism,"
Derrida cannot effectively refute the claim that it is language and
culture that decisively determine the ways in which the world is
interpreted. He stresses the philosophical origin of certain key terms
and definitions in literary criticism, while denying the legitimacy of all
such
claims
to
"origin."
He
admits
that
philosophy
always

260
Soft Logic
reappropriates the discourse that delimits it,15 yet looks for a place
"outside" philosophy to ground his deconstructive strategies. 16 He
certainly blurs the distinction between philosophy and literature when
he treats philosophy as a textual phenomenon, and thus in effect
subjugates reason to rhetoric. What philosophy has failed to think
through in his view is the salient fact of its textual condition, its
dependence on the figural resources of language that open up strange
and unsettling possibilities of sense. In this manner he questions the
idea of "context" to the point of denying that it can ever serve as a
ground of appeal for deciding what speech acts properly mean in any
given situation. Since language is subject to a generalized readiness to
be grafted into new and unforseeable contexts, there is no appeal to
performative intent that can serve to delimit the range of possible
meaning. What Derrida calls into question is the right ofphilosophy to
maintain a wholesale theory of the mind and language on the basis of
common-sense notions that work well enough for all practical
purposes but take on a different, more doctrinaire aspect when applied
as a matter of philosophic principle. He repudiates the idea that
philosophy can lay down the rules of procedure by explaining how
language should and must work. Thus, he rejects the prevalent notion
that there is just one way a text should "properly" be read. He admits
that we require at least some presumed general grasp of an author's
purpose in order to read the text at all. But he insists what any theory
will have to get along in the end without in itself implying either that I
fully understand what the other says, writes, means to say or write, or
even that any adequate equivalence could obtain between what he
consciously intended, what he did, and what I do while reading. 17
Derrida thus questions the Cartesian ideal of clear and distinct
ideas on which the standard speech act theory is founded, and the
related notion of a privileged access to self-present meanings and
intentions.
It
is this tradition
that sustains the belief in
the
recoverability of intentions, the power of a text to reveal its true
meaning in the presence of an authorized interpreter. Derrida rejects
the rationalist presumption that claims to know in advance of reading
precisely what standards and criteria a text must obey if it is to count
as "serious" philosophy. He concludes that the most a rigorous
reflection on the process and limits oftextual critique can show is that
such matters remain undecidable. The problem is, however, that such
"prelogical possibilities of logic" are not amenable to Derrida's
deconstruction anymore than to standard analysis. This is also what

Derrida's Deconstruction
261
makes his notion of writing so opaque to rational explanation, since
anything Derrida can affirm about it is already part and parcel of the
logocentric tradition he rejects. His aim is to expose the habitual
presumption that enables philosophers to go (as they think) straight to
the conceptual heart ofthe text without wasting time over matters that
are distant or (to them) unnecessary detail. In La Carte Postale, he
emphasizes that communication is not always what philosophers
imagine it to be - an exchange where intentions are never mistaken
and where messages always arrive on time and at the appointed place.
He stresses the multiplicity ofmeaning, which prevents any assurance
that true communication has in fact taken place. The postcard is a
message casually written and promiscuously open to all to read. At the
same time, it is a writing that can only make sense to one person (the
presumed addressee) whose knowledge of the sender enables him to
figure out its otherwise impossibly cryptic message. What Derrida
suggests is that we read the great texts of the written tradition as so
many messages that circulate without any absolutely authorized source
or designation. The particular postcard that so caught Derrida's fancy
was one that he found in the Bodleian Library reproduced form the
fontpiece of a thirteenth century English fortune telling book. 18 The
remarkable thing about this engraving was that it showed Plato
standing and apparently dictating his thoughts to a seated Socrates
who obediently wrote them down. One can see why this image should
have struck Derrida with the force of a revelation. One of his chief
arguments or strategies of reading has to do precisely with this
mythical relationship between Socrates, Plato, and the writing of
philosophy. Thus, Plato is the prototype of all those unfortunate
philosophers who must resort to writing in order to communicate their
thoughts, but who lay themselves open in the process to all manner of
unauthorized reading and interpretation. Norris argues that to envision
a Socrates who writes is to open up a counter tradition, however
apocryphal, where the old logocentric myth of origins no longer holds
exclusive sway. It suggests that writing is in at the source of
philosophy, that there is no turning back to an authorized voice that
doesn't pass by way of certain images or metaphors derived from
writing. 19
Derrida's point in deploying the postcard is to show how
circumstance
always
and
everywhere
enters
the
discourse
of
philosophical reason. Philosophy is motivated by a natural desire to
treat its discoveries as a timeless a priori truth rather than a series of

262
Soft Logic
interesting notions thrown up by chance encounter with events and
ideas. The problem is that there are no given boundaries on
deconstruction once he has localized logic to shifting contexts. That is
why he fmds himself incapable of abiding by the consequences of his
own epistemological skepticism. By rejecting the common sense view
that language signifies literal meaning, he is left without strict laws of
deductive inference. He stresses the undecidability that attaches to
speech acts in general and shows that this has extensive political
consequences in the American context where a written constitution
enshrines certain supposedly "self-evident" values and principles.
These can be interpreted in very different ways by Supreme Court
judges with the power to overturn even well-entrenched acts of state
legislature. What Derrida objects to in the standard consensus version
of speech act theory is the idea that meanings can be simply read off
by an authorized interpreter who knows as if by natural right what
constitutes true understanding. The presence of a written constitution
where principles are left open to all manner of far-reaching juridical
review gives a political edge to questions oftextual interpretation.
Derrida
also
discusses
the
related
issue
of an
author's
responsibility for future interpretations ofhis text. He believes that it is
by no means an accident that Nietzsche's writings, for example, took
on their bad eminence in the Nazi period. But denying, as Derrida
does, all literal meaning and original intent on the part of the author,
he inevitably invites such second guessing of his own text. He attacks
the Aristotelian tradition that defined metaphor on philosophical terms
as a figure of speech whose workings can always be explained by
reference to some other, more reliable or epistemologically more
privileged use of language. Derrida, however, pursues this critique to
the point where any distinction between "concept" and "metaphor"
altogether disappears. If all propositions concerning metaphor are
undecidable, there is always the possibility of some radical new
meaning that could utterly change the way such writings signify.
Contrary to Norris, there seems to be little in Derrida's notion of
deconstruction that is capable of imposing effective control on
interpretative discourse. He holds that thought is deluded if it tries to
achieve
a
standpoint
"outside"
or
"above"
the
discourse
of
philosophical reason, and at the same time this is precisely what his
deconstrictive strategies are out to accomplish. To speak or to write
against reason becomes, in the end, always a self-defeating gesture. It
is why deconstruction has been regarded as a species if irrationalism

Derrida's Deconstruction
263
that denies the very possibility of objective meaning and knowledge. It
appears, however, that no case can be argued, no proposition stated, no
matter how radical its intention, that does not appeal to the conceptual
resources of ordinary language. And such language is steeped in all
kinds ofanthropocentric and metaphysical meanings that determine its
intelligibility and logic. Structuralism, therefore, is heir to all the
epistemological projects from Plato to Kant and Husser} that have tried
to fix limits to the discourse of knowledge and the truth claims of
universal reason. And literary criticism since Aristotle has taken over
these ambitions, since it has worked with a handful of concepts
(mimesis, form, metaphorical versus literal meaning) whose line of
descent is altogether philosophical. Derrida emphasizes that what
structuralism manages to leave out is the excess of meaning over form,
the fact that certain elements of force or meaning must always escape
its organization. There are many indications in his work identifying
closely with the heritage of Jewish religion. What distinguishes such
commentary from its orthodox Christian counterpart is precisely the
emphasis on writing as an endless productive signifying practice
irreducible to some ultimate self-evident truth.20 To set the Jewish
against the Graeco-Christian tradition is implicitly to focus on writing
and its place in the economy of knowledge and truth. What is
intelligible to the thinkers in the Greek tradition is whatever lends
itself to various totaling methods and strategies that thought has
devised in order to maintain its grasp on the otherwise recalcitrant real
world. For the only kind of knowledge that counts philosophically is
that which finds its place in the grand dialectical scheme, and thus has
a claim on world historical status. This position is attained, however,
only
at
the
cost
of
confming
philosophy
to
its
narrowed
epistemological mode of inquiry. While Derrida attempts to broaden
this scope, he still wants to remain within the tradition of what he
regards as the present-day enlightened thought.
Yet these two
aspirations seem incompatible.

264
Notes
Soft Logic
1 Christopher Norris, Derrida, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1987.
2 Jacques Derrida, Margins ofPhilosophy (1972), trans. Alan Bass,
Chicago, ~: Chicago University Press, 1982, pp. 3-27.
3 Ibid., p. 305.
4 Norris, Derrida, p. 26.
5 See Derrida's interview with Richard Kearney in Dialogues with
Contemproary Continental Thinkers, ed. Richard Kearney, Manchester
University Press, 1984, p. 100.
6 Norris, Derrida, p. 187.
7 Jacques Derrida, OfGrammatology, (1967), trans. Gayatri
Chakravorty Spivak:, Baltimore, MD: John Hopkins University Press, 1976, p.
27.
8 Ibid., p. 55.
9 Jacques Derrida, Dissemination (1972), trans. Barbara Johnson,
London: Athlone Press, 1981, p. 258.
10 Norris, Derrida, p. 156.
11 Ibid., p. 159.
12 Jacques Derrida, "No Apocalypse, Not Now (full spead ahead, seven
missiles, seven missives)," Diacritics, vol xv (1984), p. 24.
13 Derrida, Margins ofPhilosophy, pp.207-21.
14 Norris, Derrida, p. 170.
15 Jacques Derrida, "The Supplement ofCopula," in Margins of
Philosophy, p. 177.
16 Interview with Kearney, p. 98.
17 Jacques Derrida, "Limited Inc abc (response to John Searle), G~vph~
vol II, Baltimore, MD: John Hopkins University Press, 1977, p. 199.
18 Jacques Derrida, La Carte Postale de Socrate a Freud et au-dela,
Paris: Aubier-Flammarion, 1980, pp. 101-118.
19 Norris, Derrida, p. 187.
20 Ibid., p. 229.

Chapter Twenty
DerrideanDisplacement
Although
displacement is not explicitly discussed
in
Derrida's
writings, it is central to his de-centering mode of critique. He remains
conspicuously modest in his conception of what deconstruction can
accomplish, yet the subject of his literary study includes society,
culture, sexuality, and the unconscious -
all considered as texts.
Displacement is above all about writing itself: but it is also about
woman, the unconsciousness, and Jewishness, for these are all
exemplary
instances
of the
marginal.
Derrida's
dr~.ft
remains
indeterminable and undecidable, the old organizations are shaken, yet
they remain. Even when we think against metaphysical concepts, we
do this by means of words that cannot be cleansed from their
metaphysical associations. There seems, therefore, no way back to
what all right-thinking persons can agree on, based on common sense.
and the evidence of the senses. Certitude of theory gives way to the
characteristic Derridean undecidability,
the vertigo that has
its
analogue in the flutter, oscillation, and trembling of Op Art. I For
Derrida, ornament and style are not mere embellishment; rather,
ornament generates texts and concepts. Thus, the seemingly arbitrary
conjunction of oir words - Moira, moire, grimoire (medieval book of
spells in La Carte Posta/e) turn out to obey a certain
(non-
Aristotelian) logic: neither pure randomness not pure determinance.
Derrida emphasizes that metaphor is never innocent, since it orients
research and fixes results,2 and he constructs an entire philosophical
program on the homonym (the homophone, pun, and related devices)

266
Soft Logic
providing a non-Aristotelian grammatology that tolerates equivocity.
In dissemination, thought is guided not by forms of sight but by the
sounds of puns or the distribution of letters. This functions on the
assumption that
language
itself is
intelligent,
and
hence that
homophones "know something."
Derrida reveals the power of thought residing in decorative
devices3 through the equivocacy of his terminology, such as the term
differance, which combines difference and deferment. He takes this as
a model ofthe history ofphilosophy, which in spite of its insistence on
clarity is subject to blurred repetitions, as in the exemplary case ofthe
distinction between platonism and sophistics. These discriminations
become so subtle that, in the end, they separate nothing. Derrida's own
writing therefore deals only marginally with what it is about. It
proceeds by means ofcontamination, as it were, a discontinuous model
of innovation and change, as happens when the analogy is weak.
Under such circumstances, analogy may well mislead us, becoming
frivolous, as in the blurring of the distinction between discourse and
quotation. The unfolding that most interests Derrida is the interlacing
ofthe narrator and the narrative. He challenges the cognitive prejudice
against rhetoric as "ornament" by showing that ornamentation itself
can prove the methodology of a science: grammatology.4 There is a
''world view" at work in the decorative in which part and whole have a
supplementary relationship.5 Against the logocentrism of Western
metaphysics, which takes the style as something added on to thought,
Derrida emphasizes that the "center" itself is not a natural or fixed
focus. Unlike symbolism and analogy, which tend to assume a basic or
literal foundation on which an analogy is based or a symbol is drawn,
the concept of transformation assumes no fundamental.dimension.6
Derrida plays with our conceptual habits and displaces the normal line
oflogic resulting in a conceptual ''vertigo,'' and the liability ofhis own
system is thereby readily admitted. Thus for Conley, Derrida is
primarily a writer rather than a philosopher; he includes literary styles
in his inquiry and within this "supplemental" view of the craft, the
"styles" ofphilosophy and literature tend to overlap. An apprehension
of other, different languages in use allows us to discover the limits of
our monocular perspective. Lines of binary logic that had been
associated with writing find themselves loosened up by the vagaries of
style. Shifting to single words and what attention makes of them
brings us to a much broader horizon of discourse, not entirely
controlled by grammar. Derrida calls this play of order and disorder

Derridean Displacement
267
"dissemination" in which the so-called free play is not controlled by
some godlike context the analyst imposes on it. When Derrida's styles
are followed up carefully, there is no way that his thought can be
appropriated by a single tongue.7 Rather than arguing, he constructs a
dialogue of several voices that approach, blend, harmonize for a
moment, and take leave of each other. The power inherent in the use
of language is such that every user marks off a space that he takes to
be his own.
Ryan concludes that liberal institutions are not founded on
anything that can be called "real," and that natural rights are never
fully natural - they are displaceable from the outset. Liberal reason
assumes that it is possible and necessary to begin the search for
knowledge with a clean slate, and to base knowledge claims on a clear
and distinct indubitable, self-evident foundation. The appropriate
formal standards for all human knowledge are those of mathematical
modes of inquiry, and the key to the progress of human knowledge is
the development and pursuit of explicit rules of method. The entire
body of valid human knowledge is a unity both in method and in
substance, and, thereby, human knowledge can be made accessible to
all men. Deconstructive philosophy, on the other hand, questions this
nonnativization of the logos and the natural rights of reason, and it
denies the possibility of a clean slate altogether free of historical
presuppositions.
It also doubts the possibility of a
self-evident
foundation of complete unambiguous ideas. It questions the absolute
certainty of the mathematical model, the validity of formal method
abstracted from practical situations as well as the unity of knowledge.
It thus denies the possibility of absolute certainty or determinacy, and
much of this skepticism has to do with the value and use of the
language within which knowledge must necessarily be committed.
Deconstruction discredits oppositions within liberal reason, such as
those of thought and practice, semantics and syntax, mind and body,
oppositions that permit a supposedly natural form of knowledge
disassociated from institutions, history, and technology.8 Displacement
is a process in rhetoric that presents one thing to be compared and
identified with another by virtue of contingency and analogy. Such
contrivances are seen as secondary and degraded from the point of
view ofthe natural light of reason, which prefers self-evident, ideal, or
natural foundations.
Liberal social theory is subject to displacement because it is based
on two founding metaphors or analogies: the metaphor of nature,

268
Soft Logic
which connotes freedom and lack of constraint, and the metaphor of
scientific law, which suggests order and harmony between parts
subsumed under a whole. Liberalism consists of a number of concepts
and institutions that form a coherent system only as long as the initial
analogies are accepted. The initial assumptions are that anyone in civil
society is equal and free, and that civil society functions according to
laws that are analogous to those ofnatural science. A power is a power
to dispose, and the assertion of that power immediately implies the
possible threat of its removal. The very assertion of right is always a
denial of its naturalness, that is, of its permanence and necessity.
Ownership is merely a displacement that is recognized by convention
as legitimate, and by its very existence as law; property right testifies
to its own nonuniversality and nonuniformity. Its authority rests on the
metaphorical analogy to the laws of natural science, which must be
uniform and universal. Individual reason may determine rational truth,
but it does so on the basis of socio-historical contexts. Individualism
and collectivism are undecidably intertwined,9 yet liberal reason is
intolerant of the undecidability (between individual and collective,
universal and particular, fact and value, subject and object, etc.) that is
in fact the case in our world.
Handelman's point of departure is also the fluidity of boundaries
between text and commentary in both the Jewish hermeneutical
tradition and in Derrida. Her interpretation of Derrida as "Reb
Derissa" treats his writings as a form of heretic hermeneutics within a
larger tradition of heresy. Usually translated as ''writing,'' Derrida's
ecriture can also be translated as "Scripture." Most readers ofDerrida
interpret
his
displacements
as
extensions
of the
Nietzschean-
Heideggerian tradition, whereas Handelman argues that they may be
read and understood just as much as an extension of the long tradition
of rabbinic scriptural hermeneutics. Qisplacement constitutes the
historic Jewish tradition of exile, and Derrida in his essay on the
French-Jewish writer Edmond Jares traces. this connection between
Jew as exile and writing. For the Jews the central problem is
interpretation, and in order to come to grips with it, the rabbis created
a system that itself became another equally authoritative canon,
another Scripture. Interpretation in Derrida is always already there
because the commentator's discourse cannot be really or methodically
separated from that of the -author, this relation being a contaminating
one. The model of interpretation of the rabbis arose out of the tension
between continuity and rebellion, attachment to the text and alienation

Derridean Displacement
269
from it. This became particularly acute for the post-Enlightenment
Jews who have, like Freud and Derrida, assimilated into Western
secular culture. Like Freud, Derrida is obsessed with the need for a
revisonary interpretation,
and
his
target
is
all
the
fathers
of
philosophy. His project is to deconstruct the entire Western tradition of
"onto-theology," to undo "logocentrism," and to send the word into the
exile of writing. 10 Writing is the realm not of presence - to which the
word is so intimately related - but of absence, deferment, and differ-
ence. Rabbinic thought has always been an alternative metaphysics
due to the Biblical doctrine that the world is created, not as in the
Greek view, eternally existent. It is a place for the contingent within
philosophy, and against the latter's original bias.II Rabbinic reason
could not be founded on necessary axioms inherent in the nature of
things that furnished neat syllogisms and universally true statements.
There is also the standard contrast between the Greek emphasis on
seeing and the Hebrew emphasis on hearing: seeing is presence,
whereas hearing implies absence. When sight is the predominant
mode, then the search for identity in knowledge or resemblance will be
defined in terms of copy, re-presentation, and thought as speculative,
as in specular. And this view ofknowledge as mimesis is exactly what
Derrida and the deconstructionists attack. 12
The Jewish concept of idolatry was a kind of fetishism, the
worship of reified signs devoid of significance. The loss of a stable
referent that grounds the "literal" and "proper" meaning of words is a
manner of exile. Freedom comes in the characteristically rabbinic
mode: through interpretation, a chain in which signifier and signified
do not merge. In Derrida there is a Midrashic play, which makes his
deconstruction
so
different
from
Heidegger's
or
Nietzsche's.
Philosophy, Derrida points out, is Greek in the most ethnographic
sense. Absence does not equal nonexistence;. like otherness, it is one of
Derrida's prime terms in a vocabulary that seeks to evade the trap of
Being and Nonbeing. Derrida's reality is not Being but Absence, not
the One but the Other, not unity buy plurality, dissemination, writing
and difference. Much of Derrida is in the spirit of the Kabbalistic
interpreters who created baroque mythologies out of the elements of
Scripture. 13 He reveals the irrational, daemonic, and mythic secrets at
the heart of reason, science, and the hermeneutic tradition. Derrida
chooses to stay in exile, to differ infinitely and defer; there is for him
no end to exile, but rather a rising ofthe Jewish condition ofexile into
the paradigm ofexistence - to be is to be in exile. That is why there is

270
Soft Logic
something sacred about writing (as in Kafka's ''writing as a form of
prayer"), commentary, and text, even after it has been displaced into
the profane fields ofpsychoanalysis, literature, and philosophy.
Notes
1Mark Krupnick, ed., Displacement, Derrida and After, Bloomington,
IN: Indiana University Press, 1983, p. 22.
2 Jacques Derrida, Writing and Difference, trans. A. Bass, Chicago, IL:
University ofChicago Press, 1978, p. 17.
3 Gregory L. Ulmer, "Op Writing: Derrida's Solicitation ofTheoria," in
Displacement, Derrida andAfter, p. 41.
4 Jacques Derrida, "Living On: Border Lines," trans. James Hulbert,
Deconstruction and Criticism, ed. H. Bloom et aI, New York, NY: New York
Seabury Press, 1979, pp. 99-100.
S Jacques Derrida, Verite en pienture, Paris: Flammarion, 1978, p. 392.
6 James Ogilvy, Many Dimensional Man, New York, Oxford, 1979, pp.
46-7.
7 Tom Conley, "A Trace ofStyle," in Displacement, Derrida and After,
p.85.
g Michael Ryan, "Deconstruction and Social Theory: The Case of
Liberalism," in Displacement, Derrida and After, p. 155.
9 Ibid.,p. 166.
to Susan Handelman, "Jacques Derrida and the Heretic Hermeneutic," in
Displacement, Derrida and After, p. 102.
11 Hans Jonas, Philosophical Essays,From Ancient Creed to
Technological Man, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1973, p. 29.
12 Handelman. "Jacques Derrida and the Heretic Hermeneutic," p. 105;··
13 Harold Bloom A Map ofMisreadings, New York, NY: Oxford
University Pr~ss, 1975, p. 43.

Chapter Twenty-One
Limits of Deconstruction
Deconstruction is the general strategy that exposes the myth ofa fixed,
essential,
timeless,
and
naturally
acceptable
structure
of
an
independent reality which can be discovered. Derrida's speculation is
a deconstruction in the absence of a given, but lacking literal meaning
his metaphors remain inconclusive. He argues that theorizing about
human discourse, Saussure turns to construct a more congenial but
entirely fictional world of language, which he finally acknowledges to
be such, and yet somehow, as he proceeds, he seems to forget that the
system of language is but a fiction. The resulting "order" Derrida
rejects as "logocentrism." Although Derrida admits that we cannot
avoid language and its implicit inconsistencies even when we express
its presumptions, he rejects the resulting order. He believes that we are
forever subject to the illusion that what we say captures how the would
really is, yet his deconstruction is not altogether successful in
dispelling this fallacy. Even though he insists that we can never go
beyond language, he holds, like Wittgenstein, that by exposing the
deformative power of what we say, deconstruction enables us to
recover what cannot be said. This, for Derrida, coincides with the
puzzle of "writing," which is, of course, not merely the recording of
what is uttered, but a reflection of the power of difference underlying
the joint process of speech and of written language. We should not
expect that by means ofdeconstruction ofconceptual networks we will
somehow become more inclusive and accurate, since deconstruction
merely reflects the contingent provisional supplement of all such

272
Soft Logic
reflexive efforts deprived of their logocentric pretensions. Because for
Derrida there is no decipherable alternative structure, deconstruction is
the denial ofdecipherment, I but while there is a sense in which a mere
notation is arbitrary, the fact that the "graphic sign" represents the
linguistic (or phonic) sign presupposes a deeper unanalyzed ability to
fix the latter so that it can thus be represented, however arbitrarily.
The thing that constitutes language (l'essentiel de la langue) is itself
unrelated to the phonic character of the linguistic sign, and linguistics
is finally only a part ofa more general semiology. Derrida emphasizes
that Saussure illegitimately assumes that there is an unproblematic
cognitive faculty that human beings manifest in using language
naturally in their intercourse with the world. What Saussure fails to
question, he insists, is the essential possibility ofnonintuition,2 i.e. the
profound possibility that there are no recognizable structures of the
world independent ofour mind.
The theory of deconstruction is only a comment on whatever
ability we may have to generate and interpret a text, but which for
Derrida essentially remains a mystery. What he offers is not a
methodology of interpretation or, what comes to the same thing, a link
between interpretive text and the world3 because deconstruction makes
no sense unless some networks of difference are already in place, and
since all communication is necessarily modeled in the decoder's way,
however provisionally and heuristically. On the deconstructive view,
signs are merely traces, and they are traces of nothing. Deconstruction
begs to expose the myth that the structure of language and thought is
ultimately the structure of reality, but the problem then becomes to
show that anyone established scheme for analyzing or interpreting
familiar
phenomena
is
more
adequate
than
another.
While
deconstruction opposes the pretensions of totalizing any system of
differences imposed on the unending changes in human experience, it
fails to show how any such distinction will make a difference. By
acknowledging the inescapabilty of conceptual systems, it presupposes
literal truth at least as an ideal that all interpretation must tacitly
assume. Derrida opposes what he takes to be the delusions of
essentialism, foundationalism, correspondence, cognitive privilege,
and logocentrism, but all such global arguments against logic must in
the end become self-defeating. He recognizes that internal to any
conceptual scheme, and relative to it, judgments of comparative value
and power are both unavoidable and convincing, yet his rejection of
logocentrism is itself radical and global, and it is particularly suspect

Limits ofDeconstruction
273
when applied to mathematics or technology. If logic is relative to a
particular language, Derrida fails to have a medium in which
logocentrism can convincingly be refuted. On the one hand, he warns
us that any conceptual framework remains deconstructable, and at the
same time he resists all attempts to deconstruct deconstruction.4 But of
course, this is exactly what his interpreters and critics have been doing
all along.
In "White Mythology," Derrida's analysis implies a profound
suspicion of the concept of metaphor, and it is indeed not quite clear
how metaphoricity can yield a structure that accounts for the
difference between the figural and the properly literal. Ricoeur
concludes in The Role ofMetaphor that the entire theory of analogy is
no more than a pseudoscience.s Only to the extent that being is
difference can it be said to be analogical, and it is within such a
perspective that this doctrine is taken by both Heidegger and Derrida.
In Being and Time everything is primarily understood not by focusing
on the thing itselfbut with regard to something else, such as the what-
for of the thing. Being is dif-ference; it is analogical; it is nothing in
itself: But it is the very articulation of its own understanding within
which it appears as a multiple of irreducible sense. Already Aristotle
had indicated that a certain multiplicity is constitutive of the very
variety of being. The movement that is constitutive of metaphor
(epiphora) is present in all understanding of the as-what. In the
Poetics, Aristotle considered analogy one species of metaphor whereas
in his Rhetoric, it already had become the paradigm of metaphor.
Derrida accepts that metaphor and the movement ofepiphora are to be
thought of in the background and with respect to the more general
problem of analogy.6 Analogy brings together the concept and what is
without concept; it serves to think the difference.7 The hierarchization
of logocentric analogy proceeds from the fact that one term within th~
relation of relations comes to name the relation itself Language,
according to Derrida, is analogy through and through,8 but language
engenders also a negative product: the analogy of the analogy, the
useless and vain simulacrum of discourse, prattle, nonsense - in short,
the frivolous.9 The message'ofsuch frivolous use oflanguage is that its
proper and legitimate use is restricted, but Derrida's theory of
language cannot tell us where this line between meaning and nonsense
is to be drawn.
Ricoeur
claims
that
philosophical
discourse
maintains
its
authority by stripping the mathematical notion of analogy of its

274
Soft Logic
conceptual rigor. Derrida, on the other hand, emphasizes that it is
from the trope that we learn about the status of the literal proper
meaning. IO He admits in Dissemination that since everything becomes
metaphorical, there is no longer a literal sense, and hence no longer a
metaphor either. 11 It would seem, however, that without the contrast
with
literal meaning, Derrida's insistence on the metaphorical
character of language becomes pointless.
Since the "logic" of
metaphors is taken to be one of contamination (i.e. lacking discernible
structure or method), this leads to an erosion of the very distinction
between concept and metaphor. Such figures of speech can no longer
define the limits ofwhat is proper and legitimate within language. For
Derrida, the metaphor "retreats," as does Being for Heidegger: both
are vanishing concepts, as it were, and are no longer capable of being
imposed as norms for what is proper and legitimate, or for making the
required distinctions and differences. In this manner, Being is also no
longer resistant to metaphor as Heidegger claims, because for
Heidegger,
the
being
of language
resides
in
the
as-structure
characteristic of logos, whereas for Derrida, it coincides with the
problematic context of being a metaphor. Derrida emphasizes that
Being, the proper, etc., do not escape the claim ofmaking distinctions,
and that there is consequently nothing outside the text, no reality that
can serve as a touchstone for language. While the concept in its
universality may be irreducible to metaphor, figure of speech, or trope,
its intelligibility nevertheless hinges on the possibility of lending itself
to metaphorization. Such irreducible metaphoricity, which is said to be
the origin of sense or meaning, is due to syntax. This self-destruction
ofmetaphor, although similar to the Hegelian "sublation" (Aujhebung)
in many respects, differs from it in that it lacks a direction or purpose.
For Derrida, metaphor always carries its own death within itself. 12
Metaphoricity is said to be quasi transcendental and to reflect the
limits ofphilosophical discourse. Yet like Wittgenstein, Derrida makes
a point to philosophize about what cannot be said to have a literal
meaning
Paradoxically, it is I-Iusserl who provides Derrida with
a
paradigm of his deconstructive method. While Husser1 emphasizes
direct seeing, the things themselves, presence, fulfilled meanings, and
the like, Derrida points out that these are all promises that cannot be
kept. The perceptual object, contrary to Husserl's repeated claims, is
not an unproblematic presence, but precisely a complex interplay of
presence and absence. And as Husserl himself admits, there is always

Limits ofDeconstruction
275
more to the intentional object than what is present. 13 What is true of
Husserl's analysis ofperception is no less true of intersubjectivity. The
other is not present in person but is precisely absent, and this absence
must
be
compensated
for.
Presence
is
always
infiltrated
and
undermined by absence, and Derrida concludes that while there is a
phenomenon, "experience is a dream of presence.,,14 It is precisely
insofar
as
the
thing
itself eludes the
aspirations
of intuitive
consciousness that it is taken to be real. In other words, absence is the
indicator, the transcendental clue to reality. The real is what resists the
grasp of intuition, and it is just because the object cannot be seized by
intuition that it is taken to be real. The irreducibility of the
phenomenon to intuitive consciousness
in
Husserl
becomes
in
Heidegger a playful alternation of mutual concealment and disclosure,
and the failure of presence which in Husserl is the clue to the
transcendence of the real, becomes in Heidegger the withdrawal of
Being. The task of thought is to wait upon and heed the hidden
movement ofBeing, and Dasein (existence, presence) is swept away in
this receding movement. The response of Dasein to the withdrawal
(transcendence) of Being is what Heidegger calls
Gelassenheit
(composure), letting go, letting be. It expresses the mystery precisely
in its withdrawal, but it is in this movement of Gelassenheit that
Caputo15 locates the most important difference between Derrida and
Heidegger. Absence for Derrida is not the gentle power of withdrawal
but the variety of signs and writings; he moves from the failure of
presence not to the transcendence of recessive mystery of things, but
into the indefmite play of differential systems of interchangeable
interpretations. All such representations are due to the will to subdue
things to our purposes and thus are violent; all discourse is caught up
within a system of differences, and the matter itself, things, are
indefinitely put oft: de-ferred. There remains only a network of signs
in which all are caught. Derrida's thought lacks piety since it refuses
to serve any purpose, but such experience of loss in the end becomes a
loss ofexperience. 16
This loss of experience inevitably brings about a loss of literal
meaning and objectivity. Graeme Nicholson argues that our experience
ofreality is profoundly linked with our experience of seeing, and with
the fact that both are interpretive. His point is that the dynamic
conditions ofperception should be treated in a parallel way: perception
is shaped by projections both practical and linguistic. Projection is at
the root of our visual interpretation since there is no seeing without

276
Soft Logic
interpretation. What we have to realize, however,
is that the
interpretations of perception are background renderings. When we just
see something, we do not employ a complicated skill or any
specialized knowledge like we do in learning how to read and write,
but exercise species specific instincts. We hardly ever need to puzzle
over identifying an object under ordinary circumstances, while reading
a text requires often complex and sophisticated skills. Seeing is
precisely the elementary encounter with entities that can be made
subject to further interpretation. The factors ofvisual interpretation are
at work only in the background, and that means that we are not at
liberty to deconstruct them under normal conditions. We remain
largely unaware ofthe practical interests and conditions that shape our
seeing and resist deconstruction. Whenever there is interpretation,
there is something seen as requiring explanation, and thus as
appealing to some literal sense or concern. Derrida's deconstruction
assumes that interpretation is part even of background knowledge,17
yet what we are unaware of cannot normally be deconstructed. If there
is nothing capable of being identified apart from interpretation, the
concept of interpretation itself becomes empty. To interpret is to
explain, and all explanation presupposes something that is understood
and in terms of which the explanation is being accomplished. We are
acquainted with interpretations of many different kinds: linguistic,
psychological, structuralist, and what not, and we accept such
explanations with reference to what we take to be their literal or
common-sense meaning. Every such attempt needs to identify a
nucleus of meaning to which the broad periphery can be attached, 18
and that is why the alleged metaphorical character of interpretation
remains parasitic on literal meaning. Such literal meaning is taken for
granted in each specific context and remains consequently much more
resistant to deconstruction than are the accompanying versions of
interpretation and explanation. Derrida's position that emphasizes the
uniform metaphorical nature of all discourse turns out to be self-
defeating.
Heelan likewise claims that visual perception - and by analogy,
all perception - is hermeneutic, Le. it has the capacity to "read" the
appropriate structure imposed on the world. The clues that are "read"
perceptually as giving an Euclidean visual space are engineered
objects, such as streets and buildings with repetitive architectural
elements. Hence, scientific artifacts belong to a family of readable
technology central to the phenomenological
and hermeneutical

Limits ofDeconstruction
277
analyses of what natural science takes to be real. But Heelan follows
Gadamer's hermeneutics that confronts the text or cultural object with
an antecedent domain of nleaning suggested by clues through the
playful interaction of part and whole, text and context. Heidegger also
regarded perception in which the world is disclosed and articulated as
being hermeneutical. Heelan, however, rightly points out that states of
the world are by defmition real and public,19 and that consequently
this reality is expressed as the standard for a perceptual judgment
formulated
in
a common descriptive
language of a
linguistic
community. Derrida, on the other hand, denies that there are any such
states of the world prior to interpretation. Perceivers "pick up"
information about the world, but it is the picking up that creates the
information, not discovers it. He denies that the information gathered
is in some sense "'present" in the world prior to the acts of perception.
For him, esse is interpretari, to explain, expound, an agent between
two parties, a broker, negotiator, and any isolation of meaning is,
therefore, an illusion created by the misuse of language. Yet some
meanings are more resistant to deconstruction than others, e.g.
perceptual images. The term "information" analogously refers to both
the signs that are read and to the visual clues that are automatically
picked up by the referent. There is no necessary, unique, one-to-one
mapping between seeing and reading, and all such affinities remain
problematic.
However, the manner in which an information system is utilized
depends on the context chosen for its interpretation. Heidegger
observes that eidetic analyses cannot be unique and definite, and while
such
a
determination
may
be
possible
for
a
rule-governed
mathematical object, perceptual profiles are never exact. Heelan
identifies this inexactness as metaphorical,20 but the suitability of
metaphors is more a matter ofaptness than ofaccurateness. Such cases
merely reveal a relativity of perception as something that cannot be
precisely identified, a profound ambiguity at the root of all natural
language. Nevertheless, and contrary to Derrida, metaphors remain
parasitic on literal meaning, for to say that the interpretation of a text
is due to unconscious analogy is to leave the alleged metaphorical
nature of language unexplained. It inevitably assumes a kind of
preunderstanding that
identifies
the
subject
in
anticipation
of
interpretation but does not amount itself to explanation in the normal
sense. Some marks are identified as a piece of writing, and thereby a
text is assumed to exist, but its reading is the result of acculturation

278
Soft Logic
and training, as is the reading of a scientific instrument. Moreover,
scientific explanation comprises a reality guided by the physical
interaction by means of a suitable technology. Since the principal
argument in favor of the hermeneutical character of perception is
based on the contrast between perceiving and reading. Derrida's
declaring the reading of a text to be paradigmatic for all perceiving
becomes
pointless.
Reading
and
perceiving
differ
in
their
hermeneutical preconditions since perceiving is largely intuitive and
species specific, while reading is an acquired skill not shared by
billions of humans. Any meaning conveyed by a text is open to
deconstruction only to the extent that it is not taken to be self-evident,
and all such analysis inevitably refers back to meanings that are
accepted
as
unproblematic
at
least
in
the
given
context.
A
deconstruction that does not amount to such an explanation lacks even
the force of an alternative reading.
While we are genetically
programmed to speak a human language, which language we happen
to master
depends
upon
upbringing
and
skill.
What
can
be
deconstructed is only the text, i.e. a set of words in some specific
language and explained according to its particular conventions.
Scientific instruments are likewise manmade conventional texts in this
sense, and their mastery requires apprenticeship and indoctrination;
all such interpretation is based on specific conventions that can be
questioned in deconstructive analysis. While it is characteristic of
hermeneutics that it presents more than just one interpretation,
mathematical notation as well as scientific terminology generally have
been largely successful in resisting such ambiguity.
Classical metaphysics reads the imperfect from the viewpoint of
the perfect, and movement from the standpoint of repose. One of
Derrida's major contributions was to fmd this constructive core of
traditional metaphysics -
poetic identity and its supplement in
logocentric technology - still operative in Edmund Husserl's Logical
Investigations. Derrida criticizes this entire metaphysical tradition as
being fundamentally due to the desire to exclude writing, taken
primarily not as "putting words on paper," but as irreducible
difference.21 But deconstruction is, after all, itself a way of reading
texts critically. To read is to interpret; it is to articulate one sense
rather than another. Derrida insists that when the writing is words on
a page, we cannot move outside language and remain in the blissful
innocence of animal immediacy. We are forever reading things in
terms of this or. that or for such and such a purpose. The notion of

Limits ofDeconstruction
279
empirical immediacy, as Derrida says, is a dream that vanishes at
daybreak, as soon as language awakens.22 Reading, hermeneua and
logos name the same thing: the human way of being. Reading is
intrinsically metaphysical and ontological, but is nevertheless a
referral to no presence. At best we can speak only of a relative priority
of open-mindedness over closure in any ongoing movement in which
there is no advance or goal, no identity of sense outside of
interpretation. One lives and acts in unending plurality, and entities
are traces of the movement of reading itself For that reason Derrida
does not use the term "criticism/' at least in its standard meaning. In
"Double Seance, " he says that "criticism," as the term indicates, is
linked to the possibility of decision, whereas "Double Seance" is
precisely a deconstructive critique of the possibility of decidability. To
read, to interpret ourselves, to tum logos critically back upon itself: is
to achieve nothing stable and substantial, but only the very movement
of reading itself. Criticism is the retrieval of indecidability right back
to the indeterminateness of what makes sense. It is an ongoing
subversion ofall stability.
The scientific prejudice is a belief in self-evident facts and
unconditioned grounds. Derrida, on the other hand, insists that there
are no such unproblematic facts and grounds, and that what arises is
merely a play of changing conditions that we do not fully understand.
Whether existence without interpretation makes any sense cannot be
decided because to decide would require that we get around our own
perspectives and interpretations. According to Nietzsche, it is the
affirmation of chance, of the irrational, that must be faced because
reason is no more than unquestioned belief: All is interpretation, and
what remains is the indefinite play of life itself: the will to power.
Even physics is an interpretation rather than the paradigm of certainty
and justification. Scientific discourse is part of the infmite series of
translations and interpretations, and truth persists merely as a
rigidified effect in this movable array of interpretations.23 Since we
cannot escape our own practices or paradigms, we cannot get around
the issue of certainty. Nietzsche's "overcoming" (Uberwindung) is at
the center of thought not only of the later Heidegger and of Derrida,
but also of Wittgenstein and Camap who wanted to "overcome"
metaphysics by means of a logical analysis of language. The issue
ren1ains undecided, however, once we realize that rationality has no
foundations. In the more recent philosophy of science, Kuhn and
Feyerabend
demonstrated
that
all
scientific
judgments
remain

280
Soft Logic
historically relative.24 All true thought is open to more than one
interpretation,25 and Derrida, therefore demands that reality should
free itself from the timeless categories of the history of philosophy.26
But Ormiston suggests that one can interpret Derrida in terms of
possibilities for reading, writing, and critical inquiry, even though
difference operates in and through dissemination, i.e. beyond any
discernible methods, and the mark of difference becomes one of self-
effacement.27 In this manner deconstruction finally disintegrates, for
by becoming an activity without a purpose, it loses not merely
direction but all discoverable meaning. Derrida believes that he can
retain relative significance even when there is no absolute or universal
truth, yet his rejection of logocentrism is itself comprehensive and
radical. Questioning logic, he cannot draw a line between what makes
sense and what does not, since he faces no problems that demand a
defmite solution. Lacking a discoverable philosophical content, he has
no identifiable franlework to refer to, because, unlike Wittgenstein,
there are for him no unproblematic lifeforms to fall back on. Reading
for Derrida is to thwart the very desire for analysis, but then there is
nothing to be understood, no meaning to be discovered, and no task to
be accomplished. Critical reading, for him, does create conflict, but
since logic can always be overruled, there is no need to resolve such
conflict. If we are asked by Derrida to be mindful of, and attentive to,
what is being passed over in silence, the appeal is to some overall
inlplicit consistency whose existence, however, he repeatedly denies.
All such quests aim inevitably at some literal and stable truth, for if I
speak or belong to a discourse .for which no one else has ears, I fail to
communicate, and such a discourse that is addressed to no one in
particular will not be comprehensible even to myself: If I have no
choice but to articulate questions or insights that are culturally
relative, there is no philosophical point to what I am doing. Derrida
fails to provide a rational justification for our desire to do philosophy.
Thus, while Heidegger, like Hegel before him, announced the
"end of philosophy," Derrida leaves this open.28 What is at stake here
is not merely a view ofknowledge that aims at ultimate and final truth
but the questionable validity of any argument that denies logic. It may
plausibly be argued that ifphilosophy is understood as the search for a
permanent neutral matrix, or ultimate foundation, or final framework
and vocabulary, skepticism just is the end of philosophy.29 According
to Derrida, there are no solutions to problems called "philosophical,"
and the history of philosophy is just a failed attempt to define

Limits ofDeconstruction
281
philosophical problems, the failed search for infallible methods, and a
series of failed proposed solutions. But ifDerrida argues that there are
no philosophical problems or solutions, he may rightly be said to be
doing philosophy himself We are urged to give up the view that
philosophical problems arise naturally upon reflection, and to pretend
that philosophy names no natural kind, no activity intrinsic to our
species, but that it is merely a historic, principally Western tradition.30
This entails giving up the view that there is a fixed permanent
philosophical agenda, a set of problems that defines philosophy, a
common paradigm that transcends natural languages, frameworks,
idioms, defmitions, and interests. Deconstructionists are decidedly
Kuhnian31 in their interpretation of science, and at the extreme end
they view science as a literary genre. If there is no metahistorical
agenda, we are asked to recognize that there are no final solutions to
putative philosophical questions. Rather, in philosophy as elsewhere in
culture, interests ebb and flow, and topics of conversation change.
Since there are no final solutions to philosophical questions, there is
no final vocabulary - no ultimate principles, distinctions, insights, and
frameworks
that
defme
rationality
in
virtue
of its
privileged
attachment to reality. It is, however, fair to ask what is left once the
quest for truth has been given up in this manner. Derrida claims that
knowledge is not the kind of thing about which one ought to have a
theory, but then goes on to offer just such a thesis denouncing
logocentrism. He wants us to give up the visual metaphor that inspires
the Platonic picture ofknowledge, ofa mind seeing things as they rally
are, but even when he rejects that picture, Derrida remains part of a
skeptical tradition that is philosophical to the extent that it makes
global and consistent claims. He seems to be saying that whereas there
can be explanation and illustration of successful discourse on a case-
by-case basis, there can be only a misconceived ''theory'' of successful
discourse -
yet even his deconstructivist denial of such a claim
amounts to further philosophical argument.
Schrag convincingly argues that the main lesson to be learned
from the contemporary flurry of deconstructionist strategy is that no
complete deconstruction is possible.32 Just as, according to Descartes,
all contents of experimental and natural truth can be doubted, save the
inescapable fact of the doubter, so in deconstruction the very strategy
reinvents the subject and assures that no complete deconstruction can
ever be accomplished. The Cartesian way fails because the inquiry's
standpoint presupposes a center of consciousness, a stale presence that

282
Soft Logic
somehow supports the provisional stream of consciousness. Spoken or
written discourse likewise implicate a speaker or author because all
discourse displays a world of concerns that go beyond the text and
serve as background for its interpretation. Explaining the text renders
manifest a specific understanding of human behavior and operates
within a network of intentions that the interpreter brings to the text by
speaking its language and by being familiar with its culture. Such
reference is more than just metaphorical since it is not only about
something but also by someone and for someone. It is within such a
specific context that literal meaning emerges as an epistemological
framework, an interiority seeking commerce with an external world.
The speaker or writer is implicated by his discourse by means of these
specific practices, both verbal and nonverbal. No speaking or writing
subject is an isolated island, but functions as a member of a specific
linguistic and cultural community. As a subject or agent, he is
implicated both in a confined time-space point, as an abstracted here-
and-now, and is a decentered co-subject cohabiting the world with
other subjects. Responsiveness to cultural conventions and demands on
the part of the speaker or writer, no less than explicit discourse,
comprises our understanding of the text. What "scientific" means is
likewise determined by pregiven disciplines that are considered to be
already on the secure path of established knowledge. While it is
usually assumed that all such philosophical problems can be solved by
means of the new scientific method, the specific understanding of
"scientific" that emerges has the consequence that most ofthe original
problems become meaningless since they cannot be formulated in the
new language ofscience.
The history of philosophy teaches us, however, that there have
always been skeptical traditions that have questioned its authority.
Even a general answer to the question, "What is philosophy?" cannot
be provided because the very definition of topics has changed
considerably over time as have the methods to solve them. There are
no eternal principles or fixed frameworks within which philosophical
questions can be answered. While Derrida is part of this philosophical
tradition, he resists all attempts at deconstructing deconstruction as
frivolous. Like Sextus Empiricus,33 he maintains that knowledge is not
altogether impossible, but an issue that cannot be conclusively settled.
The real problem seems to be that all such radical and comprehensive
skepticism remains parasitic on philosophical speculation, as have
been similar attempts in language analysis to demonstrate the

Limits ofDeconstruction
283
"meaninglessness" of philosophy. It is, therefore, not surprising that
these movements have been nlanifestly unsuccessful at bringing
philosophy to an end. Like Wittgenstein, Derrida's deconstruction
ultimately leaves everything as it is, largely because its logic is
incapable of making its criticism stick. The attempt to "overcome"
philosophy in Logical Positivism conles to an end with the recognition
that all scientific knowledge is historically relative. This, of course,
raises new questions, for history's concern is primarily with the real
world, while its narrative record seems always to be contaminated by
fiction. What stories and "history portray is not physical reality but
human
activity,
and this
invariably
involves .projecting
human
concerns into events. As Husserl reminds us, all experience involves
anticipation and intentionally. We cannot experience anything as
happening or as present except as succeeding something else, and as
leading to something further. Everything we experience is expressed
as expected or as unexpected, as confirming or as disconfirming our
anticipations.34 As Merleau-Ponty has pointed out, sensations are
highly abstract products of analysis, and we are always in the midst of
something by virtue ofthe teleological structure of action.
We describe as actions some long-term and extremely complex
endeavors: getting an education, conducting a love affair, raising a
child, fighting a war. It is true that in a good story we are told only
what is necessary to further the plot, and that life differs from stories
in that such a selection is not made.35 Unlike the historian, we are not
describing events already completed, but are in the middle of our
stories, and cannot be sure how they will end. We must then give up
any pretension we might have to anything like being the authors of our
own lives, even when we exercise some control over our surroundings.
Frank Kermode's intriguing observation is that the very idea of crisis
is a way of making a story out of this very lack of ending. Merely J:>y
giving it a voice, we provide life with a narrative structure, and it may
well be that a life that is not some kind of a story is neither thinkable
nor livable.36 Descombes rightly concludes that the controversy
between the positivist and the hermeneutical philosophy cannot be
resolved. One cannot abolish the category offact and keep the category
of interpretation, as Derrida proposes, because these words get their
meaning in part from the contrast between them. An interpretation is
opposed to a fact insofar as it is said to involve the evaluation of that
fact. This is because a fact is necessarily beyond dispute. Descombes
emphasizes that it is useless to call upon facts in this controversy since

284
Soft Logic
facts cannot become arguments without losing the privilege of
remaining indisputable. A fact used as an argument will share the fate
of opinion or interpretation.37 There has to be a difference between
knowledge and belief
Notes
1 Joseph Margolis, "Deconstruction; or, The Mystery ofthe Mystery of
the Text," in Hermeneutics & Deconstruction, eds. Hugh J. Silverman and
Don Ihde, New York, NY: State University ofNew York Press, 1985, p. 143.
2 Jacques Derrida, OfGrammatology, trans. Gayatori Chakravorty
Spivak, Baltimore, MD: John Hopkins University Press, 1975, p. 148.
3 Margolis, "Deconstruction," p. 148.
4 Ibid., p. 151.
5 Paul Ricoeur, The Role ofMetaphor, Toronto: University ofToronto
Press, 1977, pp. 259-280.
6 Jacques Derrida, The Margins ofPhilosophy, trans. A. Bass, Chicago,
IL: University ofChicago Press, 1982, p. 238.
7 Jacques Derrida, La Verite en peinture, Paris: Flammarion, 1978, p.
143.
8 Jacques Derrida, Speech and Phenomena, trans. D. B. Allsion,
Evanston: Northwestern, 1973, p. 13.
9 Jacques Derrida, L 'archeologie dufrivole, Paris: Galilee, 1973, p. 83.
10 Derrida, Margins ofPhilosophy, p. 280.
11 Jacques Derrida, Dissemination, trans. B. Johnson, Chicago, IL:
Chicago University Press, 1981, p. 258.
12 Derrida, Margins ofPhilosophy, p. 271.
13 Edmund Husserl, Cartesian Meditations, trans. Dorian Cairns, The
Hague: Martinus NijhofI: 1960, p. 46.
14 Derrida, OfGrammato!ogy, p. 49.
15 John D. Caputo, "From the Primordiality ofAbsence to the Absense
ofPrimordiality," in Hermeneutics & Deconstruction, p. 197.
16 Ibid., p. 200.
17 Graeme Nicholson, "Seeing and Reading: Aspects oftheir
Conneciton," in Hermeneutics & Deconstruction, p. 39.
18 Ibid., p.41.

Limits ofDeconstruction
19 Patrick A. Heelan, "Perception as a Hermeneutical Act," in
Hermeneutics & Deconstruction, p. 44.
20 Ibid., p. 47.
21 Jacques Derrida, L'Ecriture et la difJerance, Paris: Seuil, 1967, p.
293.
285
22 Ibid., p. 224.
23 Friedrich Nietzsche, "On Truth and Lie in an Extra Moral Sense," in
The Portable Nietsche, trans. Walter Kaufinann, New York, NY: Viking
Press, 1954, pp. 46-47.
24 Joseph Grilnfeld, Changing Rational Stnadards, Lanham: University
Press ofAmerica, 1985.
25 Martin Heidegger, What is Called Thinking? trans. J. Glenn Gray,
New York, NY: Harper & Row, 1968, p. 71.
26 Derrida, OfGrammatology, p. Ixxxix.
27 Gayle L. Ormiston, "Binding Withdrawal," in Hermeneutics and
Deconstruction, p. 251.
28 Ibid., p. x.
29 Bernd Magnus, "The End of 'The End ofPhilosophy'" in
Hermeneutics & Deconstructoin, p. 4.
30 Ibid., p. 5.
31 T. Kuhn, The Strucutre ofScientific Revolutions, Chicago, IL:
University ofChicago Press, 1962, 1970.
32 Calvin O. Schrag, "Subjectivity and Praxis at the End ofPhilosophy,"
in Hermeneutics &Deconstruction, p. 25.
33 Sextus Empriclls, Outlines ofPhyrronism, Loeb, Harvard University
Press, 1967, pp. 122-123.
34 David Carr, "Life and the Narrator's Art," in Hermeneutics &
Deconstructoin, p. 112.
35 Ibid., p. 115.
36 Frank Kermode, The Sense ofan Ending, Studies in the Theory of
Fiction, (London: Oxford University Press, 1966, p. 93ff
37 Vincent Descombes, "The Fabric of Subjectivity," in Hermeneutics &
Deconstruction, p. 58.

Postmodernism

Chapter Twenty-Two
Prerational Power Play
The concept of play, which was initially pushed into the background
by the dominant Cartesian tradition of the seventeenth century, finds
its way back into metaphysics at the end ofthe Age of Reason. Then in
the wake of Schopenhauer, prerational play itself returns to the
philosophical center stage both through Nietzsche and through such
twentieth century artist-metaphysicians as Heidegger, Fink, Gadamer,
Deleuze, and Derrida. Although prerational play concepts surface in
modem science as well, they remain subordinated to rational modes of
play. Thus, the play of contemporary scientific discourse, unlike that
of contemporary philosophical discourse, remains a predominantly
rational one. 1 Spariosu points out that in our methodologically self-
conscious age, one can no longer write history from an unbiased,
objective, and factual point of view because "positivism" itself is seen
as a bias. The history ofwhat we call "play" in the Western tradition is
a history ofconflict, ofcompeting play concepts that have.alternatively
become dominant according to changing conditions. We all seem to
know what play is and can recognize it, but fmd ourselves at a loss
when confronted with the task of conceptualizing such knowledge.
Scholars draw a distinction between play and games, paidia and ludus,
the former remaining indefmite and the latter defmed as governed by
rules and institutionalized custom. In contemporary philosophy,
therefore, play has an ambivalent status, being both phenomenon and
subjectivity, or both behavior and intentionality. This double nature of
play has been seen as a mixture of reality and nonreality, of truth and
illusion, and it is precisely this anlbiguous nature ofplay that accounts

290
Soft Logic
for its centrality in contenlporary thought. The family of play concepts
goes back to ancient Greece and its history reveals that it has been
subordinated to the power principle that has dominated Western
mentality. Like play, power is all pervasive and, therefore, difficult to
defme, it is part of tacit knowledge and family resemblances. Indeed,
Spariosu is quite incapable of telling us what would not count as
power in Western mentality.
The Hellenic idea of play, which originally in the Homeric epic
and in Hesiod is linked to the notion of immediate physical power
(agon), gradually loses this meaning until it becomes paidia, a word
that initially denotes only the harmless play of children. It then
becomes in Plato a philosophical term for the transmission of culture,
and a proper understanding of the concepts of power and of play
reflect the polarized character of Western mentality that since its
origin in ancient Greece, has altered between a prerational and a
rational meaning. A prerational mentality conceives of power as
something physical, unrestrained, and immediate; authority depends
on physical strength or cunning, and it is imposed by violence.
Competitive values prevail throughout, and violence or the threat of it
are employed as a matter of course in resolving conflict, and that is
why
a
prerational
mentality
usually
creates
highly
unstable
authoritarian and hierarchical forms of government.2 A prerational
mentality is often also a preconscious one. It does not distinguish
between speech and action, or between cognition and emotion; its
language
is
concrete and poetic,
and
structured
according
to
mnenlonic rather than visual or logical principles. By contrast, a
rational mentality is largely conscious since its prerational part
remains suppressed at the subconscious level. Writing emerges and
addresses itself to an increasingly broader section of the community,
and a rational mentality is also largely a literate one. Since the early
Renaissance, most of Western Europe has steadily moved towards-a
rational mentality, which becomes prominent in the seventeenth
century and prevails to the present day. The concept of evolution is
itself a product of this mentality and is employed as an ideological
weapon against prerational ways of thinking. Rational mentality
experiences the transition to mediated forms of power as a loss of
presence and a yearning for authority, and that is how the prerational
past becomes idealized as a "golden age." Prerational thought, by
contrast, conceives of playas a manifestation of power in its innocent
form, its sheer delight in emotional release and raw arbitrary violence.

Prerational Power Play
291
Spariosu points out that the modern notion of play shares this
divided character when applied to art. Literature has fron1 the
beginning been associated with play and despite its repression by
rational philosophy and science, it has proven a powerful antagonist,
indeed an indispensable factor in the quest for power and cultural
authority. By openly displaying its fictitiousness, it allows science,
philosophy, history, ethics, politics, jurisprudence, and religion to be
invested with the authority of knowledge and truth. In Romanticism,
however, and more recently in Postmodemism, literature reasserts its
claim to supreme cultural authority by exposing all such truths as
fiction. It resists these claims chiefly through an "as if' mode of
knowledge whose origins in play can be traced back to Greek thought.
The establishment of aesthetics as a branch of philosophy during the
Age of Reason facilitates the introduction into metaphysics of
consciously simulative or fictional proceedings that were primarily
concerned with the fine arts. Philosophers speak again about conscious
illusion and necessary fiction, not only in literature and art but also in
metaphysics and even in science. It is Schiller who, for the first time,
explicitly calls the heuristic fictions of philosophy "play," and there-
after this idea is frequently adopted by Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel,
who ground their metaphysical speculation not only ontologically and
ethically but also aesthetically. Like Schiller however, they subordinate
aesthetics and play to morality, seriousness, and rationality. Play is
gradually stripped of its prerational violent and arbitrary connotation,
and becomes a useful instrument in support of the ontological and
ethical traditions of philosophy. In Kant, play cannot even be called a
concept (Begriff): rather it resists all attempts at conceptualization,
and this is what makes the critique of pure reason and ofthe power of
judgment necessary. Like Plato and Aristotle, what Kant dismisses as
"mere play" is the irrational ecstatic operation of power whose
medium is the senses, emancipated from the control of reason. Only
Nietzsche breaks with this Schillerian tradition by going back beyond
Plato to the archaic origins ·of playas a violent, exuberant, and
innocent manifestation of power, and thereby introduces the notion of
prerartional play into modem philosophy. The notion of art as self-
consious illusion becomes prevalent in nineteenth century aesthetics as
Coleridge's ''willing suspension ofdisbelief:" and such theories ofplay
remain influential even today.
Art is able to carry out the task of reason because of its dual
nature as both resemblance and
reality,
play and
seriousness,

292
Soft Logic
entertainment and morality. This allows art to mediate between
philosophical
and
scientific
discourse
on
the
one
hand,
and
unknowable reality on the other, between the arbitrary and chaotic
physical world, and human understanding. Schiller's theory of play
and aesthetics provides a crucial link, not only between literature and
philosophy but
also between
art
and
science generally.
With
Schopenhauer, there begins a second aesthetic tum in philosophy in
which the game of reason is taken over by the arbitrary and violent
operation of physical forces or the unmediated play of power.3
Through his idea of Will as endless striving, Schopenhauer shows
power to be the hidden source of Western metaphysics, and this notion
is taken up by Nietzsche, Heidegger, and other twentieth century
artist-metaphysicians. Like the Presocratics, Nietzsche conceives ofthe
will to power as prerational play, as an overflowing and violent cosmic
movement, beyond good and evil. Nietzsche's philosophy can be seen
as a return to Hellenic prerational values in the light ofwhich he offers
a profound critique of contemporary culture. To a rational mode of
thinking, Nietzsche and Heidegger appear paradoxical and confused
but, viewed from a prerational perspective they offer a far-reaching
analysis of modem values. The aesthetic perspective that Nietzsche
has in mind concerns the world of the senses and becoming rather
than that of reason and being,
and~ is seen as gaining priority over
mere intellectual understanding. Unlike Schiller and Kant, Nietzsche
views playas a cosmic, rather than human disinterestedness, beyond
human rationality and ethics. Fundamental throughout his philosophy
is the idea of power as play that can be traced back to Greek archaic
mentality. It is the ancient Sophist doctrine that might is right that was
tacitly taken for granted in ancient Greece.
While play is central in this prerational aristocratic mentality,
with the advent of a rational democratic mentality it becomes
separated from unrestrained power and presents itself as reason,
knowledge, morality, and truth. As a consequence, play loses its
centrality in culture and becomes tamed and repressed along with
other archaic values. Nietzsche defmes his Will to Power in terms of
prerational play; the world is conceived of as an enormous play of
forces, both creative and destructive. Since becoming is eternal and
can never resolve itself into either being or nothingness, the world as
incessant play of forces repeats itself endlessly, producing the same
combinations over an infinite time span. The will to power and its play
finally remain undefinable and groundless, or in positive terms

Prerational Power Play
293
constitute their own justification. But while in Nietzsche play and the
will to power remain undefinable, they are partly describable in terms
of each other: play is an unfolding of power, just as power is a
manifestation of play. Spariosu, therefore concludes that both terms
should be understood in their archaic sense, as a Dionysian ecstatic
and violent play of physical becoming, as aristocratic agon, and as
chance-necessity.4 Since knowledge functions as a tool of power, there
are not one but may realities that are the product of the agent's
interpretation. For Nietzsche, the world is a process through which the
agent (or "player") crates the world as he goes along. He challenges
the positivist assumption of the existence of "facts" independent of
interpretation.5 Human existence is governed not by a will to truth but
by a will to illusion, which is the foundation not merely of art but also
of metaphysics and science. His perspectivism is far from being a
modem
(e.g.
Feyerabend's)
pluralism,
a
benign
and
tolerant
acceptance of other points of view; its context remains antagonistic
throughout. For Nietzsche, just as for the ancient Greeks, truth and lie
are not moral categories but are used indifferently as long as they
further our purposes. Truth is not something to be found or discovered;
it is something that must be created and that gives a name to this
process of invention. Semblance, illusion, appearance, simulation, the
world ofthe senses, and becoming are valued over being, truth, reality,
essence, and the world ofthe spirit. Violent play, the aesthetic, and art
are valued over science, seriousness, and morality. The prerational
mentality does not disappear with the advent of the rational one but
becomes submerged and repressed, and the artist is replaced by the
artist-metaphysician and the artist-tyrant.
Like Nietzsche, Heidegger also stresses the link between power
and playas risk taking. He no longer perceives truth as an agreement
or conformity of knowledge with fact,6 but as the Greek aletheia
(un)concealment. Man is not the measure of all things as in Protagoas;
rather as in Plato, he is the toy of Being, and the most he can do is
play along (mitspielen).7 Heidegger defines Being itself as play or as
the interplay of ground and groundlessness, of sending forth and
withdrawal that cannot be rationalized or thought of in terms of
particular being: it is a sudden, spontaneous, and arbitrary unfolding.8
It is pointless to ask why Being plays its game of destiny (Geschick) as
it would be to ask why a child plays. Heidegger realizes that one
cannot overcome metaphysics but only walk away from it, yet in spite
of his straying into mysticism, the question remains whether he

294
Soft Logic
ultimately steers clear of the power-oriented mentality of Western
metaphysics, in particular form Nietzsche's "world play" (Weltspiel). 9
Although he no longer thinks of being as will, Heidegger sees it as an
inscrutable and incomprehensible force that overpowers man, playing
with him a dangerous and fearful gamelO whose stake is death. Like
Nietzsche, Heidegger thinks ofpower in prerational terms as arbitrary,
spontaneous, and violent play. Man is by nature violent, accepting the
challenge of the play of Being and venturing himself in this play.
There is no major religion that has conceived of divinity otherwise
than as power, even if the nature of this power is supposed to be
benevolent.II With Kant, Schiller, Nietzsche, and Heidegger, play has
gradually moved into a key position in modern philosophy. But this
makes also for an inherently unstable situation since even when one
group of players seems to have gained dominance, their victory turns
out to be only temporary.
Eugen
Fink,
therefore,
proposes
a
cosmological interpretation of the ''world game," (Weltspiel) which is
.already implicit in Heidegger, as a "play without players."12 While
Spariosu adopts Fink's dialectics of power and play, he reje<;ts Fink's
assumption that power is all there is. 13 Spariosu fails to tell us,
however, what would count in metaphysics as not being ·power-
oriented. While he treats both power and playas metaphors rather
than as concepts, it would nevertheless seem that if everything is both
power and play these designations are quite nleaningless. In Nietzsche,
human play, especially the play of the child or the artist, becomes a
cosmic metaphor, a poetic expression beyond all valuation. Indeed, it
is through its "unreality" that play manages to express its essential
relationship to the world of power. But to see human playas a cosmic
metaphor by no means amounts to saying that one can understand the
play of the world on the analogy of human play. The world reflects
itself merely in the unreality of human play and, therefore, can be
perceived only in a broken and fragmentary fashion. 14 The play of the
world must be understood, as in Heidegger, as a play of presence and
absence in which all beings emerge into presence and then disappear
again into the ground.less abyss of absence (which equally belongs to
the world). All beings are cosmic toys, and all players are in turn
playthings.
In Gadamer, play also serves as a nletaphor for descri1;>ing the
way in which the truth of Being occurs through man's hermeneutical
activity. The truth ofBeing is not something man arrives at through an
objective and rigorous scientific procedure, but rather is something

Prerational Power Play
295
that happens to him in the course of his history. Kant's high price for
establishing the autonomy of art is to give up all its traditional claims
to knowledge. In this manner, the artist is being deprived of his
traditional place in the community and loses most of his traditional
authority. For Gadamer, a work of art is an interplay of subject and
object, and the audience is part of this structure. The true being of a
work of art is the play of interpretation, and according to Gadamer,
this is the model for genuine understanding in all human sciences. 15
For him, man's relation to the world is fundamentally linguistic in
nature and hence intelligible,16 and the symbolic character of all art
reflects both its rational and its irrational character. Deleuze also
points out that the relationship between being and becoming, between
one and many, is to be understood in terms of a game played by an
artist, a child, and a god - three embodiments ofDionysus. 17 To affirm
chance is to know how to play, but modern man is a bad. player
because he counts on a great number of throws - on the use of
causality and probability to produce the right combination. To be a
good player is to recognize that the universe is purposeless, that it has
no cause nor goal, and hence to affirm chance in one throw. 18 What
we have here, of course, is· again the opposition between rational and
irrational play when, instead of the labor of opposition, we experience
the joy ofdestruction. The world ofbecoming is two-rather than three-
dimensional, and, therefore, one needs to ignore such traditional
logical principles as the excluded middle and the law of contradiction,
and one has to redefine the traditional notions of space, time, event,
cause, effect, necessity, chance, structure, sense - and play.19 The so-
called real world of economics, morality, and politics is as much a
matter ofsurface events as is the world ofthought and ofart.
Like Heidegger, Derrida identifies the foundation of Western
metaphysics with being, understood as presence (0usia). But unlike
Heidegger, he concentrates on "writing" (l 'ecriture) as what has
continually been excluded in a metaphysics of presence, and which,
therefore, is predominately a metaphysics of the spoken word, or the
logos. To the reactive structuralist notion of play, Derrida opposes a
Nietzschean joyous affirmation of the play of the world and the
innocence of becoming - a world of signs without truth, origin, or
fault. There is thus a prerational notion of play in Derrida who admits
that it is altogether impossible to choose between it and the rational
concept of play.20 Derrida conceives of deconstruction as a violent
subversive movement; the play ofdifferance is power play, and that of

296
Soft Logic
deconstruction a contest for authority, even as it claims to do away
with
all
authority.
Spariosu
shows
how
the
most
influential
contemporary artist-metaphysicians favor prerational over rational
play. They consider the ancient quarrel between philosophy and poetry
part of a larger contest between rational and prerational values in
Western culture. Plato challenges Homer and the tragic poets because
he sees them as influential spokesmen of a prerational mentality. Such
a mentality views the world as a ceaseless arbitrary play of forces
(unlimited becoming), whereas philosophy sets itself the task of
imposing a spiritual world of order, clarity, permanence, rationality,
and morality - the world of Being in the Platonic sense. Spariosu
observes how, since the end of the Age of Reason, prerational values
have made a gradual comeback in Western philosophy, and how this
has brought about a reversal of Platonic and Aristotelian modes of
thinking and a return to archaic presocratic speculation.
The history ofthe play concepts demonstrates a parallel reversal.
There is playas a serious object of scientific investigation, and there is
the playful aesthetic attitude toward one's object of study or
investigation.
Spariosu admits, however,
that the rational play
concepts are likely to continue dominating the prerationalones,
despite their being challenged in biology, physics, and the philosophy
of science.21 Thus, the theory of evolution is based on a "struggle for
life" metaphor leading to natural selection by an interplay of necessity
and choice. The tendency has been to move away from playas
imitation (mimesis)
and emphasize its exploratory and creative
character. But while in our postmodern world play is assigned a
productive role,
its prerational origins remain
in
force;
it
is
predominately seen as an orderly, rule-governed process that reflects a
rational
mentality.
Spariosu
points
out,
however,
that
since
competition has always been a dominant value in Western mentally,
its scientific vindication was bound to be met with general approval.
Still, our rational mentality focuses
only on certain kinds of
competition - those that are nonviolent and rule-governed. Spariosu
shows that the concept of natural selection as the interplay of
randomness and design has implications that go beyond science. The
reason Darwin's ideas caused such an uproar when they were first
announced was that they presented the living world as a world of
change, determined by natural forces in place of a world determined
by a divine plan. Many people find the idea that we are living in a
meaningless and fortuitous world frightening and repellent. Order,

Prerational Power Play
297
prediction, and certainty are crucial to science, and chance means
uncertainly, unpredictability, and chaos. For most scientists, Darwin's
theory of evolution by natural selection is not just another hypothesis
but an incontrovertible law ofnature.
Society has a vested interest in rational thought as ensuring
order, stability, predictability, and facility of communication. Science
sees itself: and is seen by others as a neutral and objective pursuit of
knowledge and truth, as an enlightened champion of freedom and
progress. But like art and religion, science is engaged in a contest for
authority and power. While its claims as a principal source of
knowledge and truth have been frequently challenged by outsiders,
science has been able to resist internal pressures much better than
either philosophy or art. Reflecting institutional pressures, this has
been accomplished by a neo-Kantian strategy and an "as if' approach
to knowledge. While Newton's famous dictum hypotheses nonjingo (I
do not feign hypotheses) implied that the purpose of science is to
discover, not to create, the laws of nature, physicists at the beginning
of this century maintained just the opposite. They no longer claimed
merely to disclose an objective reality but admitted to inventing it as
they went along. Much like mathematics, physics has worked with
such deliberate fictions as force, the atom, and more recently,
subatomic particles.22 Influential physicists like Planck and Einstein
started as Machean positivists but then nl0ved on to a Schillerian neo-
Kantianisnl, which has been largely ignored by contemporary Anglo-
American historians and philosophers of science. For Vaihinger,
thought processes and constructs are not rational but primarily
biological phenomena; many ofthem are admittedly false assumptions
that contradict not only experience, but also each other. They have,
however,
a
practical
value
in
our
struggle
for
survival-and
dominance,23 and Vaihinger explains that thought in the course of
time has gradually forgotten its original function and has turned
theoretical and contemplative. It is now practiced for its own sake.
Fictions for Vaihinger are mental strategies forged in the struggle for
survival yet, contrary to Nietzsche, he manages to suppress these
irrational aspects and to justify them on utilitarian grounds.
The great nlajority of theoretical physicists likewise stick to
rational values. But while ~epler, Newton, and the classical physicists
had an unshakable faith in the rational order of the world, for Max
Planck24 faith is at the root of science, as it is at the root of religion.
He explicitly links scientific progress to the inlagination and the

298
Soft Logic
irrational. For Einstein, the "real world" is a creation of a rational God
and this makes it possible of us to understand the law according to
which God has made the world.25 Our concepts and conceptual
reactions are free creations ofthe human intellect26 and, in the manner
of Vaihinger, Einstein stresses the purely fictitious character that
distinguishes the new physics from the classical one. He objects to the
positivist mode oftheorizing in science that has, under the influence of
Mach, given rise to what Einstein calls a phenomenal, as opposed to a
metaphysical physics. Metaphysical physics recognizes the need for a
free, constructive, theoretical element that goes beyond a mere
ordering of empirical material. He deplores the "fear of metaphysics"
of such philosophers of science as Bertrard Russell,27 arguing that if
physical concepts are free mental creations then the imagination,
rather than logic and experience, have a decisive role in their
production. Imagination is more important than knowledge, and
Einstein
assumes in the Kantian
fashion
that ther
exists an
unbridgeable gap between the two. The empirical world forever defies
reason, and the fact that the world turns out after all to be
comprehensible is nothing less than a miracle.28 In true neo-:Kantian
fashion, Einstein considers even such basic scientific cat40ries as
time, space, and causality to be of merely limited and relative validity.
These constructs are only real in the sense in which a game can be
said to be real: its rules are operative only within a "playing space"
(Spielraum) and the duration of the game. Occam's razor is explained
by the fact that a conceptual system, like a game, requires the greatest
possible economy and simplicity of rules and concepts to account for
the greatest number of situations. Such a demand is an aesthetic one
and has been imposed on works of art from Aristotle onwards. It is
what philosophers of science even today mean when they talk about_
the aesthetic criteria of science. Despite his polemic against Mach's
positivism, however, Einstein embraces the rational assumptions of
science and so does Planck. Einstein adopts the Kantian distinction
between the unstructured play of the imagination and the rule-
governed operation of the rational faculty that imposes a certain
(arbitrary) order on this chaotic world. In attempting to solve this
cosmic puzzle, the scientist in a sense plays a divine game, and it is
this religions feeling that compels Einstein to oppose some of the
theoretical principles ofquantum mechanics (indeterminacy, statistical
rather than causal laws, etc.) at the risk of becoming a lonely voice in
the scientific community. As in the case ofPlanck, this is not so much
, .
. ,

Prerational Power Play
299
a scientific as an ethical and aesthetic choice. It does not seem to affect
scientific practice because the religious and the nonreligious scientist
remain part of the same community and share the same power-
oriented
institutional
goals
and
tnethods.
Einstein
rejects
the
prerational view of playas chance that regards the cosmos as being
due to an irrational dice game. He takes it to be the creation of a
rational
God,
a
puzzle
or
labyrinth
with
a
complicated
but
decipherable code.29 At the same time, however, Einstein admits the
fictitious character ofhis own theoretical concepts.
SchrOdinger also views science as a form of play. He emphasizes
that
the
choice
between
a
determinist
and
an
indeterminist
interpretation of natural science is a matter of personal taste that
cannot be settled by either rational argument or experience. His
aesthetic and relativist approach is justified by emphasizing the
historical character of all truth claims in science. Science is not an
objective and perennial body of truth; on the contrary, not unlike
poetry, literature, or music, it is the product of an age and changes
with time and culture. Scientific knowledge depends as much on the
personality of the researcher and on his specific cultural traditions as
on objective and impersonal observations. Even a general consensus of
the scientific community is no conclusive evidence for objectivity,
since it merely reflects common goals, instruments, and techniques of
research. There is a dominant world view and various lines of activity
become attractive because they happen to be the fashion of the day,
whether' in politics, art, or science. Among the fashionable ideas that
dominate our own age, SchrOdinger emphasizes evolution and our
positivist bias to exclude from scientific discussion everything that
cannot in principle be subjected to experimental verification. Thus, by
adopting a relativist and aesthetic approach, and by viewing science as
a specific historical and cultural product, Schrodinger anticipates
much of the work of N. R. Hanson, Thomas Kuhn, and Paul Feyera-
bend. Heisenberg is likewise aware of the prerational origins of
modem atomic theory as a ceaseless play of physical forces. But while
his ontology is admittedly prerational, his epistemology remains neo-
Kantian, not unlike that of Vaihinger. For Heisenberg, the world is
fundamentally unknowable; reason is not a mirror of nature but a tool
in man's struggle for existence. The scientist is not a purely objective
and disinterested observer but an active participant in this process.
Quantum theory reveals the arbitrary character of the Cartesian
division between subject and object (res cogitans and res extensa). The

300
Soft Logic
Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics starts from the
premise that natural science does not simply describe and explain
nature, but is part of the interaction between nature and ourselves; it
describes nature as
it
is
exposed to
our
particular mode of
questioning.30 Heisenberg agrees with Schrodinger that all scientific
truth is relative or subjective and that science is a specific human
product, the result of particular human interests. He suggests that
Einstein and the other determinist scientists are reluctant to accept the
Copenhagen interpretation of quantum theory because they still
operate under the premise of a Cartesian division, according to which
the external world (res extensa) "really exists." Actually, however,
such an approach is more like an artistic style that invokes specific
idealizations essential for human understanding.
.. But while Heisenberg emphasizes the similarity of epistemic
approaches in the arts and sciences, he still stresses their rational
quality. Bohr, Heisenberg, and the advocates of the Copenhagen
school (no less than Einstein, or for that matter, D'errida) remain in
the Wdstern nletaphysical tradition precisely because they adhere,
openly or tacitly, to the power-oriented mentality of that tradition in
either its rational or irrational form.31 The physicists vacillate between
a prerational ontology that focuses on ceaseless becoming, and a
rational epistemology that assumes a determinate and orderly nature of
reality. They adopt a neo-Kantian "as if' approach to knowledge
because it enables them to argue that, within such a" flowing totality,
constructs like the atomic theory have a place, if only as a
simplification or abstraction and valid only within a limited context.
David Bohm32 traces the idea of a flowing totality of being (which
bears
a
remarkable
resemblance
to
Heidegger's
''world-game''
(Weltspiel)) back to Heraclitus and to Eastern holistic modes of
thinking. Like Heidegger and the other artist-metaphysicians, Bohm
justifies this idea aesthetically, while at the same time holding on to
his rationalist assumptions in science. The artist-metaphysicians
always attempt to impose Being upon Becoming, and they discover
ways to impose law and order upon the ceaseless play of arbitrary
physical forces in order to subordinate such play to their own rational
aims.
It is Feyerabend who questions science as an essentially rational
enterprise. Adapting a playful approach, he proceeds as if he shared
the values of the rationalists (progress, objective criteria,for scientific
knowledge, logical consistency, etc.) but only in order to show that

Prerational Power Play
301
these values do not really motivate scientific practice. He replaces his
own
earlier
methodological
anarchism
by
something
he
calls
"Dadaism" in order to emphasize the playful and aesthetic nature of
his antitotalitarianism. But in doing so, he represses the prerational
and violent aspects of this power play. Feyerabend denies that any
rationalist methodology can ever adequately account for scientific
practice which, like nature and life itself: is in continuous flux and
remains unpredictable. For him, as for Nietzsche, facts do not create a
theory; the theory creates the facts.
Contrary to the prevalent
rationalist beliefs, scientific theories are not different interpretations of
the same impersonal data; they create their own data. One cannot,
therefore, say that new theories conflict with reality, merely that they
run counter to earlier and more established theories that have already
produced the empirical support for what is taken to be real.
Feyerabend argues that scientific knowledge develops the same way
infants acquire their language skills - by playing games with new
words and concepts. Since science is essentially historical practice or a
fashion
of the times,
it may succeed even
when
it
employs
contradictory and irrational methods. Scientific theories often prevail
when they proceed counterinductively (from speculation to fact) and
when they ignore consistency. A theory may succeed, not because ofits
increased empirical content or because it has proved a more
satisfactory explanation of the phenomena, but merely because of
favorable social and cultural circumstances, or at times, purely by
chance.33 Discovery is largely irrational and is not due to any
conscious method; indeed the distinction between science and art or
between science and religion ("myth") turns out to be specious.
Particularly during times of upheaval, style, elegance of expression,
and simplicity of presentation become important features of our
knowledge. Like other artist-metaphysicians, Feyerabend operates with
aesthetic and relativist
figures
of speech;
he
emphasizes that
rationalism is only one tradition among several others in Western
thought. Knowledge is the product of a ceaseless contrast between
interpretations, the accumulation of mutually incompatible and even
incommensurable alternatives. Nothing is ever settled in science and
what does seem established is due merely to the suppression of
opponents. For Feyerabend, Western science is a kind ofmyth that has
defeated and replaced its earlier competitors. Today science reigns
supreme because its practitioners are unable to understand and
unwilling to condone different ideologies, and because they have the

302
Soft Logic
power to enforce their wishes.34 He demands that no tradition be given
an unfair advantage and (unlike Nietzsche) he has faith in the
democratic instincts of private citizens to settle such matters. But
Spariosu rightly points out that a democratic society will inevitably
favor rational values since they tend to make life more predictable and
safe. While Feyerabend's pluralism is predominately rational, in an
agnostic world balance comes about by an equilibrium of forces, not by
a sense of fair play. It is in the very nature of such a world to be
unstable,
and to move back
and
forth
between
anarchy
and
totalitarianism. Feyerabend is caught between his irrational impulses
and his rational upbringing.
Thomas Kuhn35 is fully aware that what he describes as a
scientific revolution is a power mechanism that reflects an "essential
tension" between tradition and limited innovation. He justifies this in
terms of a neo-Darwinist notion of progress. There is a sense, he
believes, in which Copernicus is "better" than Ptolomy and Einstein
than Newton. He admits, however, that what fmally prevails after such
revolutions (whether political or scientific) have taken place is the
same unchanged power oriented mentality. While Kuhn's model of
scientific practice takes its inspiration from the history of art, he
emphasizes that aesthetic turns in science are important only during
its rare revolutions, not during normal practice. The process of
normalization involves a rejection of aestheticism and of play, that is,
a return to a more authoritarian and power-oriented state of affairs.
But the kind of aestheticism and play that even extraordinary science
favors is that of Kant and Schiller, rather than of Nietzsche and
Heidegger. Scientists like Einstein, Schrodinger, and Heisenberg value
"beauty" in a new theory, but by this they mean unity, consistency,
neatness, symmetry, and simplicity -
and these are all rational
aesthetic criteria originally imposed by metaphysics on the fine arts.
Even those scholars (like Kuhn and Gerald Holton) who recognize the
"essential tension" between the rational and the prerational in science
never question the need for "law and order" as an essential condition
ofthe scientific enterprise. That is why even during times of upheaval
scientific discourse remains essentially rational, and the few dissenting
voices are largely ignored. Spariosu points out, however, that the
conflict between rational and prerational mentality (and between
rational and prerational play) is as fierce today as it has always been.

Notes
Prerational Power Play
303
1 Mihai I, Spariosu, Dionysus Reborn, Play and the Aesthetic Dimension
in Modern Philosophy and Scientific Discourse, Ithaca, NY and London:
Cornell University Press, 1989, p. x.
2 Ibid., p. 7.
3 Ibid., p. 66.
4 Ibid., p. 91.
5 Ibid., p. 92.
6 Martin Heidegger, "The Origin ofthe Artwork," (1935-36), in Poetry,
Language, Thought, trans. A. Hofstadter, New York, NY: 1977, p. 48.
7 Spariosu, Dionysus Reborn, p. 119.
8 Martin Heidegger, The Principle ofGround, (Der Satz vom Grund),
Pfullingen, 1957, p. 187.
9 Spariosu, Dionysus Reborn, p. 120.
10 Heidegger, The Principle ofGround, pp. 60-61.
11 Spariosu, Dionysus Reborn, p. 123 n75.
12 Eugen Fink, Spiel als Weltsymbol, Stuttgart: 1960, pp. 205-206.
13 Spariosu, Dionysus Reborn, p. 128 n 78.
14 Fink, Spiel als Weltsymbol, p. 238.
15 Spariosu, Dionysus Reborn, p. 137.
16 Hans Georg Gadamer, Truth and Method, trans. Garrett Barden and
John Cumming, New York, NY: 1975, p. 473
17 Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche and Philosophy, trans. H. Tomlinson, New
York, NY: 1983, p. 25.
1.8 Spariosu, Dionysis Reborn, p. 146.
19 Ibid., p. 148.
20 Jacques Derrida, "Scientific Sign and Play in the Discourse ofthe
Human Sciences," in Writing and Difference, Chicago, IL: 1978, p. 293.
21 Spariosu, Dionysis Reborn, p. 166.
22 Ibid., p. 245.
23 Ibid., p. 247.
24 Max Planck, The Phi/sophy ofPhysics, New York, NY: 1936, p. 78.
25 David Bohm, Physics in My Generation, London: 1956, p. 205.
26 Albert Einstein, "On the Method ofTheoretical Physics," in Ideas and
Opinions, trans. S. Bargmann, London: 1954, p. 272.
27 Albert Einstein, "Remarks on Russell," in Ideas and Opinions, p. 24.
28 Albert Einstein, "Physics and Reality," in Ideas and Opinions, p. 292.

304
Soft Logic
29 Spariosu, Dionysis Reborn, p. 272.
30 Werner Heisenberg, Physics and Philosophy, New York, NY: 1958,
p.80.
31 Spariosu, Dionysis Reborn, p 285 n76.
32 David BOhn1, Wholeness and the Implicate Order, London: 1980.
33 Spariosu, Dionysis Reborn, p. 296.
34 Paul Feyerabend, Against Method, London: 1975, p. 299.
35 Thomas Kuhn, The Structure ofScientific Revolutions, Chicago, IL:
1962, 1970.

Chapter Twenty-Three
Postmodernist Discoveries
Megill shows how under modem conditions Nietzsche's will to power
becomes self-defeating. His approach to Nietzsche, Heidegger, and
Foucault is a product of his reading of Derrida. 1 It is with Nietzsche
that the "failure" of the Enlightenment becomes manifest, and we are
reduced to seeing "art" or "language" or "discourse" or ''text'' as
constituting the primary realm of human experience. The work of art
creates its own reality, and so does language/discourse. Each makes a
world that ostensibly only it represents.2 The intellectual problenls that
the Enlightenment project to construct a science of society nlodeled
after natural science gave rise to are most clearly reflected in the
writings of Kant who separated the theoretical, the practical, and the
aesthetic from each other. In Germany, Romanticism started as an
aesthetic movement but soon turned into a comprehensive and explicit
world view. Yet whereas the Romantics entertained a great deal of
hope for the future, Nietzsche and his successors did not. Nietzsche
sees the world in which we live as a work of art created by ourselves.
He became the originator ofthe aesthetic metacritique oftruth wherein
the ''work ofart" or ''the text" or "language" is seen as establishing the
ground for truth's possibility.3 At the same time, however, he
considers art not as a vehicle of truth but of illusion. He extends the
notion of art as illusion to the whole conceptual world, and views
metaphysics, religion, morality, and science as products of an
underlying aesthetic will to falsification. 4 In Nietzsche's view, men

306
Soft Logic
cannot bear the full burden of realty, and only in illusion does culture
flourish or even survive.
In the realm ofthe aesthetic, we engage in the willing suspension
of disbelief: There is a distrust of conceptual knowledge, a feeling that
it is a defect of concepts that they do not give us contact with the
immediacy of things themselves, and a related tendency to view
concepts as subjective projections upon nature. Concepts are seen as
bare schemata that rob reality of its multiplicity,
and human
experience of its original richness and vitality. Man's much vaulted
abstractions tum out to be metaphors in disguise, and his language, far
from embodying logical truth, reflects rather his innate talent for
aesthetic creation.5 Truth tells us nothing about reality but only about
man's
aesthetic
appreciation
of reality.
Whereas
the
Kantian
categories are derived from the human mind and are conceived as
being the same for all men, in Nietzsche the process of"constructing"
reality is portrayed as an individual and even arbitrary matter. Thus,
Nietzsche tells us that "truth" is essentially the creation of the
language we employ. The linguists -realm in question is an aesthetic
one, language itself being a product of man's predilection for the
making ofmetaphors. Theoretical man believes that he can correct the
world by means of knowledge, while Nietzsche points out that the
sphere of solvable problems is a narrow one. Instead of living by a
common creative myth that would give our culture a frrm foundation
and protect it from the dissolving effects of the historical process, we
try to live by a passive optinlisnl and by faith in knowledge.6 Nietzsche
thus tends to the view that there is no correct interpretation, and that
all interpretations are ultimately aesthetic. Language is a prison from
which escape is utterly impossible, even though language is nothing
other than a system of interpretations or a set of illusions. In Twilight
ofIdols, Nietzsche tells us, "1 fear that we are not getting rid of God
because we still believe in grammar."7 Myth, for Nietzsche, is an
aesthetic illusion to which we submit while still knowing it to be an
illusion. All ground is lost, and we are left with a free-floating,
aesthetic universe. This, however, is incapable of either proof or
disproof, and it, therefore, becomes a free decision whether to accept
Nietzsche's perspective or to reject it.
Heidegger's philosophy is in many respects a radicalization of
Nietzsche and, in Heidegger, the anti-analytical spirit is given free
play. Megill argues that one is -able to regard the later Heidegger as
mistaken, and still hold that he opens up important perspectives.

Postmodernist Discoveries
307
Whereas in Anglo-American philosophy the dominant orientation has
been empirical and analytic, Nietzsche and Heidegger provide us with
an intellectual articulation of the assumptions underlying modernism
and postmodemism.8 There are connections with the work of Kuhn9
and Feyerabend,JO but they are rarely allowed to breach the dominant
notions of method in natural science. 11 Heidegger, on the other hand,
is concerned not with knowledge and cognition but with the art of
thinking itself. His thinking is always "under way," and he constantly
wants to go back, to go home to some earlier, less articulate, more
authentic state or condition. He moves ambiguously between the realm
ofthought and specific, German, social and political conditions at the
time of writing. Technology is conceived by him as an anonymous
force that is gaining ever more control over our lives. Man projects a
conceptual grid upon the world and attends only to what can fit the
grid. Megill points out that, for those who have difficulty in seeing
why anyone could take Heidegger seriously, much of the answer is to
be found in the fact that his nostalgia and idealistic technological
catastrophism, do seem in many of its aspects to accord with our
twentieth century experience. The Holocaust, nuclear weapons, the
growing technologization and bureaucratization of modem life - all
these realities seem to confirm Heidegger's text, or at least can be
convincingly interpreted on his terms. 12
Heidegger sees art as a counterforce to the manipulative forces of
technology. The Greeks kept themselves open to the experience of art,
and Heidegger envisages a return to this openness. 13 Our own relation
to art, by contrast, has been turned into "aesthetics," that is, into yet
another post-Cartesian science. The redemption will come (if it comes)
through an integration of technology and art. Though Heidegger
rejects such a designation, what we have here is a thinking that is
essentially aesthetic. The notion of truth in art comes as close as
anything to being the central theme of Heidegger's later thought. Art
serves to sensitize us to realities of which we nlight not otherwise be
aware. It is language/thought that brings the whole human world into
existence, and the aesthetic implications of this view become even
clearer when one notes how persistently Heidegger attempts to identify
language with poetry.14 Since he treats fiction as if it were truth, it
attains the same exemption from conventional logical criticism that a
consistent religious fideism has. But like fideism, Heidegger makes
statements regarding his own enterprise and the world that an
"ordinary" perspective is forced to reject. He is satisfied to counsel

308
Soft Logic
"composure" (Gelassenheit) with regard to whatever forces happen to
dominate the human scene. It is entirely in the spirit of this response
that he declares in a Der Spiegel interview of 1966 (published in 1976,
after his death) that only a God can save us. Megill rightly points out
that those who think that the forces of technology are utterly beyond
human control are likely to find that this is indeed the case. 15 While
Heidegger is a poor guide to those who want to understand how the
ordinary world operates, much of what he says can, nevertheless,
plausibly be considered true.
Whereas Heidegger's quest ends in pietism, Foucault is a radical
activist who engages in a relentless struggle with the world. He is a
revolutionary who frequently denied even being a philosopher, and
whose friends in the late 1940s and early 1950s were mostly painters,
writers, and musicians. Foucault denies that there is any ultimate
philosophical or social truth, or that there can be a final end to
oppression. There is no such thing as a historical past "as is really
happened" and, as Ranke wanted to rediscover, and in general, no
such thing as "objective knowledge." Foucault rejects all forms of
generalized discourse as misleading, and puts forward no vision of
happiness or liberation of his own. His vision of structuralism is an
attack on the Cartesian cognito and its contemporary successor, the
phenomenological subject. Viewed in this way, Foucault can be seen
as continuing the later Heidegger's attack on the whole tradition of
Western
science
and
technology.
There
are
no
facts,
only
interpretations. 16
Megill
emphasizes
that,
until
the
advent
of
postmodemism, it was customary to read Nietzsche, Marx, and Freud
on the model of "depth" interpretation - that is, on the model of a
search for "deep structures." It was customary to read these thinkers as
engaging in an attempt to find the will to power underlying the moral
ideal, the social force underlying the ideological fetish, the latent wish
underlying the manifest dream. But this is not the way Foucault reads
them. Interpretation does not illuminate some "thing" that passively
allows itself to be expounded. Rather it seizes upon a "meaning"
already in place and, consequently, "depth" itself is shown to be
deceptive. The task of interpretation, which would otherwise have
ended in the discovery of a foundation, becomes an infinite task of
self-reflection. 17 Postmodernism teaches us to look at a work of art not
in order to discern a meaning that lies "beneath" it, but rather to enjoy
it for what it is with nothing concealed, no intention to be discovered,
only the ultimate play ofwords itself. Foucault is viewing the world as

Postmodernist Discoveries
309
if it were discourse, and holds that every science is an ideology, not in
the strict sense of its being a reflection of the interests of some
particular class, but in the broader sense of its being immediately
caught up with reflections of power. Such "power," however, like
everything else in this rhetoric, remains an ungraspable entity.
Whereas Nietzsche had considered the will to power to be a universal
principle to which even the search for truth is subject, his own project
claims to be an articulation of truth. A similar objection applies to
Foucault who tells us that there is no such thing as a "genuine"
rhetoric, but does so in discourse that by this very argument cannot be
genuine.
Megill concludes, therefore, that such writings are intended to be
provocative rather than instructive. It was Derrida who in a 1967
interview had stated that he takes the risk of not wishing to say (or to
mean) anything. I8 It is no accident that at crucial points he moves into
interrogative or suppositional modes, thus distancing himself from the
text and destroying the apparently declarative force of what he is
saying. Whereas Nietzsche, Heidegger, and Foucault reject the extant
world but admire ideal (nostalgic or imaginative) alternatives, Derrida
seems to reject the alternatives as well.
The "play of ironic
seriousness" we find in Derrida renders explicit a prevalent attitude in
nlodemist and postmodernist art, and it can help us to come to grips
with certain assumptions pervasive in works of art in our time. 19
Derrida has become a central figure in a storm of controversy
concerned with the question of how literary texts ought to be
interpreted. Inevitably, however, it is also concerned with how we
ought to live our lives. Derrida attacks the distinction between the
aesthetic and the nonaesthetic domain that is crucial in the work of
such mondemist writers as Yeats, Pound, and Eliot. Postmodernism
has consistently called in question the distinction between "art" and
"reality." Works of art in the postmodemist mode demonstrate an
ontological concern, continually asking what it is to be a sculpture, a
play, a novel, or a painting. Already Nietzsche had used the notion of
art both in its narrow and in its wide sense; there are artists ofart, and
there are also artists of politics, science, and religion. The usual
distinction between "art" and "reality" is inadequate because the
reality
within
which
we
live
is
itself partly the
product
of
art/interpretationllanguage. This is how reading and writing become
"originating" operatives in Derrida: they involve not the discovery of
truth but its invention. Derrida's writings are putative; none comes to

310
Soft Logic
a disclosure of truth. The task of writing is not to say something, to
make a point and be done with it. On the contrary, writing is its own
justification.
Derrida's philosophical investigations, like Wittgenstein's, are a
crisscrossing of territory, the expedition of a mapmaker or land
surveyor, not of a traveler from one place to another. One is also
reminded of Heidegger's Holzwege and that side of Freud that makes
analysis interminable.20 All contexts are constructed; none is simply
given, and there is no single thing that we can designate as, say
"French
intellectual
life."
Instead
one
finds
a
multiplicity of
disorganized competing strands, and how we decide to organize them
depends on what we are interested in. As with Heidegger and
Foucault, an initial engagement with Phenomenology appears almost a
precondition for the aestheticist move. Derrida no longer takes
seriously the distinction between scientific and nonscientific discourse,
or between the literal truth ofscience and the metaphorical truth ofart.
For him criticism and creation are not separate, and he creates a
literary/philosophical collage that one must read as a work of art.
What is left is the writing of dreams, a fiction without either truth or
falsity. Derrida here describes a literature that refuses to "represent"
reality. His own thesis is that, in the course ofWestem history, writing
has been "abased" in favor of speech.21 Speech stands for immediacy,
or more precisely, for intelligibility, for the possibility of contact with
truth, with the "transcendentally signified." Writing stands for a
particular kind of secondariness -
but one that recognizes that
secondariness is all we have. Derrida's grammatological thesis seems
a shorthand version of condemning the Western tradition for its
commitment to the ultimate possibilities of literal truth. Derrida sees
the Socratic rejection ofwriting22 as dominating the entire subsequent
history of the West. Speech is presence, writing is the dismissal of
presence, and Socrates' dismissive view ofwriting parallels his equally
dismissive view of art.
Derrida concludes that reading cannot
legitimately transgress the text towards something other than itself:
toward
a
referent
(a
realty
that
is
metaphysical,
historical,
psychological, etc.), or toward a signified outside the text whose
context would take place outside language.23 He r.ejects the Kantian
notion that aesthetic function is something separable from the serious
truth ofscience.
There is the question of interpretation - the whole process of
writing
that,
in
view
of the
inaccessibility
of any
ultimate

Postmodernist Discoveries
311
interpretation becomes an end in itself. Writing and interpretation
come to be valued not because they can reveal to us the light of truth,
but
because
they
are
themselves
truth.
Thus,
they
have
a
"purposiveness without purpose" analogous to that which Kant found
in aesthetic objectivity. Derrida's move beyond Kant is to argue that
"purposiveness without purpose" pervades all we do. His move beyond
Hegel and Heidegger is to substitute an explicit theory for their
conviction that in one way or another art gives us access to the truth of
being.24 If God is dead, then we all live in secondariness, and the
essence ofsuch secondariness is writing. Derrida (who was born into a
Sephardic Jewish family living in EI Biar, a suburb or Algiers) finds a
model of such writing in Judaism, and especially in Lureanic
Kabbalism, which could make a given text mean whatever the believer
wanted it to mean. In this manner, the prioirty of text over
interpretation is eliminated, and the text really becomes a pretext. In
his own "method" of dealing with texts, Derrida stands as a successor
to Kabbalah, with one crucially important difference. For whereas the
Kabbalist sought an interpretation of words and letters (Gematria) in
order to find a way to God, Derrida takes the manipulation of words
and letters as something close to an end in itself For Derrida there is
nothing beyond the letter, no fmal voice speaking a long-concealed
truth. Interpretation heconles "literature," an end in itself It is easy to
see why Derrida should frnd Freud's enterprise congenial. As Rie:f5
observes, Freud places us in an incredible world, a world in which
events that never occurred control those that do. Derrida makes clear
how hard it is to fmd in Freud's various analytical endeavors a reality
prior to its own interpretation. The frame turns out to be crucial to
being a work of art, for it is the frame that separates art from what is
not art. Exposing the arbitrary division between what is art and what is
not art, by focusing on the frame or paradigm, calls into question the-
whole tradition of aesthetics as it has been developed by Kant and
Hegel.
Discourse creates its own reality, but Megill warns us not to take
these aestheticist theses too literally. One way of avoiding these
difficulties is by the simple expedient ofceasing to speak ofthe "truth"
of art altogether, and this is indeed what both Foucault and Derrida
seem to suggest. We should be equally suspicious of the notion of the
"creative lie," for if one adopts in a cavalier fashion the view that
everything is discourse or text or fiction, then the realities are
trivialized. Real people who really died in the gas chambers of

312
Soft Logic
Auschwitz become so much discourse. With this in mind. Megill
suggest that we ought to read these "prophets of extremity" not as
guides, but ironically as opponents. We ought to view the work of the
artist as existing in a state of tension with the given. There is,
however, something important to be learned from these philosophers
of paradox, for in attacking the primacy of literal truth, they are
denying that there is "one true way." Nietzsche and his followers call
certainty ,into question, and return us to a situation when there is no
longer one, single, literal truth, one privileged meaning. We ought to
look with suspicion at the notion of a single, privileged truth and the
corresponding distinction between the possessors of such truth - the
chosen - and those who are not chosen. Such exclusion becomes
unbearable when each community has the power to destroy the other
as becomes increasingly the case.
Notes
1 Allan Megill, Prophets ofExtremity, Nietzsche, Heidegger, Foucault,
Derrida, Berkeley, Los Angeles, CA, London: Univeristy ofCalifornia Press,
1985,p.xi.
2 Ibid., p. 3.
3 Ibid., p. 33.
4 Walter Kaufinan, ed., The Will to Power, trans. Walter Kaufinan and
R.J. Hollingsdale, New York, NY: Random House, 1967.
5 Megill, Prophets ofExtremity, p. 50.
6 Ibid., p. 75.
7 Friedrich Nietzsche, Twighlight ofthe Idols, trans. R. J. Hollingdale,
Harmondsworth, England: Penguin Books 1961, sec. 5.
8 Megill, The Will to Power, p. 109.
9 Thomas S. Kuhn, The Structure ofScientific Revolutoins, Chicago, IL:
Chicago University Press, 1970, p. 111.
10 Paul Feyerabend, Against Method: Outline ofan Anarchistic Theory
ofKnowledge, London: NLB, 1975, p. 295.
11 Joseph Griinfeld, Changing Rational Standards, Lanham, NY,
London: University Press ofAmerica, 1985.
12 Megill, The Will to Power, p. 140.
13 Ibid., p. 144.

Postmodernist Discoveries
313
14 Martin Heidegger, On the Way to Language, trans. Peter D. Hertz,
New York, NY: Harper & Row, 1971, p. 59.
15 Megill, The Will to Power, p. 180.
16 Michel Foucault, L 'archeologie du savoir, Paris: Gallin1ard, 1969, p.
65. English trans. Alan Sheridan under the title The Archeology of
Knowledge, New York, NY: Random House, Pantheon Books, 1972, p. 47.
17 Megill, The Will to Power, p. 224.
18 Jacques Derrida, Positions, Paris: Minuit, 1972, p. 24. English trans.
by Alan Bass under the title Positions, Chicago, IL: University ofChicago
Press, 1981, p. 14.
19 Megill, The Will to Power, p. 272.
20 Ibid., p. 272.
21 Derrida, Positions, p. 72, trans. P. 53.
22 Phaedrus 274c - 276e.
23 Jacques Derrida, De la grammatologie, Paris: Minuit, 1974, p. 27.
English trans. by Gayatri Spivak under the title OfGrammatology, Baltimore,
MD: John Hopkins University Press, 1976, p. 28.
24 Megill, The Will to Power, p. 305.
25 Philip Rie:f, The Mind ofthe Moralist, Garden City, NY: Doubleday
Anchor, 1961.

Chapter Twenty-Four
The Crisis of Modernity
The seventeenth century anticipation of unimpaired progress and the
early universal confidence of modernity are long-gone. Decades of
revolution in art, music, and literature have promulgated widely
divergent
views
of what
art
is,
have
denied
the
validity
of
representation, and have left the uncritical public entirely at sea. The
advances in scientific understanding of the chemical, neural, and
behavioral determinants of human experience and conduct, despite
their benefits, make belief in
the
freedom,
responsibility,
and
rationality ofthe human individual harder and harder to maintain. It is
now for an individual in the modernized world difficult to understand,
let alone control, the manifold moral, social, and economic conditions
that determine his or her life. The West is plagued by seemingly
unsurmountable
social
problems,
such
as
crime,
drug
abuse,
alcoholism, and teenage pregnancy that repeatedly raise in the public
mind the question of how free the individual is or should be. Despite
the great power and seeming stability of some of the Western
democracies,
anti-humanist
solutions
are
always
tempting
and
increasingly so. Globally, of course, humanism is the exception and
not the rule, but Cahoone argues that the modern world is caught in a
dilemma, and that modernity is eroding its own cultural foundations.
Philosophy
has
been
declared
dead,
most
noticeably
by
the
philosophers
themselves.
People
outside
philosophy
find
it
increasingly meaningless and irrelevant to their own social and
intellectual concerns. Those within philosophy seek new ways to

316
Soft Logic
reduce philosophy to literary criticism or conceptual therapy, to
deconstruct, analyze and generally define their own discipline out of
existence.! Contemporary philosophy's sense that it is cut off from its
past, that pre-twentieth century philosophy is out of date, naive, and
irrelevant to present concerns, mirrors the indifference to history that
is characteristic of modem culture in general. There has been a
progressive self-undermining of a problematic but important strain of
modem culture, and this has brought about the emergence of an anti-
culture, a delegitimization or undermining of the value of knowledge,
communication, and the sense of significance of human acts and
artifacts.
In the ongoing debate over the nature ofmodernity, the choice of
the starting points tends to depend on which principles are taken to be
constitutive of recent modernity, that is, of late nineteenth century
culture. The concept of modernity is based on the conviction that we
are heirs to a relatively coherent, modem, Western heritage of ideas. It
assumes that the technological mastery over nature, democracy, the
supremacy of the natural state, modem science, secularism, and
humanism all cohere in some way, despite their differences and
alleged contradictions.2 Cahoone assumes that the new artistic,
literary,
and philosophical movements are within the orbit of
modernity, but that they represent the critical response of late against
early modernity. He follows Adorno and Horkheimer's3 dialectical
theory of modernity as negating its own fundamental principles when
apprehending the seeming paradoxes ofthe late-modem world. It is by
no means clear that our arts have become more creative or profound,
or that democratic nations are more capable of conducting their
affairs. Neither is it self-evident that technology and the military might
have made the West more secure. For American conservatives, the
earlier or classical phase of modernity culminating in nineteenth
century culture is the sole foundation for democracy, science, the rule
of law, individual freedom, and personal as well as social morality.
They consider the cultural and social developments oflate or twentieth
century modernity - the welfare state, the erosion of the patriarchal
family, the assault on Western world leadership, non-representational
and avant-garde movements in art, the rejection of communal moral
absolutes, changes in sexual mores, and the popular adoption of a
hedonistic ethic, as a tragic turning away from the foundation of the
modern.4 Liberals, on the other hand, view the recent movements
towards greater individual choice and freedom in lifestyle, public

The Crisis ofModernity
317
control of private property, the liberation of racial minorities from the
white majority, women from men, and third-world nations from
Western influence, the philosophic and artistic rejection of traditional
concepts of truth and beauty, the loss of religious authority, all as a
fulfillment of early modernity. Cahoone points out that when liberals
approve of the avant-garde culture of late modernity as a culture of
free expression, they fail to see that much of this culture ideologically
undermines the positive conceptions of human nature and political
society, which alone prove a possible intellectual basis for such
freedom. Many liberals reject religious values and the belief in a
universal morality, but fail to recognize that the commitnlent to radical
freedom, which is one of the cornerstones of early-modernity, itself
implies something like a faith in a universal morality. The point is that
from early to late modernity, the concept of the human individual
changes in such a way that the notion of universal freedom becomes
altogether problematic. In particular, it beconles difficult to conceive
ofa community offree individuals.s
A philosophy must begin with certain questions rather than
others. The choice oftopic - the subject matter is at least as important
as the choice ofbasic premises, and makes a philosophy even more the
product of individual decision and personal insight. Philosophies are
accepted or rejected on the basis of whether they address and offer
fruitful and valuable interpretation of what the community of relevant
listeners feels most needs to be addressed. Each philosopher's work is
one piece of a constantly shifting mosaic that is the culture of a period
and a place. A philosophy that is found to be valuable by a community
provides ideas that guide action, thereby shaping the development of
community life. Cahoone emphasizes that the great figures of the
dominant, philosophical tradition (Descartes, Locke, Kant) share a
mind-body dualism and as a result an emphasis on epistemology.
Cahoone
identifies
this
ultimately
self-negating
strain
with
a
subjectivism that he thinks we must overcome. He realizes, at the same
time, that subjectivism runs deep in late-modem culture, and that
subjectivist categories are manifest in twentieth century philosophers
as different as A.J. Ayer and Martin Heidegger. Subjectivism takes
individual consciousness to be the distinctive feature of reality in spite
of its respective multiple meanings.
This pervasiveness of the
subjectivist dichotomy and its massive influence on our thirlking often
goes unnoticed. To deny subjectivism means to regard the subject-
object dichotomy as no more fundamental than the distinction between

318
Soft Logic
appearance and reality, the finite and the infinite, or matter and form.
The conception of mind and matter as metaphysically antithetical is
not particularly modern, but the identification of mind, nous, or
psyche with subjectivity or personal consciousness is characteristically
post-Cartesian. This view severely restricts the kind of interaction that
can be asserted to exist between the mental-subjective and anything
else we wish to talk about.6 Cahoone believes that, within the
subjectivist framework it is more or less inevitable that nature and
physical reality have no inherent value, or at least that subjectivity is
taken as preserving greater inherent or moral value than nature, and .
that the consciousness taken as a primary realm of evidence is
fundamentally private. From Descartes to Ayer, modern rationalism
and empiricism, however much they are opposed, agree that analysis
and human knowledge ofthe world must begin with an understanding
of the contents of the individual human mind or consciousness.
Descartes fails to question the integrity of his own self or mind; he
questions only the mind's opinions, sensations, and their sources of
referents, external existences. The upshoot of the Cartesian viewpoint
is to move one particular aspect of human being - consciousness or
subjectivity - to center stage. Cahoone, on the other hand, prefers the
Aristotelian tradition, according to which the knower and the known
exhibit an internal relation.
He realizes, however, that subjectivism cleared the metaphysical
and epistemological ground for the development of modem science by
separating science from
religion,
and by making
possible the
simultaneous retention of religion and the pursuit of science. It was
also conceivably conlpatible with the Christian belief regarding the
nature ofthe soul, especially in the Protestant versions. Its answer was
strictly to separate the spiritual and the material, giving the spiritual
domination.7 The decline of aristocracy, the growth of the middle
class, democracy, and progressively widening suffrage, all served to
erode the power of super-individual structures in determining the life
of the individual. Society became more and more a conlmunity of
politically and legally equal
individuals or
citizens.
Economic
position, class status, and career increasingly came to be interpreted as
purely a matter of extrinsic
conditions.
As
thinking
subjects,
individuals were understood to be equal and free, and religion came to
be regarded as a private and personal, hence subjective, matter. This
equally applied to aesthetics, some ethical questions, and sexual
habits. The problem, however, was that God alone could make the

The Crisis ofModernity
319
subjectivist world hang together, and that without God, or some
equally transcendent concept, the modem notion of a thinking subject
tended to lose the grounds of its relation to the rest of reality. Nature
became mere stuff: devoid of spiritual qualities or value. In this
manner, not only natural qualities but also social and economic
conditions were seen to be contingent, and thus subject to human
manipulation. In a liberal democracy, people are regarded pre-
dominately as private individuals whose beliefs and thoughts are their
own, and who confront a non-subjective, non-religious, mechanical,
and material world. This is how modem society developed in ways
that made the subjective viewpoint more and more legitimate,
pervasive, and obvious. But what conforms to subjectivist dualisnl
tends at the same time to deligitimize the transcencental doctrines and
images associated with it. During the early-modem period, the
transcendental abilities of the human mind were taken to be those
intellectual capacities of the subject that were able to bridge the
subjectivist dichotomy, that is, capable of grasping the truth about the
world itself Chief among these faculties was transcendental reason -
the
notion
that
human
understanding
functions
not
only
in
mathematics and logic but that it is also able to perceive what is real
and necessary beyond the individual mind. As a result of the
radicalization of such views during the late nineteenth and twentieth
centuries,
such
transcendental
capacities
of the
subject
were
interpreted as either purely subjective, the product of wishes, illusions,
perspectival limitations, or as the effect of objective determinations,
the product ofenvironment, conditioning, and biological factors.
Cahoone insists that the groundlessness ofmetaphysical claims is
by no means obvious, and that the fact that it may appear obvious is
merely an indication ofthe thoroughness with which such a viewpoint
has been accepted. He points out that it is the perspective that
detemlines doubt, not vice versa, and that the "critical" rejection of
transcendental
notions
is
frequently
determined
by
a
prior
commitment to subjectivist categories.8 Moreover, this gradual fading
of the transcendental initiated a profound change in the subjectivist
categories thenlselves. These categories now lacked any transcendental
mediation, any overarching context in which to limit and to harmonize
their respective applicability and scope. Transcendental reason was an
essential component of liberalism and its politics, jurisprudence, and
economic theory. The notion that every individual mind is capable of
perceiving both reality and universal "self-evident" truth, and capable

320
Soft Logic
of rational discourse, was written into the American Constitution as
well as Kant's Critique of Pure Reason. Without a moral "light of
reason," all that could be of value to the subject can only be conceived
as purely personal, and thus not subject to rational discussion,
organization, or criticism.9 The so-called demystification ofnature and
the destruction ofmetaphysics and religious beliefwere understood, on
the subjectivist model, as steps towards human liberation. The
unintended result, however, was that the progressive denial of the
referent value of anything outside the subject left it with noting of
value except materiality since, under subjectivism, any other proposed
value can be understood only as a private wish or fantasy. Other
disciplines do not need philosophy in order to have validity, but they
do need philosophy to be understood beyond the context of their own
perspective in relation to other human activities, intellectual and
otherwise. Philosophers, of course, have always responded to non-
philosophical concerns, but subjectivist theories
are remarkably
indifferent
to
common-sense
realities.
Subjectivist
philosophers
deprive reality of depth; they accept the Cartesian principle that it is
impossible to question the existence of appearances as appearances.
The result is an oscillation between the abstract subject and the
abstract world, and both these terms lack what we would call reality.
For Husserl, the problem of how transcendental subjectivity can
constitute within itself other subjectivites becomes the crucial issue of
transcendental phenomenology.lO The problem arises within the
fundamental phenomenological method of distinguishing between the
realm of natural existence and the realm of subjectivity, and of
"bracketing" the former. It becomes harder to say what is subject and
what is object, and this leaves us in the end with no ego or subject at
all, ifthese words are to have any legitimate meaning. Subjectivity or
consciousness has no nature, no content, no structure that determines-
events or leaves its mark on the world it creates. 11 While Heidegger is
opposed to Husserl's "egology," he takes over Husserlian phenomen-
ology as the basis for his own method. The world into which Dasein
has been thrown is essentially a subjective world - a world that has no
independent existence,
and
behind whose
phenomena there
is
essentially nothing else. Heidegger does not give us an answer to what
Dasein is, but for him a human being is absolutely distinct form all
nature and all natural entities, as it is in Descartes, Kant, and Husserl,
and this is the most fundamental fact in subjectivism. What is claimed
to exist must appear to the subject, yet the subject never appears.

The Crisis ofModernity
321
Cahoone admits that the reason why philosophical subjectivism
has been so influential since the seventeenth century is that it
expressed a general cultural and social movement. The evolving
cultural perspective was the conviction that the individual human
subject, considered as a thinking, perceiving, valuing mind, is the
ultimate locus of all judgments of truth, value, and political authority.
This perspective was implicit in the methodology of the new
seventeenth century science, which rejected Scriptural authority in
favor
of the
conceptually
analyzed
perceptions
of
individual
researchers. It was also implied by the economic individualism of the
growing capitalist class, and it originated in the distinction between
the individual's inner faith and the outer forms of worship and ritual.
It formed the basis for liberal, republican ideology, and thus of
political and social reforms that eventually came to define much of
modern Western life. 12 But inlportant strains within modem culture
have been undermined by delegitimizing the context within which
they had functioned. In early modernity, the view that these cultural
processes are intrinsically valuable and meaningful provided the
context by which subjectivity could be conceived as related instead as
isolated and disparate. But the subjectivist categories proved too
strong, and the loss of context and mediation changed the meaning of
the categories themselves. There is a continuing erosion of the felt
value of conlmunication, and a profound effect on intellectual,
economic, political, and personal life.
Nearly everyone admits that modernity - the related economic,
social, scientific, political, and cultural programs ofthe Western world
since the Renaissance - had its costs as well as its benefits. The
achievements of modernity, such as mobility, often cause undesired
outcomes such as a limited sense of family and community. But
admitting that modernity involves a trade-off of some values against
others does not necessarily mean that the very achievements of
modernity undermine and negate themselves. Cahoone somehow
concludes that the attempts to rationalize life necessarily end in
greater irrationality and that the goal of personal freedom leads to
collective compulsion. He follows Adorno and Horkheimer in holding
that mastery over nature, and the organization of social and sexual life
in civilized society requires ever greater instinctual renunciations as
Freud has pointed out in Civilization and Its Discontents. i3 As a
consequence, previous demystification of the power of fate, the divine
right ofkings, the sanctity ofthe hierarchic social order, belief in God

322
Soft Logic
and religious values now questions natural reason, metaphysics, a
universal moral conscience, and the very idea ofhuman nature. Reality
comes to be regarded as devoid of inherent meaning, as a mere
manipulable substance, and the enlightened self views as illusory any
projects and hopes other than knowledge and manipulation of the
given. Adorno and Horkheimer had argued that this reversal, which is
most virulently demonstrated in fascism, can also be said to be present
in various doctrines of positivism and in institutions of mass culture.
The banishing of metaphysics and value from the domain of rational
thought leads to a worship offacts, and to a rejection of all non-factual
questions as meaningless. This, in tum, brings about a weakening of
liberal, enlightened, bourgeois culture in which all realty external to
the individual subject comes to be regarded as inherently value-
neutral, as manipulable commodities. Thus, there is little left for the
individual to value, and he remains subject to a natural world, which
at a deeper level he does not value. The subject becomes a mere
manipulator of this world lacking any other source of interest,
concern, value, or belief: 14 Christopher Lasch15 suggests that the
radical effacement of aesthetic conventions or even of the concept of
art itself reveals not a greater imaginative and creative freedom, but
rather an unwillingness or inability to place oneself within the
universe of the artwork and to take its truths seriously. This, not
surprisingly, also impairs the ability to encounter reality because such
cultural conventions do not limit and obscure the truth, rather they are
truth's only vehicle, they are the way human beings know and
understand. The attempts to "get outside" of culture and contact
reality, as it were, independently of everything humanly created is
nonsensical, for reality, insofar as it is available to human beings, is
formed within culture. 16
Cahoone emphasizes that no culture is monolithic since it
comprises indefinitely complex and conflicting meanings. From such a
weakly consistent concept of culture, however, very little may be
legitimately excluded. It is thus by no means obvious that culture
becomes meaningless when its artifacts or symbols are taken as
psychologically, economically, or politically determined. Neither does
this necessarily amount to what Cahoone calls anti-culture, a culture
that is hostile to itself. The economic life of the nation can be
understood as the sum of contractual agreements between free
individuals as envisioned by early modernity and before the radical
self-negating tendencies of late modernity have set it. Cahoone claims,

The Crisis ofModernity
323
however, that these conditions of modem society could not prevail
were it not for the presumption that all free individuals share certain
guiding principles, such as enlightened self-interest or "natural
reason." Early modernism was characterized by the prevalence of such
beliefs, and it was a significant theme in early modem culture that
economic activity had religious and cultural meaning, and had
implications for the moral character of the individual. Later when
these transcendental lllediating themes lost their hold, all meaning and
value were reduced to the intentions of individual subjects, and the
objects of these intentions were taken to be merely instrumental.
Religious convictions came to be regarded as a subjective matter, not
appropriate to the determination of public life. The claim that a
particular religious belief is true of reality and ought to determine
communal behavior (something that would have been considered
obvious during the two thousand preceding years) would today be
unacceptable to all but a small minority in the West. But the decay of
the res-publica undermines the integrity of the self as well, and anti-
culture reduces culture to merely economic, administrative or private
significance. Within philosophy, thinkers as diverse as Wittgenstein
and Heidegger have written philosophical works maintaining that
philosophy has or should "come to an end." Post-structuralism regards
theoretical culture as largely exhausted, and art is widely regarded as
mere entertainment or business. Politics is taken as the impersonal
preservation ofthe status quo or as the expression ofpersonal greed or
fanatical
impulses
of
a
few
individuals.
Noneconomic
and
nontechnical discussions are widely considered to be mere matters of
taste, personal opinion, or subjective preference. The exposure to
massive advertising reduces the encounter with a large portion of daily
experience to something nonmeaningful. But the subjectivist anti-
culture fails to understand that human beings create, and become
individual and independent only within a context of meaningful
relations to other human and non-human beings.
Each philosophy is designed to address a limited set of problems
and it becomes a part of the public tradition of philosophical thought.
Cahoone realizes that subjectivism had a degree of adequacy and
fruitfulness in its application to the reconciliation of competing claims
of scientific materialism and Christian spiritualism - issues that made
it
the
dominant
force
in
modem
philosophy
and
culture.
Consciousness seemed to be that in which all evidence must appear in
order to be evidence at all. Cahoone, on the other hand, insists that it

324
Soft Logic
is only through culture that human individuals attain personality. He
rejects the prevalent view that culture is actually an obstacle to some of
the most fundamental projects of modernity. For such philosophers,
culture obscures reality by providing a context of implicit beliefs and
interpretive
models
imbibed
by
the
individual
since
infancy.
Philosophy, since Descartes and until recently has clung to various
epistemological fantasies criticized by Quine and Rorty.
Quine
questioned the myth of the "given," the distinction between the order
of thought or higher truth and the order of receptivity or empirical
truth, whereas Rorty rejected the metaphor of the mind as a nlirror of
nature. Such ideas reveal the persistent dream that if only the inquirer
could get outside the totality of human interests, beliefs, institutions,
interpretations, inherited traditions dictated by birth, family, status,
religion,
social
role,
history,
and
personal
idiosyncrasies,
the
individual would come to know reality as it really is, independently of
human bias and limitation. It is this dream that Rorty in his
Philosophy and the Mirror ofNature 17 attacks. This fantasy assumes
that the highest form ofhuman knowledge is that of a mere register, a
passive mirror of the given. Cahoone accordingly concludes that
culture does not hide truth, for culture is truth's only vehicle.
Early modem philosophy tended to view Reason itself as
providing the
basis
for
truth
and
knowledge,
and
to
regard
philosophy's task as one of showing what reason implies. Kant
presumes the truth of Newtonian science; he believes that he is
exposing, systematizing, and interpreting the nature and limits of that
truth. It is only since the late nineteenth century that philosophy
conceives of itself as providing the basis for truth. Husserl and
Heidegger are at pains to point out that the natural and social sciences
are
epistemologically
groundless,
and
that
they
require
a
phenomenological philosophy to provide them with a foundation. The
logicist project of early twentieth century analytic philosophy, which
attempted to base the truth of mathematics - and thus of modem
science -
on logic, is another example of this tendency.18 It is
impossible for Husserl and Heidegger to conceive of conlmunity,
communication, and cultural processes as a primary source ofmeaning
and value, and as the vehicle for truth and understanding. In the
positivist view, likewise, values are part of the cultural process, and
cultural artifacts as well as communicative events cannot be value-
neutral. The positivists denied that values and meanings have any
nonsubjective existence, that the empirical could be meaningful and

The Crisis ofModernity
325
valuable, or that values could be anything but emotions. Indeed, many
contemporary philosophers write as if the whole history of human
culture has no truth to tell. Positivism considered the rational
discussion
of
political
values
to
be
nonsensical,
whereas
phenomenology renders the physical constitution of the universe
irrelevant.
Philosophy
becomes
a
nonempirical,
value-neutral
metacritique, primarily concerned with problems of language, logic
and
signification.
Philosophy's
goal
is
not
to
enhance
our
understanding of the world, nature, art, or human existence, but to
improve our knowledge of the tools of understanding (i.e. language,
logic, text). Such a view divorces philosophy fron1 the rest of culture,
and renders philosophy irrelevant to whatever nonphilosophical
human beings do, say, or think. 19 The subordination of society and
culture to economics could justifiably be considered one of the
hallmarks of modernity in both its capitalist and Marxist versions.
This stands in sharp contrast to the approach oftraditional, premodern
societies that Cahoone favors.
He maintains that subjectivism has been so dominant and
pervasive within modernity that many philosophers cannot distinguish
between subjectivism and philosophy. Cahoone believes that, whereas
subjectivist modernity has exhausted itself: n10dernity was never
synonymous with subjectivism and that it still has more cards to
play.20 Many philosophers, even those who consider their work
politically relevant, accept Wittgenstein's prescription on the function
of philosophy that philosophers may reveal the problematic nature of
any pronouncement on human affairs, but that in response to the
question of how then we ought to understand reality and human
affairs, and what we should do about them, philosophers must remain
silent.21 The postmodernists, who call for a radical rejection of
modernity, tend to forget that we have a stake in the preservation of
some aspects ofmodernity; a stake that is not merely philosophical but
has implications for humanism and democracy as well. Cahoone wants
us to hold together two thoughts that are often treated as antithetical or
incompatible: that existing things are both individual integrities, and
that they are essentially related to other things.22 The problem is that
from such an inconsistent ontology any epistemological conclusion
may be derived. The tradition in Western philosophy that finds
internal relations beneath and behind every case of individual integrity
begins with Heraclitus, has been radicalized by Hume, and more
recently
by
structuralists
and
poststructuralists.
This
tradition

326
Soft Logic
emphasizes that each individual entity is what it is only because of its
relations with other entities, processes, and factors. The more one
looks for such relations, the more one fmds them, of course, and
ultimately it will appear that each individual is nothing but a nexus of
relations. Hume reduces entities to collections of sense impressions,
and there is no underlying substance supporting these impressions.
This analysis applies to human beings, to mind, or self no less than to
the nonhuman substance. The "self' is a collection of impressions and
ideas.23 At the end of his Inquiry, however, Hume admits that life
dictates that we must act as if we know what philosophical inquiry
tells us we can never know. Life forces us to live beyond what we can
know in a rational philosophical sense.
When we engage in
philosophical inquiry, we must have at least an implicit sense of the
goal of what we are doing. Much in philosophical argument turns on
this fundament question, which is one of its goals and hence, a value
commitment.24
Cahoone rejects the idea that culture is a third, a mediator
between subjectivity and objectivity in the manner of Popper's "third
world,"25 but unlike Popper, his notion of culture is essentially
precritical and Aristotelian. Much of culture is inherited, and the
inheritance provides a context of cultural activities, events, artifacts,
and meanings that serve as an interpretive reservoir on which each
individual draws. Since language is itself part of this cultural
inheritance, it is clear that communication virtually could not exist
without culture.26 But there are, of course, biological and genetic
elements in human communication as well, and language is no more
reducible to culture than vice versa. Cahoone regards culture as the
matrix of both community and individual since the individual cannot
develop without culture, communication, and community. Even the
extreme individualist, the revolutionary, and the iconoclast, all use the
cultural materials of their community, interpreting some strains and
rejecting others. Cahoone concludes that communication, community,
and the inheritance of a culture have little to do with agreement and
shared belief: but that they have to do with a shared language.27 He
sees culture not as a monolithic, but as an ever-changing, plurality of
activities, events, and artifacts that are continuously being interpreted
and reconstructed. Cahoone explains that, despite the seeming defeat
of Cartesianism within philosophy, the dualistic and subjectivistic
approach remain dominant.28 He insists, however, that the most
fundamental and deepest level of experience remains beyond the

The Crisis ofModernity
327
subjectivist distinction. The process of experiencing, assimilating,
interpreting, and creating meaningful things is a specifically human
activity. Humans happen to be the kind of beings for whom sound
waves, ink marks on paper, the movement offacial muscles, the facade
ofa building, the color ofa sunset have elaborate meaning and value.
Culture connects human beings not only with things, but also
with each other and with past generations whose products are
interpreted and reinvested with meaning by the living.29 The problem
of knowledge, which has been the primary concern of much of
philosophy since the seventeenth century, has been strongly influenced
by subjectivist categories. The dichotomy produced a distinction
between the empirical order of things and the order of spontaneous
thought insulated from direct contact with things, and thus incapable
of organization and analysis, i.e. a formal, logical, and analytical
order. Some influential twentieth century philosophers whom Cahoone
follows have refused to accept the belief in an order of receptivity or
observation that is independent of perspective, historical traditions,
interpretive paradigms, and theoretical commitments. They recognized
that the strict distinction between interpretation and perception, which
had been inherited from early modem thought and applied in more
extreme terms by language positivism, could not be maintained.30 But
what Cahoone really proposes is a return to premodern lines of
thought, as he himself realizes,31 a precritical Aristotelian position
according to which the mind has an "internal" relation to the things
themselves. What he seems to forget is that Aristotelianism was
defeated by modem science -
and by subjectivism, which made
modern science possible -
for good reasons. Since Galileo and
Descartes, modem science and modern philosophy have consistently
attempted to interpret nature in quantitative, material, and until
recently, mechanistic terms. Postcartesian science conceives culture as
subjective, free, and ideal, and nature as material, deternlinate, and
value-neutral, and this is what makes the two incompatible. What
Cahoone is, in effect, proposing is a return to an Aristotelian concept
of reality: the doctrine that all material entities contain a principle of
movement or change, and that their internal being is determined by an
innate teleology. He himself realizes that Aristotle's doctrine of
substantial forms and his teleological conception of nature are
untenable today. Modem Western thought was founded on the
autonomy of the thinking, doubting individual and on the aesthetic
reaction that expressed his uniqueness. The achievements ofmodernity

328
Soft Logic
in science, medicine and technology, democracy and economic well-
being are a consequence of this dichotomy into subject and object.
Modern humanism is the belief that the ultimate arbiter of truth, and
the ultimate source of value and political authority is the human
individual. Such humanism, ofcourse, cannot be proven, for it is itself
a choice, a philosophical conviction whose legitimacy can only be
established by its achievements and failures. It is generally agreed that
the achievements of humanism have been substantial, and that it
would be virtually impossible to conceive of modern science, Western
standards of living, the diversity of modern intellectual and artistic
culture, democracy, and civil liberation without the persuasiveness of
humanism
in
contemporary
Western
culture.
Like
humanism,
democracy is a process that is inherently self-threatening, and there is
a widespread
conviction
that
the
public
realm
is
impersonal,
uncontrollable, and dangerous, and that one is free only in privacy. A
similar conviction prevailed during the late stages of the Roman
empire, and this conviction has generally been identified with a
culture's decline. Since one of the definitions ofmodemity is the self-
conscious break with the past, it is a largely antihistorical movement.
There is indeed an implicit tension between modernity and traditional
culture quite apart from any reference to humanism.
Notes
1 Lawrence E. Cahoone, The Delimma ofModernity, Philosophy,
Culture and Anti-Culture, New York, NY: State University ofNew York
Press, 1988, p. xiv.
2 Ibid., p. 1.
3 Theodor Adorno and Max Horkheimer, Dialectic ofEnlightenment,
trans. John Cumming, New York, NY: Seabury, 1972.
4 Cahoone, The Delimma ofModernity, p. 5.
5 Ibid., p. 6.
6 Ibid., p. 23.
1 Ibid., p. 68.
8 Ibid., p. 72.
9 Ibid., p. 75.
10 Ibid., p. Ill.

The Crisis ofModernity
329
11 Ibid., p. 133.
12 Ibid., p. 178.
13 1930, trans. James Strachey, New York, Ny: Norton, 1961.
14 Cahoone, The Delimma ofModernity, p. 186.
15 Christopher Lasch, The Culture ofNarcissism, New York, NY:
Norton, 1979.
16 Cahoone, The Delimma ofModernity, p. 187.
17 Princeton University Press, 1979.
18 Cahoone, The Delima ofModernity, p. 223.
19 Ibid., p. 226.
20 Ibid., p. 228.
21 Ibid., p. 231.
22 Ibid., p. 236.
23 David Hume, Treastise ofHuman Nature, Oxford: Claredon, 1955, p.
251ft:
24 Cahoone, The Delimma ofModernity, p. 306 n10.
25 Karl Popper, John Eccles, The Selfand Its Brain, New York, NY:
Springer International, 1977, p. 38.
26 Cahoone, The Delimma ofModernity, p. 248.
27 Ibid.
28 Ibid., p. 250.
29 Ibid., p. 254.
30 Ibid., p. 255.
31 Ibid., p. 258.

Chapter Twenty-Five
Postmodernist Dimensions
The lines of demarcation between modernism and postmodemism are
not well-defined. To be modem is to break with tradition and to search
for new self-conscious, expressive forms, whereas the postmodern
artist has no such privileged status. 1 It was Nietzsche who used the
idea of self-overcoming to describe developments and transformations
in Western thought, and we find that this process of self-overcoming
also characterizes the development of his own thinking. While he had
impulses for underlying truth, his thinking does not primarily present
itself within the metaphysical formulations of truth and goodness.
Self-overcoming and the manner in which Nietzsche's discourse puts
itself in question have exerted significant influence both consciously
and unconsciously on twentieth century style and thought. It prevents
us from thinking with Nietzsche and through him, and at the sanle
time from making his work either a model or a true and sufficient
evaluation of Western culture. When self-overcoming controls the dis-
course, there is no transcendence of the discourse to explain it and to
justify its own processes. Nietzsche is a countermetaphysics meta-
physician; for him falseness of judgment is becoming less of a
concern, and the issue is whether a group of evaluations is life promo-
ting and life preserving.2 This thinking does not have an overriding
interest in certainty, literal truth, or speculative coherence; and per-
manence, in contrast to change, is taken to be more a function of
grammar than of reality. The self-overcoming that occurs in this dis-
course sets in motion ways of speaking and thinking that bring about
alertness to their own logical and moral way ofbeing.

332
Soft Logic
Kuspit thus concludes that the contradictory character of post-
modernism is unresolvable, and that this reflects the inflated and con-
tradictory character of our society and culture. The existence of
seemingly unresolvable contradictions undermines our critical capa-
city, and to counteract such frustration, the meaning ofthe term "post-
modernism" is kept open, even if it is thereby reduced to preserving
only marginal significance. Indeed, it implies the collapse of an
established critical sense; postmodernism is an artistic phenonlenon of
sorts, for it gets harder to distinguish the things aesthetic from their
cognitive aspects, and its very analysis becomes a form of narrative.
Nevertheless, the theory of postmodernism is the latest attempt to
reinforce the credibility of critical thinking, even when it turns out to
be without teeth, so to speak.3 While postmodernism implies the con-
tradiction of the modem, it lacks any transcendence of it, for while it
is usually critical of the past, the past also represents lost integrity -
the "home" the subject no longer inhabits but still yearns for. Post-
modem historians of art make the past contemporary by using it to
satisfy living needs symbolically, and in this sense postmodernism
represents an extended range of the possibilities of the past. The con-
tention that there is nothing outside of language is unacceptable
largely because it is ourselves who are outside of language to begin
with. Having reduced language and history to our own uses, we are as
unaware ofour own place among their shifting signifiers. In such con-
text everything becomes surface, and objectivity and authority are lost,
and without them even grammar falls apart. Such a culture collapses
contrasts, combines sentimentalism with indifference, exploitation,
and emancipation, recalling suffering only through the rosy glasses of
nostalgia. Men are no longer sure of their knowledge, and are unable
to legitimize the master narrative oftruth and justice.
It was no accident that Kant chose the figure or schema of archit-
ectonics, sure of its apparent connection with the geometric method.
But Kant was also the first to realize the failure of this attempt to re-
concile the principles of mechanics with the spontaneity and freedom
that characterize both the basis of responsibility in the human sphere,
and in human creativity, the free play of imagination in the arts. What
the division in Kant's text foretells is precisely the failure of nlodem-
ism. He realizes that one cannot simply choose either one or the other;
hence the failure ofmodernism, it could be said, is a matter ofnot see-
ing the difference between things intellectual and things sensible, ima-
ginary, and aesthetic. It led to the delusion that the formal might itself

Postmodernist Dimensions
333
dictate a style, that style could become objective, instead of the sym-
bolic, indirect presentation, or figurative expression of the conceptual.
What the modem lacked was the recognition of the problem of inter-
pretation - the recognition that there is a kind of abyss between the
formal and the figurative that demands a certain translation. The
search for a single algorithm for decision has to be foregone; it be-
comes a question concerning the right thing to do at the right time in
the right way. It is a situation where nothing can be decided by
proofs,4 but it is all the same a problem of art, as Kant defines it. Be-
yond the canons of science, the problem of interpretation remains, and
summons the figural as an extension of the rational. Kant and Hegel
open up a space for other logics and other grammars, even though for
most viewers, the object of attention is always people. Thus an art
without sentimental attachment leaves them without a clue to what it
is about. The work of art is no longer a sign, a means to think about
some other reality and to make it present; rather it is itself made the
object and aim of thought.5 It is a displacement that disrupts our or-
dinary ties with the world, so that knowing is transformed into a study
of openness.6 Derrida explains that the painting serves such a refer-
ence, and in this way the work of art is open to anyone's interpretive
understanding. However, no one understanding can ever claim posses-
sion of it; there is no idiomatic reality to painting since detachment
always leaves the work open to the unconscious of the other.7 Wendy
Steiner notes that prose stresses the already established signifying
system whereas painting focuses on the work of art as a thing. Struct-
uralism has made language the model of understanding all cultural
phenomena.8
Magritte "names" his paintings in a manner that brings into
question the act of nanling, undermining the obvious relation between
the title and the work, the name and the thing. This represents the
subject-predicate relation projected by language onto things" and leads
us to question presence and time as they have imposed themselves
upon the work of art. One can no longer affirm that "this" painting,
word, or image is not a pipe because similitude, insofar as it is neither
subject-predicate nor ontological, renders identify and its difference
meaningless. The simulacrum, always reversible, ranges across the
surface, eliminating the original and forcing a reorientation of
thought. What must be made clear is the hold that language has over
what it describes - the pictorial image - over the vast realm of the un-
thought. In the postmodern world, it seems that history no longer pro-

334
Soft Logic
vides identity or autonomy, but is another commodity served up in tel-
evision reruns, nostalgia, and endless repetition.9 Signs no longer refer
to either a subjective or an objective realty, but to themselves, because
there is no "reality" left to represent. Reality is constructed by the
codes of society, by the already written, by the received languages and
conventions that assume the subject's place. IO On video and television
everything is infmitely repeatable, and Gilles Deleuze suggests that we
consider a metaphysics that is not a metaphysics of substance but a
metaphysics of the event. An event is without substance, and this is
why we must be alert to the surface ofthe domain of intelligible (non-
spatial and nontemporal) objects. The photograph repeats mechan-
ically what could never actually be reproduced.
Some modernist writing lets go of the foundations of discourse;
Finnegan's Wake, for example, turns us against interpretation and
onto the path of surrealist analysis, where the end ofreading is no lon-
ger to determine the meaning of anything but rather to lay open to
view the deep structure of production that makes meaning possible.
The question posed is not ''what does it mean?" but "how does it
work?" Finnegan's Wake works like a dream and requires something
like a Freudian model of analysis. The text is not something that we
"read through" but, like a dream, is something to be reconstructed on
another level. I-Iusserlian language seeks total intelligibility, whereas
Joycean language turns itself loose in this manner. So there is no pre-
Babel relationship between word and thing; there is no deep structure
as in Husserl or in the analytic tradition, merely a textual mosaic
lacking any overall logical form. Analysis is not taking us deeper. into
an inner world of preconscious grammar; on the contrary, the deeper
we go, the more open things get. II For Heidegger, likewise, poetry and
thinking are not containable within unitary language; the point is that
words are not something under control. Language speaks but not in
the strucutralist sense that, whatever the surface variability of our
speech, meaning remains the product of deep structure (grammar and
ideology). For Heidegger, our linguistic competence consists less in
the neological ability to produce intelligible sentences than in the ear's
ability to pick up all the punning that is always going on in language.
Language speaks, but not in the structuralist sense that we are con-
strained by its rules and can say only what it allows us to say.
Contrary to the philosophical tradition, in Heidegger the infeli-
cities of words are not repressed; on the contrary, they are what poetry
and thinking must remain open to. This is why Heidegger's way with

Postmodernist Dimensions
335
words is more Joyce-like than Husserlian. The upshot of Heidegger's
listening is that it has more to do with receptivity or openness than
with meaning. To think is, above all, to listen, to let the Saying hap-
pen to us, and not to ask questions. 12 This seems roughly the idea of
Heidegger's Gelassenheit, letting be or letting go; renunciation, Heid-
egger says, means giving up language as logos, Le. as the power of
framing representations. It means giving up signs as names that "rule
over thingS."13 Renunciation is the way with words of the poet who
must relinquish the claim to the assurance that he will on demand be
supplied with a name for what he as posited as what truly is. Poetry
does not connect up with things in a way of worldmaking but simply
lets them be, treating them like a work of art in their otherness or
strangeness. Heideggerian things are more events than objects; his
"listening" is not a form of exegesis, or a listing of meaning. In a
similar vein, Artaud attacks the theater in which the author functions
like an absent God, controlling the process from a distance, providing
the illusion of a closure with nleaning for both the author and the aud-
ience.14 In place of plot and developed action, we have stasis lacking
both meaning and possibility in which the audience is confronted with
the defeat ofall its traditional expectations of meaning. The theater of
representation is thus an illusion, and in the language of decon-
struction, truth is undecidable, for there is nothing to refer to, only
more language.
For Benjamin, the photographic image (or simulacrum) entails
the dissolution ofthe aesthetic aura and inaugurates the political use of
the image. As such, catharsis can no longer be understood according
to a personalist psychological model but must be grasped in accor-
dance with a political, revolutionary paradigm. Discussing the relation
between mechanical reproduction and mass movements, he points out
that their most powerful agent is the film. Benjamin regards the fmal
transformation of catharsis as an apocalyptic political upheaval, and
this new reign of photographic and cinematic simulacra entails a
radical epistemological break. Metaphysics is not overcome by decon-
struction, rather it is presented as a particular discursive possibility in
which rationality, dialectics, and "master-narrative" are rejected. 15
Writing about the differences between modernism and postmodemism,
Craig Owens explains:
Postmodernism neither brackets nor suspends the referent but
tends instead to problematize the activity of reference. When the

336
Soft Logic
postmodernist work speaks of itself: it is no longer to proclaim its
authority, self-sufficiency, or transcendence; rather it is to narrate
its own contingency, insufficiency and lack oftranscendence. 16
Perhaps the most profound implication entailed by the postmodern
condition is that it is no longer possible to determine unequivocally
whether any given enunciation of image is a statement or a metastate-
ment, while no enunciation (especially the metaphysical one) may be
deemed devoid ofnarrative content. Significance is subject to a radical
questioning in which both authorship and spectatorship become rhe-
torical (grammatical) constructs; every signified is nothing but another
signifier, literacy another trope, depth a play of surfaces and the
person a role ofacting.
David Levin traces modernist aesthetics back to its origin in the
Kantian revolution, and shows that in modernist art the defining con-
ditions ofthe work finally become the sole subject of presentation. Be-
cause of their essentially constitutive function, however, these condi-
tions cannot be made present as the subject oftraditional techniques of
representation; they can only be made present indirectly and obliquely.
They become manifest in the play of their deconstruction. Modernist
works of art defy the structural law of identity; they are what they are
not, and they are not what they are. They are implicitly subversive, not
innovative or original in the traditional sense. In nlodemist art, the
"substance" of the work, which used to be called "content," has be-
come an implicitly upsetting process of self-reflection and self-
disclosure. Jacques Derrida, Richard Rorty, Michael Foucault, and
Paul Feyerabend are presumably postmodern writers and their postmo-
dernist philosophy is a family of deconstructive strategies, questions,
and suspicion instigating playful procedures that challenge our pre-
vailing logocentrism because ·it suppresses feeling and imagination.
These postmodem philosophies question the traditional binary oppo-
sites insofar as they constitute fixed, independent, reciprocally exclu-
sive positions. Instead, postmodem thinning embraces relativities,
conflicts, and complications in interpretation, ruptures and discontinu-
ities, the proliferation of differences, multiplicites, ambiguities, and
complexities. It acknowledges contingencies and accidents, accepts the
unfmished, the open, the fragmentary; it appreciates spontaneity, and
gives ready attention to the local, the regional, the specific, and the
unique, and it recognizes the existence of microprocesses. 17 Thus
while modernist aesthetics continued essentialism, the postmodern

Postmodernist Dimensions
337
approach rejected it. Contrary to modernism, it proclaims itself open to
meaning, but in it the various media are nlixed together: idioms of the
vernacular, and elements taken from mass culture. There is no longer
any privileged standpoint either expressing or interpreting the work.
Of all the commodities, the fashion object appears to be the most
superfluous, transitory, and trivial - infinitely distanced from its his-
torical origins in the magic and mystique of ceremonial costume or
bodily adornment. Faurschou argues, however, that it is not despite,
but precisely because, fashion has this ephemeral volatile existence
that it becomes the exemplary site for exploring the deviant tendencies
and contradictions of our late, capitalist, consumer, or postmodern
society. Fashion discloses a pervasive and enveloping logic, since
production is compelled to drive production to ever new extremes of
insatiability. Fashion becomes the propelling momentum, the domin-
ant role of consumption itself: and understood this way, it can be seen
to exceed all other cultural logics. Commodities are now marketed first
and foremost as "symbolic goods," and only secondarily as utilitarian
objects. 18 Advertising has become a multibillion dollar industry deny-
ing the instrumentality ofall social relations. While the markets of late
capitalism present immense selections of differentiated commodities
that appear to compete on the basis of ever more minute distinctions,
in fact, the more effective strategy to increase consumption (an imper-
ative to the survival of late capitalism) is to create even more elaborate
and expensive categories of signs that can be consumed systematically
and, just as systematically, rendered obsolete at an increasingly accel-
erated pace. The greater the integration ofconsumer universes, and the
more quickly they are rendered obsolete, the more fashion asserts itself
as the totaling logic of commodity consumption in late capitalism. 19
Baudrillard's main polemic is the oversimplified critique of consump-
tion as manipulation, as the creation of false needs that prevent the
satisfaction of"natural" or truly human desires. Such a critique fails to
consider that the power and selection of consumption lies in the degree
to which it establishes itself as the only form of collective activity in
which the atomized individual ofbourgeois society can participate. But
to the extent that the system of objects is gaining coherence, its impos-
ing strategy is also growing more complex and, as a consequence, such
integration never becomes permanent or substantive.
Fashion is one of the more inexplicable phenomena; its com-
pulsion to innovative signs is apparently arbitrary. It is now an over-
riding stylistic code in which the novel is a quality independent of the

338
Soft Logic
use ofthe commodity. In it the representation ofthe ever "new" erases
the record of growth, maturation, and decay that history inscribes on
material objects and bodies. Fashion collapses the coordinates of space
and tinle into a variety of marketable environments. No longer
occupied with the latest styles in clothing and hair, fashion magazines
provide us with up-to-date recommendations on what, where, and with
whom it is fashionable to be eating, working, living, traveling, etc.
This produces the effect of flatness or depthlessness, a new kind of
superficiality in the most literal sense, which Frederick Jameson has
described as "perhaps the most supreme formal feature of postmod-
emism.,,20 Even the theorist's critical capacity becomes paralyzed,
since the late capitalist market has developed strategies that allow it to
remain as rigorous as ever in spite of the internal contradictions on
which it operates, and to resist outside challenges.
One of the patterns distinguishing the televised and the untele-
vised is the traditional metaphysical line between the true (reality) and
the false (television), which refuses to recognize the productive power
of TV. Another path, a distinctively postmodern one, is advanced by
Baudrillard who proclaims the coming of a "hyperreality" constituted
by the collapse of all real distinctions.21 Seitz argues that the truth
must be different from either of these polar positions, something in
between. He emphasizes the inseparability of the televised and· the
untelevised, and claims that, if TV is a system of communication at
all, it is one that radically transforms what communication is. While
the power of television has been likened to the power of speech or
immediate presence (as opposed to writing), it should also be seen that
television is not speech - it is audio-visual, which is not the same as
oral - and that the power of televised speech is an effect or dimension
of the power of this complex electronic system of ''writing'' or
markmaking. Television not only repeats, but also generates, powerful
mythologies of our times; it does not only express, but creates, stories
{"realities").22 Even a quite average person can sound smart reading a
prepared speech on television, and a persuasive actor can shape public
opinion in this manner. Thus, television is a new decisive element the
likes ofwhich has never existed until just now.23 It becomes a medium
by means of which political and economic power are exercised. The
real untelevised is restricted to the few who know the whole story since
television is used effectively to deceive and manipulate the public in a
variety of ways. At the same time, television is a medium, a form of
adhesive, a binding agent that holds our culture together; it is a basic

Postmodernist Dimensions
339
dimension ofwhat and who we are. In the process, politics has become
more of a show, but this does not mean that the world outside
television turns into a separate entity or is sealed offfrom it.
Those who present TV as a network of nothing more than ap-
pearances reduce it to the level of mere image, a deviation from
Reality that is considered fundamental. The danger here is a reliance
on a conception of reality as ultimately self-evident, and a refusal to
recognize television's productive capacities. It lies in misunderstand-
ing the powerful way in which the televised informs and contributes to
what the untelevised is. TV makes reality; it does not only reflect it.
The traditional metaphysical viewing of television will necessarily
miss the power ofthis point and will thus miss the power oftelevision,
reducing it to laziness, ignorance, and stupidity on the part of the
viewers.24 But an equally hazardous reading is Baudrillard's nihilism
because here all distinctions vanish, and television "is" reality. The
police have not disappeared, they have simply developed more sophis-
ticated techniques of regulation and control, which produce less need
for coercion. Not that coercion has disappeared either,25 and we may
reasonably doubt that Baudrillard's views are very popular with the
victims of police power. If "power is dead,,,26 it is at least less dead
than the academic theory that announces its demise, for it deals with
real people, not just actors on. a stage. While not altogether separate,
the televised and the untelevised are different from each other, and
certainly not interchangeable. By privileging reality, traditional meta-
physics underestimates the productive capacities oftelevision and mis-
ses its power as the generating and binding agent, and by privileging
TV, Baudrillard loses the world that has not just turned into a simu-
lacrum. Television is not merely a conlmunications technology that
presents itself as a choice, as just one more human activity. It contrib-
utes to the formation ofthe untelevised, and we are the first generati()n
to live with its indefinite but disturbing co-presence. The relationship
between the televised and the untelevised is not simple polarized meta-
physical differences between appearances and Reality, rather the dif-
ference between the televised and the untelevised remains unresolved.
Wurzer and Silverman expose filming as a nonlogocentric, post-
modem interplay between thinking and imagining.27 In modern meta-
physics we encounter the beginning of this kind of thinking in Kant's
Critique of Judgment, in Nietzsche's Birth of Tragedy, and more
recently, in Heidegger's philosophy. Traditional philosophy from Plato
to Spinoza has consistently suppressed the notion of image and re-

340
Soft Logic
duced its limited significance to a logocentric view of reason. In Hei-
degger's discourse, on the other hand, philosophy is a thinking that
can be either metaphysics or science, and according to Wurzer and Sil-
verman, filming is just such a thinking. Filming may be conceived as
the postmodern displacenlent of metaphysics, suggesting an "imagis-
tic" mode ofthinking that is not prerational or irrational. It is rather a
kind of reflection (Besinnug) that has the courage to question the truth
of its own presuppositions as well as recognize the diverse direction of
interests.28 According to Kant, the aesthetic idea occasions the imagin-
ative spreading over a host of related representations,29 and is not re-
strained by the usual spatial and temporal intuitions. Indeed in a
vaguely postmodern sense, Kant describes the aesthetic idea as that re-
presentation of the imagination which reduces such a wealth of
thought that would never admit comprehension in a definite concept.30
Kant's attempts to formulate a "discontinuous" relation between think-
ing and the imagination in the sublime lacks definite form, transcends
the boundaries of imagination, and emerges as the self (Gemiit) parti-
cipating in imagination's play of presence and absence. Neither pre-
sence nor absence can ever be fully attained conceptually, or - and this
may be the demise of Kant's Critique ofJudgment - by means of taste
or reflection. The categories of the transcendental analytic become
fluid in filming, and thus are made free for imagination's transition to
the aesthetic zone of reason's play. The realm of invention is then no
longer conceived in terms of a logocentric operation of objects of
knowledge, but rather in terms of a postontological, genealogical, and
epistemologically more disruptive terrain ofdifference.
When Heidegger separates the world from the metaphysical con-
cept of idea towards a play of images, he makes it possible for us to
introduce filming as a reflection ofthe'power of imagination.3! Film-
ing in Heidegger's sense of Besinnung distinguishes images of being
form the hermeneutic power of establishing a new presence. This in~
teraction may be conceived as subjective and objective representation
of images wherein neither subject nor object are readily discernible.
Discussing the postmodern aspect ofhis work, Heidegger remarks that
what withdraws may concern and claim man more essentially than
anything present that strikes and touches him.32 "True sublimity,"
Kant writes, "must be sought only in the mind ofthe subject, not in the
natural object.,,33 Filming is a paradox; thus in the postmodern era, the
relation of thinking and filming may be considered as a gathering of
inlages that is not wedded to a representational experience (Erlebnis)

Postmodernist Dimensions
341
of imagination's identity. In filming, an activity occurs that designates
the space in which alternative readings multiply and coexist, for
filming is that ontological activity and space which has no identity of
its own. It is neither transcendental nor empirical, neither subjective
nor objective, neither a reality nor an appearance, neither a thought
nor a thing. For Heidegger, the tendency to separate the self as subject
and the world as object has come to an end in the modern age, and this
"world-picture" is neither ofthe world nor ofthe subject. Filming does
not render determinate what is multiple and indeterminate; it is not a
specification of what is broad, disparate, and nonspecific. The filming
language has no place in the world except as a commodity, as expres-
sion of viewpoints, and as a representation of reality. The only frame
that filming produces is the frame of the modern age, and the inde-
terminacy ofwhat is post-modem is due to the fact that it has no style.
The perplexity about postmodemism is that, like filming, it has no
definite shape, no determinate form or context. Filming as such offers
no content, style, or form of its own; what it offers is a content~style, or
a form ofmodernism and, thereby, modernism within its own frame.
Notes
I Hugh 1. Silverman, "The Philosophjy of Postmodernism," in Post-
modernism - Philosphy and the Arts, ed. H. J. Silverman, Routledge, NY and
London: 1990,p.3.
2 F. Nietzsche, Beyond Good and Evil, trans. Walter Kaufinann, New
York, NY: Randonl House, 1966, vol. I, p. 4.
3 Donald Kuspit, "The Contradictory Character of Postmoderism," in
Postmodernism - Philosphy and the Arts, p. 57.
4 Immnanuel Kant, The Critique of Judgement, trans. J. H. Bernard,
New York, NY: Hafuer, 1968, p. 183.
5 Ortega Y Gasset, The Dehumanization ofArt and Other Essays in Art,
Culture, Literature, trans. Helene Weyl, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 1968, pp. 18-19.
6 Martin Heidegger, "The Origin of the Work of Art," in Poetry,
Language, Thought, trans. Albert Hofstadter, New York, NY: Harper & Row,
1971, p. 67.
7 Jacques Derrida, La verite en peinture, Paris: Flammarion, 1978, p.
435.
8 Wendy Steiner, The Colors of Rhetoric, Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press, 1982, p. 123.

342
99.
Soft Logic
9 Thomas Lawson, "Generation in Vitro," Artforum, September 1984, p.
10 Kate Linker, "From Imitation to Copy to Just Effect: On Reading Jean
Baudrillard," ArtForum,I 1984, p.46.
11 Gerald L. Bruns, "The Otherness of Words: Joynce, Bakhtin,
Heidegger," in Postmodernism - Philosphy and the Arts, p. 76.
12 M. Heidegger, On the Way to Language, trans. P.D. Hertz, New York,
NY: Harper & Row, 1971, p. 76.
13 Ibid., p. 144.
14 Antonin Artaud, The Theater and its Double, trans. M.C. Richards,
New York, NY: Grove Press, 1958, p. 75.
15 Allen S. Weiss, "Lucid Intervals: Postmodernism and Photography,"
in Postmodernism - Philosphy and the Arts, p. 160.
16 Craig Owens, "The Allegorical Impulse: Towards a Thoery of
Postmodernism," (part 2) October 13, (Sumnmer 1980), p. 80.
17 David Michael Levin, "Postmodernism in Dance; Dance, Discourse,
Democracy," in Postmodernism - Philosphy and the Arts, p. 224.
18 Gail
Faurschou,
"Obsolescence
and
Desire:
Fashion
and
the
Commodity Form," in Postmodernism - Philosphy and the Arts, p. 238.
19 Ibid., p. 241.
20 Frederic Jameson, "Postmodemism and the Cultural Logic of Late
Capitalism," New Left Reveiw, Fall 1985, p. 60.
21 Brian Seitz, "The Televised and the Untelevised: Keeping an Eye
On/Offthe Tube," in Postmodernism - Philosphy and the Arts, p. 187.
22 Ibid., p. 191.
23 Ibid., p. 192.
24 Ibid., p. 202.
25 Ibid., p. 292 n33.
26 Jean Baudrillard and Sylvere Lotringer, "Forget Baudrillard," trans.
Phil Beitchman, Lee Hildreth and Mark Polizzotti, in Jean Baudrillard, Forget
Foucault, New York, NY: Semiotext(e), 1987, p. 173.
27 Wilhelm S. Wurzer and Hugh J. Silverman, "Filming: Inscriptions of
Denken, " in Postmodernism - Philosophy and the Arts, p. 173.
28 Martin Heidegger, "The Age of the World Picture," in The Question
Concerning Technolgoy, trans. William Lovitt, New York, NY: Harper &
Row, 1977, p. 183.
29 Immanuel Kant, Kritik der Urteilskraft, Stuttgart: Philip Reclam,
1976, p. 146.
30 Ibid., p. 147.
31 Heidegger, "Age ofthe World Picture," p. 140.
32 M. Heidegger, "What Calls for Thinking?" in Basic Writings, trans.
D.F. Krell, New York, NY: Harper & Row, 1977, p. 350.
33 Kant, Kritik der Urteilskraft, p. 135.

Chapter Twenty-Six
Postmodern Aesthetics
The project of nlodernity was formulated in the 18th century by the
philosophers of the enlightenment in their efforts to develop objective
science, universal morality, and autonomous art. But the 20th century
shattered this optimism; there is now a prevalent view that the project
ofmodernity is deeply problematic. 1 The fiction of the creative subject
gives way to a frank confiscation, quotation, excerption, accumulation,
and repetition of already existing images. Lately we have come to
regard this condition
as
postmodem -
decentered,
allegorical,
schizophrenic.
However
we
choose
to
diagnose
its
symptonls,
postmodernism is usually treated by its protagonists and antagonists
alike as a crisis in the cultural authority vested in Western European
institutions. Suddenly it becomes possible that we are just others, that
we ourselves are an "other" among others.2 What is at stake in this
kind of pluralisnl is our sense of identity as a culture. In the modern
period, the claim of work of art to represent some vision of the world
was based on the universality of modem aesthetics, on something like
Kant's dream that the judgment oftaste is universal. Not only does the
postmodern at work claim no such authority, it actually seeks to
undermine all such claims, and hence its deconstructive thrust.
Postmodern thought is no longer binary, and what we must learn to
conceive is difference without opposition.3 For Jameson, the loss of
narrative is equivalent to the loss of our ability to locate ourselves
historically, hence his diagnosis ofpostmodernism as "schizophrenia",
i.e. meaning that is characterized by its collapsed sense oftemporality.
The great recitals ofmodernity are all parables ofmastery over nature;

Postmodern Aesthetics
345
nonillusionistic objects presented a new and original source of
interplay between artistic expressions and the experience of the
everyday world. "Collage" is the transfer ofmaterials from one context
to another, and "montage" is the dissemination of these borrowings
through the new settings. Photography is a collage machine (perfected
in television) producing simulacra of the life-world. Photography
selects and transforms a fragment of the visual continuum into a new
frame. The photographic image signifies itself and something else, for
in it the real is viewed as an element of discourse (as pointed out by
Sergei Eisenstein), montage does not reproduce the real but intervenes
in the world - not to reflect but to change reality.9
Barthes concludes that the categories of literature and criticism
can no longer be kept apart, that now there are only writers. Authors
and critics both face the same material; the critic's text is an analogy
with
a distorted perspective,
which
in post-criticism
is given
expression
by
means
of collage
or
montage. 10
Derrida
has
consequently pointed out that what critical vangardism cannot bear is
for anyone to tamper with language. Even vangard criticism can
accept more readily the most apparently revolutionary positions if only
they do not affect language and all the juridical an political
assumptions they imply. 11 It is not a question of "rejecting" these
notions, Derrida writes; they are necessary. And, at least at present,
nothing is conceivable for us without them. Since these concepts are
indispensable for unsettling the heritage to which they belong, we
should be even less prone to renounce them. 12 Derrida's alternative to
"mimetologism", then, does not abandon or deny reference, but
rethinks reference in another way. As Aristotle provides a theory of
tragedy (mimesis) and a method (formal analysis) for the study of all
literary modes, Derrida in a text such as Glas (identified as the
"exemplary" text of post-structuralism) offers a theory of montage
(grammatology) and a method (deconstruction) for working with any
mode of writing. 13 Whether in spoken or in written discourse, no
element can function as a sign without referring to another element
that itself is not simply present. Indeed nothing, either among the
elements or within the system, is anywhere ever simple present or
absent.
Everywhere there are differences and traces of traces. 14
Collage's heterogeneity produces a signification that can be neither
univocal nor stable; each cited element breaks the continuity or the
hierarchy of discourse, and leads necessarily to a double reading: that
of the fragment as incorporated into a new whole, a different totality.

346
Soft Logic
Thus, the art ofcollage proves to be one ofthe most effective strategies
ofrepresentation. 15
Such an undecidable reading effect, oscillating between presence
and absence, is just what Derrida tries to achieve in his publishing of
two books under one cover. 16 The tendency of Western philosophy
throughout its history has been to attempt to pin down and fix a
specific signified to a given signifier (logocentrism), but this violates,
according to grammatology, the nature of language, which functions,
not in terms of matched pairs (signifier/signified) but of couplers and
couplings. Every sign, linguistic or nonlinguistic, spoken or written, in
a small or large unit, can be cited, put between quotation marks, and
in so doing can break with every given context, engendering an
infmity of new contexts in a manner that is altogether illimitable. 17 In
criticisnl
as
in
literature,
collage takes the
form
of citation,
grammatology being the theory of writing as citation. I8 Derrida's
discussion of montage writing as "grafting" in Dissemination is itself
couched in the collage style (it does what it says). Collage writing is a
kind of theft which violates "property" in every sense - intellectual
property protected by copyright as well as the properties of a given
concept. Writing, in short, is a simulacrum of "true sense", but true
sense from Plato to positivism, is what post-criticism puts into
question. There is no simple reference, and it becomes apparent that
representation without reference is the description of the way film or
tape functions as a "language". The temporal oscillation generated in
this play between presence and absence is what Derrida terms
difference. Contrary to Heidegger, who claimed that art "speaks",
Derrida insists on its capacity to work without concepts and without
conclusions. Deconstruction proves without showing, without entailing
anything, without an available thesis; it transforms itself in this
process rather than advancing a signifiable object of discourse. If
constitutes a hybrid of literature and criticism, art and science,
demonstrating that knowledge of an object of study may be obtained
without conceptualization or explanation. Post-criticism functions with
an epistemology of .performance - knowing as making, producing,
doing, acting - similar to Wittgenstein's account of knowing as the
mastery ofa technique.
Whereas modernist theory presupposes that the art object can be
substituted metaphorically for its referent, postmodemism neither
brackets nor suspends the referent but instead works to problematize
the activity of reference. 19 Describing one theory under the image of

Postmodern Aesthetics
347
another, traditional criticism "suspends" the surface of the text,
applying a terminology of levels and of hidden meanings. Post-critics,
by contrast, write with the discourse of others (the already written) as
proposed by Walter Benjamin, who was the principal precursor of such
post-critical use of collage-allegory. Montage became for him the
active form of allegory, the ability to connect dissimilars in such a way
as to "shock" people into new recognitions and understandings.20
Revealing the conventional academic book as an outdated mediation
between two different filing systems,21 Benjamin wanted to write a
book made up entirely of quotations in order to purge all subjectivity
and allow the self to be the vehicle for the expression of "objective"
cultural tendencies.22 The ''truth'' that Benjamin had discovered was
that allegory is not an arbitrary representation of the idea that it
portrays; it is instead the concrete expression of this idea'smaterial
foundation.23 Benjamin's procedure was to collect and reproduce in
quotation the contradictions of the present without resolution. The
collage strategy was itselfthe image of the breakup, the disintegration
of civilization in the modem world and, once articulated, the material
could be rearranged in order to render intelligible its ''truth''. The
thinker reflects on the sensuous, nonidentical reality, not in order to
eliminate it, nor to butcher it to fit the Procustrean bed of mental
categories, or to liquidate its particularity by making it disappear
under abstract concepts. Instead, the thinker, like the artist, proceeds
mimetically and, in the process of imitating matter, transforms it so it
can be read as a nonanalogical expression of social truth.
In
philosophy no less than in artwork, form is not indifferent to context.
But it is important to realize that this object-become-thing in
montage/allegory functions in terms of a representation that is neither
allegorical nor symbolic in the traditional sense. The interest is in the
concrete particular, with what since Plato has been dismissed as
transitory and insignificant, and which Hegel called "foul existence".24
J. Hillis Miller points out that a deconstructive reading of a given
work is not simply parasitical on the obvious univocal reading:25 the
selection of texts is not itself random, but a major part of the critical
statement. For Derrida, deconstruction is a process of decomposition at
work within the very root metaphors - the philosophemes - ofWestem
thought. In other words, what those who attack post-modernism as
parasitical have not realized is that montage-allegory provides the very
technique of popularization, for communicating the knowledge of the
cultural disciplines to a general public. Postmodernism, however, is

348
Soft Logic
not widely accepted or even understood nowadays.
Most post-
modernisms constitute specific reactions against established forms of
modernism that have become prevalent in universities, museums, art-
galleries, and foundations. There is an effacement and erosion in
postnlodernism of the older distinction between high culture and so-
called mass or popular culture. The immense fragmentation and
privatization of modem literature - its disintegration into a host of
distinct styles and nlannerisms - foreshadows deeper and more general
tendencies in social life. Each group comes to speak its private
language, each profession develops its private code or idiom and,
finally each individual becomes a linguistic island, separated from
anyone else. But in that case, the very possibility of linguistic norms in
terms of which one could articulate such languages and styles
vanishes, and we would have nothing but stylistic diversity and
heterogeneity.26 It thus becomes apparent that this kind of extreme
individualism is largely ideological, creating an aesthetic dilemma for
contemporary artists and writers. That is one reason why postmodern
art is increasingly about art itself: for there has been a tendency in
postmodemism to argue that reference is a myth, and that one can no
longer talk about the "real" as external or objectively given. The
tendency in structuralism has been to dispel the old conception of
language as naming, which involves a one-to-one correspondence
between signifier and signified. We do not translate the individual
signifier or words that make up a sentence back into their signifieds;
rather, we read the whole sentence, and it is from the relationship of
its words or signifieds that a more global meaning is derived. For
Lacan, the experience oftemporality is also an effect of language. The
schizophrenic has a far more intense experience of any given present
of the world than we do because our own present is always part>of
some larger set of projects that force us selectively to focus our
perceptions. We do not globally receive the outside world as an
undifferentiated vision, but are always engaged in using it, in
attending to this or that object or person within it. The signifier in
isolation becomes ever more material or literal, ever more vivid in
sensory ways, whether the new experience is attractive or terrifying. In
normal speech we try to see through the materiality of words, (their
strange sounds and printed appearance, voice timbre, peculiar accent,
and the like) towards their meaning. But as meaning is lost, the
materiality of the words becomes obsessive, as when children repeat a
word over and over until its sense is lost and it becomes an

Postmodern Aesthetics
349
incomprehensible incantation. A signifier that has lost its signified has
thereby become transformed into an image.27
Modernism was originally oppositionist; it posed as a scandalous
and offensive art attempting to shock the middle-class public by being
ugly, dissonant, bohemian, and sexually offensive. It was an outrage to
good taste and to common sense, a provocative challenge to the
reigning reality and performance principles of early 20th-century,
middle-class society. But not only are Joyce and Picasso no longer
considered weird and repulsive; they have themselves become classics,
and now look rather realistic to us. Indeed, there is little in either the
form or the content of postmodem art that contemporary society finds
intolerable or scandalous. The most offensive forms of this art are all
taken in stride by society, and they are even commercially successful
unlike the productions of early modernism. Commodity production -
our clothing, furniture, buildings and other artifacts is intimately tied
up with changes in style, and are due to artistic experimentation. Our
advertising is fed by postmodemism in the arts and would be
inconceivable without it. By the early 1960s, modernism had emerged
as the dominant aesthetics and, consequently, it was felt to have
beconle part of the academic tradition on the part of a whole new
generation of poets, painters and musicians.28 There is the prevalent
awareness that at some point following World War II a new kind of
society began
to
emerge
variously described
as
postindustrial,
multinational, capitalistic, consumer, media, and the like. New types
of consumption, planned obsolescence, an ever more rapid rhythm of
fashion and style changes, the penetration ofadvertising and television
throughout society, universal standardization, a net of superhighways,
and the arrival of automobile culture - these are some of the features
that would seem to mark a radical break with that older prewar society
in which modernism was still an underground movement. 29 Jameson
emphasizes that the emergence of postmodernism is closely related to
this moment of late, consumer, or multinational capitalism, and the
disappearance of a sense of history due to a perpetual change that
obliterates traditions.
Baudrillard points out that the television image is the ultimate
and perfect object for this new era for it reflects a regulated system,
control, and global managenlent of the ensemble. What used to be
taken as metaphor as mental or metaphorical sense, is henceforth
projected into a reality that is also that of simulation.30 Advertising
invades
everything,
and
there
is
an
omnipresent
visibility of

350
Soft Logic
enterprises, brands, and social interlocutors, whereas the traditional
public
spaces
of the
street
and
market-place
disappear.
Not
surprisingly, this loss of public space brings about a loss of private
space as well, since the one is no longer a spectacle and the other no
longer a secret. Unlike the object that never completely gives up its
secret, the commodity remains always accessible and readable. The
promiscuous communication networks may fascinate us, but such
attraction remains superficial as real passion disappears. Baudrillard
argues that we now live in a new form of schizophrenia, at too great a
proximity to everything. What characterizes the schizophrenic is not
loss of the real, the pathos of distance and radical separation, as is
commonly believed,
but very much
the
opposite,
the
absolute
proximity and impossibility ofretreating from things, which induces a
feeling of defenselessness. This results in a loss of interiority and
intimacy. Said is also convinced that the cult of expertise and
professionalism has so restricted our scope of vision that a positive
doctrine ofnoninterference has set in. According to this doctrine, most
crucial policy questions affecting human existence are best left to
"experts" who supposedly know how things really work. Critics read
each other and care about little else.3l
The trouble with such
interpretation is that it tends to homogenize evidence since it aspires to
be accepted at almost any cost. We suffer from an arbitrary notion of
history as a canon of classics that was developed by professors of
literature. By elevating the subject beyond his or her time and society,
an exaggerated respect for single individuals is produced. An almost
invariable rule is that very little of the circumstances making
interpreting activity possible is allowed to be considered. If the study
of literature is only about literary representation, then it must be the
case that writing, reading, and producing humanities, the arts and
letters are essentially ornamental. Literary studies are taken to be not
about society but about masterpieces in need of periodic adulation and
appreciation. The particular mission of the humanities is, in the
aggregate, to represent noninterference in the affairs of the everyday
world. There is the mystification of science through the promotion of
formalized decision methodologies, the restoration of the authority of
expertise, and the use of science as legitimization for social policy.
Said concludes that we need to break out of the disciplinary ghettos in
which, as intellectuals, we have been confmed.

Notes
Postmodern Aesthetics
351
1 Hal Foster, "Postmodernism: A Preference," in The Anti-Aesthetic,
Essays on Postmodern Culture, ed. Hal Foster, Port Townsend, WA: Bay
Press, 1983, p. ix.
2 Paul Ricoeur, "Universal Civilization and National Cultures," (1961)
in History and Truth, trans. Chas. A. Kelbley, Evanston: Northwestern
University Press, 1965, p. 278.
3
Craig
Owens,
"The
Discourse
of
Others:
Feminists
and
Postmodernists," in The Anti-Aesthetic, p. 62.
4 M. Heidegger, Die Zeit des Weltbi/des 1938, published 1953.
5 Owens, "The Discourse ofOthers," p. 70.
6 Gregory L. Ulmer, "The Object of Postcriticism," in The Anti-
Aesthetic, p. 83.
7 Richard Kostelanetz, ed., Esthetics Contemporary,
Buffalo, NY:
Prometheus, 1978.
8 Edward Fry, Cubism, New York, NY: McGraw Hill, n.d., p. 27.
9 Ulmer, "The Object ofPostcriticism," p. 86.
10 Roland Barthes, Critique et verite, Paris: Seuil, 1966, pp 68-9.
11 Jacques Derrida, "Living On: Borderlines," in Deconstruction and
Criticism, New York, NYU: Seabury, 1979, pp. 94-5.
12
Jacques
Derrida,
Of Grammatology,
trans.
Gayatari
Spivak,
Baltimore, MD: John Hopkins University Press, 1976, pp. 14-15.
13 Ulmer, "The Object ofPostcriticism," p. 87
14 Jacques Derrida, Positions, trans. A. Bass, Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press, 1981, p. 26.
15 Group Mu eds. Collages, Paris: Union Generale, 1978, pp. 34-5.
16 l Tlmer, "The Object ofPostcriticsim," p. 88.
17 Jacques Derrida, "Signature Event Context," in Glyph (1977), p. 185.
18 cfCollages, p. 301.
19 Craig Owens, "The Allegorical Impulse: Toward a Theory of
Postmodernism," October 12 (1980), p. 84.
20 Stanley Mitchell, "Introduction" to Walter Benjamin's Understanding
Brecht, trans. Anna Bostock, London: New Left Books, 1977, p. xiii.
21 Walter Benjanlin, One-Way Street and Other Writings, trans. E.
Jephcott and K. Sharper, London: New Left Books, 1977, p. 62.
22 Ulmer, "The Object ofPostcriticism," p. 97.
23 Susan Buck Morss, The Origin of Negative Dialectics, London:
Macmillan, 1977, p. 56.
24 Ibid., p. 69.
25 J. Hillis Miller, "The Critic as Host," Critical Inquiry 3 (1977), p.
439.

352
Soft Logic
26 Frederic Jameson, "Postmodemism and Consumer Society," in The
Anti-Aesthetic, p. 114.
27 Ibid., p. 120.
28 Ibid., p. 124.
29 Ibid., p. 125.
30 Jean Baudrillard, "The Ecstasy of Communication,"
in The Anti-
Aesthetic, p. 128.
31
Edward
W.
Said,
"Opponents,
Audiences,
Constituencies
and
Community," in The Anti-Aesthetic, p. 140.

Aesthetics

Chapter Twenty-Seven
Gadamer's Aesthetics
Gadamer is concerned with the sense we might speak of as the truth in
a work of art. His point is that we gain access through the arts to an
irresistible truth that the dogmatic application of scientific truth tends
to overlook. His reader is left in no doubt that concentration on method
can conceal much that art and history have to teach us. 1 Modem
writers and artists may frequently have understood themselves as being
in revolt against previous forms of art, but their real target was often
no more than the aesthetic definition of art developed in the late
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. In Gadamer's account, modern
art does not so much break with tradition but extends the awareness of
our heritage as pointed out be Hegel. When Hegel spoke of art as a
thing of the past, he meant that art was no longer understood as a
presentation of the divine in the unproblematic way in which it had
been understood in the Greek world. Hegel's real thesis was that while
for the Greeks the divine was principally and properly revealed in their
own aesthetic fomls of expression, this kind of reverence became
impossible with the arrival of Christianity. The truth of Christianity
with its more profound insight into the transcendence of God could no
longer be adequately expressed within the visual language of art or the
imagery of poetic language. In the nineteenth century, every artist
lived with the knowledge that he could no longer take for granted the
former unproblematic communication between himself and those
among whom he lived and for whom he created. A new challenge
arose in the second half of the twentieth century by the breakdown of

356
Soft Logic
the status of linear perspective, which was one of the fundamental
presuppositions of the visual arts as practiced in recent centuries.2
Linear perspective is not a self-evident fact of aesthetic vision and
expression, since it did not exist at all during the Christian Middle
Ages. It was during the Renaissance, a time of enthusiasm for
scientific and mathematical constructions, that linear perspective
became the norm for painting as an achievement of artistic as well as
scientific progress. Its rejection anticipated even more far-reaching
developments in modern art, as the destruction of traditional foml in
cubism from about 1908 led to the total elimination ofreference to any
external object in aesthetic creation, We can no longer take in a cubist
painting at a glance, but are asked to make an active contribution of
our own ifwe want to make sense ofit.
While modem art is opposed to traditional art, it is also the case
that it has been stimulated and nourished by it. The real question now
is how to distinguish "art" from mechanical production. The artwork
has no real use, and it is part of our natural sense of the beautiful that
we cannot ask why it pleases us. In the Platonic tradition, the
ontological function of the beautiful was to bridge the chasm between
the ideal and the real. Gadamer's appeal to ancient thought makes him
realize that in art and the beautiful we encounter a significance that
transcends all conceptual thought. The truth that is encountered in the
beautiful, and can come to be shared, is not the sort of understanding
that is the result of conceptual analysis. Kant's presumption that
everyone should agree with my aesthetic judgment3 does not imply
that I could convince him by argument, for it does not come about by
producing good reasons or conclusive proofs for one's taste. In so-
called classical art, we often are talking about the production ofworks
that were not originally taken as art, but were encountered as religious
or secular ornaments, objects of worship, the representation of a ruler,
and the like. The aesthetic revolution of modern times led to the
emancipation of art from all such traditional subject matters, and it
began when art insisted on being art and noting else. Kant emphasized
that art is the creation of something exemplary that is not simply
produced by following rules. A work ofart allows us "to go on to think
much that cannot be said.,,4 Kant means that the concept functions as
a kind of sounding board, capable of articulating the free play of the
imagination. Culture is quite inconceivable without an element of
play, as J. Huizinga5 has shown, play here appears as self-movement
that does not pursue any particular end or purpose. One of the

Gadamer's Aesthetics
357
prevailing impulses of modem art has been the desire to eliminate the
distance separating the audience from a word of art. A genuine
experience of a work of art can exist only for someone who partici-
pates actively himself. Its identity consists precisely in there being
something to "understand," as the work issues a challenge that it
expects to be met. The participants belong to the play, for every work
of art leaves the person who responds to it some leeway, a space to be
filled out by him. There is always some reflective or intellectual
accomplishment involved, whether I deal with traditional forms of art
handed down to us, or whether I am challenged by modem forms.
Reading is not just scrutinizing or taking one word after another; it
means performing a constant hermeneutic movement guided by the
anticipation ofthe work.
Gadamer follows Heidegger in holding that the symbolic in
general, and the symbolic in art in particular, rest upon an intricate
interplay of showing and concealing. Heidegger emphasized· that the
Greek concept of aletheia (concealment) only represents one side of
man's fundamental experience ofthe world.6 The work of art does not
refer to something else but signifies an increase in being, and this is
what distinguishes it from all technological achievement. Against
Hegel, Heidegger argued that truth in art can only insufficiently be
represented in philosophy, and that this is precisely why we need art.
Art is only encountered in a form that resists pure conceptualization.
Thus, the sense of the symbolic lies in the fact that it is not located in
an ultimate meaning that could be recovered in intellectual terms. All
art,
whether
traditional
or
contemporary,
demands
constructive
activity on our part.7 It is not allegory in the sense that it says one
thing and gives us to understand something else; rather there is a
fundamental similarity between the objective vision with which we
orient ourselves in the world, and the claim art makes upon us. We
should remember that we learn to read pictures, and that one picture
may not become accessible to us as quickly as another. The longer we
allow ourselves to dwell upon a work of art, the more it displays its
manifold riches to us. Recognition means knowing something as that
with which we are already acquainted, and it is the proper function of
the symbolic, and the symbolic content of the language of art, to
accomplish this. As finite beings we always already find ourselves
within certain traditions irrespective of whether we are aware of them
or whether we deceive ourselves into believing that we can start from
scratch. Indeed our attitude does very little to diminish the power that

358
Soft Logic
tradition has over us. Art, like any festive celebration, is meaningful
only for those who actually take part in it.
Gadamer emphasizes that we only interpret something when its
meaning is not clearly stated or when it is ambiguous. Classical
examples of things that require interpretation are the flight of birds,
oracles, dreams, pictorial images, and enigmatic writings. We have
only to interpret that which has a multiplicity of meanings.8 Art
demands interpretation because of its inexhaustible ambiguity, and
because it cannot be satisfactorily translated into terms of conceptual
knowledge. This applies ·no less to poetry, for words are not merely
complexes of sounds; they are meaning gestures that point away fron1
themselves. Interpretation is already part of all composition.9 The
ambiguity of poetic language answers to the ambiguity of human life
as a whole and therein lies its unique value. What poetry interprets for
us and point to is not, of course, the same as what the poet intends, for
what the poet intends is in no way superior to what anyone else
intends -
poetry does not consist in intending something else.
Whenever we find ourselves in the presence of real poetry, it always
transcends both poet and interpreter. The poet's own self-conception
or conscious situation is guided by many different possibilities of
reflective self-understanding, and is quite different from what he
actually accomplishes if the poem is a success. The truth of poetry is
not subject to the distinction of true and false as it was understood by
hostile philosophers who claimed that "poets tell many lies."lO
Gadamer explains that it is precisely the dearth of the symbol that
characterizes contemporary art in all its forms. All symbols facilitate
recognition, and the dearth of the symbol that is characteristic of our
times reflects the growing unfamiliarity and impersonality ofthe world
around us. In painting, we encounter these signs as the surface
elements of point, line, and color, yet the meaning ascribed to such
signs remains
intangible,
ineffable,
and
incommensurable with
anything else we have ever experienced. Nevertheless, a dynamic
interplay has been captured and in this manner a solution has been
found, for there is a meaning in all these forms of modern art, even
though it is a meaning that cannot be rendered explicit. Since the time
of the Baroque and Christian-humanistic expressions associated with
it, there is no longer a unified symbolic language capable of gaining
our acceptance.
Hegel understood "substance" as something that supports us,
although it does not emerge into thought ofreflective consciousness. It

Gadamer's Aesthetics
359
is something that can never be fully articulated, even though it is
absolutely necessary for the attainment of clarity, consciousness,
expression, and communication. Hegel invoked the idea of substance
to grasp the nature ofthe spirit of a people or the spirit of an age - the
all-pervasive reality that supports us, but does not become fully
conscious in anyone particular individual. We are always other and
much more than we know ourselves to be, and what exceeds our
knowledge is precisely our real being. I I When we are at a loss for
words, what we want to say is something for which we have to seek
new words. In European painting, such speechlessness began with the
still-life and the landscape, for when we encounter such subjects in a
painting, they clearly do not require the same degree of interpretation
as did the depiction's of gods and men in classical art. Here it seems
that the sensible world around us finds expression in a language that
needs no words. I2 The still-life enjoys a unique freedom in the
arrangement of its subject matter because the "objects of composition
are things that we can move around: fr'uit, flowers, everyday objects -
anything, in fact, that we choose to display. Compositional freedom
thus begins with the subject matter itself: and to that extent the still-
life anticipates the compositional freedom ofmodern art. It was a truly
momentous event when, at the beginning of this century, the unity of
our pictorial experience began to dissolve and splinter into a great
variety ofpossible forms. We live in a world ofplay, design, assembly,
technical competition, delivery, and sale, a world that is dominated by
advertising techniques that strive to render the fmished product
obsolete once it has become an article of consumption, and supplant it
by something new and different. There are still many skeptics who
consider abstract painting to be nothing more than a fashion, and
consider the art business to be ultimately responsible for its success.
Gadanler emphasizes that ifthe visual artist could express what he-has
to say in words, he need not create images to being with.
The truly nlomentolls invention of alphabetic script has enabled
us to capture human experience by means of a combination of abstract
individual signs in an orthographic system. In part this has already
influenced the way in which we perceive images; we no longer see
these paintings as copies of a reality that presents a unified view with
an instantly recognizable meaning. Gadamer is well within the
Aristotelian traditio!1 according to which all art is a form of recog-
nition that serves to deepen our knowledge of ourselves, and thus our
familiarity with the world as well. 13 He points out that poetic language

360
Soft Logic
has a particular and unique relationship to truth, for every poem
worthy of the name is quite different from all fonns of motivated
speech. What the poet intends and what motivates him to say this or
that are not the issue. When we grow up in a language, the world is
brought close to us, and comes to acquire a certain stability. Language
always
furnishes
the
traditional
articulations
that
guide
our
understanding of the world because when something is recognized, it
has liberated itself from the uniqueness and contingency of the
circumstances in which it was encountered. Gadamer follows the
Aristotelian tradition according to which poetry participates in the
truth of the universal. 14 But he points out that unconscious factors,
compulsive devises, and interests not only detennine our behavior but
our consciousness as well. I5 We discover fonns of play in the most
serious kinds of human activity: in ritual, in the administration of
justice, and in various fonns of social behavior generally. Human
productivity exhibits an enonnous variety of ways of trying things out,
rejecting them, succeeding, and failing. Art "intends" something, and
yet it is not what it intends. The work of art has something of the "as
if' character that we recognize as an essential feature of play. There
has always been the tendency to link the experience of art with the
notion of play. Art as imitation enables us to see more than so-called
reality because in it play and seriousness interact.
Notes
I Robert Bernasconi in Hans-Georg Gadamer, The Relevance of the
Beautiful and Other Essays, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986, p.
xii.
2 Ibid., p. 7.
3 I. Kant, Critique of Judgment, trans. J. H. Bernard, New York, NY:
Hafuer, 1951, sec. 22, p. 76.
4 Ibid., p. 160.
5 Johann Huizinga, Homo Ludens, London: Paladin, 1970.
6 Martin Heidegger, "The Origin of the Work of Art," trans. A.
Hofstadter, in Poetry Language Play, New York, NY: Harper & Row, 1971,
pp.58-72.
7 Gadamer, The Relevance ofthe Beautiful and Other Essays, p.37.
8 Ibid., p. 69

9 Ibid., p. 70.
10 Ibid., p. 73.
11 Ibid., p, 78~
12 Ibid., p. 84.
13 Ibid., p. 100.
14 Ibid., p. 120.
15 Ibid., p. 123.
Gadamer 's Aesthetics
361

Chapter Twenty-Eight
Virtue and Taste
One consequence of the dramatic tum in philosophy during the
seventeenth century towards an examination of our experience was a
fixing of attention on the phenomenon of taste. This focus upon our
experience of beauty extended into the study of our subjective,
psychological responses to the natural world and resulted in a
clarification ofthese responses, which is still of interest. Schier argues
that Hume was wrong to assimilate moral judgments to aesthetic
judgments.! Rationality requires us to tailor our ends to our abilities;
while pragmatists tell us to restrain our ambitions, romantics want
them to run free. We should aim at the stars, not to achieve more on
earth, but to have our sights on what is noblest in itselt:2 While
pragmatists want our beliefs constrained by evidence, romantics tell us
to soar beyond evidence. The romantic view has many literary
expressions, but the best illustration of romanticism is Don Quixote:
inspired by the chivalry that no longer fits his world, Quixote pursues
beautiful goals that cannot be realized.
As nineteenth century
psychology has revealed, we humans have deep-seated tendencies to
inner conflict that can be hard to acknowledge, let alone overcome.
Whatever our personal tendencies to irrationality, our modem society
contains many institutions that reinforce thenl, such as advertising.
People whose goals conflict often oscillate between them.
The
possession of taste is something we value highly, for it would seem
that its possession makes its possessor a better person. Good taste
requires aesthetic sensitivity. Whereas aesthetic and moral sensitivity

364
Soft Logic
are different, there is at least a widespread belief that developed
aesthetic taste should have a beneficial effect upon moral character.
Basically, aestheticism is allowing aesthetic principles to overrule
moral principles. One reason why people may be alert to matters of
taste is that lapses oftaste may provide insights into character that are
not so easily obtained otherwise. Similarities of attitude and outlook
smooth the path of friendship and affection between people. We value
intelligence in itself, and not just because it is a help in the attainment
of wisdom and the performance of good works. Good taste, Brooks
argues, is a perfection of our emotional nature.3 It has a tendency to
improve us morally and make us wiser. It can be a guide to character
but, beyond these instrumental merits it is a good in itself. In order to
appreciate it, one needs to possess it in some measure oneself. Mill, in
open defiance of the Benthamite belief that pushpin is as good as
poetry, says that no intelligent person could consent to be a fool, even
though he should be persuaded that the fool, the dunce, or the rascal is
better satisfied with their lot that he is with his.4 These higher and
lower grades of existence are associated with enjoying or not enjoying
the higher pleasures - in short, with taste. Moreover, taste is closely
associated with social class. For the snob, people with taste form a sort
ofnatural kind; they have a distinctive character. Possession oftaste is
manifested not only in aesthetic choice, but in qualities like urbanity
and imaginativeness. By and large, the higher the social class, the
better the taste, but good taste is exercised differently in different
cultures. Those who hold important positions and function adequately
in them are likely to be educated and appreciators of Mill's higher
virtues. Those without these advantages are less likely to function so
adequately.
There are obvious advantages to be able to tell at a glance
whether food is fresh, and an animal or plant is healthy. Our ancestors
have had good reason to be aware of, and to be attracted by, what is
healthy and well-proportioned. If in multiple photography male and
female human beings are superimposed to form composite male or
female faces, the result, it seems, is a pair of surprisingly beautiful
faces, and not the characterless features we might have expected.
People are beautiful in so far as they approximate to the human norm,
the evolutionary explanation of our having such tastes is that what is
beautiful is also socially engineered. This may also serve to explain
Hermann Weyl's apparently shocking claim that he had always tried
to unite the true with the beautiful, but that when he had to choose~J!~__

Virtue and Taste
365
over the other, he usually chose the beautifu1.5 A great scientist's
educated sensibility is sometimes more reliable than what can - at the
time - be demonstrated by less subtle wits.6 The philistine wishes us to
believe that efficiency is all that matters to us, but efficiency is
essentially instrumentalist. Things can only be efficient for definite
ends. The philistine transforms all things into tools, but leaves himself
no goal in terms of which such instrumental efficiency can be
calculated except sensual pleasure or the feeling of power over others.
Modem subjectivists are difficult to convince - partly, no doubt,
because they admit no objective rational obligation to be convinced by
anything. Natural selection has produced many ways of solving social
and personal problems, but the creatures concerned cannot usually be
supposed to have it in mind to solve these problems. What attracts
them in the direction they must go is not the thought of a solution.
They do things because, at the time, they want to, and what they want
to do is usually what they need to do if their kind of creature is to
survive. Animals do not court and mate in order to have offspring
whereas we, who can conceive of having offspring and of acting
towards that goal, can also take steps to mate and not have offspring.7
Our goals are not determined by our biology; what we choose to value
need not be what has guided natural selection, nor need it be what
natural selection has caused us to desire. The virtuous do not act in
order to win the game and are not much troubled if they sometimes
lose: that is why they win.8 We can expect that virtue will prevail in
the sense that too great a departure from the human norm in any
population is likely to eliminate itself over the long run. Most human
beings, accident and illness and corrupt manners permitting, will be
fairly healthy and fairly virtuous.
Natural goods are those things that people will, by and
la~ge,
desire: honor, wealth, -and bodily strength; friendship and good
fortune. Such things, by and large, will assist their fond possessor to
survive and to reproduce his kind. Fashions ofphysical beauty change.
Our morality is founded on our biology, in one sense, just as our
science is founded on our biology; creatures of other imaginable
biological natures would have very different ways of perceiving the
world, and (for all we know) quite different ways of experiencing it.
The world apart from value is a theoretical construct devised for
political purposes quite as much as for "scientific" ones, and not
obviously the only really real world. Clark's conclusion is that the
beautiful is indeed a constraint on what can happen. The idea of

366
Soft Logic
higher and lower pleasures (which is, of course, an idea that goes back
to the Greeks) is in a nutshell the idea,that some types ofpleasures are
better than others, and that the person whose pleasure is in question is
not necessarily the best judge ofits quality. The assumption is also that
intellectual aesthetic and moral pleasures are of higher quality than
physical pleasure, and that when there is a choice one should prefer
the higher pleasures. Even ifwe accept that we should try to behave in
ways characteristic ofour species, we might argue that our species has
a dual nature; we are rational animals, not angels, and it is as
appropriate to human beings to enjoy animal pleasures as it is to enjoy
intellectual pleasures. The ordinary person would be reluctant to
exchange his mixed style with its discontents, both mental and
physical, for a purely intellectual life as for a purely physical one.9 The
language of aesthetics is designed to shield the initiate, disarm the
critic, and exclude the vulgar. It follows that taste cannot be reasoned
about, cannot be taught or learned, and cannot be communicated. It is
something you just "have" if you belong to the elite, and you get it
largely by claiming to have it. Functionalism simply begs the question;
the functionalist, like the utilitarian, is forced to value all human needs
on the same scale, and it is no wonder if he thus misconstrues, or
simply fails to recognize, the more profound. 10 At any rate, let no one
presume to say that such things are only a question oftaste. 11
Our aesthetic judgment about something cannot be made in
abstraction from what sort of thing it is. Different things are beautiful
in different ways, and to say something is beautiful does not provide
the slightest indication about its appearance. 12 When Kant says that
something is "purposive without purpose," all he means is that the
object in question serves some function in our spiritual economy; it is
rewarding or salutary for us.in one way or another. Being caught up in-
fictional worlds and at the same time recognizing their fictionality
involves a delicate balance - even a tension - which accounts for
much of the pleasure and value of imaginary works of art. 13 In the
game of make-believe associated with fiction, readers and viewers can
speak about, refer to, reflect on, and form attitudes towards characters
and events in nluch the same way as their otherworldly companions
can do to one another. 14 But it would be wrong to suppose that the
internal perspective is characterized by special semantic features.
Rather, sentences reflected or thoughts entertained from the internal
perspective are subject, not to linguistic constraints, but to rules of
make-believe. Few philosophers are comfortable with simply admitting

Virtue and Taste
367
fictitious entities into the class of things that can be referred to or can
be the subject of these predictions. Lamarque believes that a more
promising line is simply to take the idea of "character" at face value.
Internally, the problem is epistemological; there are certain facts we
just don't know, but that doesn't disturb our imaginings because
ignorance about people is familiar to us in the actual world. What we
know, we know as much by description as by acquaintance, just as our
thoughts are as often general as singular. Here there are further
reasons why fictitious and real things seem so intimately connected.15
In the pursuit of knowledge, we naturally strive to an objective
perspective transcending both our individual and subjective points of
view, but also those of our species and world: the attempt is made to
view the world not from a place within it, or from the vantage point of
a special type of life and awareness, but from nowhere in particular.16
From the internal perspective, I am immersed in my projects, desires,
and achievements, and take them seriously, but from a more detached
external point of view, my petty strivings can come to seem pointless
or without justification, making my life seem objectively insignificant.
I am, nevertheless, unable to extricate myself from an unqualified
commitment to it, and the sense of the absurd is the result of this
juxtaposition.17 The value of adapting an internal perspective to an
imaginary world is that it allows us to adopt a point of view that is not
our own. One difference between fantasy and art is that the former is
self-centered, literally self-indulgent, while the latter seeks more
detachment, a transcending of self-interest. The imaginary worlds of
works of art provide an excellent example of the simultaneous non-
conflicting occurrence of the subjective and objective points of view. 18
When we adopt the viewpoint of and participate in an imaginary
world, we can do so with varying degrees of self-consciousness. In one
familiar view of art, great art is "timeless" or ''universal'' in the sense
that it transcends the circumstances of its production, whether
personal or historical. But however the artist strives to cover his
tracks, in order to portray universal truths timelessly, there is no
escaping the historical rootedness of art. To appreciate these worlds,
we need both an external awareness of their artifice and an internal
involvement with their content. Some readers will insist that fictional
characters be viewed and judged as real people, while for others,
characters should be seen for what they are. No doubt different genres
of writing encourage an emphasis one way or another. But the simple
conclusion must be that imaginative involvement and awareness of

368
Soft Logic
artifice are both indispensable in an appropriate response to imagin-
ative works ofart. 19 Perhaps one reason why we accept artistic fictions
so readily is that the tension between these two attitudes so closely
mirrors that more familiar tension that Nagel notices between our self-
absorbed involvement in our own lives, and our predisposition to stand
back and view ourselves as mere players in a game.20
The distinctive mark of a picture is that it represents its subject
by virtue of looking like what it depicts. But Budd points out that this
naive idea is inadequate as it stands. Perhaps its most important
deficiency is that it operates with the concept of one thing's looking
like another, and that this is a notion too loose to bear such weight. It
is indeed the vagueness of this concept that renders the analysis of
depiction based on it vulnerable to counterexamples and, at the sanle
time allows it further life when a different aspect of the concept is
turned to face the objection. If there is one thing that the most
impressive,
recent,
philosophical
theories
of depicting
are
in
agreement about, it is precisely the negation of the idea that depiction
should be elucidated in terms of one thing's looking like another. A
black and white line drawing does not thereby depict its subject as
lacking color, and a spectator who understands it does not see it as
depicting a colorless state of affairs.21 The artist's intuition is not to
depict a black and white state of affairs, or a colored state of affairs as
being black and white; it is to depict only the spatial structure of a
state of affairs and the comparative brightness of its parts. The
extraction of pictorial content by pictorial perception should not be
thought ofin a simplistic way as an instantaneous occurrence. There is
no such thing as the visual appearance of an object or scene. The
(murky) intuition that depiction is based on a natural, rather than a
purely conventional, relation, can easily be preserved in the face ofthe
obvious fact that, even given constancy ofpoint of view and prevailing-
conditions, there are indefmitely many ways or styles of depicting a
particular kind ofthing.
A philosophically more modest way of calling attention to the
cognitive virtues of art is to claim for it the power not so much to
represent things as they are in themselves, as to represent how they
appear to observers stationed at certain points ofview. But internalized
canons of taste are necessarily unstable. The idea that a painter might
try to paint human perception will strike the philosophical mind as a
bit odd, for it will appear that in order to paint something one must
know what it looks like. However, even if a painting cannot depict

Virtue and Taste
369
perception, it can allude to or intimate facts about perception, in rather
the way that a metaphor like Shakespeare's "Juliet is the sun" alludes
to, but does not state or represent facts about, human love. The idea is
that the power of art consists in giving us truth about how things look
and feel to hunlan beings.22 Works of art do not have a purely visual
interest for us, and their formal power is not independent of the
various thematic uses the artist makes of the form. It might look as
though
the
doctrine of the
radical
autonomy of art,
or
art's
unconditional value, must collapse from the start, for we cannot help
but speak ofart in aesthetic terms, or in terms ofthe intelligence ofthe
work, and these aesthetic and artistic terms immediately impart values
from the outside into the art world. We must understand such
modernists as Eliot and Greenberg as proposing that the standards of
aesthetic excellence are specific to each art, and are not to be
incorporated under standards that cover domains other than that
particular artistic enterprise. If the value of art is thus radically
inconlmensurable with, or unconnected to, our other values, how do
we ever come to be sensitive to the value of art? Sometimes the most
excellent agency can be displayed in the pursuit of ends that are, in
themselves, rather trivial seeming. The last move in a chess game has
no significance apart from the fact that its motive is the result of
worthwhile play. Sometimes these intuitions are summed up in the
thought that what matters is not the product but the process. Art is a
unique kind of value, but we can explain it as emerging out of a
particular structure consisting of other values,
perfectionist and
aesthetic values, that exist independently ofthe art world.
Notes
1 Flint Schier, "Hume and the Aesthetic Agency," Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society 7 1986-7, p. 131.
2 Thomas Hurka, "Excellence: Trying, Deserving, Succeeding," in
Dudley Knowles and John Skorupski, Virtue and Taste, Oxford, England and
Cambridge, MA: Blackwell, 1993.
3 David Brooks, Taste, Virtue and Class," in Virtue and Taste, p. 66.
4 J.S. Mill, Utilitarianism, chp. 2.

370
Soft Logic
5 S. Chandrasekhar, Truth and Beauty, Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press, 1987, p. 52.
6 Stephen R.L. Clark, "Natural Goods and Moral Beauty," in Virtue and
Taste, p. 86.
7 Ibid., p. 90.
8 Ibid., p. 91.
9 Elizabeth Telfer, "The Pleasures of Eating and Drinking," in Virtue
and Taste, p. 108.
10 R.A.D. Grant, "Home Truths: Charles Rennie Mackintosh and the
House," in Virtue and Taste, p. 118.
11 Ibid., p. 122.
12 Anthony Savile, "Architecture, Formalism and the Sense of Selt:" in
Virtue and Taste, p. 136.
13 Peter Lamarque, "In and Out of Imaginary Worlds," in Virtue and
Taste, p. 144.
14 Ibid., p. 145.
15 Ibid., p. 147.
16 Thomas Nagel, Moral Questions, Canlbridge University Press, 1978,
p.208.
17 Thomas Nagel, The View from Nowhere, Oxford University Press,
1986, p. 218.
18 Lamarque, "In and Out ofImaginary Worlds," p. 149.
19 Ibid., p. 151.
20 Ibid.
21 Malcolm Budd, "How Pictures Look," in Virtue and Taste, p. 164.
22 Flint Schier, "Van Gogh's Boots: The Claims of Representation," in
Virtue and Taste, p. 185.

Chapter Twenty-Nine
Acquiring Taste
Traditionally, theories of taste have stressed the close connection
between aesthetic appreciation and the feeling of pleasure. l We think
that a person has taste when he nlakes appreciative remarks that are
intelligent, interesting, suitable, show discrimination, and are not
banal, trivial, or boringly obvious. But we think that he has taste only
if we believe that what he says arises from his own experience, and is
not parroted or feigned. Schaper points out that, on the one hand, we
believe that taste is bound up with the immediacy of feeling, and that
taste judgments, therefore, cannot be derived from principles or
canons. On the other hand, we hold that taste can be cultivated and
educated, and that taste judgments are reasoned appraisal. To have
taste is more like having learned how to read than it is like having a
taste for curry. But while feelings are sometimes not justified by our
reasons, it does not follow that feelings never have reasons. We do not
feel obliged to defend our culinary preferences, whereas aesthetic
preferences can be refuted. Taste judgments are not merely capricious
or idiosyncratic, and giving reasons is legitimate for them. While it is
possible to maintain that the felt delight is primary, and that there is
no reason why feelings should be consistent, Schaper agrees with
Burke that aesthetic preferences are rational in a way culinary ones are
not. A preference for which no reason could be given - like preferring
wine to cider - is not aesthetic. However, finding reasons may modify
our responses, for it alters what we see in the object, and that in tum
affects what we feel towards it. But there are no criteria for

372
Soft Logic
determining judgments of taste as false, as there are for empirical
judgments. Consensus, even if there were one in these matters, would
not amount to a means of assessing the objective validity of individual
judgments.
This does not mean, however, that failing such standards, the
only alternative is to fall back on a simple subjectivism, considering
taste judgments merely as statements of likes and dislikes about which
dispute would be futile. We may not believe in rules of taste, but
neither do we think that in matters of taste anything goes. There is a
way to be found for speaking of errors and lapses of taste, and for the
cultivation and education of taste.2 Taste judgments must be based on
the individual response of the person making them, that is, on the felt
pleasure in or repugnance to, something. Part ofwhat it is for a person
to have taste is to have, among other qualities, those of sensitivity and
discrimination. This, Schaper believes, does more justice to our
intuitions about how tenuous our grip on our emotions often is. There
is always reason for uncertainty, not whether one feels pleasure but
why. Yet individual taste judgn1ents are not on that account corrigible.
What is corrigible is a person's attitude to his feelings. I appeal to all
persons of taste, to those who know its pleasures. They form a
community in which communication is possible, even though not
always easy. So the appeal implicit in the taste judgment that I can
share with the members of a privileged community of taste is not that
others should agree with my particular appraisals but that everyone
should come to see that such appraisals are possible. Such an
aesthetics owes much to Kant and the view that without conceptual-
ization, no communication would be possible. There would be nothing
to communicate, for there would be nothing that was believed or
known. Falk points out that what is a candidate for communicability is
knowledge of feelings, not the feelings themselves.3 To fmd anything
beautiful, Kant insists, is not something one can be argued into; it is to
have a feeling. It is something that. happens to one. Yet, the subject
who experiences "that is beautiful" refers to the object, not to a state of
oneself: It is not, Kant says, a judgment about a psychological fact. To
judge an object beautiful is not to subsume it under concepts. That this
does not happen is the proper reason for saying that we are dealing
with a feeling here, not a knowing. However, feeling something
beautiful, the feelings I have, result not from contingent features in my
own personality, but from a part of human nature that is common to
all. Having an interest (and therefore in suitable circumstances, a

Acquiring Taste
373
feeling) is not a communicable state. It does not arise out of my
following any correct procedures or out ofa nature that I share with all
other men. The mere noticing ofan aspect, as opposed to thinking that
it is important, is something that neither requires nor can receive
justification. The crucial question, Falk suggests, is what we can
suppose ourselves to be sensitive to. The meaningfulness of presenting
a sad sequence of events is not something that can have an external
source. The artist manipulates the material of the world and provides
an object that will only seem nonarbitrary to one who fmds in his own
feelings what will make sense of it - that justifies its exclusions, and
the specific connections it nlakes.
The concept of pleasure has played a double role in the
philosophy of art. It has been thought to be the reason for cultivating
art, since pleasure has been thought to require no justification. At the
same time, pleasure has been considered to be the criterion that
enables us to distinguish between good art and bad art. Sharpe4 rejects
both these views based on the assumption that the art connoisseurs
cultivate art that gives us pleasure. He points out that a great deal of
art is uncomfortable, upsetting, even horrifying, and is not valued any
the less on that account. Tragedy provides the paradigm example of art
that is not pleasing, and the minimum claim we can nlake of art is
merely that it should not be boring, as T.S. Eliot has enlphasized. But
as long as we rely on the consensus ofconnoisseurs, our understanding
of beauty has to explicate the idea in terms of some experimental
response. In the mid-eighteenth century, it was taken for granted that
the response in question was that of pleasure. Both Kant and Schiller
explained art in terms of a certain kind of fit between the inlagination
and understanding, The spectator cannot appreciate the beauty of art if
his response of fit is not based upon the discovery of what the artist's
endeavor is, and what the relevant aesthetic canons are according to
which his statement of fit must be guided.5 Because objects of similar
configuration can be devised in answer to different projects and in
different styles, the very same material features of one work that make
it beautiful may well condemn another to be a dismal and ugly feature.
Savile suggests that given the way beauty characterizing fit has been
designed - simply as fit of work to project - it is hard to understand
why it should deeply engage our affections. While there can be beauty
that is nonattaching, unless it were sometimes found attaching, we
should not be able to say that a man had an aesthetic experience at all.
We should not be able to see a work ofart exhibit sufficient richness of

374
Soft Logic
style to generate those constraints that make a sharp experience of fit
possible.
The world is represented as coherent under the values of style in
point, and the artist's work is only judged to be beautiful insofar as it
is experienced under these values as compelling and making sense.
We cannot make a correct judgment unless in so doing we make the
experimental judgment of coherence or sense. This suggests that the
beauty of nature is parasitic on that of art. Unless we extended the
perception of beauty beyond the sel~ it is hard to see how its norm
could be something that is sufficiently common to form the basis of a
public institution. Cohen6 explains this by focusing on the functional
similarities between works of art and jokes. Failing to be amused by a
good joke is like lack of taste. In failing to make the proper response,
one is not so much wrong as different, and it is a difference that leaves
one outside a vital community. But one cannot will oneself in anymore
than one can will oneself out. The point of telling a joke is the
attainment of community, and likewise the artform induces particular
expectations and forms ofattention. We are all virtually agreed that no
description or explanation of an artwork will do in place of the work.
The explanation of a joke will inevitably be discursive; it will give the
solution discretely, and that will prevent the magical all-at-once kick.
But although exegesis won't be a substitute in either artwork or joke, it
can augment appreciation ofartwork while it seems to destroy the joke
altogether. Cohen points out that when your special background is
called into play, your sensibility is galvanized. The appreciative
audience discovers that it can supply what is needed, and in doing this
it collaborates in the success of jokes and artworks - by creating
intimacy. Our capacity to entertain a thought without accepting it, to
make believe without believing, and to imagine what we know has not
happened are all instrumental in this. It is not necessary for a reader to
share the beliefs ofthe author to enjoy a work offiction or poetry.
We take a lot as intelligible and imaginable that to men of other
times and places would seem queer and nonsensical. We have thus to
accept the essentially perception-relative nature of aesthetic descrip-
tions and their perceptual elusiveness. Pettit emphasizes that you have
to "see" that something is graceful, sad, or charming, and that no
argument can show that it is so. Whether a picture represents this or
that person or scene would seem to depend on factors other than its
color properties. In particular, it would seem to depend on the
painter's
intentions.
But
the
proper
interpretation
of artistic

Acquiring Taste
375
characterizations may have truth value only in a weak sense. To agree
to an aesthetic description is to "see the point," and to justify it is to
justify merely an experience and not a belief.7 Just as one must be
amused before one is fully entitled to describe a joke as funny, so one
must be moved in some non cognitive fashion before one has a full
title to endorse an aesthetic characterization.8 In aesthetics you have to
see for yourself precisely because what you have to "see" is not a
property. Aesthetic characterizations are perceptually elusive, and
what this means is that visual scrutiny ofa picture, necessary though it
might be for aesthetic knowledge, is not always sufficient to guarantee
it. One may look and look and not see its elegance, economy, or
sadness. There is no exercise that is guaranteed to bring the
perceptually elusive into view. Since a picture has many aesthetic
properties, it is posited at once in many different reference classes.
Each ofthese classes can be seen as a dimension, and the concept of a
multidimensional aesthetic space offers a useful way of thinking about
what happens when a picture assumes an overall aesthetic character
for an observer.
Pictures display themselves as suitable objects for a given
aesthetic characterization only insofar as they are cast in appropriate
contrast. Thus, it is not surprising that some observers will look and
look at a picture, and yet fail to come to a point where they can
sincerely assent, on the basis of what they see, to an aesthetic
characterization.9
Pettit
argues
that
a
given
position
will
be
illegitimate, if it means that we cannot make unified sense of the
picture as a whole, that is, if it gives raise to a certain incoherence, or
if it allows to make sense of only part of the picture. 10 But he has to
admit that such holistic constraints need not be taken very seriously,
since the standards ofwhat is a perceptual or aesthetic unity have been
dramatically altered in modem art. It is natural to wonder whether the
idea of transcending special points of view really make sense in
aesthetics.
In David Hume's essay "Of the Standard of Taste," which he
published in 1757, he makes the point that, although common sense
agrees with the "skeptical philosophy" in holding it fruitless to dispute
about matters of taste, common sense also dismisses certain critical
judgments as not merely false, but absurd and ridiculous. This is the
paradox of taste. He tries to show that although the judgment of taste
depends not on reason but on "sentiment," nonetheless, some critics
have better judgment than others. It is a sort of"soft" logic that makes

376
Soft Logic
it possible for them to identify not only what constitutes art but also
what makes it beautiful or significant. While today we no longer
believe that there is a universal standard of taste, we do discover that
in art there is invariably something to be learned and to become
acquainted with. Artists and philosophers - unlike scientists - have
been largely unable to convince each other in their disputes, and one
reason for this is that they accept different standards of relevance in
their arguments. The model of mathematical logic has misled
philosophers since Plato, and made them insist on standards of
decidabilty and finality, which in practice they cannot attain. Even
skeptics (like Hume) accepted this ideal while declaring it unat-
tainable. The "logic" of context and relevance to which they appealed
proved incapable of becoming fully verbalized, let alone adequate for
settling their disputes. It tolerates some ambiguity and even contra-
dictions (like Hume's paradox), but at the same time any such
interpretation takes it for granted that not anything goes. Such soft
logic is different fron1 fuzzy logic in that in fuzzy logic we have a
range of correspondences that can be determined, whereas soft logic
remains usually unquantifiable, as in the interpretation of a text. To
judge that something is relevant is to judge it by analogy, and there is
more than just one way to do this.
Notes
1 Eva Schaper, "The Pleasures of Taste," in Pleasure, Preference and
Value, Studies in Philosophical Aesthetics, ed. Eva Schaper, Cambridge
University Press, 1983, p. 39.
2 Ibid., p. 47.
3
Barrie
Falk,
"The
Comnlunicability of
Feeling,'~ in Pleasure,
Preference and Value, p. 58.
4 R.A. Sharpe, "Solid Joys or Fading Pleasures," in Pleasure, Preference
and Value, p. 86£
5 Anthony Savile, "Beauty and Attachment," in Pleasure, Preference and
Value, p. 103.
6 Ted Cohen, "Jokes," in Pleasure, Preference and Value, p. 120£
7 Roger Scruton, Art and Imagination, London: Methuen, 1974, p. 49.

Acquiring Taste
377
8 Philip Pettit, "The Possibility of Aesthetic Realism," in Pleasure,
Preference and Value, p. 26.
9 Ibid., p. 34.
10 Ibid., p. 35.

Chapter Thirty
Scharfstein's Aesthetic Universal
Scharfstein argues in favor of an aesthetic universal rooted in human
biology. Art, of course, is so varied that anyone can discover artists
with whom he is in sympathy, but this pluralism makes it more
difficult to appreciate the artists whom art historians and critics have
praised.! History teaches us that there is every reason to believe that
our own evaluations of artists will be subjected to extensive re-
evaluations.2 Not surprisingly, the prevalence of a given fashion
influences the choice of exemplary works from the past. Both short-
term and long-term fashions change, and the always victorious present
leaves disturbing inconsistencies. But rejection ofthe past is also much
harder to accomplish than it might seem at first, for something always
remains in one's conscious or unconscious memory. Even the song of
a bird develops in a given sequence, a development that is not unlike
the speech of a child. The observed trends may be the outcome of
chance, which resists scientific explanation much as our own human
history does. The often complicated animal reactions that we think of
as automatic or instinctive are not well-understood. Though parrots do
naturally well with a vocabulary of sounds, and apes with one of
gestures, we find it difficult to fathom the intelligence of nonhumans
because we identify intelligence with our own anatomical structures,
needs, and values. This applies even more to our sense of beauty and
to human art.
Scharfstein argues that even if animals or birds were never either
intelligent or conscious, the likeness of their song and display to our

380
Soft Logic
own would still be convincing. This is because art, too, has biological
grounds.3 The song of birds and of humans has similar uses: to
establish intimacy, to court, claim, warn, and fight. But he has to
admit that no one really knows why certain species of birds have such
an ability to imitate sounds, including those of human speech. He
speculates that birdsong, like human art, creates a pattern of challenge
and response. Like the bird that sings at large to attract a still
unknown listener, an artist tries to attract someone as yet, and perhaps
forever, unknown. Dialects make those who use them more intimately
responsive to one another; they make them more a family, clan, tribe,
or nation. The dialects also make strangers of those who do not use
them. The apes, and particularly chimpanzees, give facial and bodily
expression to sadness, anger, resentment, satisfaction, reassurance,
friendship, and love, nluch as we do. Whether or not apes can learn
syntactic structure, they have imagination enough to deceive on
purpose, for example, by pointing in the wrong direction to mislead a
hunlan searching for food they want to keep for themselves. Imagin-
ation is also implicit in the ability of apes to recognize pictures for
what they are. An ape experienced with pictures can ask for something
by pointing to its picture. Apes can also recognize photographs of
themselves and their own mirror images. A young chimpanzee
brought up with a child scribbled pencil marks on paper just as the
child did. But, ofcourse, painting by an ape is possible only because of
the human material and the human example. What Scharfstein calls
the "art" ofan ape is really a simian response to human curiosity - the
human attempt to see how an ape might fit into the human tradition.
As long as we consider only informal abstraction, the painting of
an ape cannot be distinguished from that ofa human. However, human
art presupposes a cultural context, a web of associations, words, and
memories, which give art its specific significance. Scharfstein himself
realizes that what looks exactly like art in animals may well be
something altogether different,4 so that, strictly speaking, there is no
such thing as proto-art or an aesthetic universal. In early infancy, there
may be signs of preference for music over noise or the mother's voice
over that of another woman, but it is certainly an oversimplification to
reduce the cultural complexities of art to such elementary reactions.
An infant's art naturally expresses his observation of the world, and
his pleasure in recording and imagining it after his own fashion, yet
artists who cultivate simplicity or sincerity do not become children
thereby. To survive, animals learn a traditional fidelity to type of food,

Scharfstein's Aesthetic Universal
381
potential enemies, prey, territories, feeding grounds, courting, shelter,
and migratory routes, but most of this fidelity is genetic, built into
their nervous system. Scharfstein believes that art and play are
invented to unite populations by creating a local dialect and way of
living, so that the function of the aesthetic is mainly to create a sense
of familiarity and mutual support. It means that whoever wants to
appreciate art fully, can do so only by becoming acquainted with the
local tradition - and this leaves little room for the aesthetic universal.
Scharfstein stresses spontaneity and lack of constraint in art, the
appeasement of elementary interests in serving our sensuality. But
there is more to art than the pleasure of manipulating materials and
instruments, as there is in sport. Identifying spontaneity with the art of
children, he comes to look upon art as a mental aberration, a product
of"crazy" Taoists, Romantics, Dadaists, and Surrealists. He sides with
those who identify with the nonmoral whole oforder-in-chaos, or even
with chaos itself, and he interprets the belief in genius as a rejection of
imitation and of academic study. But most artists prefer to believe that
inspiration and intellect, or imagination and the skills of crafts-
manship, can still be joined in a civilized harmony. Scharfstein is
convinced that anything done for its own sake is suspect because (by
defInition) there is no reason for it. Thus, he refuses to believe that
inspired creation may become an end in itselfrather than the means of
life.
It cannot be denied that many writers and artists have shown
evident signs of suffering and mental disturbance, and that in many
cases this has entered deeply into the fabric of their art. Against the
strong human need for tradition, there is an equally intense desire on
the part of some creative individuals to remain stubbornly individual.
By learning to shed his inhibitions, the artist discovers that as good as
such spontaneity may be for his art, it is otherwise unpleasant or even
pathological, and likely to frighten him into self-punishment, silence,
and suicide.5 It seems also that a usual condition for aesthetic creation
is
loneliness
experienced
and
overcome
by
means
of
one's
imagination, a use by which one turns to oneself for the company that
is missing. Scharfstein believes that there is a great deal oftruth in the
stereotyped picture, already in Vasari, of the artist as someone with-
drawn, introspective, independent, imaginative, unpredictable, and
alienated from community expectations. His work requires the artist to
be sensitive to his inner states and to that extent narcissistic, and many
artists feel alienated from their work and are not satisfied with it.

382
Soft Logic
Pride, shame, depression, and a degree of obsessiveness characterize
artists ofall sorts and, even if they regard themselves free individuals,
they usually remain subject to the vagaries of the marketplace.
Whereas Scharfstein believes that the insistence on context is no more
than a refuge from analysis, his own aesthetic universal is said to be
not only biological and psychological but metaphysical, Le. beyond all
context. The "objective" character ofart is supposed to result from the
biological and psychological likeness between individuals, and from
the similar methods by which all communities have tried to preserve
their unity. The function of art is reduced by Scharfstein to that of
uniting individuals who make up a conlmunity as well as to distin-
guish communities from each other. He emphasizes that sensation and
perception, no less than preference and emotions, are the same in all
human beings. That is why different cultures proceed by means of
similar modes of response in what he calls "aesthetic overlap." He
realizes that out of context a work of art must lose its subtlety, and at
the same time he maintains that it retains its proto-or pancultural
values - it is the attempt to remain individual while merging with
what is beyond the individual. The desire to fuse is also evident in
what the artist feels to be inspiration and which links him to
something beyond himself: Hume and those who claimed that beauty
lies in the eyes of the beholder retained the belief in inspiration. This
beliefthat art, or good art, n1ust be inspired, remains as widespread as
ever.6 Taking the aesthetic to be some sort of absolute universal,
Scharfstein links
it to
Einfuhlung
or
empathy,
but
any
such
preestablished harmony between the intentions of the artist and what
the
artwork
comes
to
mean
to
his
audience
remains
highly
problematic.
Notes
1 Ben-Ami Scharfstein, OfBirds, Beasts, and Other Artists, An Essay on
the Universality ofArt, New York, NY: New York University Press, 1988, p.
12.
2 Ibid., p. 21.
3 Ibid., p. 47.
4 Ibid., p. 63.

5 Ibid., p. 166.
6 Ibid., p. 209.
Scharfstein's Aesthetic Universal
383

Art

Chapter Thirty-One
Defining Art
In most traditional theories of art, it is generally assumed that the art
theorist should provide a defmition that enables us to distinguish art
from nonart. Historically such defmitions have been "essentialist," that
is, they presuppose that there is a complete set of necessary and
sufficient conditions for something to be a work of art. It is clear,
however, that traditional theories ofart differ radically in just what the
necessary and sufficient conditions of art may be. Until the nineteenth
century, everyone understood what counted as a work of art. What
such a work as Ulysses or Duchamp's Fountain might be trying to do
or say could not have been taken into consideration by the pre-
twentieth century artworld. These works would have been rejected as
art simply because they did not conform to what was expected as a
proper art medium, a proper formal structure, or a proper subject
matter.! The idea was that if art is a unique cultural activity, then all
kinds of art, e.g. painting, nlusic, and literature, must have sinli1ar
shared characteristics that are not exhibited by other phenomena.
These essential characteristics have been alternatively defmed as
mimesis, beauty, expressiveness, symbolisnl, or significant form. The
history of aesthetics is, in part, a running dispute about what qualities
best define and apply most uniquely to art. But the claim that art is a
unique
cultural
activity
becomes
questionable
when
literally
everything is so called. Thus, in our century the relatively simple
distinctions between art and other artifacts have broken down, and
traditional concepts for evaluating works of art have been challenged.

388
Soft Logic
For Kennick and many early "analytic aestheticians," such theories as
Croce's and Collingwood's are fundamentally flawed by their reliance
on an underlying assumption that it is possible and useful to attempt to
answer a question as broad as the one Croce attempts - namely "What
is Art?" It is to hold that for the term art to apply to any work there
must be a common nature that applies to all works of art and to
nothing else. This is the essentialist fallacy of supposing that the
meaning of every common noun must designate a feature shared by
every object denoted by that word.
Philosophers analyzing the
meaning of the word should, therefore, pay attention to the variety of
uses of the word art, and not, like Croce, look for some nonexistent
essence shared by all artworks.2 We ought to be able to look at the
various works of art and see what art is - yet we fail to do so. We are,
therefore, inclined to think that its essence must be something hidden,
something that only the aesthetician can see.
But Kennick points
out that
no
amount of looking
and
scrutinizing gives us what we want. The word "art" has complicated
variety of uses, which is nowadays called a conlplex "logic." It is
neither a word coined in the laboratory or studio to name something
that is hitherto escaped our attention, nor is it a relatively simple term
of common parlance like star or tree which names something with
which we are all quite familiar. It is the complicated concepts like
space, time, reality, change, art, knowledge, and many more like them
that give us trouble. Dictionaries and their definitions are of use in
answering questions ofthe form "What is x?" only in relatively simple
and comparatively trivial cases. Kennick concludes that we are able.to
separate the objects that are works of art from those that are not
because we know English; that is, we know how to correctly use the
word "art" and to apply the phrase ''work of art." "Correctly" alld
"properly" here have nothing to do with any "common nature" or
"common denominator" of all works of art; they have merely to do
with the rules that govern the actual and commonly accepted usage of
the word.3 Admittedly, there are occasions on which we are not sure
whether something is a work of art or not. But this merely reflects the
systematic vagueness of the concept in question, an "open texture,"
which the definitions of the aestheticians do nothing at all to remove.
On such occasions we can indeed tighten the texture, remove some of
the vagueness by making a decision, drawing a line; and this is what
curators and purchasing committees of art museums are sometimes
forced for practical reasons to do. But in doing so, they and we are not

Defining Art
389
discovering anything about art.4 It is the compulsion to reduce the
complexity of aesthetic concepts to simplicity, neatness, and order that
moves the aesthetician to make his first mistake, to ask "What is Art"
and so to expect to fmd an answer that can be given to "What is
helium?"s There is no such thing as the aesthetic experience, since
different sorts of experiences are properly referred to as aesthetic.
There is, however, a fruitful and enlightening search for similarities
and resemblances in art, which the search for a common denominator
sometimes furthers - the search for family resemblances. One of the
prime reasons for the aesthetician's search for defmition ofart, beauty,
and the rest, is his supposition that unless we know what art or beauty
is, we cannot say what good art or beautiful art is. Traditional
aesthetics mistakenly assumes that responsible criticism is impossible
without standards or criteria universally applicable to all works of art.
Kennick points out, however, that we can and do praise art for a
variety of reasons, and not always the same variety. Since "art" and
"beauty" do not name one and only one substance and attribute
respectively, it is no wonder we cannot fmd the thing they name, nor
to render intelligible the felt discovery that they name one thing.
Art has no function or purpose in the sense in which knives or
telescopes have functions. There is no one thing we do with all works
of art: some we hang, some we play, some we perform, some we read,
some we look at, some we listen to, some we analyze, some we
contemplate. There is no special aesthetic use for works of art. In the
arts we are not as a rule interested in uniformity, and those critics and
aestheticians who are interested in uniformity issue their alleged
defmitions as slogans of reform. Kennick emphasizes that criticism
. has in no way been hampered by the absence of generally applicable
canons or norms; different works ofart, are,or may be, praiseworthy or
blameworthy for different reasons. Realism in art, for example, is not
always a virtue, but this does not mean that it is not sometimes a
virtue. A work of art is not essentially the answer to a question or the
solution to a particular problem.6 Not all artists are doing the same
thing - solving the same problem, answering the same question,
playing the same game. Yet contrary to Kennick,7 it would seem that
we do have an interest in the uniformity of taste for quite similar
reasons that we have an interest in the uniformity of moral norms.
People who have deep differences in taste are less likely to live side by
side in peace and amity. We may not always be consistent in our
aesthetic and artistic demands (anymore than we are in our moral

390
Soft Logic
demands), but we do require some consistency in both, for we offer
arguments for our preferences in aesthetics no less than we do in
ethics. Weitz argues that it is futile to attempt to state the conditions
that are necessary and sufficient for an object to be a work of art; the
concept of art must be treated as an open concept. But he admits that
theory has been central in aesthetics and that it is still the pre-
occupation of the philosophy of art. Like Kennick, Weitz pleads for
the rejection of this problem; both are convinced that theory - in the
requisite classical sense -
is never forthcoming in aesthetics. The
inadequacies of these theories are not primarily due to any legitimate
difficulty such as the vast complexity of art, which may be sorted out
by further probing and research. Art, as the logic ofthe concept shows,
has no set of necessary and sufficient properties, hence a theory is
logically inlpossible and not merely factually difficult. Like in Witt-
genstein's "games," what we find are not necessary and sufficient
properties, only.a complicated network of similarities overlapping and
crisscrossing. Knowing what a game is is not knowing some real
definition or theory, but being able to recognize and explain games,
and decide which among imaginary and new examples would or would
not be called "games.,,8 Knowing what art is not apprehending some
manifest or latent essence, but being able to recognize, describe, and
explain those things we call "art" in virtue of these similarities. In
elucidating the term, certain paradigm cases can be given about which
there can be no question as to their being correctly described as "art"
or "game," but no exhaustive set of cases can be given. Unforseeable
or novel conditions are always forthcoming or envisageable. If
necessary and sufficient conditions for the application of a concept can
be given, the concept is a closed one. But this can happen only in
classical logic or mathematics where concepts are constructed and
completely defined. It cannot occur with empirically descriptive and
normative concepts unless we arbitrarily close them by stipulating the
ranges oftheir uses.9
What is at issue is not factual analysis concerning necessary and
sufficient properties but a decision as to whether a work under
construction is similar in certain respects to other works already called
for example, "novel," and which, therefore, warrants the extension of
the term to cover the new case. "Is N a novel?" is not a factual but
rather a decision problem, where the verdict turns on whether or not
we enlarge our set ofconditions for applying the concept. 10 "Art" itself
is an open concept, for new conditions and cases have certainly arisen

Defining Art
391
and will undoubtedly arise - new art forms, movements that will
demand decisions on the part of those interested, usually professional
critics, as to whether the concept should be extended or not. Weitz
argues that the very expressive and adventurous character of art, its
ever-present
changes
and
novel
conditions,
make
it
logically
impossible to ensure any set of defining properties. As we actually use
the concept, "art" is both descriptive and .evaluative. There are not
necessary and sufficient conditions but there are strands of similarities,
Le. bundles of properties, some of which are criteria of recognition of
works ofart. Statements like "X is a work ofart" and ''was made by no
one," or ''was made by accident when he spilled paint on the canvas,"
in each case of which a normal condition is denied; are also sensible
and capable of being true in certain circumstances. None of these
criteria is a defining one, either necessary or sufficient, because we can
sometimes assert of something that is a work of art and then go on to
deny anyone of these conditions, even the one that has traditionally
been taken to be basic, namely that of being an artifact. For many
theorists, "This is a work of art" does more than describe; it also
praises. Its conditions of utterance, therefore include certain preferred
properties or characteristics. What makes these honorific defmitions
valuable is not their disguised linguistic recommendations; rather it is
the debates over the reasons for changing the criteria of the concept of
art that are built into the definitions. If we take the aesthetic theories
literally, they all fail, but if we reconstrue them in terms of their
function and point as being serious, and argued for recommendations
to concentrate on c.ertain criteria of excellence in art, we shall see that
aesthetic theory is far from worthless. It teaches us what to look for in
art and how to look for it.
Weitz
emphasizes
that
many,
perhaps
most,
fundamental
problems of aesthetics are conceptual, not empirical, and that some of
the concepts of aesthetics are especially relevant to logic iri its
indigenous quest for the limits and scope ofvalid argument. Aesthetics
invites logic to consider, if not ultimately to accommodate, certain
irreducibly open concepts that do not simply dissolve into the
traditional notions of ambiguity and vagueness. 11 The history of
philosophy of the arts is, in large part, a history of successive
competing affirmative answers to the question of whether there is a
true theory ofart, whereas Kennick and Weitz deny this. The problem,
they insist, is not factual but conceptual. The concept of art, as its use
reveals, is open, whereas a theory of art presupposes or entails the

392
Soft Logic
false claim that the concept ofart is closed, governed by necessary and
sufficient criteria. Weitz argues that "art" and it subconcepts, such as
"novel," "drama," "nlusic," ''tragedy,'' "painting," and so forth, are
employed either the describe or to evaluate certain objects, and that
though this description or evaluation is dependent on certain criteria,
these criteria are neither necessary nor sufficient. All, therefore, are
open in the sense that they perform their descriptive and appraising
jobs on the overall condition that new cases with their new properties
can be accommodated by the addition of new criteria for those terms.
The concept ofart reflects this origination of the new which, until it
occurs, is unpredictable. Since aesthetic concepts are also, and more
radically, open in the sense that they must allow for the possibility of
the rejection ofany ofthe prevailing criteria as well, "This is a work of
art" can be joined with "and it was made by no one," "and it is not an
artifact," "and it was created by accident." With the help of
Wittgenstein's talk about games, Weitz claims that we do not need a
theory in order to argue intelligently about art. The doctrine, then, is
one about the logical grammar of certain words or concepts, not about
the less-than-essential ontology of things. But Tilghman argues that
despite the considerable increase in debate, those who are skeptical
about the role of theories in aesthetics have clearly been in the
minority. The prevailing opinion seems to be that theories are not only
possible but are essential to the philosophical enterprise of thinking
about art and aesthetics. 12 In none of these contexts does the theory
carry with it a high level of generality, and we can understand the
theory only in particular contexts. Thus, we have to reject the
assumption that behind our practices there is a latent essence that will
make everything clear once it is brought to light, and no theory can
help us to pick out works ofart from things that are not works ofart.
Soon after the second World War, Anglo-American aestheticians
gave their field a dismal review and progress report: aesthetic theory
was dismissed as being logically incapable of playing the roles in
which it traditionally had been cast. In his
1964 essay, "The
Artworld," Arthur Danto turned the tide for aesthetic theory by
arguing that a decisive factor in determining whether any object
counts as art is whether the history ofthe artworld has rendered the art
public ready to accept the object as art. To see anything as art requires
something the eye cannot descry - an atmosphere of artistic theory, a
knowledge of the history of art; an artworld. 13 Likewise, the answer
usually given to what it is to be creative, is that there is a "creative

Defining Art
393
process," and most writers on creativity have taken their task to be a
description of the kind of activity that takes place when one is acting
creatively. Glickman, on the other hand, argues that one must attend
to the aesthetic product rather than to the process. 14 To sayan idea is
an inspiration is to say that it is a good idea or the right idea, for ifthe
idea is a poor one, it is not called an inspiration. But then there can be
no characterization of inspiration in temlS of the agent's feelings. It is
likely that an artist might think he is creative when he is not. It is
precisely because we do not call an activity creative unless the product
is new and valuable that no characterization of reality simply in terms
ofthe artist's actions, thoughts, and feelings can be adequate, for such
a characterization cannot distinguish activity that results in a valuable
new product from that which does not. Creating is not an insoluble
activity; to know whether someone has created, we have to see (or be
told about) the results of his work. We say that an activity such as
painting, writing, or composing is creative if it achieves new and
valuable results. In saying that the agent is creative, one is praising
him for what he has accomplished, not for having gone through a
special process in accomplishing it. "Creative" is a term of praise, but
there is no specific sort ofactivity necessary or sufficient for producing
things ofvalue. 15 No one can tell at a glance which oftwo paintings or
poems is the more creative. To tell this, one must be acquainted with
conlparable works of art and be able to appreciate the aesthetic
significance of any artistic innovation, see how it enlarges the range of
viable artistic alternatives. 16 There are creative painters, creative
teachers, creative businessmen, creative mathematicians, and ascrip-
tion of creativity implicitly compares what has been created to other
things of similar kind and provenance.
The driftwood case is
illuminating because it shows that, although in Danto's view anything
might become a work of art, this doesn't mean anything goes; rational
argument has a place in formulating and assessing the theory that
would extend the concept ofart to some new kind ofobject. 17
Margolis emphasizes that we individuate works of art in unusual
ways. When an artist creates "beach art," he creates a type particular.
Works ofart are products of culturally informed labor, whereas objects
are not. Thus, works of art are culturally emergent entities; their
properties are what might be characterized as functional or intentional
properties that include design, expressiveness, symbolism, represen-
tation, meaning, style, and the like. 18 Dickie insists that the descriptive
use of"work of art" is used to indicate that a thing belongs to a certain

394
Soft Logic
category of artifacts. Nothing is said about actual appreciation, and
this leaves open the possibility of works of art that, for whatever
reason, are not appreciated. But many artifacts that are obviously not
works ofart are appreciated. Danto shows that there is more to being a
work of art than what is visually apparent; it is a web of relations
within which an object is enmeshed that makes it art, and the visually
indistinguishable object that is not a work. of art lacks these relations.
We have to deal with a context that is rich, structured, and historical.
Traditional theorists, in the view of Dickie, do not exploit the cultural
and historical background from which art emerges; they proceed as if
art is the result of individual initiative unrelated in any essential way
to its cultural background. 19 Dickie concludes that the context or
framework of art is institutional, a cultural practice that consists of a
variety of roles of persons behaving in certain established ways. The
artworld is not a formally organized body of some kind; rather it is a
broad informal cultural practice. The various artworld activities, like
painting, are rule-governed, but art making is not the only facet of the
artworld. Ziff and Weitz conceived of the members of the class of
artworks as having no common nature of any theoretical significance:
the members of the class of works of art are created only by means of
similarities. According to this view, an object becomes a work of art by
sufficiently resembling a prior established work of art.20 The reason
that the traditional theories are easy prey for counterexamples is that
the frameworks composed by these theories are too narrowly focused
on the artist. Each of the traditional theories purports to describe an
established practice. And in each case, the artists is seen as the creator
of an artifact with a property such as being appreciative, being
symbolic, or being an expression. What an artist understands and does
when he creates an artwork far exceeds the simple understanding and
doing entailed by the traditional theories.21 The notion of a public
always hovers at the background, and there are as many different
publics as there are different arts. The knowledge required from one
public is different from that required from another public. There are
innumerable conventions involved in the creation and presentation of
art but there is not one primary convention to which all the other
conventions are secondary. The theater, painting, sculpture, and the
like, are not ways of doing sonlething that could be done in another
way. What is primary is the understanding shared by all involved that
they are engaged in an established practice within which there is a
variety of roles: artist roles, critic roles, public roles, and so on. OUf

Defining Art
395
artworld consists of the totality of such roles, and these roles are
subject to change. What the definitions of art reveal is that artmaking
involves an intricate correlative structure, which cannot be described
in a straightforward linear fashion envisaged by the ideal of non-
circular definition. The inflected nature of art is also reflected by the
way we learn about art, by being taught how to be an artist - how to
draw pictures that can be displayed as well as how to be a member of
the artworld public. Both approaches teach us about artists, works, and
publics all at the same time, for these notions are not independent of
one another.
Stecker criticizes Dickie mainly for failing to distinguish works
of art from any other artifacts. He thinks that Dickie's new account
turns out to be closer to the approach of those who claim that art
cannot be defined than to Dickie's own later approach. Dickie fails to
show that existing in an institutional framework is a necessary
condition for being art.22 Dickie acknowledges the circularity ofthe set
ofdefinitions, yet denies that this poses a problem. But unless artworld
systems can be distinguished from
nonart artifacts presentation
systems, the framework Dickie gives us tells us no more than that art
resembles many other kinds ofartifacts. What has to be accepted is the
arbitrariness of being an artwork system.23 This is an admission to
Stecker that there simply is no such thing as the nature of art - at least
nothing that is sufficient for being art. Stecker argues that these
definitions are unilluminating, since we cannot doubt that Duchamp's
Fountain is an artifact but can doubt that it is a work of art. Dickie
claims that institutional facts about art reveal a sufficient condition for
being art, while at the same time admitting that the institution of art
cannot be distinguished from
other systems in
an
informative
noncircular, nonarbitrary way. Stecker concludes that although Dickie
does not acknowledge it, he is best construed as holding a position
similar to the one he once opposed, vis., that the project of defming art
is misconceived.24 The concept of art that emerges from Dickie's
account resembles Weitz's concept: what things tum out to be art is a
function ofpractice, not a function of statable conditions for arthood.25
It does have to be admitted that the concept of art in Dickie's view is
not as wide open as is Weitz's. Part of our common understanding of
art is that works of art are objects of value. The problem is that no one
has ever succeeded in defining art in terms of the valuable qualities it
has. Art is not a natural kind; it is a cultural kind. And it is often a
feature of our cultural phenomena that are our collective conventions

396
Soft Logic
that they exhibit arbitrariness. Ted Cohen points out that if part of
what makes a thing a work of· art issues from an "institution" or
"social practice," we need to be told something of the details of the
institution. Art and its institutions are inbred and self-justifying in
ways that are hard to disentangle. Dickie seems to believe that we are
all, or nearly all, in the artworld, and that in the artworld everyone is
empowered to make art. But Cohen insists that there must be a
boundary, however hard to chart, between making art, and trying but
failing to make art, and Dickie cannot account for this.26 Blisek also
emphasizes that it will be very difficult to determine what objects in
the world are works of art if everyone who sees himself a member of
the artworld can transform any object into a work of art simply by
treating it as a candidate for appreciation. We merely would not know
whether most of the objects we encounter had been so treated. Works
ofart would become a matter ofprivate rather than public concern and
the role of art in the culture would certainly be diminished. Ifmember-
ship in the artworld is extended to everyone who "sees hinlself as a
member," there is no need to introduce a special institution (the
artworld); the customary practice is likely to be diffuse, and the
institution it defines ambiguous.27 Dickie wants a clearly defined
institution (in which case art is recognizable and public) and an open
door for creativity. It appears however, that moving towards one aspect
ofthis theory means moving away from the other. The artistic activity,
according to Dickie, is equivalent to conferring status, but there is
nothing in this theory by which to distinguish between appreciation in
one art and appreciation in general. The more narrowly the artworld is
defmed, the more likely it is that the range ofart will be limited.
Notes
1 Patricia H. Werhane, ed., Philosophical Issues in Art, Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1984, p. 436.
2 John W. Bender, H. Gene Blocker, eds., Contemporary Philosophy of
Art, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1993, p. 124.
3 William E. Kennick, "Does Traditional Aesthetics Rest on a Mistake?"
in Contemporary Philosophy ofArt, p. 137a.
4 Ibid.
5 Ibid., p. 13Th.

Defining Art
397
6 Stuart Hampshire, "Logic and Appreciation,"
in Aesthetics and
Language, ed. W. Elton, Oxford: 1954, p. 162.
7 Kennick, "Does Traditional Aesthetics Rest on a Mistake?" p. 143a.
8 Morris Weitz, "The Role of Theory in Aesthetics," in Philosophical
Issues in Art, p, 450.
9 Ibid.
10 Ibid., p. 451.
11 Morris Weitz, "Art as an Open Concept,"
in Aesthetics, eds. G.
Dickie, R. Sclafani, and R. Roblin, S1. Martins, NY: 1989, p. 152.
12 Benjamin R.
Tilghman, "Reflections on Aesthetic Theory,"
in
Aesthetics, p. 160.
13 Arthur Danto, "The Artworld," The Journal of Philosophy, vol. 61
(1964), pp. 571-584.
14 Jack Glickman, "Creativity in the Arts," in Philosophy Looks at the
Arts, ed. J. Margolis, Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press, 1987, p.
168.
15 Ibid., p. 174.
16 W.E. Kennick, "Creative Arts," in Art and Philosophy, New York,
NY: 1964, p. 225.
17 Glickman, "Creativity in the Arts," p. 182.
18 Joseph Margoplis, "The Ontological Peculiarity of Works of Art," in
Contemporary Philosophy ofArt, p.321b.
19 George Dickie, "The Return of Art Theory," in Philosophical Issues
in Art, p. 471.
20 George Dickie, "The New Institutional Theory of Art," in Aesthetics,
p.197.
21 Ibid., p. 201.
22 Robert Stecker, "The End of an Institutional Definition of Art," in
Aesthetics, p. 206.
23 George Dickie, The Art Circle, New York, NY: 1984, p. 77.
24 Stecker, "The End ofan Institutional Definition ofArt," p. 209.
25 Ibid., p.210.
26 Ted Cohen, "The Possibility ofArt," in Philosophical Issues in Art, p.
487.
27 William L. Blizek, "An Institutional Theory of Art,'" Contemporary
Philosophy ofArt, p. 220a.

Chapter Thirty-Two
Art and Progress
Roberts argues that the emergence ofthe aesthetic in the second half of
the eighteenth century signaled a new stage in the historical self-
reflection of nl0dern art. It announces the crisis and the end of art in
Hegel, and at the same time denies that art itself has become
theoretical. The second critical tum arises in the fITst decades of the
twentieth century, signaled by the collapse of perspective in painting
and tonality in music. But modernism is a term that has become
increasingly indeterminate. l Art since the first World War has brought
to an end the preceding five hundred years of ordered sequential
change. We have now entered a period characterized not by a linear
cumulative development of a single style, but the coexistence of a
multiplicity of quite different styles in a fluctuating and dynamic
steady state.2 Functionalism and historicism are both responses to the
revolutionary break that reduced the European tradition to freely
disposable material, open to reconlbination as rational organization or
parodistic quotation. The radical impulse ofmodernism and its critical
dominance had to succumb to its own contradictions. The multiplicity
of styles and tendencies renders aesthetic theory as we know it from
Kant to Adorno no longer possible, for what comes after post-avant-
garde art defies aesthetic theory. Hegel's verdict on the end of art does
not mean that art ceases to be produced, but that it can no longer claim
or retain our highest interest.3 This explains, according to Roberts,
why Hegel may justly be considered the godfather of postmodernism.
Atonal music and abstract painting register in our time unmistakably

400
Soft Logic
the end of the European tradition. It is expressed in the unique
development of music from ars nova to Gustav Mahler, and of
painting from Giotto to Cezanne. These are significantly European
arts, and have no parallel elsewhere. The abandonment of tonality
corresponded to that ofphilosophical idealism, for the crisis ofthe new
music is at the same time a crisis oftheory.4 The prospect of unending
progress revealed, however, the cunning of reason as the cunning of
the devil. Progress ends for Adorno's philosophy of music in the
"satanic parody" of nihilism. The self-understanding of the modem
age as movement from the physic~ of the seventeenth century to the
historical materialism of the nineteenth century is thus driven to
absurdity in Adorno's view. Art falls victim to the terminal logic ofthe
enlightenment.5 Leonard Meyer argues that the end of the Western
paradigm of art history, dominant since the seventeenth century, is
tied up with the demise of the idea of progress. The end point of this
dialectic is indifference the avant-garde is an end that is no end. What
we might call the crisis of art in Hegel's theory becomes the crisis of
theory itself in Lukacs and Adorno. And yet for Hegel, Adorno, and
BOrger, the postmodern situation of art is the outcome of progress, of
enlightenment. The predicament of contingency in modem art signals
the need for a change of paradigm. Art becomes its own metatheory
since aesthetic theory can no longer claim a vantage point beyond art.
The new music is, for Adorno, aesthetic philosophy: music and
dialectic belong together.6 Music, no less than architecture, nlathe-
matics, bureaucratic organization, systematic theology, or economic
calculation is for Max Weber part ofthe history ofoccidental reason, a
process of development unique to Europe. The pluralization of value
spheres and the consequent multiplication of partial conditions simul-
taneously disenchant the world and create an irrational polytheistic
universe. Since the middle of the nineteenth century all consensus of
taste has disappeared, and the new music exists in a social vacuum.
Development - that is, the subjective reflection ofthe theme - becomes
the justifying impulse and center of dynamic form, whose potentiality
unfolds in the dialectic of identity (theme) and nonidentity (variation).
Progress comes to self-knowledge in philosophy, and what is left is the
fragmentary work. The dialectic of enlightenment drives Adorno on to
negation as the sole expression of freedom. Progress and reaction
converge into the indifference of time and space. Aesthetic Theory7 is
Adorno's Endgame, since nothing significant can happen anymore.
Unconcerned with development as it is commonly understood, Beckett

Art and Progress
401
views his task in an infmitely small space, ultimately an one-
dimensional point. It is also transdynamic in that it "marks time,"
shuffling its feet and, thereby, confessing to the uselessness of
dynamics. Since the potential for freedom is scuttled by social
conditions, it cannot come to the fore in art either. All history becomes
the record of the fall, whereas progress has been the concept that
expresses the self-understanding ofthe bourgeois age. It enabled Hegel
to view the philosophy of history as the progress to freedom. By
contrast, for both Lukacs and Adorno, modernity (the postmodern) lies
beyond progress, reason, and history. The dialectic of the rational!
irrational ends in the indifference of Adorno's and Hochheimer's
''universal system of delusion" in which it is no longer possible to
distinguish between reason and myth. It had originated in the under-
standing of form as an inner-directed, self-evolving system, in which
each part is respectively means and end, "purposedness without
purpose," (Kant), the expression of "inner truth and necessity"
(Goethe), that is the source of both Adorno's and Lukacs's conception
of a work of art. Adorno has no place for the new versions of
"mechanical" order - the aggregations of montage in which the
organizing primacy ofthe whole is surrendered to the parts.8
The contenlporary rejection of the ideal of progress had started
with Spengler's thesis on the decline of Western culture as an
inescapable fate. It is in explicit opposition to the Enlightenment idea
of universal history as the self-understanding of the modem age. To
Spengler's macrocosm of a culture corresponds Adorno's microcosm
of a work ofart. Just as for Lukacs history comes to self-knowledge in
the proletariat, so for Adorno musical history realizes its own nature in
the twelve-tone music of Schoenberg. Adorno, however, destroys
dialectical reason; his negative dialectics detaches itself completely
from history to circle endlessly in the iron cage of timeless modernity.
In Adorno's negative dialectics, abstract form confronts totally opaque
content. Progress is Adorno's immanent absolute, the logic of
historical necessity, which completes and destroys history. It is thus a
retrospective category: Adorno's model ofprogress is tied to the end of
tradition, which in tum becomes the endless crisis of tradition, as
European progress ended in World War. Adorno's adoption of the
bourgeois principle ofindividuation forces him to condemn modem art
with few exceptions. For him, neoclassicism and surrealism are
complementary aspects ofthe arbitrary association of the incongruous.
Unlike any previous school of painting or music, they are defined not

402
Soft Logic
by style but by the alienation from content (the pregiven model or
materials). Roberts points out that if Stravinsky epitomizes for Adorno
the abdication of music to painting, Kandinsky, by contrast, was
strongly inspired by Schoenberg and thought of painting as music.9
Like Schoenberg, Stravinsky, too, is in search of order, that is, an
obligatory style that would make composition possible again. But
Roberts points out that the final result of this play with the past adds
up to no more than a gigantic quotation. IO Boulez would like to
explain the fascination that the ''world of quotation" exerted over the
most brilliant minds in the twentieth century. Fear of regression is an
eminently
modem
phenomenon,
a
reaction
to
the
advancing
rationalization progress. Already Hegel predicted a free disposition
over forms and objects after the "end ofart," and this process becomes
cogent when there is no longer a generally binding system of
symbols. 11
As
ever
in
art,
theory
lags
behind
practice;
the
postmodernist debates ofthe last twenty years in aesthetic theory are a
belated
recognition
of what
twentieth
century
art
has
been
demonstrating
for
some
seventy
years.
The
division
between
"modernism"
and "postmodernism" is artificial in that both are
themselves reflections of the postmodern situation. Although we can
distinguish "modernist" and "postmodernist" positions in contem-
porary critical discussions, it does not follow that we can identify
recent art as "postmodemist." There is no agreement on what would
constitute
postmodemism
in
contemporary
painting,
music,
or
literature. The familiar argument that anything and everything goes is
impossible to sustain in practice.
The emergence of an autonomous aesthetic sphere in the
eighteenth century sets in train a system-immanent process of differ-
entiation (rationalization), which progressively eliminates content and
whose endpoint is the doctrine and practice of art for art's sake. The
development of art in bourgeois society can be grasped from the
vantage point of the avant-garde, but not the other way round. Music
remains the clearest example ofrationalization, just as painting can be
taken as the most obvious specimen for the disappearance of content.
Without the assumption that postmodemism is a new, systematic,
cultural norm, we fall back into the view of present history as sheer
heterogeneity, random difference, a coexistence of a host of distinct
forces whose efficiency is undecideable. 12 Progress as viewed from this
final perspective allows Jameson simultaneously to assert progress and
catastrophe (the end of difference). Whereas the idea of a ruling class

Art and Progress
403
was once the dominant ideology of bourgeois society, the advanced
capitalist conventions today are a field of stylistic and discursive
heterogeneity.13 Roberts concludes that the nornl of postmodernism is
no norm. There is the poststructrualist dissolution of depth models of
hermeneutics, the dialectical model of essence and appearance, the
psychoanalytical model of the latent and the manifest, and the
existentialist model of authenticity and inauthenticity. All of these
enter into combination with the schema of progress and decline. If we
cannot distinguish essence and appearance, the appearance becomes
essence; and similarly with the latent and the manifest, and the
authentic and the inauthentic. Pastiche represents a world transformed
into sheer images ofitself; it is the world of surface, spectacle, pseudo-
event, simulacrum. But where there is no depth, there can be no
signifying surface either, and parody becomes a quixotic gain.
"Progress" from metaphysical depth to blank surface transforms
modernist art into identity without mystery or the scandal of
modernism.
In The Postmodern Condition,14 Jean
Fran~ois Lyotard argues
that the postmodern condition is defined by the recognition of an
irreducible plurality oflanguage games, the consequence ofexhaustion
of the grand narratives of modernity and its epistemologies of
representation.
By modern Lyotard understands any sense that
legitimizes itselfby reference to some metanarrative, whether it be the
dialectics of the spirit, the emancipation of the subject, the hermen-
eutics of meaning, or even their negation, as in the negative dialectics
ofAdorno. Such nihilism means the collapse ofall criteria for judging
a musical work, the breakdown of the traditional limits that insured
the standards that separated the authentic and the inauthentic. It is a
non-Hegelian dialectic because the totality is missing, and because
there is no overarching good to reconcile; it thus becomes a "satani~"
work in the opinion of Lyotard. The irrational limit is the sign of the
self-destruction of the dialectical model, the completion of the grand
narrative of the European modern age. Postmodemism is not the
immanent critique of modernism but its indifferent parody. And yet
"postmodernity" in art is for Hegel, Adorno, and Burger the product of
the progress of enlightenment. This rupture is both the historical and
the logical ground for paradigm change. Indifference is the vanishing
point of aesthetic progress; this failure of dialogue is the result of
contingency conceptualized negatively as indifference. That is why
Roberts returns to Hegel and German romanticism in order to reopen

404
Soft Logic
the dialogue terminated by Adorno, that is, the model of literature
rather than music. Roberts proposes an alternative reconstruction of
the enlightenment in which the vanishing point of indifference
becomes the ground for paradigm change -
the emancipation of
contingency. It is the recognition of the historically contingent nature
ofsocial structures, institutions, and systems, which may be considered
a general condition of modernity. The freedom of modernity dissolves
into a split between subject and object, the inner world of reflection
and the external world ofobjects. What Hegel already registered as the
problematic condition of art in modem times becomes evident in the
crisis ofmodern tradition at the beginning of the twentieth century. In
postmodern music and painting, the collapse of the progressive
paradigm of art history beconles manifest. The freedom of the artist is
no longer limited by tradition; rather it has become the problematic
consciousness of potentially unlimited, experimental alternatives. It
gives us a new indeterminate paradigm in which the work of art is no
longer conceived as essence but as virtuality.
Thus, the social function of modern literature is to present and
explore alternatives to the given order of society through the multi-
plication of imaginary models of reality, of possible experiences and
actions. Reality is pluralized in the form ofcritical, utopian, dystopian,
or
fantastic
alternatives.
The
freedom
of
literature
-
the
fictionalization (or rendering contingent) of its truth-claims enables it
to demonstrate the contingency of something without, thereby, calling
society in question. 15 The emancipation of literature from social
control is a slow process; it covers the long period of transition from
hierarchically stratified to functionally organized society. Roberts
opposes Hegel's and Adorno's terminal dialectic of enlightenment, an
open-ended
model
that
takes
us
from
a
determinate
to
an
indeterminate realm of art. To literature's pluralization of reality
corresponds the pluralization of perception
in
painting,
which
multiplies the possible worlds of vision, and the pluralization of
audition in music, which multiplies the possible worlds of sound. The
crisis of tradition in painting and music is related to the "age of
mechanical reproduction" - Benjamin's version of the "death of art" -
but is also the medium of Malraux's concept of world art. 16 The
progress of art requires latency and destroys latency; all that is secret
and mysterious (i.e. unilluminated, blind to itself: unconscious) is
brought to self-consciousness and leads to the self-critique of art. All
structures represent selections that exclude other possibilities since

Art and Progress
405
certain things must remain unconscious to persons and institutions if
they are to function. Structures incorporate contingency by recognizing
the equivalence of alternative problem situations. The emergence of
radical critique in the eighteenth century (the search for radical social
order) and the radical practice in the nineteenth century (revolutionary
social change) must, therefore, be seen in its relation to the problem of
latency and progress. As Luhmann expresses it, echoing Brecht, "If
something does not work, something else will.,,17
It is not surprising that idealist aesthetics, which privileges the
autonomy of the artwork, has remained indifferent or hostile to the
practice of parody as a critique of "authenticity"
and aura. In
traditional stratified society, parody expresses the possibility of
reversal. In Don Quixote, the ironic ambiguities of enchantment and
disenchantment, lament and liberation, govern the emerging world of
prose. The rise of the novel, which accompanies the decline of the
classical genres (the verse epic, tragedy), is above all a result of the
openness and indeterminacy of its form, which makes it the typical
medium of social contingency, the chronicle of the vicissitudes of the
individual facing an increasingly alien and problematic reality. It also
leads to the self-thematization ofthe progressively autonomous system
of literature, literature motivated by literature, literature criticized by
literature.18 Irony plunges the artwork into endless ambiguities of
interpretation, and parody is transformed from oppositional criticism
from below into internalized self-critique. In the modem age, even the
Devil is coopted by progress: the principle of negation (Goethe's
Mephisto) is made to serve higher ends, but the unconscious-made-
conscious brings progress to an end. Freedom is now the recognition
of contingency, and this is the question of postmodern art.19 Forms as
well as contents of all previous art are now freely and indifferently
available. If freedom has become the recognition of contingency, it
transposes the dialectic of freedom and necessity into the problematic
of indeterminism, in other words, the change from a determinate to an
indeterminate system.20 Schoenberg's technique of composing with
twelve tones is Adorno's example for the pure rationalism that seeks to
overcome the threat ofcontingency. Other examples are the renewal of
painting through the spirit of geometry (Mondrian, Schlemmer), the
search for pure sculptural forms or, more generally, abstract painting
as the emancipation ofpure surface or color, the insistence on the total
self-reference of the artwork. The other main response Roberts calls
impure irrationalism. Here the recognition of contingency takes the

406
Soft Logic
form not of a rationally posited order but as the chance of disorder, as
a source of new latentness. We find it in the widespread recourse to
primitivism and the archaic, the fascination with the darkness of
mystery and madness, the prerational. The surrealists adopted Freud's
"logic" of the unconscious in their work, the arbitrary connections
(free
associations,
dream
images),
the
mysterious
power
of
coincidence. Surrealist combination techniques appear in collage and
montage, which explore the possibilities of the assembly of materials.
They are the source of the paradoxes of postmodem art. The
deconstruction of appearance produces the paradox of an open system
in which apparently anything can be art and everyone an artist. John
Cage's "Four minutes and thirty three seconds of silence," or Beckett's
"Breathing" are gestures ofchallenge. The question, art/nonart, cannot
be decided as long as order remains indeterminate. A juxtaposition of
discrete contingent chains of events, the acceleration or slowing down
of time, the simultaneity of multiple personalities that we find in
montage, register the relativities and multiple interferences of the
diverse artistic media. Montage is based on technology, not nature; the
montage work reflects and responds to the transformation of industrial
society to the age of mass production and reproduction that have
destroyed the ideology of the bourgeois personality and the unique
work.21 Facing an increasingly complex world, montage becomes the
organizing principle that pernlits the assimilation of heterogeneity in
the
form
of the
indeterminate
work,
and
that
dissolves
the
form/content
dialectic
into
the
relation
of its
elements.
The
dehumanization multiplicity of dimensions and materials signals the
end ofteleological integration.
Robert's example for the change of traditions is the work of
Brecht who was convinced that bourgeois society was bankrupt and
that its tradition had been exhausted. The problem art/nonart becomes
critical once the boundaries of tradition collapse. Science alone for
Brecht transcends the limits ofbourgeois consciousness by overcoming
the illusory viewpoint of individuation. The presumed knowledge of
the laws ofsociety, the dynamics ofsocial movement and motivation is
intended to eliminate the prescientific dichotomy between individual
freedom and social determinism, exchange and law. The laws of
society form the deep structure of social being, which must be brought
to
consciousness through
estrangement
in
order to reveal
the
historicity (contingency) of all social formation. This puts all action
and speech within quotation marks. It subverts not only the naive

Art and Progress
407
illusion of representation but, equally, the separate identity of art and
life. Only by treating reality as "literature," by quoting it, can its
otherness, its contingency, be demonstrated.22 This assault on all
hierarchies
and
boundaries
opens
the
era
of postmodern
art.
Henceforth, art enters into an alienating relation to tradition, cut oft:
as in montage, from its origins, context and "intrinsic" meaning - the
wealth of tradition has become freely convertible.23 The primacy of
method means that everything can be adapted, translated, retooled.
The image-become-simulacrum signifies for Baudrillard the triumph
of appearance (surface) and the disappearance of the illusion of depth.
We have learned that meaning is unstable, and that the reign of
enlightenment was ephemeral. What the enlightenment sought to
dissipate - appearances - that alone is immorta1.24 But Roberts points
out that Baudrillard's version of enlightenment is itself a myth due to
the logic of indifference. The simulacrum is the truth of the trans-
political in which all that is latent must surrender its secrets in the
glare and publicity ofcommunication.25 That is why the image and the
pseudo-events of public relations cannot be deconstructed or parodied.
And this is also the reason why the visual media are so fascinated by
the spontaneous, the naive, the private. Politics is now openly part of
the spectacle, treated cynically by both actors and spectators. The
"deceptions" of the political system are endlessly discussed and
dissected in terms of the all too familiar criteria of credibility. It is a
system that takes a sophisticated and cynical audience for granted.
Benjamin in his "Theses on the Philosophy of History" adopts a
historical materialisnl that rejects both legacies of the nineteenth
century; progress and historicism. We wait in vain for the messianic-
revolutionary redemption of mankind. The discovery of the past was
the achievement of the modem age; it was subsumed, however, under
the progressive perspective of universal history. Benjamin proposes
two contradictory versions of emancipation of the past: secularization
and redemption. Reproduction emancipates for the frrst time in world
history the code of the artist from its parasitic existence in and as
ritual, whose fmal expression was the theology of art for art's sake. In
this progression from depth to surface, the whole function of art is
revolutionized. Mass reproduction together with the new techniques of
reproduction in film, brings art close to the masses. Beethoven is more
our contemporary than he was for the Vienna of his time. It is the
move from European to world culture that has brought with it an
enormous expansion of horizons and a corresponding openness and

408
Soft Logic
indeterminacy of the boundaries of art. Picasso did not see African
masks with the same eyes as those for whom they were intended.26
Meyer argues that art since the First World War has brought to an end
the preceding five hundred years of ordered sequential change. We
have entered a period of stylistic statis, a period characterized not by
the linear development of a single fundamental style, but the
coexistence of a multiplicity of quite different styles. Past and present
are chronologically separate but
epistemologically equal.27
The
pluralism of styles reflects the diversity of perception and taste, the
loss of a cohesive audience for serious painting, music, and literature
since 1914. Danto's starting point is also the collapse in the first
decade of this century of what he calls the progressive model of art
history, most evident in painting and sculpture.28 Since then, art has
been characterized by a history of discontinuities in which each new
movement presupposes some sort of theoretical understanding. The
crisis of tradition - the collapse of the progressive paradigm of art
history - opens for Danto the posthistorical stage of art. Once the
question ofthe philosophical nature of art has been posed from within
art - Danto's key example is Duchamp's ready-makes - art becomes
philosophy. There is no further place to go; having reached the point
where art can be anything at all, art has exhausted its conceptual
mission. Endless reflection on the end of tradition is thus the critical
condition of aesthetic modemity.29 Roberts
concludes that
the
vanishing point of progress is equally the vanishing point of theory.
What this ~'endgame" of enlightenment leaves behind is not only the
suicide of aesthetic art but also the endless paradoxes of Adorno's
negative aesthetics, or what Baudrillard has described as the position
ofobjective irony - the vanishing point ofdiscourse itself
Notes
1 David Roberts, Art and Enlightenment, Aesthetic Theory after Adorno,
Lincoln, NE: University ofNebraska, 1991, p. 3.
2 Leonard Meyer, Music, the Arts, and Ideas: Patterns and Predictions
in Twentieth Century Culture, Chicago, IL: University ofChicago Press, 1967,
p.98.

Art and Progress
409
3 Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, The Philosophy ofFine Art, trans. F.
Osmaston, 4 vols, New York, NY: Hacker Fine Art, vol. 1, pp. 125-44.
4 Roberts, Art and Enlightenment, p. 14.
5 Ibid., p. 16.
6 Theodor Adorno, Philosophy ofModern Music, trans. Anne G.
Mitchell and Wesley V. Blomster, New York, NY: Seabury Press, 1973.
7 Theodor Adorno, Aesthetic Theory, trans. C. Lenhardt, London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1984.
8 Ibid., p. 232.
9 Roberts, Art and Enlightenment, p. 119.
10 Ibid., p. 121.
11 Peter Burger, "The Decline ofthe Modem Age," Telos 62, (1984-85),
p.129.
12 Frederic Jameson, "Postmodernism, or the Cultural Logic ofLate
Capitalism," New Left Review 146 (July/August 1984), p. 57.
13 Ibid., p. 65.
14 Jean Francois Lyotard, The Postmodern Condition: A Report on
Knowledge, trans. GeoffBennington and Brian Massumi, University of
Minnesota Press, 1984.
15 Siegfried J. Schmidt, Die Selbstorganisation des Sozialsystems
Literatur im 18 Jarhundert, Frankfort, Germany: Suhrkamp, 1989, pp. 21-22.
16 Roberts, Art and Enlightenment, p. 116.
17 Niklas Luhman, Soziale Systeme, Grundriss einer allgemeinen
Theorie, Frankfort, Germany: Suhrkamp, 1985, pp. 21-22.
18 Roberts, Art and Enlightenment, p. 168.
19 Ibid., p. 174.
20 Ibid., p. 175.
21 Ibid., p. 183.
22 Ibid., p. 190.
23 Ibid., p. 191.
24 Jean Baudrillard, Simulacres et simulation, Paris, France: Galilee,
1981, p. 236.
25 Roberts, Art and Enlightenment, p. 202.
26 Andre Malraux, Museum without Walls, trans. Stuart Gilbert and
Francis Price, London: Secker and Warburg, 1967, pp. 208-9.
27 Meyer, Music, the Arts, and Ideas, p. 151.
28 Arthur C. Danto, The Philosophical Disenfranchisement ofArt, New
York, NY: Columbia University Press, 1986, p. 90.
29 Roberts, Art and Enlightenment, p. 226.

Chapter Thirty-Three
Art and Alienation
McEvilley argues that religious reverence for aura was presupposed by
both the great artworks and the great critical writings ofthe modernist
period. The intense reverence ofthe original masterpiece was based on
it. But under the influence of Walter Benjamin, Theodor Adorno, and
other European thinkers in the Marxist tradition, artists began to point
to the socioeconomic set surrounding the canvas as well as to the rest
ofaesthetic forces operating within it. Artists themselves began to take
over the critical function, for dogmas were seen as support of the
ruling groups, as the expression of the will to power, seeking to
enforce conceptual closure. The history of Western culture is marked
by the continuing struggle between the forces of dogma supporting
claims for authority, and criticism undermining them. 1 From the Earl
of Shaftesubry to Clement Greenberg, the worship of the faculty of
taste is the disguised form of Platonic doctrine of unchanging soul,
which the rational and scientific culture of the Enlightenment had
relegated to the periphery of practical affairs, that is, to the realm of
art. Rejections of change function as buttresses of existing power
structures. Greenberg maintained that visual art should confine itself
exclusively to what is given in the visual experience and make no
reference to anything given in other orders of experience.2 Content, to
be believed, must become strictly optical and be dissolved completely
into form.3 The impossible idea of pure form (form without content)
quickly became an absolute. This project is rooted in the Romantic
tradition and in Neoplatonism, which yearned to see the artwork as

412
Soft Logic
transcendentally far beyond the web of conditionally. Spurred on by a
desire for a sacred in a secular age, the enterprise took a quasi-
religious aura. Artworks were to be granted a self-validating status, but
McEvilley points out that the claim for freedom from any plane of
content whatever is a contradiction in terms. The claim is unprecisely
and incompletely made because the formalists take a much too narrow
view of what can constitute "content." What is not representational in
the sense of recognizable objects, persons, and places may well be
representational in other senses. It may be bound to the surrounding
world by its reflection of structures of thought, political tensions,
psychological attitudes, and so forth. 4
Jackson Pollock is one of Greenberg's prime examples of the
artist whose work is supposedly "pure," and without semantic
function. J. Campbell, however, reads Action Rhythm as a cosmolog-
ical diagram of flux and indeterminacy, as at times Pollock himself
seems to have done.5 Piet Mondrian was Greenberg's foremost
example of an artist whose work is set over against the extra-pictorial
references of old-time illusionist art. But McEvilley emphasizes that
Mondrian was not the first to demonstrate that art can survive without
representing recognizable objets, persons, and places. He was preceded
by the abstract artists of the Paleolithic, Neolithic, and Bronze ages,
and by later Tantric and Islamic artists who eliminated this type of
representation in favor of abstract quadrature, heraldic symmetry,
monochromy, and so forth. In fact, abstract painting is a practice that
precedes our species; for the earliest known examples are Neanderthal
fmger
paintings.
In
these
older
traditions,
content
was
read
comfortably from abstract form, and the ideas produced by these
premodern abstract artists are widely interpreted as representing ideas
about reality.6 While nonrepresentational in terms of physical objects,
these
works
have
clear
metaphysical
or
ontological
content.7
McEvilley argues that, in much the same way, Mondrian's mature
paintings can be read as presenting a model ofthe real: they suggest a
geometrically ordered universe made up of a flow of unchanging and
universal elements which shifts their arrangements to create the
impression
of changing
particulars.
Pollock
models
reality
as
indefinite and in perpetual flux, whereas Yves Klein presents a
counterview of reality as unified and fundamentally static. Marxist
critics have insisted that any act (including any art act) is saturated
with political meaning; each act is grounded in a subtext of implied
assumptions about the nature ofreality. This hypothesis that a work of

Art and Alienation
413
art is a proposal about what is real might explain why art that people
don't like makes them so angry.8
When
Harold
Rosenberg
wrote
that
"paintings
are
today
apprehended with the ears,,,9 he was revising Greenberg's entirely-
through-the-eyes approach, and pointing to the plain fact that verbal
supplements are of universal importance in relating to art. Much
interpretation
masquerades
as
description,
and
much
avowedly
formalist criticism contains hidden references that cannot escape
content. This is most obvious in the widespread cult slogan of "art for
art's sake." It is very doubtful that any cultural object, being a product
of human consciousness, can exist except in a web of intentions and
Dleanings. 10 The relationship between form and content is one of
universal concomitance, that is, neither of them ever appears without
the other. The same relationship exists between any paired terms, such
as cause and effect, up and down, right and left, and does not in the
least mean that we cannot distinguish one from the other, but rather
that the existence of the one always implies the existence of the other.
Ultinlately, the idea that reference and associations are to be excluded
from the art experience is naive.
Obviously art experience is
conditioned by what one knows, by what one has learned to expect,
and by what one likes. The experience of a work of art depends not
only on the natural sensitivity and visual training ofthe spectator, but
also on his cultural equipment. Language seems to provide a
background stratum against which every mental and perceptual event
takes place. If that is the case, then it is impossible that we could ever
achieve a "purely optical" experience of a work of art. In several ways
it is clearly impossible to exclude the artist's intentions from the
critical process. The critic should at least know the approximate date
of the work, and this information is, of course, biographical and
intentionalistic. Even more basic is our awareness of the genre of the
work: we are asking really whether the artist intended it as a painting,
or a poem,
or whatever. 11 If the formJcontent
relationship
is
unmotivated, a limitless number of possible interpretations exists,
none more frrmly bound to the artwork than any other. But texts
impose constraints and limits upon their interpretation. Of course, not
every viewer will experience the work with the same feeling-tone and
the
same
associations,
yet
within
these
variable
limits
some
connections will be widely recognized as appropriate and others not.
There are thus limits to interpretation, even though the artists can

414
Soft Logic
sometimes willfully override this correlation, thereby introducing
levels oftension into his work.
McEvilley concludes that once we recognize that artworks exist
in the world and are of it, we are driven to a multimodel approach to
criticisnl. Such an approach recognizes the work as a complex in
which different semantic realities coexist and interpenetrate without
interfering with one another. Criticism is not a metalanguage above
art, but just another game on the same level with similar motives and
satisfactions. Like art, it operates on constantly shifting foundations,
peaking in flashes of special insight. Ultimately the workshop of form
as an absolute is a distant resonance of the Pythagorean/Platonic
doctrine of the music of the spheres. McEvilley points out that the
doctrine of the soul has always been an argument for unchanging
totalitarianism - from the Old Kingdom in Egypt to the aristocratic
Plato to the divine right of kings in eighteenth century Europe. But
soulism did not simply disappear, it crept into art and hid there. From
the
Cambridge
Platonists
to
Shaftesbury,
Kant
and
Clement
Greenberg, it would now be called the faculty oftaste. This soulism in
art was soon joined by an equally myth-based view of history that
became the foundation ofart: that history is driving toward this or that
end, and that past events could only have happened as they did. Spirit
expressed itself through art, which was, as Hegel said, ''the sensuous
appearance ofthe absolute."
We tend to feel that representation works by a recognizable
element of objective resemblance, but it seems more accurate to say
that what 'Ye experience as representation is, like aesthetic taste, a
culturally conditioned habit-response not involving objective resem-
blance. The resemblance we seem to see between pictures and nature
does not result from the fact that art imitates nature, but from the fact
that our perception of nature imitates our perception of art. Just as it
seems that we cannot think anything that our language cannot
formulate, so it seems that we cannot see anything that our pictorial
tradition does not include or imply.12 The fact that Greenberg used
Pollock's work as proof of the idea of contentless painting is now part
ofthe content ofthese paintings. 13 A Pollock drip painting asserts flux
and indefiniteness of identity as qualities that can be found in the
world. Thus, abstract art, far from being nonrepresentational, is in
effect a representation of concepts; it is based on a process like that of
metaphor, and overlaps somewhat with both iconography and repre-
sentation. 14 Conflict between all these levels can occur, and the

Art and Alienation
415
artwork thereby gains yet another level involving paradox, inner
struggle, tension, and the negation of meaning processes. By contrast,
works that exhibit a high degree of harmony or mutual confirmation
among the various levels of content tacitly model the real as
integrated, whole, and rich in meaning, somewhat in the manner of
the
traditional
masterpiece. 15
What
is
essential,
according
to
McEvilley, is that we begin to appreciate the complexity ofwhat we do
when we relate to an artwork. Far from being a "purely optical" and
unmediated reflex, the art event is an infinitely complex semiotic bead
game involving many different levels and directions of meaning. One
ofthe great achievements of antiformalist periods oftwentieth century
Western art is precisely their deliberate foregrounding of categories of
content that had been working on us unnoticed for so long. 16
The recent history of content may be described (on one level) as
expressing a constantly intensified attention to the question of repre-
sentation. So-called abstract art challenged the (discredited) inherited
canon of representation and explored new ones that, since they
differed from the established type of representation, were not recog-
nized as representation at all. Kant asserted that these three human
faculties (aesthetic, cognitive, and practical) were independent of one
another. This meant that no verbal (Le. cognitive) formulation could
ever approach the aesthetic experience. Largley under the influence of
this doctrine, fornlalist critics from Benedetto Croce to Clement
Greenberg denied the appropriateness of any acknowledgment of
content whatever. But in written supplements in the form of titles,
interviews, essays, and catalogue statements, artists like Kandinsky,
Rothko, and Mondrian rejected in effect the pure form analysis oftheir
work and specified the contents they intended it to carry. This is why
critics in the heyday of formalism insisted that one should never listen
to artists. John Dewey stressed that with reason, pragmatism, and good
will, communication can identify and solve human problems. History,
in this view, is regarded as a process of problem solving driven by an
inner imperative towards progress. This ideology arose under Greek
influence in the eighteenth century, and gained momentum in the
nineteenth century from an uncritical extension of Darwinism from
biological to cultural affairs and processes. But such appreciation has
flourished mainly in democracies, and the opposite stance - an attempt
to make change appear taboo or unnatural - has characterized cultures
with hereditary rulers or self-perpetuating ruling cliques. Modernism
arose in the context ofa positivistic democracy carried away by a sense

416
Soft Logic
of its ability to solve all social and cultural problems. Traditions that
developed over centuries were discarded almost casually on the
historicist assumption that something better would inevitably replace
them. The intellectual origin of this approach is to be found in the
sophists who were the first to state publicly that convention is not a
binding law. A period in which traditions are destroyed is apt to be
followed by a period of nostalgic longing for them, and by attempts to
reconstruct them. The guilt of having destroyed them is allayed by
incorporating them into the very context oftheir destruction.
McEvilley admits that postmodernism amounts to a failure of
nerve, but he still rejects as a superstition the idea that cultural history
is inherently progressive. The flaw in modernism was precisely its
conviction that it was not quoting and varying but creating. Quoting is
an inevitable component of all acts of communication; it is what
makes communication possible. Communication operates upon a
foundation ofhabits, that is, codes shared between the senders and the
receivers of these messages. Every message is a quotation or allusion
to a mass ofpast messages in the same code that have established the
habits of recognition. Communication not based on quoting is a
mythic ideal, like the innocent eye; both are part of the myth of Eden,
an ahistorical condition in which everything happens for the first time.
In most acts of communication, the quoting is in the background; it
functions almost invisibly, the better to foreground the specific present
message. Such an experience teaches one the relativity of one's own
values or produces a xenophobic reaction designed to avoid that
realization. Roland Barthes likened the impersonality of semiotic
transnlission to the "death of the author:" it is not an individual who
speaks, but language that speaks through the individual. 17 In the same
sense, it is not the individual who makes images, but the vast reservoir
of world culture that imagines itself forth through the individual. To
that extent, art based on quoting postulates the artist as a channel as
much as a source, and negates or diminishes the idea of Romantic
creativity. If we feel a conscientious resistance to quoting, it may be
because we cherish an essentialist prejudice about what art should be.
Our ability to see things as they are is affronted by quoting, as is the
ultimately myth-based conviction ofa historical inevitability.
Modern American culture has inherited the Platonic-Christian
concept of an eternal soul as its most common presupposition about
the self; the idea of the unique value of the individual and his or her
moral or aesthetic decisions is a somewhat secularized version of it. 18

Art and Alienation
417
The same soul concept that opposed Darwinism opposes artificial
intelligence for similar reasons. The traditional Western idea of the
self as an underlying essence feels threatened by all these critiques.
The soul is removed from the process of evolution, and defends itself
by declaring it irrelevant. Language, the collective unconscious, the
historical dialectic, natural selection, the double helix, all have
acquired something of a metaphysical status. For the self: which
transpires through the melting and merging of intricate transpersonal
patterings, the idea of freedom becomes ambiguous or even ironic.
Modern thought has evolved a composite view of the self as a shifting
ripple in the Heraclitean river, a view that has much in common with
Buddhist psychology.19 But one person's enlightenment is another's
dehumanization.20 McEvilley believes that it is precisely the author-
itarian claims of the soul that have rendered Christianity and Islam
among the most violent and repressive traditions in history. The goal
is to rearrange one's relation to language so that the metaphor of
selfhood is not constantly presupposed in one's thinking. Fascination
with the unique object is another disguised Edenic myth; questions of
originality and authenticity of the creative artwork depend on the
belief in the integrity and creative freedom of the selfthat produced it
as a trace ofthe soul.
The Graeco-Roman tradition has been on the whole positivistic
and critical, emphasizing doubt over faith and empirical investigation
over inspiration. The Judeo-Christian tradition, on the other hand, has
been generally transcendentalist and faith-oriented, with a tendency to
denigrate reason and investigation in favor of feeling and intuition.
The failure of transcendentalist feeling was compensated in the
Romantic period by the widespread belief in the transcendental power
of poetry and art, which were reinvested with traces of their archaic
magical uses in order, as Matthew Arnold pointed out, to buffer the
shock of the dechristianization of Europe.21 Postmodemism, seen in
this broad perspective, is a renewed codification of the Graeco-Roman
aspect of our inheritance. Not long after Seneca, the idea of progress
acquired a hidden religious meaning by its merging with the Judeo-
Christian idea of the millennium. Progress became the reverse of the
myth of the Golden Age, heralding the end of history and the
restoration of Eden on earth. It was, in effect, a disguised form of
providence. This sort of belief invites abuse in the form of claims,
however disguised, either that a certain state of society is the end
condition, toward which all history has been striving, or that a certain

418
Soft Logic
leader or party (or art critic, for that matter) knows the direction that
things must inevitably take. The conviction, originally religious, that
progress is a working out of the will of God - that art is, in other
words, a sacred history - was the basis of transcendentalist modern-
ism. This became the standard means of writing history in the West,
including art history.
Transcendental modemisnl was
definitely
formulated in the work of Hegel: history was to be seen as a story of
the progressive self-realization or self-remembrance of the transcen-
dental spirit. The progress would culminate at the end ofhistory in the
absorption of nature entirely into spirit. Auguste Comte based his
theory of history on what he called the law of progress, implying that
progress is a natural law, like the law of gravity: as gravity always
pulls things down, so progress always pulls history forward and
upward. Darwinism was received as scientific proof of the idea that
progress is inherent in nature itself Herbert Spencer generalized
Darwinism to apply to culture, and, during the industrial revolution
and its inherited belief in unlimited technical advance, this seemed
eminently plausible and self-evident. Progress was simply in the
nature of things. But this myth concealed the fact that history had
shown not only periods of progress but also
equally nlassive
regression. Because of this, contemporary biologists do not view
evolution as a progressive force but as a neutral flow that has no value
quality at all.
Following Plotinus,22 Hegel regarded art as a series of intim-
ations of the absolute-foretastes, as it were, of the ultimate reality
towards which all history, under Western leadership, was said to be
striving. Along with religion and philosophy, art was a channel to the
beyond, the reality ofthe transcendent spirit. Because of its connection
with the absolute, aesthetic form was regarded as freed fronl reference
to changing circumstance. Artistic development, in other words, is not
dependent upon changes in society or religion or anything else outside
of its own formal means. The idea of progress in art in terms of the
spiritual advancenlent of humanity motivates the works of Kasimir
Malevich, Wassily Kandinsky, Piet Mondrian, Mark Rothko, and
many other modem artists. All of them spoke of their work in exalted
religious terms that go back to the age ofHegel- the ability ofthe art-
work to embody the infinite in fmite form, its purity and separation
from the here and now, its ability to lift the veil that lies before the
realm ofthe Platonic pure form. Many of them actually suspected that
their works were the last physical artifices that immediately preceded
----------------------

Art and Alienation
419
the absorption of matter into spirit. The idea of progress in art history
implied
some transcendent
and unchanging
criteria of quality.
Changes
in
different
styles
and
periods
were
all
regarded
as
expressions of a single overriding essence, ultimately of spirit itself
Artists have tended to favor spiritual terms, whereas writers and
historians have usually preferred the terminology of cognitive achieve-
ment, but these are variants of the same myth. 23 The overall myth of
Western art history maintains that with the renaissance of perspective
an objective rendering of outer reality became possible, and that, over
the following five centuries, representation was developed in more and
more perfect terms until mid-nineteenth century realism and early
impressionism. At that time, art, having perfected representation, was
ready to transcend it by its own inner directive or law of progress, and
proceed from the nlastery of nature to the mastery of the sublinle and
the absolute. The stage, in other words, was set for abstract art, which
in the minds of such as Malevich and Modrian, was a fmal or very
advanced stage in the self-realization of the spirit. The belief that
biological evolution exhibits progress parallel to that projected into
Western culture, had the effect of cultivating nature, making it seem
on our side. But from a postmodem point of view, history no longer
seems to have a shape, nor does it seem to be going any place in
particular. The elimination of the human figure from representational
spaces expresses a loss of direction of selfhood, an uncertainty of what
it should, or could, or will, perform. The enmeshedness of the self in
the general causal web leads to the rejection of the traditional
dichotomies of abstract/representational and figure/ground. The art
that moves us from modernism to postmodernism expresses a return of
history into time and the dissolving of the self into the welter of
spaces. In its attempt to break down the balance that separates nature
from culture it claims the transcendent criteria of quality. The point is
now not one of formal originality but one of response to the alnbient
world moment. Every age has certain things that it needs to have said.
Postmodernisnl is an opportunity to adjust our inherited myths into a
frame ofmind in which we may begin to embrace traditions other than
ours on something like equal terms.24
Evolutionary change happens not steadily and gradually but in
unpredictable bursts following long periods of comparative statis.
McEvilley proposes that the idea ofhistory be redefined: the modernist
period was dominated by Hegel's view that history had an internal
direction and goal, and that progress was, in effect, a law of nature.

420
Soft Logic
Entranced by this faith. The Western nations felt that history was on
their side, that it was taking them where they wanted to go - to the
vaguely conceived spiritual culmination that Hegel had proclaimed.
Alongside the Hegelian myth of history, the second guiding principle
of the modernist period was the Kantian judgment of quality. The
apprehension of value, according to Kant's Critique ofJudgment, was
supposedly a self-justifying and primarily simple act of aesthetic
conception made without the intervention of cognitive, ethical, or
social awareness. But lately a more complex and conciliatory idea of
quality has been emerging, an idea that involves the fusion of
cognitive and social attitudes with the aesthetic presence.
The
postmodern counterproposal operates by relativizations instead of
puritanical rejections and reductions. In a similar sense, something
like metaphysics still plays a role, but without reference to an
"otherworldly beyond," so much as an to an indefinability or unknow-
ableness within the world of experience. From a classical, positivistic
point of view, the unknowable has not been considered a real topic,
since it insisted that a question without the possibility of an answer is
not a real question. But today this seems less clear; art now makes
approaches towards the unknowable as it is found in incommen-
surabilities between culture and nature or between different aspects of
culture. The act of focusing attention on specific areas of unknow-
ability assumed that sonlething can be derived from the experience
despite the fact that the unknown object of attention will remain
unknown. It would seem, however, that, contrary to McEvilley, art and
criticism are not in the same position in that respect.25 The artist may
work with the unknowable, but the critic inevitably demands some sort
of understanding of it. Thus, the artist may make unverifiable
hypotheses or intuitive proposals about the unknown, whereas the
critic deals with a network of their open implications. These two
activities drive one another forward, and together they comprise an
investigative tool that does not duplicate the model of science, but
rather follows those ofscholarship and philosophy.
Modernism postulated a pure essential reality in which each self
maintained its identity. Yet self cannot be known without the other to
establish its boundaries; so otherness becomes a necessary correlate of
sel£: sonlething that self is never encountered without. Socially this
idea appears in Hegel, in his assertion of the integral selthood or
distinctive character of each culture, a doctrine that seems to make
significant cultural mixing impossible. The affirmation of change, on

Art and Alienation
421
the other hand, gives rise to insecurity, since with selves in flux, there
can be no real identifications. McEvilley proposes a view of history
redeemed from Eurocentric perspective in which culture seeks a global
framework ofitnperfect meaning constructed by the balanced interplay
ofsameness and difference. In a culture founded on essence, and hence
terrified of the other, there are. deep frustrations and a longing to go
back. A hybrid object attempts to incorporate into itself its own
counterweight or critique -
its other. Thus, the postmodernlpost-
historical/postcolonialist/postaesthetic moment involves pastiche, or
meltdown ofelements from manifestly different matrices. With a little
time, the grotesque no longer looks grotesque - it becomes a new
norm,26 and meanwhile a new criterion ofquality will arise. McEvilley
points out that, while seeming to emphasize universality or sameness,
art in the West became a force for divisiveness and exclusion.27 To
correct the fit, a fundamental shift in Western modes of cognition
seems to be called for. During the modernist period, Western anthro-
pologists, despite all attempts at objectivity, tended to represent the
rest of the world through Western conventions, as if they were
normative and given. Western culture, taking its paradigm from
science, was regarded as the universal self. The idea of taking an
anthropological approach towards one's own culture - treating one's
own culture as the other - would have seemed subversive. Nowadays,
however, many Western anthropologists have come to see their goal as
one of shedding light on their own culture as much as on others. To
this end they recognize the need to listen to voices previously
excluded.
The mainstream tradition in Western philosophy - what Richard
Rorty has called the Plato-Kant axis - has argued for universal and
unchanging criteria of quality that are supposedly valid for all times
and places. Absolute values, in this view, are inborn in all humans
identically in what Plato called the eye of the soul, and what Kant
called the faculty of judgment, or taste. Some people can apprehend
these inborn ideas clearly, and some cannot, because of a variety of
obscuring factors.28 Even if they do not articulate this, the most
outspoken proponents of the priority of quality over all other issues in
art today still take this theoretical assumption for granted. McEvilley,
by contrast, emphasizes that the very notions of what makes a work of
art good have been observed to change from age to age.29 He,
therefore, questions the modernist belief in progress, the idea that all
past ages were essentially striving to become what we now are. The

422
Soft Logic
classic modernist position, which was characteristic of the colonialist
era, was essentially to say that every culture but our own was wrong.
Only relatively recently have we come to admit that quality changes
from culture to culture, as it does from age to age, and that no idea of
quality can claim universal validity. By recognizing fluctuations in
quality, we are not giving up such discourse altogether; rather we are
setting merely its limits. People of the same culture, with the same
education and class background, may well have similar ideas of
quality. The history ofconnoisseurship suggests that quality judgments
do have a degree of stability within limited contexts oftinle and space.
The conditioning situation does not bring about that all members of
the same culture will agree, like identically programmed robots, but
merely that the set of options available within a given culture, though,
complex, is still limited. A society's prevailing value system is in part
a hidden ideological tool, and it is to the advantage of the controlling
groups to posit its own criteria as eternal and universal.30 McEvilley is
not advocating that we dispense with the value judgment; he wants us,
however, to become more self-conscious in our exercise of it. Value
judgments serve to define and bond groups - communities oftaste - in
ways that are often useful, and always dangerous because, by bonding
some individuals, they inevitably exclude others.
Art's primary function is to define the communal self, and to
redefme it when the community is changing. From the inspection of
the artworks of any culture it may be inferred what that culture has
tried to think of itselfat any moment. Normally this confirms a class's
or clique's belief that its point of view is "natural." One's com-
munity's hegemony of taste always works to the advantage of some
and to the disadvantage of others - those who see things differently.31
By mutual identification with the body of images regarded as its own,
the group's interest and its sense of their natural rightness are
reinforced. Mainstream modernist art has an array of disguised fetish
objects and hidden
propositions.
Thus,
Jackson
Pollock's
drip
paintings are cosmograms ofthe idea ofmetaphysical flux, the process
by which entities arise and fall without intermediate periods of fixed
defmitions. And these propositions bring with them others about
human values and social reality. McEvilley regards modem art as a
single massive icon representing the international primacy of the
wealthy and educated class who appreciated, collected, and exhibited
these modernist fetishes.32 The artspace is cut off from any contagion
of change,
from
the
context of society as
a
set
of shifting

Art and Alienation
423
circumstances rather than an internally structured order. As early as
the seventeenth century, the idea was common in Europe that colonial
conquests had demonstrated the superiority of Western civilization.
This view was confirmed in nineteenth century curio rooms and early
ethnographic museums, where "captured" tribal objects represented
booty brought home from dark skinned people much as in the
triumphal processions displayed in ancient Rome. Captured tribal
objects came to be called art by Western commentators in the early
twentieth century, and began to be shifted from ethnological to art
museums. It still assumes that the makers of these objects did not
understand their own intentions, that it took the allegedly superior eye
of the Western connoisseur to tell what these objects really were for.
Modernism, relying on a system ofprogress and scientific method, saw
itself as a global or transcendent viewpoint. But lately it has conle to
be seen as a tribal view itself, that of Western Christendom since the
Renaissance. The sense of community of nations as a global village
has caused Western attitudes to be criticized from within.
The view that one's culture is not a standard by which all others
are to be measured, but merely one stance among many, is the essence
of the reversal that is called postmodemism, which relativizes all
communities of taste. This does not mean the end of quality, but its
limitation to a conditioned group within a community of similarly
conditioned people. Consensual standards of quality defme and bond,
and are within the limits of that consensus, valid. Within another
community, however, or within the same comnlunity at another time,
completely different standards may obtain. They offer their group a
field of self-reflection, a mirror in which to glimpse the meanings of
its/changes and developments, as well as its relatively unchanging
foundational assumptions.33 A postmodem exhibition strategy begins
with the realization that categories and criteria have no innate validity
- only the validity that is projected upon them - and thus that their
transgression
can
be an
opening to freedom.
The postmodem
exhibition does not compete in the conflict ofdifferent ideas of quality,
priority,
or
historical
centrality.
It
allows
different
intentions,
definitions,
an~ standards of quality to stand side by side without
giving one of them dominance or authority over the others. The
postmodem exhibition involves the difficult ideal of letting things be
what they are before being appropriated into categories not their own.
It posits no unifying idea of quality, but many pluralistic relativized
ideas of it, and no classified hierarchy. The community of modem art,

424
Soft Logic
especially of modernist abstraction, was in part a cultic attempt to
regain a sense of wholeness and unity that the society around no
longer provided with sufficient intensity. It ratified a certain com-
munity oftaste, and with it, at a somewhat hidden level, a community
of shared spiritual and social ambitions.34 The artworks speak only to
the initiates, keeping their secrets safe from interlopers.35 Modernism
involved a cultic beliefin progress and a messianic belief in a Western
avant garde that would make it happen. While modernism was
universalist in its championing of a certain idea of quality, post-
modernism might recognize the appropriateness of different ideas of
quality to different cultural situations.
McEvilley argues that at the heart of modernism was a myth of
history designed to justify colonialism through an idea of progress.
Thus, he interprets postmodernism in the visual arts as part of the
global project of cultural decolonization. It involves (among other
things) an attempt on the part of Westem people to get beyond strictly
European ideas of aesthetics and its history. The European colonial
myth was evident in the claim that the conquered people were outside
of history. When one culture regards the objects of another, these
objects are constantly incorporated into an alien mental framework.
Similarly, to see an object in another place than that in which and for
which it was made is to see it surrounded with questions. Power
relationships govern these (as other) feelings. There is the myth of
cultural purity, that humans were once psychologically and socially
whole, and that it is the mixing ofcultures that destroys this wholeness
and creates monsters. This attitude assumes something like the
Hegelian idea that each culture has a nature or essence. On the basis of
Kant's epistemology, Western philosophers developed a feeling that
their cognitions were the best that could be attained with human
faculties. The Western judgment of art was said to be exclusively
aesthetic when properly exercised, with no clouding of social and
cognitive concerns. This view ofthe inadequacy ofthe perceptions and
cognitions of the non-Western peoples was akin to the Christian view
oftheir soullessness, and to Hegel's view that oriental cultures are "for
the most part really unhistorical.,,36 Part of epistemological im-
perialism was the conviction that Western modes of regimentation,
whether visual or otherwise, were superior - that is, more objective or
true to nature than those ofnon-Westem cultures. One ofthe common
social functions of art has been its role of shaping and sustaining the
sense of identity (hence, of changing it). Art represents communically
------------

Art and Alienation
425
generated and received objects that invite a bonding of communal
identification around a shared understanding of their meaning. Yet as
an instrument ofpersuasion, art has the ability to sever no less than to
bond. The advent of postmodemism in the West has been expressed
prominently as a crisis in our representations.37
All art is derived from sources, and most culture is made up in
large part of elements diffused from elsewhere. Quotational art in
Europe and America contains elements of homage, but usually the
dominant force has been one of criticism of art historical notions of
originality, style, and, especially, progress. By holding up for mental
inspection the aesthetic or representational canons of the past, out of
context and stripped of their aura, the artist is often asking us to
perceive the limits of these canons. The formalist or aesthetic attitude
contained with it a little regarded contradiction: it features the idea of
change, but puts no value on it for its own sake, imagining it instead
as a movement toward some kind of end or culmination of history.
What was not realized was that,
if no such
conclusion was
forthcoming,
these
endless
changes
would
inevitably
become
trivializing. If an aesthetic innovation is going to last only for a few
years or months, what really is the value of it? The loss of faith in the
advance of formalist movements retlected a deeper loss offaith in the
similarly discredited march oftechnological progress, which had been
the underpinning of the modernist faith in progress. It reflects the
general loss of faith in the importance of art and a suspicion that what
happens in art history has no real importance for anything except the
market. But McEvilley elnphasizes that the visual arts have a global
social importance that is quite independent of formalist notions of
aesthetic presence. A culture's visual tradition embodies the image it
has ofitself, and it has not become evident that in the emerging global
scenario no one culture will be paramount, as he confidently
predicts.38 Western culture seems to be dominating the global village
by
its
technology,
mass
entertainment,
music,
and
instant
communication.
Modernism was an age when a single model of history seemed
adequate to the experience of white Westerners, and this model was
basically the model of progress so influentially articulated by Hegel.
But the vast undeveloped spaces can no longer be regarded as an
ahistoricallimbo, nor will their inhabitants any longer accept a view of
history that they understandingly feel has victimized them.39 History
has seemed to be taking us some place we do not want to go. But

426
Soft Logic
McEvilley admits that no new view has definitely established itself yet.
Because revolutions never begin with a clean slate, it is inevitable that
even the most genuinely multicultural approach contains residual
elements of Hegelianism. Thus, McEvilley's own dialectics of self and
other is no less Hegelian than the end of history he rejects. Moreover,
it is not at all obvious that cultures are going to reach some stable
interaction. McEvilley himself realizes that multiculturalism cannot be
the end of history, since it contains countless unresolved themes and
issues. We are living in a period when every ethnic group or
community is writing and rewriting its own fragment ofhistory in very
conflicting versions.
Notes
I Thomas McEvilley, Art and Discontent, Theory at the Millennium,
New York, NY: McPherson, 1991, p. 18.
2 Clement Greenberg, "Modernist Painting," in The New Art, ed.
Gregory Battock, E. P. Dalton, 1973, p. 74.
3 Clement Greenberg, Art and Culture, Boston, MA: Beacon Press,
1961, p. 6.
4 McEvilley, Art and Discontent, p. 29.
5 Joseph Campbell,
The Mythic Image,
Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1974.
0
6 William S. Wilson ill, "Art, Energy and Attention," in The New Art, p.
247.
7 McEvilley, Art and Discontent, p. 31.
8 Wilson, "Art, Energy and Attention," p. 251.
9 Harold Rosenberg, "Art and Words," in Idea Art, ed. Gregory Battock,
New York, NY: Dutton, 1973, p. 153.
10 McEvilley, Art and Discontent, p. 41.
11 Ibid., p. 47.
12 Ibid., p. 75.
13 Ibid., p. 79.
14 Ibid., p. 81.
15 Ibid., p. 86.
16 Ibid., p. 89.
17 Roland Barthes, "Death of the Author," in Image, Music, Text, trans.
Stephen Health, New York, NY: Hill and Wang, 1977, p. 145.
18 McEvilley, Art and Discontent, p. 109.

Art and Alienation
427
19 Ibid., p. 115.
20 Ibid., p. 118.
21 Ibid., p. 135.
22 Plutonis, Enneads, trans. S. Mackenna, London: Faber, 1956, 5.8.1.
23 McEvilley, Art and Discontent} p. 164.
24 Ibid., p. 164.
25 Ibid., p. 173.
26 Ibid., p. 177.
27 Thomas McEvilley, Art and Otherness, Crisis in Cultural Identity,
New York, NY: McPherson, 1992, p. 9.
28 Ibid., p. 17.
29 Ibid., p. 18.
30 Ibid., p. 22.
31 Ibid., p. 60.
32 Ibid., p. 62.
33 Ibid., p. 67.
34 Ibid., p. 75.
35 Ibid., p. 76.
36 G.F.W. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, New York, NY: Dover,
1956, p. 106.
37 McEvilley, Art and Otherness, p. 105.
38 Ibid., p. 132.
39 Ibid., p. 135.

Chapter Thirty-Four
Understanding Art
Following Wittgenstein, Best emphasizes the dependence of language
and the arts on prelinguistic behavior. He points out that unless there
was something that humans just do, an innate instinctive response,
there would be nothing to which learning could appeal, nothing on
which reason could get a grip. 1 The relevant responses are learned, not
as a result ofexplicit teaching, but by growing up in and emulating the
practices of a social environment. Examples are learning to wave
good-bye, smiling as a greeting, nodding in agreement and approval,
and various other gestures and facial expressions that a child
associates as the norms of behavior. Best argues that such nonrational
ways of behaving and responding are the roots of the concept of art,
and that they give sense to the reasons used in the discussions of the
arts. He rejects the foundationalist picture, that is, the notion that our
concepts need, or can coherently have, underlying justification.
Instead, he asks us to focus on the ways in which concept formation is
a development from instinctive behavior and purpose, as well as a
result of being brought up in the ways of behaving of a particular
community.2 There are various loosely related sets ofhuman activities,
and one should look not for an underlying justification of each, but
rather at what counts as justification within each. A child grows up in
an environment where there are responses to the arts in which he
learns to join. It makes no sense to speak of "reasons" at this level
because a precondition of being able to engage in rational discourse is
to have grasped, without rational justification, what
counts
as

430
Soft Logic
rationality.3 Thus, understanding art presupposes roots in nonrational
feelings, responses, and attitudes.
But
this
does
not
imply
that
there
are
no
criteria
for
appropriateness of responses to particular works of art. Some people
are said to have "a feeling for" the subject, and part ofwhat this means
is that they make what are often fruitful, conjectural leaps ahead ofthe
evidence and reasoning. Without such intuitive leaps, no progress
could be made - the scientist, for instance, could have no idea in what
direction his search for evidence should proceed. Thus, no explanation
of such a principle would be comprehensible to anyone who had not
already some experience of responding to the arts. Artistic meaning
and responses are not derived from an underlying rational principle;
on the contrary, if any principle could be formulated, it would have to
be answerable to the ways in which people respond to the arts. But
while agreeing with the subjectivist that feeling is natural in the arts,
Best insists that aesthetic appreciation is not unreasoned, a matter of
irrational or nonrational feelings and attitudes. The question of
whether reason has a place in the arts is the question of whether it is
intelligible to speak ofknowledge in the arts. The subjectivist is in the
odd position of denying that some works and performances are better
than others. Best emphasizes that the very sense of "interpretation"
requires limits, and that only within these limits is there scope for
agreement and discussion of whether a particular interpretation is
valid or invalid. Thus, although there are different traditions and
concepts of art, this does not imply that we could choose which one to
adopt.4 In stressing, however, the rootedness of the arts in one's own
culture, Best faces the problenl of explaining how we are, after all,
able to acquire a knowledge ofalien languages and forms ofart.
Like Wittgenstein,Best believes that the contribution of the arts
and other activities to conceptual understanding cannot be coherently
distinguished from that of language. Thus, he denies that the notion of
a reality independent of language makes any sense. Rather, the
concepts implicit in language and the arts determine what counts as
truth and falsity. On the other hand, it would be misleading to imply
that different conceptual schemes are all equally available to us for, in
that case, reality would be what one chooses it to be. This, of course, is
precisely the argument of the realist that Best, somewhat surprisingly,
adopts. He holds that it is not a matter of choosing to see reality in a
certain manner, but rather of learning a language, and the natural
responses and activities which give sense to it. The conceptual network

Understanding Art
431
eInbodied in language presents reality to us in its terms. It is not that
one sees reality according to one's interests and purposes, but that, to a
very large extent, the concepts one has acquired in learning a language
determine the interests and purposes it is possible to have. The initial
limits of intelligibility given with language can be developed and
extended according to people's interests and purposes.5 The network of
concepts, which one acquires in learning a language and the arts,
constitute the limit of intelligibility ofreasons, values, and knowledge.
The notion of interpretation, however, requires agreement about what
is being interpreted, and it follows from the meaning of "inter-
pretation" that disagreement is possible. One can disagree only if there
is something to disagree about, and if one can recognize contradictory
reasons as reasons. In Best's opinion, this does not imply under-
standing being irrevocably confmed to the conceptual limits that one
has acquired in growing up in a certain culture. Other conceptions are
available to the extent that one can learn other languages, arts,
attitudes, and ways of acting and responding. But he fails to explain
how this is really possible.
Best's picture of aesthetic appreciation allows for an indefinite,
though not unlimited, possibility of interpretation, and for a corres-
ponding extension of concepts that give sense to interpretation and
judgment. He rightly points out that, on a strictly subjectivist basis, a
disagreement would amount merely to personal likes and dislikes
passing each other by. Rational differences ofopinion are possible only
ifthere can be an exchange of reasons for one's judgments;6 however,
such exchange may tum out to be inconclusive. To be able to
recognize something as very different art, dance, drama, or music in
another culture, some overlapping with our own concepts would seem
to be required. But this, of course, will provide only partial under-
standing since we can operate only with the concepts we have. The
point is that we are asked to extend the limits of intelligibility beyond
what is provided for in our own culture. It may indeed be rare for
someone in another culture to develop the complete grasp that is
possible for the native, but learning to understand foreign languages
and artforms is an everyday occurrence nevertheless. If one were con-
sistently to respond in a way, or to reveal an attitude, that was
completely at variance with the norms, it would constitute good
grounds for saying that one did not understand the art form at all. Best
insists that it makes no sense to suppose that the facts or reality give us
our picture of the world. Rather, it is our ways of behaving and

432
Soft Logic
responding that determine what counts as a fact and reality. The same
applies to objectivity and to what can count as a valid reason. Since
there are different grounds, and grounds may change, what counts as
rational and objective in one culture or era may also be different and
change.7 Rationality and objectivity in one sphere are relative to the
grounds of natural action and response that give them sense, and that
may be quite different in different cultures and at different times. Best
admits that such conceptual differences cannot always be resolved or
even understood.8
The possibility of being able to understand a very different
concept, and thus to extend one's own notion of what is intelligible,
depends upon connections with these concepts that already constitute
the grounds of one's present understanding. The more tenuous the
connection, or the farther the innovation has moved from the grounds
that give them sense, the more the innovator is likely to be regarded as
a fool or lunatic,9 or alternatively, a creative genius. The onus is on the
innovators or their apologists to provide connections. Convincing
someone of the validity and value of conceptual innovation requires
not proof but persuasion, and Best has a hard time convincing the
skeptic that what purports to be rational discourse of critical
appreciation in the arts, is really no more than a thinly disguised
attempt to justify subjective preferences. The fact is that even within
the same culture and concept ofart, there remain irreconcilable differ-
ences of opinion. By mastering the discipline of correct language
usage the child learns to see the world in terms of that language. On
the other hand, any account of creativity in the arts has to recognize
that there is necessarily something inexplicable about it. Even those
who are most creative are at a loss to explain creativity or to say where
their ideas come from. The point is that one may use language
creatively or recognize something as creative even though one is
unable to state the criteria for creativity. Best insists that to recognize
something as creative is to employ objective criteria,IO but differences
of opinion as to whether something is creative can only be settled by
hindsight. Originality is given its sense by a background of the
traditional, and the creative genius is thus always involved in
conceptual change. He is, to some extent, changing the criteria for
what counts as art and as good art. Best points out that any aesthetic
innovation, to be understood as an innovation, necessarily employs
many of the criteria of the concepts it is changing. 11 Thus, creativity

Understanding Art
433
depends upon cultural traditions, and the criteria for innovation cannot
be purely private but require public manifestation.
Best concludes that an image is not sufficient for meaning, and
that what is required for knowing the meaning of a term is the ability
to use it correctly in various linguistic and aesthetic contexts. Two
people watching a game of chess, one of whom understands it and one
of whom knows nothing of chess or any similar game, may have the
same sensory experience. The difference between them is that only one
has the conceptual grasp.12 In the discussion of feeling and knowledge
in the arts, this conceptual difference is likewise crucial. We cannot
look outside language for an understanding of what it is to possess
concepts expressible in it anymore than we can look outside chess to
understand the chess moves. Language cannot coherently be regarded
as isolated from the natural ways of acting and responding that
surround it and give sense to the utterance of words. These natural
forms ofbehavior, not images, are the roots of language and the arts. 13
Like Wittgenstein, Best conceives of art as a way of behavior and an
associated manner of speaking and reasoning. The possibility even of
raising questions depends upon the existence of concepts or a
vocabulary in which they can be formulated. He rejects the positivist
doctrine according to which the only things that really exist are
physical entities. This, he thinks, is like asking "How can what is
really no more than a carved piece of wood be a king in chess?" For
those who know what chess is, it is not normally seen as a piece of
wood but as a chess piece. In a similar fashion, a written word or a
portrait are not mere physical marks on paper or canvas, but are given
sense and identity by their respective language or artform. Thus, while
a physical object is not the kind of thing that can express feeling, a
work of art is. It is, however, questionable whether, as Best maintains,
only by having a language can a human being come to know that, e.g.
sobbing is a criterion of sadness. 14 Focusing on the language depend-
ence of concepts, he tends to underestimate the shared roots of all
cultural responding.
Since he believes that a social practice like painting does not
admit further justification, he cannot explain why some responses are
more "natural" than others. He fails to distinguish between what is
innate and what is acquired in the learning of language and the arts.
Since, in his view, what is rational is merely the function of a
changing context, aesthetic arguments unavoidably remain incon-
clusive; they constitute no more than a set of loosely connected

434
Soft Logic
language games. What it nleans to say that an artform is a language is
thus precisely at issue. Contrary to Best, intention or feeling can be
"private" in ways their concepts are not, and that is how we may be
mistaken about our own intentions. Neither is it incoherent to say that
an intention may precede or be separate from what is done, since some
intentions fail to be realized, such as the sincere intention to stop
smoking. What a person does or fails to do is not the only criterion for
what his real intentions are in either the arts or ordinary affairs. The
grammar and vocabulary ofa language set limits, although not rigid or
tinleless limits, to what words can mean. But whether there are
corresponding limits to what we can appropriately feel in responding
to art is much less clear. We nlay, for instance, be equally bored by a
novel or symphony because we fail to understand them or because we
fmd them trite. Thus, Best's explanation of aesthetic feeling as a
"mode of understanding"15 is largely metaphorical. There are no
readily identifiable rules for the appropriateness of feeling as there are
for language use, and that is indeed one reason why in the arts we are
frequently unable to say coherently what it is that we understand.
Inconclusive reasoning may be the paradigm case in the arts; it is not
in ordinary discourse, and Best's identification of artform with
language fails to address this crucial difference. The problem with
such inconclusive reasoning is that it tends to become pointless. While
there are synonyms in language, each work of art is essentially unique.
It is a failure in understanding the nature of art to suppose that the
aesthetic meaning of one artwork could be expressed by another.
Understanding art is far less "natural" than is understanding language.
Best realizes that when one is engaged in artistic appreciation,
one is not concerned how others respond to it,16 while this is crucial in
the understanding of language. He claims an understanding Iof art that
is not exhausted by whatever discursive intelligence manages to render
explicit, and at the same time insists that there can be no feeling prior
to or apart from language. But even if we did know a priori what is
appropriate in the arts (and this is far from obvious), this does not help
us to decide between competing interpretations of a work. One
interpretation of a text may be refuted by pointing out internal
contradictions or overlooked evidence, but deciding what response is
"natural" to a given work of art cannot usually be settled in this
fashion. Even ifwe grant Best that not everything goes in art, this will
not provide us with valid criteria for judging specific responses as
appropriate. While understanding art is impossible without being

Understanding Art
435
familiar with the relevant social practice, it is misleading to say that
an artform is a language in the literal sense. To understand art is to be
familiar with a social context, but in the case of modem art, for
example, this may fail to provide us with relevant criteria. Unlike
chess, the rules that govern art are largely insufficient for settling
disputes. The learning experience that art is said to provide by Best is
an emotional one, the "casting a new light on the object," and such an
experience tends to remain private and indeed unstatable. Such an
''understanding'' is not to do something specific and identifiable, like
the learning of facts or the meaning of words; it is merely a change of
feeling that may remain private and nonconceptual.
Notes
1 David Best, Feeling and Reason in the Arts, London: George Allen &
Unwin, 1985, p. 4.
2 Ibid., p. 5.
3 Ibid., p. 7.
4 Ibid., p. 20.
5 Ibid., p. 22.
6 Ibid., p. 43.
7 Joseph Grunfeld, Changing Rational Standards, Lanham: University
Press ofAmerica, 1985.
8 Best, Feeling and Reason in the Arts, p. 58.
9 L. Wittgenstein, On Certainty, Oxford: Blackwell, 1969, para. 611.
10 Best, Feeling and Reason in the Arts, p. 78.
11 Ibid., p. 80.
12 Ibid., p. 100.
13 Ibid., p. 104.
14 Ibid., p. 110.
15 Ibid., p. 137.
16 Ibid., p. 126.

Chapter Thirty-Five
Understanding The World Through Art
We value art for a great variety of reasons. It yields much pleasure,
exercises our perceptual and imaginative faculties, expands our
emotional and reflective capacities, and reflects individuals' and
cultures' images of themselves. The focus is upon a certain kind of
objectivity. 1 Unless we are ready to accept the propositional truth
model as a paradigm for all knowledge, the dismissal of these other
claims to be knowledge seems dogmatic, sweeping, and far too simple.
Knowledge ofother persons, ofmoral values, of art, cannot be reduced
to empirical
statements "that something
is the
case."
In the
experience-knowledge of works of art, feeling and knowing are
inseparable. The content of our cognitive feeling for art can never be
translated adequately into words and symbols other than those of art
itself2 Everyday language is not a model ofconsistency; there is, more
often than not, a range of indeterminacy, a penumbra of uncertainty.
The assumption that the object to be interpreted has, or should have, a
single meaning in relation to which the interpretation is correct or
incorrect, no longer holds in these contexts. It is generally believed
nowadays that works of art, including poems and literary art in
general, contain a multiplicity of varied but not always compatible
meanings that become apparent only in course of time, and not all of
which are consciously known to the artist or intended by him. It is not
assumed that there is only one "true" interpretation, and it is regarded
as a merit, not a defect, in a work of art if it is replete with an
abundance of meanings that are thus gradually discovered.3 A portrait

438
Soft Logic
is more than an accurately depicted assembly of individual features.
Language is meager in words with which to express and discriminate
finer shades of aesthetic flavor or emotional complexion.
Such
qualities ofthings can be brought to attention only through art, and by
art alone can people be helped to a richer and more sensitive
experience of their world. When works of art are representational,
neither exactness nor completeness of correspondence are criteria of
their excellence. By inventing fictional, even impossible situations, the
arts widen man's experience, engendering new and more sensitive
attitudes with which to face these realities. The arts bring back into
life the richness and variety that
scientific understanding
has
abstracted from the world.
Goodman emphasizes that truth by itself matters very little even
in science. We can generate volumes of dependable truths at will, as
long as we are not concerned with their importance: the multiplication
tables are inexhaustible, and empirical truths abound. Scientific
hypotheses, however true, are worthless unless they meet minimal
demands of scope and specifity imposed by our inquiry, unless they
raise or answer significant questions. Minor discrepancies are over-
ridden in the interest of breadth or power or simplicity and, given an
assemblage ofevidence, countless alternative hypotheses conform to it:
we judge them by such features as their simplicity and strength. Truth
ofa hypothesis is a matter offit - fit with the body oftheory, and fit of
hypotheses and theory to the data at hand and the facts to be
encountered. But such fitness, such aptness in conforming to and
reforming our knowledge and our world, is equally relevant for the
aesthetic symbol. A persistent tradition pictures the aesthetic attitude
as passive contemplation ofthe immediately given, direct appreciation
of that which is presented uncontaminated by any conceptualizatio~.
Goodman rejects this view and likens it to holding that the appropriate
aesthetic attitude towards a poem amounts to gazing at the printed
page without reading it.4 He emphasizes, on the contrary, that we have
to read a painting no less than a poem, and that this involves making
deliberate
discriminations
and
discovering
subtle
relationships,
identifying symbolic systems and characters within these systems, and
determining what these characters denote and exemplify. The aesthetic
attitude is restless, searching, testing: it is less attitude than action,
creation, and recreation. The aesthetic is directed to no practical end.
Disinterested inquiry embraces both scientific and aesthetic exper-
ience,5 and that a picture or poem provides more pleasure than does a

Understanding the World Through Art
439
proof is by no means clear.
Goodman rejects the dominating
dichotomy between the cognitive and the emotive; he maintains that
syntactic density is characteristic of nonlinguistic systems. "Ineff-
ability," upon analysis, turns into density rather than mystery.
Attempts to assimilate aesthetics into epistemology are often
dismissed out of hand. But Elgin points out that, because of its narrow
focus on the conditions of knowledge, contemporary epistemology
cannot say what makes insights interesting and important; thus cannot
say what sort of knowledge is worth seeking and having. Not being
constrained to facts, understanding is more comprehensive than
knowledge ever hoped to be. Understanding need not be couched in
sentences; it might equally be located in apt terminology, insightful
questions, or effective nonverbal symbols. Even a scientist's under-
standing ofhis subject typically outstrips his words. It is realized in his
framing of problems, his design and execution of experiments, his
response to research failures and successes. Understanding physics
involves a feel for the subject, a capacity to operate successfully within
the constraints the discipline dictates or to challenge these constraints
effectively. Understanding a particular fact or finding, concept or
value, technique or law, is largely a matter of knowing where it fits
and how it functions in the matrix of commitments that constitute a
science. Neither knowing where nor knowing how reduces to the
knowing that traditional epistemology explicates.6 Aesthetic under-
standing, likewise, is not primarily a matter of knowing truths about
art or truth that art describes, but of using art effectively as a vehicle
for exploration and discovery. Examples, sanlples, experiments, and
abstract painting then all serve as synlbols. Exemplification is
selective; thus, an experiment can metaphorically exemplify properties
like power, elegance, and promise and a painting properties like
balance, movement, and depth. 7 New categories often reconfigure a
domain, connecting previously isolated features to form patterns
focusing on factors hitherto considered unworthy of attention. The
features a symbol exemplifies depend on their functions, and a symbol
often performs a family of functions. Functions, moreover, vary with
context.
The intention of its producer does not determine an
exemplar's interpretation, for its producer has neither privileged
access to nor a monopoly on a symbol's function. Many symbols admit
multiple, right interpretations, and whether such multiplicity was
originally intended makes no difference.8 Exemplars operate against a
constellation of background assumptions, and an interpreter ignorant

440
Soft Logic
of these assumptions may be incapable of interpreting or even recog-
nizing symbols. These assumptions need not be articulate, they need
not
presuppose
their
truth
or
adequacy.
Not
all
background
assumptions are propositional; what we cannot quite put into words is
often captured in equations or harmonies or diagrams or designs.9
Interpretation is rarely a matter of routine application of fixed rules,
for exemplars are largely sensitive to context, function, and back-
ground assumptions, and these admit enormous variation. Neverthe-
less,
interpretation is neither arbitrary nor hopelessly difficult;
traditions,
accepted
rules
of thumb,
interpretive
practices
and
precedents guide us, though they provide no recipes. What a symbol
exemplifies or denotes may permanently elude us, or remain forever in
dispute. Works of art often bring out hitherto unnoticed or poorly
differentiated features. Fiction feeds back on fact, but justification in
the sense of argument from accepted premises is out of place - nor is
truth
crucial.
Effectiveness
sometimes depends
on nonsemantic
features such as syntax, style, reflection, or emphasis. The disciplines
complement one another, each contributing to the achievement of
understanding.
Putnam considers it wrong either to say that novels give
knowledge about man as to say categorically that they do not. No
matter how profound the psychological insights of a novelist may be,
they cannot be called knowledge if they have not been tested. What a
novel provides us with is knowledge of a possibility, Le. conceptual
knowledge. 10 Thinking of a hypothesis that one has not considered
before is conceptual discovery; it is not empirical discovery, although
it may result in empirical discovery if the hypothesis turns out to be
correct. There are both empirical and conceptual elements in the
knowledge we gain from literature, since imagination and sensibility
are essential constraints on practical reasoning of this kind. Anglo-
American philosophers of this century continue, for the most part,to
speak of the growth of knowledge only in the context of scientific
inquiry. But Putnam believes that this tendency has not only hampered
the epistemological enterprise, but has encouraged many to ignore the
products of fanciful imagination, and especially works of art, as a
potential source of knowledge. Indeed, attentive readers who respond
to fiction frequently claim that they have acquired knowledge of the
real world. It helps us to understand, and to come to terms with, what
otherwise would be baffling. It is also possible to acquire certain
values or attitudes from fictional works, and a good deal of what we

Understanding the World Through Art
441
learn from fiction is practical and attitudinal. Fiction may impart
conceptual or cognitive skills that offer radically new ways ofthinking
about
or
perceiving
aspects
of our
environment.
Usually
our
imaginings are guided and contrasted by what we actually know; they
will be used as a foundation on which we base our understanding ot:
and our action in, the situation. Fiction often explores, teases, and tests
our moral standards and attitudes. Bender concludes that art in general
functions in a multiplicity of cognitive, perceptual, and expressive
ways, and sometimes this includes the conveyance of propositional
knowledge. 11
Some philosophers have argued that a successful account of
pictorial representation must give a central place to the notion of
aspect-seeing. Wilkerson argues that interpreting pictures is a special
case of seeing aspects. In a portrait, I may see anger and disgust or
fear. Others can guide and assist nIY efforts by drawing my attention to
crucial parts of the figure, or by obscuring elements, by turning the
figure around, or by offering verbal encouragement. There is a clear
contrast here with ordinary seeing: I cannot try to believe that
Napoleon is in front of my eyes, but I can attempt to see a Napoleon
aspect. 12 Aspects may suddenly dawn as, after effort, I detect the sense
ofa knotty passage in a foreign language. The "look" of a figure is not
a simple nonrelational property; it is a focusing of attention that pulls
everything together. Aspect-seeing is an exercise of the imagination;
indeed, in many respects this is the most important feature of aspect-
seeing. Some aspects demand a selective connection and organization
of detail. It is no good to distinguish "purely optical" aspects from
"purely intellectual" ones because the perception of aspects, like the
perception of everything else, requires the cooperation of sense and
intellect. I must both perceive the object in front of me and bring it
under concepts, classifying it as belonging to a kind or kinds. So no
perception is purely intellectual, as Kant remarked; thoughts without
content are empty, and intuition without concepts are blind. What is
often forgotten, however, is that understanding, on Kant's view, is
assisted by the imagination in its work of organization and com-
bination. Knowledge requires thought not merely about actualities but
also about possibilities. If I am to identify a chair or a chimpanzee, I
must have views about its possible behavior, about how it might and
might not behave, how it can and cannot change. I need to think about
all kinds of counterfactual possibilities, for I am implicitly connecting
actual representations with possible representations. Indeed, if I could

442
Soft Logic
not think about possible representations, I could not think about actual
ones. 13 In normal perception, the role of the imagination is necessary,
but subordinate to the roles of sense and intellect. Yet, in the per-
ception of aspects the imagination dominates, and sense and intellect
are both in a subordinate role. My comprehension of the actual (e.g.
the figure in front of my eyes) is subordinated to nlY thoughts about
what is possible. The imagination takes over, and I concentrate
entirely on what might be the case, or on what could be the case, given
the
limited
sensory
information
available.
I
use
the
sensory
information, not in an effort to form beliefs, but in an effort to explore
possibilities. Developing possibilities and pondering counterfactuals is
consistent with believing that they are only possibilities, and indeed
counterfactual. 14 Imagination is required to see new applications to old
rules and formulas; to develop original solutions to knotty problems; to
make connections between apparently disparate things; to display a
sensitivity to, and a talent for, metaphor; to develop a sense of humor
and a feeling for the incongruous, the ridiculous, the ironic, the
anlbiguous. Aspect-seeing is a special kind of imagining. 15
Kivy points out that the language of aesthetics is used in the
writings ofmen of science. It is in aesthetic value that the justification
of a scientific theory is to be found, and with it the justification of
scientific method. Yet the line seems to be sharply drawn between
"aesthetics" on the one hand and truth on the other. Roger Fry is
expressing no more than what "common sense" will allow when he
argues that if aesthetic value is the measure, or even an important
measure, of scientific value, than a false but beautiful theory must be
preferred over a true but homely one. Aesthetic evaluation and appre-
ciation meant for Fry, as for many, paradigmatically the evaluation
and perception of art qua art. But since for Fry the foremost aesthetic
appreciation was solely estimation of fornlal properties, to read that
science is evaluated primarily on aesthetic grounds means that it is
appreciated for its formal properties, in which case truth is irrelevant.
People who are able to understand scientific theories at the highest
level sometimes describe their enjoyment as "aesthetic." The criteria
that scientists customarily cite in support of their apparent aesthetic
judgments are symmetry, order, unity, coherence, elegance, and
harmony - to name the most representable. Kivy emphasizes, how-
ever, that all these criteria are what we might call "classical" ones. No
one ever heard of a scientist gushing over a theory because of its wild
sublime disorder, its intriguing obscurity and ambiguity, or its gothic

Understanding the World Through Art
443
complexity. A historian of science, or even a working scientist, might
well enjoy aesthetically the Baroque complexity of the Ptolemaic
astronomy with its profligate multiplication of epicycles to save the
appearances. What such an example suggests is that Baroque and
Ronlantic features of theories are objects of appreciation only after the
theories have ceased to be in the running; when, that is, the question
of truth has ceased to matter because a verdict of "false" has been
declared by scientific consensus. 16 When scientific theories are,
however, established doctrine, or at the cutting edge in the process of
confmnation or computation, it would appear that the classical
aesthetic criteria exclusively prevail. When I appreciate the elegance
of a theory, I do not have to choose between its elegance aesthetically
and appreciating it epistemologically, for in doing the one I anl doing
the other, and vice versa. 17 On fITst blush, it would seem difficult to
follow Sullivan in his stronger claim that aesthetics is the only
motivating force in theoretical science. 18 But when one is asking the
grand questions of theoretical physics or cosmology, or evolutionary
biology, it is difficult not to see the quest as aesthetically motivated
and the answers as aesthetically satisfying. One cannot solve problems
of such a theoretical kind whiteout fulfilling, at least in part, the
requirements of theoretical harmony, unity, elegance, simplicity, and
the like, that excite the scientist's aesthetic emotions. One cannot
intelligibly ask
whether
aesthetic
criteria
are
ever
decisive
in
themselves in deciding for the truth of a scientific theory, unless one
has severed the aesthetic from the true in a formalist fashion. 19 But the
beauty of a theory can be compelling enough to keep it alive, even if
believed to be false long enough to be ultimately vindicated.
Kraut defends a critical pluralism, which contrasts with critical
monism (There is one single, correct complete interpretation of an
artwork") and with critical anarchism ("All interpretations of an
artwork are equally acceptable"). Critical pluralism entails that two
artifices could lay equal claims to understanding the same aesthetic
phenomenon despite serious disagreements with one another.
It
presupposes rival interpretations, equally correct, and genuinely in-
compatible. But it is not clear how artistic understanding relates to
other varieties of understanding, for example, to the varieties of
understanding at work when a native speaker (or translator) under-
stands a grammatical sentence, or when a scientist understands the
data, or when a person understands another person's actions or natural
states. Quine claims that natural language meaning is indeterminate:

444
Soft Logic
for a given language L, it is possible in principle to construct
acceptable translations of L ("rival translation manuals"), all of which
are equally correct.20 The critical pluralist might attempt to appro-
priate Quine's arguments for the indeterminacy oftranslation and urge
their applicability to the artworld. That some ways might seem more
natural than others is due to our parochial sense of what counts as a
natural kind; it does not point toward the incorrectness of the
apparently bizarre translation schemes.21 The linguist begins with the
capacity to use his own language (this is the "preunderstanding" that
is derived from the interpreter's initial situation). He asks about the
conditions under which his sentences are true, and this involves
idealizations, approximations, counterfactual hypotheses, appeals to
normalcy, and ceteris paribus conditions, as well as other aspects of
theory construction.22 Two interpreters immersed in quite distinct
initial situations have different interests and explanatory goals,
different senses of what is or what is not important, different ideo-
logical commitments. But no argument has been provided that these
interpretations are in any interesting sense incompatible, or rival
interpretations, or that, if they are, they have an equal claim to
correctness. Artworks are artifacts; they cannot be understood in
isolation from the communal norms that spawn and sustain them.
There are many such artworlds, just as there are many distinct natural
languages. Locating an artist's work within a style or genre and,
thereby, determining what is or what is not important in the work is
often difficult, not because we do not know enough but because the
facts resist classification. Often - perhaps usually - we cannot say
where one community of interest groups ends and the next begins. A
critical pluralist rejects the specification of a privileged community,
but ambiguity is not indeterminacy, and it is not pluralism. No
population enjoys privileges over ,any other in fixing the artistic facts
constitutive of the "proper interpretation" of an artwork. And this
spells doom to strict analogies between
linguistic and artistic
meaning.23 The incompatibility of rival interpretations is not a truth-
fictional matter consisting of disagreement about the facts; it is more
like the incompatibility between a "boo" stance and a "hooray" stance
taken toward the same state of affairs. The discourse of aesthetic
interpretation
seems
remarkably
similar
to
the
discourse
of
psychological interpretation, linguistic interpretation, and semantic
content description generally. So the monist and pluralist are, on this
construal of their dispute, not in disagreement about some matter of

Understanding the World Through Art
445
fact; rather they have clashing sentiments about how art should be
approached, about what sort of considerations should constrain one's
aesthetic experiences.24 There is more to incompatibility than logical
inconsistency.
Notes
1 Louis Arnaud Reid, "Art and Knowledge," The British Journal of
Aesthetcis, 25 (1985), reprinted in John W. Bender and H. Gene Blocker,
Contemporary Philosophy ofArt, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Princeton Hall, 1993,
p.563.
2 Ibid., p. 566.
3 Harold Osborne, "Interpretation in Science and Art,"
The British
Journal of Aesthetics, 23 (1983) reprinted in Contemporary Philosophy of
Art, p. 572.
4 Nelson Goodman, "The Activity of Aesthetic Experience,"
in
Languages ofArt, Indianapolis, IN: The Bobbs-Merrill Co. 1968, reprinted in
Contemporary Philosophy ofArt, p. 397.
5 Ibid.
6 Catherine Z. Elgin, "Understanding: Art and Science," Midwest
Studies in Philosophy, Volume XVI, Philosophy and the Arts, Notre Dame, IN:
University ofNotre Dame Press, 1991, p. 197.
7 Ibid., p. 198.
8 Ibid., p. 201.
9 Ibid.
10 Hilary Putnam, "Literature, Science, and Reflection," in Meaning and
the Moral Sciences, Boston, MA: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1978, reprinted
in Contemporary Philosophy ofArt, p. 583.
11 John W. Bender, "Art as a Source of Knowledge: Linking Analytic
Aesthetics and Epistenl0Iogy," in Contemporary Philosophy ofArt, p. 594.
12 E.E. Wilkerson, "Pictorial Representation: A Defense of the Aspect
Theory," in Midwest Studies in Philosophy, Volume XVI, p. 154.
13 Ibid., p. 158.
14 Ibid.
15 Ibid., p. 159.
16 Peter Kivy, "Science and Aesthetic Appreciation," in Midwest Studies
in Philosophy, Volume XVI, p. 186.
17 Ibid.
18 J.W.N. Sullivan, "The Place of Science," Athenaeum, April 11, 1919,
p. 76, reprinted in Aspects ofScience, New York and London: 1927, p. 14.

446
Soft Logic
19 Kivy, "Science and Aesthetic Appreciation," p. 190.
20 W.V. Quine, Word and Object, Cambridge, MA: 1960, p. 27.
21 Robert Kraut, "On Pluralism and Indeterminacy," Midwest Studies in
Philosophy, Volume XVL p.211.
22 Ibid., p. 212.
23 Ibid., p. 219.
24 Ibid., p. 223.

Chapter Thirty-Six
Knowledge Through Art
Berleant argues that engagement is not only an explicit factor in the
work of any innovative artist but that it becomes the principle key for
making the various regions of aesthetic experience intelligible. We
face an array ofdualisms, especially that of subject and object, that are
widely accepted as fundamental truths.
Despite Hegel and the
succeeding efforts of Bergson, Dewey, and Merleau-Ponty, among
others, these dualisms still remain primarily philosophical tenets for
most philosophers. And they join with other basic convictions, such as
the cognitive primacy of science, the universality and exclusiveness of
truth, the objectivity ofknowledge, and the hierarchical order ofbeing,
to form the foundation of modem intellectual culture. 1 Aesthetic
engagement challenges this tradition; it claims continuity rather than
separation, contextual relevance rather than subjectivity, historical
pluralism rather than certainty, ontological parity rather than priority.
The natural world does not stand apart from human presence and
action, and an impressive impulse compels people toward the aesthetic
and the artistic. Not only are these experiences distinctive and
valuable; they cannot be excluded from any consideration of human
culture. As an empirically grounded discipline, aesthetics must estab-
lish itself in the evidence of artistic activities and artistic experience,
but what we select as identifiable and relevant is guided by the
conceptual frame we employ. Aesthetic theory has not only often failed
to reflect aesthetic practice and artistic experience, it has presumed at
times to decide them. From the earliest times art has been an integral

448
Soft Logic
part of human culture. The classical age centered on art as an activity
that is at once cosmic, social, and individual - an activity that brings
understanding of a sort. Since the eighteenth century, however, this
has changed, and now at the end of the twentieth century, we have
finally recognized that the human factor in every kind of awareness
and knowledge is structurally unavoidable. Art has become both a
symptom of the change and a standard for grasping it.2 The scope of
our claims has narrowed, and while the human place has become less
cosmic, it is more pervasive and personal. Theories of beauty have
given way to doctrines of emotion, meaning, communication, with
even symbols being taken as the embodiment offeeling.
Berleant challenges the traditional theory that art consists
primarily ofobjects, that these objects possess a special status, and that
they must be regarded in a unique way. Disinterestedness began to
emerge as the mark ofa new and distinctive mode ofexperience called
"aesthetic," a kind of awareness distinct fronl more commonly recog-
nized alternative modes, such as historical, cognitive, moral, and
religious experience.3 It was in the work of Kant that the concept of
aesthetic disinterestedness became fixed, and assumed a distinct and
integral place in aesthetic thinking. By making taste disinterested,
Kant provided the theoretical impetus for isolating art from commerce
with the world of human activity, and setting it in its own region
beyond the command of practical affairs. From this formative period
in the history of modem aesthetics, there emerged an identification of
the art object as separate and distinct from what surrounds it, isolated
from what surrounds it, and isolated fron1 the rest of life. One can read
the history of the philosophy of art as a reflection of the powerful
impact ofthis contemplative ideal, which was continued to the present
day in the attempt to identify art with language, symbol, and symbol
systems.4 For Berleant, on the other hand, experience is the critical
term in aesthetics and all that we can say about art and the aesthetic is
in some wayan elaboration of this notion. In attempting to describe
experience, it is essential to escape the prevalent tendency to regard it
as a purely subjective event, a tendency that emerges in phenomen-
ology as strongly as in traditional empiricism. To the Western philo-
sophical mind, experience connotes sense experience, and the appeal
to sensation as the source of knowledge, or empiricism, as this is
known, suggests the major tradition in British philosophy. What we
have inherited from that tradition (it, too, like aesthetics, a product of
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries) is a view of experience as

Knowledge Through Art
449
the composite product of separate, discrete sensations.
Yet this
dualistic tradition of separating consciousness from the external world,
so deeply ingrained in modem thought, cannot be assumed as given.
For it presumes a structure of experience that, for all its initial plausi-
bility, rests upon a particular historical and cultural tradition not
shared in other times and places.5 But this pattern of separation
continues to prevail in the way the arts are explained and treated. Our
Western
involvement
with
science
and
technology,
where
the
automatic pattern of experience seems so effective, may in fact have
provided us with a misleading paradigm. The contemporary arts, in
particular, frequently insist on experiences of engagement by pro-
voking us into movement or action, or by forcing us to adjust our
vision and imagination. A clear alternative to the dualistic claims of
the empiricist tradition lies in the claim for a continuity of experience,
joining percejver with the world in complex patterns of reciprocity.
One must enter into the work in an intimate fashion, active, not as a
pure spectator, but as an involved viewer.6 Berleant concludes that the
arts of this century demand a transformation of theory,7 since the
evolution of the arts in the twentieth century has often been described
as experimental, controversial, even chaotic. Yet contemporary art
exhibits more than an expression of styles, materials, and techniques,
for technical innovations do not stand alone; they reflect the manner in
which we engage with and appreciate art. Artists have altered our very
ability to identify what art is and our capacities for expressing it. By
modifying what we accept as art, and by reordering the conditions and
character ofour experience of it, these developments have, at the same
time, undermined the customary beliefs through which people have
appreciated, understood, and esteemed art.
Berleant argues that it is presumptuous for the theories of the arts
to decree what qualifies as art and aesthetic. The converse is more
appropriate: aesthetic theory must examine aesthetic practice carefully,
and consider how best to respond to this alteration and enlargement of
the traditional station and experience of the arts. During the last
century, the art object has become less important in the aesthetic
situation, and at times has vanished altogether. Impressionist painting
began the process; it dissolved the substantiality of things into
atmospheric appearances, from the pointillism of Seurat to Monet's
multiple versions of haystacks, suggesting a painterly exemplification
of Berkeley's dictum of the previous century, "To be is to be per-
ceived.,,8 Analytical cubism flattened out the thickness of things by

450
Soft Logic
delivering a multiplicity of perspectives simultaneously. The perspect-
ival
process
took
a
psychological
form
in
the
work
of the
Expressionists where subjects were transfigured in their emotive
significance. In Surrealism, the painter's oneiric world dominated the
visual one, and painting relied nlore on a nletaphorical than a literal
image. Just as Newton proved in 1666 that color was not a property of
matter but rather of light as it interacts with objects, artists in this
century seem to be showing us that art is not a property of objects but
emerges from the perception of human beings in interaction with
objects or elements.9 The tragic hero becomes a nondescript unsuccess-
ful salesman; the dramatic situation is described in the transcript of a
trial; the poetry of language is sacrificed to the dullmindedness of
common speech. Action, furthermore, is nonexistent, and the force of
a situation emerges from the intimations that rise out of a seemingly
pointless reiteration of banalities, and perhaps even more, from the
silences that interrupt them. 10
The experience of art is indeed distinctive, and the doctrine of
disinterestedness attempted to promote this by putting a frame of sorts
around art, thereby isolating it from the rest of the human objects and
activities, and placing it in a special realm different from practical
demands. This frame is primarily a psychological one, a shift in
attitude that leads the appreciator to attend to the qualities of the art
object without concern for the usual meanings and uses it may have in
ordinary experience, therefore, disinterestedness no longer identifies
what is distinctive in the aesthetic situation and, in the past century
artists have been producing work that denies the isolation of art from
the active involvements of daily life. Aesthetic experience thus
becomes an emphasis on intrinsic qualities and lived experience rather
than a shift in attitude. Such engagement emphasizes connections and
continuities, and it leads ultimately to the aesthetization of the human
world. Active discernment is a demand of all painting, from recent
color field and minimalist art to traditional landscape and portrait
painting. Innovations in theater have also appeared that disrupt
dramatically the conventional projection of distance. The modernist
novel, along with some notable precursors, makes the reader a
collaborator in the fictional process. In place of a plot developed in a
more or less direct manner, situations, events, and perceptions are
described, which the reader is compelled to fit together in order for the
novel to become coherent. 11 The lines between what happens and what
is imagined are indiscernible, according ~o_~~r!e~~~ _h~ _r~j~~t~ _t~e_

Knowledge Through Art
451
philosophical doctrine that has dominated both understanding and
appreciation of art for some two centuries largely because it has
shaped an aesthetics of separation, isolation, contemplation, and
distance.
Instead,
Berleant
emphasizes
that
both
theory
and
appreciation must rest
on
what
happens
in
art.
The
artistic
developments of the past century are part of a transformation in per-
ception and understanding that compels us toward a different
aesthetics. New materials, objects, and techniques that arise out of
technology of industrial production have entered into the art world,
and profoundly influenced the vocabulary and the practice of artists.
At the same time, fundamental social changes in the modem world
have reshaped our perceptual activities in the arts into new and
different forms. Art is one ofthe powerful elements in human culture,
and its evolution has significance not only for its own future but for
understanding the larger society as well. For the arts, both popular and
high, pervade modern societies in unprecedented variety and scope.
Industrial techniques have transfigured the art object just as it has
transformed other objects ofhuman making, and our relationship with
them.
This undermined the sharp distinction between people's
practical activities, which demanded an unqualified commitment to
utility, and artistic activities ofaesthetic enjoyment, which were cut off
from practical affairs and regarded for their own intrinsic worth. The
emancipation of the arts from subservience to historical accuracy and
devotional purpose has encouraged their propensity to abstraction. At
the same tinle, their integration into the traffic of daily life has
replaced the isolated object of art with one absorbed through its
function into the course of ordinary human activity. Science and
technology have continued to exercise a profound influence on artistic
production. Technological tools like the computer and the music
synthesizer are now commonplace, and recording on magnetic tape
has both assisted performers and replaced them. The nlusic no longer
lives and grows as a freshly recreative act; it is constructed like a
machine product. 12 While traditional theater has continued to function,
a new technology has produced a new art in which the actual
movement and discourse of people is replaced by the presence of
images fixed on celluloid strip, and shown in rapid succession so as to
create the illusion of movement. In portraying movement in time and
space, the film approaches the directness and randomness of life. The
distancing logic of the plot has receded, and in its place appear the

452
Soft Logic
ordinary details of life that we never trouble to notice: dramatic shape
is replaced by the mystery ofthe mundane.
As art is not eternal, neither are the modes of perception and
consciousness with which we experience them. The interpretive rich-
ness of good art leads us beyond the qualities inherent in the object
alone and makes art relevant to new conditions. Art can thus outlive
the theories in which it has been explained, and gain in force through
a more inclusive aesthetic.
Berleant believes that contemporary
theories impede the full force of art, and misdirect our understanding
of how art and the aesthetic actually function. Social, historical, and
cultural factors influence the kind of work artists do and the uses that
are made of their art; aesthetic experience is part of the entire spec-
trum of human experience. In art, as in modem society, traditional
rules
have
blurred;
the
psychology
of perception
has
joined
philosophical psychology in undermining the common division of
sense experience into separate channels ofsensation, each governed by
its donlinant sense. As human beings we are cultural creatures, unable
to sense without the presence of associations and meanings. The very
process of sensory development is, in fact, a process of acculturation
through which ideas and beliefs become embodied in our direct
experience. The meanings and attitudes are not merely intellectual
constituents or internal accomplishments of sensation, but are subtly
infused into our sensory experience. New ideas mean new perceptions,
and this involvement occurs in many different orders of activity -
sensory, conscious, physical, and social - but it is most pronounced in
aesthetic experience. Art does not consist of objects but ofsituations in
which experiences occur. Art objects are not inherently different from
other objects but they express features that make them effective in the
aesthetic situation in which they become art.
Paintings are the typical referent of the term art, and the painter
is taken as the prototypical artist. Painting seems to accord completely
with the tradition of aesthetic theory for which disinterested contem-
plation is the appropriate mode of appreciation. Space is often used to
exemplify the traditional attitude ofpictorial appreciation, for disinter-
estedness is commonly expressed by the spatial metaphor of distance.
Yet there have been major changes in both our scientific and philoso-
phical understanding ofspace, and these changes hold implications for
aesthetic perception. The usual treatment of space in painting assumes
the classical model of Newtonian physics; it is a conception that
Newton developed by extending the system of Cartesian coordinates

Knowledge Through Art
453
into a universal order. In this system both space and time are absolute;
space is a medium that is abstract, universal and impersonal - a
medium in which discrete objects are placed and in which they can be
located clearly and irrefragably.13 Despite the radically different
orientation of modem relativity physics, common sense continues to
struggle along under the Newtonian conception. We still tend to see
ourselves as inhabitants of a Euclidean universe, preserving the
functions of simultaneity and absoluteness of space and time. We per-
sist in the Cartesian illusion that .we can stand apart from things,
regard them from some remove, and remain unimplicated in their
processes. Not yet having accommodated ourselves perceptually to the
vastly altered world of Einsteinian physics and quantum mechanics,
we continue unwittingly to apply the repudiated spatial orientation to
pictorial as well as ordinary experience.14 Distance develops not only
as a space that separates perceiver and object but as a division between
them as well. The perceiver becomes primarily a visual awareness who
adopts a contemplative attitude toward an isolated object. We learn
from the history of art that pictorial space was absent in the visual art
of Egypt, Crete, and India; that it was limited and idealized in Greek
and Roman art; and that it began to emerge as an important
component in the West during the Middle Ages. Space first appeared
in paintings in the form of imaginative landscapes constructed as
settings for mythological and religious figures and events. Distance
was neglected, the size of figures rather than their spatial distribution
designating their importance. Joined to the interest in physical space
and the emergence of the landscape was the development of pictorial
techniques for reading depth accurately. Linear perspective is a
carefully studied technique that rests on the visual perception of
distance, and while the perceiver is a necessary factor in the perceptual
array, he functions only as a distant observer. is The theory of linear
perspective was developed with such mastery that it has continued to
the present time as the model for the realistic·appointment of pictorial
space. It solidified in graphic form the primacy of vision as the pre...
eminent sensory modality, a status that reflected its superiority, and
the
long-standing metaphorical
identification of sight with
the
cognitive process.
Our visual understanding of space continues to reflect the same
scientific and artistic traditions and to share similar premise. We still
understand an account of spatial perception in common experience
largley in Euclidean terms, taking space as independent of the

454
Soft Logic
perceiver within fixed and unchanging orthological coordinates, and
within which separate objects are located. The changes that modem
relativity physics has made in perception of space, however, are well-
known. Space and time are now understood as a continuum that is
curved in the presence of a gravitational field in which time and
position of events can be fixed only relatively to the location of the
observer. Thus, the perceiver's placement is critical: one's location not
only makes a difference in the knowledge of events, it makes a
contribution to what they are. We can, therefore, no longer speak of
things as if they occurred independently in absolute spatial and
temporal frames, and any specification of occurrences depends on the
presence and position of a perceiver.16 Recent approaches to the
psychology of perception, such as those of the Gestalt and trans-
actional schools, provide additional reasons for recognizing the human
contributions to the world we perceive. The space of appearance is far
different from the space of Euclidean geometry.17 Perception is not
entirely a sensory phenomenon, and recent interest in hermeneutics
has made us realize how meaning never stands alone, and how the
knower contributes through the interpretive process to the very nature
ofwhat is known. Interpretation is ubiquitous, and this is as true ofthe
physical spatial world as it is ofthe social and cultural one, offact and
perception as it is oftexts. Facts are themselves hermeneutical; like all
forms of meaning they are hunlan constructions. Thus the impartial
objective knowledge, to which we have been accustomed to ascribe the
results of scientific inquiry, appears to be going the way of the
absoluteness and objectivity of space and time. The individual is no
longer a spectator, distinctly removed from objects and events, and
viewing them with uninvolved objectivity. The spectator has been
transformed into an actor, wholly inlplicated in the space continuum
in which everyone else is involved. We have now come to recognize
our contribution to the world we inhabit through action, perception,
and consciousness, whether involving scholarly research, scientific
inquiry, and knowledge or aesthetic experience. How the world is
known makes a difference in what is actually there as well as how it is
perceived. The implication of the knower in what is known is a major
claim in this century, supported scientifically by relativity theory,
quantum mechanics, and the psychology of perception as well as
interpretively by phenomenology, pragmatism, deconstructionism,
hermeneutics, and feminism, among current intellectual movements.
Thus a blurring takes place between the seeing and the seen; both our

Knowledge Through Art
455
understanding and our perception of space have changed and become
fused. From being thought of as an absolute and independent medium
known in itself alone, space has been transformed into a condition that
includes the perceiver as a constituent. This works to reshape not just
physical space and our awareness of it, but all spatial perception,
transforming our encounter with pictorial space as well. Euclidean-
Newtonian space and Einsteinian-phenomenological space lead to
dissimilar ways of ordering the world and thus experiencing it. Their
influence on the arts can be traced in many directions; the panoramic
landscape vividly expresses Newtonian space. Such paintings exhibit
pictorial tendencies that present an objectified space and encourage a
disinterested attitude. Yet, Berleant emphasizes that it is possible to set
aside Newtonian objectivity and tum to the capacities most landscapes
have for perceptual engagement. Perspective does not require a precise
and immobile spectator but is remarkably able to accommodate a
whole
range of viewing
positions.
We
now
understand
space
differently, and this change enables us to experience it more freely and
more personally. Berleant concludes that the history of aesthetics has
long labored under a rationalistic burden. I8 Art does not legislate
experience it invites it. The participating landscape requires a new
way of seeing, a new way of perceiving pictorial space as continuous
with the viewer instead as opposed to him. It is undoubtedly true, as
Goethe maintained, that people see what they know, the task, then, is
to enlarge our knowledge so as to expand our vision.
The objects of our ordinary world often impose themselves
forcibly on our thought and actions, and our involvement with them is
likely to be active as well as reciprocal. Environmental experiences are
not only sensory, the environment can no longer be regarded as an
internal location but must be considered a physico-historical condition
ofengagement, a dynamic field offorces continuous with human life. 19
Yet, the active patterns in which the human world takes shape display
forms ofgrasping the environment that are far more varied than those
that conventional usage has made orthodox. In constituting their
habitat, people have created different kinds of environmental order
that
reflect
the
contrast
in
attitude
and
experience
between
disinterested contemplation and aesthetic engagement. Urban design is
replete with examples of the contemplative visual approach to space.
The eye becomes the reflective organ of space, since starting from the
seventeenth century, it has been the metaphorical origin of thought.20
It is becoming increasingly clear that environment, far from being a

456
Soft Logic
contemplative object, collaborates in human perception and action.
The eye is but one factor in our perception of space, an awareness that
we grasp through multiple sensory channels. The recent sources ofthis
approach are in the American pragmatic tradition and the continental
experimental phenomenological philosophy, but the origin of the
active approach goes back to identification of practical modes of
knowing, and the development of craft technology in the West. This
sense of environment considers people to be embedded in their world,
implicated in their constant processes of action and response. A
physical interaction of body and setting, a psychological intercon-
nection of consciousness and culture, a dynamic harmony of sensory
awareness - all make the person inseparable from his environmental
situation. Traditional dualisms, such as those separating idea and
object, self and others, mere consciousness and external world,
dissolve in the integration of person and place.21 What is common to
the various expressions of the active model is the recognition that the
objective world of classical science is not the experiential world of the
human perceiver. Environment is not outside us to be experienced in
consciousness
and
feeling,
nor
can
it
even
be
construed
as
surroundings. As actors in the world, we are inseparable from it and
fully implicated in its dynamic processes.22 Philosophical attempts to
articulate this
conception have become increasingly influential.
Human perception is not purely visual but rather semantic; for
Merleau-Ponty perception starts with the body, and thus leads to
grasping the perceived object not as a discrete material thing, but in
relation to the space of the perceiver. The world is all around me, not
in front of me.23 Extending Merleu-Ponty's spatial concept, O.F.
Bollnow uses the notion of lived space, in which space becomes the
medium of action.24 The environment has become the stage on which
the beholder has metamorphosed into the actor.25 Not only is it
impossible to objectify environment, we also cannot take it simply as a
reflection ofthe perceiver or as the ground on which people carry out
their activities.
The
visual
tactic of removal
and
distance
is
unavailable, since the environment becomes our very world. Although
not usually formulated theoretically, such a sense of environmental
participation often appears in research areas such as the ecological
sciences and cognitive science, in applied fields like urban planning
and agriculture, and in activities such as hiking, camping, small boat
cruising,
and
wilderness
travel.
The
fundamental
participating
character of such experience is being understood by people following

Knowledge Through Art
457
many routes: phenomenological, hermeneutic, psychological, reli-
gious, environmental, aesthetic.
The participating environment develops a spatial continuity with
the view, and there is a concrete manipulation of space in which all
senses collaborate. This phenomenological aesthetic of space defmes a
world vastly different fron1 the traditional scientific ideal of physics.
Space has no precise boundaries; it is not quantitative and mathe-
matically measurable, for it is not universal and homogeneous. It is not
objective, distinct, and separate from the person inhabiting it. Personal
space is instead qualitative, not uniformly measurable, but with fluid,
fuzzy boundaries. Space is perceived as identical with the events
occurring in them, and tirp.e is recognized only in relation to move-
ment and spaces. Space, then, is human space, personal space, relative
to the perceiver, and it is as heterogeneous as the infmitely varied
terms and conditions ofhuman life. We can regard space as a rarefied
or liquid means, a medium through which we move much as fish swim
through water. Objects are not solids opposed to empty space; they are
part ofthat space, concentrations of it, so to speak. To understand how
this happens requires us to enter the environment as participants, and
not just to regard it as observers. Yet this is difficult to talk about, in
part because we have few concepts and techniques in our tradition to
assist us. Environment is not foreign territory surrounding the self;
rather understanding the environment involves recognizing that
human life is lived as an integral part of a physical and cultural
medium. There is no inside and outside, human being and external
world - even in the final reckoning - no discrete self and separate
other. The conscious body moving as part of the spatio-temporal
environment medium becomes the domain of human experience, the
ground ofhuman reality within which and from which discriminations
and distinctions are made.
The human environment is always
historico-cultural, and certain places exemplify such an aesthetic. We
must, then, dispense with the notion of space and consider place
instead, for it is through dwelling, belonging to a place, that the
human relation appears.
Berleant emphasizes that a text requires a cohort of critics and
readers, a literary public, a linguistic system, all surrounded by a
larger society with its conventions and beliefs, and all placed within an
ordered historical perspective to be interpreted and understood. Edges
blur and domains merge in the different efforts of formalists to locate
and comprehend literature. For Ferdinand de Saussure, who estab-

458
Soft Logic
lished the study of structural linguistics early in this century, words
have no meaning in themselves, nor do they refer directly to things
themselves. Only within the objective structure of its system does a
sign
possess
meaning,
and
the
system,
moreover,
is
entirely
conventional. Words do not "refer" to things themselves; rather they
have meaning as parts within the entire systenl that is a language. 26
Both sign and referent carry a certain arbitrariness. Together they
acquire an identity, fluid but cohesive; yet, the closed system of signs
is essentially incomplete. Words in themselves do not refer; people use
words to refer, and it is the user who creates the bond between sign
and referent. We must escape from the systenl of signs into the larger
conditions oftheir use. 27 The study of language in literature directs us
beyond the written word, even beyond its author, to the reader who
actualizes language at any given moment. It is the reader who
reinvents the sign, locates the referent, and joins them into a unity by
the act of reading, and the referent, too, never stands alone but is
selected and focused by the reader.28 Reading transforms literature
from an object into an event, and an event cannot be objectified,
grasped, and held at arm's length. It is something more elusive, more
intangible; moreover, it assumes a life of its own. Different texts imply
different kinds ofreaders. Literature is no independent body of special
texts culled from the vast ocean of print by standard canons of
normative judgment. The reader does not discern the meaning hidden
in the text, for apart from the reader, the text has none. We do not first
read a text and then proceed to interpret it; interpretation strategies
shape our reading, deciding not only how we read but what we are
reading. But placing the weight of literature so heavily on its reader
does not necessarily rest it on the soft ground of subjectivity. Even
though there are no ''true'' objective meanings embedded in literature,
there is the obvious fact that readers agree widely on meanings, formal
units, and even interpretations and judgments. As readers we are never
independent but members all of interpretive communities who will
agree with others in the same group. Fiction does not rest on
opposition to reality but has an obvious connection with it. Actually
fiction tells us something about reality. An interaction occurs between
familiar experiences and new ones, and the reader's response to the
text develops out ofthis interplay.
But in spite ofthe radical transfer of attention from the text to its
reader, the content of criticism has remained virtually unchanged.
Recent criticism continues to occupy itself with interpretation, and

Knowledge Through Art
459
thus centers the discussion of literature around questions of meaning.
Berleant emphasizes that it is crucial to recognize the difference
between the experience of literature, and the analysis and theory of
that experience. For literature is more than a vehicle for embodying
and transmitting meanings. It has sensuous dimensions; it requires
semantic involvement; it stimulates psychological processes of imagin-
ation and association. Our engagement with literature comes first, and
how we interpret it or otherwise explain that experience is, in the final
analysis, derivative. Confounding theory with experience is the great
danger ofthe scholarly process, and Berleant questions the essentialist
assumption that literature possesses a fundamental function. Literature
may be a socializing force, acquainting the reader with the belief
system, convictions, attitudes, values, and traditions of a culture. Liter-
ature may have psychotherapic value, offering opportunities for wish
fulfillment, sublimation, or projection; it may provide occasion for
daydreaming,
reverie,
oneiric
activity.29
Restricting
criticism's
function exclusively to interpretation rests on the narrow assumption
that the cognitive role of language is the only legitimate one, all others
being dismissed as intellectually unacceptable. It is exceedingly hard
to evade the pervasive dualisms of Western culture, and thus to move
beyond the dualism of text and reader in dealing with the literary
experience seems to leave us without a vocabulary to describe it.30 We
face the difficulty of describing the language of experience by the
language about experience, and this is the primary underlying problem
of all criticism. The novel has the ability to make a world present, to
become the means whereby readers immerse themselves in human
experiences. The means are as varied as the modalities, techniques,
and styles of that art; for each style, each period in literature, invents
its own ways of creating its world. Thus, a writer's style is not a
peculiarity of skill but rather a mirror of that individual's sense of
reality. The adoption of stylistic devices and other technical features is
the power of the vital image and the metaphor. The force of the
metaphor does not lie principally with what it means but with what it
does. Images alone in vivid construction or in metaphor and symbol
inlpose a demand on the reader for participation. The poem does not
tell us the truth; it confronts us with it. Language cannot hold
meaning; it can lead us to encounter meaning, and nowhere more
effectively than in literature. The relation ofthe reader to the text, like
the more general philosophical problem of the relation of words to
things, is a scholar's problem for those who use language and

460
Soft Logic
experience literature. In our customary use of language we observe no
real division between word and thing, and this identity is especially
marked in ritual, as well as in literature, where language occurs in
conjunction with overt dramatic devices, objects, and symbols.31
Without a reader, a text has no meaning; in various ways the reader
and the text interact and interpenetrate, each making contribution of
equal substance.
In music, as in the other arts, the work is not a construction from
elements but a growth toward an integral unity. Thus, melodies have a
kind of logic in their fulfillment, although works like logic or
necessity have connotations too rational to convey the dynamic
qualities of sound that the composer shapes intuitively. Every original
work is newly made, not by building up a structure but by the process
of germination and growth. A musical work is not a container within
which sounds are situated or a framework inside which they are
arranged. There is relatedness and cohesion to musical sounds;
improvisation
reflects
the
generative
characteristics
of musical
material, and offers a first approximation of where it might go.
Improvisation embodies the creative quality central to the experience
ofmusic; meaning becomes an aura ofawareness, while improvisation
evolves the unfolding life ofmusical ideas. We need logic and rhetoric
both in philosophy and in art, since a true metaphor may be more
eloquent than a valid argument.32 Within dance, object, artist, and
audience join in a bond of extraordinary intimacy, directness, and
force. Movement becomes art when it is removed from purposive
action and is placed in an imaginary virtual realm.33 Such powers do
not separate into traditional dualistic regions of illusion and reality.
Dance creates a realm ofpowers, offorces at work, and the appearance
of dancers in a performance space changes that space. Dance makes
explicit an essential constituent of the aesthetic field - the dynamic
presence of the human body in its immediacy and its possibilities.
Dance establishes a world through the moving presence of the body.
Movement always occurs in context, and in a world without movement
we· would have no sense either of time or space. Like the tortoise, we
produce our accompanying place - no material shell, but a perceptual
realm that we inhabit and with which we are continuous. The aware
body is thus the center of our personal world, and as it moves, it
generates that world. Space becomes not something exterior and
objective but something I live inside.34 Space in this sense is alive; a
dance performance is not a display of object moving in empty space

Knowledge Through Art
461
but an array of conscious human bodies moving in a field of forces,
forces that they create and to which they respond. Through their
movement, dancers generate the perceptual space of their dance. Like
space, time arises out of motion, and time stops with the cessation of
motion. This is lived time, time generated and brought to awareness
through the vital movement of the body. From its source in such
movement derive all special forces of temporal understanding devised
for such specific purposes as comparison, measurement, abstraction,
calculation, and even imagination. As the body moves, so does time,
and in some sense, tinle, like space, is transcendental, as Kant held. It
lies at the basis of experience; a condition without which perceptional
experience would not occur.35 Time is inherent in the very condition of
experience, and experience must be extended to include the transition
of thoughts, of perceptions, and of bodily actions and sensations. The
awareness
of their
movement
engenders
our
consciousness
of
temporality.36 Both the impulse to move and our awareness of the
power inherent in motion have their sources in our body conscious-
ness. Nowhere is the function of the conscious human body revealed
more directly.37
Film is the mass art of our day. In this modem equivalent of
crystal gazing, everyone becomes able to see beyond the ordinary
limits of time and place to the farthest distances of artistic imagin-
ation. Film is the composite of magic carpet and time machine,
capable of transposing us instantly to any place in the world and any
moment in history. More than any other art, film can order the pure
dimensions of experience directly and without any apparent physical
intermediary to create a convincing and absolute reality of its own.
Filmmakers manipulate time the way composers order sound; it. is
experimental time, the time of perceptual awareness. Stopping the
camera freezes time, and temporality becomes multidimensional, as
we move along different chronologies without regard to their historical
sequence. Through montage the filmmaker transcends the linearity of
time moving horizontally to achieve simultaneity, or doubling back to
repeat or reenact events. The flashback allows sequences depicting
past and present to be exchanged and rearranged in any order.
Berleant argues that we engage in this process of temporal reordering
not only in waking and sleeping, but also in the deliberate activities of
remembering and planning. By means of the editing process, the film
artist fashions a temporal mosaic that pleases the creative purpose and
standards of regularity, uniformity, and objectivity are disregarded in

462
Soft Logic
this process. Since temporal sequences can now be arranged at will in
any order whatsoever, they all become ''timeless'' segments of an
extended present.38 Time in film is inseparable from the space in
which the action moves; the cinematic space is not the space of
physical action but of perceptual experience; the fixed dimensions of
the so-called objective world dissolve into the changing horizon of
human action. Like the space of dreams, cinema space is fluid and its
periphery mobile, and it can be manipulated and ordered in whatever
way the director desires. Space in film becomes place, the place of
human habitation, action, and meaning. Unlike the so called physical
space, the absolute space of Newtonian physics, cinema space is not
homogeneous. It is associated with human feeling, human endeavor.
Space is the place in which life is lived and assumes the qualities of
the characters who inhabit it. Proximity and remoteness lose their
visual meanings; distances are under the director's control and can be
bent in multiple ways. Like the space of a nlap, cinema space is elastic
and can be made to expand or contract. A history of perception would
show that spatial awareness is different under different geographical
and cultural conditions. Cinematic space is the paradigm of the
modern world because it projects the experience of a 'relativism and
malleable quantum universe, the space of satellite communication, and
instantaneous
electronic
transmission
and
transformation.39
The
distinction between the real and the verbal disappears; they are
continuos and they embrace in art as they do in life. The situation
resembles dreams for, from the standpoint of living experience, no
reality has precedence over any other. Films do not mirror empirical
reality but structure a sui generis technological reality.40 In film we
often fmd ourselves shifting from one world to another, or inhabiting
two or more different realities concurrently. We are accustomed to
seeking frequent transitions in ordinary waking life, shifting from the
immediate present to the projected future, and returning in the next
instant to the various strands of the present that jostle for attention in
om nlenlory. Like the film, human reality is often multiple.41 The
boundaries of the ordinary world fade away, and the cinematic sphere
is so comprehensive, so pervasive, and so powerful that it easily
displaces the apparent reality ofeveryday life.
Implicit in any mode of perception are presuppositions about
what experience is, what it means, and what it entails. So it may be
that the history of the arts is more than anything else a history of
changes in the way we experience and comprehend our world. This

Knowledge Through Art
463
diverges from the empiricist tradition in philosophy, which has
continually narrowed the purview of experience until for some it has
been reduced to pure, isolated elements of sensation. Berleant uses the
aesthetic as a corrective to this abridgment of experience; although its
foundation lies in sense perception, the scope of aesthetic experience
leads us to extend the domain ofperception to include the rich regions
of imagination, fantasy,
memory, and dream.
In fact,
all this
tamr~ing with the range of perception and experience leads one to
wonder about the truth of the usual boundaries between the real and
the unreal.42 We begin to realize that aesthetic theory is bound to
epistemology, since perception and consciousness is never empty and
unconditional. The aesthetic web is multidimensional.43 Every art
dwells in its own sphere of experience, and yet it transcends that
dOlnain with connections tenuous or strong to other regions in the
world: of personal action, of ordinary objects, of "real" people and
places. We come to realize that each art shapes a distinctive world of
its own condition of being. One can identify different orders of
experience, such as the religious, erotic, social, playful, and humorous,
each ofwhich can claim its own authenticity, and yet may, at the same
time, enter into reciprocity with the aesthetic. Object, perception, and
meaning coalesce in aesthetic engagement.44 To speak of art as an
illusion ascribes to it a defective character; even Coleridge's "willing
suspension of disbelief' implies the underlying falsity of art. The
tendency to confine art to the realm ofthe unreal is so deep-rooted and
well-established as to seenl unchallengable. But Berleant points out
that this order is not fixed in advance; rather it emerges from the
activities, conditions, and requirements ofthe situation, and that it can
always be redefined. When we enter the world of literature, we tend to
take ordinary experience as our standard of reality and regard
everything that diverges from that standard as less than real. But
novels do not imitate reality; they create it. Imagination and reality are
not opposite poles but are so essentially interdependent that they
become equal and inseparable.
45 For the world ofmen is not merely a
world ofthings; it is a world of symbols where the distinction between
reality and make-believe is itselfunreal.46
It is easy to dismiss the belief in the magical power of art as a
fanciful exaggeration, but Berleant rejects this as a condescending
response to a more serious intent.47 It is a curious border, this line
between the real and the illusory. Not only does art claim its own
reality, it refuses to remain apart from the "real" (read ordinary) world

464
Soft Logic
and stay in its own place. An editing process comparable to the
cinematic one occurs in the ways we shape and experience the daily
environment. As the film editor cuts and chooses his materials, we
pursue our conscious lives through our choice of activities, selective
attention, fantasizing, dreaming, and other imaginative constructions.
And as the viewer cannot remain aloof and removed, so we cannot
avoid participating in some fashion in daily life.48 As with film and
the other arts, the environment is the result of the same actions by
which we fabricate every reality. What is central to them all is the
human domain. This ambiguity of the real inhabits all the modes and
forms of art, and it links in various ways the world that lies both
within and beyond art. Nor is the realm of art less real than any other
by not being objective, absolute, and eternal. Such an impersonal and
independent status we now recognize as both unnecessary and
impossible in any human enterprise - scientific, practical, or social as
well as aesthetic. Aesthetic engagement is the very condition ofart and
aesthetic reality its ultimate achievement.49 Aesthetic theory is not
intellectually derivative or subsumed under philosophical disciplines
mistakenly considered more basic. Like the fundamental axioms of a
metaphysical system, the basic concepts of aesthetics do not lend
themselves to logical deconstruction. In the directness and immediacy
of aesthetic experience, art precedes reflective judgment and so
forestalls the difficulties and indeterminacies of philosophy and
science. Indeed, as a model of engaged experience, perhaps the most
effective one, the aesthetic may well serve as a model for science.50
The story of aesthetics reaffIrmS human participation in the natural
and cultural world.
Notes
1 Arnold Berleant, Art and Engagement, Philadelphia, PA: Temple
University Press, 1991, p. xiii.
2 Ibid., p. 10.
3 Ibid., p. 12.
4 Ibid., p. 13.
5 Ibid., p. 14.
6 Mikel Dufrenne, The Phenomenology of Aesthetic Experience, trans.
E. Caseyet aI, Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1973, p. 55.

Knowledge Through Art
465
7 Berleant, Art and Engagement, p. 18.
8 Ibid., p. 21.
9 Ibid., p. 24.
10 Ibid.
11 Ibid., p. 29.
12 Ibid., p. 36.
13 Ibid., p. 55.
14 Ibid., p. 56.
15 Ibid., p. 57.
16 Ibid., p. 58.
17 Ibid., p. 59.
18 Ibid., p. 73.
19 Ibid., p. 77.
20 Ibid., p. 84.
21 Ibid., p. 85.
22 Ibid., p. 86.
23 Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Philosophy of Perception,
trans.
Colin
Smith, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1962, p. 234.
24 O.F. Bollnow, "Lived Space," Philosophy Today 5 (1961), pp. 31-39.
25 Berleant, Art and Engagement, p. 88.
26 Saussure quoted in Saussure, Jonathan Culler, Glasgow, Fontana:
Collins, 1976, p. 50.
27 Berleant, Art and Engagement, p. 108.
28 Ibid., p. 109.
29 Ibid., p. 120.
30 Ibid., p. 122.
31 Ibid., p. 129.
32 Ibid., p. 150.
33 Suzanne K. Langer, Feeling and Form, New York Scriberner's, 1953,
p.184.
34 M.
Merleau-Ponty,
The
Primacy of Perception,
Evanston,
IL:
Northwestern University Press, 1964, p. 16.
35 I. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, trans. N. Kemp Smith, London:
Macmillan, 1956, I First Part, pp. 65-91.
36 Berleant, Art and Engagement, p. 165.
37 Ibid., p. 168.
38 Ibid., p. 178.
39 Ibid., p. 181.
40 Pierre Rouve, "Reel to Real: The Cinema as Teclmological Co-
Reality," in Art and Technology, eds. Rene Beger and Lloyd Eby, New York,
NY: Paragon House, 1986, p. 96.
41 Berleant, Art and Engagement, p. 187.

466
Soft Logic
42 Ibid., p. 192.
43 Ibid., p. 193.
44 Ibid., p. 194.
45 Wallace Stevens, "The Noble Rider and the Sound of Words," in
Modern Poetics, ed. James Scully, New York, NY: McGraw Hill, 1965, p.
139.
46 E.H. Gombrich, Art and Illusion, 2nd ed., New York, NY: Pantheon,
1961, p. 99.
47 Berteant, Art and Engagement, p. 202.
48 Ibid., p. 206.
49 Ibid., p. 208.
50 Ibid., p.213.

Chapter Thirty-Seven
Art, Interpretation, and Reality
Hermeren argues that aesthetics is, and should be, relevant to the
production, understanding, and enjoyment of art. The problem is
analogous in some ways to the one between metaethics and ethics, or
between ethics and moral action. But experience shows that when an
aesthetician tries to tell an artist what to do, the result is usually bad
art.
On the whole, Anglo-American aestheticians do not seem
concerned about the relevance of aesthetics to art, nor would they
regard it a failure iftheir work did not have such relevance. Language
has been their primary concern, and it is assumed that conceptual
clarification and analysis is practically and normatively neutral, has no
practical or normative consequences, and does not tell us what works
of art are beautiful. 1 But this alleged neutrality of conceptual analysis
has been questioned. Theories ofart are crucial for the identification of
possible works of art and their interpretation. Such theorizing serves
several functions: descriptive, prescriptive, and predictive. Claims of
relevance can be given several different interpretations.2 Still, even if
there are no obvious direct relations between aesthetics and art, there
might be indirect ones. It would be difficult to exclude on a priori
grounds the possibility that an artist might be positively or negatively
influenced by aesthetic doctrines, and even more so the possibility that
new trends in art will confront aestheticians with altogether different
sets of problems. At least prima facie it would seen as if aesthetic
doctrines have a pragmatic relevance to art. Hermeren concludes that
aesthetic doctrines ofcertain kinds may help us to see works ofart in a

468
Soft Logic
fresh way, to notice things that we might otherwise have missed. Each
generation takes over, often without too much reflection, cultural
habits and traditions of the past. Aesthetic theorists can liberate us
from the prejudices of earlier generations, and from their ways of
seeing. Artistic problems are hard to state verbally, and most of them
are dealt with intuitively, yet our standard vocabulary is not quite
equal to this purpose. Aesthetic considerations also play a role in
science, as do the often discussed beauty of mathematical proofs.
Theoretical considerations of parsimony, fruitfulness,
scope and
generality play a role in aesthetic theorizing. But the variety of
aesthetic theories is only too conspicuous, and the difficulty of
maintaining a sharp distinction between form and content in art is
well-known.3
Drawing on Peirce's elaborate taxonomy of various species of
signification, a picture was described as an iconic sign, one which
signifies by virtue of the natural relation of resemblance. Goodman,
however, argues that resemblance is neither sufficient nor necessary
for depiction. The way we see and depict depends upon and varies
with experience, practice, interests, and attitudes.4 The painter's eye,
like any other, does not so much mirror as take and make.5 There is no
doubt that what we are accustomed to seeing and saying tends to· color
our judgment, affect our memory, and influence the pictorial records
that we make of visible things. What we choose to call the "appear-
ance" of an object, and what we are content to acknowledge as a
significant measure of visible similarity will depend upon what pre-
dicates we are accustomed to employing when describing our visible
environnlent. The visible qualities that we require a painting to
possess in order to qualify as reproducing the appearance of an object
will vary correspondingly. Inductive validity depends not only on what
is presented, but also on how it is organized. Yet the organization to
which we point is influenced by the use of language, and is not
attributable to anything inevitable or immutable in the nature of
human cognition.6 Repetition, Goodman has convinced us, is relative
to organization. A world may be unmanageably heterogeneous or
unbearably monotonous according to how events are sorted into
kinds. 7 Goodman's proposal is that the manufacture of a picture, like
the use of language, is a syrnbolic activity governed by a complex array
of semantic and syntactic rules. Different pictorial stages are different
schemes, and we are inclined to say that some styles are more
naturalistic than others. But if Goodman's argument is sound, then it

Art, Interpretation, and Reality
469
would certainly be absurd to suggest that a style is naturalistic
according to the degree to which paintings in that style resemble what
they depict. Instead, he maintains, it is the familiarity of the style in
which the picture is painted, rather than optical correspondence
between the painting and its subject, that leads us to regard it as more
naturalistic than another. Realism is relative, determined by the system
of representation standard for a given culture or person at a given
time. Newer or older or alien systems are accounted artificial or
unskilled.8 Goodman's theory reflects a radical rejection of the view
associated with the academic tradition that originated with the
Renaissance writers on art. They maintained, or so it was believed,
that painters, unlike poets, really do hold a mirror up to nature.
Margolis agrees with Beardsley that description and interpret-
ation do not form distinct species of a common genus. There is,
therefore, no reason for denying that interpretations nlay also be des-
criptions. Margolis takes the intentional to be identical with the
cultural. Once we grasp that reference is inherently informal and
context-bound, we must see that reidentification of a particular
similarity depends on society's cOlubined practices. Margolis construes
texts as lacking "nature" in the sense of their also being "natural
kinds" - kinds, that is, whose properties and change ofproperty can be
expressed in terms of physical laws, or physical or biological
essentialisms. He agrees with Goodman that reidentification is always
a function of the range of tolerance and remembered sense of
coherence of a society's persistent practice. Contrary to Brentano and
Husserl, Margolis insists that the "intentional" mind need not be
confmed to the mental; instead he identifies it with the cultural - that
is, the collective features of a society's "form of life" along linguistic
and other semiotic lines. The "aboutness" of pictorial studies is taken
to be an intrinsic attribute of these texts because the texts themselves
are identifiable as interpretable in the space of a given society's
consensual pertinent practices. Margolis takes the world to be non-
transparent; there is no privileged disjunction between the structure
and
the "brute"
world
independent
of the
categories
of our
understanding. Thinking has a history, the concepts by which
cognizing agents make truth claims about the world are artifacts,
subject to conditions of the changing consensual history of diverse
societies. The "nature" we impute to ourselves is a function of our
having internalized the "forms of life" of our native culture. Texts are
evolving histories; they are not strictly ordered objects, as physical and

470
Soft Logic
natural objects are said to be. Intentional properties belong to the space
of historical cultures and cannot be more determinate than they are.
There is, therefore, no principled difference between a text and the
interpretation of a text. We need not subscribe to any of those
particular models, for there is always a form of historized change
capable of overtaking even the most powerfully entrenched tradition.
The distinction ofthe "same" and "different" are artifacts ofthat same
interpretive picture. Consensually valid interpretations may, never-
theless, be incompatible· among themselves on the usual bivalent
model of truth. A tolerance of such diversity is a function of limits in
interest, coherence, and effective accommodation that a society is
willing and able to support. The result is an explicit relativism: given
the openendness of history and the constructed nature of selves and
texts, we may claim that ifthere are valid interpretation ofa text, then,
in principle, there may be infmitely many valid interpretations being
synchronically and diachronically incongruent.
Fishelov criticizes Margolis's radical historicism, pointing out
that the problems of interpretation are not unique to the literary or
artistic world. Interpretations are based on metadescriptions and these
descriptions are in their tum intimately related to certain interpretive
schemata. The difference between interpretation and description does
not lie in the fact that interpretations take different kinds ofpredicates
or are attached to certain kinds of objects, but in the relative position
of a statement within the framework of a means-ends model.
Descriptions are those statements holding the "means" position, and
interpretations the "end" position.9 Sometimes the same statement can
be labeled both, depending on its relation to the concomitant
statements. Texts do not have stable descriptions upon which different
interpretations are imposed. Providing a rational and economic
interpretation is the foundation of our interpreting activity applied to
art as well as to human actions and artifacts in general. By
overemphasizing the importance ofthe interpreter's ideological world-
view in the act of interpretation, a literary or artistic work is
diminished to the status of a Rorschach inkblot into which the
interpreter reads his own preoccupations. Fishelov denies that an
interpretation is historically bounded, i.e. that its validity can be
measured only with respect to a specified historical phase and world-
view. 10 Our responses and interpretations should primarily be directed
at and contrasted with the work's structure, and not by our historical,
ideological, and other private preoccupations. Brinker also questions

Art, Interpretation, and Reality
471
whether several ofthe new approaches to interpretation are compatible
with our full interpretive practices. Such new approaches include
analytical philosophy when it speaks of "radical interpretation," and
the absurdity of the very idea of different conceptual schemes that
order the same world, experience, or sense data. There are the
interpreter's "horizon" of which Gadamer speaks, the "episteme" of
Foucault and, with some adjustments, the "home language" of Quine,
and the interpreter's "light" to which Davidson appeals in his
discussion
of
"radical
interpretation."11
When
a
Western
anthropologist faces the task of understanding another culture, what
hope do we have for a full and complete fusion of horizons? Brinker
concludes that intuitive understanding (Verstehen) is an indispensable
part of any research in the humanities. A total denial of presence or a
total rejection of commensurability reduces the richness that some
interpretations do have. Such richness is due to the ability to subjugate
the text simultaneously to two types ofunderstanding or episteme: that
of the object of study and that of the student. 12 Brinker admits,
however, to having no transcendental argument for the superiority of
the kinds ofinterpretation he prefers.
Krausz also wants to continue to do ontology while adopting a
nonfoundational approach. Thus, for musical interpretation based on
traditional
musical
scores,
there
is
no
single
right
musical
interpretation. Neither is there a metastandard in virtue of which
literature or artistic merit can be conclusively ranked. For Margolis, to
use the same predicate does not commit one to an invariant order, but
to principles, rules, genres, or laws are abstractions from within some
life
form
or
practice.
Discourse
cannot
foundationally
or
algorithmically be separated from its communicative context. Yet
Margolis's program is avowedly progressive; it allows for truth
accommodation of basic ideas like objectivity, truth, and rationality in
a reconstructed light. 13 Margolis emphasizes that the intelligible world
as articulated under certain conditions of history is itself a function of
a historically emergent inquiry. Such a view allows for laws of nature,
and whatever else is needed for doing science. But he emphasizes that
the cognizing subject and the cognized world are symbiotically related
in one unanalyzable unity. The concepts under which we understand
the world are themselves historical. Thus, the knowing subject has no
fixed structure, but is a center of cognitive activity that is open to
change over time. 14 Margolis insists that we cannot escape from the
historical condition, and there is correspondingly no changeless

472
Soft Logic
understanding. Human beings have no essential or fixed nature; rather
they transform
and make themselves.
The distinction
between
ontology and epistemology is not given independently of a theoretical
context, and such a context may be construed in different ways. While
he allows that our survival depends on our being in touch with the real
world, the specific details of that world are always under historical
construction. This kind of realism does not inhibit distinguishing the
reality of the cultural from the reality of the physical. In a culture, as
opposed to the physical world, humans are both the subject and the
object ofdiscourse. Along Wittgensteinian lines, Margolis holds that it
does not make sense to suppose that in a nlassive way human beings
do not understand the form of life they manifest in their lives. What
we take to be the real structure ofthe world is systematically connected
with the descriptions and explanations we take to be central. 15 It is
impossible to speak about discourse, as such, in terms that resemble
how we speak about claims within the discourse. We cannot speak
about discourse from the outside, as it were, for any supposedly
successful attempt to do so will but expand the discourse, and so will
have failed to speak from its "outside." But we are not left dumb at this
stage, for there are nontruth valued-ways of speaking about myth or
the context ofall contexts. That is, we may speak of one's being more
or less amenable to certain ways of thinking and acting, or more or
less perspicuous, apt, illuminating, or useful for one or another
theoretical purpose. 16 Language has a discursive function concerned
with truth claims, and it has a mythic function beyond truth clainls.
While we need evidence for discursive claims, we do not need
evidence, at least in some ways, for mythic theorizing. In the latter,
aptness, perspicuity, amenability, at-homeness, and related aesthetic
notions enter into consideration. Being part of our background, they
remain unfathomed at any particular moment in the enlergence of
inquiry. To change absolute presuppositions is to change one's
inquiry, and this choice cannot entirely be rational, for the grounds of
rationality are historically tied to the nature of a systematic inquiry to
begin with. One's own guiding myths may, at any stage of theorizing,
remain clouded, inchoate, and incomplete to oneself. But this does not
mean that they may not, in principle, be articulated from another
historical perspective.
Zemach
holds
aesthetic
properties
to
be
supervening
on
nonaesthetic ones; the former are observed, when the latter are seen
through a special medium of desire. Since the phenomenal properties

Art, Interpretation, and Reality
473
we perceive depend on our biological and psychological structures as
humans, it seems that aesthetic properties cannot be properties of
things themselves. Aesthetic predicates are primitive. The statement
that x is coarse is not synonymous with any sort of nonaesthetic
predicate; neither is the relation of aesthetic to nonaesthetic properties
a Humean "causal," Le. constant, conjunction. A conscious mind that
has no interests can discern nonaesthetic phenomenal properties (e.g.
it can see x as blue), but it cannot see things aesthetically, that is,
encoded in aesthetic properties. A thing looks lovely only if we desire
to have it in some way, whereas relative to another system of desires
the noble will look vain or pompous. The aesthetic merit of a thing
depends on the degree to which it satisfies our desire to make sense of
the world, to organize it perceptually or conceptually in a form that is
appropriate to our cognitive faculties. What is too much for us to
digest, what has too many items that we fmd impossible to integrate, is
noisy and chaotic. If, on the other hand, the information delivered is
too meager relative the capacity of our cognitive system, if it has too
much order and too little innovation, the subject is boring. We see
beauty when the ratio of richness or order in the object examined is
optimal for us to grasp. Zemach rejects realism as naive: to believe
that our parochial phenomenal distinctions, determined as they are by
human-specific
organs
and
interests,
are
properties
of things
themselves, is chauvinistic if not downright silly. He emphasizes,
however, that aesthetic properties, too, are essential to and inelimin-
able from any adequate theory of reality as it is in itself Indeed, our
acceptance or rejection of theories, worldviews, and purported facts
depends on their aesthetic properties. To be accepted as genuine, a
purported fact must cohere with other facts, preferably explain them,
and be explained by them. For theories, it is unity and simplicity,
generality and depth, elegance and power (their ability to predict
phenomena) that makes them worthy of our belief Zemach reverts to
the ancient Greek tradition that declared the identity of truth and
beauty, and that was taken up by romantic poets like Keats. But
Zemach offers a philosophical argument that he himself does not take
quite seriously: he accepts Duhem's thesis that our science is but one
of infinitely many theories that can account for exactly the same data.
Even the predictive power of our science is not an argument in its
favor, since each one ofthese infinity of other theories would have had
the same rate of success. Zemach concludes that alternative Duhemian
systems may be no less successful than our science, but they are not as

474
Soft Logic
pretty. I? Pragmatism to the contrary, our thinking is not the one that
works best, but the fairest ofthose which work.
Lyotard points out that artists have always expected and will
always expect the philosopher to make intelligible what they have
made. What art gives us is not "the given," but the generalization of a
gesture, a nlovement and passage of colors, lines, volumes, and
sounds. Lyotard concludes that we must rid our discourse of the
referential, cognitive, and objectifying function that philosophy, like
other intellectual disciplines, naively and consciously confers upon
words and their arrangement, even if it does this in a different way
than the other disciplines. The philosophers who are sumnloned in this
way must thus begin to talk about thought itself as a work of art, and
no longer sinlply as argument. This results in a profound change in the
modus oftheir discourse, a modus that, as a result, leaves the province
of the philosophical community.I8 Speculative and romantic thought
resorted to the principle that there is an organic continuity between
plastic, sonorous, or theatrical gestures on the one hand, and the
discourse bearing on these gestures on the other. As Valery has
already shown, explications ofthe work ofart that have been borrowed
from psychology, psychoanalysis, sociology, history, semiotics, or
linguistics, all have in common that they treat the real as a defmite
object. The question of what is art is usually understood as inquiry
about the nature of the object that has been qualified as artistic. But
this question can also be read as seeking to put an end to every attempt
to "read" the gestures - to put an end to every kind of conceptual
operation on the work. Morawski emphasizes that there is no fixed
order within social reality. The regularities discovered by scholars are
only circumstantial, Le., they hinge on changing conjectures. The
postmodem artist despises or merely ignores all theorizing in art. 19
Unlike his modernist predecessors who were constantly theorizing
about their aesthetic productions, he is anti-intellectual. But theorizing
goes on all the same by means of pastiche and parody, which are the
most suitable vehicles for exploring the confusions, permissiveness,
and eclecticism in our culture. Postmodemism entails a disbelief in
art's meaning and dignity. There is no masterplan and no established
order of things, and we look in vain for such foundations. Neverthe-
less, a yearning for a history that makes sense cannot be denied, even
if there is no Hegelian final tribunal of appeal. Lacking philosophical
constraints, art criticism and aesthetics come to be expressed in a
profusion of attitudes that accept aporias as unresolvable. The critic

Art, Interpretation, and Reality
475
today is a kind of artist, for one and the same logic governs all these
arguments, which results in the not surprising suggestion to abandon
philosophy altogether. Mooij points out that art in modem culture has
powerful irrational features. 2o But while many ofthe relevant decisions
may depend on taste, preference, political attitude, or even mere folly,
other claims are certainly based on rational expectation, calculation,
and argument. In "applied" art, the part of rationality is even more
evident, for the role of practical, even technical, constraints demands
rational deliberation. Reasons can be given why some means are better
or worse than others. While science yields the most important
paradigm of strict rationality, there remains a legitimate role for
weaker versions of logic. Scientific attitudes and strategies can be
criticized in the name of rationality, and the alleged logic can be
understood and explained in different ways. The paradigmatic role of
scientific intelligence is connected with the place science and scientific
technology play in modem society. Alleged superrational forces are
viewed with suspicion and irony.
According to LA. Richards, the value of literature in the modem
period is based on its capacity to bring about a complex temporary
balance and harmony between otherwise divergent and incompatible
emotive reactions. Richards argues that when religion disappears,
literature is essential to the mental health of individuals and of society
as the emotive counterpart of the rational and cognitive aspect of the
sciences.21 This is made. possible by the capacity of literature to
suspend or cross the border between the rational and the irrational. It
often plays with strange or "unbelievable" notions, and it might
suggest profound insights by making connections that are illusive from
a scientific or even commonsensical point of view. Poetry, and
literature in general, order the world in a way different from the
rational ordering ofthe sciences. It subjects phenomena to the needs of
the human mind, and it appropriates insights and powers that are
contrary to rational expectation and technical contro1.22 One might
even say that it puts forth a resemblance of magic in a world that is
increasingly dominated by the scientific attitude. Poets, consciously or
unconsciously, playfully or seriously, are inspired by magical beliefs.
The universe of poetry, and of literature in general, is still a universe
of meaning, even though science teaches us not to believe this
anymore. Owing to the vitality of its magic, modem culture is richer
and more complex than it would be otherwise. The aesthetic view of
magic supplants the classical scientific world view and the common-

476
Soft Logic
sense attitude with fascinating glimpses of other ways of interpreting
the world. Moreover, the boundary between quasi-magical sophis-
tication and crude obscurantism, or between intelligent symbolism and
sentimental self-projection is by no means sharp or definite. Science,
also, has its own region of fantasy and marvel in the ever=-changing set
ofriddles and speculation correlated to its teachings. Literature and art
can make us aware of how things are, what a certain type of reality is
like, and what is really at issue in a specific situation.23 It can bring
unknown or half-known areas of experience home to us. Such
speculation may have only a weak link with the observable facts, for
not only the boundaries between science and philosophy, but also those
between science and art tum out to be indeterminate. It has become
evident that the differences between scientific and artistic creativity are
not at all easy to defme. One should realize that fact and fancy
inevitably interfere with one another.
Notes
1 Goran Hem1eren, "The Relevance of Aesthetics to Art," Iyyun, The
Jerusalem Philosophical Quarterly, vol 42 (January 1993), p. 75.
2 Ibid., p. 80.
3 Ibid., p. 98.
4 N. Goodman, Languages ofArt, Brighton: Harvester, 1981, p. 8.
5 Ibid., p. 10.
6 N. Goodman, Fact, Fiction and Forecast, 3rd. Ed., Indianapolis, IN:
Bobbs-Merrill, 1973, pp. 96-7.
7 N. Goodman, Ways ofWorldmaking, Hassocks: Harvester, 1978, p. 9.
8 Goodman, Languages ofArt, p. 37.
9 David Fishelov, "Interpretation and Historicism," in Iyyun, p. 20.
10 Ibid., p. 26.
11 Menachem Brinker, "Interpretation and Otherness," in Iyyun, p. 31.
12 Ibid., p. 35.
13 Michael Krausz, "Culture and the Ontology of Music," in Iyyun, p.
172.
14 Ibid., p. 173.
15 Ibid., p. 175.
16 Ibid., p. 176.
17 Eddy M. Zemach, "The Ontology of Aesthetic Properties," in Iyyun,
p.65.

Art, Interpretation, and Reality
477
18 Jean-Francois Lyotard, "Gesture and Commentary," in Iyyun, p. 43.
19 Stefan Morawski, "Art, Philosophy and Art Criticism," in Iyyun, p.
128.
20 J.J. A. Mooij, "Art and Rationality/' in Iyyun, p. 105.
21 LA. Richards, Poetry and the Sciences, London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul, 1970.
22 Mooij, "Art and Rationality," p. 115.
23 Ibid., p. 120.

Chapter Thirty-Eight
The Philosophical Disenfranchisement of
Art
Danto adopts the Hegelian view that regards history as the drive to
break through to the consciousness of itself: 1 But while Hegel believed
this to have been attained in his own philosophy, Danto does not
accept that the history of philosophy came to a final end with Hegel.
He does, however, adopt an eschatological view of art, maintaining
that art has reached the stage where it no longer has a history, and all
that remains is a philosophy of art. Unlike Hegel, Danto is not content
to understand the present situation of art but goes on to predict its
future. He claims that progress in the visual arts has come to an end at
the tum of the twentieth century with the invention of modern motion
picture technology. At this stage, further progress could be achieved
only in this new medium which was able to show movement directly,
and which could, in this way, tell a story previously unknown to the
audience - something painting and sculpture could never hope to do,
Traditional painters and sculptors had to assunle that viewers were
already familiar with the biblical, classical, or whatever stories they
were depicting, whereas the cinema need not presume any such
knowledge on the part ofthe audience. While movies were understood
by a largley passive audience, the visual arts demanded considerable
cooperation from the viewers. Danto explains how this state of affairs
led to abstract art and a formalist aesthetics that have remained a
central feature of modernism. It led to the belief that how the artist
orders the world is very much up to him, and to a pluralism that

480
Soft Logic
characterizes, not only artmaking, but postn10dern culture generally in
its morality, politics, theories of history, and even philosophies of
science. Danto's point is that such a pluralism becomes self-defeating
once it loses control over what is permissible. Having reached a stage
when art can be anything at all, it has exhausted its historical mission.
He maintains that it would be inconsistent with such an approach to
believe in any future history of art, and cites Hegel to the effect that
any further step is philosophy's to take because philosophy, unlike art,
has no post-historical phase. Once the truth has been found, there is
nothing further to be done, and history comes to an end.
Danto fails to explain, however, what there is to philosophize
about once art no longer matters. He himself treats the history of art,
not just as the record ofa (Hegelian) "form ofthought," but also as one
that reflects an account of its long and persistent suppression. Thus,
for Danto, art is not only the tale of the spirit's progress towards self-
consciousness, it is also the record of something perceived to be dark
and dangerous. He believes, on the one hand, that persecution
constitutes an essential part ofthe history of art going back all the way
to Plato and, on the other hand, that this view is philosophically
mistaken. He dismisses the near unanimous beliefamong philosophers
that art makes nothing happen, while explaining that modem art has
reached the stage of historical insignificance where it no longer needs
to be suppressed because it no longer matters. But his explanation is
inadequate largely because contemporary philosophy considers itselfto
be no less problematic than does modem art. For Wittgenstein,
philosophy begins when language goes on a holiday and, since
philosophy leaves everything as it is, its future is to disappear and
become some sort of linguistic therapy. Danto realizes that if art
makes nothing happen, and if art is but a disguised form of
philosophy, then philosophy makes its appearance only when it is too
late for anything but understanding. When Duchamp, therefore, calls
his urinal Fountain and declares it a work of art, Danto regards this
not as a logical definition or philosophical classification, but strictly as
a matter of power politics. It is not surprising that under such
circumstances contemporary criticism and philosophy ofart are unable
to reach agreed-upon resolutions of conflicting interpretations. A
modem artwork is taken as a mirror that reflects only a particular
viewer and, as such, is incommensurable with what other viewers
perceive it to be. While Danto prefers an interpretation that coincides
most closely with the artist's own interpretation, what may be at work

The Philosophical Disenfranchment ofArt
481
here is a Hegelian "cunning of reason" that renders the artist unaware
ofthe true historical significance ofhis own work.
Hegelian reason may act to achieve ends that come about even
though the secondary agents of historical realization are totally
unaware of the grand scheme in which they figure. Since Danto
considers Hegel's "absolute knowledge fatally flawed,,,2 he lacks a
convincing argument for the "end of history," or for deciding which
events are not part of history. His philosophy of art is likewise
incapable of providing a plausible explanation for the transformation
of an ordinary object into a work of art and that is how this becomes a
matter of sheer power politics. Contrary to Hegel, for Danto all
interpretation is contextually relative, but since he rejects the meaning-
conferring context of the Fregean sentence, he can provide nothing
approaching the rules of syntax and grammar for the interpretation of
a text. The contextual links he does provide exhibit only a network-
like structure that is unable to prevent conflicting interpretations.
These interpretations are not rule-governed in the required manner,
and fail therefore to yield logical calculi or convincing arguments. The
"contextual logic" Danto proposes is said to cut across the traditional
boundaries between the pictorial and the verbal, but there is little he is
able to say about such a logic.
What the required
skills of
interpretation are that tum an ordinary object into a work of art is
consequently also obscure. Danto defines as "transformation" the
process whereby quite commonplace objects are raised to the level of
art, yet his coherence criteria leave such a metamorphosis incompre-
hensible. Since relevance for him is merely a matter of context and not
of reference, the artwork remains a semi-opaque object that resists his
kind of analysis. He focuses on the historical domain every artwork is
said to display in consequence of the interaction between its content
and mode of representation, and in this manner "style" reflects
aesthetic responses that combine interpretation with appreciation. But
Danto has to concede that we hardly have any idea what sort ofunder-
standing this involves. He is unable to render explicit the criteria for
judgment oftaste that are essential for his kind ofanalysis.
Thus, Danto starts, not only with what he takes to be the "present
dismal state ofthe artworld," but goes on to proclaim this sorry state of
affairs to be irreversible. While he realizes that nothing belongs so
much to its own time as to an age's glimpses of the future, he all the
same insists that there is not going to be a future in which art matters.
Predicting that art has no future involves anticipating complex social

482
Soft Logic
and
economic
conditions
of society as
a whole,
yet
Danto's
eschatological vision is not an extrapolation of existing trends. Hegel
saw the task of philosophy as one of understanding present reality,
whereas Danto regards the contemporary proliferation of styles as an
indication that there is no future in which art is going to matter. Even
though periods of anarchy are as much part of history as are ages of
stability, Danto rejects the present pluralism of styles as "cultural
entropy"
because this does not meet Hegel's rational criteria for
progress. But since he himself fails to adhere to Hegel's absolute
standards for what is rational and real, he has no way of knowing
whether what comes next is going to matter. What is at issue here is
not the mere survival ofart but its historical role, yet Danto's notion of
evolution owes much more to Darwin than it does to Hegel. He accepts
that "our present institutions of art - museums, galleries, collectors,
and art journals - all share the assumption of a significant and even
brilliant future,,,3 and at the same time insists that the concept of art is
"internally exhausted." It is a well-known fact, however, that even the
great philosophers were notoriously bad at predicting the future.
Aristotle was altogether unaware that the Greek city state he was
setting up as a model for civilized government was about to disappear
in
consequence of Alexander's conquests.
Kant,
likewise,
was
convinced that after Aristotle, there was nothing of consequence to be
discovered in the science of reasoning, and that logic, therefore, had
no future. While we know by hindsight how wrong they both were,
predicting the future is an urge few philosophers are able to resist.
When at the beginning of this century the basic cinematic
strategies had been discovered, painters began asking themselves what
was left for them to do. Given the manner progress was perceived, they
could justify their work only be redefining art in ways that were bound
to be shocking to those who continued to judge painting by the
traditional standards. In subsequent art, progress was no longer
specified in terms of the artist's mastery of illusionist techniques, but
was conceived as consisting in his ability to give expression to his
feelings and move an audience. Danto rightly points out, however, that
this is always a delicate matter, and one for which we lack clear-cut
criteria. Interpretation of expressionist work, therefore, lacks the
developmental sequence we take for granted in mimetic interpretation.
The point is that modem art has a history, even though it cannot be
said to make progress in the Hegelian sense, Hegel believed that
history ends with the advent of self-knowledge; for Danto, however,

The Philosophical Disenfranchment ofArt
483
such self-knowledge is no longer unique, yet he still wants it to be
fmal. Given the philosophical nature of historical knowledge, it
becomes inevitable that the termination ofart's history brings about an
end to its philosophy. If there ever comes a time when art no longer
matters, there will be, by the same token, nothing of importance to
philosophize about.
Indeed philosophy after Hegel has been no less a record of
discontinuities than is modern art. Analytic philosophy failed in its
attempt to gain for itself scientific status, and what passes today as
philosophy is by no means an easily defined subject matter. In spite of
such lack of identifiable uniformity, however, Danto insists that post-
Hegelian philosophy has a history while he denies one to modem art.
Since contemporary philosophy cannot answer the question of its own
identity any better than does modem art, the history of neither can
nowadays be told as a novel of self-education (Bildungsroman) in the
Hegelian manner. Danto concedes that even future artists will continue
to do whatever they are doing in their historical insignificance. For
Hegel, art was free only when it had established itself in the sphere it
shared with religion and philosophy, becoming, thereby, an additional
form
of thought
through
which
spiritual
truth
is brought
to
consciousness. Since Danto realizes that decoration, self-expression,
and entertainment are abiding human needs, he fails to explain why
they should not have a history, like fashion and cooking have histories.
The traditional boundaries between the arts are no longer in place - as
collage, assemblage, mobile sculpture, and concrete poetry demon-
strate - but this only partly accounts for why contemporary philosophy
ofart isn't what it used to be. Indeed, Danto's dilemma is not so much
due to recent changes in the arts as to the very problematic status of
contemporary philosophy. In trying to reconcile Hegel's view with that
of Nietzsche, he attempts to understand art both as a stage in the
development of the spirit, and as something dark and dangerous.
While he considers this latter view to be philosophically mistaken, he
nevertheless believes that there is extensive historical evidence for the
suppression of art and the persecution of artists. He does adopt
Nietzsche's conjecture that classical tragedy is a development out of
the Dionysian rites, and that it reflects the insertion of a certain
distance between the audiences - itself an evolution out of celebrants -
and what happens on the stage. Greek tragedy reenacted this at the
level of art rather than religious practice, and this brought about a
separation of images from reality in the particular way modem

484
Soft Logic
theories of the image take for granted. The god is merely represented
by the actor, and the actor is no longer believed to be possessed by the
god as he was in the Dionysian rites. Danto finds support for this view
in Aristotle's doctrine of catharsis designed to explain why, in going
to the theater, something profound happens to the audience. The
audience is mystically purged as the original Dionysiast must have
been by the climax ofthe enactment. Danto explains that even modern
audiences conle to the theater for something like this to happen, not
merely to enjoy a spectacle and have a good time. As a Hegelian,
however, he is bound to mistrust the revival of such magical elements
in art as "going against the historical grain."4 Danto's claim that "art
is dead" owes more to Nietzsche than it does to Hegel; it is Nietzsche's
"death of god" rather than Hegel's "end of history" that provides
Danto with a paradigm for his philosophy ofart.
Because ofsuch inconsistencies, Danto's Hegelianism amounts to
an inadequate refutation of the positivist and deconstructivist attacks
that view philosophy itself as an artform or metaphor. By reducing
philosophy to literature, Carnap and Derrida question its claim to
objective knowledge, and Danto in effect admits that Plato's theory of
ideas expresses the feelings ofthe philosopher - his fear of poetry and
ofthe magical qualities that are latent in art. Plato is thus regarded by
Danto as an artist who was frightened by the destruction spells he
perceived to be lurking in artistic make-believe. Following Nietzsche,
he in the end agrees with Camap and Derrida that philosophers use
the appearance of scientific discourse to create the illusion of objective
meaning, when it is in fact the philosopher's feelings that are being
expressed, and for which the conventions of literature would be much
more suitable and
less misleading.
Since Danto's half-hearted
Hegelianism is unable to substantiate the intellectual claims of
philosophy, his argument that denies a historical role to all future art
also becomes self-defeating.
Notes
1 Arthur C. Danto, The Philosophical Disenfranchisement ofArt, New
York, NY: Columbia University Press, 1986.
2 Ibid., p. 113.
3 Ibid., p. 85.

The Philosophical Disenfranchment ofArt
4 Ibid., p. 133.
485

Chapter Thirty-Nine
Danto on the End of Art
Danto discusses the history of contemporary art from the perspective
of what has happened during the last two decades in the New York
artworld. As a philosopher and art critic, he is concerned with the very
possibilities of art criticism for anyone who is sensitive to the
discontinuities between the artistic present and the conceptually
comfortable past. l IfDuchamp's Fountain is an artwork, there must be
an answer to the question of why other urinals are not, even if the
resemblances are perfect. When the Medici Tomb or the Cathedral of
Beauvais were made, no one could have imagined there could be
works
like those
of Duchamp
and
Warhol.
Duchamp's great
philosophical achievement was to demonstrate that "work ofart" is not
an expression we can learn to apply on the basis of perceptual criteria.
Danto's point is that this could not have been shown until history
made it possible, that is, by hindsight. When the question about the
identity of art became possible, it also became evident that the
beautiful and the sublime did not belong to the essence of art. Danto's
outlook in all this is one of an art critic writing reviews on upcoming
exhibitions for some of the leading New York museums and galleries.
He is disappointed by what he sees and draws from this far-reaching
philosophical conclusions on the nature and history of art in general.
He believes that art, as it has been historically understood, has come to
an end, and he concludes that this is a
~isis not only for the
philosophy of art, but also for art education and for art making in
general. And it is, of course, a crisis for a.rt criticism itself; how does

488
Soft Logic
one judge what are the appropriate responses, where are the standards,
and how can we evaluate? There is no longer any validity to the
critical charge that something is not art because if fails to meet some
standard ofaesthetic purity.
The mystery ofart has to do with the way it attaches us to images
- to the showing ofthings rather than the things shown. But the fact is
that the bulk of our experience with works of art comes from
reproductions, and there is no question that the reproduction is an
image that never attaches us to itself but only to the object - the
painting or the statue in question. Discussing Sienese painting, Danto
argues that modernism began when the surface became something to
look at rather than look through, and artists no longer sought illusion
because painting had become an object in its own right rather than a
transparent opening into an ulterior reality. Yet even with abstract art,
the distinction between looking and looking through and, hence
between subject and surface remained. The moment the work became
all surface, it collapsed into decoration. In order to remain art
accordingly, illusory or pictorial space had to· be retained; so artists
may just as well have remained realists for all the good the revolutions
did them. The window-paradigm co-opts those who undertake to
overthrow it.2 The relationship between the viewer and the event is
essentially perceptual and cognitive. Because the viewer has no access
to the scene depicted other than visually, he becomes reduced to a
disembodied eye, a geometric point. Internal and external illusory
space are repudiated, and paintings are made supervisually to stifle the
possibility of illusion, as if the work consists only of its own surface.3
There is also the sense in which Western civilization has lost the belief
of being at the apex of progress as it came to accept the view that
progress had been bought at too great a cost. "Primitive" art, which
until then had been dismissed as a mere anthropological curiosity or as
evidence of the inferiority of the cultures that produced it, became
instead an inspiration. Until Picasso began work on Les Demoiselles
d'Avignon in 1907, the carvings and assemblages of Africa and
Oceania had been viewed chiefly as ethnographic data for the science
of man that addressed primitive cultures primarily as yielding
analogical insights into stages through which our own culture must
long have since passed. But primitive artworks had been ripped from a
context in which they functioned as something much more important
to its makers than museum pieces. In its native provinces, the
sculpture was vested with powers of which Western art has not been

Danto on the End ofArt
489
capable for centuries, except for those special cases where a certain
Madonna or some sacred bambino is believed miraculous and is
worshipped for its powers.4 Modernist sensibility opened our eyes to
the polished surfaces, the rhythmic ornamentation, and the clean
forms of African carving. In their original context, most of what we
class as a primitive art was not intended to be responded to
aesthetically, even if aesthetic excellence was acknowledged as an
index that deep and inlportant powers had been captured. In Africa,
even today, works ofart are concealed form alien eyes and are believed
to hold powers that must be understood
as preconditions for
responding to the work in the intended way. The ancient Egyptian
figure was a configuration of prototypical body parts whose obvious-
ness and familiarity were the criteria of representation. In a similar
manner, cubism analyzes into prototypical aspects objects of the most
commonplace order. When Japanese prints inlpinged upon European
artwork in the late nineteenth century, a whole order of representation
opened up for artists. It was out of this encounter that Van Gogh,
Gauguin, Bonnard, and Matisse began what became modem art, in
which the eye as an optical systenl was disenfranchised in favor of
something altogether more cerebral.
It was as though beneath the visual appearances of the familiar
world there was another system of reality altogether, covert and
disguised, but that stands to the surface world as the unconsciousness
stands to conscious rational processes. Freud saw in dreams, jokes, and
free
associations
the
aperture
into
primary
processes
of the
unconscious, which the surrealists treated as the creative substratum of
the mind. The image is endowed with magical possibilities, and if the
surreal world has some "logic," it would record the magic to which
rationality is blind. The surrealists used the premise of optical
exactitude to demonstrate the fantastic exterior of the ordinary world.
But often they achieved this only by flagrant manipulations and
montages, or by using as motifs things they found rich in their own
particular meanings. Now the moral transformation ofthe viewer is an
ancient and respected goal of art; it underlies the phenomenon of
catharsis in Aristotle, and it defined the priorities of censorship in
Plato's political aesthetics. But the term "aesthetics," with its notions
of disinterestedness and deletion, was very much an eighteenth-
century invention and, except for the period of the Impressionists and
Cezanne, art has always been part of the arsenal of moral education.
Danto concludes that you cannot fuse propositions about reeducation

490
Soft Logic
in painting and injunctions into a coherent concept to better one's
moral condition. He fails to recognize, however, the role oftechnology
as one of the major sources of modernity - photography, the movies,
and television on the one hand, and the capacity for rapid and
continuos movement on the part of the viewer, on the other. Such
movement is not an extra property that can be added or subtracted,
leaving all other properties as they are, as in the way a change of color
leaves shape unaffected. Rather, the perception of movement affects
the way we perceive everything else.
Some modern painters want us to look at a painting as if it were
merely a flat surface, yet it is not obvious that an image is the kind of
entity that exhausts its essence by being pure surface either. At a
certain moment in the history of painting, flatness, which one might
have supposed could be taken for granted, served an almost impossible
goal. Its being a goal was connected with the struggle against illusion,
in which abstraction was a strategy. The problem with abstraction is
that th~ moment one makes a mark on the canvas, it seems immed-
iately to assume a position in an i,llusory pictorial space. Another mark
will be seen as behind it or in front of it, and neither of them seems
really to be staying at the surface. If flatness could be achieved, the
painter would no longer be engaged in representing reality but in
creating it. There would be no hidden depths because there are no
depths, and it should be a world in which the only problems are
aesthetic problems. But it also illustrates the fact that what we see
depends on how we feel and on what we believe. There are those who
maintain that our perception of the visible world is so laden with
perception that, in science as in common life, there is no sharp ,line to
be drawn between observation and theory "To draw" brings to light
some of the primitive beliefs about aesthetic power that could explain
some of the magic association with art, and some of the reasons
ancient writers found it dangerous and fearful. 5 Portraiture must have
evoked an even more mysterious achievement, the drawing forth, as it
were, of the inner self or soul. In the archaic form of representation
the picture is a copy, and the subject is really present in his or her
picture, since the spirit was believed to be literally present in the icon
that was made holy and potent for just the same reasons that a relic
was holy and potent. It also explains why iconoclasm was so powerful
and influential a movement in Byzantine and Protestant theology and
politics. It offered us a theory of the artist as magician and even
Wittgenstein believed that the human body is the best picture of the

Danto on the End ofArt
491
human soul since nothing is intelligibly interior that lacks an external
criterion.
Danto argues that the relationship between museum and big
business is our society's version of the symbiosis of church and state.
Today artworks have sunk to the level of commodities, and investing
in art futures has become the "truth" of contemporary art. The
corporate presence dominates the museum and, while insisting on the
ideology of disinterestedness, art has become transformed into a
showroom ofclassy investments. At some point it was recognized that
the demand for appreciable artworks was seriously exceeding the
supply. There are only so many Manets around, only so many Seurats,
and the response to this in the 1980s was to augment the supply by
according a spiritual status to a number of artworks on condition that
they look important.
The museums are needed to certify the
investments, yet the idea of the masterpiece has come itself under
attack. It came from the artmakers who understood that a period had
been entered in which the rules and practices that made the master-
piece a possibility and an ideal no longer defined the making of art.
The second attack came from the direction of politics and was
motivated by a new generation of art makers who felt themselves
disenfranchised by the institutions and attitudes embodied by the
masterpiece, construed as the symbol of everything eliticist, exclusion-
ary, and oppressive in the world of art. The task of art is no longer to
produce masterpiece but to use the making and showing of art in the
service of more socially urgent endeavor. In this manner the museum,
like the university, has become an arena of political conflict, and
masterpiece turned into a charged concept. Part of what we mean in
calling a work of art a masterpiece is that it is of "museum quality,"
yet the museum itself is a deeply contested idea in the artworld today.6
The possession of art was the symbol of authority, and this power was
symbolically transferred to the people from their rulers when their art
was seized in the name of the Revolution. It is also as the emblem of
power that the Dluseum enters modern consciousness, and not simply
as a place to see aesthetically impressive works, or to study the
masters. The idea of an aggregation of masterpieces having in
common only their museum quality has been the dominant component
in the concepts of museum and works of art ever since Napoleon, and
the masterpiece has come to playa role that is at once political and
coIi-.~eptua1. The museum did not exist merely for pleasure or the
development of taste, but for the moral education of the citizens.

492
Soft Logic
Today the masterpiece is an essentially contested concept, no less than
the museum or the work ofgenius that define it.
Danto takes his model ofthe history of art from Vasari, a history
of stages that come to an end when no further breakthroughs were
thinkable. Danto construes the history of contemporary art as the
collective investigation by artists into the philosophical nature of art.
Pop violated every component of theory and somehow remained art. It
was Warhol who revealed as merely accidental most of the things his
predecessors supposed essential to art, and who carried the discussion
as far as it would go without passing into pure philosophy. In the
opinion of Danto, he brought the history of art to an end by
demonstrating that no visual criterion could serve the purpose of
defming art. Warhol achieved this with the celebrated Brillo boxes he'
exhibited in 1964 in New York. 7 What was most striking about them
was that they looked sufficiently like their counterparts in the
supermarket stockrooms that the difference between them could hardly
be ofa kind to explain why they were art and their counterparts merely
cheap containers of scouring pads. Warhol did not himself make these
boxes nor did he paint them, but when they were displayed, the
question was inevitable: why were these boxes art when their originals
were just boxes? Danto believes that just by asking this question, no
less than a century of deflected philosophical investigation came to an
end. Artifacts were liberated to enter the postphilosophical phase of
modernism, free from the obligation of self scrutiny.8 This in spite of
his contention that art has conle to an end and that philosophy has
taken over art. Part of what makes Danto think that we have reached
the end of art is the near consensus in the artworld today that we are
living through bad aesthetic times. There is a lot of style, but there
doesn't seem to be much substance. The irony is .that these feelings
arise against a background in which, in every other way, the times are
very good for art. There are more art magazines, more interest than
ever before in what artists are doing, more galleries and museums,
incredible prices at auctions even for living artists, more art schools
turning out more artists who see art as a viable profession like
dentistry or accounting, more money all around. And yet, while the
engines ofthe artworld tum furiously, the output has been aesthetically
stalled for two decades, and if there is a direction to speak of it is that
of bad aesthetics. Disturbatory art exploits aesthetic means to achieve
social and moral change; it is not meant to be beautiful, symmetrical,
composed, tasteful, pretty, elegant, or perfect. But it often fails and

Danto on the End ofArt
493
collapses into sonlething merely embarrassing, boring, silly, and
awful. From this, Danto senses that the charge is to end one form of
history and to begin another. Viewing the history of art from his
narrow
New
York
vantage
point,
he
concludes
that
further
breakthroughs are unthinkable. But breakthroughs always come as a
surprise, and the notion of history coming to an end is one with which
he is not himselfquite comfortable.
Notes
I Arthur C. Danto, Encounters and Reflections, Art in the Historical
Present, New York, NY: Farrer Straus Giroux, 1990, p. 5.
2 Ibid., p. 265.
3 Ibid., p. 186.
4 Ibid., p. 166.
5 Ibid., p. 63.
6 Ibid., p. 317.
7 Ibid., p. 288.
8 Ibid.

Chapter Forty
Iconology
In a series of historical essays Mitchell connects theories of art,
language, and the mind with conceptions of social, cultural, and
political value. 1 Central to his theory is an explanation of the fear of
images, and the struggle between iconoclasm and idolatry. He shows
that icons have not lost their power over us, and that we still do not
seem to understand their nature. But language and inlagery are no
longer presumed perfect and transparent media; instead they are seen
to be in need of analysis and justification. At the same time,
discussions of imagery often proceed on the questionable assumption
that there are kinds of images, such as photographs or mirror images
that provide a direct unmediated copy ofwhat they represent. Mitchell
emphasizes, however, that the meaning of a picture does not declare
itself by simple direct reference to the object it depicts. Following the
later Wittgenstein, he conceives of knowledge as a matter of social
practices, disputes, and arguments, not as a copy or image of reality
imprinted in the mind.
But contrary to
Wittgenstein,
Mitchell
concludes that it is futile to attempt to purge the world of images.
Instead, he offers a historical explanation of how the notion of image
as transparent picture has dominated our ideas of the mind and of
language. Aided by the political and economic ascendance of Western
Europe, artificial perspective conquered the world of representation
under the banner of science and objectivity. No amount of counter-
demonstration by artists that there are other ways ofpicturing what we
really see has been able to shake the conviction that these pictures

496
Soft Logic
have a kind of identity with natural human VISIon and objective
external space. The invention of the camera build to produce this sort
of image has only reinforced the conviction that this is a natural mode
of representation. Mitchell insists that there is no objective and
independent visible world out there to match things against, no
unmediated "facts" about what or how we see.
He argues that the category of realistic or naturalistic image has
become the focus of modern secular idolatry, linked with the ideology
of Western science and rationalism. Indeed, he largely identifies with
the iconoclastic reaction that the hegemony of these images has
generated. Rejecting G. E. Lessing's separation of painting from
poetry, he justifies the crossing of such lines as inevitable. Moreover,
he conceives the relation between words and images in political terms,
as a contest of rival ideologies. While we create much of our world out
of the dialogue between verbal and pictorial representation. We have
not been able to provide a unified theory of verbal and pictorial signs.
Thus, we are inclined to think that to compare poetry with painting is
to make a metaphor, whereas to differentiate poetry from painting is to
state the literal truth. These are powerful distinctions that reflect the
ways the arts are understood and practiced.
Mitchell criticizes
Gombrich's linguistic approach to imagery who holds that vision,
picturing, and plain seeing are activities much like reading and
writing. He likewise questions Nelson Goodman's contention that
language provides the model for all symbol systems including the
pictorial. Mitchell emphasizes that the sign type that has proved most
difficult to assimilate into semiotics has been the icon, the traditional
contrary to the verbal sign. The major reason for this is that similarity
is such a capacious relationship, that everything in the world is similar
to everything else in some aspects, if we look hard enough. Signs are
everywhere, and there is nothing that is not potentially or actually a
sign. Mitchell agrees with Goodman that the test of fidelity is never
simply ''the real world" but some standard construction of the world.
People who have never seen photographs have to learn how to see
them, that is, how to read what is depicted. But Goodman deliberately
avoids questions of value and offers no canons for criticism; he
proceeds on the assumption that art is simply a universal category that
can be described from a neutral analytic perspective. Mitchell points
out, however, that in spite of Goodman's proclaimed relativism, his
work has been devoted to the problem of how to tell right versions
from wrong versions in art.

Iconology
497
Gombrich also regards the naturalness of perspective painting as
a literal truth. Perspective is not merely one conventional procedure
for interpreting the visible world but occupies a privileged position
that Gombrich sees represented in the objective nonconventional
element of a photograph. Mitchell points out, however, that the nature
implicit in Gombrich's theory of the image is far from universal;
rather it is a particular historical formation, an ideology associated
with the rise of modem science and the emergence of capitalist
economics. Mitchell argues that the notion of image as a "natural
sign" is the fetish or idol of Western culture. This Western idolatry
disguises its own nature under the cover of ritual iconoclasm, the
claim that our own images, unlike "theirs," are constructed by a
principle of effective self-criticislll. But since all signs, whether words
or images, work by custom and convention, the mistake is to think that
we can know the truth about things by knowing their right names,
signs, or interpretations. The other mistake is to believe that we can
know anything without names, images, or representations. Mitchell
concludes that because signs and images are all we have to work with,
we have to learn to use them dialectically, as a starting point for a
dialogue or conversation. He discusses the visual-verbal relationship in
the arts as a dialectical struggle in which the opposed terms take on
different ideological roles at different moments in history. Exclusive
preferences become improper because they are abstracted foml one
another as independent antithetical categories that define the nature of
art. Lessing's "laws of genre," which were said to be imposed by the
nature of the subject, tum out to be artificial and historical conven-
tions. Lessing merely rationalized a fear of inlagery that donlinates
Western philosophy in the works of Bacon, Kant, and Wittgenstein.
Mitchell follows the nineteenth century German art historian Alois
Riegl who pointed out that vision has a history. Our ideas of what
vision is and of what is worth looking at are all deeply embedded in
social and cultural history.
Since the time ofLocke, our theory ofthe mind has rested on the
conception of consciousness as a recorder and reflector of images.
Later on, a confusion of sensory aesthetic symbols of the natural order
of gender, social class, and symbolic modes became the basis for
Burke's rejection of the French Revolution. Mitchell emphasizes that
both sides were caught up in a rhetoric of iconoclasm, and the
imputation of idolatry to the other. It is only when we come to under-
stand the text-image relationship as a historical one, characterized by

498
Soft Logic
all the complexities and conflicts that plague the relationships of
individuals, groups, nations, classes, genders, and cultures that our
study might be freed from the craving for unity, analogy, harmony,
and universality. Such a shortcoming Mitchell discovers in Marx's
treatment of ideology, which is dominated by the image ofthe camera
obscura. The camera obscura is thought to produce highly realistic
images, exact replicas of the outside world. It is constructed in
accordance with of a scientific understanding of optics, whereas the
fetish serves as the antithesis of the scientific image, epitomizing
irrationality in both its crudity ofrepresentational means and its use in
superstitious ritual. Mitchell claims that there is a tendency in Marx to
treat ideology and commodity as refined and separate abstractions
instead of dialectical images. Ideology, which begins historically as an
iconoclastic "science of ideas" designed to overturn "idols of the
mind," winds up being characterized itself as a new form of idolatry.
For Marx, ideology is primarily the false consciousness of the Young
Hegelians who thought that revolutions could occur at the level ofcon-
sciousness, ideas, and philosophy without a material revolution in
social life.
Mitchell emphasizes that the problem with the facts and mental
images of the empiricists is not that they are false, but that they are
static and dead. There is no such thing as an ideology apart from
particular social and historical tendencies, and the critique of ideology
is possible only because of its localization and particularity. The
iconoclast
sees
himself working
from
a
more "advanced"
or
"developed" stage in the human evolution and, therefore, in a position
to provide a historical interpretation ofthe myths taken literally by the
idolater. While iconoclasm has a history almost as old as idolatry, it
prefers to appear as a relatively recent revolutionary breakthrough
overturning some previously established cult of image worship. The
iconoclast chooses to believe that he worships no images ofany sort, or
at least that his own images are purer or truer than those of the
idolater. The problem is that all this applies to Mitchell's "iconology"
as well. While his historical analysis does provide some illuminating
and intriguing insights and perspectives, it proclaims a relativisnl that
must become self-defeating. His own critique of iconoclasm requires
that we relativize and particularize our scope of investigation, and this
inevitably defeats his purpose of providing a general theory of icons.
He is thus unable to show that his dialectics can eliminate error and
imperfection in images.

Notes
Iconology
499
1 W.lT. Mitchell, Iconology: Image,
Text, Ideology, Chicago, IL:
University ofChicago Press, 1986.

Philosophy

Chapter Forty-One
Rorty's Pragmatism
Rorty believes that the attempt to explain the success of astrophysics
and the failure of astrology is bound to be merely an enlpty complaint
unless we can attain what Putnam calls a God's-eye standpoint
one
that has somehow broken out of our language and our beliefs, and
tested them against something known without their aid. l Rorty's
pragmatism is thus unable to account for the success of astrophysics
and the failure of astrology. Reducing objectivity to cultural solidarity,
he aims to eliminate both ontology and epistemology. But to argue that
we need not argue is still to argue; even if moved by the desire for
solidarity he prefers the images of the Romantics in praise of poets to
those used by the Greeks to praise mathematicians.2 We talk of poets
and painters as using some faculty other than "reason" in their· work
because, by their own confession they are not sure what they want to
do before they have done it. Ifto be rational means to lay down criteria
in advance, then it is plausible to take natural science as the paradigm
ofrationality.3 But Rorty believes that it is characteristic of democratic
and pluralistic societies to continually redefme their goals and, ifto be
rational means to satisfy criteria, then such a process of redefmition
really is irrational. He sees himself as a proponent of what Clark
Glymour calls the "new fuzziness," since he supports the attempt to
blur the distinction between fact and value that the critical conception
ofrationality (i.e. ofHume and Kant) have introduced. To take Rorty's

504
Soft Logic
"unforced argument" as primitive is to ignore complex psychological,
social, and economic factors that cause us to change our mind.
Rorty adopts the Davidsonian position that the term ''true''
should not be analyzed or defined. Combining this with what he calls
"ethnocentrism," he maintains that our present beliefs are inevitably
the ones we use to decide how to apply the term ''true.'' In this manner
he trivializes the term ''true,,,4 making it relative to upbringing and
culture, while insisting at the same time that there is nothing special
about prediction and control.5 The problem is that a pragmatism that
renounces prediction and control will have a hard time distinguishing
what works and what doesn't. While there may not be a "best"
explanation for anything, we still need some sort of criteria to prefer
one explanation to another. An explanation which merely suits the
purposes of the explainer will not be able to convince anybody not
already in agreement with his aims to begin with. Rorty denies that
there is a general view about the nature of inquiry or a universal
method of fixing belief, but what counts as "persuasion" and what as
"force" is by no means easy to decideu It is not obvious when
persuasion turns into brainwashing, and at what point the power to
starve people into submission is to count as violence. Even if Rorty is
right that "serious" politics is always reformist, these issues should not
simply be ignored. Since ''truth,'' for Rorty, is ultimately what gives us
comfort, his notion of philosophy is not anymore likely to produce
defmite results than is literary criticism. He picks favorite philosophers
by consonance with his desirata, realizing all the while that to make
comparisons between different philosophers in this fashion is to
discriminate unfairly.6 Declaring his pragmatism to be ''without
method," he intends to render it immune to attack, but what cannot be
attacked in this manner cannot be defended effectively either. He
offers an analysis of science that construes the reputed hardship of
facts merely as an artifact produced by our choice of language. Facts,
for Rorty, are hybrid entities, that is to say, the causes of assertability
ofsentences include both physical stimuli and our antecedent choice of
response to such stimuli.
Rorty would prefer to do away altogether with the notion of an
ideal language and an ideal experience, but describing language as a
''tool'' or a "set of tools" is in the end no less metaphorical than had
been taking it as a "veil" between ourselves and reality. All he can do
is tell us a story about his favorite metaphor, realizing that he is unable
to convince us, since he considers diverse language-games as incom-

Rorty's Pragmatism
505
mensurable. As he is unable to distinguish between more and less
useful language-games, he lacks convincing arguments for excluding
any of them. Thus for Rorty, the views of idiosyncratic nature mystics
are on a par with the views of professors of chemistry. The only
objectivity he allows is agreement whether a particular set of desirata
has been satisfied.7 But the gap that is said to exist between language
and reality is not automatically bridged when we say what we want.
Rorty follows Dewey in holding that not all questions can be answered
in terms of the alternatives that the questions thenlselves present.
Progress is said to occur through the sheer abandonment of questions
together with the alternatives they assume - we do not solve them, we
get around them. But whereas Dewey still takes some sort of realisnl
for granted, for Rorty there is no such thing as an intrinsically
privileged context. The only kind of entities he admits are individual
beliefs because he accepts them as equivalent to individual sentential
attitudes.8 He believes that whereas a sentence cannot correspond to
anything real, it does correspond to a given belief or desire. But he
also holds that a belief is what it is by virtue of its position in a web of
other beliefs. He insists that there are objects that are causally
independent of human beliefs and desires,9 yet he never really gets
outside his own head.
Rorty rightly realizes that interpretation is an exciting notion
only as long as it contrasts with something harder, firmer, less contro-
versial - something like "explanation" or "natural science."lO When
we are told that a certain activity should be viewed as interpretive, it is
implied that we should not, contrary to our expectations, expect this
activity to produce either knock-down arguments or a consensus
among the experts. We should neither expect to have a natural starting
point nor a method. But advising us to settle for such fuzziness is
interesting only insofar as we have reason to think that other people,
in other disciplines, nlanage to be less fuzzy than this. What consti-
tutes a useful contrast is one of the crucial issues for Rorty's
pragmatism. He denies categorically that there is any area ofculture in
which the essentialist has a point, but it is hard to see how such a
"mistake" could have survived for so long and in so many diverse
cultures. There seems to be at least a primafacie case for this doctrine,
which enables us to simplify our environment and helps us to discover
what it is that we really want.
Rorty questions Quine's distinction between areas of culture in
which there are "facts of the matter" (roughly the physical sciences)

506
Soft Logic
and those in which there are not. 11 When these patterns of behavior
differ widely, instead of saying that we have different world-views,
cultures, or theories, Rorty prefers to say merely that communication
becomes harder and translation less helpful. While talking about
"essentialist instincts," he insists that they have no biological or social
significance. At the sanle time, he speaks of objects as something we
find useful to talk about in order to cope with the stimulations to
which our bodies are subjected. Since these stimulations tend to cluster
in certain typical ways, philosophers since Aristotle have explained
them by means ofessences. But Rorty wants to modulate philosophical
debate from the methodological-ontological to the ethical-political
key,12 in this manner turning liberal democracy into a privileged
context. Rejecting essentialism, he realizes, nevertheless, that it is
virtually impossible to show that a language-game that has been
played for some time is in fact dispensable. After five hundred years of
experience with the language of secular culture, we are still not done
with theological terminology in our moral and political deliberations.
Even Rorty believes that we shall very likely continue to talk about
mental entities - beliefs and desires - and that what he calls folk
psychology will remain the best way ofpredicting what our friends and
acquaintances will do next. But this is just to assume the "human
nature" that Rorty supposedly rejects. His strategy to avoid these
difficulties by giving up introspection altogether13 ignores the fact that
our ordinary talk about beliefs and desires takes introspection very
much for granted. What the individual human being identifies as
"himself' or "herself' is, for the most part, his or her beliefs and
desires. Rorty admits that the picture of a network, which is not
rewoven by an agent but reweaves itself: as it were, in responses to
stimuli such as new beliefs acquired, is hard to reconcile with common
speech, according to which the "I" is distinct from its beliefs and
desires, picks and chooses among them, and the like. His pragmatism
fails to give an account of why some metaphors are successful in the
sense that we fmd them compelling, and make them candidates for
beliefand for literal truth. 14
Rorty counts Davidson and Quine as belonging to the American
pragmatist tradition,15 even though Davidson denies this. 16 Whereas
Rorty thinks of pragmatism as an "identification of truth with assert-
ability under ideal conditions" - that is a privileged context, after all -
Davidson does not want to see truth identified with anything at all.
What Rorty calls "pragmatism" is largely a disinclination to talk in

Rorty's Pragmatism
507
certain ways, in particular to deal with certain philosophical problems
that originated in Kant's theory of knowledge. But deciding to take
''true'' as primitive in this manner, in effect, begs the question of
assertability in an ideal context. "True" is said by Rorty to have no
explanatory use, merely an endorsing one; thus, his pragmatism is no
longer a philosophical doctrine in the usual sense to be argued about
and defended. It amounts to stopping the playing of certain language-
games without being able to give reasons for such a decision. For
holists, like Rorty, truth is always evidence-transcendent,17 so prag-
matism isn't true either. That such sweeping pictures of the nature of
language and reality are not called for is precisely one of the major
points of a more traditional pragmatism. Rejecting the Enlightenment
idea of "reason," Rorty denies that free and open discussion will
produce one right answer. The effect of giving up this theory is to
break the link between truth and justifiability,18 including, it would
seem, a pragmatic justification. He wants us to "bracket" philosophical
inquiry, and put aside such topics as an ahistorical human nature by
treating them as irrelevant to politics, as Jefferson thought questions
about the Trinity and transubstantiation. 19 Rorty admits, however, that
the question how we should determine what issues to discuss on
political or on "theoretical" (for example, theological or philosophical)
grounds remains unanswered.20 There is no a priori way to decide
what vocabularies and modes of discourse are going to be appropriate
or useless. Preaching an "end to ideology," his own plea for pluralism
and tolerance is no less ideological than is a neo-Darwinist "survival
ofthe fittest." Rorty fails to discuss the crucial issue ofhow to defeat a
free society against those who attempt to overthrow it by violence.
Thinking ofenemies of liberal denlocracy like Loyola and Nietzsche as
"mad," Rorty is likely to increase the likelihood of violence in settling
such
disputes.
He
wants
democracy
to
take
precedence
over
philosophy,21 but by declaring argument in favor of tolerance and
representative government pointless, he reduces them to mere cllstonl
or arbitrary choice. He hopes that "light-mindedness" will make it
unnecessary to offer such arguments because it will render these issues
to be no longer threatening or indeed important. But it is only for a
tiny privileged minority in the West that politics seems a "game" they
can afford to ignore.
Rorty realizes that American society's self-image is bound up
with the Kantian vocabulary of "inalienable rights" and human
dignity, and that American society has traditionally asked to be based

508
Soft Logic
on something more than mere solidarity. For Rorty, by contrast, the
principal backup for historiography is not philosophy but the arts,
which serve to develop and modify a group's self-image by apotheo-
sizing its heroes and diabolizing its enemies.22 Moral dilemmas, in his
view, are due to the fact that we identify with different comnlunities
and are reluctant to marginalize ourselves in relation to any of them.23
But it would seem that the notion of "progress" in either rationality or
morality is an instance of metaphorical metadiscourse that Rorty is
reluctant to give up. Renouncing standards that are merely local, he
concludes that there are people not worth understanding, and that
those who disagree with us on fundamentals are to be treated as crazy,
stupid, base, or sinful. This in tum is not likely to increase tolerance or
make violence less likely in settling disputes on fundamental issues.
To be part of society, in his sense, is to be taken as a possible
conversational partner but, since we cannot escape our merely
contingent spatio-temporal affiliations, Rorty really lacks any criteria
for progress in either rationality or morality. He cannot know that the
ideals of human equality and procedural justice are the best hope for
our species, as he claims.24 Rejecting the ahistorical ideal of a world
polity whose citizens share common aspirations, he has a hard time
reconciling private narcissism with public pragmatism. It is by no
means obvious that Cartesian clarity and
critical thinking are
politically pernicious by preventing the solidarity Rorty aspires to
achieve. Preferring the welfare state, he simply ignores the libertarian
arguments that it diminishes human freedom and personal respon-
sibility. His contrast between force and persuasion certainly demands
more than an anecdotal treatment. He rejects the Kantian idea that we
think of inquiry on the model ofjuridical proceedings, suggesting that
we consider rationality not as the appreciation of criteria (as in a
tribunal) but as the achievement of consensus.25 This suggestion is in
accord
with
Wittgenstein's
idea
that
we
think
of
linguistic
competence, not as theoretical knowledge, but as the ability to get
along with other players ofthe language-game, a game played without
referees. So when we say that Aristotle and Galileo, or Holbein and
Matisse, did not speak the same language, we should not mean that
they had different semantical rules with which to organize their
experience. Rather, we should say merely that there would have been
no simple, easy, quick way for either to convince the other in a
common project.

Rorty's Pragmatism
509
Davidson's point is that it is misleading to
interpret the
expression "the metaphorical use of language" as implying that lots of
"metaphorical meanings" in addition to "literal meanings" are already
present in our language. Metaphor does not expand logical space, for
to learn the language is already to have learned all the possibilities for
metaphor as well as all the possibilities for fact. No theory of
metaphorical meaning or metaphorical truth can help explain how
metaphors work. What distinguishes metaphor is not meaning but use
-
in
this
it
is
like
assertion,
hinting,
lying,
promising,
and
criticizing.26 Davidson likens metaphors to pictures, and holds that
words are the wrong currency to exchange for a picture. Another way
of putting this is to say that the "irrational" is essential for intellectual
progress. The irrational intrusions of belief that "make no sense" (Le.
cannot be justified by exhibiting their coherence with the rest of what
we believe) are just these events that intellectual historians' look back
upon as "conceptual revolutions." Rorty adopts Davidson's theory of
metaphor and concludes that things will get better for everybody if
only new metaphor is given a hearing. The task of intellectuals in
democratic societies is precisely to help their fellow citizens with the
idea that we do not have an adequate language. Whereas the analytical
tradition regards metaphor as a distraction from Reality, Rorty sees
metaphor as a way of escaping the illusion that there is such a reality.
He is, however, somewhat ambivalent about this, for he too would like
his work to be continuos not only with fictitious literature, but also
with politics, which is for him as close to reality as we are ever likely
to get.
The only thing we can be certain about, in Rorty's view, is that
we know what we want.27 Liberal democracy, however, proceeds on
the assumption that we know what we want only by hindsight; all our
answers remain incomplete, and this is something that even most
realists do not dispute. Rorty wants to recapture our sense of contin-
gency by rejecting the philosophical tradition that what counts is
literary truth, not the choice of words or metaphors.
So, like
Heidegger, he defends the poets against the philosophers by insisting
that philosophical reflection is historical through and through and that
no language is fated or necessitated. Forgetting this, we Westerners
tend to think of poets as referring to the same old things under fuzzy
new metaphorical descriptions, instead ofthinking ofpoetic acts as the
original opening up of the world.28 Heidegger, however, was never
able to shake offthe philosophy professor's conviction that politics and

510
Soft Logic
art stand to philosophy as superstructure to base. So when he decided
that Western philosophy had exhausted its possibilities, he concluded
that the West had reached the end of its tether. Rorty, by contrast,
predicts that things will tum out well in the end, even though his sense
of contingency reduces this to a mere hope. Thus, his pragnlatism
turns out to be too honest to survive - since we cannot distance
ourselves from time and chance by anything we may do, progress in
rationality or morality becomes as problematic as is knowledge of any
other alleged kind ofreality.
Rorty wants us to give up the notion of "the limits of language,"
and thus Wittgenstein's early doctrine that there are things that can be
shown but cannot be said. But he also wants philosophy to be more
than therapeutic, even after he has asked us to resist the taste for
theory as opposed to narrative. He claims the privileges of a novelist
but his pragmatism remains a theory ofhuman behavior, not just some
sort of fiction. Like the rest of philosophers, Rorty sees himself as
engaged in something more than a mere private project. Since no
alternative can be shown to be superior to any other, neither can this
be done for pluralism and tolerance. Blurring the literature-philosophy
distinction, Rorty would like to eliminate philosophy altogether. Of
course, as long as people agree on what is wanted and on how to
achieve it, philosophical concerns will be at a minimum. But when
ultimate goals are questioned, the appropriateness and relevance of
vocabularies and ways of expression inevitably do become an issue.
Philosophical problems arise when people take up alternatives that
have not been envisaged before and thereby question a common-
sensical belief that they had previously had no reason to doubt. Rorty
wants us to give up the philosophical dream of fmding the one true
metaphor, offering us pluralism and ambiguity instead. But his
criticism of Derrida applies no less to himself: when he forgets about
philosophy, Rorty's own writing loses focus and point. His "soft"
pragmatism offers us the metaphor of "reweaving a vocabulary," yet
this never adds up to a conclusive argument because not enough
prenlises are shared across competing language-games. Revolutionary
philosophers, like physicists or even politicians, have always taken
words and given them new meanings -
but not to the point of
terminating their own language-ganle.
Rorty,
therefore,
doesn't
succeed in leaving philosophy behind him; his hope that philosophy
will "wither away" is not more realistic than was the Marxist
prediction that the state will wither away. His ethnocentrism shows

Rorty's Pragmatism
511
most clearly in the assumptions that the majority of contemporary
intellectuals will self-consciously renounce ontology and essences, or
that they are content to give up rigor and objectivity. To argue that
rationality consists in the continuos adaption of our language in an
expanding world or to investigate what metaphor can or cannot do, is
to make a philosophical argument.
Rorty believes that the premise philosophy is pervasive seems
plausible only if one identifies ''the discourse of philosophy" with any
and all binary oppositions. But his strategy of evasion merely turns
philosophy enigmatic; it does not amount to an argument capable of
convincing opponents.
He tells us that he doesn't believe in
philosophical argument because the only thing that can displace one
intellectual world-view is another intellectual world-view rather than
an argument.29 He fails, however, to present us with a world-view that
can take the place of philosophy; all he can do is to advise us to
"forget" about certain philosophical issues. It is one thing to point out
that philosophical arguments are often not rigorous, and quite another
to deny their legitimacy altogether. The way in which we are supposed
to "forget" our philosophical convictions remains obscure, and why
certain language-games go out of fashion is something Rorty never
explains. He certainly is not providing us with criteria to decide what
is and what is not "pointless." If there is no preexisting logical space
shared by such philosophical alternatives, there can be no rules or
techniques for choosing between thenl either. Argumentation requires
that the same vocabulary be used in premises and conclusions - that
both be part of the same language-game. What Rorty wants us to do,
on the other hand, is to use different vocabularies for different
purposes without bothering about their relation to each other. He
reduces language to human beings using marks and noises to get what
they want,30 as ifthis were not just another metaphor. 'We do not know
what we want anymore reliably or definitely than we know 'Nhat is
real, nor is it any easier to decide this. Rorty would like to argue that
there is no such thing as "language" but for the fact that this would
make his own "interweaving" metaphor inapplicable. No language-
game starts from scratch; it always arises form the modification of a
previous
language-game.
Every metaphor
presupposes
a
literal
meaning in an idiom that is taken for granted, and that is why we
never literally live in a "different world" after a conceptual revolution
or paradigm shift has occurred.

512
Soft Logic
Rorty wants us to discard the fallacy of unmediated expression,
and to get rid of the metaphors of transparency and identity by
accepting Saussure's claim that language is a play of differences.
Signs have meaning by virtue of their relations to other signs -
relations
of similarity
and
dissimilarity
rather
than
by
their
coincidence with something mental. Rorty further insists that all
thought is in language, so that thoughts, too, have meaning only by
virtue of other thoughts. Once one drops the essentialist idea that
things have both intrinsic and relational properties - properties that
they have "in themselves" and properties that they have merely in
relation to, for example, human desires and interests -
then a
Saussurian notion
of language and a Davidsonian account
of
knowledge follow naturally. Rorty generalizes Wittgenstein's and
Quine's points by saying that the significance of a sentence like that of
a belief or desire is its place in the web of all sentences, beliefs, and
desires. He emphasizes the context-sensitivity not only of signs but
also ofthoughts by treating them not as quasi-things but as nodes in a
web of relations. He prefers the metaphor of seeing ourselves as a
centerless web to those of centrality and depth because he considers
them to be more in accord with democratic politics. Thus, he
concludes that the spirit of tolerance which is a condition for the
working of constitutional democracies precludes our holding strong
convictions of any kind. This, however, is likely to weaken the senses
ofpersonal and social responsibility, which liberal democracies require
no less. Moreover, it renders Rorty powerless to change the status quo
- political, economic, or philosophical - in any effective manner. He
has very little to say about how power "corrupts," i.e. is likely to
change our convictions and, therefore, to modify what we think we
want. Denying that the status quo needs justification; Rorty in effect
renders suspect any attack on it.
He denies that humanity is a natural kind or that it has a center;
rather we are more like machines, and it is up to us to invent a use for
ourselves.31 The world of living creatures is as pointless as Newtonian
mechanics has rendered cosmology, and the world in which we live no
longer teaches us anything about how we should live. We, therefore,
speak one language for Baconian purposes of prediction and control,
and quite a different language for purposes of moral attention. Thus,
contrary to his romantic leanings, Rorty is among those who have
given up on the possibility of radical political engagement. His
principal technique of self-enlargement (even ifthere is supposedly no

Rorty's Pragmatism
513
"self')
is the enrichment of language, the acquisition
of new
vocabularies for moral reflection. Since philosophy is incapable of
contributing to such an enrichment, Rorty turns this task over to poets,
novelists, and dramatists. His enthusiasm for mechanization and
decentering is challenged by those who, like Heidegger, see the
mechanization of culture a prelude to barbarism. Rorty thinks that his
suggestion that our stories about ourselves as centerless mechanisms
will seem to strip us of human dignity only to the degree that we
believe we need reasons to live romantically, to treat others decently,
or to be treated decently ourselves.32 Somewhat naively he concludes
that we will have fewer bully boys to cope with if people had more
education,
leisure,
and
money.33
But
being
suspicious
of all
metadiscourses, Rorty is'nevertheless incapable ofgiving them up. It is
only in a formalized language like mathematics that one can
legitimately speak of a metalanguage, whereas in ordinary discourse -
and, therefore, in philosophy - this is only a manner of speaking. Like
Feyerabend, Rorty sees scientific and political discourse as continuous;
science is something that a certain group of people invented, in the
same sense in which they can be said to have invented Protestantism,
parliamentary government, and Romantic poetry. He, therefore, resists
attempts to reduce all discourse to either science, politics (as did
Lenin), or aesthetics (as did Baudelaire and Nietzsche). The trouble is
that, on his own terms, Rorty cannot know in advance whether 'a
certain language-game is to be avoided. He accepts with equanimity
the fact that truth and power are inseparable, yet opposes violence
under all conditions. He wants us to stick to the concrete, even though
the concrete-abstract opposition is no less problematic than the one
between theory and narrative. Rorty asks that intellectuals give up
their traditional function of going beyond the limits, and use words
that are not part of everyone's language-game,34 even if that means
giving up their innovative function in society. He wants to bring the
philosophical tradition to an end, but he also believes in emancipation
and progress. It isn't clear, however, how we are supposed to work for
progress and rational change ifwe cannot even make a good argument
for them. Rorty is a philosopher who claims a novelist's privileges, yet
isn't content to offer his pragmatism as mere fiction.

514
Notes
Soft Logic
1 Richard Rorty, Objectivity,
Relativism,
and Truth,
Philosophical
Papers, vol. I, Cambridge University Press, 1991, p. 6.
2 Ibid., p. 28.
3 Ibid., p. 36.
4 Ibid., p. 50.
5 Ibid., p. 58.
6 Ibid., p. 79.
7 Ibid., p. 90.
8 Ibid., p. 95.
9 Ibid., p. 101.
10 Ibid., p. 102.
11 Ibid., p. 103.
12 Ibid., p. 110.
13 Ibid., p. 120.
14 Ibid., p. 124.
15 Ibid., p. 126.
16 Donald Davidson, Inquiry into Truth and Interpretation, Oxford
University Press, 1984, p. xviii.
17 Rorty, Objectivity, Relativism, and Truth, p. 147.
18 Ibid., p. 176.
19 Ibid., p. 180.
20 Ibid., p. 182 n15.
21 Ibid., p. 192.
22 Ibid., p. 200.
23 Ibid., p. 201.
24 Ibid., p. 208.
25 Ibid., p.217.
26 Davidson, Inquiry into Truth and Interpretation, p. 259.
27 Richard Rorty, Essays on Heidegger and Others,
Philosophical
Papers, vol. II, Cambridge University Press, 1991, p. 29.
28 Ibid., p. 46.
29 Ibid., p. 121.
30 Ibid., p. 127.
31 Ibid., p. 144.
32 Ibid., p. 162.
33 Ibid., p. 162 n31.
34 Ibid., p. 176.

Chapter Forty-Two
Limits of Philosophy
Woods argues that much of what we think of as clarity and
distinctness in our philosophical ideas rests on topological hygiene,
mending fences, and defining boundaries. l Since Kant's day, the
legacy of Euclid and Newton has faded and we are much more
inclined to understand the transcendental more realistically either in
terms of mathematical or physical models of experience or language.
What
consequently
opens
up
are
nlore
complex
topological
possibilities that radically unsettle any simple assignation ofinside and
outside,
and
hence
of limits.
Contemporary
philosophers
are
increasingly impressed by the impact of language on experience. If
there is one thing Nietzsche, Wittgenstein, Heidegger, Foucault, and
Derrida have each taught us, it is that traditional epistemologically
oriented demarcation of the subject's relation to the world, in which
perceptual knowledge provides a guiding thread, is fatefully undercut
by the linguistic character of our being. Language understood in this
way cannot be assigned a place within the traditional topological
scheme of regions and linear limits. Wood emphasizes that our whole
way ofthinking about limits and whether or not they can be overcome
is mistakenly visuaL The most obvious meaning of "limit" is that of a
boundary that marks off whatever is on one side from whatever is on
the other. Much of the difficulty arises from the attempt to visualize
limits using notions, pictures, and schemes drawn from geography,
geometry, or real estate. "Being able to be talked about" does not seem
to be a property in any ordinary sense, and there is a strong and

516
Soft Logic
important sense in which the idea of there being sonlething that
cannot be said is itself an effect of language. Language just is not the
same as experience, but it intensi:(ies experience by forcing certain
ambiguities to resolve themselves and raising the particular to the
level of the concept, as Hegel would say, for experience and language
cannot be separated in a way necessary for experience to constitute a
limit to language. Experience, in this view, is not a silent movie but a
great Babel of voices interwoven with concepts and perceptual
schemata, with much ofthe internal structure derived from language.
Any language, or particular conceptual framework, rests on
prescriptions that cannot be made explicit within that language.
Foucault and Gadamer agree that it is only through time (i.e. history)
that the presuppositions of the present become visible and so
discussible.2 Whereas the early Wittgenstein and Heidegger agree that
there are things that cannot be said ever, Foucault, Gadamer, and
Kuhn hold that every overarching conceptual scheme rests on certain
tacit assumptions that cannot be stated within that scheme but that the
subsequent
course
of
intellectual
history
reveals.
We
cannot,
Wittgenstein declares, use language to describe the conditions of the
possibility of language. But these remarks, and indeed the whole ofthe
Tractatus, are the very sort of observations that Wittgenstein has
claimed are not descriptive. And yet description is the essence of his
account of language. While the limits of the sayable in the Tractatus
are taken to be rigid, in his Philosophical Investigations, they become
soft, a function of the various language-games we play. What cannot
be said within one language-game may well be expressible in another,
since there are no a priori limits to what can be said. Even in the
Tractatus,
Wittgenstein emphasizes that what we cannot say in
language can nonetheless be shown, thus the wonder of existence
cannot be expressed in a logically appropriate form, yet poets have
been expressing the wonder of existence for ages. From a logical point
of view one is "saying nothing," but what is shown or pointed at is of
enormous importance.3 Thus,
Heidegger's questioning reveals
a
significantly richer understanding of language than is offered by the
early Wittgenstein, and this leads to a different understanding of the
limits of language as well. For Heidegger, it is language that makes it
possible to think of possibilities, relations, complex times, and moods.
To use language in a nonobjectifying way is to show what cannot just
be stated, to point to something without directly describing it, to allow
something to appear without slapping a label on it.4 What Heidegger

Limit's of Philosophy
517
tries to do is to handle language in such a way that the uttering of
descriptive propositions occurs as one possibility among others. What
is unspoken is what cannot revealingly be stated in a propositional
form, or cannot be stated without producing an essential distortion.
The rise oftwentieth century positivism, logical atomism, and the
linguistic philosophy were seen as the virtual eclipse of historical
perspective within influential philosophical circles. The interpretation
ofhistory was often regarded as something of an intellectual swamp in
which anyone with any ambition would soon catch the fever of
"metaphysics." One of the obvious problems in a philosophical
treatment of the history of ideas is that one is dealing with a
succession of thinkers who were convinced that what they said was
true quite independently of the time at which they said it. And yet the
frames of reference they adopted (their conceptual schemes, their
theories, their basic assumptions about the shape of knowledge) -
things which seemed so self-evident to them that they often were not
even visible as assumptions - these change from epoch to epoch.
Foucault and Gadamer agree that our most basic assumptions about
the nature ofknowledge, the relation between language and the world,
the division between madness and reason, always constitute a layer
that is structurally invisible, and that we cannot make explicit at the
time. In each case we have a limit to what can be said, thought,
understood, communicated, even noticed. It is a limit of language, if
language here is understood as the totality of available procedures for
observation, interpretation, description, and explanation. What each of
these accounts recognizes is that there have been enormous and
characteristic shifts in these webs of comprehension. The question of
the limits of language does not only depend on one's theory of
language but, when one is dealing with these forms of structural
invisibility, it depends crucially on the level at which the "framework,"
or whatever one wants to call it, is conceived.5 Heidegger rightly
points out that we cannot separate our "world" or our "existence" from
the manifold linguistic practices in which we engage. When we think
of language as essentially descriptive and as a means of everyday
information, we distort our understanding of the "world" and our
"existence" in it. It was Kierkegaard who emphasized that subjectivity
cannot be communicated directly. He contrasts indirect communica-
tion using metaphor, parables, irony, and the like in which subjectivity
is evident but not stated with ordinary direct communication in which,
he claims, one is not really giving anything of oneself: and so it is not

518
Soft Logic
truly comnlunicating. The sense and significance of there being
something that cannot be said is itself an effect of language. We
usually treat description as the paradigm of language use, and what
seems closed or constant to description takes on a value that has often
been thought of as transcendent, as beyond our ken. It is not that
language cannot handle the transcendent; rather, the transcendent is
the name we give to the discovery ofthe limits ofdescriptive language,
tacitly but erroneously supposing that it names a realm that cannot be
described. Wood argues that if we expand our understanding of the
functions of language, our sense of there being such a realm will
disappear.
Philosophy is said to have taken a "linguistic tum," but this is not
a single-strained phenomenon. The reassessment of the relationship
between philosophy and metaphor in the English-speaking world was
precipitated by the demise of the logocentric view of language,
language thought of as (literally) picturing reality, the breakdown of
procedures for deciding on the metaphorical/literal claims made
during periods of philosophical/theoretical transition from one·frame
of reference to another.6 Metaphor, then, becomes part of a way of
understanding language without a real job to do after the displacement
of the locentric model. This_ way of understanding language takes for
granted a rigid distinction between literal and figurative uses of
language. With the disappearance of the belief that language pictures
the world or directly represents it, the merely derivative status of
metaphor is threatened. It is no longer at all obvious that metaphorical
claims are to be treated either as literally false, or more charitably, as
disguised forms of literal utterance, into which they should be
retranslated. There is the recognition that at least some claims about
the proper relationship between concepts (such as Ryle's claim that
some statements are "category nlistakes") are not eternal truths, but
rather prescriptive reflections of the constitutive semantic order of
certain language-games. Once we recognize that these games can
change, there will be transitional periods (in science, but also in
ordinary discourse) in which it will often be unclear whether an
utterance is to be taken metaphorically or literally because no clear
categorical structure is available.
After Aristotle, philosophers have often taken it for granted that
there are different categories of stuff in the world, different kinds of
being. A philosophical discourse that recognized this would be
governed by an understanding of which words are proper to what

Limit's of Philosophy
519
things. It would not, for example, make sense to take thoughts as being
located in space. Metaphor feeds on and exploits just such categorical
confusion; it brings together things that should be kept apart.
Metaphor, in short, is a threat to categorical order and hence to
philosophy, for it endangers the Cartesian clarity and distinctness of
our ideas. Metaphorical expressions, taken literally, are false, and
when we probe them more deeply, we discover indeterminacy and
vagueness.
Metaphors work
on
similarity,
and in
some
sense
everything is similar to everything else, whereas philosophy requires
identity and sameness, not merely the empirical relation of similarity.
Figurative language has meaning only in so far as it can be given a
literal translation, and it is more usually responsible for those misuses
of language that generate philosophical error. The meaningful core of
metaphor is discovered by translating it back into its literal origins, but
already Nietzsche shows that the most primitive contact through
sensations we have with the world reveals things to be of infinitely
complexity. We pick them out in language only by means of certain
particular features they have, and only in this manner do we get
classes and categories of things to which we apply general words. In
picking out these features of things and grasping them linguistically,
Nietzsche's concept of truth (understood, as it generally is, as repre-
sentation) is a kind of compounding of an original metaphor.7 What
this really suggests is that in philosophy the claim of truth is
underpinned by a whole system of concepts and values, not just a
single concept of truth in the abstract. One thinks of the foundation
model in terms of "conceptual geography" or "logical space," and the
spatial rhetoric of structuralist thought - of limits, discontinuities,
thresholds, and the like.8 Thus, the same metaphysicians who want to
escape the world of appearance are destined to live perpetually in
allegory
and
metaphor.
Philosophers
cannot
acknowledge
the
metaphorical nature ofabstraction, but neither can they escape it.
Metaphysics, for Heidegger, is philosophical thought alienated
form the question ofbeing, and as such it includes all philosophy since
Plato. What Heidegger attempts in his later writings is not to go
beyond metaphysics but to do something different, and this requires a
new relation to language. Heidegger's later writings remain highly
metaphorical, however, even though he claims that the very distinction
between the metaphorical and the literal is one that makes sense only
within a metaphysical framework. 9 Metaphor is traditionally based on
the distinction between these predicates that belong to a certain subject

520
Soft Logic
and those that do not belong. Wittgenstein was presumably drawing on
such a distinction when he talked about philosophical problems arising
when "language goes on holiday." However, in On the Way to
Language, Heidegger tells us that, in thinking, the important thing is
not to get anywhere else but to get where one is already, i.e. to
transfoffil one's being, and in particular one's relation to language.
The same issue is taken up by Derrida when he discusses the nature of
writing, which might be called "parametaphorical." Derrida under-
stands language, not via some relation to being (as does Heidegger),
but as the play ofdifferences. The distinction between words and their
meaning is "in play" because the notion of metaphor presupposes a
level of semantic stability that Derrida has long since given up.
Derrida explains that he has to "borrow from m_etaphor" even to talk
about it, just as it is impossible in principle to step outside meta-
physics. Deconstruction works from within, or on the boundaries of
abandoning or eliminating metaphor precisely because of its links to
metaphysics. 10 Derrida agrees with Heidegger that we are inside
language, but whereas for Heidegger this "inside" is a kind of
dwelling, Derrida emphasizes that we remain always on the move.
Heidegger may have released us from a naive acceptance of the
metaphor/literal distinction, but he still ascribes to language a special
sacredness, as it were. For Derrida, on the other hand, the very dis-
tinction between reality and writing is something difficult to make. His
philosophical methods are a self-conscious, transformative rewriting,
since he denies the implicit reference to a proper literal meaning t4at
this would imply.
Deconstruction is not reductionist in any simple way; rather it is
a critique that operates on the blind side of philosophical practice. 11 It
performs on philosophy an operation that philosophy traditionally
applies to the world. Philosophers do all sorts of things - explain,
analyze, argue, construct, criticize, etc. but the operation that seems
quite central is one of defamiliarzation, or distancing oneself form the
taken-for-granted. Deconstruction involves some sort of contradiction,
making use of standards such as rational accountability, which it itself
puts in question. The features of a philosophical text deconstruction
picks on are not logical inconsistencies, weak arguments, and unlikely
premises, but the features that seem philosophically most acceptable.
To say that all philosophy is writing is to claim that it is never a
transparent expression of thought. A philosophical text chases what
Derrida calls presence - self-sufficient accessible points of reference,

Limit's of Philosophy
521
unequivocal terms, and the like - and it does so intermittently and
always without success. Wood stresses the similarities between
deconstruction and Wittgenstein's therapeutic model of philosophy.
While for Kant, the general error of speculation lay in employing
empirical
concepts
beyond
their
proper
sphere,
Wittgenstein's
therapeutic approach to philosophy sees perplexity arising when
language is disengaged from its proper everyday context of use. Once
the perplexity vanishes, the philosophical problem has been solved,
even if it is necessary to understand how it came about in the first
place. But this need not be statable and need not apply to other
philosophical perplexities. Not only is there no need for such a
philosophy to institutionalize itself in a more systematic form, it
arguably cannot do so because it is just such rigid formulations; such
attempts to make language behave in artificial ways that generate
philosophical problems. Wittgenstein not only abandoned theoretical
truth as a goal in philosophy, but his practice resembles deconstruction
in forging a counter-philosophical strategy.12 His strategy involves a
privileging of normal standard use over philosophical use and, hence
we are supposed to need determinate context, settings in which
language thrives in natural health.13 But there is no therapeutic intent
in deconstruction, since from a theoretical perspective the practice of
deconstruction is self-defeating. Where Wittgenstein talks about
language-games,
Derrida
refers
to
"play"
and,
contrary
to
Wittgenstein, deconstruction does not leave everything as it is. Derrida
questions the distinction between relations ofmeaning and relations of
association, and reading him brings about a more acute sensitivity to
the figural and metaphorical dimensions of philosophical writing.
"Metaphor" comes to be seen not just as one philosophical topic
among others, but as playing a pervasive role in the construction of
philosophical arguments. Metaphor and other forms of equivocation,
arnbiguity, figurative meaning, and semantic indeterminacy cannot be
eliminated
from
philosophy.
A
complacent
falling
back
to
a
therapeutic grasp of the philosopher's activity is likewise not possible
because ofthe aporias latent in the goals oftherapy itself
History has witnessed considerable changes in what counts as
philosophy, and there is no consensus. But there is a recognition ofthe
weaknesses of a linguistic philosophy that is almost entirely concerned
with ordinary language. English-speaking philosophers have been
stressing the importance of clarity, yet Wood considers this insistence
on clarity to be problematic: mere coherence is superficial, and it takes

522
Soft Logic
little account of the depth of a text. Philosophical terms and concepts
are to be understood not just "in context," but in the way their
meaning actively informs and structures a text, and this may occur at a
number of different levels. Wood follows Hegel in arguing that formal
thought destroys the natural movement of thinking, ignoring the self-
modifying character of speculative judgment. That is why we are
unable to give a formally adequate representation of dialectics. But
following Derrida, Wood interprets dialectics as writing, for writing,
unlike speech, renders time explicit. Philosophical truth is not a
relation between a set of propositions and some real world; rather it is
the reflexive structure of a text. 14 Examples of this are Nietzsche's
multiple styles and Kierkegaard's insistence that true communication
is always indirect. Nietzsche's basic insight denies that there are
necessary connections in the world, that the world as such exhibits
logical relations. He denies this also to language as a whole and claims
that what we read off as the structures of language are no more than
internal
grammatical
properties of a
particular
language.
The
referential and conlmunicative success a language may have is the
result of the implicit agreement to see the world the way a particular
language depicts it. This is a product of needs and desires, not an
appeal to an independent and neutral truth. Language is at base, he
claims, a lie, but there is, nevertheless, a joyous affirmation of
language's rhetorical and metaphorical functions. It amounts to the
claim that the original relationship of language to the world is both
negatively
misrepresentation,
and
positively
metaphorical
and
rhetorical play. No nonmetaphorical or unrhetorical natural language
exists that could serve as a point ofreference.
In Beyond Good and Evil, Nietzsche observes how unfailingly
the most diverse philosophers always fill in a defmite fundamental
scheme of possible philosophies. Under an invisible spell, they always
revolve once more in the same orbit prescribed by the unconscious
domination and guidance of similar grammatical functions. 15 This
bewitchment by language appears, he suggests, in metaphysical
projections ofthe subject-predicate structure ofgrammar. It appears in
the way the matrix of philosophical possibilities is set up by a
collection of oppositions - reason and emotion, matter and form,
subject and object, man and woman, good and evil. These oppositions
supply
us
with
analytical
tools
but
also
serve
as
invisible
straightjackets for our thought, unconscious limits of which we are
largely unaware. Nietzsche's point is that philosophy is seen to have

Limit's of Philosophy
523
come full circle, and to have exhausted itself. Heidegger's judgment on
Nietzsche was that the will to power - the position from which he
diagnosed the limits of all previous philosophy - was itself caught up
in the circle of metaphysics,. and this makes Nietzsche ''the last
metaphysician." The product is a philosophy that contests its own
possibility, while at the same time never quite destroying it. Derrida
points out that Nietzsche's text is marked by a strategy of writing, a
multiplicity of styles, which not only renders its meaning radically
undecidable, but which promotes the cause of undecidability. This
started with Kierkegaard's account of individuality from the point of
view ofthe thinker who reflects on his own existence from within. For
Kierkegaard, subjective existence is no mere aspect of philosophy but
the basis on which philosophical problems matter at all. When
Kierkegaard turns the table on Hegel and claims that subjectivity is
truth, what he means is that the essence of being human is one's
"ethical" existence, one's commitments,
one's relation to limit
situations. The subjective thinker is significantly aware that it is he
who is thinking his thoughts, and presumably what they mean to him
in his particular state ofexistence. By "inwardness" he means that any
thinking is both an activity not adequately reflected in a summing up
of results, and ultimately something that concerns me and as such
cannot just be said. 16 What he wants to express is not a fact about
himself, not a state, but a striving, plagued by doubts, the risk of
failure, and the need for constant reaffrrmation. That is why all
communication is in some sense indirect, and why there are limits to
what we can communicate that are specific to one particular language,
but that can be overcome by a change ofstyle.
Derrida
demonstrates
the
persuasiveness
of metaphor
in
philosophy, yet at the same time he rejects the suggestion that we
reduce philosophy to the status of metaphorical discourse. The·idea of
metaphor is historically linked to the notion of a proper meaning, or a
proper application of a word,
in which metaphor could be a
replacement. The concept of metaphor is bound up with certain
philosophical commitments for a privileged proper object for a name.
In order for one's textual performance to have philosophical value, it
must convince the reader that it denl0nstrates a general truth rather
than an idiosyncratic one. Direct communication is unfit to express the
subject's engagement with his own thought, the fact that his thought is
a process, a thinking, and never done with, and that it is all this
precisely to the extent that it is not given outward expression. Straight-

524
Soft Logic
forward, declarative, descriptive language only nourishes the old
philosophical illusion of the representational adequacy of language.
But it is not the natural function oflanguage to represent the world nor
is language capable of doing so. Representation is just a philosopher's
dream, perhaps the dream of philosophy. Nietzsche recommends that
philosophers give up seriousness and recognize language for what it is,
an expression of the will to power, and governed by aesthetic rather
than epistemological values. Philosophy is essentially repetition, and
its sharpest analytical tools rest on linguistic and philosophical
conditions open neither to inspection nor reflection. I7 Even Heidegger
came to realize that he cannot treat existence as a privileged source of
primordial experience untouched by history. One specific change at
which Heidegger aims and Derrida endorses ( in "The retrait of
metaphor") is an end to treating language as an instrument, a trans-
parent vehicle of thought that could, in principle, be formulated in
some independent fashion. Derrida's version is that the history of
philosophy is one of presence, the belief in privileged points of
reference. He opts for an obsessive, self-conscious and reflexive
writing, for the traditional values of philosophy (truth, objectivity,
reality) are none of them simple unities independent of language but
always formulated in a syntax of truth/function, literal/metaphorical,
objectivity/subjectivity, and the like. So when a philosopher appeals to
truth, or even to subjectivity, as Kierkegaard does, he is making a
move within writing. I8 Language is not an instrument of epistemology,
and; the ideal of a philosophical text that would demystify or enlighten
us in the name of truth is no longer credible. The breakthrough to a
philosophical "beyond" is a mirage.
Notes
1 David Wood, Philosophy at the Limit,
London, Boston, Sidney,
Wellington: Unwin Hynlan, 1990, p. xvi.
2 Ibid., p. 10.
3 Ibid., p. 13.
4 Ibid., p. 15.
S Ibid., p. 20.
6 Ibid., p. 27.
7 Ibid., p. 31.

Limit's of Philosophy
525
8 Ibid.
9 Ibid., p. 35.
10 Ibid., p. 38.
11 Ibid., p. 42.
12 Ibid., p. 55.
13 Ibid., p. 56.
14 Ibid., p. 87.
15 F. Nietzsche, Beyond Good and Evil,
trans.
Helen Zimmern,
Edinburgh: Foulis, 1908, Section 20, p. 28.
16 Wood, Philosophy at the Limit, p. 109.
17 Ibid., p. 142.
18 Ibid., p. 146.

Chapter Forty-Three
Philosophy's Future
Nielsen follows Rorty in arguing that there is no coherent knowledge
claim that can be constructed as if we at last found nature's own
language. 1 The philosophical illusion is that we can gain foundation
knowledge of what is "real," and working from this, assess the
soundness of various knowledge-claims in art,
science, morals,
religion, and politics. While he is convinced that philosophy cannot
coherently go on in its traditional manner (including that of analytical
philosophy), he still wants a philosophy that (in Wilfrid Sellar's
phrase) is the attempt to see "how things, in the broadest possible
sense of the term, hang together, in the broadest possible sense of the
term." Although many philosophers -
J.S. Mill, Spinoza, Plato,
Bertrand Russell - have been philosophers in this sense, many people
who are not in any technical sense philosophers - Fyodor Dostoyevsky,
Heinrich Heine, Thucydides, George Eliot - have also been philoso-
phers. Rorty construes philosophy as something that includes, but is
broader than, the Descartes-Kant epistemology-based conception of
philosophy. Nielsen considers Wittgenstein's Tractatus to be as
metaphysical as the works of Aristotle, Scotus, or Leibniz.2 Only with
Dewey and the later Wittgenstein, he believes, do we get a firm break
with
the
metaphysical
tradition.
Where
Wittgenstein
remained
ambivalent and alienated, Rorty is quite at honle in what he considers
a post-philosophical culture. But contrary to Rorty, Nielsen believes
that philosophical problems emerge naturally and repeatedly out ofthe
natural and social sciences, literature, art, and out of life itself Rorty's

528
Soft Logic
account undermines any confidence we might have in the powers of
conceptual analysis to resolve or dissolve "conceptual confusions"
emerging out ofthe sciences and everyday life. Philosophers frequently
suffer from
the self-deception that they have a mastery over
"conceptual questions" that others lack, and that this gives them a
certain expertise in the articulation and critique of culture. We should
renounce the idea that we have access to some super-concepts that are
the concepts of no particular historical epoch, and no particular
profession, position, or culture. All that the argumentative abilities of
a philosopher will enable him to do (that is, what is implicit in the
stylistic variety ofhis work) is what a sophist or a good lawyer is adept
at doing - namely to provide an argument for whatever our client has
decided to do, to make the chosen cause appear the better.3 We do not
know what it would be like, Rorty argues, to have a set of critical
concepts or categories that could in some nonarbitary way serve to
order and assess the validity ofvarious practices, language-games, and
forms oflife.
It is, therefore, not clear to Nielsen how, or even that, philosophy
helps us to understand ourselves. He argues that the Kantian distinc-
tion between the analytic and the syntethic implies that there is some
clear line of demarcation between philosophy and something else - a
line that a philosopher must not cross if he wants to do philosophy.
Professionalism with its drawing of boundary lines and its invocation
of sanctions against those who cross them, its conception of what is
central to ''the discipline" and what is marginal, is the inevitable
accompaniment of bureaucratization. Whether philosophy can in any
coherent way have an overseer role is what is at issue.4 McIntyre
argues that demarcating astronomy from astrology (thus, distinguish-
ing good science from bad science) is something philosophy cannot
do.5 Nielsen likewise believes that whereas physicists and chemists
know something fIrst-order,
philosophers of science, with their
second-order talk about the natural sciences, know something very
modest comparable to what grammarians know about how language
works. Logic, he believes, is a discipline of its own akin to
mathematics,
and there are the
logicians
(including
analytical
philosophers of science) and the lotus eaters, and nothing else in
between. When we give up the Cartesian "mental tum," we give up the
quest for certainty.6 Nielsen suspects that there may be an uncon-
scious nostalgia for the Absolute even among those philosophers who
have consciously given it up. Like Rorty, he holds that we are plagued

Philosophy's Future
529
by irrational religious hang-ups, but contrary to Rorty he thinks it
reasonable that reflective and intelligent human beings should want
some standards of rationality and adequacy to assess the conditions of
our social life. Rorty puts the very possibility of such a critical
narrative in doubt, believing that even science must cease to be inquiry
and become conversation.7 He insists that we cannot break out of the
web of language into some brute state of affairs, some fact that is
nonlinguistically specifiable for a sentence to correspond to. Rorty is
making the familiar point that scientists do not bring a naked eye to
nature,
and
that
the
propositions
of science
are
not
simple
transcriptions ofwhat is present to the senses.8 In saying that speech is
not representational, Rorty is making the point that any specification
of a referent is going to be in some vocabulary and thus one can only
compare two descriptions of a thing, rather than a description with the
thing itself There is no privileged standpoint that can just give us the
state ofaffairs as it is in itself
Put in the older epistemological idiom, the principal task of
philosophy is to ascertain how we can assess knowledge claims, i.e.
determine what genuine knowledge is. The rationale for this is evident
enough, for a sound epistemology would enable philosophy to set itself
up as an arbiter of culture. On that self-image, philosophy is to
determine when genuine knowledge claims in art, morality, religion,
the sciences (both natural and social) and politics are made and what
they are. According to this Cartesian-Kantian view, implicitly shared
by positivists with their claim of having a criterion of cognitive
significance, philosophy is "foundational" in respect to the rest of
culture because culture is the assemblage of claims to knowledge, and
philosophy adjudicates such claims.9 There is no way of providing an
indubitable foundation for knowledge, but there can be claims that do
not claim certainty. Instead, we take the various activities - not only in
science, but in art, morality, literature, law, politics, and religion - and
investigate what knowledge in these domains comes to and the styles
of reasoning involved in these practices. Contrary to Rorty, it seems
that this means that we can say what is and what is not knowledge,
and what it makes sense to say in a given context by representing what
has already been certified as knowledge or as being coherent in some
particular domain. 10 Nielsen insists that there is no epistemology that
is purely descriptive, for what we are describing is knowledge claims.
To display what mathematical knowledge claims and styles of
reasoning look like is to play a somewhat weaker variation of

530
Soft Logic
traditional epistemology.
To argue that epistemology cannot be
normative is to make the very reductionist and critical moves that
Rorty and Nielsen claim cannot be made. There is no radically
different way of playing the epistemological language-game or of
doing philosophy in a radically different manner. That there are fonns
of knowledge of which we are unaware of is certainly part of the
philosophical tradition Nielsen says he rejects. There can be no
coherent claim to knowledge in a particular domain if we a priori
reject that we can ever understand what knowledge is.
The
very
doing
of philosophy
became
problematic
with
Wittgenstein, but Wittgenstein plainly would have had no sympathy
with Nielsen's attempt to show how the whole of reality hangs
together. Wittgenstein stresses the plurality and diversity of language-
games, practices, and forms of life, and how they set the very
conditions of intelligibility. It is Nielsen who claims that, in spite of
their diversity, such language-games and practices hang together,
albeit loosely. At the same time, he maintains that our practices may
well make coherent sense without its being the case that we can have a
synthetic picture of how the whole of reality (as if we knew what that
means) fits together. Doubts, to be intelligible, need grounds, must be
specific, and presuppose the making of a language-game; whereas
doubt about a whole language-game, form of life, world-picture,
system of principles, or deeply embedded convictions is impossible,
according to Wittgenstein. The concept ofknowledge does not apply to
the propositions that stand fast come what may, that are bedrock in a
knowledge situation, background beliefs for the very possibility of our
being able to make knowledge claims at all. 11 This certainty is less in
our thought than in our practice ofjudging and acting; 12 these are not
esoteric beliefs but part ofour mundane commerce with the world. The
difficulty is to realize the groundlessness of our believing. 13 Nielsen
accepts the view that the system of framework beliefs is a kind of
"preknowledge" (Vorwissen) that we cannot state as a set of axioms or
be enumerated once and for all. In that respect, as in many others, our
language is not at all like a calculus. This Vorwissen, however, hangs
loosely together in something like a cluster, a network of interwoven
properties. Such a ''world-picture'' (We/tbild) is the common ground
we share with others in our culture; it comprises those deeply
enlbedded elements that make communication, understanding, action,
and a common life possible within a culture. OUf quest for justification
comes to an end, not in "self-evident" knowledge or necessary truths

Philosophy's Future
531
but in action. We must say in the end ''this is what we do," this is the
way we act and respond, and we cannot think, act, and respond
otherwise. And this practice is not a more or less arbitrary and doubt-
ful point of departure for all our arguments - rather it belongs to the
essence of what we call an argument. 14 If you are not certain of any
fact, you cannot be certain of the meaning of your words either. I5 We
cannot discuss the totality of our system of convictions or render a
unified perspicuous display ofits structure. But we can describe certain
parts of our "preknowledge," recognize how they are bits of the
bedrock of our system, and how they relate to each other. We have no
idea what the totality ofour background beliefs is, and thus we cannot
state this totality.16 At any given time we operate with some cluster of
groundless beliefs we accept and do not justify, and it is through the
certainties of my way of believing and understanding that I gain my
most fundamental understanding. 17
The system of bedrock convictions constituting our ''world-
picture" has no fixed boundaries, for the concept of knowing is
coupled with that of the language-game. 18 A language-game is a
distinctive doing of things with words, as when we negotiate or claim
to know or assent or question or pray or complain. Language-games
are no more rigidly ordered than is an ancient city, and our We/tbild-
the systenl of such convictions - is neither true nor false. 19 Resolving
disputes can only take place within a system and about considerations
internal to a framework, because a form of life is a loose system of
prinlitive convictions, and a language-embedded mode of action. We
would say of a person rejecting his own world-picture that he was
mentally deranged, though he is not in error. Wittgenstein maintains
that no argument or justification is in order here, though there can be
persuasion leading to conversion.20 Some things stand unshakably fast
not because they are intrinsically obvious or convincing but because of
what is around them. 21 We live and act and think within systems we
simply are socialized into, systems we passively imbibe and learn to
take on trust, and we do not know how to think outside that system. In
the interaction of this network some beliefs will come into conflict or
at least will not fit well together, and there will come to be anomalous
situations. Certain beliefs, including sometimes rather central beliefs,
will come to be questioned, but too much ofwhat we understand being
human, for example, is tied up with our having a head to make a
headless existence coherently thinkable. Skepticism here is senseless.22
Most of what we know or think we know of history and science rests

532
Soft Logic
largely on trust, and we have utterly firm primitive certainties that we
cannot but take on trust. Wittgenstein maintains that gaining that kind
of understanding, which would enable us to break with the tradition,
will give us no guidance at all. Nielsen, following Rorty, on the
contrary, believes that it will enable us to live and flourish without a
philosophical culture as traditionally conceived. In that way - taking
the fly out of the fly bottle - this understanding will help to emanci-
pate us from the tyranny of philosophical obsessions.23 Wittgenstein
denied that he articulated philosophical themes, but this is a posture, a
self-deception, for there are philosophical themes galore in his work.
Wittgenstein gives, however, no encouragement at all to the idea that
we may one day come to see things together as a whole, as Nielsen
demands. Somehow Nielsen believes that there is no logical connec-
tion between Wittgenstein's Lebensphilosophie - his attitudes towards
life, culture, and religion - and his characteristically philosophical
stances as set out in the Philosophical Investigations and On
Certainty.
Nielsen maintains that ifwe want to know what the basic features
of the world are, we should go to physics and its allied sciences.
Traditional philosophy, in his view, is essentially a quest for certainty,
which is unattainable; however he wants to retain philosophy as a
quest for meaning. It would certainly seem that those who are bored
with philosophy or treat it with irony are not its most competent
judges. The kind of fallibilisnl Nielsen defends is, when all is said and
done, an epistemological theory, well within the skeptical tradition.
Arguing that there are not and cannot be epistemological theories, he
is playing a traditional language-game. Like Putnam, Goodman, and
the pragmatists, Nielsen believes that justification is social and
heterogeneous. Justification consists in giving reasons in accordance
with certain norms embedded in social practices within historically
determinate communities. Yet, this may not be any more decidable
than what is basic or irrational. The traditional epistemologists'
penchant for fastening on rather brute conceptual knowledge obscures
its social nature and renders it prone to the solitary cognizer model.
Even if there is no God's eye view of knowledge available to us, this
does not make all knowledge claims ethnocentric, for coherence,
suitably understood, is not at all implausible as a test, or a partial test,
for truth. Nielsen, however, rejects coherence as a weaker form of
foundationalism. The underlying common-sense assumption ofrealism
is that there are truths about the world to be discovered in a

Philosophy's Future
533
verification process. Nielsen, on the other hand, insists that the
correspondence theory of truth is incoherent, for the world does not
consist of factlike entities of the sort that would correspond exactly to
properties and sentences. He makes the by now familiar claim that
objects and kinds do not exist independently of conceptual schemes.
He follows Putnam in claiming that we cut up the world into objects
when we introduce one or another scheme of description.24 There are
no self-identifying objects, rather it is we, conceptualizing in our
varying
ways,
who
sort
the
world
into
kinds.
Traditional
correspondence theories use the metaphor of mirroring, which Rorty
and Nielsen reject, taking it, however, literally. Yet the mirror
metaphor is only one possible version for characterizing knowledge as
fittingness, and there may be structural similarity, as Wittgenstein
suggests in the Tractatus or a weak kind of coherence. All Rorty and
Nielsen can do is chose one metaphor rather than another.
Thus, the sense in which clothes fit the body is said by Alvin
Goldnlan to correspond to the statement creating ability ofthe speaker.
At the same time, it captures the basic realist intuition that what
makes a statement true is the way the world is.25 Custom and sartorial
ingenuity decide what parts of the body to cover, what types of
garment should cover what parts, whether garments should be loose
fitting or snug, and the like. It is people with their interests,
preferences, and inventiveness who devise standards for proper
fittingness. Conventions determine the conditions of fittingnness for a
given type of garment, but it remains the case that whether any given
sentence, thought system, or proposition is true depends on something
extra-human, namely, the actual world itself.26 The conditions oftruth
are set by human convention and devising that, in many cases, answer
to various human interests. Nielsen argues against Goldman t4at since
there is no unique word-world relation that can be identified with
truth, the correspondence notion· of truth is untenable. Reference
relations are always indeterminate, and this, according to Putnam, has
key implications for truth.27 There is no determining what is the
correct reading independently of societal conventions or determinate
uses of terms in certain language-games built into the linguistic
practices of a given society. There is no truth to be had here that is
independent of conceptualizing things in accordance with some
conceptual framework. But there is nothing in the world that forces us
to accept that or any other conceptual framework; there are no
conceptual considerations of a pragmatic sort that may reasonably

534
Soft Logic
induce us to accept one framework rather than another. People and
particularly different peoples, have various visions and versions of the
world. To some extent, at least, it is a matter of consent how we
individuate and count objects.
Davidson has denied that it makes sense to speak of alternative
realities, each with its own truth untranslatable into another way of
thinking.28 We come to comprehend the language of others, including
people from very different cultures with very different languages, in
basically the same way we come to understand our own language,
namely, by systematically grasping the truth
conditions of the
sentences in the languages in question. If I am a field linguist and I
profess to understand the language of another society, in gaining such
an understanding, I match its sentences with our own truth conditions.
Davidson concludes that we cannot attribute a wholly alien scheme of
thought to an articulate people. He argues that all of our beliefs cannot
be false together, and that if we understand what belief is, we will
come to appreciate that most of our beliefs are true, and that it is
impossible that anyone could be mostly wrong about how things are.
C. B. Martin29 claims, however, that the skeptic is neither refuted nor
do we have any proof that his concerns can be legitimately set aside.
Everything here depends on the power of Davidson's a priori
argument to show that the majority of our beliefs must be true. While
Davidson calls our attention to a number of natural and reasonable
enough assumptions, he does not give us a sound a priori proof or
demonstration that they must be SOo Consequently, he does not with his
transcendental argument refute global skepticism or even properly set
it aside. Davidson, in Martin's view, in typical philosophical fashion
(the rationalist in us dies hard) tries to refute global skepticism and
predictably fails. But Nielsen believes that if we communicate, and
communicate across cultures, then it must be the case that most of our
beliefs are true. It is more reasonable to believe that the skeptic's
argument has gone wrong somewhere than to believe that there is no
communication across cultures, and that field linguists and anthro-
pologists always fail in constructfug translation manuals.
As different as people are in various culturally specific ways, it is
perfectly obvious (Michel Foucault to the contrary, notwithstanding)
that there is at a certain level of abstraction a common human nature.
All people have heliefs and desires and a language they use; moreover
some of these beliefs and desires are very much alike, and the
languages we use all find ways of expressing them. Given all this, we

Philosophy's Future
535
are perfectly justified in attributing to people in other tribes a massive
number of mundane beliefs and concerns that run together with ours.
We could not even identify an alien scheme of thought as an alien
language if all or even the great mass of the utterances were
"translated" in ways that made no sense to us or did not run together
with a considerable portion of our common-sense beliefs. To have an
understanding of different cultures, we must have such background
beliefs, and they must be reasonably extensive. But it remains
impossible for Nielsen to demonstrate that there are no untranslatable
languages, nor can he really know that philosophy has no future. He
believes that what makes us go wrong here is the deeply embedded
basically Kantian conception that has its hold on both Goldman and
Putnam as well as on Goodman - namely, what Davidson calls the
dogma of scheme and reality.30 This picture, Davidson thinks, is
incoherent, as if there are various human schemes for perspicuously
displaying this reality by categorizing it in different ways. But in the
wide-ranging Kantian picture of scheme and content, there is no
possibility of standing outside one or another of these conceptual
schemes, and identifying the reality we are talking about. The kind of
objectivity we achieve is not of a foundationalist sort, but a way of
seeing how the sentences of a natural language hang together as part
of a web of belief: and where truth conditions are in a parallel way
mutually dependent. When another language of an alien belief system
is in question, we have good reason to say that we have correctly
interpreted it when we have got the sentences, devices, and feelings
into a coherent set.
Justification is clearly something that admits of degrees. The
problem is that Nielsen denies that truth is coherence or is what is
maximally coherent. He could very well take ''truth'' as primitive, as
Derrida does, were it not for his conviction that we need not try to
state or search for any set of foundational beliefs or basic propositions
that must be true in a correspondence sense (weak or otherwise).31
Nielsen renlains skeptical of Davidson's grand holism, given the
multiplicity and complexity of social practices and that of related
language-games, and the seemingly different styles of reasoning that
go with them. But by the same token, Nielsen cannot a priori know
that epistemology is not a viable enterprise either, or that there is no
point in engaging in metaphysical inquiry, for that is precisely what he
is doing himself, when all is said and done. His own supposedly
holistic and empirically grounded account ofknowledge is well within

536
Soft Logic
the philosophical tradition going back to Locke, on the one hand, and
to Montaigne and the ancient skeptics on the other.
Whether
epistemology based philosophy has a future is not something he can a
priori know or decide, since it is made up of precisely the kind of
metahistorical statements he supposedly rejects. To fmd out system-
atically how things hang together is what the historical tradition has
been concerned with all along; the idea being that this will give us the
kind of certainty of which we are capable. The trouble is that Rorty
and Nielsen ignore the historical impact of the philosophical tradition
in Western civilization, in science, the arts, morality, and politics.
Indeed that philosophy has no future was already argued against
Socrates and has been a major philosophical theme in the twentieth
century. Nietzsche believed that philosophy had come to an end, and
so did the early Wittgenstein and Carnap, yet there has been no letup
in either the quantity or the quality of philosophizing. To predict that
philosophy (or even theology) has no future is to take precisely that
God's eye view of the possibility of human knowledge that Rorty and
Nielsen supposedly reject.
Being skeptical of the philosophical
tradition, they nevertheless remain part of it. To claim that all truth is
historical is to do metaphysics, and is not, in the end, more coherent
than other "realist" statements. Nielsen cannot help being what he
calls "ontologically serious," and neither is he, of course, willing to
stop doing philosophy or tum to other things.
Nielsen somehow believes that there is progress in intellectual
history because human intellectual resources have expanded and
developed in the course of time. At the same time he denies, however,
that philosophy has progressed32 because, in his opinion, "philosophy"
does not nanle a na~ral kind - it has denoted various things in the
course of its history. In the earlier periods philosophy was not clearly
distinct from other activities, including science, whereas in the modern
era, in the West, philosophy became an epistemologically based
activity, claiming a disciplinary matrix that would make it cultural
overseer or adjucator. Nielsen insists that we do not have anything that
counts as a distinctly philosophical knowledge. All justification, it is
necessary to recognize, is context-bound and inescapably involves
reference to existent social practices.
Since such
practices not
infrequently conflict, Nielsen denies that philosophy, even properly
reconstructed, can playa critical or constructive role. In this manner,
Dewey's instrumentalism conflicts sharply with Rorty's and Nielsen's
aesthetic pragmatism. But against Rorty, Nielsen argues that even if

Philosophy's Future
537
one rejects foundationalism, and "timeless" questions and answers,
there can be sound historically determinate arguments for resolving at
least some of these questions. Like Rorty, Nielsen is convinced that
epistemologically based speculation has no future, while advocating at
the same time a philosophy focusing on how things hang together in a
theoretic and systematic, that is, timeless fashion. He fails to explain
how a piecemeal solving of problems is going to give us anything like
a comprehensive vision.
Without a fmn distinction between theory and ideology, we have
no basis for the hope ofmaking rational criticism of our social institu-
tions. While there are no context-independent criteria of rationality
and validity, we are nevertheless able, Rorty maintains, to solve such
problems even thought our criteria of rationality and validity are only
implicit and determined by our diverse language-games. It would be
better, Rorty tells us, to be frankly ethnocentric here. To establish that
our social practices ofjustification are more than just local has been
philosophy's traditional interest in reason. What we should avoid,
Rorty follows Lyotard in claiming, are metanarratives, i.e. narratives
that describe and predict such activities as the noumenal self or the
Absolute Spirit or the Proletariat.33 They are bits of ideological
mythmaking that distort our knowledge of ourselves and the societies
in which we live. There is no supercommunity such as humanity itself
with whom we can identify.34 But in arguments against nuclear war or
for preserving the global environment such overriding nonethnocentric
considerations would seem to play a crucial role. Like Hume and
Burke before him, Rorty takes humanity to be a biological rather than
a moral entity; ''there is," he claims, "no human dignity that is not
derivable from the dignity of some specific community."35 Liberal
society, under the influence ofthe Kantians, has tried to ground liberal
institutions on something more than mere solidarity. But that is a
myth, for one cannot give an account of "rationality" or "morality" in
transcendental and ahistorical terms.36 At the same time, however,
Rorty realizes that relativism is self-refuting, Le. that he cannot simply
accept the notion that every community is as good as any other. He
believes that solidarity with one's tribe is a sufficient (and indeed the
only) basis for solidarity. But sticking with that solidarity will bring
the liberal into conflict with the Afrikaner, though it will give him no
rational basis for criticizing the Afrikaner. What made liberalism
attractive in the first place is that it seemed to .have a place for
humanistic values that could take one beyond ethnocentrism and

538
Soft Logic
tribalism. Rorty's democratic liberalism, by contrast, rests on an
accident of cultural history. These views, Rorty is in effect saying, just
happen to be the views that got socialized into him as he grew up in
North America rather than the significantly different circumstances of
Saudi Arabia, Nazi Germany, or the Orange Free State.
From a reading ofPhilosophy and the Mirror ofNature it is easy
to get the impression that Rorty is telling us we should go from
epistemology to hermeneutics, from systematic philosophy to edifying
philosophy, giving us a new kind of philosophical theory. Edifying
philosophy, with its hermeneutical tum, sees philosophy not as a
rational inquiry but as conversation that can be civilized, illuminating,
intelligent, revealing, exciting.37 We move from a scientific style to
something like a literary style, and philosophy is no longer to be
viewed as an inquiry into truth or an attempted discovery of
foundations. Yet, considerations oftruth do not simply drop out; rather
they enter, along with many other elements, into the conversation.
Bernstein believes that Dewe/8 sees deeper and further than does
Rorty or Wittgenstein as to what a reconstructed philosophy would
look like. These issues·cannot be resolved by appealing to existing
social practices, for the heart of the controversy is the conflict of
competing social practices.39 Nielsen likewise appeals to a kind of
phronesis, a type of practical reasoning that doesn't appeal to cultural
foundations, eternal standards, or algorithms. The rationality available
to us within this contextual fallibilism is always a form of persuasion
that can never attain a defmite ahistorical closure. Rorty rejects not
only talk about conceptual foundations but also talk about method-
ology: methodological issues, however, remain all the same part of his
argument. In reacting against scientism, Rorty, like Wittgenstein, is
too ready to view science as just one language-game among others. He
generalizes Kuhn's
incomnlensurability thesis
to
apply
beyond
different scientific paradigms or disciplinary matrices to different
political and economic arrangements, aesthetic stances, conceptions of
philosophy, and religious world views. Levi rightly points out,
however, that in no case are we just struck with incommensurabilites.
Against Feyerabend, Levi argues that it is silly to give a serious
hearing to every fool proposal that comes along.40
Nielsen concludes that it is plainly not the case in predicting
what will lead to progress that anything goes, but he admits that he is
unable to explain why this is so. One plausible explanation might well
be that he ignores the epistemological role coherence plays, i.e. the

Philosophy's Future
539
notion of conceptual relevance41 or of"soft" logic in determining what
renders a context relevant. In attempting to solve real life problems of
people (when language is not idling), and when faced with seemingly
intractable conflict, we only need to keep reasoned argument alive and
not block inquiry to be able to move to a point of view neutral to the
issues under scrutiny. We do not have to be able to move to a point of
view neutral for all controversies,42 and we need not therefore assume
that there are situations in which our intellects cannot give us
guidance and discussions must tum irrational. Nielsen's rejection of
the decision metaphor in favor of a pragmatic one begs the question of
rationality, since the choice ofmodel largely decides what "inquiry" is.
If we are thorough antifoundationalist coherentists, we will not
postulate incommensurable conceptual frameworks, or assume a sharp
distinction between issues concerning conceptual frameworks. That
seems to go with the rejection of a sharp, nonrelativized distinction
between analytic and synthetic propositions. Following Kuhn, Rorty
argues that controversies in the sciences do not differ in kind from
controversies in politics and morals. When we look at various belief
systems in different cultures and historical epochs, we are not
confronted with unorganizable, distant world views. Morals, the arts,
politics, and science may well be different life-forms with different
ends and distinct rationalities, but they are all in important respects
goal-oriented and, because of this, they share common norms of
rational inquiry, and thus are not incommensurable. We may not be
able to rely without supplementation on these general standards of
rationality and scientific method for resolving all, or even most, of our
problems. But in spite of his antifoundationalism, Nielsen admits that
an underlying, commonly required method with common standards of
rationality undercuts incommensurability claims and extreme forms of
relativism.43
Rorty argues that he no more appeals to standards of objectivity
and rationality than novelists appeal to standards of good novel
writing, or that Newton appeals to standards of scientific inquiry.
Typically a new history or a new theory or a new novel succeeds by
striking its readers as 'just what is needed." The opposition between
rational argument and irrational persuasion is too coarse to describe
what happens in intellectual history.44 Against Rorty, Nielsen argues
that sometimes the practices correct the standards, and sometimes the
standards are used to correct the practices. We shuttle back and forth
until we gain what for a time is an equilibrium. Recent developments

540
Soft Logic
in the philosophy ofscience, Rorty contends, show that we cannot hold
theory and evidence apart in the relatively sharp way that E. G. Nagel
requires.45 There is no theory-independent objective given that we just
take the evidence to confirm or disconfirm competing theories. Rather,
Rorty argues, we should take pragmatism in Quine's way, as a holistic
and syncretic theory. We must come to realize that appealing to the
evidence is not a very useful notion when trying to decide what one
thinks of the world as a whole.46 We need instead, and in all kinds of
different ways, to make adjustments from time to time in our intricate
web of belief Nielsen likewise argues that this nostalgia for the
Absolute, this begging for some ultimate final context in which our
deepest hopes will be met and our perplexity resolved is something
pragmatists have long since overcome. But he believes that eve'll with
the demise ofthe tradition, philosophy as social critique would still be
much to the point in setting out answers to such problems. Nielsen
concludes that Rorty's "Pragmatism Without Method" fails to see that
there is all the same in science a loose family of networks that
constrain and help defme scientific activity, and distinguish it from
uncontrolled speculation and various a priori and intuitive nlethods.
Rorty ignores the natural role scientific method (construed broadly)
plays in our understanding of the world, and tends to treat science as
just one language-game among others. There is indeed no such thing
as nature's own language or a particular privileged vocabulary in
which the world demands to be described. Rorty seems to assume that
there is no progress in science and this is very counterintuitive; his
"pragmatism without method" heuristically enmeshes us in a web of
words from which Nielsen is unable to extricate us. Nielsen's problem
is that he cannot carry out an effective critique of ideology on his own
terms.
Notes
1 Kai Nielsen, After the Demise ofthe Tradition, Rorty, Critical Theory
and the Fate of Philosophy, Boulder, CO, San Francisco, CA, Oxford:
Westview Press, 1991, p. 4.
2 Ibid., p. 9.
3 Richard Rorty, The Consequences of Pragmatism, Minneapolis, MN:
University ofMinnesota Press, 1982, p. 222.
4 Nielsen, After the Demise ofthe Tradition, p. 36.

Philosophy's Future
541
5 Alasdair MacIntrye, "Philosophy and Its History," Analyse & Kritik I
no. 1 (October 1982), p. 108.
6 Nielsen, After the Demise ofthe Tradition, p. 42.
7 Jaegwon Kim, "Rortyand the Possibility of Philosophy," Journal of
Philosophy, lxxvii no. 10 (October 1980), p. 579.
8 Rorty, The Consequence ofPragmatism, p. 142.
9 Richard Rorty, Philosophy and the Mirror ofNature, Princeton, NJ: L
Princeton University Press, 1979, p. 45.
10 Nielsen, After the Demise ofthe Tradition, p. 53.
11 Ibid., p. 95.
12 L. Wittgenstein, On Certainty, Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1969, pp. 24,
33.
13 Ibid., #209, #262.
14 Wittgenstein, On Certainty, p. 105.
15 Ibid., p. 17.
16 Nielsen, After the Demise ofthe Tradition, p. 100.
17 Ibid., p. 101.
18 Wittgenstein, On Certainty, #560.
19 Ibid., p. 205.
20 Ibid., p. 471.
21 Ibid., p. 144.
22 Nielsen, After the Demise ofthe Tradition, p. 110.
23 Ibid., p. 114.
24 H. Putnam, Reason, Truth and History, New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press, 1981, p. 152.
25 Alvin Goldman, Epistemology and Cognition,
Canlbridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1986, p. 152.
26 Ibid., p. 153.
27 Nielsen, After the Demise ofthe Tradition, p. 78.
28 Donald Davidson, Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation, Oxford:
Claredon, 1984, pp. 183-241.
29 C. B. Martin, "The New Cartesianism," Pacific Philosophical
Quarterly, 65 (1984), pp. 236-58.
30 Davidson, Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation, pp. 193-98.
31 Nielsen, After the Demise ofthe Tradition, p. 88.
32 Ibid., p. 125.
33 Rorty, "Postmodemist Bourgeois Liberalism," Journal ofPhilosophy,
lxxx n 10, (October 1983), pp. 585, 587.
34 Nielsen, After the Demise ofthe Tradition, p. 150.
35 Rorty, "Postmodemist Bourgeois Liberalism," p. 583.
36 Nielsen, After the Demise ofthe Tradition, p. 151.

542
Soft Logic
37 Richard Bernstein, "Philosophy and the Conversation of Mankind,"
Review ofMetaphysics, xxxiii n 4 (1980), p. 765.
38 J. Dewey, Reconstruction in Philosophy, Boston, MA: Beacon Press,
1957.
39 Bernstein, "Philosophy and the Conversation ofMankind," p. 771.
40 Isaac Levi, "Escape from Boredom: Edification according to Rorty,"
Canadian Journal ofPhilosophy xi n 4 (1981), p. 591.
41 Joseph Griinfeld, Conceptual Relevance, Amsterdam: B.R. Griiner
Publishing Co., 1989.
42 Levi, "Escape from Boredom," p. 591.
43 Nielsen, After the Demise ofthe Tradition, p. 175.
44 Rorty, "A Reply to Six Critics," Analyse & Kritik, 6 n 1 (1984), p. 86.
45 Ernest Nagel,
Teleology Revisited,
New York, NY: Columbia
University Press, 1979, pp. 2948.
46 Rorty, Pragmatism Without Method, pp. 262-3.

INDEX
abstract
2, 4-7, 20, 24, 36, 44,
46, 56, 74, 120, 133, 173-
74,177,180,188,205,226,
227, 267, 282-83, 300, 306,
320, 348, 359, 366, 380,
399, 405, 412, 424, 438,
451, 453, 461, 471, 479,
488,490,497-98, 513, 519,
534
Achilles 140
Adorno, T. 316,321,322, 328n,
399-400,
401,
403,
404,
409n, 411
aesthetic ix, x, xii, xv, xviii, xix,
xx, 3, 40, 87-88, 93, 149,
158, 175, 181, 193, 194,
197, 212, 215, 291, 292,
296,
298-302,
305-307,
309-311,
318,
322,
327,
333, 335, 336, 337, 340,
344-51, 355-60, 363, 364,
366, 369, 371-73, 375, 379-
382, 388-93, 399-400, 402-
403, 405, 408, 411, 415-16,
418, 420, 421, 424-25, 431-
34, 438, 439, 442-43, 445,
447-52, 455, 457, 460, 463-
64, 467, 472-74, 479, 481,
488-92, 497, 513, 524, 536,
538
Alexander the Great 482
ambiguity
xviii, 102, 376, 442,
464,510,516,521
Amsterdamski, S. xiii, 51-55, 57,
60-63, 64n, 65n
analogy x, xii, xvi, 1-3, 5, 8, 43,
121, 125, 135, 136, 140,
157, 175,
180, 181, 201,
203,
205-207,
211,
254,
266-68, 273, 346, 348, 376,
444
analysis xiv, 2, 4, 6, 17, 29, 41,
69, 83, 92, 101-102, 116,
117, 152, 208, 211, 219-22,
224, 238, 240, 242-45, 253,
257-60, 267, 272-73, 275-
7~ 280, 283, 292, 306-30~
310-11, 316, 318, 321, 327,
334, 346, 368, 382, 388-89,
439, 449, 459, 467, 481,
483, 495, 504, 522, 527-28,
539
Apter, M. 182n
Archimedes 107
Aristotle
ix, xi, xvii, xviii, 13,
14, 17-18, 21, 31-32, 72,
99,174,194,201,212,259,
262, 263, 265-66, 273, 291,
296, 298, 318, 326, 327,
346, 359-60, 482, 489, 506,
508, 518, 527
Arnold, M. 417
art ix, x, xi, xiv, xviii, xix, xx, 3,
15, 39, 40, 42, 44, 70, 73,
77, 82, 87-88, 92, 100, 106,
131, 136-39, 141-42, 144,
147, 149, 151, 156-58, 164,
165, 168,175-77, 178, 181,
193-94, 202, 211-12, 214-
16, 246-47,
265,
291-97,
299-301,
305,
307,
309-
312,315-17,322,325,328,
331-333, 336, 344-45, 347-
51, 355-60, 366-69, 373-76,
379-82,
388-96,
399-408,
411-26,
429-35,
437-45,
447-64,
467-76,
479-84,
487-93, 495-97, 508-9, 527,
529,539,
Artaud,A.335,342n

544
Soft Logic
Ashmore, M.
xvi, 235, 237-245,
247, 247n, 248n, 249n
astronomy
36, 41, 43, 47, 53,
443,528
Augustine, 8t 181, 183n
Ayer, A. J. 317-18
background
79, 92, 114, 125,
135, 148-49, 161, 167-68,
176,
193,
198,
205-206,
245, 273, 276, 282, 289,
374, 394, 413, 416, 422,
432, 439-40, 472, 492, 530,
531,535
Bacon, F. 55, 63, 147, 181, 497,
512
Barth, 1. 249n
Barthes, R. 346, 352n, 416, 427n
Baudelaire, C. 513
Baudrillard, J.
337-39, 343n,
350,352n,407,408,409n
Beardsley, M. 229, 233n, 469
beauty
15, 40, 302, 442, 448,
467-68, 473, 492
Beckett, 8. 400,406
Beethoven, L. V. 407
behavior
7-8, 15, 21, 30, 32-35,
39, 42-44, 47, 92, 121-24,
127-28, 135, 153-55, 282,
289, 315, 323, 360, 366,
429, 432-33, 441, 506, 510,
521
being
68-69, 71, 82, 103-104,
114, 133, 137, 147, 153,
196, 269, 273-75, 293-96,
300, 357, 447, 463, 488,
518,520
belief xiv, 24, 80, 104, 105, 108,
109, 119, 124-25, 127, 147-
48, 151-53, 155, 157, 161,
166-69, 174, 177, 203-204,
207-208, 211, 220-22, 230-
31, 237-38, 241, 244, 247,
260, 279, 284, 291, 301,
306, 311, 315, 318-19, 323-
24, 326, 357, 363-66, 371-
72,374,376,379,381,382,
411,417-19,422,424,441-
42,449,452,457,459,463,
469,373, 475, 479, 487-88,
490, 503-506, 511-13, 518,
524, 529, 530, 531, 532,
534-36,540
Bellarmino, R. 139
Bender,J. VV.441,445n
Benjamin, VV.
335, 348, 352n,
404,407,411
Bentham, J. 364
Berger, P. 248n
Bergson, H. 447
Berkeley, G. 449
Berleant, A. xxi, 447-49, 451-52,
455, 459, 463, 464n, 465n,
466n
Bernasconi, R. 80, 85n, 360
Bernstein, R.
106, 108, lIOn,
538,542n
Best, D. xix, 429-435, 435n
biology
xii, xix, 32-34, 39, 41-
43, 47, 57, 59, 63-64, 105,
116, 154-55, 207, 296-97,
319, 326, 365, 379, 380,
382, 415, 418-19, 443, 439,
473,506,537
bivalence 13-21
Black, M. 26n, 179n 203n 208n,
213n 216n
Blisek, VV. L. 396, 397n
Bloom, H. 207n
Bohm, D. 300, 303n, 304n
Bohr, N. 150, 300
Bollnow, O. F. 456, 465n
Boltzmann, L. 139
Bonnard, P. 489
Boyle, R. 53
brain xiii, 9, 14, 16, 23, 25, 29,
46,64
Braque, G. 345
Brecht, B. 405-406
Brentano, F. 125, 469

Brinker, M. 470-71, 476n
Brooks, D. 364, 369n
Bruns, G. L. 342n
Budd, M. 368, 342n
Buddha 13,17,417
Burali-Forti, C. 126
BUrger, P. 400, 403, 409n
Burke, E. 371, 497, 537
Butterfield, H. 249n
Cage, J. 406
Cahoone, L. E.
xvii, 315-327,
328n, 329n
Campell, J. 412, 426n
Cantor, G. xii, 35, 36, 126
Cantor, P. 182n
Caputo, J. 81, 85n, 275, 284n
Carnap, R.
63, 196, 279, 484,
536
Carr, D. 285n
Cassirer, E. 104
category 39, 70, 92, 96-97, 120,
161-63, 168, 174, 177, 189,
191-92, 194, 198, 203, 212,
221-22, 284, 293, 298, 306,
317, 319, 321, 327, 337,
340, 346, 348, 394, 401,
415, 423, 434, 439, 469,
505, 518-19, 528
causality
16, 24, 43, 46, 105,
125, 222, 295, 298, 321,
365,423,473,523
Cervantes, M. 237
Cezanne,P.400,489
Chandrasekhar, S. 370n
chaos 29-48
Chomsky, N. 59, 114, 118n, 122,
196
Cicero 181, 183n
Clark, S. 365, 370n
Cohen, T. 374, 376n, 396, 397n
coherence xiv, xv, xxi, 9, 18, 32,
75, 77-79, 100, 123, 140,
150-53, 156, 168, 187-89,
190, 193, 195, 197-98, 206,
Index
545
213, 215, 221, 231, 241,
256, 257-59, 268, 316, 331,
338, 374, 429, 430, 433,
434, 442, 450, 469, 490,
521, 527, 528, 529-30, 532-
33, 535-36, 538-39
Coleridge, S. T. 291, 463
Collingwood, R. G. 388
Collins, H. 248n
common sense
2, 16, 21-23, 36,
56, 61, 126, 139, 167, 230,
242, 246, 253, 260, 262,
265, 276, 320, 350, 375,
442, 453, 476, 510, 532,
535
communication
53, 79, 123-25,
196, 261, 272, 280, 297,
316, 326, 339, 350, 366,
372, 373, 407, 415-16, 448,
462, 506, 517, 518, 522,
523,530,534
complexity
5-6, 18, 21, 23-24,
30, 32-33, 36, 41, 43-48,
92, 102, 104, 127, 132-33,
135, 137-38, 143, 154-55,
165-66, 180, 220, 226, 235,
259, 274, 283, 322, 337,
338, 358, 380, 388-89, 396,
406, 414, 422, 443, 468,
475, 482, 497, 504, 516,
519,535
computer xii, xv, 1-5, 8-9, 13-15,
17, 20-22, 24, 30-31, 40,
43-45, 113, 197
Comte, A. 418
concept xv, xviii, xxi, 20, 24, 45,
54-55, 58, 67, 71-72, 75,
76, 82, 87, 92,
101-103,
106, 108, 113, 116-17, 133-
36, 139-40, 149, 152, 154,
158, 161-61, 164, 166-67,
176, 185-191, 193-95, 197-
98, 201...204, 206-207, 212-
13, 222-23, 225, 237, 251-
52, 254-57,
259,
261-63,

546
Soft Logic
265-66,
268-69,
2171-74,
276, 289-91, 294-96, 298-
99, 301, 305-307, 31617,
319, 321-22, 327, 333, 339-
40, 346-47,
349, 356-57,
368, 372-73, 375, 387, 389-
92, 395, 401, 403-404, 408,
414, 416-17, 420, 429-35,
440-41, 447-48, 453, 457,
467, 469, 471, 473, 482,
487, 490-92, 495, 503, 509,
516-19, 521, 523, 528, 530-
33, 538-39
Conley, T. 266, 27011
consiousness 6,8, 114-115, 117,
205, 275, 282, 290-91, 318,
323, 331, 358-59, 367, 379,
404-406,
413,
422,
437,
452, 456-57, 461, 463, 467,
479-80, 497-98, 511, 520,
524
consistency
8, 117, 215, 302,
322,390
content
5-6, 9, 77-78, 83, 101,
115,122,127,135,175-76,
179-80, 205-207, 251, 280,
282, 318, 320, 336, 350,
367, 401-402, 405, 411-13,
415, 435, 437, 441, 468,
481,511, 535
context
x, 5, 78-79, 88, 96-98,
100,
104,
108,
114-115,
117, 123, 128, 135, 143,
158, 166-68, 173, 175, 177,
192,
195,
197,
202-206,
208, 211 ..23,215, 224, 241,
243, 245, 259, 260, 262,
267, 268, 274, 276, 277,
278, 282, 293, 300, 314,
319, 321, 323-24, 326, 332,
341, 346..48, 376, 380, 382,
392, 394, 407, 415..16, 422-
23,433,437,440,460,469,
471-72, 481, 489, 506, 521-
22,529,536-37,539,540
contradiction 13, 15, 20
convention
21, 222, 268, 278,
282,421
conversation 74, 77..78
Copernicus, N. 53, 58, 116, 150,
302
creative
2-3, 5, 8, 151, 176-78,
181, 202, 206, 211-16, 230,
246, 311, 316, 332, 344,
381, 392, 393, 394, 396,
416,417,432-33,438,489
criterion 61, 62, 92, 96, 106-107,
124, 132, 140, 156, 174,
202, 227, 238, 245, 258,
259, 260, 298, 300, 305,
371, 373, 391, 392, 403,
407, 419, 421,430, 432-34,
438, 442-43, 482, 489, 491,
503,504,508,511,529
criticism
62, 88, 96, 100, 103,
108-109,
119,
121,
147,
150, 155, 211, 214, 219,
225-28, 230-32, 237, 238,
240, 241, 251-54, 257-59,
260, 262-63, 265, 273, 278-
80, 291-92,
307,
315-16,
319-20 324, 327, 332, 337-
38, 345-348, 351, 366, 375,
379, 389, 394, 399, 402-
405,411-414,417-18,425,
432, 443-44, 448, 457-59,
474, 480, 487, 496-97, 503,
508-509, 520, 528-30, 537,
540
Croce,B.388,415
Crosman, R. 233n
Culler, J. 231, 233n
culture
xiii, xix, xx, 4, 13, 15,
24, 40, 51, 54-55, 57-59,
63-64,72, 74, 96, 103, 105,
107, 109, 116, 123-25, 127,
131-32,
134-37,
141-43,
185-96, 198, 213, 215, 220,
236, 243, 255-57, 259, 268,
277, 280-82, 290-92, 296,

299, 301, 306, 316-17, 321-
28, 332-33, 337, 339, 343,
345, 348-50, 356, 364, 371,
380, 382, 387, 393-96, 401-
402, 407, 411, 413-16, 418-
24, 430-33, 437,
447~49,
451-52, 456-57, 449, 461,
464, 468, 469-72, 475, 480,
482, 488, 495, 497, 503-
506, 513, 538, 529, 530,
532,534-36,538-39
Dada 144,301,381
Dallnlayr, F. 69, 70, 84n
Dalton,1. 150
Danto, A. xx, 392-94, 397n, 408,
409n, 479, 482-84, 484n,
485n, 487-493, 493n
Darwin, C.
ix, 43, 116, 138-39,
142, 296, 297, 302, 415,
417-18, 482, 507
data
24-25, 32, 34-35, 45, 120,
123, 134, 149-50, 301, 443,
471,473
Davidson, D.
204, 208n, 471,
504, 506, 509, 512, 514n,
534,535, 541n
Dean, J. 248n
deconstruction
xvi, 67, 69-73,
76-77,
79-82,
105,
108,
117, 166, 219-32, 235, 237,
238, 243-44, 247, 251-63,
267, 269, 271-284, 295-96,
316, 335-36, 347-48, 406-
407,454,464,520-21
Deleuze, G. 289, 295, 303n, 334
Democritus 204
Derrida, J.
x, xiii, xvi, xvii, 67-
83, 83n, 84n, 105, 107-108,
141,
220-25,
228,
232n,
233n, 238-39, 246, 249n,
251-63,
246n,
265-70,
270n, 271-75, 277-81, 283-
84, 284n, 285n, 289, 295,
300, 303n, 305, 309-311,
Index
547
313n, 333, 336, 342n, 346-
47, 348, 352n, 484, 510,
515, 520-24, 535
Descartes, R. xi, 53, 55, 63, 89,
96..98, 100, 106-107, 116,
122, 260, 282, 289, 299-
300,
307-308,
317-318,
320, 324, 327, 452-53, 508,
519, 527-28
Descombes, V. 284, 286n
Dewey, 1.
415, 447, 505, 527,
536,538
dialectics
68, 77, 83, 98, 101,
246, 263, 294, 316, 335,
400-401,
403-406,
417,
426,497,522
Dickie, G. 393-96, 397n
Dionysus 293,295,483,494
Discourse
xvi, xviii, 69, 72-73,
76, 80, 82, 96, 105, 107,
115-16, 125, 134, 141, 173,
203-204, 206, 211, 223-24,
232, 237, 240, 242-44, 246,
252, 255-56, 260-63, 266,
268, 271, 273-76, 279-82,
289, 292, 302, 305, 309,
311-12, 331-32, 334, 340,
346, 347-48, 408, 422, 429,
434, 471-72, 474,484, 507,
513, 518, 523
Dostoyevski, F. 527
dream 2, 3, 6, 90, 10, 116, 255,
275, 278, 308, 310, 324,
334, 344,
358~406, 450,
462-64, 510, 524
Dretske, F. 205, 207, 209n
Duchamp, M.
387, 395, 408,
480,487
Dufrenne, M. 464n
Duhem, P. 60, 65n, 236, 473
Dupre, L. 11n
economics
30, 34-35, 47, 295,
315, 318-19, 321-22, 325,

548
Soft Logic
327,
339-400,
482,
497,
504, 538
Einstein, A. ix, 44, 64, 139, 150,
297-300, 302, 303n, 455
Eisenstein, G. 83, 85n, 453
Eisenstein, S. 346
Elgin, C. Z.
xv, 161-67, 169,
169n, 170n, 439, 445n
Eliot, G. 527
Eliot, T. S. 309, 369, 373
Ellis, J. M.
219, 220, 224, 225,
226, 229, 230, 231, 232n,
233n
empirical
xiv, 5, 55-56, 59-60,
62,105,119-128, 141, 152,
175, 194-95, 197, 201-202,
236, 238, 240, 278, 298,
301, 307, 318, 324-25, 327,
371, 437-38, 440, 447-48,
462-63,519,531,535
epistemology
xiii, xiii, xxi, 51,
52, 55-56, 59, 73, 96, 104,
105,
107-108,
120,
136,
148, 154, 156-57, 161-69,
207, 214, 236, 238, 242,
244-45, 262-63, 282, 299,
300, 317, 324, 325, 335,
347, 367, 403, 408, 424,
439, 440, 443, 463, 471,
472, 503, 515, 524, 529,
530,532,535,536-38
ethics 25, 253, 291-92, 298, 316,
318,420,467,523
Euclid
36-37, 39, 44, 276, 453-
55, 515
Evans-Prtchard, E. E. 152
event 9, 16, 24, 25, 31, 77, 90,
102-103,
105,
135,
140,
141, 151, 155, 176, 213,
242, 245, 262, 283, 295,
326, 334, 335,m 366, 373,
406, 413, 448, 450, 454,
457-58,461,481,488
evolution 30, 39, 43, 48, 57, 155,
192, 290, 296, 299, 264,
417-19,443,451,498
experience 7, 16, 32, 40, 55-56,
72, 87, 91-93, 96, 100, 103,
106, 108, 114, 122, 136,
139,143,161, 179, 185-91,
193-94, 196-99, 204, 207,
215, 227, 243, 251, 272,
275, 283, 295, 297, 298,
305, 306, 307, 323, 326,
346, 349, 358, 360, 363-64,
372-75, 380-81, 389, 411,
413-16, 425, 430, 433, 435,
437, 438, 445, 447-48, 450,
452-64, 467-68, 476, 488,
515-16
experiment
55, 62, 121, 127,
138, 139, 143, 147, 192,
197-98, 203, 213, 236, 282,
299, 373, 404, 439, 449,
461
explanation
xv, 23, 55, 62, 91,
98, 123-25, 140, 142, 152,
165, 180, 212-13, 220, 232,
23~ 242,246,253,255-57,
260-62, 276, 213, 220, 232,
23~ 242, 246, 253, 255-57,
260-62,
276-78,
281-82,
299,301,331,373-74,379,
390, 399, 402, 413, 430,
433-34, 444, 480-81, 490,
492,
495,
503-504,
520,
537,528
fact xii, xviii, xx, 13-15, 18, 24,
25, 37, 55-56, 62-63, 68,
73, 82, 93, 98, 100, 104,
116,123,128, 132-33, 135,
138-39, 149, 151, 156-57,
164, 167, 198, 222-23, 227,
235, 251, 255, 259, 260,
268, 275, 279, 282, 284,
289, 293, 301, 308, 319,
320, 322, 356, 369, 372,
390-91, 395, 432, 43~ 439,

441, 444, 454, 476, 496,
503-504, 509, 533
Falk, B. 372, 373, 376n
Faurschou, G. 337, 342n
Feigenbaum, M. 29, 42, 43
Feyerabend, P.
xiv, 53, 55, 61-
63, 694n, 65n,
107,
108,
lIOn,
131-44,
144n,
164,
279, 293, 299-302,
304n,
307, 312n, 336, 513, 538
Feynman, R. 181
Fichte, J. G. 291
Filmer, P. 248n
Fink, E. 289, 294, 303n
Fishelov, D. 470, 476n
fit
18-19, 21, 167, 168-69, 193,
195,373,421,450,507
Fodor, J. A. IOn
Folger, T. A. 169n
Ford, J. 48
Forget, P. 84n
Foster, H. 351n
Foucault, M. xvii, 108, 134, 142,
305,
308-11,
313n,
336,
471, 515-17, 534
Fourier, 1. B. 34
Frank, M. 73,84n
Frege, G. 114, 481
French, R. M. 8, 11n
Freud, S.
104, 108, 115-17, 181,
226, 269, 308, 310-11, 321,
334,406
Fry, E. 352n
Fry, R. 442
Frye, N. 181
Fuller, S. 247
fuzziness xi, xv, 13-27
Gadamer, H. G.
xiii, xiv, xviii,
67-83,
84n,
85n,
87-93,
93n,
97-103,
105-109,
109n, lIOn, 11 In, 277, 289,
294,
295,
303n,
355-60,
360n, 471, 516,517
Index
549
Galileo, G.
31-32, 52-54, 68,
104, 139-40, 150, 181, 327,
508
game
16, 31, 51, 74, 79, 100-
103, 114,
120, 122, 125,
241, 259, 289, 292, 293,
294,
298-301,
365,
366,
368-69, 389, 390, 392, 403,
414, 433-34, 504-507, 510-
11,513,516,518,528,530-
31-33,535,537,540
Garbarino, F. M. IOn
Gasset, O. Y. 342n
Gauguin, P. 489
Gauss, C. F. 35
Gelernter, D.
xiii, 1-4, 6-7, 9,
lOn, lIn
Gellner, E. 240, 248n
Gentner, D. 182n, 193n
geometry xii, 36, 40, 44, 56, 332,
405,412,454,488,515
Gilhooly, K. J. lIn
Giotto 400
Gleick, J. xxi, 29, 48n, 49n
Glickman, 1. 393, 397n
Glymour, C. 503
Godel, K. 64
Goethe, J. W. 43, 401, 405, 455
Gogh, Van, V. 489
Goldman, A. 533, 534, 541n
Gombrich, E. H. 1466n, 496, 479
Goodman, N.
xv, 161-69, 169n,
170n, 438, 439, 445n, 468,
476n,496, 532, 535
grammer xviii, 74, 101-102, 105,
127,
165,
196, 253, 266,
305, 310, 331-34, 336, 346,
392,434,443,522,528
Grant, R. A. D. 370n
Grelling, K. 239
Greenberg, C. 369, 411-15, 426n
Grene, M. 157
Grice, H. P. 199n
Groosberg, S. 26n
Gruenberg,B.238,248n

550
Soft Logic
Griinfeld, J.
lIOn, 128n, 145n,
169n,
208n,
248n,
285n,
312n,435n
Habermas, J. 101, 103, lIOn
Hall, R. L. 157, 159
Hampshire, S. 397n
Handelman, S. 268, 170n
Hansen, N. R. 150, 299
Harre, R. 156, 159n, 179, 182n
Harvey, B. 248n
Hausman, C. R.
xvi, 211-216,
216n
llenan, P. A. 276, 277, 285n
Hegel, G. W. F.
xx, 58, 80-81,
87, 97, 100, 106, 108, 115,
117, 274, 281, 291, 311,
333, 348, 355, 357, 358,
359,
399-400,
402-404,
409n,
414,
418,
420-21,
424-26,
427n,
447,
474,
479-82, 484, 498
Heidegger, M.
xvii, 67-68, 70-
72, 75, 80, 82, 97-98, 100,
103-104, 108, 109n, 113,
239, 268, 273-75, 277, 279,
281,
2850,
289,
292-95,
300, 302, 303n, 305-311,
313n,
317,
320,
323..24,
334-35,
340-41,
342n,
343n, 345, 347, 351n, 357,
360n, 509,
513,
515-17,
519, 520, 523-24
Heine, H. 527
Heisenberg, W.
xii, 14, 17-19,
57, 64, 150, 299-300, 302,
304n
Heraclitus 300, 325, 417
hernleneutics xix, 67-73, 76-77,
80-81, 87-93, 95-111, 113,
115, 117, 268-69, 276-79,
284, 294, 341, 357, 403,
454,457,538
Hermeren, G. 467, 476n
Hesoid 290
Hesse, M. 202, 208n
history xiv, xx, 42, 52-54, 56-58,
60-61, 63-64, 71, 73, 76,
79-81,
87-88,
90-91,
95-
103, 105-108, 113, 115-16,
132, 134-39, 14-142, 155,
176, 186, 202, 240-43, 247,
253, 255-56, 258, 263, 266-
68, 279-83, 289-91, 295-96,
299,
301-302,
306,
308,
310, 316, 324, 325, 327-28,
332, 334, 337-38, 344, 347,
350, 355, 367, 379, 387,
391-92, 394, 399, 400, 403,
404, 406-408, 411, 414-25,
443, 447-49, 451-53, 455,
457, 461-62, 469-72, 474,
479-84, 487, 490-93, 495,
497-98,
507-508,
516-17,
521, 523-24, 528, 531-32,
536-39
Holbein, H. 508
Holton, G. 302
Holyoak, K. J. IOn
Homer 134, 290, 296
horizon
xiv, 74, 76, 78, 89-92,
101-102,
106,
407,
461,
462,471
Horkheimer, M.
316, 321-322,
328n
Houthakker, H. 34-35
Hoy, D. C. 105, lIOn
Huizinga, J. 356, 360n
Humboldt, W. 101
Hume, D. 87, 325-26, 329n, 363,
375,382,374,503,537
Hurka, T. 369n
Husserl, E.
72, 97-98, 251, 263,
274, 275, 278, 283, 285n,
320,324,334-35,469
hypothesis
60, 150, 168, 201,
229-30, 297, 412, 420, 438,
440,444

idea 5, 20, 44, 47, 56, 59-60, 74,
131, 133, 137-40, 142, 147,
148,
173, 178, 206, 219,
222-23, 225-26, 230, 254,
257, 260-62, 292, 296, 307,
316-17, 326, 331, 348, 366,
368, 373, 393, 412, 414,
416, 418, 420-23 432, 456,
460, 481, 497, 515-17, 519,
523,532
ideal
52-54, 56-58, 74, 89, 102,
108, 147-48, 177, 239, 240,
267,
272,
290,
308-309,
327, 356, 376, 395, 401,
416, 444, 491, 504, 506,
524
identity
9, 74, 128, 175, 336,
433,512
ideology 16, 52, 61, 103, 415
image 7, 9, 24, 31, 45, 88, 164,
173, 175, 206, 244, 277,
319, 334-36, 340-41, 344-
49,403,406,422,425,433,
459, 484, 488, 496-97, 498,
529
imagination
xviii, 20, 41, 92,
150, 152, 154, 158, 193-95,
198, 207, 228, 230-31, 244,
246, 261, 297-98, 309, 332,
333, 336, 340, 356, 365,
367-68,
373-74,
380-81,
390, 425, 437, 441-42, 449,
450,453,459-61,463
imitation 137, 177, 296, 345
induction xiv, 122, 162, 301, 468
infinity 44, 279, 318, 418
information 6-7, 15, 18, 41, 45-
47, 52, 56-57, 120, 131-32,
135-36, 162, 205-207, 277,
335,395,442
insight
8, 17, 87, 95, 179, 211,
281,317
intelligence
14, 16, 22, 24, 30,
319
Index
551
intention
73, 88, 105-106, 109,
125-26,148,149, 153, 174,
180,213,228-30, 260, 263,
275, 282-83, 289, 360, 382,
393, 413, 423, 434, 463,
469
interpretation xi, xii, xiv, xv, xx,
63, 68-69, 71, 74, 76-77,
79, 81, 83, 88-93, 96, 101-
105,
107-109,
113-118,
121, 123, 135, 141, 149,
151, 156-57, 161, 164, 166,
174, 177, 187, 204, 211-
212, 214-16, 222, 226-228,
230-31, 237-38, 242, 245,
252, 254, 255, 257-62, 268-
69, 272, 273, 275-82, 284,
293,
294,
299-301,
306-
311, 317-18, 324, 326-27,
333-34,
336-37,
358-59,
374, 376, 381, 413, 430-31,
434, 437, 439-41, 443-44,
452, 454, 457-58, 467-76,
480-82, 497-98, 517, 522,
535
intuition xi, xii, xx, 1, 23, 34-35,
37, 45, 47, 54, 123, 139,
149, 151, 181, 193, 198,
275, 278, 340, 368-69, 417,
430, 441, 460, 468, 533,
540
Jabes, E. 268
Jameson, F. 338, 342n, 344, 350,
352n, 402, 409n
Jefferson, T. 507
Johnson,~.
xv, 185, 189-90,
193-99,200n
Jonas, H. 270n
Joyce, J. 334, 335, 350
judgement
69, 73, 87, 99-101,
134, 139, 151, 162, 167,
192, 207, 214, 220, 229-30,
251, 272, 277, 279, 291,
321, 331, 344, 356, 363,

552
Soft Logic
366-67,
371-72,
374-76,
403, 420-22, 424, 431, 434,
438, 458, 464, 468, 484,
488, 522-23, 532
Jung, C. G. 16
justification
108, 135, 156-57,
163, 167, 228, 229, 279,
281, 293, 300, 302, 310,
367, 373, 375, 396, 400,
429, 432-33, 442, 482, 495,
507, 509, 530-32, 535-37
Kafka, F. 270
Kandinsky, W. 402, 415, 518
Kant, I. 57, 69, 87, 97, 104, 116,
158, 196, 256, 263, 291-92,
294-95, 297-300, 302, 305-
306, 310-11, 317, 320, 324,
332,
333,
336,
340-41,
342n, 343n, 344, 356, 360,
366, 372-73, 399-400, 414-
415, 420-21, 424, 441, 448,
461, 465n, 482, 497, 503,
507, 508, 515, 521, 527-29,
535,537
Kearny, R. 264n
Keats, J. 473
Kennick, W. E.
388-89, 391,
396n, 397
Kepler, J. 53, 150, 181, 297
Kermode, F. 283, 285n
Kierkegaard, S.
72, 108, 517,
522-24
Kim, J. 541n
Kittay, E. F.
xv, 201-208, 208n,
209n
Kivy, P. 442, 445n
Klein, Y. 412
Klir, G. J. 169n
knowledge xiii, 6, 45, 51-53, 55-
60, 62, 64, 68, 81, 87-91,
95-97, 99,
104-109,
113,
115-117,
122,
125,
131-
136, 138-139, 141-42, 144,
147-58, 161, 165, 166-69,
173-74, 177-79, 198, 202,
205-208, 213, 227-30, 235-
44, 246, 247, 256-61, 263,
266-67, 269, 276, 281-84,
289-93,
295-96,
299-301,
306-308,
316,
318,
322,
324-27, 333, 339-40, 347-
48, 351, 355, 357-59, 367-
68, 372, 375, 380, 388-90,
392,
400-401,
406,
413,
418,420,430-31,433,437-
441, 444, 447-64, 471, 476,
479,481-83, 495, 497, 507,
508, 511-13, 515, 517, 527-
533,535-37
Koch, H. 37, 38
Kosko, B.
xi, xiii, 13-14, 16-17,
21,23, 25, 25n, 26n,27n
Kostelanetz, R 352n
Koyre, A. 54, 64n
Kratylus x
Krausz, M. 471, 476n
Kraut, R. 443, 446n
Krupnick, M. 270n
Kuhn, T. ix, 31, 52, 53, 61, 64n,
65n, 95, 107, lIOn,
150,
164,
241-42,
244,
248n,
249n, 279, 281, 285n, 299,
302, 304n, 307, 312n, 516,
538,339
Kulka, T. ix
Kupsit, D. 332, 342n
Lacan, J. 349
Lakatos, I. 60, 65n, 95, 107
Lakoff, G. xv, 185, 188, 190,193-
198, 199n,200n
Lamarque, P. 367, 370n
Landau, L. D. 41
Landfield, A. W. 248n
Langer, S. 465n
language x, xi, xii, xv, xvi, 2, 6,
14, 16, 17, 22-23, 25, 45,
57, 62, 64, 67-85, 89-90,
92,
93,
95-104,
113-116,

116,119-128,134-35, 140,
142, 161, 164-65, 173-74,
176-79, 181, 185-86, 191,
193, 195-97, 201-207, 211,
213-16,
219-26,
228-30,
236, 238-39, 241-43, 245,
246, 251-57, 259-60, 262,
263, 266-67, 271-72, 274,
276-79, 282-83, 290, 295,
301,
306-307,
309,
314,
325-27, 332-335, 341, 346,
347, 349, 355, 359-60, 366,
391, 403, 413-14, 416-17,
429-35,
437-38,
441-44,
448, 450, 457-60, 467-69,
471-72, 480, 495-96, 503-
506,
508-513,
515-524,
527-535, 537, 539-40
Lao-Tzu 13
Laplace, P. 30
Larmore, C. 108, 111n
Lash,C.322,329n
Latour, B. 328, 248n
Lavoisier, A. L. 53
law 56, 106, 167, 262, 268, 298,
300, 302, 336, 418, 469,
497,529
Lawson, T. 342n
learning 3, 24, 92, 96, 98, 100-
102, 119, 123, 125, 148,
155-56, 165, 201, 204-205,
226, 276, 336, 371, 380-81,
395, 407, 413, 429-30, 432-
33,435,497,509,531
Lehrer, A. 207,209n
Leibniz, G. 22, 55, 115, 496, 537
Leitch, V. 232n
Lenin, W. 513
Lessing, G. E. 497
Leventhal, H. IOn
Levi, I. 538, 542n
Libchaber, A. 42, 43
Linker, K. 342n
literature xiv, xv, xvii, 9, 87-88,
93, 138, 164-65, 179, 225-
Index
553
27, 231, 232, 235-38, 246,
252, 260, 265-66, 270, 281,
291-92, 299, 310, 315-16,
345-47, 349, 351, 387, 402-
404,
407-408,
457,
459,
460, 463, 471, 475-76, 484,
510,529
Locke, J.
120, 122, 201, 317,
497,536
logic ix, x, xi, xiii, xiv, xv, xvi,
xvii, xix, 1-7, 9-10, 15-27,
42, 59, 60, 68, 73-74, 80,
92, 97, 100, 104, 114, 116,
117,119-121,125-26,127,
136, 139, 141-42, 148, 150,
152, 154, 156-58, 164, 167,
173-182, 196-97, 202, 205,
208, 219-22, 225, 227, 229,
231, 236-41, 243, 245-46,
252-55,
257-63,
265-67,
269, 271, 273, 278-81, 283,
290,
295,
298,
306-307,
325, 327, 332-37, 340, 375-
76, 388, 391-92, 400-401,
403,
406-407,
445,
451,
461, 475, 480, 489, 509,
511, 516-20, 522, 528, 523,
539
Lorenz, E. 31, 32, 41, 48
Lorenz, K. 59
Lotringer, S. 343n
Loyala, I. 507
Luhmann, N. 405,409n
Lukacs, G. 400, 401
Lyons, J. 208,209n
Lyotard, 1. F.
403, 409n, 474,
477n,537
Mach, E.
139, 142, 145n, 297,
598
machine
1-10, 14, 16, 22, 38,
123, 150, 461
tvIadison, G. B. 78, 84n
Magellan, F. 44

554
Soft Logic
magic 52, 63, 125, 152, 337, 461,
463,475-76,484,489-90
Magnus, B. 2850
Magritte, R. 333
Mahler, G. 400
Malevich, K. 418, 419
Malraux, A. 404,4090
Mamdaoi, E. 260
Maodelbrot, B. 35-37,39-41,44
Manet, E. 491
nlap
24, 37, 46, 79, 180, 310,
462
Margolis,
J.
2840,
393,
3970,
469,470,471,472
Martin, C. 534, 541n
Martin, J. 179, 182n
Iy1arx, K.
108, 115, 226, 237,
308, 325, 411, 412, 498,
510
mathematics xi, 4, 13-15, 17- 21,
23-25, 29-35, 39-41, 43-47,
52, 54, 57, 68, 100, 104,
119, 120, 127, 134-35, 137-
138, 153-54, 157-58, 195,
197, 235, 237, 241, 246,
267, 273, 277-78, 297, 356,
376, 390, 393, 400, 468,
503,513, 515, 529
Matisse, H. 489, 508
Maxwell, J. C. 136, 181
May, R. 33, 34
McEvilley, T.
xix, 411-12, 414,
416-17,
420-22,
424-26,
426n, 427n
McHoul, A. 242, 243, 249n
McIn~e,A. 528,5410
meaning x, xvii, xviii, xix, 5, 17,
20, 23-24, 36, 45, 62, 67-
77,
80-83,
87-92,
96-99,
102-106,
109,
113-114,
116, 119, 122-23, 126-28,
140-41,
148-153,
155-57,
165,173-75,177, 180,187-
89, 193-96, 198, 202-204,
206-208,
212-15,
221-26,
229-31,
239-40,
251-52,
254-57, 260, 262-63, 269,
271, 273-80, 282, 284, 290,
294,
296,
308-309,
312,
315, 317, 320-24, 326-27,
332-35, 33~ 339, 349, 357-
58,366,373,375,388,393,
403, 407, 412-13, 415, 423,
425, 430-31, 433-34, 437,
443-44, 448, 450, 452, 454,
458-60, 462, 474-75, 481,
489,
509-512,
523,
515,
519,521-23,531
mechanics 68, 104,327,332,325
Megill, A.
xvii, 305-309, 311-
312, 312n, 313n
memory
3, 5, 7-8, 23, 379-80,
462,463,468
Merleau-Ponty, M.
283,
447,
456, 465n
metaphor ix, x, xii, xiv, xv, xvii,
1-3, 5-6, 10, 33, 47, 88-92,
101,
113, 122, 155, 162,
165-66,
173-82,
185-99,
201-208, 211-16, 252, 254-
59, 261, 265, 267-68, 271,
273-74,
276-77,
,,281-82,
294, 296, 347-48, 350, 368,
414, 417, 434, 439, 442,
450, 452, 455, 459, 496,
504, 506, 508-512, 517-23,
533,539
metaphysics
xviii, xxi, 55, 62,
67-72, 75, 76, 80, 82, 108,
134, 139, 257, 263, 265-66,
269, 278-79, 289, 291-96,
298, 300, 302, 305, 310,
318-19, 322, 331, 334-36,
338-40, 403, 417, 420, 422,
464, 519, 522-23, 535-36
method xvi, 45-46, 51-52, 54-55,
57-58, 60-52, 87-88, 90-92,
99-100, 103-107, 114, 116,
132, 141, 150-51, 205, 226,
237-38, 242-43, 251, 254,

258, 263, 266-68, 272, 274,
280-83, 289, 299-301, 307,
320-21, 332, 346, 351, 355,
382, 407, 423, 442, 504-
506, 520, 538-40
Meyer, L. 400, 408, 408n, 409n
Michelfelder, D. 83n, 84n
Mill, J. S. 364, 369n, 527
Miller, 1. H. 348, 352n
mind
5-6, 9, 16-17, 45, 82, 90,
96, 124, 126, 143, 147, 149,
150-51, 153, 156-57, 176,
202, 208, 228-30, 245, 252,
260, 267, 272, 306, 317-19,
321, 326, 341, 402, 419,
448,472,495,507
Minsky, M. IOn
Mitchell, S. 352n, 495, 499n
Mitchell, W. 1. T. xx, 495-498
model
1-2, 4, 19, 22-23, 32-34,
46-48, 52, 59, 68, 74, 81-
82,
87-99,
104-105,
133,
140, 147, 165, 181, 195,
197,
202,
207-208,
236,
242, 253, 266-68, 272, 295,
302, 305, 308, 311, 324,
331, 333-35, 376, 401, 404,
408, 412, 414-15, 420, 425,
437, 452, 453, 464, 470,
491, 496, 515, 518-19, 521,
532,539
modern xviii, xix, 4-6, 9, 16, 44,
51, 55, 58, 61, 67-68, 103,
104,
107-108,
139,
142,
147, 153-55, 181, 185, 194,
231, 236, 259, 289, 291,
294-95, 305, 307, 309, 315-
328, 311-34, 336, 337, 340-
41, 344-458, 347-50, 355,
356, 357, 363, 365, 369,
399-404, 411, 415-20, 422-
25,435,447,449,452,454,
461-62,
474-75,
479-80,
483-84,489-90,492,497
Index
555
Modrian, P.
405, 412, 415, 418,
419
Monet, C. 449
Monod, J. 59
Montaige, M. 536
Mooij, 1. J. A. 475, 477n
Moore, F. 173, 182n
moral 87, 97, 117, 132, 148, 153,
193-94, 187, 292-93, 295-
96, 305, 308, 316-18, 332,
344,363-66, 381, 389, 416,
437, 441, 444, 448, 467,
480, 489, 491, 492, 508,
510, 513, 527, 529, 536,
537,539
Morawski, S. 474, 477n
Morss, S. B. 352n
Mulkay, M. 248n, 2149n
music
211, 214, 246, 299, 315,
350, 380, 387, 392, 399-
404, 408, 414, 431, 451,
460,471
mysticism 15, 220,293, 505
myth 62, 116, 124, 193-95, 198,
240, 242, 259, 261, 269,
271-73, 301, 306, 324, 349,
407, 414, 416-19, 424, 472,
498,537
Naess, A. 249n
Nagel, E. 540, 542n
Nagel, T. 368, 370n
name
121, 213-14, 333, 335,
349,518,523
Napoleon 164, 441, 491
nature 33-34, 40-41, 46, 48, 55
Newton, I. ix, xi, 18, 30, 53, 55,
147, 150, 297, 302, 324,
450, 452, 455, 462, 512,
515,539
Nicholson, G. 275, 285n
Nielsen, K.
xxi, 527-30, 532-40,
540n, 541n, 542n
Nietzsche, F. xvii, 68, 70-71, 75,
81, 104, 108, 115, 176-78,

556
Soft Logic
18211, 239, 262, 268, 279,
285n,
289,
292-95,
297,
301-302,
305-309,
312,
312n, 331, 340, 342n, 483-
84,507,513,515,519,522-
24, 525n, 536
norm
xii, 5, 51-52, 120, 153,
158, 251, 252, 256, 258,
274, 349, 356, 364-65, 374,
389, 403, 421, 431, 458,
535,539
Norris, C. 252, 253, 255-58, 261-
262, 264n
number 17, 19-20, 23, 32, 35, 37,
44-45, 120-21, 137, 180
object 56, 105, 121, 123-24, 126,
131, 137, 149, 156-57, 161-
62,
165-66,
175,
180-81,
187-88,
190-92,
195-96,
201, 213-15, 242-43, 274-
77, 295-96, 320, 328, 333-
35, 337-38, 341, 345, 347-
48, 350, 356, 368, 371-73,
375, 388, 390, 391, 393-94,
396, 402, 494, 412, 417,
421-25, 433, 435, 437, 443,
447-48, 450-56, 458, 460,
463,
468-470,
481,
488,
495,505,522,533-534
observation xiv, 62, 68, 102, 105,
116, 119-20, 122-23, 125,
128, 137, 147, 150, 154,
192, 214, 236, 241, 299,
327, 368, 375, 379-80, 453,
457,472,517
Occam 298
Ogilvy, 1. 270n
Olivier, D. 248n
Olsen, S. H. 182n
ontology
57, 60, 62, 70, 72-73,
103, 113-14, 120-21, 127,
154, 156-57, 196, 201, 214,
169, 179, 291, 300, 309,
325, 333, 340-41, 356, 412,
447, 471-72,503, 506, 511,
536
Oppenheinler, R. 52
order 9, 42, 45, 48, 74, 83, 102,
132, 135-36, 138, 162, 173-
74,189,296,242,251,253,
254, 266, 268, 271, 296,
298, 300, 302, 324, 327,
381,
389-400,
402,
404,
406, 411, 417, 423, 447,
452-53, 455, 461-63, 471,
474-75, 519, 528
Ormiston, G. L. 280, 285n
Osborne, H. 445n
other 80, 82, 344, 407, 413, 420,
423,443,457,513
Owens, C. 336, 342n, 351n
painting xiv, xvi, xviii, 138, 149,
156, 176, 211, 215, 236,
309, 333, 345, 350, 356,
358-59, 36~ 374, 380,38~
393-94, 399-402, 404-405,
408, 412-14, 422, 439, 449-
50, 452-53,
455,
468-69,
479, 482, 488, 490, 496,
503
Palmer, R. 83n, 84n
Pantin, C. F. A. 149
Paracelsus 181
paradigm 4, 5, 82, 92, 100, 105,
107, 202, 236, 238, 244,
269, 273, 278-79, 281, 327,
335, 373, 390, 400, 403-
404, 421, 437, 499, 462,
475, 488, 503, 511, 518,
538
paradox
17-19, 126, 140, 181,
211, 213, 215, 235-47, 274,
292, 312, 316, 341, 376,
406,408,415
pattern
37, 39, 45, 46, 48, 102,
133, 140, 155
Paul,8t 181
Peirce, C. S. 214, 468

Peitgen 40, 44, 45
perception xciii, xx, 4, 123, 149
person
20, 317, 324, 355, 366-
37,372,374,394,404,412,
434,437,448,457
Pettit, P. 374, 375, 377n
phenomenology
113, 115, 276,
308, 310, 320, 324-25, 448,
454-55,457
Philipson, M. 248n
philosophy xiv, xv, xvi, xx, xxi,
13, 17, 20, 44, 51-52, 54-
55, 58-59, 63-64, 67, 69-73,
76-80, 82, 91, 96, 100, 104,
105,
107-108,
113,
116,
117, 121-22, 131, 134-35,
136-38, 140-44, 147, 150,
152, 158, 164, 176-79, 185,
191, 194-95, 197, 201-202,
211, 225, 227, 230, 235-36,
.238-40, 244, 251-54, 256,
258-61, 263, 265-67, 269-
70, 273-74, 279-84, 289-92,
294, 296-98, 306-308, 310,
312, 315-17, 320-21, 323-
'28, 335-36, 340, 344, 347,
348, 357-58, 363, 366 368,
373, 375-76, 388, 390-92,
400,
407-408,
418,
424,
440-41,
447-48,
451-52,
456, 459-60, 463-64, 471,
473-76, 479-81, 487, 492,
498, 504, 506-513, 515-24,
527-40
physics 18-19, 23, 29, 30, 32-33,
40, 43-45, 47, 53-55, 57,
60, 63, 116, 126, 134, 137,
140, 163, 187, 192, 204,
236, 241, 279, 298, 299,
300, 325, 400, 439, 443,
452-53, 455, 462, 505, 510,
528
Piaget, J. 59
Picasso, P. 345, 350, 408, 488
Pinch, T. 248n
Index
557
Planck, M.
139, 150, 297, 298,
303n
Plato 36, 42, 57, 116, 201, 225,
253-54, 261, 263, 266, 281,
290-91, 293, 296, 340, 347,
348, 356, 376, 411, 414,
416, 419, 421, 480, 484,
489,527
Plautus 174
play xvii, xviii, 19, 88-89, 136,
176, 223-25, 228, 229, 231,
251, 266-67, 269, 274-75,
277,
279,
289-303,
308-
309, 336, 340, 347, 356-57,
359-60, 368, 369, 374, 381,
389, 402, 420, 475, 506,
508, 512, 516, 521, 522,
529,530,532,536
Plotinus 418
poetry
4, 91, 176-78, 185-86,
193,
202,
204,
206-207,
228, 278, 290, 296, 299,
307, 334-35, 350, 355, 358-
60,364,374,438,450,459,
469,475, 503, 509, 513,
516
Poincare, H. 181
Polanyi, M. xiv, 95, 100, 147...58,
158n, 159n
politics xviii, 235, 252, 262, 291,
295, 299, 307, 309, 319,
321-23, 325, 328, 335, 339,
346, 365, 407, 412, 448,
480, 490-91, 495, 504, 507,
510,512,527,529,536
Pollock, J. 412, 414, 422
Popper, K.
54-55, 57-60, 63,
64n,
107-108,
lIOn,
131,
236,241,326, 329n
positivism
18, 68, 97, 102, 116,
135, 137, 147-48, 175, 179,
196, 202, 225, 240, 245,
283-84, 289, 293, 297, 322,
324-25, 327, 347, 417, 420,
433,484,517,529

558
Soft Logic
possibility 55, 57, 61, 70, 74, 78,
87-90,
97,
99-102,
105,
116, 141, 153, 158, 163,
166, 174, 178-80, 196, 198,
205-208, 221-23, 225, 227-
29, 247, 254, 260, 262-63,
267-68, 272, 274, 277, 279,
280,
282,
298,
305-306,
310, 328, 332, 334-36, 349,
371-72, 374, 376, 388, 391-
92, 394, 404-405, 420, 431,
434,
440-442,
444,
455,
460, 464, 467, 473, 475,
487-89, 491, 509-510, 515-
16, 521-23, 527, 529-30,
533,536
postmodernism
xviii, 108, 231,
291,
296,
305-312,
325,
331-41,
344-51,
399-400,
403-407,
416-17,
419-21,
423-25,474,480
Pound, E. 309
power xvii, 154, 156, 202, 252,
258, 267-68, 271-72, 275,
289-303,
305,
309,
312,
315, 318, 321, 335, 337-39,
341, 357, 368-69, 411, 417,
424, 438-39, 448, 459-63,
470, 480, 489-91, 504, 512,
523-24, 528, 532
principle 24, 106, 124, 147, 177,
182, 211, 235, 238, 240,
258, 260, 262, 281, 283,
290, 295, 298, 309, 316,
323, 332, 350, 364, 371,
420, 430, 444, 471, 472,
474,497,520
probability 14, 16, 18, 21, 127
problem
14, 25, 31, 45-46, 51,
54, 57-58, 63, 68-69, 99,
107, 116, 134-35, 141-42,
150-51,
153-54,
165-66,
204, 222-25, 227, 230-31,
236, 238-39, 240, 242, 244-
47,260,262,268,272,274,
277-82, 302, 306, 315, 317-
18, 325, 333, 335, 344-45,
347, 355, 365, 367, 382,
389-91, 395, 404...406, 415-
16, 430, 434, 442-43, 459,
467, 470, 483, 490, 498,
504, 507, 510, 520-21, 523,
527,537,539,540
process 24, 44, 45, 47, 58, 60-61,
63, 68, 75, 82, 90, 93-94,
97, 134-35, 139, 154, 166,
168, 176, 181, 202, 222,
224, 228, 230, 235, 242,
255, 260-61, 271, 293, 297,
299, 302, 306, 310, 324,
326, 328, 331, 335-36, 339,
347, 369, 393, 404, 414-15,
417, 422, 443, 449, 450,
453, 456, 459, 461-62, 464,
481,489,503,523,533
progress xix, 52,.57, 60, 63, 75,
88-89, 108, 131-32, 137-38,
142-43, 155, 168, 187, 230-
31,241,267,297,300,302,
315, 318, 320, 356, 392,
399-408, 415, 417-19, 423-
25,430,480,482,488,505,
508-10,513,536,538,540
Prosch, H. 157, 158n, 159n
Protagoras 293
psychology
11, 32, 59, 88, 90,
105,116,121, 123-24, 148,
152,154-56,176, 197,212,
227, 231, 237, 239, 256,
276, 310, 322, 335, 363,
372, 382, 412, 417, 424,
440, 444, 450, 452, 456-57,
459, 473-74, 504
Ptolemy 36, 302, 443
Putnam, H. 440, 445n, 503, 532,
533,54111
Pythagoras 19, 414
quantum mechanics
18-19, 30,
60,453,454

Quine W. O. xiv, 21, 60, 119-28,
128n, 129n, 196, 236, 324,
443, 444, 446n, 471, 505,
506, 512, 540
Ranke, L. 308
rational
xvii, 4, 19, 31, 51-65,
73, 76, 98, 107, 117, 132,
134-36, 139, 141-42, 144,
193-95, 197-98, 201, 212,
220, 231, 236, 238-39, 242,
253, 258-61, 279, 281, 289-
303~ 315, 318, 320-21, 325,
326, 333, 335, 340, 363,
365, 366, 371, 393, 399,
402, 406, 411, 429-33, 460,
470-72,475,482, 496, 503,
508-511,
513,
520,
529,
523,537-39
realism xvi, 151, 166, 211-216,
237, 242, 245, 247, 345,
350, 389, 469, 472, 473,
498,505,510,532,536
reality
20, 57, 88, 95-99, 104-
105, 114, 128, 133, 136,
138, 139-40, 150, 153-57,
163, 176-77, 179, 189-91,
193, 197,201, 213, 215-16,
221-23, 246, 252, 257, 259,
267, 271-72, 275, 277-78,
280-81, 283, 289, 292, 294,
297, 300, 305-306, 309-11,
317-18, 322, 324, 331, 333,
334, 338-41, 346, 348-50,
356, 369, 367, 388, 393,
404-405,
412-414,
420,
422, 430-31, 434, 458, 459-
60, 462-64,
467-76,
484,
488, 490, 496, 505, 509-10,
518, 520, 522, 527, 530,
535
reason xii, xvi, xix, 5, 7, 20, 22-
25, 54, 60, 74, 81, 89, 97,
99, 103, 109, 131-44, 163,
186, 192, 194, 198, 219,
Index
559
221, 227-28, 230, 239, 242,
246, 255-56, 257-60, 262-
63, 267-68, 269, 279, 289,
291-92, 296, 298-99, 319-
20, 322-24, 340, 367, 371-
72, 376, 379, 381, 388-89,
391, 394, 400, 415, 417,
428, 430-31, 434, 437, 440,
475, 490, 503, 510, 513,
517, 529, 532-33, 535, 537-
39
Reid, L. A. 445n
relevance xxi, 7, 8, 92, 123, 135,
147, 164, 197, 198, 213,
214-15,231,317,376,429,
467,510,539
religion
xvii, 18, 115-17, 125,
139, 153, 155, 157, 291,
294, 297-98, 301, 305, 307,
309, 317-18, 322, 324, 356,
411-12, 418, 448, 457, 463,
475,483,527,529,538
Rendall, S. 233n
research
60, 61, 141, 144, 227,
236, 240, 242-43, 245, 265,
299,321,390,454,456
Richards, I. A.
173, 176, 179,
182n, 475, 477n
Richardson, L. 36
Richter, P. 44
Ricoeur, P.
xiv, lIOn, 113-18,
118n, 273, 284n, 351n
Rie£: P. 311, 313n
Riegl, A. 497
Risser, J. 84n
Roberts, D.
399, 402-408, 408n,
409n
Roche, M. 248n
Romantic 51, 194, 198, 201, 291,
305, 363, 381, 403, 411,
416-17, 443, 473-74, 503,
512-13
Rorty, R. xx, xxi, 107-108, 111n,
164, 324, 329n, 336, 421,

Soft Logic
503-13, 541n, 527-30, 532-
33,536-37,539, 540, 542n
Rosenberg, H. 413, 426n
Ross, J. E. 208n
Rothko, M. 415, 418
Rousseau, J. J. 256
Rouve, P. 465n
Ruelle, D. 41
rule 7, 13, 17-18, 22-24, 31, 41,
44, 47, 5.1-52, 54, 58, 60-
62, 74, 87, 96-97, 101-102,
136, 140-41, 149, 151-52,
156-58, 165, 202-204, 228-
60,267,277,289,296,298,
335, 356, 366, 372, 388,
394, 435, 440, 442, 481,
508
Russell, B. 17, 18, 26n, 126, 245,
298,527
Rutherford, E. 180-81
Ryan, M. 267, 270n
Ryle, G. 518
Said, E. W. 325n
Sallis, J. 81, 85n
Sandywell, B. 248n
Saussure, F.
203, 221-23, 225,
271-72, 457, 465n, 512
Savile, A. 370n, 373, 376n
Schaper, E. 371, 372, 376n
Scharfstein, B. A.
xix, 379-82,
382n, 383n
Schelling, F. W. J. 291
Schier, F. 363, 369n, 370n
Schiller, F.
88, 291, 292, 294,
297,302,373
Schleiermacher, F. E. D. 88
Schlemmer, O. 405
Schmidt, S. J. 409n
Schoenberg, A. 401, 402
Scholz, C. 38
Schopenhauer, A. 289, 292
Schrag, C. O. 282, 285n
Schrodinger, E. 299,300, 302
Schwenk, T. 43
science x, xi, xiii, xiv, xv, xvii,
xviii, xx, 4, 13-14, 16-18,
20-22, 25, 29-31, 33, 38-40,
42-43, 45-47, 51-65, 68, 71-
72, 83, 87,95, 99-100, 103-
108, 115-16, 119-20, 122,
125, 127-28, 131-44, 147-
54,
156-58,
173,
179-81,
194,
197,
198,
202-203,
205,
207-208,
211,
227,
230-32, 235-36, 238, 240-
44, 246-47, 252, 259, 266,
268-69, 273, 276-79, 281,
282,
289,
292-302,
305,
307-310,
315,
318,
321,
323-24, 327-28, 333, 340,
344, 355-56, 365, 376, 379,
406, 411, 418, 420-21, 423,
430, 438-40, 442-43, 447,
449, 451-52, 454, 456, 464,
471, 473, 475-76, 480, 482,
484, 490, 496-97, 518, 527,
528-29, 531, 536, 538-40
Scolnic, B. E. 10, lIn
Scotus, D. 527
Searle, J. 74, 85n, 212, 216n
Sitz, B. 338, 342n, 343n
self 75, 116, 236-39, 243, 245,
254-55, 257, 262-63, 267,
272, 274, 276, 278-79, 308,
319, 322-23, 326, 328, 331,
336, 340-41, 346, 356, 358,
367-68, 374, 399-401, 403,
405, 417-23, 426, 456-57,
480, 483-84, 490, 497-98,
507, 511, 513, 517, 520,
522, 524, 528-30, 532-33
Sellar, W. 527
semantic 5, 72, 89, 113-16, 128,
155, 162, 164, 173-74, 180,
195,
203-204,
206-207,
243, 251, 267, 366, 412,
414,440,459,521
Seneca 417

sense 22, 113, 127, 140, 148-49,
163,173, 175-76, 186, 191,
193-94, 203-205, 207, 211,
213-15, 222-23, 225, 227,
232, 239, 242, 253-55, 258-
60, 265, 269, 272-74, 276,
277-79, 292-93, 295, 298,
302, 309, 321, 326, 332,
334-35, 338, 345, 347-50,
355-57, 367, 373-75, 381,
403, 412, 415, 420, 422-25,
431-33, 435, 440-42, 444,
459-61, 463, 469, 471, 473,
474,
488,
506-510,
512,
515, 518-19, 520, 523, 529,
532,535
set
xi, 16, 19-25, 44-45, 121,
126-27, 197, 205, 222, 245,
522
Seurat, G. 449, 491
Sextus Empiricus 283, 285n
Shaftesbury, A. 87, 411, 414
Shakespeare, W. 369
Shannon, C. 45
Sharpe, R. A. 373, 376n
Shaw, R. ix
Shusterman, R. 78, 79
sign
74, 76, 105, 114, 121-23,
125, 221-23, 225, 228, 251,
253, 255, 269, 272, 275,
277, 295, 333-35, 337, 346-
47,358,380,403,458,468,
496-97,512
Silverman, D. 248n, 249n
Silverman, H. 1. 340, 341n, 343n
Simon, 1. 84n
simplicity
15, 18-19, 46-47, 61,
76, 127-28, 133, 137, 150,
167,
175,
222,
300-302,
380, 387, 438, 443-44, 508,
524
Smale, S. 41
Smuts, J. C. 26n
Socrates 261, 310, 536
Index
561
space
37, 41, 48, 55, 176, 245,
267, 282, 295, 298, 338,
341, 350, 368, 375, 388,
400-401,
422-23,
451-57,
460-62, 496, 519
Spariosu, M. S.
xvii, 289-91,
293-94,
296,
302,
303n,
304n
Spence, H. 418
Spengler, O. 401
Spinoza, B. 340, 527
standard
35, 97, 106, 121, 125,
131-32,
135-36,
141-42,
153, 155, 163, 167, 173,
177, 188, 212, 214-15, 219,
230-32, 236, 245, 252, 255,
256, 260, 262, 267, 269,
277, 279, 328, 350, 369,
372, 375-76, 389, 423, 441,
448, 458, 461, 463, 468,
471, 482, 488, 508, 520,
521,529,533,538-39
statenlent
14, 15, 17-21, 60, 92,
96, 133-34, 136, 147, 153,
163, 165, 167-68, 192, 203-
205, 219, 223, 225, 228,
240, 243, 269, 307, 336,
348, 373, 391, 437, 470,
473, 516, 518, 521, 533,
536
Stecker, R. 395, 397n
Steiner, W. 333, 342n
Sterne, L. 237
Stevens, W. 466n
Stott, F. M. IOn
Stravinsky, 1. 402
structure
7, 16, 19, 25, 39-40,
44, 45, 47-48, 72, 74, 76-
78, 83, 97, 101, 113-115,
133, 137, 141, 149, 155,
161, 180, 182, 186-87, 189,
191, 195-96, 198, 203, 206,
211, 215, 221-22, 251, 253,
254-57, 263, 271-72, 274,
276, 283-84, 290, 295, 298,

562
Soft Logic
308, 318, 325, 333-36, 346,
349, 368, 379, 387, 394,
395,
404-406,
412,
423,
448, 458, 460, 469-71, 473,
481, 510, 516-17, 519, 522,
531,533
style xvii, xviii, 2, 31, 168, 176,
178, 214-15, 224, 226, 231,
259, 265-67, 300-301, 333,
338, 341, 349-50, 366, 373,
374,
393,
399,
402-403,
408, 419, 425, 440, 444,
449, 459, 468, 481-82, 492,
522-23,528-29,535,538
subject 57, 59, 73, 81, 123-125,
161,163-65,171, 179,203,
204, 214, 238-39, 246-47,
265, 268, 277, 282, 295,
308, 318-22, 328, 332-34,
336, 367, 372, 387, 403-
404, 430, 447, 450, 469,
471-72, 475, 490, 497, 515,
519, 522-23
subjective
59, 88, 90, 105-106,
125, 134, 137-39, 143-44,
147, 150, 157, 193-98, 215,
275, 289, 300, 306, 317-21,
323-27, 334, 341, 348, 363,
365, 367, 400, 448, 458,
517,523
Sullivan, 1. W. N. 443, 445n
symbol x, 13, 18, 22,25, 74, 87,
102, 113-15, 117, 121, 154,
156, 161-63, 165-68, 177,
178,
266~ 295, 322, 332,
333, 337, 348, 357, 358,
387, 393, 402, 437, 438-40,
448, 459-60, 463, 468, 476,
491,497
symmetry 37, 207, 302, 492
syntax 17, 57, 162, 164-65, 189,
267,274,380,439,524
system x, xvii, 7, 13, 17, 20-24,
30, 32-34, 38-39, 41-47, 54,
57,60,74,76,82,100,102,
107,
115,
119,
120-121,
128, 150, 152, 157, 161,
162-63, 166-67, 177, 180,
181, 185-90, 194-95, 197-
98, 203-204, 206, 212-13,
220, 222-25, 227, 240, 247,
251, 253-56, 258, 266, 268,
271, 272, 275, 277, 298,
306, 333, 337-38, 346, 348,
350, 381, 388, 395, 400,
402,
404,
406-407,
422,
423, 438, 452-53, 457-59,
464, 469, 472, 489, 519,
521,531,533,535-37
Taoism 13, 381
Tarski, A. 126
taste xviii, xix, 15, 22, 87-88, 97,
299, 323, 340, 350, 356,
363-69, 371-76, 389, 400,
408,411, 414, 421-22, 424,
491,510
Telfer, E. 37011
text xiv, xvi, xx, 3-4, 67-69, 71,
74,
76-77,
80-82,
87-92,
101,
103-106,
108-109,
113, 164, 166, 177, 201,
204, 220, 225-31, 235, 237,
238-39, 244, 246, 252-58,
260-62,265, 258, 270, 272,
274, 276-77, 278, 282, 305,
309-311, 325, 334, 345-48,
376, 434, 457-60, 469-71,
497, 520, 522-24
theology
81, 93, 152, 181, 269,
400,407,490,506,536
theory
xviii, 24, 31-33, 39, 41-
43, 51-52, 55-63, 68, 100,
105,107,115,119,121-22,
127-28, 131, 133-34, 136-
38,
140-41,
147-48,
150,
151-53, 163, 165-67, 178,
201-208,
211,
213,
222,
226, 22~ 230, 232, 235-36,
238, 241-42, 245, 252, 254-

55, 257-58, 260, 262, 265,
267, 271-73, 281-82, 291,
296-302,
306,
311,
316,
319, 320, 323, 327, 332,
338-39, 347, 365, 368, 387,
388, 390-94, 396, 399-400,
402, 408, 418, 438, 442-44,
447-49, 451-54, 456, 459,
463, 467-69, 472-74, 484,
490, 492, 495-98, 506-510,
513, 517, 518, 521, 532,
537-540
thing
15, 19-23, 25, 38, 47, 87,
98, 114-15, 133, 149, 151,
157,161,163,173-77,185-
88,
190-93,
195-96, 202,
213, 221-22, 225, 237, 239,
241, 245, 267, 269, 272-75,
281, 293, 306, 308, 325,
327, 337, 333, 335, 341,
348, 351, 359-60, 366-68,
380, 389, 393, 395-96, 416,
423, 433, 438, 442, 449,
453-54, 456, 458-59, 463,
468, 473, 476, 488, 496,
497,
505,
509-512,
519,
520, 527, 529, 531-33, 536,
537, 540
thinking 2-6, 8-10, 19, 24-25, 38,
39, 42, 67, 69, 71, 73, 75,
80, 82-83, 89, 95-98, 103,
104-105,
107,
114,
121,
133, 136-37, 139, 141, 148,
149, 153, 156-57, 176, 178,
179, 180-81, 185-86, 195,
196,
201-202,
204-206,
213, 220-22, 224-25, 227,
230-31, 236, 240, 252, 253,
255, 25-58,
261-63,
266,
267, 269, 272, 275, 279,
290, 294, 296-97, 300, 307,
308, 317-19, 321, 323-25,
327, 331-35, 340-41, 344,
346, 348, 356, 358, 365-67,
369, 371-73, 375, 379, 392,
Index
563
393, 412, 417, 422, 433,
440-42, 449, 455, 461, 469,
472, 474, 480, 483, 493,
497,
505,
507-508,
512,
515-17,
519-20,
522-24,
531,534,540
Thomas, D.241n
Thompson, D. 43
Thucydides 527
Tilghman, B. R. 392, 397n
time
55, 101, 186-89, 196, 213,
224, 282, 292, 296, 298-99,
301, 333, 338, 358, 367,
388,
400-401,
416,
422,
437, 451, 453-54, 460-62,
471, 481, 504, 510, 516,
537
Toulmin, S. 107
Tourangeau, R. 182n
tradition
63, 72, 74, 78-79, 81,
82, 88-91,
103,
105-106,
114,
121-122,
133,
136,
139, 142, 147, 169, 179,
185, 189, 194-95, 201-202,
212, 214-16, 220-21, 225-
28, 231, 236, 240-41, 245,
246, 247, 252-53, 258, 261-
63, 268-69, 278, 281, 283,
289, 294-95, 299, 301-302,
308, 310, 316, 318, 325,
327, 331, 335, 336, 338-39,
340, 345, 347, 350, 355,
356-59,361, 371,380, 384,
387, 389, 394-95, 399-402,
404-408,
411-12,
416-17,
419, 421, 425, 439, 432-33,
440, 448-49, 451-52, 456,
457,460, 463, 469-71, 479,
481, 483, 507, 509, 515,
524, 527, 529, 530-31, 533,
536-537, 540
transcendence
5-6,
101,
114,
136, 151, 169, 193, 215,
223, 226, 244, 246, 247,
255-56, 274-75, 281, 310,

564
Soft Logic
319-20, 323, 331-32, 336,
340-41, 355, 358, 367, 375,
411,417-19,423,461,471,
507,515, 518, 537
translation x, xiv, 47, 62, 80, 93,
99, 101-105, 122-24, 126,
128, 140, 142, 182, 216,
231, 236, 268, 333, 349,
358, 407, 437, 444, 506,
518, 519, 534-35
truth x, xi, xii, xv, xvi, xvii, xvii,
xxi, 4, 6, 13-15, 17, 19, 21,
22-23, 25, 56-57, 59, 67,
58, 70-71, 73-74, 76-77, 81,
82-83, 87, 90, 92, 96, 99,
100,
104-109,
119-121,
126-28, 131, 133-34, 136,
141, 148-50, 152-53, 155-
56, 158, 163, 165-69, 185-
199, 202, 207, 214-15, 221,
228, 231, 237, 239, 241,
243, 247, 251-54, 256-58,
261-63, 268-69, 272, 275,
279-82, 289, 291-95, 297,
299-300,
305-312,
319,
321-25, 331-32, 335, 338,
340, 347-48, 355-58, 361,
364, 367, 369, 375, 391,
400, 404, 407, 430, 437,
438, 440, 442-44, 447, 459,
463, 469-70, 472-73, 480,
481, 491, 496-97, 504, 506,
509, 513, 518-19, 521-24,
530, 532-35, 538
Turing, A. 8
Ullman, S. 118
Ulmer, G. L. 270n, 351n
understanding xiv, xv, xvii, xviii,
xx, 8-9, 17, 31-32, 36, 39,
42, 46-47, 67-69, 71-72, 74,
75-79,
81-83,
87-93,
95-
111,113-114,117,120,
124, 126-28, 135, 141, 143,
148-;t9, 152-55, 157, 161,
165-69,
178-81,
185-86,
188, 190-99, 201-208, 211,
212,
215-216,
229,
235,
238, 240, 243, 247, 255,
260, 262, 268, 273, 276,
277, 279-82, 290, 294-95,
298,
300-301,
308,
315,
318, 320, 322, 323, 324,
325, 333, 335, 339, 348,
355-57, 358, 360, 368-69,
373, 379, 387, 392, 394-95,
401, 403, 408, 420, 425-26,
428-35, 437-45, 448, 454,
455-57, 461, 467, 469, 471,
472, 474, 479-83, 487, 489,
497-98, 508, 515-522, 530,
531, 562, 534-35
Urban, W. 114
utility 37, 61, 82, 120, 126, 133,
162-63, 188, 201, 277, 291,
297, 337, 366, 380, 401,
422,472,506
vague
8, 13-14, 19, 22-24, 69,
119, 120, 122, 124, 126,
127, 154, 180-81, 252, 368,
288,391,519
Vaihinger, H. 297-99
Valery P. 474
value xviii, xxi, 14, 24, 40, 54,
56, 61, 87, 99, 120, 126,
132, 135, 137, 139, 142,
148, 155, 177, 180, 185-87,
191, 197-98, 230, 232, 262,
267-68, 272, 290, 292, 294,
296-97, 300-302, 311, 317,
318-19,
321-22,
324-28,
345, 358, 363-67, 369, 373,
374-75, 379, 382, 387, 393,
395, 400, 416, 418, 421-22,
431, 432, 437, 440, 442,
447, 459, 475, 495-96, 503,
518-19, 523-24
Vasari, G. 381, 492

Wachterhauser, B. 109n, lIOn
Warhol, A. 487, 492
Weber, M. 400
Weiss, A. S. 342n
Weitz, M. 390-92, 394-95, 397n
Westphal, M. 100, lIOn
Weyl, H. 364
Wheelwright, P. 176
Wilkerson, E. E. 426n
Wimsatt, W. K. 229, 233n
Winch, P. 249n
Wittgenstein, L.
x, xx, 4, lOn,
14, 101-102, 108, 222, 271,
274, 279-80, 283, 310, 323,
325, 347, 390, 392, 429,
430, 433, 435n, 472, 480,
490, 495, 497, 508, 510,
512, 515-16, 520-21, 527,
530-33, 536, 538, 541n
Wood, D.
xxi, 515, 518, 52-22,
524n, 525n
Woolgar, S. 246, 247n, 249n
word
13, 17-18, 21-25, 67-69,
73, 76, 79-81, 92, 96, 98,
115, 124, 126-27, 140, 149,
173-74,176, 179, 185, 189,
193-94, 203-205, 207, 221,
222-25, 229, 242, 253-54,
258, 265-66, 269, 278, 284,
290, 295, 311, 320, 334-35,
349, 357-59, 380, 388, 392,
418, 433-35, 438-40, 458,
459-71, 496, 509, 510, 518,
523, 531,533, 540
world
xv, xvi, xviii, 4-6, 9, 13-
14, 17, 20-22, 24-25, 29,
34, 36, 42-44, 46-47, 54,
56-59, 63, 74-75, 88, 92-93,
96, 98-99, 101, 119, 121,
128, 131-39, 143, 153-54,
157, 161-69, 175, 179-80,
185-87,
189-92,
195-97,
199,
201-202,
204,
211,
213-16, 220, 223, 227, 235,
Index
565
239, 240, 242-46, 251, 256,
257, 269, 263, 266, 268-69,
271, 272, 276-77,282, 292,
293-300,
302,
305-309,
311,315-16,318-320,322,
325-26, 333-35, 339, 341,
344, 345, 346, 348, 351,
358-60, 363, 365-67, 369,
373-74, 380, 400, 403-405,
407, 412, 414, 416, 421,
432, 438, 440, 447-51, 454-
57, 459-64, 468-70, 471-72,
475-476, 479, 489-90, 495,
496-98, 506, 511-12, 515,
517-20, 522, 524, 530-34,
539-40
Wurzer, W. S. 340, 343n
Yeats, W. B. 309
Yorke, J. 32-33
Zadeh, L. 20, 21, 26n
Zemach, E. 472-73, 476n
Zeno 140
ZitI: P. 394

