!  1
Wittgenstein and Symbolic Mathematics 
Sören Stenlund 
Department of Philosophy 
Uppsala University 
 
 
Abstract 
 
The notion of symbolic mathematics has its roots in the invention of the algebraic symbolism 
in the 17th century. Franciscus Vieta (1540 –1603), who made decisive contributions to this 
development, uses the word ‘symbol’ (lat. symbolum) in the sense that is relevant here. 
Symbolic mathematics is to be contrasted with mathematics as an ontological science, for 
instance as the science of quantity and magnitude, which was the prevailing view in ancient 
Greek mathematics and in the renaissance version of the Aristotelian and Euclidian heritage. 
The algebraic symbolism and techniques were decisive for the invention of the differential 
and integral calculus and of much of modern mathematics, but the ontological conception has 
still survived, in great tension with the symbolic conception. It has survived in particular 
through the influence of formal logic and modern mathematical logic. The purpose of this 
paper is to show that Wittgenstein’s view of mathematics has much in common with the 
symbolic (non-ontological) view of mathematics. In particular, it is argued that Wittgenstein’s 
symbolic conception of mathematics is the appropriate background for understanding 
Wittgenstein’s critique of mathematical logic and its philosophical impact. 
 
Keywords: symbolic, operation, Vieta, Aristotles, Euclid, Klein, Hilbert, Hertz, ontology, 
logic, prose, calculus, rigor. 
 
 
 
The foundational status of formal logic. 
Some of the most controversial statements made by Wittgenstein are remarks 46 and 48 in 
Part V of the RFM. In the latter, Wittgenstein says: 
'Mathematical logic' has completely deformed the thinking of mathematicians and 
of philosophers, by setting up a superficial interpretation of the forms of our 
everyday language as an analysis of the structures of facts. Of course in this it has 
only continued to build on the Aristotelian logic.  1
In PR §§87-98 Wittgenstein offers more specific examples of what he means by ‘superficial interpretation’. 
1

!  2
And a few lines earlier, he has already stated why he takes mathematical logic to give a 
‘superficial interpretation’ of the forms of our everyday language. He writes: 
The curse of the invasion of mathematics by mathematical logic is that now any 
proposition can be represented in a mathematical symbolism, and this makes us 
feel obliged to understand it. Although of course this method of writing is nothing 
but the translation of vague ordinary prose.  
2
Many logicians (and philosophers) tend to react to these remarks as though they were only the 
emotional reactions of someone who dislikes mathematical logic. But Wittgenstein hardly 
disliked mathematical logic as mathematics. Principia Mathematica as well as the 
propositional calculus and the predicate calculus are mathematical symbolisms; they can be 
seen as pure mathematical calculi on the same level as many other mathematical or algebraic 
calculi. What Wittgenstein is calling into question here is a certain use of mathematical logic. 
He is questioning the foundational status that mathematical logic acquired in the discussions 
of the foundations of mathematics from the turn of the twentieth century onward. This 
foundational position of formal logic, even with respect to language in general, is what Quine 
has in mind when he says in the introduction to his book Mathematical Logic, regarding the 
‘logical particles’, that “They are basic to all discourse”. (p. 2). We find another explicit 
statement of the foundational status of mathematical logic in Gödel’s article on Russell’s 
mathematical logic. Gödel says there that mathematical logic “is a science prior to all others, 
which contains the ideas and principles underlying all sciences”.  The systems of 
3
mathematical logic are assigned the role of universal logical frameworks. But this is no longer 
a thesis that is motivated and argued for; it is rather an attitude about which there is tacit 
agreement among philosophical logicians. 
With regard to the foundational status of formal logic, I think that Wittgenstein is right to 
suggest that modern mathematical logic continues to build on the Aristotelian logical doctrine 
as it is expounded in the Organon. The foundational status of Aristotelian logic was 
transferred to modern times, and in particular to modern mathematics, mainly through the 
influential renaissance reading of Euclid’s Elements as an application of Aristotle’s logical 
By the “translation of vague ordinary prose” Wittgenstein means the reading of logical formulas that is based on 
2
the translation of “¬ A” as “not A” or “it is not the case that A”, of  “A & B” as “A and B”, of “∃x.A(x)” as 
“there is an x such that A(x)”, etc.  
 Gödel (1964, p. 447).  
3

!  3
doctrine, in particular the doctrine of demonstrative science (episteme) found in the Posterior 
Analytics.  Euclid’s Elements was one of the most influential classical works, its authority 
4
having been compared to that of the Bible. Newton’s Principia follows the format of Euclid’s 
Elements, and its precepts were fundamental to Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason, to mention 
only two examples. It is not until the latter half of the 19th century that Euclid’s (and thereby 
also Aristotle’s) authority regarding logic is questioned. But what modern logicians (such as 
Frege, for instance) called into question in Aristotle’s logical doctrine were a number of 
specific features, such as the subject-predicate form of all propositions. The very idea that 
there is a logical doctrine with a foundational status was not questioned; rather, it was asserted 
anew in the name of mathematical logic. 
What then is involved in the foundational status of formal logic? I would suggest the 
following things. First, formal logic is concerned with judgments or propositions originally 
connected with the episteme (scientific knowledge) of the Aristotelian ontological concept of 
a science. In this sense, a science and its propositions are always about a certain 
independently given subject-matter. The subject-matter of a theory does not originate with the 
theory and its propositions; the theory is a representation (a sort of copy) of the subject matter 
that already exists in physical nature. Since logic is taken to be basic to all scientific 
discourse, this ontological (or descriptive) conception of propositions applies to mathematics 
as much as to physics. 
In modern mathematical logic, ‘the independently given subject matter’ are the objects or 
entities in the domain over which the bound variables range, and to which names in 
propositions refer. This is of course intimately connected to the view of all simple 
propositions as having the form of a function applied to one or more arguments, given the 
modern concept of function according to which the objects in the argument domain of a 
function are given logically prior to and independently of the function defined for that 
domain. (Remember that in Frege’s ontology there are two categories: functions and objects 
(Gegenstände); numbers, for instance, are objects that numerals denote.) 
 See Mancuso /1996, Ch. 1 and 4.) Mancuso argues convincingly that “the Aristotelian epistemological 
4
framework was pervasive in the seventeenth century and very influential indeed in later centuries” (Mancuso 
1996, p. 92). By the “Aristotelian epistemological framework” Mancuso means primarily what we find in 
Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics. 

!  4
To the foundational status of formal logic belongs also the idea that logic is a universal system 
that displays the form of propositions essential for their being true or false as well as for the 
form of the deductive relationships between propositions. This has been taken to mean in 
particular that a logically well-articulated proposition carries its meaning or logical content in 
and of itself as a proposition, regardless of its context of use. (This well-articulatedness of the 
logical content of propositions is what Wittgenstein is questioning when he says that it rests 
upon translation into “vague ordinary prose”.) 
The discussion in the philosophy of mathematics since the 1920’s has taken place on the basis 
of this view of the nature of logic as if it were a well-established scientific fact that everyone 
taking part in the discussion is supposed to know. Doubts had been expressed earlier about the 
foundational significance of formal logic for mathematics by Poincaré and the early Brouwer, 
but their criticism was largely ignored and forgotten in the enthusiasm about the progress in 
mathematical logic that took place in the 1930’s through the work of Gödel, Tarski, Church 
and others. 
Let me conclude this introduction with a more specific example of what Wittgenstein means 
when he talks about ‘superficial interpretation of the forms of our everyday language’. In PR 
§ 96, he says that “Russell and Frege construe a concept as a sort of property of a thing. But it 
is very unnatural to construe the words ‘man’, ‘tree’, ‘treatise’, ‘circle’ as properties of a 
substratum.” Suppose you have a projector that projects a black circle on a white screen, and 
suppose also that by pressing certain buttons you can change the color (but nothing else) of 
the circle, into red, blue etc. The colors can then be seen as properties of a substrate 
(properties of one and the same the circle). But suppose furthermore that by pressing other 
buttons you can change the shape of the projected object. By pressing a certain button the 
circle turns into an ellipse. Having pressed that button, it would not make sense to say that the 
projected circle now has the form of an ellipse. The circularity of the original circle is not an 
external property of a substrate like the colors, it is rather the form of the projected object, the 
form in which it is given as what it is (a circle and not an ellipse). 
In mathematical logic, where all properties and relations are rendered as functions and thereby 
as external properties and relations, it is impossible to do justice to this difference between the 
form and a property of a substrate. A form cannot be described: it is shown or displayed, and 

!  5
there is a sense of generality connected with the notion of form which is not the generality 
expressed by a quantifier that binds a variable at the argument-place of a function.  This 
5
notion of form is of fundamental importance in his philosophy of mathematics because 
getting clear about the workings of mathematical symbolism is one of Wittgenstein’s main 
concerns there. According to Wittgenstein, inaccurate symbolism is a main source of 
problems and confusions in the philosophy of mathematics. 
 
A philosophical vocabulary 
Against the background of the foundational status of mathematical logic, a philosophical 
vocabulary has been developed and has become quite well-established. Included in this 
vocabulary are the names of the main philosophical views and positions in the philosophy of 
mathematics: Platonism, realism, formalism, intuitionism, constructivism, finitism, 
conventionalism, verificationism, fictionalism, etc. And sometimes these positions are 
furnished with qualifications such as ‘strict’, ‘strong’, ‘weak’. etc. It is also within the context 
of logical foundationalism that technical distinctions come into play, such as for instance, 
between ‘reference’, ‘syntax’, ‘semantics’, and other notions that are used to capture the 
nature of mathematics.  
A characteristic feature of this vocabulary is that a view or position is often defined or 
explained in terms of other positions and the tensions between different views. A certain 
position in this vocabulary derives its meaning in relation to the other positions. The formalist 
position, for example, is often explained in terms of the views or methods of the Platonist or 
realist views that formalists reject. Thus for a finitist or formalist, the realist or Platonist views 
are false or mistaken, but the realist view would nevertheless seem to make sense for the 
formalist as a possible alternative view of mathematics. 
There are also attempts to summarize Wittgenstein’s philosophy of mathematics within this 
vocabulary. One example is the article “Wittgenstein’s philosophy of mathematics” in the 
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (written by Victor Rodych). Before I say what I find 
 In his Cambridge lectures of 1939, especially lecture XVII (Diamond 1976, p. 161), Wittgenstein develops in 
5
great detail a critique of Frege’s and Russell’s concept of number based on their failure to distinguish between a 
form and a property of a substrate. 

!  6
problematic with that article, I want to state that I find it quite useful and helpful. The article 
tries to bring out crucial features of Wittgenstein’s philosophy of mathematics, and the author 
connects his claims to relevant quotations from Wittgenstein’s texts. He is unusually generous 
in providing references to other commentators on each topic, and he has a very 
comprehensive bibliography. 
What I find most problematic about this article is that it makes Wittgenstein look like a 
dogmatic revisionist. There is a long list of views in the article that Wittgenstein is simply 
said to reject. There is no mention that Wittgenstein was expressly aware of the danger of 
dogmatism in the early 1930’s, and worked diligently to avoid it. It was precisely due to this 
awareness that he insisted that his language-games be regarded as mere “objects of 
comparison”. Moreover, Wittgenstein explicitly stated that a successful philosophical 
investigation of mathematics must leave mathematics as it is. (PI § 124). Already in his 
discussions with the Vienna Circle, he remarked 
It is a strange mistake of some mathematicians to believe that something inside 
mathematics might be dropped because of a critique of the foundations. Some 
mathematicians have the right instinct: once we have calculated something it 
cannot drop out and disappear!   
6
What Wittgenstein has in mind here is obviously the critique of Brouwer and (the early) 
Hermann Weyl, who wanted to drop large parts of classical mathematics. In this particular 
controversy, Wittgenstein sides more with Hilbert. Wittgenstein continues this reflection by 
contrasting the revisionist attitude with his own critical approach: 
And in fact, what are caused to disappear by such a critique are names and 
allusions that occur in the calculus, hence what I wish to call ‘prose’. It is very 
important to distinguish as strictly as possible between the calculus and this kind 
of prose. 
I shall argue that this idea of “misleading prose” in mathematics is an important feature of 
Wittgenstein’s philosophy of mathematics that has not been paid sufficient attention. It is 
particularly important in his questioning of the foundational status of mathematical logic, and 
in his critique of the extensional view in mathematics. I shall return to the importance of the 
 McGuinness (1979, p. 149). 
6

!  7
prose/calculus distinction, and argue that it connects Wittgenstein’s view of mathematics with 
the rigorization movement in mathematics in the late nineteenth century. 
One might think that Wittgenstein abandoned the idea of misleading prose and the calculus/
prose distinction when he began to talk about mathematical language-games in his later 
philosophy of mathematics. But that is not true, and he never meant to say that all use of 
verbal language in mathematics is misleading. The two remarks I quoted at the beginning of 
this paper were written in the years 1942-1944, and thus by the late Wittgenstein. And in the 
last part of RFM, written in 1944, we find him referring to the “curse of prose” (RFM VII, § 
41). 
There is one general remark in the Stanford Encyclopedia article which I want to mention, 
and it is the following: 
The core idea of Wittgenstein’s formalism [in the philosophy of mathematics] 
from 1929 through 1944 is that mathematics is essentially syntactical, devoid of 
reference and semantics. 
I think that there is some truth, a trifle, in this remark, but it is misleading since this use of the 
words ‘formalism’, ‘syntactical’, ‘reference’ and ‘semantical’ belong to the philosophical 
vocabulary which, as I noted earlier, is strongly conditioned by the foundational status of 
mathematical logic. (More about the problems with this use of philosophical terminology 
later.) As a matter of fact, I don’t think that it is possible to articulate a fair account of 
Wittgenstein’s philosophy of mathematics within this vocabulary. Wittgenstein’s conception 
of mathematics is incompatible with the foundational status of mathematical logic. I think that 
this is the key to understanding Wittgenstein’s remarks cited at the beginning of the article. 
 
The symbolic point of view and the history of mathematics 
Wittgenstein’s conception of mathematics, already from the beginning in the Tractatus, has 
much in common with what has been called symbolic mathematics. I think that this is true of 
the early and middle as well as the late Wittgenstein. I am inclined to say that for 
Wittgenstein, the most authentic form of mathematics in modern times is symbolic 

!  8
mathematics.  The symbolic view of mathematics offers us a perspective from which the 
7
unity of Wittgenstein’s philosophy of mathematics becomes apparent.  
A clear manifestation of Wittgenstein’s symbolic point of view is his claim that mathematical 
propositions are not ‘real’ propositions. According to Wittgenstein, they don’t have a 
descriptive content; they do not describe real states of affairs. Already in the Tractatus, 
mathematical propositions were called “pseudo-propositions”. And around the beginning of 
the 1940’s, he expressed a symbolic, non-ontological conception of mathematics as follows: 
Let us remember that in mathematics we are convinced of grammatical 
propositions; so the expression, the result, of our being convinced is that we 
accept a rule. 
Nothing is more likely than that the verbal expression of the result of a 
mathematical proof is calculated to delude us with a myth. 
I am trying to say something like this: even if the proved mathematical 
proposition seems to point to a reality outside itself, still it is only the expression 
of acceptance of a new measure (of reality).  
Thus we take the constructability (provability) of this symbol (that is, of the 
mathematical proposition) as a sign that we are to transform symbols in such and 
such a way.  8
 
This is something that cannot be made much sense of within a philosophical vocabulary based 
on the foundational status of mathematical logic, where all possible propositions are 
propositions in the ontological sense. They have a descriptive content and are about 
something in a ‘referential sense’. There is no place in the vocabulary for propositions in 
another sense. The closest one can come to propositions in some non-ontological sense are 
propositions in the “nominalistic” sense that are merely about concrete signs, so-called 
‘syntactical propositions’. Thus within the philosophical vocabulary, one is forced to see 
Wittgenstein’s philosophy of mathematics as some superficial kind of formalism in which 
mathematics has been deprived of all meaning (it is “purely syntactical, without semantics”, 
according to the Stanford Encyclopedia article). 
 Here I am using the word ‘authentic’ in more or less the same sense as when we say that chemistry is an 
7
authentic natural science today, which alchemy is not. 
 RFM III, §§26-27.
8

!  9
But as Wittgenstein said in the last quotation, if he is depriving mathematics of something in 
his critique of foundations, it is the (often misleading) prose that accompanies the 
mathematical calculi, and he is doing so in order to clarify the sense that mathematical notions 
have within the calculi. 
So what is symbolic mathematics? – To answer this question, a historical perspective on the 
development of mathematics is necessary. The view of modern mathematics as symbolic 
mathematics has been suppressed and misrepresented through the self-understanding of 
modern mathematics that is influenced by at least three different tendencies. The first is the 
influence of the Aristotelian and Euclidian heritage already mentioned; the second is the 
influence of mathematical logic on the discussion about the foundations of mathematics in the 
twentieth century. But there is also a third tendency, more common among many professional 
mathematicians: the picture of mathematics as a “science of mathematical objects and states 
of affairs”, bearing strong similarities with physics. The “abstract reality” that is the subject 
matter of mathematics in this view is similar to the nature of the natural sciences in that “it is 
as it is by itself”; the subject matter is something given in advance, just as there are processes 
and phenomena studied in physics that are given in advance of the emergence of science of 
physics. As to the character of the objects and states of affairs in this ‘mathematical nature’, 
one tends to rely on analogies with laws of nature in physics. An equation such as 5 + 7 = 12 
is seen as a law of nature about what happens (what number of objects you get) when you put 
together 5 objects with 7 other objects into one collection.  As the equation E = mc2 expresses 
9
an eternal truth about physical nature, so do the true equations of algebra express eternal truth 
about ‘mathematical nature’. They are taken to be eternal, not in the sense of timeless, but as 
having permanence, as being invariant over time. There is no coming into existence and 
passing away in this abstract ‘mathematical nature’. Everything that is possible is already 
actualized and the mathematician is a discoverer, not an inventor. 
One feature of mathematics that is neglected or marginalized in this view is the human aspect, 
that is, mathematics as a human activity. The absence of historical sensitivity is therefore also 
 This view seems to be presupposed when Hilary Putnam discusses scientific principles undergoing change and 
9
speculates as follows: ”But are we not in the same position with respect to a sentence like ‘In the year 2010 
scientists discovered that 7 electrons and 5 electrons sometimes make 13 electrons’? Or with respect to ‘In the 
year 2010 scientists discovered that there are exceptions to 5 + 7 = 12 in quantum  mechanics?’ If this is right, 
and I think it is, […]” Putnam  (1990,  p. 254). 

!
 
10
a common characteristic of the prevalent images of the nature mathematics. The history of 
mathematics is seen as our heritage in Grattan-Guinness’ sense.  Grattan-Guinness contrasts 
10
“heritage” with history proper: the latter is concerned with “what actually happened in the 
past”, whereas the former has to do with mathematics in the past only as different stages in 
the development of mathematics towards modern contemporary mathematics. This means, 
among other things, that there is an emphasis on modern mathematical notions, views and 
results when writing about our mathematical heritage. According to Grattan-Guinness, both 
kinds of historical study are legitimate as long as they are not conflated. But the conflation of 
history and heritage is largely what occurred in the history of ancient mathematics. Heritage 
has been presented as though it is history. This is no doubt connected with the fact that many 
classical texts in the history of mathematics have been written by professional  
mathematicians who have wanted to start out from an eternal conception of what real and 
genuine mathematics is. And, from this perspective, what is real and genuine mathematics if 
not our modern mathematics? As a consequence, ancient mathematical texts are read and 
understood from the points of view of modern mathematics. What cannot be made sense of 
and find support in modern mathematics tends to be ignored, dismissed or falsified. 
There is historiographical discussion about this attitude. The historian of mathematics Sabatai 
Unguru, for instance, writes: “to read ancient mathematical texts with modern mathematics in 
mind is the safest method for misunderstanding the character of ancient mathematics […] ”  
11
Unguru’s article “On the Need to Rewrite the History of Greek Mathematics”, published 
in1975, ignited a heated debate.  Well-known mathematicians such as André Weil, B.L. Van 
12
der Waerden, and Hans Freudenthal took part in the controversy, claiming that the Greeks 
already possessed the basic elements modern algebra in the form of ‘geometric algebra’. The 
Greeks were somehow in possession of the ‘algebraic content’, but they had not yet found the 
most advantageous form for expressing that content. 
 Grattan- Guinness (2004). 
10
 Quoted from Kastanis and Thomaidis ”The term ‘Geomtrical Algebra’, target of a contemporary 
11
epistemological debate.”  
 Unguru (1075). See Kastanis, N. and Thomaidis, Y.  ”The term “Geometrical Algebra”, target of a 
12
contemporary epistemological debate”, for a survey of this debate. http://users.auth.gr/~nioka/Files/
GEOMALGE.pdf

!
 
11
With the heritage view of ancient Greek mathematics, the conceptual transformation that 
takes place in the seventeenth century is not seen. However, the invention of the algebraic 
symbolism and the symbolic point of view in the seventeenth century was a profound 
conceptual transformation in mathematics. 
 
 
Vieta’s Analytical Art 
The notion of symbolic mathematics has its origin in the seventeenth century with Fransiscus 
Vieta’s work Isagoge or Introduction to the Analytical Art. A penetrating account of the origin 
and nature of symbolic mathematics is found in the phenomenologist Jacob Klein’s book 
Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Algebra.  As Klein explains, it is difficult to 
13
understand symbolic mathematics without a historically sensitive perspective on the 
transformation of ancient Greek mathematics that took place in the seventeenth century. What 
Klein means by a ‘historically sensitive’ perspective is primarily that we cannot read classical 
mathematical texts with modern mathematics in mind. He expresses this feature of his 
historical approach as follows: 
[…] most of the standard histories attempt to grasp Greek mathematics itself with 
the aid of modern symbolism, as if the latter were an altogether external “form” 
which may be tailored to any desirable “content”. And even in the case of 
investigations intent upon a genuine understanding of Greek science, one finds 
that the enquiry starts out from a conceptual level which is, from the very 
beginning, and precisely with respect to the fundamental concepts, determined by 
modern modes of thought. To disengage ourselves as far as possible from these 
modes must be the first concern of our enterprise.  
14
That we have to do with a transformation and not just with what is usually called a historical 
development is important. Klein argues convincingly that it is only against the background of 
an understanding of crucial features of Greek mathematics that this transformation of 
mathematics becomes clearly visible. This is so because the influence of the viewpoint of 
modern mathematics in well-established accounts of Greek mathematics has blocked our 
understanding of Greek mathematical thinking. We tend to see the modern concept of number 
 Klein (1968).  See also Hopkins (2011). 
13
Klein (1968, p. 5)
14

!
 
12
or magnitude, for instance, as the result of an almost continuous historical development of the 
Greek notions of number and magnitude up to the modern ones. But this idea of a ‘continuous 
development’ is highly questionable. 
The modern symbolic concept of number is not a determinate numbers of things of a 
multitude, as the ancient Greek arithmos. Jacob Klein argues that the modern symbolic 
concept of number does not appear through a continuous development and extension of the 
ancient Greek concept. The latter belongs to ancient Greek non-symbolic, ontological science. 
The modern symbolic concept of number is an essentially different concept, or rather, 
introduces a new conceptual dimension, which was possible to articulate only in conjunction 
with the invention of the algebraic symbolism in the seventeenth century. According to Klein, 
the invention of the algebraic symbolism was an essential transformation in the sense that it 
provided new techniques and operational practices as the basis for new conceptions. But an 
effect of this conceptual transformation was also that the original Greek understanding of 
numbers was lost, which is why Klein claims that his ‘intentional’ historical investigation of 
Greek mathematics is necessary. 
The Greek mathematician who seems to have come closest to the conceptual transformation 
in which the algebraic symbolism originated was Diophantus of Alexandria (third century 
AD, sometimes referred to as "the father of algebra"). He was the author of a series of books 
called Arithmetica that deal with solving (what we call) algebraic equations. But according to 
Klein, it is Franciscus Vieta, 1540 –1603, who develops the logical and mathematical 
consequences of Diophantus’ work, and who deserves to be called the ‘inventor’ of modern 
mathematics. An important step in Vieta’s work was his innovative use of letters as 
parameters in equations. And it is Vieta who introduces the word ‘symbol’ (lat. symbolum), 
and talks about the symbolic concept of number.   
15
Diophantus worked with an arithmetical calculus of determinate numbers. Vieta advances 
Diophantus’ problems by introducing a new general analytic or an analytic art, using not only 
determinate number but ‘species’ or ‘forms’ of number – a calculus of species or forms. In the 
articulation of these symbolic forms of number, the use of letters as variables is essential. 
 Klein claims that the term “symbolum,” used for letter signs as well as for connective signs, originated with 
15
Vieta himself (Klein 1968, p. 276).

!
 
13
The words ‘species’ and ‘form’ alludes to the ‘eidos’ of Greek philosophy, but it is important 
to understand how its sense is transformed in Vieta’s ‘analytic art’. This is how Klein explains 
the difference: 
[…] the “being” of the species in Vieta, i.e. the “being” of the objects of “general 
analytic,” is to be understood neither as independent in the Pythagorean or 
Platonic sense nor as attained “by abstraction” […] in the Aristotelian sense, but 
as symbolic. The species are in themselves symbolic formations – […]. They are, 
therefore, comprehensible only within the language of symbolic formalism. […] 
Therewith the most important tool of mathematical natural science, the “formula,” 
first becomes possible, but above all, a new way of “understanding,” inaccessible 
to ancient episteme is thus opened up.  
16
This new understanding is the symbolic point of view. The core of the conceptual 
transformation achieved by Vieta is the replacement of the concern with determinate numbers 
(of ancient non-symbolic arithmetic) with the identification of a number represented by its 
form. In a certain sense, one might say that in the symbolic conception, form becomes the 
content. But ‘form’ in this sense is not ‘syntactical form’ in the modern meta-mathematical 
sense. ‘Form’ in Vieta’s sense is displayed in the operational practices. 
It is important to understand that the new arithmetic-algebraic system of Vieta (as well as the 
mathesis universalis of Simon Stevin, Rene Descartes and John Wallis, who continued and 
completed Vieta’s work) are not new theories of arithmetic or new sciences of number (in the 
Aristotelian sense of ‘theory’ and ‘science’). They are primarily new arts, new practices, new 
methods and techniques for dealing with problems: problems not only in ‘pure mathematics’ 
but also in physics and astronomy. Vieta ends his work Isagoge by saying “Analytic art 
appropriates to itself by right the proud problem of problems, which is: to leave no problem 
unsolved.” Klein points out that Vieta, “ in concentrating his reflections on procedure […] no 
longer differentiates between “theorems” and “problems”, […] because he sees all theorems 
as problems”. (Klein, p., 166) 
In the fourth chapter of the Isagoge, Vieta lays down the rules for the operation with species 
or forms, as well as rules for the transformation of equations. These rules create, as Klein puts 
it, the systematic context which “defines” the object to which they apply. Klein calls this 
system of rules “the first modern axiom system”, alluding to Hilbert’s axiomatic method. 
 Klein (1968, p. 175).
16

!
 
14
There is no talk here about logical demonstrations from postulates or first principles as in 
Aristotle and Euclid. The analytic art of Vieta is not seen primarily as a representation of a 
body of truths, or a body of knowledge of some subject-matter, but in the first instance as a 
system of methods and techniques for solving problems, which later develops into the 
analytic geometry of Descartes and the infinitesimal calculus of Leibnitz. 
 
 
Wittgenstein’s symbolic point of view 
We can see striking similarities between Vieta’s analytic art and essential features of 
Wittgenstein’s views of mathematics, such as Wittgenstein’s frequent emphasis on 
mathematics as activity and as calculus. (In the PR he makes the somewhat excessive claims 
that, “in mathematics, the signs themselves do mathematics, they don’t describe it”, and “You 
can’t write mathematics [as you can write history]. You can only do it.” PR, p. 186.) When 
Wittgenstein is working on the notion of proof in mathematics, his examples are often 
arithmetical or algebraic calculations, which many logicians and mathematicians would not 
want to call real proofs at all, since they require that a proof should be dressed up in prose. 
Wittgenstein is interested only in the mathematical core of proofs. Regarding Euclid’s proofs, 
Wittgenstein would say that the core of the proof is often what is shown in the diagram, and 
that the verbal proof-rhetoric surrounding it can be disregarded. 
I don’t want to say that Wittgenstein was inspired by 17th-century mathematicians. He had 
surely become aware of the deep difference between ancient Greek mathematical thinking and 
modern mathematics through his reading of Spengler in the early 1930’s. But the symbolic 
point of view is present already in the Tractarian conception of arithmetic and logic.  I think 
17
that the main source of inspiration for Wittgenstein were certain ideas issuing from the 
struggle for rigor in mathematics and theoretical physics in the latter half of the 19th century, 
in which the symbolic point of view was prominent. He was particularly influenced in this 
respect by Heinrich Hertz. Hertz’ work on the mathematics of classical mechanics, in which 
Hertz showed how to deal with conceptual problems connected, for instance, with the notion 
of force of classical mechanics, was an important and influential contribution to the symbolic 
 E.g. “My fundamental thought is that the ‘logical constants’ do not represent. That the logic of the facts does 
17
not represent.” (TLP 4.0312).

!
 
15
point of view. I believe that Ernst Cassirer was right when he said: “Heinrich Hertz is the first 
modern scientist to have effected a decisive turn from the copy theory of physical knowledge 
to a purely symbolic theory.”  Hertz saw the scientific theory as the application of a symbolic 
18
system, which is an autonomous system, in its formal aspects, independent of the empirical 
phenomena it is used to explain.  
19
This feature of Hertz’ work deeply influenced Wittgenstein, not only the author of the 
Tractatus, but also the later Wittgenstein.  In the Big Typescript, Wittgenstein writes: 
20
In my way of doing philosophy, its whole aim is to give an expression such a form 
that certain disquietudes disappear. (Hertz) 
 
21
 
In his introduction to the Ogden translation of the Tractatus, Russell states emphatically that 
the basic and most fundamental topic of the Tractatus is “the principles of Symbolism” or 
“the conditions for accurate Symbolism”. This was something that Wittgenstein obviously 
had stressed in their private conversations. But there is no sign in Russell’s introduction that 
he understood this point. Russell’s introduction does not even mention the harsh critique of 
the theory of types found in the Tractatus which was based precisely on Wittgenstein’s ideas 
about an accurate symbolism. 
  
22
 
Mathematics as activity. 
The perspective of mathematics as an activity is essential in the logic of symbolic 
mathematics, and this is also an important reason why Wittgenstein’s conception of 
mathematics is close to the symbolic conception. I think that the most important reason why 
 Cassirer (1957, p. 20) 
18
 Hertz (1956, p. 8)
19
 This is argued in more detail in Stenlund (2012b). See also Kjaergaard  (2002) for an argument for the 
20
importance of Hertz’ ideas for Wittgenstein’s philosophy of science as a whole.
MS 213 (in the Bergen Electronic Editions of Wittgenstein’s works).
21
 In a letter to Russell dated August 19, 1919 Wittgenstein wrote: ”The theory of types, in my view, is a theory 
22
of correct symbolism: a simple symbol must not be used to express anything complex: more generally, a symbol 
must have the same structure as its meaning. That’s exactly what one can’t say. You cannot prescribe to a symbol 
what it may be used to express. All that a symbol can express, it may express.” (App. III in Wittgenstein 1998, p. 
130.) Here we see how Wittgenstein’s notion of correct symbolism is connected with the showing/saying 
distinction and the distinction between a form and a property of a substrate.    

!
 
16
Wittgenstein found the game analogy so useful (not only in the philosophy of mathematics 
but for language in general) is that it brings mathematics (and language) as activity into the 
foreground. 
In the formal logical tradition as well as among many professional mathematicians, the 
tendency is the opposite: a mathematical system is seen as a representation of a body of truths 
rather than as a calculus. The activity element is suppressed and concealed, as though it were 
something inessential. The emphasis is rather on results, stated in prose. As a consequence, a 
language or a symbolism tends to be seen merely as a static sign-system or a notation in an 
almost purely typographical sense. 
I think that this careless attitude towards mathematics as an activity was one source of the 
debate in the Unguru controversy mentioned earlier. The algebraic symbolism is seen as a 
mere static notation rather than as a symbolism in which the symbols are constituted by the 
use of signs. The static view of a symbolism is quite manifest in Van der Waerden’s argument 
in the Unguru debate: 
Unguru, like many non-mathematicians, grossly overestimates the importance of 
symbolism in mathematics. These people see our papers full of formulae, and they 
think that these formulae are an essential part of mathematical thinking. We, 
working mathematicians, know that in many cases the formulae are not at all 
essential, only convenient.  
23
It seems to me that a static view of mathematical symbolism like Van der Waerden’s often 
goes hand in hand with an extensional view of mathematics (as Wittgenstein speaks of the 
extensional view in PR § 99). Wittgenstein’s disinclination towards the extensional view is 
tied to his symbolic conception of mathematics. The extensional view is perhaps the most 
characteristic feature of the modern ontological conception of mathematics, i.e. as the science 
of a mathematical reality in which nearly all is and will always be hidden from us. Notice the 
separation, or dualism, between form and content that is presupposed in Van der Waerden’s 
remark. He speaks as though ‘working  mathematicians’ could have the mathematical content 
in their mind without having it articulated in some notation or symbolism. 
Now compare and contrast Van der Waerden’s statement with the following statement by 
Hertz: 
 Van der Waerden (1975, p. 205).
23

!
 
17
We cannot escape the feeling that these mathematical formulas have an 
independent existence and an intelligence of their own, that they are wiser than 
we are, wiser even than their discoverers, that we get more out of them than what 
was originally put into them.  
24
It is the view of a symbolism as a mere combinatorial structure of sequences of concrete signs 
that is the background of the established notion of ‘syntax’ in modern mathematical logic and 
meta-mathematics. With that notion of ‘syntactical form’, the view of mathematics called 
‘formalism’ becomes a hopelessly superficial view that hardly anyone has seriously held.  
25
The notion of ‘syntax’ originated in the traditional linguistic conception of language, 
according to which a language is a system – not primarily an activity! – determined by 
grammar and lexicon. Syntax was the doctrine of correct sentence-construction of a (natural) 
language. But when the notion of syntax was transferred to the so-called ‘formal languages’, 
with the distinction between object-language and meta-language, syntax becomes more 
‘formal’ in the sense that the rules of syntax have been given a mathematical content: the 
syntactical objects have the structure of arbitrary finite sequences (in a purely mathematical 
sense) generated by recursive or inductive procedures. There is no limit to the length of well-
formed formulae of the object-language, but formulae are still claimed to be concrete objects. 
This does not really make sense!  With this notion of syntactical form with roots in meta-
26
mathematics, a dualism between form and content is created. There arises a need to 
supplement the syntax with a ‘semantics’ that endows the syntactical objects with content or 
meaning. This is the origin of Tarski’s ‘logical semantics’ or ‘model theory’. 
Wittgenstein’s conception of logical syntax in the Tractatus, which later develops into 
(philosophical) grammar, is very different in that it is related to activity, to the use of signs. It 
has to do not only with the external combinatorial forms of the signs as finite sequences, but 
with the forms of use of signs, i.e. the forms of use that constitute the symbols. The logical 
syntax of the Tractatus needs no supplementation with something like a ‘semantics’, because 
 Quoted from Bell, (1937, p. 31).
24
 Formalism in this sense will also be a kind of finitism, and it is’finitism’ in this sense Wittgenstein has in mind 
25
when he says,”Finitism and behaviorism are quite similar trends. Both say, but surely, all we have here is.... Both 
deny the existence of something, both with a view to escaping from a confusion.” (RFM II, § 61.) Wittgenstein 
was no more a formalist or finitist in this sense than he was a behaviorist.
 The source of this confusion in the notion of syntax of formal languages is a similar confusion in Hilbert’s 
26
finitism. See Stenlund (2012a).

!
 
18
it is already concerned with the sense of signs: to get clear about the forms of use of signs is 
to get clear about their sense (or logical content). 
Wittgenstein’s emphasized the operational aspect of a symbolism already in the Tractatus, 
where we find, for example, the following significant observation:  
In order to recognize the symbol in the sign we must consider the significant use. 
(TLP, 3.326).  
27
A sign does not determine a logical form unless it is taken together with its logico-
syntactical employment. (TLP, 3.327). 
 
This difference between sign and symbol becomes quite clear in the game-of-chess analogy. A 
sign corresponds to a chess piece as physical or perceptual object with a certain shape, size, 
colour, etc., while a symbol corresponds to a chess piece as ‘a piece you play with’, 
determined by the conventions which govern its moves and its relations to other pieces in the 
game. 
In Wittgenstein’s view of mathematics since the 1930’s, as I understand it, it is the operational 
aspect of a symbol, its function in the calculus, its role in the manipulation and transformation 
of expressions, which constitutes it as a symbol. A symbolism is not just a system of notation 
in some typographical or combinatorial sense. 
Accordingly, Wittgenstein’s view means that new mathematical concepts (such as, for 
instance, the concept of a number) necessarily emerged together with the new algebraic 
symbolism and the place-value notation for numbers. They could come into existence as new 
precise notions only when the operational practices of the new symbolism were in place. Or 
rather, the invention of new notions was the invention of the new operational practices of the 
algebraic symbolism. It is not as if the new notions were invented in advance “in the minds of 
mathematicians” (as Van der Waerden’s remark suggests) and were then given expression and 
application using the new algebraic notation. That is the sort of mentalism that Wittgenstein 
persistently calls into question. And it is essentially the same mentalistic tendency in Frege 
that is being questioned when Wittgenstein writes: “In attacking the formalist conception of 
  The original German version of this remark is “Um das Symbol am Zeichen zu erkennen, muss man auf den 
27
sinnvollen Gebrauch achten.” I prefer Ogden’s translation of this remark. 

!
 
19
arithmetic, Frege says more or less this: these petty explanations of the signs are idle once we 
understand the signs. Understanding would be something like seeing a picture from which all 
the rules followed, or a picture that makes them all clear. But Frege does not seem to see that 
such a picture would itself be another sign, or a calculus to explain the written one to us.”(PG, 
p. 40) 
 
Calculus and Prose 
Vieta’s analytic art draws on the works of Pappus and Diophantus, which are primarily 
geometrical. As a consequence, Vieta presents algebraic operations geometrically, which 
manifests itself in his algebraic notation. Powers such as a2, a3 are expressed by Vieta as a 
plane and a cube, respectively. An algebraic expression which we would write as 
x3 – 3b 
 cy2 !
would be expressed in Vieta’s notation as: 
A cubus – B solido 3 
C in E quadratum 
!
with the reading: ”A cubed minus 3 times B solid divided by C times E squared”. Vieta also 
adopted a principle of homogeneity according to which only magnitudes of the same 
dimension can be compared, for instance, be added to one another. Thus, the expression we 
would write a2 + a was not permitted. Descartes greatly simplified the algebraic symbolism 
when he showed how to represent any magnitude (including a power) as the length of a line 
segment, given an arbitrary stipulated unit of length. The expression a2 + a  is then interpreted 
as a length added to a length and is permitted. By viewing all numbers as ratios, John Wallis 
arrived at a notion of number according to which all numbers are homogenous. Their 
homogeneity is identical with their dimensionlessness, which, in turn, as Klein expresses it, is 
identical with their symbolic character. Thus with Wallis, the analytic art becomes a pure 
calculus, a system of symbolic calculation. 

!
 
20
Using Wittgenstein’s distinction between calculus and prose, one could say that Vieta 
introduces his algebraic system using geometrical prose. The development from Vieta up to 
Wallis could then be seen as one of the first clarifications through a logical separation of 
calculus and prose. This clarification consists in finding a more adequate symbolism: one in 
which ‘geometrical prose’ is not needed. 
During the 18th and the beginning of the 19th centuries, two opposed tendencies influencing 
the development of mathematics can be discerned. One is the ontological view of the 
Euclidean-Aristotelian heritage; the other tendency is the symbolic point of view arising out 
of the invention of the algebraic symbolism and the new powerful methods and analytic 
techniques that the algebraic symbolism made possible. A number of conceptual problems in 
mathematics emerged during this time due to the tension between these two tendencies (e.g. 
problems with infinitesimal magnitudes, with imaginary numbers, convergence of series, 
etc.). The common 18th century mathematicians’ view of mathematics as the science of 
quantity shows the continued influence of the Euclidean-Aristotelian heritage – even if one 
had a more general notion of quantity that could bridge the ancient Greek gap between 
discrete and continuous quantity. 
By the latter half of the 19th century, we had arrived at what Moritz Epple calls “the end of the 
paradigm of the science of quantity” . There were several parallel developments that initiated 
28
the abandonment of the paradigm, but it is clear that in many cases the symbolic point of view 
plays a decisive role. This is particularly true of the new endeavor towards rigor in 
mathematics that begins with Cauchy, Weierstrass, Gauss and others. Hertz can also be seen 
as belonging to the rigorization movement, along with Hilbert and Einstein, who, like 
Wittgenstein, were both deeply influenced by Hertz’ symbolic approach.   
29
An exception here is the perspective on mathematics from the point of view of mathematical 
logic understood as its foundation. Here the ontological view of mathematical theories and the 
descriptive view of mathematical propositions still prevails. The aspect of mathematics as 
activity and calculus is entirely disregarded. The emphasis is on results, and mathematical 
prose is given the prominent position as the source of meaning in mathematics through 
 Epple, (2003, p. 291).
28
 See Stenlund, (2012b). 
29

!
 
21
‘semantics’, ‘theory of reference’, ‘ontology’ etc. But this prose does not come from the 
application of the logical calculi on some subject matter outside the calculi, in which case it 
could be harmless. The problematic prose is the one that comes from the reading (or 
translation) of the logical particles and formulas into ordinary language (‘vague ordinary 
prose’, as Wittgenstein calls it), and which is presented as belonging to, and constitutive of, 
the logical systems. It is on the basis of this prose that certain mathematical results in 
mathematical logic are read as results about consistency, completeness, decidability, etc. And 
it is on the basis of this ‘internal or constitutive prose’ that mathematical logic is given its 
foundational status. 
The logical distinction that Wittgenstein calls ‘calculus versus prose’ was an essential feature 
of the symbolic approach in the work on rigorization in mathematics in the latter half of the 
19th century. The ‘prose-sense’ (which is often called ‘the intuitive meaning’) of imaginary 
numbers, for instance, was perceived as unclear and confused. In Cauchy’s work on reforming 
analysis in his Cours d‘analyse, the problem is solved through a logical separation between 
the prose and the calculus of imaginary numbers. According to Umberto Bottazzini,  
30
“Cauchy took the ontological problem concerning the nature of imaginary numbers much 
more seriously than anyone before him. In the Cours d‘analyse, chapter VII, he introduced 
them in a formal manner as ‘symbolic expressions’.” Cauchy does not solve the “ontological 
problem” of imaginary numbers by providing a positive answer to the question of their 
“ontological nature”, but rather by making the ontological problem disappear along with the 
prose through the development of a rigorous calculus of imaginary numbers. At that time, 
Cauchy’s approach required hard work. Bottazzini points out that “it took him no less than 
fifty-five pages to […] define algebraic operations on “expressions” like α + β√-1 (α and β 
being real quantities) in a rigorous way and to establish their properties.” In Bottazzini’s 
judgement, “Chapter VII of the Cours can be considered one of the places where Cauchy 
displayed his concept of rigor best.” 
There was no sharp division between pure and applied mathematics in 18th century 
mathematics. Most mathematicians also worked in theoretical physics. This state of affairs 
was reflected in the language of mathematics, that is to say, in the prose of mathematics. Does 
 Bottazzini, (2003, p. 217).
30

!
 
22
a certain word, say, ‘quantity’, derive its meaning from its use in physics, or does it have its 
meaning from its operationalization in the mathematical calculus, i.e. does its mathematical 
sense coincide with its sense as a symbol of the calculus? It was only after the influence of the 
symbolic view of mathematics that this question could be raised. An essential feature of the 
symbolic point of view in the rigorization endeavor was the logical separation of a symbolic 
system from its application on some subject matter outside the system. This is why it is 
sometimes necessary to deprive words of their meaning in order to discern the dividing line 
between calculus and prose. Even a word of ordinary language may have the role of a symbol 
in a calculus (such as, for instance, the words ‘point’ and ‘line’ in Hilbert’s system in 
Grundlagen der Geometrie).  
In his work on the arithmetization of analysis (which was a move away from the traditional 
notion of mathematics as the science of quantity), Weierstrass still uses the word ‘quantity’, 
but it is nonetheless clear that the sense of the word as he uses it is as a symbol in the 
arithmetical calculus. Moritz Epple (2003 p. 296) notes: “ Weierstrass continued to use the 
notion of quantity, but expressions like “arithmetical quantity” or “number quantity” made 
clear what he had in mind: a logical separation of his concepts from their more intuitive 
counterparts in geometry and physics.”  
31
As noted earlier, by this time there is a change in the symbolic point of view in that it is no 
longer bound up with the idea of a mathesis universalis, a universal mathematical system. 
With the invention of different geometries, different number systems and different algebraic 
systems, there arises a need to distinguish between pure mathematical systems and their 
application on something outside the systems. This change is reflected in Wittgenstein’s 
philosophy from the beginning of the 1930th in his use of the notions of ‘system’, ‘calculus’ 
and ‘game’. In one of his lectures on the foundations of mathematics in 1939, Wittgenstein is 
reported to have said:  
 In 1947, when Wittgenstein was working in the philosophy of psychology, he wrote in his diary: “Weierstrass 
31
introduces a string of new concepts to bring about order in the thinking about the differential calculus. And in 
that way on the whole, it seems to me, I must bring about order in psychological thinking through new concepts. 
(That it concerns a calculus in the first case, but not in the second, is not important.)”. (The Bergen electronic 
edition of Wittgenstein’s works, MS 135, p. 115-116, my translation)

!
 
23
 
The difficulty in looking at mathematics as we do is to make one particular 
section – to cut pure mathematics off from its application.  
32
 
The difficulty with this approach is to know where to make the section. The similarity 
between , for instance, the two prose-sentences “A quadratic equation has two roots” and “A 
human being has two eyes” might suggest that they are both propositions of applied 
mathematics. But the former, unlike the latter, is not an application of arithmetic to a given 
subject matter outside the arithmetic-algebraic calculus. 
At this time, a mathematical calculus or system is often compared with the game of chess. 
The French mathematician and philosopher Luis Couturat sketched the nature of mathematics 
as follows: 
A mathematician never defines magnitudes [or numbers] in themselves, as a 
philosopher would be tempted to do; he defines their equality, their sum and their 
product, and these definitions determine, or rather constitute, all the mathematical 
properties of magnitudes. In a yet more abstract and more formal manner he lays 
down symbols and at the same time prescribes the rules according to which they 
must be combined; these rules suffice to characterize these symbols and to give 
them a mathematical value. Briefly, he creates mathematical entities by means of 
arbitrary conventions, in the same way that the several chessmen are defined by 
the conventions which govern their moves and the relations between them.   
33
!
I find this to be quite a good formulation of the idea of the symbolic view of mathematics as it 
was embraced by this time, and I would say that the germ of this view of mathematics was 
present already in Vieta. 
 
The Uniqueness of Wittgenstein’s Symbolic Approach 
It would, however, be a mistake to think that Wittgentein’s symbolic conception of 
mathematics was in complete agreement with that of any mathematician or scientist. 
Wittgenstein was not a mathematician but a philosopher, and he was not the sort of 
 Diamond (1976), p. 150.
32
 Quoted from Bell (1937, p. 624).
33

!
 
24
philosopher who worked in the service of science. He took from Hertz and others (Boltzmann, 
Weierstrass, Thomae, Hilbert, Einstein) what he found useful and clarifying for his 
philosophical work.  
One manifestation of Wittgenstein’s aversion to scientific ambitions in philosophy, it seems to 
me, is the final breakdown of his extensive collaborations with Waismann on a joint effort. 
Waismann did not separate philosophical and scientific ambitions as sharply as Wittgenstein 
did. In the first of his lectures on the foundations of mathematics in 1939, Wittgenstein is 
reported to have said “it will be most important not to interfere with the mathematicians.”  I 
34
believe that Wittgenstein felt that modern scientific ambitions are not always compatible with 
the aspiration towards clarity as an end in itself, and these aspirations of Wittgenstein’s 
manifest themselves most clearly in his style of writing. He does not write like someone who 
wants to accomplish ‘rational reconstructions’ of problematic mathematical notions. 
This is connected with the way in which Wittgenstein’s method of philosophical clarification 
differs from explication in the naturalistic sense of Carnap and Quine (who says that 
explication is elimination of philosophical difficulties). Wittgenstein starts from a 
philosophical puzzle and, in a sense, works backwards towards its source. The source often 
turns out to be a false analogy to which we are misled by prose. He does not eliminate the 
difficulty by avoiding it or by finding a way around it – a roundabout way that nevertheless 
leads to the scientific objectives or satisfies the scientific needs. When the source of the 
confusion is found, the philosophical task is completed. What the mathematicians or scientists 
will do with that clarification (if anything) is up to them. 
Let me return to Hertz’ idea, to which I alluded earlier, that the signs and formulas of a 
mathematical symbolism have “an intelligence of their own, that they are wiser than we are, 
wiser even than their discoverers, that we get more out of them than was originally put into 
them”. The activity-aspect of mathematics can throw some light on this remark. The ‘hidden 
intelligence of formulas’, I would suggest, is simply the manner in which a certain symbol or 
formula in its use is connected with so many other things in the arithmetical-algebraic system 
which we don’t survey and cannot foresee even if we master its use. This ‘intelligence’ seems 
to be hidden only because we do not survey the possible situations of use of the formulas. We 
 Diamond (1976, p. 13). 
34

!
 
25
do master them in practice, and we can often handle the new situations when confronted with 
them –even if it may require some extra effort in the new situations. 
That we do not survey all possible situations of the use of mathematical symbols is true also 
of the ‘moves of the game’ at the most basic operational level, where there is complete 
agreement in action among mathematicians about how to go on. The moves and features of 
the calculus at this level tend to be dismissed as ‘trivialities’ by mathematicians. But such 
trivialities are often precisely the topic of many of Wittgenstein’s investigations. I would say 
that this is why it is so difficult in many cases to understand what he is doing, what he is up 
to, in his writings on the foundations of mathematics. On this level of ‘trivialities’, the topic 
of ‘the nature of mathematical symbolism’ is a non-issue for the mathematician. No 
mathematician would get the idea of problematizing the following of a simple rule such as 
“Add 2” (i.e. iterating the operation of adding the number 2) as Wittgenstein does in his 
investigation of rule-following in the PI (§ 184). With respect to this difference between a 
mathematician’s concerns and Wittgenstein’s philosophical concerns, he remarks: “The 
philosopher only marks what the mathematician casually throws off about his activities.” (PG, 
p. 369). A higher degree of conceptual sensitivity is a characteristic trait of Wittgenstein’s 
symbolic approach. From the end of the 1930’s onward, this sensitivity also involves 
mathematics as a human activity, as an anthropological phenomenon. 
 
 
References 
!
Bell, E.T. 1937, Men of Mathematics, London: Victor Gollancz LTD. 
Bottazzini, U. 2003, Complex Function Theory, 1780-1900, in Jahnke (ed.), A History of Analysis, History of 
Mathematics Volume 24, Providence Rhode Island: Amer. Mathematical Society, London Math. 
Society. pp. 213-259.  
Cassirer, E. 1957, The Philosophy of Symbolic Forms, Volume Three: The Phenomenology of Knowledge, New 
Haven and London: Yale University Press. 
Diamond, C., (ed.), 1976, Wittgenstein’s lectures on the foundations of mathematics, 1939, Chicago and London: 
The University of Chicago Press. 
Grattan-Guinness, 2004, The mathematics of the past: distinguishing its history from our heritage, Historia 
Mathematica 31: 163-185. 

!
 
26
Gödel, K., 1964, Russell’s Mathematical Logic, in Benacerraf, P. and Putnam, H., (eds.), Philosophy of 
Mathematics, Englewood Cliffs.  
Epple, M. 2003. The End of the Science of Quantity: Foundations of Analysis 1860-1910. In Jahnke (ed.), A 
History of Analysis, History of Mathematics Volume 24, Providence Rhode Island: Amer. 
Mathematical Society, London Math. Society. pp. 291-323. 
Hertz, H. 1956, The Principles of Mechanics Presented in a New Form, New York, Dover (English translation of 
Die Prinzipen der Mechanik in neuem Zusammanhange dargestellt, Leipzig, 1894.) 
Hopkins, B.C., 2011. The Origin of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics, Edmund Husserl and Jacob Klein, 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 
Kastanis, N. and Thomaidis, Y., ”The term “Geometrical Algebra”, target of a contemporary epistemological 
debate”,< http://users.auth.gr/~nioka/Files/GEOMALGE.pdf>. 
Kjaergaard, P.C., 2002, Hertz and Wittgenstein´s Philosophy of Science, Journal for General Philosophy of 
Science, 33, No.1: 121-149. 
Klein, J., 1968, Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Algebra, New York: Dover Publications, Inc. 
Mancosu, P. 1996. Philosophy of Mathematics and Mathematical Practice in the Seventeenth Century, New 
York: Oxford University Press. 
McGuiness, B.F. 1979 (ed.), Ludvig Wittgenstein and the Vienna Circle: Conversations Recorded by Friedrich 
Waismann. Blackwell, Oxford. 
Putnam, H., 1990, Rethinking Mathematical Necessity, in Conant, J. (ed.), Words and Life, Harward University 
Press. 
Quine, 1965,W. V. O, Mathematical Logic, New York: Harper & Row. 
Stenlund, S., 2012a, Different Senses of Finitude: An Enquiry into Hilbert’s Finitism, Synthese, Vol 185, No. 3, 
pp. 335-363.  
!
Stenlund, S. 2012b, The ‘Middle’ Wittgenstein and Modern Mathematics, forthcoming in Dybjer, P. et al. (eds), 
Epistemology versus Ontology: Essays on the Philosophy and Foundations of Mathematics in 
Honour of Per Martin-Löf,  (Logic, Epistemology and the Unity of Science Series, NewYork/
Dordrecht: Springer Verlag.) 
Unguru, S. 1975, On the need to rewrite the history of Greek mathematics, Archive for History of Exact 
Sciences, 15: 67-114. 
Unguru, S. 1979, History of Ancient Mathematics, Some reflections on the state of the art, Isis, 70, No. 4: 
555-565. 
Viète, Francois (Vieta), Introduction to the Analytic Art, English translation in appendix to Klein (1968). 
Van der Waerden, B.L., 1975, “Defence of a ‘Shocking’ point of view,” Archive for History of Exact Sciences, 
15:199-210.  
Wittgenstein, L., [TLP]: Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, trans. D.F. Pears and B.F. McGuinnes, Routledge & 
Kegan Paul, London, 1969. 
Wittgenstein, L., [PR]: Philosophical Remarks, R. Rhees ed., trans. R. Hargreaves and R. White, Blackwell, 
Oxford, 2nd ed. 1975 
Wittgenstein, L. [PG]: Philosophical grammar, R. Rhees ed., trans. A.J.P. Kenny, Blackwell, Oxford, 1974. 
Wittgenstein, L., [PI]: Philosophical Investigations, G.E.M. Anscombe and R. Rhees eds., trans. G.E.M. 
Anscombe, Blackwell, Oxford, 2nd ed., 1958. 

!
 
27
Wittgenstein, L., [RFM]: Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics, G.H. von Wright, R. Rhees and G.E.M. 
Anscombe eds., trans. G.E.M. Anscombe, Blackwell, Oxford, 3rd ed., 1978. 
Wittgenstein, L., 1998, Notebooks 1914-1916, 2:nd ed., G.H. von Wright et al. eds., Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 

