Teaching English Grammar 
Communicatively in an Indonesian University 
by 
Bahagia Tarigan 
M A by Research Thesis 
Department of Communication, Language and Cultural Studies, 
Victoria University of Technology, Melbourne, AUSTRALIA 
November, 2001 

FTS THESIS 
428.2499221 TAR 
30001007530282 
Tarigan, Bahagia 
Teaching English grammar 
communicatively in an 
Indonesian University 

DECLARATION 
I declare that this thesis is m y own work and has not been submitted previously, in whole 
or part, in respect of any other academic award. 
Bahagia Tarigan 
13 January, 2001 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 
A C K N O W L E D G E M E N T S 
ABSTRACT 
CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION 1 
CHAPTER2 LITERATURE REVIEW 5 
2.1. Second Language Acquisition Theory and Approaches 
to Language Teaching 
6 
2.2. The Acquisition of Knowledge about Grammatical 
Rules 
7 
2.2.1. Linguistic Knowledge 
8 
2.2.2. Acquisition vs Learning 
9 
2.3. Teaching and Learning of Second Language Grammar 11 
2.3.1. Teachability 
" 
12 
2.3.2. Consciousness-raising and Focus on 
Grammatical Forms 
14 
2.3.3. Discussion 
15 
2.4. Communicative Language Teaching 17 
2.4.1. Communicative Practice and Grammatical 
Rules 
18 
2.5. The Learning of Tense and Aspect in English 20 
2.5.1. Tense and Aspect in English 
21 
2.5.2. H o w English Tense and Aspect Operate 
22 
2.5.3. The Acquisition of Tense and Aspect in 
English 
24 
2.5.4. Difficulties in Learning English Tense and 
Aspect 
27 
2.5.5. Teaching Approaches 
31 
2.6. Concluding Discussion 34 

C H A P T E R 3 R E S E A R C H D E S I G N 
35 
3.1. Research Aims 
35 
3.1.1. Specific Aims 
36 
3.2. Research Design 36 
3.3. The Two Teaching Methods 38 
3.3.1. Current U S U Method (CM) 
38 
3.3.2. Alternative Communicative Grammar 
Teaching Method ( A C G M ) 
39 
3.4. Student Participants 41 
3.5. Language Development Assessment Tasks 42 
3.5.1. Discrete Point Tasks 
44 
3.5.2. Modified Cloze Task 
45 
3.5.3. Writing Task 
46 
3.5.4. Speaking Tasks 
47 
3.5.5. Pilot Testing of the Tasks 
48 
3.6. Data Collection 50 
3.6.1. Pre-testing of Students 
50 
3.6.2. Data Collection during the Teaching Period 
50 
3.6.3. Post-test of Students 
51 
3.7. Data Analysis 51 
CHAPTER4 CLASSROOMS IN ACTION 54 
4.1. Explanation of the COLT Analysis Framework 54 
4.2. Planned Differences between the Two 
Teaching Methods 
58 
4.3. Characteristics of the Alternative Grammar Teaching 
Method ( A C G M ) 
58 
4.3.1. Present Simple and Present Progressive Class 
59 
4.3.2. Simple Past and Past Progressive Class 
67 
4.3.3. Present Perfect and Present Perfect Progressive 
Class 
73 

4.4. Characteristics of the Current Method (CM) 
79 
4.4.1. Present Simple and Present Progressive Class 
79 
4.4.2. Simple Past and Past Progressive Class 
86 
4.4.3. Present Perfect and Present Perfect Progressive 
Class 
~ 
91 
4.5. Conclusions 94 
CHAPTER 5 STUDENT PERFORMANCE WITH DIFFERENT 
TEACHING M E T H O D S 
97 
5.1. Differences in Achievement of the Experimental Group 
and the Control Group 
97 
5.1.1. Discrete Point Tasks 98 
5.1.2. Cloze Task 
106 
5.1.3. Writing Task 
112 
5.1.4. Speaking Tasks 
114 
5.1.5. Discussion 
117 
5.2. Progress Over Time within Each Group 121 
5.3. Conclusions 124 
CHAPTER 6 QUALITATIVE DIFFERENCES IN THE USE OF 
TENSE A N D ASPECT IN ENGLISH 
126 
6.1. Frequency Analysis - Forms Used by Each Group Over Time 127 
6.2. Patterns of Usage in the Guided Speaking Task 136 
6.2.1. Control Group 137 
6.2.2. Experimental Group 
152 
6.2.3. Summary of Differences - Guided Speaking Task 
167 
6.3. Patterns of Usage in Free Speaking Task 171 
6.3.1. Control Group 171 
6.3.2. Experimental Group 
183 
6.3.3. Summary of Differences - Free Speaking Task 
194 
CHAPTER7 CONCLUSIONS 201 
7.1. The Two Teaching Methods 201 
7.2. Teaching Method in Relation to Performance over Time 
202 

7.3. Teaching Method and Second Language Acquisition 
and Performance 
204 
7.4. Teaching Method and Different Types of Linguistic 
Knowledge 
207 
7.5. Future Research 209 
REFERENCES 212 
APPENDICES 221 

CHAPTER 1 
INTRODUCTION 
Since 1945 English has been widely used as a means of international communication (s
for example McCoy 1988: 1; Abas 1989: 30; Crystal 1997) and as a result, English has
come to be seen as the most important foreign language in Indonesia. In 1967 the 
Government, through the Department of Education and Culture, passed a ministerial 
decree to introduce English as the prime foreign language in secondary education (ye
up to year 12) and in higher education (universities and other higher education 
institutions) (McCoy 1988: 4). Despite such official commitments the level of compet
of students in English has not been as high as expected. In fact, Abas (1989: 30) has
commented that the ability of graduate students is low and their performance in Engl
poor. Similarly, Djauhari (1991: 26) states that Indonesian learners have not yet ach
the desired degree of competence in English. 
The term "foreign language acquisition" (FLA) is most appropriately applied to the 
learning of English in Indonesia as English is a language which is mainly learnt in 
classroom and has no major role in the surrounding community. This learning context 
contrasts to acquisition in a second language context in which that same language is
for institutional and social purposes within the surrounding community (Ellis 1994:1
1 

In line with research findings and developing language acquisition theories, English 
language teaching (ELT) in Indonesia has undergone several changes in methodology over 
the past three decades. Grammar-translation, direct methods, audio-lingual methods, an
contrastive methods have all been used and now teachers are gradually moving towards 
communicative methods (Nababan 1976: 1 & 5; Subyakto-Nababan 1993: 109). Whilst 
researchers have made valuable contributions to ELT, dealing with issues such as 
preferred learning style and preferred teacher behaviour (Thaib 1993: 5 and Pammu 1994
140) and highlighting some of the most common problems faced by Indonesian learners of 
English (Syahrial 1993: 6; Syafiah 1993: 3; Pammu 1994: 139-140), further research is 
needed in order to find more effective means of ELT. 
Recent research into ELT and FLA in Indonesia have revealed problems faced by the 
learners in a number of areas. For example, many studies have highlighted grammatical 
difficulties. Syafiah (1993: 3) suggests that unmarked forms of verbs, the selection o
tenses, and aspectual factors of the present perfect tense need greater attention. Sya
(1993: 6) also argues that acquisition of grammar is the prime problem of learners. 
Similarly, McCoy (1988: 10) argues that teaching English tense and aspect to Indonesian
learners is a real challenge. 
This thesis seeks to make a contribution to the research which is trying to understan
likely causes of problems experienced in teaching and learning English in Indonesia a
investigate how these can be addressed. Nababan (1976: 3) suggests that the 
unsatisfactory achievement of ELT in higher education mainly results from unclear 
2 

objectives in the syllabuses of E L T , a view also supported by Barus (1991: 5). In 
particular, Nababan argues that unclear objectives lead to difficulty in assessing 
achievement in the teaching and learning processes. Class size is also problematic in 
Indonesia. It is not uncommon that a class comprises 40-50 students. Whilst the teacher 
may wish to encourage the students to be actively involved in the class, practically th
be difficult to achieve. Pammu (1994:133) argues that large classes bring about several 
negative factors such as the students' discomfort, interactional constraints, difficulty
understanding the teacher, and lack of feedback from the teacher. To solve these problem
Barus (1991: 5) and Nababan (1976: 7) point out that there is a need for constructing a 
suitable syllabus in order to achieve desired goals in ELT. Nababan further suggests tha
ELT teachers should have access to resources for updating their knowledge and 
reorientating their methods. For example, a fairly recent study has shown that 
"communicating about grammar" tasks facilitate a great deal of interaction and suggests 
that they may promote fast acquisition (Priyana 1994: 99). 
Empirical research on ELT and learning in Indonesia has uncovered some of the most 
common problems experienced by learners, and more importantly, research also has paved 
the way for solving some problems experienced by Indonesian learners, but more 
classroom-based research is needed to find more effective ways to deal with FLT in 
Indonesia. Not only do syllabuses and teaching materials need to be reviewed and 
reorganised but I would argue new approaches to teaching problematic features of 
English, such as the tense and aspect system, need to be further researched in order to 
optimally achieve the objectives of ELT. 
3 

The aim of the research reported in this thesis is to investigate h o w the expression of tense 
and aspect are acquired during the process of learning English as a foreign language w
the classroom. Specifically, the research will compare the level and usage of English 
and aspect forms by two separate groups of students exposed to two different teaching 
methods. The first of these teaching methods is that currently used within the Diploma
English at an Indonesian university, whereas the second is one that includes activitie
based on the principles of the communicative approach to language teaching. 
The next chapter of the thesis reviews some of the key literature relevant to the rese
Following this in Chapter 3 the proposed research methodology is outlined in detail. Th
data analysis is presented in Chapters 4-6. Specifically Chapter 4 provides an analysi
the classroom processes in a selection of the actual language classes for each group. 
Chapter 5 presents an analysis of the contrasting performance of the groups on the ful
range of tasks that each group undertook. In Chapter 6 the development and use of 
English tense and aspect of the students in each group is considered in greater detail
focussing specifically on the spoken language production of each group. Finally, in 
Chapter 7, conclusions are reached about the outcomes of the research, and the 
implications of these are discussed. 
4 

CHAPTER 2 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Studies in language acquisition have contributed to theories and approaches to langua
teaching which may facilitate the process of acquisition. Chapter 2 begins by discuss
second language acquisition theory and approaches to language teaching. It moves from 
behaviourist to innatist theories and considers how some recent studies both in first
second language acquisition have contributed to theory development. In section 2.2. 
different kinds of knowledge of grammatical rules are discussed, considering how 
grammatical knowledge may contribute to the ability to use the language, and the 
distinction between "explicit knowledge" and "implicit knowledge" and how these may 
affect the acquisition of grammar rules. Section 2.3 deals with the proposed approache
to teaching the grammar of English as a second/foreign language. Section 2.4 deals wit
studies on the system of English tense and aspect and the developmental sequences of 
tense and aspect marking in the processes of language acquisition. In section 2.5 
communicative language teaching is discussed and some research on the application of 
this teaching paradigm to the teaching of grammar rules is considered. 
5 

2.1. Second Language Acquisition Theory and Approaches to Language Teaching 
Behaviourists 
First language acquisition studies have made valuable contributions to second language 
acquisition research. In studying second language acquisition one of the key issues is the 
extent to which the acquisitional processes in a first language are the same or different 
from those in a second language (Ellis 1985:5). U p to the end of the 1960s, behaviourist 
learning theory was very dominant in language learning research (Nababan 1976: 1; Ellis 
1985:20; Subyakto-Nababan 1993: 7). Behaviourists (Watson 1924; Skinner 1957) 
suggest that the acquisitional processes are something analogous to motor skill learning 
in general. They name the theory "the formation of habits" and argue that learning a 
language is forming new habits over old habits. These new habits will be formed by 
responding to stimuli through processes of imitation, repetition, and reinforcement. 
Behaviourist theory rejects any internal or mental factors as acquisitional contributors. In 
this era (1960s) several teaching methods such as grammar translation and audio-lingual 
were widely used (Nababan 1976: 1; Rutherford 1987: 29). Some of the teaching 
methods still commonly used in Indonesian textbooks for E L T draw on this behaviourist 
paradigm and focus on drilling. Their objective mainly focuses on forms and lacks 
function and meaning-based instruction and communicative practice activities. 
Innatists 
The stimuli which are claimed responsible for enabling acquisition by behaviourists are 
argued by innatists, such as Chomsky (1968), to only trigger innate mental processes in 
the brain of the learner. Innatists argue that a human has a "built-in" mechanism for 
6 

acquiring a language. Chomsky has termed this a "Language Acquisition Device" (LAD) 
(Ellis 1985: 12), although others have characterised this rather differently in terms
set of cognitive operating principles and strategies (see for example Slobin). Innati
argue that these built-in cognitive capacities draw on grammatical competence (a core
grammar) with its general principles that can be applied to all languages (Cook 1988
to process the input into output. They claim that these general principles allow any 
to learn other languages. Innatists minimise the contribution of environmental factor
the developmental processes of language acquisition. As a reaction to behaviourist 
teaching methods, such as the audio-lingual method, the cognitive-code method was 
developed (Krashen 1982: 132; Subyakato-Nababan 1993: 37). More recently, in line 
with the emergence of new theoretical developments in language acquisition which 
placed more emphasis on an interactionist perspective (egs. Pica, 1988; Long, 1985), 
communicative context of SLA and psychosocial factors which may impede language 
development, further new teaching approaches have since emerged, for example, the 
direct method, the natural approach, total physical response, suggestopedia, and the 
communicative approach (Nababan 1976: 1; Krashen 1982). 
2.2. The Acquisition of Knowledge about Grammatical Rules 
A plethora of studies (see for example, Dulay and Burt 1974a,b; Robison 1990; Anderse
1991; Shirai and Korono 1998; Bardovi-Harlig 1999) have suggested language 
acquisition occurs in stages, but it still remains unclear the precise processes by w
aspects of a language are learned and acquired. Bialystok's linguistic knowledge (197
and Krashen's learnt and acquired knowledge (1982) are amongst theories concerning th

nature of language knowledge in the process of S L A discussed in this respect. The main 
focus of this debate concerns whether or not practice can convert the explicit/learnt 
linguistic knowledge into implicit/acquired linguistic knowledge. Bialystok argues that 
explicit/learnt linguistic knowledge which consists of conscious grammatical knowledge 
can be automatically converted into implicit/acquired linguistic knowledge through 
practice. Similarly, Lightbown and Pienemann (1993: 718) argue that explicit knowledge 
learnt through formal instruction can change learners' competence and can facilitate 
further language acquisition. However, Krashen argues that grammatical rules are 
acquired in a predicted order and claims that explicit/learnt linguistic knowledge canno
be transferred to implicit/acquired linguistic knowledge by means of practice. He argues
that explicit/learnt knowledge can merely be used as a monitor. In this section aspects 
these debates will be discussed in detail. 
2.2.1. Linguistic Knowledge 
Bialystok (1978) divides the knowledge of language use into three kinds of knowledge, 
namely, "explicit linguistic knowledge", "implicit linguistic knowledge", and "other 
knowledge". Explicit linguistic knowledge is composed of grammatical knowledge, for 
instance, knowledge of morphological and syntax rules, together with other forms of 
linguistic knowledge such as vocabulary items, pronunciation and the ability to 
consciously articulate these, while implicit linguistic knowledge contains intuitive 
information about the language and the ability to use the language automatically and 
spontaneously. Bialystok refers to "other knowledge" as all the information the learner 
brings, such as the native language, information about the culture associated with the 
8 

language and other knowledge of the world. According to Bialystok explicit linguistic 
knowledge has three functions. First, it functions as a buffer for new information 
presented in a classroom. This information will then become automatic and transferred t
implicit knowledge after continued used. Second, the explicit linguistic knowledge acts
as a store for information which is always represented explicitly and the third functio
as an "explicit articulatory system". Bialystok argues that information represented in 
implicit linguistic knowledge may be made explicit. For example, by examining the 
grammar rules which are already unconsciously or implicitly used, the learner will then
notice and become aware of the grammar rules in question. Bialystok argues that the 
implicit linguistic knowledge functions as a working system for most spontaneous 
comprehension and production tasks. 
2.2.2. Acquisition vs Learning 
Dulay and Burt (1973; 1974a,b), Bailey, Madden and Krashen (1974), Bloom, Lifter and 
Hafitz (1980), Dulay and Burt (1973; 1974a,b), Krashen and Terrell (1983: 28), Krashen 
(1985: 1) and Larsen-Freeman (1976) are amongst those who suggest that grammatical 
rules are acquired in order. In order to aid the acquisition of these grammatical rules
Krashen (1982: 10; 1985: 1) puts forward five hypotheses (Acquisition-Learning; Natural
Order; Monitor; Input; and Affective Filter). Krashen and Terrell (1983) apply the same
division in terms of linguistic knowledge. They draw a distinction between "acquisition
and "learning" and claim that "acquisition" and "learning" are separate. "Acquisition" 
refers to the natural way of developing linguistic ability. This is claimed to be a 
subconscious process in which formal teaching does not help, while "learning" refers to
9 

formal knowledge of a language and is said to be a conscious process in which formal 
teaching helps (Krashen and Terrell 1983: 26). They argue that the former is the 
competence to use the language and the latter is knowing about the language and that 
"learnt knowledge" can only be used to "monitor" or self-repair. Krashen (1988: 112-
118) claims that the monitor is used to correct performance and that such correction wi
only be likely to occur when enough time is available and when the focus is on 
appropriate form. He contends that the 'monitor' can correct fairly well with simple ru
but with more complex rules it is not so successful. He divides conscious rules into th
which are not yet acquired (refered to as "late acquired") and those which are 'easy' t
learn. The easy rules (eg. the passive structure, wh-questions) and the late acquired (
third person -s, 's for possive and past irregular) may aid accuracy and produce L2 whi
appears better formed in monitored performance, such as in writing and in prepared 
speech. 
Krashen and Terrell (1983: 28) and Krashen (1985: 1) claim that certain structures are 
likely acquired early and others later in accordance with a 'natural' order. So that 
grammatical tense and aspects are said to be in a predictable order. The striking issue 
which Krashen (1985: 6) argues for is the role of comprehensible "input". He claims tha
language is acquired by understanding input a little above current degree of competence
(i + 1). Krashen (1985: 3) argues that the learners have to be "open" to the input so a
deactivate their "affective filter", a mental block which he claims inhibits the leaner
utilising the comprehensible input for language acquisition. 
10 

Bialystok and Krashen to some extent share the same opinions. For example, they argue 
that grammar rules which are not yet used spontaneously m a y be represented in the so-
called learnt knowledge/explicit linguistic knowledge. All knowledge about the language 
which is already acquired and spontaneously articulated is represented in the 
acquired/implicit linguistic knowledge. However, Bialystok argues that information 
represented in the explicit linguistic knowledge, after continued use, can become 
automatic and transferred to the implicit linguistic knowledge. She also further claims 
that other knowledge, for instance, the native language, can and does make a contribution 
to second language learning. In contrast, Krashen argues that the learnt/explicit linguistic 
knowledge cannot be transferred to the acquired/implicit linguistic knowledge. This is 
due to his claim that these kinds of knowledge are separate and discrete. H e claims that 
the former knowledge can only function as a "monitor". 
Bialystok's and Krashen's theories about the acquisition process and different sorts of
linguistic knowledge are amongst the theories of language acquisition relevant to the 
teaching and learning of grammar. However, it could be argued that not only is it 
important to observe the empirical issues regarding these theories about the process of 
language acquisition, but it is also worth considering on-going studies of approaches to 
the teaching of grammar. 
2.3. Teaching and Learning of Second Language Grammar 
In its broadest sense "grammar" can be used to mean anything concerning knowledge of 
a language, and thus to cover all branches of linguistics, including phonology, semantics, 
11 

morphology, syntax, and lexis (Fromkin, Rodman, Collin, Blair 1990: 15). In this 
discussion, however, grammar is used in its narrower definition to refer only to aspec
morphology and syntax. 
A number of researchers have investigated the place and means of grammar learning and 
teaching in SLA. Most important amongst these are theories of teachability (Pienemann 
1984), and those associated with consciousness-raising and focus on grammatical forms 
(egs. Rutherford 1987; Ellis 1995; Sharwood Smithl981; White et al 1991). 
2.3.1. Teachability 
Pienemann's "multidimensional model" forms the basis of his teachability hypothesis. 
This model proposes that language acquisition has two separate dimensions 
("developmental" and "variational"). The developmental dimension refers to the 
sequence of acquisition of certain aspects of a language which cannot be altered by ot
factors, such as learner and environmental factors, and the variational dimension refer
to aspects of a language which are dependent on differences in the learner or the situ
(Cook 1993: 93). The multidimensional model attempts to bring these two separate 
dimensions together. Pienemann (1984: 37; 1989: 55) argues that each developmental 
stage along the developmental dimension/axis is a prerequisite for the following stage
For example, the x+2 stage cannot be acquired before fully acquiring the x+1 stage. In 
other words, the learners only learn when they are developmentally ready. Pienemann 
(1985: 23) argues that the input in learning a second language should be graded from t
simplest structure (x) to more complex structures (x + _). According to him grading 

should aim to suit the level of current competence of the learners and to follow the 
natural sequence of predetermined acquisitional developmental stages and that grouping 
learners to the right stage is needed for the purpose of instruction. 
With respect to Pienemann's proposal, in fact, it is difficult to follow his suggestion in
many classroom contexts as the basis for grading/grouping of students takes place within 
broader institutional constraints, including factors such as expected class size, and 
number of years students have been enrolled in the program in question. Whilst grouping 
according to stage of development might be the optimal for facilitating language 
acquisition, it assumes a level of flexibility, specialised knowledge and time commitment 
to undertake the necessary assessment of students' development, and to then organise the 
class grouping around their level of development that is rarely able to be achieved 
practically. 
In the case of the particular study being proposed for this research project, the teaching
intervention took place in the middle of the semester as part of a larger course conducted
as an accredited university award-bearing program. The students had already been 
grouped according to their course year level, and had been introduced to many aspects of 
English grammar in ways that did not necessarily involve grading from simplest to more 
complex structures. The teacher who was involved in the intervention had to work with 
the approval of the department and using the proscribed syllabus as the prime determiner 
of the content to be covered. 
13 

In addition to these practical constraints, there is also the question of h o w long such a 
grouping may be effective. Every learner is likely to progress at relatively different pa
Over time this means that the initial group will no longer reflect a common level of 
development. Does this mean that regrouping takes place regularly or on an ongoing 
basis with the associated institutional and organisational issues? In short, there seem t
enormous practical barriers to undertaking the sort of fairly rigid grouping based on 
acquisitional stage that Pienemann proposes, even if it might be desirable for facilitat
SLA. Such an approach also devalues the importance of other aspects of class/group 
dynamics which may be facilitative of learning such as a supportive, non-threatening 
environment, and which may be affected if there is a constant movement of students 
between groups. 
2.3.2. Consciousness-raising and Focus on Grammatical Forms 
With regard to grammatical acquisition different tenninology is used by scholars, 
although they all share an interest in how classes on aspects of grammatical structure c
enhance acquisition. For example, grammatical consciousness-raising is an approach for 
grammar teaching proposed by Rutherford (1987) and Fotos (1994). This approach is 
aimed at raising the awareness of learners to enable them to notice the grammatical 
features of the language being learnt. This awareness is claimed to indirectly facilitat
process of acquisition. In other words, Rutherford (1987: 18) argues that grammatical 
consciousness-raising is a tool of language learning which attempts to provide the cruci
data for the learner's testing of hypotheses and forming generalisations. Rutherford 
claims that in grammatical consciousness-raising activities the learners will enter into

new unfamiliar system in the language they are learning. This system is different from 
that which the learner already knows (eg. their mother tongue and associated general 
linguistic knowledge). In other words, the role of grammatical consciousness-raising is as
"instantiations" of what he terms "familiar to unfamiliar " learning progression. For 
example, he points out that all languages have a basic word order that the learners are 
familiar with. However, each language has a specific order deviation that is unfamiliar t
the learners. The grammatical consciousness-raising attempts to aid the learner's 
perception of how such deviation is likely to be constrained in the language the learner 
learning. Rutherford further claims that grammatical consciousness-raising will bridge 
the gap between the learner's prior knowledge of how the major constituents are likely 
properly ordered for effective communication (the familiar) and the learner's ignorance 
of the specific grammatical devices that the language in question requires for the correc
ordering (the unfamiliar). 
Ellis (1995) proposes that the selection of materials for grammar teaching should be 
determined by the forms which are not yet used and the forms which are not yet properly 
used (problematicity). He advocates an approach using "interpretation tasks", which are 
designed to manipulate input. The manipulation of input is aimed to make the learners 
attend to specific grammatical properties. Ellis (1995: 94) points out that interpretation
tasks have three goals. The first goal is to enable the learner to identify and comprehend 
the meanings in a specific grammatical feature. For instance, he argues that the learner 
may understand that "bottles" indicates the plural form without noticing the "-s" in "I'd 
like three bottles please". The second goal is to induce the learner to notice a 
grammatical feature which they may fail to notice, and the third goal is to encourage the 

learner to notice the gap between the way a particular form functions to convey the 
meaning in the input and how the learner uses the form in communication. 
2.3.3. Discussion 
Pienemann (1985) argues that the teaching content should start from easy structures and 
move to complex structures and be graded according to the sequence of developmental 
stages, whereas Rutherford (1987) claims that grammatical consciousness-raising directs 
the learner's attention from what they already know to the language-specific information 
and by doing this they can learn the structure. Similarly, Ellis (1995) proposes his 
"candidature for instruction" through what he terms "problematicity" where it focuses on 
forms which are not yet used and are not yet properly used and the focus is on drawing 
learner's attention to specific grammatical features. In contrast to Pienemann, Ellis an
Rutherford do not consider it necessary to group the learners for the purpose of 
instruction. Both Ellis' interpretation tasks, and Rutherford's grammatical 
consciousness-raising, attempt to encourage the learner's awareness of language specific
properties that they might ignore. Pienemann proposes that the teaching content should 
be graded from easy structures to complex structures, whereas Rutherford proposes that 
the teaching content should be graded from general linguistic principles (familiar) to 
specific grammatical features (unfamiliar). Pienemann argues that for the purpose of 
instruction the learners should be grouped. He seems to put more emphasis on his 
hypothesis ( x +_) where each stage has as its prerequisite other stages, while Rutherfor
puts more emphasis on the activities which attempt to make the learners aware of the 
specific features in the language they are learning and enable them to notice them. Elli

proposes that the "candidature for instruction" is determined from the grammatical 
features which are not yet used and the grammatical features which are not yet used 
correctly, thus the learners' actual level determines what is focused on. This is very 
similar to both Pienemann's proposal and Rutherford's. The features which are not used 
correctly imply that the learner already knows them partially and therefore they are 
familiar to some extent. Ellis' grammar teaching activities are mainly meant to enable 
learners to notice the meanings conveyed by specific grammatical features. In other 
words, the activities attempt to direct the learners' awareness among the forms and the
functions and the meanings they convey. His proposal is similar to Rutherford's as he 
attempts to make the learners aware of the grammatical features which they might ignore
in the input. The most important issue discussed in this respect is Ellis'. Besides 
encouraging the learner to attend to specific grammatical properties Ellis also emphas
the need to encourage the learner to use these specific properties in communication. 
2.4. Communicative Language Teaching 
Currently, the dominant paradigm in ELT is the communicative approach, an approach 
that Yelden (1987:87) argues accommodates wider aspects of language teaching in 
comparison with the more traditional approach, which mainly focuses on linguistic 
structures and words. Communicative language teaching (CLT) is " an approach to 
foreign or second language teaching which emphasises that the goal of language learning
is COMMUNICATIVE COMPETENCE" (Richards, Piatt and Piatt 1992: 65). In other 
words, the learners should be able to both use the grammatical rules correctly and to b
capable of appropriately using them according to sociocultural rules (eg. to know when,
17 

where, and to w h o m ) in everyday situations (Scott 1981:71; Nunan 1988: 25; Dubin and 
Olshtain 1986: 76). Brumfit (1979: 188) defines a communicative methodology as 
starting with communication and exercises that challenge students to communicate. 
Exercises such as information gap activities, role play, simulation, and language game
can promote communication (Morrow 1981: 62; Howatt 1984: 279; Johnson 1982: 150-
1). Similarly, Morrow (1981: 61) and Nunan (1989: 59) suggest that tasks for the 
communicative classroom should contain skilled behaviour needed in genuine 
communicative interaction outside the classroom. In addition, Littlewood (1981: 94) an
Dubin and Olshtain 1986: 77) contend that the communicative approach should go along 
with interpersonal relationships between teacher and learners, and among learners 
themselves. This relationship is an important factor in language teaching settings. Th
argue that the teacher should create a comfortable situation in order to lessen learne
tension and barriers and that this will bring about a cooperative and shared attitude 
thus facilitate communication. 
The next section will deal with practice, communication and the learning of grammar. 
2.4.1. Communicative Practice and Grammatical Rules 
Within the communicative paradigm a growing level of interest has developed in the 
place of formal grammar teaching (eg. McKay's "form, function and technique" 1985; 
Rutherford's "grammatical consciousness raising" 1987; Wood & McLeod's "meaning 
and form" 1990; Ellis' "interpretation tasks" 1995). One important issue is whether or n
and, if so how, to teach grammar in second and foreign language classes (Celce-Murcia 

and Hilles 1988: 1). Ur (1988: 4-5) argues that ability to communicate effectively may 
not be achieved most quickly by means of pure communication practice and claims that 
learning of grammar is one of the means to thoroughly master the language as a whole. 
This claim implies that both communicative practice and learning grammatical rules are 
equally important in the mastery of the language as a whole. Similarly, McKay (1985: 
xvii) argues that carefully selected functions of grammatical features introduced to a c
will encourage learners' communication. Rutherford (1987: 27) also strongly claims that 
not only is grammatical instruction considered necessary, but it is considered a suffici
condition in achieving successful language learning. Nunan (1989:59) suggests that tasks
designed for grammar instruction should encourage students to participate in 
communicative interaction activities in order to aid the acquisition. Although Krashen 
and Terrell (1983: 72) strongly argue that the provision of comprehensible input is more 
valuable in aiding acquisition than grammatical instruction, they, nevertheless, admit th
grammar has a role in the second language program as well as being important for future 
linguists and teachers. 
To summarise, proponents of communicative language teaching advocate that the 
selection and the design of the tasks as well as grammar instruction for grammar teaching
should encourage learners to actively participate in communicative interaction activitie
so as to facilitate acquisition. 
In grammar teaching tense and aspect are best understood in conjunction with each other. 
Tense and aspect are two grammatical features which need to be explained clearly before 
19 

proceeding further, so in section 2.5 the relationship between the two features will be 
further explicated. 
2.5. The Learning of the Tense and Aspect in English 
Tense and aspect in English are two integrated grammatical features. Richards (1988: 
391) for example, claims that sentences in English contain both tense and aspect. In 
contrast, Shirai and Korono (1999:246) state a sentence may consists either tense, aspec
or both, but regardless of which of these possibilities pertains, these two features are
important in establishing time reference and the way the speaker views a situation. 
DeCarrico (1986: 665) also suggests that the clarification of tense and aspectual 
relationships are important to avoid confusion for learners. Research also has suggested
that the acquisition of tense is influenced by the acquisition of aspect (see, for examp
Andersen 1991: 306; Bardovi-Harlig and Reynolds 1995: 665). 
Research has shown the order of acquisition of English tense/aspect morphology (Dulay 
and Burt 1974b; Madden, Bailey, and Krashen 1974; Andersen 1991) and has also shown 
that aspect can either be encoded clearly within a verb or inherently exist within a ver
a predicate. The following section describes the relationship between tenses and aspects
in English. 
20 

2.5.1. Tense and Aspect in English 
Tense and aspect are two main constituents that govern the structure and meaning of a 
sentence. Tense can be described as "a set of grammatical markings which are used to 
relate the time of events described in a sentence to the time of the utterance itself." 
(Richards 1981: 392). Traditionally, English tense can be grouped into three main tenses
past, present, and future (Hartmann and Stork 1972: 235), a three-way distinction that is
also called deitic (Bache 1994: 4). The verb 'play1, for example, in "We play tennis in 
private courts" refers to present time and the verb 'play' in "We played tennis in privat
courts" refers to past time of tense and 'will play' in "We will play tennis in private 
courts." refers to future (Andersen 1991: 307). These three sentences can be said to dif
in terms of tense. 
The term aspect can be described as "ways of viewing the internal temporal constituency 
of a situation" (Comrie 1976:3). Smith (1983: 480) refers to this as 'viewpoint' aspect. I
a general definition, English aspect has been divided in two basic categories, that is, 
perfective and progressive (Richards, Piatt and Piatt 1992: 376). For example, "I have 
read the newspaper.", "I had read the newspaper.", "I will have read the newspaper.", are
perfective aspect, whilst "I am reading the newspaper.", I was reading the newspaper.", 
and "I will be reading the newspaper.", are progressive or continuous aspect (Hartmann 
and Stork 1972: 20). In the next section the relationship between tense and aspect and 
how these operate in English will be discussed in detail. 
21 

2.5.2. H o w Tense and Aspect Operate in English 
The tense system provides information dealing with the time of an event and the aspect 
system provides information dealing with the nature of the event which the verb refers to
(Richards 1981: 392). Richards explain that an event, in terms of aspect, may be 
described as changing, repeated, habitual, or complete. He argues that two sentences may 
have the same tense but have different grammatical aspect (eg. "Tim worked." and "Tim 
was working") with the difference between the two sentences being that the non-
progressive verb 'worked' in the first sentence refers to a complete event, whilst the 
progressive verb 'was working' in the second sentence refers to a changing event. 
In addition, the choice of progressive aspect and non-progressive aspect is associated 
with a difference between kinds of situation to which the verb refers - a dynamic or 
stative situation (Richards 1981). For example, 'ask' and 'believe' are verbs which refer 
a dynamic situation and a stative situation respectively (Quirk 1972). As Richards (1981)
demonstrates dynamic verbs can be put into the progressive form (eg. I was cleaning the 
kitchen this morning.) and non-progressive form (eg. I cleaned the kitchen this morning.)
whilst stative verbs are usually used in the simple non-progressive only (eg. I know the 
answer.). For dynamic verbs then, the simple form (non-progressive) is used to describe 
actions as complete and the progressive form to describe actions as incomplete, changing 
or developing. 
Andersen (1991: 308) has developed a more-detailed analysis of how aspect operates. He 
argues that in a particular language aspect may be explicitly encoded by means of an 
auxiliary or inflections - represented in verbal endings, termed by Robison (1995: 345) a

grammatical aspect. For example, " W e were playing a tie-breaker when m y racket 
broke." and "We have played tennis since we were nine.", refer to progressive aspect and 
perfect aspect respectively. However, Andersen argues that such an aspect may not be 
explicitly encoded. Inherent' aspect may exist within the verb or predicate which 
represents the situation or the event. For example, "We played a great game." is 
associated with a single event. The aspect is represented by the context, not by the verb
played (p. 307). 
Vendler (1967: 107-108) has categorised 'inherent' aspect into activity, accomplishment, 
achievement, and state, in contrast to Quirk's (1972) two main distinctions, dynamic and 
stative. Andersen (1991) has somewhat different terms for these categories grouping 
them as state, activity, telic event, and punctual event. He states that activity, telic 
and punctual event are non-stative or dynamic. States (eg. like, want, and hate) have 
stative inherent aspect with no change over time. Activities (eg. listen, study, and run)
have durative inherent aspect thus involve a span of time and do not have a specific 
endpoint. Telic events such as in "paint a picture" and 'build a house" have inherent 
aspect of activities and inherent aspect of punctual events. In contrast, telic events ha
inherent duration and endpoint. Whilst punctual events have momentaneous inherent 
aspect and an endpoint as in "lose something" and "find something", they have no 
duration (p: 134). Bardovi-Harlig and Reynolds (1995:108-109) term this instantaneous 
point (a single point). They state that the punctual events may have the beginning and an
endpoint as in "The race began." and "The game ended.". 

Tense involves expression of the concept of the time, specifically the time when the event 
being discussed took place. For example, the present tense refers to an event that take
place in the present and the past tense refers to an event that took place in the past.
contrasts with aspect that relates to the situations the verb refers to or the inheren
(eg. stative or dynamic) the verb possesses. Therefore, it can be argued that the stru
or the performance of a sentence is not merely deterrnined by the time when the event 
occurs, but is also governed by the inherent aspect of the verb. These two factors will
govern the whole meaning of the sentence (eg. present or past and repeated or developin
event). This leads to an important question, how these two factors are acquired by 
learners of English. 
2.5.3. The Acquisition of Tense and Aspect in English 
There have been many studies carried out researching the area of tense and aspect 
acquisition in the first language (egs. Antinucci and Miller 1976; Bloom, Lifter, and 
Hafits 1980) and second language (egs. Dulay and Burt 1974b; Bailey, Madden, and 
Krashen 1974; Andersen 1991; Robison 1995; and Hinkel 1997). One approach has been 
to research how the morphology of tense and aspect is acquired by non-native speakers o
English. Dulay and Burt's findings (1974) suggest that for second language learners 
acquiring verb morphology, progressive -ing and copula (contractible 's) are acquired 
first followed by auxiliary, past irregular, past regular and third person singular -s
findings are supported by other studies which suggest that adult learners' development 
sequence is similar to that of children learning English as a second language (Bailey, 
Madden, and Krashen 1974). Similarly, Andersen (1991:318) and Bardovi-Harlig and 

Reynolds (1995) have found that learners rarely use past forms in the early stages. 
However, Gradman and Hanania's findings (1990) conflict with those of earlier findings 
in the case of regular past verb (-ed marking) being acquired before copula. In Gradman
and Hanania's study regular forms (eg. wanted and selected) and irregular forms (eg. ga
and bought) are combined together. They term verb + -ed an easy structure, verb + -s an
intermediate structure, with modals being difficult structures. They suggest that copul
acquired after verb + -s and is eventually followed by modals. 
The use of tense and the accuracy of using it appear to be influenced by several factor
Levels of proficiency, passage context, and lexical aspectual class are suggested among
the factors which have influence. Gradman and Hanania (1990) and Robison (1995), for 
example, have suggested that level of proficiency is related to the accuracy of using t
and aspect. Gradman and Hanania have revealed significant differences in the 
performance of using verb + -s form for lower levels (Intermediate and Low) and for all
levels of proficiency for modals. Similarly, Bardovi-Harlig and Reynolds (1995: 114) 
argue that levels of proficiency have influence on accuracy of using tenses. Their find
suggest that Level 6 has higher appropriate use of tense than those of lower levels (1-
Furthermore, Hinkel (1997: 306-307) suggests that passage context might result in the 
shift in tense usage. His study has demonstrated that students incorrectly used the ver
'gather' and 'expand' in "2,000 years ago people (1. discover) how to form glass 
containers. They (2. gather) melted glass on the ends of iron pipes and (3. expand) 
the glass by blowing through the pipes, (p. 306), His findings indicate that the use 
of past tense declines significantly in the gaps requiring 'gather' and 'expand'. Hinke
argues that discover is finite, but the interpretation in the process of making glass 

containers m a y be seen by non-native speakers as currently relevant because the process 
of making glass has hardly changed. Bardovi-Harlig and Reynolds also share the same 
opinion and argue that the use of tense depends on how the text is constructed. They 
suggest that"..., if a story is told in chronological order, the pluperfect (past perfect
unlikely." and "if all events are reported as sequential there will be no need for the pas
progressive, ....".(p. 285). Their study has also demonstrated how some learners use 
present forms for imaginative episodes which suggest past. 
In the acquisition of the aspectual system in English Andersen (1991) and Andersen and 
Shirai (1994: 135) state that in the early stage verbs (eg. believe and know) are used 
without inflections, progressive -ing inflection is mainly used with active verbs (egs. 
drink and eat), past and perfective forms are used with accomplishment and achievement 
verbs, whilst in the later stages imperfective forms are used with state verbs, progressi
imperfective with activity verbs, past perfective with activity and state verbs. Perfecti
refers to actions completed in the past or in the future (eg. I have seen the book.). 
Imperfective refers to continuous or repeated actions in the past, present, or future (eg
was raining all day) (Hartmann and Stork 1972). Andersen (1991: 319) argues that 
irregular past inflection is associated by learners with marking inherent aspect rather 
with past because it is more relevant to the meaning conveyed by the verb alone than to 
the time reference. He further argues that the use of third person singular -s inflection
associated with marking time reference for occurrence of event, it is not associated with 
the meaning of the verb. 
26 

Robison (1995) argues that the learners with lower proficiency level associate past 
marking with punctual events and verb + -ing form is associated with durative and 
punctual events, and the use of verb + s form is associated with states and durative 
events. In the higher proficiency levels the use of past marking spread from punctual 
events to durative events and punctual activities, and the use of verb -+- ing form 
strengthens as a marker of lexical aspect. He argues that learners at a lower level 
associate verb + s and past marking with lexical aspect, whilst for learners at a higher
level associate them with tense. The use of verb + s form associates present reference, 
past marking denotes time reference, and verb + ing form refers to aspect. 
Based on the empirical findings in first, second, and foreign language studies, there 
seems to be a predetermined developmental sequence in the acquisition of the tense and 
aspect system for native and non-native speakers of English. The findings show that non-
past forms are first acquired, followed by past forms (regular and irregular), verb + s 
form and, subsequently, modals. However, non-native speakers of English, particularly 
those who learn English as a foreign language, would normally take a considerably 
longer period of time to acquire the tense and aspect system in English than first lang
learners of English. 
2.5.4. Difficulties in Learning Tense and Aspect in English 
Research has highlighted some of the difficulties second language learners experience i
learning English tense and aspect. The relationship of the actual time of an event's 

occurrence with the speaker, hearer, and other participants, ways of describing and 
conceptualising external phenomena, different concept of temporal discourse frame, the 
relationship of tense and aspect, and the relationship of attitude and aspect are amongst 
difficulties discussed in this respect. 
Lakoff (1970) claims that the lack of understanding of the relationship of the actual time
of occurrence of events with the involvement of the speaker, hearer, or other participants
results in difficulty for non-native speakers of English in acquiring the usage of tenses
Learners need to acquire an understanding of the relationship of temporal aspect (actual 
time of occurrence of events) and the 'viewpoint' aspect of a speaker, and other 
participants involved in representing the meanings to be passed on to a hearer in order to
be able to use tenses appropriately and to understand the meaning they represent. Lakoff 
(1970: 846) also argues that other languages have similar distinctive characteristics of 
tense use and he claims that this brings about difficulty in acquisition for non-native 
speakers. Guiora (1983: 6-8) suggests that the usage of past tense is regarded as a 
pervasive problem for Hebrew speaking learners of English to the extent that some 
learners never succeed. According to him the failure of non-native speakers of English to 
appropriately use the past tense is associated with the ways of describing and 
conceptualising external phenomena which he attributes to the difference in concept of 
time between the first language and the second language being learnt. Guiora argues that 
not only do learners need a cognitive shift regarding vocabulary, grammar, and syntax, 
but also to recategorise information in line with the linguistic forms, and thus to 
assimilate other alternative different ways to describe, conceptualise, and experience 
events in and around them in order to be able to acquire the usage of tenses in English. 

Hinkel (1997: 300-304) recently has investigated the use of past tense by Chinese, 
Korean, Japanese, and Indonesian learners of English within a contextual frame. His 
findings suggest that inconsistency of use of the past tense is associated with differen
concept of temporal discourse frame. He demonstrates how the failure to use the 
appropriate temporal discourse frame is likely to occur when learners deal with 
information which holds true to the present time. He claims that such verbs as 'follows',
'pays' and 'makes' in "He said that a good student follows the teacher and pays attention
to the important point that the teachers makes.", are written in the present tense becaus
they are considered to hold true to the present time, even though the first verb has clea
referred to the past event. Hinkel also has found that the other likely causes of 
inconsistency in the use of frame result from type of verb (eg. stative verbs such as kn
and be) and context of the passage. 
Bardovi-Harlig and Reynolds (1995: 114-116) have identified difficulties dealing with 
the use of past tense and its relationship to lexical aspect. Their study indicates that 
native learners of English have a strong conception of the present tense when dealing 
with adverbs of frequency. This strong concept causes the learners to fail to notice 
contextual cues which are stated in the past tense. Overall, their study has found; a) th
use of past tense is low with activity and state verbs as compared with events, b) the us
of progressive is high with activity verbs as it probably has to do with the assumption 
the action is in progress, c) within the state verbs, the use present tense is very 
competitive to the use of past tense, d) adverb of frequency has great effect in the choi
of tense with correct use of past tense in the environment of adverb of frequency being 
29 

low. The rate varies considerable according to the level of proficiency because in higher 
levels the effect of adverb of frequency is very mild. 
Bland (1988: 60-66) has suggested that the use of the present progressive with stative 
verbs in formal speaking is problematic even for the most advanced students. This is 
because the meaning they convey, when they are used in the present progressive, is 
associated with emotion, desire, and attitude. He claims that the use of the present 
progressive with stative verbs may represent 'strengthening effect" as in 'I'm hating thi
weather.". However, stative verbs combined with present progressive may have a 
"weakening effect" as in "Are you liking it here?" Based on his study, Bland suggests 
that the incorrect use of present progressive by ESL learners is due to "... inadequate 
knowledge of the meaning and the functional range of both the progressive and the 
simple present". His findings also suggests that the use of the simple present by learner
is to refer to "characterising in general", whilst the use of the present progressive is 
refer to "describing something immediate or specific." 
In summary, contextualised understanding, a communicative approach, and explicit form-
based instruction are all claimed to be essential to aid the acquisition of tense and asp
(Bardovi-Harlig and Reynolds 1995; Hinkel 1997). This is discussed further in the next 
section. 
30 

2.5.5. Teaching Approach 
Research studies in English tense and aspect have contributed a great deal to teaching 
approaches. The past tense, present tense, present progressive, present perfect and present 
perfect progressive are amongst tenses to have been discussed. 
Riddle (1986) has researched the teaching of tense and aspect and suggests that in order 
to obtain good results in the teaching of past tense, activities should be designed to be 
communicatively and contextually based. She claims that this can contribute to the 
consistency of use of the present tense and the past tense. Riddle proposes several tasks 
together with teaching activities regarding the use of these tenses. These include the 
provision of examples in context from real-life materials (egs. novels, articles from 
newspapers, dialogue from actual T V programs), drawing on student experience to 
generate examples of the usage of the tenses, fill-in-the-blank and tense manipulation 
exercises, role plays, and generating discussion on real-life topics that require contrasting 
use of past and present tenses (eg. about past experiences, customs, ways of living). M o y 
(1977: 309) makes similar suggestions for dealing with the contrast between present and 
present perfect tenses. 
Similarly, regarding the use of present progressive, Bland (1988) argues that the teachin
materials should be strongly focused on the discourse context in which the progressive is 
used. To deal with the present progressive, she contrasts the notion of progressive events 
with non progressive states. Bland proposes that the materials for teaching the 
progressive should; 1) have a great deal of speaker's perception of meaning, range, and 
31 

scope of the progressive, 2) have focus on the function of the progressive extracted from 
discourse and complement communicative approaches. 
"Input enhancement" (Sharwood Smith 1991) is a revised version of the so-called 
"consciousness-raising" (Sharwood Smith 1981; Rutherford 1987). "Input enhancement' 
may help learners to sense aspects of the second language (White, Spada, Lightbown and 
Tanta 1991). Input enhancement focuses on drawing explicit attention toward properties 
of a language being learnt. They argue that "input enhancement" provides "positive 
evidence" and "negative evidence". "Positive evidence" refers to utterances which "give 
learners unconscious knowledge of what the language allows" and "negative evidence" 
refers to unacceptable forms in the language being learnt. Although they admit that 
negative evidence might contribute very little to first language acquisition, they argue
that it might be of great benefit in learning unacceptable forms when it is not possible
draw learners' attention explicitly to formal properties of a language being learnt. Thi
will aid learners to notice the aspects of the target language that may be unnoticed. 
Bardovi-Harlig and Reynolds (1995) have enriched "input enhancement" by expanding 
the tasks with the provision of the use of the past by means of contextualised instances 
extracted from authentic text. They organise the instruction into "positive evidence", 
"focused noticing", and "beyond positive evidence and focused noticing". Through the 
presentation of "positive evidence", learners will get the idea of how the target langua
works. The aim of "positive evidence" is to give the examples of activity verbs and state 
verbs in the past form, so as to provide activity verbs with adverb of frequency and sta
verbs with tense (eg. "I never saw that man again" and "He looked very clean."). With 

respect to activity verbs, the examples are given in the simple past and the past 
progressive context. "Focused noticing" aims at drawing learners' attention to identify 
the use of each of the tense/aspect forms and the use of the two forms. Learners are 
assigned to find the corresponding simple past from the past progressive forms. The tasks 
given to learners are also meant to draw their attention towards the relationship between 
lexical aspectual class and tense/aspect morphology by means of contextualised examples 
of both tense and aspect forms. The task following this is for the class to discuss the 
difference in meaning of the verbs in question when used in a different tense, such as in 
the simple past and past progressive. An additional task in "focused noticing" is to 
emphasise the use of state verbs in the simple past in the environment of an adverb of 
frequency. "Beyond positive evidence and focused noticing" focuses on the use of past 
with adverb of frequency. The focus of the instruction is also to draw learners' attention 
to the use of activity verbs in the past and the past progressive through extracts of 
authentic reading passages and a cloze passage. A writing assignment is then designed to 
deal with the use of the simple past and the past progressive tense set up by means of 
instructions. 
Bardovi-Harlig and Reynolds (1995) argue that when learners have noticed the 
differences between their first language and the language they are learning through 
carefUlly tailored instruction, various sources of authentic text, conversation, and other
sources of input (eg. news from radio and television) can provide evidence that the 
simple past is distributed across aspectual categories. 
33 

2.6. Concluding Discussion 
The demand of students for grammar instruction is relatively high in the English 
Department, Universitas Sumatera Utara (State University of North Sumatera), Medan, 
Indonesia. This results from the average level of students' English competence, which 
ranges from intermediate to low-advanced. The students in the program have a lot of 
previous experience in learning languages (eg. native languages, bahasa Indonesia, and 
English). Furthermore, some of the students are, in fact, English teachers at private 
English courses and schools. In order to meet the demand of the department and adult 
learners at tertiary level for enhancing their knowledge of English grammar and then-
ability to apply this knowledge, I would argue that grammar rules need to be more 
relevantly and meaningfully taught and learnt. Based on the literature about the 
acquisition of tense and aspect and the teachmg/learning of this aspect of English 
grammar it appears that this can probably optimally be achieved by using a 
communicative approach which emphasises focussed 'noticing' and the development of 
contextualised understanding and of implicit as well as explicit knowledge of English 
grammar. In the next chapter the research aims and methodology for the study into 
acquisition of English tense and aspect that has been undertaken in the Indonesian highe
education context will be outlined in detail. 
34 

CHAPTER 3 
RESEARCH DESIGN 
This chapter deals with the research aims and methodology. It starts by outlining the 
general and specific aims of the study, and expteining the focus of the study. After this
research design is outlined beginning with an explanation of the two different teaching 
methods and including discussion of the principal differences between them. Following thi
the background of the participants and the process of their selection and allocation to t
two groups is explained. The next section of the chapter then explains the nature and 
process of development of the language development assessment tasks used to collect data 
about the students' use of tense and aspect in English. Finally, the data collection proce
is discussed as well as the intended approaches to the data analysis. 
3.1. Research Aims 
The general aim of the research is to investigate the effectiveness of methods of grammar
teaching in facilitating the acquisition of English grammar by Indonesian university 
students. The area of English grammar selected as the focus of this project is tense and 
aspect, an area where Indonesian students experience considerable difficulty. The main 
thesis is that grammar will be acquired more effectively if the approach to teaching 
includes principles from coinmunicative grammar teaching pedagogy. 

3.1.1. Specific Aims 
The specific aims of the research are: 
1. To undertake teaching of tense/aspect using two different approaches, one of which 
includes principles based on communicative grammar teaching pedagogy. 
2. To investigate the extent to which the application of communicative grammar teaching 
pedagogy to the teaching of tense/aspect in English can facilitate their acquisition in a 
classroom context. 
3. To monitor and document the progress of students in their acquisition of English tense 
and aspect in the context of classroom processes. 
4. To assess the relative impact of these approaches on the understanding and use of 
tense/aspect by students both during the teaching phase and after the teaching has been 
completed. 
5. To assess the extent to which the teaching method may affect the forms of linguistic 
knowledge the learner has access to (eg. implicit/acquired vs. exphcit/learnt), and thus 
their performance on different task types. 
3.2. Research Design 
This study is aimed at investigating the learning of and use of English tense and aspect b
adult Indonesian learners enrolled in the second year of the Diploma of English at the 
University of North Sumatra (USU). In particular, it investigates the extent to which the 
use of some aspects of a communicative grammar teaching pedagogy may facilitate 
students' acquisition of English tense and aspect in comparison with the current grammar 

teaching method used widely within the university. In addition to investigating the product 
of students' learning, an important component of the study is an investigation of the 
language acquisition process over time within the classroom. 
A range of data was collected during fieldwork and these data are then analysed. The 
experimental method (Hatch and Farhady, 1982; Nunan, 1992) was used for collecting 
data on students' language development over time, with the students being randomly 
assigned to one of two teaching methods (Current Method (CM) and Alternative 
Communicative Grammar Method (ACGM)) and tested on four occasions in all (Time 1 = 
pre-test, Time 2 = mid-test, conducted in the middle of the teaching phase, Time 3 = post-
test, immediately following the teaching phase, Time 4 = delayed post-test, four weeks 
after the conclusion of the teaching phase). With its focus on the performance of two 
groups of students over time the research design combines both longitudinal and cross-
sectional approaches to documenting language development. These data allowed for the 
effectiveness of current teaching method and classroom processes to be investigated 
together with the impact of the alternative approach on students' acquisition of English 
tense and aspect. 
In this next section the two teaching methods to which the participants were assigned are 
described. Subsequent to this the participants are described and the nature of the data 
elicitation tasks used and the process of data collection are outlined. 
37 

3.3. 
The T w o Teaching Methods 
The two randomly divided groups were formed into the two class groups of students. 
Each class group was taught separately for the 'Grammar' subject within their Diploma 
program over a period of 6 weeks. On average, the students in the diploma would be 
taking Grammar as one of five subjects in a given semester, and would study the Grammar 
subject for two 100 minute sessions per week. The teaching was undertaken by the 
researcher and author of this research based on a planned approach to pedagogy for each 
method. 
3.3.1. Current USU Method (CM) (The Control Condition) 
Grammar is one amongst many subjects taught in the English Department in the USU. An 
analysis was undertaken of the means by which grammar has been presented and taught 
within the current USU English syllabus. According to the description of the syllabus 
designed for the department in question, the aims of the teaching of grammar subjects a
to enable the students to identify the grammatical rules and to use them correctly. This
means that the activities used in the classroom are currently focused on grammatical f
and the usage of grammatical features. Activities focusing on meanings and the use of t
grammatical features in real communicative contexts are not the main focus of syllabus. 
This orientation relates to another distinctive feature of the current curriculum: the 
division of the teaching of macro English skills (listening and speaking, conversation

reading, and writing). These subjects are taught separately from the grammar subject and 
are also handled by different teachers. In the grammar subject within the CM the method 
of teaching adopted is described below. This is identical to the method normally adopted
in grammar subjects within the USU diploma program (thus the title of the method), and 
involves the following elements: 
1. The presentation of specific grammatical features within one or two sentences. This i
aimed at focusing the students' attention on the use of these grammatical features 
isolated from a broader context. 
2. The explanation of these grammatical features within their usage. The explanation is 
aimed at enabling the students to identify the forms and to use them correctly. 
3. Grammar exercise. The aim of the exercise is to give the students an opportunity to 
demonstrate their grammatical competence appropriately. 
4. Correction and feedback. The aim of correction and feedback is to help the students t
fully understand the usage of grammatical features being learnt, but tasks are not 
designed to encourage students to engage in communicative practice. 
3.3.2. Alternative Communicative Grammar Teaching Method (ACGM) 
(the Experimental Condition) 
In the alternative communicative grammar teaching method (ACGM) planned by the 
researcher presentation and practice of grammatical features are undertaken in a way 
which was designed to be compatible with CLT. In particular, the activities, adapted fro
39 

Celce-Murcia (1988), present examples of the grammatical features in real-life 
communicative contexts. These basic stages in teaching were planned to be followed: 
1. The presentation of specific grammatical features is extracted from simple paragraphs
or conversations. The tasks here are aimed at focusing the students' attention on the 
use of the grammatical features within their natural context. 
2. The explanation of the grammatical features within the usage. This aims at focussing 
the students' attention on the use of the grammatical features, to make them conscious 
and aware of the forms and the functions, and more importantly, to understand the 
meanings they conveyed through their natural context. 
3. Grammar exercise. The aim of this exercise is to give the students an opportunity to 
demonstrate their grammatical competence appropriately. 
4. Correction and feedback. The correction and the feedback from the teacher had the 
same aim as that of the CM. 
5. Communicative Practice. The objective of the communicative practice stage is to 
provide an atmosphere which encourages the students to communicate with their 
fellow students in small groups or pairs applying the grammatical features being learnt. 
In the ACGM correction is planned to be undertaken somewhat differently from in the 
CM. Correction is made after the grammar exercises. This correction is aimed to ensure 
that the learners fully understand the grammatical features being learnt and to make the
learners aware of the form, function, and the meanings (Ellis 1995). However, correction 

is not planned to be made when the learners are engaged in communicative practice, as it 
would obstruct the flow of communicative activities and would also discourage the 
learners from communicating due to their mistakes. The ungrammatical features that may 
occur during communicative practices are only to be put forward, discussed, and 
corrected when the tasks have been completed. 
In recognition of the tensions associated with the researcher's involvement as the teache
for each of the teaching methods, and the potential that this may create for unintended 
changes in the teaching methods actually adopted, it was decided to include in the resear
design an independent means of recording and analysing classroom processes and 
activities. This was achieved by recording 3 classes for each teaching method and 
undertaking an analysis of these recordings applying Frohlich and Spada's (1995) 
Communicative Orientation of Language Teaching (COLT) Scheme to examine the nature 
of the activities and episodes in the classes in each of the teaching methods. 
3.4. Student Participants 
The students who participated in the research were all Indonesians and had received their
education through the medium of the national lingua franca, Bahasa Indonesia. All the 
students were enrolled in their third semester of the Department of English's Diploma 
Program at the Universitas Sumatera Utara (State University of North Sumatra). Prior to 
their enrolment in the Department of English Diploma Program, the students had studied 

English formally for at least six years - three years at Sekolah Menengah Pertama (year 7 -
year 9) and another three years at Sekolah Menengah Atas (year 10 - year 12). 
The student cohort of 57 was randomly divided into two classes. This division of the 
cohort was made for the purpose of separation of teaching between the proposed 
alternative communicative approach (ACGM, the experimental group) and the current 
approach (CM, control group). Over a period of 6 weeks each class was taught separately 
by the same teacher using one or the other of these two methods, which have been 
outlined in the previous section. Altogether each class group participated in data coll
tasks involving the use of tense and aspect in English on four separate test occasions. 
Because of absences from designated classes only 21 of the 57 students completed all 
tasks at each of the four test times. This group of 21, which comprised 11 students in t
experimental group (ACGM) and 10 students in the control group (Current Method) are 
the focus for the analysis of language acquisition and use in Chapters 5 and 6. 
3.5. Language Development Assessment Tasks 
Data on the students' use and development of tense and aspect in English were collected 
through a series of 4 sets of language development assessment tasks (pre-test (Time 1), 
mid-test (Time 2), post-test (Time 3), and delayed post-test (Time 4)). Each set 
comprised a number of modules designed to enable students to exhibit different aspects 
their productive competence in the use of tense and aspect in both speaking (recorded o
42 

tape) and written activities. S o m e activities were designed to enable a closer focus on 
form and explicit/learnt knowledge (eg. discrete point, fill-the-gap tasks) whereas other
had a stronger focus on the integrated and spontaneous use of language and, thus, of 
implicit/acquired knowledge. The tasks were aimed at providing evidence of the level of 
knowledge of the students of features of tense and aspect and also to obtain data on 
overall group means and performance 
The Language Development Assessment Tasks developed for the research included: 
a discrete point tasks 
 modified cloze task 
 writing task 
 speaking tasks 
All tasks and task items were developed prior to the commencement of the data collection 
phase of the project and were designed to be equivalent in difficulty and format. The 
allocation of items and tasks to each of the 4 separate sets of assessments was undertaken
on a random assignment basis. Details of the process of development and piloting of each 
of the task types is provided below. 
3.5.1. Discrete Point Tasks 
The discrete point tasks involved gap filling exercises in individual sentences in sets o
items with each set requiring choice between two contrasting aspects (and, in one case, 

tense); present simple vs present progressive, simple past vs past progressive, present 
perfect vs present perfect progressive, past perfect vs past progressive, the future (will vs
going to), past (habitual - used to) vs simple present. In each sentence a verb is missing 
and the base verb form is included in brackets. The task requires the student to decide on 
the appropriate form of the verb in each sentence and write this into the gap. 
Put the verb into the correct form, present continuous or present simple. 
[Instruction] 
Examples: Please don't make so much noise, I... cwvu $CuclyiY\fy.... (study). 
This machine ... do&y 
KVOC" \oorh... (not/work). It hasn't worked 
for years. 
l.The economic situation 
(get) worse. 
2.Laurence usually (play) badminton, but 
today he 
(play) table tennis. 
The intention behind this task was to maximise the opportunity for the learners' attention 
to be focussed on the choice of the form of the verb. The four sets of discrete point tasks 
are provided in full in Appendix 3.1. 
The performance of learners was analysed statistically using the SPSS package. The 
assessment of language development for the discrete point tasks was based on the mean 
scores and standard deviations for each group. 

3.5.2. Modified Cloze Task 
The modified cloze task was selected to have a strong focus on contexts requiring the 
present perfect tense. However, the cloze task was open to other tenses and grammatical 
forms. Each cloze task comprised ten gap filling items within a passage of connected text. 
Each gap required the student to generate and insert a verb in the appropriate 
tense/aspect. 
Fill in the gaps with the most appropriate words and tenses 
Growing Old in America 
For years, the elderly were "forgotten" members of American society, but in recent 
times this has changed. The elderly 
(1) groups such as the 
Panthers to represent their rights. These groups 
(2) America 
politically, economically and psychologically. 
Each version of the cloze task was designed to be roughly equivalent in format and 
difficulty, and there was random assignment of versions to one of the four test times. The 
four modified cloze tasks are provided in full in Appendix 3.2. 
The scoring of performance of individual learners and groups was based on acceptable 
tenses and grammatical forms in each modified cloze task. The language development of 
each group was then based on comparison of the means and standard deviations, using 
SPSS statistical analysis. 
45 

3.5.3. Writing Task 
The topics for each of the four versions of the writing task were developed by the 
researcher, but the students were given a free choice to structure and compose their 
writings. This task was aimed at investigating the extent of use of the tenses being tau
in a context where there was a stronger focus on independent composition and 
communication in relation to a topic, but where there was some capacity for the student t
review what they had written given that the format was not one that required spontaneity 
and instantaneous production. 
The topics for each version of the task were developed to be broadly comparable in their 
difficulty and focus. The assignment of each topic to one of the four test times was 
undertaken on a random assignment basis. The four topics were: Changes to the 
Environment, Changes in Family Life, Changes in Eating Habits, Changes in Parental 
Attitudes. 
The performance of learners in writing tasks first was graded by two experts in assessing
students using the Australian Second Language Proficiency Ratings (ASLPR) from the 
English Language Institute of Victoria University of Technology (VU), with the final 
rating assigned to each piece being the average of the assessed rating of the two 
interviewers. The ratings obtained from the ASLPR were then analysed by means of SPSS 
statistical analysis. The assessment of language development for the writing tasks was 

based on comparison of the means and standard deviations for group and used in 
comparing the performance of the two groups (Chapter 5). 
3.5.4. Speaking Tasks 
The speaking task was divided into a free speaking task and a guided speaking task. It w
designed to produce the most spontaneous language from the students in a context where 
there was relatively little time to focus on the form of the language they were producin
and where there was a strong focus on self-expression and communication. 
The topics in the speaking tasks were selected from those topics considered to be most 
familiar to the students. The topics for the free speaking tasks were My Spare Time 
Activities, My Family, My Campus, and My Country, and encouraged use of descriptive 
and evaluative language. In the free speaking task the performance of the students was 
entirely dependent on their own capability to interpret the selected topic as no guidanc
(eg. pictures or key words) was provided. The topics for the guided speaking task were 
Reunion, Jogging, Bank Robbers, and Dinner Party (adapted from Fletcher.1994). In 
each of these tasks the students were encouraged to generate a narrative guided by a 
series of pictures. 
Each student recorded each speaking task onto an audio cassette. The recordings were 
also transcribed to enable detailed linguistic analysis (refer to Chapter 6). The langua

produced in the speaking tasks was considered to be the most spontaneous, and thus 
assumed to provide the clearest indication of the students' implicit, unconscious 
knowledge of English tense and aspect. 
The language level in each speaking task for each student was also graded by two ASLPR 
rating experts from the English Language Institute of Victoria University of Technology 
(VU) with each being assigned the average rating of the two independent assessments. 
The derived scores were then analysed by the means and standard deviation using SPSS 
statistical analysis to compare the performance of the groups (Chapter 5). 
3.5.5. Pilot Testing of the Tasks 
The Discrete Point task items were largely adapted from various ESL textbook 'fill in the 
gap' grammar exercises with some items also being developed by the researcher with 
approval from 2 native speakers of English. Discrete point task items were revised sever
times and then were pilot tested in an ESL class at Victoria University's ELICOS Centre 
with students of a comparable level to those in the Diploma in English in Medan. After the
first piloting the tasks were revised again, and then tested again this time in an ESL cl
from a different section of the University (students studying in the first year of a maj
English as a second language). After this second piloting only minor corrections such as 
missing words and incorrect spellings were required. 
48 

The Modified Cloze tasks and Guided Speaking tasks were adapted from reputable E S L 
textbooks. The topics for the Writing and Free Speaking tasks were selected by the 
researcher and approved by the supervisor. 
The Modified Cloze tasks were also tested out twice prior to their use with the USU 
classes. The first pilot test was administered at VU and the outcomes were discussed with 
the researcher's supervisor. The discussion was about the possibility of other forms of 
tenses and alternate grammatical forms used by the participants for the tasks. The 
approved final Modified Cloze tasks were then tested out in Indonesia. 
All four task versions for each of the five task types (Discrete Point tasks, Modified Clo
task, Writing task, Guided and Free Speaking tasks) were assembled, and then randomly 
assigned to each of the task times (pre-test, mid-test, final-test and post-test) prior to
commencement of the data collection. 
49 

3.6. 
Data Collection 
3.6.1. Pre-testing of Students 
Prior to any intervention in the teaching program all students in the second year Diploma
of English cohort completed the first set of Language Development Assessment Tasks 
(the pre-test) to assess their level of competence and knowledge in the grammatical 
features which would be taught. 
3.6.2. Data Collection during the Teaching Period 
During the teaching period, data were collected both on classroom interactions and 
processes and on the learning progress of students. Data collection included: 
 taping of at least 3 x 90 minutes class sessions for each method over the six weeks 
period. This taping included taping of communication practice pair work/group work 
in ACGM. 
 adrninistration of the second set the language development assessment tasks halfway 
through the teaching period (mid-test), including assessment of both oral and written 
skills. 
5 0 

3.63. Post-test of Students 
At the conclusion of the teaching period all students were assessed again using the third 
set of the language development assessment tasks. 
Four weeks after the conclusion of the teaching period all students were re-assessed to 
whether there had been any differences in retention of learning as a consequence of one 
other method using the fourth set of the Language Development Assessment Tasks. 
3.7. Data Analysis 
Data analysis in the following chapters includes: 
 Detailed analysis of each of the teaching methods both in terms of the planned teaching
methods and the actual classroom processes was undertaken using Frohlich and 
Spada's (1995) Communicative Orientation of Language Teaching (COLT) Scheme. 
The findings of this analysis are reported in Chapter 4. 
 Analysis of Language Development Assessment Task Performance of the Students 
within each teaching method group to determine: 
1. Relative performances on the various types of tasks and activities (Chapter 5). 
2. Acquisition process and the nature of students' second language production in 
learning English tense and aspect (focussing on the two speaking tasks - Chapter 
6). 

3. Differences in performance and process in relation to the teaching method (see 
Chapters 5 and 6). 
4. Short term and longer term effects of the two fundamentally different methods 
in students' mastery of English tense and aspect (Chapters 5 and 6). 
There were two stages in the analysis of the performance and language use of the studen
within each teaching method: the first focussing primarily on quantitative measures and
change in these over time and the second focussing more strongly on the nature of 
students' language production of English tense and aspect. 
Language Performance Data Analysis - Stage 1 
Standard deviations and means obtained from SPSS statistical analysis across all tasks 
(discrete point tasks, modified cloze task, writing task, speaking tasks) were used to 
measure the performance of learners. The performance was analysed from time to time, 
that is: 
a), from pre-test (Tl) to mid-test (T2), Tl to final-test (T3), and from Tl to post-tes
(T4) 
b). from T2 to T3 and T2 to T 4 
c). from T3 to T4. 
with the performance of the two groups being compared. The findings of these analyses 
are reported in Chapter 5. 
52 

Language Performance Data Analysis - Stage 2 
The analysis was aimed at exarmning in a more qualitative way the outcomes of each of 
the two teaching methods in terms of the nature and quantity of the language produced by 
the students in each group (reported in Chapter 6). This analysis focuses on how the 
students use English in spontaneous production and whether and how the groups may 
have differed from each other in such contexts. It was for this reason the analysis was 
based on the language produced in the most 'spontaneous' tasks, guided and free speaking
The analysis focuses on: 
 a frequency analysis exarmning the proportion of attempts of use of different verb 
phrase (VP) variants over time 
 average number of attempts of use of each of the tenses for individual learners over 
time, and the extent that this usage can be regarded as target-like or acceptable in L2. 
 the nature of the non-target like forms produced by the learners. 
As this discussion of the process of data analysis has explained the following three 
chapters (4 - 6) report on the different aspects of analysis of the data collected in th
study. Each chapter provides a different window through which the workings and 
effectiveness of the different teaching methods can be examined. 
53 

CHAPTER 4 
CLASSROOMS IN ACTION 
The Communicative Orientation of Language Teaching (COLT) Observation Scheme has 
been developed by Spada and Frohlich (1995) as a framework for recording aspects of 
classroom practice in order to ascertain the exact nature of classroom activities and 
evaluate how communicative the language teaching is. In this study comparing student 
performance and development in relation to two different language teaching methods, th
collection and analysis of observations using the COLT framework was undertaken to 
assist in verifying how and to what extent the teaching approaches differed (see Chapt
for more details on the methodology). To gain a clear sense of the format and the 
structure of classes three lessons were recorded for each method. Each activity in the
alternative communicative grammar teaching method (ACGM) and the current method 
(CM) has been analysed by means of the COLT observation scheme (Spada and Frohlich 
1995). After a brief description of the categories used in the COLT analysis this chap
will use Part A of the COLT observation scheme to analyse the three lessons for each 
the teaching methods adopted in this study. 
4.1. Explanation of the COLT Analysis Framework 
A chart is used for documenting classroom activities and episodes (referred to as Part
This chart consists of seven main categories; time, activities & episodes, participant

organisation, content, content control, student modality, and materials (refer to Table 
4.1 for an example of the C O L T Part A proforma). Time indicates the starting point for 
each activity and the length of time spent in the activity. Activity & episode indicates all 
the activities involved in the class during the teaching phase. T o be precise, Activity 
indicates the main topic or content given to the class and episode refers to the follow Up 
of the main topic or content. In much of the description these m a y also be referred to as 
sections of the class lesson. 
Table 4.1: Example of COLT, Part A Proforma 
School 
Teacher 
Subject 
COLT PART A 
- Communicative Orientation of Language Teaching Observation S c h e m e  
Grade(s) 
Observer 
Lesson (min.) 
VisitNo 
Date 
Page 
OSpM4FlMc*!B 
TIME 
1 
ACTIVITIES * EPISODES 
2 
PARTICIPANT 
ORGANISATION 
CtHS 
S 
: 
i  
3 
r~ 
s 
J 
4 
1 
i 
GIMP 
| 
E 
6 
3 
a 
E 
e 
 
5 
7 
Mhr. 
3 
 
E 
m 
m 
8 
I 
a 
B 
e 
E 
o 
 
CONTENT 
MMM. 
| 
8 
K> 
m 
s 
o 
11 
LtMOft 
f 
e 
12 
B 
e 
-6 
c 
n 
 
o 
m 
a 
14 
 
2 
15 
to#tc 
 
g 
1 
16 
1 
17 
CONTENT 
CONTROL 
| 
 
s 
m 
18 
1 
 
19 
 
5 
20 
STUDENT 
MODALITY 
3 
21 
1 
 
22 
m 
m 
m. 
23 
c 
* 
24 
 
i 
25 
MATERIALS 
TM 
Tut 
E 
X 
26 
 
 
s 
27 
 
5 
28 
a 
29 
Soarce 
a 
at 
3 
30 31 
00 
at 
i 
32 
m 
 
E 
o 
33 
FIGURE 2.1 COLT Observation scheme: Part A 
The remaining four main categories are used to analyse the activities in the class. 
Participant organisation refers to the way in which students are organised, with this 
category being divided into class, group, and individual. For example, if the central 
activity is detennined by the teacher - the interaction with the whole class or with 
individual students - the activity falls into the sub-category of class under T-S/C, whilst 
S-S/C indicates student to student/class interaction. Choral indicates that the whole class 
or groups engage in choral work, repeating a model from the textbook or given by the 

teacher. Same task under group indicates that the members of the groups or pairs work on 
the same task and different tasks indicates that the groups/pairs work on different tasks. 
Similarly, same task under individual indicates that students work individually on the 
same task and different task indicates that they individually work on different tasks. 
Content refers to the subject matter/theme of activities. This category is divided into 
management, language, and other topics. Management is divided into procedure and 
discipline. The former indicates a procedural directive. For example, "Please have a look 
at the passages and see how the words are used". The latter indicates disciplinary 
expressions in the class such as "be quiet please". The content category dealing with 
language is split into four sub-categories: form, function, discourse, and sociolinguistic
Form indicates a focus on grammar, vocabulary, pronunciation etc. Function indicates 
function/communicative acts such as requesting, apologising, and explaining and 
discourse indicates consideration of the way in which sentences are cohesively and 
sequentially structured in describing a process (e.g.. how to operate a video recorder). 
Sociolinguistics refers to consideration of forms or style used for certain contexts 
(formal/informal contexts). Other topics indicates topics which are used in the class 
activities and is divided into narrow and broad. Narrow refers to topics which are related 
the classroom and the students' immediate environment and experiences (personal 
information, routine school, family and community topics) whilst broad indicates topics 
beyond the classroom and immediate environment (international events, subject-matter, 
instruction and imaginary/hypothetical events). 
56 

The category of content control refers to w h o selects the topic. Content control is divided 
into teacher/text, teacher/text/student, and student. Teacher/text indicates that the topic
determined by the teacher or selected from the textbook and teacher/text/student indicates 
that the topic is decided by teacher and students and/or textbook. Student indicates that 
the topic is determined by the student/s. 
Student modality refers to the kinds of skill (e.g. Ustening, speaking, reading, writing, o
other) involved in classroom activities. Activities such as drawing and acting in 
classroom displays are regarded as other. 
Finally, materials are subcategorised into type and source. Wfthin type texts are classifie
as minimal or extended. Minimal indicates that the materials are selected from written 
text such as captions, isolated sentences, word lists etc., whereas extended indicates that 
the materials are selected from written text such as stories, dialogues, connected 
sentences, paragraphs etc. For the other two subcategories of materials, Audio indicates 
recorded material for Ustening and Visual refers to pictures, cartoons and other pictorial 
based materials which may encompass both audio and visual (e.g.. video). Source of 
material is divided into L2-NNS, L2-NS, L2-NSA, and student-made. L2-NNS indicates 
that the material is specifically designed for second language teaching (e.g. course books, 
teacher-prepared exercises, material etc). L2-NS refers to the material intended for native
speakers (e.g. newspapers, magazines, advertisements, brochures, etc.). L2-NSA refers to 
native speaker material which has been adapted for second language purposes (e.g. 
stories/texts which have been linguistically simplified) and student-made refers to 
materials such as stories and reports created by students. 

4.2 Planned Differences Between the T w o Teaching Methods 
In pfenning the class the researcher had planned to include certain differences in the ways 
classes were taught. 
Table 4.2 Summary of Planned Differences between Methods 
CM 
ACGM 
Class 
No. of 
Activities 
4 
5 
Presentation 
Phase 
features 
presented in 
isolated 
sentences 
features 
presented in 
contextualised 
environments 
Grammar 
Explanation 
Explanation 
of features 
being learnt 
as for C M 
Grammar 
Exercise 
Longer 
Shorter 
Correction/ 
Feedback 
grammar 
accuracy 
focus of 
correction 
As for CM 
Communicative 
Practice 
None 
Yes-
collaborative 
requiring 
communicative 
practice in pairs 
As indicated in the table the main differences were planned to be in the presentation 
phase, grammar exercise/s and communicative practice. 
4.3. Characteristics of the Alternative Communicative G r a m m a r Teaching Method 
(ACGM) 
To provide an independent assessment of the nature of teaching practice with ACGM 3 
classes involving teaching of the experimental group were taped. These classes dealt wit
the teaching of certain tenses and tense/aspect contrasts, specifically the present simp
and simple progressive class, the simple past and past progressive class, and the present
perfect and present perfect progressive class. Class materials are included in Appendice
4.1-4.3. 
58 

It was observed that the experimental group's class in each case had five activities! 
episodes: 
Presentation 
Grammar explanation 
Grammar exercise 
Correction/feedback 
Communicative practice 
All activities in the class are analysed by means of the COLT's features and categories in 
these sections. Except where mentioned all discussion by the teacher was in English. 
4.3.1. Present Simple and Simple Progressive Class (Table 4.3) 
Presentation 
During this activity the participant organisation involved the teacher addressing the cla
with individual students studying the handout provided to the class by the teacher. The 
teacher directed the students to look at the examples of the present simple and the simple 
progressive in the handout. The focus in this presentation activity was on the grammatica
forms and the functions of the tenses being learnt. However, the primary focus was on 
form. The examples of the tenses were given in the extended text type of paragraphs with 
the tenses being learnt presented in their contextual environments. At the beginning the 
teacher led the class and interacted with the class, but eventually students worked on the
own. Both teacher interaction with the class and individual work was involved, but 
59 

Table 4.3: C O L T Part A for Simple Present/Simple Progressive Class, A C G M 
3 
V) 
D 
eft 
o 
Z 
55 M 
> a, 
0 
o 
^ 1 
e 
3 
8 
I 
tii 
1 -8 1 
co H to 
09 
- 
CO 
z o 
UJ tc 
e o 
o o 
5 2 
CO 
aprm-iusptqs 
VSN-ZIS 
SN-71 
stw-Ti 
otpv 
Papuans 
MtRO 
aiS/mi/JMptai 2 
PWJ/MMPM1 
68 
 a. 
o 
to 
co 
CO 
|UMQ 
3fc~S 
a/s-i 
ir -i- ^ 
 
? 
s-
IS 
Y 
S5 
O 
'-P 
s 
CCS 
^ 
tr 
SS 
ir 
o 
S5 
-V 
^y 
3" 
& 
& 
SO 
^T 
ir 
^ J 
-v 
V 
25 
-
*
 
"X 
-t 
^r 
-*-
$ 
8 
t>4 
O 
6*J I 
sS> 
*  
Q 
cr-
a 

individual work was more involved in the presentation with each student looking at the 
examples of the present simple and the simple progressive in the handout. 
In terms of content, the teacher enacted di procedure in asking the students to look at t
handout and assigned them to study the underlined words in the excerpt of Marja and 
Bertrand's conversation (Adamson 1992: 12). The main objective of introducing these 
examples appears to have been to raise the students' consciousness of the structural form
of the tenses being learnt. In the presentation episode form was the primary focus. 
Besides form, function was also intended to be a focus for the students and this explains 
why the examples of the tenses being taught were given in the context. The topic being 
selected from the conversation was a very familiar topic (school activities), which is 
classified as narrow. 
In the content control only teacher/text is marked and is clearly the primary category. 
The selection of the topic and the content as well as the activity of the class was 
controlled by the teacher. 
In terms oi student modality three skills were involved in the class. Although the primar
focus in the presentation was intended to be reading the handout, some questions were 
raised by students. There ensued a kind of short, but genuine, communicative practice 
between teacher and students involving listening and speaking skills. However, the bulk 
of the time was used by students to read the text tentatively. 
61 

The examples of the present simple and simple progressive usage in the presentation are 
regarded as extended as they were given in contextual environments. The source of the 
materials are those specifically designed for second language teaching (Adamson, 1992: 
12). 
Grammar Explanation 
In this episode the whole class worked on the same task. In the participant organisation
T-S/C and same task were marked, but the teacher was primarily involved in interacting 
with the class. In this episode the teacher also distributed a handout as a guide for th
grammatical rules of the present simple and the present progressive to students. The 
teacher asked students to look at the handout and asked them to observe and study how 
the present simple and the simple progressive are used in various different contexts, bu
in isolated sentences. Individual work was also involved as when the teacher read and 
explained the examples of the tenses, the students looked at their handouts and read 
silently. 
Function was the primary focus in this grammar explanation episode. The teacher 
explained various usages of the tenses in different contexts with different meanings to
students. The topic being selected from the conversation was a very familiar topic (sch
activities) and is classified as narrow. 
The selection of the topic and the content of the grammar explanation as well as the 
activity of the class was controlled by the teacher. 
62 

In student modality, listening, and reading are marked indicating that the students were 
not using productive skills during the grammar explanation episode, rather being engage
in comprehension. 
Minimal and L2-NNS were marked respectively. The examples of the present simple and 
the simple progressive were given in isolated sentences with the materials being 
specifically designed for second language teaching (Murphy, 1985; Dean, 1993). 
Grammar Exercise 
Individual work was dominant in the course of the grammar exercise episode. The 
teacher only interacted with the class before the students started to do the exercises. 
When they had started the exercise they worked on their own until the time for the 
grammar exercise was up. The task for each student was the same for the grammatical 
exercise episode. 
Procedure, form, function, narrow were marked respectively in the content. However, 
form was the primary focus. The teacher only directed the class to do the exercise as 
procedure and then left them do the exercise on their own. In the grammar exercise the 
primary objective was grammatical accuracy - i.e. to get correct answers. Function was 
also involved because one part of the exercise was given in the form of dialogue and the
other two parts were given in isolated sentences. These parts were deliberately exclude
for the following classes in the ACGM so as to be more relevant to the contextualised 
examples and to allow the class to have more time later in communicative practice 
63 

episode. The tasks were selected amongst familiar events that were based on Laura and 
George's daily activities (Dean 1993:11). 
The selection of the task and the content in the grammar exercise was controlled by the 
teacher. 
In the student modality reading and writing were the two skills which were equally used 
during the course of the grammar exercise. Students read carefully the exercises and 
wrote the answers in the blanks. It should be noted that writing in the grammar exercise 
only referred to writing the answers in the blanks. 
The materials were selected from materials specifically designed for second language 
teaching (Dean, 1993). 
Correction/Feedback 
In the course of the correction/feedback episode both students and teacher were equally 
involved in the class. The activity in the correction/feedback was different from the 
activity in the grammar exercise. The students were asked one by one to read their 
answers to the class. The class was asked by the teacher to comment on the answers 
uttered by their fellow students. The whole class/students commented on the answer 
instantly. When students could not give the correct answers the teacher then gave the 
correct answers and explained again to the class until they understood. 

Procedure, form, function, narrow were equally involved. The teacher drew the attention 
of the class {procedure) and then had the students one by one read their answer to the 
class. The correction given by the students and the teacher both covered form and 
function. The examples of tenses being learnt dealt with familiar topics. 
The content of the task in the correction/feedback episode was controlled by teacher. 
In the student modality three skills were equally involved: reading, listening and 
speaking. The students were asked one by one to read their answers to the class and other 
students listened and commented to the class on whether the answers were correct or 
incorrect. These activities continued for the whole course of the correction/feedback 
episode. 
The exercises for the present simple and the simple progressive were given in isolated 
sentences and in contextualised passages. Therefore, it covered both minimal and 
extended text types. The materials were selected from materials specifically designed for
second language teaching (Dean, 1993). 
Communicative Practice 
In the course of the communicative practice activity students were given more 
opportunity to take part in the class. Perhaps because it was the first meeting students 
needed a lot of guidance with their tasks during the course of the communicative practice 
episode. The students were assigned to work in pairs. Interaction between the members of 
the pairs took place. However, it did not last very long. The teacher than asked the 
65 

members of the pairs to take turns to ask their fellow students, then the teacher changed 
the rules again because this still did not seem to work effectively and he then acted as o
of the members of the pair group directing the whole class/students (choral) to respond 
which they did. The task in the communicative practice for each pair of students' work 
was the same. 
Perhaps because the students within their pair groups were encouraged to actively 
participate in the communicative activities the class became very noisy and the teacher 
had to encourage the class to focus on the task (termed discipline). The objective of this
activity was to encourage the students to use the tenses being taught in the 
communicative activities and thus enhance their speaking fluency and also to raise their 
understanding of functions within their contexts. The topic selected for the 
communicative practice was regarded as narrow because it was familiar to the students. 
In the content control only teacher/text was marked. The topic in the communicative 
practice was selected from texts by the teacher and the activity was controlled by teacher
Listening and speaking skills were used most of the time during the course of the 
communicative practice. The students were asked to read as well as listen to the 
instructions from the teacher for the task. When the reading finished and the instruction 
was understood the students engaged in communicative activities. For the present simple 
and the simple progressive class the interruptions occurred several times. 
66 

Most of the time in the present simple and the simple progressive class was used for 
presentation, grammar explanation, grarnmar exercise, and correction and feedback that 
left only a little time for the communicative practice episode. This was because the 
grammar exercise was a bit too long. More time was needed to do it and also more time 
was required for the correction and feedback episode. Pairs of students did not seem to 
work effectively and the teacher repeated the instruction and encouraged them in many 
ways in order for them to actively participate in the communicative practice task. 
The tasks for the present simple and the simple progressive class consisted of lists of 
instructions in sentences and thus have been classified as minimal. The materials are 
selected from materials specifically designed for second language teaching (Dean, 1993: 
136-148). 
4.3.2. Simple Past and Past Progressive Class (Table 4.4) 
Presentation 
During the presentation activity the participant organisation involved the teacher 
addressing the class and in order to save time the teacher read the handout to the class 
and students were asked to look at their handout at the same time. Teacher interaction 
with the class and individual work were equally involved in the presentation activity. 
Listening and reading skills were involved for the bulk of the time in the student 
modality. In order to provide more time for the planned later commumcative practice 
episode the teacher initiated reading the handout to the class 

Table 4.4: C O L T Part A Proforma, Simple Past/Past Progressive Class, A C G M 
 
E 
E 
o 
15 
fA 
Q 
. : 
fcj 
-*-! 
? 
0=5i 
hool. 
acher 
bject 
(/> H 
co 

In the materials, extended and L2-NNS are both marked. The examples of the simple past 
and past progressive usage in the presentation activity were given in contextual 
environments selected from Fotos, Hopman and Poel (1994: 36). 
Grammar Explanation 
In the participant organisation the activity was mainly led by the teacher - the teacher
interacted with the class, read to the class the examples of the simple past and the pas
progressive and also explained the usage and the meanings they convey. Individual work 
was also involved. 
Function was the language content involved in the grammar explanation episode. The 
teacher started the class by asking students to look at their handout (procedure) and 
assigned them to examine the examples of the simple past and the past progressive. The 
examples of the simple past and the past were narrow. The selection of the topic and the
activity of the class was controlled by the teacher. The student modalities of listening
reading were equally involved. 
The examples of the simple past and the past progressive were minimal and selected 
amongst materials specifically designed for second language teaching with the primary 
purpose of functional differentiation (Dean, 1993: 21; Fotos et al, 1994: 36). 
69 

G r a m m a r Exercise 
Individual work was the most common form of participant organisation. In this episode 
the teacher was only involved when explaining the procedure to the class. The students 
worked on their own until the time for the grammar exercise was over. 
Form was the primary focus in the grammar exercise. Function was also involved. The 
examples were extended and selected amongst familiar events. 
The selection of the task and the content of the grammar exercise was controlled solely 
by the teacher. 
Listening was only involved when the teacher addressed the class about the episode. 
Reading and writing were equally involved. It should be noted that writing in the 
grammar exercise episode only referred to writing the answers in the gap blanks. 
The task for the simple past and the past progressive class was reduced to only one 
exercise in order to provide more time for communicative practice. The type of material 
was extended. The materials were selected from material specifically designed for seco
language teaching (Dean, 1993:23). 
Correction/Feed back 
T-S/C, choral and same task are marked. Individual work was not involved. Students an
the teacher were equally involved in the simple past and past progressive class. The 
70 

whole class/students were asked to provide answers to the exercise and to comment on 
the answers. 
Form is the main focus of language in the correction and feedback. The correction was 
made by students and the teacher. Function was also involved and the topic was narrow. 
The text was selected by the teacher. 
In student modality listening, speaking, and reading were equally involved in the class. 
These skills were used during the whole course of the correction/feedback episode. 
The exercise being corrected was extended and selected from materials specifically 
designed for second language teaching (Dean, 1993: 23). 
Communicative Practice 
T-S/C, S-S/C, and group with same task were marked. Teacher interaction was only 
involved when addressing the class. Pairs of students working on the same task was the 
primary activity in the communicative practice episode. For the simple past and the past 
progressive students didn't seem to need a lot of guidance with their tasks before and 
during the course of the communicative practice. The interaction between the members of 
the pairs went smoothly until the time was up. 
Procedure, discipline, function and narrow are marked respectively. The teacher was 
involved in addressing procedurally during the communicative practice episode, that is, 
71 

to ask students to work in pairs and to encourage them to actively participate in the 
communicative activities as the procedure. The task in the communicative practice 
episode was to describe routines using the simple past and the past progressive and was 
adapted from Heaton (1992:10). 
The text and the primary source of the activity were selected and controlled by teacher. 
Listening and speaking skills were used most of the time during the course of the 
communicative practice. Reading was only involved to understand the handout. The task 
selected for the simple past and the past progressive did encourage students to be 
involved in communicative activities. Students were actively using the simple past and 
the past progressive describing routines selected for the task. Students' communicative 
practice worked effectively and there were hardly any interruptions by the teacher during 
the course of the communicative practice episode. The communicative activities 
continued to occur until the time was over. 
The type of material for the simple past and the past progressive class was visual. The 
material was selected from materials specifically designed for second language teaching 
(Heaton, 1992: 10). 
72 

4.3.3. Present Perfect and Present Perfect Progressive Class (Table 4.5) 
Presentation 
At the beginning of the Presentation episode the teacher led the class and interacted wit
the class, but eventually students worked on their own. Individual student work was 
mostly involved in relation to participant organisation. 
Form was the main focus. Students looked at the examples of the present perfect and the 
present perfect progressive in the story of Vicar Peter Newman adapted from Liz and 
Soar (1996: 96-97). The main objective was to raise the students' consciousness of the 
forms and functions of the tenses being learnt. The topic is narrow. 
The selection of the topic and the content as well as the activity of the class was 
controlled by the teacher. 
In content listening and reading skills were involved, but the bulk of the time was used 
students to read the text tentatively. Reading was the primary activity in the student 
modality. 
The examples of the present perfect and the present perfect progressive usage were 
extended and selected from material specifically designed for second language teaching 
(Liz and Soar 1996: 96-97). 
73 

Table 4.5: C O L T Part A Proforma, Present Perfect/Present Perfect Progressive 
Class, ACGM 
< 
I 
V 
X. 
u 
CO 
c 
o 
eo 
V 
09 
O -
BO 
O 
Z 
o 
cm 
CD 
a. 
<l 
1 
> 
a -
S3* 
o 
o 
s ^ 
; 1 Q 
> 
u 
E 
E 
o 
O 
2 
O 
e 
o cS 
3 
ll 
.. 
"O 22 O 
JS co . 
co F co 
CO 
tit 
CO 
o u 
52 
co 
apeui-iuapais 
VSN-CT 
SN-Z1 
SMN-n 
lensiA 
oipnv 
papuaiq 
|BIU|U|N 
J8IQ0 
BVRMM 
Buipaau 
fancads 
Suiuatsn 
liiapus 
paiS/ixaj/jamaai 
paj/jaaaiai 
|8 
if 
nttmaawmo 
Efsniaajaiua 
o 
CO 
UJ 
o 
o 
C O 
CO-
LLI 
s 
CO 
-Hippos 
uuoj 
auippqa 
PJW8 
a/s^s 
3/8^1 
5 
T 
SI 
> 
2 
cJ 
\ 
 
Si 
^ 
TSJ 

* 
.3-
o* 
-
-*-
^ 
3T 
^ 
< 
 V 
O 
^ 
^ 
3T 
^ 
-fr 
^T 
V 
& 
T 
3" 
Ufa 
It 
lf\ 
 
 
^r 
V 
V 
<S* 
^T 
> 
25 
O 
74 

G r a m m a r Explanation 
The activity was mainly led by the teacher - the teacher interacted with the class, read t
the class the examples of the present simple and the simple progressive and explained the 
usage and the meanings they conveyed. Individual work was involved, that is, when the 
teacher read and explained the examples of the tenses to the class, at the same time the 
students looked at their handout and read silently. Each student had the same task. 
Function was the main focus in the content. The examples of present perfect and present 
perfect progressive were introduced in various contexts and the teacher explained the 
usage with regard to their contexts and the meanings they conveyed. The examples of 
present perfect and present perfect progressive were narrow. 
The selection of the topic and content in the grammar explanation episode as well as the 
activity of the class was controlled by the teacher (Dean, 1993: 43). 
Speaking was involved when students asked for further explanation about the tenses 
being learnt and responded to the teacher's explanation. However, listening and reading 
skills were far more involved in the grammar explanation. 
The examples of the present perfect and the present perfect progressive were minimal and 
selected amongst materials specifically designed for second language teaching. 
75 

G r a m m a r Exercise 
Individual work was dominant in the course of the grammar exercise episode. The 
teacher was only involved when addressing the class. Students worked on their own until 
the time for the grammar exercise was over. Each student was assigned to do the same 
task. 
Form was the primary focus. The teacher directed the class to do the exercise 
procedurally. The students did the exercise on their own. The topic was William 
Empson's work experience, adapted from Dean (1993: 47). The examples of the present 
perfect and the present perfect progressive were narrow. 
The selection of the task and the content of the grammar exercise were controlled solely
by the teacher. 
Listening was only involved when the teacher directed the grammar episode. Reading 
and writing skills were equally used during the course of the grammar exercise. It shoul
be noted that writing in the grammar exercise episode only referred to writing the 
answers in the gaps in the contextual exercise. 
The task in the grammar exercise for the present perfect and the present perfect 
progressive consisted of one exercise only. It was extended and selected from materials 
specifically designed for second language teaching (Dean, 1993: 47). 
76 

Correction/Feedback 
In the course of the correction/feedback students and the teacher were equally involved i
the class. The activities basically were the same as in the simple past and past progress
class. The students were asked one by one to read their answers to the class. The class 
was asked by the teacher to comment on the answers uttered by their fellow students. The 
whole class/students commented on the answers instantly. When all the students could 
not give the correct answers the teacher then gave the correct answers and explained 
again to the class until they understood. 
Form was the main focus. Functions were also exposed through contextual 
sentences/examples covered. The examples being corrected in the exercise were narrow. 
The activities and the exercise being corrected in the correction and feedback episode 
was controlled by teacher. For the students listening, speaking, and reading skills were 
equally involved in the class. The students were asked one by one to read their answers t
the class. 
The examples in the exercise for the present perfect and present perfect progressive were
extended and selected from materials specifically designed for second language teaching 
(Dean, 1993: 47). 
Communicative Practice 
Teacher interaction was only involved when organising the class. Pairs of students 
working interactively was the primary activity in the communicative practice episode. In 

the course of the communicative practice students were given more opportunity to be 
involved in the class. For the present perfect and the present perfect progressive student
did not seem to need a lot of guidance with their tasks during the course of the 
communicative practice. The interaction between the members of pairs did take place 
smoothly. Each pair was assigned the same task. 
Function was the main focus in the content of language. The topic/activities selected for 
the task in the communicative practice episode were narrow. 
The topic for the task in the communicative practice was selected from texts by the 
teacher. The primary source of the activity was controlled by the teacher. 
Listening and speaking skills were used most the time during the course of the 
communicative practice. The students were asked to read as well as to listen the 
instructions from the teacher. The tasks selected for the present perfect and the present 
perfect progressive did encourage students to be actively involved in communicative 
activities. Some students were found to have extended their task to their own real 
activities. Overall, the communicative practice episode for the present perfect and the 
present perfect progressive seemed to work effectively. There were hardly any 
interruptions by the teacher during the course of the communicative practice episode with 
the communicative activities continuing to occur until the time for the class was over. 
The type of material for this class episode was visual. The material was selected from 
materials specifically designed for second language teaching (Dean, 1993: 47). 

4.4. Characteristics of the Current Method ( C M ) 
To provide an independent assessment of the nature of teaching practice with CM 3 
classes of this method in practice with the control group were taped; classes dealing wi
the present simple and the simple progressive, the simple past and the past progressive,
and the present perfect and the present perfect progressive. 
The current method classes were planned to include four sections of activities/episodes 
the class: 
Presentation 
Grammar explanation 
Grammar exercise 
Correction/feedback 
The class materials used can be viewed in Appendices 4.4 - 4.6. The activities/episodes 
are analysed using the COLT observation proforma (Part A). 
4.4.1. Present Simple and Simple Progressive Class (Table 4.6) 
Presentation 
In the participant organisation T-S/C and same task are marked, but same and individual 
were the primary focus. In the presentation the teacher gave a handout to each student. 
79 

The teacher directed the students to look at the handout and asked them to observe h o w 
the present simple and the simple progressive were used in sentences. Speaking was 
involved when a student was not sure what to do during this episode, but this only 
occurred once. The teacher was involved in organising the class, but eventually students 
worked on their own - the students looked at the examples of the tenses being learnt in 
the handout. 
In the content, procedure, function, and narrow were marked respectively, whilst form 
was the main focus. The teacher gave the procedural directions asking the students to 
take a look at their handout and drawing their attention to the underlined present simple 
and simple progressive forms in the isolated sentences. The objective was to introduce 
the examples so that the students noticed and raised their consciousness of the structura
forms of the tenses. The examples selected were narrow. 
In the content control only teacher/text was ticked. The selection of the topic and the 
content as well as the activity of the class were controlled by the teacher. 
In the student modality only three skills were involved in the class. Although the primar
focus of the presentation was to read the handout, a question was raised by a student 
regarding the answers in the task. There followed a short spontaneous exchange between 
the student and the teacher when the teacher explained what to do. In relation to that 
explanation Ustening and speaking skills were involved, but the bulk of the time was used 
by students to read the text tentatively. 
80 

Table 4.6: C O L T Part A Proforma, Present Simple/Simple Progressive Class, C M 
0 
(J 
S 
u 
co 
c 
.2 
*-* 
CO 
t 
<u 
JB 
O 
t 
6 
S : 
Ms"1 
CO 
u 
C 
3 
E 
E 
o 
U 
o 
3 
rs 
o 
z 
> o. 
Z 
6 ^ >  IN 
c 
Q 
I 
CL_ 
, 
<
^ 
 
i 
J= 
co 
JO 
co H co 
CO 
.J 
< 
UI 
2 
STUDENT 
MODALITY 
CONTENT 
CONTROL 
Ul 
1 
o 
o 
-S 
PARTICIPAN 
ORGANISATII 
 
u 
a 
e 
CO 
<9 
ex 
* 
spcui-papnis 
VSH-n 
sun 
Mft-Zl 
P*W 
OIPV: 
s 
popuauG 
* 
itiuiuiM; 
ino: 
BURMM; 
BtqpMu; 
BappatJs; 
lupapn; 
mtmni 
PUS/mi/Mcptai  
mi/mptax; 
 
 
a 
e 
B 
z 
B 
a 
s 
e 
8' 
CO 
UI 
o 
eo 
cu 
UI 
0 
CO 
UJ 
> 
o 
 
MHUO C 
2 
M I W M M 
"ll^^^^l* ^ 
SMW3SMI2 
MfPMJS 
HM4 ** 
MHMltMMl " 
PMMJS 
npaipaaaiiHi o 
t**! eatj  
iptaipMiaDKi r-
iimg  
P*W" 
3HHH>C> * 
a/s*-i* 
r> 
UJ 
z 
M 
8 .A 
n 
<< 
3 < ^ 
5 \ 
3 
4 
m 
\ 
3 \ 
4 
I \ 
J 
5 
 
1 \ 
1 
$ 
* 
* 
<3> 
> 
< 
* 
. 
\ 
1 
 -4-
c 
^> 
i 
~i 
 
j^ 
\ 
o> 
A 
<*> 
A 
\ 
\ 
\ 
 
\ 
V 
\ 
<^*t 
<?) 
^ 
C
5) 
P 
5 
t>4 
5 
\ 
i 
V 
> 
< > > 
\ 
> 
i 
\ 
J 
v 
\ 
v 
^ 
x 
\ 
J^*L 
^ ) 
\ 
o 
to 
#  
5 
\ 3 
\ 
A 
< A ) 
V 
\ 
!s. 
\ 
* 
i 
V 
1 
e 
i 
i 
J, 
^ 
it 
>3 
 
81 

The examples of the present simple and simple progressive usage were minimal - given in 
isolated sentences. The material was selected from materials specifically designed for 
second language teaching (Murphy, 1985: 2 & 4). 
Grammar Explanation 
In the participant organisation T-S/C and same task for individual were marked. The 
teacher distributed a handout to each student and asked the students to look at it. The 
teacher read the handout to the class and explained the present simple and the simple 
progressive to the class whilst students looked at their handout and listened so teacher
class interaction as well as individual work was equally involved at the same time during
the course of the presentation episode. The students did not raise any questions or 
demand further explanation regarding the tenses being learnt. 
Whilst procedure, form, function, narrow are marked respectively under content. 
Function was the prime focus in this part of the lesson for the class. The teacher starte
the grammar explanation episode by asking students to look at their handout (procedure) 
and assigned them to look at the examples of the present simple and the simple 
progressive in various different contexts and consider the meanings they conveyed. Form 
was also exposed to the students within the examples of the tenses being learnt. The 
examples covered various usage of the tenses in different contexts having different 
meanings. The sentences using the present simple and the simple progressive were 
narrow - they covered a familiar topic, community activities. 
82 

In content control, the selection of the task and the content for the grammar exercise was 
controlled by the teacher. 
In student modality reading and writing skills were involved. These two skills were 
equally used during the course of grammar exercise. It should be noted that writing in the
grammar exercise only referred to writing the answers in the blanks. 
In the grammar exercise episode, the type of material for the present simple and the 
present progressive exercises were minimal and selected from materials specifically 
designed for second language teaching (Thomson and Martinet 1980: 8-9 and Dean 1993: 
H) 
Correction/Feedback 
T-S/C, S-S/C, choral and same task are marked in the participation organisation. Teache
and students, individual students with the class, and the whole class was equally involved
during the course of the correction and feedback. During the course of the correction and 
feedback episode the class was lively. Students used this episode as the medium to 
demonstrate their speaking competence in the present simple and the simple progressive 
class (e.g., commenting and arguing over their friends' answers). The topic being 
discussed and corrected in the correction/feedback episode was the same as the topic in 
the grammar exercise episode. The students were asked one by one to read their answers 
to the class. The class was asked by the teacher to comment on the answer uttered by 
their fellow students. The whole class/students commented on the answer instantly. When 

all the students could not give the correct answer the teacher then gave the correct answer 
and explained again to the class until they understood. 
Procedure, form, function, narrow are marked respectively. Each of them was equally 
involved. The teacher drew the attention of the students and explained what they should 
do as procedure and then had the students one by one read their answer to class. The 
correction given by the students and the teacher both coveredybrw and function. The 
topic of discussion in the correction and feedback was about incorrect answers from the 
grammar exercise episode. The examples of the present simple and the simple 
progressive selected from familiar contexts were narrow. 
In content control only teacher/text is marked. The primary control in the class was led 
by the teacher and the topic of the activity was also based on the text selected by the 
teacher. 
In student modality three skills were involved in the present perfect and the present 
perfect progressive class. Listening, speaking, and reading were equally involved. 
Students were asked one by one to read their answers to the class and other students 
listened and commented to the class whether the answers were correct or incorrect. 
Students used the correction and feedback episode as the medium to demonstrate their 
speaking ability. They actively commented on their fellow students' answers. 
Minimal, and L2-NNS are marked in the materials. The exercise for the present simple 
and the simple progressive were given in isolated sentences. The type of text used for th

present simple and the simple progressive class was minimal as the exercises only 
involved isolated sentences. The source of the material was selected from material 
specifically designed for second language teaching (Thomson and Martinet, 1980: 8-9; 
Dean, 1993:11). 
4.4.2. Simple Past and Past Progressive (Table 4.7) 
i 
Presentation 
In the presentation the teacher distributed a handout to each student. The teacher read t
sentences using the simple past and the past progressive to the class whilst students 
looked at their handout. Teacher to class interaction as well as individual work was 
equally involved. 
Form was the primary focus. The teacher asked the students to look at their handout and 
assigned them to look at underlined words in the isolated sentences as the procedure to 
begin the class. The examples of the sentences using the tenses being learnt were narrow.
In content control the selection of the examples of tenses being learnt and the content a
well as the activity of the class was determined by the teacher. 
In student modality the primary skills involved were listening and reading skills. While 
the teacher read the handout students also tentatively looked at and read the handout 
silently. There were no questions raised by students. 
86 

Table 4.7: C O L T Part A Proforma, Simple Past/Past Progressive Class, C M 
1 
u 
V 
E 
V 
$ 
C 
CO 
I 
V 
M 
6 
I 
J 
o 
o 
Z 
sit 
oil 
5 3 
a 
o 
o 0 
i s J J 
E 
e 
o 
U 
3 
CI 
8 
X 
CO 
Q-\ 
d 
Si 
.2 5 
CO 
fc 
t- o 
VSN-71 
SN-71 
War*! 
IU 
o o 
o = 
"T 
1r 
* 
ii 
* 
2 
CO 
tf*~t 
3fc~l 
S 
T 
 
* 
 
\ 
-y 
22 
1) 
1" 
-v 
I
s 
p<s 
tNJ 
o 
^r 
Si 
P. 
-2-
^ 
* 
 
1 
2L 

The examples of the simple past and the past progressive were minimal. The source of the 
materials was from materials specifically designed for second language teaching (Dean 
1993:21; Fotos 1994: 36). 
Grammar Explanation 
In participant organisation T-S/C, and choral were equally involved. The teacher read 
the handout and explained the simple past and the past progressive to the class whilst 
students looked at their handout Students did take some part in the grammar explanation 
episode though, as they engaged in communication during the course of this episode. The 
explanation encouraged students to interact with the teacher. Students made contribution
to the explanation several times. 
Function was the prime focus in the simple past and the past progressive class. The 
teacher started the grammar explanation by asking students to look at the examples of th
simple past and the past progressive with the various different contexts and the meaning
they convey. The sentences using the simple past and the past progressive were narrow. 
In content the examples and the content of grammar explanation were solely detennined 
by the teacher. 
In student modality listening, speaking, and reading skills were involved. Students read
the handout silently and listened to the explanation from the teacher. Listening and 
reading were the primary skills involved. 
89 

The examples of the simple past and the past progressive were minimal. The content of 
the grammar explanation episode was selected from material specifically designed for 
second language teaching (Dean 1993:21). 
Grammar Exercise 
Individual work was dominant during the course of the grammar exercise episode. 
Teacher interaction only occurred in the class before the students started to do the 
exercises. Individual students worked on their own until the time for the grammar 
exercise was over. The task for each student was the same. 
Form was the primary focus in the content. The teacher only directed the class to do th
exercise and then left them to do the exercise on their own. The exercises for the simp
past and the past progressive were narrow. 
In content control the selection of the task and the content of the grammar exercise wa
controlled by the teacher. 
In terms of student modality listening, speaking, reading, and writing were involved. 
However, reading and writing skills were involved most of the time. Listening was only 
involved when the teacher was addressing the class and when the teacher asked whether 
the students had finished with their work. Speaking was involved when the students 
responded to the teacher's remarks. Writing only refers to writing the answers in the 
blanks. 

The exercises for the simple past and the past progressive were minimal. The materials 
were selected from materials specifically designed for second language teaching 
(Thomson and Martinet, 1980:16; Dean, 1993: 23). 
Correction/Feedback 
T-S/C, S-S/C, choral and same task were involved in the participant organisation. In the 
course of the correction/feedback episode both the students and the teacher equally 
participated. The students used the correction and feedback episode as the medium to 
demonstrate their speaking ability in the simple past and the past progressive class. The 
students were asked one by one to read their answers to the class. The class was asked to 
comment on the answers uttered by their fellow students. The whole class/students 
commented on each answer instantly. W h e n all the students could not give the correct 
answer the teacher then gave the correct answer and explained again to the class until 
they understood. 
Form was the main focus in the content. The examples of the present perfect and the 
present perfect progressive were narrow. 
In content control the teacher determined the topic of the task. 
In student modality listening, speaking, and reading were equally involved. Students wer
very active in the correction and feedback episode and used this episode as the medium to 
demonstrate their spoken competence. The students argued that the answer was "stop" 
and said the teacher was wrong when he dealt with past progressive "stopping". There 
91 

was a lively debate between students and teacher. Students were very active in 
commenting on their fellow students' answers. These activities continued for the whole 
course of correction/feedback. 
The exercise for the simple past and the past progressive were minimum. The source of 
the materials was specifically designed for second language teaching (Thomson and 
Martinet, 1980: 16; Dean, 1993: 23). 
4.4.3. Present Perfect and Present Perfect Progressive Class (Table 4.8) 
The present perfect and present perfect progressive class was conducted in very much the
same way as the previous classes wfthin CM. The only difference was in the degree of 
the students' involvement/interaction in commenting on the answers to the exercises and 
the explanation of tenses being learnt. The procedure, activities, and the main focus of 
each phase are shown in Table 4.8. 
92 

Table 4.8: C O L T Part A Proforma, Present Perf./Pres. Perf. Progressive Class, C M 
u 
E 
V 
JZ 
o 
CO 
c 
o 
*c 
ca 
6 
o 
Z 
S Oj9 
ir- 
a 
> 
O. 
a v 
*3 
0 
S 
8 ^  
 c g 
5 o J3 6 
E 
E 
o 
U 
3 
M 
2) 
c<\ 
Ci 
csr: 
1 
.i 
<M 
.dl 
^ 
< 
L. 
.J 
"8-8 4 
CO*  
eg 
CO 
CO 
paw-papais 
VSN-71 
SN-71 
stw-n 
ui oe 
as z 
o O 
o  
5 C9 
^r 
21 9 
S8 
if 
3 
aft~s 
*~1 
Y 
& 
3* 
$ ^5 
:X 
T 
4
s 
* -
Y 
T 
1 
f> 
X 
<*f 
 
V 
I 
Irs 

$ 
35 
 
$ V 
"ST 
\ 
S 
i. 
csi 
(V\ 
& 
93 

4.5. Conclusions 
In many respects the two teaching methods were similar. There was a strong focus on the 
presentation and explanation of specific grammatical features in each of the classes 
analysed for each of the groups. In comparing the COLT analysis for both methods, it is 
clear that throughout there was a strong element of teacher control and direction in each
However, teaching in the current method was even more strongly teacher controlled and 
directed than the alternative communicative grammar method. In addition, there were 
small differences in relation to the text types, with the ACGM using some materials that 
used extended text types, and in content with/wwefton being more frequently part of the 
content for the ACGM than for the CM. 
The main distinctive difference between the groups was the inclusion of the 
'Communicative Practice' activities for the ACGM. This activity did not work particularly
well in the first class analysed (see 4.3.1.) when the students were learning what was 
expected and the teacher had to intervene to demonstrate what was expected, but it was 
then more successful and led to spontaneous student to student interaction in the 
remaining two classes analysed (see 4.3.2. and 4.3.3.). 
The Communicative Practice section of the class for the experimental ACGM group did 
facilitate communicative interactions between the students in that group. In particular, 
visual tasks - routines and repairing an old house - selected for the simple past and the
past progressive and the present perfect and present perfect progressive classes worked 
very well. In the present perfect and present perfect progressive class students extended

the task with their o w n real activities. Students actively interacted with their fellow 
students in their pair work during the course of this conmiunicative practice episode and 
did not need a lot of assistance. However, in the task - whether or not to sack Mr Smith -
for the present simple and present progressive class there were a lot of interruptions 
during the course of the communicative practice. Students needed a lot of help to work on 
the task. The communicative practice did not last very long. This might have to do with 
the instructions of the task or the task itself was too difficult. The teacher was involved
several times in providing assistance for students to work on the task. Visual tasks 
seemed to be understood more easily by the students than written language-based 
instructions. 
The alternative communicative grammar method did provide communicative activities 
where learners were given freedom to express their individuality in their responses within
the activities. Nevertheless, the situations were artificial and the tasks were designed t
focus on specific forms (tenses) to be mastered for productive use. In reflecting and 
reporting and what took place in the ACGM classes it is clear that what have been called 
'communicative activities' did not fully conform to criteria for communicative language 
teacliing (Littlewood 1981; Nunan 1989). In feet, what occurred are probably better 
described as 'pre-communicative' activities. This is because the tasks still focused very 
much on linguistic knowledge (tenses/aspects being learnt), and thus were primarily a 
means to provide an opportunity to train students with the linguistic knowledge that could
be applied in later real communication outside the classroom. Even if understood in these 
terms the communicative practice activities undertaken in the ACGM by the 
experimental group represent a significant departure from the approach to teaching 

grammar which was employed for the control group and which is in the current method 
(CM) used at this university. 
An interesting observation to emerge from the COLT analysis is how the teacher 
unconsciously sought to encourage more spontaneous interaction within the class. He 
unconsciously extended the grammar explanation and the correction/feedback episodes 
by encouraging students to get involved in making comments and providing explanations. 
This was particularly noticeable for the CM group where the pressure of time in these 
episodes was not as great. As a result, CM students were involved in more spontaneous 
communication several times, and they made the most of their opportunity in grammar 
explanation and correction and feedback to develop their spoken competence. For the 
control group, the correction and feedback episode, in particular, took a longer period 
time than for the experimental group. These spontaneous exchanges provided an 
alternative means for CM students to gain real-life communicative practice, but such 
opportunities were relatively restricted in terms of the number of students involved. Th
pair work undertaken by the ACGM group in the communicative practice activities 
provided a lengthier and more systematic opportunity for all students in the class to 
engage in meaningful exchanges in English 
96 

CHAPTER 5 
STUDENT PERFORMANCE WITH DIFFERENT 
TEACHING METHODS 
An important aim of the research is to investigate whether and how the teaching methods
have affected the performance of students on a range of tasks. As explained in Chapter 3
the tasks differ in terms of the level of explicit focus on grammatical constructions a
the extent to which the language use being required is contextualised and spontaneous. 
this chapter the performance of the two groups - the experimental group who were taught 
the grammar subject within their diploma course over 6 weeks using the Alternative 
Communicative Grarnmar Method and the control group who were taught the same topics 
in the same subject with the current method normally adopted at USU - is compared. In 
section 5.1 the achievements of each group are compared over the course of the research 
using means and standard deviations for each group at each of the four data collection 
times. In section 5.2 the extent of significant change in performance over time for each 
group is then examined and compared. 
5.1 Differences in Achievement of the Experimental Group and the Control Group 
This section describes the difference in terms of achievement between the experimental 
group and the control group. The analysis regarding the differences in their achievement
are based on the results obtained from discrete point tasks, cloze task, writing task, and 
speaking tasks from the beginning of the teaching phase (Tl), the middle of the teachin
phase (T2) to the end of the teacliing phase (T3) and four weeks after the teaching pha

(T4). The analysis on discrete point tasks was based on students' performance obtained 
from a series of exercises dealing with present tense (simple, progressive, perfective and
perfective progressive), past tense (simple, progressive, perfective and perfective 
progressive), future tense (will and going to), and past and present habitual aspect (used
to and present simple). The analysis of cloze task performance is based on students' 
performance in terms of use of the correct main verb, acceptable main verb, and 
alternative acceptable grammatical form as well as the total of acceptable usage. The 
analysis on speaking tasks performance was based on the rating of students' performance 
in a free speaking and a guided speaking task. 
5.1.1 Discrete Point Tasks 
This section describes the performance of students on six kinds of contrasts involving 
aspect within specific tenses, and habitual aspect in past and present tenses. The 
performance of the experimental group and the control group is analysed using the mean 
scores and standard deviations obtained at each time for the given tasks. The scores for 
each individual are based on whether or not they have used the target form correctly. The 
comparison of differences regarding their performance is depicted both in tables and in 
the format of line graphs. 
a. Present Tense (Simple and Progressive) 
The mean scores for each group on the discrete point task dealing with simple vs 
progressive in present tense (see Table 5.1 and Fig. 5.1) indicate that the two groups 
performed virtually identically on the pre-test (Tl). Overall the improvement in means 

for the control group is more rapid than for the experimental group, which only shows an 
increase in mean from immediate post-test (T3) onwards. There are significant 
differences between the means of the two groups at T2 and T3, with performanc
control group being superior. The distribution of scores as indicated by the 
deviation is not completely comparable in the two groups. In particular, the s
control group are less dispersed than those of the experimental group at each 
However, the extent of dispersion in the experimental group also decreases ove
although not as much as that of the control group. 
Table 5.1: Means and standard deviations for discrete point tasks - simple vs 
progressive in present tense 
Test 
Group 
Experimental 
Control 
Time 1 
X 
7.46 
7.40 
SD 
1.64 
1.43 
Time 2 
X 
7.46 
8.90 
SD 
1.51 
0.88 
Time 3 
X 
8.09 
9.10 
SD 
1.38 
0.57 
Time 4 
X 
8.73 
9.10 
SD 
0.79 
0.10 
10 -r 
9.5  
5 -| 
1 
1 
1 
Time 1 
Time 2 
Time 3 
Time 4 
Fig. 5.1: Means for each group over time - simple vs progressive in present tense 

There is no difference initially between the groups but the control group performs 
significantly better during the teaching phase (T2 and T3). However, the exp
group's performance continues to improve after the teaching phase so that b
after teaching the experimental group has almost caught up to the control g
has plateaued. Performance by the control group directly during the teachin
more consistent and better than for the experimental group. 
b. Simple vs Progressive in Past Tense 
As depicted in Table 5.2 and Fig. 5.2, both groups performed similarly on t
(Tl). The improvement in means for the experimental group is more salient t
control group in the middle of the teaching phase (T2) with the control gro
having a marginally lower mean than it had at Tl. However, the mean score f
experimental group has decreased by the end of the teaching phase (T3), whi
score for the control group increases marginally by T3 and more substantial
However, there are no significant differences at any of the times in terms o
The distribution of the scores in the two groups as shown by the standard de
broadly comparable, although at T4 the experimental group's scores are more 
Whilst there is no significant difference between groups at any time by T4 
group has a substantially higher mean and lower dispersion than the experime
Table 5.2: Means and standard deviations for discrete point tasks - simple 
progressive in past tense 
Test 
Group 
Experimental 
Control 
Time 1 
X 
8.09 
8.10 
SD 
2.12 
2.28 
Time 2 
X 
8.73 
8.00 
SD 
1.95 
2.00 
Time 3 
X 
8.00 
8.20 
SD 
1.00 
1.40 
Time 4 
X 
8.18 
9.10 
SD 
1.89 
1.10 
100 

10 j 
9.5  
Thnel 
Time 2 
Time 3 
Time 4 
Fig. 5.2: Means for each group over time - simple vs progressive in past tense 
In summary, at the beginning of the teaching phase (Tl), there is almost no difference in 
means for both groups. The control group continues to improve from the middle of the 
teaching phase until the end of T 4 and overall the improvement in means for the control 
group is greater than for the experimental group, although the difference is not 
statistically significant. 
c. Discrete Point Tasks - Present Tense, Perfective vs Perfective Progressive 
The experimental group performs better than the control group before the teaching phase 
(Tl)(see Table 5.3 and Fig. 5.3), although there are no significant differences between the 
two groups at any of the times. Overall, the improvement in means for the experimental 
group is more steady than for the control group with the mean scores for the control 
group fluctuating over time. The standard deviation indicates that the distribution of 
scores within each group is broadly comparable. The scores for the experimental group 
101 

are less dispersed than those of the control group until T3. However, the dispersion for 
the control group, although it fluctuates, decreases over time. 
Table 5.3: Means and standard deviation for discrete point tasks - present tense, 
perfective vs perfective progressive 
Test 
Group 
Experimental 
Control 
Time 1 
X 
6.46 
5.70 
ISD 
1.97 
2.31 
Time 2 
X 
7.56 
8.20 
SD 
1.21 
1.32 
Time 3 
X 
7.27 
6.10 
SD 
1.34 
1.73 
Time 4 
X 
7.56 
7.70 
SD 
2.02 
1.77 
10 j 
9.5  
Fig. 5.3: Means for each group over time - present tense, perfective vs perfective 
progressive 
The experimental group has a steadily improving performance over time (T1-T4), whilst 
the control group experiences considerable greater fluctuation in means. However, 
between Tl and T4 the control group has made a more marked improvement in means 
than the experimental group. 
d. Past Tense - Perfective vs Progressive 
The figures for mean scores for both groups on the discrete point task dealing with
perfect indicate that the two groups perform virtually identically at Tl. As Table 
102 

Fig. 5.4 indicate, the fluctuations and overall improvement in means for the control group 
and the experimental group are almost the same over time and there is no significant 
difference in means between the two groups scores at any of the times. The figures for
standard deviation indicate that the scores for the experimental group overall tend t
less dispersed than those of the control group, with the exception of mid-test (T2). 
extent of dispersion, however, drops for both groups from Tl to T4. 
There is hardly any difference initially in performance between the control group and
experimental group. Both groups continue to improve from the beginning of the teacluh
phase until the end of the teaching phase (T1-T3), but there is a considerable decline
means for the two groups on the delayed post-test (T4). 
Table 5.4: Means and standard deviations for discrete point tasks - past tense, 
perfective vs progressive 
Test 
Group 
Experimental 
Control 
Time 1 
X 
7.27 
7.10 
SD 
2.10 
2.56 
Time 2 
X 
7.55 
7.80 
SD 
1.75 
0.92 
Time 3 
X 
8.91 
9.10 
SD 
1.14 
1.20 
Time 4 
X 
7.82 
7.40 
SD 
1.17 
1.71 
9.5 j 
9  
8.5  
8   
7.5--
7l" 
6.5  
6   
5.5  
5 \ 1 1 1 
Thnel 
Time 2 
Time 3 
Time 4 
Fig. 5.4: Means for each group over time - past tense, 
perfective vs progressive 
103 

e. Future Tense 
The means for both groups on the discrete point task regarding future tenses indicate that 
the control and experimental groups performed identically at Tl (see Table 5.5 and Fig. 
5.5). Overall, the improvement in mean for the control group is faster than for the 
experimental group. However, there are no significant differences in the means of the two 
groups at any of the times, although the largest difference is at T2. The standard deviation 
shows that the distribution of scores for the control group is more dispersed than those of 
the experimental group at Tl, but the standard deviation for this group steadily decreases 
over time in contrast to the experimental group. 
Table 5.5: Means and standard deviations for discrete point tasks - future tense 
Test 
Group 
Experimental 
Control 
Time 1 
X 
6.55 
6.60 
SD 
1.81 
2.37 
Time 2 
X 
6.18 
7.80 
J 
SD 
2.40 
1.55 
Time 3 
X 
8.00 
8.20 
SD 
1.79 
1.48 
Time 4 
X 
7.82 
8.70 
SD 
1.89 
1.25 
10 T 
9.5  
5-( 
1 
1 
1 
Time 1 
Time 2 
Time 3 
Time 4 
Fig. 5.5: Means for each group over time - future tense 
104 

There is no difference initially between the two groups, but the control group's 
performance improves steadily right through until the delayed post-test (T4). T
experimental group regresses twice so that in the middle of the teaching phase 
by four weeks after the teaching phase (T4), the control group's performance is
to that of the experimental group. 
f. Habitual - Past vs Present 
The mean scores on the discrete point task on past and present indicate that th
group performed better at Time 1 with there being a significant difference betw
mean scores. However, the mean scores for the control group then drop back from
it performs virtually identically to the experimental group at T2. The mean sco
each group continue to increase from T3 to T4. Yet, there are no significant di
means for the two groups other than Tl. Overall, the improvement in means for t
experimental group is quite considerable over time and the means increase more 
than for the control group. The figures for standard deviation show that the di
scores within the control group is less dispersed than that of the experimental
although the difference is less marked at T4 than at Tl. 
Table 5.6: Means and standard deviations for discrete point tasks - Habitual - 
vs Present 
Test 
Group 
Experimental 
Control 
Time 1 
X 
5.36 
7.60 
SD 
2.98 
1.43 
Time 2 
X 
5.82 
5.90 
SD 
2.99 
2.23 
Time 3 
X 
7.64 
7.90 
SD 
2.98 
2.13 
Time 4 
X 
9.00 
8.30 
SD 
1.90 
1.49 
105 

Time 1 
Time 2 
Time 3 
Time 4 
Fig. 5.6 Means for each group over time - Habitual - Past vs Present 
To sum up, initially, there is a significant difference in performance between the two 
groups with the control group performing better than the experimental group on the pre-
test (Tl). However, there is a decline in the performance of the control group so that 
two groups perform virtually identically in the middle and at the end of the teaching 
phase (T2 & T3). Both groups continue to improve, but the experimental group makes 
greater progress than the control group from T3 to T4. 
5.1.2. Cloze Task 
The performance of students on the cloze tasks is based on the answers put in the blanks 
and is analysed in terms of three main categories of responses: correct main verb (the 
target-like intended verb as per the original passage), acceptable main verb, and 
alternative correct grammatical form. Acceptable main verb means a different main 
verb has been used but in terms of the meaning it still remains acceptable within the 

passage, whilst alternative correct grammatical form refers to an answer using another 
grammatical form, which is nevertheless acceptable in terms of the meaning with
context. By means of these three categories the results are compared at each of 
to see the differences in the performance of the two groups. The total of these 
(effectively all usage that is acceptable in the contexts) is also considered. 
The scores of the students on the cloze task were consistently low. Most studen
this task extremely difficult and the level of acceptable usage of any type was
a. Correct Main Verb 
Very few students in each group successfully completed any correct main verbs. T
mean scores on the cloze task for correct use of main verb indicate that the co
performs slightly better than the experimental group initially (Tl) and the con
continues to perform better in the middle of the teaching phase (T2) (see Table
Fig. 5.7). The performance of both groups declines during the teaching phase (t
performance of the two groups improves marginally by four weeks after the teach
phase (T4). However, there is no significant difference in mean at any of the ti
distribution of scores for the experimental group is less dispersed most of the
the extent of the dispersion tends to decrease over time. 
Table 5.7: Means and standard deviations for cloze tasks - correct main verb 
Test 
Group 
Experimental 
Control 
Time 1 
X 
0.36 
0.70 
SD 
0.51 
0.82 
Time 2 
X 
0.27 
0.60 
SD 
0.65 
0.70 
Time 3 
X 
0.18 
0.10 
SD 
0.41 
0.32 
Time 4 
X 
0.27 
0.40 
SD 
0.47 
052 
107 

4 j 
3.5--
3  
2.5-
2  
1.5  
1  
O i l 
0  
-0.5  
-1  
-1.5   
-2-
Time 1 
+-
Time 2 
1 
Time 3 
Fig. 5.7 Means for each group over time - correct main verb 
b. Acceptable Main Verb 
Expr 
Ctrl 
H 
Time 4 
As shown in Table 5.8 (also Fig. 5.8), the means for the cloze task in terms of correct use 
of an acceptable main verb show that initially the control group has better performance 
than the experimental group. The level of acceptable usage for both groups is very low, 
however, there is a significant difference in means between the scores of the two groups 
on the pre-test (Tl). The control group continues to have better performance on the mid-
test (T2), whilst the experimental group has a small but steady improvement and 
continues to improve during the teaching phase (Tl - T3) so that at T3 and by four weeks 
after the teaching phase (T4) the experimental group performs better than the control 
group. The distribution of scores for the experimental group becomes more dispersed 
over time but not as much as that of the control group. 

Table 5.8: Means and standard deviations for cloze tasks - acceptable main verb 
Test 
Group 
Experimental 
Control 
Time 1 
X 
0.09 
0.60 
SD 
0.30 
0.52 
Time 2 
X 
0.18 
0.40 
SD 
0.41 
052 
Time 3 
X 
0.27 
0.20 
SD 
0.47 
0.63 
Time 4 
X 
0.55 
0.40 
SD 
0.52 
0.52 
Time 1 
Time 2 
Time 3 
Time 4 
Fig. 5.8 Means for each group over time - acceptable main verb 
There is a difference in performance between the two groups initially. However, the 
performance of the experimental group tends to steadily increase by small degr
time and the distribution of scores for the experimental group is less dispers
of the control group. 
c. Alternative Acceptable Grammatical Form 
The performance of each group fluctuates somewhat over time and each has a low 
overall mean. The means for each group on alternative acceptable grammatical f
(refer Table 5.9 and Fig. 5.9) indicate that initially the control group perf
the experimental group. The performance of the two groups declines on the mid-
109 

the performance of the control group still remains better than the performance of the 
experimental group. Both groups improve slightly on the post-test (T3), however the 
improvement of the experimental group is a little greater that the improvement of the 
control group. By four weeks after the teaching phase the performance of the control 
group declines, but not as much as that of the experimental group. The distribution of 
scores for the experimental group is less dispersed than that of the control group over
time. The extent of the dispersion decreases over time for the control group, whilst fo
control group the extent increases over time. None of the differences between the group
are statistically significant. 
Table 5.9: Means and standard deviations for cloze tasks - alternative acceptable 
grammatical form 
Test 
Group 
Experimental 
Control 
Time 1 
X 
0.36 
0.80 
SD 
0.67 
0.92 
Time 2 
X 
0.18 
0.40 
SD 
0.41 
0.52 
Time 3 
X 
0.82 
0.60 
SD 
0.41 
0.52 
Time 4 
X 
0.09 
0.40 
SD 
0.30 
0.97 
Time 1 
Time 2 
Time 3 
Time 4 
Fig. 5.9 Means for each group over time - alternative acceptable grammatical form 
110 

Overall, the control group has marginally better performance than the experimental 
group. However, in terms of the distribution of scores the experimental group's scores ar
less dispersed than the control group's. 
d. Total Scores for Cloze Task 
Table 5.10 (also Fig. 5.10) indicates that the control group's performance is better than
that of the experimental group at most of the times. There is a significant difference 
between the two groups' performance on the pre-test (Tl). However, the performance of 
the groups is almost the same at the end of the teaching phase (T3) and by four weeks 
after the teaching phase (T4). The performance of the experimental group is slightly 
better at T3 but a little bit lower than that of the control group at T4. The distributio
scores fluctuates over time for both of the groups, but the experimental group's 
distribution is less dispersed most of the times. 
Table 5.10: M e a n s and standard deviations for total score for cloze tasks 
Test 
Group 
Experimental 
Control 
Time 1 
X 
0.82 
2.10 
SD 
0.98 
1.20 
Time 2 
X 
0.64 
1.40 
SD 
1.12 
0.84 
Time 3 
X 
1.27 
0.90 
SD 
0.65 
0.88 
Time 4 
X 
0.91 
1.20 
SD 
0.70 
1.03 
111 

4 j 
3.5  
3 --
2.5  
2 
1.5 -
1  
0.5  
0 -
-0.5  
-1 -
-1.5   
-2 -
-Expr 
Ctrl 
+ 
Time 1 
Time 2 
1 
Time 3 
1 
Time 4 
Fig. 5.10: Means over time for each group - total score for cloze task 
Initially, the control group has better performance than the experimental group (at Tl 
T2), but on the post-test and on the delayed post-test their performance is almost the 
same. 
5.1.3 Writing Task 
The performance on writing tasks is only based on the average rating of each student's 
writing derived from the rating of two experienced E S L teachers and student assessors. 
The tasks given to students in both groups at each time are selected from the most 
common topics. Based on these topics the mean rating scores and the standard deviations 
for each group are compared to see the differences in terms of their performance from 
Time 1 to Time 4. The performance of the two groups is shown in the following table 
(5.11) and graph (Fig. 5.11). 
112 

Table 5.11: Means and standard deviation for writing task 
Test 
Group 
Experimental 
Control 
Time 1 
X 
5.64 
5.60 
SD 
0.45 
0.52 
Time 2 
X 
5.46 
5.35 
SD 
0.47 
0.41 
Time 3 
X 
5.73 
5.60 
SD 
0.47 
0.46 
Time 4 
X 
5.36 
5.30 
SD 
0.60 
0.35 
3.| 
1 
1 
1 
Time 1 
Time 2 
Time 3 
Time 4 
The fluctuations in mean scores for the experimental group parallel those of the control 
group. The mean scores for the two groups on the writing task are virtually identical and 
there is no difference between the means of the two groups at any of the times. The 
figures for standard deviation display the distribution of scores and these, too, are 
virtually identical. 
There is no difference in the performance of the two groups and the patterns of 
fluctuations in performance are similar over time. 
113 

5.1.4 Speaking Tasks 
The speaking tasks consist of two separate tasks, guided speaking and free speaking. The 
performance of the control group and the experimental group in both tasks is analyse
each of the times in terms of the groups' mean scores and standard deviation scores t
if there are significant differences in achievement between the control group and th
experimental group. Each individual's score is derived from the mean rating of then-
spoken production derived from the independent rating of their speech by two 
experienced ESL teachers and assessors/raters. 
a. Speaking Tasks - Guided Speaking 
The mean scores on the guided speaking task indicate that both groups perform simila
at Tl (refer Table 5.12 and Fig. 5.12). Overall, the means for the experimental group 
similar to those of the control group, although showing a marginal improvement from T
- T4, whereas the control group's scores show a decline from Tl - T4. There are no 
significant differences between the means of the two groups at each of the times. The 
distribution of the scores as displayed by the standard deviation indicates that the 
for the experimental group tend to be a little less dispersed than the scores for th
group (exception is T4). 
Table 5.12: Means and standard deviations for guided speaking 
Test 
Group 
Experimental 
Control 
Time 1 
X 
5.27 
5.43 
SD 
0.47 
071 
Time 2 
X 
5.41 
5.65 
SD 
0.58 
0.71 
Time 3 
X 
5.32 
5.40 
SD 
0.64 
0.74 
Time 4 
X 
5.46 
4.90 
SD 
0.72 
0.62 
114 

3 J 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Time 1 
Time 2 
Time 3 
Time 4 
Fig. 5.12 Means for each group over time - guided speaking 
Initially, the control group's performance is marginally better than that of the 
experimental group. However, the control group's performance declines after the teaching 
phase so that on the delayed post test (T4) the experimental group's performance is better 
than that of the control group. 
b. Speaking Tasks - Free Speaking 
The data in the table (5.13 and Fig. 5.13) indicate that the means for the experimental 
group remain steady over time whereas the control group marginally declines. Both 
groups have comparable means at Tl with the control group mean being marginally 
higher. The mean scores for the control group whilst increasing at T2 then drop over 
time. There are no difference between the means of the two groups at any of the times. 
The standard deviations show that the distribution of the scores for experimental group is 
115 

consistently a little less dispersed than for the control group. The extent of the dispersion 
for both groups tends to increase a little over time. 
Table 5.13: Means and standard deviations for free speaking 
Test 
Group 
Experimental 
Control 
Time 1 
X 
5.27 
5.48 
SD 
0.47 
0.65 
Time 2 
X 
5.27 
5.70 
SD 
0.47 
0.68 
Time 3 
X 
5.32 
5.20 
SD 
0.72 
0.92 
Time 4 
X 
5.27 
5.10 
SD 
0.68 
0.81 
8 j 
7.5  
7  
6.5 -
6  
5.5 
5--
4.5  
4 - 
3.5  
3 -
-t-
Timel 
Time 2 
1 
Time 3 
Fig. 5.13 Means for each group over time - free speaking 
-Expr 
-Ctrl 
1 
Time 4 
There is only a slight difference in the performance between the two groups on the pre-
test. The control group's performance is better and continues to be marginally better than 
that of the experimental group which seems to be static. However, the control group's 
performance drops on the post-test (T3) and keeps on declining so that at T3 and T4 the 
experimental group performs marginally better than the control group. 
116 

5.1.5. Discussion 
Overall, in the discrete point tasks the experimental group and the control group progress 
during the teaching phase and continue to improve by four weeks after the teaching 
phase. Each group has a higher mean at T 4 for each subtask than at T L The experimental 
group and the control group perform virtually identically on the pre-test (Tl) with the 
exception of the task contrasting habitual - past vs. present tenses (significant difference) 
and the task for the present tense, perfective vs perfective progressive (where there is a 
fairly large but not statistically significant difference in the means). In each case where 
the mean is higher at Tl it is the control group with the superior performance prior to the 
teaching commencing. After the teaching commences though the only significant 
difference in means between the two groups is for present tense - simple vs progressive at 
T2 and T3 where the mean for the control group is significantly higher. So whilst the 
control group may have had slightly superior performance to the experimental group 
initially or during and immediately at the conclusion of the teaching phase (eg. present 
tense - simple vs. progressive) any advantage of that group was not sustained and by 
Time 4 both groups were performing to an equivalent level and with the mean for the 
experimental group in some cases actually being higher than for the control group. This 
means that in general the two groups are at the same level of proficiency after the 
teaching phase regardless of their teaching method. 
However, whilst the differences do not normally reach the level required to be 
statistically significant it is noticeable that the control group seemingly generally has a 
higher level of performance than the experimental group on the mid-test (T2) with their 
117 

mean in three cases (present tense - simple vs. progressive, present tense - perfective vs 
perfective progressive, future tense) being well above that for the experimental group. It 
is only in simple vs progressive in past tense that the experimental group has a somewhat 
higher mean at T2. This might be because the control group is encouraged to focus on the 
usage of grammatical features and to practice these in discrete point exercises, whilst the 
experimental group is encouraged to undertake more contextualised communicative 
practice. This makes the experimental group's performance on the discrete point tasks a 
little less strong than the control group's specifically in the middle of the teaching phase 
(T2). HoweveT, the experimental group generally continues to improve until the end of 
the teaching program (T3), and the two groups perform very similarly on present tense -
simple vs progressive, present perfective, past perfective at Time 4. At Time 4 the control 
group still has substantially higher means for simple vs progressive in past tense, and 
future tense, whereas the experimental group's mean is quite a bit higher than the control 
group's for habitual - past vs. present tense. 
With respect to the discrete point tasks, it is difficult to argue that one approach is b
than the other as, in general, the two groups improve over time and significant differences 
between them are few. The only noticeable difference is in the pace of improvement for 
the experimental group which may be a little behind that of the control group during the 
teaching phase. In general, the students in the control group (current method) seem to 
progress a little more quickly during the teaching phase as compared to the experimental 
group (alternative communicative grammar method). In contrast, whilst the alternative 
communicative grammar method does not result in such rapid improvement, it may 
eventually aid learners to improve continuously or better maintain their learning. 
118 

As for the discrete point tasks the performance of the experimental and control groups on 
the cloze task does not indicate much difference between the groups over time. In general 
the performance of the students in both groups is quite poor on the cloze task, with 
relatively few correct or acceptable attempts on average. However, initially (Tl) the 
control group has a higher mean on each of the aspects being measured - correct main 
verb, acceptable main verb and alternative acceptable grammatical form - suggesting that 
the control group had superior capacity to complete the cloze task prior to the teaching 
phase. At Tl the difference in means between the two groups for acceptable main verb 
was statistically significant. After Time 1 the performance of the two groups is 
comparable. There is no evidence for one method leading to superior outcomes, although 
given their means at Tl it could possibly be argued that the experimental group's 
performance from T2-T4 was marginally superior comparatively to that of the control 
group. However, it is extremely difficult to compare the performance of the two groups 
over time as the difference in means for the three categories on the cloze task is fairly 
marginal, and the actual scores very low. 
With respect to the writing task and the speaking tasks the performance of the 
experimental and control groups in terms of the means does not show any significant 
differences between the groups. O n the writing task the experimental group and the 
control group perform fairly similarly at each time from the beginning of the teaching 
phase (Tl) until by four weeks after the teaching phase (T4). The performance of the two 
groups for the speaking tasks does not differ a lot at any of the times. Initially, the control 
group performs marginally better than that of the experimental group for guided and free 
119 

speaking tasks, but the control group's means decline over time, whereas those for the 
experimental group remain steady or marginally improve (guided speaking). At Time 4 
for guided speaking the experimental group has a higher (although not statistically 
significantly higher) mean than the control group. 
It appears that the proficiency rating method used to assess student performance on these 
writing and speaking tasks has meant that variations are quite small. The proficiency 
rating approach adopts a range of criteria to assess student proficiency meaning that 
differences in usage in one specific area of grammar (tense/aspect), even if present, are 
not likely to have a major impact on the overall assessment. What the results for these 
tasks do indicate is that the experimental group have not been disadvantaged by their 
teaching method. However, likewise, there is no evidence that they gained any significant 
advantage. Nevertheless, the data for the speaking tasks, especially for guided speaking, 
is suggestive of the possibility that students exposed to a more communicative approach 
may gain some small benefit over time in their proficiency rating. The expression of 
tense and aspect by each group in the speaking tasks will be considered in greater depth 
in the next chapter (Chapter 6), and this should enable a much more thorough 
exarnination of how students' performance on these tasks may have been affected by the 
teaching method. 
Finally, it should be said that the nature and scale of these findings need to be conside
in relation to the nature and amount of difference between the two methods and the 
length of time students were exposed to these differences in relation to their total teac
time. Trends in differences which are not significant in this study may yield more 

noticeable and larger effects if the differences in teaching methodology are more 
substantial and sustained throughout all subjects within the teaching program over a 
longer duration. 
5.2 Progress Over Time Within Each Group 
The progress of each group varies over time. In this section the progress for each of the
two groups over time is analysed using the scores of each group at each time and paired t
tests (two-tail). Table 5.14 summarises the significant differences from time to time for
each group on these t-tests. 
From Table 5.14 it is evident that the groups have an identical number of significant 
increases over time (14 each). However, for the experimental group six of these fourteen 
significant increases are highly significant (indicating a larger degree of change) wher
for the control group only four out of fourteen are highly significant. When significant 
decreases are considered there is a small difference between the groups. The 
experimental group has only 3 significant decreases in means over time. All of these are 
decreases from Time 3 at the end of the teaching phase to Time 4 four weeks after the 
teaching phase. In contrast, the control group has 5 significant decreases. Only one of 
these increases is from T3 to T4. Another indicates regression over all (from Tl to T4), 
whereas the other three involve a significant decrease from during the teaching phase 
(T2) to either the end (T3) or some time after the teaching has concluded (T4). 
121 

Table 5.14: Significant differences in performance of each group over time for each 
task (based on results of paired t-tests (two-tailed)) 
Task 
Discrete Point Tasks 
Present Tense - simple vs 
progressive 
Past Tense - simple vs 
progressive 
Present - perfective and 
perfective progressive 
Past - perfective and 
perfective progressive 
Future Tense 
Habitual - past vs present 
Cloze Tasks 
Correct Main Verb 
Acceptable Main Verb 
Alternative Acceptable 
Grammatical Form 
Writing Tasks 
Speaking Tasks 
Guided Speaking 
Free Speaking 
Experimenta 
Significant 
Increase 
T1 - T4 ** 
T2-T4* 
T1 - T3 * 
T2 - T3 ** 
T1 - T3 * 
T1 - T4 * 
T2-T3** 
T2 - T4 * 
T1 -T4** 
T2-T3* 
T2 - T4 ** 
T3-T4* 
T1 - T4 * 
T2-T3** 
Group 
Significant 
Decrease 
T3-T4* 
T3 - T4 ** 
T3-T4* 
Control Group 
Significant 
Increase 
T1-T2* 
T1-T3** 
T1 -T4** 
T3-T4* 
T1-T2* 
T1 -T4* 
T1-T3* 
T2-T3* 
T1-T3* 
T1-T4* 
T2-T3* 
T3-T4** 
T2-T3* 
T2-T4** 
Significant 
Decrease 
T2 - T3 * 
T1 -T4* 
T2-T4* 
T3-T4* 
T2-T3* 
** indicates p >0.01 
* indicates p>0.05 
In the discrete point tasks there is evidence of a greater amount of positive change over 
time for the control group. The experimental group does not have as many significant 
increases as the control group on the discrete point tasks (12 vs 14) and the control gro
has also made at least one significant improvement over time in each of the aspectual or 
tense contrasts, whereas the experimental group has only made significant increases in 
four out of six subtasks (not perfective vs perfective progressive in either past or pre
122 

tenses). In addition, for the control group all the significant changes are increases, 
whereas for the experimental group there is one significant decrease - after end of 
teaching phase (T3 -T4) in past - perfective vs perfective progressive. 
In contrast to the discrete point tasks there is evidence of slightly superior improvemen
of the experimental group on the cloze tasks with a significant increase for this group in 
acceptable main verb (Tl - T4) and alternative acceptable grammatical form (T2 - T 3 ) . 
The only change in performance of the control group on the cloze tasks during the 
teaching phase is a significant decrease in correct main verb T 2 - T3. The experimental 
group's use of alternative acceptable grammatical forms does also significantly decrease 
after the end of the teaching phase (T3 - T4). As in 5.1.5 the low overall scores for the 
cloze task and relatively small amount of change over time make it difficult to come to 
strong conclusions on the change in performance over time on this task. 
Despite the limitations of the proficiency rating method (as previously discussed in 5.1
there is also some evidence to suggest that the control group performed worse on 
speaking tasks than the experimental group. In both free and guided speaking tasks there 
is a significant decrease from teaching phase to either T3 or T 4 in the control group's 
mean scores, whereas those of the experimental group do not change significantly either 
way. 
In the Writing Task the only significant changes for either group are decreases. In the 
case of the experimental group there is a significant decrease from T3 to T4, whereas for 
the control group the significant decrease is an overall one from Tl to T4. 
123 

W h e n all of the above is taken into consideration it can be concluded that in terms of 
significant change over time in mean scores the experimental group has slightly superior 
performance to the control group with a net of 11 (14 - 3) significant increases (and more 
that are highly significant) to only 9 for the control group. In addition, there is some 
evidence to support the less generalised benefits of learning for the control group in 
comparison to the experimental group. All the significant increases for the control group 
are in the form-focussed single sentence discrete point tasks. There is no evidence of 
significant improvement over time for the control group on any of the other tasks, and, in 
fact, the control group has five significant decreases on the other tasks. Whilst the 
significant increases for the experimental group in the discrete point tasks are not as 
numerous, and that group actually also records one significant decrease in the past perfec
subtask, it does make significant improvements in two of the features within the cloze 
task, and has no significant decreases in the most spontaneous tasks, the speaking tasks. 
5.3 Conclusions 
The data on student performance across a range of tasks indicates that prior to the 
teaching intervention the control group was marginally stronger than the experimental 
group and had on average higher mean scores. Yet any advantage this group had prior to 
the teaching intervention is no longer evident by Time 4 where there are no significant 
differences between the groups and, in some cases, the experimental group has higher 
mean scores. Clearly, the experimental group has not been disadvantaged by their 
exposure to the alternative communicative grammar teaching method. 
124 

W h e n the data on the change over time in the mean scores for each group is considered 
this suggests that the experimental group has actually made marginally more 
improvement over time than the control group overall and specifically has performed 
better than the control group in relation to the less form-focussed and more 
contextualised and/or spontaneous language tasks. In contrast to this the significant 
improvements over time for the control group have been restricted to the discrete point 
tasks which have been the only focus of their classroom exercises, explanations and 
discussion. 
Whilst these findings must be treated with caution for a number of reasons, including 
some possible deficiencies with the use of proficiency ratings for writing and speaking 
tasks, the very low scores at all times for the cloze task and the overall group size, th
do suggest that the alternative communicative grammar method yielded superior 
outcomes overall, and that the implicit and/or automatised knowledge of the learners in 
the experimental group was marginally greater. It appears that the learning that took pl
in the experimental method (ACGM) was better able to be applied in more spontaneous 
and less form-focussed contexts, ie those contexts which are more genuinely 
communicative. Given the relatively small amount of time devoted to the ACGM (one 
subject for only 6 weeks out of the total syllabus) these very small differences in 
outcomes may well point to the possibility of achieving much more marked differences in 
student performance with a communicative language teaching methodology (in 
comparison with current methods) in contexts where the innovative teaching method can 
be adopted across a whole course over a sustained period. 
125 

CHAPTER 6 
QUALITATIVE DIFFERENCES IN THE USE OF 
TENSE AND ASPECT IN ENGLISH 
The focus of the previous chapter, Chapter 5, was on comparing the performance of the 
two groups of students across a range of tasks. The analysis of performance on these 
tasks was in terms of their responses being either correct or acceptable forms for the 
discrete point and cloze task, and proficiency rating scores for the speaking and writing
tasks. 
In this chapter, the aim is to examine in much greater detail what tense and aspect forms
are produced by the learners in each group in contexts requiring the spontaneous 
production of utterances. Because of this interest in whether there is evidence of 
difference between the students in the two groups in more spontaneous contexts, it was 
decided to focus specifically on the spoken output of the students in the two types of 
tasks that were used: the guided speaking task and the free speaking task. As is explaine
in greater detail in Chapter 3 the nature of the tasks used for guided speaking were 
designed to encourage the use of past tenses and those for the free speaking task were 
expected to generate more output from students in the present tenses. 
The analysis in this chapter is broken up into three major sections. First of all a frequ
analysis is presented. This focuses on describing and comparing the actual finite verb 
phrase forms produced by the students in each group for each task type. Then in section 
6.2 a more detailed analysis is presented of the patterns of usage for each group of the 

most commonly used tenses and aspects within the guided speaking task. This analysis 
concentrates on the functional acceptability of the tense/aspect choice/s of the students in 
each group as well as commenting on the most c o m m o n formal errors. At the end of 6.2 
(Section 6.2.3) there is further consideration about the similarities and differences in how 
each group performed on the guided speaking task. Section 6.3 follows a similar format 
to Section 6.2, but for the Free Speaking Task. 
6.1. Frequency Analysis - Forms Used by Each Group over Time 
The first approach to analysing the actual spoken production of the students in detail w
to undertake a frequency analysis. This involved identifying all the finite verb phrase 
(VP) forms produced by each student and then categorising these based on the actual 
structure produced (irrespective of its acceptability/target-like use within the context). A 
frequency analysis provides a benchmark of the actual range of structures being used 
within a student's or a group of students' second language production (sometimes, also 
referred to as 'interlanguage' (IL)) and thus enables the forms within that/those English 
L2s to be documented. A summary of the findings of this analysis for the students in each 
group can be found in Table 6.1 for the Guided Speaking Task and in Table 6.2 for the 
Free Speaking Task. 
In the Guided Speaking Task (Table 6.1) at Time 1 the experimental group produces on 
average a larger number of finite VPs, but by Times 2 and 3 the control group has a 
higher average. At Time 4 both groups have a similar average number, although the 
experimental group is slightly ahead. This task explicitly encouraged learners to provide 
127 

Table 6.1: Percentage Use of Each Verb Form for Each Group - Guided Speaking 
Task 
Other 
13 
=5* 2! 
< 
^ 
HAVE + V 
Pres Past 
11a 11b 
^  2 
> o_ ^ 
Mod + 
Pres 
10a 
n o> 
0-
BE+V 
Pres 
9a 
ither 
Past 
8b 
BE+0 
Pres 
8a 
AUX+V 
Pres Past 
7a 
7b 
Irreg 
6b 
a co <o 
n o o 
BE+V-ing 
Pres Past 
5a 
5b 
Q. 
* 
0. 
CA 
 
co 
1 
> 
10 
0 
CM 
 
> 
> 
o 
10 
*-
CB 
00 
Av. Finite 
Verbs/ 
Subject 
e 
E 
O) 00 
O CO 
If) CO 
o o 
o ci 
CO CO 
o> o 
o' o 
in co 
o o 
o o 
CD r*-
16.2 
1.7 
12.8 
17.2 
o> o 
o' ci 
CM 00 
T-' C) 
12.8 
9.6 
3.4 
12.1 
1.8 3.4 
1.3 0.4 
o o 
ci ci 
^- CO 
oi t^ 
* OJ 
<D ui 
32.9 
40.6 
29.8 
23.9 
K U J O 
^- CO 
r-1 O 
"* 00 
r1 Ci 
O CD 
d d 
CD 00 
ci o 
Tf CD 
^ ci 
a> N -
ci T^ 
CM T-
CO T^ 
CD r-
ci T-^ 
15.6 
9.0 
4.9 
11.5 
CD * 
M- CO 
O CM 
ci oi 
20.2 
19.4 
10.1 
7.0 
0.9 8.4 
1.7 5.1 
CD CD 
ci ci 
o> r-. 
ci *-: 
TT N; 
22.8 
29.8 
31.5 
35.6 
CD 00 
ci ci 
CD o 
ci ci 
O) CD 
O) OJ 
CO -
CO T^ 
h- T~ 
CM CO 
oi ci 
* OJ 
oi i*-' 
o in 
ui oi 
o o 
CO CO 
CO CO 
ci ci 
13.6 
13.1 
h- T-
0.0 8.3 
0.3 5.4 
CD UI 
ci ci 
CO o 
co ci 
0.6 
11.4 
37.1 
33.2 
32.8 
36.7 
1- UJ O 
in co 
ci oi 
T- CO 
CM r^ 
t*~ o> 
oi cd 
r*. co 
oi co 
O) 00 
ci ci 
CO CD 
oi ^ 
o> oo 
ci ci 
u> 00 
o" T^ 
CM ** 
oi vi 
11.2 
12.9 
CD O 
Ci r-1 
CT> CO 
ci Ci 
13.3 
9.8 
oi ui 
2.1 5.0 
1.3 1.8 
u> o 
ci T^ 
"* m. 
oi oi 
30.9 
38.0 
39.7 
38.9 
ZB 

a narrative in the past, meaning that unmarked verb (Base V ) was not acceptable in many 
contexts (as the later analysis discusses - see section 6.2). The experimental group us
less Base V at Times 1, 2 and 4, but slightly more at Time 3. For both groups from Time 
1 to Time 2 there is increased use of irregular past, but then this diminishes Time 2 -
Time 3. The experimental group has close to a third of finite VPs with BE+ Other (some 
form of predicate, eg. NP, Adj, Adv.) at Time 1 with more than half of these being 
marked for tense. In contrast, the control group has little use of past BE + Other at T
1, but this increases to Time 2. 
From Table 6.2 it is evident that at Time 1 the experimental group is on average 
producing a larger number of finite VPs (19.0 vs 15.2), although this difference is not 
maintained at Time 2 and is lesser at Time 3. At Time 4 the experimental group is once 
again producing on average a large number of finite VPs. For the Free Speaking Task it 
noticeable that both groups have a high proportion of unmarked Verb (Base V) at Time 1, 
although this diminishes to be just over a third of finite VPs by Time 2 for each group.
Initially at Time 1 the use of Base V by the experimental group is higher than for the 
control group (perhaps contributing to their marginally lower proficiency rating). From 
Time 1 to Time 2 there is a noticeable increase in the use of BE + Other (ie predicate) 
the present tense for both groups, although this increase is more rapid initially for t
control group and more sustained for the experimental group. Both groups use a broader 
range of forms over time. 
129 

Table 6.2: Percentage Use of Each Verb Form for Each Group - Free Speaking 
Task 
Other 
13 
I * 
+ v 
Past 
11b 
HAVE 
Pres 
11a 
> 0. T" 
Mod + 
Pres 
10a 
"5 ^ 
(0 CO 
0. 
+ s  
UJ  en 
ffi Q. 
BE+Other 
Pres Past 
8a 
8b 
AUX+V 
Pres Past 
7a 
7b 
Irreg 
6b 
M O 10 
0 0 CO 
0. QC 
BE+V-ing 
Pres Past 
5a 
5b 
a. - 
0. 
CO 
 
co 
> 
0 
OI 
> 
0 
0 
* 
0 
ffi 
Av. Finite 
Verbs/ 
Subiect 
0 
E 
O CO 
T^ "St 
t-' d 
o o 
d d 
o r>-
d d 
o o 
d oi 
h- OJ 
<6 co 
o o 
d d 
d d 
o o 
^ d 
10.5 
11.8 
3.8 1.0 
4.6 
0.0 
o >. 
T^ d 
o r*. 
d d 
3.3 0.0 
5.3 0.0 
o o 
d d 
co OJ 
co ui 
UJ CO 
66.5 
57.2 
19.0 
15.2 
PulS 
OJ o 
CD OJ 
^ d 
* o 
d d 
UJ f>-
oi oi 
o o 
d d 
co h~ 
co oi 
o st 
d d 
o 00 
d T-: 
OJ -st 
^t d 
29.9 
38.4 
1.6 0.4 
1.3 0.0 
OJ 00 
oi i-1 
oi sr 
^ d 
5.3 1.2 
2.7 0.0 
o o 
d d 
oo -st 
d d 
O CO 
oi co 
36.9 
38.4 
22.2 
22.4 
CM X = 
H UJ O 
co o 
St CO 
CO o 
oi T^ 
o o 
d i-1 
o o 
d r^ 
o o 
d T^ 
11.2 
4.1 
'St O 
d d 
CD UJ 
oi oi 
o o 
d d 
31.9 
38.6 
3.0 
0.4 
2.5 0.5 
CO T^ 
CM UJ 
oi d 
2.2 0.0 
2.5 0.5 
o o 
d d 
o o 
d d 
OJ u> 
d -^ 
34.9 
38.1 
21.1 
19.7 
CO X *= 
h- UJ O 
OJ CM 
oi co" 
St CO 
- oi 
st O 
d d 
T ^ 
sf OJ 
d d 
OJ CM 
00 h-' 
o o 
d d 
st 00 
d d 
t- UJ 
^ d 
36.8 
31.1 
O st 
d ^ 
UJ st 
oi T-1 
T- CO 
oi T-1 
w o 
oi d 
0.4 0.0 
0.0 0.5 
o * 
d -^ 
K u> 
d d 
T- OJ 
oi d 
36.4 
39.2 
25.5 
22.2 
s* X = 
K UJ O 

Tables 6.3 and 6.4 combine data from the frequency analysis to enable comparison of the 
marking of tense and within each of these of aspectual marking by each group. In Guided 
Speaking (Table 6.3) there is a much higher proportion of past tense marking as a resul
of the task. Despite this there is still a large proportion of Base V/simpie present. T
total usage of present is higher for the control group, and the experimental group make
more advance over time in the proportion of past marking. There is a noticeable increas
in the marking of past tense from Time 1-Time 2 for both groups with each having an 
increase of more than 20% in the number of finite VPs with past marking. However, this 
past marking declines more or less steeply from Time 2-Time 3 and Time 3-Time 4. In 
both groups the level of past marking at Time 4 is only about 5% higher than at Time 1. 
Most of the gain in improvement over time in marking for tense is in the complex tenses
continuous, perfective and modal 
In the Free Speaking Tasks (see Table 6.4) both groups use present/unmarked tense a 
very high proportion of the time (over 90% at Time 1). However, the experimental group 
at Time 2and Time 3 has a lesser proportion of present/unmarked and marks more past, 
primarily simple past. At Time 2 the experimental group is marking more not just for 
tense, but also for aspect (continuous and perfective). By Time 4 the two groups have a 
similar proportion of marking tense as past/non-past, but the experimental group uses a 
higher proportion of modals. 
131 

Table 6.3: Summary of Proportional Use of Main Categories of Tense and Aspect -
Guided Speaking Task 
0 
 
C 
0 
0 
0 
0. 
0 
0 
C 
0 
0 
C 
0 
0 
O 
t-
0. 
0 
o 
S 
t 
0 
0. 
C 
o 
o 
1 > 
"H. O> 
co ffi 
0 
o 
o 
S 
t 
0 
DL 
c 
c 
o 
o 
"8 > 
Impi 
ase 
co m 
0 
- "Si's 
 .2 . 
 .$ 3 
> 
0 
E P 
OJ 
o 
d d 
o o 
d d 
< *t 
co d 
CM st 
CO CO 
CO CM 
p p 
CO CO 
d -^ 
CO U) 
st oi 
U) >St 
*6 r^ 
U) CO 
OO OJ 
d co 
CM CM 
,- S-5 
I- UJ O 
st CO 
"^ d 
O 
CO 
d d 
"St T-
d ui 
oo GJ 
co" d 
UJ CO 
OJ l> 
d r^ 
co oo 
d d 
r> st 
s-= CO 
CM CM 
"t-1 h-' 
CO -st 
U) CO 
s-1 ui 
CO CO 
CM x i= 
- UJ O 
p OJ 
T T~ 
p p 
T *~ 
CO <t 
d ui 
st CM 
oi oi 
CO CO 
CO T-
C0 T^ 
N. -St 
T T 
CO CO 
co d 
o co 
d -st 
st in 
CO h-
oi d 
CO CO 
eo x *= 
1- UJ O 
OJ 00 
d d 
Is- OJ 
oi co 
o oo 
ui T^ 
p cq 
co" oi 
CO CM 
CO CD 
oi * 
h- CO 
oi co 
st CD 
co oi 
CO CO 
d d 
st UJ 
1^- OJ 
d d 
CO CO 
* 
1- UJ o 
1 

Table 6.4: Summary of Proportional Use of Main Categories of Tense and Aspect -
Free Speaking Task 
0 
0 
c 
0 
0 
 
On. 
0 
0 
C 
0 
<- 
C 
0 
0 
0 
tw 
0_ 
Simple/ 
Contin 
Perf 
Modal 
BaseV 
Simple/ 
Contin 
Perf 
Modal 
BaseV 
Av. Finite 
Verbs/ 
Subject 
0 
E 
h-
O O 
O O 
O O 
*t OJ 
doi 
d d 
d r^ 
d d 
p O 
-st o 
o O 
-st o 
d d 
d d 
d T-^ 
d d 
o o 
^ p 
q u) 
O U J 
d o 
- d 
d o 
d o 
p p 
^! ^ 
Ui Ui 
t^CO 
oit^ 
ai co 
d o i 
ui co 
82.8 6.7 
0.0 
6.7 
76.3 
112 
0.7 
3.9 
72.1 
6.1 
2.5 
3.3 
84.4 
3.1 
2.7 
2.7 
75.9 2.2 
0.0 
11.2 
84.3 2.5 
1.0 
4.1 
79.6 
1.1 
1.1 
8.9 
81.5 
0.5 
1.4 
7.2 
19.0 
15.2 
22.2 
22.4 
21.1 
19.7 
25.5 
22.2 
Q.-r- 
0.-r- 
Q.-c 
Q--r-
s-X-fc 
C M X J = 
(O X j 
s J X y = 
K U J O 
l-LUO 
t-UJO 
h-UJO 

If we specifically compare the proportion of past tense marking for each group for each 
task (see Table 6.5 and Figure 6.1), it is evident that in the guided speaking task t
experimental group marks for past tense consistently more than the control group. 
However, this difference between the groups is evident prior to the teaching phase at
Time 1. There is a considerable increase in past tense marking at Time 2 for both gro
but the increase is higher for the experimental group than the control group, even th
the base the experimental group has started from is higher. Both groups use less past 
tense marking at Time 3 with a particularly noticeable decrease for the experimental 
group. Whilst this decrease continues from Time 3 to Time 4, it is much more marked f
the control group. By Time 4 in each group the level of past tense marking is only 
approximately 5% higher than at Time 1, suggesting that much of the learning during t
teaching phase is not maintained by either group. 
Data from the free speaking task indicates a low level of past tense marking consiste
with the nature of the task. It is evident that the teaching phase encourages the 
experimental group to use more past tense marking, especially at Time 2. 
Table 6.5: Summary of Proportional Use of Past Tense Marking 
Time 
T1 
T2 
T3 
T4 
Free Speaking 
Exp. 
Ctrl 
2.9 
3.3 
11.1 
3.1 
6.5 
5.1 
6.4 
5.0 
Guided Speaking 
Exp. 
Ctrl 
37.5 
23.8 
63.6 
46.1 
44.6 
41.1 
42.3 
29.0 
134 

Figure 6.1: Proportional Use of Past Tense Marking for Each Task and Group 
0 
E 
asuaj. ised % 
Q. 
X 
UJ 
CO 
c 
rn 
0 
CO 
 
2 
IL 
5 
OJ 
c 
m 
8. 
CO 
0 
2 
u_ 
H 
Q. 
UI 
c 
^ 
0 
t 
O 
cn 
c 
X. 
0 
8.8. 
CO CO 
"8 "8 
3 
o 
ai 
3 
(!) 
* 
1 
135 

6.2. 
Patterns of Usage in the Guided Speaking Tasks 
The analysis of the learners' usage of various tenses and aspects in the guided and free 
speaking tasks focuses first on the functional acceptability/appropriacy of the tense/aspect 
produced within its context. The analysis in section 6.1 of frequencies of various forms in 
the language of the learners in each group highlights aspects of their transitional, yet 
developing competence, such as use of V-ing without A U X in the progressive, and use of 
Base V. In this section the formal acceptability of forms used is not considered in 
calculating proportions as the determination of a feature being non-target like is based on 
the functional acceptability of the choice of tense/aspect combination. So for example, 
both 'She is going' and 'She going' are both categorised as progressive forms 
(present/base). If present progressive is an acceptable choice of tense/aspect in the given 
context then each would be counted as target-like. If within the context created by the 
speaker the choice of tense/aspect should be something different (eg. past progressive, 
simple past, simple present), then it would be classified as non-target like. For each 
tense/aspect then examples of non-target like usage are categorised. This includes 
consideration of the types of errors, particularly those in the formation of the tense. 
The guided speaking tasks discussed in this section are adapted from Fletcher and Birt 
(1994). Whilst the tasks were originally designed to enable students to practise their 
usage of simple past and past progressive, the nature of the tasks also make it possible to 
use other tenses, and, particularly, it was hoped, other past tenses such as past perfect and 
past perfect progressive. This all depends on the level of learners' grammatical 
knowledge, and their capacity to flexibly use their knowledge of the language to generate 
136 

a narrative with appropriate tense/aspect choices in relation to time reference and 
viewpoint. 
6.2.1. Control group 
In the guided speaking task learners in the control group demonstrate the capacity to use
a range of tenses and aspects. When progressive and perfective aspects are used they 
largely indicate progressive and perfective aspect and meaning. However, past usage (eg. 
simple past, past progressive, past perfect) is still problematic. There is great confusion 
between past and present tenses. Some learners start with past, but change to present in 
the middle and switch to past or present at the end of the task. Others begin With present 
then in the middle of the task start using past tense and end the task with either present or 
past tenses. In fact, present simple/Base V is the second most frequently used 
tense/aspect over time in guided speaking tasks. 
With regard to the contexts, past tense was more appropriate to narrate the activities in 
each guided speaking task, and learners were expected to use past tense most of the time 
in each task. However, present simple/Base V is acceptable in some contexts, for 
example, when dealing with direct speech, such as 1 think', 'you know', 'we can see that', 
'it means' etc. Yet, present simple/Base Fis still used widely by these learners in each 
guided speaking task over time. The distribution of use ofpresent simple/Base Kis 
presented in Table 6.6. There is actually an increase of use of present simple/Base Voxer 
time, and the proportion of non-target like usage also increases and is particularly high at 
Times 2 and 3. 
137 

Table: 6.6: Usage of Present Simple/Base V - Control Group, Guided Speaking 
Time 
Subject 
07 
09 
11 
13 
17 
25 
37 
41 
51 
55 
All 
1 
No. 
17 
S 
9 
21 
25 
16 
21 
15 
18 
15 
165 
% Non 
Target 
0% 
100% 
100% 
95% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
87% 
0% 
0% 
30% 
2 
No. 
12 
12 
13 
7 
20 
39 
25 
17 
19 
7 
171 
% Non 
Target 
100% 
67% 
46% 
86% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
100% 
95% 
100% 
44% 
3 
No. 
4 
18 
17 
17 
7 
29 
30 
19 
13 
12 
166 
% Non 
Target 
100% 
83% 
71% 
88% 
29% 
48% 
0% 
100% 
100% 
0% 
57% 
4 
No. 
17 
22 
13 
30 
5 
33 
46 
16 
26 
21 
229 
% Non 
Target 
0% 
91% 
75% 
0% 
75% 
0% 
0% 
100% 
0% 
0% 
21% 
Total 1 - 4 
No. 
48 
59 
49 
75 
53 
115 
116 
63 
72 
55 
728 
% Non 
Target 
33% 
85% 
74% 
55% 
9% 
12% 
0% 
100% 
43% 
13% 
37% 
The use of present simple/Base V outnumbers other tenses, particularly at Time 1. There 
are likely three main factors that result in greater than anticipated usage of present 
simple/Base Fin the guided speaking tasks. Firstly, some learners base their narrative 
around events that are viewed as being in the present (eg. subjects 7, 17 and 37 at Time 
1). Secondly, past, progressive, perfective, and future have not yet been formally taught
at Time 1 and some learners are adopting a strategy of using uninflected verb forms (eg. 
Subject 13). Thirdly, many learners are not yet able to consistently use past tense (eg. 
Subject 13 at Time 1). In other words, it is still beyond their capability to control the
consistency of using past tense - when they are engaged in this speaking task. Direct 
speech using expressions such as 'I think', 'you know' and 'we can see', is another 
contributor to present simple/Base Fuse in the guided speaking task. 
138 

However, after the introduction of other tenses and aspects - past, progressive, perfective, 
and future -the use of present simple/Base V decreases slightly with some learners (07, 
13,17, 37, 51, 55) at Time 2. The use of present tense by subject 07, in fact, consistent
lessens until Time 4 when it increases again at Time 4 and remains the same as at Time 1
Three subjects (07,17, 51) continue using less present simple/Base V until Time 3, and 
five subjects (07,13,17, 37,55) can only maintain the low of usage until Time 2. At Time 
4 the use of present simple/Base V increases again. It is noticeable that during the 
teaching phase and immediately after it, there is a higher level of non-target usage of 
present simple/Base Verb overall. This results particularly from the usage of subjects 0
and 51 and seems to reflect difficulties in sustaining the use of past tense consistentl
within a. past narrative. 
Examples of use ofpresent simple/Base Fare as follows: 
 He get some food and soft drink from the servant (stewardess) (07/T1) 
 He is in the aeroplane (25/T1) 
 He doesn't see anything in front of him (55/T2) 
 They bring guns (37/T3) 
 They are very surprised (51 /T4) 
Non-target like formation of present simple/Base V exhibits the following errors: 
 omission of person marking for third person singular (Verb root only) 
(eg. The old man go to the travel, 07/T1, He have a mistake, 07/1) 
 omission of BE for passive with root verb only(eg. Someone which 
invite by Mr. Smith, 31/T4) 
139 

 confusion in person/number marking with B E (eg. There is robbers in 
thebank,51/T3) 
 confusion between noun and verb (eg. ... who robbers the bank, 
17/T2) 
 combination of BE+Verb (eg. The letter is address to .... 11/1) 
 omission of B E (copula) (eg. He very glad (25/T1); The dog angry 
whhhim(17/T2)) 
In relation to omission of Copula - B E the teaching phase seems to produce a significant 
change. Five subjects omit Copula - B E on a total of seven occasions at Time 1, whereas 
only two subjects omit B E on four occasions at Time 2 and one subject on one occasion 
at Time 3. However, this learning does not generally seem to be retained as at Time 4 as 
seven out of eight subjects who have omitted B E in previous times omit B E at Time 4 on 
a total of 11 occasions. Only one subject who omits B E at Time 1 (subject 41) does not 
omit B E at later times, including Time 4. There are only two learners (55, 13) who do 
not omit B E at any of the four times. 
The use of simple past (refer to Table 6.7) increases over time for six subjects (09,
41, 51, 55). The amount of use of past tense is very high at Time 2 - in fact, the highest 
amongst all guided speaking tasks for students in the control group, except for subject 17. 
This could have been related to the introduction of simple past after Time 1. However, 
the higher quantity of past tense usage is generally not retained for the following times, 
and the usage declines at Time 3. Perhaps this might have also been influenced by the 
introduction of other tenses between Time 2 and Time 3, and their increased usage at 
Time 3. The usage of simple past for subjects 09,25,41 and 55 slightly increases from 
140 

Time 3 to Time 4, whilst for some subjects (07,11,17, 37,51) the use of simple past 
continues to decrease. For the group overall the proportion of non-target-like usage 
increases after the end of the teaching phase, but not all subjects follow this pattern
example, subject 09 shows a definite and sustained development towards target like 
usage, if the performance across times is compared. Both the number of simple past 
forms being used increases dramatically after the teaching commences, and all usage 
from Time 2 onwards in target-like. In contrast, for some subjects there is no evidence
development in terms of improved target like output or increased amount of use (eg. 
Subject 37). 
Table 6.7: Usage of Simple Past - Control Group, Guided Speaking 
Time 
Subject 
07 
09 
11 
13 
17 
25 
37 
41 
51 
55 
All 
1 
No. 
-
4 
5 
3 
5 
2 
1 
12 
3 
4 
39 
% Non 
Target 
-
100% 
0% 
0% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
0% 
100% 
100% 
49% 
2 
No. 
14 
22 
31 
16 
5 
5 
8 
22 
12 
9 
144 
% Non 
Target 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
13% 
3 
No. 
10 
12 
22 
2 
10 
30 
3 
16 
8 
5 
118 
% 
Non 
Target 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
100% 
0% 
0% 
100% 
7% 
4 
No. 
7 
16 
19 
-
9 
1 
1 
20 
5 
12 
90 
% Non 
Target 
100% 
0% 
0% 
-
0% 
100% 
100% 
0% 
100% 
100% 
29% 
Total 1-4 
No. 
31 
54 
77 
21 
29 
38 
13 
70 
28 
30 
391 
% Non 
Target 
23% 
7% 
0% 
0% 
35% 
21% 
100% 
0% 
29% 
70% 
18% 
Examples of use of simple past include: 
 Suddenly the woman cried (13/T1) 
 He thought the lady was bis daughter (17/T1) 

 H e didn't care about them (51 /T2) 
 They were very confused (09/T3) 
 Before the guest came to his house (55/T4) 
Non-target like formation and/or usage of simple past had the following characteristics
 overgeneralisation (eg. He buyed ticket, 51/T1; He feeled unlucky, 
25/T2) 
 confusion between past and past participle (eg. The dog bitten his 
hand, 37/T2; He done it with fostly 41/T4) 
 confusion between noun and verb (eg. They hostaged people, 09/T3) 
 confusion between passive and active (eg. The cat was stolen their 
fish, 51/T4) 
 combination of BE +Verb (eg. He was run, he was still run, 41/T2) 
 confusion between past and progressive (eg. They didn't realising 
17/T3) 
 confusion of person markers (eg. They was drinking and laughing, 
51/T3; Mr. Smith were really busy, 11/T4) 
Simple progressive/ V-ing was not generally very appropriate in the guided speaking ta
This is because the nature of the task encouraged reference to past activities/events. 
However, simple progressive is still used by some learners over time, by two at Time 1, 
four at Time 2, two at Time 3, and four at Time 4, and some of this usage is target-like
within the contexts expressed (particularly at Times 1 and 4). The distribution of use 
simpleprogressive/V-ing over time is shown in Table 6.8. 

Table 6.8: Usage of Simple Progressive/V-ing - Control Group, Guided Speaking 
Time 
Subject 
07 
09 
11 
13 
17 
25 
37 
41 
51 
55 
All 
1 
No. 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 
-
5 
6 
% Non 
Target 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0% 
-
0% 
0% 
2 
No. 
-
-
-
-
1 
2 
-
-
4 
5 
12 
% Non 
Target 
-
-
-
-
0% 
0% 
-
-
0% 
100% 
42% 
3 
No. 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 
-
1 
2 
% 
Non 
Target 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
100% 
-
0% 
50% 
4 
No. 
-
-
2 
-
-
4 
-
-
1 
3 
10 
% 
Non 
Target 
-
-
100% 
-
-
0% 
-
-
0% 
0% 
20% 
Total 1-4 
No. 
-
-
2 
-
1 
6 
-
2 
5 
14 
30 
% Non 
Target 
-
100% 
-
0% 
0% 
-
50% 
0% 
36% 
27% 
Whilst only on the part of two subjects, the use of simple progressive at Time 1 is 
consistently target like. At Time 2 subjects 17, 25 and 51 all use simple progressive in
target like way, but subject 55 appears to be in a confused state and is using simple 
progressive in a consistently non target like way (in contrast to this subject's usage a
Time 1). The understanding of appropriate use simple progressive appears to have 
improved at Time 3, with the extent of usage dropping dramatically. The increase of use 
of simple progressive to four subjects (11,25,51,55) at Time 4 suggests a willingness to
use a variety of tenses, and it is important to note that the proportion of usage that i
target like has increased significantly, in comparison with Times 2 and 3. 
Some examples of use of simple progressive are as follows: 
 Both these men are hugging (55/T1) 
 When he is jogging (25/T2) 
143 

 They are laughing (55/T2) 
 While they are waiting for the guests.... (11/T4) 
 His wife cooking for the dinner (25/T4) 
Formal errors in the use of simple progressive include: 
 Omission of A U X (BE) (eg. His wife cooking for dinner (25/T4) 
 choice of verb (eg. The police and this woman are realising now, 
55/T1) 
It is interesting to note that the omission of AUX (BE) is not particularly prevalent, b
occurs most at Time 1 and Time 4 and not at all at Time 3. 
Past progressive was acceptable in many contexts in the guiding speaking tasks, as the 
narrative refers past activities. When used past progressive is used in a target-like wa
most of the times to express progressive aspect in thepasf, the exception being once by 
subject 11 and once by subject 41 at Time 3. On both these occasions the progressive was
not acceptable as the action was one that from the point of view of the speaker was 
completed (eg. After the bandit was going out (41/T3). The distribution of use of past 
progressive is shown in Table 6.9 below. 
144 

Table 6.9: Usage of Past Progressive - Control Group, Guided Speaking 
Time 
Subject 
07 
09 
11 
13 
17 
25 
37 
41 
51 
55 
All 
1 
No. 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 
-
-
1 
%Non 
Target 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0% 
-
-
0% 
2 
No. 
1 
3 
2 
4 
-
-
-
3 
-
5 
18 
% 
Non 
Target 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
-
-
-
0% 
-
0% 
0% 
3 
No. 
1 
1 
10 
-
1 
1 
-
1 
3 
4 
20 
% 
Non 
Target 
0% 
0% 
10% 
-
0% 
0% 
-
0% 
0% 
50% 
15% 
4 
Na 
-
-
4 
-
1 
-
-
2 
-
-
7 
% 
Non 
Target 
-
-
0% 
-
0% 
-
-
0% 
-
-
0% 
Total 1-4 
No. 
2 
4 
16 
4 
2 
1 
-
6 
3 
9 
46 
% Non 
Target 
0% 
0% 
6% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
-
0% 
0% 
22% 
6% 
Past progressive is hardly used at Time 1 with only one subject using this tense/aspect 
combination then. At Time 2 the number of students who use past progressive increases 
to 6 (07, 09,11,13,41, 55). The increase use of past progressive at Time 2 might have a
strong connection to the introduction of progressive aspect which made learners aware 
and conscious of the use of past progressive in the guided speaking at Time 2. By Time 
eight subjects are using the past progressive and there is only one student overall wh
not attempted to use the tense. However, the number of learners that use past progressi
decreases back to three (11,17,41) at Time 4, suggesting that many students do not 
retain their learning after the conclusion of the explicit teaching phase. 
Examples of use of past progressive usage include: 
 He was looking for his friend (41/T1) 
145 

 It was raining (11/T2) 
 They were watching the robbers' action (25/T3) 
 The robbers were enjoying the money with the girls (55/T3) 
 Mrs. Robins was cooking in the kitchen (41/T4) 
In some cases the progressive aspect and meaning are appropriate and acceptable, but the
form is not grammatically target like. The types of formal errors can be categorised as:
 confusion of was and were (eg. They was having a very nice time on 
the beach: 11/T3, They was drinking and laughing: 51/T3) 
 confusion ofpassive and progressive (eg. They was looking for by the 
police: 51/T3, They were filming by the camera: 07/T3) 
 in appropriate choice of verbs (nuance) (eg. A camera was detecting 
them: 11/T3) 
 confusion in choosing progressive form (eg. The raining was falling: 
41/T2) 
Present perfect is not very appropriate in guided speaking tasks because all the activit
expected to be reported were presented as happening in the past and having no 
connection to the present time. However, present perfect was still used by all but two o
the learners at some stage over the four test times. In all cases the use of present per
not considered acceptable in terms of its functional appropriacy in context even though 
most cases the tense was formed correctly. More appropriate and acceptable tenses would 
have been usually either past perfect or simple past. The distribution of use of present
perfect is shown in Table 6.10. 

Table 6.10: Usage of Present Perfect - Control Group, Guided Speaking 
Time 
Subject 
07 
09 
11 
13 
17 
25 
37 
41 
51 
55 
All 
1 
No. 
-
-
-
-
1 
-
-
1 
-
1 
3 
% Non 
Target 
-
-
-
-
100% 
-
-
100% 
-
100% 
100% 
2 
No. 
-
-
-
-
1 
2 
-
-
-
1 
4 
%Non 
Target 
-
-
-
-
100% 
100% 
-
-
-
100% 
100% 
3 
No. 
2 
-
1 
-
-
2 
-
-
-
-
5 
% 
Non 
Target 
100% 
-
100% 
-
-
100% 
-
-
-
-
100% 
4 
No. 
2 
-
2 
1 
-
3 
-
3 
2 
-
13 
% 
Non 
Target 
100% 
-
100% 
100% 
-
100% 
-
100% 
100% 
-
100% 
Total 
No. 
4 
-
3 
1 
2 
7 
-
4 
2 
2 
25 
% Non 
Target 
100% 
" -
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
-
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
At Time 1 present perfect is hardly used. At this stage, learners have not yet been 
introduced to the present perfect in their classes, which may contribute to why only two 
subjects (17,55) use present perfect at Time 1. The use of present perfect remains in 
frequent at Time 2 after its formal introduction, with only three subjects (17,25, 55) 
using the tense/aspect combination. Although other subjects (07,11) begin to use present 
perfect at Time 3 the number of students that use present perfect remains the same 
because subjects 17 and 55 use present perfect only until Time 2. The nature of the tasks
does not encourage learners to use perfective, yet the formal teaching of the tense does 
seem to encourage the students to attempt to use it. Whilst they may form the tense 
appropriately their usage indicates a lack of understanding of the functional contexts i
which the tense is appropriate. In particular, it is noticeable that for subject 25 the 
teacriing leads to ongoing, but inappropriate usage of the tense. By the end of Time 4 al

but two of the learners have used the tense at least once, but none of these attempts have 
been target-like in terms of their functional appropriacy. Some examples ofpresent 
perfect usage include: 
 The father has make mistake (17/T1) 
 has decided not to follow (25/T2) 
 The pictures they have had (11/T3) 
 It has eaten the fish (13/T4) 
Categories of non-target-like usage in terms of grammatical forms are as follows: 
 Use of Base Verb instead of past participle (eg. They have search, 
25/T3, They have cook, 17/T4) 
 confusion between present perfect and passive voice (eg. has been 
hide, 41/T4, has been arrange, 41/T4) 
 confusion between verb and adjective (eg. The fish has been 
disappeared, 25/T4, The fish has gone: 17/T4) 
Past perfect was potentially acceptable for the guided speaking tasks. However, at Tim
1 it was not used at all, and at Time 2 only once by one learner and in a non-target li
way functionally. What is evident though is that past perfect starts to be used by thr
subjects (09,11,17) by Time 3 on all occasions in a target like way, and by one 
additional learner (41) as well as these three at Time 4. In the case of one of these 
learners, 17, by Time the level of usage has increased to 10 occurrences, but with 40% 
non-target-like. The distribution of use ofpast perfect is shown in Table 6.11. 
148 

Table 6.11: Usage of Past Perfect - Control Group, Guided Speaking 
Time 
Subject 
07 
09 
11 
13 
17 
25 
37 
41 
51 
55 
All 
1 
No. 
% Non 
Target 
2 
No. 
1 
1 
% 
Non 
Target 
100% 
100% 
3 
No. 
1 
2 
3 
6 
% 
Non 
Target 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
4 
No. 
1 
2 
10 
3 
16 
% 
Non 
Target 
0% 
0% 
40% 
0% 
25% 
Total 1-4 
No. 
2 
4 
13 
1 
3 
23 
% Non 
Target 
0% 
0% 
31% 
100% 
0% 
17% 
Some examples of use of past perfect are: 
 The robbers who had stolen Unity Bank (17/T3) 
 After they had finished to cook (09/T4) 
 Mr and Mrs Smith had arranged the table in the dining room (17/T4) 
Categories of incorrect formation of past perfect are: 
 Use of Base V instead of past participle (eg.... a camera that had 
record their action. 17/T3, when they had finish to dress, 41/T4) 
 omission of been for passive voice (eg. They had reported by a 
camera, 09/T3) 
Present Modal (eg. can, has to, must) should normally have been in past tense. Howeve
under certain circumstances present modal may have been acceptable, for example in 

direct speech when learners comment or give ideas on the tasks. The first analysis is 
dealing with non target-like usage of present modal (Table 6.12). Three subjects (13,
51) use present modal at Time 1, but all this usage is non-target like. Subject 51 
continues to use present modal at Times 3 and 4, and all usage is non-target like. Su
09 uses present modal twice at Time 2 with all usage being non-target like also. In 
contrast, two other learners (11 and 37) use the tense on two occasions and in the 
majority of their usage is target-like. For subject 37, in particular, there is a lar
of usage most of which is target-like. 
Table 6.12: Usage of Present Modal - Control Group, Guided Speaking 
Time 
Subject 
07 
09 
11 
13 
17 
25 
37 
41 
51 
55 
All 
1 
No. 
-
-
-
1 
1 
-
-
-
1 
-
3 
% Non 
Target 
-
-
100% 
100% 
-
-
-
100% 
-
100% 
2 
No. 
-
2 
3 
-
-
-
-
-
1 
-
6 
% 
Non 
Target 
-
100% 
33% 
-
-
-
-
-
100% 
-
67% 
3 
No. 
-
-
2 
-
-
-
1 
-
-
-
3 
% 
Non 
Target 
-
-
50% 
-
-
-
0% 
-
-
-
33% 
4 
No. 
-
-
-
-
-
-
14 
-
2 
-
16 
% 
Non 
Target 
-
-
-
-
-
-
7% 
-
100% 
-
19% 
Total 1-4 
No. 
-
2 
5 
1 
1 
-
15 
-
4 
-
28 
% Non 
Target 
-
100% 
40% 
100% 
100% 
-
7% 
-
100% 
-
39% 
Some of use ofpresent modal include: 
 Because she can meet bis grand child (13/T1) 
 I can't imagine (11/T2) 
 We can see the policeman or officer come to their house (37/T3) 
150 

 Finally they can enjoy their dinner party (51/T4) 
The one example of incorrect formation of present modal involved confusion of verb and
noun with the noun 'sport' being used as a verb (eg. He must sport: 51/T4). 
The use of past modal was acceptable for all guided speaking tasks and, whilst it is very 
little used, it is noticeable that when it is used the usage is target-like. The distr
use of past modal is shown in Table 6.13. 
Table 6.13: Usage of Past Modal - Control Group Guided Speaking 
Time 
Subject 
07 
09 
11 
13 
17 
25 
37 
41 
51 
55 
All 
1 
No. 
% Non 
Target 
2 
No. 
1 
1 
% 
Non 
Target 
0% 
0% 
3 
No. 
3 
1 
1 
1 
6 
% 
Non 
Target 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
4 
No. 
2 
1 
3 
% 
Non 
Target 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Total 1-4 
No. 
6 
1 
1 
2 
10 
% Non 
Target 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
The usage of past modal is very uncommon both in terms of number of uses and numbers 
of learners who use it over time. The peak of use of past modal is at Time 3, when four
learners in all use it, always in a target-like way. At Time 1 prior to the teaching p
past modal does not occur at all. Even after the introduction of past tense the use of
151 

modal has not yet appeared at Time 2 for all but one learner (subject 11). Only two 
learners (11 and 51) continue to use the past modal at the delayed post-test (Time 4
Some examples of use of past modal are: 
 Could be really regret (11/T2) 
 They couldn't run away (25/T3) 
 They couldn't do anything (41/T3) 
 They would like to cook (11 /T4) 
There was only one example of non-target like formation of past modal, 11/T2 above 
('Could be really regret') in which there was confusion of Verb and adjective, with
being treated as an adjective requiring Copula - BE. 
6.2.2. Experimental group 
Present simple/Base V is used extensively in the guided speaking tasks over time. The
distribution of use of Present simple/Base Fis presented in Table 6.14. 
152 

Table 6.14: Usage of Present simple/Base V- Experimental Group, Guided Speaking 
Time 
Subject 
06 
16 
20 
22 
26 
32 
36 
48 
52 
54 
58 
All 
1 
No. 
18 
17 
15 
14 
18 
18 
21 
21 
21 
16 
13 
194 
% Non 
Target 
94% 
88% 
93% 
0% 
0% 
94% 
100% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
97% 
50% 
2 
No. 
12 
10 
2 
6 
11 
18 
17 
17 
9 
8 
1 
111 
% Non 
Target 
92% 
80% 
100% 
18% 
82% 
94% 
100% 
71% 
89%% 
63% 
100% 
77% 
3 
No. 
17 
12 
21 
13 
18 
20 
13 
15 
20 
6 
12 
167 
% Non 
Target 
0% 
92% 
0% 
92% 
61% 
95% 
100% 
93% 
0% 
83% 
92% 
64% 
4 
No. 
32 
18 
25 
12 
27 
40 
19 
18 
10 
9 
7 
217 
% 
Non 
Target 
0% 
0% 
96% 
75% 
63% 
0% 
0% 
94% 
80% 
100% 
86% 
42% 
Total 1-4 
No. 
79 
50 
63 
45 
74 
96 
69 
71 
60 
39 
33 
687 
% Non 
Target 
35% 
60% 
63% 
47% 
47% 
55% 
74% 
61% 
27% 
49% 
91% 
55% 
However, after such other tenses as past tense, progressive, perfective, and future have 
been introduced, the usage of Present simple/Base V decreases at Time 2. In fact, all 
subjects have less use of this tense at Time 2, except subject 32, and in some cases the 
amount of use is dramatically less (egs. subject, 20,22, 52 and 12). There are three main
factors which result in the amount of usage ofPresent simple/Base Fin these tasks. 
Firstly, some learners have viewed the activities in the tasks as activities taking place
the present (eg. at Time 1, subjects 22,26,48, 52, 54). Secondly, learners are not yet ab
to consistently use past tense when it should be past tense, and revert to use of Base Ve
The use of direct speech in expressions, such as 1 think', 'you know', 'we can see', is 
another contributor to present simple/Base Fuse in each guided speaking task. 
Some examples of Present simple/Base Fare: 
153 

 H e look at a girl (20/T1) 
 The man run continuously (48/T2) 
 The police succeed to capture them (06/T3) 
 There is a big fish in the middle of the table (54/T4) 
Categories of non-target like usage in terms of grammatical forms are as follows: 
 Uninflected Base V only (eg. She speak loudly: 20/T1, Mrs. Smith 
cook the food: 32/T4) 
 confusion of BE for 3rd person singular and plural (eg. There are a 
woman, 36/T1; There are a couple 52/T2) 
 confusion between Verb and noun (eg.... that he mistake, 06/T1) 
 confusion between passive and active (eg. His foot to be bit and blood, 
26/T2, Finally they take in a car of pohcemen, 26/T3) 
 Base verb only for passive ( Their record is investigate, 26/T3; ... 
which is use to identify, 16/T3) 
 combination of BE+Verb (eg. They are apologise each other, 20/T4) 
Why is happen to my best dinner, 06/T4) 
Omission of COPULA - BE occurs in the language produced by all but two of the 11 
learners at one time or another. Four subjects omit BE on a total of six occasions at 
1. At Time 2 five subjects, including two from Time 1, omit the copula on a total of e
occasions. At Time 3, there is a noticeable drop in copula omission, with only two 
subjects omitting COP - BE on only three occasions altogether. However, there is then 
large increase in the omission of COP-BE at Time 4 with seven subjects omitting the 
copula on a total of 11 occasions. For the experimental group the omission of copula i

twice as c o m m o n at Time 4 as at Time 1. This constitutes almost a doubling in real terms 
given that the total occurrence of simple present/Base Ffor the group is only 186 to 206
We can conclude that whilst there is evidence of a possible short term beneficial effect
the teaching phase on the use of copula for the students in this group, that learning doe
not become automatised and is lost. There is actually a decline in accuracy in using the 
copula from Times 1 and 2 to Time 4. 
The distribution of use of simple past is presented in Table 6.15. Seven subjects (06,16,
20, 32, 36, 54,12) use simple past at Time 1. Those using the tense most frequently also 
consistently use it in a target like way, whereas those with a small amount of usage (36
52, 54) have 100% non-target like usage. The amount of usage of simple past increases 
more than threefold from Time 1 to Time 2, and at Time 2 there are only two instances of 
non-target like usage from a functional perspective in almost 200 finite Verb phrases 
using simple past. 
The amount of usage of simple past decreases for most subjects at Time 3, and in the case
of three of these (06, 20 and 52) all the usage is non-target like. By the completion of 
teaching phase, Time 3, a wider range of tenses have been introduced. For some subjects 
this seems to lead to problems with appropriate choice of tense and consistency in use o
tenses (eg. subject 06). At Time 4 the usage of the tense has increased again - not to t
level at Time 2, but it is nevertheless more than twice the level at Time 1. All but two 
(06,16) of the subjects use the tense quite frequently and in a target like way 
consistently. 
155 

Table 6.15 Usage of Simple Past - Experimental Group, Guided Speaking 
Time 
Subject 
06 
16 
20 
22 
26 
32 
36 
48 
52 
54 
58 
All 
Somee) 
1 
No. 
8 
4 
21 
-
-
17 
3 
-
1 
1 
13 
63 
camples 
% Non 
Target 
0% 
0% 
0% 
-
-
0% 
100% 
-
100% 
100% 
0% 
8% 
of use o? 
2 
No. 
12 
15 
16 
11 
15 
34 
20 
14 
17 
17 
21 
192 
'simple 
% Non 
Target 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
6% 
0% 
0% 
1% 
past inch 
3 
No. 
8 
7 
8 
5 
13 
20 
10 
8 
2 
25 
11 
117 
ide: 
% Non 
Target 
100% 
0% 
100% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
100% 
0% 
0% 
15% 
4 
No. 
5 
25 
21 
11 
7 
1 
9 
15 
28 
16 
10 
148 
% 
Non 
Target 
100% 
100% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
20% 
Total 1-4 
No. 
33 
51 
66 
27 
35 
72 
42 
37 
48 
59 
55 
520 
% Non 
Target 
39% 
49% 
12% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
7% 
0% 
8% 
2% 
0% 
10% 
 H e thought she was his daughter (58/T1) 
 He made many people laughing (20/T2) 
 After they got the money from the cashier, they went out (32/T3) 
 Tony rushed out from his house (52/T4) 
The main categories of incorrect use of simple past in terms of grammatical forms ar
follows: 
 combination of BE+Verb (eg. He was feel so cold, 26/T2; They were 
succeed in robbing the bank, 06/T3) 
 confusion of BE for 3rd pers. singular and plural (eg. The cashier 
were afraid, 32/T3) 
 overgeneralisation (eg. He weared his dress, 26/T2; He bringed to his 
home, 16/T4) 
156 

 
confusion between past and past participle (eg. The dog bitten bis 
hand, 58/T2) 
 confusion between passive and active (eg. It was bitten his leg, 20/T2) 
 mixing of past tense and present perfect (eg. They didn't have seen for 
a long time: 32/T1) 
 confusion between verb and adjective (eg. He didn't happy with that, 
32/T2) 
Usage of progressive aspect was appropriate and acceptable in the guided speaking task, 
but was more likely to be appropriate in past tense. In other words, Simple progressive/V
ing was generally not likely to be target like because the task in each case was expected
to refer to past activities. However, Simple progressive/V-ing usage still occurs in 
experimental group in guided speaking tasks over time and is outlined in Table 6.16. In 
the case of V-ing without AUX - BE there is no specific marking of tense. 
Five subjects (16, 36,48, 52,54) use Simple progressive/V-ing at Time 1 and on all 
occasions the usage is target like. In contrast, the usage of Simple progressive/V-ing at 
Time 2 is less, and in the case of some subjects also non-target like (32, 52, 54). At Tim
3 the usage of Simple progressive/V-ing increases and is once again consistently target-
like for all six subjects using the form. However, at Time 4 whilst the amount of usage 
continues to increase and is equivalent to Time 1, two of the five subjects using the ten
have examples of non target like usage (20, 26). There are two subjects (22, 58) who do 
not use Simple progressive/V-ing at any time. Both these subjects use Past progressive in 
a target like way from Time 2 onwards. 

Table 6.16: Usage of Simple Progressive/ V-ing - Experimental Group, Guided 
Speaking 
Time 
Subject 
06 
16 
20 
22 
26 
32 
36 
48 
52 
54 
58 
All 
1 
No. 
-
3 
-
-
-
2 
2 
3 
4 
-
14 
% 
Non 
Target 
-
0% 
-
-
-
-
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
-
0% 
2 
No. 
1 
1 
-
-
1 
1 
-
-
1 
1 
-
6 
% 
Non 
Target 
0% 
0% 
-
-
0% 
100% 
-
-
100% 
100% 
-
33% 
3 
No. 
4 
1 
1 
-
1 
2 
-
2 
-
-
-
11 
%Non 
Target 
0% 
0% 
0% 
-
0% 
0% 
-
0% 
-
-
-
0% 
4 
No. 
4 
-
3 
-
5 
-
1 
2 
-
-
-
15 
% 
Non 
Target 
0% 
-
100% 
-
60% 
-
0% 
0% 
-
-
-
40% 
Total 1-4 
No. 
9 
5 
4 
-
7 
3 
3 
6 
4 
5 
-
46 
% Non 
Target 
0% 
0% 
75% 
-
43% 
33% 
0% 
0% 
25% 
0% 
-
17% 
Some examples of Simple progressive/V-ing are as follows: 
 He walking down the plane (14/T1) 
 He is being served by the stewardess (54/T1) 
 The rain is falling (52/2) 
 I am telling you what happen with the fat man (54/T2) 
 Smith is inviting his colleague through telephone (06/T4) 
Categories of non-target like usage of Simple progressive/V-ing are as follows: 
 Omission of AUX - BE (eg. He jogging in the morning' (25/T2)) 
 Choice of verb (eg. semantically inappropriate use of progressive as in 
He very very missing to her' (48/T1)). 
158 

 verb selection and/or structure (eg. T h e rain is falling' (52/T2) where 
'It's raining' would be more appropriate; 'An old man seeing a picture 
in his hand' (54/T1) where 'looking at' a picture may have been more 
appropriate in this context; 'The husband is lightening on the candle 
(20/T3) instead of'The husband is lighting the candle') 
The most common category of non-target like usage in terms of the formation of 
progressive tense is the omission of AUX -BE. Four subjects (16,36,48, 54,) use only F-
ing at Time 1, but this decreases at Time 2 to only three subjects (06,20,26), all of 
whom did not use progressive at all at Time 1. Use of V-ing without AUX-BE occurs for 
seven subjects (06,16,20,22,26,32,48) on some occasions at Time 3, including two 
who had made this error at Time 1 and all who had done so at Time 2. The problem 
seems to still remain at Time 4, but its incidence decreases to four subjects (06, 26, 3
48) after the teaching phase is completed. 
Most of the times past progressive was use in the guided speaking tasks reflects 
progressive aspect and meaning appropriately over time as well as correctly reflecting t
tense(see Table 6.17). From Time 1 to Time 4 most of the subjects use the past 
progressive in a target like way when they use it. The main difference over time is in t
number of learners attempting to use the tense. Before the teaching phase the use of pas
progressive is very limited. In fact, only two subjects (06 and 20) use past progressive
Time 1 with subject 20 using the tense/aspect combination extensively and consistently i
a target-like way. The usage of past progressive increases dramatically at Time 2 with a
learners using the tense at least once, and some using it on several occasions. Whilst t
159 

of the subjects do not continue to use the tense at Time 3, its use is nevertheless quite 
widespread and the number of occurrences similar to Time 2. However, by a few weeks 
after the completion of the teaching phase at Time 4 there has been a noticeable drop in 
the use of past progressive and only four subjects (20, 52, 54, 58) use the tense. Given 
that subject 20 was already using past progressive consistently in a target-like way from
before the teaching phase, only two other subjects (54, 58) seem to have acquired/?arf 
progressive as a result of the teaching phase in a way that has enabled them to maintain 
their learning and continue to use the tense consistently and regularly. 
Table 6.17: Usage of Past Progressive - Experimental Group, Guided Speaking Task 
Time 
Subject 
06 
16 
20 
22 
26 
32 
36 
48 
52 
54 
58 
All 
1 
No. 
1 
-
10 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
11 
%Non 
Target 
0% 
-
0% 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0% 
2 
No. 
5 
2 
8 
3 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
3 
2 
29 
% Non 
Target 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
3 
No. 
4 
-
4 
5 
5 
3 
4 
1 
-
3 
1 
30 
% 
Non 
Target 
100% 
-
100% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
-
0% 
0% 
27% 
4 
No. 
-
-
12 
-
-
-
-
-
1 
4 
5 
22 
% 
Non 
Target 
-
-
0% 
-
-
-
-
-
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Total 1-4 
No. 
10 
2 
34 
8 
6 
4 
6 
2 
2 
10 
8 
92 
% Non 
Target 
40% 
0% 
12% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
9% 
160 

Some examples of past progressive usage include: 
 He was watching the in flight movie on the way: (06/T1) 
 He was crying (48/T2) 
 ... and while they err they were robbing (06/T3) 
 Tony was washing the plates (52/T4) 
The main categories of non target like usage in terms of the formation of past progress
include: 
 Choice of verb (nuance). Within the broad context progressive aspect 
is appropriate, but the specific choice of the verb is inappropriate. For 
example, He was seeing his body at the mirror' ('looking at') (06/T2); 
'What the monitor was getting' ('recording') (54/T3). 
 Confusion in singular/plural marking of BE (was/were). For example, 
They was preparing' (58/T4); They was welcoming' (58/4). 
 Use of active instead of passive voice. For example, 'They were taking 
to the police office with car' ('were being taken' or 'the police were 
taking them') (06/T2). 
 Mixing of simple past and progressive. For example, Because he was 
ashamed to many people he didn't running again ('was not running 
again') (20/T2). 
 Omission of preposition in prepositional/phrasal verbs. For example, 
He looking the movie TV*(16/T1); He looking his grand daughter' 
(16/T1). 

Present perfect was generally not appropriate in the guided speaking tasks. This is 
because the activities in guided speaking tasks were past activities and had no connectio
to the moment of speaking. However, learners still used present perfect in the task over 
time. The distribution of use of present perfect is shown in Table 6.18. Present perfect 
occurs once only at Times 1 and 2, on each occasion in a way that is acceptable in the 
context. In contrast at Time 3 it is used by four subjects (16, 20,26, 32) on 6 occasions, 
and for three of these learners their usage is non-target like. At Time 4 it is used 12 ti
by six different learners (20, 22, 32,48, 52 and 56) and for all but one of these the usage
is consistently non-target like. This suggests that the teaching of perfective leads to ma
of the learners attempting to use the present perfect tense, but few use it appropriately 
and there is a lot of confusion about how to use it. Much of this confusion relates to the 
marking of past tense, as in many of the examples of non-target like usage the choice of 
perfective may be acceptable, but the actual tense ought to have been past perfect. 
Some examples of use of present perfect are: 
 He hasn't met her for alongtime(54/Tl) 
 Because he have done the exercise .... (26/T2) 
 Two policemen have arrived in this bank (20/T3) 
 .. they have finish their dinner (32/T4) 
162 

Table 6.18: Usage of Present Perfect - Experimental Group, Guided Speaking Task 
Time 
Subject 
06 
16 
20 
22 
26 
32 
36 
48 
52 
54 
58 
All 
1 
No. 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 
-
i 
% Non 
Target 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0% 
-
0% 
2 
No. 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 
-
-
1 
% 
Non 
Target 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0% 
-
-
0% 
3 
Na 
-
1 
3 
-
1 
1 
-
-
-
-
-
6 
% 
Non 
Target 
-
100% 
0% 
-
100% 
100% 
-
-
-
-
-
50% 
4 
No. 
-
-
2 
2 
-
2 
-
1 
3 
2 
-
12 
% Non 
Target 
-
-
100% 
100% 
-
0% 
-
100% 
100% 
100% 
-
83% 
Total 1-4 
No. 
-
1 
5 
2 
1 
3 
-
1 
4 
3 
-
20 
% Non 
Target 
-
100% 
40% 
100% 
100% 
33% 
-
100% 
75% 
67% 
-
65% 
The main types of errors in the formation of present perfect were in the formation of the 
verbal participle, and lack of third person marking on the auxiliary HAVE (see eg. of 
26/T2 above). In relation to the verbal participle, in some cases Base Verb was used in 
conjunction with HAVE (eg. 32/T4 above). 
Past perfect was acceptable in many contexts within the guided speaking tasks (for usage 
see Table 6.19). At Time 1 and Time 2 past perfect was not used by any of the learners. 
The use of past perfect only occurs first at Time 3 (4 subjects - 29,22, 32, 54) and 
expands to more learners at Time 4. In fact at Time 4, six subjects use the past perfec
and all usage is target-like. The use of past perfect has inherent perfective aspect an
meaning. Only one subject at Time 3 (subject 20) uses the tense three times in a non-
target like way. 
163 

Table 6.19: Usage of Past Perfect - Experimental Group, Guided Speaking 
Time 
Subject 
06 
16 
20 
22 
26 
32 
36 
48 
52 
54 
58 
All 
1 
No. 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
% Non 
Target 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2 
Na 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
% 
Non 
Target 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3 
Na 
-
-
3 
1 
-
1 
-
-
-
2 
-
7 
% Non 
Target 
-
-
100% 
0% 
-
0% 
-
-
-
0% 
-
43% 
4 
No. 
-
-
1 
4 
2 
-
-
1 
-
1 
1 
10 
% 
Non 
Target 
-
-
0% 
0% 
0% 
-
-
0% 
-
0% 
0% 
0% 
Total 1-4 
No. 
-
-
4 
5 
2 
1 
-
1 
-
3 
1 
17 
% Non 
Target 
-
-
75% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
-
0% 
-
0% 
0% 
18% 
Some examples of use of past perfect at Times 3 and 4 are: 
 Suddenly the two policemen had arrived (20/T3) 
 They had given all the money (54/T3) 
 They had eaten the food (22/T4) 
 After they had arranged the table (48/T4) 
The most common type of non-target like usage in terms of grammatical form was the 
use of Base Verb instead of verbal participle (eg. They had prepare some food: 22/T4,
Somebody had take their food: 26/T4). This occurred in more than a third of the 
sentences (6 occasions) (eg. pictures that had recorded by the camera: 22/T3). 
164 

The distribution of use of present modal is shown in Table 6.20. Present modal was not 
widely use by learners, but the usage did increase over time from three subjects a
1, and 2 subjects at Time 2, to 4 subjects at Time 3, and 7 subjects at Time 4. Wi
to events/activities in guided speaking tasks present tense was not normally appro
However, under certain circumstances, such as direct speech, (eg. 'I can see an ol
(54/T1)) it was acceptable. It should be noted that all acceptable use of present 
the tasks is direct speech from learners. 
Table 6.20: Usage of Present Modal - Experimental Group, Guided Speaking 
Time 
Subject 
06 
16 
20 
22 
26 
32 
36 
48 
52 
54 
58 
All 
1 
No. 
-
-
-
2 
-
-
-
1 
-
2 
-
5 
% Non 
Target 
-
-
-
0% 
-
-
-
0% 
-
0% 
-
0% 
2 
Na 
1 
-
-
1 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2 
% 
Non 
Target 
0% 
-
-
0% 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0% 
3 
No. 
-
-
-
1 
3 
-
-
2 
6 
-
-
12 
% Non 
Target 
-
-
-
0% 
100% 
-
-
0% 
0% 
-
-
25% 
4 
Na 
-
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
-
1 
2 
-
-
9 
% 
Non 
Target 
-
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
-
0% 
100% 
-
-
22% 
Total 1-4 
Na 
1 
1 
1 
5 
5 
1 
-
4 
8 
2 
-
28 
% Non 
Target 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
60% 
0% 
-
0% 
25% 
0% 
-
18% 
Some examples of present modal include: 
 We can see the old man (48/T1) 
 We can see blood here (06/T2) 
 The police cannot enter the room (52/3) 
165 

 W e can look someone who... (20/4) 
The use of past modal was acceptable for all guided speaking tasks in certain contexts
The distribution of use of past modal is shown in Table 6.21 below. The use of past 
modal was very infrequent both in terms of numbers of use and numbers of learners who 
use it over time. At Time 1 past modal was used only once by a learner (subject 22). At
Time 2 -past modal is used by four subjects (06,20,32,54), but decreases to only three
subjects at Time 3 (20, 32, 52) and further to only one subject (22) at Time 4. Six of
learners (16,26,36,48, 52, 58) do not use past modal at all. It is notable that two of 
these (36, 58) do not use any modals in present either, whilst three others (16,26 and
only start using present modal at Time 3 or Time 4. 
Some examples of use of past modal include: 
 He could phone his grand daughter (22/1) 
 ... that could lose his weight (45/2) 
 They could recognise the robbers (54/3) 
 They could eat the fish with their friend in the dining room (22/4) 
In terms of grammatical formation, the only noticeable non-target like form was the 
omission of the main verb, eg. 'They could about them' (32/2). 
166 

Table 6.21: Usage of Past Modal - Experimental Group, Guided Speaking 
Time 
Subject 
06 
16 
20 
22 
26 
32 
36 
48 
52 
54 
58 
All 
1 
No. 
-
-
-
1 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 
% Non 
Target 
-
-
-
0% 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0% 
2 
Na 
1 
-
1 
-
-
1 
-
-
-
2 
-
5 
% Non 
Target 
100% 
-
0% 
-
-
0% 
-
-
-
0% 
-
20% 
3 
Na 
-
-
2 
-
-
1 
-
-
-
3 
-
6 
% Non 
Target 
-
-
100% 
-
-
0% 
-
-
-
0% 
-
33% 
4 
Na 
-
-
-
3 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3 
% Non 
Target 
-
-
-
0% 
.-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0% 
Total 1-4 
Na 
1 
-
3 
4 
-
2 
-
-
-
5 
-
15 
% Non 
Target 
100% 
-
67% 
0% 
-
0% 
-
-
-
0% 
-
20% 
6.2.3 Summary of Differences - Guided Speaking Task 
Quantity and Range of Tenses Used 
Students in the experimental group on average produced a greater number of finite Verb 
forms at Time 1 (see Table 6.22) than the control group, and also had a lesser proporti
of these finite verbs that are in present simple/Base V form. During the teaching phase
control group increases the quantity of finite verbs produced more dramatically than th
experimental group, but the experimental group has a sharper decrease in the proportion
of verb forms that are inpresent simple/Base Fto Time 2. At Time 3 the two groups are 
very similar in both the quantity of finite verb forms being produced and the proportio
of these that are inpresent simple/Base V form. But the results at Time 4 indicate that
level of usage of present simple/Base Fhas not increased after the teaching phase for t
167 

experimental group and their quantity of verb forms has increased further. In contrast, 
whilst the average quantity of verb forms has also increased for the control group, the 
proportion of these forms that are inpresent simple/Base V form has also increased 
considerably. This suggests that the control group has not maintained their willingness to 
use tense marking as well as the experimental group. 
Table 6.22: Use present simple/Base V'm guided speaking tasks in relation to total 
finite verb clauses, Control group vs Experimental group 
Time 
Control 
Group 
Total 
% clauses 
Pres Simple 
Mean No. 
Experiment-
al Group 
Total 
%Pres 
Simple 
Mean No. 
1 
Present 
Simple 
158 
77% 
15.8 
186 
66% 
16.9 
Total 
Clauses 
210 
21.0 
281 
25.6 
2 
Present 
Simple 
167 
47% 
16.7 
103 
31% 
9.4 
Total 
Clauses 
353 
35.3 
338 
30.7 
3 
Present 
Simple 
165 
51% 
16.5 
164 
47% 
14.9 
Total 
Clauses 
325 
32.5 
353 
32.1 
4 
Present 
Simple 
218 
59% 
21.8 
206 
49% 
18.7 
Total 
Clauses 
373 
37.3 
425 
38.6 
Total 1-4 
Present 
Simple 
705 
56% 
70.5 
659 
47% 
59.9 
Total 
Clauses 
1261 
126.1 
1397 
127 
The data presented in Table 6.23 confirms that the experimental group is using a greater 
range of tenses. In particular, it is evident that the experimental group is using more pa
tense, both in simple and progressive. This is particularly evident at Times 1, 2 and, 
importantly, at Time 4, after the teaching phase has concluded. Most of the other 
differences are very small, although the control group does appear to use more perfect 
tenses (especially past perfect) and a larger increase in the use of present modal over 
time. 
168 

Table 6.23: Quantity and Average Usage of Tenses over time in guided speaking 
task for each group 
Time 
Group 
Total 
Attempt 
Average 
Present 
Simple 
Average 
Simple 
Prog. 
Average 
Simple 
Past 
Average 
Past 
Prog. 
Average 
Present 
Perfect 
Average 
Past 
Perfect 
Average 
Present 
Modal 
Average 
Past 
Modal 
Average 
1 
Exp. 
Group 
281 
25.5 
186 
16.9 
14 
1.3 
63 
5.7 
11 
1.0 
1 
0.1 
"  
. 
5 
0.5 
1 
0.1 
Ctrl 
Group 
210 
21.0 
158 
15.8 
6 
0.6 
39 
3.9 
1 
0.1 
3 
0.3 
" 
-
5 
0.5 
~ 
-
2 
Exp. 
Group 
338 
30.7 
103 
9.4 
6 
0.6 
192 
17.5 
29 
2.6 
1 
0.1 
" 
-
2 
0.2 
5 
0.5 
Ctrl 
Group 
353 
35.3 
167 
16.7 
12 
1.2 
144 
14.4 
18 
1.8 
4 
0.4 
1 
0.1 
6 
0.6 
1 
0.1 
3 
Exp. 
Group 
353 
32.1 
164 
14.9 
11 
1.0 
117 
10.6 
30 
2.7 
6 
0.6 
7 
0.6 
12 
1.1 
6 
0.6 
Ctrl 
Group 
325 
32.5 
165 
16.5 
2 
0.2 
118 
11.8 
20 
2.0 
5 
0.5 
6 
0.6 
3 
0.3 
6 
0.6 
4 
Exp. 
Group 
425 
38.6 
206 
18.7 
15 
1.4 
148 
13.5 
22 
2.0 
12 
1.1 
10 
0.9 
9 
0.8 
3 
1 0.3 
Ctrl 
Group 
373 
37.3 
218 
21.8 
10 
1.0 
90 
9.0 
7 
0.7 
13 
1.3 
16 
1.6 
16 
1.6 
3 
0.3 
Total 1-4 
Exp. 
Group 
1397 
127 
659 
59.9 
46 
4.2 
520 
47.3 
92 
8.4 
20 
1.8 
17 
1.6 
28 
2.6 
15 
1.4 
Ctrl 
Group 
1261 
126 
705 
70.1 
30 
3.0 
391 
39.1 
46 
4.6 
25 
2.5 
23 
2.3 
28 
2.8 
10 
1.0 
Accuracy 
Table 6.24 surnmarises the incidence of non-target like usage across the main tenses u
in the guided speaking task for each group. Despite the students in the experimental 
group producing a larger average number of finite verb forms at Time 1, the proportion 
non-target like usage for the 2 groups is virtually identical at Time 1. At Time 2 the 
169 

experimental group has a lower level of non-target like usage than the control group, but 
this then reverses at Time 3 and 4 with the experimental group having a lower level of 
accuracy in usage of tenses. Both groups exhibit improved levels of accuracy at Time 4 i
comparison with prior to the teaching phase (Time 1), but the improvement in accuracy i
superior for the control group. 
Table 6.24: Incidence of non target-like usage across main tenses in the guided 
speaking task for both groups 
Time 
Group 
Present 
Simple 
Simple 
Prog. 
Simple 
Past 
Past 
Prog. 
Present 
Perfect 
Past 
Perfect 
Present 
Modal 
TOTAL 
Av. 
% non-
target 
of total 
verb 
forms 
1 
Exp. 
Group 
97 
0 
5 
0 
0 
-
0 
102 
9.3 
36.5% 
Ctrl 
Group 
51 
0 
19 
0 
3 
-
3 
76 
7.6 
36.2% 
2 
Exp. 
Group 
86 
2 
2 
0 
0 
-
0 
90 
8.2 
26.7% 
Ctrl 
Group 
74 
5 
19 
0 
4 
1 
4 
107 
10.7 
30.3% 
3 
Exp. 
Group 
107 
0 
18 
8 
3 
3 
3 
142 
12.9 
40.2% 
Ctrl 
Group 
94 
1 
8 
3 
5 
0 
1 
112 
11.2 
34.5% 
4 
Exp. 
Group 
91 
6 
30 
0 
10 
0 
2 
139 
12.6 
32.6% 
Ctrl 
Group 
48 
2 
26 
0 
13 
4 
3 
96 
9.6 
25.7% 
Total 1-4 
Exp. 
Group 
381 
8 
55 
8 
13 
3 
5 
473 
43 
33.9% 
Ctrl 
Group 
267 
8 
72 
3 
25 
5 
11 
391 
39.1 
31.0% 
This brief summary of the differences between the groups suggests that students studying 
the Alternative Communication Grammar Method (the experimental group) are more 
adventurous and attempt to use a wider range of forms, and particularly, more past tens
forms in the guided speaking task. However, whilst at Time 2 this group appears to use 
the tenses with a superior level of accuracy than the control group, this advantage is 
170 

maintained. B y the end of the teaching phase this group's tense/aspect usage is not as 
consistently target-like as that of the students studying with the Current Method (the 
control group) and they have a lower level of accuracy in appropriate usage of tenses. 
6.3. Patterns of Usage in Free Speaking Task 
In the free speaking tasks learners demonstrate the capacity to use a range of tenses and 
aspects, including present simple/Base V, simple progressive/V-ing, present perfect, 
future, and simple past. However, present simple/Base V is far and away the most 
favoured choice, at least partly as a result of the nature of the task, for which the lear
were required to describe aspects of their life and experience. Simple progressive/V-ing 
and simple past were also used quite frequently. 
This analysis of use of these tenses and aspects will mainly focus on the main verbal 
constituent of the verb phrase (verbs infinite clauses - both main and subordinate 
clauses). The figures depicted in the tables indicate the number of attempts for each 
learner to use that specific tense over time, together with the percentage of the usage th
was non-target like. The basis of the categorisation of the usage being non-target like 
relates to whether the tense was used in a way that was functionally appropriate within 
the context that it was used. There may nevertheless have been formal errors in the 
formation of the tense. The nature of such errors is categorised and described separately 
as part of the discussion of usage of the tense, and is also evident in the frequency 
analysis included in section 6.1 of this chapter. 
6.3.1. Control Group 

Present simple/Base V is by far the most favoured choice of tense. Given that only the 
third person singular inpresent simple differs in form from the base form of the verb, 
these forms are treated together, but the use of this form is only accepted as target lik
contexts in which present simple tense is acceptable. 
The use of present simple outnumbers other tenses on each task consistently (see Table 
6.25). In the majority of cases this usage was considered target like, indicating that the 
nature of the tasks permitted and fostered use of present simple/Base V. The use of the 
simple present/Base V increases for almost every subject from Time 1 to Time 2. This 
increase may relate to increased confidence in using verbs as a result of the introductio
of the teaching phase. Both present simple and simple past tenses had been introduced 
before Time 2. Only one subject (13) uses less present simple at Time 2. At Time 3 the 
use ofpresent simple/Base Fdecreases in some subjects (07, 25, 41, 55), whereas it 
continues to increase substantially for two subjects (37, 51). The decrease is partly off
by the increase in usage of a larger range of other tenses. A few weeks after the teaching 
phase is completed the use of present simple/Base Fhas increased further for 5 subjects 
(07,09,17,25, 55). 
At Time 1 all usage by all learners is target like. From Time 2 onwards there is a small 
amount of non-target like usage, but this constitutes a very small proportion of total us
for all four learners who have some non-target like usage. Indeed the only time at which 
the non-target like usage is greater than 10% is for subject 09 at Time 3, and this is the 
only occasion that subject 09 uses the tense in a non target like way. Overall, it can be 
172 

concluded that all learners use present simple/Base V appropriately and that many 
significantly increase the number of finite verb clauses using this tense over time. 
Whilst the highest amount of usage on average is at Time 2 (during the teaching phase), 
Time 4 has the second highest amount of usage overall. There are differences between 
subjects particularly in the growth in number of verb phrases produced. Some subjects 
steadily and very significantly increase their output (eg. 51), whilst others do not i
their usage greatly (eg. 07) or actually decrease (eg. 13). 
Table 6.25: Usage of Simple Present/Base V - Control Group, Free Speaking 
Time 
Subject 
07 
09 
11 
13 
17 
25 
37 
41 
51 
55 
All 
1 
No. 
16 
8 
21 
12 
5 
12 
9 
11 
3 
14 
116 
%Non 
Target 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
2 
No. 
18 
26 
30 
10 
9 
36 
16 
24 
12 
15 
196 
% Non 
Tareet 
0% 
0% 
3% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
1% 
3 
No. 
15 
20 
33 
11 
8 
10 
22 
15 
21 
8 
163 
%Non 
Tareet 
0% 
20% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
10% 
9% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
4% 
4 
Na 
20 
27 
19 
11 
15 
23 
22 
7 
20 
11 
175 
%Non 
Tareet 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
23% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
3% 
Total 1-4 
Na 
69 
81 
103 
49 
37 
81 
79 
57 
56 
48 
650 
%Non 
Target 
0% 
5% 
1% 
0% 
0% 
1% 
9% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
2% 
Some examples of use ofSimple present/Base Fare as follows: 
 I go to take a bath (41/T1) 
 My father works in one company in Lok Sumawe (51/T2) 
 I tliink this is the good place to study (07/T3) 
 We are in the Faculty of Letters (11/T3) 

 
M y country has also many indigenous tribes (55/T4) 
Categories of non-target like usage of Present simple/Base Fin terms of form are mainly 
as follows: 
 omission of -e/s third person marking, (eg. My father always listen to 
us 51/T2, My father give rules that.... 41/T2, Our campus have a large 
yard 17/T3, Indonesia have the big sea..... 51/T4). 
 omission of BE copula (eg.... the youngest child always like that 
11/T2) 
 use of BE + Verb, (eg.,... this campus is look not so busy 11/T3, My 
parents are live in Pematang Siantar 25/T2). 
Whilst seven of the ten learners have at least one instance of omission of Copula BE, 
making this the most common formal error, there are only about 4-5 examples of 
omission across the group of learners at any one time, and only 17 clauses with copula 
BE omitted in total. 
Simple progressive/V-ing is not frequently used in free speaking tasks, and is used most 
at Time 1. Simple progressive/V-ing usage gradually lessens through the following tasks. 
The use of Simple progressive/V-ing over time is shown in Table 6.26. A noticeable 
aspect of learners' usage is the contrast between Time 1 and the later times in terms of 
acceptability of usage. At Time 1 all four subjects (17,37,41, 55) who use Simple 
progressive/V-ing use it consistently in a non-target like way, whereas at all the later
times the usage for all subjects, including 41, 55 who used it at Time 1, is target-like
174 

Table 6.26: Usage of Simple Progressive/V-ing - Control Group, Free Speaking 
Time 
Subject 
07 
09 
11 
13 
17 
25 
37 
41 
51 
55 
All 
1 
Na 
-
-
-
-
8 
-
3 
3 
-
3 
17 
% 
Non 
Target 
-
-
-
-
100% 
-
100% 
100% 
-
67% 
94% 
2 
Na 
-
4 
-
1 
-
-
-
-
-
2 
7 
% 
Non 
Target 
-
0% 
-
0% 
-
-
-
-
-
0% 
0% 
3 
No. 
1 
2 
2 
-
-
-
-
1 
-
1 
7 
% 
Non 
Target 
0% 
0% 
0% 
-
-
-
-
0% 
-
0% 
0% 
4 
Na 
-
-
1 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 
% 
Non 
Target 
-
-
0% 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0% 
Total 1-4 
Na 
1 
6 
3 
1 
8 
-
3 
4 
-
5 
32 
%Non 
Target 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
100% 
-
100% 
75% 
-
40% 
50% 
Some examples of use of Simple progressive/V-ing are as follows: 
 H e is studying at Methodist University (09/T2) 
 M y oldest brother is working in Aceh now (13/T2) 
 If w e are talking about campus (11/T3) 
Categories of non target-like usage of Simple progressive/V-ing tense/aspect in terms of 
grammatical formation are: 
 inconsistency of using tense (eg. I usually read a book and watching 
television 55/T1,1 usually play football and swimming 55/T1). 
 omission of A U X - BE. (eg. I watching television 41/T1, They might 
wondering about Indonesia 11/T4) 
 incorrect use of progressive (eg. In my spare time I am watching 
TV(17/T1)) 
175 

The attempts to use progressive, in fact, also includes the use of non-finite progressive 
V-ing with progressive aspectual meaning as a gerund or verbal complement after by, 
like, with, after, besides, before, for and verbs following finite verbs, such as go and 
For example, with instances of activity: 
 I spend my free time by watching television, listening to the music 
(09/T1). 
 Besides swimming,... and After going home (55/T1). 
 I am cooking special food^br watching a special program in the 
TV(17/T1). 
This suggests that many of the learners have a broad understanding of progressive aspect
and are able to use it in a range of relevant contexts. 
Simple past is used by a small, but increasing number of learners over time (see Table 
6.27). At Time 1 simple past was used only once by one subject (55). Simple past is used 
by an increasingly large number of subjects from Time 2 onwards (three subjects (09, 25,
37) at Time 2, four (09,11, 51, 55) at Time 3 and 6 (07, 09,37,41,51, 55) at Time 4). 
However, much of the usage of simple past is non-target like. Most non-target examples 
ofsimple past were more appropriate inpresent simple. Looking at the pattern of usage 
of the various learners there is little evidence of a pattern of more consistently targe
usage over time by learners who use the tense more than once. However, for the group 
overall, it is noticeable that the lowest level of non-target like usage is at Time 3, 
immediately after the end of the teaching phase. 

Table 6.27: Usage of Simple Past - Control Group, Free Speaking Task 
Time 
Subject 
07 
09 
11 
13 
17 
25 
37 
41 
51 
55 
All 
1 
Na 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 
1 
%Non 
Target 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
100% 
100% 
2 
Na 
-
1 
-
-
-
2 
5 
-
-
-
8 
% 
Non 
Target 
-
0% 
-
-
-
50% 
80% 
-
-
-
63% 
3 
Na 
-
1 
1 
-
-
-
-
-
3 
1 
6 
%Non 
Target 
100% 
0% 
-
-
-
-
-
0% 
0% 
17% 
4 
Na 
5 
1 
-
-
-
-
3 
1 
1 
1 
12 
% 
Non 
Target 
60% 
100% 
-
-
-
-
67% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
75% 
Total 1-4 
Na 
5 
3 
1 
-
-
2 
8 
1 
4 
3 
27 
% Non 
Target 
60% 
67% 
0% 
-
-
50% 
75% 
100% 
25% 
67% 
59% 
Some examples of use of simple past are: 
 I usually play football and swirnming if I had money (55/T1). 
 I always thought that my family is very big (37/T2). 
 I didn 't choose it wrong to study here (51/T3). 
 I was so proud with my country (41/T4). 
The main categories of non target-like usage of simple past is terms of grammatical fo
include: 
 confusion of adjective and verb (eg. I didn 7 satisfied to enter this 
campus, 09/T3) 
 confusion of past and infinitive (I am (fortunate) because I can entered 
this campus, 51/T3,... because many student want to entered to this 
campus, 51/T3). 
177 

Table 6.28 shows the distribution of usage of present perfect by the learners over time. 
The present perfect is not widely used by these learners over time, with the only notabl
amount of usage being at Time 2, when 6 subjects (09,11, 17,29,37,41) use the tense 
on a total of 10 occasions. When all times are included then all but three (07,13, 51) o
the subjects have used the present perfect at least once at one of the times. When prese
perfect is used the usage is uniformly target like suggesting that learners attempt to u
the tense only in contexts in which they are confident of its appropriateness. The 
increased use of present perfect at Time 2 might be related to the nature of the task. 
However, the intervention of teaching activities might also have enriched the learners' 
understanding of acceptable use of present perfect in terms of function, and fostered th
use of the tense. Present perfect was used largely with a small number of common verbs 
such as marry, get, decide, grow, spread, teach, and do. For example, marry is used 5 
times and get is used 3 times. 
Table 6.28: Usage of the Present Perfect - Control Group, Free Speaking 
Time 
Subject 
07 
09 
11 
13 
17 
25 
37 
41 
51 
55 
All 
1 
No. 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 
1 
%NOD 
Target 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0% 
0% 
2 
No. 
-
1 
2 
-
2 
3 
1 
1 
-
-
10 
%Non 
Target 
-
0% 
0% 
-
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
-
-
0% 
3 
No. 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 
-
-
1 
%Non 
Target 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0% 
-
-
0% 
4 
Na 
-
3 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3 
%Non 
Target 
-
0% 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0% 
Total 1-4 
No. 
-
4 
2 
-
2 
3 
1 
2 
-
1 
15 
%Non 
Target 
-
0% 
0% 
-
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
-
0% 
0% 
178 

Some examples of use of present perfect include: 
 Today I try one program, that is, Lotus 2.4 ... and the result is I 've 
done it well (55/T1) 
 My father has decided... that my sister and I have to back before seven 
o'clock at noon (17/T2). 
 I like the friend that Yve got (41/T3). 
 ... it's made the tourism ("tourists") want to invite ("visit") and made 
and made the income for our country (09/T4). 
Categories of non target-like usage of present perfect in terms of grammatical formatio
was mainly as follows: 
 omission of perfective marking on verb (eg. We have been grow up 
and spread... 25/T2) 
 confusion between passive and active (eg. We have been grow up and 
spread... 25/T2) 
 confusion of past tense and perfective (eg. eg. My brother has got a 
job on Jakarta my brother got job on Jakarta... 37/T2) 
Future is also used by subjects in the free speaking tasks only to a limited extent (se
Table 6.29). All of the attempts to use future are target-like. Future is only used by f
subjects over time, two (11,37) at Time 1, one (51) at Time 2, two (09,51) at Time 3, an
three (07,09,51) at Time 4. In feet, only two subjects (07 and 51) use future more than 
once over time. The limited use of present future over time appears primarily to be the 
result of the nature of the tasks. The intervention of teaching phase does not seem to 
facilitate the increase in the production of the future overall, but for two subjects (0

61) the use of future commences during (T2) or by the end of the teaching phase (T3) and 
continues, and may have been fostered by learning that took place during the teaching 
phase. 
Table 6.29: Usage of Future - Control Group, Free Speaking 
Time 
Subject 
07 
09 
11 
13 
17 
25 
37 
41 
51 
55 
All 
1 
Na 
-
i 
1 
-
-
-
1 
-
-
-
2 
%Non 
Target 
-
-
0% 
-
-
-
0% 
-
-
-
0% 
2 
Na 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 
-
1 
%Non 
Target 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0% 
-
0% 
3 
No. 
-
1 
-
-
-
-
-
-
2 
-
3 
%Non 
Target 
-
0% 
-
-
-
-
-
-
0% 
-
0% 
4 
Na 
1 
1 
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 
-
3 
%Non 
Target 
0% 
0% 
-
-
-
-
-
-
0% 
-
0% 
Total 1-4 
Na 
1 
2 
1 
-
-
-
1 
-
4 
-
9 
%Non 
Target 
0% 
0% 
0% 
-
-
-
0% 
-
0% 
-
0% 
Some examples of usage of future tense are as follows: 
 lam not going to pass it just like that (11/T1). 
 I can't do it but 17/ try it (37/T1). 
 I think my family will move to Medan (51/T2). 
 I will study hard to get my ambition (51/T3). 
 I will tell you about the Indonesian... my country Indonesian (07/T4). 
The only instances of non target-like formation of the tense involve confusion among 
passive, future, and the verb marking (eg. ...the people will be make against...). How
with regard to function in its contextfuture is acceptable. 
180 

Present modal is used by most learners, but infrequently over time (see Table 6.30 
below). The use of present modal is in a target-like way most of the time. In fact, the o
occurrence of non-target like usage is at Time 3 by one subject (41) on one occasion. Th
number of subjects using present modal increases gradually over time (2 subjects (13,17)
at Time 1, three subjects (11,41, 51) at Time 2, four subjects (09, 25, 41, 51) at Time 3
and 5 subjects (09, 37,41,51, 55) at Time 4. In addition, the amount of usage also 
increases, although the largest increase in occurrence is from Times 1-3 and Time 4, 
where across the learners present modal is used on 12 occasions. With regard to the usag
of present modal it is difficult to argue that the nature of the task contributes to the 
increase and decrease of the use of the present modal over time. However, it is possible 
that the teacliing intervention widened the range of tenses that the learners attempted 
use. 
Table 6.30: Usage of Present Modal - Control Group, Free Speaking 
Time 
Subject 
07 
09 
11 
13 
17 
25 
37 
41 
51 
55 
All 
1 
Na 
-
-
-
3 
-
-
1 
-
-
-
4 
% 
Non 
Target 
-
-
-
0% 
-
-
0% 
-
-
-
0% 
2 
Na 
-
1 
-
-
-
-
1 
2 
-
4 
% Non 
Target 
0% 
-
-
-
-
0% 
0% 
-
0% 
3 
Na 
-
1 
-
-
-
1 
-
2 
1 
-
5 
% Non 
Target 
-
0% 
-
-
-
0% 
-
50% 
0% 
-
20% 
4 
Na 
-
2 
-
-
-
-
2 
1 
4 
3 
12 
% 
Non 
Target 
-
0% 
-
-
-
-
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Total 1-4 
Na 
-
3 
1 
3 
-
1 
3 
4 
7 
3 
25 
%Non 
Target 
-
0% 
0% 
0% 
-
0% 
0% 
25% 
0% 
0% 
4% 
181 

Some examples of usage of present modal are: 
 But for this time I can't do it (37/T1) 
 We don't have to wonder about it (11/T2) 
 ... that the Faculty of Letters must have language laboratory (09/T3) 
 We can buy it freely (55/T4) 
Modals are also used in the part tense by subject 11 three times at Time 1 and once at 
Time 3 and twice at Time 4 by subject 37 (refer Table 6.31). All the attempts to use 
modal were target-like except once at Time 1. With regard to the tense (past) the lim
use of past modal was largely the result of the nature of the task, but also relates 
level of proficiency of the learners, as the use ofpast modal in the context of the f
speaking task has the nuance of referring to the mildness of possibility and has an 
overtone of particular politeness (Murphy, 1985: 54, Liz & Soars, 1996:148).. 
Table 6.31: Usage of Past Modal - Control Group, Free Speaking 
Time 
Subject 
07 
09 
11 
13 
17 
25 
37 
41 
51 
55 
All 
1 
Na 
-
-
3 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3 
% 
Non 
Target 
-
-
33% 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
33% 
2 
Na 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
% 
Non 
Target 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3 
Na 
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 
-
-
-
1 
% 
Non 
Target 
-
-
-
-
-
-
0% 
-
-
-
0% 
4 
Na 
-
-
-
-
-
-
2 
-
-
-
2 
% 
Non 
Target 
-
-
-
-
-
-
0% 
-
-
-
0% 
Total 1-4 
Na 
-
-
3 
-
-
-
3 
-
-
-
6 
% Non 
Target 
-
-
33% 
-
-
-
0% 
-
-
-
17% 
182 

Some examples of use of past modal are as follows: 
 Because it could be useful for our relationship (11/1) 
 I would like to follow the exam to pass the government university 
(37/T3) 
 We should know... how to be a good Indonesian (37/T4) 
6.3.2. Experimental Group in Free Speaking 
Present simple/Base Fis largely used by learners in the experimental group over time 
(refer to Table 6.32). In the overwhelming majority of cases this usage was considered 
target-like, indicating that the nature of the tasks permitted and fostered use of pres
simple/Base V. The level of usage of Present simple/Base Ffor the group overall 
remains very similar from Time 1 to Time 3, but increases a little at Time 4. All learn
are using finite verbs in Present simple/Base V. They do differ, however, in the quantum
of this usage (eg. contrast between four learners who each have less than 10 usages at 
Time 1, and three who have more than 20 usages (one actually over 30)). There are also 
differences between learners in the extent to which their usage of the tense changes ov
time. Some learners reduce their usage of the tense once the teaching phase has 
commenced (eg. subjects 06 and 52), whereas others increase (eg. 32), and yet others 
fluctuate quite dramatically from one time to the next, most characteristically with hig
usage at Time 2 (eg. 36, 54). 
Virtually on all occasions the use of present simple is target-like both in terms of fo
and function. However, there are some verb phrases which would have been more 
acceptable in another tense due to the context or the environment of the clause. 

Table 6.32: Usage of Present Simple/Base V - Experimental Group, Free Speaking 
Time 
Subject 
06 
16 
20 
22 
26 
32 
36 
48 
52 
54 
58 
All 
1 
No. 
13 
29 
23 
7 
10 
9 
14 
15 
33 
18 
5 
176 
% Non 
Target 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
2 
No. 
9 
27 
15 
7 
8 
12 
32 
9 
27 
29 
5 
180 
% 
Non 
Target 
0% 
11% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
2% 
3 
No. 
6 
27 
20 
4 
23 
24 
17 
16 
19 
18 
7 
182 
% 
Non 
Target 
100% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
16% 
0% 
0% 
5% 
4 
No. 
7 
46 
28 
26 
24 
13 
13 
18 
19 
12 
23 
229 
% 
Non 
Target 
0% 
0% 
0% 
29% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
3% 
Total 1-4 
No. 
35 
129 
86 
42 
65 
56 
77 
59 
98 
77 
40 
767 
% Non 
Target 
18% 
3% 
0% 
18% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
3% 
0% 
0% 
3% 
Some selected examples of use ofpresent simple/Base Fare as follows: 
 I like watching TV (06/T1) 
 I always listen to the radio (61/T1) 
 I live with my parents in Medan (20/T2) 
 But there is no laboratory in this campus (36/T3) 
The only categories of non target-like use of present simple/Base V in terms of its 
grammatical form are: 
 Failure to mark for third person singular on verb (eg. Indonesia have 
many many archipelago 22/T1, Now he work for Pertamina at 
Pangkalan Berandan 36/T2) 
184 

 Omission of copula B E (egs. That all (07/T1); Because m y house on 
the corner on m y block (17/T2); Because they interested to see 
Indonesia (07/4). 
Omission of Copula B E is the most common formal error and occurs at least once for all, 
but one of the learners. Its incidence increases over time, Time 1(3 occurrences) -Time 3 
(13 occurrences), and then is a little less at Time 4(10 occurrences). 
Simple progressive/V-ing is the second most favoured choice of tense used by learners 
the experimental group in the free speaking task. Table 6.33 shows the distribution of 
usage of simple progressive/V-ing over time. 
Table 6.33: Usage of Simple Progressive/V-ing - Experimental Group, Free 
Speaking 
Time 
Subject 
06 
16 
20 
22 
26 
32 
36 
48 
52 
54 
58 
All 
1 
No. 
2 
3 
1 
1 
1 
-
3 
3 
-
3 
-
17 
% Non 
Target 
50% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
-
100% 
100% 
-
100% 
-
94% 
2 
Na 
1 
-
1 
3 
-
-
-
3 
1 
6 
1 
16 
% Non 
Target 
0% 
-
0% 
33% 
-
-
-
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
6% 
3 
Na 
-
-
-
-
-
-
2 
1 
-
2 
-
5 
% 
Non 
Target 
-
-
-
-
-
-
0% 
100% 
-
0% 
-
20% 
4 
Na 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3 
-
-
-
3 
% 
Non 
Target 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
100% 
-
-
-
25% 
Total 1-4 
No. 
3 
3 
2 
4 
1 
-
5 
10 
1 
11 
1 
41 
% Non 
Target 
33% 
100% 
50% 
50% 
100% 
-
60% 
50% 
0% 
27% 
0% 
46% 
185 

The peak use of simple progressive/V-ing is at Times 1 and 2, where all learners but 
subject 32 use the tense at least once. Simple progressive/V-ing is used on 17 occasions 
by 8 learners at Time 1 and on 16 occasions by seven learners at Time 2. What is 
noticeable is that at Time 1 all the usage, except on one occasion by subject 06, is non-
target like in terms of its context. This non-target like usage largely involves using si
progressive/V-ing when present simple is appropriate. In contrast, at Time 2 the opposite 
is the case - all usage other than on one occasion (subject 22) is target like. This sugg
that the teacliing phase has assisted learners in using the tense in a functionally 
appropriate way. 
The usage of simple progressive/V-ing is infrequent at Times 3 and 4 suggesting that the 
learners are preferring some of the other tenses they have learnt and possibly also that 
nature of the tasks does not provide a lot of need for the tense. However, it is evident t
for all but one learner (subject 48) this usage continues to be consistently target like. 
Subject 48 seems to be an example of a learner who has not retained learning that 
appeared to have been acquired during the teaching phase at Time 2, as this learner 
continues to use simple progressive/V-ing at Times 3 and 4, but reverts to using it in a 
functionally inappropriate way (as for this learner also at Time 1). 
Some examples of use of simple progressive/V-ing are as follows: 
 I wake up at nine o'clock... I am washing my dress and.... (16/T1). 
 After I finish them I am taking a bath (20/T1). 
 My oldest sister is working in a college (06/T2). 
 I... am studying English at Diploma 3 (36/T3). 

In terms of its formation non target-like use of simple progressive can be categorised as: 
 omission of AUX - BE with progressive (eg. I watching television, I 
also playing with my young sister). 
 confusion between simple progressive and -ing marking for adjective 
(eg. I am feeling boring because nobody come to my house 48/T1) 
Simple past is the second most favoured choice of tense used by these learners in the fre
speaking task (see Table 6.34). Simple past is used by all learners at least once over ti
but most of the attempts are not target-like in terms of their acceptability within the 
context they are used. The lowest level of usage of simple past is at Time 1 when only 
four learners use the tense on a total of 6 occasions, all but one of which is non-target
like. The usage of simple past increases dramatically at Time 2, when eight learners (06,
16,20, 22, 26, 52, 54) use the tense on 24 occasions, and 75% of this usage is non target
like. One learner (16) overuses simple past, using it on 10 occasions in total. The high 
usage of simple past at Time 2 may have to do with the introduction of simple past in the
teaching phase. The usage decreases at Time 3 with only 7 learners using the tense on 15 
occasions. Whilst three of these learners use the simple past consistently in contexts i
which it is target like, the other four learners still have entirely non target like usa
Time 4 the usage increases again with eight learners (16,22,26,32, 36,48, 52, 58) using 
the tense a total of 20 times, and with the proportion of non target like usage increasi
90%, higher even than at Time 1. 
By the end of the teaching phase and beyond, it is only possible to say that 3 learners 
from the group have acquired the capacity to use simple past in a target like way. These 
187 

are subjects 06, 22 and 54. Some subjects (eg. 36, 58) seem to have gone backwards in 
their learning as they have better target like performance at earlier times than at Time
or 4. Others (eg. subject 52) appear to be improving their level of target like usage ac
the teaching phase, but then relapse at Time 4. 
Overall we can conclude that the teaching intervention seems to bring about an increase 
in the production of simple past. However, for the majority of learners the teaching 
intervention has not yet led to target-like production. There is still confusion between 
use of past tense and present tense, and simple past is not used in a target-like way most
of the times in terms of functions. The main cause of non target-like use is confusion 
between the use of past simple and present simple in relation to a truth that started in 
past and is valid until the moment of speaking, and, perhaps, will still be valid until s
time in the future, (eg. In my family I was the oldest child' 26/2). 
Some examples of use of simple past are as follows: 
 I didn't stay with my parents.(52/Tl). 
 At the first time I came to this campus is very happy (52/T3). 
 I entered this campus in 1995 (58/T3). 
 I wanted to introduce Indonesia to the world (36/T4). 
188 

Table 6.34: Usage of Simple Past - Experimental Group, Free Speaking 
Time 
Subject 
06 
16 
20 
22 
26 
32 
36 
48 
52 
54 
58 
All 
1 
No. 
-
3 
1 
-
-
-
-
-
1 
-
1 
6 
% 
Non 
Target 
-
100% 
100% 
-
-
-
-
-
100% 
-
0% 
83% 
2 
Na 
1 
10 
4 
1 
2 
-
1 
-
4 
1 
-
24 
% Non 
Target 
100% 
90% 
75% 
100% 
100% 
-
0% 
-
50% 
0% 
-
75% 
3 
Na 
3 
4 
3 
-
-
1 
1 
-
1 
-
2 
15 
% Non 
Target 
0% 
100% 
100% 
-
-
100% 
100% 
-
0% 
-
0% 
60% 
4 
Na 
-
2 
-
2 
2 
1 
3 
2 
6 
-
2 
20 
% Non 
Target 
-
100% 
-
0% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
-
100% 
90% 
Total 1-4 
Na 
4 
19 
8 
3 
4 
2 
5 
2 
12 
1 
5 
65 
% 
Non 
Target 
25% 
95% 
88% 
33% 
100% 
100% 
80% 
100% 
75% 
0% 
40% 
77% 
Present perfect is used infrequently by the experimental group in the free speaking task 
(see Table 6.35 below). In fact, present perfect is mainly used at Time 2 (by 3 learner
subjects 16,26, 36), but is also used at Time 4 by 2 learners (16, 54). Most of the tim
when used the present perfect is target like within the context. However, only 2 (subj
36 and 54) of the four learners demonstrate a capacity to use the tense consistently i
target like way. 
The small amount of usage of present perfect may have been contributed to by a number 
of factors. Most important of these was the nature of tasks, which did not provide 
contexts in which present perfect was required. In addition, when speaking very few 
189 

learners chose to view or were able to view things as perfective activities. Some 
example of use ofpresent perfect are: 
 In a big city in my country "gotong royong" has gone (16/T2). 
 There are so many natural resources. Several have been done (54/T4). 
 ... and several haven't yet (54/T4). 
Table 6.35: Usage of Present perfect - Experimental Group, Free Speaking 
Time 
Subject 
06 
16 
20 
22 
26 
32 
36 
48 
52 
54 
58 
All 
1 
Na 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
% Non 
Target 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2 
No. 
-
1 
-
-
1 
-
6 
-
-
-
-
8 
% 
Non 
Target 
-
0% 
-
-
100% 
-
0% 
-
-
-
-
13% 
3 
Na 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
% Non 
Target 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
4 
No. 
-
1 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2 
-
3 
% Non 
Target 
-
100% 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0% 
-
33% 
Total 1-4 
Na 
-
2 
-
-
1 
-
6 
-
-
2 
-
11 
% Non 
Target 
-
50% 
-
-
100% 
-
0% 
-
-
0% 
-
17% 
The main categories of non target like use of present perfective in terms of grammatical 
forms are: 
 omission of regular and irregular past participle marking (eg. They 
have live at my home town Samosir 26/T2) 
190 

 
confusion about 3rd person singular marking of H A V E (eg. M y 
youngest brother has ... have graduate for college 36/T2) 
Present future is not used by these learners very often in this task. In fact, instance
use only occur at Times 1, 3 and 4 (refer Table 6.36). However, the present future is us
consistently in a target-like way by six (20, 22, 32,36, 54, 58) of the seven learners w
use it. Only subject 06 shows evidence of non target like usage in terms of the 
appropriacy of the form in its context on both occasions when the tense is used. Most 
noticeable is the absence of use by any learners of present future at Time 2, possibly 
result of the strong focus on the usage of other tenses in the first part of the teachi
phase. Also, there is no evidence of a large increase in future production after the 
teaching phase is completed (Time 3). But at Time 4, a few weeks after the teaching 
phase is completed, the use of present future increases to 8 occurrences by three learn
who have not used it previously. 
Some examples of use of present future include: 
 If I have much money maybe 17/ go to see a movie in city (36/T1). 
 This is the place where I am going to study (06/T3). 
 We must study hard and we will (20/T3). 
 And they will try to keep the peace as long as they can (58/T4). 
191 

Table 6.36: Usage of Present future - Experimental Group, Free Speaking 
Time 
Subject 
06 
16 
20 
22 
26 
32 
36 
48 
52 
54 
58 
All 
1 
No. 
1 
1 
2 
2 
6 
% Non 
Target 
100% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
17% 
2 
Na 
% Non 
Target 
3 
No. 
1 
1 
2 
% Non 
Target 
100% 
0% 
50% 
4 
Na 
1 
4 
3 
8 
% Non 
Target 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Total 1-4 
Na 
2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
4 
5 
16 
% Non 
Target 
100% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
13% 
Present modal is used by learners an increasing amount and by an increasing number of 
the learners over time (see Table 6.37). Significantly, when used the present modal is 
used consistently in a target like way by all learners. The number of subjects (4 - 16
52, 54) who use present modal remains the same at Time 2, but the amount of usage 
increases slightly. At Time 3 there is a dramatic increase both in the number of learn
using the tense (from 4 to 9 - subjects 16,20,22,26,32, 36,48, 52, 54) and in the amoun
of their usage, although particularly in the case of one learner (54), who uses present
modal 8 times. At Time 4 the use of present modal decreases slightly to 18 times and it
also less diverse, although, nevertheless, seven subjects still use the present modal 
once. When using modals within the free speaking task the learners show a clear 
preference for present modal, most likely because of the nature of the tasks they have 
192 

been asked to engage in. In contrast, past modal occurs only twice at Time 4 (subjects 22 
and 52 - both target-like). 
Table 6.37: Usage of Present Modal - Experimental Group, Free Speaking 
Time 
Subject 
06 
16 
20 
22 
26 
32 
36 
48 
52 
54 
58 
All 
1 
No. 
-
3 
-
-
1 
-
-
-
3 
1 
-
8 
% Non 
Target 
-
0% 
-
-
0% 
-
-
-
0% 
0% 
-
0% 
2 
Na 
-
2 
3 
-
-
-
-
-
2 
4 
-
11 
% Non 
Target 
-
0% 
0% 
-
-
-
-
-
0% 
0% 
-
0% 
3 
Na 
-
1 
1 
2 
1 
3 
3 
1 
2 
8 
-
22 
% Non 
Target 
-
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
-
0% 
4 
Na 
-
5 
1 
2 
4 
-
-
1 
1 
-
4 
18 
% 
Non 
Target 
-
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
-
-
0% 
0% 
-
0% 
0% 
Total 1-4 
Na 
-
11 
5 
4 
6 
3 
3 
2 
8 
13 
4 
59 
% % 
Non 
Target 
-
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Some learners in the experimental group show evidence of quite adventurous choices of 
tense/aspect at times within the free speaking task. Past progressive, past perfective,
present perfective progressive are amongst the tenses used by some of these learners ov
time, which have not been presented in the analysis above. 
Present perfective progressive occurs twice, once by subject 22 at Time 2, and once by 
subject 54 at Time 3, and on both occasions used in a target like way: 
 My young sister is studying at Junior High School. She has been studying there 
since 1995 (22/T2). 
193 

 I have been studying in m y ... studying English in m y campus for about one year 
(54/T3). 
Past progressive is only used by one learner (16) on a number of occasions at Time 2, f
example: 
 because he was working now at Pekan Baru (16/T2). 
 My youngest brother ... he was studying at Senior High School (16/T2). 
In fact, the use of past progressive here is not appropriate in terms of the choice of
(which should he present), although the usage of progressive aspect is acceptable with
the contexts. 
Past perfect is used by two learners, one at Time 2 and one at Time 4. Here are the 
examples: 
 Bengkalis is famous place and many many visitors had came there (22/T4). 
 In Medan I had live with my femily my relatives (26/2). 
In both these examples present simple would have been the most appropriate tense 
because the inherent action that conveys the aspect/meaning of the sentence is not yet 
completed. The action started in the past, but continues to the moment of speaking and 
has no limit in continuing into the future. 
6.3.3 Summary of Differences - Free Speaking Task 
Quantity and Range of Tenses Used 
The average production for all attempts in the free speaking task for the experimental 
group is higher than for the control group most of the times. The only exception is at 
Time 2 (see Table 6.38) where the average production for the control group is higher t
194 

for the experimental group. For the experimental group the proportion of use of the 
simple present/Base V declines after the teaching phase is introduced and increases 
slightly at the end of the teaching phase, whilst for the control group the proportion o
of the simple present/Base V increases during and immediately after the teaching phase. 
A few weeks after the teaching phase is completed, at Time 4, the usage of the simple
present/Base V is still lower for the experimental group than for the control group. Thi
means that the range of use of other tense/aspect combinations in the experimental group
is greater than in control group. It appears from this that the ACGM used in experimenta
group produced a gradually increasing amount of output within the experimental group 
with learners using a greater variety of tense/aspect combinations. This suggests that t
learners in the ACGM were more confident about expressing themselves and more 
adventurous in experimenting with tense and aspect in their spoken production. As some 
of the earlier data has indicated not all this usage of other tenses and aspects was tar
like (see for example, the section on usage of simple past), so the accuracy level was no
necessarily superior for the experimental group. 
Table 6.38: Use present simple/Base Fin free speaking tasks in relation to total finite 
verb clauses, Control group vs Experimental group 
Time 
Control 
Group 
Total 
% clauses 
Pres Simple 
Mean No. 
Experiment-
al Group 
Total 
%Pres 
Simple 
Mean No. 
1 
Present 
Simple 
112 
77% 
174 
81% 
Total 
Clauses 
146 
14.6 
214 
19.5 
2 
Present 
Simple 
193 
84% 
171 
70% 
Total 
Clauses 
231 
23.1 
245 
22.3 
3 
Present 
Simple 
167 
86% 
168 
73% 
Total 
Clauses 
194 
19.4 
231 
21.0 
4 
Present 
Simple 
177 
82% 
230 
81% 
Total 
Clauses 
217 
21.7 
284 
25.8 
Total 1-4 
Present 
Simple 
649 
82% 
743 
76% 
Total 
Clauses 
788 
78.8 
974 
88.5 
195 

The introduction of the grammatical features in context, as well as written activities and 
communicative practices assigned during the teaching phase (Time 1 - Time 2) in the 
experimental group, created a lively class and made the learners more active than those in 
the control group. For the experimental group this resulted in highly motivated learners 
and also in the lessening of what in the normal Indonesian approach to classroom 
teaching (as in the current method for the control group) is a very formal interpersonal 
relationship between learners and instructor in the class. A less formal atmosphere in the 
class, in fact, encouraged learners to be involved and participate more actively. 
Learners in the experimental group are more productive than learners in control group 
across virtually all of tense/aspect combinations over time (see Table 6.39). Present 
perfect and Past Modal are exceptional as the average usage in the control group is 
slightly higher than in the experimental group. Learners in the experimental group were 
more productive in terms of the average number of finite verb phrases even before the 
teaching phase commenced. What is evident is that the control group has a very large 
increase in their usage of verb phrases and tense/aspects from Time 1 to Time 2, but do 
not manage to maintain this level of usage, slipping back at Time 3 and then only 
marginally increasing again at Time 4. This suggests that whilst the current method 
showed greater benefits in terms of immediate productivity, the learning that took place 
was not able to be built on very well over the longer term. In contrast, the experimental 
group makes a smaller increase in usage from Time 1 to Time 2 and also decreases a little 
at Time 3, but then increases substantially again to Time 4. They seem better able to 
benefit from their learning after the end of the teaching phase, and are more productive in 
the longer term than the control group. 
196 

In addition, learners in the Experimental Group are more adventurous in the range of 
tenses that they attempt to use. This group uses a much larger number of present modal
and a larger number per learner of simple progressive and simple past as well as a 
number of examples of other tense/aspect combinations, especially at Time 2. 
Table 6.39: Quantity and Average Usage of Tenses over time in free speaking task 
for each group 
Time 
Group 
Total 
Attempt 
Average 
Present 
Simple 
Average 
Simple 
Prog. 
Average 
Simple 
Past 
Average 
Present future 
Average 
Present 
Perfect 
Average 
Present 
Modal 
Average 
Past 
Modal 
Average 
Others 
Average 
l 
Exp. 
Group 
214 
19.5 
174 
15.8 
16 
1.5 
6 
0.6 
7 
0.6 
1 
0.1 
8 
0.7 
Ctrl 
Group 
146 
14.6 
112 
11.2 
16 
1.6 
2 
0.2 
2 
0.2 
1 
0.1 
4 
0.4 
3 
0.3 
2 
Exp. 
Group 
245 
22.3 
! 
171 
15.6 
17 
1.6 
23 
2.1 
9 
0.8 
11 
1.0 
6 
0.6 
Ctrl 
Group 
231 
23.1 
193 
19.3 
8 
0.8 
8 
0.8 
1 
0.1 
10 
1.0 
1 
0.1 
3 
Exp. 
Group 
231 
21.0 
168 
15.3 
5 
0.5 
16 
1.5 
2 
0.2 
22 
2.0 
1 
0.1 
Ctrl 
Group 
194 
19.4 
167 
16.7 
7 
0.7 
5 
0.5 
3 
0.3 
1 
0.1 
5 
0.5 
1 
0.1 
4 
Exp. 
group 
284 
25.8 
230 
20.9 
5 
0.5 
18 
1.6 
7 
0.6 
2 
0.2 
18 
1.6 
2 
0.2 
1 
0.1 
Ctrl 
Group 
217 
21.7 
177 
17.7 
2 
| 
0.2 
10 
1.0 
3 
0.3 
3 
0.3 
12 
1.2 
2 
0.2 
Total 1-4 
Exp. 
Group 
974 
88.5 
743 
67.6 
43 
3.9 
63 
5.7 
16 
1.5 
12 
1.1 
59 
5.4 
2 
0.2 
8 
0.7 
Ctrl 
Group 
788 
78.8 
649 
64.9 
33 
3.3 
25 
2.5 
9 
0.9 
15 
1.5 
22 
2.2 
6 
0.6 
197 

Structural Accuracy 
The 3rd person singular in simple present is not used frequently by the students in the 
free speaking task over time in either group (see Table 6.40). However, the use of 3rd 
person singular verb contexts is marginally greater in the experimental group than in th
control group. What is noticeable is that the experimental has a consistently lower rate
marking 3rd person singular (normally -s/-es). Prior to the teaching phase there is a 
marked difference between the groups in that the control group marks for 3rd person 
100% of the time whereas the experimental group students only mark 3rd person -s/-es 
17% of the time. For the control group there is a notable deterioration in 3rd person 
marking after Time 1, dropping back to about 50% of the time. The experimental group 
continues to mark for 3rd person less than 20% of the time at Time 2, but then gradually 
the level of 3rd person marking increases from Time 3 and through to Time 4. In terms of 
structural accuracy in a frequently noticed feature of English morphology, which is 
considered late acquired, the control group exhibits a higher level of accuracy in their
production. In contrast, the experimental group are more productive in terms of the 
number of 3rd person clauses produced, but their focus is less on accuracy and accuracy 
only starts to slowly develop over time. 
198 

Table 6.40: Proportion (%) of use of-e/s for 3rd person singular marking in present 
simple (eg. He goes, She calls) in free speaking tasks for each group 
Time 
1 1 
-e/s 
marking 
Control 
Group 
Total 
% 3rd pens 
marking 
Mean No. 
Experimental 
Group 
Total 
"JO-'pers 
marking 
Mean No. 
Use 
of 
-e/s 
4 
100% 
1 
17% 
use of 
3rd 
person 
4 
0.4 
6 
0.6 
2 
use of 
-e/s 
9 
53% 
4 
18% 
use of 
3rt 
person 
17 
1.7 
22 
2.0 
3 
use of 
-e/s 
4 
50% 
1 
33% 
Use of 
3rd 
person 
8 
0.8 
3 
0.3 
4 
use of 
-e/s 
4 
50% 
6 
40% 
use of 
person 
8 
0.8 
15 
1.4 
Total 1-4 
use of 
-e/s 
21 
57% 
12 
26% 
use of 
3rd 
person 
37 
3.7 
46 
4.2 
When the functional appropriacy of choice of tenses is considered it is similarly evident 
that the control group is more accurate than the experimental group over time. Table 6
shows the incidence of non target like usage of the main tenses used for both groups. 
Whilst the two groups are comparable at Time 1 in terms of the average incidence of no
target like usage, from Time 2 onwards the level of non target like usage in the 
Experimental Group is double or greater than that of the Control Group. In particular, 
Experimental Group has a high level of non target like usage of the simple past tense,
comparison with the Control Group. Both groups have a high incidence of non target like
usage of simple progressive at Time 1, but the teaching phase in both methods seems to
make a dramatic difference to the learners' understanding of the appropriate usage of 
tense. For the control group there is no non target like usage from Times 2-4, and for 
Experimental Group just a minimal amount of non target like usage. 
199 

Table 6.41: Incidence of non target-like usage across main tenses in the free 
speaking task for both groups 
Time 
Group 
Present 
Simple 
Simple 
prog. 
Simple 
past 
Present 
future 
Present 
Perfect 
TOTAL 
Av. 
1 
Exp. 
Group 
-
13 
5 
1 
1 
20 
1.8 
Ctrl 
Group 
-
15 
2 
-
-
17 
1.7 
2 
Exp. 
group 
3 
1 
18 
-
1 
23 
2.1 
Ctrl 
Group 
1 
-
4 
-
-
5 
0.5 
3 
Exp. 
Group 
9 
1 
9 
1 
-
20 
1.8 
Ctrl 
Group 
7 
-
1 
-
-
8 
0.8 
4 
Exp. 
Group 
6 
3 
16 
-
-
25 
2.3 
Ctrl 
Group 
5 
-
7 
-
-
12 
1.2 
Total 1-4 
Exp. 
Group 
18 
18 
48 
2 
2 
88 
8.0 
Ctrl 
Group 
13 
15 
14 
-
-
42 
4.2 
The Alternative Communicative Grammar Method appears to enrich the opportunities for 
learners to engage in the use of the grammar rules and this appears to have resulted in 
these learners being more productive, both in terms of the quantity of finite verb phrase
produced and in the range of tenses used in free speaking. It is evident that learners in
current method, who have more controlled practice of grammar rules, acquire a greater 
level of accuracy in their use of tenses in the free speaking task, but their output is n
plentiful. It appears also that some of the benefits they may have attained in accuracy a
increase in productivity during the teaching phase are gradually lost after the teaching 
phase has been completed, and thus, that their learning is not as well able to be 
maintained and built upon. 
200 

CHAPTER 7 
CONCLUSIONS 
7.1 The Two Teaching Methods 
The data collected using the COLT observation proforma indicated that both classes 
participated well in the classes analysed. The differences between the methods in action 
were not as great as had been intended and assumed by the researcher. This may partly 
have resulted from the large class size (up to 30), and the difficulty in establishing a 
different classroom dynamic given the sort of teaching approach the students were used 
to. There was a strong element of teacher directed control of the classroom and of the 
structure of activities and interactions in both methods. However, in the alternative 
communicative grammar method there was somewhat less direct teacher control and 
more opportunity for student to student interaction. There was also greater use of 
extended text types and focus on function in language usage. In addition, the 
experimental group (ACGM) participated in specially designed communicative practice 
activities. Whilst it took some time for students to learn how to participate in such 
activities by the second and third lessons analysed they enthusiastically participated in
student to student interactions designed to enable this more spontaneous practice. 
Yet even in the control group, which was not specifically provided with communicative 
practice, unconsciously the teacher encouraged active participation in discussion relatin
to tenses being learnt (both in grammar explanation episode and correction/feedback 

episode) leading to a different type of communication, which was nevertheless 
spontaneous. A n important difference, however, was that the group exposed to the 
current teaching method did not get as many contextualised examples of the grammar 
features being taught and did not have opportunity for practice in extended text types, 
being restricted to practice only in discrete point tasks. Students in the current method did 
spend longer on grammar explanation and feedback and correction, meaning that they 
could be assumed to have greater explicit knowledge of the grammatical forms they were 
being taught. 
In discussing the findings of the classroom analysis it can be concluded that the activi
used in teaching the alternative communicative grammar teaching method are probably 
best categorised as 'precommunicative' because they still very much focussed on 
linguistic knowledge and the situation was somewhat artificial. Whilst these activities did 
not fully conform to Littlewood's (1981) and Nunan's (1989) criteria for communicative 
language teaching, they nevertheless constituted a significant departure from the 
approach to language teaching used within the current method. 
7.2 Teaching Method in Relation to Performance over Time 
On the measures used to assess performance of the students in each group and to compare 
this over time (see Chapter 5), the students in the current method class, the control group, 
were marginally stronger prior to the teaching intervention and had on average higher 
mean scores. Both groups progressed over time, but any advantage that the control group 
had prior to the teaching intervention was not evident at Time 4. In feet, in some cases 
202 

the experimental group had higher mean scores, although none of the differences were 
significant. This suggests that being exposed to the alternative communication grammar 
method did not disadvantage the experimental group, and, in fact, if anything, they were 
advantaged, as they improved their position in relation to the current method group. A 
comparison of the improvements made by each group over time (see section 5.2) 
confirmed that the experimental group had made marginally more improvement over 
time than the control group overall, and had particularly performed better than the control 
group in the less form focussed and more open-ended and spontaneous tasks. In contrast, 
improvement over time for the control group was more restricted and was only evident in 
the discrete point tasks. 
A noticeable feature of the performance of both groups was that much of the progress 
that was evident during the teaching phase was gradually lost, so learning1 was not 
always retained. However, the evidence that the experimental group progressed a little 
more over time also supports the contention that the students in the experimental group 
retained some of their learning a little better. 
The findings from this analysis need to be treated with caution. There is only limited 
evidence of the superior performance of the experimental group - the overall differences 
between the groups are quite small and there is also quite a lot of individual variation 
within each group (refer Chapter 6 for more discussion of this). A number of aspects of 
the approach taken were found not to be ideal - for example, the use of proficiency rating 
for assessment of student performance on the writing and speaking tasks proved not to be 
very satisfactory in discriminating changes in performance, and the performance on cloze 
203 

tasks was consistently very poor. In addition, the scale of the teaching intervention was 
relatively small (approximately 1/5 of the total teaching time over a six week period). 
Whilst the observed differences were small if such results were extended as a result o
more widespread use of similar teacWng techniques then the impact on student 
performance could be considerably larger. 
7.3 Teaching Method and Second Language Acquisition and Performance 
The analysis in Chapter 6 provided the means to examine in much greater detail how the 
learners in each group performed in their usage of tense and aspect in two of the more 
spontaneous tasks, guided speaking, which was designed to elicit substantial usage of 
past tenses and free speaking, which involved more usage of habitual and present tenses
A lot of commonality was evident in the performance of students in the two groups. In 
particular, there was similarity in the transitional forms produced by the students. Fo
example, Base V in which there was no marking of tense or aspect was a very commonly 
occurring feature of the students' second language production. Once the learners starte
to mark for tense the separation of tense marking from the root verb by means of "BE+ 
tense marker + V was a commonly occurring transitional form for past tense. Students in
each group also commonly omitted the copula 'BE' and omitted person and/or number 
marking. Similarly, consistency in tense usage was a great difficulty for students in e
group. These transitional forms are similar to those noted in other studies of acquisit
of English as a second language (eg. Bailey, Madden and Krashen, 1974; Andersen, 
1991; Bardovi-Harlig and Reynolds, 1995) 
204 

One of the most noticeable features of the narratives produced in the guided speaking 
task was the tendency to vary between simple present/Base V and past tense. In this 
context it was sometimes clear that the learner had failed to mark for past tense (ie was 
using Base V), however, in other cases the learner appeared to have adopted a different 
viewpoint to the events part way through the narrative and was using present tense to 
give greater immediacy to the narrative (egs. H e run on the road and some people laugh 
him (17/T2); W h e n he is jogging there are four teenagers that laugh at him (25/T2)). This 
characteristic has also been noted by Bardovi-Harlig and Reynolds (1995). 
In terms of second language acquisition, using the data obtained cross-sectionally there 
support for the trend reported in the literature of Base forms/non-past being acquired 
before past (eg. Andersen, 1991; Bailey, Madden and Krashen, 1974; Bardovi-Harlig and 
Reynolds, 1995). In terms of aspect progressive appears to be acquired before modal, 
with perfective probably being even later acquired. A noticeable feature of the texts 
produced by the learners was the high level of avoidance, both of past tense, and 
particularly, of complex tenses. Because of the relational/contextual nature of 
requirements for complex tenses, it was relatively straightforward for students to avoid 
generating contexts requiring the perfective or other complex tenses, and this is what 
most of the learners did. This agrees with findings of researchers such as Bardovi-Harlig 
and Reynolds (1995), Hinkel (1997) and Gradman and Hanania (1990). It was notable 
that when these more complex tenses were produced they tended to be used in a target-
like way, indicating that they were only used when the learner/s were confident about 
their usage and were otherwise avoided. 
205 

Some differences were also evident between the groups in terms of their performance on 
the speaking tasks. These are discussed in some detail in sections 6.2.3 and 6.3.3. In 
summary, the analysis suggested that in both guided speaking and free speaking tasks, the 
experimental group were more adventurous and attempted to use a wider range of 
tense/aspect combinations. In the guided speaking task this group especially used more 
past tense forms (both simple and continuous), whereas in the free speaking task they 
used a greater amount of non-simple present/Base V than the control group. This 
difference was maintained after the end of the teaching phase at Time 4. In addition, in 
the free speaking task the experimental group, taught with the alternative communicative 
grammar method, produce considerably more clauses overall. In particular, it is 
noticeable that the amount of clauses they produce steadily increases, with a particular 
increase from Time 3 to Time 4. This suggests that the experimental group experienced 
greater long term benefits from the teaching phase in terms of the quantity of their output, 
as well as being more willing to experiment in their tense and aspectual choices. This 
finding supports the contentions of those advocating communicative language teaching 
(eg. van Ek, 1979) that communicative activities facilitate fluency in L 2 production. 
In contrast, there is evidence to suggest that the performance of the control group was 
superior in terms of the accuracy of their second language production. For example, in 
the guided speaking task, whilst the experimental group had a lower level of non-target 
like usage at Time 2, by Times 3 and 4 their level of non-target like usage was higher 
than for the control group. The control group improved its level of non-target like usage 
from Time 1 to Time 4 by more than 10%, whereas the improvement for the experimental 
group was only 4 % . A similar trend was evident in the free speaking task, where after 
206 

having similar proportions of non-target like usage of tenses at Time 1, the control 
group's level of non-target like usage significantly improved whereas that of the 
experimental group stayed similar or deteriorated. In addition, in the free speaking task, 
which involved a lot of usage of simple present, it was possible to examine the level of 
accuracy in person marking for third person singular, a feature of English morphology 
that is widely recognised as being late acquired (eg. Bailey, Madden and Krashen, 1976). 
This analysis revealed that whilst the experimental group produced more 3rd person 
singular clauses in simple present, the control group marked 3rd person singular -s to a 
greater extent. The superiority of the control group in 3rd person singular -s marking was 
particularly noticeable at Times 1-3. Interestingly, a distinctive feature of the difference 
in accuracy between the two groups was in the trends in their performance. The control 
group had little usage, but 1 0 0 % -s marking at Time 1 and then plateaued to mark -s 
about 5 0 % of the time from Times 2-4, whereas the experimental group had a low level 
of marking of 3rd person singular -s at Times 1 and 2 (only 17-18%), but then from Time 
3 to Time 4 the percentage of marking gradually increased to reach 4 0 % . 
7.4 Teaching Method and Different Types of Linguistic Knowledge 
The control group, taught by the current method, had a stronger focus on form and more
focus on the development of explicit knowledge than the experimental group. This 
control group did perform marginally better on the discrete point tasks and also had 
greater accuracy in their use of 3rd person -s and in appropriate usage offenses. However, 
this was contrasted to the experimental group, whose teaching method placed more 
emphasis on the development of fluency and the development of the acquired system of 
207 

linguistic knowledge. Some of the differences in performance support the proposal that 
the experimental group developed greater fluency in English - they produced more 
clauses, and also they were taking more risks in experimenting with target language 
forms in spontaneous production. This seemed to contribute to their superior ongoing 
improvement in performance after the end of the specific teaching phase, and their 
greater improvement overall. 
As has been mentioned previously, the results of this research must be treated as 
tentative. Nevertheless, they are suggestive that a teaching methodology based on 
communicative principles in language teaching can enhance fluency and risk taking 
among learners, which may, in turn and in time, lead to superior learning outcomes, even 
if accuracy is not as high as when more traditional teaching methods have been 
employed. At the same time, though, the analysis has shown how a focus on grammatical 
forms can enhance accuracy in usage, so there can be value in the teaching program 
including some explicit teaching of grammar and practice of this in restricted contexts. 
fact, it seems that what needs to be considered is the balance between the two. The 
current method employed at the University of North Sumatra is heavily focussed on the 
development of explicit linguistic knowledge, and on the mastery of linguistic forms. It 
appears that a teaching method that has a stronger focus on the development of implicit, 
acquired knowledge, the use of language in context and on communicative practice could 
be of value in improving students' overall performance in English as a second language. 
208 

7.5 Future Research 
Many factors contribute to the learning outcomes for students, including teaching 
method, individual learner variables, class size and classroom dynamics. One of the 
challenges for researchers interested in classroom second language acquisition is to 
assess the importance and relative contribution of these various factors. Given the 
historically large class sizes in Indonesian university language classes, an important are
for future research should be the relative contribution of factors such as class size, 
teaching method and the resulting classroom dynamics to the success of ELT programs. 
For example, is it possible to have comparable success with communicative language 
teaching methods in large classes (eg. >30-40) in comparison with smaller classes (<20)? 
Another area that is worthy of future research and which relates to classroom 
management and dynamics is the nature and extent of L2 modeling and target-like L2 
input that is necessary to assist learners in their second language development. For 
example, how important is it for the learner to be hearing target like usage? Can learners 
benefit from pairwork in L2 if their partner may not be consistently producing target-like
forms? In the Indonesian context one of the reasons for a strongly teacher centred 
approach has been a belief in the importance of exposure to the best English language 
model available, that of the teacher. Yet, this teacher-centred approach has traditionally
limited the opportonuty for student to student interaction and practice, which researchers
such as Storch (1999) and Widdowson (1984) have demonstrated to have positive effects 
in the L2 classroom. 
209 

A n interesting finding of the study was h o w much of the grammar learning that appeared 
to occur during the teaching phase was lost after the teaching concluded. This seems to 
support the theory that the learner will only genuinely learn when he/she is 
developmentally ready, as has been proposed by numerous researchers including 
Pienemann and Krashen (see, for example, section 2.3.1). Retention of learning is clearly 
an area that deserves further investigation. Should less be introduced and more time given
for this small amount to be retained, with new features then being introduced more 
incrementally? Are there ways in which material can be presented so that retention of 
learning can be enhanced? 
The analysis of second language acquisition of this group of Indonesian learners did not 
reveal transitional forms or errors that could easily be attributed to the influence of th
learners' first language, Bahasa Indonesia. Indeed, as discussed in the previous section, 
Indonesian learners of English seem to make similar errors and generate similar 
transitional forms to other learners of English as a second/foreign language. There may, 
however, be subtle differences in the types or proportion of errors and transitional forms
and/or in the rate of acquisition in relation to Ll. It would be interesting to research t
more closely by comparing the output of Indonesian learners of English with that of 
students with other language backgrounds. In particular, given previous research on 
errors and avoidance in SLA (eg. Schachter, 1974), it would be interesting to investigate 
the extent to which the phenomenon of avoidance of complex tenses and aspects is a 
product of Ll influence, as Bahasa Indonesia has a much simpler system of tense and 
aspect marking than English 
210 

Finally, there is scope to undertake more research on English tense and aspect acquisition 
by Indonesian learners. This study has provided very limited opportunity to analyse 
verbal semantics in relation to aspectual marking. Closer analysis of this could prove 
very valuable in understanding how and why learners seem to find it easier to 
comprehend and express the nuances of time reference and aspect with certain classes of 
verbs, and what differences may exist between Indonesian background English learners 
and English native speakers in their understanding of temporal' and 'viewpoint' aspect. 
211 

REFERENCES 
Abas, H. (1989). C o m m o n challenges in foreign language learning and cross 
cultural teaching with special reference to Australia-Indonesia Relations, 
Indonesian Studies, 6/2: 29-34. 
Adamson, D. (1992). Practise Your Tenses, Essex: Longman. 
Andersen, R. W. (1984). The one to one principle of interlanguage 
construction, Language Learning, 34: 77-95. 
Andersen, R. W. (1991). Developmental sequences: the emergence of aspect 
marking in second language acquisition. In T. Heubner and 
C. A. Ferguson (Eds.). Crosscurrents in SLA and Linguistic Theories, 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Andersen, R. W. and Shirai, Y. (1994). Discourse motivations for some 
cognitive acquisition principles, Studies in Second Language Acquisition. 
16: 133-156. 
Antinucti, F. and Miller, R. (1976). How children talk about what happened, 
Child Language, 167-189. 
Azar, B.S.and Azar, D.A.(1990). Understanding and Using English Grammar. 
N e w Jersey: Prentice Hall Regents. 
Bailey, N. Madden, C. Krashen, S.D. (1974). Is there a 'natural sequence' in 
adult second language learning? Language Learning, 24: 235-243. 
Bardovi-Harlig, K. (1995). A narrative perspective on the development of 
tense/aspect system in second language acquisition, Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition. 17:263-291. 
Bardovi-Harlig, K. (1999). From morpheme studies to temporal semantics. 
tense-aspect research in SLA, Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 
21:241-382. 
Bardovi-Harlig, K. and Reynolds, D.W. (1995) The role of lexical aspect in the 
acquisition of tense and aspect, TESOL Quarterly, 29:107-131 
Barus, I. (1991). An ESP reading syllabus for the first year undergraduate 
students at Bogor Agricultural University (IPB) (Indonesia). Abstacts of 
212 

Field Studies Undertaken by M.A. (TESOL) Candidates. Canberra: 
Belconnen ACT. 
Bialystok, E. (1978). A theoretical model of second language learning, 
Language Learning. 28: 69-83 
Bland, S.K. (1988). The present progressive in discourse: grammar versus 
usage revisited, TESOL Quarterly, 22: 53-68. 
Bloom, L. Lifter, K. and Hafitz, J. (1980). Semantics of verbs and the 
development of verb inflection in child language, Language, 56: 386-412. 
Brumfit, C. J. (1979). Communicative' language teaching: an education 
perspective. In C. J. Brumfit and K. Johnson (Eds.) The Communicative 
Approach to Language Teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Carter, R. and McCarthy, M. (1995). Grammar and the spoken language, Applied 
Linguistics, 16: 141-158. 
Celce-Murcia, M. And Hilles, S. (1988). Techniques and Resources in Teaching 
Grammar. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Celce-Murcia, M. (1991). Grammar pedagogy in second and foreign language 
Teaching, TESOL Quarterly, 25: 459-480. 
Celce-Murcia, M. (1991) Formal grammar instruction, an educator 
comments ...., TESOL Quarterly, 25: 406-408. 
Celce-Murcia, M. Domey, Z. and Thurrell, S. (1997). Direct approaches in L2 
instruction: a turning point in communicative language teaching? 
TESOL Quarterly, 31: 141-152 
Cohen, A.D. Laser-Freeman, D. and Tarone, E. (1991) The contribution of SLA 
theories and research to teaching language, In Sadtono, E. (Ed.). Language 
and Acquisition and the Second/Foreign Language Classroom, 
Singapore: S E A M E O Regional Language Centre. 
Connelly, M. (1997). Using c-tests in English with post-graduate students, 
English for Special Purposes, 16: 139-150. 
Comrie, B. (1976). Aspect, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Cook, V. J. (1988). Chomsky's Universal Grammar, Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 
213 

Cook, V. J. (1988). Linguistic and Second Language Acquisition, London: 
Macmillan. 
Crystal, D. (1997). English as a Global Language, New York: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Dean, M. (1993). English Grammar Lesson, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
DeCarrico, J.S. (1986). Tense, aspect, and time in English modality system, 
TESOL Quarterly, 20: 665-682. 
Djauhari, M. T. (1991). Reading academic English at post graduate level, Bogor
Institute of Agriculture, Indonesia. In M.A. (TESOL) Study Project 
Report's 1994, University of Canberra, A C T . 
Dubin, F. and Olshtain (1986). Course Design: Developing Program and 
Materials for Language Learning, London: Cambridge University Press. 
Dulay, H.C. and Burt, M.K. (1973). Should we teach children syntax? Language 
Learning, 23: 245-258 
Dulay, H.C. and Burt, M.K. (1974a). A new perspective on the creative 
construction process in child second language acquisition, Language 
Learning, 24:253-278. 
Dulay, H.C. and Burt, M.K. (1974b). Natural sequences in child second language
acquisition, Language Learning, 24: 37-53. 
Ellis, R. (1985). Understanding Second Language Acquisition, Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
(1990). Individual learning style in classroom L2 development. In 
H.A.L. de Jong and D.K. Stevenson (Eds.). Individualizing the 
Assessment of Language Abilities, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters. 
(1993a). Interpretation-based grammar teaching, System, 21: 69-78. 
(1993b). The structural syllabus and second language acquisition, TESOL 
Quarterly, 27: 91-113 
( 1994). Implicit/explicit knowledge and language pedagogy, 
TESOL Quarterly, 28: 166-172. 
(1994). The Study of Second Language Acquisition. Oxford: Oxford 
214 

University Press. 
(1995). Interpretation tasks for grammar teaching, TESOL Quarterly, 29: 
87-105. 
Ellis, R. and Fotos, S (1991). Communicating about grammar, TESOL 
Quarterly, 25: 605-628. 
Fletcher, M. and Birt, D. (1994). Storylines, Essex: Longman. 
Fotos, S. (1994). Integrating grammar instruction and communicative 
language use through grammar consciousness-raising tasks, TESOL 
Quarterly, 28: 323-351. 
Fotos, S. and Ellis, R. (1991). Communicating about grammar: a task-based 
approach, TESOL Quarterly, 25: 605-628. 
Fotos, S., Homan, R M. and Poel CJ. (1994). Grammar in Mind, Tokyo: Logos 
International. 
Frohlich, M. and Spada, N. (1995). Communicative Orientation and Language 
Teaching (COLT), Sydney: National Centre for English Language 
Teacliing and Research, Maequarie University. 
Fromkin, V. Rodman, R, Collins, P. Blair, D. (1990). An Introduction to 
Language, Sydney: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. 
Guiora, A.Z. (1983). The dialectic of language acquisition, Language Learning, 
34: 2-12. 
Gradman, H.L. and Hanania, E. (1990). Discrete focus vs global tests: 
performance on selected verb structures. In de Jong, J. H. A. L. and D.K. 
Stevenson (Eds.). Individualizing of Language Abilities, Clevedon: 
Multilingual Matters. 
Hatch, E. and Farhady, H. (1982). Research Design and Statistics for Applied 
Linguistics, Rowley: Newbury House Publishers, Inc. 
Hartmann, R.R.K. and Stork, F.C. (1972) Dictionary of Language and 
Linguistics, London: Applied Science Publishers. 
Heaton, J.B. (1992). Writing Through Pictures, Essex: Longman. 
215 

Hinkel, E. (1992). L2 tense and time reference, TESOL Quarterly, 26: 557-572. 
Hinkel, E. (1997). The past tense and temporal verb meanings in a contextual 
frame, TESOL Quarterly 31: 289-313. 
Howatt, A.P.R. (1984). A History of English Language Teaching, London: 
Oxford University Press. 
Ingram, D.E. (no date) Australian Second language Proficiency Ratings. Darwin
Cornmunity College. 
Johnson, K (1979).Communicative approaches and communicative processes, In 
Brumfit CJ. and K. Johnson (Eds). The Communicative Approach to 
Language Teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Johnson, K (1982). Communicative Syllabus Design and Methodology, Oxford: 
Pergamon Press. 
Kaplan, M. A. (1987) Developmental patterns of past tense acquisition among 
foreign language learners of french. In Van Patten, B., Dvorack, T.R and 
Lee, J.F. (Eds.). Foreign Language Learning, Cambridge: Newburry 
House Publishers. 
Krashen, S.D. (1982). Principles and Practice in Second Language Acquisition, 
Oxford: Pergamon Press. 
(1985). The Input Hypothesis: Issues and Application, London: 
Longman. 
(1991) Formal grammar instruction, an educator comments .... , 
TESOL Quarterly, 25: 409-411. 
Krashen, S.D. and Selinger, H.W. (1975). The essential contributions of formal
instruction in adult second language, TESOL Quarterly, 9: 173-183. 
Krashen, S.D. and Terrell, T.D. (1983). The Natural Approach: Language 
Acquisition in the Classroom, Oxford: Pergamon Press. 
Lakoff, R. (1970). Tense and its relation to participants, Language, 46: 839-84
Larsen-Freeman, D.E. (1976). An explanation for the morpheme acquisition order
of second language learners, Language Learning, 26: 125-134. 
216 

Lightbown, P.M. and Pienemann, M . (1993). Comments on Stephen D. Krashen's 
"Teaching issues: formal grammar instruction". TESOL Quarterly, 27: 
717-721. 
Littlewood, W. (1981). Communicative Language Teaching. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Liz and Soar, J. (1996). New Headway English course, Oxford: Oxford University
Press. 
Long, M. (1985). Input and second language acquisition theory. In Gass, S. and
C Madden (Eds.) Input in Second Language Acquisition, Rowley, Mass.: 
Newbury House. 
Lyster, R. (1994). The effect of functional-analytic teaching on aspects of 
French immersion students' sociolinguistic competence, Applied 
Linguistics, 15: 263-289. 
McCoy, I. H. (1988) Tense and Aspect. A Comparative Study of Meaning in 
English andBahasa Indonesia. Michigan: U M I Dissertation Service. 
McKay, S. L. (1985). Teaching Grammar: Form, Function and Techniques, New 
York: Pergamon Press. 
McLaughlin, B. (1990). "Conscious" versus "unconscious" learning, TESOL 
Quarterly, 24: 617-634. 
Morrow, K (1981). Principles of communicative methodology in Johnson, K. and 
K. Morrow (Eds). Communication in the Classroom, Essex: Longman 
Moy, R.H. (1977). Contextual factors in the use of the present perfect, 
TESOL Quarterly, 11: 303-309 
Muljoatmodjo, S. (1979). The Indonesian modular instruction system, RELC 
Journal, 10:45-57. 
Mub/adi (1994) An investigation into the use of Ll by Indonesian teachers of 
English as a foreign language. M.A. (TESOL) Study Project Report's 1994, 
Canberra, A C T : University of Canberra. 
Murphy, R (1985). English Grammar in Use, Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Nababan, P. W. J. (1976). Objectives and syllabus of a foreign language readin
217 

course: E L T in higher education in Indonesia, RELC Journal: 7: 1-7. 
Newbrook, J., Newbrook, N. and Kenny, N. (1995). Accelerate, Oxford: 
Heinemann. 
Nunan, D. (1988). The Leaner-Centred Curriculum, New York: Cambridge 
University Press. 
(1989). Design Tasks for the Communicative Classroom, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press 
(1991). Language Teaching Methodology, New York: Prentice Hall. 
(1992). Research Methods in Language Learning, New York: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Ortega, L. (1999). Planning and focus on form in L2 oral performance, Studies 
Second Language Acquisition, 21: 109-148. 
Pammu, A. (1994). Indonesian EFL university students' perceptions of learning i
large classes. Abstracts of Field Studies Undertaken by M.A. (TESOL) 
Candidates, Canberra, A C T : University of Canberra. 
Pattison, B. (1969).The present perfect again, TESOL Quarterly, 9: 151-156. 
Pica, T. (1988) Interlanguage adjustments as an outcome of NS-NNS negotiated 
interaction, Language Learning, 38: 45-73. 
Pienemann, M. (1984). Psychological constraints on the teachability of language
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 6: 186-214. 
(1985). Learnability and syllabus construction, In K. Hyltenstam 
and M . Pienemann. (Eds.). Modelling and Assessing Second Language 
Acquisition, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters. 
(1989). Is language teachable? Psycholinguistic experiments and 
Hypotheses, Applied Linguistics, 10: 52-75. 
Priyana, J. (1994). The use of communicative tasks with adult Indonesian learne
M.A. (TESOL) Study Project Report's 1994, Canberra, A C T : University of 
Canberra. 
Quirk, R. Greenbaum, S. Leech, G. and Svartvik, J. (1972). A Grammar of 
Contemporary English, London: Longman. 
218 

Richards, J. C , Piatt, J. and Piatt, H. (1992). Longman Dictionary of Language 
Teaching and Applied Linguistics, Essex: Longman. 
Richards, J.C (1981). Introducing the progressive, TESOL Quarterly, 15: 
391-402. 
Riddle, E. (1986). The meaning and discourse function of the past tense in Engl
TESOL Quarterly, 20: 267-286. 
Robison, P. (1994). Comments on Rod Ellis's "The structural syllabus and second 
language acquisition", Implicit knowledge, second language learning, and 
syllabus construction, TESOL Quarterly, 28: 161-166. 
(1997). Individual differences and the fundamental similarity of implicit 
and explicit adult second language learning, Language Learning, 47: 
45-59. 
Robison, R E. (1990). The primacy of aspect. Aspectual marking in English 
interlanguage, Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 12: 315-330. 
(1995). The aspect hypothesis revisited: A cross-sectional study of 
tense and aspect marking in interlanguage. Applied Linguistics,16: 
344-370 
Rutherford, E. W. (1987). Second Language Grammar. Learning and Teaching, 
London: Longman. 
Salabery, M.R. (1999). the development of past tense verbal morphology in 
classroom L2 Spanish, AppliedLinguistics, 20: 151-178. 
Schachter, J. (1974). An error in error analysis. Language Learning, 27: 205-214
Scott, R (1981). Speaking. In Johnson, K, and K. Morrow (Eds). Communication 
in the Classroom, Essex: Longman 
SeidL J. (1994). Grammar Four, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Sharwood-Smith, M. (1981). Consciousness-raising and the second language 
learner. Applied Linguistics, 2: 159-168. 
Sharwood-Smith, M. (1994). Second Language Learning: Theoretical 
Foundations, Longman, London. 
Shirai, and Y. Kurono, (1998). The acquisition of tense-aspect marking in 
219 

Japanese as a second language, Language Learning, 48: 245-279. 
Sibbald, F. and Mason, P. (1994). Grammar Four. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
Skinner, B. F. (1957). Verbal Behavior, New York: Appleton Century Crofts. 
Smith, CS. (1983). A theory of aspectual choice, Language. 59: 479-501. 
Spada, N. (1990). Observing classroom behaviours and learning outcomes in 
different second language programs, In J. C. Richards and D. Nunan 
(Eds.). Second Language Teacher Education, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Spada, N. & Frohlich, M. (1995). Communicative Orientation of Language 
Teaching Observation Scheme: Coding Conventions & Applications, 
Sydney: National Centre for English Language Teaching and Research 
Storch, N. (1999). Are two headS better than one? Pair work and grammatical 
accuracy, System 27: 363-374. 
Subyakto-Nababan, S. U. (1993). Metode Pengajaran Bahasa. Jakarta: PT 
Gramedia Pustaka Urnum. 
Syafiah (1993). The use of past tense and present perfect tense by Indonesian 
students: an error analysis, Abstracts of Field Studies Undertaken by M.A. 
(TESOL) Candidates, Canberra, A C T : University of Canberra. 
Syahrial, E. (1993). Reading difficulties in EFL experienced by Indonesian stu
at the upper-intermediate level of proficiency. Abstacts of Field Studies 
Undertaken by M.A. (TESOL) Candidates, Canberra, A C T : University of 
Canberra. 
Thaib, R. (1993). Learning style preferences of English Department students at
Teachers' Training College Padang, Indonesia Abstacts od Field Studies 
Undertaken by M.A. (TESOL) Candidates. Canberra, A C T : University of 
Canberra. 
Thomson, A. J. and Martinet, A.V. (1980). A Practical English Grammar: 
Exercises Volumes 1 and 2, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Trahey, M. and White, L. (1993). Positive evidence and pre-emption in the secon
language classroom, Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 15: 
181-204. 
220 

Ur, P. (1988). Grammar Practice Activities, N e w York: Cambridge University 
Press. 
van Ek, J. A. (1979). The Threshold level. In C. J. Brumfit and K. Johnson (Eds)
The Communicative Approach to Language Teaching, Oxford : Oxford 
University Press. 
Vendler, Z. (1967). Linguistics in Philosophy, Ithaca: Cornell University Press
Walker, R.H. (1967). Teaching the present perfect tenses, TESOL Quarterly 
1: 17-30. 
Watson, J.B. (1924). Psychology from the Standpoint of a Behaviorist, 
Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott. 
Watson, J.B. (1924). Behaviorism, London: Kegal Paul, Trench, Trubner. 
Werner, P.K. (1985). A Content-Based Grammar, New York: Random House Inc. 
White, L., Spada, N., Lightbown, P.M. and Ranta, L. (1991). Input enhancement 
and L2 question formation, Applied Linguistics, 12: 416-432. 
Wood, E. and McLeod, N. (1990). Using English Grammar: Meaning and Form, 
N e w York: Prentice Hall. 
Yatim. N. (1988). Problems and prospects of language teaching in Eastern 
Indonesia, Indonesian Studies, 5: 72-84. 
Yelden, J. (1987). The Communicative Syllabus: Evolution, Design and 
Implementation, London: Prentice-Hall International 
Zalewski, J.P. (1993). Number/person error in an information-processing 
perspective: implications for form-focused instruction, TESOL Quarterly, 
27:691-703. 
ZobL H. (1995). Converging evidence for the 'acquisition learning' distinction
Applied Linguistics, 16: 35-56. 
221 

Appendix 3.1 - Discrete Point Tasks, Times 1 - 4 
Time. JL 
Put the verb into the correct form, present continuous or present simple. 
i.xamples: Please don't make so much noise. J <\fT\ .^TV^Mintf... (study). 
This machine . wOgSnt.. JrO.OOK (not/work). It hasn't work for 
vears 
I The government is worried because the number of people without jobs 
(increase). 
2 Thomas usually (stay) in the Polonia Hotel but now he 
(stay) in the DarmaDeli Hotel. 
5 1-xcuse mc! I (look) for a phone box. Is there one 
near here? 
4. Look at this toy1 It (look) like a real animal. 
5 The moon (go) around the earth. 
(\ The kettle (boil). Can you turn it ofl"7 
7 1 (not'like) like him at all. 
S Alexandra is at the party at the moment. She (wear) 
red shoes. 
9 Put on your juniper and head cover. It (snow) 
outside 

Put the verb into the correct form, past continuous or past simple. 
:xmpte W c . !!>&*-. 
to!.'!$. 
(have) our anniversav dav when mv uncle 
$M 
(call) to congratulate us last night. 
I Alan 
(prepare) breakfast when the electricity 
(go) out. 
2 Sandy (find) her grandmother's wedding dress 
when she (clean) out the attic. 
3 Me (not/see) his friend waving him a 
greeting because he (read) a magazine.  
4 James (rip) his trousers when 
he (dance). 
5 I (damage) my refrigerator when I 
(remove) frost in it. 

'1 
Put the verb into the correct form, present perfect simple or present perfect 
continuous. 
Examples: I F.vV.t^.WL&u. (lose) my key. Can you help me look for it? 
You look tired. .v:.rby,.^U....teri..lU)fr?:mfl. (you/work) hard? 
I. There's a strange smell in here 
(you/cook) 
something? 
2. Betty (study) for three hours. 
3 (you/eat) at the new Italian restaurant? 
4 (Gerry/ask) Diana to marry him? 
5. They - (read) the books you gave them but they 
(not/finish) them yet. 
-6. 'Sorry I'm late.' 'That's all right. 1 (not/wait) long'. 
7. Anita  (clean) the windows. So far she 
(clean) five of them and there are two more to do. 
8. My brother is an actor. He (appear) in several 
movies. 

Put the verb into the correct form, past perfect continuous or past continuous. 
I xamples: I tried to catch Tom but I couldn't. He .$#$.Jf.Ufflj.QQ (run) very fast. 
I le was out of breath. He .. h<)A.M...(M$k<\ (run). 
! The passengers were waiting for a 9:45 train. It was running 15 minutes late. They 
(wait) for 15 minutes. 
2 Tom and Pauline broke up. They (go) out 
together for a long time. 
3 She (watch) television for 15 minutes when 
somebody knocked at the door. 
4 Adam and Mark (sit) in the hut and their clothes were 
full of mud. They (work) in the rice-fields. 
5 He didn't notice the speed limit sign. He (think) of 
something else. 
6 The residents (live) there for years when an estate 
agent forced them to sell their land and houses. 
7. Tony was terribly thirsthy-He (jog)-
8. When 1 arrived, the workers had gone and the trucks were empty. They 
(unload) the trucks. 
9 Jack fell out of a tree while he (remove) the trunks. 

\ 
Put the verb into the correct form using will or going to. 
I xamples. A Whv are vou turning on the television? 
B: I ,m,.f}Qlto}fa.!UJQfcn 
(watch) the news. 
A: Oh, ive just realised -1 haven't got any money. 
B: Don't worry - that's no problem. 1 %\.....U.O.fl. (lend) you some. 
I. A: 1 can't do it by my self 
B: Don't worry, I (help)you. 
2. A: Why is your parent buying so much food? 
B: I (have) a special 17th birthday party. 
3 A I have decided to join the group going to the zoo to see orang-utans next week. 
B: Oh really? Which zoo ,.. (you/visit)? 
4 A: It's already very late. How can 1 get to the train station? 
B: Don't you worry about it. 1 (give) you a lift to 
the station. 
5. A Why is Anita so busy cooking in the kitchen? 
B: Yes she really is. I think she (have) a 
partv with some of her fellow students tonight 
6. A: What are you doing with all those things? 
B: I think 1 (make) a bench. 
7. A: The phone is ringing. 
B: I (get) it. 
8 A: We accept cash and credit cards. How would you like to pay? 
B: I (pay) with cash. 
9 A: Look! There is a lof smoke coming from the car 
B: We had belter stay away. I think it (explode). 
10 A: Why does Tom leave so early? 
B: He (see) a doctor this afternoon. 

Put the verb into the correct form using used to or present simple. 
Lxample: Dennis. PP^? -9r^ (not/smoke) any more but he 
tytitoJM^ (smoke) 40 cigarettes a day. 
.M.N..M. ...t?...?*&..... (he/smoke)? 
1 I (drive) to work every day but now I 
(take) a tram to work. 
2 Betty (never/watch) fiction movies. Now she 
(watch) almost every new fiction movie. 
3. farmers with small farms (not/use) fertiliser for their 
crops. Now they (use) it quite a lot. 
4 The shop which is located near the corner of the road 
(not ,have) many customers now, but ....- (it/have) 
a lot of customers? 
5. George (teach) aerobics but now he 
(be) the manager. 

Put the verb into the correct form, present continuous or present simple. 
Examples: Please don't make so much noise. I ...Q^.Z^-ty ^3.. (study). 
This machine . d o  s n 4 
t-U ?.T.^ 
(not/work). It hasn't work for 
years. 
1. Longhair (become) trendy again. 
2. Joseph usually 
(grow) tomatoes in his garden 
but this season he 
(grow) cabbages. 
3. You can't borrow m y dictionary. I 
(use) it at the 
moment. 
4. This container is very heavy. It 
(weigh) a lot. 
5. Light 
(travel) faster than sound. 
6. The river 
(flow) very fast today, faster than 
yesterday. 
7. I 
(not/believe) in ghosts. 
8. She 
(expect) her friend at the moment. 
9. Check the air-conditioner again! Yes, it 
(work) now. 

Put the verb into the correct form, past continuous or past simple. 
Examples'. We ..W.^r^....^.^.^^ (have) our anniversary day when my uncle 
(call) to congratulate us last night. 
1. Adrian (work) in his garage on his car when the 
gas tank (explode). 
" 'He (not/want) to leave the house 
because he (wait) for a phone call. 
3. Bertha (hit) the fence when she 
(reverse) the car. 
4. Tony (bump) his head against the goal post 
when he (try) to catch the ball. 
5. 1 (tear) the sheet when 1 
(pull) it out of the typewriter. 

Put the verb into the correct form using will or going to. 
Examples: A: W h y are you turning on the television? 
B: 1 ...3.r!..^.y?a..9...^.t^.... (watch) the news. 
A: Oh.. Lve just realised -1 haven't got anv money. 
B: Don't worry - that's no problem. I ."..SftJJ.M...." 
(lend) you some. 
1. A: I can't eat hot food. 
B: I .... 
(order) food without chilli. 
2. A: W h a t are you doing with all that coloured paper? 
B: I 
(make) flowers with it. 
3. A: 1 have to write two articles. 
B: O h really? W h a t kind of articles 
r 
(you/ write)? 
4. A: We've run out of petrol. 
B: I 
(go) and get some form a garage. 
5. A: She looks very tidy. 
B: Yes she looks very different today. I think she 
(give) a speech. 
6. A: Are you going to leave? 
B: Yes, I think so. I 
(attend) a meeting. 
7. A: C a n I possibly speak to T o m , please? 
B: Yes you can. I 
(get) him for you. 
8. A: W h a t would you like to eat? Fried rice or fried noodles 
B: I 
/ 
(have) fried noodles, please. 
9. A: W h y is the hen making so m u c h noise? 
B: 1 think it 
(lay) an egg. 
10 A. W h a t is he doing with his car? 
B: I think he 
(have) it checked. 

Put the verb into the correct form using used to or present simple. 
Example: Dennis .^9.^.^h.^.^?..^.3... (not/smoke) any more but he 
  - ~.7r... (smoke) 40 cigarettes a day. 
(he/smoke)? 
I. Country people 
(not/play) golf very often but now they 
( play) it a lot. 
2. I (eat) very little but now I 
(eat) a lot. 
3. Sue (never/speak) Japanese. Now She..A^....J??...2*f?*!f... 
(speak) Japanese fluently. 
4. Ivan (visit) his parents once a week but now he 
(be) too busy to visit them as regularly. 
5. The Student Health Centre (not/have) many 
patients now. ..- (it/have) a lot of patients? 

A* 
Put the verb into the correct form, past perfect continuous or past continuous. 
Examples: 1 tried to catch Tom but I couldn't. He J.^LL^.^.03 .. (run) very fast. 
He was out of breath. He . h < ^ . . . ^ l ^ . I ^ ? ? ^ (run). 
1. When I walked into the room, it was empty. But there was a smell of cigarettes. They
.-. 
(smoke) in the room. 
2. The two boys came into the house. They had a football and they were both very tired. 
They .... 
... 
(play) football. 
3. M r and Mrs Jenkins went to live in the south France. Six months later M r Jenkins 
died. They 
(live) in the south of France for six 
months when M r Jenkins died. 
4. Jim was on his hands and knees on the floor. He 
(look ) for his cigarette lighter. 
5. The boys 
(walk) along the road for about 20 
minutes when a car stopped and the driver offered them a lift. 
6. A man was having a rest under a tree. There were two plastic bags sitting next two 
him. He 
(collect) used cans. 
7. When I arrived, Ann and Eva 
(wait) for me. They were 
rather annoyed with m e because I was late and they 
(wait) for a very long time. 
8. George burnt his arm while he 
~ 
(iron). 
9 She - (sit) on tne sofa for about 5 minutes when her 
mother called her. 

^(u 
Put the verb into the correct form, present perfect simple or present perfect 
continuous. 
Examples: l .D*^..?....^?..'-..... (lose) my key. Can you help me look for it? 
You look tired.H^y.. 2../^.,^ 
hard? 
1. Jessica (sit) on that bench for about one hour. 
2 
(you/receive) the brochure yet? 
3 
(Barry/tell) Peter about the party next week? 
4 They 
_. 
(play) for 30 
minutes 
but 
they 
(not/score) any goal. 
5. 'What is the movie about?'. T don't know. I 
^not/watch) 
it long.' 
6. Agnes 
(paint) 
all 
day. 
She 
(paint) the front fence and there is one more to do. 
7. You look pretty fit 
(exercise) regularly? 
8. He is a traveller. H e 
(visit) a lot of countries. 
"S-i.i 

Put the verb into the correct form, present continuous or present simple. 
Examples: Please don't make so much noise. I QfTi....^hid.u'.in.Q 
(study). 
This machine 
^0.?5D.^.....Mrif~ 
(not/work). It hasn't work for 
years. 
I 
Winter is coming and the weather 
(get) colder. 
2. 
Gordon usually 
, 
(teach) Writing but he 
(teach) Reading at the moment 
3. 
Boys! Be quiet, please! I 
(talk) with your 
father. 
4. 
That car over there looks expensive. It 
(belong) to our neighbour 
5. 
The sun 
(rise) in the East. 
6. 
Turn down the stereo, please. The baby 
(sleep). 
7. 
I 
(not/understand) what you mean. 
8. 
Joan must be nervous. She 
(bite) her finger-
nails. 
9. 
Don't go outside kids! It 
(rain). 
3) 
3A-VS 

Put the verb into the correct form, past continuous or past simple. 
Examples: While Tom ^.^B^ (cook) the dinner, the phone 
.^.ncL 
(ring). 
1. Alexander (water) the flowers in the 
garden when the lightning 
(strike) the pine 
tree next to the house.. 
~ Ann 
(meet) her old friend at the station 
when she 
(wait) for her train. 
3 He 
(not/go) out because he .f^?.r. 
r 
(expect) his friend. 
4 John 
(hurt) 
himself 
when 
he 
(play) soccer. 
5. 1 
(break) the lawn-mower when I 
.-. 
(mow) the grass. 

Put the verb into the correct form using will or going to. 
Examples. A: Why are you turning on the television? 
B: I ...Qryi .^OJnj. ft) 
tiafth. 
(watch) the news. 
A: Oh, I've just realised -1 haven't got any money. 
B: Don't worry - that's no problem. I ..Hi 
(lend) you some. 
1. A: These shoes are too big for me. 
B: 1 (get) you a smaller size. 
2. A Why are you so nervous? 
B: You see, 1 , (sit) for an exam. 
3. A: I am looking for a second-hand car. 
B: What sort of car (you/buy)? 
4. A: 1 don't have time to go shopping. 
B: Don't worry. 1 (do) it for you. 
5. A. The are a lot of dark clouds in the sky. 
B: Yes, it.: (ram). 
6 A: Where are you going? 
B: Well er, I ., (see) my supervisor. 
7. A: Have you heard any news from Arnold? 
B: No, not at all, I (let) you know as soon as I 
hear something. 
8. A: Which colour would you like to have? Black or brown? 
B. I (have) the black one. 
9. A: What is Clara doing there? 
B: She (make) a phone call. 
10. A: What is Harry talking about? 
B ,le (get) married next week. 

Put the verb into the, correct form, present perfect simple or present perfect 
continuous. 
Examples: I ...1M.1.Q&........ 
r 
tired. .,,.tek.^^ 
(lose) m y key. Can you help m e look for it? 
You look tired. i,.-.D?.v,L.i<iyM 1JtKi , Wu\ "n%,,,(lluf,ri\ ^^ 
1 
(you/hear) about Tony? 
^ 
(Alan/tell) his mother about going to the zoo? 
3. Richard is a philatelis. H e 
(collect) thousands of 
postage-stamps 
4 
They 
(look) around for a stereo for about three 
days but they 
, 
(not/find) one that they want to 
buy. 
5. I haven't finished with m y work because I 
(not/work) on it very long'. 
A. Amelia 
f 
(write) letters to her friends overseas. She 
(write) five letters. 
%. Your car is very dirty! 
_ 
(you/drive) on country 
roads? 
8. Susan 
(sunbathe) for two hours. Her skin is 
yellowish brown. 

Put the verb into the correct form, past perfect continuous or past continuous. 
Examples: 1 tried to catch Tom but 1 couldn't. He ....'A^..X(IO.0ifl.^ (run) very fast. 
He was out of breath. H e .,M.i.,k^...CPBiM 
(run). 
1. The class began at 7:30. The teacher got into the class at 8:00. The students 
(wait) for half an hour. 
2. Fred met his wife while he 
(wait) for a bus one day. 
3. When I arrived. Tony and Henry 
(sit) around the 
table and talking. Their mouths were empty but their stomachs were full. They 
 - 
(eat). 
4. T o m asked his brother to turn down the television. He 
(study). 
5. The kittens were sleeping. They... 
(play) with their 
mother's tail. 
6. By the time I got there, they 
_ 
(discuss) the 
question with m y brother for 15 minutes. 
7. She 
(use) the computer for only about two 
weeks when somebody broke into the house stole it. 
8. Victor was filthy and greasy. He 
(repaire) his 
car. 
9. John and Martin were sacked by the company a week ago. They 
, 
(work) there quite a longtime. 
A* 
3-\-V7 

Put the verb into the correct form using used to or present simple. 
Example: Dennis ......V.9.M.I...}.^.P^A... (not/smoke) any more but he 
0*.Lto.?M 
(smoke) 40 cigarettes a day. 
J ^ !
)i-
a^Jo..^Mi(he/smoke)? 
I Grace (never/use) a computer. Now she 
(use) one every day. 
2. Villagers 
(not/borrow) money from the bank 
but now they 
(borrow) a lot of money from the bank 
now. 
3. The company 
(not/make) much profit now 
- 
(it/make) a lot of profit? 
4. Robert 
(write) 
novels. 
N o w 
he 
(be) an editor. 
5. 1 
(own) a house but now 1 
(rent) a flat. 
3.\ .\* 

Put the verb into the correct form, present continuous or present simple. 
Examples: Please don't make so much noise. 1 >.Qfl)..f).jfJ.d$i OCI. ... (study). 
This machine ..,AQ&&..UGK 
(not/work). It hasn't work for 
years. 
I. The economic situation 
(get) worse. 
2. Laurence usually 
(play) badminton but today he .. 
.-. 
(play) table tennis. 
3. Would you mind putting out your cigarette, please! 1 
,. 
(eat). 
4. 1 don't smoke. It 
(taste) awful to me. 
5. Ice 
(melt) at zero degree Celsius. 
6. The sun 
.-..- 
(shine) at the moment. 
7. 1 
(not/need) the chair at the moment. 
8. Belinda is not in the office at the moment. She ..-. 
(teach). 
9. Juan! What is the matter with your hand? It 
(bleed). 

Put the verb into the correct form, past continuous or past simple. 
Examples. While T o m 
M$.jCGftKlO(] 
(cook) the dinner, the phone 
HtiMj 
(ring). 
1. George 
(get) ready to go out one 
evening when the fire alarm 
(ring). 
2. Susan 
(fall) asleep 
when 
she 
(watch) television. 
3 He 
(not/hear) his parents having an argument 
last night because he 
(listen) to music. 
4 
Don 
(cut) his 
fingers when 
he 
.., 
(saw) a piece of wood. 
5 I 
(break) a plate last night when 1 
(do) the washing up. 
3.\ 

Put the verb into the correct form, present perfect simple or present perfect 
continuous. 
Examples: 1....Mnb. JQfT (jose)my key Can you he,p me look for it? 
You look tired... W
* 
^..t>f..l.!^.rK^...(you/work) hard? 
1 Laura (swim) for half an hour. 
2 
(Tom/sell) his car? 
3 
(you/visit) China Town? 
4. Your eyes are very red 
(you/cry)? 
5. They 
(go) out for about 6 months but they 
(not/decide) to get married. 
6. I failed to give way. 1 
(not/drive) long. 
7. Julia 
(read) 
magazines. 
She 
(read) ten magazines. *-
8. He is a very good athlete. He 
(win) a lot of gold 
medals. 

M4-
Put the verb into the correct form, past perfect continuous or past continuous. 
Examples: I tried to catch T o m but I couldn't. He . J^fl.^XUflfklAfl... (run) very fast. 
He was out of breath. He .Mt.fo&.-JMWj). 
(run). 
L She 
(try) to rent a flat for a week when 
somebody asked her if she was interested to share a house with her. 
2 When I got into the pub, 
Paul and his friends were drunk. They 
(drink). 
3. John and Michael 
, 
(walk) slowly away from 
the crowd. They were very exhausted. They 
(ride) 
their bikes. 
4. The guests 
(dance) for 15 minutes when 
somebody shouted 'fire'. 
5. There were a lot of books all over the table and the computer was left on. He 
, 
(work) on his assignment. 
6. Walter cut himself while he 
(shave). 
7. Arnold was holding a guitar in his hands. He 
..... 
(sing) 'Only You'. 
8. Indonesians proclaimed their independence in 1945. They 
v 
(fight) against colonialism for years. 
9 The owner of the company was proud of their employees because the company made-
a lot of profit. They 
(cooperate) very well. 
^.\.zd-

q-5 
Put the verb into the correct form using will or going to. 
Examples: A: W h y are you turning on the television'' 
B: I.,Clm. J>Mg..iQ....Mt.Ch 
(watch) the news 
A: Oh, I've just realised -1 haven't got anv money. 
B: Don't worry - that's no problem. I 
!i 
(lend) you some. 
1. A: I've got a terrible headache. 
B: Have You? Wait there and I 
(get) an aspirin 
for you. 
2. A: W h y are you filling that bucket with water? 
B-1 
^ 
(wash) the car. 
3. A: I've decided lo repaint this room. 
B. Oh, have you? What colour 
(you/paint) it? 
4. A. Look! There's smoke coming out of that house. It's on fire. 
B: Good heavens! 1 
(call) the 
fire-brigade immediately. 
5 A: The ceiling in the room doesn't look very safe, does it? 
B: No, it looks as if it 
(fall) down. 
6. A: Where are you going? Are you going shopping? 
B: Yes I 
(buy) something for dinner. 
7. A: I can't work out how to use this camera. 
B: It's quite easy. I 
(show) you. 
8. A: What would you like to drink - tea or coffee? 
B: 1 
(have) tea, please. 
9. A. W h y is she walking so fast? 
B: She 
(catch) a 5:10 train. 
10.A. What is John doing with the ladder? 
B: He .... ., 
>.... . 
(repair) the roof. 
s-\ 

Put the verb into the correct form using used to or present simple. 
Example: Dennis d^.art...$.> j?4fc (not/smoke) any more but he 
W:**4:..*-?... f .> * *.* 
(smoke) 40 cigarettes a day. 
b[<* h-e U 5  t o s m o k < Ch-e./r>ofc.O? 
L 1 
(drive) a car. 1 
(ride) a motor-
cycle now. 
2. Ann 
(never/drink) coffee 
but 
now 
she 
(drink) it a lot. 
3. Young girls 
 
(not/go) out very much but now they 
 
(go) out very often. 
4. Charles 
(play) tennis a lot but now 
(be) too lazy. 
5. The museum 
(not/have) a lot of visitors 
(it/have) a lot visitors? 
3.\ 

Appendix 3.2 - Modified Cloze Task, Times 1 - 4 
Modified cloze test 1 
Fill in the gaps with the most approptriate word(s) and tenses. 
Growing Old in America 
For years, the elderly were "forgotten" members of .American society, but in recent times 
this has changed. The elderly 
(1) groups such as 
the Panthers to represent their rights. These groups 
(2) America politically, economically, and psychologically. Most 
importantly, they 
(3) America that elderly 
people are valuable and energetic citizens w h o shouldn't be forgotten. 
Indrviduals, too, 
(4) then mark on the 
American conscience. For example, sixty-seven-year-old Dorothy Jackson, a widow from 
Gallup, N e w Mexico, 
(5) quite a celebrity 
because of nationwide stories and articles about her. Dorothy 
(6) from state to state in her mini-motor home for quite a 
few years. Since 1978, she 
(7) more than 
50,000 miles, from N e w York to California, from Canada to Mexico. 
People like Dorothy 
(8) Americans of all ages 
that "age is only a state of mind. Just because you 
(9) old doesn't mean that your time to enjoy life, to be productive, 
to grow and to learn 
(10). 
Adapted from Werner (1985. 90) 
-7 o 

Modified cloze test 2 
Fill in the gaps with the most approptriate word(s) and tenses. 
Footprint in the snow 
T m reading a book about monsters,' Ben told Nick one day.' I have been reading it for a 
week now. It's all about people who 
(1) strange-
things. 
There 
are 
reports 
about 
the 
research 
which 
experts 
(2). The Yeti is a famous monster. People 
(3) "a wild man' in the Himalayas for years. 
Several people 
( 4) enormous footprints in the 
snow - half a meter long, with three small toes and one huge toe. Travellers 
(5) 
Tibet 
for 
years 
and 
there 
(6) several sightings of large animals. In the 
book it says that a w o m a n called Dr Sharp 
(7) to Mongolia several times and 
(8) proof 
that yetis also live there. She believes that a yeti is a Neanderthal man.' 
'You mean, she thinks that Neanderthal man (9) 
? Nick asked. 'When you 
(10) the book, can I 
borrow it?' 
Adapted from Seidl < 1094: J 4) 

Modified cloze test 3 
Fill in the gaps with the most appropriate word(s) and tenses. 
Mrs Ellis is writing to her son, Thomas, who is a student. 
Dear Thomas. 
It has been several weeks since w e last had a letter from you. W e have been hoping to hear 
from you. W h y 
(1) to us? You know how 
much your letters 
always 
(2) to 
us. 
I h a w sent a parcel to you with some food and warm clothes. Your father 
(3) the weekly sport magazines you like to 
read, and we have put these in the parcel too. 
Life 
.. 
(4) as usual here. M r Jones next door, 
who hasn't been enjoying good health recently, has had to go into hospital. H e 
(5) an operation and will be home again soon. 
Meanwhile, his cat has been coming to us for food and milk. I think w e 
(6) to look after it quite well. 
Have you seen anything of Mark Andrews? Apparently he 
 
(7) school now and is at the same college as you. -We 
(8) news of him regularly from his mother. But, 
of course, he's two years younger than you. H e hasn't said whether he 
(9) you or not. 
By now your first exams will be over. W e hope you 
(10) well in them. D o write soon. 
Lots of love, 
Adapted from Adam.>on (1<M0:2""1 
Mum. 

Modified cloze test 4 
Fill in the gaps with the most approptriate word(s) and tenses. 
Mystery monsters 
Have you seen The Loch Ness Monster? 
Thousands of people have reported seeing a large animal in the famous lake called Loch 
Ness in Scotland. For fourteen centuries people 
(1) to 
capture it, but perhaps it 
(2) in the lake everr longer. 
Although local people 
always 
(3) about the 
mysterious 
creature, 
it 
is 
only 
in 
the 
last 
sixty 
years 
that 
there 
(4) any evidence that it might exist. In 1933, John 
McGregor, a local businessman, saw *he lake bubbling and a huge object with two humps 
came out of the water. 
Since that day, scientists have been searching the lake with underwater equipment, trying to 
find out what kind of animal lives there. Unfortunateiy, they 
(5) to find it yet because the lake is so deep and so daifc 
Tourists from all over the world have visited Loch Ness, hoping to see the monster. They 
, 
even 
(6) it a nickname: 
'Nessie'. M a n y people 
(7) photographs of it, although 
experts 
(8) that some of the photos ate forgeries. 
Scientists 
(9) that the Loch Ness monster is a dinosaur 
which was trapped in the lake during the Ice Age. Your help is needed to solve the 
mystery. Please contact the Loch Afc.> Research Center. Inverness, Scotland if you 
(10)it. 
Adapted from Seidl (1994:12) 

Appendix 3.3 - Writing Task, Times 1 - 4 
Instructions: 
Please write a paragraph of 200 words in your own words on the topic below! 
Topics 
Timel 
What changes have happened to the environment? 
Time 2 
How has the way of life of families changed? 
Time 3 
How have eating habits changed? 
Time 4 
How have attitudes towards parents changed? 
3.^.\ 

Appendix 3.4 - Guided Speaking Tasks, Times 1 - 4 
Speaking 1 
Please look at the pictures and tell the story by your own words. 

Speaking 2 
Please look at the pictures and tell the story by your own words. 
Reproduced from Fletcher and Bin (1983) 

Speaking 3 
Please look at the pictures and tell the story by your own words. 
Bank Robbers 
Reproduced from Fletcher and Birt (1983) 

Speaking 4 
Please look at the pictures and tell the story by your own words. 
Reproduced from Fletcher and Birt (1983) 

Appendix 4.1 - Class Materials, Present Simple/Simple Progressive, A C G M 
ACGM 
Presentation 
Present simple and present progressive 
Maria and Bertrand are students in a language school. The are getting to know eac
Bertrand : And where do you come from in Finland, Marja? 
Marja 
I come from Helsinki. But I don't live there any more. M y company, 
Finn-Sport has an office in Tempere, so I've moved there. 
Bertrand : I've heard of Finn-Sport. Don't they make skiinu equipment? 
Marja 
: That's right - infact, all kind of sports equipment. Actually, the company 
is payina for m e to study here. 
Bertrand : Really? You're lucky. M y company doesn't send any one on language 
course. I'm pavinti for this course out of m y own pocket 
Marja 
: What course are you taking here? Business English? 
Bertrand : No, I'm not doing Busniss English yet. I'm trying to improve m y 
general English - especially conversation. 
Marja 
: Well, there does't seem to be anything wrong with your conversation. 
Bertrand : I'm improving. By the way, do you know about the disco the school 
is organising? 
Marja 
: No. W h e n is it? 
Bertrand 'Tonight at 9 o'clock. It's at The Magnet Club, in Holland Road. 
Marja 
. Unfortunately, I don't know where that is. 
Bertrand : It's near where I live. Look, why don't w e meet before the disco 
somewhere and have dinner? Then we can go to the disco together. 
Adapted from Adamson (1992:12) 

The explanation of grammatical features. 
Present progressive 
We use the present progressive when we talk about^n action or situation in 
progress. The action is still happening or the situation is still changing. 
Use the present progressive to talk about. 
 
action happening now or over a period of time around now: 
Hattie is working al the computer al the moment, (now) Silvia is learning English at 
the moment. 
He 's reading a book about Japan at school, (over a period of time) 
 
changing and developing situation: 
It's getting colder. Black skirts are becoming fashionable again. Is your English 
getting better''' 
 
temporary situations. 
' / 'rn staying with Mark for three weeks. I am living with some friends until I can fin
aflat. 
Present simple 
The present simple is used when the speaker thinks of something as a fact. 
Use the present simple to talk about: 
 
a law of natuja: 
^ 
Light travels through space at a speed of 299,792 km per second, fihe earth goes 
round the sun. 
 ^permanent sitiwtiorM>rajtatewjth 
bitnwjiowj_ 
/ live in Oxford. 1 likefisfuMyannpany, Finn-Sport has an office in 'lempere. 
 
a regular repeate^^actionor something on timetable: 
IpJayJootbaTftwice aweeT. 
The London train leaves al seven o 'clock every day. In Britain most shops close at
5:30. 
 
ajact that you want to emphasize (emphatic do/does): 
A^m^Jfwyjievergo 
on holiday 
Brenda-. Yes, lhey(da)go on holiday. 
(Here Brenda wants to emphasize a fact because A d a m has said something wrong.) 
W e can also emphasize what w e see as a fact by stressing is/isn't or are/aren't. 
Yes, he js polite to people. 
State verbs and the present simple. 
 State verbs are usually in the present simple, because the speaker is thinking of a
and not an action in progress. 
The vejy&tiKles taste fine. ( N O T arc tasting) 
In this example, what is important to the speaker is his or her opinion of the 
vegetables, not the progress of the action (tasting). 

G r a m m a r exercises 
Complete the sentences using the verbs in brackets in the present .impressive or present 
simple. 
 
* 
. Please be quiet. I (lry) l0 read lhe paper 
This is very quiet town. Where 
(people/go) in the evenings? 
1 
(work) in a factory until I can find a better job. 
w h a t 
(you/do) with all that paper and glue? 
1 
(not/use) the computer at the moment so you can use it. 
(Karen and John/ever/write) to you? 
Choose state verbs from the list to complete the sentences. Use each verb once. 
smell, hate, know, like, remember 
She always my birthday. 
Those 
flowers 
nice. What are they? 
Jane is repairing the car. She 
how to do that. 
I 
(not) him, 1 just 
(not) him very much at 
the moment. 
you 
how to say this in French? 
Reply with sentences using empathic do/does or is/isn V. 
Example: A: Mr Smith never keeps appointments. B: Yes, he does keep appointments. 
A: It doesn't rain here in the summer. B: Yes, 
A: They never get up before eleven o'clock. B: Yes, 
A: He lives near Helen. B: No, 
A: It's over there. B: No, 
A: He isn't the right person for the job. B: Yes, 
Present progressive or present simple in context. Put the right form of the verb in 
brackets. 
Laura : Hello, George! What 
(you/do) these days? 
George : Hi, Laura. 1 
(learn) French and Spanish at college. 
What about you? 

Communicative Practice Activities 
Work in pairs, A and B. M r Smith is a salesman in the firm you both work for. He sells 
groceries and vegetables to supermarkets but his work is not very good. Discuss your 
report with your partner and decide whether to sack M r Smith. Use some emphatic 
do does where you can. Example: He does have a lot of supermarkets to visit. 
Sack M r Smith? 
Discuss this information from a report about M r Smith with your partner (1 
and listen to what B has to say about his or her report. Use emphatic do/does 
sentences where you can. Decide whether or not the firm should sack M r Sn 
Information from a report on Reginald Smith by Jane Petrifcr. Head of 
Personnel 
K 
Late for work quite often. 
a 
Not always polite. Can be rude if he has 'had a bad day'. 
s Regularly misses monthly meetings with me. 
n 
Smokes in the sales office, even when asked not to. 
K 
Has occasionally missed appointments and does not always ring to 
apologize. 
i- Sales are not particularly good. 
Adapted from Dean (1993: 136) 

Communicative Practice Activities 
Work in pairs, A and B. M r Smith is a salesman in the firm you both work for. He sells 
groceries and vegetables to supermarkets but his work is not very good. Discuss your 
report with your partner and decide whether to sack Mr Smith. Use some emphatic 
do does where you can. Example, fie does have a lot of supermarkets to visit 
Sack M r Smith? 
Discuss this information from a report about M r Smith with your partner (/ 
and listen to what A has to say about his or her report. Use emphatic do/does 
sentences where you can. Decide whether or not the firm should sack M r 
Smith. 
Information from a report on Reginald Smith by Jim Bowes, Head of Sales 
and Marketing. 
i 
Sometimes late for work when his car breaks down. 
Usually polite and helpful. 
. Thinks monthly meetings with Head of Personnel are not helpful. 
a 
Sometimes misses appointments but rings to apologize. 
s 
Has a lot oi supermarkets to visit. 
a 
Sales arc about average for the time of year. 
Adapted from Dean (1993: 148) 
B 
i. \ e r -

Appendix 4.2 - Class Materials, Simple Past/Past Progressive, A C G M 
ACGM 
Presentation 
Simple past and past continuous 
He Was Cooking When It Hit 
Yesterday afternoon, at 5:15, a major earthquake of 7.1 on the Richter scale rocked the 
area. This reporter interviewed several citizens shortly after the earthquake hit. W h e n 
asked what she was doing when the earth shook, Eve Konitz said "I was sitting in m y 
living room when the whole house began to rock." She went on, "I crawled under the 
table while the house was shaking, and I didn't move until it was over." Eve finally 
commented, "While I was sitting under the table, all the dishes fell out of the cupboard. 
was terrible. They were the family's best dishes." 
Bob was cooking dinner when it happened. Here is his story. "I was just putting the roast 
in the oven when I felt a terrible jolt. I quickly turned off the oven then I ran outside. 
while I was running to the park, I saw the house next door catch fire. I was relieved that I 
had remembered to turn off the gas. That could have been our house!" 
The people whose stories you are hearing now were fortunate because they were not 
injured. However, not everyone was as lucky. There were also property damage, 
estimated in the millions of dollars. The City Council is meeting now and is proposing to 
establish regular earthquake drills so that, if there is another quake, the citizens of this 
town will know what to do. 
Adapted from Fotos, Homan, and Poel (1994: 36) 

Simple past and past continuous 
I Past Progressive 
W e use the past progressive when we refer to something that was happening (that is, il 
was in progress) at a definite time in the past. At one o'clock yesterday 1 was having 
lunch. 
W e can use while and when to join two actions which were happening at the same time 
in the past. Both actions have a past progressive verb. He was doing the shopping while 
I was parking the car. 
W e can use still to emphasize that something was continuing, especially alter the time it 
was expected to finish. At a quarter-past ten I was still waiting for the train 
2. Past simple 
W e use the past simple when we refer to a finished action or situation in the past. 
W e use the past simple to talk about: 
finished single actions or situations: / went to London yesterday; I lived in London 
when I was a child. 
finished repeated actions or situations: Every year when I was a child we went to Italy 
on holiday; When she was young she lived in a different country every year. N O T E 
State verbs are usually used in the past simple not in the past progressive. / was running 
home. I knew it was late. NOT was knowing. N O T E ago means 'at some time before 
now" It is usually used the past simple. Hived there ten years ago. 
3. Past progressive and past simple in context. 
When we use the past progressive and the past simple together, we can use the past 
progressive to 'paint a picture' of a longer 'background' action. W e use the past simple for 
the speaker^sees as the main action in the past. 
We were living in London when Susan made her first film; I was sitting in my living 
room when the whole house began to rock; We went indoors because it was raining. 
If there is more than one 'background' action, do not repeat was/were for the second or 
third action 
The teachers were sitting in the staff room, marking books and drinking coffee when I 
came in, ( N O T were marking books and were drinking coffee) 
You can use while, as, when, and whenever to introduce the longer 'background' action. 
While and as mean 'at the same time as'. When tells you which time and whenever 
means 'every time'. 
As/While I was driving to Oxford I saw a tiny little house with no roof; While I was 
running to the park, I saw the house next door catch fire; When I was sitting on the 
beach I saw a ship in the distance; He went to see Jennifer whenever he was visiting 
Oxford; 
You can use just to emphasise that the longer action had only recently started when the 
action in the past simple interrupted it. / was just leaving when she asked me to stay. I 
was just putting the roast in the oven when I felt a terrible jolt. 
Adapted from Dean (1993: 21) and Fotos (1994:36). 
U-.2..~2_ 

G r a m m a r exercises 
Past progressive or past simple in context. Put in the right form of the verb in the 
brackets. Sometimes either form is possible. 
I 
(walk) along the street one day when I 
(see) something very strange. I 
(notice) a man the same height 
as m e w h o 
(have) a beard like mine. H e 
(wear) a blue shirt and an old pair of jeans and he 
(carry) a bag with some books in it. H e 
(just/cross) the road a head of m e but he 
(not/avoid) m e 
deliberately, 1 
(be) sure of that. As he 
(go 
across) the road 
I 
(follow) him. I 
(wonder) whether or not to stop him and ask him whether 
he had noticed something strange too. I 
(still/think) 
about it when he 
(turn around) suddenly and w e 
(look 
at) 
each 
other. 
H e 
(look) amazed. 'It's unbelievable, isn't it?' I 
(say) as I 
(stare 
at) his face, which 
(also/be) just like mine, and at his hair 
which 
(be) just like mine. 'You are m y double. You look 
exactly the same as me.' 
Adapted from Dean (1993:23) 

Communicative practice 
Look at the pictures carefully and ask your friend: 
a) what were Kim, Joe, and May doing? 
b) what did Kim, Joe and May do? 
Kim, Joe and May 
Reproduced from Heaton (1986: 10) 

Appendix 4 3 - Class Materials, Present Perfect/Present Perfect Progressive, A C G M 
ACGM 
Presentation 
The present perfect tense and present perfect continuous tense. 
Young vicar passes driving test after 632 lessons over 17 years. 
VICAR Peter Newman is celebrating success - he has finally passed his driving test. H
has been learning to drive for the past 17 years, and he has had a total of 632 lessons. 
Peter, 34, has spent over 9,000 on tuition, he has had eight different instructors, and he 
has crashed his car five times. Then, one week ago he changed to an automatic car - and 
passed his test immediately. H e said last night, 'I've been praying for a driving-licence 
for over half m y life, and at last m y prayers have been answered.' 
Peter, of St Andrew's Church, Repton in Nottmghamshire, began driving at the age of 17. 
'It was in the country,' he said, 'and I was doing quite well until one morning, in a 
narrow lane, I saw a tractor corning towards me. I panicked and drove into a ten-foot 
hedge. 
Peter said, 'My big problem was confusing the clutch and the brake. I was absolutely 
hopeless. M y instructors have been telling m e for years that I would never pass, but I was 
determined to proved them wrong. Many of them have turned grey because of me. 
The taming-point came when Peter tried an automatic , and took his test again - for the 
fifty-sixth time. 
He said, 'When I was told I'd passed, I went down on m y knees and thanked God.' So 
how has he been celebrattngl "I've been visiting all m y relatives and people who live in
the remote villages around here. I haven't been able to get them. N o w I can go 
anywhere!' 
, 
Adapted from Soars (1996r96-97). 

The present perfect tense and present perfect continuous tense. 
I. Present perfect 
w e use the present perfect and not the present perfect progressive when w e wani io make 
ii clear thai an aciion has been completed. 
We have repaired the fridge. (The fridge works now.) 
W e usually use the present perfect and not the present perfect progressive with suite verbs: 
be, seem, prefer, believe, know, like, love, hate. 
How long have you known John? ( N O T been knowing) 
W e use the preseni perfect and noi the present perfect progressive for naturally short 
actions like break, fall (over), sturi. 
Have you broken the window? ( N O T been braking) 
W e use ihe preseni perfect and noi preseni perfect progressive wiih ever, never ami yet. 
I haven r tola her yet ( N O T been telling) I have never met Tony. 
2. Preseni perfeci progressive 
we use ihe preseni progressive when we wani io emphasize an aciion or situation in 
progress and noi iis compieiion. We've been repairing ihe fridge. (Ii may or may noi 
work now.) W e use ihe present prefeci progressive for: 
temporary actions and situations: 
I've using Joanna's car while I've been staying with her. ( N O T have used and have 
stayed) 
actions in the recent past ihai w e ihink have been happening because of something w e can 
see now. (preseni evidence): 
Your eyes are red. You have been crying. ( N O T have cried) (This is ofien used io 
complain. Hey! Somebody has been drinking my coffee!) 
talking about h o w long something has been going on: 
How long have been learning English? He has been writing to her for ten years. 
The preseni perieci progressive is more commonly used in informal speech. 
3. Preseni perfeci or preseni perfect progressive 
Y o u can use the preseni perfeci progressive with ihe siaie verbs, if you wani io emphasize 
a situation in progress and noi iis completion: see, hear, look, taste, smell, want, realize, 
remember. 
I've been hearing funny noises. He's been looking miserable since his dog died 
I've been wanting one of those new computers for ages. 
If you do noi wish io emphasize ihe progressive nature of ihe situation, you can use the 
preseni perfeci simple wiih ihese verbs. 
I've heard a lot of funny noises lately. That house has looked miserable for years, 
I've always wanted one of those. 
Some verbs suggesi an aciion in progress by iheir meaning and ihese can be used both wiih 
ihe preseni perfeci and preseni perfeci progressive, wiih iiiiie difference in meaning: live, 
rain, sit, study, wait, work. 
It's been raining for hours. It's rained non-stop for hours. 
I have worked/have been working at the bank for three years. 
Adapted from Dean (1993: 45) 
4-V 

G r a m m a r excercise 
Present perfect and present perfect progressive in context. Put in the right form of the 
verb in brackets. Sometimes more than one answer is possible. 
This is a job reference in formal English. 
William Empson (^ork) in the Parks 
Department for the last is months. Throughout this time 
_ _ 
. 
(train) as a gardener under m y supervision and I can confirm that I 
_ 
(watch) his progress closely. I must 
inform you that M r Empson 
(be) in prison 
for burglary. However, during his time with us he 
(be) in charge of money several times and 
(never/attempt) to steal it. For most of his time here he 
. 
(help) to grow new trees in the greenhouses. 
He 
 
(learn) 
quickly 
and 
he 
(not/be) late for work once. W e would 
recommend 
M r 
Empson 
for the 
post 
he 
(apply) for. 
Adapted from Dean (1993: 47) 

Communicative practice 
What have you done? 
Present perfect for completed actions 
Work in the same pairs. You have finished all 
the work on the house. Explain what you have 
done. Use the present perfect, like this: We 
have repaired the roof. 
1 W e have been working 
2 
Present perfect progressive for actions in 
progress 
Work in pairs. You are both repairing an old 
house. T h e work is not finished. Explain to a 
friend what you have been doing. Use the 
picture to give you ideas. Use the present 
perfect progressive, like this: We have been 
repairing the roof. 
Adapted from Dean (1993: 44) 

Appendix 4.4 - Class Materials, Present Simple/Simple Progressive, C M 
CM 
Presentation 
Present simple and present progressive 
The earth goes round the sun 
In Britain most of the shops close at 5.30V 
In summer Tom usually plays tennis twice a week. 
I am living with some friends until I can find a Hat. 
M y parents bye in London. 
These shoes belong to me. 
- lorn isnt playing football this season . He wants to concentrate on his studies. 
is your English uettine better? 
Silvia is learning English at the moment. 
1 lave you heard about T om? He is build m a his own house. 

The explanation of grammatical features. 
Present progressive 
We use the present progressive when we talk about,an action or situation in 
progress. The action is still happening or the situation is still changing. 
Use the present progressive to talk about: 
 
aciion happening now or over a period of time around now: 
Hallie is working al the computer at the moment, (now) Silvia is learning English at 
the moment. 
^~~ 
He's reading a book about Japan at school, (over a period of time) 
 
changing and developing situation: 
// 's gelling colder. Black skirls are becoming fashionable again. Is your English 
getting heller? 
 
temporary situations: 
I'm slaying wiih Mark for three weeks. I am living wiih some friends until I can find 
aflat. 
Present simple 
The present simple is used when the speaker thinks of something as a fact. 
Use the present simple to talk about: 
 
a law of nature: 
Light travels through space at a speed of 299,792 km per second, nhe earth goes 
round the sun. 
 ^permanent situation^or a state with no definite slartand finish time buUruejiow|_ 
/ live in Oxford. I like fish. My company, Finn-Sport has an office in Tempere. 
 
a regular rerjeate^action or something on timetable: 
/ play football twice a wee) 
The London train leaves al seven o 'clock every day. In Britain most shops close at 
5:30. 
 
ajact that you want to emphasize (emphatic do/does): 
Adam: They never goon hoIhTayT 
~ 
Brenda: Yes, thefffojgo on holiday. 
(Here Brenda wants to emphasize a fact because A d a m has said something wrong.) 
W e can also emphasize what w e see as a fact by stressing is/isn't or are/aren't. 
Yes, heJs polite to people. 
State verbs and the present simple. 
 State verbs are usually in the present simple, because the speaker is thinking of a fac
and not an action in progress. 
'lJ^vcjjetiSbTes_fasle fine. ( N O T are tasting) 
In this example, what is important to the speaker is his or her opinion of the 
vegetables, not the progress of the action (tasting). 

 
S o m e of the most important state verbs are: see, hear, look, feel, taste, smell, be, 
seem, want, prefer, believe, hate, like, love, realize, remember, suppose. 
 
S o m e state verbs {see, hear, taste, and smell) are often used after can. 
I can hear something outside. 
Present progressive and present simple in context 
When we made it clear by using the present progressive that the action or situation 
is in progress, w e can use the present simple to describe facts about the same action 
or situation. 
/ 'm reading a book about the 1960s. It gives a clear description of life (hen 
and paints a pictures of.... 
Adapted from Dean (1993: 9) 

I .aura : Me? Oh, I 
(work) at tne Traye| Agency ^ 
August 
George : 
(you/like) it? 
Laura : Yes, 1 do, They 
(give) m e qiJlte a good lrammg 
1 
(work) in the shop most mornings, and 
three afternoons a week the manager 
(tell) 
m e about the travel business. I 
(work) quite 
long hours. 1 
(not/get) home until six, but 
* 
(prefer) that no to having enough to do. 
George : Yes, I 
(work) hard too at the moment. 
I1 
(become) more and more difficult to get a job 
using languages. They 
(ask) for higher and higher 
exam grades all the time. 
Laura : You can do it, George. You 
(be) clever.  
George: Thanks, Laura. 
Adapted from Dean (1993) 

(rammar exercises 
Complete the sentences using the verbs in brackets in the present progressive or present 
simple. 
Please be quiet. I (try) to read the paper. 
This is very quiet town. Where 
(people/go) in the evenings? 
1 
(work) in a factory until I can find a better job. 
W n a t 
(you/do) with all that paper and glue? 
' 
(not/use) the computer at the moment so you can use it. 
(Karen and John/ever/write) to you? 
Choose state verbs from the list to complete the sentences. Use each verb once. 
smell, hate, know, like, remember 
She always my birthday. 
Those flowers 
nice. What are they? 
Jane is repairing the car. She 
how to do that. 
I 
(not) him, I just 
(not) him very much at 
the moment. 
you 
how to say this in French? 
Reply with sentences using empathic do/does or isAsn'L 
Example. A: Mr Smith never keeps appointments. B: Yes, he does keep appointments. 
A: It doesn't rain here in the summer. B: Yes, 
A: They never get up before eleven o'clock. B: Yes, 
A: He lives near Helen. B: No, 
A: It's over there. B: No, 
A: He isn't the right person for the job. B: Yes, 
Present progressive or present simple in context. Put the right form of the verb in 
brackets. 
Laura : Hello, George! What (you/do) these days? 
George : Hi, Laura. I 
(learn) French and Spanish at college. 
What about you? 

Appendix 4.5 - Class Materials, Simple Past/Past Progressive, C M 
CM 
Presentation 
Simple past and past continuous 
At one o'clock yesterday 1 was having lunch. 
H e was doing the shopping while I was parking the car 
At a quarter-past ten I was still waiting for the train. 
1 lived in London while I was a child. 
Every year when I was a child I went to Italy. 
I was sitting in m y living room when the whole house began to rock. 
The teacher were sitting in the staff room, marking books and drinking coffee when I 
came in. 
While I was running to the park, I saw the house next door catch fire. 
I was just living when she asked m e to stay. 
Adapted from Dean (1993:21) and Fotos (1994:36) 

Simple past and past continuous 
1. Past Progressive 
W e use the past progressive when we refer to something that was happening (that is, it 
was m progress) at a definite time in the past. At one o'clock yesterday I was having 
lunch. 
W e can use while and when to join two actions which were happening at the same time 
in the past. Both actions have a past progressive verb. He was doing the shopping while 
I was parking the car. 
W e can use still to emphasize that something was continuing, especially after the time it 
was expected to finish. At a quarter-past ten I was still waiting for the train 
2. Past simple 
W e use the past simple when we refer to a finished action or situation in the past. 
W e use the past simple to talk about: 
finished single actions or situations: I went to London yesterday; I lived in London 
when I was a child. 
finished repeated actions or situations: Every year when I was a child we went to Italy 
on holiday; When she was young she lived in a different country every year. N O T E 
State verbs are usually used in the past simple not in the past progressive. J was running 
home, I knew it was late. NOT was knowing. N O T E ago means 'at some time before 
now". It is usually used the past simple. / lived there ten years ago. 
3. Past progressive and past simple in context. 
W h e n we use the past progressive and the past simple together, we can use the past 
progressive to 'paint a picture' of a longer 'background' action. W e use the past simple for 
the speaker sees as the main action in the past. 
We were living in London when Susan made her first film; J was sitting in my living 
room when the whole house began to rock; We went indoors because it was raining. 
If there is more than one 'background' action, do not repeat was/were for the second or 
third action. 
The teachers were sitting in the staff room, marking books and drinking coffee when 1 
came in. ( N O T were marking books and were drinking coffee) 
You can use while, as, when, and whenever to introduce the longer 'background' action. 
While and as mean 'at the same time as'. When tells you which time and whenever 
means'every time'. 
As/While I was driving to Oxford I saw a tiny little house with no roof; While I was 
running to the park, I saw the house next door catch fire; When I was sitting on the 
beach I saw a ship in the distance; He went to see Jennifer whenever he was visiting 
Oxford; 
You can use just to emphasise that the longer action had only recently started when the 
action in the past simple interrupted it. / was just leaving when she asked me to stay. I 
was just putting the roast in the ov&n when I felt a terrible jolt 
Adapted from Dean (1993: 21) and Fotos (1994:36). 
i*i r M 
fflMMmnWfUffliiniaarinnnmT-iTi 
m 
i 
'

G r a m m a r exercise 
Write sentences. Use the past progressive in a positive, negative or question form. 
1. /you/use/the hairdrier/when the lights went out? 
2. /John/not talk/to Barbara. Barbara was not even in the room. 
3. The last time I saw him, /Dick/drink/orange juice in the kitchen. 
4. /you/drive/slowly/ when you saw the man in the road? 
5. /it/snow/as I left home for the last time. 
Rewrite the sentences. Use the past progressive and past simple with when or while 
1. Before the bus had stopped, the child jumped off. The bus 
2. A s Jane wrote to the last sentence of her homework; her friend asked her to do his as 
well. Jane was 
Adapted from Dean (1993:23) 

3. During dinner at Harrys Anna lost her necklace. While Anna 
4. John brought the sweet in but I still had some chips on my plate to eat. I was 
5. Did Emily wear the dress when she got married? W a s Emily 
? 
Join the sentences using as, just, while, when and ago. Put the verbs into the pa
progressive or the past simple. 
1. I (eat) m y dinner. There (be) a knock at the door. (AS) 
2. Camilla (get) into the car. Henry (shout) a warning. (JUST, W H E N ) 
3. You (dance) at the disco. I (paint) the kitchen at home. (WHILE) 
4. I (know) her ten years. She (work) for Star Electronics at the same time as I was. 
(AGO, WHEN) 
5. James (hear) a noise. H e (listen to) the music. (WHILE) 
Adapted from Dean (1993:23) 

Put the verbs in brackets into the simple past or past continuous tense. 
1. I lit the fire at 6.00 and it (burn) brightly when Tom 
came in at 7:00. 
2. When I arrived the lecture had already started and the professor 
(write) on the overhead projector. 
3. I 
finish it in the dark. 
(make) a cake when the light went out. I had to 
4. I didn't 
want 
to 
meet 
Paul 
so 
when 
he 
entered 
the 
room 
I 
(leave). 
5. Unfortunately when I arrived Ann (just^ve), 
so w e only had time for a few words. 
6. He (have) a bath when the phone rang. Very 
unwillingly he 
(get) out of the bath and 
(go) to answer it. 
7. He was very polite. Whenever his wife entered the room he 
(stand) up. 
8. The admiral (play) bowls when he received news 
of the invasion. He 
(insist) on finishing the game. 
9. My dog (walk) along quietly when Mr Pitt's 
Pekinese attacked him. 
10. When I arrived she (have) lunch. She apologized 
for starting without m e but said that she always 
(lunch) 
at 12:30. 

Appendix 4.6 - Class Materials, Present Perfect/Present Perfect Progressive, 
CM 
Presentation 
The present perfect tense and present perfect con tin uos tense. 
We have repaired the fridge. 
He has had a total of 632 lessons. 
H o w long have you known John? 
I haven't told her yet. 
W e have been repairing the fridge. 
I've been using Joanna's car While I've been staving with her. 
Your eyes are red. You have been crying. 
H o w long have you been learning English? 
I have been hearing funny noises. 
It's been raining for hours. 
(Adapted from Dean 1993: 45; Soar 1996: 96; Murphy 1985) 

The present perfect tense and present perfect continuous tense. 
i. Present perieci 
W e ase the preseni perfeci and noi ihe preseni perfeci progressive when we want io make 
ii ciear inai an aciion nas been compieied. 
We have repaired the fridge. (The fridge works now.) 
W e usually use ihe preseni perfeci and noi the preseni perfeci progressive wiih siaie verbs 
De, seem, prefer, believe, know, like, love, hate. 
How long have you known John? ( N O T been knowing) 
W e use ihe preseni perfeci and noi ihe preseni perfeci progressive for naturally short 
aciions like break, fall (over), start. 
Have you broken the window? ( N O T been braking) 
Wc use ihe preseni perieci and noi preseni perieci progressive wiih ever, never and vet. 
I haven i told her yet ( N O T been telling) I have never met Tony. 
2. Preseni perieci progressive 
we use ihe preseni progressive when w e wani io emphasize an aciion or siiuaiion in 
progress and noi iis compieiion. We've been repairing ihe fridge. (It may or may noi 
work now.) W e use ihe preseni preieci progressive for: 
temporary aciions and siiuations: 
I've using Joanna's car while I've been staying with her. ( N O T have used and have 
stayed) 
aciions in ihe recent past ihai w e ihink have been happening because of someihing w e can 
see now. (preseni evidence): 
Your eyes are red You have been crying. ( N O T have cried) (This is often used io 
complain. Hey! Somebody has been drinking my coffee!) 
talking aboui how long someihing has been going on: 
How long have been learning English? He has been writing to her for ten years. 
The preseni perieci progressive is more commonly used in informal speech. 
3. Preseni perfeci or preseni perfeci progressive 
You can use the preseni perfeci progressive wiih the siaie verbs, if you wani io emphasize 
a siiuaiion in progress and noi iis compieiion: see, hear, look, taste, smell, want, realize, 
remember. 
I've been hearing funny noises. He's been looking miserable since his dog died 
I've been wanting one of those new computers for ages. 
If you do noi wish io emphasize ihe progressive nature of ihe siiuaiion, you can use ihe 
present perfeci simple wiih these verbs. 
I've heard a lot of funny noises lately. That house has looked miserable for years. 
I've always wanted one of those. 
Some verbs suggest an aciion in progress by iheh meaning and ihese can be used both wiih 
the preseni perieci and preseni perieci progressive, wiih iiiiie difference in meaning: live, 
rain, sit, study, wait, work. 
It's been raining for hours. It's rained non-stop for hours. 
I have worked/have been working at the bank for three years. 
Adapted from Dean (1993: 45) 

G r a m m a r Exercise 
Present perfect or present progressive? Choose the correct one, (a) or (b). 
(a) I have been painting 
the kitchen. I should be finished soon. 
(b) I have painted 
(a) You have breaking 
m y window 
(b)You have broken 
(a) I've liked like 
the Beatles since I was twelve. 
(b) I've been liking 
(a) been falling over. 
Oh no! Karen has just 
(b) fallen over. 
(a) Somebody has read 
m y letters. This one has been opened. 
(b) Somebody has been reading 
(a) It has been snowing 
here for days. It won't stop until next week. 
(b) It has snowed 
Put the state verbs in brackets into the present perfect (/ have remembered) or the 
perfect progressive (/ have been remembering). 
1. Happy birthday, darling. I _ 
(remember) to buy you a present. 
2 Lately, I 
(remember) the happy 
times w e spent together all those years ago. 
2 
c jje 
(prefer) classical music to 
pop music she was a child. 
4. Surely Andrew 
(believe) 
in fairies for long enough. Let's tell him the truth. 
5. Arthur 
all the food as I put it on the table. 
(taste) 
Adapted from Dean (1993: 47) 

Put the verb in brackets in the correct tense, Present perfect tense or present perfect 
continuous. 
1. I'm exhausted! I (work) all day, and 
I 
(not/finish) yet. 
2. I 
( visit) many countries over 
the past few years. 
3. Someone 
(take) m y 
books. I 
((look) for them for ages, but I 
(not/find) them yet. 
4. I 
(shop) all morning, but I 
(not/buy) anything. 
5. That's one of the books I 
(ever/read). 
6. 'You're filthy! What 
(you/do)? I 
(work) in the garden. 
7. The streets are all wet. It 
(rain). 
g j 
(listen) to you for the past half 
an hour, but I'm 
afraid 
I 
(not/understand) a single word. 
9. What's the matter?' *I 
(read) in m y roon-
for hours and I've got a headache.' 
]0 j 
(try) to lose weight for ages. I 
(lose) ten pounds so far. 
11. W h y is your hair wet?' 'I 
(swim).' 
Adapted from Liz and Soars (1996:60) 
hj-.^.t-V-

