
THE COMPLETE GUIDE TO
Japanese 
Kanji


THE COMPLETE GUIDE TO
Japanese 
Kanji
REMEMBERING AND UNDERSTANDING 
THE 2,136 STANDARD CHARACTERS
CHRISTOPHER SEELEY AND KENNETH G. HENSHALL
WITH JIAGENG FAN
漢字完全ガイド
TUTTLE Publishing
Tokyo   Rutland, Vermont   Singapore

Published by Tuttle Publishing, an imprint of Periplus Editions (HK) Ltd.
www.tuttlepublishing.com
Copyright © 1998, 2016 Periplus Editions (HK) Ltd.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any 
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage 
and retrieval system, without prior written permission from the publisher. 
Library of Congress Control Number:  2015954332
ISBN 978-4-8053-1170-7
First edition
20  19  18  17  16          5  4  3  2  1
Printed in Singapore      1601MP
Distributed by
North America, Latin America & Europe
Tuttle Publishing
364 Innovation Drive
North Clarendon, VT 05759-9436 U.S.A.
Tel: (802) 773-8930; Fax: (802) 773-6993
info@tuttlepublishing.com
www.tuttlepublishing.com
Asia Pacifi c
Berkeley Books Pte. Ltd.
61 Tai Seng Avenue #02-12
Singapore 534167
Tel: (65) 6280-1330; Fax: (65) 6280-6290
inquiries@periplus.com.sg; www.periplus.com
Japan
Tuttle Publishing
Yaekari Building, 3rd Floor
5-4-12 Osaki, Shinagawa-ku
Tokyo 141 0032
Tel: (81) 3 5437-0171; Fax: (81) 3 5437-0755
sales@tuttle.co.jp; www.tuttle.co.jp
TUTTLE PUBLISHING® is a registered trademark of Tuttle Publishing, a division of Periplus 
Editions (HK) Ltd.
; ISBN 978-1-4629-1773-0 (ebook)

  5
Contents
Preface to the Second Edition ....................................................................................7
Acknowledgments ..........................................................................................................8
Introduction ......................................................................................................................9
• Beginnings of the Chinese Script ...................................................................9
• Formational Principles of the Chinese Script ..........................................12
• Word-Families and the Chinese Script ......................................................14
• Fluctuation in the Script: Variant Forms....................................................16
• Early and Pre-Modern Character Dictionaries ........................................17
• Printed Texts and the Calligraphic Tradition ...........................................19
• Layout of Entries in This Book .......................................................................20
• Sources Used and Terminology in This Book ..........................................23
• Limitations of This Book .................................................................................26
The Japanese Writing System: A Brief Sketch ....................................................27
Hiragana and Katakana and Their Source Characters  ....................................30
The 214 Determinatives (or ‘Radicals’) System ..................................................34
General Principles of Stroke Order .........................................................................41
Editorial and Typographical Matters; Romanization .......................................44

6  Contents
The 80 First-Grade Characters..................................................................................48
The 160 Second-Grade Characters ........................................................................66
The 200 Third-Grade Characters ...........................................................................105
The 200 Fourth-Grade Characters ........................................................................154
The 185 Fifth-Grade Characters ............................................................................209
The 181 Sixth-Grade Characters ...........................................................................260
The Remaining 1130 Characters ...........................................................................307
Readings Index ............................................................................................................646
Stroke-Count ................................................................................................................683
Appendix .......................................................................................................................700
• Similarly-Shaped Elements Easily Confused .........................................700
Bibliography .................................................................................................................702

  7
Preface to the Second Edition
Th is book is an extensive revision of the original edition of A Guide to Remember-
ing Japanese Characters compiled by Kenneth Henshall and published in 1988. Th e 
original 1988 edition represents a pioneering work in English on the etymologies of 
the offi  cial General Use characters (Jōyō kanji) in use at that time. Since then, much 
has changed: a very substantial amount of scholarly research has been published on 
character etymologies and related areas, mainly in Japanese and Chinese, but also 
some in English. Another change has been that in 2010 there appeared a revised, ex-
panded version of the Jōyō kanji list, the offi  cial  list of characters for general use; this 
increased the basic number of characters for use in school education and govern-
ment publications from 1945 (in the list promulgated in 1981) to 2136. In response 
to these changes, this second edition has been prepared. While care has been taken 
in the preparation of this work, any errors and omissions remain the responsibility 
of the authors.

8  
Acknowledgments 
Th anks are due to Ogino Masayoshi, Lecturer in Japanese at the University of Can-
terbury, New Zealand, for his assistance with installation of soft ware for the elec-
tronic version of  the Kangxi zidian dictionary, one of the pre-modern Chinese char-
acter dictionaries referred to in compiling this book. Th anks also to Kazuko Seeley 
for her on-call status as unoffi  cial consultant for a number of tricky points relating 
to Japanese language. Last but not least, recognition is due to Tuttle’s senior editor 
Cathy Layne and the Tuttle team for their painstaking work on this book at the pro-
duction stage.

  9
Introduction
Th e focus of this book is on giving etymologies together with mnemonics for each 
of the 2,136 characters that make up the 改定常用漢字Kaitei Jōyō kanji ‘Revised 
General Use Characters’ offi  cially adopted in Japan in 2010, replacing the earlier 
Jōyō kanji List of 1981 (1,945 characters). In setting out the etymologies, we need to 
go back to the origins of the kanji in China. In consequence, to explain adequately 
some of the characters, considerable space is taken up referring to such things as 
values, customs, and technology in ancient China, all of which tend to refl ect a very 
diff erent world from the one we inhabit today.
1  Beginnings of the Chinese Script  
Some scholars regard Chinese writing as dating back to long before the Shang Dy-
nasty (ca. 16th–11th century BC), pointing to marks on pottery, for instance, but 
these are no more than isolated examples consisting of one or two signs of typically 
abstract shape which cannot be described with confi dence as writing as opposed to 
something like owners’ marks.
1.1  Oracle Bone Script (Ch. 甲⾻⽂  jiaguwen, J. 甲⾻⽂字 
kōkotsu moji)
Th e earliest stage of Chinese writing (and of the characters to be adopted much later 
by the Japanese) widely recognized among scholars is what is known as oracle bone 
script, sometimes referred to as OBI (for ‘oracle bone inscriptions’). Th is dates back 
to the later part of the Shang Dynasty. 
Th e oracle bone script is so called because typically it is written on bones that 
were the shoulder blades of cattle, or sometimes on the underside of turtle shells. 
Th ese were fl attish surfaces which were reasonably easy to use for writing. A knife-
like instrument was used to scratch characters or graphs (these two words are used 
with the same meaning in this book) on the bone or shell surface, hence the angular 
appearance at this stage. In some cases, a text was written fi rst onto the bone with a 

10  Introduction
writing brush, and then incised. Writing at this very early period in China was used 
by a small minority, centered on the Shang rulers, for such purposes as enquiring 
about the outcome of future events such as a battle, harvest, or childbirth, hence the 
term ‘oracle bones’. 
Although the oracle bone texts—typically fragmentary in nature—date back 
more than two thousand years, they were only brought to light (rediscovered) in 
relatively recent times. In 1899, 劉鶚 Liu E, a Chinese scholar who was looking 
for material to make up traditional Chinese medicine, purchased some bone frag-
ments. Th ese were fragments which had been unearthed by farmers when plowing, 
and they were known as ‘dragon bones’, based on the belief that dragons shed their 
bones. Liu happened to notice some unusual scratching on the fragments. Being 
familiar with how the early Chinese script looked, and guessing that these markings 
probably represented a still earlier stage of Chinese writing, he decided to purchase 
more of the bone fragments. His study of these fragments led to confi rmation that 
this was indeed an ancient stage of Chinese writing, and a stage earlier than what 
had been recognized until then. Th is was a very important discovery, and marked 
the point of departure for the scientifi c study of the oracle bone script.
1.2  Seal Script (篆書 Ch. zhuanshu, J. tensho)
Th e ancient variety of the Chinese script known as seal script is divided into two va-
rieties: ‘great seal’ (大篆Ch. dazhuan, J. daiten) and ‘small seal’ (少篆Ch. xiaozhuan, 
J. shōten).  Some of the examples of great seal script—the older variety—found on 
bronze vessels date back in some cases to a period no later than that of the oracle 
bone inscriptions,  i.e., the latter part of the Shang Dynasty. Th e situation has been 
summed up by the noted Chinese scholar Qiu Xigui as follows: ‘Th e practice of 
casting inscriptions on bronzes initially grew in popularity in the latter half of the 
Shang period and reached its zenith during the Zhou.’ (QX2000:62). Refl ecting the 
fact that before the Qin Dynasty (221–206 BC) bronze was referred to as 金 (Ch. 
jin, J. kin), characters on ancient bronzes are sometimes known alternatively as 金
文 (Ch. jinwen, J. kinbun). Great seal characters of very early date oft en occur in a 
very short sequence of a few characters or even just one, and are notable for their 
ornateness compared to those on oracle bones. In shape, the great seal forms tend to 
be characterized by soft  curves and varying stroke width, contrasting with the thin 
angularity of the oracle bone characters. In a given text, individual characters can 
vary considerable in size. Th e ornate great seal characters were ill-suited for practi-
cal purposes, and so the evolution of less impractical shapes was really a natural 
development, though this does not mean that utilitarian considerations were all-
consuming: aesthetic considerations were still very important. A degree of simpli-
fi cation in shape compared with great seal can be seen in many cases in the small 

Introduction  11
seal forms, which were very actively promoted—with the incentive of punishment 
for those who transgressed—in the Qin Dynasty under Emperor Shi Huangdi (the 
self-styled ‘First Emperor’) as part of his strategy to unify the land under his rule. 
Small seal forms were preserved for posterity in the following Han Dynasty (Early 
Han Dynasty: 206 BC–24 AD; Later Han Dynasty: 25–220 AD) in the character 
dictionary entitled Shuowen jiezi (Explanation of Indivisible Characters and Analysis 
of Compound Characters) completed ca.100AD by Xu Shen (for details, see Section 
5 [‘Early and Pre-Modern Character Dictionaries’]). In terms of Chinese writing, 
this was a pioneering work which soon became an indispensable reference for later 
scholars working on the script, and this remains true through to the present day. In 
the Early Han period, small seal was still the offi  cial script, but the clerical script was 
gaining in popularity. 
1.3  Clerical Script (隷書 Ch. lishu, J. reisho)
While small seal was promoted as the offi  cial script during the Qin Dynasty, for 
practical purposes it was still quite cumbersome. To overcome this, an abbreviated 
variety of the small seal script came to be used for record-keeping, known as lishu 
‘clerical script’ (sometimes translated as ‘scribe script’). While its use appears to have 
been promoted by the needs of an expanding government administration, accord-
ing to Qiu Xigui the beginnings of clerical script can be traced back to the Warring 
States period (475–221 BC). It is fair to say that clerical script represents the early 
stage of what was later to become the modern character script, as most of the char-
acters in clerical script are recognisable to us today. While initially a practical script 
type in nature, over time clerical script also developed a dimension of aesthetic 
refi nement, and thereby acquired respectability. By the Later Han period, clerical 
script was accepted as the offi  cial script, and small seal was retained for ornamental 
purposes.
1.4  Block Script (楷書 Ch. kaishu, J. kaisho)
Also known in English variously as standard script, regular script, or model script. 
Th e kai of kaishu/kaisho means ‘standard, a model’. In this book, this stage is referred 
to as ‘block script’. It is diffi  cult to pinpoint the time when block script evolved from 
clerical script, but in broad terms this development took place towards the end of 
the Later Han Dynasty. Compared with clerical script, characters in block script 
tend to be modestly less undulating and slightly more square in appearance, are 
readily legible (as far as is possible for oft en intricate shapes), yet at the same time 
retain an aesthetically pleasing aspect. Th e merits of block script have seen it endure 
and occupy the position of a standard over the centuries and down to the present.

12  Introduction
1.5  Cursive Script Forms
While the block script has strong merits, it is quite a slow way of writing characters, 
and inevitably quicker ways of writing evolved, later to be quite commonly broadly 
categorized as semi-cursive script (行書 Ch. xingshu, J. gyōsho) and cursive script 
(草書 Ch. caoshu, J. sōsho). For caoshu/sōsho, which are terms sometimes translated 
literally into English as ‘grass script’ but more appropriately rendered as ‘cursive 
script’, Qiu Xigui notes both broad and narrow meanings: the broad sense refers 
to any characters of any period past or present-day written hastily, while the nar-
row sense is limited to characters written in certain historical periods or modelled 
thereon (QX2000:130–31). In the present book, the term ‘cursive script’ is used only 
infrequently, and will be reserved for characters written with an advanced degree 
of cursivity (i.e., advanced degradation in shape compared with characters writ-
ten slowly and carefully), while ‘semi-cursive script’ will be used to denote modest 
cursivity (limited degradation of shape compared with slowly and carefully writ-
ten equivalents). At times, the term ‘cursivized’ may also be used in this book as a 
convenient way to indicate character text written with a degree of rapidity, without 
going into the question of greater or lesser degree. It is worth highlighting here that 
cursivized characters began to appear as early as the Warring States period, also 
marking the emergence of clerical script forms as an entity born out of the small 
seal script. In everyday (non-formal) usage today, as in the past, texts in Chinese and 
Japanese written by hand tend to exhibit a modest degree of cursivity.
2  Formational Principles of the Chinese Script
Th e earliest stage of Chinese writing dates back to the period from about the 14th 
to the 10th century BC. Th e script at that time (on oracle bones and bronze vessels) 
clearly has a strong pictorial dimension. Yet it is not ‘picture writing’, i.e., texts of that 
period do not represent a situation in an approximate way pictorially and without 
reference to language—a convention or system that we might think of as a forerun-
ner of writing proper. Rather, texts already represented a full writing system, i.e., 
each character or graph represented a word or morpheme (for explanation of ‘mor-
pheme’, see section 8.2 [‘Terminology in Th is Book’] below) in the early Chinese lan-
guage. Writing is not just visual markings on paper or other material: it represents 
language, and this is something we should not lose sight of.
Th e formational principles of Chinese characters were categorized at a very 
early stage by Xu Shen, the compiler of the Shuowen jiezi dictionary, but several of 
those categories have never been fully understood and so here we will not follow the 
Shuowen categories completely.

Introduction  13
Like other writing systems, the system for Chinese evolved originally from the 
pictorial representation of concrete objects, so it seems logical to start here with 1) 
pictographs. With this category, a written representation of a horse, say, was used 
to represent the early Chinese word for ‘horse’, and this same principle was utilized 
to represent numerous other words such as ‘sun’, ‘tree’, ‘bird’, mountain’, and so on. 
Th ere was, though, a limit to the usefulness of this principle. It was fi ne for writ-
ing simple, concrete words, but how to write more abstract words such as those 
for ‘above’ or ‘basis’, for example? In the oracle bone script, ‘above’ was represented 
by one short stroke above a longer one, while for ‘basis’ or ‘root’ a short horizontal 
stroke was added low down on the vertical stroke of 木 ‘tree, wood’ to give 本. In 
English, graphs of this category— type 2)—are generally referred to as ‘indicative 
symbols’ (or similar).
In some other cases, a word was conveyed by combining several pictographs 
into one graph, and so in English these may be termed 3) ‘semantic compounds’. 
Examples of this category include 林 (two trees) for ‘forest’, or 日 ‘sun’ and 月 ‘moon’ 
combined together as 明 to represent the word for ‘bright’. 
A further means employed to represent various words or morphemes was 4) the 
loan-graph principle, whereby a character was ‘borrowed’ for its sound value to 
represent in writing another word of the same (or similar) pronunciation. Th us, in 
oracle bone texts we fi nd, for instance, the pictograph for ‘winnowing basket’ (writ-
ten 其 in its stylized modern form) borrowed to represent another word of the same 
pronunciation meaning ‘probably’ or ‘will’. Once this happened, the reader in an-
cient times had to decide whether 其 in a particular context was to be taken as ‘win-
nowing basket’ or ‘probably/will’. In the same way, a character originally meaning 
‘sunset’ (莫) was borrowed to write a similar-sounding grammatical function-word 
meaning ‘there is none, not any’. Th is sort of arrangement seems to have worked 
adequately at fi rst, helped no doubt by the fact that OBI and also the very early 
bronze texts tended to be quite formulaic and repetitive in nature. However, as the 
number of such borrowings increased and also texts became more diverse in terms 
of content, help was needed to avoid the danger of texts degenerating into hopelessly 
complex puzzles. To combat this, gradually semantic markers (traditionally called 
‘radicals’, but better is ‘determinatives’) were oft en added. Th us, because 其 ended 
up being used more to indicate probability or futurity than in the sense ‘winnowing 
basket’, 竹 ‘bamboo’ was added at the top to create 箕 for the latter (i.e., original) 
sense, a graph which could readily be understood to mean just ‘winnowing basket’, 
leaving 其 to stand for probability/futurity. Th e same process took place with 莫: to 
overcome the ambiguity of this graph when it had come to mean either ‘sunset’ or 
‘there is none’, a second 日 ‘sun’ was added to create a new graph 暮 for ‘sunset’, leav-
ing 莫 to be used for ‘there is none’. Graphs of the type 箕 and 暮 are referred to as 

14  Introduction
5) ‘semantic-phonetic compounds’ (or similar); these are by far the most common 
category of Chinese characters. 
3  Word-Families and the Chinese Script
Note: this section, which relies extensively on the work of Japanese scholar Tōdō Aki-
yasu, involves much technical detail which many readers may not need; for such read-
ers, the brief entry ‘Phonetic with associated sense’ (see Section 8 below) is recom-
mended instead.
Th e application of the semantic-phonetic compounding principle led to a dra-
matic increase in the total number of diff erent graphs over time. As indicated above, 
in semantic-phonetic compounds the phonetic element is the original element, and 
a semantic marker is a later addition. An important point to note is that oft en a par-
ticular element, while primarily phonetic, also carries a common thread of meaning 
that can be seen in several or a number of diff erent graphs. Th is refl ects the existence 
of words of related meaning and the same or similar pronunciation in early Chinese; 
grouped together, such words are known as ‘word-families’. To give a relatively sim-
ple example: the word written as 里 ‘village; unit of linear measure’ is analyzed by 
one scholar (Tōdō) as being made up of 田 ‘fi eld’ combined with 土 ‘earth, ground’, 
originally representing a word meaning fi elds divided up according to a grid system, 
and then by extension ‘village’, representing a collection of nearby houses. Th is is 
the fi rst of a number of words and their graphs collected together in a word-family 
having the core meaning ‘line, draw a line’. On this basis, we can think of ‘line, draw 
a line’ as the associated sense of 里 as opposed to its main meanings of ‘village’ and 
as a unit measure for distance. Th e distinction is an important one. Another word 
of the same linguistically reconstructed pronunciation is one for which Tōdō gives 
the original meaning ‘lines / veins which are visible in marble’, written 理, with 玉 
(‘jade, precious / semi-precious stone’ in its abbreviated form without dot) added as 
a determinative (semantic marker). ‘Regulate, reason’ is a fi gurative extension for 理 
based on ‘drawing a line’ (a straight line), and this in turn is seen in other members 
of the same word-family such as 裏, taken by Tōdō as 里 ‘lines’ combined with  衣 
‘garment’, giving the original meaning ‘striped inner cloth (i.e., lining) of garment’. 
Words in the same word-family do not necessarily involve the same written element 
as phonetic: in this same word-family as set up by Tōdō we fi nd 肋, in which not 里
but 力serves as the phonetic, taken as ‘lines in (sides of) body’, i.e., ‘ribs’.
Sometimes the same written element serves as phonetic, but with associated 
senses which might at fi rst glance appear to be diff erent. Th e graph 肖 ‘resemble’ 
1490 (q.v.) is part of a word-family in Chinese set up by Tōdō as meaning ‘small; 
scrape off ’. At fi rst, 肖 functioned as a graph representing a range of words of similar 

Introduction  15
pronunciation and meanings which included ‘melt, dissolve’ and ‘scrape, pare, cut’. 
At a later stage, to reduce ambiguity in texts, determinatives were added. Conse-
quently, for ‘melt, dissolve’, 水/氵 ‘water’ was added as a semantic marker or deter-
minative, giving 消 (‘disappear’ is an extended sense from ‘melt, dissolve’), whereas 
for ‘scrape’ 刀/刂 ‘knife’ was added, giving 削. Th us, while we fi nd ‘resemble’ given 
as the central meaning of 肖in character dictionaries, its associated meaning in 消 
and 削 is ‘small, make small; scrape (and make small)’.
In most of the examples above, members of the same word-family share a com-
mon graph element as phonetic. Note, though, that the graph element that serves as 
phonetic within a particular word-family is not necessarily always the same; in fact, 
oft en it is diff erent, as the example below shows:
word-family: ‘round, surround’ (TA1965:619-20)
垣 (‘fence, hedge’) original meaning: ‘encircling earthen wall’; the phonetic is 亘.
玩 original meaning: ‘hold and fondle precious stone in cupped hands’; the pho-
netic is 元.
Conversely, one and the same graphic element can have diff erent associated 
senses (representing diff erent word-families) in diff erent graphs, as in the following 
example:
隅 (‘corner’) original meaning: ‘folds/creases in hills’ (禺 here represents word-
family with core meaning  ‘bend, complicated in detailed way’ [TA1965:307-11]).
愚 (‘foolish’) original meaning: ‘mind is stiff /infl exible’ (禺 here represents a 
word-family with core meaning ‘stiff ’ [TA1965:313-15]).
In addition to reconstruction of words in early Chinese by means of the meth-
odology of historical linguistics, reliance is also placed on information gleaned from 
early dictionaries such as Shuowen jiezi (see Section 5 below). Oft en there is scope 
for variation in interpretation of what can be gained from this method also, and so 
scholars frequently diff er in their analysis of a particular word or graph. To give just 
one example: while Schuessler acknowledges 里 may represent a member of a word-
family meaning ‘divide into equal sections’, he questions this as the basis for ‘village’ as 
an extended meaning, on the grounds that prehistoric and early historic Chinese vil-
lages ‘probably were not systematically planned’ (AS2007:349). Th is kind of diversity 
of interpretation is refl ected in the individual entries in this book, many of which give 

16  Introduction
alternative etymologies for the same graph. Th anks to the cumulative eff orts of schol-
ars both premodern and modern, a vast amount of knowledge on historical stages of 
both the Chinese language and the script has been built up, but even so, much of that 
knowledge is as yet tentative and incomplete, and further work is needed. 
Th e above summary of word-families in Chinese in relation to the script has 
been presented in as straightforward a way as possible, but this is a complicated 
area involving signifi cant linguistic technicalities and interpretation of material. 
Scholars oft en diverge in their analysis of the phonetic component of graphs, hence 
frequently several diff erent interpretations are made. In the analysis of the graphs 
in this book, for word-families reliance has been placed on the published work of 
established scholars, particularly Tōdō, Mizukami, and Katō. 
4  Fluctuation in the Script: Variant Forms
In handwritten texts, even in an alphabetical script with a modest number of diff er-
ent symbols, some degree of variation in the shape of individual signs is common. 
Th e potential for shape variation naturally increases in the case of a script that uses 
hundreds if not thousands of separate symbols or graphs. In Chinese and Japanese 
texts, variation in graph shape from the earliest period onwards is oft en seen. Th is 
situation is normally handled by taking one form of a graph as representative, and 
other forms as variants. Th e earliest major dictionary of Chinese characters com-
piled in China, the Shuowen jiezi, sets out over 9,000 characters. Each entry begins 
with a character in seal form which served as the standard, but in some cases an 
alternative form is noted. Th us, for instance, the Shuowen has 鬽 as the entry head-
ing—and hence main form—for a word meaning ‘malevolent spirit, demon’, and 
notes 魅 (the standard form in modern Japanese usage) as an alternative form. Th is 
illustrates the point that the standard form of a graph in one period can change to 
be regarded as the variant form in another period. An early example of a dictionary 
focused on character shapes, prescribing which ones were to be used in offi  cial texts 
as opposed to corresponding variants, is 干禄字書 Ganlu zishu (Character Diction-
ary for Seeking a [Government] Stipend; J.: Kanroku jisho), a work compiled around 
the beginning of the eighth century by 顔元孫 Yan Yuansun (? – 714 AD).  What 
is a variant form in one country or jurisdiction can occupy the position of standard 
in another.  Variant forms are in fact very common in all historical periods, though 
possibly less prominent today due to such factors as widespread education, offi  cial 
script simplifi cation in countries/jurisdictions such as Japan and mainland China, 
and the regularizing infl uence of computerization of text with its relatively limited 
support of variant forms. Other examples of variant forms, selected here at random, 
are 畄 for 留  ‘stop’, and 𡈽 for 土 ‘earth, ground’.

Introduction  17
5  Early and Pre-Modern Character Dictionaries
A number of character dictionaries are referred to in the explanations for individual 
characters listed in this book, and so these are described briefl y below for the con-
venience of readers. Titles in Chinese characters are followed by the Chinese ro-
manization of the title together with an English translation and the corresponding 
Japanese romanization.
説⽂解字 Shuowen jiezi (Explanation of Indivisible Characters 
and Analysis of Compound Characters; J.: Setsumon kaiji)
In discussing the beginnings of character dictionaries in early China, mention is 
sometimes made of a few short texts of characters for learners such as 急就篇  
Jijiupian (Rapid Access Text; J.: Kyūshūhen), compiled in the 1st century BC. Wheth-
er these warrant being regarded as actual dictionaries, though, is questionable, and 
raises the question of how the word ‘dictionary’ is defi ned. 
Th e fi rst Chinese character dictionary proper to have survived from early times is 
the Shuowen jiezi. Completed ca.100AD, this was a large-scale work and one which 
was highly innovative in that it organized characters according to a system of formal 
recurrent elements (radicals or determinatives, 540 in total). Th e compiler 許慎
Xu Shen (J.: Kyo Shin) (born sometime in the period 58–75 AD, died ca. 147–149 
AD), set out the small seal forms for some 9,400 characters together with a number 
of older and variant forms. Xu Shen analyzed the meanings of characters, dividing 
them into indivisible characters (文) and compound (i.e., divisible) characters (字). 
Th rough his work he provided valuable insights for later generations of scholars. 
Xu Shen’s analyses cannot be relied on in all cases, as he was limited by not having 
access to very early bronzes or oracle bone characters. However, in assessing and 
understanding his analyses, modern scholarship is in a position to make allowance 
for this. Unfortunately, the surviving manuscripts of Shuowen jiezi are all late, with 
the earliest dating from about 850 years aft er the time the work was compiled.
For the present book, reliance has been placed to some extent on the treatment 
and recognition of individual seal forms by scholars such as Mizukami Shizuo, and 
to some extent on the variorum text of Shuowen jiezi with its parallel modern Chi-
nese translation (published 2009, Wanjuan Publishing Co.).
⽟篇 Yupian (Jade Chapters; J.: Gyokuhen or Gokuhen)
Dating from the early 6th century AD, this work compiled by 顧野王 Gu Yewang 
is a dictionary in which 12,158 characters are arranged according to pronunciation. 
As a general trend, the number of characters listed in dictionaries increased with 
the passage of time. For the present book, quoted excerpts from Yupian appearing 
in scholarly works have been used. 

18  Introduction
集韻 Jiyun (Collected Rhymes; J.: Shūin)
A very voluminous dictionary completed in 1039AD; the chief editor was丁度 Ding 
Du. Arranged according to pronunciation, it lists 53,525 characters. For the present 
book, quoted excerpts from Jiyun appearing in scholarly works have been used.
字彙 Zihui (Character Collection; J.: Jii)
Th is was the fi rst character dictionary to be arranged according to the system of 214 
determinatives (as opposed to the 540 in Shuowen jiezi) which has been used until 
modern times in China and continuously down to the present in Japan. Dealing 
with 33,179 characters and compiled by 梅膺祚 Mei Dingzuo, Zihui was published 
in 1615 AD. While clearly a very signifi cant work that was used in the compilation 
of later dictionaries, Zihui is noted here primarily for its signifi cance in devising 
the 214 determinative system; it has not been referred to directly in the process of 
compiling this book.
正字通 Zhengzitong (Mastery of Orthodox Characters; J.: 
Seijitsū)
Originally compiled by 張自烈 Zhang Zilie, the manuscript of Zhengzitong was 
purchased by 寥文英 Liao Wenying, who supplemented and published it in about 
1671AD. Zhengzitong lists around 33,000 characters arranged according to the 214 
determinatives.
Note: in compiling the present book, Zhengzitong was used occasionally to supple-
ment Kangxi zidian (see below), using a 1996 facsimile edition (Guoji Wenhua Pub-
lishing Co.). Th is is because for technical reasons the electronic version of Kangxi 
zidian referred to immediately below was not always available to consult.
康煕字典 Kangxi zidian (The Kangxi Dictionary; J.: Kōki jiten)
Th is very prestigious dictionary was compiled at the command of Emperor Kangxi 
(康煕) (1654–1722) by a group of scholars which included 張玉書 Zhang Yushu and 
陳廷敬 Chen Tingjing. Completed and published in 1716, the aim of this work was 
to provide an authoritative character dictionary to remedy the shortcomings of Zihui 
and the verbosity of Zhengzitong. Th e Kangxi zidian, which lists 47,035 characters, 
served as a standard for matters relating to Chinese characters from the time of com-
pilation down into the 20th century. Th is is not to say that the Kangxi zidian is totally 
error free. Th e existence of errors—probably inevitable in any case in a work of such 
scale—appears to be due in part to the need to complete compilation within a time-
frame that was set by Emperor Kangxi.

Introduction  19
Note: for compiling the present book, two editions of Kangxi zidian were referred 
to: one was the edition published in 2009 by Wanjuan Publishing Co.; the other 
one—used to ascertain actual character shapes promoted in Kangxi zidian entries—
was the electronic version produced by Personal Media Co. (Tokyo, ca.2001). Th e 
latter text is a scanned version of the Peking Palace printed edition of 1827. Pagina-
tion for the latter version is given by reference not to the traditional page numbers 
for individual volumes of the dictionary, but as a continuum running from 1–3671. 
6  Printed Texts and the Calligraphic Tradition 
Th e term ‘traditional form’ will be seen in many entries in this book; it is used to 
refer in principle to printed forms based on character shapes in Kangxi zidian, which 
served as an authoritative standard in mainland China and Japan until around the 
middle of the 20th century. Th ese forms were favored by scholars because they tend-
ed to retain elements of the small seal character shapes in the very highly regarded 
Shuowen jiezi. Th e forms in Kangxi zidian and later mechanically produced texts 
sometimes diff er somewhat from the corresponding shapes favored in the calli-
graphic tradition, i.e., in texts that served as calligraphic models for many hundreds 
of years and indeed even down to the present. To illustrate this, let us consider 高 
and 髙: 高 is the traditional Kangxi zidian form, refl ecting the fact that 高 corre-
sponds closely to the small seal form, while 髙 was favored in the calligraphic tradi-
tion. Another example is provided by 京 and 亰, where 京 is the traditional Kangxi 
zidian form, refl ecting the form of this character as it appears in Shuowen jiezi, but 
亰 is predominant in the calligraphic tradition.
In cases where the traditional form is noted at the beginning of an entry in this 
book, this is because it diff ers from the corresponding form in standard modern 
Japanese usage. For example, in the case of 乱 ‘disorder’ (entry 999), 亂 is noted 
as the traditional form, and for 旧 ‘old, past’ (entry 677), 舊 is noted as the tradi-
tional form. Not infrequently there is some variation (typically very minor) in the 
traditional form for a given character; this is a point about which readers should 
not be unduly concerned.  In most cases in the entries in this book we give just one 
traditional form. In modern Japanese usage, various relatively minor earlier diff er-
ences between the printed and handwritten shapes for a given character have been 
eliminated, leaving only a small number of instances such as 人 (printed and hand-
written forms diff er modestly) and 入 (again, printed and handwritten forms diff er 
in a minor way).
Note: originally in China and Japan, printing of texts was done using the wood-
block printing technique, whereby large blocks of a hard wood were engraved with 

20  Introduction
text in reverse, then the blocks were inked to transfer the text onto paper. While 
movable type technology was invented in China at around the 11th century, xylo-
graphic (woodblock) printing remained the preferred method until the latter half 
of the 19th century. At that period, movable metal type came into favor, following 
the established norm in the West; the character shapes for the new type were based 
(with some modifi cation) on those in Kangxi zidian, and evolved into what became 
known in Japanese as 明朝体 Minchōtai ‘Ming printed form’.
7  Layout of Entries in This Book
Individual entries for the 2,136 characters vary greatly in length and other respects, 
but a broad general format is followed, as explained below.
7.1  Order
Th e 2,136 character entries in this book are set out in the order they are listed in the 
revised Jōyō kanji list of 2010. In the main part of this book, the sequential number 
for a particular character is shown in the top left  of the box for each entry. Th e fi rst 
1,006 characters are divided into six successive grades: the fi rst grade sets out those 
characters to be taught in the fi rst year of primary schooling, the second grade those 
to be taught in the second year, and so on. Th e remaining corpus of 1,130 characters, 
for learning in secondary education, is not divided into grades. Within each of the 
six grades, and the following undivided corpus, characters are arranged according 
to the 五十音図 gojū onzu, a traditional framework that was a prominent part of 
pre-modern Japanese language theory.
7.2  Character Shapes
At the head of each entry, the character shape is given large in the standard printed 
shape for modern Japanese. Th e larger shape to the right of that represents a brush-
written equivalent of aesthetic merit. When writing by hand in the modern period, 
the writing brush has been superseded in the everyday usage of individuals by and 
large by other more convenient writing instruments such as the fountain pen and 
ballpoint pen. Use of the writing brush is, however, still maintained very actively 
in the realm of calligraphy. Readers who need everyday model shapes drawn by 
pen are referred to A Guide to Reading and Writing Japanese (see Bibliography). 
Regarding the process of script reform which involved many changes and led to the 
standard character shapes in modern Japanese, detailed information can be found 
in Chapters 8 and 9 of A History of Writing in Japan. 
Within the text of each entry, the traditional printed form (shape) of a character 
is normally given where this is diff erent from the standard printed form for mod-

Introduction  21
ern Japanese. For example, the traditional equivalent corresponding to 旧 ‘old, past’ 
(entry 677) is 舊. In some cases the diff erence in shape between the traditional form 
and the modern form is very minor. One example of this is 道 ‘road’ (entry 205), for 
which the traditional form has 辶 as determinative in contrast to modern standard 
usage in which it has been changed to 辶. Another example is 者 ‘person’ (entry 
314), which in the traditional form has an extra stroke in the form of a dot. In a case 
such as this, where the diff erence is judged to be insignifi cant for explaining the ety-
mology, we do not always list the traditional form separately. Incidentally, treatment 
of characters involving a very small diff erence in shape between the traditional and 
modern forms is not always consistent in the Jōyō kanji list itself: in 箸 ‘chopsticks’ 
(entry 1853), for instance, 者 has a dot as in its traditional form, whereas as an inde-
pendent character in the list 者 has no dot. It is worth remarking here that there is a 
note appended to the list to the eff ect that very minor variation in shape of this type 
(where it is also within the accepted boundaries of shape variation for a particular 
character) is permissible in actual usage. Th is appears to be mainly to allow for the 
fact that such minor diff erences are sometimes not recognized in the modern com-
puterized printed fonts. 
7.3  Readings, Meanings, Stroke Count
Each entry has the on and/or kun reading(s) given to the right of the character at the 
head of the entry. Beneath the readings are given the English translation and stroke 
count. Beneath the translation and stroke count, examples are given of compounds 
in which the character concerned is used. Bear in mind that the meanings given to 
the elements that make up the individual characters in this book are based on ety-
mology and therefore may diff er from meanings found in a modern character dic-
tionary such as Nelson’s Th e Modern Reader’s Japanese-English Character Dictionary. 
An example of this is 壬, originally a pictograph of a spinning spool or spool-shaped 
toy, which is listed in Nelson’s Dictionary as the ‘9th calendar sign’; this is because 
Nelson is focused on the modern meaning, not the historical etymology.
7.4  OBI, Bronze, and Seal Forms
Most entries start off  by giving one or more early forms consisting of OBI, bronze, 
and/or seal equivalents, depending on how far back a particular character can be 
traced. Scholars oft en vary as to whether they recognize an OBI or bronze form for 
a given character, and this can happen sometimes with the seal forms too, depend-
ing on whether a particular form is accepted as a genuine earlier equivalent. For this 
reason, the inclusion of an OBI, bronze, or seal form should be taken as a guide only. 
If such a form is given, it is included as a representative shape: it does not necessarily 
mean that other shapes for that character at that same stage do not exist. Rather, it 

22  Introduction
refl ects the reality that in this book it is not practical to list or explore all the varying 
early shapes identifi ed for one and the same character. 
7.5 System of Cross-Referencing
In the explanatory text to many entries, readers will see numbers immediately fol-
lowing character components; these are intended to serve as a system of cross-refer-
encing. To illustrate this, let us look at 空 (character no.17). Th is is made up of the 
two elements 穴 ‘hole, cave’ and 工 ‘work’, which themselves occur as character en-
tries 860 and 125 respectively, hence the text explaining 空 refers to those same two 
elements as ‘穴 860’ and ‘工 125’. Numbers such as these are the main system of ref-
erencing and cross-referencing in this book. An example of this is 夏 88 ‘summer’: 
in this entry the traditional form is noted as having determinative no.35 夊 as the 
lower element, whereas the standard modern form has a diff erent element of similar 
shape, i.e., determinative no.34 夂. Readers of this book need not overly concern 
themselves with the system of 214 determinatives, which is used in most Japanese 
character dictionaries today just as it has been for some centuries. Nelson’s diction-
ary utilises a modifi ed version of the 214 determinative system which provides some 
ingenious modifi cations making it convenient for the modern user, albeit at the cost 
of obliterating a small number of signifi cant traditional diff erences.
7.6  Individual Etymologies; Mnemonics
Sometimes the explanation of a particular character is a clear-cut one, indicating 
general agreement regarding the etymology concerned. Oft en, though, scholars 
vary in their analysis of a specifi c character, in which case several or more diff erent 
interpretations are given. Th e abbreviated references at or towards the end of the ex-
planation for each character indicate the scholars whose work has been referred to. 
Where several diff erent interpretations are given, they should be taken as examples 
of varying opinion rather than an exhaustive listing of all opinions. In the course of 
compiling the explanations for the 2,136 character entries in this book, discussion 
and comments have been included as judged appropriate. Some entries have more 
detailed discussion added in the form of a note, given before the references; readers 
who are looking for less detail need not concern themselves with the notes.
Feedback from the original edition of this book shows that many readers fi nd 
mnemonics helpful for memorizing characters. For readers who need this feature, 
a mnemonic is included at the bottom of each and every entry. Note carefully that 
the mnemonic is intended purely to help memorize the character shape; it does not 
necessarily refl ect the actual etymology of the character concerned.

Introduction  23
8  Sources Used and Terminology in This Book 
8.1  Sources Used
Th e early and pre-modern dictionaries introduced were referred to as noted above 
(Section 5), extensively so in the case of Shuowen jiezi and Kangxi zidian. Exten-
sive use was made also of work by Japanese and Chinese scholars, particularly the 
former. Just a few will be singled out for mention here. For OBI and bronze forms, 
Mizukami’s Kōkotsu kinbun jiten was particularly helpful, as it makes use of primary 
material from the Chinese Academy of Sciences such as that contained in 甲骨文編 
Jiaguwen bian (Collected Oracle Bone Characters; J.: Kōkotsubun hen), and 金文編 
Jinwen bian (Collected Bronze Characters; J.: Kinbun hen) (one of several editions). 
For clerical script, Sano’s Mokkan jiten was invaluable. For word-families in Chinese, 
Tōdō’s Kanji gogen jiten was an important source. Among works by Chinese schol-
ars, Qiu’s Wenzixue gaiyao (referred to in its English translation: Chinese Writing) 
provided many insights, and Gu’s Hanzi yuanliu zidian (Dictionary of Origin and 
Development of Chinese Characters) was helpful for many relatively obscure charac-
ters and its analyses. In English, the work by Schuessler entitled ABC Etymological 
Dictionary of Old Chinese oft en provided a useful perspective from the viewpoint of 
reconstructed linguistic forms. Works such as the above have been noted as refer-
ences to individual entries where they were used; in addition, Satō’s Kanji hyakka 
daijiten was of considerable general use overall. 
8.2  Terminology in This Book (arranged alphabetically)
Character and graph are used only for stylistic variation, and without any signifi -
cant diff erence of meaning. Th ey refer to the symbols known in Japanese as 漢字
kanji and in Chinese as 漢字/汉字 hanzi.
CO Chinese-only characters: see under NJK.
Complex graph/character refers to a character which can be analyzed into two or 
more meaningful elements, e.g. 因 can be divided into 囗 ‘enclose, surround’ (de-
terminative 31) and 大 56 ‘big’, as opposed to 竹, which cannot be broken down into 
smaller elements each of which has meaning.
Compound graph/character: see Complex graph/character.
‘Determinative’ refers to a recurrent element (character shape), usually meaningful, 
and typically within the set of 214 such elements fi rst set out in the Zihui dictionary 
published in China in 1615. Determinatives can occur as independent characters 
(there are one or two exceptions such as 艸 ‘plants, vegetation’, which occurs only in 

24  Introduction
compound characters, in the form 艹), or as elements in compound characters such 
as 木 73 ‘tree’ in 松 536 ‘pine tree’. Th e term ‘radical’ has traditionally been used in 
the past for ‘determinative’, but is less preferable because the meaning ‘root’ inher-
ent in the etymology of the word ‘radical’ suggests that an element so labelled has 
been a feature of a compound graph from the outset, whereas in almost all cases the 
determinative/radical was added later, as explained in Section 2 above (‘Formational 
Principles of the Chinese Script’).
Element and graph element are used without signifi cant diff erence of meaning. 
Either term may refer either to a constituent part of a particular graph which can 
occur only as a dependent element, e.g. 氵 ‘water’ as part of a more complex graph 
such as 海 94 ‘sea’, or to a constituent element in a compound graph which can occur 
independently, e.g. 耳 31 ‘ear’ in 聞 219 ‘hear’.
Homomorphic means ‘having the same shape’. Used in those cases (relatively rare) 
where two graphs with diff erent meanings coincide in shape.
Morpheme is a minimal grammatical unit (sometimes referred to as a minimal unit 
of meaning) which forms the building block of words. To give an example from Eng-
lish, ‘book’ is one morpheme and also one word, but ‘books’ is one word but two 
morphemes, since it can be broken down into two functional units (morphemes), 
viz. ‘book’ and ‘-s’ (noun plural marker). A particular morpheme is not always pro-
nounced the same: in the word ‘eggs’, for instance, the noun plural marker is pro-
nounced as if it were written ‘z’.
NJK, meaning non-Jōyō kanji, is used in this book to refer to characters which are 
not included in the expanded Jōyō kanji list of 2010 (2,136 characters) but are in-
cluded in Nelson’s Japanese-English Character Dictionary (ca. 5,400 characters). Th e 
purpose of this is to recognize that there are many characters outside the Jōyō kanji 
list which can sometimes be encountered in modern Japanese texts. Th is is admit-
tedly only a ‘rough and ready’ arrangement, for two reasons. Firstly, the Nelson dic-
tionary includes various characters which the reader is very unlikely to encounter 
in modern Japanese texts, e.g. 龠 ‘fl ute’, which is included necessarily because it 
is one of the 214 determinatives (or ‘radicals’, as Nelson calls them, following the 
older terminology). Secondly, ‘NJK’ is a term used in this book to contrast with ‘CO’, 
meaning ‘Chinese only’ (either modern or pre-modern texts). What this means is 
only that CO characters are not listed in the Nelson dictionary; this by itself is no 
guarantee that CO characters will never appear in a modern Japanese text. Despite 

Introduction  25
these provisos, it is thought that the designations NJK and CO will still be of some 
value to the reader as a general indication.
Phonetic with associated sense: refers to the phonetic element in a compound 
graph, with the phonetic element also having a semantic function, but one which  
typically is diff erent from its usual dictionary meaning; this diff erent meaning is due 
in a particular case to a connection to a word-family in Chinese. For instance, 扱 
1012 ‘handle, treat as’ consists of 扌 34 ‘hand’ and 及1202 ‘reach’; 及 functions here 
as phonetic with the associated sense ‘take in, gather’, and not in its usual diction-
ary sense ‘handle, treat as’. Another example is 男, consisting of 力 78 ‘strength’ and
田 63 ‘rice-fi eld, paddy fi eld’, but here involving 田 as phonetic with the associated 
sense ‘endure’. If further details and examples are needed, see ‘Word-Families and 
the Chinese Script’ (Section 3 above).
Traditional form: in the case of modern Japanese, refers to older character shapes 
based on those in printed versions of Kangxi zidian which were adopted in early 
offi  cial Japanese government lists such as the fi rst Jōyō kanji list of 1923 (1,962 char-
acters) and then abbreviated in the Tōyō kanji list of 1946 (1,850 characters) and 
later offi  cial lists including the Kaitei Jōyō kanji list of 2010 (2,136 characters). In 
some cases, there are diff erences in the shape of a graph between Kangxi zidian and 
the fi rst Jōyō kanji List of 1923. Th ere is, in other words, a degree of looseness in the 
term ‘traditional form’. See also ‘Printed Texts and the Calligraphic Tradition’ (Sec-
tion 6 above).
Variant (or variant form) is used primarily to refer to an alternative shape for a 
particular character, e.g. 髙 is an alternative shape for 高132 ‘tall, high’. Such variants 
are described in relation to a norm such as the Kangxi zidian or the Jōyō kanji list of 
2010. What constitutes a variant can diff er according to the period and the country 
or jurisdiction, and so what is presented as the norm in terms of character shape in 
Kangxi zidian oft en diff ers from the norm in the 2010 Jōyō kanji list. ‘Variant’ is also 
sometimes used in this book to refer to the alternative shape(s) of a determinative 
when occurring as an element in a compound graph, e.g. 火 8 ‘fi re’ changes in shape 
to 灬 in 煮 1431 ‘boil, cook’.

26  Introduction
Limitations of This Book
Th is book does not seek to be a comprehensive dictionary of characters as used 
in Japanese: its scope is limited in principle to the 2,136 characters of the Revised 
General Character (Kaitei Jōyō kanji) List offi  cially adopted in Japan in 2010, though 
in the process of explaining the etymologies for that list many other characters are 
analyzed for the benefi t of those readers looking for greater detail.  Nor does it deal 
with the now relatively minor irregularities of kana spelling in the modern kana 
spellings. Readers who are looking for model shapes as a guide for everyday writing 
practice and other information such as stroke order and stroke count should refer 
to A Guide to Reading and Writing Japanese, which is another work in the Tuttle 
Language Library.
Christopher Seeley
Christchurch, New Zealand
December 2015

  27
The Japanese Writing System: 
A Brief Sketch
Beginnings
Th e fi rst contact of the Japanese with writing was when items such as inscribed 
coins, swords, and bronze mirrors were brought over from China in the fi rst few 
centuries AD. Th e writing that was brought over to Japan at that period was no 
diff erent from the writing in China itself, i.e., Chinese characters, used to write the 
Chinese language. Initially, it would have been diffi  cult for the Japanese even to un-
derstand the nature and function of writing, as this was something completely new. 
Over time, though, they started to become familiar with the concept of writing and 
subsequently learned—with the help of teachers and scribes from China and the 
ancient Korean kingdoms—to write in what for them was a foreign language.  Th is, 
of course, was a formidable task, due partly to the very great diff erences between 
the Chinese and Japanese languages. In addition, there was the intricate nature of 
the Chinese script. Gradually, though, the Chinese script was adapted for Japanese. 
One relatively simple way of doing this was sometimes to use characters just for 
their sound value to write Japanese directly. So, for instance, we fi nd the Japanese 
word yama ‘mountain’ represented in the eighth-century poetry anthology called 
Man’yōshū as 夜麻, using 夜 not for its meaning ‘night’ but purely for its on reading 
( i.e., Chinese-based sound value) YA, and 麻 not for its meaning ‘fl ax, hemp’ but 
similarly for its on reading MA. Many of the Man’yōshū poems are in fact written 
entirely in this way. Using Chinese characters in this way to write Japanese worked 
and was quite straightforward, but it was a rather longwinded method for texts of 
any length; we fi nd this point noted in the preface to the Kojiki (Record of Ancient 
Matters) of 712 AD.
Development of Kana (Japanese Syllabic Signs) 
Characters employed just for their sound value oft en came to be written quite rap-
idly for economy of eff ort, and this led to simpler shapes. Th is meant, for example, 

28  The Japanese Writing System: A Brief Sketch
that the word kuruma ‘vehicle’ might be written in a ninth century text simply as く
るま rather than more elaborately as 久留末 (on readings: KU-RU-MA), and in the 
same way nusa ‘prayer strip’ could be written effi  ciently as ぬさ instead of as 奴左 
(on readings: NU-SA). Th is, in fact, was the basic process by which the cursive-type 
syllabic signs called hiragana evolved. What later evolved as the other set of Japa-
nese syllabic signs called katakana also came about for the same reason of writing 
effi  ciency, but by a substantially diff erent process: shape simplifi cation was achieved 
largely not by writing rapidly, but by omitting part of a Chinese character used for 
its sound value. For example, whereas the hiragana sign for ka, derived from 加 (on 
reading: KA), represented the whole of that character (both left  and right elements) 
in the shape か, the katakana sign for the same syllable (ka) evolved from the same 
character (加) by omitting all of the right-hand side, resulting in カ. Th e katakana 
sign リ (ri) evolved in much the same way, in this case taking just the right-hand 
side of 利 (on reading: RI) (for further information, see kana appendix). Although 
at the earliest stage signs of both the hiragana and katakana type were used together, 
gradually there developed a tendency to use them in diff erent contexts. Hiragana 
script tended to acquire an association of aesthetic refi nement, and was oft en used 
for native Japanese prose and poetry, while katakana were employed in a more utili-
tarian and auxiliary way to indicate verb endings, grammatical function words and 
the like.
Beginnings of Mixed Kanji-Kana Text
Examples of texts written mostly or entirely in kana can be found dating back to 
about the ninth century, though it should be noted that for many centuries—unlike 
today—there was considerable variation in the actual shapes. However, while kana 
script was easy to learn and a practical tool, it lacked the enormous prestige that 
was associated with the Chinese script and Chinese culture in most periods of pre-
modern Japan. Also, there were many Chinese terms borrowed into Japanese, and it 
tended to be more straightforward to use the corresponding Chinese characters to 
write them. For reasons such as these, especially for documents of an offi  cial nature, 
the Japanese oft en wrote not in Japanese using kana (or a combination of characters 
and kana), but either in Chinese, which of course meant using only Chinese char-
acters and in the way they would be used by native Chinese writers, or—probably 
more frequently—in an imitation of written Chinese which was infl uenced to some 
extent by the diff ering structure of the Japanese language. For the Japanese, writ-
ing in Chinese or attempting to do so was surely a daunting exercise, and so it was 
no doubt a natural development that at some point texts should appear that had a 
Chinese ‘look’ but included a small number of kana-like signs, commonly written 

The Japanese Writing System: A Brief Sketch  29
smaller than the Chinese characters making up most of the text so as to help the 
reader understand it as Japanese. In broad terms, it was this sort of development that 
marked the very beginning of what was to evolve as the mixed kanji-kana writing 
used in Japan today.
The Modern Period
When Japan began actively to adopt various aspects of Western culture and mod-
ernize from the latter part of the nineteenth century onwards, some intellectuals ex-
pressed feelings of doubt over the very complicated way Japanese was written com-
pared with the marvellous simplicity of the Roman alphabet which allowed any and 
every thought to be put in writing by means of no more than several dozen letters. 
Eventually, though, such doubts were set aside, and the Japanese persevered with a 
hugely intricate writing system which involved not only thousands of characters in 
their traditional, oft en very complicated, shapes, but also a very involved histori-
cal system of kana spellings. Th is changed aft er the end of the Pacifi c War in 1945, 
though, when Japanese society experienced many radical changes. Amongst them 
was script simplifi cation. Starting in 1946, script reforms were carried out, promot-
ing the use of a restricted character set of 1850 and a far simpler system of kana us-
age based on modern pronunciation.
Broadly speaking, the script reforms put into eff ect from the late 1940s have been 
maintained down to the present, though with a degree of easing. For example, the 
number of general-use characters has been increased, fi rst from 1850 to 1945 (in 
1981) and then to 2136 (in 2010). Developments in computer technology from the 
1970s onwards have tended to make it easier to write Japanese text using a larger 
character set, as passive confi rmation of characters by the writer by selecting from a 
list of options on a computer screen is easier than active recall from memory when 
writing by hand. Computer technology has also greatly assisted the printing of Japa-
nese text, both privately by individuals and commercially. 
As should be clear from the above, Chinese characters have been an integral part 
of Japanese culture for a period of about fi ft een hundred years, and their importance 
is undiminished today. Many characters are used in senses diff erent from in Chi-
nese, and some have been simplifi ed in shape in a way diff erent from the simplifi ed 
equivalents in PRC Chinese texts. For these reasons, while the Japanese word kanji 
(漢字) is commonly and validly translated as ‘Chinese characters’, in the context of 
Japanese it is equally valid to render it instead as ‘Japanese characters’, as in the title 
to this book. 
Note: readers wanting more details are referred to CS2000 (see Bibliography).

30  
Hiragana and Katakana and Their Source Characters 
A
מ
from
A
ص
from
I
נ
from
I
ط
from
U
ע
from
U
ع
from
E
פ
from
E
ػ
from
O
צ
from
O
ؽ
from
KA ק
from
KA ؾ
from
KI ש
from
KI ـ
from
KU ׫
from
KU ق
from
KE ׭
from
KE ل
from
KO ׯ
from
KO ن
from
SA ױ
from
SA و
from
SHI ׳
from
SHI ي
from
SU ׵
from
SU ٌ
from
SE ׷
from
SE َ
from

Hiragana and Katakana and Their Source Characters   31
Hiragana
Katakana
SO ׹
from
SO ِ
from
TA ׻
from
TA ْ
from
CHI ׽
from
CHI ٔ
from
TSU ؀
derivation unclear TSU ٗ
derivation unclear
TE ؂
from
TE ٙ
from
TO ؄
from
TO ٛ
from
NA ؆
from
NA ٝ
from
NI ؇
from
NI ٞ
from
NU ؈
from
NU ٟ
from
NE ؉
from
NE ٠
from
NO ؊
from
NO ١
from
HA ؋
from
HA ٢
from
HI ؎
from
HI ٥
from
FU ؑ
from
FU ٨
from
HE ؔ
from
HE ٫
from

32  Hiragana and Katakana and Their Source Characters 
Hiragana
Katakana
HO ؗ
from
HO ٮ
from
MA ؚ
from
MA ٱ
from
MI ؛
from
MI ٲ
from
MU ؜
from
MU ٳ
from
ME ؝
from
ME ٴ
from
MO ؞
from
MO ٵ
from
YA ؠ
from
YA ٷ
from
YU آ
from
YU ٹ
from
YO ؤ
from
YO ٻ
from
RA إ
from
RA ټ
from
RI ئ
from
RI ٽ
from
RU ا
from
RU پ
from
RE ب
from
RE ٿ
from
RO ة
from
RO ڀ
from
WA ث
from
WA ڂ
from

Hiragana and Katakana and Their Source Characters   33
Hiragana
Katakana
(W)O خ from
(W)O څ from
N
د from
N
چ arbitrary symbol
Other syllables (given in hiragana only)
ga
が
gi
ぎ
gu
ぐ
ge
げ
go
ご
za
ざ
ji
じ
zu
ず
ze
ぜ
zo
ぞ
da
だ
ji
ぢ
zu
づ
de
で
do
ど
ba
ば
bi
び
bu
ぶ
be
べ
bo
ぼ
pa
ぱ
pi
ぴ
pu
ぷ
pe
ぺ
po
ぽ
kya
きゃ
kyu
きゅ
kyo
きょ
sha
しゃ
shu
しゅ
sho
しょ
cha
ちゃ
chu
ちゅ
cho
ちょ
nya
にゃ
nyu
にゅ
nyo
にょ
hya
ひゃ
hyu
ひゅ
hyo
ひょ
mya
みゃ
myu
みゅ
myo
みょ
rya
りゃ
ryu
りゅ
ryo
りょ
gya
ぎゃ
gyu
ぎゅ
gyo
ぎょ
ja
じゃ
ju
じゅ
jo
じょ
bya
びゃ
byu
びゅ
byo
びょ
pya
ぴゃ
pyu
ぴゅ
pyo
ぴょ
Syllables ending in long vowel ō shown by adding ぅ (rarely お). 
Syllables ending in long vowel ū shown by adding ぅ.
Double consonants shown by small-sized っ.

34  
The 214 Determinatives 
(or ‘Radicals’) System
Note 1: Th is system was fi rst employed in the Zihui dictionary of 1615 and then 
adopted as standard in later character dictionaries, replacing the highly innovative 
but unwieldy system of 540 determinatives known as  部首 (J. bushu, Ch. bushou) 
used in the Shuowen jiezi (ca.100AD), the earliest extant complete character dic-
tionary compiled in China. Th e 214 system has been used now for some centuries 
and continues to be a familiar framework of arrangement for characters in Japan 
and China, sometimes found with modifi cations, especially in the People’s Republic 
of China. Th e popular character dictionary Xinhua zidian (New Chinese Character 
Dictionary), published there from 1953 onwards, for example, employs a modifi ed 
system of 189 determinatives. Below is the full list of the 214 determinatives still 
widely used in Japanese character dictionaries today. In some instances the English 
equivalent is just a convenient label, not a translation. 
Note 2: While used widely as a system of arrangement in character dictionaries, the 
traditional system of 214 determinatives is not the main referencing system used in 
this book, in which the numbers for characters and character elements relate to the 
individual entries. For details, see Introduction (Section 7.6).
Note 3: Cross-reference numbers under ‘Alternative forms/nicknames/comments’ 
below relate only to the numbered determinatives in the list below, not to entry 
numbers in the main part of this book.

The 214 Determinatives (or ‘Radicals’)  System   35
No.
English
Alternative forms/nickname/comments
1 
一 one
2 
丨 
rod
3 
丶 dot
4 
丿 ‘kana no’
5 
乙 fi shhook 
乚
6 
亅 barb
7 
二 two
8 
亠 lid
9 
人 person 
亻𠂉
10 
儿 person variant 
nickname: bent legs
11 
入 entering
12 
八 eight, split, separate
13 
冂 box cover
14 
冖 a cover 
15 
冫 ice
16 
几 table enclosure
17 
凵 open box
18 
刀 knife, sword 
刂
19 
力 strength
20 
勹 wrapping enclosure
21 
匕 
ladle 
CO 匕 is separate graph element
22 
匚 box on side
23 
匸 box projects out 
24 
十 cross
25 
卜 divination
26 
卩 kneeling person
27 
厂 cliff 
28 
厶 self, ‘kana mu’
29 
又 (right) hand 
30 
口 mouth
31 
囗 ‘country’ enclosure
32 
土 earth
33 
士 warrior
34 
夂 descending foot 
nickname: crossed legs
35 
夊 walk slowly/drag foot 
36 
夕 evening
37 
大 big
38 
女 woman

36  The 214 Determinatives (or ‘Radicals’)  System
No.
English
Alternative forms/nickname/comments
39 
子 child
40 
宀 roof
 41 
寸 3-stroke hand 
42 
小 small
43 
尢 crooked leg
44 
尸 corpse/lying fi gure
45 
屮 single plant 
46 
山 mountain
47 
川 river
48 
工 carpenter’s square
49 
己 self
50 
巾 cloth
51 
干 dry
52 
幺 fi ne/small thread
53 
广 roof, building
54 
廴 move, go 
55 
廾 raise up
56 
弋 stake, weapon handle
57 
弓 bow
58 
彐 animal head
59 
彡 adorn, brush hairs, etc.
60 
彳 crossroads, go
61 
心 heart, mind 
忄
62 
戈 halberd
63 
戸 door
64 
手 hand 
扌
65 
支 branch, support
66 
攴 strike with stick, etc. 
攵
67 
文 pattern, writing
68 
斗 ladle 
69 
斤 axe
70 
方 side, direction
71 
旡 choking fi gure
72 
日 
sun, day
73 
曰 speak 
74 
月 
moon
75 
木 tree
76 
欠 yawn, open mouth

The 214 Determinatives (or ‘Radicals’)  System   37
No.
English
Alternative forms/nickname/comments
77 
止 stop
78 
歹 skeletal bones
79 
殳 attack with weapon
80 
毋 not violate woman 
母 ‘mother’ is diff erent graph
81 
比 compare
82 
毛 hair, fur
83 
氏 Mr., clan
84 
气 vapor
85 
水 water, liquid 
氵
86 
火 fi re 
灬
87 
爪 claw, hand 
爫; distinguish 爪 from 瓜 (det. 97)
88 
父 father
89 
爻 mix
90 
爿 boards (for bed, etc.)
91 
片 one side (of tree [木])
92 
牙 fang, tusk
93 
牛 cow 
牜
94 
犬 dog 
犭
95 
玄 dark
96 
玉 jade, jewel 
dot oft en omitted (compound graphs)
97 
瓜 melon 
distinguish from 爪 (det. 87)
98 
瓦 tile
99 
甘 sweet
100 
生 birth, life, raw
101 
用 use
102 
田 fi eld
103 
疋 leg variant
104 
疒 sickness
105 
癶 spring from, start
106 
白 white
107 
皮 skin, hide
108 
皿 bowl
109 
目 eye 
occasionally 罒; see also 网 (det. 122)
110 
矛 spear, halberd
111 
矢 arrow
112 
石 stone
113 
示 altar, show 
礻
114 
禸 creature with tail

38  The 214 Determinatives (or ‘Radicals’)  System
No.
English
Alternative forms/nickname/comments
115 
禾 grain plant
116 
穴 cave, hole
117 
立 stand
118 
竹 bamboo
119 
米 rice
120 
糸 thread
121 
缶 earthen jar, can
122 
网 net 
common in compound graphs, written 罒
123 
羊 sheep
124 
羽 wings, feathers 
125 
老 old
126 
而 beard, whiskers
127 
耒 plough
128 
耳 ear
129 
聿 writing brush
130 
肉 meat, fl esh, body (part) 月
131 
臣 minister, retainer, slave
132 
自 
self
133 
至 arrive
134 
臼 mortar, mill
135 
舌 tongue
136 
舛 opposing feet
137 
舟 boat 
月
138 
艮 look backwards
139 
色 colour
140 
艸 plants, vegetation 
always occurs as 艹 (traditional: 
) 
141 
虍 tiger
142 
虫 insect
143 
血 blood
144 
行 go
145 
衣 garment 
衤
146 
西 west 
覀/襾 ’stopper’ is separate from 西 ‘west’
147 
見 see
148 
角 horn
149 
言 words, say
150 
谷 valley
151 
豆  beans
152 
豕 boar, pig

The 214 Determinatives (or ‘Radicals’)  System   39
No.
English
Alternative forms/nickname/comments
153 
豸 threatening beast
154 
貝 shellfi sh, shell
155 
赤 red
156 
走 run
157 
足 leg, foot 
𧾷
158 
身 body
159 
車 vehicle
160 
辛 sharp, bitter
161 
辰 Dragon (zodiac sign)
162 
辵 walk (along road) 
occurs in short form 辶 (traditional: 辶)
163 
邑 settlement, village 
occurs on right in short form阝
164 
酉 wine (jar), zodiac sign
165 
釆 scatter seed
166 
里  village
167 
金 metal
168 
長 long
169 
門 gate 
distinguish from 鬥 ‘fi ghting’ (det. 191)
170 
阜 hill, mound, terracing 
occurs on left  in short form阝
171 
隶 catch
172 
隹 (short-tailed) bird
173 
雨 rain, weather
174 
青 blue, green
175 
非 not
176 
面 face, surface
177 
革 leather
178 
韋 surround, oppose
179 
韭 leek
180 
音 sound
181 
頁 head, page
182 
風 wind
183 
飛 fl y
184 
食 food, eat 
in compound graphs飠or 𩙿
185 
首 neck
186 
香 fragrance
187 
馬 horse
188 
骨 bone
189 
高  high
190 
髟 hair

40  The 214 Determinatives (or ‘Radicals’)  System
No.
English
Alternative forms/nickname/comments
191 
鬥 fi ghting 
distinguish from 門 ‘gate’ (det. 169)
192 
鬯 fragrant herbs
193 
鬲 cauldron (bulbous)
194 
鬼 demon
195 
魚 fi sh
196 
鳥 bird
197 
鹵 salt
198 
鹿 deer
199 
麥 wheat
200 
麻 fl ax, hemp
201 
黄 yellow
202 
黍 millet
203 
黒 black
204 
黹 sewing
205 
黽 frog
206 
鼎 cauldron
207 
鼓 drum
208 
鼠 rat
209 
鼻 nose
210 
齊 complete, equal
211 
齒 tooth
212 
龍 dragon
213 
龜 tortoise, turtle
214 
龠 fl ute

  41
General Principles of Stroke Order
Th ough there are inevitably a number of exceptions, most characters are written 
according to established principles of stroke order. A knowledge of these princi-
ples is important in order to achieve the proper shape and to write in the cursive 
style or semi-cursive style, in which normally separate strokes fl ow into one another. 
Th e basic principles listed below were issued by the Ministry of Education in 1958, 
and are considered the most authoritative. Th e guidelines apply either to individual 
strokes or to the arrangement of component elements, as the case may be. Th e fi rst 
two are especially important.
1. Top to bottom.
 
three 25 
 
word 118 
 
guest 270 
2. Left  to right.
 
province 320 
 
faction 965 
 
example 635 
3. Horizontal strokes usually precede vertical strokes when crossing.
 
ten 35 
 
earth 64 
 
till 699 

42  General Principles of Stroke Order
4. However, in a few cases vertical strokes precede horizontal ones.
 
king 5 
 
fi eld 63 
 
bend 279 
5. Centre usually precedes right and left  where the latter do not exceed two strokes 
each.
 
small 38 
 
water 42 
 
receive 736 
 
Note the two exceptions are the heart radical 
 and fi re 
. 
6.  Outer frame fi rst, but bottom line last.
 
country 136 
 
sun 66 
 
moon 18 
 
Note the order of 
, with the left -hand stroke joined to the bottom 
(e.g. 
). 
7.  Right-to-left  diagonal stroke precedes left -to-right.
 
person 41 
 
father 216 
 
again 2003 
8.  Central vertical line last.
 
middle 59 
 
vehicle 33 
 
thing 309 

General Principles of Stroke Order   43
9.  Strokes which cut through come last.
 
woman 37 
 
child 27 
 
boat 1450 
 
Note that the only exception is 
.
Th e following pointers should also be observed.
a. squares are written with three strokes not four 
 
b. vertical strokes should not slope, (e.g. 
 not 
)
c. horizontal strokes may slope, but should be parallel (e.g. 
)
d. characters should be of uniform size.

44  
Editorial and Typographical 
Matters; Romanization
As indicated in 7.2 in the Introduction, for each character entry we show in the top 
left  corner of the frame its number in the sequence of the corpus of 2,136. Directly 
underneath we give a number from L1 to L5, which indicates the level of the Japa-
nese Profi ciency Test (JLPT)—level 5 being the lowest, and level 1 being the highest. 
Unfortunately there seems to be some diffi  culty in obtaining full data on these levels, 
and we have been obliged to make our own estimates in some cases. On the right-
hand side of the sequence number and the JLPT level, we give the character. 
To the right of the character, we give three identifi ers, namely pronunciations/ 
readings on the top line, English meanings below, and stroke count below that. 
In the readings we indicate the unvarying earlier part of verbs and adjectives in 
standard (non-italic) case, and show the end-syllable(s) to be written in kana by 
using italicized lower case. Th us, for example, 決 (‘decide’ / ‘be decided’, entry 289), 
which can be transitive or intransitive, is given as ‘kimeru/kimaru’ to indicate that 
the end-syllables should be written in kana (okurigana) as 決める / 決まる. Th ere 
can be variation in okurigana usage (e.g. hikikomori ‘children staying at home’ can 
be written as 引き籠もり, 引き籠り, or 引籠り), though modern practice does tend 
towards an explicit model. Note that some characters have numerous readings and 
meanings, potentially causing space problems. Sometimes, such as with the char-
acter下 (shita ‘below’, entry 7), readings can extend over several lines. (Also, for 
considerations of spacing within the frames it has been necessary sometimes to use 
abbreviated English forms, such as ‘assoc sense’ for ‘associated sense’, and for the 
same reason an informal semi-note style is employed sometimes in the main ex-
planatory text of entries.)
Beneath the readings, English meanings, and stroke count, we give three 
example compounds for each character, where possible trying to illustrate its range 
of meanings and readings. In these compounds the Sino-Japanese (on) elements 
(‘readings’) are indicated by upper case, and the native Japanese ones (kun) by 
lower case (it is not uncommon to have a mix of the two in one word, e.g. 茶の湯 

Editorial and Typographical Matters; Romanization   45
CHAnoyu ‘tea ceremony’, hence the upper and lower case combination). Western 
loanwords also use upper case, e.g., パン屋 PANya “baker(y).” (PAN “bread” is 
from Portuguese.) An asterisk against a romanized form indicates that the way of 
reading the characters (or one of the characters) concerned is irregular, e.g. 部屋 
heya* ‘room’, in which 部 BU (‘part, section’) has the irregular reading he. Changes 
in pronunciation such as consonantal change in non-initial position, e.g. k changing 
to g (as in 筒型 tsutsugata ‘cylindrical’ [cf. kata ‘mold’]) or h to b (as in 火曜日 
kayōbi ‘Tuesday’ [cf. hi ‘day’]) are not treated as irregular, and on the whole are not 
specifi cally noted in the readings, as we assume that readers have at least a basic level 
of familiarity with the Japanese language. 
In this book, for Japanese we use a modifi ed Hepburn system. Th e syllabic nasal 
(the element written ん or ンin kana) is represented in Sino-Japanese by the letter N 
or n followed by an apostrophe where necessary to avoid ambiguity.  An example of 
this is 単位, which is romanized as TAN’I to show that it is the word (of three short 
syllables, たんいin kana) meaning ‘unit’ as opposed to the word tani ‘valley’ (two 
short syllables, たに in kana). Th e long vowel equivalents of o and u are indicated 
by a macron, as in tōri ‘road’.
For modern Chinese we use Pinyin romanization, with the tone marks omitted 
for typographical simplicity (an exception is ‘Peking Palace’ [not ‘Beijing Palace’], 
as here the older spelling seems entrenched). For early stages of Chinese we have 
followed the system employed by Schuessler, though modifi ed in some cases to 
make it more readily understood by readers without a linguistic background.


THE KANJI

THE 80 FIRST GRADE CHARACTERS
一月 
ICHIGATSU   January
均一 KIN’ITSU   uniformity
一人 hitori*   one person
右派 
UHA   rightist faction
左右 
SAYŪ   control
右手 
migite   right hand
雨季 
UKI   rainy season
大雨 
ōame   heavy rain
雨雲 
amagumo   rain cloud
A simple single stroke to represent ‘one’. 
Unsurprisingly, a similar convention was 
employed in ancient Egyptian hieroglyphic 
writing and in Sumerian cuneiform. References: 
SS1984:27; QX2000:32. 
Mnemonic:  ONE FINGER
Originally represented by 
, a stylized sketch 
of a hand. Other early but more complex 
forms show a hand on the right-hand side of 
what is widely interpreted as a mouth or – in a 
minority view (Shirakawa) – a ritual vessel 
/
口 22 . References: SS1984:36; BK1957:261-2; 
KJ1970:38; AS2007:581-2.
Mnemonic: RIGHT HAND TO THE MOUTH
OBI 
. Based on a conceptual depiction of 
rain, falling from the sky which is represented 
by a top horizontal line, though this line is often 
missing in the OBI and bronze forms. The graph 
can also indicate weather elements. References: 
SS1984:38; QX2000:208.
Mnemonic: RAIN FROM HEAVENLY CLOUDS
ICHI, ITSU, hito-
one
1 stroke
U, YŪ, migi
right
5 strokes
U, ame, ama-
rain
8 strokes
一
右
雨
L5
L5
L5
1
2
3
王子 
ŌJI   prince
女王 
JOŌ   queen
王様 
Ōsama   king
円形 
ENKEI   circle   
円高 
ENdaka   strong yen
百円 
HYAKUEN   hundred yen
bronze equivalents show a ritual blade of a 
type used only by those of high status such as a 
ruler. Qiu notes that at the seal script stage the 
character 王 and another separate character 
meaning ‘jewel’ were written so similarly that 
they could easily be confused, so a dot was 
added later for clarity when writing ‘jewel’ (see 
玉15). References: SS1984:62-3; QX2000:46.
Mnemonic: KING RULES WITH AN AX
(regularized shape for ‘circle’) with 員 248 (‘offi  -
cial’, originally ‘cauldron’) as phonetic; included by 
Tōdō in word-family meaning ‘round; surround’. 
円 may be based on a cursive form of 圓. Refer-
ences: YK1976:69; TA1965:63-4. We suggest 
taking the graph as resembling a bank teller’s 
window.
Mnemonic: ROUND YEN COINS AT THE BANK 
TELLER’S WINDOW
OBI 
 shows this graph to be based on a 
battle-ax blade. Shirakawa feels the OBI and 
The modern simplifi ed form of 圓, a relatively 
late graph (Shuowen) which consists of 囗
Ō
king, ruler
4 strokes
EN, marui
round, yen
4 strokes
王
円
L3
L5
5
4

The 80 First Grade Characters  49
Precise etymology disputed. Early bronze equi -
valent 
. The lower element is interpreted 
either as a mouth (Karlgren, Katō) or as a prayer 
A late character. The top element is the typical 
abbreviation 艹 of the ‘plant’ determinative 
艸 53 (itself based on a pictograph of plants 
growing), while the lower element 化 ‘change’ 
OBI  
. Mizukami suggests the curve was to 
help distinguish this character from early forms 
of 二 65 (‘two’). At some point, a vertical stroke 
音楽  ONGAKU   music
子音 
SHIIN   consonant
発音 
HATSUON   pronunciation
花弁 
KABEN   petal
花見 
hanami   blossom viewing
花火 
hanabi   fi reworks
下品 
GEHIN   vulgarity
低下 
TEIKA   decrease
川下 
kawashimo   downstream
火曜日  KAYŌbi   Tuesday
火山 
 KAZAN   volcano
火花 
 hibana   spark
receptacle. Shirakawa takes the latter view, 
and maintains that the (extra) horizontal stroke 
inside the receptacle represents a written 
prayer. Katō regards 音 and 言 (see ‘word’, 118) 
as having been used interchangeably in ancient 
times, though Karlgren treats them as having 
been separate. References: BK1957:173, 80; 
KJ1970:68; SS1984:68. We suggest taking 立 as 
‘rising’ 77 and 日 as ‘sun’ 66.
Mnemonic: SOUND OF THE RISING SUN
(see 258), serves as phonetic (associated sense 
here disputed), and is a pointer to the reading, 
which in modern Sino-Japanese is KA (also a 
phonetic indicator in 貨 KA 455, etc.). Accord-
ing to Shirakawa, the graph 花 was probably 
not devised in China until the early 5th century 
AD; Katō gives a wider timeframe, viz the Six 
Dynasties period (ca. 222-589AD). References: 
SS1984:72; KJ1970:315. 
Mnemonic: FLOWERS BLOSSOM WHEN 
PLANTS CHANGE
ON, IN, oto, ne
sound
9 strokes
KA, hana
fl ower, blossom
7 strokes
KA, GE, shita, moto, 
shimo, sageru, oriru, 
kudasaru 
under, lower
3 strokes
KA, hi
fi re
4 strokes
音
花
下
火
L4
L4
L5
L5
6
9
7
8
was added beneath the longer horizontal. Qiu 
feels this change was also for graphic distinc-
tion – in this case from the early forms of 上 39 
(‘above’), which was written with a short hori-
zontal stroke over a longer one to represent ‘go 
up, above’. Shirakawa takes the longer horizon-
tal line in early forms as depicting the palm of 
the hand (in profi le). References: BK1957:28; 
QX2000:46; MS1983:151; SS1984:69.
Mnemonic: T-BAR WITH DROOPY LOWER 
HANDLE UNDERNEATH
OBI 
 shows it to be based on a stylized 
sketch of a burning fi re. As a lower determina-
tive / element, it typically occurs as 灬. 
References: SS1984:70; KJ1970:953-4. 
Mnemonic: FLAMES OF FIRE

50  The 80 First Grade Characters
帆立貝  hotategai   scallop
貝殻 
 kaigara   seashell
貝類  kaiRUI   shellfi sh
times, shells were used as currency in China, 
and so as a component in more complex 
characters 貝 often serves a semantic role to 
indicate wealth, e.g. 財 712 ‘wealth, assets’. 
MR2007:347; KJ1970:759-60. Suggest remem-
bering by using 目 76 ‘eye’.
Mnemonic: SHELLFISH LOOKS LIKE AN EYE 
WITH FEELERS
OBI forms 
, 
; traditional (Kangxi) form 學. 
It has four elements, which on the basis of OBI 
and bronze forms Shirakawa takes as 爻冖⺽
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional 氣. According to 
Qiu, the traditional form 氣 was used from the 
Han dynasty onwards for 气 ‘vapor’, but this was 
in fact a loan use, as 氣is in origin a separate 
Etymology unclear. One earlier form is 
. On 
the basis of the corresponding ancient forms, 
assessed variously as representing the shapes 
kai
shell, shellfi sh
7 strokes
貝
学校 
GAKKŌ   school
化学 
KAGAKU   chemistry
学者 
GAKUSHA   scholar
気分 
KIBUN   mood
天気 
TENKI   weather
電気 
DENKI   electricity
十九   JŪKYŪ   nineteen
九日   kokonoka   ninth day
九月   KUGATSU   September
GAKU, manabu
learning
8 strokes
KI, KE
spirit
6 strokes
KYŪ, KU, kokono-
nine
2 strokes
学
気
九
L3
L5
L5
L5
10
11
12
13
子, signifying crossbeams, roof, right and left 
hands/help, and child respectively. The earliest 
forms (OBI) all omit the last of these elements, 
but the basic meaning represented appears to 
be a building whose purpose was to help peo-
ple in some way. Later forms are then more spe-
cifi c, referring to children (see 27). SS1984:110; 
KJ1970:171-2; MM1993:102. We suggest using 
‘child’ 子 27.
Mnemonic: CHILD LEARNS UNDER ORNATE 
ROOF
graph devised to write another word (a near-
homophone of 气 in early Chinese) meaning 
‘give rice (or other food) as a gift’. Based on the 
above, the block script equivalent of the OBI 
form for 気 should be 气, not 氣. The more 
familiar shape 気 is probably based on a cursive 
form of 氣; 气 is standard in modern PRC usage. 
See also 乞1346 ‘ask for, beg’. QX2000:330; 
MS1995:v2:726-8; KJ1970:247,230; OT1968:552; 
FC1974:v1:1245-7. 
Mnemonic: SPIRIT-LIKE VAPORS OVER A CROSS
of dragons (Shirakawa), or as the shape of an 
elbow used when counting with one arm (Katō), 
or as a loaned character (Qiu, Schuessler). 
SS1984:170; TS2010:25; KJ1970:49; QX2000:32; 
AS2007:320. We suggest remembering it as a 
hook indicating the removal of one from ‘ten’ 
十 35.
Mnemonic:  SOMETHING HOOKED AWAY 
FROM TEN LEAVES NINE
OBI forms indicate that this is based on the 
pictograph of a bivalve shell 
. In ancient 

The 80 First Grade Characters  51
休日 
 KYŪJITSU   holiday
休戦 
 KYŪSEN    truce
夏休み natsuyasumi   summer break
OBI 
. A ‘logical compound’ type character 
which signifi ed rest in the shade, being made 
up of 人/亻41 ‘person’ next to 木 73 ‘tree’. This 
widely accepted interpretation is supported at 
some length by Qiu, who rejects Shirakawa’s 
interpretation of early forms of this character as 
‘person’ next to ‘standing grains’. QX2000:209-
211; GY2008:278-9; AS2007:542; SS1984:171-2.
Mnemonic: PERSON RESTS AGAINST TREE
KYŪ, yasumu
rest(ing)
6 strokes
休
L5
14
OBI forms show pieces of precious stone 
(probably jade discs) strung together on a cord 
. Though the shape of this graph stood in 
contrast to 王 5 ‘king, ruler’ at the OBI stage, 
the shapes of the two became less distinctive 
玉杯 
 GYOKUHAI   jade cup
玉突き  tamatsuki   billiards
目玉 
 medama   eyeball
in bronze, and in the seal forms they were 
virtually indistinguishable. In clerical script, 玉 
was commonly written with a dot, no doubt 
to help distinguish it from 王. Note, though, 
that as a determinative in compound graphs 
(e.g. 現 692 ‘appear’), the dot in 玉 is omitted 
in the majority of cases. The meaning ‘ball’ for 
玉 is Japanese-only usage. KJ1970:283,933; 
MS1995:v2:850-63; MR2007:218; SK1984:490-91.
Mnemonic: STRING OF BALL-LIKE JEWELS FIT 
FOR A KING
GYOKU, tama
jewel, ball
5 strokes
玉
L3
15
Variations in shape in the earliest occurrences  
/  , namely bronze inscriptions, have led to 
diff erent interpretations. Shirakawa takes the 
small dots or dashes as representing lumps of 
cast metal (bronze). Another view additionally 
treats the main part of the graph as depicting 
金曜日  KIN’YŌbi    Friday
金色 
 KONJIKI   gold color
金持ち  kanemochi   rich person
an arrow at the top and an ax lower down 
(Wen). Diff erent again is a view (Katō) which 
breaks the graph down into two semantic 
elements: 土 64 ‘earth’, together with dots to 
represent something in the earth, and then an 
abbreviated form of 今 138 (‘top/cover’) as a 
phonetic indicator. At an early stage in China, 
often used in the sense of ‘bronze’, then some-
times ‘gold’, and by extension metals in general. 
SS1984:208; KJ1970:955-6; WL2010:410. We 
suggest remembering by using 王 5 ‘king’. 
Mnemonic: KING KEEPS TWO GOLD NUGGETS 
UNDER COVER
KIN, KON, kane
gold, metal, money
8 strokes
金
L5
16
空気 
KŪKI   air
空色 
sorairo   sky-blue
空箱 
karabako   empty box
Bronze 
 . The top fi ve strokes (of the modern 
form) depict the entrance to a hollowed-out pit, 
or cave 穴 860, i.e., something empty; subse-
quently extended to mean ‘sky’. The lower ele-
ment 工 125 (‘work, tool’) serves as a phonetic, 
with an associated sense of ‘hole’. References: 
SS1984:220; KJ1970:401; MS1995:v2:974-5. We 
suggest remembering by using 工 in its mean-
ing of ‘work’. 
Mnemonic:  WORK TO OPEN THE ROOF TO 
SEE THE EMPTY SKY
KŪ, sora, kara
sky, empty
8 strokes
空
L5
17

52  The 80 First Grade Characters
今月 
 KONGETSU   this month
月曜日  GETSUYŌbi    Monday
月見 
 tsukimi   moon viewing
Originally depicting crescent moon with pitted 
surface 
, later undergoing a cumulative pro-
cess of stylization 
, 
. As a determinative, 月. 
Note that the determinative for 肉 209 ‘meat/
fl esh’ is of the same shape 月 in compound 
graphs. SS1984:252; KJ1970:953.
Mnemonic: CRESCENT MOON IS PITTED AND 
FACES DOWN
GETSU, GATSU, 
tsuki
moon, month
4 strokes
月
猟犬 
 RYŌKEN   hunting-dog
犬小屋 inugoya   kennel
子犬 
 koinu   puppy
KEN, inu
dog
4 strokes
犬
L5
L4
18
19
Based on pictograph of a dog rearing up 
. 
Occurs also in the form犭as a left-hand deter-
minative, sometimes in characters for other 
animals. References: QX2000:65-67; SS1984:254. 
We suggest remembering it by taking it as 大 
56 ‘big’ plus a spot.
Mnemonic: DOG IS BIG WITH A SPOT
発見 
HAKKEN   discovery
見物 
KENBUTSU    sightseeing
見物 
mimono   spectacle, sight 
KEN, miru/seru/eru
look, see, show
7 strokes
見
L5
20
OBI forms such as 
, 
 show the graph for 
an exaggerated eye 目 76 on top of a variant 
form for ‘person’ 儿 41, originally bending but 
sometimes just ‘legs’. SS1984:255; QX2000:194. 
Take 儿 as a bending fi gure.
Mnemonic: PERSON WITH BIG EYE BENDS TO SEE
五月 
GOGATSU   May
五人 
GONIN    fi ve people
五日 
itsuka   fi fth day 
GO, itsu-
fi ve
4 strokes
五
L5
21
Disputed etymology. OBI forms can simply have 
fi ve strokes on top of each other 
, but more 
commonly 
 (unrelated to stroke number). On 
the basis of this latter, Shirakawa takes such 
shapes as representing a lid constructed with 
pieces of wood which cross each other, the char-
acter then being borrowed for its sound value to 
represent another word meaning ‘fi ve’. Alterna-
tively, Qiu seems to interpret the ancient form 
of this character as no more than a geometric 
symbol, but the relationship to fi ve is unclear. 
Also, some interpret it as a reel that replaces the 
fi ve fi ngers when winding yarn. This is one of 
those graphs with a range of proposed etymolo-
gies. SS1984:281-2; QX2000:32.
Mnemonic: IS A MISSHAPEN REEL BETTER 
THAN FIVE FINGERS?
人口 
JINKŌ   population
口実 
KŌJITSU    pretext
出口 
deguchi   exit 
KŌ, KU, kuchi
mouth, opening
3 strokes
口
L5
22
According to Katō et al., widely regarded as 
based on a pictograph for the mouth . How -
ever, according to Shirakawa, the early (OBI and 
bronze) shapes which might appear to be the 
ancestral forms of this character (with a meaning 
‘mouth’) are rare, and more common are instanc-
es of another graph of identical shape which 
instead represents a ritual vessel. It is diffi  cult 
to substantiate Shirakawa’s view, though some 
support for caution in interpretation of the early 
occurrences is found in Matsumaru. Extended 
meanings include ‘hole’, ‘opening’ and ‘speak’. 
MS1995:v1:204-5; SS1984:284-5; MM1993:30; 
KJ1985:98.
Mnemonic: SQUARE OPEN MOUTH  

The 80 First Grade Characters  53
校正 
KŌSEI   proofreading
高校 
KŌKŌ    high school
校長 
KŌCHŌ   school principal
KŌ
school, check
10 strokes
校
L5
23
A graph of the common semantic-phonetic 
category. The right-hand component 交 as an 
independent graph has meanings of ‘crossed 
(esp. legs), mixed’ (see 128). Later, the ‘wood/
tree’ determinative 木 73 was added, to clarify 
the sense ‘wooden shackles’. Other meanings 
for 校, found already in the Chinese classics, 
include ‘compare’, ‘collate’, ‘check’, ‘enclosure’, 
and ‘school’. Perhaps to be explained in the 
sense of ‘school’ through the phonetic loan 
principle, as suggested by Katō. KJ1970:172; 
AS2007:536, 307; ZY2009:v2 506. We suggest 
using ‘six’ 六 80 to help remember it.
Mnemonic: CHECK OUT SIX WOODEN 
CROSSES AT THE SCHOOL  
SA, hidari
left
5 strokes
左
L5
24
OBI  is based on a pictograph of a hand orien-
tated from left to right. Bronze equivalents add 
工 125, originally a pictograph for some kind 
of tool used in work. Can be taken as semantic 
compound (‘left hand’ with ‘tool, work’) (Karl-
gren), or as semantic-phonetic compound, in 
which case the fi rst two strokes of 左 have both 
semantic and phonetic roles. MR2007:271-2; 
BK1957:22-3; SS1984:331; KJ1970:37; 
AS2007:637.
Mnemonic: LEFT HAND HOLDS THE 
CARPENTER’S SQUARE  
左派 
SAHA   leftist faction
左側 
hidarigawa   left side
左手 
hidarite   left hand
SAN, mi-
three
3 strokes
三
L5
25
Three short straight lines 
, a simple mne-
monic device; occurring from OBI onwards. 
Similar depictions were used in certain other 
ancient writing systems (Egyptian hieroglyphs, 
Sumerian cuneiform, and suchlike). SS1984:350; 
KJ1970:40.
Mnemonic: THREE FINGERS  
三月 
SANGATSU   March
三日 
mikka    third day
三角 
SANKAKU   triangle
氷山 
HYŌZAN   iceberg
沢山 
TAKUSAN   large quantity
山道 
yamamichi   mountain trail
OBI 
, based on jagged mountains. 
MR2007:407; KJ1970:40; QX2000:175.
Mnemonic: TRIPLE PEAKED MOUNTAIN
SAN, yama
mountain, hill
3 strokes
山
電子 
DENSHI   electron
子供 
kodomo   child(ren)
様子 
YŌSU   state of things
SHI, SU, ko
child
3 strokes
子
L5
L5
26
27
Based on a pictograph of an infant 
. Note 
that this graph has also been used to denote 
the fi rst of the twelve ‘Earthly Branches’ of the 
traditional Chinese sexagenary cycle. QX2000:
178; BK1970:254; MR2007:517; KJ1985:158. 
Mnemonic: CHILD ON MUM’S BACK WITH 
ARMS OUT
or: CHILD WRITES THREE THEN STRIKES IT OUT

54  The 80 First Grade Characters
四月 
SHIGATSU   April
四日 
yokka   fourth day
四回 
yonKAI   four times
製糸 
SEISHI   silk making
毛糸 
keito   woollen yarn
糸巻 
itomaki   thread-reel
SHI, yo-, yon
four
5 strokes
SHI, ito
thread
6 strokes
四
糸
L5
L3
28
29
OBI and many bronze examples represent ‘four’ 
using four horizontal strokes 
. Some bronze 
forms appear to represent an open mouth 
with teeth, etc., possibly with the meaning of 
‘breathe’ 
. ‘Four’ is almost certainly a loan use. 
KJ1970:42; QX2000:174; KJ1985:122. As a mne-
monic, we suggest taking the present shape as 
a clenched fi st.
Mnemonic: FOUR FINGERS IN CLENCHED FIST
OBI forms show single thread 
 (probably silk); 
seal 
 . 糸 is a common determinative, as in 
e.g. 絵 95 (‘picture’); distinguish from 系 855 
(‘threads joined together’). The related element 
幺 ‘fi ne thread(s), end of fi ne thread’ has ‘small, 
young’ as extended meanings. SS1984:364; 
MS1995:v2:1002-04,v1:446-8.
Mnemonic:  SKEIN OF TWISTED THREAD 
字引 
JIbiki   dictionary
赤字 
akaJI   ‘in the red’, defi cit
数字 
SŪJI   digit, number
JI
letter, symbol
6 strokes
字
L4
30
Earliest forms such as 
 show that this graph 
is made up of 宀 ‘roof’ (in turn indicating 
‘building’ or ‘home’) and 子 27 ‘child’, originally 
with meanings such as ‘raise, bring up’. It later 
acquired the meaning of ‘[Chinese] character, 
written sign’ from ca. 100AD in Shuowen jiezi. 
SS1984:379-80; GY2008:331.
Mnemonic: A CHILD AT HOME LEARNING LETTERS 
耳科 
 JIKA   otology
耳鳴り  miminari   tinnitus
耳飾り  mimikazari   earring
七月 
SHICHIGATSU   July
七日 
nanoka*   seventh day
七重 
nanae   seven-fold
OBI 
 is based on a pictograph of an ear. 
MR2007:457-8; SS1984:380; QX2000:178.
Mnemonic: POINTED EAR
JI, mimi
ear
6 strokes
SHICHI, nana-
seven
2 strokes
耳
七
L5
L5
31
32
Derives from OBI and bronze graph similar to 
modern ‘ten’ 十 35 for a cut bone, the curve 
coming later. In early Chinese ‘cut’ and ‘seven’ 
had a similar pronunciation, and so the graph 
was borrowed to represent ‘seven’. SS1984:387; 
TS2010:3; AS2007:419,312.
Mnemonic: BADLY WRITTEN TEN: ONLY 
WORTH SEVEN

The 80 First Grade Characters  55
出発 
  SHUPPATSU   departure
思い出  omoide   a memory
引き出し  hikidashi   drawer
Based on early forms such as 
, Qiu sees the 
graph as a foot stepping out of a pit dwelling, 
noting the ancients lived in pits. Katō takes a 
broadly similar view, interpreting such forms as 
depicting a foot wearing a sandal setting out. 
See also 止 143 ‘stop’. QX2000:192; KJ1970:301-2. 
Suggest using 山 26 ‘mountain’ as a mnemonic.
Mnemonic: MOUNTAIN EMERGES ON TOP OF 
ANOTHER
SHUTSU, deru, dasu
emerge, put out
5 strokes
出
手段 
SHUDAN   means
手袋 
tebukuro   gloves
上手 
JŌZU*   skill
女性 
 JOSEI    woman
女房 
 NYŌBŌ   wife
女の子  onna-no-ko   girl 
Bronze form shows fi ve-fi ngered hand 
. In 
compound graphs, usually扌. SS1984:399; 
QX2000:178.  
Mnemonic: HAND WITH FIVE FINGERS BUT 
THE MIDDLE ONE BENT
SHU, te
hand
4 strokes
JO, NYO, NYŌ, 
onna, me
woman
3 strokes
手
女
L5
L5
L5
36
34
37
OBI forms show a kneeling woman 
, later 
stylized. MR2007:463; SS1984:432; QX2000:178; 
KJ1970:253.
Mnemonic: KNEELING WOMAN
十月 
JŪGATSU   October
十日 
tōka   tenth day
十字 
JŪJI   a cross
JŪ, tō
ten
2 strokes
十
L5
35
Etymology disputed. Katō sees early (bronze) 
forms of one vertical stroke, often with a small 
swelling halfway down, as showing a needle, 
later borrowed phonetically for ‘ten’:  Mizukami 
is in agreement. The protrusion became a hori-
zontal stroke. Shirakawa, by contrast, interprets 
十 as a wooden counting stick. It has also been 
interpreted as a knotted rope.  KJ1970:50; 
SS1984:50; TS2010:4; MS1995:v1:164-5.
Mnemonic: A PROPER CROSS GETS TEN OUT 
OF TEN 
電車 
 DENSHA   train
洗車場 SENSHAJŌ   carwash
手車 
 teguruma   handcart
SHA, kuruma
vehicle
7 strokes
車
L5
33
Based on a pictograph of a two-wheeled 
chariot. OBI . SS1984:391; KJ1970:490. 
Mnemonic: CHARIOT WITH TWO WHEELS

56  The 80 First Grade Characters
小説 
SHŌSETSU   a novel
小犬 
koinu   small dog, puppy
小川 
ogawa   brook, stream
以上 
 IJŌ   over, above
川上 
 kawakami   upstream
値上げ neage   price rise
SHŌ, chiisai, ko, o-
small
3 strokes
JŌ, ue, uwa-, kami,
ageru/garu, noboru
up, top, over, rise
3 strokes
小
上
L5
L5
38
39
OBI forms show a few small objects together 
(typically three) – shells or suchlike 
. 
MR2007:226; SS1984:435; QX2000:175. 
Mnemonic: A STROKE DIVIDED INTO TWO 
SMALL ONES
OBI forms show two horizontal strokes, upper 
one being shorter 
, but more commonly 
written as a short horizontal line above a longer 
line gently curving upwards – perhaps the 
palm of the hand 
. A vertical stroke was 
added later. ‘Go up’ etc. are extended meanings. 
MR2007:210; SS1984:456; KJ1970:541; KJ1985:3.
Mnemonic: BAR WITH HANDLE RISES UP 
OVER THE BASE LINE
森林 
SHINRIN   forest, woods
森閑 
SHINKAN   silence
青森 
Aomori   Aomori City/Pref.
SHIN, mori
woods
12 strokes
森
L4
40
OBI is based on pictograph of three trees 
 , 
indicating many trees. Three was often used to 
indicate plurality, including in ancient Egyptian 
hieroglyphs. Distinguish from 林 79 ‘forest’. 
Can have Shintoist connotations in Japanese. 
MR2007:341; KJ1970:41-2.
Mnemonic: THE WOODS CONTAIN MANY 
TREES, ALL GROWING IN THREES!
OBI  is based on the pictograph of a person 
standing, viewed side-on. As a determinative 
日本人  NIHONJIN   (a) Japanese
人間 
 NINGEN   human being
人出 
 hitode   crowd, turnout
水曜日  SUIYŌbi   Wednesday
水素 
 SUISO   hydrogen
大水 
 ōmizu   fl ood
element, commonly 亻; other elements of 
similar meaning include 𠆢 ‘person’, 儿 ‘person 
(variant)’ (determinative no. 10), and卩(deter-
minative  no. 26) ‘kneeling person’. There are in 
fact more forms relating to ‘person’, which can 
be confusing. We will indicate these as they   
occur. MR2007:379; SS1984:479; KJ1970:563-4.
Mnemonic: A PERSON WALKING WITH NO 
ARMS OR HEAD?! 
JIN, NIN, hito
person, people
2 strokes
SUI, mizu 
water
4 strokes
人
水
L5
L5
41
42
OBI 
 is a pictorial representation of water 
fl owing; later stylized in shape to 水. Often 
found in compound graphs in the form of 氵. 
See also 川 50 ‘river’. MR2007:435; SS1984:515; 
QX2000:175. We suggest taking right and left 
elements as narrowing banks.
Mnemonic: WATER NARROWS BETWEEN 
RIVER BANKS

The 80 First Grade Characters  57
OBI 
. Based on a pictograph of a growing 
plant. KJ1985:412; SS1984:493.
Mnemonic: GROWING PLANT IS A SYMBOL 
OF LIFE
On the basis of the shape in bronze forms 
 , the 
lower part is taken as a type of well dug for the 
excavation of cinnabar (丹1686). Although typi-
cally cinnabar is red in color, it does occur in other 
colors such as brown and grey, and Shirakawa 
notes several classical sources which refer to 
‘white cinnabar’ (perhaps grey?) and ‘blue/green 
cinnabar’. The upper element in the modern form 
学生 
 GAKUSEI   student
一生 
 ISSHŌ   one’s whole life 
生き物  ikimono   living thing 
青年 
SEINEN   a youth
青空 
aozora   blue sky
青物 
aomono   greens
今夕 
KONSEKI   this evening
夕食 
yūSHOKU   evening meal
夕日 
yūhi   setting sun
正解 
SEIKAI   right answer
正月 
SHŌGATSU   New Year
正に 
masa ni   just, exactly
SEI, SHŌ, ikiru/kasu,
umu/mareru, nama
life, birth, grow
5 strokes
SEI, SHŌ, aoi
young, fresh, 
green/blue 
8 strokes
SEKI, yū
evening
3 strokes
SEI, SHŌ, tadashii,
tadasu, masa
correct, proper
5 strokes
生
青
夕
正
L5
L4
L4
L4
44
45
46
43
of this character is taken to be a variant of 生 44, 
functioning originally here as a phonetic (the 
Late Han words represented by 生 and 青 were 
reasonably close in pronunciation); several com-
mentators regard 生 as also carrying a semantic 
function (the green of young plants). SS1984:495; 
KJ1970:963; GY2008:545; AS2007:459, 431. We 
suggest using ‘moon’ 月18 as a mnemonic. Note: 
the color spectrum is a continuum, and is broken 
up somewhat arbitrarily in diff erent languages. 
Thus, for instance, the blue through green range 
is diff erentiated in English, but not traditionally in 
Japanese, in which ao(i) covers both. 
Mnemonic: YOUNG BLUE-GREEN PLANTS 
LIVE ON THE MOON
月 18 ‘moon’, and at that period 夕 had the 
meanings of ‘crescent moon’ or ‘evening’. At 
some stage in bronze inscriptions two diff er-
entiated shapes evolved, one for each of the 
two associated words. SS1984:252; KJ1970:90; 
GY2008:38;  AS2007:522.  
Mnemonic: CRESCENT MOON WITH A WISP 
OF CLOUD INDICATES EVENING
‘correct’ appears to have come about probably 
as a phonetic loan – the pronunciation of the 
Chinese words for ‘march against’ and ‘correct’ 
being virtually identical in the late Han period 
(c. AD 25-220). Alternatively, regarded on basis 
of OBI form as being identical at that stage to 足 
54 ‘foot, leg’, representing lower leg (kneecap to 
foot), and by extension ‘straight, correct’, based on 
unbending part of leg (Mizukami). SS1984:492-3; 
AS2007:612; KJ1970:582-3; MS1995:v1:702-3. We 
suggest a mnemonic using 止 143 ‘stop’ (which 
also involves feet). 
Mnemonic: TO STOP AT THE LINE IS TO DO 
THE CORRECT AND PROPER THING
Etymology disputed. On the basis of OBI forms 
such as , Shirakawa considers the original mean-
ing of 正 to be ‘march/progress towards a walled 
citadel’, a meaning later represented by the more 
complex graph 征 1577 (q.v.): this interpretation 
is shared by Schuessler. Use of 正 in the sense of 
At the OBI stage, the shapes for this character 
were often indistinguishable from those for 

58  The 80 First Grade Characters
Etymology unclear. The OBI and bronze 
forms, 
, 
 may well depict a rock under an 
overhanging cliff . Shirakawa considers the 
化石 
KASEKI   fossil
小石 
koishi   pebble
石油 
SEKIYU   petroleum
SEKI, SHAKU, ishi
stone, rock
5 strokes
石
L3
47
shape beneath the cliff  to be a ritual vessel 
related to ancient beliefs, not a rock. Some 
scholars, including Katō, take 厂 as a pho-
netic element with an associated sense such 
as ‘split’ or ‘release’ (small rocks splitting off ). 
OT1968:707; QX2000:198; KJ1970:610-11; 
SS1984:504-5; YK1976:307-8.
Mnemonic:  LARGE STONE AT BASE OF 
ROCKY CLIFF
赤道   SEKIDŌ   equator
赤面   SEKIMEN   blush 
赤ん坊   akanbō   baby
SEKI, SHAKU, akai
red
7 strokes
赤
L4
48
Etymology disputed. Many scholars take the 
OBI and bronze forms 
, 
 to show 大 56 ‘big’ 
over 火 8 ‘fi re’, 灬, giving a meaning ‘fi re burn-
ing brightly’ and thus ‘red [fl ames]’. Shirakawa, 
however, interprets the upper element more 
literally as a person with outstretched limbs, 
to give a meaning such as ‘cleanse someone 
of their crimes’, which one imagines would be 
a fi nal cleansing! Popularly believed to show 
‘earth’ 土 64 over 灬. This is incorrect, but use-
ful as a mnemonic. BK1957:209-10; OT1968:964; 
SS1984:505.
Mnemonic:  BIG FIRE MAKES EARTH GLOW RED
千円 
SEN’EN   thousand yen
五千 
GOSEN   fi ve thousand
千鳥 chidori    plover
川口  kawaguchi   rivermouth
川柳 
SENRYŪ   comic verse
江戸川 edogawa   Edo River 
SEN, chi
thousand
3 strokes
SEN, kawa
river
3 strokes
千
川
L5
L5
49
50
Based on pictographs of water fl owing be-
tween two river banks, such as the OBI form 
, later stylized. See also  水 42 ‘water’.  
SS1984:515; QX2000:175; KJ1970:631. 
Mnemonic: RIVER FLOWS BETWEEN TWO 
BANKS
Etymology unclear. Early forms such as 
 
might suggest interpretation as 人 41 ‘per-
son’ with 十 35 ‘ten’, representing ‘ten people 
[each one hundred years old]’. This was the 
traditional interpretation (Shuowen), but it is 
incorrect, as in early times the graph close in 
shape to the modern 十 stood for ‘seven’ 七 32. 
Shirakawa takes it as a version of the old graph 
for 人 ‘person’ modifi ed to represent ‘thousand’ 
by the addition of a horizontal stroke, with 
人 as a phonetic element (a view shared by 
Katō). BK1957:104; AS2007:424; SS1984:515; 
KJ1985:84.
Mnemonic: ADD A STROKE ON TOP, AND TEN 
BECOMES A THOUSAND

The 80 First Grade Characters  59
早急 
 SŌKYŪ   immediately
早口 
 hayakuchi   rapid speech
早死に  hayajini    early death
SŌ, hayai
early, fast
6 strokes
早
L4
52
Etymology uncertain. Early form 
 . Possibly 
adopted in Chinese at an early stage as a 
phonetic loan in the sense of ‘early’. Yamada 
takes it as ‘sun bursting out’ (see 日 66 ‘sun’), 
with 十 35 ‘ten’ seen as a phonetic with an as-
sociated sense of ‘open, burst out’. Sunrise came 
to mean ‘early’, then ‘fast’. QX2000:96,272,392; 
SS1984:539; OT1968:460. 
Mnemonic: SUN SHOWS TEN BUT IT’S STILL 
EARLY
雑草 ZASSŌ   weed
草書 SŌSHO   cursive script
草地 kusaCHI   grassland
SŌ, kusa
grass, plant
9 strokes
草
L3
53
Seal ; late graph (Shuowen). 艹 (short form 
of 艸 ‘grass, plants’), and 早 52 (‘fast, early’) as 
phonetic to give meaning ‘acorn’ (Qiu, Katō), 
but borrowed early on for ‘grass, plants’. The 
borrowed usage soon prevailed. QX2000:266; 
KJ1970:427; TA1965:216-8.
Mnemonic: GRASS GROWS FAST
不足 FUSOKU   insuffi  ciency
足首 ashikubi   ankle
足音 ashioto   footsteps
SOKU, ashi, tariru
leg, foot, suffi  ce
7 strokes
足
L5
54
OBI 
. Pictograph of kneecap down to foot. 
At this stage 足 and 正 43 were often writ-
ten the same. ‘Suffi  ce’ is loan use. SS1984:543; 
BK1957:313; MS1995:v2:1260-62,v1:702-03.
Mnemonic: ROUND KNEE AND FOOT SUFFICE 
TO SHOW LEG
先生 
SENSEI   teacher
先月 
SENGETSU   last month 
指先 yubisaki    fi ngertip
SEN, saki
prior, precede, tip
6 strokes
先
L5
51
The OBI form 
 for 先 shows a foot on top of a 
person, signifying ‘walk ahead, go fi rst’. (This is 
similar in principle to 見 20 ‘look’, in which the 
majority of OBI forms show an exaggerated 
eye on top of a person, thereby focussing on 
what the eye does, i.e. ‘see’.) This is an interpre-
tation quite widely held (Shirakawa, Karlgren, 
Ogawa). Katō, however, sees the top element 
in some of the OBI and bronze forms diff er-
ently, not as 止143 (q.v.) but as 之 (NJK; ‘move, 
go’), a graph indicating movement (either by 
a person walking or a plant growing). In either 
case, Katō then takes the top element as pho-
netic in function with associated sense ‘die’, 
giving ‘those who have gone before’, and by 
extension ‘the past’, and ‘advance’. The majority 
view is perhaps the one to follow. SS1984:515; 
BK1957:131-3; OT1968:87; KJ1970:627; 
QX2000:53. As a mnemonic, suggest taking 
 
as a simplifi ed 生 44, showing plant(s), with 
the ‘bending person’ element 儿 (see 41). 
Mnemonic: BEND TO GO THROUGH UNDER-
GROWTH – YOU PRECEDE ME!

60  The 80 First Grade Characters
Etymology unclear. Seems a late graph, not 
in Shuowen dictionary of ca.100AD. Ogawa 
treats it as variant of CO graph 杶 ‘lacquer tree’ 
村長 
SONCHŌ   village head
農村 
NŌSON   farming village
村人 
murabito   villager(s)
大会 
TAIKAI   assembly
大学 
DAIGAKU   university
大声 
ōgoe   loud voice
which was used phonetically in the sense of 
‘village’ in place of another graph for ’village’, 
邨, which may be taken provisionally as阝 (邑) 
‘settlement, village’ (see 376), and 屯 1806 
‘accumulate, stay’ as semantic and phonetic. 
OT1968:490-91; KJ1985:311. Use 寸 920 ‘meas-
ure’ and 木 73 ‘tree’ for mnemonic.
Mnemonic: MEASURE TREES TO BUILD A 
VILLAGE
SON, mura
village
7 strokes
DAI, TAI, ōkii, ō- 
big
3 strokes
村
大
L5
L5
55
56
Based on a pictograph of a mature person or 
one with arms and legs outstretched 
, used 
in an extended sense to mean ‘big’. SS1984:570; 
QX2000:4; KJ1970:724-5.
Mnemonic: PERSON SPREADS ARMS AND 
LEGS TO LOOK BIG
男子 
DANSHI   boy
長男 
CHŌNAN   eldest son
男気 otokogi   gallantry
DAN, NAN, otoko
man, male
7 strokes
男
L5
57
OBI 
 ; made up of 田 63 ‘fi eld’ and 力 78 
‘strength’ .  The latter may at one stage have 
represented a plow, but most early forms show 
an arm and fi eld 
, associated with males 
working in the fi elds. Other analyses are pos-
sible: Yamada and Katō, for example, take 田
as phonetic, with an associated sense ‘endure’, 
while Tōdō includes the whole graph in his 
word-family meaning ‘bring in’, on the basis that 
traditionally China was a matriarchal society 
in which women brought men into the family 
through marriage. SS1984:584-5; GY2008:435; 
YK1976:352-3; TA1965:800-04; KJ1985:415.
Mnemonic: MAN PROVIDES STRENGTH IN 
FIELD
爆竹  BAKUCHIKU  fi recracker
竹馬  takeuma   stilts 
竹やぶ takeyabu   bamboo grove
Often seen as bamboo segments, which is a 
good mnemonic but incorrect. OBI 
 shows it 
to be based on a pictograph of a bamboo plant, 
which Mizukami and Katō identify as a low, 
striped variety. Later used for bamboo in gen-
eral. In compound graphs, ⺮. MS1995:v2:986-7; 
MR2007:307; KJ1970:694. 
Mnemonic: TWO BAMBOO SEGMENTS
CHIKU, take
bamboo
6 strokes
竹
L 3
58

The 80 First Grade Characters  61
The OBI form  is based on a pictograph of a 
snake. According to Qiu, later a semantic shift 
Of late provenance (Shuowen); 田 63 is ‘fi eld’, 
and 丁 367 (originally ‘nail’, now ‘block [area]’) 
is phonetic, with an associated meaning ‘tread’. 
The original meaning was ‘path between 
寄生虫 KISEICHŪ   parasite
害虫  GAICHŪ   harmful insect
虫歯  mushiba   decayed tooth
町民  CHŌMIN   townspeople
町役場 machiYAKUba   town offi  ce
下町  shitamachi   downtown
CHŪ, mushi
insect, worm
6 strokes
CHŌ, machi
town, block
7 strokes
虫
町
L3
L4
60
61
occurred, as the antecedent of 虫 was already 
being used to represent the current meaning 
‘insect’ (in the broad sense) – as in modern 
Japanese – in Qin and Han times. QX2000:177; 
AS2007:287. As a mnemonic suggest a rearing 
hooded snake.
Mnemonic: HOODED SNAKE REARS TO 
CATCH AN INSECT
fi elds’, and this is retained in modern Chinese.  
In Japan, ‘path between fi elds’ was still the 
associated meaning in the early 10th century, 
but by that period it had also come to mean 
a settlement of dwellings beside a road, and 
on that basis we have the modern Japanese 
meaning of ‘town, city’. SS1984:600; KJ1970:915; 
YK1976:365. 
Mnemonic: TOWN AT T-JUNCTION NEXT TO 
FIELD
The OBI and bronze forms 
, 
 depict the 
front profi le of a person standing with limbs 
apart, similar to 大 56 ‘big’ but with a head – 
the latter sometimes round, sometimes just a 
horizontal line (or two) and close to the modern 
天使  TENSHI   angel
天皇  TENNŌ   emperor
天下り  amakudari   heavenly descent
TEN, ama-, ame
heaven
4 strokes
天
L5
62
form. On occasion the head is also enlarged. It 
may be that originally the meaning was ‘head’ 
or ‘crown of the head’, then later by extension 
what is above the head, i.e. the sky, or – with 
a philosophical or religious connotation – 
‘Heaven’, or ‘heavenly deity’ (Ch. Tian).  Karlgren, 
however, interprets the old forms as being from 
the outset the drawing of ‘an anthropomorphic 
deity’. SS1984:627-8; KJ1970:724; AS2007:495; 
BK1957:104.
Mnemonic: BIG MAN GETS HEAD FLATTENED 
IN HEAVENLY DESCENT
中立  CHŪRITSU   neutrality
中国  CHŪGOKU   China
真ん中  mannaka   very middle
OBI forms show two categories:  a) 
, similar 
to the modern equivalent, and  b) 
 a shape 
similar to a) but with streamer-like attachments, 
CHŪ, naka
middle, inside, China/
Sino-
4 strokes
中
L5
59
generally interpreted as a banner with streamers. 
The graph’s basic meaning is ‘middle, inside’, and 
by extension ‘hit the center’. Schuessler, however, 
feels this extended meaning is from a word of 
similar but diff erent pronunciation from that for 
‘middle’ in early Chinese (1st – 2nd century AD). 
SS1984:593; KJ1970:699-700; AS2007:621, 44; 
BK1957:264-5.
Mnemonic: CHINESE LANCE PIERCES MIDDLE 
OF TARGET

62  The 80 First Grade Characters
田園  DEN’EN   rural area
田植え  taue   rice planting
田舎  inaka*   countryside
Generally seen as based on pictographs for 
a fi eld or fi elds divided by paths, very similar 
to the modern form.  Shirakawa believes the 
original sense was ‘hunt’, and the meaning ‘fi eld’ 
was a later loan use, but historical sound values 
in Schuessler leave this open to question. 
KJ1970:915; BK1957:104; AS2007:496,184.
Mnemonic:  A FIELD DIVIDED INTO FOUR 
QUARTERS
DEN, ta
rice-fi eld, paddy
5 strokes
田
L 4
63
OBI 
. Interpretations quite diverse. One 
(Ogawa, Gu) is that early (OBI and bronze) 
forms show a clod/mound of earth raised to 
土曜日  DOYŌbi   Saturday
土地  TOCHI   land
土臭い tsuchikusai   unsophisticated
honor the earth god, or represent the earth god 
himself (Shirakawa). Another is a plant coming 
out of the soil (Katō, re bronze forms only). Yet 
another (Karlgren) sees the graph as ‘a drawing 
of the phallic-shaped sacred pole of the altar of 
the soil’. OT1968:208; GY2008:22; SS1984:639; 
KJ1970:956; BK1957:36-7. 
Mnemonic:   A PLANT BREAKS THROUGH THE 
GROUND
DO, TO, tsuchi
earth, ground
3 strokes
土
L 5
64
二月 
NIGATSU   February
二十 NIJŪ   twenty
二人 NININ/futari*   two people
Two horizontal lines of equal length are found 
in OBI; later, sometimes with a shorter top 
stroke, as in the modern form. KJ1970:39; 
SS1984:668.
Mnemonic: TWO LINES MEANS TWO, EVEN IF 
ONE IS SHORT
NI, futa-
two
2 strokes
二
L5
65
日曜日  NICHIYŌbi   Sunday
本日 
 HONJITSU   today
二日 
 futsuka*   second day
NICHI, JITSU, hi, -ka 
sun, day
4 strokes
日
L5
66
Based on pictograph of the sun 
, spot/line 
probably added to distinguish it as real object 
and not a mere abstract shape. MR2007:352; 
SS1984:669; KJ1970:952-3.
Mnemonic:   IN LINE WITH THE SUN, A NEW 
DAY’S BEGUN
輸入  YUNYŪ   import
入り口  iriguchi   entrance
入れ物 iremono   container 
NYŪ, hairu, ireru/ru
enter, put in
2 strokes
入
L5
67
The OBI form and bronze forms depict the 
entrance to a dwelling 
. Many see the mod-
ern stylized form as a person bending (see 41) 
to enter, which is incorrect but a useful mne-
monic. SS1984:669-70; KJ1970:515; YK1976:401.
Mnemonic: BEND TO ENTER THROUGH 
INVERTED V-SHAPED OPENING

The 80 First Grade Characters  63
Interpretations of the OBI forms such as 
 are 
varied. The graphs may well depict a man 
carrying a load of grain plants on his back, 
indicating the annual harvest and by extension 
the annual cycle in general. Shirakawa is more 
来年  RAINEN   next year
五年生 GONENSEI   fi fth grader
年寄  toshiyori   elderly person
specifi c, seeing a man dancing while carrying 
grain on the occasion of the rite asking for a 
good harvest. Qiu, however, takes one element 
in the OBI forms as depicting grain, but the 
other element as 千 49 ‘thousand’ as a phonetic 
indicator, this later being replaced by 人/𠂉 41 
‘person’  instead. SS1984:673; QX2000:20; 
KJ1970:749. A mnemonically diffi  cult character, 
but suggest taking top element as ‘person’ 人/𠂉 
41 and lower element as variant of 井 1575 ‘well’.  
Mnemonic: PERSON VISITS MISSHAPEN WELL 
EVERY YEAR
NEN, toshi
year
6 strokes
年
L5
68
白書  HAKUSHO   White Paper
面白い omoshiroi   interesting
白髪  shiraga*   greyed hair
OBI forms such as 
, 
, 
 are interpreted 
variously. Shirakawa sees it as a bleached skull, 
Schuessler a (pale) acorn, and Katō a pale 
thumbnail. Karlgren takes it as a phallus, but 
this seems to overlook the extended vertical 
HAKU, shiroi, shira-
white
5 strokes
白
L5
69
line at the top in some forms, even curled in 
some. Katō points out that the thumb indi-
cated a hundred in ancient China, with similar 
pronunciation (see 71). Whatever the original 
meaning of 白, ‘white’ may represent a phonetic 
loan use, though it is diffi  cult to rule this out 
as a possible extended sense. SS1984:687-8; 
KJ1970:960-1; BK1957:206-7; AS2007:153-4. We 
suggest taking the character as punning on 
‘stroke’ and ‘sun’ 日 66 for a mnemonic.
Mnemonic: SUNSTROKE LEAVES YOU WHITE!?
八月 
 HACHIGATSU   August
八百屋 yaoya*   greengrocer
八日 
 yōka*   eighth day 
HACHI, ya-
eight
2 strokes
八
L5
70
All early forms, such as 
, depict splitting/
dividing, the graph for this then being 
borrowed phonetically to represent the word 
for ‘eight’. It still features as an element to indi-
cate splitting and by extension ‘disperse, away, 
out’.  TA1965:647-9; SS1984:694; OT1968:94.
Mnemonic: EIGHT IS EASILY DIVIDED
Most OBI and bronze forms such as  com-
prise a horizontal stroke to indicate one unit 
百倍  HYAKUBAI hundred-fold
百姓  HYAKUSHŌ   farmer
百貨店 HYAKKATEN   dept store
HYAKU
hundred
6 strokes
百
L5
71
on top of a graph for 白 69 ‘white’. The word 
for ‘hundred’ in early Chinese was close in 
pronunciation to that for ‘white’, the graph 
for which represents a thumb (Katō) or 
acorn (Schuessler). SS1984:723-4; TS2010:8; 
AS2007:153-4; KJ1985:425. 
Mnemonic: ONE WHITE THUMBNAIL IS 
WORTH A HUNDRED ACORNS

64  The 80 First Grade Characters
OBI and bronze forms 
, 
. Etymology 
disputed. These forms are taken by Shirakawa 
文学 BUNGAKU   literature
文字 MO(N)JI   character
恋文 koibumi   love-letter
BUN, MON, fumi
writing, text
4 strokes
文
L4
72
and Karlgren as person with tattoos, while 
Ogawa and Katō take them as a fi gure wear-
ing garment with neck. ‘Pattern, writing, text’ 
may be seen as extended senses if Karlgren 
and Shirakawa are followed. SS1984:759; 
BK1957:130-1; OT1968:445; KJ1970:218-20.
Mnemonic: A CROSS IS THE LOWEST FORM 
OF WRITING: TRY TO TOP IT
Based on pictograph of tree with roots 
 , the 
latter indicated later by the simple addition of 
a stroke near the base, to show root or stem 
below ground level. Norman observes – with 
reference to Chinese – that it “is not entirely 
clear how a word originally meaning ‘root’ could 
木曜日  MOKUYŌbi   Thursday
木目  kime   grain, texture
木立  kodachi*   grove
日本 
NIHON/NIPPON   Japan
本屋 HONya   bookshop
本社 HONSHA   this/head offi  ce
Based on a pictograph of a tree 
. 
MR2007:333; SS1984:804; QX2000:54; 
KJ1970:955.
Mnemonic: TREE WITH SWEEPING BRANCHES 
– LOOKS LIKE GOOD WOOD
BOKU, MOKU, ki, ko
tree, wood
4 strokes
HON, moto
root, book, true, main, 
this, cylinder-counter
5 strokes
木
本
L5
L5
73
74
come to be used as a measure for books”, but 
this may be explained as an extended meaning 
‘stem’, in that traditionally in China and Japan 
books were in cylindrical rolls, i.e., a stem-like 
shape. In China, the cylindrical roll for books 
started to change to a folded-page format 
from about the 9th century AD. Note also that 
in English there is a close link between trees 
and books: ‘book’, ‘bark’, ‘beech’, and ‘birch’, 
the bark once having been used for writing 
on. SS1984:807; QX2000:183; JN1988:116; 
KJ1970:866; TT1962:153. 
Mnemonic: TREE WITH ONE MAIN ROOT 
BELOW GROUND
有名 YŪMEI   famous
名字 MYŌJI   surname
名前 namae   name
MEI, MYŌ, na
name, fame
6 strokes
名
L5
75
Various interpretations. Early form 
. May well 
be a combination of 
 / 口 22 ‘mouth, say’, and 
夕 46 ‘crescent moon’ – used here as substitute 
for another graph meaning ‘shout, call out’ 
(Mizukami, Yamada).  Shirakawa, however, takes 
the earliest forms (bronze) as depicting meat 
over a ritual vessel, used in the ancient naming 
ceremony for an infant when it reached three 
months. If we follow Shirakawa, most OBI and 
bronze occurrences of 口 represent not  ‘mouth’ 
but specifi cally ‘prayer receptacle’, but this is 
very much a minority view. MS1995:v1:214-5; 
YK1976:467; SS1984:816-7. 
Mnemonic: MOUTH CALLS FAMOUS NAME 
UNDER A CRESCENT MOON

The 80 First Grade Characters  65
一目  hitome   glance 
一つ目  hitotsume   fi rst
注目  CHŪMOKU   attention
Early forms such as OBI 
 seem to be generally 
interpreted as showing an arm and hand. Less 
convincingly, Shirakawa prefers to interpret as 
MOKU, me, ma
eye, look, mesh, 
ordinal suffi  x
5 strokes
目
自立 
 JIRITSU   independence
立場  tachiba   standpoint   
目立つ  medatsu   stand out
能力  NŌRYOKU   ability
人力車 JINRIKISHA   rickshaw
力持ち  chikaramochi   strongman
林学   RINGAKU   forestry
小林   Kobayashi   a surname
密林   MITSURIN   dense forest
RITSU, tatsu/teru
stand, rise, leave
5 strokes
RYOKU, RIKI, chikara
strength, eff ort
2 strokes
RIN, hayashi
forest
8 strokes
立
力
林
L5
L5
L4
L4
76
77
78
79
OBI and bronze forms such as 
 depict a per-
son standing, ground beneath them to empha-
size the act of standing rather than the fi gure. 
Later forms such as 
 show little change. 
SS1984:875; QX2000:19; OT1968:744. ‘Leave’ is 
an extended meaning based on rising.
Mnemonic:  STAND TO TAKE YOUR LEAVE
depicting a plow, and by association 
agricultural work and therefore physical 
strength. (See also 男 57 ‘male’.) On the other 
hand, if it were indeed a plow, it could be 
argued that one might expect rather a mean-
ing such as ‘cutting’ or ‘planting’ or ‘prepar-
ing’. KJ1970:907; YK1976:492; BK1957:244; 
OT1968:123; SS1984:888-9. We suggest taking 
the modern form as a shoulder and upper arm. 
Mnemonic: STRONG UPPER ARM AND SHOULDER
the outset 林 and 森 40 ‘woods’ have been 
used with essentially the same meaning, i.e. 
‘forest’. Schuessler considers the Chinese word 
written 森 probably evolved as an intensive 
derivative from that written as 林. MR2007:341; 
SS1984:889; QX2000:54; AS2007:358-9; 
QX2000:198.
Mnemonic:  TWO TALL TREES IN THE FOREST
OBI 
 shows it as based on pictograph of an 
eye, generating a range of extended meanings. 
Use for ordinal suffi  x is loan usage. SS1984:824; 
QX2000:178; KJ1970:873.
Mnemonic:  SQUARE-EYED AND VERTICAL – 
WATCHING TOO MUCH TV?
OBI and bronze forms 
 seem to indicate 
a simple building of some sort (Shirakawa 
六月 
ROKUGATSU   June
六日 
muika*   sixth day
六角 ROKKAKU   hexagon
suggests a temporary, tent-like structure), the 
graph then probably having been borrowed for 
the meaning ‘six’ through the phonetic loan prin-
ciple. Qiu prefers a more abstract interpretation, 
taking it just as a geometric symbol. SS1984:919; 
KJ1970:43-4; OT1968:96; QX2000:32. We suggest 
taking the whole form as a pictorial mnemonic.
Mnemonic:  LADEN TABLE FOR SIX LOSES ITS 
LEGS
ROKU, mu-
six
4 strokes
六
L5
80
Early forms show a simple doubling of ‘tree’  
 73. Unlike in Japanese, in Chinese from 

66  
THE 160 SECOND GRADE CHARACTERS
引力   INRYOKU　gravity
字引   JIbiki　dictionary
取り引き  torihiki　dealings
羽毛 UMŌ　plumage
羽織 haori　haori coat
一羽 ICHIwa　one bird
星雲  SEIUN　nebula
浮雲  ukigumo　drifting cloud
雲行き  kumoyuki　turn of events
Traditional 羽. OBI form 
 shows to be based 
on pictograph of bird’s wings or feathers. 
MR2007:279; MS1995:v2:1046-7; YK1976:62-3.
Mnemonic: FEATHERED WINGS
Based on pictograph of a cloud 
 (云). The 
graph was borrowed for its sound value to 
IN, hiku
pull, draw
4 strokes
U, ha, -wa, hane
wing, feather,
bird-counter
6 strokes
UN, kumo
cloud
12 strokes
引
羽
雲
L4
L3
L3
81
82
83
公園  KŌEN　park
動物園 DŌBUTSUEN　zoo
花園  hanazono　fl ower garden
original meaning of ‘long robe’, ‘ample cloth-
ing’, with associated sense of encircling, hence 
encircled area. Tōdō includes these in a word-
family meaning ‘round/surround’. KJ1970:110; 
TA1965:611-21. As a mnemonic, we suggest 
taking 袁 as 土 64 ‘soil’, 囗 22 ‘opening’ and 
 
as ‘funny clothing’ 衣 444.
Mnemonic: AT OPENING OF ENCLOSED PARK, 
FUNNY CLOTHES GET SOILED 
Late graph (Shuowen) 
. Has determina-
tive 囗 ‘surround’, and 袁 as a phonetic, with 
associated meaning ‘fence’. 袁 is a CO with an 
EN, sono
park, garden
13 strokes
園
L3
84
OBI ; bronze 
; listed in the Shuowen as 
. 
Very similar to modern version. Karlgren takes 
as depicting a bow together with the bow-
string. Katō and Yamada take the long vertical 
stroke as a phonetic element with associated 
sense ‘pull, extend’. SS1984:30; BK1957:106; 
KJ1970:164; YK1976:59.
Mnemonic: FANCY BOW WITH STRING 
WAITING TO BE PULLED
represent a homophonous word in early 
Chinese meaning ‘say’ (also an NJK with that 
meaning), as well as for another word meaning 
‘revolve’. Then, to clearly indicate ‘cloud’, 雨 3 
‘rain, weather element’ was added at the seal 
stage, giving 雲. MR2007:453-4; SS1984:41; 
KJ1970:72; YK1976:63-4; AS2007:597; 
KJ1985:653; MS1995:v2:1418-20.
Mnemonic: RAIN FROM HEAVENLY CLOUDS

The 160 Second Grade Characters  67
The determinative 辶 derives from 彳 131 
‘road, go’ and 止 143 ‘stop’ (originally, picto-
graph of foot, hence also ‘go’). Right element is 
CO 袁 84 with semantic role as well as phonetic. 
Beyond that, views diverge, depending on 
meaning given to 袁. Katō and Ogawa broadly 
Ma and Shirakawa see the OBI form 
 as a 
person 
 carrying a halberd over their shoul-
der. Yamada takes 可 655 (‘able, should’) as 
phonetic, with associated sense ‘hunchback’, 
遠足  ENSOKU　excursion
遠視  ENSHI　longsighted
遠回り  tōmawari　detour
何回 nanKAI　how often?
何歳 nanSAI　how old?
何者 nanimono　who?
科学  KAGAKU　science
学科  GAKKA　school subject
英語科 EIGOKA　English Dept
agree the basic sense of 袁 is ‘long’, thus ‘long 
movement’. Shirakawa, by contrast, sees it as 
ritualistic sending off  of a deceased person on 
their last distant journey. Tōdō diff ers, taking 
linguistic form of the full graph 遠 as a member 
of a word family with the basic meaning of 
‘make room, give latitude’. KJ1970:109-10; 
OT1968:1010; SS1984:59; TA1960:624-31. As 
with 84,  we suggest 袁 as 土 64 ‘soil’, 囗 22 
‘opening’ and 
 as ‘funny clothing’ 衣 444.
Mnemonic: GO TO DISTANT OPENING TO SEE  
FUNNY SOILED CLOTHES
EN, tōi 
distant
13 strokes
KA, nan(i)
what? how many?
7 strokes
KA
course, section
9 strokes
遠
何
科
L4
L5
L3
85
86
87
and ‘carry on the back’ as an extended mean-
ing, while Katō takes ‘carry on the back’ as 
the primary associated sense.  This sense has 
now been taken over by 荷 259 ‘load’, leav-
ing 何 with just a loan sense. MR2007:381-2; 
SS1984:72; YK1976:79; KJ1970:122. Suggest 
taking it as a combination of 亻41 ‘person’ and 
可 ‘655 ‘able, should’. 
Mnemonic: WHAT!? HOW MANY LOADS CAN 
A PERSON CARRY!?
Combines 禾, based on pictograph of grain 
plant 
 , and 斗 1766, based on pictograph 
of ladle 
, giving rise to meaning ‘measure’ 
> ‘sift’ > ‘category’ > ‘section’. Used already in 
the sense of ‘class, degree’ in classical Chinese 
texts such as Analects of Confucius. 禾 also 
probably served phonetic role in coining this 
character, as Late Han sound values of 禾 and 
科 were similar. ‘Course’ is associated meaning. 
SS1984:75; OT1968:448; AS2007:333, 273.
Mnemonic: A COURSE ON MEASURES FOR 
GRAIN PLANTS
初夏 SHOKA　early summer
真夏 manatsu　midsummer
夏至 GESHI　summer solstice
Traditional 夏. Early forms (bronze) such as 
, 
 are complex graphs widely seen as showing 
someone dancing, probably with mask. Ogawa 
KA, GE, natsu 
summer
10 strokes
夏
L4
88
postulates that the dance was held in summer, 
and this graph came to mean ‘summer’ by asso-
ciation. The determinative in 夏 is traditionally 
夊 (no.35) ‘walk slowly/drag foot’, even though 
now conventionally written just like 夂 (no.34) 
‘(descending) foot’. See Appendix. SS1984:75; 
KJ1970:118-9; OT1968:229-30. Suggest taking 
夂 as ‘crossed legs’, and the upper part as head.
Mnemonic: MASKED HEAD AND CROSSED 
LEGS SHOW SUMMER MADNESS
L4
88

68  The 160 Second Grade Characters
Some OBI forms, as 
, are seen as pig under 
roof, but other OBI and bronze such as 
 are 
seen as dog under roof. In support of the pig 
analysis, Ma suggests the structures to house 
people and pigs were not all that diff erent in 
Of quite late provenance. Shuowen has the 
simpler form 哥 (NJK, ‘elder brother’), to which 
at a later date the right-hand element 欠 496 
‘yawn, mouth open wide’ was added. In this 
more complex character, 哥 serves a phonetic 
農家   NŌKA　farmhouse
武家   BUKE　warrior family
小説家  SHŌSETSUKA　novelist 
歌手 KASHU　singer
短歌 TANKA　short verse
歌声 utagoe　singing voice
KA, KE, ie, -ya
house, specialist
10 strokes
KA, uta, utau
song, sing
14 strokes
家
歌
L4
L4
89
90
ancient times. Shirakawa, however, in support 
of the dog analysis, observes that dog sacrifi ce 
was common at that period. Katō believes 豕 
to be a pig, here as a phonetic with associated 
sense ‘leisure’, i.e. building for relaxing. Over 
time the character has become associated with 
‘profession’, with particular families/houses 
being associated with particular work through 
the hereditary system in China. MR2007:367-8; 
KJ1970:124-5; BK1957:28; SS1984:76.
Mnemonic: SPECIALIST’S HOUSE LOOKS LIKE 
A PIG-STY!
role which is regarded by Katō and Yamada as 
also denoting longer articulation, while Tōdō 
includes it in a word-family meaning ‘bend’ 
(specifi cally here, manipulate or move the vocal 
chords). One can perhaps think of the early 
Chinese equivalent of KA-KA as like the English 
‘(Tra)-la-la’. KJ1970:122; YK1976:84; TA1965:578-
82. As a mnemonic, suggest again taking ‘can, 
able’ 可 655 and doubling it.
Mnemonic: GAPING MOUTH SINGS THE 
CAN-CAN
OBI ; bronze forms 
, 
; seal 
; traditional 
畵. Numerous interpretations. Upper part of 
OBI form is taken by both Gu and Katō as a 
hand holding a writing brush, but Gu takes low-
er part as pictographic for what is drawn, while 
映画 EIGA　movie
画面 GAMEN　screen
計画 KEIKAKU　plan
Katō treats instead as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘draw’. Katō takes bronze stage meaning 
as ‘(draw) fi eld boundary lines’; Karlgren regards 
the lower part in bronze as representing a map; 
Shirakawa, by contrast, sees them in bronze as a 
writing brush over a shield, the shield being an 
object to be embellished. 画 is a later abbrevi-
ated shape. MS1995:v2:880-81; KJ1970:327; 
SS1984:83; BK1957:224-5; OT1968:24; 
GY2008:579.
Mnemonic: FIELD IN PICTURE PARTITIONED 
BY STROKES
GA, KAKU
picture, stroke
8 strokes
画
L4
91
回転   KAITEN　revolution
回数   KAISŪ　frequency
言い回し  iimawashi　turn of phrase
A symbol of rotational motion 
. Appar-
ently on the basis of the bronze forms e.g. 
, 
Shirakawa sees it as depicting a current swirling 
round. SS1984:86-7; QX2000:174.
Mnemonic: CO-AXIAL ROTATION
KAI, mawaru/su
turn, rotate
6 strokes
回
L4
92

The 160 Second Grade Characters  69
Traditional 會. Early forms (OBI and bronze) 
show 
 and 
. Upper and middle parts are 
typically seen as showing lid over vessel or 
pot – probably cooking pot. Putting a lid on 
a pot suggests a subsequent extended sense 
of ‘join, ‘come/put together’, and the phonetic 
会社 KAISHA　company
会釈 ESHAKU　greeting
国会 KOKKAI　the Diet
element of this graph (top strokes) is also taken 
to have that meaning. Alternatively, regarding 
the lower element, Karlgren suggests a stand, 
while Shirakawa takes it to be a rice steamer. 
會 was abbreviated to 会on the basis of cursive 
forms. MR2007:323-4; TA1965:643-5; YK1976:87; 
AS2007:287-8; BK1957:95-6; SS1984:86; 
FC1974:v1:1082-3. Suggest remembering its 
present form as person(s) 人 41, 二 65 ‘two’, and 
nose厶, and imagine you’re in New Zealand for 
a Maori greeting that entails rubbing noses. 
Mnemonic: TWO PERSONS’ NOSES MEET
KAI, E, au
meet
6 strokes
会
L5
93
海軍  KAIGUN　navy
日本海  NIHONKAI　Japan Sea
海辺  umibe　seaside
Bronze 
. Has ‘water’ 氵 42, and 每 225 (‘eve-
ry’) as phonetic with associated sense widely 
taken as ‘dark’ (or similar). In Tōdō’s word-family 
KAI, umi
sea
9 strokes
海
絵画   KAIGA   picture, painting
口絵   kuchiE   frontispiece   
絵本   EHON   picture-book
KAI, E
picture
12 strokes
絵
L4
L3
94
95
‘black, dark’. Ma notes that one of the mean-
ings of 每 is ‘dark’, and Katō also points to early 
use of 每 in the sense of ‘dark grey’, and links 
this to the ocean. Schuessler notes that in early 
China (the Zhou dynasty) the words for ‘ocean/
sea’ and ‘dark’ were close in pronunciation. 
MR2007:220; KJ1970:149; AS2007:270, 288; 
OT1968:548.
Mnemonic: EVERY DROP OF WATER ENDS UP 
IN THE SEA
Traditional 繪. A graph of relatively late origin 
(Shuowen) 
. Right-hand element is phonetic, 
meaning ‘join, come together’ (see 会 93 
‘meet’), and is combined here with 糸 29 
‘thread’ to represent initially a meaning such as 
‘embroidered pattern’, but later more broadly 
to include drawings or pictures in general. 
SS1984:92; KJ1970:321; YK1976:90-91.
Mnemonic: THREADS MEET IN EMBROIDERED 
PICTURE  
外人   GAIJIN   foreigner
外科   GEKA   surgery
外側   sotogawa   outside
GAI, GE, soto, hoka, 
hazusu/reru 
outside, other, undo, 
miss
5 strokes
外
L5
96
Bronze 
; seal 
. Interpretations vary, but 
it is widely agreed that 卜 signifi es divination, 
as practiced in ancient China. The shape 卜 
represents cracks in the surface of turtle shells 
etc (see too 占1598). Opinions diff er regard-
ing left-hand element 夕. Ma and Katō see it 
as 夕 46 ‘moon’, i.e. night. The Shuowen notes 
that divination was normally done at dawn, 
thus suggesting doing something outside 
norms, hence an extended meaning of ‘outside’. 
Schuessler accepts 夕46 as ‘moon’ but treats 
it only as phonetic. Shirakawa, though, takes 
夕 as ‘meat, fl esh’ (see 肉 209), noting animal 
sacrifi ces were made during the divination pro-
cess. MR2007:359-60; KJ1970:91; AS2007:506; 
SS1984:98-9. 
Mnemonic:  CRESCENT MOON WITH A CRACK 
ON THE OUTSIDE?!

70  The 160 Second Grade Characters
角度 KAKUDO　angle
角笛 tsunobue　bugle, horn
街角 machikado　street corner
KAKU, tsuno, kado
horn, angle, corner 
7 strokes
角
L3
97
OBI 
. Based on pictograph of horn of ox, 
sheep, or similar animal; ‘corner, angle’ may 
be extended senses from protruding horn. 
MR2007:306; MS1995:v2:1182-3; YK1976:194-5.
Mnemonic: ANGULAR HORN IS QUITE 
SQUARE WITH BROKEN TIP
気楽  KIRAKU　comfort
楽器  GAKKI　instrument
楽しみ  tanoshimi　pleasure
GAKU, RAKU, ta-
noshii/mu
pleasure, music
13 strokes
楽
L4
98
Traditional 樂. Interpretations vary. OBI form 
; bronze 
. OBI form is seen as i) an oak/ 
horse chestnut tree (Yamada, Katō), spe-
cifi cally with silkworm cocoons (Mizukami) 
or threads (Ogawa) in it; or ii) as a musical 
instrument (Ma, Shirakawa) – Shirakawa sees 
it as a handbell with wooden handle, rung 
to please the deities. Tōdō is of the view the 
graph originally meant ‘make a loud noise’, 
later borrowed for ‘music’. The element 白 69 
(‘white’) was added at bronze stage, possibly 
as a phonetic, but could be semantic (or both), 
as it might originally have depicted an acorn. 
Schuessler notes relationship with ‘joy’ has 
been much debated. YK1976:488; KJ1970:196; 
MS1995:v1:684-6; OT1968:513; MR2007:338-9; 
SS1984:111; TA1965:273-5; AS2007:596-7. Use 
木 73 ‘wood, tree’
Mnemonic: TASSELED DRUM ON WOODEN 
STAND MAKES PLEASING MUSIC
生活 SEIKATSU　life
活気 KAKKI　liveliness
活動 KATSUDŌ　activity
KATSU
activity, life
9 strokes
活
L3
99
A late graph (Shuowen). Has ‘water’ 氵42 and 
舌 755 (‘tongue’) as phonetic, with associated 
sense ‘move freely’. Tōdō includes it in two 
word-families: one means ‘give freedom/room’, 
the other signifi es ‘water moves strongly’. ‘Live/
life’ is an extended sense from ‘move strongly/
vigorously’. KJ1970:329-30; YK1976:198-9; 
TA1965:624-9, 638-9.
Mnemonic: WET TONGUE IS A SIGN OF AN 
ACTIVE LIFE
KAN, KEN, aida, ma
space, gap
12 strokes
間
L5
100
Bronze  and seal (Shuowen) 
 forms show
月 18 ‘moon’ through 門 231 ‘gate’, as does the 
traditional form, though in modern times 月
has been replaced by 日 66 ‘day/sun’. The ‘moon’ 
時間   JIKAN　hour, time
人間   NINGEN　human being
間違い  machigai　mistake
component is felt by Katō and Ogawa to be a 
phonetic, though the Late Han sound values 
for 間 and月seem to be markedly diff erent. Per-
haps for this reason Qiu prefers a semantic role 
for 月 and believes the graph ‘shows a gate with 
an opening through which moonlight can be 
seen’. KJ1970:217-8; OT1968:1058; AS2007:303, 
595; QX2000:192. 
Mnemonic: SUN SHINES THROUGH GAP IN 
SALOON DOORS 

The 160 Second Grade Characters  71
丸薬  GAN’YAKU　pill
丸み  marumi　roundness
日本丸  NIPPON-maru　‘HMS’ Nippon
A late graph (Shuowen); seal script form is 
. 
Interpretations diff er. There is general agree-
ment that the enclosed element in seal script is 
人 41 ‘person’. 厂 (in mirrored form) is taken as 
GAN, maru, marui
round, circle, ball, 
ship-mark
3 strokes
丸
岩石   GANSEKI　rock
岩屋   iwaya　cave
火成岩  KASEIGAN　igneous rock
顔面  GANMEN　face
顔色  kaoiro　complexion
顔付き  kaotsuki　countenance
汽車 KISHA　steam train
汽船 KISEN　steamship
汽笛 KITEKI　steam whistle
GAN, iwa
rock, crag
8 strokes
GAN, kao
face
18 strokes
KI
steam, vapor
7 strokes
岩
顔
汽
L3
L3
L4
L1
101
102
103
104
A late graph (post-Shuowen). Has 山 26 ‘moun-
tain’ and 石 47 ‘stone, rock’. Tōdō includes it 
in a word-family meaning ‘angular and hard’. 
YK1976:108; TA1965:866-8.
Mnemonic: STONY MOUNTAIN IS ALL ROCK
Bronze 
 consists of a head (頁) exaggerated, 
and 彦 (NJK; male name; etymology disputed). 
Relatively late origin (Shuowen). ‘Water’ 氵42, 
and 气 ‘vapor, steam’ (see 12) which also serves 
as phonetic. KJ1970:230; GY2008:498.
Mnemonic: STEAM COMPRISES WATERY 
VAPORS
phonetic with associated meaning ‘roll over and 
over’ (Katō) or ‘round’ (Yamada).  Tōdō includes 
the underlying word in a word-family mean-
ing ‘round; surround’, and takes 厂 as semantic 
(see ‘cliff ’ 47, being based on pictograph for the 
same) as well as phonetic, to give ‘person roll-
ing themselves into ball shape at foot of cliff , to 
hide’. KJ1970:336-7; YK1976:107-8; TA1965:611-
19. We suggest 九 13 ‘nine’, plus extra stroke to 
‘round off ’.
Mnemonic: NINE IS ROUNDED OFF WITH AN 
EXTRA STROKE
Katō sees 彦 here as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘forehead’, and 顔 itself originally mean-
ing ‘forehead’. Shirakawa sees 彦 as depicting 
tattooing of forehead as marking adulthood. 
‘Face’ shows minor semantic shift. KJ1970:222; 
SS1984:137-8,269.
Mnemonic: ONLY THREE HAIRS LEFT 
STANDING ON HEAD: GLUM FACE
記者 KISHA　reporter
記事 KIJI　article
日記 
NIKKI　diary
KI
chronicle
10 strokes
記
L3
105
Relatively late (Shuowen). Has 言 118 ‘words’ 
and 己 866 (‘self’, originally ‘twisted thread’) 
with associated sense taken as i] ‘record’, thus 
‘record words’ (Katō, Yamada), or ii] ‘something 
twisted is straightened’, thus ‘put confused mat-
ters in order’ (Tōdō). TA1965:127-8; KJ1970:233-
4; YK1976:113-4. 
Mnemonic: A WORDY CHRONICLE WITH A 
TWIST IN IT

72  The 160 Second Grade Characters
牛肉  GYŪNIKU　beef
牛耳る  GYŪJIru*　control someone
牛飼い ushigai　cowherd
帰化  KIKA　naturalization
帰省  KISEI　homecoming
帰り道  kaerimichi　way back
弓道  KYŪDŌ　archery
弓状  KYŪJŌ　arch
弓取り  yumitori　archer
GYŪ, ushi
cow, bull
4 strokes
KI, kaeru
return
10 strokes
KYŪ, yumi
bow, archery, arc
3 strokes
牛
帰
弓
L4
L4
L1
108
106
107
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional 歸. Interpretations 
vary. The right side 帚 element occurs in OBI 
texts as a pictograph for ‘broom held in hand’, 
and then also to represent the word for ‘wife’ 
(otherwise written unambiguously as 婦 800). 
The meaning ‘return’ seems related to the 
ancient custom of a groom going to the home 
of his new bride to collect her, and for them to 
return to his own home.  Katō and Yamada take  
Based on pictograph of a bow. Some OBI and 
bronze forms include the bowstring 
, others 
do not; bowstring is omitted in seal script 
(Shuowen) onwards. Other meanings 
such as ‘arc’ by extension. MR2007:483; 
MS1995:v1:466-7.
Mnemonic: STRINGLESS BOW
the top left element of 歸 as phonetic, with 
associated meaning ‘follow’, while Ogawa con-
siders the lower left-hand element 止143 ‘stop’ 
serves in this role, with the same meaning. For 
Shirakawa, alternatively, the top left element 
of the traditional form at the OBI stage shows 
pieces of raw meat used as part of a ceremony 
to mark the return of soldiers to camp. Present 
form has a much simplifi ed left-hand element 
(similar to ‘cut/sword’ determinative 198刂) to 
represent combined upper and lower left-hand 
elements. MR2007:377,464; KJ1970:254-5; 
YK1976:113; OT1968:540; SS1984:144.
Mnemonic: RETURN WITH WIFE CARRYING 
BROOM AND SWORD
Based on pictograph of the head of a cow or 
bull. At the OBI stage 
, the horns are promi-
nent. Opinion is divided as to whether the cross 
line indicates ears or crown of the head. Katō 
favors a perspective from behind the head. 
MR2007:229-30; QX2000:181; KJ1985:396.
Mnemonic: COW WITH EARS AND BROKEN 
HORN
金魚  KINGYO　goldfi sh   
魚釣り  uotsuri　angling
魚屋  sakanaya　fi shmonger
Based on the pictograph of a whole fi sh, e.g. 
bronze form 
. MR2007:454; QX2000:45. As a 
mnemonic we suggest taking the four strokes 
of the tail as the ‘fi re’ determinative 灬 8.
Mnemonic: FISH WITH SQUARE BODY AND 
FIERY TAIL
GYO, uo, sakana
fi sh
11 strokes
魚
L5
109

The 160 Second Grade Characters  73
東京 TŌKYŌ　Tokyo
上京 JŌKYŌ　going to capital
京浜 KEIHIN　Tokyo-Yokohama
勉強 BENKYŌ　study
強盗 GŌTŌ　burglar/burglary
強み tsuyomi　strong point
KYŌ, KEI
capital
8 strokes
KYŌ, GŌ, shiiru,
tsuyoi/meru/maru 
strength, compel
11 strokes
京
強
L4
L4
110
111
Typical OBI 
; bronze 
. OBI forms seem to 
show some sort of building seemingly on top 
of a hill or artifi cially raised mound of earth. 
Katō and Ogawa favour this interpretation. In 
ancient China nobles often lived in houses el-
Seal 
. According to Qiu, 强 (a variant of 強; 
standard in PRC usage) originally refers to type 
of ‘insect’ 虫 60, but came to be used as substi-
tute for another graph of more complex shape, 
i.e. 彊. In part, this was because pronunciation 
for the two words concerned in early Chinese 
represented by 強/强 and 彊 was identical, if 
we accept Schuessler’s reconstruction of sound 
evated above the general populace. Shirakawa, 
by contrast, interprets both OBI and bronze 
forms as showing a watchtower over an arched 
gate. Either way, the graph can be taken as a 
structure controlled by those in positions of 
power, leading to extended meanings such as 
‘great’ and ‘capital (city)’ KJ1970:345; OT1968:38; 
SS1984:190-91. Suggest take graph as tōrō 
(stone garden lantern).
Mnemonic: FANCY LANTERN SYMBOLISES 
THE CAPITAL
values. Latter graph is made up of 弓 ’bow’ 107 
and two ‘fi eld’ graphs 田 63 with three straight 
dividing lines (note that as independent graph 
this component here had the sense of ‘bound-
ary’). The meaning of 彊, fi rst found in OBI texts, 
is tentatively taken as ‘strong bow’ by Tōdō, 
who sees ‘unmoving’ – and thereby ‘strong’ – 
as extended senses of ‘boundary’. As for 弓, 
it is thought that the bow, being of standard 
length, may have had the additional role of be-
ing a convenient tool for making land measure-
ments. QX2000:358; AS2007:427; MR2007:484; 
TA1965:394-5. Suggest taking ム as a nose. 
Mnemonic: STRONG BOW AIMED AT 
INSECT’S NOSE
On the basis of the OBI 
 and bronze 
  
forms, the components of this graph are con-
sidered to be 爻 roof crossbeams (represent-
ing a building), 子 27 ‘child’, and 攴/攵 a hand 
教会  KYŌKAI　church
教室  KYŌSHITSU　classroom
教え子  oshiego　pupil
近所 KINJO　neighborhood
最近 SAIKIN　recently
近道 chikamichi　shortcut
holding a stick, meaning ‘strike, beat, compel’ 
(distinguish 攵 from 夂 ‘descending foot’; see 
Appendix). That is, this was a school where 
children were taught by coercive methods; 
Shirakawa says it was children of nobility who 
were taught by elders. By extension, the graph 
came to be used for ‘teach’. Modern form has 
equivalent to 耂, known as the ‘old man’ deter-
minative. SS1984:195; KJ1970:173; OT1968:439.
Mnemonic: OLD MAN, STICK IN HAND, 
TEACHES CHILD TO COUNT BEAMS
KYŌ, oshieru
teach
11 strokes
KIN, chikai
near
7 strokes
教
近
L4
L4
112
113
Seal 
. Has ⻌ 85 ‘walk along road, go’, and 斤
1233 (‘ax’) as phonetic with associated sense ‘a 
little’. ‘Near’ is an extended sense based on ‘walk 
a short distance’. MR2007:503; KJ1970:285; 
OT1968:993; TA1960:695-8.
Mnemonic: GO TO AN AX NEARBY

74  The 160 Second Grade Characters
父兄  FUKEI　guardians
兄弟  KYŌDAI　brothers
兄さん  niisan*　elder brother
KEI, KYŌ, ani
elder brother
5 strokes
兄
L4
114
OBI forms 
, 
; seal 
. Lower element, 
which in OBI has 人 ‘person’ or 卩 ‘kneeling per-
son’ (see 41), changes to another determinative 
(no.10) for ‘person’, viz. 儿 (see also 41) in seal 
form. Analyses vary. In one view, shows child 
with big head (taking 口 as standing for ‘head’). 
In another view, 口 22 ‘mouth; speak’, and 儿 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘big’, giving 
‘loud/big voice’, and by extension ‘big’ > ‘big/
elder brother’ (both views noted in Mizukami). 
Alternatively some scholars take as ‘person who 
utters incantations/prayers’ (Ma, Shirakawa). 
KJ1970:348-9; MR2007:397; SS1984:226; 
MS1995:v1:90-91.
Mnemonic: ELDER BROTHER IS JUST MOUTH 
AND LEGS
形式的 KEISHIKITEKI　formal
人形  NINGYŌ　doll
形見  katami　keepsake
Seal forms 
, 
. Relatively late origin 
(Shuowen). Interpretations vary. Has 彡 ‘color, 
brush pattern’ (etc.) (determinative no. 59), 
and left-hand element identical with or close 
in shape to 井 1575 ‘well’. In one view, taken as 
Of quite late origin (Shuowen) 
. Varied in-
terpretations. The modern form comprises the 
determinative 言 118 ‘words/say’ and 十 35 ‘ten’.  
In OBI and bronze texts, a symbol close in shape 
to 十 represented the word for ‘seven’, not ‘ten’, 
but by the time of the Shuowen dictionary of 
KEI, GYŌ, kata(chi)
shape, form
7 strokes
形
合計  GŌKEI　sum total
計算  KEISAN　calculation 
速度計 SOKUDOKEI　speedometer
元気  GENKI　health, vigor
元来  GANRAI　originally
元通り  motodōri　as before
KEI, hakaru
measure
9 strokes
GEN, GAN, moto
origin, source
4 strokes
計
元
L3
L4
L4
115
116
117
around 100AD we fi nd 十 being used for ‘ten’. 
Ogawa takes ‘words’ together with the number 
‘ten’ as combining to give meanings such as 
‘count, calculate, plan’. Qiu prefers to regard 
it simply as an abstract geometric symbol. 
Shirakawa is alone in looking to interpret the 
right-hand element of this graph as originally 
having links to the ancient Chinese practice 
of divination (卜, see 96), speculating it was 
misinterpreted as 十. OT1968:920; QX2000:18, 
31, 32; SS1984:230.
Mnemonic:  COUNTING IN TENS MAKES IT 
EASY TO MEASURE
OBI and bronze forms depict side view of a 
person with exaggeratedly large head 
, to 
convey meanings such as ‘head’ and ‘begin-
ning’. The modern form uses 儿 for ‘person’ (see 
41). MR2007:209; SS1984:267-8; QX2000:182; 
YK1976:146. Use 二 65 ‘two’.
Mnemonic: TWO BENT PERSONS OF SAME 
ORIGIN
consisting of 彡 meaning ‘writing brush hairs’, 
and 开 as phonetic with associated sense ‘imi-
tate, model after’, giving ‘model, copy’ (Katō). 
Another analysis treats as 彡 ‘pattern’, and 开/井 
as semantic and phonetic meaning ‘square 
frame’, giving ‘mold (to make copies)’ (Tōdō). 
Shirakawa also sees 开/井 as representing 
a frame or mold. TA1965:501-3; SS1984:227; 
KJ1970:359; KJ1985:214.
Mnemonic: THREE STROKES NEXT TO A GRID 
FORM IS A DISTINCTIVE SHAPE

The 160 Second Grade Characters  75
発言 HATSUGEN　statement
無言 MUGON　silence
言葉 kotoba　word
原子 GENSHI　atom
原文 GENBUN　original text
草原 kusahara　grassy plain
戸外 KOGAI　outdoors
戸主 KOSHU　head of house
戸口 toguchi　doorway
GEN, GON, koto, iu
word, say, speak
7 strokes
GEN, hara
plain, origin
10 strokes
KO, to
door
4 strokes
言
原
戸
L5
L3
L3
118
119
120
Typical OBI form 
. Interpretations vary. Some 
commentators (Karlgren, Ma) take this to be 
based on a pictograph of a fl ute, and treat 
‘words, speak’ as a loan usage. Others diff er, 
typically taking it as 口 22 ‘mouth’ with a pho-
netic element (interpretations of which vary), 
but Shirakawa takes it as a tattooing needle 
for oath-taking with receptacle for the written 
oath. BK1957:80; MR2007:256; KJ1970:386-7; 
YK1976:162; SS1984:268-9.
Mnemonic:  MOUTH SPEAKS THREE AND A 
BIT WORDS
There is agreement that the bronze forms 
 
depict a spring gushing out from the foot 
of a cliff , and is thus the early version for the 
word later represented by 源 864. This led to 
an extended meaning of ‘source/origin’. The 
graph acquired the meaning of ‘plain, open 
country’, but this is a borrowed sense originally 
represented by a much more complex graph. 
QX2000:193, 329; SS1984:269; KJ1970:631-2. As 
a mnemonic, we suggest taking it as 厂 47 ‘cliff ’, 
白 69 ‘white’ and 小 38 ‘little’.
Mnemonic:  ORIGINALLY CLIFF WITH A LITTLE 
WHITE SPRING, NOW A PLAIN
Based on OBI and bronze pictographs of a 
single-leaf door . In similar fashion, the 
double-leaf door or gate is represented in mod-
ern script as 門 231. MR2007:457; QX2000:180; 
SS1984:273. Take top horizontal line as a ceiling.
Mnemonic:  SINGLE-LEAF DOOR UNDER A 
CEILING
復古  FUKKO　restoration
古着  furugi　old clothes
考古学 KŌKOGAKU　archeology
KO, furui
old
5 strokes
古
L5
121
OBI 
; typical bronze forms 
, 
. Views vary. 
Katō and Tōdō take as showing old skull, ‘old’ 
then being an extended meaning; Katō notes 
that in ancient China skulls were revered as 
representing spirits of the dead. Shirakawa 
takes the lower element not as ‘mouth, say’ 
口 22 but ‘receptacle’, and takes the graph 
as showing shield placed over receptacle for 
prayers or spells. Analysis along the lines of ‘ten 
mouths’ (though a useful mnemonic) in the 
sense of ‘relate past’ or similar fails to take into 
account the OBI and bronze forms for 十 35 
‘ten’. KJ1970:330-31; TA1965:385-9; SS1984:273-
4. Take as 十 35 ‘ten’, and 口 22 ‘say’. 
Mnemonic:  AN OLD ORAL TALE TOLD TEN 
TIMES OVER 

76  The 160 Second Grade Characters
午後 GOGO　p.m., afternoon
午前 GOZEN　a.m., morning
正午 SHŌGO　noon
GO
noon
4 strokes
午
L5
122
Based on pictograph of a pestle: OBI 
; bronze 
; Shuowen 
. Associated with the horse in 
the context of the Twelve Earthly Branches, a 
traditional classifi catory system employed from 
the Shang Dynasty to denote hours of the day, 
compass points, and so on. The ‘hour of the 
Horse’ (actually two hours) was the seventh of 
the Twelve Branches, and corresponded rough-
ly to 11 a.m. to 1 p.m., hence the extended 
meaning of ‘noon’. Distinguish from 牛 108 ‘cow’. 
QX2000:335; SS1984:282; AS2007:519.
Mnemonic: COW BROKE TIP OFF HORN AT 
NOON
以後 IGO　after
後半 KŌHAN　second half
後味 atoaji　aftertaste
GO, KŌ, ushiro, ato, 
nochi, okureru
behind, after, delay
9 strokes
後
L5
123
Bronze 
; seal 
. Analyses vary. Taken in one 
view (Katō) as 
 meaning ‘go back/backwards’, 
with 幺 29 (‘fi ne threads, small’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘go’, giving ‘go back/
語調  GOCHŌ　tone of voice
物語  monogatari　saga
日本語  NIHONGO　Japanese lang.
GO, kataru
tell, speak, talk
14 strokes
語
L5
124
Bronze 
; Shuowen form 
. Has 言 118 
‘words, language’, and 吾 (NJK, ‘I/we’) as 
backwards’. ‘Behind, after’ and ‘be behind, 
put afterwards’, etc. are all in the same word-
family (Schuessler). Katō takes the lower 
right-hand element in 後 as 夂 (‘descending 
foot’ [determinative no.34]) meaning ‘go’, but 
Tōdō takes it as ‘walk slowly, drag foot’, which 
is the sense normally attributed to 夊 (deter-
minative 35); see Appendix.  TA1965:304-5; 
OT1968:229; KJ1970:404; AS2007:280. Take 夂 
as crosslegged, 彳131 ‘go’. 
Mnemonic: GO CROSSLEGGED ON 
THREADING ROAD AND FALL BEHIND
phonetic with associated sense taken as ‘defend 
verbally’ (to questions), or ‘exchange’ (Ogawa, 
Tōdō). In latter case, ‘tell, speak’ is a generalized 
sense. KJ1970:395; SS1984:284; OT1968:930; 
TA1965:427. Take 吾 as 五 21 ‘fi ve’ and 口 22 
‘mouth’.
Mnemonic: FIVE MOUTHS SPEAK MANY 
WORDS
Ma considers the OBI form 
 to show an ax-
head and Katō similarly takes it as an ax, but 
questionable. Shirakawa interprets as some 
工場 KŌJŌ　factory
人工 JINKŌ　man-made
大工 DAIKU　carpenter
kind of tool also. Based on a bronze form with 
thicker bottom stroke, Gu takes as tool for 
compacting soil. Ogawa believes a chisel is rep-
resented, but this is less convincing. Others see 
it as an adze-cum-square. By the bronze stage 
it had acquired its modern form. MR2007:308; 
KJ1970:405-6; SS1984:285; OT1968:309; 
GY2008:23.
Mnemonic: WORK WITH CARPENTER’S 
SET-SQUARE
KŌ, KU
work
3 strokes
工
L4
125

The 160 Second Grade Characters  77
公共  KŌKYŌ　public
公平  KŌHEI　fairness
紀州公 KISHŪKŌ　Lord Kishu
KŌ, ōyake
public, fair, lord
4 strokes
公
L3
126
OBI 
, 
; seal 
 . Views vary. One takes 八 
‘eight’ in its original sense ‘divide’, ‘open up’, and 
lower element (口) as ‘enclose, surround’. Over-
all meaning is then taken as either ‘open up a 
physical area’ (Shirakawa takes as walled area 
for ceremonies at Court), or ‘open up something 
enclosed /kept by individuals)’, giving ‘open 
up’, and by extension ‘public; fair (distribution)’ 
(Mizukami, Shirakawa, Yamada, Katō). A minor-
ity view takes the lower element in OBI as a re-
ceptacle, treating the whole graph as originally 
meaning ‘(lidded) jar’, and takes other mean-
ings as loan uses (Ma). At seal stage, the lower 
element was changed to 厶; Katō says changed 
in error, but 厶 was originally (OBI) a closed 
circle shape (‘enclose and make one’s own’; 
later 私 887 ‘I, me’). MS1995:v1:100-02,188-90; 
SS1984:285-6; YK1976:173; KJ1970:396-7; 
MR2007:228. We suggest taking 厶 as a nose, 
and 八 70 in its modern meaning ‘eight’. 
Mnemonic: EIGHT LORDS SHOW NOSE IN 
PUBLIC
広大 KŌDAI　vast
広島 Hiroshima　place-name
広告 KŌKOKU　advertisement
KŌ, hiroi/geru/garu
wide, spacious
5 strokes
広
L3
127
Bronze 
; traditional 廣. One of various graphs 
of the most numerous category, the semantic-
phonetic compound type (see Introduction). 
Based on OBI and bronze forms, Qiu assesses 
early equivalents of the determinative 广 as 
‘a kind of structure’, and as one simpler than 
that represented by the ‘roof’ determinative 
宀 30. Tōdō takes the phonetic component 
黄 as having an associated sense ‘spread out’; 
Shirakawa and Katō are in general agreement. 
MR2007:408; QX2000:180; TA1965:414-5; 
SS1984:287; KJ1970:324. We suggest taking the 
modern form’s 厶 as a nose. 
Mnemonic: SPACIOUS BUILDING TO NOSE 
AROUND IN
交通 KŌTSŪ　traffi  c
外交 GAIKŌ　diplomacy
交換 KŌKAN　exchange
OBI 
; bronze 
; and seal 
 forms show 
fl ames over a kneeling person’s head; 
KŌ, majiru, kawasu
mix, exchange
6 strokes
交
日光 
NIKKŌ　sunlight
光年 KŌNEN　light year
光学 KŌGAKU　optics
KŌ, hikari, hikaru 
light, shine
6 strokes
光
L3
L4
128
129
interpreted as conveying the meaning ‘light’ 
(as opposed to darkness). At the seal stage, the 
lower element was changed to 儿‘person’ (see 
41). MR2007:425; SS1984:289; KJ1970:325-6. 
Take modern form as ‘person’ 儿 and 
 as ‘odd’ 
fl ames 火 8. 
Mnemonic: LIGHT SHINES FROM ODD 
FLAMES OVER PERSON’S FLAT HEAD
The OBI and bronze forms show a person with 
legs crossed 
; leading to extended meanings 
such as ‘exchange’. MR2007:429; SS1984:288; 
KJ1970:173; OT1968:37. We suggest taking the 
modern form as 六 80 ‘six’ over a cross.
Mnemonic: MIX SIX CROSSES – FAIR 
EXCHANGE

78  The 160 Second Grade Characters
OBI 
; seal 
. OBI forms are very close to or 
the same as those for 老 638 ‘aged, old’; they 
depict an old person with bent back and long 
hair, leaning on a stick. At the bronze stage, the 
lower element was changed in some cases from 
the stick shape to 丂 (CO ‘fl oating weed’), as in 
the seal form. This serves here as phonetic with 
考案  KŌAN　idea 
参考  SANKŌ　reference
考え事  kangaegoto　a concern
KŌ, kangaeru
consider
6 strokes
考
L4
130
associated sense ‘bent over’ (or Ogawa says 
‘old’), giving a word for ‘old person’ diff erent in 
early Chinese pronunciation from that written 
as 老 . 考 was subsequently borrowed for its 
sound value to write another word meaning 
‘examine, consider’. MR2007:393; OT1968:805; 
KJ1970:891-2; MS 1995:V2:1048-51. We suggest 
taking 耂 (which is actually nicknamed the ‘old 
man’ determinative) as ‘entering the ground’ 
(see ‘ground’ 土 64), and the lower element as a 
(physically) crooked old man.
Mnemonic: CROOKED OLD MAN CONSIDERS 
BURIAL IN THE GROUND
実行 JIKKŌ　carrying out
行列 GYŌRETSU　procession
行方 yukue*　whereabouts
KŌ, GYŌ, iku, yuku,
okonau
go, conduct, line
6 strokes
行
L5
131
OBI forms such as 
 show this to be based 
on pictograph of crossroads. It has a range of 
extended meanings such as ‘go, travel’, ‘act’, 
‘be in line’. In broad terms this same semantic 
range can be seen in Chinese from early texts 
(OBI) onwards. SS1984:291; KJ1970:157-8; 
QX2000:180, 208; AS2007:540. As determina-
tive, abbreviated to 彳, meaning ‘move/road’.
Mnemonic: GO TO THE CROSSROADS IN A LINE
OBI and bronze forms such as 
 and 
 show 
a structure – possibly a watchtower – on top 
of a hill or mound, quite similar in shape to OBI 
高原 KŌGEN　plateau
最高 SAIKŌ　highest
高値 takane　high price
KŌ, taka, takai 
tall, high, sum
10 strokes
高
L5
132
forms for 京 110 ‘capital’.  Ma interprets the bot-
tom element 口 as representing a hollowed-out 
room in the hill or mound, while Katō takes it as 
an entrance, and Shirakawa alternatively takes 
it instead as a receptacle for prayers or incanta-
tions. MR2007:325-6; KJ1970:164; SS1984:304-5; 
TA1965:262. As with 110, we suggest associat-
ing graph with a tōrō (stone garden lantern). 
Mnemonic: TALL LANTERN-LIKE WATCHTOWER 
ON A HIGH HILL
Traditional 黃. Some OBI and other early forms 
such as 
 and 
 seem to depict a fl aming 
arrow with what is probably a counterweight, 
while others of a diff erent shape, such as 
, 
黄葉 KŌYŌ　yellow leaves
黄金 ŌGON　gold
黄色(い) kiiro(i)　yellow
are seen as showing a person standing wearing 
what is taken to be a jeweled belt. The color 
of the fl aming arrow or belt by extension was 
used for the word for ‘yellow’. MR2007:499-500; 
OT1968:1162; KJ1970:962; SS1984:306. Mne-
monically challenging, but we suggest using 
艹 53 ‘grass’ and taking 田 as 63 ‘fi eld’ as partial 
prompts.
Mnemonic: ARROW BURNS YELLOW WITH 
GRASS FROM FIELD
KŌ, Ō, ki
yellow
11 strokes
黄
L 4
133

The 160 Second Grade Characters  79
合理   GŌRI　rationality
合戦   KASSEN　battle
話し合い  hanashiai　discussion 
OBI ; bronze 
. In one view, seen as pic-
tograph of a receptacle with lid (Ogawa). 
GŌ, KATSU, au/waseru
meet, join, fi t
6 strokes
合
L 4
134
Alternatively, taken as 口 22 ‘mouth; speak’, and 
  as phonetic with associated sense ‘reply’, 
giving ‘reply (to questions)’. ‘Meet, put together, 
join’ are extended senses if the fi rst view above 
is followed, or loan uses in relation to the 
second. MR2007:323; OT1968:166; SS1984:317; 
MS1995:v1:212-3. 
Mnemonic: COVER FITS OVER A RECEPTACLE
幽谷   YŪKOKU　deep ravine
谷底   tanisoko　valley bottom
長谷川*  Hasegawa　a surname
OBI 
; bronze 
; seal 
. Views diff er. In one 
view, upper strokes in OBI and bronze are seen 
as water fl owing, and 口 as a (mountain) spring 
(Gu). Another view sees mountain slopes and 
valley depression (Shirakawa).  Yet again, the 
KOKU, tani 
valley, gorge
7 strokes
谷
L 3
135
upper strokes 
  are treated as meaning ‘open 
up’ (reduplication of 八 70 ‘divide up, open up’), 
combining with 口 22 ’mouth, cavity’ as se-
mantic and phonetic to give ‘wide open mouth’ 
(Katō); in this view, ‘mountain valley’ seems 
to be taken as an extended sense. Mizukami 
agrees broadly, but notes ‘cave from which 
spring water emerges’ as alternative mean-
ing. MR2007:450; SS1984:320-21; OT1968:946; 
KJ1985:573.
Mnemonic: DOUBLY WIDE OPEN VALLEY 
MOUTH
OBI 
 ; bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 國. OBI 
form has 戈 545 ‘halberd, arms’, and lower left 
口 here indicating ‘boundary’ to make up 戓, 
in one view meaning ‘defend defi ned area with 
arms’ (Shirakawa treats the area more specifi -
cally as fortifi ed town). Used in the sense ‘state’ 
外国 GAIKOKU　overseas
国家 KOKKA　state
国々 
kuniguni　nations
already from the Shang Dynasty. In bronze, 囗 
or 
 probably added to emphasize bounda-
ries. 国 is considered to represent a word in 
the same Chinese word-family as 域 828 ‘area, 
limits’ (Schuessler). There is an alternative 
interpretation of 戓 (see 828), but still includes 
the meaning ‘defi ned area’ as in the above 
view. MR2007:477; SS1984:321; KJ1970:28; 
YK1976:188-9; MS1995:v1:258-9,536-7; 
AS2007:268. We suggest taking the enclosed 
part of the modern form as 玉 15 ‘jewel’.
Mnemonic: A COUNTRY IS AN ENCLOSED 
JEWEL
KOKU, kuni
country, region
8 strokes
国
L 5
136
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 黑. Interpreta-
tions diff er somewhat (the top part of the 
graph is taken as representing, for instance, 
a primitive window or chimney or grille), but 
黒板 KOKUBAN　blackboard
黒海 KOKKAI　Black Sea
黒幕 kuroMAKU　manipulator
there is broad agreement that the depiction 
in the original bronze forms involves fl ames 
(now in its short form 灬 8) and smoke rising 
and causing an accumulation of soot, hence 
the extended meaning ‘black’. KJ1970:961; 
OT1968:1165; SS1984:322. We suggest taking 
里 238 as the graph for ‘village’, comprising 田 
63 ‘fi eld’ and 土 64 ‘ground’.
Mnemonic: GROUND IN BURNT FIELD IS 
BLACK
KOKU, kuroi
black
11 strokes
黒
L 4
137

80  The 160 Second Grade Characters
Originally the graph was just 乍, with OBI forms 
such as 
 showing what is seen as timber 
being cut with an ax. Some bronze forms have 
Etymology uncertain. Early forms 
, 
. There 
are numerous proposals for this graph, which 
appears from OBI onwards. Among them, Ma 
notes the view that it depicts a plant appear-
ing above the surface for the fi rst time. Ogawa 
and Shirakawa, by contrast, see it as a length 
今週 KONSHŪ　this week
今度 KONDO　this time
今頃 imagoro　around now
製作 SEISAKU　production
作品 SAKUHIN　a work
動作 DŌSA　action
天才 TENSAI　genius
五才 GOSAI　fi ve years old
才能 SAINŌ　talent 
細工  SAIKU　craftsmanship
細長い hosonagai　slender
細々 
 komagoma　in detail
The OBI forms such as 
 are taken by Katō and 
Ogawa to depict a roof covering some sort of 
object; Shirakawa interprets as a lid and stop-
per over a container. Either way, the meaning 
‘now’ represents a loan usage. KJ1970:175-6; 
OT1968:42; SS1984:325.
Mnemonic: NOW IS THE TIME TO COVER THAT 
OBJECT  
a hand appended; later this was dropped, and 
the ‘person’ determinative 亻 41 was added. 
‘To make’ evolved as an extended meaning.  
As the phonetic in 作, 乍 also has associated 
sense of ‘modifi ed, not genuine’ (cf English 
‘made up’). MS1995:v1:18-20, 54; KJ1970:435-6; 
OT1968:25,53. We suggest taking 乍 as a saw.
Mnemonic: PERSON USES SAW TO MAKE 
THINGS
KON, KIN, ima 
now
4 strokes
SAKU, SA, tsukuru
make, make up
7 strokes
SAI
talent, age, -year
3 strokes
SAI, hosoi, komakai
slender, fi ne
11 strokes
今
作
才
細
L5
L4
L3
L3
138
141
139
140
of wood secured in the ground, with a hori-
zontal length or bundle to form a cross shape; 
Shirakawa then hypothesizes that this served 
as a marker of sacred places. Katō follows 
the hypothesis of a noted Chinese scholar, 
who believes it depicts a river blocked up, 
with disastrous consequences. It is unclear 
as to how it gained its present meanings, but 
probably through loan usage. MR2007:341-2; 
OT1968:399; SS1984:334; KJ1970:420-21.
Mnemonic: PROPPING UP THE CROSS 
SHOWS TALENT
Late graph (Shuowen). Seal form 
 has 糸 29 
‘thread’ as semantic, and 囟 (CO originally a 
pictograph of skull or fontanelle) as phonetic, 
with associated sense ‘thin, slender’. The change 
from 囟 to 田 in standard script is due either 
to script regularization or mistaken analysis. 
KJ1970:469; YK1976:198; SS1984:338. We sug-
gest taking 田 as 63 ‘fi eld’.
Mnemonic: SLENDER PATH THREADS 
THROUGH FIELD

The 160 Second Grade Characters  81
計算 KEISAN　calculation
予算 YOSAN　budget
算数 SANSŪ　arithmetic
On the basis of the bronze form 
, Mizukami 
interprets the graph as consisting of 兮, mean-
ing ‘fl at’ or ‘balanced’ (according to Katō, CO 
丂 originally referred to waterweed spreading 
fl at over the surface, see 130), and 止 143 ‘stop’, 
SAN
reckon, count
14 strokes
算
中止  CHŪSHI　suspension
止め役  tomeYAKU　peacemaker
止め処  tomedo*　an end 
吹田市 SUItaSHI　Suita City
市場  SHIJŌ　market
魚市  uoichi　fi shmarket
一矢  ISSHI　retaliation
矢印  yajirushi　arrow sign
矢先に  yasaki ni　just on the point of
SHI, tomeru/maru
stop
4 strokes
SHI, ichi
city, market
5 strokes
SHI, ya
arrow
5 strokes
止
市
矢
L3
L4
L4
L1
142
143
144
145
OBI forms such as 
 and 
, already stylized, 
are taken as a person’s foot; ‘stop, remain’ is an 
extended sense (Qiu), but the graph can also 
indicate action with the feet, i.e., ‘go, move’ (see 
e.g. 歴 636 ‘istory’), apparently due to confu-
sion with several other early graphs similar in 
shape and pronunciation. MS1995:v1:702-03; 
QX2000:329; BK1957:253-4; OT1968:536, 25. 
Mnemonic: FOOTPRINT STOPS OVER LINE
giving an extended meaning of ‘stop/stay [at 
a place] and exchange items of equal value’, 
refl ecting an ancient barter system for goods. 
Ogawa is in general agreement. Shirakawa, less 
convincingly, takes the bronze form as a picto-
graph depicting a large sign to show where 
a market was being held. MS1995:v1:436-7; 
OT1968:313; SS1984:362-3; KJ1985:194. We 
suggest taking lower part as ‘cloth’ 巾 1232 and 
亠 as a top hat.
Mnemonic: GO TO MARKET TO BUY CLOTH 
AND TOP HAT 
OBI ; bronze 
. Based on a pictograph of an 
arrow. See also 黄 133 (‘yellow’) and 至 886 
(‘reach’). MS1995:v2:928-9; KJ1970:460-61; 
SS1984:363. We suggest taking the graph as 大 
56 ‘big’ with single top stroke as a broken tip. 
Mnemonic: BIG ARROW WITH BROKEN TIP
Relatively late origin (Shuowen) 
. The top 
element is ⺮ 58 ‘bamboo’, which Katō takes as 
referring to bamboo tallies used for counting 
in ancient times, together with 具 284 (‘equip-
ment, means’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘count’, giving ‘to count’. KJ1970:443; 
SS1984:353; OT1968:755, 98.
Mnemonic: USE BOTH HANDS TO COUNT ON 
A BAMBOO ABACUS
姉妹  SHIMAI　sisters
姉さん  neesan* elder sister
姉上  aneue　elder sister (formal)
SHI, ane
elder sister
8 strokes
姉
L4
146
Etymology disputed. Generally recognised from 
bronze stage onwards 
. Has 女 37 ‘woman’, 
and a phonetic interpreted in various ways, 
such as 市 144 (‘market’), with associated sense 
‘young plant sprouting’ (Katō), or as  (CO; ‘veg-
etation growing vigorously’) with associated 
sense ‘unequal’ (Mizukami, Tōdō) or ‘projecting’ 

82  The 160 Second Grade Characters
A graph of relatively late occurrence, initial 
forms 
 and 
. Mizukami interprets the top 
思想  SHISŌ　ideology
思考  SHIKŌ　thought
思い出 omoide　recollection
表紙 HYŌSHI　book cover
和紙 WASHI　Japanese paper
手紙 tegami　letter
SHI, omou
think
9 strokes
SHI, kami
paper
10 strokes
思
紙
L4
L4
147
148
element as CO 囟 ‘skull’, with 心 164 ‘mind, 
heart’; Ogawa is in agreement. Shirakawa 
takes the top element to represent ‘brain’. 
MS1995:v1:502-3; OT 1968:364; SS1984:368. 
We suggest taking top element as 田 63 ‘fi eld’ 
though it is incorrect as the etymology.
Mnemonic: I THINK MY HEART WILL ALWAYS 
BE IN MY FIELD
A late graph (Shuowen) . Traditionally the 
invention of paper has been attributed to Cai 
Lun, who did invent a type of coarse paper in 
AD105, but in earlier times scraps of diff erent 
fabrics and the like were used. Before paper 
appeared, texts in China were written on vari-
ous materials, the closest to paper being silk. 
This accounts for the use of 糸29, the ‘thread’ 
determinative. 氏 522 (which originally repre-
sented a ladle) serves as phonetic for ‘smooth’. 
SS1984:370; OT1968:769; KJ1985:474.
Mnemonic: APPLY LADLE TO THREADS TO 
MAKE PAPER
竜安寺 RYŌANJI　Ryoan Temple
寺院  JIIN　Buddhist temple
山寺  yamadera　mountain temple
Mizukami takes bronze forms 
 
 to combine 
‘hand’ 920 寸 orig. ‘hand’, with 止 143 ‘stop’, 
latter acting as phonetic with associated sense 
‘control’; Katō broadly agrees. Ogawa identifi es 
same two elements as ‘keep in the hand’. In-
stead of 止, Tōdō takes top element as 之 (NJK; 
‘move, go’, see 151). Note some OBI and bronze 
forms of 止 and 之 are very similar (之 might 
originally have depicted foot, like 止); Karlgren 
asserts 止 ‘is mostly used in the bone and the 
JI, tera
temple 
6 strokes
寺
L3
149
bronze inscriptions as loan for the homopho-
nous 之 in its various meanings’ (Schuessler 
has these two graphs as near-homophones, 
not complete homophones in Late Han times). 
Originally meaning ‘control with hand’, in Han 
times 寺 acquired the sense of ‘place to control/
administer’, and also – after transmission of 
Buddhism to China c.1st century A.D. – the more 
specialized sense of ‘Buddhist temple’. By cleri-
cal script stage upper element had changed 
to 土. MS1995:v1:392-3,18-19; KJ1970:480; 
OT1968:285; BK1957:253-4; AS2007:613; 
SK1984:230. Take as 土 64 ‘ground’ and 寸 920 
‘hand’.
Mnemonic: HAND OFFERS GROUND TO 
TEMPLE
(Ogawa). The Kangxi zidian dictionary lists both 
姉 and 姊, with the same meaning, but treats 
the latter as auxiliary to 姉, which stands as the 
main entry. MS1995:v1:320-21; KJ1970:14-15; 
TA1965:770-76; OT1968:255; ZY2009:v1:203-4. 
Mnemonic: WOMAN GOING TO MARKET IS 
AN ELDER SISTER

The 160 Second Grade Characters  83
As Mizukami and Ma note, OBI forms such as 
 have 之 ‘move, go’ (NJK graph taken either 
as foot moving away from boundary line or as 
vegetation sprouting up out of ground; see too 
149), here as semantic and phonetic meaning 
自分 
JIBUN　oneself
自然 
SHIZEN　Nature
自信 
JISHIN　self-confi dence
時代 JIDAI　era, period
二時 NIJI　two o’clock
時々 
tokidoki　sometimes
JI, SHI, mizukara
self
6 strokes
JI, toki
time, hour
10 strokes
自
時
L4
L5
150
151
‘move’, and 日 66 ‘sun, day’, to give a sense 
‘movement of the sun’, and then – by extension 
– ‘season, time’. Ogawa interprets instead as 
日 and 寺 149 (in later forms) as phonetic with 
associated meaning ‘go’. Came to be used for 
‘hour’ when the Twelve Branches were adopted 
to refer to the way a 24-hour day was divided 
up into twelve segments each of two hours. 
MS1995:v1:618-20; MR2007:352; SS1984:382; 
AS2007:463, 613; OT1968:468. Suggest 寺 149 
‘temple’ as a mnemonic.
Mnemonic: TELL TIME BY SUN ON TEMPLE 
室内 SHITSUNAI　indoors 
教室 KYŌSHITSU　classroom
室町 Muromachi　place/period name
OBI forms such as 
 depict ‘roof/building’ 宀 
30, under which there is a graph 
 interpreted 
SHITSU, muro
room, house
9 strokes
室
L4
152
as an arrow arriving at its target (or at least 
somewhere), to give the sense of ‘arrive, reach’ 
(modern 至: see 886 ‘reach’), with an over-
all extended meaning ‘place to shelter’, and 
thus ‘room’. MS1995: v1:370-01; SS1984:387; 
OT1968:277.
Mnemonic: ARROW REACHES ROOF OF 
ROOM
At the OBI stage, written simply with a graph 
 to represent a mound of earth or the 
earth deity (modern 土 64 ‘ground’). Eventu-
ally in bronze inscriptions written with the 
determinative 示 723 ‘show’ in original sense 
社会  SHAKAI　society
会社  KAISHA　company, fi rm
社交性 SHAKŌSEI　sociability
SHA, yashiro
shrine, company
7 strokes
社
L5
153
‘altar’ added in its short form 礻. Some bronze 
forms also have 木 73 ‘tree’ as an additional 
component, and this is taken as refl ecting the 
frequent custom of planting trees on these sa-
cred sites. Mizukami defi nes the original mean-
ing of this graph as ‘a place to revere where the 
earth deity is, who has the wondrous power to 
emit various things from within the earth’, and 
hence ‘shrine’. MS1995:v2:938-40; SS1984:391; 
OT1968:718. 
Mnemonic: GROUND IS A SHRINE
Based on pictograph of nose 
. Extended 
meaning ‘self’ refl ects custom of Chinese 
people visually referring to themselves by 
pointing to the nose, whereas Western people 
typically point at the chest. MR2007:287-8; 
MS1995:v2:1086-88; KJ1970:482-3. Use 目 76 
‘eye’.
Mnemonic: NOSE JUST A STROKE AWAY 
FROM THE EYE, SYMBOLISING SELF

84  The 160 Second Grade Characters
弱点 JAKUTEN　weak point
弱み yowami　weakness
弱虫 yowamushi　weakling
JAKU, yowai/meru
weak
10 strokes
弱
L4
154
Late occurrence (Shuowen). The early form (seal 
script) 
  is made up of two bows each with 
the three-stroke ‘embellishment’ 彡 115, and 
this leads Shirakawa to interpret the graph as 
depicting two ceremonial bows, i.e. ones not 
for use in warfare and therefore not robust, giv-
ing the sense of ‘weak’. Ogawa takes the early 
graph as representing a bow being bent on a 
frame so it could fl ex, then embellished, and by 
extension ‘weak’. SS1984:398; OT1968:340. We 
suggest taking 
 as double ‘ice determinative’ 
冫 401.
Mnemonic: ICED-UP BOWS ARE WEAK, 
DOUBLY SO 
首領  SHURYŌ　leader
首輪  kubiwa　necklace
首切り  kubikiri　decapitation
SHU, kubi
head, neck, chief
9 strokes
首
L4
155
OBI 
, 
; bronze 
. OBI forms clearly depict 
the head of an animal, some with horns 
(Karlgren). Some scholars (e.g. Mizukami, 
Shirakawa, Qiu) tend to see some bronze 
forms as showing hair attached to a person’s 
head or eye. ‘Chief’ is an extended meaning. 
MS1995:v2:1462-4; SS1984:401; QX2000:178; 
MR2007:401; BK1957:283-4. We suggest taking 
modern form as 自 150 ‘self/nose’ with brow 
and horns. 
Mnemonic: A NOSE, BROW AND HORNS 
SIGNIFY A HEAD
晩秋 BANSHŪ　late autumn
秋分 SHŪBUN　autumn equinox
秋空 akizora　autumn sky
Much variation in elements of OBI forms such as 
, 
, and also varied interpretations. Complex 
OBI forms seem to show fi re under some sort 
of creature, which Qiu interprets as a hornless 
dragon, but Ma takes as a cricket: quite possibly 
this element served as a phonetic.  Shirakawa 
SHŪ, aki
autumn
9 strokes
秋
L4
156
and Ogawa list a complex graph made up of 禾 
87 ‘grain plant’ on the left and 龜 ‘turtle’ over 灬 
8 ‘fi re’ on the right, taking the right-hand part 
as a phonetic for ‘burn’ or ‘gather’, though Qiu 
considers this to be a corrupt variant. Mizukami 
and Katō also list several simpler OBI forms that 
appear to depict a bundle of grain plants , 
and this can be more readily seen as referring 
to harvesting cereals, and by extension the 
season, autumn. MS1995:v2:962-4; QX2000:234; 
MR2007:424; SS1984:407; OT1968:730-1.
Mnemonic: RICE PLANTS (OR INSECTS!) CAN 
GET BURNED IN AUTUMN
週間  SHŪKAN　week
先週  SENSHŪ　last week
二週目  NISHŪme　second week
SHŪ
week
11 strokes
週
L5
157
A late graph (post-Shuowen). Has ⻌ 85 ‘walk, 
go’, and 周 532 ‘around’ as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘go round’. The extended usage for 
‘week’ based on going round one cycle, in this 
case a seven-day period, evolved through West -
ern infl uence, as traditionally in China and Japan 
a ten-day cycle had been the norm (see 旬1472). 
KJ1970:1514-5; YK1976:253; SS1984:409; 
DJ2009:v3:1069.
Mnemonic: ANOTHER WEEK GOES ROUND 

The 160 Second Grade Characters  85
OBI forms such as 
 have ‘(a type of) tree’ and 
日 66 ‘sun, day’, often with a third element 屯 
1806 (modern meaning ‘camp’). Some scholars 
(Mizukami, Katō) take the tree to be specifi cally 
a mulberry, though Ma points to OBI forms 
supporting his view of a more general sense 
青春 SEISHUN　youth
売春 BAISHUN　prostitution
春着 harugi　spring clothes
SHUN, haru
spring(-time)
9 strokes
春
L4
158
of ‘forest’. 屯 seems to serve as phonetic, but 
Schuessler sees a semantic role too: he notes 
the original meaning as ‘begin to grow’ (of 
plants in spring). As for the modern form of 
158, Qiu sees top part (top fi ve strokes) of 春 
as a fused version of the ‘plant’ determinative 
艸 53 with 屯. MS1995:v1:616-7; KJ1970:118; 
MR2007:224; AS2007:197; QX2000:20. Sug-
gest taking modern form as 三 25 ‘three’, 人 41 
‘person’ and 日 66 ‘sun’.
Mnemonic: THREE PEOPLE OUT IN THE 
SUN – MUST BE SPRING
OBI forms for this graph comprise four short 
vertical strokes 
, apparently contrasting with 
three for 小 38 ‘small’. There are varying views 
on the signifi cance of the fourth stroke. Ma, for 
instance, takes it as simply a means to visually 
distinguish the underlying word from the near-
書記  SHOKI　secretary
教科書 KYŌKASHO　text book 
葉書  hagaki　postcard
少年 SHŌNEN　a youth
少数 SHŌSŪ　minority
多少 TASHŌ　more or less
Bronze 
. The graph seems to occur very 
rarely in OBI, the graphs of which were typically 
carved directly into the bone or shell surface 
with a knife, though it should be noted that at 
SHO, kaku
write, text
10 strokes
SHŌ,sukunai,sukoshi
few, a little
4 strokes
書
少
L5
L5
159
160
homophone written 小, while Ogawa takes it 
as representing ‘one’, i.e. still a small number or 
‘few’. Qiu, by contrast, feels the word for ‘small’ 
was represented by both the three-dash and 
four-dash versions, and that the 小:少 distinc-
tion was a later development, the four-dash 
version having evolved into the modern 
form; Katō is of the same view. MR2007:226; 
OT1968:292; QX2000:175; KJ1970:606; 
AS2007:535,454.
Mnemonic: THREE WITH ONE IS STILL JUST 
A FEW 
least a small number of OBI texts were written 
fi rst with a brush and then incised. The bronze 
forms such as above depict a hand holding a 
writing brush (聿; see 400) over 者 314 (‘per-
son’) as phonetic – the latter later reduced to 
日– with associated sense such as ‘imitate’ or 
‘write’, giving ‘copy text, write’. MS1995:v1:632-3; 
KJ1970:491; OT1968:813.
Mnemonic:  BRUSH IN HAND WRITES TEXT IN 
LINES
会場 KAIJŌ　meeting place
入場 NYŪJŌ　admission
広場 hiroba　open space
JŌ, ba
place
12 strokes
場
L4
161
Possibly a relatively late graph (Shuowen) 
, 
though Mizukami lists forms which he believes 
to be OBI equivalents, depicting divided-up 
and leveled land 
. The later forms are taken as 
土 64 ‘earth, ground’, and 昜 (CO, original sense 
‘sun rises up’) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken as i] ‘remove obstructions from ground’, 
giving ‘ground made level by removing things’ 

86  The 160 Second Grade Characters
好色 KŌSHOKU　amorousness
色素 SHIKISO　pigment 
銀色 GIN’iro　silver color
A relatively late graph. The form 
 in the 
Shuowen is taken as showing a man bending 
SHOKU, SHIKI, iro
color, sex
6 strokes
色
食事  SHOKUJI　meal
食べ物 tabemono　food
食い物 kuimono　food, victim
中心 CHŪSHIN　core
心臓 SHINZŌ　heart
真心 magokoro　sincerity
SHOKU, taberu, kuu
food, eat
9 strokes
SHIN, kokoro
heart, mind
4 strokes
食
心
L4
L5
L4
162
163
164
Based on pictograph: OBI forms, e.g. , depict 
food piled up in vessel, with a top element 
taken as a lid (Qiu), or as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘bite’, giving ‘eat’ (Mizukami). As  a 
determinative in compound graphs, can be 
飠. MR2007:322; QX2000:183; OT1968:1114: 
MS1995:v2:1454-5.
Mnemonic: FOOD IN A VESSEL WITH LID ON 
TOP
Based on a pictograph: the bronze forms depict 
a heart 
, 
 as do the OBI forms listed by 
Ma. MR2007:433; SS1984:467; KJ1970:560. As 
a determinative, in compound graphs often in 
short form 忄.
Mnemonic: HEART HAS FOUR PARTS
over another bent person, to denote sexual 
intercourse. The lower element also has a pho-
netic role. Extended meanings include ‘sexual 
desire’, ‘beautiful woman’, ‘beautiful complex-
ion/color’. MS1995:v2:1104-05; SS1984:462; 
KJ1970:556-7; OT1968:840.
Mnemonic: COLORFUL TALE ABOUT BODIES 
BENT IN SEX ACT
(Katō), or ii] ‘above, high, opened up, big’, giving 
‘sunny ground developed higher up’ (noted in 
Mizukami). Shirakawa and Ogawa see as origi-
nally a place to conduct ritual. Sense general-
ised to ‘place’. MS1995:v1:274-6; KJ1970:879-80; 
SS1984:459; OT1968:220. Suggest take modern 
form as 土 64 ‘ground’, with 日 66 ‘sun’ and as rays.
Mnemonic: PLACE WHERE SUN-RAYS SHINE 
DOWN ON THE GROUND 
新年 SHINNEN　New Year
新品 SHINPIN　new article
新潟 Niigata　place name
SHIN, atarashii, 
arata, nii-
new
13 strokes
新
L5
165
The OBI forms 
, 
 are typically interpreted 
as including i] depictions of an ax 斤 1233 
and a needle 辛 1535, or ii] an ax and a tree 木 
73, or iii] an ax and a needle with a tree  (the 
shape 立 here is seen as abbreviation of  辛 [as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘cut’ or ‘new’]). 
Among these, iii] seems to be probably the most 
commonly occurrent as an OBI and bronze 
compound graph, with the original meaning 
of ‘cut a tree (for fi rewood)’. With regard to how 
this graph acquired the sense of ‘new’, Mizu-
kami and Tōdō consider this may be based on 
the sense of ‘newness’ associated with freshly 
cut wood. MR2007:504; MS1995:v1:596-8; 
KJ1970:575-6; TA1965:778-80. We suggest tak-
ing the modern form as 斤 1233 ‘ax’, 木 73 ‘tree, 
wood’, and 立 77 ‘stand’.
Mnemonic: AX STANDING BY TREE READY TO 
CUT NEW WOOD 

The 160 Second Grade Characters  87
両親 RYŌSHIN　parents
親類 SHINRUI　relatives
親方 oyakata　boss, foreman
地図  CHIZU　map
図画  ZUGA　a drawing
図書館 TOSHOKAN　library
数学 SŪGAKU　mathematics
数日 
SŪJITSU　several days
数々 
kazukazu　numerous
Generally identifi ed from bronze script stage 
onwards as 
 and interpreted as consisting of 
見 20 ‘see’ with  (see 165). The latter element 
is made up of 辛 1535 ‘needle’ with 木 73 ‘tree’, 
and is interpreted in several ways: Shirakawa 
sees it as ‘a tree selected for religious purposes 
SHIN, oya, shitashii
parents, intimate
16 strokes
ZU, TO, hakaru
plan, diagram
7 strokes
SŪ, kazu, kazoeru
number, count
13 strokes
親
図
数
L4
L4
L3
166
167
168
Early form 
; traditional form 圖. Taken as a 
sketch showing land within boundaries (Mi-
zukawa, Katō), similar to some interpretations 
of 画 91 ‘draw’. Shirakawa takes it as grana-
ries on agricultural land. MS1995:v1:260-61; 
KJ1970:909; SS1984:483. 
Mnemonic: DIAGRAM ON PAPER SHEET 
SHOWS SPOT X WITH TWO POINTERS
Seal 
; traditional 數. Has 攵 (攴 normally 
‘beat, strike’ 112, but here ‘do something with 
the hands’), and 婁 (CO; ‘sorceress’) as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘count out loud’ 
(by marking with a needle or arrow)’, cut down 
and used as part of the process of revering rela-
tives who were deceased – hence the extended 
meaning of ‘parents, relatives’.  Mizukami, how-
ever, takes the original meaning of  as a tree 
used for fi rewood, or a luxuriant rapidly-grow-
ing tree; in the graph 親, he takes it as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘close, near’, giving overall 
meaning ‘seeing those nearby’, i.e., parents, 
relatives. SS1984:472, 478; MS1995:v1:668-9, 
1178-9.
Mnemonic:  A PARENT SHOULD LOOK OUT 
FOR NEEDLES, EVEN FROM TREES
(Katō), or ‘be linked’ (Mizukami). Shirakawa, 
though, takes the graph as originally depict-
ing a woman with a chignon, which is then 
dishevelled by someone’s hands (攵) to denote 
‘blame, reproach’ (now a minor meaning in 
Chinese). MS1995:v1:582-3,336-7; KJ1970:499; 
SS1984:490-91. We suggest taking the modern 
form as 米 220 ‘rice’, 女 37 ‘woman’, and  ‘use of 
hands’ 攵 112.
Mnemonic: WOMAN COUNTS NUMBER OF 
RICE GRAINS BY HAND
西洋 SEIYŌ　the West   
関西 KANSAI　Kansai region
西日 
nishibi　afternoon sun
SEI, SAI, nishi
west
6 strokes
西
L5
169
OBI 
 and other early forms 
 seem to 
depict a basket (Mizukami, Shirakawa), or ‘wine 
press’ (Katō), while Ma and Schuessler say ‘nest’. 
From the outset, it appears to have been a 
loan for ‘west’. MS1995:v2:1174-5; SS1984:493; 
MR2007:457; AS2007:522; KJ1985:550-1. Taking 
the modern form as a wine jar may be helpful.
Mnemonic: TIME FOR A JAR – THE SUN IS IN 
THE WEST

88  The 160 Second Grade Characters
声援  SEIEN　vocal support
大音声 DAIONJŌ　loud voice
泣き声  nakigoe　sobbing voice
Traditional 聲. OBI  is taken as 磬 ‘qing – an-
cient Chinese musical instrument with suspend-
ed stones and striker’ (声 is based on pictograph 
SEI, SHŌ, koe 
voice
7 strokes
声
火星  KASEI　Mars   
明星  MYŌJŌ　Venus  
流れ星 nagareboshi　shooting star
晴天  SEITEN　clear sky
晴々 
 harebare　bright
晴れ着 haregi　best clothes
SEI, SHŌ, hoshi
star
9 strokes
SEI, hareru
clear, bright
12 strokes
星
晴
L4
L3
L3
170
171
172
Some of the OBI forms such as 
, 
 have up 
to fi ve circular or roughly square shapes similar 
to 日 66 ‘sun’ (with or without 生), and these 
of a qing, with 殳, another form of ‘hand holding 
something to strike with’) and 耳 31 ‘ear’ to give 
overall meaning ‘listen to instrument’, and by ex-
tension ‘sound, voice’. In the OBI form, Shirakawa 
takes 口 22 ‘mouth’ as a receptacle for written 
incantations). MS1995:v2:1060-61; MR2007:459; 
SS1984:493-4. We suggest taking modern form 
as 士 521 ‘samurai’, with lower element as variant 
of ‘door’ 戸 120.
Mnemonic: VOICE OF SAMURAI AT DOOR 
presumed ‘sources of light’ represent stars 
pictographically. Mizukami treats 晶 (1502, 
‘clear/bright/crystal’) as the original form of 星, 
while Ma treats the two as separate graphs. 生 
44 (‘birth, life’) here is phonetic with associated 
sense ‘clear’. Tōdō has 星 and 晶 in same word-
family ‘clear’. MS1995:v1:626-8; MR2007:357-8; 
TA1965:488-91. 
Mnemonic: STARS ARE BORN FROM THE SUN
A very late graph; not listed in Shuowen 
(Schuessler gives Yupian ‘Jade Chapters’ – a 
Chinese dictionary compiled ca. 543AD – as an 
early reference). Made up of semantic element 
日 66 ‘sun/bright’, with 青 45 (‘blue/green’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘clear, fresh’. 
OT1968:471; AS2007:431-2, 539. 
Mnemonic: BRIGHT SUN AGAINST BLUE 
MEANS CLEAR WEATHER
親切  SHINSETSU　kindness
一切  ISSAI　all
腹切り  harakiri　harakiri   
SETSU, SAI, kiru
cut
4 strokes
切
L4
173
Relatively late (Shuowen). Has 刀 198 ‘sword, 
knife’, and 七 32 (‘seven’, originally ‘cut’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘cut bone, 
cut’. In Late Han times, 七 and 切 were near-
homophones. KJ1970:47-8; TA1965:778-9; 
AS2007:419,312.
Mnemonic: SEVEN SWORD CUTS

The 160 Second Grade Characters  89
降雪  KŌSETSU　snowfall
大雪  ōyuki　heavy snow
除雪車 JOSETSUSHA　snow plow
船長  SENCHŌ　captain
こぎ船  kogibune　rowing boat
船便  funaBIN　seamail
脱線 DASSEN　derailment
光線 KŌSEN　light ray
直線 CHOKUSEN　straight line
OBI forms 
, 
. The simpler OBI form is taken 
either as patterns in the surface of snow made 
by wind in a blizzard (Mizukami, Katō), or 
snowfl akes (Karlgren, Shirakawa); additional 
SETSU, yuki
snow
11 strokes
SEN, fune, funa-
boat, ship
11 strokes
SEN
line
15 strokes
雪
船
線
L3
L3
L3
L4
174
175
176
Bronze forms such as 
 show 舟 1450 ‘boat’ 
with right-hand element as phonetic, prob-
ably as a substitute for NJK 穿 ‘to gouge, bore 
through’, giving ‘hollowed-out timber’ and 
element in the other OBI form shows clouds, or 
rain. The snow patterns/snowfl akes were later 
(seal script) mistakenly interpreted as 彗 ‘broom’, 
and wrongly interpreted as ‘precipitation to 
be swept away’; lower element is not phonetic 
here. MS1995:v2:1418-9; KJ1970:617; BK1957:90; 
SS1984:512-3; AS2007: 547,289. However, while 
incorrect, we suggest taking the modern form as 
sweeping snow away (by broom).
Mnemonic: ‘RAIN’ THAT A BROOM CAN 
SWEEP AWAY IS ACTUALLY SNOW
A relatively late graph 
, noted in Shuowen 
as an old form of 綫 ‘thread’.  Modern form has 
糸 29 ‘thread’, and 泉 926 (‘spring/source’) as 
phonetic with associated sense of ‘thin/fi ne 
thread’. KJ1970:626-7; YK1976:320; SS1984:525; 
DJ2009:v3:1069.
Mnemonic: TRACE THREAD-LIKE LINE TO 
SOURCE
thus ‘boat’ (early Chinese pronunciation of 穿 
is close to 船) (Schuessler). Katō too feels the 
right-hand element is phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘hollowing out’. MS1995:v1:1100-01; 
KJ1970:501; AS2007:195; SS1984:520. We 
suggest taking the right hand element as 八 
70 ‘eight’ and 口 22,  ‘mouth, opening’ as ‘(port)
hole’.
Mnemonic: A BOAT WITH EIGHT PORTHOLES 
IS A SHIP
前者  ZENSHA　the former
空前  KŪZEN　unprecedented
前払い maebarai　prepayment
Early forms 
, 
. Traditional 
 . Views vary, 
but widely agreed OBI forms onwards have 止 
143 ‘foot, footprint’. Beneath there is an element 
typically taken as 舟 1450 ‘boat’, here perhaps 
representing primitive boat-shaped sandals (re-
ferred to by Ma), overall giving meaning of ‘go 
ZEN, mae
before, front
9 strokes
前
L5
177
forward’ spatially, then by extension in terms 
of time. Katō and Tōdō both note the graph 
as early way of writing 剪 ‘cut’ (NJK); when 前 
came to be used mainly for ‘before’, 刀 198 
‘knife’ was added as bottom element to repre-
sent ‘cut’. Shirakawa interprets it in a ceremonial 
sense, with ‘before’ etc. as extended mean-
ings. MR2007:238-9; SS1984:530; KJ1970:636; 
TA1965:571. We suggest taking 月 (a variant of 
肉 209 ‘meat’) of the modern form as ‘meat’, and 
the top element as ‘horns’.
Mnemonic: BEFORE CUTTING MEAT, CUT THE 
HORNS

90  The 160 Second Grade Characters
組織   SOSHIKI　organization
組合   kumiai　union
組み立て kumitate　assembly
SO, kumi, kumu
group, assemble
11 strokes
組
L3
178
Bronze forms such as 
 often include 又 
2003 ‘hand’ (later omitted in seal script). Has 
糸 29 ‘thread’ and phonetic 且 1135 (based 
on pictograph– possibly meat – piled up in a 
vessel as an off ering), with/without ‘hand’, with 
associated sense i] ‘accumulate’ (Ogawa), or ii] 
‘mix, accumulate’ (Mizukami), giving ‘cord made 
of threads put together. ‘Group’ and ‘assemble’ 
are extended meanings. MS1995:v2:1012-3; 
TA1965:364-7; OT1968:775,18.
Mnemonic: THE GROUP ASSEMBLES PILES OF 
THREADS
競走   KYŌSŌ　race
走行   SŌKŌ　travelling
走り書き  hashirigaki　scrawl
SŌ, hashiru
run
7 strokes
走
L4
179
Lower part of bronze form 
 has 止 143 (here 
‘foot’); upper element 夭 (NJK, ‘calamity’ [loan 
use, pictograph of person with head inclined]) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘move 
limbs rapidly’, and so ‘run’ (Qiu says ‘jog, trot’, 
Tōdō says ‘walk hurriedly’). Modern Japanese 
preserves the meaning ‘run’ from early Chinese, 
but in modern Chinese (Mandarin) 走 means 
‘walk/go’. MS1995:v2:1254-6; KJ1970:643-4; 
QX2000:196; TA1965:298-9. Suggest taking 
upper element as 土 64 ‘ground’, and lower ele-
ment as ‘foot’ (see 143).
Mnemonic: FOOT RUNNING ALONG GROUND
多数  TASŪ　majority
多面的 TAMENTEKI　many-sided
多過ぎ  ōsugi　too much/many
太子 TAISHI　prince
太陽 TAIYŌ　sun 
太字 futoJI　bold type
OBI form is 
, depicting one piece of meat 
肉/月 209 over another and giving the mean-
ings ‘meat piled up, plentiful meat; plentiful’. 
TA, ōi
many
6 strokes
TAI, TA, futoi, futoru
fat, big
4 strokes
多
太
L5
L4
180
181
Shuowen (along with Katō) analyzes it as 夕 46 
‘moon/evening’ duplicated, but this would ap-
pear to be based on the later, very similar seal 
script shapes: the graphs for ‘meat’ and ‘evening’ 
are more contrastive in OBI. MS1995:v1:292-3; 
MR2007:360; SS1984:559-60; KJ1985:142. We 
suggest taking ‘evening / moon’ 夕 for an easier 
mnemonic.
Mnemonic: MANY MOONS, MANY EVENINGS 
A very late graph (Yupian). Noted in the Kangxi 
zidian as identical with both 大 56 and 泰 1665, 
meaning ‘big’. Tōdō includes it in a word family 
meaning ‘loose; latitude’. Katō sees the extra 
stroke as denoting especially big even among 
other big things. DJ2009:v1:195; TA1965:525-7; 
Katō 1985:144.
Mnemonic: FAT IS A BIT MORE THAN JUST BIG

The 160 Second Grade Characters  91
体格  TAIKAKU　physique
風体  FŪTEI　posture
体付き  karadatsuki　fi gure
L4
182
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 體. Has 骨 877 
‘bone’, and 豊 811 (‘abundant’) as phonetic 
with associated sense i] ‘separate, divide’, giving 
‘divide up sacrifi cial animal carcasse (still with 
bones attached)’ (Katō), or ii] ‘neatly set out’, giv-
ing ‘sacrifi cial animal carcass with dismembered 
TAI, TEI, karada
body
7 strokes
体
parts neatly set out’ (noted in Mizukami). The 
simpler form 体 originally represented a sepa-
rate word of diff erent pronunciation meaning 
‘coarse’, but it appears 体 was adopted later 
(Ming Dynasty) in popular usage as an abbrevi-
ated writing for 體 ‘body’, probably regarded as 
亻/人 41 ‘person’ combined with 本 74 ‘basis’. 
Noted in Kangxi zidian as erroneous in this lat-
ter sense, 体 was adopted as offi  cial form in the 
modern period in Japan. QX2000:299, 306-7; 
ZY2009:v1:21:v4:1567-8; MS1995:v2:1476-7.
Mnemonic: THE BODY IS THE BASIS OF A 
PERSON
土台 DODAI　foundation
台風 TAIFŪ　typhoon
台所 DAIdokoro　kitchen
Seal 
; traditional 臺. Analyses diff er. In one 
view, 壴 ‘big drum’ over 至 886 (‘arrive’) with the 
sense ‘foot, base’ gives ‘drum stand’ (Ogawa). 
DAI, TAI
stand, platform
5 strokes
台
地方 CHIHŌ　region
地下 CHIKA　underground
地元 JImoto　locality
用水池 YŌSUICHI　reservoir
電池  DENCHI　battery
古池  furuike　old pond
CHI, JI
ground, land
6 strokes
CHI, ike
pond, lake
6 strokes
地
池
L4
L4
L4
183
184
185
Seal 
. Late graph (Shuowen). Has 土 64 
‘ground’, and 也 (NJK; see Note below) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘extend in 
In another view, upper element is taken as 
‘watchtower’ over 至 meaning ‘stay’, giving 
‘place to stay and watch out’, i.e. ‘watchtower’ 
(Mizukami). Later abbreviated shape 台 coin-
cides with a separate graph 台 (originally ‘I, me’ 
[口 22 ‘mouth, speak’, and 厶 ‘enclose and make 
one’s own’ as phonetic meaning ‘oneself’]). 
OT1968:163; MS1995:v2:1092-3,v1:204-5
Mnemonic: A NOSE IS A SORT OF PLATFORM 
FOR A MOUTH 
a meandering way’ (Mizukami); Katō and 
Tōdō are in broad agreement.  Note: 也 was 
originally pictograph of a slithering snake 
or – in one view – female genitalia (noted in 
Mizukami); later borrowed for sound value for 
several grammatical function words such as 
‘be’, ‘also’. MS1995:v1:264-5,24-5; KJ1970:692; 
TA1965:455-57.
Mnemonic: LAND WITH WRIGGLING SNAKES 
ON THE GROUND 
Seal 
. a late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵 ‘water’ 
42, and 也 (see 184 Note) as phonetic with 
associated sense taken as i] ‘extend’, giving 
original meaning ‘water channel’ (Tōdō), or ii] 
‘bank, dyke’, giving original meaning ‘water 
surrounded by dykes’, and hence ‘marshland’ 
(Katō). ‘Pond’ is an extended sense. TA1965:528-
32; KJ1970:692.
Mnemonic: POND WITH WRIGGLING 
WATER-SNAKES 

92  The 160 Second Grade Characters
知識   CHISHIKI　knowledge
知的   CHITEKI　intellectual
知り合い  shiriai　acquaintance
CHI, shiru
know
8 strokes
知
L4
186
Seal 
. A late graph. Has 口 22 ‘mouth; speak’, 
and 矢 145 (‘arrow’) as phonetic with associat-
ed sense ‘hit the mark’, giving ‘describe spot-on/
exactly (like a fl ying arrow to its target)’, and by 
extension ‘know’.  Alternatively, Shirakawa takes 
‘arrow’ as being linked to taking an oath to the 
deities, and interprets 口 22 in his more usual 
way as ‘receptacle’; ‘knowing’ is then taken as 
emerging from the process of oath-taking. 
智 is a separate graph (NJK) also meaning 
‘know’; lower element is originally not 日 66 
‘sun, day’, but NJK 曰 ‘speak’. MS1995:v2:930-31; 
TA1965:465-7; SS1984:587.
Mnemonic: IF YOU GOT AN ARROW IN THE 
MOUTH, YOU’D KNOW ABOUT IT!
茶わん  CHAWAN　teabowl
茶々 
 CHACHA　interruption
茶道  SADŌ　tea ceremony
昼食  CHŪSHOKU　lunch
昼行性 CHŪKŌSEI　diurnal
昼間  hiruma　daytime
成長  SEICHŌ　growth
会長  KAICHŌ　chairperson
長生き  nagaiki　long life 
Very late graph (probably Tang Dynasty). Qiu 
notes that originally 荼 – a graph comprising 
艹 53 ‘plant, grass’, and 余 820 (‘ample’) as 
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 晝. The bronze 
form has 日 66 ‘sun, day’, and an upper element 
comprised of a rare graph which has 聿 400 
‘writing brush’ over 乂 (‘mix; cut’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘sun, red, bright’, giving 
‘sun makes bright’; meaning extended to 
OBI forms 
, 
 show a person with long hair, 
in some cases with a walking stick; Shirakawa 
notes that only old people were allowed long 
hair. Tōdō puts the graph in a word-family 
meaning ‘long’. MS1995:v2:1382-4; SS1984:601; 
TA1965:348-9. (See also 638.)
Mnemonic: SENIOR CITIZEN RUNS WITH 
FUNNY LEGS, LONG HAIR STREAMING
CHA, SA
tea, annoy
9 strokes
CHŪ, hiru
noon, daytime
9 strokes
CHŌ, nagai
long, senior
8 strokes
茶
昼
長
L4
L4
L5
187
188
189
phonetic with associated sense ‘bitter’ – denot-
ed a certain bitter plant, and that the modifi ed 
shape 茶 was apparently devised to refer clearly 
to another type of plant with bitter leaves, i.e. 
tea. The occasional use of 187 as ‘make fun of’ 
or ‘irritate’ may relate to the bitter connotations. 
QX2000: 326. Though the lower element in the 
modern form is not quite 余 820, ‘ample’, it may 
be helpful.
Mnemonic: ALMOST AMPLE TEA PLANTS
‘daytime’ in contrast to darkness of night (Katō). 
In another view, the same upper element is 
equated with 畫 (traditional form of 画 91 
‘picture, stroke’), but like Katō also as phonetic, 
in this case with associated sense ‘shine with 
red light’, giving ‘sun shines making Heaven 
and Earth bright’ (Mizukami). 昼 is based on 
cursive equivalents of 晝. MS1995:v1:620-22; 
SS1984:595; KJ1970:491-2. We suggest taking 
the modern form as 尺 895 ‘measure’, with 日 66 
‘sun’ and a single line as the horizon.
Mnemonic: MEASURE NOON SUN OVER 
HORIZON

The 160 Second Grade Characters  93
白鳥 HAKUCHŌ　swan
野鳥 YACHŌ　wild bird
鳥居 torii　shrine gate
Based on pictograph of a bird 
, 
. Note 
that there is another ‘bird’ graph , occurrent in 
Japanese as an element in compound graphs 
(e.g. 集 324). MS1995:v2:1494-5; MR2007:296; 
KJ1970:11-12. 
Mnemonic: IF IT’S GOT WINGS AND FEATHERS, 
IT MUST BE A BIRD
CHŌ, tori
bird
11 strokes
鳥
L4
190
OBI 
; seal 
.  OBI form has 日 66 ‘sun’, 屮 
’plant/plant shoot’ or  艸/艹 53 ‘plants’ and 月
18 ‘moon’, giving ‘sun emerging from vegeta-
tion with moon still out’, i.e. ‘morning’. Bronze 
occurrences commonly had earlier 月changed 
to 川 50 ‘river’, maybe to represent near-hom-
ophone meaning ‘morning tide, tide’ (later 潮 
The OBI form 
 is generally taken as 目 76 
‘eye’, and 丨 (replaced in seal script by 十) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘straight’ 
(Mizukami suggests alternatively 十 could be 
朝食 CHŌSHOKU　breakfast
朝日 
asahi　morning sun
朝廷 CHŌTEI　imperial court
直接　CHOKUSETSU　direct
正直　SHŌJIKI　honesty
直し屋　naoshiya　repairman
通行  TSŪKŌ　passage
通勤  TSŪKIN　commuting
大通り  ōdōri　main road
952) (Shirakawa); Gu treats the change from 
月 as erroneous. The seal form in Shuowen 
may involve corruption in shape in relation to 
bronze equivalents.  At the clerical script stage, 
月 became usual here instead of the right-hand 
side in seal with 舟1450 ‘boat’; Qiu regards this 
as a shape abbreviation of  舟, and this led to 
block script 朝. Analyses of this graph diff er; 
above account is tentative. MS1995:v1:640-41; 
SS1984:603; QX2000:109-10; AS2007:607; 
GY2008:1382; SK1984:391.
Mnemonic: SUN RISES THROUGH PLANTS, 
MOON STILL OUT – IT’S MORNING
CHŌ, asa
morning, court
12 strokes
CHOKU, JIKI, 
naoru/su, sugu, tadachi
direct, upright, fi x
8 strokes
TSŪ, tōru/su, kayou
pass, commute, way
10 strokes
朝
直
通
L4
L3
L4
191
192
193
taken as semantic element for ‘straight’.) Oc-
casionally in the bronze forms, then routinely 
in the seal script, a curved line was added (fi nal 
stroke in the modern form) with the sense 
‘bend’; the graph is then taken to convey 
‘straighten the gaze’ (Mizukami, Yamada, 
Katō), and by extension ‘straighten’ generally. 
MR2007:480-81; MS1995:v2:914-5; KJ1975:687-
8; YK1976:369-70. We suggest taking 十 as a 
cross.
Mnemonic: CROSS EYED – NEED TO FIX IT 
DIRECTLY 
OBI 
; bronze 
; seal: 
. Has ⻌ 85 ‘walk 
along road, go’, and a right-hand element as 
phonetic which varies (用 [235 ‘use’] in OBI, 
甬 in seal [CO; taken variously as ‘fl ower buds 
emerging’, ‘person leaping up’, and ‘suspension 
ring at top of bell’]), but with the same associ-
ated sense ‘go through, penetrate’, giving ‘road 
carries on through’. This treatment fi nds support 
in Tōdō, who has 用, 甬, and 通 all in the same 
word-family ‘penetrate’. MS1995:v1:1294-5; 
KJ1970:671; TA1965:286-90. We suggest taking
マ as a bent fi gure, and 用 in its present mean-
ing of ‘use’. 
Mnemonic: BENT FIGURE USES PASSAGE-WAY 
TO COMMUTE

94  The 160 Second Grade Characters
子弟 SHITEI　sons, children
弟子 DESHI　follower, pupil
兄弟 KYŌDAI　brothers
A very late graph (Yupian). Has 广 127 ‘roof, 
building’, and 占 1598 (‘perform divination; oc-
cupy’) as phonetic with associated sense taken 
TEI, DAI, DE, otōto 
younger brother
7 strokes
弟
店員  TEN’IN　store staff 
夜店  yomise　night stall
店立て  tanadate　eviction
点線 TENSEN　dotted line
得点 TOKUTEN　points 
重点 JŪTEN　emphasis
電話 DENWA　telephone
電球 DENKYŪ　light bulb
電流 DENRYŪ　electric current
TEN, mise, tana
store, premises
8 strokes
TEN
point, mark
9 strokes
DEN
electricity
13 strokes
店
点
電
L3
L5
L3
L5
194
195
196
197
as i] ‘arrange, display’, giving ‘place to set out 
(and sell) things’ (Katō), or ii] ‘fi xed/established 
in the one place’, hence ‘building where things 
are established (together) in one place’ (Tōdō); 
in either case, ‘premises, shop’. KJ1970728-9; 
TA1965:836-8. Suggest taking 占 in one of its 
modern meanings, ‘occupy’.
Mnemonic: A STORE OCCUPIES THAT BUILD-
ING WITH THE BIG ROOF
Seal 
. Late graph (Shuowen); traditional: 點. 
Has 黑 137 ‘black’, and 占 1598 (‘divine, occupy’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘small’, thus 
‘small black specks’; then broadly ‘point/mark’. 
KJ1970:726; SS1984:629; TA1965:836-8. Take 占 
as divination, and 灬 8 fi re.
Mnemonic: FIRE USED IN DIVINATION LEAVES 
BLACK MARKS
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 雨 3 ‘rain/weather ele-
ment’, and 申 338 (orig. forked lightning), with 
associated sense ‘stretch’ > ‘stretched weather 
element’ > ‘lightning’. Both 電 and 申 are in 
Tōdō’s word-family ‘extend’. MS1995:v2:1418-9, 
872-3; TA1965:754-6. Use 田 63 ‘fi eld’.
Mnemonic: LIGHTNING STRIKES FIELD IN 
ELECTRIC RAINSTORM
OBI forms depict a weapon handle wrapped 
with leather 
. There was a set, ordered 
process for wrapping the handle, which can 
be thought of as the lower part of a weapon. 
Mizukami lists associated meanings as ‘low; 
order’, and ‘younger brother’ by extension; Katō 
is essentially in agreement. The graph is in a 
word-family Tōdō takes as meaning ‘straight 
and short, low’. MS1995:v1:468-70; KJ1970:716; 
TA1965:749-53.
Mnemonic: YOUNGER BROTHER GETS 
BOUND TO A STAKE, BUT LOOSELY
大刀 DAITŌ　long sword
軍刀 GUNTŌ　military sword
小刀 kogatana　pocketknife
TŌ, katana
sword, knife
2 strokes
刀
L1
198
Pictograph of knife/sword 
, in compounds 
usually 刂. QX2000:180; MS1995:v1:122-3.
Mnemonic: TWO-EDGED SWORD

The 160 Second Grade Characters  95
冬眠  TŌMIN　hibernation
冬季  TŌKI　winter season
冬枯れ fuyugare　winter decay
Views vary. OBI 
; seal 
. Mizukami sees 
persimmons on tree after leaf fall, or food 
stored hanging. Katō sees seal as 冫401‘ice’, and
夂as phonetic with associated sense ‘freeze’ 
> ‘ice’. Shirakawa takes OBI form as tied rope 
ends, to denote ‘end’ > ‘end season’, i.e. ‘winter’. 
MS1995:v1:116-7; KJ1970:120; SS1984:641. Take 
夂 as ‘cross-legged’.
Mnemonic: CROSSED LEGS SLIPPING ON 
WINTER ICE
TŌ, fuyu
winter
5 strokes
冬
L4
199
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 當. Has 田 63 
‘fi eld’, and 尚 1491 (‘furthermore’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘value, price, equivalent 
相当  SŌTŌ　appropriate
当人  TŌNIN　person concerned
手当て  teate　allowance, treatment
price’ (Mizukami, Katō). (In Late Han times, 
pronunciation of 當 and 尚 was fairly close.) 
Originally referred to off ering a fi eld as a 
pledge. Tōdō has this graph in a word-family 
meaning ‘push one thing against another, make 
to correspond’. MS1995:v2:884-5; KJ1970:669-
70; AS2007:206, 181; TA1965:351-2.
We suggest taking upper element of modern 
form as ‘little’ 小 38 and ヨ as ‘hand’. 
Mnemonic: THIS LITTLE HAND APPROPRI-
ATELY HITS THE MARK
TŌ, ataru/teru
apply, hit mark, 
appropriate, this
6 strokes
当
L3
200
OBI forms show a bottomless bag with both 
ends tied 
; the bag has a pole going verti-
東洋 TŌYŌ　Orient
東側 higashigawa　east side
東屋 azumaya　arbor, bower
cally through the center, which explains the 
word-family sense ‘penetrate’, noted by Mizu-
kami and Tōdō. Used as a loan graph for ‘east’. 
See also ‘bundle’ 束 561 and ‘knead’ 練 438. 
MS1995:v1:654; KJ1970:1956-7; MR2007:340; 
TA1965:286-7. We suggest taking the modern 
form as ‘sun’ 日 66 rising behind a ‘tree’ 木 73.
Mnemonic: SUN RISING BEHIND TREE 
INDICATES EAST
TŌ, higashi, azuma
east
8 strokes
東
L5
201
解答  KAITŌ　solution
答案  TŌAN　exam paper
口答え  kuchigotae　retort
A late graph (post-Shuowen). 合 134 ‘meet, join’ 
was used by itself in OBI and bronze texts for a) 
‘respond’ and also for b) ‘fi t together, join’, but 
later 竹 / ⺮ 58 (‘bamboo’) was added so as to 
denote the sense ‘respond, answer’ to disam-
biguate. KJ1970:668-9; AS2007:202, 625, 274; 
MS1995:v1:212-3; SS1984:649. 
Mnemonic: BAMBOO IS A FITTING ANSWER
TŌ, kotaeru 
answer
12 strokes
答
L4
202

96  The 160 Second Grade Characters
頭骨 TŌKOTSU　skull
頭痛 ZUTSŪ　headache
頭金 atamaKIN　down payment
TŌ, ZU, atama, kashira
head, top, start
16 strokes
頭
同様 DŌYŌ　similar
同時 DŌJI　simultaneous
同意 DŌI　agreement
DŌ, onaji
same
6 strokes
同
L4
L4
203
204
Early forms 
, 
. Interpretations diff er. Mizu-
kami sees 口 22 ‘mouth’ as possibly semantic for 
‘words’, with 
 (= 舟 1450) as phonetic with as-
sociated sense ‘collect’ – a view shared by Katō.  
鉄道 TETSUDŌ　railway
神道 SHINTŌ　Shinto
道端 michibata　roadside 
DŌ, TŌ, michi 
way, road
12 strokes
道
L5
205
The various bronze shapes, e.g. 
 have 行
131 ‘crossroads, roads, go’ (or the abbreviated 
form彳), here also with 又 2003 ‘hand’ but 
読者  DOKUSHA　reader
読本  TOKUHON　reading-book
読み方 yomikata　a reading (kanji) 
DOKU, TOKU, yomu
read
14 strokes
読
L5
206
A late graph (Shuowen) 
. Traditional form is 
讀, with right-hand  (NJK, ‘exchange/display 
goods’), changed in the modern form to 売, as 
phonetic. Consists of 言118 ‘words’, and right-
hand phonetic with associated sense ‘recite’. 
Right-hand element of traditional form is 
slightly diff erent in shape from traditional form 
of 売 211 ‘sell’ (q.v.). KJ1970:46; YK1976:397; 
KZ2001:2629/3671. We suggest taking the right 
hand of the modern form as 売 211 ‘sell’. 
Mnemonic: SELL WORDS TO READ or 
READING OUT SALES SPIEL
As seen in the bronze form 
, this has 頁103 
‘head’, and 豆 379 ‘(upright vessel’, now ‘bean’) 
as phonetic with associated meaning ‘stand 
upright’ and probably also ‘vessel’. Like 首155 
(‘head’), also has extended senses of ‘begin-
ning; fi rst in rank’. Note: The bronze form here 
is in the decorative elongated ‘bird script’. 
MS1995:v2:1446-7; KJ1970:734; TA1965:281-3; 
QX2000:275; KJ1985:573,663.
Mnemonic: BEAN HEAD!
Mizukami also notes alternative view of 
 as 
semantic for ‘board’, with 口 as ‘hole’, to mean 
‘penetrate’ and then ‘same’ (the latter because 
a round hole is the same seen or measured 
from any angle); Tōdō also takes as originally 
‘penetrate’. MS1995:v1:214-5; KJ1970:736-7; 
TA1965:286-9. We suggest taking the enclosure 
of the modern form as a croquet hoop, with 口 
as opening, with a single stroke.
Mnemonic: SIMILAR HOOPS HAVE THE SAME 
SINGLE OPENING
this changed at the seal stage to 辶, as in 遠 
85, with phonetic 首 155 (‘head’) with associ-
ated sense of ‘straight road’. Tōdō puts 道 into 
word-family meaning ‘extend in narrow line’. 
MS1995:v2:1302-3; KJ1970:670-71; TA1965:190-
93. We suggest taking the meaning of ‘head’ 
for 首. 
Mnemonic: THE HEAD LEADS THE WAY 
ALONG THE ROAD 

The 160 Second Grade Characters  97
内部 NAIBU　inner part
家内 KANAI　wife
内気 uchiKI　shyness
NAI, DAI, uchi
inside
4 strokes
内
L3
207
OBI 
. Components are ‘roof’ or ‘dwelling’ with 
‘entrance’. By extension, ‘enter’, ‘inside’ (though 
Ma takes ‘enter’ as the primary meaning). 
KJ1970:515-6; SS1984:666; MR2007:324. In 
modern form we suggest taking 人 as ‘person’ 
41, and the ‘hoop’ as a frame.
Mnemonic: PERSON TOO BIG TO GET FULLY 
INSIDE FRAME  
東南 TŌNAN　southeast
南極 NANKYOKU　South Pole
南側 minamigawa　south side
NAN, minami 
south
9 strokes
南
L5
208
Found in OBI texts onwards 
, 
 but etymol-
ogy disputed.  Hypotheses include taking as 
based on pictograph for ‘(decorated?) tent’, and 
phonetic with associated sense ‘warm’ (Katō, 
Ogawa, Yamada), perhaps to indicate facing 
south (Katō), or as pictograph of a musical 
instrument (Shirakawa; Yamada also notes 
as alternative possibility). ‘South’ is loan use. 
KJ1970:959-60; OT1968:139; YK1976:398-9; 
SS1984:666-7; KJ1985:86-7.
Mnemonic: TENT WITH CROSS AND TIED 
ENTRANCE FACING SOUTH 
NIKU
meat, fl esh
6 strokes
肉
L4
209
OBI form 
 is based on pictograph of a piece 
of meat. Bronze forms onwards  show several 
internal lines, not just one; these represent the 
graining or sinews in the meat. Note: as one ele-
ment in a more complex graph, in the modern 
script (both Japanese and Chinese) 肉changes 
to 月 as a determinative relating to the body 
and certain other contexts, as in e.g. 肺 968 
‘lungs’, and so in shape is now indistinguishable 
from 月 18 ‘moon’ as a determinative in more 
complex forms, e.g. 期 269 ‘period’. This simply 
refl ects the historical situation, as both 肉 and 
月 ‘moon’ were indistinguishable in shape 
already in seal script when they occurred as 
elements in compound graphs. MR2007:301-2; 
KJ1970:479; MS1995:v2:1068-9.
Mnemonic: A GRAINY FILLET OF MEAT  
馬肉 BANIKU　horsemeat
肉屋 NIKUya　butcher
肉眼 NIKUGAN　naked eye
BA, uma, ma
horse
10 strokes
馬
L3
210
OBI forms such as 
 show the graph is 
clearly based on a pictograph of a horse. 
MS1995:v2:1466-7; MR2007:414.
Mnemonic: FLOWING MANE, FOUR LEGS 
AND A TAIL – MUST BE A HORSE  
馬術  BAJUTSU　horsemanship
馬乗り  umanori　horse-riding
馬子  mago　pack-horse driver

98  The 160 Second Grade Characters
売買  BAIBAI　dealing
売店  BAITEN　stall
売り物  urimono　item for sale
OBI 
. Traditional form: 麥. Views diverge. 
Taken by Karlgren and Ma as based on a picto-
graph of a wheat or barley plant. Ma sees the 
lowest part as the root; Ogawa and Tōdō in-
terpret lowest part as 夂 ‘descending foot’ (see 
Appendix), to give ‘wheat/barley given down 
from Heaven’. This graph is a member of Tōdō’s 
BAI, uru/reru
sell
7 strokes
売
買収  BAISHŪ　purchase
買い物 kaimono　shopping
買い手 kaite　buyer
麦芽 BAKUGA　malt
麦茶 mugiCHA　barley tea
小麦 komugi　wheat
半分 HANBUN　half
半島 HANTŌ　peninsula
半年 HANtoshi　half-year
BAI, kau
buy
12 strokes
BAKU, mugi
barley, wheat
7 strokes
HAN, nakaba
half, middle
5 strokes
買
麦
半
L4
L5
L3
L5
211
212
213
214
A more ancient graph than 売 (賣) 211 (‘sell’). 
Exists from OBI stage 
. Ogawa takes as 貝 10 
word-family meaning ‘descend’, and he notes 
that for the ancient Chinese this grain was 
believed to be given by the deities. Shirakawa 
takes it to refer to a ceremonial dance for the 
grain. Schuessler gives the thought-provoking 
view of Pulleyblank, who suggests 來 (see 237) 
is the original graph for the cereal, and that the 
separate graph 麥, meaning ‘wheat’ (with夂 
‘foot’) was originally intended for ‘come’. Katō 
sees 夂 as phonetic, but this seems less likely. 
BK1957:245-6; MR2007:330; TA1965:169-71; 
SS1984:692; AS2007:374, 342-3; KJ1970:287-8.
Mnemonic: SITTING CROSS-LEGGED 
WATCHING WHEAT PLANT GROW
Bronze 
; traditional ᦪ. The upper part is 
八 70 ‘divide’ (both a semantic and phonetic 
indicator), and the lower part is a stylized rep-
resentation of an ox head showing horns and 
ears. The original sense of ‘butcher an ox carcass 
into two halves’ took on the broader mean-
ing of ‘half’.  MS1995:v1:166-7; KJ1970:784; 
YK1976:416.
Mnemonic: SPLIT OX HEAD DOWN THE 
MIDDLE INTO HALVES 
A late graph (Shuowen) 
. Traditional form is 
賣. 士 521 (‘samurai’) is in error for – or possibly 
an abbreviation of – 出 36 ‘put out, display’, 
combining with a second element 買 212 ‘buy’, 
serving here as semantic and phonetic mean-
ing ‘exchange’; overall meaning is ‘put things 
out to exchange for money’. 貝10 represents a 
shell as currency.  YK1976:411; KJ1970:760-61. 
Mnemonic: SAMURAI WITH CROOKED LEGS 
SELLING OVER THE COUNTER
‘shell currency’, with 罒 570 ‘net’ as semantic 
and phonetic meaning ‘take, acquire’, giving 
‘buy for money’. Katō, alternatively, takes as se-
mantic 貝, with 罒 as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘exchange’, giving ‘exchange for (shell) 
currency’. MR2007:349; SS1984:686; KJ1970:760; 
OT1968:956. 
Mnemonic: A NETFUL OF SHELLS CAN BE 
USED TO BUY

The 160 Second Grade Characters  99
順番 JUNBAN　order, turn
番人 BANNIN　watchman
一番 ICHIBAN　number one
分子  BUNSHI　molecule
一分  IPPUN　one minute
分かり  wakari　understanding
父母  FUBO　parents
お父様  otōsama*　Father
父親  chichioya　father
風船  FŪSEN　balloon
神風  kamikaze　divine wind
和風  WAFŪ　Japanese-style
Bronze 
; generally taken as 田 63 ‘fi eld’, with 
釆 as both phonetic and semantic element, 
meaning ‘hand holding/scattering seed’. Tōdō, 
while noting the Shuowen analysis (favored 
Has 刀198 ‘knife/cut’, and 八 70 ‘divide’, the 
latter as both semantic and phonetic, meaning 
‘cut in two’; a member of Tōdō’s word-family 
‘cut in two’. MS1995:v1:124-5; KJ1970:256; 
TA1965:726-9.
Mnemonic: UNDERSTAND THAT ONE CAN 
DIVIDE BY CUTTING IN TWO
BAN
number, guard, turn 
(in sequence)
12 strokes
BUN, FUN, BU,
wakaru/keru/katsu
divide, minute,
understand
4 strokes
FU, chichi
father
4 strokes
FŪ, FU, kaze
wind, style
9 strokes
番
分
父
風
L3
L5
L5
L5
215
218
216
217
OBI 
. Commentators agree this depicts a hand 
holding a stone ax. Use in the sense ‘father/
male relative of father’s generation’ represents 
a loan usage. MS1995:v2:820-22; KJ1970:824-5; 
YK1976:431-2; MR2007:267; AS2007:243.
Mnemonic: FATHER IS CROSS ABOUT TWO 
LITTLE THINGS
Some variation in OBI forms (e.g. 
, 
), but 
generally taken to show a phoenix or other 
large bird (modern 鳳), often with a pho-
netic element corresponding to modern 凡 
1993. Fierce winds, including typhoons, were 
perceived in ancient times as a harmful bird 
by Shirakawa), which – based on the seal 
form – interprets 釆 as ‘claws of a beast’ and 
田 as ‘paw underpad’, includes the underlying 
word for this graph in a word-family meaning 
‘spread out’, with particular sense ‘scatter seed’. 
The meanings ‘turn; number; guard’ represent 
loan usage. MS1995:v2:882-3; KJ1970:780; 
YK1976:420; TA1965:654-6; SS1984:706. We sug-
gest taking the upper element as ‘rice plant’ 米 
220 with an extra leaf.
Mnemonic: GUARD NUMBERS OF EX-
TRA-LEAVED RICE-PLANTS IN FIELD
bringing danger, so already at the OBI stage this 
‘bird graph’ was adopted as a loan for strong 
winds, and winds in general. In seal script, ‘bird’ 
was replaced by ‘insect, reptile’ 虫 60, another 
harmful entity, as in the modern graph. The 
phonetic element may be onomatopoeic for 
the sound of a typhoon (Mizukami), or have an 
associated meaning ‘big’ (Yamada), or ‘shake’ 
(Tōdō). MS1995:v2:1452-3,1496-7; YK1976:435-
6; TA1965:825-9. 
Mnemonic: STYLISH INSECT GETS BLOWN BY 
THE WIND

100  The 160 Second Grade Characters
新聞   SHINBUN　newspaper
聴聞   CHŌMON　a hearing
聞き違い kikichigai　mishearing
OBI 
 has ‘person’ with hand to exaggeratedly 
large ‘ear’: parallel formational construction 
is found with 見 20 ‘see’.  Bronze script then 
BUN, MON, kiku/koeru
hear, ask, listen
14 strokes
聞
米価 BEIKA　price of rice
米国 BEIKOKU　America
白米 HAKUMAI　white rice
進歩   SHINPO　progress
歩合   BUai　ratio
歩き出す arukidasu　start walking
母性  BOSEI　maternity
お母様  okāsama*　Mother
母親  hahaoya　mother
BEI, MAI, kome
rice, America
6 strokes
HO, BU, aruku, ayumu
walk, rate
8 strokes
BO, haha
mother
5 strokes
米
歩
母
L5
L3
L4
L5
219
220
221
222
OBI 
, based on pictograph of ears of grain. 
Katō takes the horizontal line as chaff . The 
Traditional form is 步. The most complete OBI 
graph 
 has ‘crossroads’ with ‘left foot’ and 
‘right foot’, to represent ‘walk’. KJ1970:156; 
MS1995:v1:703-4; YK1976:449. We suggest tak-
ing the modern graph as ‘foot/stop’ 止 143 (q.v.) 
and ‘few’ 少 160.
Mnemonic: FOOT STOPS AFTER JUST A FEW 
PACES OF WALKING
OBI forms onwards 
 are based on picto-
graph of woman 女 37 with exaggerated 
breasts and nipples. KJ1970:859; YK1976:451; 
SS1984:780-81.
Mnemonic: A MOTHER IS A WOMAN WITH 
PROMINENT NIPPLES
shows some variation, and seal script becomes 
standardized as 耳 31 ‘ear’ with 門 231 (‘door’/ 
‘gate’) as phonetic with associated sense ‘dis-
tinguish’. The other meaning ‘ask’ (a word with 
slightly diff erent pronunciation from ‘hear’ in 
early Chinese) might represent a loan usage. 
MS1995:v2:1060-61; KJ1970:834-5; YK1976:442; 
MR2007:459; AS2007:514.
Mnemonic: AN EAR AT THE DOOR MEANS 
SOMEONE IS LISTENING
graph now stands for ‘rice’, but disputed whether 
originally rice grains were represented, or 
millet. The sense ‘America’ is based on an old 
on reading ME, formerly used to write 亜 米
利 加 AMERIKA. KJ1970:840-41; YK1976:444-5; 
SS1984:765-6. 
Mnemonic: GRAIN-LADEN AMERICAN RICE 
PLANTS
方角 HŌGAKU　direction
親方 oyakata　boss
見方 mikata　way of looking
The OBI form 
 appears generally to be 
taken as based on a pictograph of a plow-
share. All modern meanings are loan usages. 
MR2007:395-6; KJ1970:762-3; YK1976:452.
Mnemonic: PLOW OFF TO ONE SIDE – THAT’S 
THE DIRECTION 
HŌ, kata
side, way, person,
direction, square
4 strokes
方
L4
223

The 160 Second Grade Characters  101
姉妹 SHIMAI　sisters 
妹分 imōtoBUN　sworn sister
令妹 REIMAI 　your younger sister
東北 TŌHOKU　northeast
敗北 HAIBOKU　defeat
北風 kitakaze　north wind
毎日 
MAINICHI　every day
毎度 MAIDO　each time
日毎 
higoto　daily
Semantic-phonetic compound found in OBI 
texts onwards 
. Has 女 37 ‘woman’, and 未 
617 (‘immature’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘continuation’ (Katō, Yamada) or ‘small’ 
(Ogawa, Tōdō). KJ1970:868-9; YK1976:461; 
OT1968:256; TA1965:732-6. 
Mnemonic: YOUNGER SISTER IS AN IMMA-
TURE WOMAN
MAI, imōto 
younger sister
8 strokes
HOKU, kita 
north, fl ee
5 strokes
MAI, -goto
each, every
6 strokes
妹
北
毎
L4
L5
L5
226
224
225
OBI 
 is based on pictograph of two people 
back-to-back in profi le. ‘Turn back on, retreat’ is 
taken as primary meaning by Ma and Mizu-
Traditional 每; OBI 
. OBI views divided, taking 
the graph as depicting either a mother with 
hairpin (Ma, Ogawa), or plant, with 母 222 
kami. ‘North’ is loan usage (Schuessler notes 
the two words were homophones in early 
Chinese), while (less likely) Mizukami treats 
as extended sense on basis that houses in 
ancient China were built facing south, so the 
backs of occupants faced north. MR2007:389; 
MS1995:v1:156-7; AS2007:246; KJ1970:960.
Mnemonic: PEOPLE FLEE, TURNING THEIR 
BACKS ON THE NORTH
(‘mother’) as phonetic, with associated sense 
‘abundant’ (Katō, Yamada, Tōdō); the latter 
seems the more persuasive. The meaning of 
‘each, every’ is borrowed usage. MR2007:220; 
OT1968:548; KJ1970:756; YK1976:461; 
TA1965:166-8. Suggest taking elements as 
‘person’ 
/人 41 and ‘mother’ 母.
Mnemonic: EACH AND EVERY PERSON HAS A 
MOTHER
五万 GOMAN　fi fty thousand
万事 BANJI　all things
万屋 yorozuya　general dealer
Formerly 萬. OBI 
 form is based on picto-
graph of a scorpion. Already in OBI 萬 was used 
as a loan to indicate a number (‘ten thousand/  
large number’), and so, according to Qiu, 
another graph was then devised for ‘scorpion’, 
comprising 萬 and 虫 60 ‘insect’. Traditionally 
MAN, BAN, yorozu
ten thousand, myriad
3 strokes
万
L5
227
(at least from the time of the early 11th century 
Guangyun dictionary) 万 was seen as being a 
popular or vulgar equivalent for 萬, but accord-
ing to Katō, this is a loan use of 万, originally a 
separate graph (pictograph of type of aquatic 
plant), for ‘ten thousand’. MS1995:v2:1124-6; 
MR2007:512; QX2000:177; KJ1970:299-300,812; 
KZ2009:v1:2. We suggest taking 万 as a ‘head-
less’ version of 方 223 in one of its meanings, 
‘person’.
Mnemonic: TEN THOUSAND HEADLESS 
PERSONS 

102  The 160 Second Grade Characters
明白  MEIHAKU　clarity
明日 
 MYŌNICHI　tomorrow
明け方  akegata　day-break
鳴動  MEIDŌ　rumbling
鳴き声  nakigoe　animal cry
鳴り物  narimono　musical instrument
羊毛 
YŌMŌ　wool
毛皮  kegawa　fur
毛虫  kemushi　caterpillar
MEI, MYŌ, akarui,
akari/keru/kasu
clear, open, bright  
8 strokes
MEI, naku/ru
non-human sound
14 strokes
MŌ, ke
hair, fur
4 strokes
明
鳴
毛
L4
L3
L3
228
229
230
Occurs in two forms in OBI: a) 
 and b) 
: 
a) – the dominant line of development – cor-
responding to 日 66 ‘sun’ and 月 18 ‘moon’, as in 
modern Japanese and Chinese script;  b) made 
of ‘moon’ and an element which is taken either 
as ‘window’ (Qiu, Karlgren) or ‘light, bright’ 
(Katō, Yamada). QX2000:83, 192; BK1957:201; 
KJ1970:838; YK1976:468. 
Mnemonic: SUN AND MOON TOGETHER 
MAKE IT CLEAR AND BRIGHT
The modern graph has ‘mouth’ 口 22 and ‘bird’ 
鳥 190, but based on OBI 
 and bronze forms 
Katō takes the bird to be a cock. KJ1970:839; 
MR2007:297; OT1968:1150. 
Mnemonic: SOUNDS FROM A BIRD’S MOUTH 
ARE NOT HUMAN
Bronze forms such as 
 show the graph is 
based on a tuft of fur or hair. SS1984:822; 
OT1968:549; YK1976:471.
Mnemonic: FOUR STROKES FOR A TUFT OF 
HAIR
正門 
SEIMON　main gate
門番 
MONBAN　doorman
門出 
kadode　departure
夜行性 YAKŌSEI　nocturnal
夜明け  yoake　dawn
夜昼  yoruhiru　night and day
MON, kado
gate, door
8 strokes
YA, yo, yoru
night
8 strokes
門
夜
L4
L4
231
232
Based on pictograph of a closed double gate or 
door; OBI form 
. MR2007:457; SS1984:824-5; 
OT1968:1055.
Mnemonic: A DOUBLE-DOORED GATE
Bronze form 
 has 夕 46 ‘moon’ (later ‘even-
ing’), and the NJK 亦 (‘again’) as phonetic 
(associated sense disputed). Tōdō includes in 
a word-family meaning ‘alternating shape or 
pattern’, in this case night and day. KJ1970:89; 
YK1976:473; TA1965:332-6. We suggest taking 
亠 as a top-hat, ‘person’ 亻41, ‘moon’ 夕 , and  
an extra stroke. 
Mnemonic: PERSON PUTS TOP HAT ON AT 
NIGHT TO AVOID MOON-STROKE

The 160 Second Grade Characters  103
野生 YASEI　wild
野球 YAKYŪ　baseball
野原 nohara　moor, fi eld
YA, no
moor, wild
11 strokes
野
L4
233
The graph made up of these elements can be 
traced back only as far as the seal script 
(Shuowen). It comprises 里238 ‘village’, and 
予 425 (‘already’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘calm, quiet’. KJ1970:874; MS1995:v2:1356; 
YK1976:474. 
Mnemonic: VILLAGE ALREADY BUILT ON 
WILD MOOR
友人 YŪJIN　friend
友情 YŪJŌ　friendship
友達 tomodachi　friend
YŪ, tomo
friend
4 strokes
友
L5
234
OBI form 
 shows two hands together, 
to signify ‘help’, ‘togetherness’, and so also 
‘friend’. MR2007:271; KJ1970:38; SS1984:832; 
YK1976:477-8. 
Mnemonic: TWO HANDS TOGETHER IS A 
SIGN OF FRIENDSHIP
用事 YŌJI　business
用意 YŌI　preparation
悪用 AKUYŌ　abuse
YŌ, mochiiru
use
5 strokes
用
L4
235
OBI form 
 is widely taken to show a pen for 
animals which were sometimes used in the 
Shang dynasty for sacrifi ce; ‘use’ is probably 
loan usage. Ma interprets it as depicting a 
bucket. SS1984:844; KJ1970:885; YK1976:482; 
AS2007:577; MR2007:283.
Mnemonic: MAKE USE OF A FENCE
曜日 
 YŌbi　day of week
火曜日  KAYŌbi　Tuesday
七曜  SHICHIYŌ　days of week
YŌ
day of week, shine 
18 strokes
曜
L4
236
Late graph, not in Shuowen. Noted in late 6th 
century AD Yupian as having same meaning 
as 燿 (NJK), i.e. ‘shine’, and Yamada and Katō 
treat 隹 324 (‘bird’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘shine’.  Morohashi, though, explains 
the Japanese-only sense ‘day of the week’ as: 
‘shine’/‘bright’ 明 228, which gives 日 66 ‘sun’ 
and 月 18 ‘moon’, to which was added the tra-
ditional fi ve-planet group 火水木金土 (Mars, 
Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, Saturn respectively); 
each of these seven then combines with 曜 to 
give 日曜 ‘Sunday’, 月曜 ‘Monday’, and so on. 
KJ1970:84; YK1976:486; MT1989:v5:945. Sug-
gest taking 日 in its two meanings of sun and 
day, and  as its elements, ‘wings’ 羽 82 and 
‘bird’ 隹 324. 
Mnemonic: SUN WINGS ITS WAY LIKE A BIRD 
– ANOTHER DAY PASSES
来月 
 RAIGETSU　next month
新来者 SHINRAISHA　newcomer
出来事 dekigoto　occurrence
RAI, kuru, kitaru/su
come
7 strokes
来
L5
237
Traditional 來; OBI 
. Treated by almost all 
scholars as based on pictograph of wheat / 
barley, which was then borrowed as a loan 
for the (near/) homophonous word for ‘come’. 
Frequently used already in OBI texts for ‘come’. 
But Pulleyblank suggests that 來 is the original 
graph for the cereal, and that the separate 
graph 麥, meaning ‘wheat’ (with 夂 ‘foot’, see 

104  The 160 Second Grade Characters
Appendix) was originally intended for ‘come’ 
(see also 213). MS1995:v1:62-4; QX2000:287-
8; MR2007:329; KJ1970:286-7; SS1984:1861; 
AS2007:374, 342-3. We suggest taking the mod-
ern components as  十 35 ‘ten’and 米 220 ‘rice’. 
Mnemonic: WHEAT COMES TO BE TEN 
GRAINS OF RICE!?
一里 ICHIRI　1 ri (= 2.44 miles)
里子 satogo　foster child
里芋 satoimo　taro
RI, sato
village, league
7 strokes
里
L1
238
Bronze 
 shows 田 63 ‘fi eld’ and 土 64 ‘earth/
ground’ to give meaning ‘ground/land in form 
of paths or ridges separating fi elds’ (Katō, 
Yamada); Yamada takes ‘village’ as loan usage. 
Tōdō, alternatively, includes in word-family 
meaning ‘line; draw a line’, and takes ‘village’ as 
extended usage on basis of arranging dwell-
ings in grid pattern. KJ1970:902; YK1976:491; 
TA1965:100-02. 
Mnemonic: GROUND MADE INTO 
FIELDS – INDICATES VILLAGE
A late graph (Shuowen) 
. Has 玉 15 ‘jewel/
jade’, and 里 238 (‘village’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘split (jade in accordance with 
理性 RISEI　rationality
無理 MURI　unreasonable
理由 RIYŪ　reason
会話 KAIWA　conversation
話題 WADAI　topic (of talk)
小話 kobanashi　tale
the vein patterning)’. The meaning seems to 
have progressed from ‘make a jade vessel’ to a 
more general ‘organise (something)’. In Tōdō’s 
‘(draw) a line’ word-family, here ‘draw a logical 
line’. KJ1970:902; YK1976:491-2; TA1965:100-02. 
We suggest taking the ‘dotless’ jade determina-
tive as ‘king’ 5. 
Mnemonic: THE KING HAS COME TO THE 
VILLAGE – MUST BE SOME REASON
RI
reason, rational 
11 strokes
WA, hanashi, hanasu
speech, talk
13 strokes
理
話
L4
L5
239
240
A late graph (Shuowen) 
. The left hand ele-
ment is 言118 ‘words, speak’. Scholars diff er 
in interpreting the right-hand element in seal 
script.  Katō takes it as 舌 755 (‘tongue’) being 
phonetic with associated sense ‘good’ (i.e. good 
words), while Yamada takes 舌 not as ‘tongue’ 
but as standing for an NJK graph 刮 (‘scrape, 
shave off ’) as phonetic, also with associated 
sense ‘good’. Tōdō takes the right-hand element 
as 舌 93, likewise as phonetic, and includes 
in word-family meaning ‘join together’. ‘Story’ 
and ‘to talk’ are treated as extended usage. 
KJ1970:322; YK1976:509; TA1965:643-6.
Mnemonic: TONGUE IS USED TO TALK 
WORDS IN SPEECH

  105
THE 200 THIRD GRADE CHARACTERS
悪意 AKUI　malice
悪寒 OKAN　chill
悪者 warumono　a rogue
AKU, O, warui
bad, hate
11 strokes
悪
L4
241
A late graph (Shuowen) 
. Has 心 164 ‘heart, 
mind, feelings’ and 亜 1007 (q.v.) as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘hunchback, ugly, 
twisted’, to give negative meanings such as 
‘hate’ and ‘bad’. KJ1970:3-4; YK1976:49-50; 
OT1968:371.
Mnemonic: BAD HEART AND TWISTED 
FEELINGS LEAD TO HATE
Some early forms show just ‘woman under roof’ 
; others show additional line 
, which – from 
its position – is generally taken as a napkin 
不安 FUAN　unease
安心 ANSHIN　relief
安物 yasumono　cheap item
明暗 MEIAN　light and dark
暗殺 ANSATSU　assassination
真暗 makkura　pitch dark
AN, yasui
relax, ease, cheap
6 strokes
AN, kurai
dark, gloomy
13 strokes
安
暗
L5
L4
242
243
used for menstruation (especially from bronze 
on). Modern form has just 宀 30 ‘roof, dwelling’ 
and 女 37 ‘woman’. Katō and Mizukami take 宀 
as also having a phonetic role with associated 
sense ‘cover over’. ‘Cheap’ is a meaning only 
in Japanese. MS1995:v1:360-61; KJ1970:5-6; 
YK1976:50-51.
Mnemonic: WOMAN AT EASE RELAXES IN 
CHEAP HOUSE
A late graph (Shuowen) 
. Has 日 66 ‘sun’/‘day’, 
and 音 6 (‘sound’) used here as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘shade’/‘dark’. KJ1970: 7; 
YK1976:51; TA1965:815-24.
Mnemonic: THE SOUNDS OF A GLOOMY DAY 
医者  ISHA　doctor
外科医 GEKAI　surgeon
医学  IGAKU　medical science
I, iyasu
heal, medical 
7 strokes
医
L4
244
Early form 
. Traditional 醫; late graph (Shuowen), 
consisting of 酉 ‘jar/ brewing pot for wine’ (see 
318), with 殹 (CO ‘attack’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘clear’ (not cloudy). In early 
times wine was used sometimes for medicinal 
purposes, hence extended meanings of ‘heal; 
healer, physician’. Note that originally 医 was 
a separate and independent graph meaning 
‘quiver’ (for arrows: see 145). 医 has become 
the offi  cial form for 醫 in Japan. YK1976:53-4; 
KJ1970:20-22; OT1968:1029.
Mnemonic: ARROW IN MEDICAL DOCTOR’S 
BAG IS USED TO HEAL 

106  The 200 Third Grade Characters
Bronze . Has 女 37 ‘woman’, and 禾 87 ‘cereal’ 
bent with ripe grain (Qiu identifi es as ‘foxtail 
millet’, Karlgren as ‘growing grain’, Ogawa as 
委員会 IINKAI　committee
委任  ININ　entrustment
委託金 ITAKUKIN　trust money
I, yudaneru
entrust
8 strokes
委
L3
245
‘rice’; Mizukami argues that ‘millet’ is correct, 
botanically speaking) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘supple’, leading to extended 
senses such as ‘compliant; entrust’. Ma inter-
prets as woman carrying cereal on her back, 
and by extension ‘to follow’. QX2000:176; 
BK1957:23; OT1968:727; MS1995:v2:960-61, 
v1:318-9; YK1976:54; MR2007:469.
Mnemonic: ENTRUST GRAIN PLANTS TO 
WOMAN
注意 CHŪI　attention, care
決意 KETSUI　determination
意見 IKEN　opinion
A late graph (Shuowen) 
. Has 心 164 ‘heart, 
mind, feelings’, and 音 6 (‘sound’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘full; congested’ (Yamada, 
Katō) or ‘keep contained, suppress’ (Ogawa). 
YK1976:55-6; KJ1970:17; OT1968:378.
Mnemonic: A THOUGHT IS A SOUND FROM 
THE MIND—OR THE HEART
I
mind, thought
13 strokes
意
L 4
246
Originally 
 in OBI (corresponding to 毓: see 
also 432), depicting ‘woman’ with ‘child’ (baby 
being born) with dots for amniotic fl uid. An 
abbreviated form of the graph, with its modern 
教育 KYŌIKU　education
育児 IKUJI　childcare
育ち 
sodachi　upbringing
structure, is found from the seal script stage, 
consisting of 子 27 ‘child’ but inverted, over 
肉 209 ‘meat, fl esh’ in its abbreviated form 月, 
possibly as phonetic with associated sense 
‘to be born’ (Yamada, Katō), but Tōdō consid-
ers 月 here to be semantic only. ‘Be raised/ 
raise’ and ‘educate’ are extended meanings. 
MS1995:v2:1070-71; YK1976:57; KJ1970:52-3; 
TA1965:194.
Mnemonic: RAISING A FLESHY 
UPSIDE-DOWN CHILD IS AN EDUCATION!
IKU, sodatsu/teru
raise, educate 
8 strokes
育
L3
247
会員 KAIIN　member of group
全員 ZEN’IN　all members
動員 DŌIN　mobilization
IN
member, offi  cial
10 strokes
員
L4
248
Seal 
. OBI form 
 shows the graph was 
originally a three-legged cauldron topped by 
a circle, depicting a round-necked vessel. As in 
the seal form (Shuowen) and modern form, the 
lower element might appear to be 貝 10 ‘shell 
currency’, which is incorrect but may be a help-
ful mnemonic. The top element 口 22 ‘round’ 
is semantic, and Tōdō takes it in this role only; 
Mizukami, Katō, and Yamada choose to take it 
as phonetic with associated meaning ‘round’, 
as well as semantic. ‘Member’ and ‘offi  cial’ ap-
pear to be modern meanings. TA1965:611-23; 
MS1995:v1:228-30; KJ1970:63; YK1976:60-61. 
Mnemonic: OFFICIAL MEMBER MAKES 
SHELL-MONEY GO ROUND

The 200 Third Grade Characters  107
病院 BYŌIN　hospital 
寺院 JIIN　temple
議院 GIIN　the House
IN
institute
10 strokes
院
L4
249
A late graph (Shuowen) 
. Has 阝 1907 ‘piled-
up earth, mound, hill’ (see also 376), and 完 
464 (‘complete’) as phonetic with associated 
飲用水 IN’YŌSUI　drinking water
飲み物 nomimono　drinks
飲み屋 nomiya　tavern
IN, nomu
drink, swallow
12 strokes
飲
L5
250
sense of ‘earthen wall or fence around dwelling’; 
later used to denote the dwelling or building 
itself, typically an imposing one such as palace 
or temple. ‘Institute’ is a further extended 
usage. Tōdō includes in word-family meaning 
‘round; surround’. YK1976:61; OT1968:1066; 
TA1965:611-19.
Mnemonic: INSTITUTE IS COMPLETE WITH 
EARTHEN WALL 
OBI 
. Seal script 
 has equivalent of 酓 on 
left, conveying ‘bitter wine taste’, or ‘drink’ (‘wine 
barrel’ with 今 as phonetic), and 欠 496 ‘gaping 
mouth’/ ‘lack’ on the right. Later, 食 ‘meal’ 163 
was substituted as left-hand element. Earlier 
OBI form simply depicts person bending over 
wine barrel or similar to drink. YK1976:61; 
OT1968:533, 1026. 
Mnemonic: LACK FOOD, SO SWALLOW DRINK
運動 UNDŌ　movement
不運 FUUN　bad luck
運び hakobi　state of aff airs
UN, hakobu
transport, luck 
progress
12 strokes
運
L4
251
Late graph (Shuowen) 
. Has determinative 
⻌ 85 ‘walk, go’, and 軍 490 (‘wheels’/ ‘army’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘round’. 
KJ1970:74; YK1976:63. 
Mnemonic: ARMY NEEDS WHEELED 
TRANSPORT AND LUCK TO PROGRESS
水泳  SUIEI　swimming
背泳  HAIEI　backstroke
平泳ぎ  hiraoyogi　breaststroke
A late graph (Shuowen) 
. Has 氵42 ‘water’, 
and 永 644 (‘long’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘fl utter; fl oat’. KJ1970:79; YK1976:64-5.
Mnemonic: LONG SWIM IN THE WATER
EI, oyogu
swim
8 strokes
泳
L3
252
駅長  EKICHŌ　stationmaster
駅弁  EKIBEN　station lunch-box
東京駅 TŌKYŌEKI　Tokyo Stn
EKI 
station
14 strokes
駅
L5
253
Traditional 驛. Late graph (Shuowen) 
. Has 馬 
210 ‘horse’, and 睪 (CO ‘spy’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘change’, simplifi ed to 尺 895. 
KJ1970:94; YK1976:68-9.
Mnemonic: MAN WITH BACKPACK MOUNTS 
HORSE AT RELAY STATION

108  The 200 Third Grade Characters
横断  ŌDAN　crossing
横乗り  yokonori　riding sidesaddle
横顔  yokogao　profi le
中央  CHŪŌ　center
中央部 CHŪŌBU　central part
中央口 CHŪŌguchi　central exit 
A late graph (Shuowen) 
 . Traditional: ߺ. 
Has 木 73 ‘tree, wood’, and 黄 133 (‘yellow’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘stop, obstruct’. 
Original meaning is horizontal door bolt, and 
by extension ‘crossways, side’. KJ1970:324-5; 
YK1976:74.
Mnemonic: YELLOW PIECE OF WOOD LAID 
ON ITS SIDE
Ō, yoko
side, crossways
15 strokes
Ō
center
5 strokes
横
央
L3
L3
255
254
OBI 
; bronze 
. Opinions diff er. In broad 
terms, Mizukami, Katō and Yamada agree that 
this graph consists of variant 
 for 大 56 ‘big’ 
for person standing upright with 
 as phonetic 
element positioned centrally just above the 
shoulders with associated sense ‘straight, 
upright’. Graph meaning is ‘neck, back of neck’, 
and as the neck is positioned centrally, neither 
to left nor right, the extended sense ‘center’ 
evolved. Tōdō interprets diff erently, including 
央 within a word-family ‘restrain’, taking the 
element across the top of the shoulders as a 
restraining device for criminals (see also 英 
449); Ogawa also favors this analysis. With this 
view, ‘center’ may still be seen as extended 
usage. MS1995:v1:298-9; KJ1970:76-7; 
YK1976:72; TA1965:404-7; OT1968:244. 
Mnemonic: BIG MAN WITH THICK NECK AT 
THE CENTER OF THINGS
屋上  OKUJŌ　roof
小屋  koya　hut, shed
パン屋  PANya　baker(y)
No OBI or bronze forms, but other forms – pos-
sibly pre-Shuowen – exist, e.g. 
, 
. Taken as 
尸 (NJK graph) ‘person slumped or bent or lying 
OKU, ya (in compounds)
store, building, dealer
9 strokes
屋
L4
256
down/ corpse’, with either: a) 厔, an abbreviated 
version of 室 152 ‘room’, combining to give ‘a 
room to lie down in’, and by extension ‘house’, 
etc. (Ogawa, Katō, Yamada); or b) 至 886 ‘arrive/ 
reach’ (Shirakawa), to give ‘(decide by ritual 
process) a place to lie down’. OT1968:296-7; 
KJ1970:324-5; YK1976:74; SS1984:67.
Mnemonic: ARRIVE AT STORE AND FIND 
DEALER’S CORPSE IN BUILDING
OBI forms 
, 
. Traditional 溫. Typically treat-
ed as quite late in origin. Seal form onwards 
consists of 氵 42 ‘water’, with  as phonetic; 
generally, taken as associated sense unclear 
and the whole graph originally representing 
a specifi c river name, then loaned for ‘warm’. 
温泉 ONSEN　hot springs
温情 ONJŌ　kindness
温室 ONSHITSU　hothouse
ON, atatakai/meru
warm
12 strokes
温
L3
257
Mizukami, however, lists the above OBI forms 
as showing someone with water in a bath-like 
container, regards associated sense of the 
phonetic as ‘warm’, and takes the meaning 
as ‘river with warm current’ or ‘steamy warm 
water’. He also treats the same OBI form as the 
earliest form of 浴 625 ‘bathe’, listing diff erent 
shapes for 温 and 浴 only at the seal stage. 
MS1995:V2,772-3; KJ1970:114; YK1976:76. We 
suggest taking the modern graph as 氵42 
‘water’, 日 66 ‘sun’, and 皿 300 ‘bowl’. 
Mnemonic: SUN WARMS WATER IN A BOWL

The 200 Third Grade Characters  109
Traditional 化. OBI form 
 depicts ‘person’ 
亻 41 (‘standing’), with element 
 (匕 in 
A late graph (Shuowen) 
. Has 艹 53 ‘plant, 
vegetation’, and 何 86 (‘what?’) as phonetic, 
変化  HENKA　change
化粧  KESHŌ　make-up
化け物  bakemono　‘spook’
出荷 SHUKKA　consignment
船荷 funani　ship’s cargo
荷物 niMOTSU　luggage
KA, KE, bakeru/kasu
change, bewitch
4 strokes
KA, ni
load, burden
10 strokes
化
荷
L3
L4
258
259
Japanese) for person fallen down – indicat-
ing change of state – acting as phonetic with 
associated sense range ‘become diff erent, 
imitate, false’. The graph is in Tōdō’s word-family 
meaning ‘change shape’. MS1995:v1:54-5; 
KJ1970:305-06; YK1976:77; TA1965:607-09.
Mnemonic: STANDING MAN IS BEWITCHED 
AND FALLS DOWN CHANGED
original meaning ‘lotus plant’. Early Chinese 
word for ‘carry on shoulder/back’ was originally 
written 何, but when 何 came to be used for 
a near-homophone meaning ‘who?’, ‘what?’, 
荷 was borrowed for ‘carry’. AS2007:273,275; 
YK1976:83; TA1965:583-6.
Mnemonic: WHAT PLANTS ARE IN THAT 
LOAD?
世界 SEKAI　world
境界 KYŌKAI　boundary
政界 SEIKAI　world of politics
KAI
area, boundary
9 strokes
界
L4
260
A late graph (Shuowen) 
. Has 田 63 ‘fi eld’, and 
1094 介 (modern meaning ‘come between’) 
here as phonetic with associated sense ‘divide’, 
giving original meaning ‘divide up fi elds’. In 
Tōdō’s word-family meaning ‘divide in two; 
interval, gap’.  KJ1970:143; YK1976:90; 
TA1965:601-05.
Mnemonic: DIVIDE FIELDS INTO AREAS WITH 
BOUNDARIES
開発  KAIHATSU　development
開始  KAISHI　inception
開き綱  hirakizuna　rip-cord 
KAI, hiraku, akeru
open
12 strokes
開
L4
261
A relatively late graph (Shuowen) 
. Has 門 231 
‘gate’, and an inner element taken i] as 幵 
‘face, oppose’ (the two leaves of opened gate 
facing each other) (Yamada, Katō), or ii] two 
hands reaching out to remove the crossbar 
(Shirakawa, Ogawa). YK1976:91; KJ1970:143; 
SS1984:92-3; OT1968:1057.
Mnemonic: HANDS REMOVE BAR AND OPEN 
GATE
階段 KAIDAN　stairs
二階 NIKAI　upstairs
階級 KAIKYŪ　class, grade 
Late graph (Shuowen) 
. Has determinative 阝 
‘piled-up earth, mound’ (short form of 阜1907), 
KAI
storey, grade, step
12 strokes
階
L3
262
and 皆1099 (modern meaning ‘all, everyone’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘be lined 
up’, or ‘be in unison’. KJ1970:152; YK1976:91; 
OT1968:1072. Note that the determinative 阝 
can also occur as a right-hand element, with 
diff erent etymology and meaning; see 都 376 
and 阜 1907 for further discussion.
Mnemonic: ALL THE MOUNDS SHOULD HAVE 
STEPS LINED UP

110  The 200 Third Grade Characters
寒波  KANPA　cold spell/wave
寒気  samuKE　a chill
寒暖計 KANDANKEI　thermometer 
Bronze form A 
; bronze form B 
; seal form 
. Form A shows a roof/dwelling, with gathered 
vegetation inside to keep occupant warm from 
the cold (Shirakawa). Form B additionally has 
KAN, samui
cold
12 strokes
寒
L4
263
two horizontal lines sometimes taken to rep-
resent ice (Yamada), but ice was not normally 
represented in this way; instead, the lines might 
indicate mats to lie on (Shirakawa, Karlgren also 
in broad agreement). YK1976:102-3; BK1957:58; 
SS1984:124-5. We suggest taking middle part 
as 井 1575 ‘well’, 
 as variant of 六 80 ‘six’, plus
冫 ‘ice’ 401.
Mnemonic: SIX ROOFED WELLS ICE OVER IN 
THE COLD
感心 KANSHIN　admiration
感覚 KANKAKU　sense
感情 KANJŌ　feelings, emotion 
KAN(jiru)
feeling, emotion
13 strokes
感
L3
264
A late graph (Shuowen) 
. Has 心 164 ‘heart’, 
and 咸 (NJK graph based on a halberd: see e.g. 
545) as phonetic with associated sense ‘shake’, 
to give ‘shaking heart’, and so ‘feeling, emotion’. 
KJ1970:215; YK1976:104; OT1968:379. Suggest 
taking 口 as ‘mouth’ 22.
Mnemonic: FEELING HEART IN THE MOUTH 
WHEN FACING A HALBERD
漢字 KANJI　character
悪漢 AKKAN　rogue
漢詩 KANSHI　Chinese poetry 
Ironically, one of the most etymologically 
obscure characters. Bronze 
. Has 氵 42 ‘water’, 
with right-hand side as phonetic (associated 
sense unclear). Originally referred to the Han 
River (modern Shaanxi Province), one of the 
most important tributaries of the Yangtze River; 
KAN
Han China, male
13 strokes
漢
L4
265
later taken as name for the Han dynasty by its 
founder Liu Bang, as that region was where he 
began building the dynasty. At an early period, 
non-Han ethnic groups in China referred to 
Han Chinese as 漢 子 ‘sons of Han’, and by 
extension the general sense ‘male’. KJ1970:223; 
OT1968:599; YK1976:104; SS1984:128. We sug-
gest taking the right hand element as 夫 601 
‘man’, 口 22 ‘mouth’ and 艹 53 ‘grass/plant’, with 
a little geographical licence.
Mnemonic: MAN FROM MOUTH OF HAN 
RIVER IN GRASSY HAN CHINA
会館  KAIKAN　hall
旅館  RYOKAN　inn
美術館 BIJUTSUKAN　art gallery 
Late graph (Shuowen) 
. Has 飠163 ‘meal/
eat’, and 官 465 (modern meaning ‘offi  cial’) as 
KAN
large building, hall
16 strokes
館
L4
266
phonetic with associated sense ‘building to 
work in’, then ‘building’ in general or ‘house’ 
(Yamada). Shirakawa sees diff erently as origi-
nally a temporary building used by army on 
the move for ceremonial use, then ‘building’ in 
general sense. Katō takes the graph as ‘place to 
stay/eat’. KJ1970:335; YK1976:106; SS1984:131; 
KJ1985:669.
Mnemonic: OFFICIAL EATS IN HALL

The 200 Third Grade Characters  111
海岸 KAIGAN　coast
対岸 TAIGAN　opposite bank
川岸 kawagishi　riverbank 
GAN, kishi
bank, shore
8 strokes
岸
L3
267
associated sense ‘dwelling built high on rocks/
high’ (Yamada), ‘mountain prominence’ (Oga-
wa), or ‘jagged cliff ’ (Shirakawa). Later, extended 
usage for ‘high land close to water’, and ‘bank, 
shore’. YK1976:108; OT1968:302; SS1984:136. We 
suggest taking 干 840 in its modern meaning 
of ‘dry’, and 厂 as a bank.
Mnemonic: MOUNTAIN-LIKE BANK IS DRY
起源  KIGEN　origin
早起き  hayaoki　early rising
起動機 KIDŌKI　starter motor 
A relatively late graph 
 (Shuowen). Tradi-
tional form has 巳 (NJK ‘serpent’) on the right, 
refl ecting the seal form. Has 走 179 ‘run’ (shows 
movement), and right-hand 巳 with associated 
KI, okiru/kosu/koru
arise, bring about
10 strokes
起
L4
268
sense ‘begin’ (Ogawa), or – by another analysis – 
己 866 (‘twisting thread’; ‘self’) with associated 
sense ‘(person) bent over (when getting up)’ 
(Shirakawa) or ‘stop’ (stop running > stand) 
(Yamada). ‘Bring about’ is extended usage. 
First analysis above is probably the one to 
follow. KJ1970:232; YK1976:114; SS1984:145; 
OT1968:966.
Mnemonic: RUNNING IN A TWISTED WAY 
BRINGS ABOUT CONSEQUENCES
学期 GAKKI　school term
期待 KITAI　expectation
最期 SAIGO　end, death 
Bronze forms such as 
, 
 typically consist of 
其 as phonetic with associated sense ‘go round’, 
with determinative 日 66 ‘sun’, or occasionally 
月 18 ‘moon’; seal script (Shuowen) onwards 
KI, GO
period, expect
12 strokes
期
L3
269
has ‘moon’. One cycle of the sun (one year) 
or the moon (month); by extended usage 
for ‘period’ in general. 其 is an NJK used to 
express ‘that’, but this is loan usage, originally 
pictograph of a winnowing basket, which may 
also relate to cyclic seasons. ‘Expect’ is an ex-
tended meaning perhaps related to regularity. 
MS1995:v1:640-41; KJ1970:238; OT1968:739.
Mnemonic: EXPECT PERIOD OF MONTHS 
BETWEEN WINNOWINGS
来客 RAIKYAKU　visitor
乗客 JŌKYAKU　passenger
客員 KAKUIN　guest member 
OBI forms include 
, bronze 
. OBI shows 
‘roof, dwelling’ 宀 30, ‘roof, dwelling’ 止143 
‘stop, stay’, ‘person kneeling’, with 口 22 ‘mouth’ 
KYAKU, KAKU
guest, visitor
9 strokes
客
L3
270
as phonetic (Mizukami). Bronze has ‘roof’, 
‘person’  and 各 462 (modern meaning ‘each’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘come, 
stay, stop’; seal form onwards is as for bronze, 
minus ‘person’. MS1995:v1:368-70; OT1968:276; 
YK1976:120-21. Suggest taking 各 as ‘cross-
legged’ 夂 (see Appendix) and ‘mouth’ 口 22.
Mnemonic: EACH VISITOR UNDER ROOF IS 
CROSS-LEGGED WITH OPEN MOUTH
A late graph (Shuowen) 
. Has 山 26 
‘mountain’, and lower part as phonetic with 

112  The 200 Third Grade Characters
研究 KENKYŪ research
究明 KYŪMEI investigation
探究 TANKYŪ inquiry
急死 
 KYŪSHI 
sudden death
急速 
 KYŪSOKU 
rapidity
大急ぎ  ōisogi  great haste
進級 
 SHINKYŪ 
promotion
同級生 DŌKYŪSEI 
classmate
上級 
 JŌKYŪ 
upper grade
Late graph (Shuowen) 
. Has 穴 860 ‘cave 
(dwelling), hole’, and 九 13 (‘nine’ q.v.) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘bend’, to give 
‘cramped cave dwelling’, and by extension 
‘be in diffi  culties’, ‘go/take to extremes’. The 
extended meaning of ‘investigate’ may relate to 
narrowing the focus. YK1976:124; KJ1970:264; 
OT1968:739. 
Mnemonic: EXTREME INVESTIGATION OF 
NINE HOLES
A late graph. Seal form (Shuowen) 
, depict-
ing 心 164 ‘heart/feelings’ under upper part 
with hand behind (chasing) a person, probably 
signifying urgency. Upper part is early form of 
及 1202 (‘reach, extend’), acting here as pho-
netic with associated sense such as ‘become 
tense, brace’. ‘Sudden’ is an extended meaning. 
SS1984:174; YK1976:125; OT1968:363.
Mnemonic: HURRYING PERSON SUDDENLY 
STOPS, HAND OVER HEART
Generally listed as a late graph, though Yamada 
gives a bronze form. Made of 糸 29 ‘thread’, 
with 及 1202 (‘reach, extend’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘next’. ‘Order’ is an ex-
tended meaning. KJ1970:260; YK1976:125-6; 
OT1968:767.
Mnemonic: REACH OUT AND GRADE THREADS
KYŪ, kiwameru
investigate, extreme
7 strokes
KYŪ, isogu
hurry, sudden
9 strokes
KYŪ
rank, grade
9 strokes
究
急
級
L4
L4
L3
271
272
273
神宮 
JINGŪ 
shrine
宮中 
KYŪCHŪ 
Court
宮様 
miyasama 
prince
OBI 
 shows rooms beneath a roof; taken to 
represent a large house or building. Became 
associated with grand buildings such as palaces 
and shrines, and their principal residents. 
MS1995:v1:374; YK1976:126; OT1968:278.
Mnemonic: MANY ROOMS UNDER A ROOF 
INDICATE A PALACE OR SHRINE
KYŪ, GŪ, KU, miya
palace, shrine prince
10 strokes
宮
L5
274
球技 
 KYŪGI 
ball game
地球  CHIKYŪ　Earth
球拾い tamahiroi　caddie
Late graph (Shuowen) 
. 玉/王 15 ‘jade’ and
求 478 (‘seek’) as phonetic, associated sense 
‘pretty’ (Katō, Yamada), or ‘round’(Ogawa) > 
pretty jade disc/ball. KJ1970:263; OT1968:657.
Mnemonic: SEEK JADE BALLS AS SPHERICAL 
JEWELS
KYŪ, tama
sphere, ball
11 strokes
球
L3
275

The 200 Third Grade Characters  113
Bronze  represents a musical instrument 
with bells suspended from a notched board; in 
Tōdō’s word-family ‘rough and hard’. The graph 
OBI 
 is based on pictograph of container 
with double lids, probably for rice, and made of 
産業 
SANGYŌ industry 
罪業 
ZAIGŌ sin
仕業 
shiwaza 
act, deed
去年 
  KYONEN 
last year
過去 
  KAKO 
the past
立ち去る  tachisaru 
depart
鉄橋 
TEKKYŌ 
steel bridge
陸橋 
RIKKYŌ 
overpass
石橋 
ishibashi 
stone bridge 
was also used to denote board or tablet used 
as a fl at surface for learning, then for learning 
itself or any activity involving learning, includ-
ing work. ‘Karma’ is an extended meaning. 
KJ1970:282; OT1968:514; YK1976:136-7. Dif-
fi cult mnemonically, but we suggest taking the 
lower part as a combination of 木73 ‘tree/wood’ 
and 羊 426 ‘sheep’, and the upper part a topless 
‘row’ 並 977. 
Mnemonic: MAKING ODD ROWS OF 
WOODEN SHEEP IS A STRANGE PROFESSION
GYŌ, GŌ, waza
profession, deed, 
karma
13 strokes
KYO, KO, saru
go, leave, past
5 strokes
KYŌ, hashi
bridge
16 strokes
業
去
橋
L4
L4
L3
278
276
277
bamboo or similar pliant plant-based material. 
According to Yamada, ‘depart’ is an extended 
usage based on the container being for taking 
out rice from a cooking pot but more likely 
loan usage. MS1995:v1:190-91; KJ197:266-7; 
YK1976:128. We suggest taking the graph as 土 
64 ‘ground’ and ム as ‘nose’.
Mnemonic: NOSE UNDER THE GROUND 
MEANS YOU HAVE DEPARTED – GONE!
A late graph (Shuowen) 
. 木 73 is ‘tree, wood’, 
and  喬 is an NJK meaning ‘tall’ (similar in form 
and meaning to 高132 ‘tall/high’) and also acts 
here as phonetic. Despite some points of diff er-
ence, scholars are in  general agreement that 
the basic associated sense is ‘tall, high’, in this 
case presumably denoting something tall and 
wooden; ‘bridge’ is perhaps an extended sense, 
though Yamada sees as loan.YK1976:134-5; 
SS1984:199-200; OT1968:525.
Mnemonic: TALL WOODEN STRUCTURE WITH 
IRREGULAR TOP IS A BRIDGE
曲線 
  KYOKUSEN 
curve
作曲 
  SAKKYOKU 
songwriting
曲がり目  magarime 
a turning
Bronze is 
 ; pictograph of curved container 
made of wood or bamboo (Mizukami also 
notes alternative interpretation as carpenter’s 
square); by extension ‘bend’. MS1995:v1:628-9; 
YK1976:137; KJ1970:284. ‘Melody’ is an extended 
meaning perhaps based on convolutions. We 
suggest remembering the modern graph by 
using 田 63 ‘fi eld(s)’. 
Mnemonic: BENDY PATHS THROUGH THE 
FIELDS AND BEYOND
KYOKU,
mageru/garu
bend, melody
6 strokes
曲
L3
279

114  The 200 Third Grade Characters
Late graph (Shuowen): 
. Usually taken as 尸 
‘corpse or person slumped or bent or lying’ 
(NJK graph: e.g. see 256), with variant of 句 683 
OBI 
 ; bronze 
; traditional 區. Mizukami 
takes OBI form as ‘armpit’ with 品 405 ‘goods’, 
局面 
 KYOKUMEN 
situation
結局 
 KEKKYOKU 
fi nally
郵便局 YŪBINKYOKU 
post offi  ce
銀行 
GINKŌ 
bank
銀河 
GINGA 
Milky Way
銀貨 
GINKA 
silver coin
区別 
KUBETSU 
distinguishing
地区 
CHIKU 
district
北区 
kitaKU 
Kita Ward
KYOKU
offi  ce, section, circum-
stances
7 strokes
GIN, shirogane
silver
14 strokes
KU
ward, section
4 strokes
局
銀
区
L3
L4
L4
280
281
282
(modern meaning ‘phrase’) as phonetic with 
associated sense i] ‘bent; hunchback’ (Katō, 
Yamada) or ii] ‘divide’ (Ogawa). Interpretation 
i] then treats meanings of the type ‘room’, 
‘apartment of a court-lady’, ‘offi  ce’ as loan usage; 
ii] regards as extended use. Tōdō includes in 
word-family meaning ‘bend’, ‘made intricate’. 
KJ1970:279-80; YK1976:137; OT1968:295; 
TA1965:307-10.
Mnemonic: ODD PHRASE USED ABOUT 
CIRCUMSTANCES OF OFFICE CORPSE
Seal 
. A late graph (Shuowen). Has 金 16 
‘metal’ and 艮 (NJK, originally showed an eye 
on top of twisted legs, to mean ‘stop, look back 
angrily, oppose’) as phonetic with the associ-
ated sense ‘white’. Distinguish 艮 from 良 628 
‘good’. KJ1970:291-2; OT1968:1041; YK1976:141.
Mnemonic: STOP AND STARE AT SILVERY METAL
here treated as ‘many enclosed items’, giving 
‘confi ned armpit space for hiding things’. The 
bronze form has ‘armpit’ with several items lined 
up, interpreted as ‘small place under armpit’ 
(Katō), to which Mizukami adds ‘to hide things’. 
‘Small’ and ‘divide up’ are extended meanings. 
MS1995:v1:162-3; KJ1970:296; YK1976:141-2. 
Mnemonic: MOSTLY ENCLOSED ‘SECTION X’ 
IS A WARD
苦心 
KUSHIN pains, trouble
苦痛 
KUTSŪ  pain, agony
苦味 nigami 
bitterness 
A late graph (Shuowen) 
. It comprises艹
53 ‘plant/grass’, and 古 121 (‘old’) as a pho-
netic with an associated sense ‘tighten’ (Katō, 
Yamada) or ‘feel strong stimulation’ (Ogawa); 
the meaning extended to ‘bitter, unpleasant’, 
etc. KJ1970:393; YK1976:142-3; OT1968:847.
Mnemonic:  OLD PLANTS TASTE BITTER, 
EVEN PAINFUL
KU, nigai,
kurushii/shimu
painful, bitter
8 strokes
苦
L3
283
OBI 
 is taken as i] 鼎 ‘three-legged 
vessel, cauldron’, or ii] 貝 10 ‘shellfi sh’ as 
具合 
GUai condition
用具 
YŌGU appliance
道具 
DŌGU 
tool
an abbreviation for 鼎, with two hands as 
both semantic and phonetic, to give ‘off er, 
provide’. ‘Wherewithal/equipment’ and ‘means’ 
are extended meanings. MS1995:v1:104-5; 
OT1968:98; YK1976:143. We suggest taking the 
modern simplifi ed upper element as 目 76 ‘eye’, 
and the lower element as a table.
Mnemonic: KEEP AN EYE ON THAT TABLE – 
IT’S USEFUL EQUIPMENT
GU, sonaeru
equip(ment), means
8 strokes
具
L3
284

The 200 Third Grade Characters  115
暴君 
 BŌKUN  tyrant
細君 
 SAIKUN wife
山田君 YamadaKUN 
Mr Yamada
OBI 
 has ‘words’ (represented by 口 22 
‘mouth, say’), and 尹 (CO graph meaning 
‘govern’ by holding a stick) as both semantic 
and phonetic, to give ‘lead people by words’, 
and hence ‘lead, leader’. MS1995:v1:216-7; 
YK1976:144; OT1968:170. 
Mnemonic: MY LORD, I SEE YOU RULE BY 
STICK IN HAND AND BY WORD
KUN, kimi
lord, you, Mr
7 strokes
君
L3
285
関係 
KANKEI connection
係争 
KEISŌ contention
係員 
kakariIN 
clerk in charge
A late graph (Shuowen) 
. Has ‘person’亻 41 
and 系 855 (‘joined threads’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘link up’. KJ1970:359; YK1976:
147-8; OT1968:63.  
Mnemonic: PERSON INVOLVED WITH JOIN-
ING THREADS
KEI, kakari
involvement
9 strokes
係
L3
286
軽食 
KEISHOKU 
light meal
軽薄 
KEIHAKU  fl ippancy
軽石 karuishi 
pumice
on loom) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘empty’ (Katō, Yamada); Ogawa says ‘at full 
speed’. ‘Light’ is extended meaning from ‘empty’. 
KJ1970:346; YK1976:150; OT1968:983. Suggest 
take the modern right hand parts as 又 2003 
‘hand’ and 土 64 ‘ground’.
Mnemonic: LIGHT VEHICLE PUSHED ALONG 
GROUND BY HAND
KEI, karui
light, fl ippant
12 strokes
軽
L4
287
血液 
KETSUEKI 
blood
血統 
KETTŌ 
lineage
鼻血 
hanaji 
nose-bleed
解決 
KAIKETSU 
solution
決裂 
KETSURETSU 
breakdown
決心 
KESSHIN 
determination
OBI 
 shows 皿 300 ‘bowl’ with blood in it 
(short stroke), in pledge. The meaning later 
became restricted to just ‘blood’. MS1995:v2:
1156-8; MR2007:318; KJ1970:365.
Mnemonic: LIQUID SPILLING FROM BOWL IS 
BLOOD
KETSU, chi
blood
6 strokes
KETSU, kimeru/maru
decide, settle, collapse
7 strokes
血
決
L3
L3
288
289
Late graph (Shuowen) 
. Has 氵 42 ‘water’, and 
夬 (CO, meaning disputed, a hand pulling bow-
string etc.) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘earth collapses’ as in a dyke, and possibly also 
‘pull apart’. In Tōdō’s word-family ‘gouge out’ (cf 
the NJK 抉 meaning ‘gouge’). ‘Decide’ is a loan 
usage. Note ‘collapse’ is still a minor mean-
ing for this graph. KJ1970:367; YK1976:154; 
TA1965:631-6; KJ1985:351. We suggest taking 
夬 as a man with a backpack (see also 駅 253).
Mnemonic: MAN DECIDES TO CARRY WATER 
IN BACKPACK
Late graph (Shuowen): 
. Traditional form 輕 
has 車 33 ‘vehicle’, and 巠 (CO, threads stretched 

116  The 200 Third Grade Characters
三重県 MieKEN 
Mie Prefecture
県令 
 KENREI 
prefectural bylaw
県庁 
 KENCHŌ 
Prefectural Offi  ce
研修 
 KENSHŪ 
training
研ぎ革  togikawa 
strop
研究者 KENKYŪSHA 
researcher
Bronze 
 depicts a severed head suspended 
upside down in a tree, as a punishment. 
Traditional form 縣 (which distorts the ‘tree’ 
component in bronze), has 系 855 (‘joined 
A late graph (Shuowen) 
. Has 石 47 ‘stone’, 
and 幵/幵 (a CO representing two level stakes 
with a meaning of ‘level’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘(make) fl at, level’; in Tōdō’s 
word-family ‘divide in two; gap’ (here, eliminate 
gaps or undulations). ‘Refi ne’ is an extension 
of basic meaning ‘smoothe out’. KJ1970:375; 
YK1976:157-8; TA1965:601-06.
Mnemonic: HONE STONE WITH TWO FUNNY 
STICKS
KEN
prefecture
9 strokes
KEN, togu
hone, refi ne
9 strokes
県
研
L4
L4
291
290
threads’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘hang’. Came to be used in Chinese for a 
similar-sounding word meaning ‘district, 
county’, and then in Japanese for ‘prefecture’. 
MS1995:v2:1020-22; KJ1970:379; YK1976:158; 
OT1968:787. For the modern form we suggest 
taking the top element as 目 76 ‘eye’ and the 
remaining strokes as a stand.
Mnemonic: KEEP AN EYE ON THE STAND AT 
THE PREFECTURAL SHOW
車庫 
 SHAKO 
garage, depot
倉庫 
 SŌKO 
warehouse
冷蔵庫 REIZŌKO 
refrigerator
琵琶湖 BIWAKO 
Lake Biwa
湖岸 
 KOGAN 
lake shore
湖水 
 KOSUI 
lake
Bronze 
. Has 广 127 ‘building’, and 車 33 
(‘vehicle, chariot’) as semantic and also as pho-
netic indicator. (The associated early Chinese 
pronunciation of 車 was closer to SJ KO than 
SHA – the latter reading refl ects a later Chinese 
pronunciation). Originally, a building to house 
chariots; later, became more general in mean-
ing. MS1995:v1:452-3; KJ1970:390; YK1976:168; 
AS2007:182.
Mnemonic: VEHICLE LEFT IN STOREHOUSE
KO
storehouse
10 strokes
KO, mizuumi
lake
12 strokes
庫
湖
L3
L3
292
293
According to Mizukami, possibly originates 
in the simpler bronze form 
 (= 沽, now an 
unrelated NJK meaning ‘trade’). 湖 consists 
of 氵 42 ‘water’, with 胡 (NJK originally ‘fl esh 
beneath jaw’) as phonetic with, here, associ-
ated sense ‘large’. MS1995:v2:766-7, 1072-3; 
KJ1970:393; YK1976:168. We suggest taking 月 
as 月18 ‘moon’ along with古121 ‘old’. 
Mnemonic: OLD MOON SEEN IN WATER OF 
LAKE

The 200 Third Grade Characters  117
Seal 
. Late graph (Shuowen). Consists of i] 夭, 
showing a fi gure with head bent down, mean-
ing ‘delicate, beautiful’, but borrowed in early 
Chinese for similar-sounding word meaning 
‘calamity’ (Mizukami), ‘premature death’ (Katō), 
with ii] 屰 ‘inverted’ (see 675) (Ogawa), ‘avoid’ 
幸運  KŌUN good fortune
不幸  FUKŌ misery, bad luck
幸いに  saiwai ni　fortunately
向上   KŌJŌ　improvement
向こう側  mukōgawa　opposite side
前向き   maemuki　forward-looking 
(Katō), giving overall sense ‘good fortune’. The 
graph elements show distortion in progres-
sion from seal to standard script, and Qiu notes 
that as part of the evolutionary process what 
was originally a separate graph in seal script 
for another word meaning ‘wooden handcuff s’ 
also ended up having the same shape in block 
script as 幸 . MS1995:v1:296-8; KJ1970:402-3; 
OT1968:323,300; AS2007:559-60; QX2000:190. 
We suggest using 辛 1535 meaning ‘sharp/bit-
ter’ as a mnemonic.
Mnemonic: EXTRA SHARP STROKE BRINGS 
HAPPINESS AND LUCK
KŌ, saiwai, sachi, 
shiawase
happiness, luck
8 strokes
KŌ, muku/keru/kau/kō
turn, face, beyond
6 strokes
幸
向
L3
L3
295
294
OBI 
 shows a dwelling with a window, 
apparently north-facing. Mizukami, Ma and 
Yamada take ‘face toward’ or ‘direction’ as later 
meanings; Qiu explores this topic in detail. Katō 
sees the graph as specifi cally a high window 
facing north, but takes the core meaning to be 
the window itself, with the meaning of ‘facing’ 
resulting from being used as a substitute for a 
more complex NJK character 卿 (now meaning 
lord) relating to facing each other at the meal 
table. ‘Turn’ and ‘beyond’ are extended meanings. 
MS1995:v1:210-11; MR2007:369; YK1976:175; 
QX2000:217-8; KJ1985:102-3.
Mnemonic: TURN TO THE HOUSE WITH THE 
HIGH WINDOW 
空港 KŪKŌ　airport
入港 NYŪKŌ　port entry
港町 minatomachi　port town
番号 BANGŌ　number
号令 GŌREI　command
号泣 GŌKYŪ　wailing
Late graph (Shuowen) 
. Traditional 號, which 
has 虎 1301 ‘tiger’, with left-side 号 (analyses 
diff er): Ogawa takes as 口 22 ‘mouth’; ‘say’, with 
丂 (‘fl oating waterweed’ 130 [Katō] or ‘curved 
KŌ, minato
harbor, port
12 strokes
GŌ
number, call, sign
5 strokes
港
号
L3
L3
296
297
A late graph (Shuowen) 
. Has 氵 ‘water’ 42, 
and 巷 (NJK, ‘streets of settlement’) as seman-
tic and phonetic, meaning ‘road, path’, giving 
water lane for boats, and by extension ‘har-
bour’. KJ1970:163; YK1976:184-5; OT1968:594. 
We suggest taking the upper-right element 
as 共 484 ‘together’, and the lower part as 己 
866 ‘self’.
Mnemonic: FIND ONESELF TOGETHER WITH 
WATER IN PORT  
knife’ [Shirakawa]) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘howl, etc.’, while Yamada and Tōdō 
take as 号 (with same sense). Either analysis 
yields overall sense ‘howl, roar like a tiger’. The 
abbreviated modern form has a more general-
ized sense range; ‘name, number’ are extended 
meanings.’YK1976:186-7; OT1968:161; 
TA1965:273-4; KJ1985:99.
Mnemonic: LOUD RISING VOICE CALLS OUT 
A NUMBER

118  The 200 Third Grade Characters
根本 
KONPON 
basis
大根 
DAIKON 
giant radish
屋根 
yane 
roof
A late graph (Shuowen) 
. Has 木 73 ‘tree, wood’, 
and 艮 (‘stop and stare’, see 281) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘root, stem’. In Tōdō’s word-family 
‘stay still’. Thus the root/stem of a tree. ‘Origin’ 
and similar meanings are derived. KJ1970:411; 
YK1976:191-2; TA1965:706-7; KJ1985:319.
Mnemonic: STOP AND STARE AT TREE ROOT
KON, ne
root, base
10 strokes
根
L3
298
祭日 
SAIJITSU 
holiday
祭壇 
SAIDAN 
altar
雪祭 
yukimatsuri 
Snow Festival
mon compared with bronze forms). Usage 
was extended to ‘ceremonies to invoke the 
deities’. Later forms appear to have excluded 
the wine, the reasons for this being unclear. 
MS1995:v2:948-50; SS1984:339; KJ1970:599; 
YK1976:198. KJ1985:446-7; We suggest taking 
the elements as ‘altar’/‘show’ 723 示 (see also 
153), 肉 209 ‘meat’, and ‘hand’ マ.
Mnemonic: HAND PUTS MEAT ON ALTAR IN 
FESTIVAL OF WORSHIP
OBI forms 
, 
. Bronze forms 
, 
. OBI 
forms are taken to show meat and wine be-
ing placed by hand on an altar (though such 
forms including ‘stand, altar’ are still uncom-
SAI, matsuri, matsuru
festival, worship
11 strokes
祭
L3
299
灰皿 
 haizara 
ashtray
大皿 
 ōzara 
large dish
皿洗い saraarai 
dishwashing
仕事 
 SHIgoto 
work
仕方 
 SHIkata 
way, means
仕組み SHIkumi 
arrangement
OBI forms 
, 
 show deeply curved bowl on 
raised base. Later forms 
, 
 show slightly 
more elaborate versions, probably being 
wrought in metal. MS1995:v2:900-02; QX2000:
179; MR2007:316; OT1968:690.
Mnemonic: DISH WITH VERTICAL STRIPES
sara
dish, bowl, plate
5 strokes
SHI, JI, tsukaeru
serve, work, do
5 strokes
皿
仕
L3
L4
300
301
associated sense either ‘work, serve’ (Katō, Ya-
mada), or ‘stand’ (Tōdō, Mizukami). Work in an-
cient China was often done by slaves, but later 
by servants, and so ‘serve’. Meanings given by 
Schuessler include ‘take offi  ce, serve, retainer, 
knight’. KJ1970:452; YK1976:214; TA1965:104-
06; MS1995:v1:44-5 AS2007:465.
Mnemonic: SAMURAI IS PERSON WHO 
WORKS AND SERVES
Bronze form onwards has 亻 41 ‘person’, and 
士 521 (‘male’/ ‘samurai’) as phonetic with 
ii] ‘divided up into small pieces’, giving ‘die and 
bones come apart’ (Tōdō). In ancient China a per-
son was only seen as dead when the corpse be-
came a clean skeleton after exposure to weather 
(Mizukami). By block script, left-hand changed 
to 歹, and right-hand to 匕. Modern form com-
prises 
, known as ‘meatless bones’ (cf ‘meaty 
bone’ 骨 877), with ‘fallen person’ 匕 (see 258). 
KJ1970:466-7; SS1984:364; MS1995:v1:710-11; 
TA1965:762-4.
Mnemonic: PERSON FALLS DEAD, SOON TO 
BE BARE BONES
死体 
 SHITAI 
corpse
死去 
 SHIKYO 
death
若死に  wakajini 
early death
SHI, shinu
die, death
6 strokes
死
L4
302
 OBI 
; seal 
. OBI left-hand  shows skeletal 
remains (possibly occipital bone); right-hand 
(person) is phonetic with associated sense i] 
‘fl esh rots and drops to ground’, giving ‘corpse 
turns to bleached bones free of fl esh’ (Katō), or 

The 200 Third Grade Characters  119
始終 
 SHIJŪ 
throughout
始動機 SHIDŌKI 
starter motor
始めて  hajimete 
for the fi rst time
The bronze forms 
 and 
 have 女 37 ‘woman’, 
together with elements corresponding to 台 
SHI, hajimeru/maru
begin, fi rst
8 strokes
始
指示 SHIJI　indication
親指 oyayubi　thumb
指図 sashiZU　directions
歯根 
 SHIKON 
dental root
歯医者 haISHA 
dentist
歯車 
 haguruma 
toothed gear
SHI, yubi, sasu
fi nger, point
9 strokes
SHI, ha
tooth, teeth
12 strokes
指
歯
L4
L3
L3
304
305
306
meaning of 旨 is ‘good/tasty’, here it has an asso-
ciated sense of ‘become divided up, separate’ – a 
reference to the fi ngers (Katō, Yamada) or ‘show, 
point to’ (Ogawa). KJ1970:466; YK1976:222; 
OT1968:412. We suggest taking 匕 (see 258) as a 
person sitting, and 日 as ‘sun’ 66.
Mnemonic: PERSON SITS POINTING WITH 
FINGER AT SUN
lined up’ (Katō, Yamada), or ‘stay, stop’ (Mizu-
kami, Tōdō). (Tōdō says sense is teeth ‘stay in 
one place’ while chewing). MS1995:v2:1526-7; 
KJ1970:469-70; YK1976:224; TA1965:69-71; 
MR2007:249. We suggest taking 止 in its mean-
ing ‘stop’, 米 as ‘rice’ 220, and the enclosure as a 
mouth.
Mnemonic: TEETH ENSURE RICE STOPS IN 
MOUTH
(not 183) or  以 443 respectively as the pho-
netic, both having similar pronunciation in early 
Chinese. The phonetic has an associated sense 
of ‘fi rst daughter’, leading to a more general-
ised meaning of just ‘fi rst’. MS1995:v1:320-21; 
KJ1970:14; OT1968:255; YK1976:220. We suggest 
taking 台 as ‘nose’ ム and ‘mouth’ 口 22.
Mnemonic: A WOMAN’S FACE BEGINS WITH A 
NOSE AND MOUTH
A late graph (Shuowen) 
. Has 扌 34 ‘hand’, 
and 旨 1401 as phonetic. Though the modern 
Chinese, two of the four underlying words (those 
represented by 使 and 史 ) were homophones. 
At seal stage, the graph 使 emerged diff erenti-
ated in shape from the other three, having 亻 41 
‘person’, and 吏 2074 as phonetic and semantic 
meaning ‘work’, giving ‘one who does (allocated) 
work’; sense then narrowed to ‘(an) offi  cial’. 
MS1995:v1:60-61, 26-8; BK1957:256; KJ1970:450; 
OT1968:59; AS2007:350, 465-6. 
Mnemonic: OFFICIAL PERSON USES SERVANT
使用 SHIYŌ　use   
大使 TAISHI　ambassador
小使 kozukai　servant, porter
SHI, tsukau
use, servant
8 strokes
使
L4
303
OBI , seal 
. OBI forms, showing a hand 
holding a writing brush are diffi  cult to diff er-
entiate from those for 吏 2074 ‘offi  cial’, 事 309 
(‘thing’, ‘act’), and 史 523 ‘scribe, history’. In early 
Traditional 齒. OBI form 
 depicts mouth, 
showing teeth. Bronze form 
 has phonetic 
止 143 (‘stop’) added as top component, as in 
the modern graph, with associated sense ‘be 

120  The 200 Third Grade Characters
詩人 
SHIJIN 
poet
詩的 
SHITEKI 
poetic
詩情 
SHIJŌ 
poetic sentiment
SHI
poetry
13 strokes
詩
L1
307
A late graph (Shuowen) 
. Has 言 118 ‘words’, 
and 寺 149 (‘temple’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘move, advance’ (Mizukami, 
Tōdō) (Tōdō says here it means ‘move feelings 
forward through language’), or ‘thought, voli-
tion’ (Yamada). MS1995:v2:1194-5; TA1965:72-4; 
YK1976:224-5.
Mnemonic: WORDS AT THE TEMPLE ARE 
POETIC
On the basis of OBI form 
 generally taken as 
originally 欠 496 ‘open the mouth, yawn’, with 
two strokes for 二 as phonetic with associated 
三次 
  SANJI tertiary
次第に   SHIDAI ni  gradually
相次いで aitsuide 
in succession
sense ‘stop’ (Katō, Mizukami, Ogawa), or ‘ar-
range’ (Mizukami), ‘follow after’ (Ogawa). (Ma, 
though, takes as showing fl uid coming out of 
the mouth.) Katō feels yawning indicates taking 
turns to rest, adding to the idea of follow-
ing in order. MS1995:v1:696-7; KJ1970:181-2; 
OT1968:531; MR2007:399. We suggest taking 冫
as the ‘ice radical’ (see 401).
Mnemonic: YAWNING ON ICE! WHAT MIGHT 
FOLLOW NEXT?
JI, SHI, tsugi, tsugu
next, follow
6 strokes
次
L3
308
OBI 
; bronze 
. As Mizukami notes, the 
‘old forms’ (meaning here OBI and bronze) for 
this graph are the same as those for 吏 2074 
and 使 303; the graph shapes are somewhat 
diff erentiated at the seal script stage. Karlgren 
adds one more graph, 史 523, to this group. 
大事 
 DAIJI importance
好事家 KŌZUKA dilettante
出来事 dekigoto 
event
Generally interpreted as a hand holding up an 
element taken as both semantic and phonetic, 
to represent part of a tree with branches and 
a sign or banner attached. The meaning of the 
graph is work, with its type displayed on the 
sign; Katō takes the small mouth-shaped com-
ponent above the hand as meaning ‘announce’ 
(the type of work). MS1995:v1:26-8, 214, 60-61; 
KJ1970:449-50; YK1976:230. We suggest 十 35 
‘ten’, hand, and box 口 .
Mnemonic: HAND HOLDING UP TEN BOXES 
IS A MEMORABLE THING
JI, ZU, koto
thing, matter, act
8 strokes
事
L4
309
持久 
 JIKYŪ  endurance
持ち主  mochinushi owner
長持ち  nagamochi 
durability
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 扌 34 ‘hand’, and 寺 149 
(‘temple’) as phonetic with associated senses 
such as ‘manage’ (Mizukami, Katō) or ‘use’ 
(Yamada). Thus ‘using the hands’, leading to a 
more general ‘take in hand’ and ‘hold’ (the latter 
including ‘hold out/ endure’). MS1995:v1:552-3; 
KJ1970:480; YK1976:231. 
Mnemonic: HOLD HANDS AT THE TEMPLE
JI, motsu
hold, have, maintain
9 strokes
持
L4
310

The 200 Third Grade Characters  121
A late graph (Shuowen) 
. Has 工 125 ‘ax’/‘adze’ 
(often associated with carpentry/ construction, 
新式 
SHINSHIKI new style
方式 
HŌSHIKI formula
葬式 
SŌSHIKI 
funeral
and sometimes seen as a set-square), with 弋 
(‘stake’, NJK also meaning ‘wooden pile’ and as 
an element often indicates ‘tool’ [Tōdō] or ‘sign/
marker’) as semantic and phonetic, meaning 
‘sign, mark’ (including in construction work), 
or (Ogawa) ‘a rule, guideline’. KJ1970:310-11; 
YK1976:233; OT1968:311; TA1965:74-9. 
Mnemonic: TO APPLY SET-SQUARE TO STAKE 
IS GOOD FORM
SHIKI
ceremony, form
6 strokes
式
L3
311
実行 
 JIKKŌ 
carrying out
事実 
 JIJITSU  fact
実入り  miiri 
crop, profi ts
Traditional 實. The bronze form 
 comprises 
宀 30 ‘roof, dwelling’, with 貝 10 ‘shellfi sh/ shell’, 
‘currency’, and the element 
 between the two, 
taken as phonetic by Katō and Yamada with 
JITSU, mi, minoru 
truth, reality, bear 
fruit
8 strokes
実
写真 
 SHASHIN 
photograph
写実 
 SHAJITSU 
realism
複写機 FUKUSHAKI 
copier
SHA, utsusu/ru
copy, transcribe
5 strokes
写
L3
L4
312
313
A late graph (Shuowen) 
. The traditional 
form 寫 has 宀 30 ‘roof, dwelling’, and 舄 (舃) 
(a CO with a range of meanings but originally 
作者 
SAKUSHA author
後者 
KŌSHA  the latter 
若者 
wakamono 
young people
SHA, mono
person
8 strokes
者
L4
314
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional ⁼ (note dot). 
Bronze form has fi rewood projecting up out of 
a container; possibly the fi rewood is burning. 
an associated meaning ‘fi ll’. Thus ‘a house with 
wealth’. ‘(Bear) fruit’ is an extended meaning 
(cf the English term ‘fruitful’), as also perhaps 
is ‘truth’. 貫 fi rst appears as lower element in 
this graph as a variant at clerical script stage.  
MS1995:v1:384-6; KJ1970:486; YK1976:236; 
AS2007:464. We suggest taking the lower ele-
ment of the modern form as a variant of 大 56 
‘big (man)’.
Mnemonic: THERE’S A BIG SIX-ARMED MAN 
IN THE HOUSE – IT’S THE TRUTH!
pictograph of bird) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘move from one place to another’; by 
extension, ‘copy’. KJ1970:489-90; YK1976:237; 
OT1968:284; ZY2009:v1:245, v3:1049. For the 
modern form we suggest taking the top ele-
ment as a ‘fl at roof’ and the lower as 与 2047 
‘convey/give’.
Mnemonic: PEAKED ROOF ‘COPIED’ AS 
FLAT – CONVEYS WRONG IMPRESSION
Original graph meaning is ‘collect and store 
much fi rewood’; other meanings such as 
‘person’ are loan usages. MS1995:v2:1052-3; 
KJ1970:492; YK1976:238-9. We suggest using 耂 
(nicknamed ‘old man radical’), noting ‘ground’ 
土 64 (see also 考 130) with 日 as 日 66 ‘day/
sun’.
Mnemonic: MOST PERSONS WILL BE BURIED 
IN THE GROUND ONE DAY

122  The 200 Third Grade Characters
主人 
SHUJIN master, husband  
地主 
JInushi landowner
主に 
omo ni 
mainly 
SHU, nushi, omo
master, owner, main
5 strokes
主
L4
315
OBI 
; bronze 
. The OBI form depicts a lamp 
with a wick burning, whereas the bronze form 
has just the wick. The graph originally meant 
‘lamp’. In ancient times the head of the house 
was in charge of the lamp, thus by exten-
sion other meanings were acquired such as 
‘master, main’. MS1995:v1:16-17; KJ1970:506; 
YK1976:243-4. We suggest using 王 5 ‘king’, not 
forgetting the extra stroke on top.
Mnemonic: A KING WITH A LITTLE BIT EXTRA 
IS A REAL MASTER
保守 
 HOSHU conservatism
留守番 RUSUBAN  caretaker
子守 
 komori 
nursemaid 
SHU, SU, (ma)moru
protect, keep
6 strokes
守
L3
316
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 宀 30 ‘roof, dwell-
ing’, and 寸 920 (now meaning ‘measure’ but 
originally ‘hand’) or in some cases 又 2003, 
also meaning ‘hand’ and by extension ‘control’ 
or ‘work’, and regarded by Katō and Yamada 
as phonetic also. Original meaning ‘work/take 
control in the house’, and by extension ‘control’ 
in general, ‘protect’, etc.  MS1995:v1:360-62; 
KJ1970:503; YK1976:244.
Mnemonic: HANDY MEASURES TO PROTECT 
ROOF 
取得 
  SHUTOKU acquisition
取り出す  toridasu  take out
取引 
  torihiki 
transactions
SHU, toru
take
8 strokes
取
L3
317
OBI 
; bronze 
. Has 耳 31 ‘ear’, and又
2003 as semantic meaning ‘hand’. The graph 
stands for ‘take, catch’, and typically this seems 
to be regarded as based on the technique of 
capturing a wild animal by holding its ears to 
avoid being bitten. There is an alternative view, 
though, i.e. that it was a human ear: Qiu notes 
that in ancient times ‘when game was taken 
in hunting or an enemy was killed in battle, 
the left ear was generally taken as a proof of 
prowess’. Note there is a CO 刵 comprising ‘ear’ 
耳 and 刂 198 ‘cut’. Regarding animal ears see 
also 牛108 ‘cow’ and its example compounds. 
MS1995:v1:198-9; QX2000:187; KJ1970:501; 
YK1976:244.
Mnemonic: HAND TAKES CONTROL OF EAR 
SHU, sake, saka-
alcohol, sake
10 strokes
酒
L3
318
OBI 
; bronze 
 In the OBI form, one ele-
ment is 氵 42 ‘water’/‘liquid’ (often omitted 
in bronze), the other is 酉 , an NJK originally a 
pictograph of a lidded jar for fermenting or just 
storing wine (now means ‘Cock’ [tenth in the 
traditional Twelve Branches, used for counting 
years, etc.]). MS1995:v2:1344-46; KJ1970:503; 
YK1976:245. Distinguish from 西 169 meaning 
‘west’.
Mnemonic: DROPLETS OF ALCOHOL FROM A 
SAKE JAR
飲酒 
 INSHU drinking
酒場 
 sakaba  tavern
酒飲み sakenomi 
heavy drinker

The 200 Third Grade Characters  123
JU, ukeru
receive
8 strokes
受
L3
319
OBI 
; bronze 
. Has two hands, each po-
sitioned across from each other with 舟 1450 
‘boat’ in between. The latter element serves as 
受験者 JUKENSHA examinee
受取 
 uketori  receipt
受付 
 uketsuke 
reception
phonetic with associated meaning ‘hand across 
from one side to the other’; originally the one 
graph was used for both ‘receive’ and ‘give’, 
but later (seal script) the separate graph 授 
729 ‘give’ was devised so the ambiguity could 
be avoided. MS1995:v1:198-9; KJ1970:507; 
YK1976:246-7. We suggest taking 冖 as a baton, 
with 爫 and 又 as ‘hands’ (see 1739, 2003).
Mnemonic: HAND RECEIVES BATON FROM 
ANOTHER’S HAND
本州 
HONSHŪ 
Honshū
砂州 
SAsu 
sandbank
九州 
KYŪSHŪ 
Kyūshū
SHŪ, su
province, sandbank
6 strokes
州
L3
320
OBI 
; bronze 
. Depicts an islet or sandbank 
in a river (Ma says a piece of land big enough 
to live on); in the seal script, the one islet or 
similar is changed to three, resulting in the 
standard script form of today. The meaning 
was later made more general and extended to 
large areas of land such as a state or province. 
MS1995:v1:424-5; MR2007:449; KJ1970:511. We 
suggest using ‘river’ 川 50.
Mnemonic: PROVINCE WITH RIVER AND 
SANDBANK
収拾 
 SHŪSHŪ 
control
拾い物 hiroimono 
bargain, windfall
拾壱 
 JŪICHI 
eleven (formal)
終点 
  SHŪTEN 
terminus
終止符  SHŪSHIFU 
full stop
終わりに  owari ni 
fi nally
SHŪ, JŪ, hirou
pick up, gather, ten
9 strokes
SHŪ, owaru/eru
fi nish, end
11 strokes
拾
終
L3
L4
321
322
Late graph (Shuowen) 
. All agree on left 
element being 扌 34 ‘hand’, but not on 合 134 
‘join’, which is taken as  phonetic with associat-
ed sense ‘continue’, and ‘pick up’ as a loan usage 
OBI form 
 and bronze form 
 show a length 
of string with knots at or near the ends, so by 
extension ‘end’. Seal form onwards is gener-
ally taken as 糸 29 ‘silk/thread’, with 冬 199 
(‘winter’, qv) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘gather, store’. Shirakawa explains 冬 as being 
the fi rst way of writing ‘end’ (as well as ‘winter’), 
with 糸 added to it later when 冬 came to be 
used primarily for ‘winter’, thus distinguishing 
the two words in writing. MS1995:v2:1010-11; 
KJ1970:510; YK1976:252; SS1984:408.
Mnemonic: THREADS FINISH IN WINTER
(Katō, Yamada). Early Chinese sound values 
for 合 in relation to 拾 may support taking 合 
as phonetic, but Tōdō treats it as semantic to 
give a meaning ‘bring things together with the 
hands’. ‘Pick up’ can be seen as extended us-
age. In Tōdō’s word-family ‘bring together’. The 
graph has also been borrowed to mean ‘ten’ 
(formal). KJ1970:520; YK1976:250; OT1968:413; 
TA1965:796-9; AS2007:274,462. 
Mnemonic: JOINED HANDS CAN PICK THINGS 
UP OR COUNT TO TEN

124  The 200 Third Grade Characters
OBI 
. Generally taken as 羽 82, traditional 
form of 羽 ‘bird feathers’, with 白 (as an abbrevi-
ated form of 自 150 ‘nose/self’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘accumulate’; meaning was 
originally a bird fl apping its wings practicing to 
練習 
 RENSHŪ 
practice
習字 
 SHŪJI 
penmanship
見習い minarai 
apprentice
SHŪ, narau
learn, train
11 strokes
習
L4
323
fl y, and by extension ‘repeat and practice; learn’. 
However, the element taken as 白 or 自 looks 
somewhat diff erent in shape (close to OBI forms 
for 日 ‘sun’ in some occurrences), and so Ma 
interprets instead as 日 66 ‘sun’, to give 羽 over 
日, with original sense ‘bird fl ying in the sky 
on a fi ne day’. MS1995:v2:1046-7; OT1968:802; 
YK1976:252-3; MR2007:289. We suggest taking 
modern form 白 as 白 69 ‘white’.
Mnemonic: LEARNING TO FLY WITH WHITE 
WINGS
集団 
 SHŪDAN group
編集 
 HENSHŪ  editing
集まり  atsumari 
a gathering 
SHŪ, atsumeru/maru
gather, collect 
12 strokes
集
L3
324
OBI 
; bronze ; traditional 坷. Traditional 
form has three birds on 木 73 ‘tree’ but ear-
lier and modern forms have just one. Has 隹 
‘(short-tailed) bird’ as opposed to  鳥 190 ‘bird’ 
(general). ‘Birds gathering on tree’ gives the 
meaning ‘collect, gather’. MS1995:v2:1416-7; 
MR2007:296; OT1968:1077; KJ1970:511.
Mnemonic: BIRDS GATHERED IN TREE
住所 
 JŪSHO address
住宅 
 JŪTAKU  dwelling
住み手 sumite 
occupant
JŪ, sumu
reside, live
7 strokes
住
L4
325
A very late graph (Shirakawa puts origin in 
Six Dynasties period [229-589AD]).  Has 亻 41 
‘person’, and 主 315 (‘main/master’, originally 
‘lamp’) as phonetic with associated sense ‘stay 
still’. OT1968:54; SS1984:415; YK1976:255.
Mnemonic: THE PERSON NEAR THE LAMP 
LIVES HERE
JŪ, CHŌ, omoi, -e, 
kasaneru/naru
heavy, pile, -fold
9 strokes
重
L4
326
Simpler bronze form 
, more complex bronze 
form 
. The simpler version consists of 亻 41 
‘person’, with 東 201, now meaning ‘east’ but 
here with its original meaning of ‘sack (with 
things inside)’ and as phonetic. The more com-
plex bronze form adds 土 64 ‘earth, ground’ as 
bottom component. Thus the literal meaning is 
person standing upright (on the ground) with 
things in a sack, which by extension stands 
for ‘heavy’, and then also ‘pile up’ and ‘-fold’. 
MS1995:v2:1356-7; KJ1970:704; OT1968:1031. 
We suggest taking the graph as a variant of 車 
33 ‘vehicle’ with extra wheels.
Mnemonic: HEAVY VEHICLE HAS EXTRA 
WHEELS  
重大 
JŪDAI seriousness
重さ 
omosa  weight
三重 
mie 
three-fold

The 200 Third Grade Characters  125
SHUKU, yado(ru)
lodge, shelter, house
11 strokes
宿
L3
327
Simpler OBI form 
; more complex OBI form 
; seal 
. The simpler OBI has a person 亻 41 
kneeling or lying on a mat; the more complex 
宿題 
 SHUKUDAI homework
宿屋 
 yadoya  inn, hostel
下宿人 GESHUKUNIN 
boarder
form adds the element 宀 30 ‘roof’. In the 
seal form the element for ‘mat’ is distorted in 
shape, and this gets worse in the block script 
version, which has 百 , seemingly miscopied. 
Overall meaning is a person sitting in a chair 
or lying on (or next to) a mat in a building. 
MS1995:v1:378-9; MR2007:371; KJ1970:519-20. 
We suggest taking 百 as 百 71 ‘hundred’.
Mnemonic: A HUNDRED PERSONS LODGING 
UNDER THE SAME ROOF
場所 baSHO　place
所有 SHOYŪ　possession
居所 idokoro　whereabouts
Bronze 
; seal 
. This graph is generally 
interpreted as 斤 1233 ‘ax’, with 戸 120 (‘door’) 
as a phonetic for the sound of wood being 
SHO, tokoro
place, situation
8 strokes
所
酷暑 
 KOKUSHO 
intense heat
避暑地 HISHOCHI 
cool resort
暑さ 
 atsusa 
heat
助手 
  JOSHU 
assistant
助力 
  JORYOKU 
help, support
助け合い tasukeai 
mutual aid
昭和 
SHŌWA 
Showa Period
昭代 
SHŌDAI 
enlightened era
昭々 
SHŌSHŌ 
brightness
SHO, atsui
hot (weather)
12 strokes
JO, tasukeru/karu
assist, help
7 strokes
SHŌ
bright, light
9 strokes
暑
助
昭
L4
L4
L3
L1
328
329
330
331
Late graph (Shuowen) 
; traditional form ᮒ 
(note dot). Has 日 66 ‘sun’, and 者 314 (‘person’) 
as phonetic meaning ‘burn’. (The latter element 
may be taken – as Ogawa does – as semantic 
also, based on its original meaning relat-
ing to fi rewood). KJ1970:492; YK1976:265; 
OT1968:471.
Mnemonic: PERSON UNDER HOT SUN
Bronze 
. Has 力 78 ‘strength’, and 且 1135 
(modern meaning ‘besides’, ‘further’, originally 
‘cairn/piled stones’), here used as a pho-
netic with associated sense of ‘help’ or ‘aid’, 
to give ‘help with strength’ or ‘add strength’. 
MS1995:v1:138-9; KJ1970:1673; YK1976:266-7.
Mnemonic: HELP FURTHER BY ADDING 
STRENGTH
Seal 
. Has 日 66 ‘sun’, and 召 1486 (‘summon’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘bright, 
clear; shine’. MS1995:v1:616-7; KJ1970:607; 
OT1968:466.
Mnemonic: SUMMON SUN, AND LET THERE 
BE BRIGHT LIGHT
chopped. The meaning ‘place’ is a loan usage – 
a physical place at fi rst, then extended to fi gu-
rative senses such as ‘situation, circumstances’. 
MS1995:v1:544-6; KJ1970:534; YK1976:264; 
AS2007:486.
Mnemonic: CHOP DOWN DOOR WITH AX TO 
GET INTO THE PLACE
Or
Or GIVEN THE SITUATION, CHOP THE DOOR 
DOWN WITH AN AX

126  The 200 Third Grade Characters
消費 
  SHŌHI consumption
消しゴム  keshiGOMU  eraser
消火器  SHŌKAKI 
fi re extinguisher 
SHŌ, kieru, kesu
extinguish, vanish, 
consume
10 strokes
消
L3
332
Late graph (Shuowen) 
; traditional form ᰖ. 
Has 氵 42 ‘water’, and ⍝ (modern 肖 1490, 
now meaning ‘look alike’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘few, scant, small’. ‘Water 
becomes scarce’ was original meaning, but 
became more general in relation to using up. 
KJ1970:606; SS1984:440; YK1976:271-2. We 
suggest taking the right hand element as 小 
38 ‘little’ and 月 18 ‘moon’.
Mnemonic: WATER HAS VANISHED FROM 
OUR LITTLE MOON
商業 
SHŌGYŌ commerce
商人 
SHŌNIN  merchant
商い 
akinai 
trade, business
SHŌ, akinau
trade, deal, sell
11 strokes
商
L3
333
OBI 
; bronze 
. Interpretations vary. Some 
scholars take these early forms to show 
fi rewood on a platform/stand, with ritual 
signifi cance (Shirakawa, Ma). More convinc-
ing is the view that the lower part represents 
the hindquarters of an animal such as a cow, 
or the buttocks/thighs of a woman, with the 
‘opening’ element 口 22 being the vagina; 
the upper part, which seems to show a large 
tattooing needle with a handle, is then taken 
as phonetic with associated sense such as ‘go 
out, emerge’, giving overall meaning of ‘vagina’ 
(from which children emerge) (Mizukami, Katō, 
Yamada). Another associated sense is ‘pierce’, 
and so vaginal penetration could be another 
interpretation. ‘Trade, sell’ is a loan usage, and 
possibly may be felt to suggest prostitution 
(supposedly the earliest profession). Some 
scholars suggest 商 may be a shortened form 
of a complex graph for a word of similar pro-
nunciation in early Chinese meaning ‘peddle’, 
which at the bronze stage usually – but not 
always – has the element 貝 10 ‘shell, currency’ 
added beneath 商 . MS1995:v1:234-5, v2:1246-
7; SS1984:441-2; MR2007:254; KJ1970:429-30; 
YK1976:273.
Mnemonic: USE YOUR IMAGINATION!! 
SHŌ
badge, chapter
11 strokes
章
L3
334
Bronze 
; seal 
. Depicts a needle for tat-
tooing criminals and slaves, to identify them 
clearly. Signifi cance of the swollen roundish 
part is debated: Shirakawa suggests it might 
represent accumulation of ink, while Mizukami 
suggests it is either eye of the needle or a part 
made wider to hold more easily. Tattooing 
needle came to signify ‘mark (made by tattoo-
ing), sign’, and originally the two-character 
compound 文章 meant ‘elaborate tattoo’ (Shi-
rakawa); by extension such meanings as ‘writ-
ing; sections in a piece of writing’ evolved for 
章. MS1995:v2:982-3; OT1968:745; SS1984:443; 
YK1976:274. We suggest taking the modern 
graph as ‘stand’ 立 77 and ‘early’ 早 52.
Mnemonic: EARLY CHAPTER ON BADGES 
STANDS OUT 
記章 
KISHŌ medal, badge
文章 
BUNSHŌ  writing, prose
章句 
SHŌKU 
chapter, passage

The 200 Third Grade Characters  127
勝利 
SHŌRI 
victory
勝負 
SHŌBU 
win or lose, match
勝気 
kachiKI 
will to win
Seal 
. Late graph (Shuowen). Has 力 78 
‘strength’, and 朕 1731 (now royal ‘We’, but 
originally ‘join boat-planks’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘raise up’, giving ‘use strength 
and raise up; endure’. ‘Win’ is extended meaning. 
KJ1970:535; YK1976:274; OT1968:12. We suggest 
using 力 , 夫 601 ‘man’, 月 209 ‘fl esh’, and the two 
strokes as horns.
Mnemonic: STRONG FLESHY MAN WITH 
HORNS WILL WIN
SHŌ, katsu, masaru
win, surpass
12 strokes
勝
L3
335
乗船 
 JŌSEN 
embarkation
乗数 
 JŌSŪ 
multiplier
乗り物  norimono 
vehicle
植物 
 SHOKUBUTSU 
fl ora
田植え  taue 
rice planting
植民地 SHOKUMINCHI 
colony
申告 
  SHINKOKU 
report
申し込み  mōshikomi 
application
申し訳   mōshiwake 
apology
JŌ, noru/seru
ride, mount, load
9 strokes
SHOKU, ueru
plant
12 strokes
SHIN, mōsu
say, expound
5 strokes
乗
植
申
L4
L3
L3
336
337
338
Traditional 乘. OBI form 
 shows a person 
astride top branches of a tree, i.e. climbing/ 
mounting, later with extended meanings of 
A late graph (Shuowen) 
. Comprises 木 73 
‘tree’ and 直 192 (‘direct, upright’) as semantic 
and phonetic, meaning ‘upright, stand upright’. 
Ogawa regards ‘pillar’ as the original mean-
ing. Katō and Yamada treat the meanings 
related to ‘plant, vegetation’ as a loan usage. 
KJ1970:557-8; YK1976:283; OT1968:511.
Mnemonic: TREE PLANTED UPRIGHT
OBI 
; seal 
. The OBI form represents forked 
lightning, while the seal form, which depicts 
the human backbone and a few ribs, is the basis 
of the modern graph. That is, there are two dis-
tinct graph shapes involved. The meaning ‘say’ 
is a loan usage. MS1995:v2:872-3; MR2007:521; 
KJ1970:949-50; YK1976:285. We suggest using 
日 66 ‘sun’ and a piercing element 丨 represent-
ing lightning.
Mnemonic: THE SUN IS PIERCED BY 
LIGHTNING! WHAT CAN ONE SAY?
ride and load. Some bronze forms have been 
taken historically as including the component 
for two feet pointing away from each other 
(modern 舛), and this has then been incor-
porated in later forms such as the traditional 
above; Katō, however, sees this as a misinter-
pretation, and treats it as simply a pictograph. 
MS1995:v1:22-3; MR2007:427; KJ1970:555. Take 
二 65 ‘two’ and variant of ‘come’ 来 237.
Mnemonic: TWO COME RIDING

128  The 200 Third Grade Characters
身体 
SHINTAI body
自身 
JISHIN  oneself
身分 
miBUN 
status 
SHIN, mi
body
7 strokes
身
L3
339
The OBI 
 and some bronze forms depict 
a pregnant woman; other bronze forms 
have this with 千 49 (‘thousand’), regarded 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘be preg-
nant’. The modern reference to ‘body’ can be 
seen as an extended generalised meaning. 
MS1995:v2:1264-6; KJ1970:563; YK1976:285-6. 
We suggest taking the graph as a whole as a 
stylized pictograph.
Mnemonic: PREGNANT WOMAN WALKS WITH 
SWOLLEN BODY
精神 
SEISHIN spirit
神父 
SHINPU  priest
女神 
megami 
goddess
SHIN, JIN, kami
a god, spirit, deity
9 strokes
神
L3
340
Bronze forms 
, 
. First depicts lightning (see 
申 338 ‘say’). Second more common, compris-
ing i] lightning component, with ii] 示 723 as 
semantic (showing table/altar, by extension 
‘deity’), to give meanings ‘thunder’ or ‘thunder 
deity’, then just ‘deity’. i] here is in Tōdō’s word-
family ‘extend, stretch’; Mizukami and Katō take 
as thunder and lightning. MS1995:v2:944-5; 
KJ1970:575; YK1976:287.
Mnemonic: THUNDER GOD SAYS SOMETHING 
SPIRITED AT THE ALTAR
SHIN, ma
truth, essence
10 strokes
真
L4
341
OBI 
; bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 眞. 
Katō and Yamada feel there are no OBI or 
bronze forms, so on basis of later seal form 
they provisionally see it as ‘inverted person’ 
匕 258 with inverted 首 155 ‘head, neck’, with 
meaning ‘heavy fall’/‘upside-down’; with ‘true’ 
a loan usage. Mizukami, though, lists the much 
earlier OBI form, and two possible analyses: i] 
匕 ‘person fallen upside down’ (distinguish from 
七 32 ‘seven’) with 
, with sense ‘turn upside 
down’ (original way of writing NJK 顚 ‘summit’, 
‘fall over’); ii] 匕 ‘spoon’ with 鼎, 3-legged caul-
dron’, with sense ‘fi ll up container’ (original way 
of writing NJK 塡 ‘obstruct; fi ll, fall’); Tōdō also 
includes in word-family meaning ‘be fi lled right 
up’. Again, ‘true’ is a loan usage. Gu also seems 
to support taking top element in OBI as ‘person’. 
KJ1970:212; YK1976:288; MS1995:v2:918-20, 
v1:154-5, v2:1516-8; TA1965:745. We suggest 
taking as 具 284 ‘equipment’ and 十 35 ‘ten’.
Mnemonic: THE TRUTH IS, THE EQUIPMENT IS 
IN TEN PIECES
真実 
 SHINJITSU truth
写真 
 SHASHIN  photograph
真っ白  masshiro* 
pure white
深遠 
 SHIN’EN 
profundity
深海 
 SHINKAI 
deep sea
深入り  fukairi 
going deeply
Bronze 
. ‘Water’ 氵 42, and 穼 or 罙 as 
phonetic, a river name; loan usage for ‘deep’. 
MS1995:v2:760-61; KJ1970:565-6; YK1976:289. 
Take 木 73 ‘tree’ and variant 穴 860 ‘hole’.
Mnemonic: DEEP WATERHOLE NEAR TREE
SHIN, fukai/meru
deep, deepen
11 strokes
深
L3
342

The 200 Third Grade Characters  129
Bronze 
; seal 
. Generally taken as the graph 
for ‘thirty’ (the ‘ten’ graph 十 35 written three 
times in a slightly modifi ed way), on the basis 
that about thirty years made up one genera-
tion. Qiu, though, considers the early Zhou 
bronze form of 世 ‘clearly was simply the top 
前進 
ZENSHIN 
advance 
進化 
SHINKA 
evolution
進言 
SHINGEN 
advice, proposal
世紀 
 SEIKI 
century
世話 
 SEWA 
care
世の中  yononaka 
world at large
整理 
 SEIRI 
arrangement
整備 
 SEIBI 
maintenance
微調整 BICHŌSEI 
fi ne tuning
SHIN, susumu/meru
advance
11 strokes
SEI, SE, yo
world, generation
5 strokes
SEI, totonou/eru
arrange
16 strokes
進
世
整
L4
L4
L3
343
344
345
part of  䭚’ , which was the original way of 
writing 葉 428 ‘leaf’; as both Qiu and Katō note, 
葉 also had the meaning ‘generation’ (Qiu links 
with the fact that leaves grow out once a year). 
In similar vein, Shirakawa takes as originally 
depicting plants growing.  ‘The world, society’ is 
an extended usage. MS1995:v1:10-11, v2:1126-
7; KJ1970:50-51; YK1976:295; QX2000:182; 
SS1984:492. Suggest take the two lower laterals 
as ‘two’ 二 65.
Mnemonic: THE ODD WORLD OF THE GEN-
ERATION OF  ’32
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 敕 (a variant of 勅 
1727 ‘edict’ qv), which in itself has a meaning 
of ‘arrange properly’, and 正 43 (‘correct’) as 
phonetic with similar associated sense ‘put in 
order, arrange’; in Tōdō’s word-family ‘bring to-
gether/arrange in one place’. MS1995:v1:586-7; 
KJ1970:584; YK1976:306; TA1965:472-4.
Mnemonic:  EDICT ENFORCES CORRECT 
ARRANGEMENT
OBI 
; seal 
. Comprises ⻌ 85 ‘walk, go’, 
and 隹 324 (‘bird’) as phonetic with as-
sociated sense ‘go out (with footwear on)’. 
MS1995:v2:1296-7; KJ1970:563; YK1976:289.
Mnemonic: ADVANCE LIKE A MOVING BIRD
OBI 
; seal 
. Etymology disputed. Katō and 
Tōdō treat as 日 66 ‘day(s)’, with 
 as phonetic 
meaning ‘pile up’. In Tōdō’s word-family ‘pile 
昔日 
SEKIJITSU 
old days
昔風 
mukashiFŪ 
old-style 
今昔 
KONJAKU 
past and present
SEKI, SHAKU, mu-
kashi
olden times, past
8 strokes
昔
L3
346
up, accumulate’. Thus ‘accumulated days’. Ma 
takes it as originally showing a fl ood; Shirakawa 
considers it originally to show dried meat, 
with sunlight used to dry; for both Ma and 
Shirakawa, the sense of ‘passing time’ is loan us-
age. KJ1970:614-5; TA1965:364-7; MR2007:354; 
SS1984:505; JA2000:437. Suggest the upper 
part as two ‘tens’ 十 35 and ‘one’ 一 1.
Mnemonic: TWENTY-ONE DAYS AGO IS THE 
PAST

130  The 200 Third Grade Characters
全部 
ZENBU all
全身 
ZENSHIN whole body
安全 
ANZEN 
safety 
ZEN, mattaku
whole, complete
6 strokes
全
L3
347
Seal forms 
, 
. Generally taken as 王 5 
‘king’ or 工 125 ‘work’ standing for 玉 15 (‘jewel, 
jade, precious stone’), and 入 67 (‘enter’), here 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘beauti-
ful, good’, giving overall meaning of ‘beauti-
ful/unblemished jade or precious stone’, 
and by extension ‘complete’.  KJ1970:637; 
MS1995:v1:98-9; YK1976:320-21.
Mnemonic: THE KING IS COMPLETE WITH 
HIS CAP
相談 
SŌDAN discussion
相手 
aite  other party
首相 
SHUSHŌ 
Prime Minister
SŌ, SHŌ, ai-
mutual, aspect, min-
ister
9 strokes
相
L3
348
OBI 
; bronze 
. Either taken as 目 76 ‘eye’, 
with 木 73 ‘tree’ (Qiu, Shirakawa), or 目 with 
桑 1632 ‘mulberry’ (Mizukami, Katō, Ogawa, 
Yamada).  Former view gives overall meaning 
of ‘look at/examine a tree’, and more generally 
‘look/examine’; the latter takes 木 as standing 
for 桑 on the basis of historical Chinese sound 
correspondences, taking the latter as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘see (clearly) right inside’. 
Other meanings such as ‘mutual’, ‘help’, ‘minister’ 
may be seen as loan usages. QX2000:192, 215-6; 
SS1984:540; MS1995:v2:916-7; KJ1970:428-9; 
OT1968:696; YK1976:327; AS2007:531, 450.
Mnemonic: MINISTER EYES TREE, TREE EYES 
MINISTER – IT’S MUTUAL
SŌ, okuru
send
9 strokes
SŌ, SO
idea, thought
13 strokes
送
想
L4
L3
349
350
Bronze forms 
, 
; seal 
; traditional ᱄. Has 
⻌ 85 ‘go, walk’, and 
/
. Top right element of 
seal is properly not 火 8 ‘fi re’ (miscopied at seal 
script stage) but ‘pestle’ (seen in bronze), with 
associated sense ‘continue’ (Katō, Yamada) or 
‘push’ (Mizukami). Original meaning of graph: 
‘walk behind along a road, or follow behind 
husband’; ‘send’ is an extended sense.  Sug-
gest take right side as 
 70 ‘eight’, but here 
in its meaning of ‘out’, and 天 62 ‘heaven’. 
MS1995:v2:1288-9; KJ1970:644; YK1976:326-7.
Mnemonic: SENT OUT OF HEAVEN !
A late graph (Shuowen); seal form: 
. Has 心 
164 ‘heart, mind’, and 相 348 (‘mutual’ qv) as 
phonetic and semantic meaning ‘see, examine’, 
to give overall sense ‘see in one’s mind, think’. 
OT1968:382; YK1976:329; KJ1970:551. We sug-
gest taking 相 as its literal components 木 73 
‘tree’ and 目 76 ‘eye, look’.
Mnemonic: LOOKING AT A TREE, AN IDEA 
CAME TO MIND
放送 
 HŌSŌ broadcast
送金 
 SŌKIN  remittance
見送る  miokuru 
see off 
着想 
CHAKUSŌ concept
理想 
RISŌ ideal
愛想 
AISO/AISŌ 
aff ability

The 200 Third Grade Characters  131
休息 
KYŪSOKU 
rest 
溜息 
tameiki 
sigh
利息 
RISOKU 
interest (money)
Bronze forms 
, ; seal . Has 150 自 ‘self’, 
here in original sense ‘nose’, and 丨 (bronze) 
or 心 164 ‘heart/mind’ as phonetic with 
OBI 
; bronze 
. Generally taken as 矢 145 
‘arrow’, with element for fl agpole and streamer 
(modern form 
/
: see also CO 斿 at 424) as 
SOKU, iki
breath, rest, child, 
interest (money)
10 strokes
息
速記 
  SOKKI 
shorthand 
時速 
  JISOKU 
speed per hour
速やかに sumiyaka ni 
rapidly
家族 
KAZOKU 
family
民族 
MINZOKU 
race
種族 
SHUZOKU 
tribe
SOKU, hayai/meru, 
sumiyaka
speed, fast
10 strokes
ZOKU
clan, family
11 strokes
速
族
L3
L3
L4
351
352
353
phonetic with associated sense ‘sharp, pointed’. 
Originally meant ‘arrowhead’. ‘Family’ is a 
loan usage, and when this meaning became 
dominant, the metal determinative 金 16 was 
added to create a new graph 鏃 for ‘arrowhead’. 
MS1995:v1:604-5; KJ1970:649-50; YK1976:336. 
We suggest taking 方 as 223 ‘side’, and 
 as 41 
‘person’.
Mnemonic: PERSON WITH ARROW AT HIS 
SIDE SIDE BELONGS TO OUR FAMILY
Bronze (它) 
; seal (佗) 
; 他 is post-Shuowen. 
At fi rst, early Chinese word for ‘other, other 
person’ was written 它, originally pictograph of 
snake with large head (CO graph). This bronze 
form for ‘snake’ later diverged into two separate 
graphs, viz. 它 and 也 (see Note below). Later, 
他人 
TANIN 
stranger
他国 
TAKOKU 
foreign land
他所 
yoso* 
elsewhere
TA, hoka
other
5 strokes
他
L3
354
the graph 佗 ‘carry on the back’ evolved (亻 41  
‘person’, and 它 as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘add’, giving ‘carry’), and was sometimes 
borrowed  for ‘other (person)’ (a near-homo-
phone). To reduce ambiguity in texts, 他 was 
devised (Six Dynasties [222-589] or later) for 
‘other’, leaving 佗 for ‘load; carry’. Note: 也, also 
originally pictograph of a snake [NJK], was itself 
borrowed for other words meaning ‘be, also’, 
etc. MS1995:v1:56-7; YK1976:341. Take 也 as 
both ‘snake’ and ‘to be’.
Mnemonic: THAT OTHER PERSON IS A SNAKE
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has ⻌ 85 ‘go, walk’, and 束 
561 (now meaning ‘bundle’ and ‘manage’ qv) 
as phonetic with associated sense range ‘busy, 
restless, hurry’. MS1995:v2:1292-3; KJ1970:649; 
YK1976:335.
Mnemonic: MOVES VERY FAST TO MAKE A 
BUNDLE
associated sense ‘advance’ (here, of breath 
through the nose). Thus the core meaning is 
‘breath(e)’. ‘Rest’ is an extended meaning. From 
Han times, the graph also had the sense of 
‘increase and decrease’, and then just ‘increase’ 
(hence interest on money). Gu takes ‘child’ as 
based on semantic extension from ‘breath’ (as 
vital life sign) fi rstly to ‘grow’, and then ‘child’. 
MS1995:v1:508-9; KJ1970:644-5; YK1976:334-5; 
GY2008:1082-3.
Mnemonic: HEART NEEDS NOSE TO BREATHE

132  The 200 Third Grade Characters
打者 
  DASHA batter
打撃 
  DAGEKI  blow
打ち返す uchikaesu 
hit back 
DA, utsu
hit, strike
5 strokes
打
L3
355
Seal 
. A late graph (Shuowen); Has 扌 34 
‘hand’ and 丁 367 (‘block’, originally ‘nail’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘strike’. 
KJ1970:714; YK1976:342; OT1968:400.
Mnemonic: HAND HITS NAIL
反対 
HANTAI opposition
対象 
TAISHŌ  object
対句 
TSUIKU 
couplet
TAI, TSUI
oppose, against, pair
7 strokes
対
L3
356
OBI 
; bronze 
; traditional 對 . Gener-
ally taken as comprising 業 278 ‘deed’, which 
originally depicted a musical instrument (bells 
suspended from a supporting framework), 
with 又 2003 ‘hand’ (part of OBI form; original-
ly meant ‘[right] hand’) or 寸 920 (part of seal 
form; another hand-related graph originally 
meaning ‘pulse’ [now ‘measure’]). Two boards 
or pillars of the instrument’s framework 
faced each other, and so gives meaning ‘pair, 
correspond; face each other’ (Katō, Mizu-
kami, Ogawa). Shirakawa treats diff erently 
on basis of OBI and bronze forms as made 
up of component for a digging or engraving 
tool, with 土 64 ‘earth, soil’, with寸 (but on 
basis of OBI better taken as 又); in Shirakawa’s 
interpretation, the later abstract meanings 
probably represent loan usages. KJ1970:661-2; 
MS1995:v1:396-8; OT1968:285; SS1984:563-4. 
We suggest taking the left-hand part as a vari-
ant of 文 72 ‘text’.
Mnemonic: TEXT MEASURES OPPOSITION
TAI, matsu
wait
9 strokes
DAI, TAI, kawaru/eru, 
yo
replace, world, 
generation, fee
5 strokes
待
代
L4
L4
357
358
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 彳 131 ‘road’, and 寺 
149 (‘temple’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘stop’. MS1995:v1:484-5; KJ1970:481; 
YK1976:343-4.
Mnemonic: WAIT AT TEMPLE BESIDE ROAD
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 亻 41 ‘person’, and 弋 
311 (‘stake’, ‘marker’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘change’, to give overall meaning 
‘substitute person’; subsequently took on 
more abstract and generalised meanings: ‘sub-
stitution, alternation, exchange,  generation, 
age’. KJ1970:889; YK1976:346-7; OT1968:46.
Mnemonic: PERSON REPLACED BY 
STAKE – FOR A FEE
待機 
  TAIKI awaiting chance
招待 
  SHŌTAI  invitation
待ち伏せ machibuse 
ambush
世代 
 SEDAI generation
交代 
 KŌTAI  alternation
部屋代 heyaDAI 
room charge

The 200 Third Grade Characters  133
Seal 
. Generally taken as 火 8 ‘fi re’ and 屵 as 
phonetic element with associated sense ‘return, 
go back’. Charcoal is wood that has been 
burned once (under controlled conditions) 
問題 
MONDAI 
problem, issue 
題名 
DAIMEI 
title
話題 
WADAI 
topic
石炭 
TANSEKI 
coal
炭素 
TANSO 
carbon
炭火 
sumibi 
charcoal fi re
DAI
subject, title
18 strokes
TAN, sumi
charcoal, coal
9 strokes
題
炭
L4
L4
360
361
but can be burned again as fuel, hence the 
two graphic elements together meaning ‘fi re 
returns’. As well as this interpretation, Mizukami 
sets out an alternative, taking 屵 semantically 
as ‘cliff , bluff ’, to give ‘combustible material 
coming from a cliff  or similar’, i.e. coal (as ex-
tended sense; also in modern Chinese [certain 
non-Mandarin dialects], 炭 can mean ‘coal’). 
MS1995:v2:796-7; KJ1970:678; YK1976:351.
Mnemonic: FIERY MATERIAL FROM MOUN-
TAIN CLIFF IS COAL
Seal 
. Has 頁 103 ‘head’, and 是1574 (now 
‘proper’, ‘this’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘shave the head’; shaving the head gives 
impression of bigger forehead, hence the 
original meaning ‘forehead’. In ancient China, 
slaves’ foreheads were marked (tattooed) with 
a sign to show ownership, and from that there 
evolved the extended sense ‘title, heading’. 
KJ1970:712-3; YK1976:348; MS1995:v2:1450-51.
Mnemonic: PROPER HEADER NEEDED FOR 
TITLE OF THIS SUBJECT
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Katō and 
Yamada choose to take 矢 145 ‘arrow’ as an 
abbreviation of the NJK 矩 ‘carpenter’s square’, 
短所 
 TANSHO 
shortcoming
短気 
 TANKI 
short tempered
手短に  temijika ni 
in brief
with 豆 379 (‘upright vessel’, now ‘bean’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘small’, to give 
overall meaning such as ‘small in measure, short 
in stature’. Ogawa, though, takes 矢 literally 
as ‘arrow’, and 豆 as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘small’, to give ‘short arrow’. Either way, 
the resultant meaning evolved as just ‘short’. 
KJ1970:683; YK1976:351-2; OT1968:706.
Mnemonic: ARROW FALLS SHORT OF VESSEL
TAN, mijikai
short
12 strokes
短
L3
362
Seal ; a late graph (Shuowen). Has ⺮ 58 
‘bamboo’, and a slightly abbreviated form of 
弟 194 (‘younger brother’; qv) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘order, sequence’, to give 
original meaning ‘put letters or records in order’. 
It subsequently acquired more general meaning 
of ‘order, sequence’, probably with a connotation 
of relative status, given other related words in 
Chinese noted by Schuessler such as those for 
‘younger brother’ and possibly also ‘ladder’. Note: 
In Han times, strips of bamboo were commonly 
joined together – clearly refl ected in the shape 
of the graph 冊 884 ‘bundle of bamboo tablets’ 
– to give a surface for writing. MS1995:v2:986-7; 
YK1976:348; OT1968:749; AS2007:210.
Mnemonic: BAMBOO TOPS YOUNGER 
BROTHER IN TERMS OF ORDER
第二課 DAINIKA 
Lesson Two
次第に  SHIDAI ni 
gradually
及第 
 KYŪDAI 
making grade
DAI
grade, order
11 strokes
第
L3
359

134  The 200 Third Grade Characters
到着 
TŌCHAKU 
arrival
着物 
kimono 
clothing
付着 
FUCHAKU 
adhesion
CHAKU, tsuku, kiru
arrive, wear
12 strokes
着
L4
364
Rather awkward. This late graph, not listed in 
the Shuowen, is included in the Ganlu zishu 
(Character Dictionary for Seeking an Offi  cial 
Stipend, compiled in 8th century AD China by 
Yan Yuansun) as a popular or vulgar variant 
of ⃪ (see 949), which is itself a variant of ⃦ 
1853 ‘chopsticks’ (q.v.). ⃦ consists of ⺮ 58 
‘bamboo’, with 者 314 (‘person’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘put between’. Qiu notes 
that in the Han dynasty clerical script (see 
Introduction) there was alternation between 
竹 ‘bamboo’ and 艸/艹 53 ‘plant, vegetation’ as 
a determinative. Despite a long history of use 
in China, the status of 着 was less solid than 
⃪ in the sense that in character dictionaries it 
continued to be treated by scholars typically as 
a vulgar form until it was offi  cially accepted as 
a separate graph in modern times. In Japa-
nese, meaning range is ‘wear, arrive, adhere’. 
QX2000:323-4; SS1984:592; YK1976:359. We 
suggest taking the upper part as slight variant 
of 426 羊 ‘sheep’, and lower as 目 76 ‘eye/see’. 
Mnemonic: I SEE SHEEP ARRIVING, WEARING 
THEIR FLEECE
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵 42 
‘water’, and 主 315 (now ‘main/master’ but 
originally a stemmed lamp) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘continue’, to give meaning 
注目 
CHŪMOKU attention
注射 
CHŪSHA injection
注釈 
CHŪSHAKU 
notes (text)
‘continuation of water droplets’ (Katō, Ogawa). 
An alternative analysis is given by Tōdō, who 
includes 注 in his word-family ‘stand fi rmly/
upright’ on the basis that water pouring down 
can be seen as a vertical column. The early 
meaning of 主 is stemmed lamp, and this may 
reinforce ‘column’. KJ1970:506-7; YK1976:362; 
OT1968:567; TA1965:281-4.
Mnemonic: MASTER POURS WATER IN A COL-
UMN, AND TAKES NOTES
CHŪ, sosogu
pour, note
8 strokes
注
L4
365
柱石 CHŪSEKI 
pillar
電柱 
DENCHŪ 
telegraph pole
氷柱 
tsurara* 
icicle
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 木 73 ‘tree, 
wood’, and 主 315 (‘main’, originally a stemmed 
lamp) as phonetic with associated sense ‘stand 
fi rmly’; in Tōdō’s word-family ‘stand fi rmly/up-
right’. YK1976:362-3; OT1968:499; TA1965:281-4.
Mnemonic: MASTER WOODEN PILLAR
CHŪ, hashira
column, pillar
9 strokes
柱
L3
366
相談役 SŌDAN’YAKU 
adviser
会談 
 KAIDAN 
conference
談話 
 DANWA 
conversation
DAN
conversation, talk
15 strokes
談
L3
363
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 言 118 
‘words, language’, and 炎 1050 ‘leaping fl ames’ 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘peaceful’, to 
give original meaning ‘say things in a peaceful 
way’, and possibly having a sense of warmth. 
KJ1970:97-8; YK1976:354; OT1968:935.
Mnemonic: NOT A FLAMING ROW, BUT 
WARM WORDS IN CONVERSATION

The 200 Third Grade Characters  135
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Generally taken 
as 巾1232 ‘cloth’, with 長 189 ‘long’ as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘pull taut’ (later 張 775), 
手帳 
teCHŌ 
notebook
帳場 
CHŌba 
counter, desk
蚊帳 
kaya* 
mosquito net
調整 
CHŌSEI 
adjustment
調べ 
shirabe 
investigation
調子 
CHŌSHI 
tone, condition 
CHŌ
register, drape
11 strokes
CHŌ, shiraberu, toto-
noeru
investigate, tone, 
adjust, tune
15 strokes
帳
調
L1
L3
368
369
originally referring to a curtain pulled around 
a bed as a screen; Tōdō, in contrast, includes 帳 
in a word-family meaning ‘long’, to give ‘long 
hanging cloth’. Not clear whether the sense 
‘record book/accounts book’ is an extended 
usage (records written on cloth?) or a loan 
usage. KJ1970:702-3; YK1976:366; OT1968:318; 
TA1965:348-9.
Mnemonic: LONG CLOTH DRAPE USED AS 
REGISTER
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 言 118 
‘words, language’, and 周 532 (‘around’), here 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘harmonise’ 
(Katō, Yamada) or ‘extend thoroughly’ (Ogawa, 
Tōdō). Though these two interpretations of 
the phonetic diff er, the former is in line with 
the modern Japanese meaning totonoeru 
‘arrange’, the latter with shiraberu ‘investi-
gate’. KJ1970:514; YK1976:369; OT1968:935; 
TA1965:179-83.
Mnemonic: INVESTIGATE BY TALKING 
AROUND
OBI 
; bronze 
. Has ⻌ 85 ‘go/walk’, and  
(CO ‘buttocks’) as phonetic, which is generally 
taken as having associated sense ‘follow/
追究 
  TSUIKYŪ 
inquiry
追放 
  TSUIHŌ 
banishment
追い払う  oiharau 
chase off 
continue from behind’ (Yamada, Katō, Mizu-
kami). In Tōdō’s word-family ‘follow a route’. 
Analysing the occurrence of this graph in 
OBI contexts, Qiu gives a similar but more 
specifi c meaning to 追, i.e. ‘pursue someone’s 
troops’. MS1995:v2:1290-91; KJ1970:659-60; 
YK1976:370; TA1965:682-5; QX2000:213. We 
suggest taking 匕 as ‘buttocks’ with a funny 
little tail.
Mnemonic: PURSUE MOVING BUTTOCKS 
WITH A FUNNY LITTLE TAIL
TSUI, ou
chase, pursue
9 strokes
追
L1
370
OBI 
; seal 
. The OBI form shows a nail head 
(typically squared, as at that stage of script a 
丁度 
CHŌDO 
exactly
丁寧 
TEINEI 
civility
丁目 CHŌme 
city block
CHŌ, TEI 
block , exact
2 strokes
丁
L1
367
rounded shape was diffi  cult), whereas the seal 
form shows a side view. Through later general 
development of the script, the determinative 
金 16 ‘metal’ was added to create NJK 釘 as 
an unambiguous way of writing ‘nail’. Note 
too the reading TEI, as in teinei ‘polite’, ‘care-
ful’. MS1995:v1:4-5; MR2007:514; KJ1970:940; 
YK1976:372.
Mnemonic: BLOCK IS EXACT TO A ‘T’.

136  The 200 Third Grade Characters
汽笛 
KITEKI steam whistle
笛手 
TEKISHU fl utist
口笛 
kuchibue 
whistle
家庭 
KATEI 
household
庭園 
TEIEN 
garden
庭師 
niwaSHI 
master gardener
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has ⺮ 58 
‘bamboo’, and 由 421 (‘reason’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘extract’ (Tōdō, Ogawa) 
or ‘clear’ (Katō); Tōdō takes it as extracting the 
material from inside the bamboo joints to make 
it hollow, while Katō takes as meaning a fl ute 
which produces clear sound. TA1965:185-90; 
OT1968:749; KJ1970:720.
Mnemonic: THERE’S A REASON WHY BAM-
BOO IS USED AS A FLUTE
TEKI, fue
fl ute, whistle
11 strokes
TEI, niwa
garden, courtyard
9 strokes
笛
庭
L1
L3
373
372
Seal 
. Has 广 127 ‘house, building’, and 廷 
1742 (‘imperial court’), here as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘extend/spread in a straight 
line/evenly’ (Mizukami, Tōdō). Originally, the 
building was typically a palace, and the graph 
referred to a level open space in a courtyard 
where people often gathered for formal occa-
sions. Used with a similar meaning historically 
in Japan, but then also came to denote ‘garden’. 
MS1995:454-5; TA1965:455-59; OT1968:329. 
Mnemonic: PALACE COURTYARD HAS FINE 
COVERED GARDEN
鉄板 
 TEPPAN 
iron/steel plate
地下鉄 CHIKATETSU 
subway
鉄橋 
 TEKKYŌ 
iron bridge
Seal 
; traditional 鐵 . Generally taken as 金 16 
‘metal’, with  (CO ‘big’) (the minor change from 
大 56 [‘big’] in top of seal form to 十 35 [‘ten’] in 
block script is not signifi cant) as phonetic with 
associated sense range ‘black soil, black, reddish-
black’ (Mizukami, Yamada, Ogawa), though 
TETSU, kurogane
iron, steel
13 strokes
鉄
L3
374
Katō regards the right-hand element as having 
semantic and phonetic role, meaning ‘big’. In 
favour of interpretation of right-hand element 
as ‘black, reddish black’ here is the existence of 
a related word in Chinese of the same or similar 
pronunciation represented by the graph 驖 
meaning ‘reddish-black horse’. The black or red-
dish-black metal is usually taken as ‘iron’, which 
takes on a reddish-black colour when rusted.
MS1995:v2:1378-9; YK1976:377; OT1968:1040; 
KJ1970:723; ZY2009:v4:1560. We suggest taking 
the modern right-side as 失 529 ‘lose’.
Mnemonic: LOST METAL PROVES TO BE IRON  
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 宀 30 ‘roof, building’, 
and 正 43 (‘correct’) as phonetic, generally 
taken as having associated sense ‘prepare a 
定期 
TEIKI 
fi xed term
不定 
FUTEI 
indefi nite
決定 
KETTEI 
decision
TEI, JŌ, sadameru 
fi x, establish
8 strokes
定
L3
371
house’, and by extension the more generalized 
meanings ‘arrange’, ‘decide’. Mizukami also lists 
second interpretation, i.e. ‘stay on in a house’. 
Ma interprets as ‘person entering a house’ by 
taking lower element in his proposed OBI forms 
as 足 54 ‘foot/leg’ (q.v.). In the latter cases, 
‘decide’ is presumably considered a loan usage. 
KJ1970:584; YK1976:373; MS1995v1:368-9; 
MR2007:369.
Mnemonic: FIX ROOF CORRECTLY

The 200 Third Grade Characters  137
Bronze 
; seal 
. Widely taken as 邑 (阝as 
a right-hand component 376) ‘village/town’, 
with 者 314 (‘person’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘gather, accumulate’ (Mizukami, 
Katō, Yamada). In the right-hand side of the 
bronze and seal forms, (corresponding to 邑 
or right-hand 阝), an element for ‘kneeling 
都市 
TOSHI 
city
首都 
SHUTO 
capital
都合 
TSUGŌ 
circumstances
TO, TSU, miyako
capital, big city
11 strokes
都
L4
376
person’ is discernible (in 邑, corrupted in shape 
to 巴). Original graph meaning ‘enclosed area 
where many people are gathered’ became 
extended to ‘capital’ (city where the Emperor 
resides). MS1995:v2:1332-3; KJ1970:497; 
YK1976:382. Note: In Japanese and Chinese 
script, 阝 is used in compound graphs for two 
separate determinatives: one as described im-
mediately above, while the other (full form: 阜 
1907) occurs as a left-hand component, as in 
for example 院 249, meaning ‘piled-up earth, 
terraced land, mound’.
Mnemonic: CAPITAL IS A VILLAGE ON THE 
RIGHT WITH MANY PERSONS 
Seal 
 (bronze similar). Taken as 又 2003 ‘hand’, 
with abbreviated form of 庶 1480 (‘many’) 
(Katō, Yamada, Tōdō) – or variant of 石 47 
(‘stone’) – (Ogawa) as a phonetic, both with 
same associated sense ‘spread out fi ngers of 
程度 TEIDO　degree
温度 ONDO　temperature
一度 ICHIDO　once
投手   TŌSHU　baseball pitcher
投票   TŌHYŌ　vote
投げ出す nagedasu　throw out
the hand’, to give ‘measure with the hand’. The 
hand, with spread-out thumb and middle fi n-
ger, was moved from one point to the next as a 
rough way of measuring a short distance. Later 
took on a generalized meaning ‘measure’ and 
not just linear, hence ‘degree’, etc.  KJ1970:612; 
YK1976:383-4; TA1965:332-5; OT1968:156. We 
suggest taking 广 127 as ‘building’ and central 
part as two ‘tens’ 十 35 with ‘one’ 一 1.
Mnemonic: HAND MEASURES TWENTY-ONE 
DEGREES IN BUILDING
DO, TAKU, tabi
degree, times
9 strokes
TŌ, nageru
throw, cast
7 strokes
度
投
L4
L3
377
378
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has扌34 ‘hand’, 
and 殳 170 (originally hand holding stick) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘throw (stick)’ 
(Ogawa); Shirakawa also sees 殳 as stick/
baton, as weapon. KJ1970:735; YK1976:386; 
OT1968:404; SS1984:642.
Mnemonic: TWO DIFFERENT HANDS NEEDED 
TO THROW WEAPON
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 轉. Has 車 33 
‘cart/vehicle’, and 專 925 (‘sole’) as phonetic 
転送 
 TENSŌ 
forwarding
運転 
 UNTEN 
driving
自転車  JITENSHA 
bicycle
TEN, korogeru/garu
rotate, tumble, roll
11 strokes
転
L4
375
with associated sense ‘move/change’, thus 
‘move things elsewhere’. ‘Go round/revolve’ is 
an extended usage. 転 is based on cursive form. 
MS1995:v2:1272-3; KJ1970:630; YK1976:380. We 
suggest taking the right-hand part as ‘two’ 二 
65 noses ム.
Mnemonic: VEHICLE ROLLS OVER TWO 
NOSES – OUCH!

138  The 200 Third Grade Characters
列島 RETTŌ　archipelago
島民 TŌMIN　islanders
島国 shimaguni　island nation
Seal 
; this is a late graph (Shuowen). Has 
山 26 ‘mountain’, and 
 (abbreviated shape 
for 鳥 190 ‘bird’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘big waves’, to give ‘mountains 
(or other land projecting up) surrounded by 
sea’, namely ‘island’. YK1976:387; KJ1970:668; 
OT1968:304.
Mnemonic: BIRD ALIGHTS ON MOUNTAIN-
OUS ISLAND
TŌ, shima
island
10 strokes
島
L3
380
銭湯  SENTŌ　public bath
湯気  yuge　steam
茶の湯  CHAnoyu　tea ceremony
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 氵 42 ‘water’, and 昜 
161 (‘sun shining up high’) as phonetic with as-
sociated sense ‘hot sun, hot’. MS1995:v2:768-9; 
KJ1970:879; YK1976:388; OT1968:596. We sug-
gest taking 日 66 ‘sun’ with 
 as rays.
Mnemonic: RAYS FROM RISING SUN MAKE 
WATER HOT
OBI forms 
, 
; bronze 
. Interpretations 
diverge. Often taken as 癶 ‘tread or step 
heavily’, with 豆 379 ‘food vessel’ as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘climb’ (Mizukami, Katō, 
Yamada). An alternative analysis is found in 
TŌ, yu
hot water
12 strokes
湯
登場  TŌJŌ　appearance
登山  TOZAN　mountaineering
木登り  kinobori　tree-climbing
TŌ, TO, noboru
climb
12 strokes
登
L3
L3
381
382
Ma, taking the second common OBI form 
above as showing a stone platform or pedestal 
for mounting a horse, with two helping hands 
below and the feet of the rider above; 
Shirakawa also takes the element similar 
in shape to 豆 as a mounting platform. 
MS1995:v2:894-5; KJ1970:733; YK1976:388; 
MR2007:239-40; SS1984:648. We suggest 豆 in 
its original meaning ‘tall food vessel’, and 癶 as 
funny feet.
Mnemonic: TWO FUNNY FEET CLIMB TALL 
FOOD VESSEL
豆腐 TŌFU　tofu (beancurd)
大豆 DAIZU　soybean
豆本 mameHON　miniature book
TŌ, ZU, mame
beans, miniature
7 strokes
豆
L1
379
OBI form 
; seal 
. Originally a pictograph of 
a round vessel on a stem (varied in height) with 
a splayed foot, to serve meat or other food; 
later, some such vessels (Ch. dou) served a ritual 
purpose. In Tōdō’s word-family ‘stand upright’.  
The graph seems to have been borrowed to 
represent a diff erent word (of same pronuncia-
tion in Han times) meaning ‘bean, soybean’; 
the meaning ‘small’ may be an extended use 
from ‘bean’ (something small). KJ1970:733-4; 
MR2007:314; QX2000:179,356; TA1965:281-3; 
SS1984:642; AS2007:215-6. We suggest taking 
the top lateral stroke as ‘one’ 一 (1).
Mnemonic: ONE MINIATURE BOX ON STAND, 
FULL OF BEANS

The 200 Third Grade Characters  139
Bronze 
. Seal 
. Bronze form has 辛 1535 
‘needle’ over 重 326 (‘heavy’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘slave’, also with 目 76 ‘eye’ 
added in the middle. In ancient China, slaves 
were tattooed on the forehead with a needle 
to indicate ownership, and ‘eye’ here is taken to 
denote forehead, the eye being much easier to 
represent pictographically. There is debate over 
this graph’s diff erent meanings ‘slave, servant’ 
and ‘child’. Qiu observes that in ancient texts 童
represented both ‘slave, servant’ and ‘child’, and 
童話 DŌWA　nursery tale
児童 JIDŌ　children
童心 DŌSHIN　child’s mind
that by the time of Shuowen, the NJK graph 僮 
had been devised to create the orthographical-
ly contrastive pair 童 ‘slave, servant’ as opposed 
to 僮 ‘child’, but even after that 童 was still often 
used for ‘child’, and likewise 僮 has meanings 
of both ‘child’ and ‘servant’. In early Chinese, the 
associated words for ‘slave, servant’ and ‘child’ 
appear to have been of the same pronuncia-
tion, assuming they were in fact separate words 
(Schuessler lists them together as one entry). 
Aesthetically a displeasing graph at bronze 
stage because it consists of multiple elements 
one on top of the other; this visual imbalance 
became moderated at the seal script stage. 
MS1995:v2:984-5; KJ1970:735; YK1976:392; 
QX2000:350-51; AS2007:500. Take modern 
graph as 立 77 ‘stand’ and 里 238 ‘village’.
Mnemonic: CHILD STANDS IN VILLAGE
DŌ, warabe
child
12 strokes
童
L3
385
OBI 
; bronze 
; seal 
. Some variation 
in shape, but OBI commonly has 林 79 or 森 
40 ‘forest’ (these two graphs originally not 
農場 NŌJŌ　farm 
農民 NŌMIN　farmers
農業 NŌGYŌ　agriculture
necessarily distinguished strictly as in modern 
Japanese) with 辰 ‘clam’ (later written as NJK 
蜃) , sometimes also with 又 2003 (or other 
equivalent graph for) ‘hand’. Overall meaning is 
‘cut (small) trees and vegetation with sharp-
ened clam shells to clear for growing crops’. 
Bronze forms commonly include 田 63 ‘fi eld’ 
(originally had a general sense, not necessarily 
‘wet/paddy fi eld’), with or without an element 
for ‘forest’ or ‘hand’, but interpreted in same 
way as OBI form. The seal form has what has 
NŌ
farming
13 strokes
農
L3
386
Seal 
. Late graph (Shuowen). Has ⺮ 58 ‘bam-
boo’, here denoting bamboo writing tablet, and 
寺 149 (‘temple’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘arrange, put in order’. Similar to 第 359 
一等  ITTŌ　fi rst class
上等  JŌTŌ　high class
等圧線 TŌATSUSEN　isobar
TŌ, hitoshii, nado
class, equal, et cetera
12 strokes
等
L3
383
‘order’, but regarding the additional sense ‘equal’ 
which 等 has, Shirakawa cites a pre-modern 
Chinese commentary which explains this on 
the basis of sorting out big and small bamboo 
writing tablets, resulting in groups of tablets of 
equal size; if we accept this explanation, ‘etc. (et 
cetera)’ – meaning the inclusion of further similar 
items – can be regarded as an extended sense. 
KJ1970:482; YK1976:389; SS1984:648.
Mnemonic: BAMBOO TABLETS ETC AT TEM-
PLE ARE ALL CLASSED EQUAL
動物 DŌBUTSU　animal
動機 DŌKI　motive
動き 
ugoki　movement
DŌ, ugoku/kasu
move
11 strokes
動
L4
384
Seal 
. Late graph (Shuowen). Has 力 78 
‘strength, power’, and 重 326 (‘heavy’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘shake’, to give 
meaning ‘exert power’, and by extension ‘move’. 
YK1976:391; KJ1970:704; OT1968:128.
Mnemonic: STRENGTH MOVES HEAVY OBJECT

140  The 200 Third Grade Characters
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 酉 318 ‘wine jar, wine’, and 
right-hand element showing a kneeling person. 
Ma interprets original meaning as ‘person 
wanting wine badly’, while Mizukami takes 
right-hand element as having associated sense 
‘serve, accompany’, and regards ‘distribute’ as a 
心配 SHINPAI　worry
配達 HAITATSU　delivery
配り手 kubarite　card dealer
loan usage. Other commentators, though, are 
typically more cautious on how to interpret 
this graph, as there are no examples of usage 
in the Chinese classics to help analysis. At the 
bronze stage, in some occurrences the shape 
of the ‘person kneeling’ element changed; this 
change is refl ected in the seal form, which was 
then rendered as 己 866 (‘self’) in block script. 
MR2007:522; MS1995:v2:1346-7; KJ1970:798-9; 
YK1976:410.
Mnemonic: DISTRIBUTE WINE TO 
ONESELF – WHILE KNEELING
HAI, kubaru
distribute
10 strokes
配
L3
388
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 亻 41 ‘per-
son’, and 咅 (a CO meaning ‘spit’) as phonetic 
五倍 GOBAI　fi ve-fold
倍加 BAIKA　doubling
倍数 BAISŪ　multiple
with associated sense ‘oppose, rebel’. Original 
meaning of the graph is ‘oppose, rebel’, but 
Tōdō gives a classical reference to support the 
sense ‘multiply’, as does Schuessler. KJ1970:758-
9; YK1976:411-2; OT1968:71; TA1965:158; 
AS2007:159. We suggest taking 咅 as 77 立‘ 
stand’ and 22 口 ‘open mouth’.
Mnemonic: PERSON STANDS OPEN-
MOUTHED AT DOUBLE
BAI
double, -fold
10 strokes
倍
L3
389
小箱 kobako　little box
箱舟 hakobune　ark
箱入り hakoiri　boxed
Seal 
; a relatively late graph (Shuowen). 
Has ⺮ 58 ‘bamboo’, and 相 348 (‘mutual’) as 
a phonetic with associated sense ‘face each 
hako
box
15 strokes
箱
L3
390
other’, which is taken as referring to the long 
rails on either side of an oxcart. The graph 箱 
was originally used to denote the part of an ox-
cart used for carrying goods (Katō, Shirakawa), 
and since this was box-like in shape, by exten-
sion the meaning ‘box’ evolved. MS1995:990-91; 
KJ1970:551; SS1984:548. 
Mnemonic: BAMBOO SIDES MUTUALLY OP-
POSED IN BOX
周波 SHŪHA　frequency
音波 ONPA　sound wave
波乗り naminori　surfi ng
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen).  Has 氵 42 
‘water’, and 皮 396 (‘skin, hide’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘move up and down, 
heave’. In Tōdō’s word-family ‘be covered with; 
skewed, slanting’. YK1976:407; OT1968:567; 
TA1965:658-60.
Mnemonic: WAVES FORM ‘SKIN’ OF WATER
HA, nami
wave
8 strokes
波
L3
387
sometimes been taken as 囟 ‘fontanelle/skull’ 
(see 思 147 ‘think’), but this is a miscopying 
or misinterpretation of 田 in the bronze forms 
(Katō). MS1995:v2:1280-81; KJ1970:738-9; 
MR2007:263; YK1976:406-7; AS2007:49. We sug-
gest using 曲 279 ‘bend’ (though incorrect), 厂 
as a slope, and the lower part as a scythe. 
Mnemonic: FARMING INVOLVES BENDING 
AND CUTTING ON SLOPES

The 200 Third Grade Characters  141
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 發. Has 弓 107 
‘bow’, and 癹 (a combination of 癶 382 ‘two 
発表  HAPPYŌ　announcement
発足  HOSSOKU　inauguration
発電機 HATSUDENKI　generator
feet treading’ and 殳170 ‘hand holding stick’) 
regarded as phonetic representing the sound 
of a bow when released. ‘Go out, leave, be-
gin’ are extended usages. MS1995:v2: 894-6; 
KJ1970:779; YK1976:415. We suggest taking 癶 as 
two funny feet and 
 as 二 65 ‘two’ bent legs 儿.
Mnemonic: TWO FUNNY FEET AND TWO 
BENT LEGS LEAD TO DISCHARGE
HATSU, HOTSU
discharge, start, leave
9 strokes
発
L4
392
OBI 
; seal . Generally treated as 又 2003 
‘(right) hand’, with 厂 as phonetic with associat-
ed sense ‘raise the hands, overturn’ (though Ma 
反応 HANNŌ*　reaction
反核 HANKAKU　anti-nuclear
反物 TANmono　textiles
takes the same two elements as representing 
a person scrambling up a cliff ). Meanings such 
as ‘oppose’ are extended usage. According to 
Ogawa, the SJ reading TAN (denoting a unit of 
measure for cloth, or land ) derives from 反 as 
an abbreviation of 段 944 (‘step’: 段 also has an 
SJ reading TAN), and one meaning of 段 in pre-
modern China was a unit of measure for cloth. 
MS1995:v1:194-5; KJ1970:785; YK1976:415; 
MR2007:269-70; OT1968:153; ZY2009:v2:572.
Mnemonic: CLIFF OPPOSES HAND
HAN,TAN, soru/rasu
oppose, anti, reverse, 
bend, cloth, measure
4 strokes
反
L3
393
急坂  KYŪHAN　steep slope
坂道  sakamichi　slope
下り坂  kudarizaka　downhill
consists of 土 64 ‘earth, ground’ with 反 393 
(‘slope, oppose’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘sloping’, to give ‘sloping ground’. In Tōdō’s 
word-family ‘be covered with; sloping’. Note: 
meaning of 阝 as left-hand element is ‘piled-
up earth, terraced elevated land, mound’: see 
1907. KJ1970:787; OT1968:213; TA1965:658-60.
Mnemonic: SLOPE IS OPPOSED GROUND
HAN, saka
slope
7 strokes
坂
L3
394
黒板 KOKUBAN　blackboard
板紙 itagami　cardboard
板前 itamae　chef
791 (‘board, print’), refl ecting the fact that early 
printing in Japan, as in China, used wooden 
blocks.  板 consists of ‘tree, wood’, with 反 393 
(‘oppose’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘thin, fl at’, to give ‘fl at board’. In Tōdō’s word-
family ‘spread out fl at, open out in circular pat-
tern’. YK1976:419; OT1968:496; TA1965:654-6.
Mnemonic: OPPOSED WOODEN BOARDS
HAN, BAN, ita
board, plate
8 strokes
板
L3
395
Occurs in seal form 
, but not included in 
Shuowen; generally treated as a variant of 版 
茶畑 CHAbatake　tea fi eld
田畑 tahata　fi elds, estate
麦畑 mugibatake　wheat fi eld
hata, hatake
(dry-) fi eld
9 strokes
畑
L3
391
One of a limited number of graphs devised in 
Japan based on the formational principles of 
Chinese characters, known as ‘kokuji’ (国 字 ‘na-
tional characters’). Has 火 8 ‘fi re’ and 田63 ‘fi eld’, 
meaning ‘dry fi eld’ (as opposed to a paddy 
fi eld). OT1968:671.
Mnemonic: A DRY-FIELD IS AN EASILY 
BURNED FIELD
A late, post-Shuowen graph; generally treated 
as variant of 阪 1865 (seal form of 阪: 
). 坂 

142  The 200 Third Grade Characters
Bronze 
; seal . Bronze form has 又 2003 
‘(right) hand’, and 
 (later /
) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘remove’, to give original 
皮膚  HIFU　skin
皮肉  HINIKU　sarcasm
木の皮  kinokawa　bark
meaning ‘remove [animal hide] with the hand’. 
The modern meaning range ‘[animal] hide, 
leather, fur, skin’ refl ects a restricted semantic 
shift. YK1976:421; MS1995:v2:900; OT1968:689. 
As a mnemonic we suggest taking the modern 
graph as 反 (393 ‘opposed’) with one extra 
stroke.
Mnemonic: SKINS WITH AN OPPOSED EXTRA 
STROKE
HI, kawa
skin, leather
5 strokes
皮
L3
396
悲劇  HIGEKI　tragedy
悲鳴  HIMEI　shriek, wail
悲しみ  kanashimi　sorrow
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 心 164 
‘heart, mind’, and 非 794 (originally bird wings, 
meaning ‘oppose’, and by extension ‘deny; 
wrong’) as phonetic with associated sense ‘sad, 
misery, grief’. The overall meaning ‘sad, misery’ 
can be understood as ‘opposing/confl icted feel-
ings’. YK1976:424; KJ1970:797; SS1984:713.
Mnemonic: MY HEART HAS WINGS – YET I AM 
SAD!
HI, kanashii/shimu
sad
12 strokes
悲
L3
397
美人 BIJIN　beautiful woman
美術 BIJUTSU　fi ne arts
美学 BIGAKU　aesthetics
BI, utsukushii
beautiful, fi ne
9 strokes
美
L3
398
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 羊 426 ‘sheep’ (often 
⺷), and 大 56 ‘big’, to give meaning ‘big/fat 
sheep’. By extension from this positive as-
sociation, ‘good to eat/drink’, and ‘beautiful’. 
MS1995:v2:1040-41; KJ1970:801; YK1976:424. 
See 1657 for further comment on standards of 
beauty in early Japan.
Mnemonic: A BEAUTIFUL FAT SHEEP
鼻音 BION　nasal sound
鼻先 hanasaki　tip of nose
鼻薬 hanagusuri　bribe
Originally found in OBI in simpler graph自 
150 (‘nose’, ‘self’). Seal form for 鼻 is 
. Has 自, 
originally a pictograph of the nose, and 畀 (CO, 
BI, hana
nose
14 strokes
鼻
L3
399
originally ‘arrow with big head’) as phonetic 
with associated sense in dispute: ‘stick out’ 
(Yamada, Ogawa), or ‘two things are together’ 
(Mizukami, Tōdō), or ‘naturally draw in and 
expel air’ (Mizukami). MS1995:v2:1522-3; 
YK1976:425; OT1968:1171. Suggest 自 as ‘nose’, 
田 as 田 63 ‘fi eld’, and lower part as two ‘tens’ 
十 35.
Mnemonic: OWN NOSE FOLLOWS TRAIL 
THROUGH TWENTY FIELDS

The 200 Third Grade Characters  143
OBI 
; seal 
. The simpler, older form shows a 
hand holding a writing brush (聿 159); to this, 
⺮ 58 ‘bamboo’ was later added, refl ecting 
鉛筆  ENPITSU　pencil
筆者  HISSHA　writer
筆使い fudezukai　penmanship
the fact that brushes typically had a bamboo 
shaft, though sometimes wood was used. In 
OBI, texts were sometimes written fi rst using 
a brush, then incised with a knife-like instru-
ment. The brush was the most common writing 
instrument in China and Japan until displaced 
by the steel-tipped pen, etc. in modern times. 
YK1976:426; KJ1970:55; MS1995:v2:1062.
Mnemonic: HAND HOLDS BAMBOO WRITING 
BRUSH
HITSU, fude
writing brush
12 strokes
筆
L3
400
OBI 
 (冫); bronze 
 (冰) ; seal 
; the latter 
now a CO 冰 . Quite a rare graph in OBI and 
bronze. OBI form depicts cracks or irregularities 
in ice. At bronze stage 水 42 ‘water’ was added 
氷山 HYŌZAN　iceberg
氷点 HYŌTEN　freezing point
氷水 kōrimizu　ice water
on the left, but in the seal script this changed 
to the right, giving 冰 , as in modern Chinese 
usage. The form 氷 standard in Japanese is 
found in Chinese calligraphic tradition (Tang 
Dynasty onwards). Distinguish also from 永 644 
‘long’. MR2007:450; MS1995:v1:116; KJ1970:809; 
FC1974:v1:191-2. Suggest taking the extra 
stroke relative to 水 42 ‘water’ (at the top left) as 
a crack in the ice. 
Mnemonic: A CRACK IN THE WATER? – THAT 
MUST MEAN ICE
HYŌ, kōri
ice
5 strokes
氷
L3
401
表面  HYŌMEN　surface
表現  HYŌGEN　expression
時刻表 JIKOKUHYŌ　timetable
Seal 
. Has 衣 444 ‘clothing’, and 毛 230 ‘fur, 
hair’. The function of the element 毛 is dis-
puted: taken either as phonetic with associated 
HYŌ, omote, arawasu
show, surface, list
8 strokes
表
L3
402
二秒 NIBYŌ　two seconds
秒針 BYŌSHIN　a second hand
秒速 BYŌSOKU　speed per sec.
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 禾 87 ‘grain 
plant/cereal’, and 少 160 (‘few, little’) taken 
BYŌ
second (of time)
9 strokes
秒
L3
403
sense ‘envelop, enclose’, to give ‘outer garment 
to cover inside’ (Katō, Mizukami, Yamada), or as 
semantic and interpreted as a garment worn 
over a fur coat (Mizukami, Qiu). The meanings 
‘front, surface; show’ are extended usages. 
KJ1970:843-4; MS1995:v2:1164-5; YK1976:427; 
QX2000:20. Suggest take the top part as odd 
variant of ‘master’ 主 315, with ‘clothing’ 衣.
Mnemonic: THE ODD MASTER’S CLOTHES 
SHOW A LONG LIST
either as phonetic and semantic meaning 
‘small’ (Ogawa), or as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘slender, thin’ (Yamada) or ‘ear (of cereal)’ 
– again, something small – (Katō). The sense 
‘small’ was then extended to small units, giving 
‘second’ in the dimension of time. KJ1970:847; 
YK1976:429; OT1968:731.
Mnemonic: A LITTLE BIT OF CEREAL EATEN IN 
A SECOND

144  The 200 Third Grade Characters
病気  BYŌKI　illness
病人  BYŌNIN　sick person
黒死病 KOKUSHIBYŌ　plague
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 疒 ‘(sick-)
bed’ (the ‘sickness’ determinative, based on a 
person resting on a bed), and 丙 1932 (origi-
nally, probably chopping board used in rituals, 
now ‘third class’), as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘be added’, to give ‘illness which 
gets worse’. KJ1970:837,938-40; YK1976:429; 
OT1968:678; SS1984:728.
Mnemonic: THIRD CLASS HEALTH LEADS TO 
ILLNESS
BYŌ, yamai, yamu
illness, sickness
10 strokes
病
L4
404
商品 SHŌHIN　commodity
品質 HINSHITSU　quality
品物 shinamono　goods
OBI 
; seal form similar 
. Has three mouths, 
taken to mean ‘talk a lot, many people talking’. 
Yamada has a similar view regarding a gener-
alised meaning of talking. Ma takes ‘goods’ as a 
HIN, shina
goods, quality, kind
9 strokes
品
L4
405
負傷   FUSHŌ　wound
負担   FUTAN　burden
負け嫌い makegirai　unyielding
FU, makeru/kasu, ou
defeat, carry
9 strokes
負
L3
406
Bronze 
; seal . Generally taken as ‘person’ 
 
(see 人 41), on top of 貝 10 (original meaning 
‘shell, money’) used here as phonetic with asso-
部分 BUBUN　part
部長 BUCHŌ　head of division
部屋 heya*　room
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has right-hand 
determinative 阝 376 (full form: 邑), ‘village, 
settlement’, and 咅 ‘spit’ (see 389), here as pho-
netic with disputed associated sense.  Katō and 
BU
part, section
11 strokes
部
L3
407
Yamada feel sense unclear as originally 部 was 
a proper noun for a tribe in western China, and 
treat it as loan usage for ‘part, section’. Tōdō, 
however, includes 部 in a word-family ‘oppose; 
divide’, linking it to a word later written 剖 1975 
‘cut, split open’. Shirakawa also takes the sense 
as ‘divide’. KJ1970:759; YK1976:435; TA1965:155-
8; SS1984:745-6. Suggest taking 咅 as 立 77 
‘stand’ and 口 22 ‘mouth’. 
Mnemonic: STAND OPEN-MOUTHED AT PART 
OF THE VILLAGE ON THE RIGHT
loan usage. Note that already in OBI this graph 
appears to have had quite a wide semantic 
range: ‘a kind, class, piece’ (Schuessler). As 
Mizukami and others have noted, three here 
denotes ‘many’ rather than specifi cally ‘three’ (cf. 
森 40). MR2007:250; YK1976:430; KJ1970:207; 
AS2007:415; MS1995:v1:228-9. Take as three 
boxes.
Mnemonic: THREE BOXES OF QUALITY 
GOODS
ciated sense ‘the back’, to give ‘carry [someone] 
on the back’ (Katō, Yamada, Ogawa), and then 
more generally ‘carry on the back’.  Shirakawa, 
though, takes it more literally as ‘carry shellfi sh 
on the back’. ‘Turn the back on, oppose’ may 
be seen as extended usage, and ‘be defeated’ 
as a loan usage. KJ1970:821; YK1976:433; 
MS1995:v2:1230-32; OT1968:952; SS1984:740.
Mnemonic: DEFEATED PERSON CARRIES 
SHELL-MONEY AWAY

The 200 Third Grade Characters  145
服装 FUKUSŌ　clothing 
服従 FUKUJŪ　submission
服部 Hattori*　a surname
OBI 
; seal 
. The OBI form (left-hand) cor-
responds to 舟 1450 ‘boat, hollowed-out vessel’, 
with , made up originally of a hand positioned 
typically at the back of an element representing 
a person kneeling submissively (Katō) but here 
acting as phonetic with associated sense such 
as ‘lie/face downwards’, or ‘adhere to some-
thing’, to give overall meaning ‘work while look-
ing down into a vessel (boat/large container)’. 
Mizukami gives an additional associated sense 
‘boards attached tightly to sides of a boat’, and 
FUKU
clothes, yield, serve
8 strokes
服
L4
408
OBI forms 
, 
. The fi rst OBI form has 示/礻 
‘altar, deity; show’ 723, and a CO 畐 as semantic 
and phonetic meaning ‘(full) wine jar’ (it is a 
pictograph of a wine jar). The second OBI has 
these two elements and in addition two hands, 
幸福  KŌFUKU　happiness
福引  FUKUbiki　lottery
福音書 FUKUINSHO　Gospels
generally taken as indicating a person receiv-
ing wine after a ritual off ering it to the deities. 
On this basis, the overall original sense of the 
graph was ‘sacred/auspicious wine from a ritual 
to the gods’. It then underwent a change to 
a more generalised meaning to ‘something 
received from the deities’, and by extension 
‘good fortune’. KJ1970:827; MS1995:v2:954-5; 
YK1976:438. We suggest taking the right-hand 
components as 一 1 ‘one/single’, 口 22 ‘mouth/
entrance’, and 田 63 ‘fi eld’. 
Mnemonic: ALTAR AT SINGLE ENTRANCE TO 
FIELD – WHAT GOOD FORTUNE
FUKU
good fortune
13 strokes
福
L3
409
on this basis posits the extended meaning 
‘something worn close to the body, clothes’.  
Additionally,  may be treated as also hav-
ing a semantic role: if ‘hand’ is taken with the 
other element interpreted as ‘person kneeling 
submissively’, this gives the meaning ‘obey, sub-
mit’ (Ogawa, Shirakawa). MS1995:v2:1100-01; 
KJ1970:793-4; OT1968:481; SS1984:750. Note: 
The element 月 in 服, which has gone through 
an intermediate stage , is an altered form of
舟, and is not 月 18 ‘moon’ or the abbreviated 
form of 肉 209 ‘meat, fl esh’, which were often 
confused from an early period (though useful 
as mnenomics). We suggest taking  as a hand 
reaching up to clothes hoist.
Mnemonic: SERVILE HAND PUTS CLOTHES 
ON HOIST UNDER THE MOON
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 牜(牛) 108 ‘cow’, and an 
NJK 勿 (originally a graph with OBI forms taken 
as mostly depicting fl uttering streamers of 
人物  JINBUTSU　person
食物  SHOKUMOTSU　food
食べ物 tabemono　food
diff erent colors, but then adopted through loan 
usage for a word meaning ‘not’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘various’, to give overall 
meaning ‘cow of various colors (mottled hide)’. 
A generalised shift in meaning gave rise to the 
sense ‘things’, which according to Schuessler 
is already found in OBI texts. KJ1970:830-32; 
MS1995:v2:832-3, v1:146-8; YK1976:439-40; 
AS2007:520. 
Mnemonic: COW WITH STREAMERS FROM ITS 
HORNS – WHAT A FUNNY THING
BUTSU, MOTSU, 
mono
thing
8 strokes
物
L4
410

146  The 200 Third Grade Characters
平気 HEIKI　calmness
平等 BYŌDŌ　equality
平手 hirate　palm of hand
OBI 
; bronze 
. The bottom two strokes of 
the OBI form show an aquatic plant. Yamada 
suggests the curved shape indicates it has no 
roots and is just fl oating, and takes the three 
HEI, BYŌ, taira, hiratai
fl at, even, calm
5 strokes
平
L3
411
返事  HENJI　reply
返済  HENSAI　repayment
仕返し  shikaeshi　retaliation
HEN, kaesu/ru
return
7 strokes
返
L3
412
勉強 BENKYŌ　study
勤勉 KINBEN　diligence
勉学 BENGAKU　study
BEN
strive
10 strokes
勉
L4
413
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Katō and Yama-
da take as 力 78 ‘strength, power’, with 免 2018 
開放  KAIHŌ　liberation
放射  HŌSHA　radiation
手放す  tebanasu　let go
Bronze 
. Has 攵 (usual right-hand form of 攴 
112 ‘hit with a stick’), and left-hand element 
with disputed function and meaning. Based 
on bronze forms, Mizukami interprets the left-
hand element as 方 223 (‘direction, person’), 
serving as phonetic with associated sense 
HŌ, hanasu/tsu
release, emit
8 strokes
放
L3
414
‘release, spread, extend’. Shirakawa, alternative-
ly, takes 方as showing an exposed corpse, and 
the whole graph as showing the corpse being 
beaten in a ritual to drive out evil spirits. Ogawa 
regards what others take as 方 as in error for 
人 41 ‘person’. Whichever analysis is followed, 
in broad terms the overall sense is still ‘beat 
with a stick and chase away’, leading to other 
related meanings such as ‘emit’ and ‘release’. 
MS1995:v1:570-71; SS1984:785; OT1968:435; 
YK1976:453. 
Mnemonic: BEATING A PERSON IS A FORM 
OF RELEASE FOR SOME
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has ⻌ 85 ‘go, walk, move’, 
and 反 393 (‘oppose’) as phonetic, here with 
associated sense ‘return, reverse’. KJ1970:786-7; 
MS1995:v2:1284-5; YK1976:446.
Mnemonic: REVERSE MOVEMENT AND 
RETURN
q.v. (originally a woman striving to give birth; 
now meaning ‘avoid, escape’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘be born’. Along the same lines, 
Tōdō notes 免 as the original way of writing NJK 
娩 ‘childbirth’, and includes it in the word-family 
‘take out/produce with great eff ort’. The graph 
勉 thus has the meaning ‘make an eff ort, strive’. 
KJ1970:854; YK1976:449; TA1965:739-41.
Mnemonic: STRIVE STRONGLY TO ESCAPE
strokes above as the OBI graph for 小 38 ‘small’, 
to give ‘small fl oating plant’; at the bronze 
stage, the top horizontal stroke was added, 
probably for the fl at surface of the water. ‘Flat, 
even’ is extended usage, and ‘calm’ a further 
extended sense. YK1976:443; KJ1970:167; 
MS1995:v1:446-7. We suggest taking the graph 
as a whole, i.e. as a pictograph, of evenly bal-
anced scales.
Mnemonic: SCALES ARE FLAT AND EVEN

The 200 Third Grade Characters  147
意味 IMI　meaning
興味 KYŌMI　interest
味見 ajimi　tasting
MI, aji, ajiwau
taste, relish
8 strokes
味
L4
415
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 卩 (see 41) ‘person 
kneeling’, and 
 as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘shout loudly’ together with 口 22 
‘mouth, speak’ for emphasis, to give the overall 
meaning ‘order, command’ (to kneeling person) 
(Yamada). Ogawa, though, takes this graph as
口 ‘mouth’ with 令 633 ‘order’ as semantic and 
phonetic, meaning ‘use others’. Those who give 
命令  MEIREI　order
生命  SEIMEI　life
命取り  inochitori　fatal
orders control others, and so meanings such 
as ‘fate’ and ‘life’ represent extended usage. In 
Shang times the simpler graph 令 was used to 
write two words of similar pronunciation and 
probably related (both have the meaning ‘order, 
command’, but the word later written 命 also 
had the lesser sense ‘give a name’); the later ap-
pearance of 命 in bronze texts signals that each 
of the two words could be represented unam-
biguously from that point on. MS1995:v1:224; 
YK1976:467-8; KJ1970:177-8; OT1968:178; 
AS2007:387, 361.
Mnemonic: LIFE CAN HINGE ON A SPOKEN 
ORDER
MEI, MYŌ, inochi
life, order
8 strokes
命
L3
416
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 口 22 
‘mouth’, and 未 617 (originally a tree with luxu-
riant foliage, but borrowed to mean ‘not yet’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘delicious’ 
(Ogawa says ‘good’), to give ‘taste, fl avor’. Also 
used by extension to denote an attribute or 
quality. KJ1970:869; YK1976:464; OT1968:179; 
AS2007:512.
Mnemonic: TASTE NOT YET IN THE MOUTH
OBI 
; bronze 
; seal 
. Interpretation varies. 
Taken to represent either the face with a line or 
lines in front of it (Qiu, Ma, Ogawa – Qiu sees 
外面  GAIMEN　exterior
面白い omoshiroi　interesting
鼻面  hanazura　muzzle
the long outside line in the bronze form as 
showing the front surface of the face), or a mask 
(Katō, Yamada). The long line is more suggestive 
of something around a face, i.e. mask, yet the 
Shuowen takes it as meaning ‘face’. ‘Face’ led to 
extended senses such as ‘aspect’. QX2000:184; 
MR2007:401; OT1968:1093; KJ1970:870-71; 
YK1976:470. Suggest using 目 76 ‘eye’.
Mnemonic: FACE-MASK WITH BIG EYE IN THE 
MIDDLE AND A FLAT TOP
MEN, omo(te), tsura
face, aspect, mask
9 strokes
面
L3
417
質問 SHITSUMON　question
学問 GAKUMON　scholarship
問屋 toiya/tonya*　dealer
MON, tou
ask
11 strokes
問
L4
418
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 口 22 ‘mouth’ (here as 
‘speak/call’), and 門 231 ‘gate/door’ serving 
here as phonetic with associated sense ‘ques-
tion aggressively’; later acquired generalized 
meaning ‘ask’. MS1995:v1:234-5; KJ1970:834-5; 
YK1976:473.
Mnemonic: ASK WHO’S CALLING AT THE 
DOOR

148  The 200 Third Grade Characters
役人 YAKUNIN　functionary
役者 YAKUSHA　actor
兵役 HEIEKI　military service
OBI 
; bronze 
; seal 
. Typically analyzed 
as 彳 131 ‘go/walk’, with 殳 170 ‘hand holding 
big stick’, to give overall sense ‘travel round with 
stick’. Shirakawa treats the stick as ritualistic, 
and Ogawa sees it as a symbol of authority to 
YAKU, EKI
role, service, duty
7 strokes
役
L3
419
薬局 YAKKYOKU　pharmacy
火薬 KAYAKU　gunpowder
薬指 kusuriyubi　ring fi nger
YAKU, kusuri
medicine, drug
16 strokes
薬
L4
420
由来 YURAI　derivation
理由 RIYŪ　reason
自由 
JIYŪ　freedom
YU, YŪ, yoshi
reason, means, way, 
from
5 strokes
由
L4
421
Seal 
. Etymology disputed. Katō and Yamada 
treat as originally same graph as 西 169 (later 
divergence in shape), showing basket/bag for 
pressing out liquid in wine-making. Shirakawa 
sees early forms of 由 as the same as for 卣 
Bronze 
; seal ; traditional 藥. Has 艹 53 
plant/grass and 樂 98 (qv, originally ‘oak tree’ 
or type of musical instrument, later loaned for 
‘music; pleasure’), here serving as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘heal, cure’. The bronze 
form lacks the element 白 69 ‘white’, which may 
represent an acorn (see 98). MS1995:v2:1136-7; 
KJ1970:874; YK1976:475-6.
Mnemonic: MEDICINAL PLANT GIVES PLEASURE
(‘small-necked wine jar’), which he takes as 
initially showing a fl eshy gourd that produced a 
form of oil (see 油 422 ‘oil’).  Ogawa also treats
卣 and 由 as having same early forms. Diff er-
ences in analysis of early forms of 由 refl ect 
diffi  culties often found in deciding which old 
forms correspond to which modern graphs. The 
abstract meanings for 由 such as ‘from’ may be 
taken as loan usages. KJ1970:24; YK1976:476; 
SS1984:829; OT1968:669,144. Take as 田 63 
‘fi eld’ and l as a drill.
Mnemonic: THERE’S A REASON FOR THE 
DRILL IN THE FIELD (see 422 below)
give warnings. This is appropriate for the seal 
form, but not older forms. The OBI and bronze 
equivalents of this graph have not 彳 but either 
two persons, or one person who – in some 
cases – is kneeling: in combination with 殳 , 
this gives the overall meaning ‘forced work/
labor’ (Mizukami, Katō, Schuessler). Often 
the work appears to have been of a military 
nature. YK1976:474-5; KJ1970:88; SS1984:827; 
OT1968:346; AS2007:568. 
Mnemonic: GO OFF WITH STICK IN HAND TO 
DO ONE’S DUTY
油田 YUDEN　oil fi eld
灯油 TŌYU　kerosene
油絵 aburaE　oil painting
YU, abura
oil
8 strokes
油
L3
422
agrees, regarding the meaning ‘oil’ as a loan 
usage. Shirakawa, though, treats as 氵‘water/
liquid’ with 由 as semantic and phonetic 
meaning ‘oil’, regarding (early form of) 由 as 
the original way of writing 油. Ogawa gives 
another alternative, treating 油 as 氵, with 由 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘extract’. Tōdō 
also includes in word-family meaning ‘extract’, 
but regards ‘oil’ as loan use of 油 . YK1976:476-
7; KJ1970:886; SS1984:829; OT1968:570,669; 
TA1965:185-9.
Mnemonic: THE REASON IS THAT THE LIQUID 
IN THE FIELD IS OIL (see 421 above)
OBI 
; seal 
. Etymology disputed. Yamada 
and also Matsushima list OBI forms; Yamada 
takes as 氵42 water/liquid, with 由 421 (‘reason’) 
as phonetic with associated sense unknown 
because originally it stood for a proper noun 
(river name). On the basis of the seal form, Katō 

The 200 Third Grade Characters  149
OBI forms 
, 
; bronze 
. Mizukami, Katō 
and Yamada all analyze the bronze form as 
肉 209 ‘meat, fl esh’ (later modifi ed in shape 
through regularization to 月) with 又 2003 
‘(right) hand’; they also attribute the sense 
‘off er’ to the latter, while Tōdō takes it instead 
as ‘enclose, keep’.  The overall meaning of 有
thus becomes ‘off er meat held in the hand’, or 
‘keep in the hand’. The above does not account 
for the OBI forms, however. The simpler OBI 
所有者  SHOYŪSHA　owner
有無   UMU　existence
有り難う  arigatō　thank you
form above for 有 is the same as that for 又, 
and Ma notes the latter is borrowed sometimes 
for 有 (both were very close in pronunciation 
in early Chinese), but regards the other OBI 
form above for 有 as obscure. Qiu observes 
that for a time in antiquity 又 ‘hand’ was used 
for 有 in the sense ‘have’, and also 有 was 
sometimes used for 又 ‘hand’, thereby con-
fusing later commentators on the Chinese 
classics. Such interchangeability of graphs well 
illustrates the complexity of historical Chinese 
character use. MS1995:v1:636-7; KJ1970:22-3; 
YK1976:478; TA1965:139-43; MR2007:358,267; 
QX2000:346,349,401; AS2007:580-81. 
Mnemonic: EXISTENCE IS DEPENDENT ON 
HAVING MEAT IN HAND
YŪ, U, aru
have, exist
6 strokes
有
L4
423
A post-Shuowen graph, found in Yupian (6th 
century AD). It consists of ⻌ 85 ‘walk, go, move’, 
with the CO 斿. The latter represents a ‘fl utter-
ing fl ag/streamer’: see also 族 353, and note 
that here fl ag/streamer 
 has 子 27 ‘child’ (as 
opposed to ‘arrow’ 矢 145) possibly added to 
遊覧  YŪRAN　sightseeing
遊山  YUSAN　excursion
遊び場 asobiba　playground
indicate smallness – in this case small ripples 
in the fl ag. 斿 has a role as phonetic, having 
an associated meaning of ‘waves, advance’ 
(Katō, Yamada) – such motion often giving an 
unhurried impression – or ‘shake, sway’ (Ogawa, 
Tōdō). The resultant overall meaning for 遊 is 
‘walk unhurriedly, wander around’. ‘Relax’ and 
‘play’ are extended meanings. YK1976:479; 
KJ1970:464; OT1968:1009; TA1965:195-6.  We 
suggest taking 方 223 as ‘side’, 
 41 ‘person’, 
and 子 27 ‘child’. 
Mnemonic: CHILD PLAYS ALONGSIDE MOV-
ING PERSON
YŪ, YU, asobu
play, relax
12 strokes
遊
L3
424
予約　YOYAKU　booking
予想　YOSŌ　expectation
予定　YOTEI　schedule
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional 豫. In modern times 
in Japan, 予 has been – and continues to be – 
popularly regarded as an abbreviated version of 
the traditional form 豫 , but the latter is in fact 
a separate character from 予 both historically 
and in modern Chinese. 予itself depicts a weav-
ing shuttle to move thread back and forth hori-
zontally, and by extension to represent actions 
done with the shuttle, e.g.  ‘push’. The meanings 
‘I/me’, ‘beforehand’, and ‘already’ are generally 
YO, kanete
already, prior, me
4 strokes
予
L3
425
regarded as loan usages. Mizukami, Yamada, 
and Ogawa follow Shuowen and take 豫 as con-
sisting of 象 540 ‘elephant’, with 予 as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘big and calm’, to give 
original meaning ‘big elephant’, and Karlgren is 
in broad agreement. This analysis is questioned 
by Schuessler and Shirakawa, who maintain 
there are no examples of early usage in this 
sense; Shirakawa does note the early use of 豫 
in the sense ‘beforehand’. MS1995:v2:1226-7, 
v1:26-7; YK1976:480; OT1968:29; BK1957:41; 
AS2007:592; SS1984:841-2. We suggest taking 
the upper part マ as a ‘bent fi gure’ and thus 
‘bent over’, and the lower part as a variant of 丁
367 in its original meaning of ‘nail’.
Mnemonic: THE NAIL IS ALREADY BENT

150  The 200 Third Grade Characters
羊皮  YŌHI　sheepskin
羊水  YŌSUI　amniotic fl uid
羊飼い hitsujikai　shepherd
YŌ, hitsuji
sheep
6 strokes
羊
L1
426
西洋人 SEIYŌJIN　Westerner
大西洋 TAISEIYŌ　Atlantic Ocean
洋食  YŌSHOKU　Western food
YŌ
ocean, Western
9 strokes
洋
L4
427
OBI 
; seal 
. Originally a pictograph show-
ing head and horns of a sheep; as Ma observes, 
associated sense unclear because this graph 
originally denoted a river name (Katō, Ogawa, 
Yamada). Its meaning of ‘sea, ocean’ is regarded 
as a loan usage. Mizukami, though, takes 羊 
here as having the associated sense ‘spa-
cious, expansive’. KJ1970:535-6; OT1968:573; 
YK1976:483; MS1995:v2:750-52.
Mnemonic: OCEAN OF WHITE SHEEP, NOT 
WHITE HORSES!
this stands for the whole animal. Katō and 
Mizukami follow the view in Shuowen that 
the tail is shown also, though the longish line 
in some OBI occurrences could represent the 
body instead. In compound graphs, the short-
ened form 
 is often used. MR2007:293-4; 
YK1976:482; KJ1970:875; MS1995:v2:1038-9. 
Mnemonic: THIN-BODIED SHEEP WITH 
HORNS AND THREE STRIPES
針葉樹 SHIN’YŌJU　conifer
葉巻  hamaki　cigar
葉書  hagaki　postcard 
YŌ, ha
leaf, generation
12 strokes
葉
L3
428
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 艹 53 plant/
grass, and 枼 (OBI form 
; a CO that originally 
represented thin fl at leaves on tree branches, 
later stylized to 世 344 ‘generation’ qv and 木 
73 ‘tree’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘thin and fl at’. In Tōdō’s word-family ‘thin’. He 
suggests that the (lesser and now rare) sense 
‘generation, age’ is a metaphoric use based 
on layers of leaves one on top of the other. 
OT1968:863; MS1995:v1:662; TA1965:831-3. 
Mnemonic: LEAVES ARE GENERATIONS OF 
PLANTS ON A TREE
OBI 
; seal 
. Generally taken as 氵 42 
‘water’, and 羊 426 (‘sheep’) as phonetic with 
陽極  YŌKYOKU　anode
陽気  YŌKI　liveliness, good cheer
太陽系 TAIYŌKEI　solar system
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 阝1907 ‘hill, piled-up earth’ 
and 昜 161 (CO, ‘sun rises’) as semantic and 
phonetic to give ‘sun shines’ > ‘sunny hill/hill-
side’. By extension, ‘sun; bright, warm’. A further 
extended meaning, deriving from ancient Chi-
nese belief, is yang ‘the male/positive principle’ 
(YŌ), which contrasts with 陰 1635 (IN) ‘the 
female/negative principle’, as in ‘Yin and Yang’. 
KJ1970:879; MS1995:v2:1400-02; OT1968:1072.
Mnemonic: POSITIVELY SUNNY RAYS FALL 
ON HILLSIDE
YŌ, hi
sunny, male, positive
12 strokes
陽
L3
429

The 200 Third Grade Characters  151
Seal 
; traditional 樣 ; a late graph (Shuowen). 
Has 木 73 ‘tree, wood’, and what is generally 
taken as 羕 (originally pictograph of big river 
with tributaries) as phonetic. Yamada takes 羕 
as having associated sense ‘resemble’, and Katō 
says it may have this meaning, but despite the 
connection with appearance, both consider 
仕様 SHIYŌ　way, means
有様 arisama　situation
皆様 minasama　everyone (polite)
‘appearance/form’ as loan usage. Ogawa takes 
樣 to be a variant of the NJK 橡 ‘horse chest-
nut’ or ‘oak’, and likewise takes 様 as a loan for 
‘appearance’. As for the use of 様 for‘–sama’ as 
a polite suffi  x, there was an independent Japa-
nese word sama ‘condition/appearance/shape’, 
found from about the tenth century, sometimes 
written as 様, and its use in modern Japanese 
for ‘–sama’ as a suffi  x may be regarded as a loan 
usage.  YK1976:485; KJ1970:875; OT1968:519. 
We suggest taking the elements as 木 73 ‘tree’, 
羊 426 ‘sheep’, and 水 42 ‘water’.
Mnemonic: SHEEP APPEARS TO WATER TREE 
– AWKWARD SITUATION
YŌ, sama
situation, way, ap-
pearance, polite suffi  x
14 strokes
様
L3
430
落下  RAKKA　fall, descent
落ち葉  ochiba　fallen leaf
落し物  otoshimono　dropped item
RAKU, ochiru/tosu
fall, drop
12 strokes
落
L4
431
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 艹 53 plant/
grass, and 洛 (now NJK for ‘Kyoto’; originally a 
river name) as phonetic, to give ‘leaves fall’, then 
general sense ‘fall’. KJ1970:894; MS1995:v2:750; 
YK1976:488. Suggest use 各 462 ‘each’, with 氵 
42 ‘water’.
Mnemonic: FROM EACH PLANT, LEAVES FALL 
LIKE WATER DROPLETS
流行  RYŪKŌ　fashion
流布  RUFU　spread
流れ木 nagaregi　driftwood
RYŪ, RU, nagareru/su
fl ow, stream
10 strokes
流
L3
432
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 氵42 ‘water/liquid’, and 
CO 
 ‘baby born amidst outfl owing amniotic 
fl uid’ (see also 247) as semantic and pho-
netic, giving ‘baby born amidst amniotic fl uid’; 
meaning later generalized to ‘fl ow out’. The 
earlier seal form has ‘water’ 水/氵written twice. 
KJ1970:585; MS1995:v2:778-9; YK1976:495; 
OT1968:581. 
Mnemonic: INVERTED CHILD BORN IN 
WATERY FLOW
旅行 RYOKŌ　journey
旅費 RYOHI　travel expenses
旅人 tabibito　traveler
RYO, tabi
journey
10 strokes
旅
L4
433
OBI 
 ; seal 
. Has 
 353 ‘fl ag’, with what 
is today a CO 从 meaning ‘follow’, which Ya-
mada takes as phonetic with associated sense 
‘accompany’, while Katō and Mizukami take as 
‘many together’, to give an overall meaning of 
‘(many) people/soldiers gathered beneath a 
fl ag’. Historical meanings include ‘group of 500 
troops’ (still used in modern Chinese to mean 
‘troops’); also ‘troops moving’, and then in 
generalised sense ‘journey’. MS1995:v1:602-3; 
KJ1970:900; OT1968:456. We suggest taking 方
223 as ‘side’, and  as ‘odd clothes’ (see 衣 444).
Mnemonic: PUT ODD CLOTHES ON ONE SIDE 
FOR JOURNEY

152  The 200 Third Grade Characters
両方 RYŌHŌ　both sides
両手 RYŌte　both hands
両替 RYŌgae　money exchange
RYŌ
both, pair, money
6 strokes
両
L3
434
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional form: 兩. A vari-
ant of 
, depicting a gourd split in half (not 
quite completely), with the short curved lines 
inside representing membranes. Originally 
meant ‘split into two’, then took on more gen-
eralised sense ‘two’. Shuowen takes it instead as 
pictographically representing a pair of scales, 
but modern scholars consider this analysis 
carries no weight – though perhaps useful as 
a mnemonic. MS1995:v1:98-9; KJ1970:200-01; 
YK1976:496-7.
Mnemonic: SCALES WEIGH BOTH PARTS OF 
A PAIR
常緑樹 JŌRYOKUJU　evergreen
緑青  ROKUSHŌ　verdigris
緑色  midoriiro　green
RYOKU, ROKU, 
midori
green
14 strokes
緑
L3
435
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional 綠. Seal form 
onwards  has 糸 29 ‘thread’, and 䩑 (CO; OBI 
and bronze forms of the latter are typically 
taken as originally a pictograph showing wine 
being strained and dripping down), the latter 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘verdigris’, 
including its color. (Verdigris is a bluish-green 
coating which comes out of copper and 
forms on its surface; later written 録 640 qv 
[the meaning ‘record, make a copy’ is a later 
loan usage].) The overall meaning of 緑 was 
originally ‘silk the color of verdigris’; later it was 
used for just the color itself. KJ1970:932,931; 
YK1976:499; MS1995:v2:1018-9,v1:474-5. We 
suggest taking 䩑 as a hand ヨ squeezing 
liquid/water (see 水 42 ‘water’).
Mnemonic: HAND SQUEEZES GREEN DROPS 
IN THREAD-LIKE FASHION
失礼 SHITSUREI　impoliteness
礼服 REIFUKU　formal attire
敬礼 KEIREI　bow
REI
propriety, bow
5 strokes
礼
L3
436
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional 禮. OBI forms consist 
of 豊 only. Some bronze occurrences have礻 
723 (‘off ering table; deity’) as determinative. 
OBI stage, consisting only of 豊 (811 [‘abun-
dant, many’]), is taken to mean ‘ritual off ering 
vessel’ (Mizukami [OBI]); in one view (Katō), 
the vessel was originally a certain type of shell. 
Shirakawa and Katō consider 豊 here to stand 
for the later CO graph 醴 ‘sacred sweet wine’. 
Katō notes that there were numerous ritu-
als practised in ancient China, but the most 
important centered on the drinking of sacred 
wine, and so the graph 禮 with its wine as-
sociation came to be used for rituals in general. 
Some scholars (including Katō and Shirakawa) 
view 礼as a separate graph from 禮, not just 
a variant of the latter, but the interpretation 
of the right-hand element in 礼 is disputed. 
According to Shirakawa, the form 礼 is found in 
texts such as epitaphs dating from Han times; 
the Jiyun dictionary (11th century AD) treats 禮
as the old form of 礼. In either case, the graph 
expresses propriety in the observation of ritual. 
YK1976:502; MS1995:v2:958-9; KJ1970:226; 
SS1984:896; OT1968:26; ZY2009:v3:858. 
Mnemonic: PERSON KNEELS AT ALTAR 
SHOWING DUE PROPRIETY

The 200 Third Grade Characters  153
列車 RESSHA　train
列次 RETSUJI　sequence
前列 ZENRETSU　front row
Seal 
. Has 刂 198 ‘knife, cut’, and an early form 
 (see 302), interpreted as skeletal remains 
(possibly this depicted just the occipital 
bone, which forms back and base of skull and 
RETSU
row, line
6 strokes
列
L3
437
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional ៳. 
Has 糸 29 ‘thread’, and 柬 (originally 束 561 
‘bundle of twigs/branches’, with 八 70 ‘divide; 
select’) as phonetic with associated sense 
訓練  KUNREN　training
洗練  SENREN　refi nement
練り粉  neriko　dough
‘soften by boiling’, which referred to a process 
of bringing out the gloss in silk thread, and 
was also applied to the product, i.e. silk fabric 
woven with glossed thread. The meaning was 
then modifi ed from ‘work/process silk thread’ 
to ‘attain skill in a task, practice’. KJ1970:648; 
MS1995:v1:658-9; YK1976:504-5; OT1968:784. 
We suggest taking the right-hand element as  
東 201 ‘east’.
Mnemonic: REFINED THREADS FROM THE EAST
REN, neru
refi ne, knead, train
14 strokes
練
L3
438
encircles top of spinal cord, to represent a 
complete skeleton); in later stages of the script 
this changed in shape through 䗈 to become 
歹. The latter element serves as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘separate, cleave’. There was a 
set order to cutting up an animal into pieces, 
often arranged in a row, and so the mean-
ing of this graph was extended to ‘row, line, 
order’. MS1995:v1:126-7; YK1976:503-4, 312; 
KJ1970:922.
Mnemonic: CUT UP BONES IN A ROW
道路 DŌRO　road
線路 SENRO　rail track
旅路 tabiji　journey
RO, -ji
road, route
13 strokes
路
L3
439
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 足 54 ‘foot’, and 各 462 
(originally ‘movement’, now meaning ‘each’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘tread’ (Mizu-
kami also lists alternative sense ‘link, join’), to 
give ‘[place] where people tread with their feet’, 
i.e. ‘path, road’. MS1995:v2:1262-3; KJ1970:190-
91; YK1976:505.
Mnemonic: EACH FOOT FOLLOWS SAME 
ROAD, SAME ROUTE
平和 HEIWA　peace
大和 Yamato*　Japan
和食 WASHOKU　Japanese food
WA, O, yawaragu, 
nagoyaka
Japan, peace, soft
8 strokes
和
L3
440
meanings (Katō, Mizukami, Yamada). The 
additional meaning  ‘Japan’ came about as a 
substitute initiated by the Japanese themselves 
to replace an earlier, less fl attering graph for 
Japan used in early Chinese histories such as 
Wei Zhi ‘History of the Wei [Kingdom]’, namely 
倭 (SJ WA), which means ‘submissive’, and ac-
cording to some scholars, ‘dwarfs’. KJ1970:306; 
MS1995:222-3; YK1976:508-9; OT1968:178.
Mnemonic: SOFT RICE FOR THE MOUTH IN 
PEACEFUL JAPAN
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 口 22 ‘mouth’, and 禾 
87 (‘rice/grain plant’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘add’; giving ‘one voice is added to 
another’. ‘Soften, be calmed down’ are extended 

154  
愛情  AIJŌ love
母性愛 BOSEIAI maternal love
愛国者 AIKOKUSHA patriot
提案 TEIAN　plan
案外 ANGAI unexpectedly
案内 ANNAI　guidance
Seal 
; traditional 
; late graph (Shuowen). 
Views vary. There are several complicating factors 
with the etymology of this graph, explained 
below. Analyzed by Yamada as 夊 in line with the 
seal form (‘walk slowly, drag feet’ [determinative 
35; see Appendix]), with 
 (an obsolete graph 
meaning ‘favor, feel compassion’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘by stealth’, to give overall 
meaning ‘walk stealthily’; Katō sees this tenta-
tively as the possible meaning also. Both scholars 
regard ‘love’ as a loan usage. Mizukami notes an 
alternative analysis: 心 164 ‘heart, mind’ with 夂 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 木 73 ‘tree, 
wood’, and 安 242 (‘relax’) as phonetic with asso-
ciated sense ‘place, put’, to represent a small table 
on which tableware and food were put. Meanings 
such as ‘investigate’, ‘consider’, ‘plan’ are loan us-
ages (Yamada). Art dating back to the Shang Dy-
nasty shows that low tables were in use in China 
at that period already. YK1976:51; OT1968:501.
Mnemonic: PLAN TO RELAX AT WOODEN TABLE
AI
love
13 strokes
AN
plan, concern,
table
10 strokes
愛
案
L3
L3
441
442
‘descending foot’ (determinative 34) and 旡 (origi-
nally, pictograph of person who has eaten till full) 
‘be full; stick in the throat’; overall meaning is ‘diffi  -
cult to move forward with heart full of anguish’, 
and ‘love’ as loan usage. Note this analysis has 
夂 ‘descending foot’, but treats as meaning 夊 
‘walk slowly’. Morohashi quotes the voluminous 
17th century dictionary Zhengzitong in treating 
 as the original way of writing 愛. He makes no 
mention of loan usage for ‘love’, though it would 
appear to be valid to take ‘love’ as an extension of 
‘favor, feel compassion’, the original meaning of 
. YK1976:49; KJ1970:1-2; MT1989:v4:980, 1123; 
MS1995:v1:513-4. Note: for more on 夂 and 夊 see 
Appendix. We suggest taking 夂 as crossed legs, 
爫 1739 as ‘hand’, 冖 as cover, and 心 164 ‘heart’.
Mnemonic: SIT CROSS-LEGGED, HAND 
COVERING HEART, IN LOVE
OBI forms , 
; seal forms , 
. Interpretations 
diverge radically. The fi rst OBI form here is taken 
in one view as consisting of 人 41 ‘person’, com-
bining with a second element as semantic and 
phonetic meaning‘plow’, to give overall meaning 
‘person with plow, farmer’ (Yamada; Katō is in 
broad agreement). Mizukami takes the second 
OBI form as instead corresponding to later 厶 
NJK the ancestral form of 厶 (NJK ‘I/me’) meaning 
以下 IKA　below
以内 INAI　within
以外 IGAI　outside, except
‘enclose and make one’s own’ (later 私 887). Gu, 
in contrast, working on the basis of the second 
OBI form above, interprets it as a fetus about to 
be born, and takes the more complex graph with 
人 – which he recognizes as having been added 
only at the bronze form – as being for emphasis. 
The above interpretations can only be regarded 
as very tentative, as views on the etymology of 以 
vary so much. The fi rst OBI is listed by Matsumaru 
as corresponding – in the view of various schol-
ars – to one of a range of later graphs, among 
them 以, 勹 ‘enclose’ (determinative no. 20) and 
氐 (CO, possible original meaning [disputed]: 
‘base of small hill’ or ‘spoon touching bottom of 
plate’, giving ‘down low’ or ‘scrape’). According 
to Schuessler, 以 was used in OBI texts with the 
meaning ‘to take’ (e.g. prisoners), and in bronze 
I, motte
start point, use, 
means, because
5 strokes
以
L4
443
THE 200 FOURTH GRADE CHARACTERS

The 200 Fourth Grade Characters  155
衣服  IFUKU　clothing
衣類  IRUI　garments
衣替え  koromogae　change of clothes
tail-like line in some occurrences represents 
the garment somewhat lower down. As a left-
hand component/determinative, 衣 takes the 
form 衤 (not to be confused with ‘altar/show’ 
礻: see 153 and 723). MR2007:391; YK1976:52; 
MS1995:v2:1164-5; OT1968:900. Awkward to 
fi nd a ‘fi tting’ mnemonic, but we suggest taking 
the main central part as variant 大 56 ‘big/large’. 
Mnemonic: CLOTHING IS SORT OF TOO 
BIG – COLLAR AND SLEEVES ETC
I, koromo
clothing
6 strokes
衣
L3
444
OBI 
; seal 
. This is a stylized pictograph of 
a garment, or at least the upper part of a gar-
ment, showing the collar and two sleeves. The 
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Mizukami and 
Yamada say 位 and 立 77 ‘stand (/ up)’ were origi-
nally the same graph, but the situation would 
be better expressed as ‘originally (in Chinese) 立 
represented two separate but related words’, one 
地位 CHII　position, rank
学位 GAKUI academic degree
位置 ICHI　situation, position
meaning ‘stand, stand up’, the other meaning 
‘position or place (in a court or group of persons)’. 
For this latter meaning, the separate graph with 
亻 41 ‘person’ added as left-hand component 
was devised at the seal stage. Yamada takes as 
亻 ‘person’ with 立, the latter functioning as both 
semantic and phonetic meaning ‘people lined up’, 
to give an overall meaning of ‘place where people 
stand’; Katō is in agreement. MS1995:v1:52-3; 
AS2007:351, 512-3; OT1968:52; YK1976:52-3;
Mnemonic: PERSON STANDS ACCORDING TO 
RANK
I, kurai
rank, extent
7 strokes
位
L3
445
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 圍. Has 囗 ‘enclo-
sure’ (see 84: Qiu considers this developed from 
an earlier shape O ‘round, circle’), and 韋 taken 
either as simply semantic (showing two feet 
with original meaning of ‘patrol by going round 
an enclosed area’: see Note below) – an analysis 
listed by Mizukami – or semantic and  phonetic 
meaning ‘surround’ (Ogawa), or alternatively as 
phonetic, with associated sense ‘enclose’ (Katō, 
Yamada). The component graph 韋 was later 
borrowed to represent a word of similar pronun-
ciation meaning ‘tanned leather’, which appears 
周囲 
  SHŪI perimeter
範囲 
  HAN’I range
囲い込む kakoikomu 
enclose
to have subsequently become the main sense; 
given the original sense, it seems preferable to 
take the role of 韋 as either semantic or semantic 
and phonetic. The ‘enclosure’ element 囗 was 
likely added to韋 to make clear in writing when 
the word being represented was ‘surround, en-
close’ and not ‘tanned leather’. MS1995:v1:258-9, 
v2:1436-8; OT1968:204; KJ1970:110; YK1976:53. 
Note: Some OBI forms of 韋 have two feet on 
either side of an enclosure, pointing in the same 
direction, and some forms with one foot facing 
to the right and the other foot facing to the left. 
Although in the latter case the feet are in one 
sense pointing in opposite directions, they indi-
cate motion in the same direction going round 
an enclosed area. As a mnemonic, we suggest 
taking the modern form 井, graphically the same 
as 井 1575, and meaning ‘(water)well’. 
Mnemonic: ENCLOSURE SURROUNDS WELL
I, kakomu
surround
7 strokes
囲
L3
446
texts for ‘use, employ, in order to’. YK1976:51-2; 
MS1995:188-90; KJ1970:18,13-4; TA1965:74-
7. SY2008:123; MM1993:342-3; GY2008:123; 
AS2007:567. We suggest as a mnemonic that the 
sharp angular left-hand element be taken as a 
stylized pictograph of a plow/plowshare, being 
pushed by a ‘person’ 人 41, and with the dot (not 
to be overlooked) taken as a clod of earth.
Mnemonic: PERSON STARTS USING PLOW AS 
A MEANS TO MOVE CLODS

156  The 200 Fourth Grade Characters
胃液 IEKI　gastric juice
胃袋 Ibukuro　stomach
胃弱 IJAKU　dyspepsia
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has top element which is a 
regularized version of what was originally a 
pictograph of the stomach (taken by Mi-
zukami as stomach with food in it, and by 
Katō as showing the stomach as an internal 
organ), and lower element 月 209 ‘fl esh, meat’. 
MS1995:1072-3; KJ1970:17; YK1976:54. Suggest 
taking 田 as 田63 ‘fi eld’. 
Mnemonic: FLESHY STOMACH SEEN IN FIELD
I
stomach
9 strokes
胃
L3
447
OBI ; seal 
. OBI form shows hand press-
ing down on a kneeling person, to give ‘press 
someone down from above and make kneel/
submit’. Some OBI forms have a right hand, oth-
ers have a left hand, reinforcing Qiu’s observa-
tion that orientation of graphs at the OBI stage 
was rather inconsistent. The meaning ‘press’ gave 
印刷 
INSATSU printing
印判 
INBAN seal
目印 
mejirushi 
guiding mark
rise to extended usages such as ‘(name) seal’ and 
‘printing’, the latter refl ecting the development 
of printing using a system of fl at blocks or plates 
(originally wood, later metal). Earliest surviving 
large-scale example of printing on paper dates 
back to AD868 in China, though printed designs 
on silk in that country can be dated back to the 
Later Han dynasty. Katō and Yamada treat 抑 
2060 (‘suppress’) as an alternative form of 印 (抑 
has a second ‘hand’ 扌 34 added as a determina-
tive). MS1995:v1:178-9; KJ1970:65-6; YK1976:59; 
QX2000:67; MT1993:265. 
Mnemonic: HAND PRESSES DOWN ON PERSON 
AS ON SEAL
IN, shirushi
seal, sign, symbol
6 strokes
印
L3
448
英才 EISAI　talent
英国 EIKOKU　England
英語 EIGO　English language
sense ‘blossom’, and by extension ‘beautiful, 
excellent’. The sense ‘Britain’ refl ects the adoption 
by the Chinese of this graph for its sound value 
(ying) to represent the Chinese version of ‘Eng-
land’, i.e. 英 国 Yingguo). The choice of 英 seems 
to show a positive view of England/Britain at the 
time. YK1976:65; KJ1970:77; OT1968:846.
Mnemonic: SUPERIOR PLANTS IN THE CENTER 
OF ENGLAND
EI
superior, england
8 strokes
英
L4
449
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 艹 53 ‘plant’, 
and 央 254 ‘center’ as phonetic with associated 
光栄 KŌEI　glory, honor
栄養 EIYŌ　nutrition
繁栄 HAN’EI　prosperity 
EI, sakaeru, haeru
fl ourish, glory, shine
9 strokes
栄
L3
450
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 榮. Original mean-
ing of 榮 is ‘Chinese parasol tree’ (Latin names: 
Firmiana platanifolia, or Firmiana simplex). Has 木 
73 ‘tree’ with 
 as phonetic with associated sense 
‘light [in weight]’ (Katō, Yamada) or ‘surround’ 
(Ogawa, Tōdō). The ‘light [in weight]’ proposal is 
based on association with the wood of this tree 
being light; the ‘surround’ view is based on the 
blossoms being perceived as encircling the whole 
tree. Both these interpretations of the phonetic 
are listed by Mizukami, who also notes another 
proposal – that 
 is an abbreviation of CO 熒 
‘light [of a lamp/fi re]’. Katō dismisses the latter 
theory (fi rst noted in Shuowen) as erroneous, but 
a contrasting assessment is off ered by Schuessler, 
who includes the early Chinese linguistic forms for 
both 榮 and 熒 in the same word-family mean-
ing ‘bright, dazzle’.  If accepted that the graph 
originally referred to a type of tree, meanings 
such as ‘shine’ and ‘fl ourish’ represent loan usages, 
whichever of the above analyses is followed. 
KJ1970:81-2; YK1976:66; OT1968:497; TA1965:509-
12; MS1995:v1:682-3; ZY2009:v2:528,675; 
AS2007:575.
Mnemonic: GLORIOUS TREE FLOURISHES 
UNDER ORNATE COVER

The 200 Fourth Grade Characters  157
食塩  SHOKUEN　table salt
塩水  shiomizu　saltwater
製塩所 SEIENSHO　saltworks 
EN, shio
salt
13 strokes
塩
L3
451
Seal 
; traditional 鹽. Traditional form has 
鹵, based on pictograph of salt or salty soil 
contained in a basket-like container, and 監 
1159 (‘watch’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘bitter’ (Katō, Yamada); Schuessler, 
though, considers the proposed associated 
sense ‘bitter’ as unlikely here, on linguistic 
grounds. Ogawa, by contrast, takes the sense 
of the phonetic as ‘soak in water’, namely 
seawater. This is noted tentatively as a pos-
sibility by Mizukami also, who gives a bronze 
equivalent that includes 氵 42 ‘water’ as an 
additional component, though the ‘water’ 
component here could alternatively refl ect 
part of a process for obtaining salt (‘rock salt’) 
from salty soil.  Salt was an important trad-
ing commodity in ancient China, as in other 
ancient civilisations, due in part to its preserv-
ing qualities. The modern (block script) form 
has 土 64 ‘earth, ground’, refl ecting that one 
salt production method was from the ground. 
The right-hand side is a simplifi ed modifi ca-
tion in shape to the upper right and lower 
elements of the traditional form (examples 
of the simplifi ed right-hand side can be 
found in Han time clerical script). KJ1970:105; 
YK1976:71; OT1968:1158; MS1995:v2:1502-3; 
AS2007:554; WM1974:121. Suggest taking four 
components: 土 64 ‘ground’, 
 41 ‘person’, 口 
22 ‘mouth’, and 皿 300 ‘dish ‘.
Mnemonic: PERSON SPITS SALTY DISH FROM 
MOUTH TO GROUND
二億 NIOKU 200 million
十億 JŪOKU billion
億兆 OKUCHŌ　‘the masses’ 
OKU
100,000,000; lots
15 strokes
億
L3
452
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 亻41 ‘per-
son’ and 意 246 (‘thought’) as semantic and 
phonetic with associated meaning ‘heart is 
full, content’ (Ogawa), giving overall meaning 
‘satisfi ed person’. The meaning ‘one hundred 
million/ extremely large number’ (originally ‘one 
hundred thousand’) is loan usage. Based on the 
seal form Yamada feels that the standard script 
form of 億 should properly be 
 (‘satisfi ed’), 
but Kangxi zidian quotes the 11th century Jiyun 
dictionary, which says that this latter graph and 
億 are the same. OT1968:81; KJ1970:300-01; 
YK1976:74-5; ZY2009:v1:48.
Mnemonic: PERSON WITH A HUNDRED 
MILLION THOUGHTS  
増加  ZŌKA　increase
参加  SANKA　participation
加え算  kuwaeZAN　adding
KA, kuwaeru/waru
add, join
5 strokes
加
L3
453
Bronze 
; seal . Has 口 22 ‘mouth/speech’ 
and 力 78 ‘strength’. Typically considered to 
have the word-family association ‘numerous’.
Yamada gives basic overall meaning as ‘speak 
forcefully at length’. Ogawa, however, treats 
力 as phonetic with associated sense ‘pile up, 
accumulate’, to give ‘accumulate words and 
overcome another’, but a phonetic role for 
力 here is debatable on linguistic grounds. 
Shirakawa sees 力 as originally showing a plow 
(a minority view), and the whole graph as 
originally referring to a ritual to increase pro-
ductivity. Tōdō has diff erent view on 加, and 
includes instead in word-family ‘add on top’ 
together with 荷 259 ‘load, burden’. YK1976:78; 
OT1968:124; SS1984:70-71; MS1995:v1:138-9. 
TA1965:583-6.
Mnemonic: SPEECH HAS ADDED STRENGTH  

158  The 200 Fourth Grade Characters
貨物船 KAMOTSUSEN 
freighter
硬貨 
 KŌKA 
hard currency
雑貨 
 ZAKKA 
sundry goods
Seal ; late graph (Shuowen). Has 貝 10 ‘shell/
currency’, and 化 258 (‘change’) as semantic and 
phonetic meaning ‘change’, to give overall sense 
‘currency changes into something diff erent’ or 
‘something exchanged with money’; and by 
KA
goods, money
11 strokes
貨
L3
455
extension, ‘treasure, wealth, assets’. This graph 
is seen on one category of very early inscribed 
items found in Japan (sites in Nagasaki Prefec-
ture) – coins brought over from China dating 
back to the early 1st century AD which in seal 
script read 貨泉 ‘coinage’ (泉 926 ‘spring’, here 
serves as loan for 銭 757 ‘copper coin, money’). 
OT1968:953; MS1995:v2:1232-3; KJ1970:306; 
CS2000:9.
Mnemonic: CHANGE SHELLS FOR GOODS OR 
MONEY
KA, hatasu, hate
fruit, result,
carry out
8 strokes
果
L3
454
OBI ; seal . OBI form depicts fruit on 木 
73 ‘tree’. Seal script has what seems to be 
田 63 ‘fi eld’, but this is generally taken as 
fruit (Yamada says fruit with streaks), to 
give overall meaning ‘small fruit on a tree’. 
‘Carry out’ and ‘result’ are extended meanings. 
MS1995:v1:652-3; YK1976:80; KJ1970:306-7; 
OT1968:492; TA1965:611-17.
Mnemonic: HAVING TREE IN FIELD RESULTS 
IN FRUIT  
成果   SEIKA　result
果物   kudamono*　fruit
果たして  hatashite　as expected
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 言 118 
‘words/speech’, and 果 454 (‘fruit/result’) as 
phonetic with associated sense i] ‘consider, test’ 
課税  KAZEI　taxation
課長  KACHŌ　section head
第二課 DAINIKA　Lesson Two
KA
section, lesson, levy
15 strokes
課
L3
456
(Katō, Yamada), to give ‘consider one’s words’; 
or ii] ‘divide’ (Ogawa), to give ‘divide up work 
and test what is done’. If Ogawa’s interpreta-
tion is followed, the division of work, which 
would involve allocation, and often a degree of 
sequencing, may be seen as having given rise 
to extended meanings such as ‘levy’, ‘section’, 
‘lesson’. KJ1970:307; YK1976:84; OT1968:933.
Mnemonic: A LESSON IN FRUITFUL WORDS
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 艹 53 ‘plant’ and 牙 1090 
(‘fang, tusk’) as phonetic with associated sense 
発芽   HATSUGA　sprouting
新芽   SHINme　bud, sprout
芽生える  mebaeru　to bud, sprout
GA, me
bud, sprout, shoot
8 strokes
芽
L1
457
‘interlocking, intertwined’, to give overall 
meaning ‘bud, shoot, sprout’. Ogawa takes 
associated sense of 牙 as ‘stick out, project’. 
(Note Mizukami and Katō see ‘fang’ 牙 as an 
extended sense and that it originally showed 
an interlocking wooden joint on a carriage 
wheel.) MS1995:v2:1106-8, 826-8; KJ1970:124; 
OT1968:847.
Mnemonic: PLANT SPROUTS FANG-LIKE BUDS 

The 200 Fourth Grade Characters  159
改革  KAIKAKU　reform
改正  KAISEI　amendment
改めて  aratamete　once again
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 攴/攵 112 ‘strike with stick/
whip’, and a left-hand component which in OBI 
and bronze is equivalent to the NJK 巳, origi-
nally a pictograph of a snake or fetus, but later 
changed to 已 (NJK; ‘stop; already’), and then to
己 866 (‘twisted thread; self’); the authoritative 
Kangxi zidian (Peking Palace printed edition) 
has what seems the etymologically incorrect 
form with 己 (改). Japanese scholars typically 
interpret the graph as 攴 112, ‘hand holding 
stick’, with 巳 as a phonetic with an associ-
ated sense ‘demon’, to give ‘drive out demons’, 
a ritual practiced in ancient China around the 
end of one season to usher in the next season. 
KAI, aratameru/maru
reform
7 strokes
改
L3
458
Thus meanings such as ‘change’ in general, and 
‘reform’ are extended usages. However, several 
Chinese scholars, as noted by Ma, analyze it 
instead as a person chastising a child (in OBI 
script, some occurrences of 巳 and 子 27 ‘child’ 
are extremely similar in shape). In either case 
‘change, reform’ is still seen as extended usage. 
Note: the graph 巳 is still used in the context 
of Chinese and Japanese culture in its original 
meaning of ‘snake’ as the sixth of the ‘Twelve 
Branches’, to indicate hours of the day etc.. 
KJ170:151-2; KZ2001:998/3671; YK1976:88-9; 
OT1968:435; SS1984:87-8; MR2007:280-81; 
QX2000:326. We give two suggested mnemon-
ics below, one based on 己 as snake, the other 
taking the same form 己 as ‘self’ (in the latter 
case taking 攵 in one of its extended meanings, 
‘force/coerce’).
Mnemonic: BEAT A SNAKE TO MAKE IT REFORM
Or: FORCE ONESELF TO REFORM
器械  KIKAI　apparatus
機械  KIKAI　machine
機械化 KIKAIKA　mechanization
KAI
device
11 strokes
械
L3
459
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 木 73 
‘tree, wood’, and 戒 1095 (‘warn, admonish’ 
qv) functioning here either semantically to 
mean ‘admonish’, to give an overall meaning of 
‘wooden item used to admonish’, i.e. handcuff s 
or shackles, or phonetically with an associated 
sense of ‘device, tool’, to give ‘wooden device/
tool’. The latter sense may be regarded as a 
generalised meaning based on the former. 
KJ1970:147; YK1976:90; OT1968:506. Again we 
suggest two mnemonics, one using 戒 as it 
stands, with its meaning of ‘admonish,’ and one 
breaking it down to its component parts: 戈 
545 ‘halberd’ with 
 indicating two hands.
Mnemonic: WOODEN DEVICE FOR ADMONISHING
Or: A TWO-HANDED WOODEN HALBERD IS A 
USEFUL DEVICE
損害 SONGAI　damage, loss
殺害 SATSUGAI　murder
妨害 BŌGAI　obstruction
Bronze 
; seal . Bronze form is taken in one 
view as an inverted basket, with 古 121 (original 
meaning ‘skull’) as phonetic. Mizukami lists two 
interpretations for the associated sense of 古 : 
fi rstly, ‘something to put on from on top’, or ‘stop, 
GAI
harm, damage
10 strokes
害
L3
460
prevent’, to give overall meaning ‘put something 
over’, or ‘cover and prevent’.  Alternatively, Katō 
and Yamada take 古 in a semantic function as 
‘helmet/cap/head’ (‘head’ is an extended sense 
from ‘skull’), to give resultant meaning ‘cover the 
head’. ‘Harm, damage’ is treated as a loan usage. 
MS1995:v1:372-4; YK1976:93; KJ1970:154-5. We 
suggest taking 宀 30 as ‘cover’, 口 22 ‘mouth, and  
 as variant of 生 44 ‘life’.
Mnemonic: COVERING LIVE MOUTH CAN 
CAUSE HARM

160  The 200 Fourth Grade Characters
市街 
SHIGAI 
town, city
街道 
KAIDŌ 
highway
街頭 
GAITŌ 
street
GAI, KAI, machi
road, town, area
12 strokes
街
L1
461
土 64 ‘earth’ as boundary between fi elds, later 
‘corner’) as phonetic with associated sense his-
torically taken as ‘diverge’, but in modern times 
as ‘join’, to give ‘roads which join’. By extension, 
‘(busy) area’, ‘town’. KJ1970:153; YK1976:93; 
TA1965:509-12.
Mnemonic: TOWN WITH PILED UP EARTH ON 
ITS CROSSROADS
各駅 KAKUEKI　each station
各国 KAKKOKU　each country
各自 
KAKUJI　each, respectively 
KAKU, ono-ono
each
6 strokes
各
L3
462
OBI ; seal 
. Has ‘descending foot’ (block 
script 夂; for details, see Appendix), and 口 
22 (‘opening/vessel/mouth’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘descend, come down from 
a high place’; Ogawa and Shirakawa consider 
各 refers to the spirits of deities coming down 
from on high. As usual, Shirakawa takes 口 as 
a prayer receptacle, not mouth, and regards 
original sense as praying for spirits of deities to 
come down. The meaning ‘each’ is a loan usage. 
MS1995:v1:210-11; KJ1970:190; YK1976:94; 
OT1968:229.
Mnemonic: EACH OF US HAS PUT OUR FOOT 
IN OUR MOUTH
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 行 131 
‘go/crossroads’, and NJK 圭 (originally piled up 
自覚 
 JIKAKU　self-awareness 
目覚め  mezame　awakening
覚書  oboegaki　memorandum
KAKU, oboeru, sameru/
masu
remember, awake
12 strokes
覚
L3
463
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional form 
覺. Has 見 20 ‘look/see’ (originally ‘appear before 
the eyes’), and 
 (join pieces of wood with the 
hands, presumably timbers on a roof [冖/宀]: see 
11 and 30) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘clear, evident’, to give ‘become clear before the 
eyes’, and extended senses such as ‘discern, un-
derstand’. KJ1970:195; YK1976:96; OT1968:915; 
MS1995:v2:1176-7. As with 学 11, we suggest 
taking the upper part as ‘ornate roof’.
Mnemonic: WHEN AWAKE, REMEMBER TO 
LOOK AT ORNATE ROOF
完成 KANSEI　completion
未完 MIKAN　incompletion
完全 KANZEN　perfect
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 宀 30 ‘roof, 
house’, and 元 117 (‘origin’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘hedge, wall’, to give ‘fence/
wall around a house’. By extension, ‘fence/
wall which completely surrounds’ gives the 
abstract meaning ‘complete’. KJ1970:339-40; 
YK1976:101; OT1968:272.
Mnemonic: COMPLETELY ORIGINAL ROOF 
KAN
complete
7 strokes
完
L3
464
警官 KEIKAN　policeman
官僚 KANRYŌ　bureaucracy
官庁 KANCHŌ　government offi  ce
KAN
government, offi  cial
8 strokes
官
L3
465
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 宀 30 ‘roof, house’, and 𠂤
(‘buttocks’) as phonetic with associated sense 
of ‘work’, to give ‘house/building where someone 
works’. The use of a graph with a meaning of 
‘buttocks’ may very likely suggest a further se-
mantic role indicating sedentary work, thus giv-
ing a more explicit meaning of ‘house/building 

The 200 Fourth Grade Characters  161
管理   KANRI　control
気管   KIKAN　windpipe
管々しい  kudakudashii　verbose 
KAN, kuda 
pipe, control
14 strokes
管
L3
466
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has ⺮ 58 
‘bamboo’, and 官 465 (‘house/building with 
minor offi  cial’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘pierce, penetrate’ (Ogawa says ‘hole’), 
to give ‘pierced length of bamboo’, and so 
‘bamboo wind instrument’; also used in 
generalized sense for ‘pipe’. Its meaning of 
‘control’ is possibly an extended meaning based 
on control of a wind instrument. KJ1970:335; 
YK1976:105; OT1968:754.
Mnemonic: BAMBOO PIPE UNDER CONTROL 
BY OFFICIAL
関東  KANTŌ　Kantō district
関心  KANSHIN　interest
関の山  sekinoyama　one’s utmost
KAN, seki
barrier,
connection
14 strokes
関
L3
467
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 關. Has 門 231 
‘(double) gate’, and  (CO, original meaning 
‘treadle on a loom’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘side, turn sideways’ (Mizukami also 
notes tentative alternative interpretation as 
‘pierce, penetrate’), to give ‘fasten gate by put-
ting bolt sideways across left and right sides’. 
Yamada considers that  ‘treadle on a loom’ 
was connected by cords to the upper parts and 
this probably gave rise to ‘connection’ as an 
extended sense. The meaning ‘barrier’ may be 
seen as an extended sense derived from fas-
tened gate. MS1995:v2:1388-90; KJ1970:146-7; 
YK1976:105-6. We suggest taking 关 as variant 
天 62 ‘heaven’, and 
 70 meaning ‘sent away’.
Mnemonic: THE GATES OF HEAVEN ARE A 
BARRIER – SENT AWAY
観光 KANKŌ　sightseeing
観察 KANSATSU　observation
観客 KANKYAKU　spectator 
KAN
watch, observe
18 strokes
観
L3
468
Seal 
; traditional 觀. Has 見 20 ‘see’ or 目 76 
‘eye’, with 雚 (properly 
 CO, ‘crested bird’) 
being used as a phonetic with associated sense 
‘turn, rotate’, to give ‘look all around’. KJ1970:
340-41; MS1995:v2:1180-81; YK1976:107; 
KZ2001:3053/3671. We suggest taking  as a 
crested variant of  324 ‘short-tailed bird’.
Mnemonic: BIRD WATCHER OBSERVES 
CRESTED BIRD
with minor bureaucrat/offi  cial’.  By extension, 
‘government offi  ce’, or person attached thereto. 
MS1995:v1:364-6; KJ1970:333-4; YK1976:101.
Mnemonic: GOVERNMENT OFFICIAL IN 
BUILDING SITS ON BACKSIDE
志願者 SHIGANSHA　applicant
願望的 GANBŌTEKI　wishful
願い事 negaigoto　prayer
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 頁 103 
‘head’, and 原 119 (‘spring/plain’) as a phonetic 
with associated sense ‘big’, to give ‘large head’. 
The meaning ‘request, wish’ is a loan usage. 
YK1976:109; KJ1970:337-8; OT1968:1108. 
Mnemonic: I WISH TO LAY MY HEAD ON AN 
OPEN PLAIN
GAN, negau
request, wish
19 strokes
願
L3
469

162  The 200 Fourth Grade Characters
Bronze 
; seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). The 
seal form onwards has NJK 巾 (‘towel’), origi-
nally depicting a scrap of cloth, but as Katō 
and Yamada point out the bronze predecessor 
希望 KIBŌ　wish
希求 KIKYŪ　desire
希薄 KIHAKU　thinness
KI, KE
desire, rare
7 strokes
希
L3
470
of this graph has a more elaborate element, 
taken to represent embroidered cloth; this 
combines with 
 showing interwoven threads. 
Yamada takes ‘rare’ as a loan usage (Ogawa 
considers original sense of 希 to be ‘fi ne weave 
[of fabric]’, and by extension ‘extremely small; 
rare’); ‘desire’ is also a loan usage. KJ1970:6 87; 
YK1976:111; OT1968:315; MS1995:v2:1514-5; 
ZY2009:v4:1654. 
Mnemonic: INTERWOVEN CLOTH THREADS 
DESIRABLE BUT RARE
季節 KISETSU　season
四季 SHIKI　the four seasons 
季刊 KIKAN　quarterly publication
KI
season, young
8 strokes
季
L3
471
OBI ; seal 
. Views vary. 禾 87 ‘grain plant’ 
(note: not necessarily just rice – Qiu takes it 
to denote foxtail millet, grown widely in NW 
China from ancient times), and 子 27 ‘child’, 
which Yamada treats as semantic and phonetic, 
meaning ‘young’, to give ‘young grain’, and 
believes the association with crops was later 
lost and the sense ‘child’ came to prominence, 
giving ‘young child’. Katō is in broad agreement, 
but chooses to follow the Shuowen assessment 
in regarding 禾 as an abbreviation of 稚 1700 
‘young’. Schuessler notes use of 季 in bronze 
texts already to mean ‘young, youngest (of 
persons)’, with ‘season, three-month period’ as a 
much later sense (Tang period). Three months is 
roughly the period needed for grains such as 
barley and millet to grow and ripen. YK1976:112; 
KJ1970:244; AS2007:298; MS1995:v1:350-52.
Mnemonic: GRAIN PLANTS IN SEASON GROW 
LIKE YOUNG CHILDREN
紀元 
 KIGEN 
epoch, era
紀行 
 KIKŌ 
travelogue
五世紀 GOSEIKI 
fi fth century
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 己 866 
(modern meaning ‘self’) in broad original sense 
of ‘length of thread’ (Yamada takes as phonetic 
also) with meaning extended to ‘beginning’ 
(one of the ends of the thread), later clarifi ed by 
KI
chronicle, start
9 strokes
紀
L1
472
adding determinative ‘thread’ 糸 29. Yamada 
treats the sense ‘record, chronicle’ as loan usage, 
but alternatively it may be extended usage 
on the basis of the thread of continuity in an 
account or record. As Qiu notes – with reference 
to Chinese – there is some overlap in usage of 紀 
and 記 115 ‘account, record’, and this may also be 
the case in Japanese. KJ1970:234; YK1976:112; 
OT1968:766; QX2000:297-8; AS2007:298.
Mnemonic: THREADS IN CHRONICLE OF 
ONESELF START FROM BEGINNING
喜劇  KIGEKI　comedy
歓喜  KANKI　delight
大喜び ōyorokobi　great joy
KI, yorokobu
rejoice, happy
12 strokes
喜
L3
473
OBI 
; seal 
. Typically interpreted as 口 22 
‘mouth’, with 
 functioning as semantic and 
phonetic with original sense ‘sprouts of vegeta-
tion newly emerged from the ground’, to give ‘put 
soft, cooked food in the mouth’. (It may also have 
a connection with a food vessel 豆 379.) It should 
be noted that Mizukami, Yamada, and Katō treat 
 as phonetic only, and with this analysis, ‘be 

The 200 Fourth Grade Characters  163
国旗  KOKKI　national fl ag
旗持ち  hatamochi　fl ag bearer
旗魚  kajiki*　billfi sh
KI, hata
fl ag
14 strokes
旗
L1
474
其 269 (originally ‘winnowing basket’, later 
other senses including ‘that’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘gather together’, to give 
‘fl ag for troops to gather under’. KJ1970:240; 
YK1976:117; OT1968:457. Suggest 方 223 as 
‘side’, and 
 as 41 ‘person’.
Mnemonic: PERSON AT SIDE OF WINNOWING 
BASKET HOLDS A FLAG
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 
 353 
(‘fl agpole and streaming banner’) ‘fl ag’, and 
器具 
KIGU 
utensil
食器 
SHOKKI 
tableware
器用 
KIYŌ 
skill
KI, utsuwa
vessel, utensil, skill, 
ability
15 strokes
器
L3
475
Bronze 
; seal ; traditional 器. Despite the 
distinctive nature of this graph, interpretations 
diverge quite markedly. The graph has 犬 19 ‘dog’, 
and the element , which according to the most 
popular analysis means ‘many mouths’ (口 22) 
and also plays a role as a phonetic with an associ-
ated sense of ‘breath’, to give ‘dog breathing with 
open mouth (in summer heat)’ (Katō, Yamada; 
and also listed by Mizukawa). ‘Container(s)’ is 
then taken as an extended usage based on ‘open 
mouth’.  However, Ogawa takes the graph instead 
to represent ‘many dogs howling’, and treats 
‘container(s)’ as a loan usage. Shirakawa follows 
his preferred interpretation of 口 as ‘prayer re-
ceptacle’, not ‘mouth’, and analyzes 器 as a graph 
representing a number of ritual receptacles 
purifi ed by a dog sacrifi ce. Another interpreta-
tion – perhaps less palatable to some readers – is 
to take dog here as food to be divided amongst 
many mouths or containers/bowls (eating dog 
meat became established in China at a very early 
period). To the above variety of interpretations, 
one might possibly also add an interpretation 
of the graph as a dog wheeling to defend itself 
on all quarters, its weapon of defence being the 
teeth in its mouth, leading to possible derived 
meanings such as ‘fi ght hard’ and thus show 
ability etc. Gu proposes a quite diff erent analysis 
of 器, giving an OBI form with a tree-like shape 
rather than dog which he interprets as mulberry, 
noting that in ancient China mulberry branches 
were used as part of burial ritual. As an alterna-
tive explanation regarding the graph’s meaning 
of ‘skill’, given the range of usage for 器 in Chinese 
texts from Han times, this might appear to be an 
extended meaning, possibly through ‘container’ 
giving rise to ‘utensil’ and in turn ‘utensil’ giving 
rise to a person using a utensil in an optimal 
(= skilled) manner. Note that 噐 is an unoffi  cial 
variant form of 器. KJ1970:232-3; YK1976:118; 
MS1995:v1:248-9; OT1968: 195; SS1984:153. As a 
mnemonic, given that the dog 犬 has already lost 
its spot and become 大 , we suggest taking the 
graph as the identical 大 56 ‘big’ and four boxes.
Mnemonic: FOUR BIG BOX-LIKE VESSELS ARE 
USEFUL UTENSILS
pleased’ is seen as an extended sense. Alterna-
tively, 
 is taken as a large drum with some sort 
of embellishment on top (this view also listed 
by Mizukami), and on this basis Ogawa takes 喜 
as musical instruments set up on a stand, which 
is the meaning given in Shuowen, to give ‘play 
musical instruments and feel pleasure’. In work-
ing out his etymologies, the Shuowen compiler 
Xu Shen did not have access to the OBI forms 
which were often so valuable in determining the 
meanings, or the line of development of mean-
ings of graphs, but which were brought to light 
in Mainland China only from 1899 onwards. The 
OBI forms are accessible, though, to Ma, who still 
prefers to regard ‘drum’ as the appropriate mean-
ing of 
. On the other hand, Katō categorically 
rejects the idea that it represents a musical instru-
ment. Thus the etymology of this particular graph 
is somewhat disputed. MS1995:v1:236-7,282-3; 
YK1976:115; OT1968:188; MR2007:313; 
KJ1985:117. As a mnemonic we suggest taking 
the graph’s components as 十 35 ‘ten’ with 豆 379 
‘food vessel/beans’ and 口 22 ‘mouth’. 
Mnemonic: HAPPINESS IS HAVING TEN 
BEANS IN YOUR MOUTH

164  The 200 Fourth Grade Characters
機能  KINŌ　function
機会 
KIKAI　opportunity
機織  hataori　weaving
KI, hata
loom, device, occasion
16 strokes
機
L3
476
Bronze 
; seal . Interpretations vary. Has 木 
73 ‘tree, wood’, and the right-hand element 幾 
1181 (modern meaning ‘how much/many?’) 
which Yamada takes as both semantic and pho-
netic, meaning ‘stop thread’, to give ‘device to 
move vertical (warp) thread on loom’, then used 
by extension to refer in general to something 
which has a stopping action. Katō breaks down 
幾 (itself the original way of writing 機: see also 
1181) into 絲 29 ‘threads’, with 戌 545 (person 
carrying halberd) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘stop fi rmly’, to give overall meaning in 
agreement with Yamada, i.e. ‘device to control 
vertical thread [on loom]’. Tōdō analyzes 機 (and 
幾) diff erently, including the underlying linguis-
tic forms in a word-family ‘small, detailed’, and 
– on the basis of the way the graph 機 is treated 
in Shuowen along with other weaving-related 
graphs – takes it to refer likewise in broad terms 
originally to a small mechanical device in a 
loom. Tōdō notes that 機 was also employed for 
a variety of other small devices related to move-
ment, then for ‘loom’; by further extension, the 
association with initiating movement gave rise 
to the sense ‘opportunity/occasion’. Schuessler, 
for his part, has reservations about the above 
interpretation, which is common to Tōdō and 
Karlgren. Despite emphases on stopping on 
the one hand and starting on the other, the 
key factor is ‘control’. Whichever interpretation 
is followed, unchanging is the fact that 木 was 
later added to 幾 to denote ‘loom’ or ‘small 
mechanical device’ in order to distinguish this 
sense from 幾 in its increasingly common use 
for other words of the same or similar pronun-
ciation but diff erent, abstract meanings (‘for 
a short time’, ‘how many times?’ ‘how much’, 
etc.). KJ1970:144-5; YK1976:118; TA1965:695-7; 
AS2007:293; WD1974:416-7. 
Mnemonic: ON HOW MANY OCCASIONS IS A 
WOODEN LOOM USED?
議論  GIRON　discussion
会議 
KAIGI　conference
議会  GIKAI　the Diet
GI
discussion
20 strokes
議
L3
477
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 言 118 
‘words, speech’, and 義 674 (originally denoted 
a beautiful dance or appearance, now meaning 
‘righteousness’, qv) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘criticize’ (Katō, Yamada, Shirakawa) or as 
semantic element meaning ‘correct’ (Ogawa; 
a meaning already found at the OBI stage, 
according to Schuessler). Either way, ‘discuss’ 
is the result of a generalized shift in mean-
ing. KJ1970:240-41; YK1976:120; SS1984:165; 
OT1968:944; AS2007:566.
Mnemonic: DISCUSSION INVOLVES 
RIGHTEOUS WORDS
OBI 
; bronze ; seal 
. Pictograph of animal 
fur, taken as fur garment (later written 裘, 
with 衣 444 ‘clothing’ to distinguish from 
要求 YŌKYŪ　demand
追求 TSUIKYŪ　pursuit 
求職 KYŪSHOKU　seeking work
other meanings of abstract nature); some OBI 
occurrences show the fur spread out, while 
others show it hanging. The meaning ‘seek’ is 
a loan usage. MS1995:v2:1166-8; KJ1970:124; 
YK1976:124; OT1968:556. We suggest taking 
 
as a variant of 水 42 ‘water’, – as a cross (stroke), 
with a spot (top right). 
Mnemonic: CROSS WATER TO SEEK SPOTTED 
FUR
KYŪ, motomeru
request, seek
7 strokes
求
L 3
478

The 200 Fourth Grade Characters  165
OBI 
; seal forms 
, 
. OBI and fi rst seal form 
have 目 76 ‘eye’ with 水 42 ‘water, liquid’ (here, 
tears), while the second seal form has氵/水 ‘wa-
ter, liquid’ with 立 77 (‘stand’), generally taken 
泣訴 
  KYŪSO 
imploring
泣き虫   nakimushi ‘cry baby’
泣き出す nakidasu 
burst into tears
as a phonetic with associated sense ‘tears’, 
to mean ‘cry, weep’. On the basis of historical 
pronunciation criteria, though, Tōdō considers 
the above analysis questionable, and includes 
in his word-family ‘put between and obstruct’, 
interpreting 泣 as denoting crying interrupt-
ed with loud gasps, i.e. ‘sob’. KJ1970:261; 
MS1995:v2:740-41; YK1976:125; OT1968:565; 
TA1965:815-20. 
Mnemonic: STAND WEEPING 
WATERY TEARDROPS
KYŪ, naku
weep, cry
8 strokes
泣
L3
479
救命ブイ  KYŪMEIBUI 
lifebuoy
救援 
  KYŪEN 
rescue, relief
救い出す sukuidasu 
extricate
KYŪ, sukuu
rescue, redeem
11 strokes
救
L3
480
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 攴/攵 112 ‘strike with 
whip/stick; compel’, and 求 478 (originally fur 
garment, now meaning ‘request’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘stop, rest’, to give ‘cause 
to stop’. ‘Help’ is a loan usage. MS1995:v1:572-3; 
KJ1970:263; YK1976:126.
Mnemonic: BEING BEATEN – REQUEST 
RESCUE
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 糸 29 
‘thread’ (originally silk thread), and 合 134 
(‘join’) as semantic and phonetic, to give ‘join 
供給  KYŌKYŪ　supply
月給 
 GEKKYŪ　monthly pay
来給え  kitamae　Come!
KYŪ, tamau
supply, bestow
12 strokes
給
L3
481
up silk threads’. This involved quickly joining 
up broken silk threads from cocoons in the silk 
manufacturing process, and so ‘supplement, 
make up (a defi ciency)’ evolved as an extended 
use. In modern Japanese, also employed oc-
casionally for the verbal suffi  x –tamau, based 
on the older honorifi c verb tamau ‘to bestow’ 
(of a superior to an inferior). OT1968:776; 
KJ1970:260-61; YK1976:127. 
Mnemonic: SUPPLY JOINED THREADS
Bronze 
; seal 
; slightly modifi ed traditional 
form 擧. Has 手 34 ‘hand’, and 
, which is the 
traditional form of 与 2047 ‘give’, serving here 
挙手  KYOSHU　raising hands
選挙  SENKYO　election
一挙に  IKKYO ni　at a stroke
in the majority view as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘lift up high’ (Ogawa takes as ‘join 
together and raise up’). Overall meaning is ‘lift 
up high with the hands’. Bronze form has many 
hands, so ‘all together’ may be an extended 
sense. KJ1970:268; TA1965:423-8; YK1976:129; 
OT1968:411. Suggest taking modern form as 
hand 手 and 
 as laden table. 
Mnemonic: HAND RAISES LADEN 
TABLE – SOME ACT! 
KYO, ageru, kozotte
raise, off er, act, 
perform,together
10 strokes
挙
L 1
482

166  The 200 Fourth Grade Characters
OBI 
; bronze ; seal 
. The OBI through 
to seal forms all have two hands off ering 
up an object which appears to be typically 
共通  KYŌTSŪ　commonality
共食い tomogui　cannibalism
共同  KYŌDŌ　joint-
KYŌ, tomo
together
6 strokes
共
L3
484
interpreted as a jade disc with a center hole 
(Mizukami, Katō, Yamada); Ogawa is more 
cautious, and takes it in more general terms as 
some type of object. ‘Provide’ is an extended 
sense; the meaning ‘all together’ is found from 
pre-Han times (Schuessler). MS1995:v1:102-3; 
KJ1970:234-5; YK1976:130; OT1968:97; 
AS2007:256-7. Suggest taking the upper part as
艹 53 ‘plant’ and the lower part as a table.
Mnemonic: PLANT AND TABLE GO TOGETHER
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). The underly-
ing word seems to have been represented in 
writing already in Shang times, as there is an 
協定　KYŌTEI　agreement
協力　KYŌRYOKU　cooperation
協会　KYŌKAI　association
KYŌ
cooperate
8 strokes
協
L3
485
OBI form comprising 力 78 ‘strength’ tripled 
listed by Mizukami, meaning ‘collect strength 
and put together’. The graph 十 35 ‘ten, many’ 
was added at seal stage to reinforce the 
meaning, with a phonetic role with associated 
meaning ‘collect’ (Katō). MS1995:v1:168-9,138-9; 
KJ1970:360; YK1976:132.
Mnemonic: TEN TRIPLE-STRONG ARMS 
COOPERATING
Seal ; late graph (Shuowen). Has 金 16 ‘metal’, 
and NJK 竟 (‘end’, originally of a piece of music) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘appearance, 
shape’.  In early China, mirrors were typically 
望遠鏡 BŌENKYŌ　telescope
鏡台  KYŌDAI　dressing table
手鏡  tekagami　hand mirror
KYŌ, kagami
mirror
19 strokes
鏡
L1
486
thin discs made of bronze, with the back 
decorated – often ornately – with patterns and 
motifs of great signifi cance (mythological, etc.), 
and often featured inscriptions also. Bronze was 
a material used extensively for ritual artefacts 
such as mirrors, aff ordable only to the wealthy. 
KJ1970:350-51; OT1968:1049; YK1976:135. Sug-
gest taking 竟 as its components 音 6 ‘sound’ 
and 儿 41 ‘bent legs’, for a Zen-like mnemonic.
Mnemonic: THE SOUND OF BENT LEGS IN A 
METAL MIRROR!?
漁船 GYOSEN　fi shing boat
漁師 RYŌSHI　(pro) fi sherman
漁業 GYOGYŌ　fi shery
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 氵 42 water, and 魚 109 ‘fi sh’, 
to give ‘fi sh in water’, and by extension ‘catch fi sh’. 
Some of the OBI occurrences have up to four 
GYO, RYŌ
fi shing
14 strokes
漁
L1
483
fi sh; the bronze form has two hands added. As 
proposed by Ogawa and Yamada, the SJ reading 
RYŌ – less to be expected than the more regular 
reading GYO, and diffi  cult to explain in terms 
of the early Chinese pronunciation – probably 
arose through confused association with 猟 SJ 
RYŌ ‘hunt’ 2090. MS1995:v2:794-5; OT1968:606; 
YK1976:130; KJ1970:269.
Mnemonic: FISHING MEANS CATCHING FISH 
IN WATER

The 200 Fourth Grade Characters  167
Bronze 
; seal . Has 从 ‘two people; follow’, 
and 誩 ‘quarrel’ (言 118 ‘word’ duplicated), 
to give original sense ‘two people quarrel’, 
then ‘quarrel’ generally; ‘vie, compete’ may be 
競争  KYŌSŌ　competition
競馬  KEIBA　horse race
競り売り seriuri　auction
KYŌ, KEI, kisou, seru
compete, bid
20 strokes
競
L3
487
seen as an extended meaning. The seal form 
still preserves the etymologically important 
component 言 in this graph, but subsequently 
it became distorted and lost in the block script. 
MS1995:v2:984-5; OT1968:90; YK1976:136; 
KJ1970:272. Suggest taking modern graph as 
doubling of 兄 114 ‘elder brother’ with 立 77 
‘stand’.
Mnemonic: TWO ELDER BROTHERS COMPETE 
IN STAND-OFF
Seal ; late graph (Shuowen). Has 木 73 ‘tree/
wood’ and CO 亟 (‘urge on, hurry’) as phonetic, 
typically taken as having associated sense ‘in 
the highest place’, thus timber in the highest 
北極 HOKKYOKU　North Pole
至極 SHIGOKU　extremely
消極 SHŌKYOKU　cathode
place in a building, i.e. ‘ridgebeam’; by exten-
sion, ‘extremity, limit’ (Katō, Ogawa, Yamada).  
Shirakawa, by contrast, believes the initial 
meaning of 極 was a form of capital punish-
ment (later written 殛), and that ridgebeam 
is a later meaning. KJ1970:284-5; YK1976:138; 
OT1968:515; SS1984:206; MS1995:v1:32-3. Awk-
ward mnemonically but we suggest  as two 
lines/bars 二, with 口 22 ‘mouth/opening’, and  
hook, and  2003 ‘hand’.
Mnemonic: EXTREMELY HOOKED HAND IN 
OPENING BETWEEN TWO WOODEN BARS
KYOKU, GOKU, 
kiwameru
extreme, pole
12 strokes
極
L 3
488
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 言 118 
‘words’, and 川 50 (‘river’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘follow’, to give ‘make to follow 
using words, instruct’. Also has the specifi c 
訓読み KUNyomi　kun reading
訓練  KUNREN　training
教訓的 KYŌKUNTEKI　edifying
meaning ‘native Japanese reading for a Chinese 
character’, or ‘kun reading’. The graph also 
retains its early meaning ‘instruct’, refl ecting 
the fact that when Chinese script and language 
were brought to Japan, the Japanese were in-
structed in the meanings of Chinese characters. 
KJ1970:344; MS1995:v2:1186-7; YK1976:144; 
OT1968:921.
Mnemonic: DURING INSTRUCTION ABOUT 
KUN, WORDS FLOW LIKE RIVER
KUN
instruction, kun
10 strokes
訓
L 3
489
Bronze 
; seal . Has 車 33 ‘vehicle’ (here, 
‘military chariot’), and an enclosing element 
(originally a pictograph of a snake in a curved 
shape, or in some cases an encircling arm) cor-
空軍 KŪGUN　airforce
軍人 GUNJIN　military (wo)man
米軍 BEIGUN　US forces
responding in outward form to 勹 (enclose) but 
considered here, based on historical pronuncia-
tion, to be an abbreviation of a CO 匀 ‘surround, 
enclose’ (the latter with both semantic and 
phonetic functions).  The graph 軍 thus repre-
sents chariots drawn up in a circular protective 
encampment – an ancient military practice. 
MS1995:v2:1266-9; KJ1970:343; YK1976:145. We 
suggest taking 冖 as ‘cover’.
Mnemonic: COVERED MILITARY VEHICLES
GUN
army, military
9 strokes
軍
L 3
490

168  The 200 Fourth Grade Characters
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 阝 376 (as 
abbreviated right-hand form of 邑 ‘settlement, 
郡部  GUNBU　rural district
郡山  Kōriyama　a place name
和気郡 WAKEGUN Wake County
GUN, kōri
county, district
10 strokes
郡
L1
491
village’), and 君 285 (‘lord’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘collect, accumulate’, to give 
‘a collection of settlements’. This served as 
an administrative unit for such (of varying 
scale) from an early period in China, and then 
in Japan, where it is still used. KJ1970:343; 
YK1976:145; OT1968:1020. 
Mnemonic: VILLAGE BELONGS TO LORD OF 
COUNTY DISTRICT
Seal 
; traditional 徑. Late graph (Shuowen). 
Has 彳 131 ‘road, go’, and 巠 287 (thread 
stretched on a loom) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘straight’ (Tōdō, Shirakawa, Ogawa). 
Thus ‘direct path’. However, Katō and Yamada 
take 巠 as ‘small’. This is just one of many 
直径 CHOKKEI　diameter
径路 KEIRO　route
捷径 SHŌKEI　short cut
KEI
path, direct
8 strokes
径
L1
492
examples of divergence in assessing the associ-
ated sense of a phonetic in the same graph – in 
this case, it seems to result from two diff erent 
interpretations of the same explanation for 
巠 in Zilin, a Chinese dictionary compiled ca. 
300AD which has survived only in fragments. 
TA1965:498-9; SS1984:227-8; OT1968:347; 
KJ1970:345-6; YK1976:147. Take modern right-
hand elements as 又 2003 ‘hand’ and 土 64 
‘ground’. 
Mnemonic: DIRECT PATH ENTAILS MOVING 
WITH HANDS ON GROUND
Bronze ; seal 
. The etymology of this seem-
ingly straightforward graph presents some 
diffi  culties. It has 土 64 ‘earth’ (here: probably 
‘clay’), and an element the shape of which in 
the block script equivalent is taken to be a) 
 
(‘start to make’) (Katō, Yamada), or b) 刑 (1256 
‘punish’) (Mizukami, Tōdō). In the case of b), the 
left-hand side of the older forms (井 in OBI, 
bronze, and seal) has been carried over into 
block script in a modifi ed way (as 开) which is a 
potential pitfall when it comes to the etymolo-
gy. This sort of modifi cation in shape happened 
in some cases, as the script evolved through the 
diff erent stages (see Introduction). Having de-
scribed the above variations, it should be noted 
that Kangxi zidian lists both as independent 
原型  GENKEI　prototype
大型  ōgata　large size
典型的 TENKEITEKI　typical
graphs, but treats a) as being the same as b). 
The disputed top part of this graph may repre-
sent the outer frame of a mold, together with a 
knife 刂 198 ‘knife’ (Mizukami). Gu takes it as an 
enclosure with a person, standing for cage and 
prisoner, but the OBI and bronze forms tend to 
be of a shape better interpreted as 刀/刂 198 
rather than 人 41 ‘person’. Some bronze equiva-
lents of 型 have 田 63 ‘fi eld’ instead of 土 ‘earth’. 
Despite the above  divergences in analysis, 
commentators typically take shapes a) and b) 
as both having the associated sense ‘make’ , 
and assess  the overall meaning of 型 as ‘mold 
for casting (metal artefacts)’ (Katō, Yamada, 
Mizukami). ‘Model’ is an extended sense. 
MS1995:v1:268-9, 122-5, 40-41; KJ1970:359; 
YK1976:148; GX2008:217; ZY2009:v1:65. We 
suggest remembering this graph by taking it 
as 刑 1256 ‘punishment’ and 土 64 ‘soil/clay/
earth(y)’.
Mnemonic: MODEL PUNISHMENT FOR 
EARTHY TYPES
KEI, kata
type, model, mold
9 strokes
型
L3
493

The 200 Fourth Grade Characters  169
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 日 66 
‘sun’, and 京 110 (‘capital’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘light’ (Katō, Yamada) or 
光景 KŌKEI　sight, spectacle
景気 KEIKI　liveliness, business
景色 KESHIKI　scenery
KEI, KE 
scene, view, bright
12 strokes
景
L3
494
‘demarcate’ (Ogawa, Tōdō). The latter sense 
derives from the clear boundary or line of 
demarcation between light and the shadow 
cast by an object; in Tōdō’s word-family ‘fi rm/ 
clearly demarcate’, together with 境 680 
‘boundary’. KJ1970:83; YK1976:150; OT1968:470; 
TA1965:394-6.
Mnemonic: SUNNY CAPITAL IS A BRIGHT 
SCENE
OBI ; seal . OBI form is pictograph of person 
kneeling and yawning. Mizukami and Katō fol-
low Shuowen explanation of seal form as steam 
or vapor rising, but Qiu treats as just a miscopy-
ing of the earlier pictograph. The graph 缺 is 
conventionally treated in Japan as traditional 
form of 欠, but 缺 is separate graph made of 缶 
1141 ‘pot’, and 夬 (CO, meaning disputed; ‘pull 
bowstring’, etc.) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘open’, giving originally ‘pot opened up’, 
i.e. ‘damaged/broken pot’. Despite separate ori-
gins, 缼 and 欠 have been used interchange-
欠席者　KESSEKISHA　absentee
欠点　 KETTEN　a fault 
欠け目　kakeme　a break, rupture
KETSU, kaku/keru
lack, gap, omit
4 strokes
欠
L3
496
ably from early on, at least in Japan. Refl ecting 
this, 缺 is listed as traditional form of 欠 even in 
the Jōyō kanji Lists for 1981 and 2010. ‘Lack’ is 
an extended sense derived from generalisation 
of original meaning ‘chipped/damaged pot’ for 
缺. Since ‘lack’ is a meaning found for both 缺 
and 欠 in modern Chinese too, this suggests 
possible word-family link or cross-contamina-
tion in these two graphs not just in Japanese 
but in Chinese usage also. Note: the graph 缼 
also exists, but is stated by Yamada to be erro-
neous. Not listed in Kangxi zidian, and probably 
evolved as a cross-formation from 缺 and 欠. 
MS1995:v1:696-7; QX2000:96,109; KJ1970:367; 
YK1976:152-3; SS1984:248; GY2008:1063; 
OT1968:239. Suggest taking graph as 人 41 
‘person(s)’ and 冖 ‘roof/house’.
Mnemonic: HOUSE LACKS PEOPLE
芸術 GEIJUTSU　art
手芸 SHUGEI　handicraft
芸者 GEISHA　geisha
OBI 
; seal 
 (埶); traditional 藝. Late, post-
Shuowen graph  
 (originally ‘kneel on the 
ground and plant something’) is regarded 
as the original way of writing what was later 
changed in shape (distorted) to 埶 (same 
meaning). Later, 艹 53 ‘plant, grass’ was added 
to 埶, to give ‘plant vegetation’ (Qiu says ‘sow 
and plant’); the seal equivalent of this graph is 
given in Shuowen. Finally, 云 83 (‘say’, ‘cloud’) 
GEI
art, skill, plant
7 strokes
芸
L3
495
was added as a phonetic; this is felt to derive 
from CO 耘 (‘remove weeds’). The modern 
form 芸 is felt to be an abbreviated version of 
藝, taking the top and bottom elements only. 
(It  is not believed to originate from a one-step 
process of combining 艹 ‘plant’ with 云 as pho-
netic, which was the process that generated the 
homomorphic yet totally separate earlier graph 
芸, listed in Shuowen and meaning ‘[type of] 
fragrant plant’.) ‘Art/skill’ are extended mean-
ings. MS1995:v1:270-72, 12-14; KJ1970:353-4; 
MR2007:265; YK1976:151; QX2000:329-30; 
DJ2009:v1:54. 
Mnemonic: THEY SAY THAT PLANTING IS A 
SKILLED ART

170  The 200 Fourth Grade Characters
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 糸 29 
‘thread’, and 吉 1196 (‘good fortune’) as 
結婚  KEKKON　marriage
結果  KEKKA　result
結び目  musubime　knot
KETSU, musubu, 
yuu/waeru
bind, join, end
12 strokes
結
L3
497
phonetic with associated sense ‘bend’ (Katō, 
Yamada) or ‘fasten tightly’ (Tōdō, Ogawa). 
Either interpretation gives ‘tie knot in thread/
rope’, and then by extension the more gener-
alized ‘join up’; ‘conclude, tie up’ is a further, 
fi gurative extension. KJ1970:230; YK1976:154; 
TA1965:784-7; OT1968:777. We suggest 士 521 
‘samurai’ and 口 22 ‘mouth’.
Mnemonic: BIND SAMURAI’S MOUTH WITH 
THREAD
固体  KOTAI　solid state
強固  KYŌKO　solidity 
固まり  katamari　lump, mass
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 囗 84 
‘enclosure’ (taken here as walls of a castle or 
citadel), and 古 121 (‘old’) as phonetic with as-
sociated sense ‘solid, hard, fi rm’, to give ‘defend 
solidly with castle walls’ or ‘defend castle walls 
solidly’. The meaning later became general-
ized to ‘hard, solid’; in Tōdō’s word-family ‘hard, 
KO, katai/meru/maru
hard, fi rm, solid
8 strokes
固
L3
501
Bronze forms 
/
; seal 
. Has 聿 400 (writing 
brush held upright), and 廴 – a determinative ap-
parently set up in error by the Shuowen compiler 
on the basis of the small seal form for this graph, 
but the older bronze form shows the original 
建設 KENSETSU　construction
建立 KONRYŪ*　erection
建物 tatemono　a building
KEN, KON, tatsu/teru
build, erect
9 strokes
建
L4
498
way of writing featured 聿 with not 廴 but 
 as 
semantic and phonetic, meaning ‘move slowly’ 
(Yamada, Katō, Mizukami) or 辵 ‘go, move forward’ 
(the full form of 辶/ ⻌: see 581) (Mizukami). 
Overall meaning is ‘move writing brush’; the brush 
is held upright for writing, and so usage later ex-
tended to ‘hold/stand timber (etc.) upright/erect’, 
and by further extension ‘build’. MS1995v1:460-1; 
KJ1970:383-5; YK1976:157,383-5. 
Mnemonic: HAND HOLDS PEN ERECT WHILE 
MOVING IT
健康 KENKŌ　health
健全 KENZEN　soundness
壮健 SŌKEN　healthy
KEN, sukoyaka
healthy
11 strokes
健
L3
499
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 亻 41 ‘person’, 
and 建 498 (‘erect, build’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘strong’, to give ‘strong person’; mean-
ing later generalized to ‘strong’, and by extension 
‘healthy’. KJ1970:385; YK1976:159; OT1968:74. 
Mnemonic: HEALTHY PERSON STANDS ERECT
試験 SHIKEN examination 
実験 JIKKEN　experiment
経験 KEIKEN　experience
phonetic with associated sense unclear (Katō, 
Yamada), regarding ‘examine’ as a loan usage. 
Tōdō, though, includes it in a word-family with 
associated sense ‘collect and bring together/un-
der control’, an interpretation giving ‘examine’. 
KJ1970:376-7; YK1976:161; TA1965:842-6. Sug-
gest taking as ‘odd’ elder brother 兄 114 under 
cover 
.
Mnemonic: ODD ELDER BROTHER EXAMINES 
HORSE UNDER COVER
KEN
examine
18 strokes
験
L4
500
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional form 
驗. Has 馬 210 ‘horse’, and 僉 (CO, ‘people 
agree on opinion’). The associated meaning 
of 僉 here is disputed: one analysis takes it as 

The 200 Fourth Grade Characters  171
成功 SEIKŌ　success
功罪 KŌZAI　pros and cons
功労 KŌRŌ　stalwart service
好意`  KŌI　goodwill 
好きな  suki na nice, liked
好色  KŌSHOKU　amorousness
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 力 78 ‘strength, eff ort’, 
and 工 125 (‘adze’ or other tool) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘work’ or ‘make’, to give 
‘put eff ort into work’, and by extension 
‘meritorious’. MS1995:v1:138-9; KJ1970:406; 
YK1976:173; OT1968:124.
Mnemonic: STRENGTH AND USE OF TOOL 
MEANS MERITORIOUS SERVICE 
child’, and by extension favourable senses such 
as ‘like, favor’, ‘good’ (Ogawa, Tōdō). Alternatively, 
子 is seen as phonetic, with associated sense 
‘beautiful’, to give ‘beautiful woman’, and then by 
extension ‘like, favor’ (Katō, Yamada). The view 
taking 子 as phonetic, though, is less persuasive. 
Mizukami lists both interpretations. OT1968:252; 
TA1965:226-7; KJ1970:163; YK1976:176; 
MS1995:v1:310-11; AS2007:273,633. 
Mnemonic: WOMAN LIKES CHILD – WHAT A 
FINE THING
KŌ, KU
merit, service
5 strokes
KŌ, suku/ki, konomu
like, fi ne, good
6 strokes
功
好
L1
L4
502
503
OBI ; seal . Has 女 37 ‘woman’, and 子 27 ‘child’. 
Scholars are divided over the function of 子 here. 
The traditional view (as in Shuowen) is to take 子 
semantically as ‘child’, to give ‘woman looks after 
気候 KIKŌ　climate
候補 KŌHO　candidacy
候文 sōrōBUN　historical style
the meaning ‘serve’ (primarily as an older mean-
ing), Shirakawa observes on the basis of informa-
tion in Yupian that in higher circles in early China 
there was a position designated as 候人 , a role 
which involved greeting visitors. The meanings 
‘weather’ and ‘sign’ for 候 can be seen as extended 
senses deriving from ‘look out for’ relating to 
weather conditions. In ancient China the year was 
divided into the ‘seventy-two short periods’ (七十
二候) , of fi ve days each. Numerical categories 
such as this – other examples include the Five Ele-
ments (五行), the Eight [Musical] Sounds (八音) , 
and the Ten Moral Obligations (十義) to name but 
a few – have been an integral part of Chinese cul-
ture from ancient times. KJ1970:398; YK1976:181; 
SS1984:300,296; AS2007:279. Suggest taking 
short vertical line as pointer. See too 侯 1326.
Mnemonic: PERSONS POINT TO WEATHER 
SIGNS WITH ARROW
KŌ, sōrō
weather, sign, ask, 
serve, suffi  x
10 strokes
候
L3
504
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Views vary. Katō 
and Yamada treat as 亻 41 ‘person’, and 矦 (an NJK 
graph which they alone take as meaning ‘hunch-
back’) as phonetic with associated sense ‘go/
come out to greet’, and by extension ‘look out for’ 
(Katō, Yamada). Shirakawa also links 矦 to ‘target’, 
but regards it as referring to a purifi catory ritual 
involving shooting arrows. Treatment  by scholars 
refl ects a degree of historical confusion between 
候 and 侯, two graphs similar in shape, pronun-
ciation, and meaning. Uncertainty over the early 
history of the words and meanings represented 
by these two graphs is noted by Schuessler. As for 
solid’. KJ1970:392; YK1976:167; TA1965:385-90; 
OT1968:205.
Mnemonic: OLD ENCLOSING WALL IS FIRM 
AND SOLID

172  The 200 Fourth Grade Characters
航空 KŌKŪ　fl ight
航海 KŌKAI　sea voyage
航路 KŌRO　route
phonetic with associated sense ‘side’. Denotes 
several boats lashed together side-by-side for 
stability, or boat(s) crossing a river, or both 
these meanings together; sense later broad-
ened to ‘navigate’ in general. KJ1970:160-62; 
YK1976:182; OT1968:837. Suggest taking 亢 as 
‘top’ 
 and 
 as 845 ‘desk’.
Mnemonic: DESKTOP BOAT VOYAGE
KŌ
sail, voyage
10 strokes
航
L3
Seal 
; late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 舟1450 
‘boat’, and 亢 (NJK, originally ‘[upright] neck’) as 
505
小康  SHŌKŌ　respite
不健康 FUKENKŌ　ill health
健康体 KENKŌTAI　healthy body
incorporates the determinative 禾 87 ‘grain’ 
also, but this was dropped at the clerical 
stage.  ‘Peace’ and healthy’ are loan usages. 
Note that what became 广 127 ‘roof, building’ 
(determinative no. 53) here is a distortion of 
the original with two hands and pestle, but 
use as mnemonic. YK1976:183; KJ1970:164-5; 
MS1995:v2:970-71; TA1965:392-4; SK1984:274.  
Mnemonic: HAND HOLDING PESTLE POUNDS 
HEALTHY BRAN FLAKES IN BUILDING
KŌ
peace, health
11 strokes
康
L3
OBI ; bronze ; seal (穅) 
. OBI and bronze 
forms show two hands pounding grain with 
pestle and producing what is taken as ei-
ther bran (Yamada) or chaff  (Tōdō). The seal 
stage has a more complicated form which 
506
抗告 KŌKOKU　complaint
公告 KŌKOKU　public notice
広告 KŌKOKU　advertisement
and based on classical usage takes 告 to origi-
nally mean ‘announce to the deities and elders’. 
However, some scholars take it as abbreviated 
version of 生 44 ‘grow, life’ as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘put forward’ (Katō, Mizu-
kami), or ‘move upwards’ (Yamada), to give 
‘put forward words, advise’. TA1965:222-224; 
KJ1970:407-8; MS1995:v1:218-9; YK1976:187. 
Suggest taking upper part as cow minus a tail.
Mnemonic: INFORM BY WORD OF MOUTH 
ABOUT A COW WITH NO TAIL
KOKU, tsugeru
proclaim, inform
7 strokes
告
L4
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional 告. Interpretations 
vary. Has 口 22 ‘mouth, words, speech’, and 
second component traditionally (Shuowen) 
taken as 牛 108 ‘cow’. Tōdō still takes as ‘cow’, 
507
時差   JISA　time-diff erence
差別   SABETSU　discrimination
差し込む  sashikomu　insert
SA, sasu
diff erence, point
10 strokes
差
L3
Bronze 
; seal 
. The upper part of the bronze 
form represents shoots or buds on a young 
508
tree, and the lower part is 左 24 (‘left’), serving 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘uneven’. 
Overall sense is ‘young shoots/buds hanging 
down unevenly’, and by extension ‘diff erence, 
divergence’. ‘Point’ seems to be an extended 
meaning. KJ1970:415; YK1976:194; OT1968:312. 
Suggest taking upper part as 羊 426 ‘sheep’ (
 
is a variant).
Mnemonic: SHEEP ON LEFT IS DIFFERENT

The 200 Fourth Grade Characters  173
野菜 YASAI　vegetables
菜種 natane　rape-seed
菜食 SAISHOKU　vegetarianism
as semantic and phonetic, meaning ‘hand pick-
ing fruit, etc.’, to give ‘edible fruit/plants to pick 
and eat’.  In modern Japanese (and Chinese), 
means ‘greens, vegetables’, but in Japanese 
also has the more specialised sense of ‘rape’ 
(the vegetable). KJ1970:419; MS1995:1354-5; 
YK1976:198.
Mnemonic: HAND PLUCKS VEGETABLES 
NEAR TREE 
SAI, na
vegetable, rape
11 strokes
菜
L4
OBI of 采 is 
; seal ; traditional
. Has 艹 53 
‘plant, vegetation’, and 采 (see OBI form above) 
509
最大 SAIDAI　biggest
最後 SAIGO　fi nal, end
最新 SAISHIN　most recent
regarded as a loan usage. The top element 日
in the block script version of this graph – easily 
mistaken for 日 66 ‘sun, day’ – is just the result 
of historical shape regularization, a process 
which has often led, as here, to the etymology 
being obscured. KJ1970:501-2; YK1976:199; 
OT1968:157. We suggest taking日 as ‘sun’ for 
convenience. 
Mnemonic: TAKE MOST SUN WHEN IT’S AT 
ITS HIGHEST
SAI, mottomo
most, -est
12 strokes
最
L3
Seal ; late graph (Shuowen). Has 冃 ‘helmet, 
head covering’, and 取 317 as semantic and 
phonetic with meaning ‘take’, to give ‘seize 
unlawfully’. The meaning ‘most’ should be 
510
材木 ZAIMOKU　timber
材料 ZAIRYŌ　material, data
人材 JINZAI　talented person
Yamada) or ‘cut off /down; interrupt’ (Tōdō), 
to give ‘wood which is useful’ or ‘wood to cut’. 
Later, it also acquired generalized meaning 
‘useful material, resource’ in both physical and 
fi gurative senses. KJ1970:422; YK1976:201; 
TA1965:107-9. Suggest taking 才 for its mean-
ing ‘age’.
Mnemonic: WHATEVER AGE A TREE IS, IT’S A 
USEFUL TIMBER RESOURCE
ZAI
timber, resource
7 strokes
材
L3
511
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 木 73 ‘tree, 
wood’, and 才 139 (original meaning uncertain) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘use’ (Katō, 
昨日 
SAKUJITSU　yesterday
昨夜 SAKUYA　last night
昨年 SAKUNEN　last year
restricted meaning ‘last, previous’ (in Japanese, 
eff ectively the only modern sense) dates back 
to at least the time of the Guangyun diction-
ary (1008 AD); in that work, 昨is connected 
to 隔 1120 (‘separate’), but other proposed 
connections include 昔 346 ‘in the past; yes-
terday’ (Schuessler). KJ1970:438; YK1976:203; 
TA1965:364-7; AS2007:637.
Mnemonic: THE PAST IS MADE UP OF YES-
TERDAYS
SAKU
yesterday, past
9 strokes
昨
L4
512
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has日 66 ‘day’, 
and 乍 141 (‘cut up wood; make’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘accumulate’, to give 
original sense ‘some days earlier’. The more 

174  The 200 Fourth Grade Characters
札入れ SATSUire　billfold
名札  nafuda　name tag
千円札 SEN’ENSATSU　1000 yen note
i.e. a wooden tag. In modern usage, has a range 
of meanings such as ‘receipt, coupon, [paper 
currency] note’. Tags or thin tablets made of 
wood were in common use in early Japan – 
when paper was an expensive writing medium 
– as labels attached to goods, for letters and 
other documents, and for writing practice. 
Though typically quite short, they are a valu-
able source of information regarding aspects of 
early Japanese history. KJ1970:439; OT1968:486.
Mnemonic: TAGS AND NOTES ARE MADE BY 
WOOD-CUT BY CURVED KNIFE
SATSU, fuda
tag, bill, note
5 strokes
札
L3
513
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 木 73 ‘wood’, 
and 乙 1072 (‘knife tool for carving’), usually 
taken as phonetic only, with associated mean-
ing ‘shave off , reduce’, but may also be regarded 
as semantic. Thus ‘thinly shaved piece of wood’, 
印刷   INSATSU　printing
刷新   SASSHIN　reform
校正刷り  KŌSEIzuri　printer’s proofs
SATSU, suru
print, rub
8 strokes
刷
L3
514
earlier shorter printed texts or images do exist. 
Rubbing was part of the process of printing texts 
on wooden blocks, but it was a lesser task: the 
more demanding main work involved the actual 
engraving, i.e. the cutting out of text and/or 
images on the blocks, in reverse; a sheet of paper 
was then applied to the surface of the inked 
block and rubbed to produce the text or image. 
The earliest printing technology dates from later 
than the emergence of seal script, so it would be 
wrong to connect the etymological origins of 刷 
to considerations of printing. Nevertheless, use 
of the ‘knife’ determinative is supportive of inter-
pretation of 刷 as ‘scrape’ rather than ‘rub, wipe’, 
as Katō points out. ZY2009:v1:254; KJ1970:439; 
YK1976:204; TA1965:572-3,624-9; OT1968:115; 
AS2007:474,264; KJ1985:69. Regarding a mne-
monic we suggest taking 巾 as itself, namely 巾 
1232 ‘cloth’, and the NJK 256 尸, the so-called 
‘corpse’determinative, which often refers to a 
slumped fi gure with buttocks stuck out, and oc-
curs with a meaning of ‘buttocks’ in a number of 
characters, such as 尾 1888 ‘tail’.
Mnemonic: ‘BUTTOCK CLOTH’ HAS FINELY 
CUT PRINT
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 刂 198 ‘knife/
cut’, and  (listed in Kangxi zidian as an old way 
of writing 豕 89 ‘wild boar, pig’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘scrape, shave off ’, to give 
‘scrape with knife’ (Katō, Yamada). Katō also links 
刷 to 削 1385 ‘scrape, pare, cut’, while Schuessler 
considers it to be probably related to NJK 刮 
‘scrape’, which comprises 刂 198 ‘knife’, with 舌 
755 (‘tongue’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘create space’, giving original meaning ‘scraping 
tool’. Tōdō and Ogawa, alternatively, take the 
associated sense as ‘rub’, which is the meaning of 
another graph of similar shape, i.e. 
, which has 
又 2003 ‘hand’ as determinative and originally 
referred to wiping one’s bottom (Katō). It is 
generally considered that printing – on wooden 
blocks – was invented in China; the earliest sur-
viving printed book dates from 868AD, though 
殺人  SATSUJIN　murder
自殺 
 JISATSU　suicide
殺し屋  koroshiya　‘hit man’
associated sense ‘corpse’ or ‘kill’, to give ‘turn 
(someone) into a corpse by striking’, and then 
more generalized sense ‘kill’. MS1995:v1:714-5; 
KJ1970:439-40; YK1976:204-5. We suggest tak-
ing the left-hand part of the modern graph as 
a combination of 木 73 ‘tree/wood(en)’, with 
 
as a cross.
Mnemonic: KILL BY STRIKING WITH WOODEN 
CROSS
SATSU, korosu
kill
10 strokes
殺
L3
515
OBI ; seal . Has 殳 170 ‘strike with weapon’, 
and 豕 89 (‘wild boar, pig’) (here, later distorted 
to tree and cross shape) as phonetic with 

The 200 Fourth Grade Characters  175
警察 KEISATSU　police
察知 SATCHI　inference
観察 KANSATSU　observation
with an associated sense ‘place on top’, to give 
the overall meaning ‘cover’. Yamada regards the 
meanings ‘look carefully, examine’ as loan us-
age. Katō too is of the same opinion. Shirakawa, 
for his part, takes 祭 as having a semantic 
role, with its original meaning, to give the 
proposed overall meaning of ‘make off erings 
in a shrine’ – presumably under a roof. Tōdō, 
by contrast, proposes the associated sense 
‘cleanse and examine’, on the basis of classical 
usage. KJ1970:426; YK1976:205; SS1984:349; 
KJ1985:172. As a mnemonic, we suggest taking 
宀 as a roof, and 祭 as ‘worship’.
Mnemonic: SURMISE WHY ONE WORSHIPS 
UNDER ROOF
SATSU
judge, surmise, realise
14 strokes
察
L3
516
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). There are diverse 
interpretations for this graph, and the etymol-
ogy is uncertain. There is general agreement 
regarding 宀 30 ‘roof’ as ‘cover’, though Katō 
appears to believe that a cover is specifi cally 
being put on a roof. As for 祭 299 ‘worship; fes-
tival’ (originally meat [and in some cases wine] 
being placed on an off ering table/altar), Katō 
and Yamada treat this as a phonetic component 
参加 SANKA　participation
参考 SANKŌ　reference
参議 SANGI　Councillor
‘three’ is a loan usage; Katō draws attention 
to the usage of threes in the graph. Another 
meaning, namely ‘go’, is probably also a loan 
usage according to Katō. Note, however, that 
Tōdō, on the basis of classical usage, includes 
参 in a word-family ‘many come together’, and 
this interpretation – if followed – provides a 
movement-related meaning which could be 
extended (generalised) to ‘go’. KJ1970:40-41; 
YK1976:207; MS1995:v1:626-7; TA1965:811-14; 
KJ1985:93. As a somewhat crude and unroman-
tic mnemonic, we suggest taking – in descend-
ing order – ム as a nose, the central element as 
a variant of 大 56 ‘big’, with the three hairs彡.
Mnemonic: THREE BIG HAIRS UP YOUR   
NOSE – GO AND ATTEND TO THEM !
SAN, mairu
go, attend, three, be 
upset/ in love
8 strokes
参
L4
517
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 參. The bronze 
form depicts three hairpins with pearls at-
tached, adorning the hair of a kneeling person 
(woman). The element of what what looks like 
three brush hairs or strokes 彡 (see 115) is taken 
as phonetic here, with an associated sense 
‘beautiful’. The overall meaning is thus ‘beautiful 
woman adorned with hairpins’. The meaning 
生産 SEISAN　production
産物 SANBUTSU　product
出産 SHUSSAN　birth
phonetic with associated sense ‘grow’ (Katō, 
Yamada). Mizukami notes a view that 产 is an 
abbreviation of 彦 103 (‘fi ne young man’), but 
Katō disagrees. Ogawa, alternatively, takes 
as having the associated sense ‘open’, mean-
ing ‘womb opens and new life is produced’. 
KJ1970:221-2; YK1976:208; MS1995:v2:868-9; 
OT1968:666. As a mnemonic for the modern 
form we suggest taking 产 as 立 77 ‘standing’ 
on a cliff  厂.
Mnemonic: LIVE BIRTH STANDING ON CLIFF!
SAN, umu/mareru
birth, produce
11 strokes
産
L4
518
Bronze 
; seal ; traditional 產. General agree-
ment that lower element is 生 44 ‘vegetation 
growing; life’, but views vary regarding other 
part(s) of the graph. One analysis takes 产 as 

176  The 200 Fourth Grade Characters
散歩 SANPO　stroll
散文 SANBUN　prose
散らし chirashi　leafl et
the seal form onwards to be in error. Despite 
this diff erence of opinion, both scholars take 
散 to comprise 肉 ‘meat’, with 
 (‘separate’) 
as semantic and phonetic, meaning ‘beat and 
separate’; Yamada then takes it as ‘meat divided 
up’ (as does Tōdō), with a subsequent generali-
zation of meaning, to give ‘divide up, break up’. 
MS1995:v2:1076-8; YK1976:208-9; KJ1970:442; 
TA1965:567. Suggest take as 攵 112 ‘beat’,  209 
‘meat’ and twenty-one (十 35 ‘ten’, x 2 and一 1 
‘one’).
Mnemonic: BEAT MEAT AND SCATTER INTO 
TWENTY-ONE BITS
SAN, chiru/rasu
scatter
12 strokes
散
L3
519
OBI 
; bronze 
; seal 
. Analyses diff er. 
OBI form has 木 73 ‘tree’; bronze and seal forms 
have 肉 209 ‘meat’ added. Further variation is 
that bronze occurrences typically have 竹58 
‘bamboo’ instead of 木. Yamada considers 竹
in bronze is probably the result of miscopying 
木, while Katō regards 竹 as correct and 木 in 
残金 ZANKIN　balance (money)
残念 ZANNEN　regret
残忍 ZANNIN　brutality
Seal ; late graph (Shuowen). Has 歹 302 ‘bare 
bones; bone fragments’, and 戔 (‘crossed hal-
berds; injure’, see e.g. 545) as semantic and pho-
netic, meaning ‘cut and wound’, to give ‘kill by 
cutting’. ‘Remain’ is a loan usage. KJ1970:625-6; 
YK1976:210; OT1968:543.
Mnemonic: TWO CRUEL HALBERDS LEAVE 
ONLY BARE BONES
ZAN, nokoru/su
leave, cruel
10 strokes
残
L3
520
武士 BUSHI　samurai, warrior
士官 SHIKAN　military offi  cer
修士 SHŪSHI　Master (degree) 
does his view that it applies particularly to 
an unmarried male, again without elabora-
tion. Tōdō treats ‘man, male’ as an extended 
sense, and notes the association in classi-
cal texts with the image of a man who is 
magnanimous and strong-willed; he takes 
‘serve’ as a sense deriving from the use of 士 
as sometimes standing for  仕 301 (‘serve’).  
Schuessler notes the meaning ‘retainer’ for 
士 already from Western Zhou period (11th 
century – 771 BC) on, and ‘scholar’ as a later 
sense.  Shirakawa, on the basis of bronze 
forms, regards the graph as depicting a bat-
tle-ax as a ritual object – the thicker bottom 
stroke in the forms he gives represents the 
ax blade; this, however, does not explain the 
simpler OBI shape. KJ1970:451-2; YK1976:211; 
TA1965:106; AS2007:465; SS1984:358; 
KJ1985:139-40.
Mnemonic: SAMURAI STANDS ERECT WITH A 
STRANGE CROSS
SHI, samurai
warrior, scholar, male
3 strokes
士
L1
521
OBI 
; bronze 
. The simple appearance 
of this graph makes it difficult to explain. It 
is widely interpreted as depicting the erect 
male organ. This view is a fair interpretation 
on the basis of most of the OBI occurrences. 
In that case there is, however, the awkward 
question of how to regard the upper hori-
zontal stroke which features consistently 
from the bronze form onwards. It might be 
argued that it represents the glans, but this 
too is graphically unconvincing. Katō takes 
the cross-stroke as simply an embellishment, 
but does not elaborate on this. Thus this does 
not seem particularly convincing either. Nor 

The 200 Fourth Grade Characters  177
氏名  SHIMEI　full name
氏族  SHIZOKU　clan
伊藤氏 ITŌ-SHI　Mr Itō
(the rounded shape), and by extension ‘hilly 
prominence’. It was common for noble families 
in ancient China to live on elevated sites (as 
in other countries around the world), and the 
families themselves came to be referred to as 
‘such-and-such ’ (i.e those who live on such-
and-such a hill). Possibly  represented a word 
of similar pronunciation to 氏, and thus 氏 
came to be used for ‘clan, family’. KJ1970:453-
4,656-8; YK1976:213; MS1995:v2:724-5.
Mnemonic: THAT CLAN HAS A STRANGE 
LADLE WITH POINTY BITS
SHI, uji
clan, family, mister
4 strokes
氏
L1
522
OBI 
; seal 
. These depict a sharp-ended 
spoon-like utensil for taking meat and other 
food from a large plate or cooking pot. As for 
the meaning ‘clan, family’, this appears to derive 
from a connection with . The OBI form of  is 
taken by Katō as originally meaning ‘buttocks’ 
歴史 REKISHI　history
女史 JOSHI　Ms/Mrs/Mme
史上 SHIJŌ　in history
(here: ‘count’), to give ‘do calendrical calcula-
tion’, and by extension person who does such 
work, then generalised to persons whose work 
involved reading/writing, i.e. scribes. (Qiu gives 
examples of graphs that coincide in shape but 
are diff erent, i.e. represent diff erent words; 
see QX2000:301ff .) KJ1970:448-9; YK1976:215; 
MS1995:v1:208-9.
Mnemonic: HAND OVER MOUTH, SCRIBE 
RECOUNTS HISTORY
SHI
history, scribe
5 strokes
史
L3
523
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 又 2003 ‘hand’, and 中, 
an element coincidental in shape with 中 59 
‘middle’ but actually diff erent, made from 
丨‘tally, counting stick’, and 口 22 ‘mouth’; say’ 
司法  SHIHŌ　judicature
司令部 SHIREIBU　headquarters
司会者 SHIKAISHA　MC
script – the direction of writing for individual 
graphs often varied in OBI and bronze texts, as 
seen in above OBI forms for 司 listed by Mizu-
kami. Yamada treats the top two strokes of 司 as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘dirty, unclean’, to 
give overall meaning ‘anus’. However, Mizukami 
takes 司 as ‘vagina’. In Tōdō’s word-family ‘(rub 
a) small opening’. AS2007:565; KJ1970:456-7; 
MS1995:206-8,212-3; YK1976:214; TA1965:117-9. 
Suggest taking 
 as ‘corner’, with 一 1 ‘one’ and 
口 22 ‘opening/entrance’. 
Mnemonic: OFFICIAL ADMINISTERS ONE 
ENTRANCE IN CORNER 
SHI, tsukasadoru
administer, offi  cial, 
regulate
5 strokes
司
L3
524
OBI forms 
, 
 seal . Has 口 22 ‘mouth, 
orifi ce’, and 尸 256 ‘person stretched out’ 
(Schuessler), or ‘person crouching’ (Katō). 司 is 
a mirror image of the diff erent graph 后 869 
(‘empress’, original meaning ‘anus’), but distinc-
tion between the two was not clear until the seal 
試合  SHIai　match
試験官 SHIKENKAN　examiner
試み  kokoromi　trial, test
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 言 118 
‘words’, and 式 311 ‘(rule, form’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘watch for, look out for’ 
(Katō, Yamada), to give ‘discern someone’s in-
tentions from their language’. Schuessler states 
in early classical texts it already had the sense 
‘test, try’. KJ1970:311; YK1976:225; AS2007:466. 
Mnemonic: TEST FORMS OF WORDS 
SHI, kokoromiru, 
tamesu
trial, test
13 strokes
試
L4
525

178  The 200 Fourth Grade Characters
孤児  KOJI　orphan
小児  SHŌNI　infant
児童期 JIDŌKI　childhood
JI, NI, ko
child
7 strokes
児
L3
526
However, the earlier OBI forms do not feature a 
hunchback shape, and this, no doubt, has led 
other commentators to interpret the graph as a 
pictogram of an infant with the fontanelle not 
yet closed (Ogawa, Ma). Both interpretations are 
listed in Mizukami, who lists a further view that 
takes 児 as originally a pictograph of an infant 
moving its arms to crawl forward. Shirakawa 
interprets as showing infant with hair around 
fontanelle. Other hypotheses include taking 
the short inner strokes 臼/
 as undulations 
in the mortar (Gu). KJ1970:368-9; YK1976:230; 
OT1968:89; MR2007:396; MS1995:v1:94-5; 
KJ1985:54; GY2008:277; SS1984:381. Suggest 
taking the modern graph as 旧 677 ‘old’ with a 
person with bent legs 儿.
Mnemonic: OLD PERSON WITH BENT LEGS IS 
REALLY A CHILD
OBI ; bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 兒. Inter-
pretations diff er quite markedly. One analysis 
(Katō, Yamada), which is based on some bronze 
occurrences, takes lower element 儿 (see 41 
‘person’) more specifi cally as ‘small and weak 
hunchback’, with 臼 677 (‘mortar, bowl’) as 
phonetic with similar associated sense ‘small and 
weak hunchback’. In that capacity, it could be 
applied to an individual of any age with those 
characteristics, and would not necessarily be 
restricted to young children, and indeed Katō 
treats the meaning ‘child’ as an extended one. 
政治 SEIJI　politics
治安 CHIAN　public order
治療 CHIRYŌ　remedy
Yamada, Ogawa). It originally stood for the name 
of a river, as noted in Shuowen. Tōdō, however, 
includes 治 in a word-family ‘modify by human 
activity’, and gives a classical reference to show 
it was used at an early period meaning ‘modify 
(topography/landscape)’, and so by extension 
‘regulate, govern’. Schuessler also notes early 
(but post-OBI) meanings which include ‘govern; 
punish; in good order’.  KJ1970:15; YK1976:356; 
OT1968:566; TA1965:74-7; AS2007:619. 
Mnemonic: GOVERN FROM A WATERY 
PLATFORM – AND GET CURED TOO 
JI, CHI, osameru,
naosu
govern, rule, cure
8 strokes
治
L3
527
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵42 ‘water, 
river’, and 台 (CO ‘I, my’; also corresponds to ab-
breviated form of 臺 ‘stand, platform’ 台 183) as 
phonetic with associated sense unknown (Katō, 
辞書  JISHO　dictionary
辞職  JISHOKU　resignation
修辞学 SHŪJIGAKU　rhetoric
crime’ or ‘judge crime’ (both these analyses are 
listed by Mizukami). As for the abbreviated form 
辞 (now standard in both Japanese and PRC 
Chinese), examples of this can be found from 
around 600AD in calligraphic text attributed to 
the noted Confucian scholar and calligrapher 
Ouyang Xun (557-641) if not earlier, with 舌 755 
(‘tongue’) perhaps functioning as a semantic 
element (‘speech’) to give an overall meaning 
‘speak in relation to a crime’. The other meanings 
of ‘word’ and ‘resignation’ are regarded as loan 
usages, and would appear to have prevailed over 
the original meaning. KJ1970:485-6; YK1976:232; 
MS1995:v2:1278-9,820-21; FC1977:1001. We 
suggest taking the elements of the modern form 
literally, as ‘needle’ and ‘tongue’. 
Mnemonic: NEEDLE-SHARP TONGUE UTTERS 
WORDS OF RESIGNATION 
JI, yameru
word, resign
13 strokes
辞
L3
528
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 辭. Has 辛 1535 
‘needle’, and 
 (two hands unravelling tangled 
thread), the latter taken by Katō and Yamada as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘regulate, make 
judgment’, but can alternatively be regarded 
as both phonetic and semantic, with sense 
‘unravel’ extended to ‘regulate’. It should be 
noted that the needle referred to above was 
for the purposes of tattooing a criminal, and by 
extension it could be used to represent ‘crime’ 
in itself. Thus the overall meaning is ‘regulate 

The 200 Fourth Grade Characters  179
借金 SHAKKIN　debt
借家 SHAKUya　rented house
借主 karinushi　borrower
takes 昔 as semantic and phonetic, meaning 
‘accumulate’ (Ogawa, Tōdō), or alternatively as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘person who 
pretends/is a substitute’, then generalized to 
‘substitute; something not one’s own’, and so 
something borrowed. In Chinese this graph 
can also mean ‘lend’. KJ1970:615; YK1976:241; 
OT1968:70; TA1965:364-7; AS2007:314. 
Mnemonic: A PERSON IN THE PAST HAD TO 
BORROW TO PAY RENT
SHAKU, kariru
borrow, rent
10 strokes
借
L4
530
Seal 
; late graph, in amended edition of 
Shuowen entitled Shuowen xinfu (Shuowen with 
New Appendices). Has 亻 41 ‘person’, with 昔 
346 (‘past, accumulated days’). One analysis 
一種  ISSHU　one sort  
人種  JINSHU　humankind 
種無し  tanenashi　seedless
周辺 SHŪHEN　perimeter
周到 SHŪTŌ　circumspect
一周 ISSHŪ　a lap, circuit
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 禾 87 
‘grain’, and 重 326 (‘heavy’) as phonetic with 
SHU, tane
seed, kind
14 strokes
SHŪ, mawari
circumference, widely, 
around
8 strokes
種
周
L3
L3
531
532
associated sense ‘late’, giving ‘late ripening 
grain/crops’. Yamada sees ‘seed’ and ‘type, kind’ 
as loan usages, but Tōdō sees a semantic link 
between 重 ‘heavy’ and the heads of grain 
heavy with seed. KJ1970:704; YK1976:246; 
OT1968:736; TA1965:291.
Mnemonic: KIND OF RICE PLANT WITH 
HEAVY SEED 
失敗 SHIPPAI　failure
失敬 SHIKKEI　rudeness
失業 SHITSUGYŌ　unemployment
of the hand’ (Katō, Yamada). This by extension 
came to mean ‘lose something in general’. 
Alternatively, the bottom right-hand element 
in the seal form has been taken as indicating 
movement sideways, but again with much the 
same overall meaning as the analysis noted 
above (Tōdō). KJ1970:486-7; YK1976:235; 
TA1965:754-6. We suggest taking the modern 
graph as 夫 601 ‘husband / man’ with the extra 
stroke taken as a baton.
Mnemonic: HUSBAND IS ABOUT TO LOSE THE 
BATON
SHITSU, ushinau
lose
5 strokes
失
L3
529
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Interpretations 
diff er, but only in a minor way. One analysis 
takes the graph as 手 34 ‘hand’, with 乙 1072 
(knife tool for carving) as a phonetic with an 
associated sense of ‘drop’, ‘lose’, to give ‘lose out 
OBI 
; seal . Analyses vary. Ogawa and 
Tōdō see fi elds with crops, and 口 as an outer 
boundary, giving ‘enclose, surround’. However, 
there is room for doubt in those OBI and bronze 
forms that include 口, as its shape is more like 
口 22 ‘mouth/speak’ than an enclosure such 
as in 園 84 ‘park’. Thus a diff erent analysis has 
been proposed, taking 口 as ‘speak’ and the 
main part of the OBI and bronze forms of 周 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘keep the 
mouth shut, say nothing‘, giving ‘ keep quiet’ 
(Yamada). OT1968:176; TA1965:176,182-3; 
MS1995:v1:224-5; KJ1970:513-4; YK1976:249. 
We suggest taking 冂 as a hoop, 土 as 64 ‘earth’, 
and 口 22 ‘mouth’.
Mnemonic: EARTH AROUND MOUTH OF HOOP 

180  The 200 Fourth Grade Characters
祝賀  SHUKUGA　celebration
祝辞  SHUKUJI　congratulations
祝い事 iwaigoto　happy event
take the shaman to be a hunchback, based 
on the bent posture. Ogawa and Ma, though, 
while taking it as a shaman, do not take as 
a hunchback. In support of Ogawa and Ma, 
some OBI occurrences show a person kneeling 
upright with outstretched arms. Also some OBI 
occurrences of 兄 ‘elder brother’ itself have the 
same ‘person variant’ element in what could 
be a hunchback shape, but no scholar has 
suggested the sense ‘hunchback’ in this case. In 
summary, interpretation as a shaman invoking 
or seeking the blessing of the gods (Ma), seems 
appropriate. ‘Bless’ and ‘celebrate’ may be seen 
as extended senses. MS1995:v2:944-5,90-91; 
KJ1970:571-3; YK1976:257-8; OT1968:719-20; 
MR2007:215; AS2007:628. Here, we suggest tak-
ing 兄 as ‘elder brother’.
Mnemonic: ELDER BROTHER CELEBRATES AT 
ALTAR
SHUKU, SHŪ, iwau
celebrate
9 strokes
祝
L3
533
順序  JUNJO　sequence
従順  JŪJUN　compliance
順調に  JUNCHŌ ni　favourably
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 頁 103 ‘head; bow down’, 
and 川 50 (‘river’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘obey, follow’, to give ‘bow head 
and obey’. Later generalized to ‘obey, follow’. 
KJ1970:529-30; MS1995:v2:1442-3,1440-41; 
YK1976:262-3; OT1968:1101.
Mnemonic: COMPLIANT HEADS BOW IN 
SEQUENCE, LIKE FLOWING RIVER 
JUN
sequence, compliance
12 strokes
順
L3
534
OBI 
; seal 
. Some OBI forms have 示/礻
723 ‘altar’ and what seems to be 兄 114 ‘elder 
brother’, but other OBI forms lack the element 
口 and have a kneeling person with arms 
reaching out towards the altar, making the 
‘elder brother’ interpretation diffi  cult. Rather, 祝 
is typically analyzed as 礻 ‘altar’, with 兄 taken 
here as having two components: 儿 ‘person 
variant’ (see 41) with 口 22 ‘speak’, to give 
person speaking – in this context, a shaman (in 
the OBI period either male or female, but later 
female only) who invokes the gods. Further, 
some commentators (Mizukami, Katō, Yamada) 
最初  SAISHO　fi rst
初めて  hajimete　fi rst time
初恋  hatsukoi　fi rst love
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 衤 (衣) 444 ‘garment; 
cloth’, and 刀 198 ‘knife’, giving ‘fi rst cut of cloth 
for a garment’. MS1995:v1:126-7; KJ1970:533; 
YK1976:264; OT1968:113.
Mnemonic: CLOTHES MUST FIRST BE CUT
SHO, hatsu-, hajime
beginning, fi rst
7 strokes
初
L3
535
松葉  matsuba　pine needle
松原  matsubara　pine grove
松根油 SHŌKON’YU　turpentine
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has木 73 ‘tree’, 
and 公 126 (‘public; fair’) as phonetic with 
associated sense regarding which interpreta-
tions diff er. Katō takes as ‘needle’, to give tree 
with needle-shape leaves, while Ogawa takes 
as ‘gather, come together’, to give tree with 
leaves close together; both scholars come to 
the same meaning, i.e. pine tree. KJ1970:541-2; 
OT1968:493. 
Mnemonic: PINE SHOULD BE A PUBLIC TREE
SHŌ, matsu
pine
8 strokes
松
L1
536

The 200 Fourth Grade Characters  181
苦笑  KUSHŌ　wry smile
笑い声 waraigoe　laughter
笑顔  egao　smiling face
1391 (note: 咲 is used in the sense ‘bloom’ only 
in Japanese; in Chinese it retains its original 
sense ‘laugh’). In broad terms, Ogawa adopts 
a broadly similar view, taking 芺 as being the 
result of miscopying, and borrowed as a loan 
for a word meaning ‘act coquettishly’; Katō 
treats the sense ‘act coquettishly’ as the original 
meaning of 笑, and ‘laugh’ as a further exten-
sion of meaning. In the above there is reference 
to 竹 as a top element having been substituted 
for 艹 53 (‘grass, plant’); the explanation for this 
is that in the clerical script (the developmental 
stage before block script) these two elements 
were sometimes used interchangeably (as 
top elements), as noted by Qiu. YK1976:272; 
OT1968:748; KJ1970:85; QX2000:323. We sug-
gest taking 夭 as a big man 大 56 with head 
bent. 
Mnemonic: BIG MAN WITH HEAD BENT LIKE 
BAMBOO, LAUGHING 
SHŌ, warau, emu
laugh, smile
10 strokes
笑
L3
537
Seal 
; a late graph which is included in 
Shuowen xinfu. This graph is the result of fl uc-
tuation in shape, or possibly error. According 
to Yamada, 笑 originated from a graph written 
芺, meaning ‘thistle’, which was borrowed as 
a loan writing for the abstract word meaning 
‘laugh’; following this, as the result of miscopy-
ing, 芺 was written with 关 and then 
, and as 
a further variation the top element came to be 
written as 竹/⺮ 58 ‘bamboo’. To disambiguate 
芺 in the two senses of ‘thistle’ and ‘laugh’, 口 
was added for the latter meaning, to give 
. 
As a further complicating twist, 口 22 (‘mouth’) 
was also added to 关/
 above, to give 咲 
提唱  TEISHŌ　advocacy
合唱  GASSHŌ　chorus
唱え値  tonaene　asking price
voice/pitch of the voice’, and by extension ‘sing’. 
The seal (and older) forms of 昌 point to only 
the upper component as being 日 66 ‘sun, day’, 
and the lower component as diff erent: i.e. NJK 
曰 ‘say, speak’ (determinative no. 73), with OBI 
and bronze forms representing breath coming 
out of the mouth when speaking. KJ1970:544; 
YK1976:273; MS1995:612-3,628-9.
Mnemonic: PREACHER’S MOUTH RECITES 
FOR TWO DAYS
SHŌ, tonaeru
recite, preach
11 strokes
唱
L1
538
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 22 口 ‘mouth’ 
‘speak’, and NJK 昌 (‘sun rises; rise’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘raise’, to give ‘raise the 
燃焼  NENSHŌ　combustion 
焼け跡  yakeato　burnt remains
焼立て  yakitate　fresh-baked
sees it as associated sense ‘surround’ (later 繞), 
when setting wildfi res in hunting. However, 
Tōdō feels phonetic role for 堯 unlikely based 
on historical pronunciation, and includes in his 
word-family ‘curve’, giving ‘fl ames curving up-
wards’. KJ1970:604-5; YK1976:275; OT1968:620; 
TA1965:245-6. We suggest taking 
 as 十 [35] 
‘ten’ x 3 and 一 [1] ‘one’ = 31 legs. See also 1230 
暁.
Mnemonic: ROAST THIRTY-ONE LEGS ON FIRE 
SHŌ, yaku/keru
burn, roast
12 strokes
焼
L3
539
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 燒. 
Has 火 8 ‘fi re’ and CO 堯 (‘high’). Analysis of lat-
ter varies. One takes 堯 as associated sense ‘rise 
high’ (Katō, Yamada), giving ‘fl ames rise’. Ogawa 

182  The 200 Fourth Grade Characters
象徴 SHŌCHŌ　symbol
印象 INSHŌ　impression
象牙 ZŌGE　ivory
senting separate word having same pronuncia-
tion in early Chinese as that for ‘elephant’. Use of 
象 in the sense ‘image’ is a loan use. The graph 像 
762 ‘image’ (distinguish from 象) was devised lat-
er. KJ1970:542; MS1995:v2:1222-3; AS2007:534-5; 
YK1976:331-2. Suggest taking upper part as ears 
and trunk, lower part legs and tail.
Mnemonic: IMAGE OF ELEPHANT IS TRUNK, 
FLAPPY EARS, LEGS AND TAIL
SHŌ, ZŌ
elephant, image
12 strokes
象
L3
540
OBI ; seal . Pictograph of elephant. Schuessler 
takes other meanings such as ‘image’ as repre-
参照   SANSHŌ　reference
対照   TAISHŌ　contrast
照り返し  terikaeshi　refl ector
賞品  SHŌHIN　prize
賞賛  SHŌSAN 　praise
一等賞 ITTŌSHŌ　fi rst prize
and 昭 331 (qv) as semantic and phonetic, 
meaning ‘bright’, to give ‘bright fl ames’; Katō 
takes the associated sense as ‘rise’ as well as 
‘bright’, referring to fl ames burning bright and 
also rising up high. OT1968:624; KJ1970:607; 
YK1976:276.
Mnemonic: BRIGHT FLAMES SHINE AND 
ILLUMINATE
rises’, ‘high’; now meaning ‘moreover’, ‘esteem’). 
尚 possibly has a semantic role in terms of ‘high’ 
(achievement), but here it is mainly a phonetic 
with associated sense ‘bestow’, to give ‘bestow 
shell currency/valuables’ (on someone meritori-
ous); by extension,  ‘prize; praise’. KJ1970:545-6; 
MS1995:v2:1246-7; YK1976:277.
Mnemonic: MOREOVER, SHELLS ARE PRAISED 
AS PRIZES
SHŌ, teru/rasu
illuminate, shine
13 strokes
SHŌ
prize, praise
15 strokes
照
賞
L3
L3
541
542
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 火 8 ‘fl ames, 
fi re’ in its modifi ed bottom-of-graph form灬, 
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 貝 10 ‘shell, shell cur-
rency’ and 尚 1491 (early meanings ‘smoke 
臣下 SHINKA　vassal
臣民 SHINMIN 　subjects
大臣 DAIJIN　minister
Schuessler, by contrast, treats the abstract senses 
as extended usage with a basic meaning ‘one 
who watches and looks after things on behalf of 
higher authority’, and hence the range in status 
from ‘servant’ through to ‘minister’. Distinguish 
from 巨 1209 (‘huge, giant’), though this may 
be helpful as a mnemonic, taking the extra two 
short strokes as eyelashes. MS1995:v2:1084-5; 
KJ1970:130; YK1976:286; OT1968:829; 
AS2007:468.
Mnemonic: SQUARE-EYED GIANT WITH 
EYELASHES IS A RETAINER
SHIN, JIN
retainer, subject, 
minister
7 strokes
臣
L3
543
OBI ; seal . Depicts eye with exaggeratedly 
large pupil. Taken to mean ‘eyeball’, with senses 
such as ‘servant, retainer’ typically treated as 
loan usages (Mizukami, Katō, Yamada, Ogawa). 
信用 SHIN’YŌ　trust
迷信 MEISHIN 　superstition
確信 KAKUSHIN　conviction
SHIN
trust, believe
9 strokes
信
L3
544
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 言 118 ‘words, speech’, 
and 亻 41 ‘person’, the latter element being 
taken as phonetic with associated sense ‘pile 
up, accumulate’, to give ‘words spoken pile 
up on (= correspond to) inner thoughts’, and 
hence ‘sincerity; believe’ (Yamada, Katō). Katō 
and Mizukami consider that 亻 may be in error 
for 千 (49 ‘thousand’), but even so the latter is 

The 200 Fourth Grade Characters  183
成分   SEIBUN　component
成人   SEIJIN　adult (in Japan 20)
成り立つ  naritatsu　form, consist of
be held with both hands; also, the phonetic in 
those same early forms is sometimes close in 
shape to 丨, and on that basis is taken by Katō 
and Yamada as the earliest form of 十 35 (‘ten’), 
though still acting as a phonetic here with the 
same associated sense (‘pile up’, ‘repeat’) as 
丁. Mizukami and Yamada treat the meanings 
‘achieve’, ‘complete’ as extended, deriving from 
working with wood and fi nishing or complet-
ing an object. MS1995:v1:536-7; YK1976:298; 
KJ1970:593-95. A diffi  cult graph in terms of 
mnemonics, but we suggest taking the full 
form of halberd, 戊 , and the additional  (from 
丁) as a bent nail.
Mnemonic: HALBERD CONSISTS OF BLADE, 
HANDLE, AND BENT NAIL!
SEI, JŌ, naru/su
become, make, consist
6 strokes
成
L3
545
OBI ; seal . The seal form has 戊 ‘halberd’ 
(see for example 476, sometimes also occur-
ring as 戈 or in multiples 戔), and 丁 367 (nail, 
now meaning ‘exact’ and ‘town block’) as a 
phonetic with associated sense ‘pile up, repeat’, 
to give ‘cutting tool for repeatedly shaving or 
planing wood’. Some of the OBI and bronze 
occurrences point not so much to a weapon 
as to a woodworking tool which needed to 
反省  HANSEI　(self-) refl ection
省略  SHŌRYAKU　omission
厚生省 KŌSEISHŌ　Welfare Ministry
graph through error arising from the similarity in 
shape of these elements (there is limited similarity 
in shape between the two in some bronze forms). 
Tōdō treats the 少 of 省 as having a semantic 
function, and includes the graph and underlying 
word in a word-family ‘divide up small’; on this 
basis, he takes 省 as ‘make the eyes narrow and 
look’; ‘examine’ may then be seen as an extended 
sense, along with ‘ministry’, for in ancient China 
one had to pass examinations to work for the 
government.. Both the semantic and the phonetic 
interpretations are listed by Mizukami. 眚 (but 
not 省) is regarded by various commentators 
as having OBI and bronze equivalents, though 
Mizukami lists and treats both these graphs as 
occurring at the OBI and bronze stages with the 
same or ‘shared’ shapes, with divergence fi rst 
occurring at the seal stage. Yamada suggests this 
divergence in shape between the two arose due 
to an old or regional variant being adopted as 
the basis for 省. Whichever analysis is followed, 
the sense ‘omit’ may be regarded as a loan us-
age. KJ1970:598-9; YK1976:270-71; OT1968:697; 
MS1995:v2:916-18,920-21; TA1965:481-2.
Mnemonic: FEW EYES EXAMINE MINISTRY – AN 
OMISSION
SEI, SHŌ, habuku, 
kaerimiru
ministry, omit, 
examine
9 strokes
省
L3
546
Seal ; late graph (Shuowen); treated by Mizukami 
as having OBI and bronze equivalents (see below). 
Consists of 目 76 ‘eye’, with a second element 
少 160 (‘few’) which is taken either as phonetic 
in function or as semantic, depending on the 
scholar. The phonetic view (Katō, Yamada) takes 
少 as having the associated sense ‘cover, conceal’, 
and links 省 to what in seal script is the similarly-
shaped 眚, which means ‘cannot see clearly’ (a CO; 
in modern Chinese usage has meanings ‘cataract’ 
and ‘disaster’). Katō and Yamada feel that confu-
sion arose between 眚 and 省 due partly to the 
similarity of shape, but also because of similarity 
in pronunciation between 省 and 視 889 ‘see’, 
which led to ‘see’ being taken (misunderstood) 
as the main sense of 省 (省 is noted as ‘see’ in 
Shuowen). Ogawa also considers that 少 came to 
be used sometimes in place of 生 44 (‘life’) in this 
still acting as phonetic and still with the same 
associated sense (pile up, accumulate); Ogawa 
prefers to regard 亻 in its semantic function of 
‘person’, in which case ‘sincerity’ and ‘believe’ 
are perhaps to be treated as extended senses, 
but this is not clear. YK1976:286; KJ1970:515-6; 
MS1995:v1:66-7; OT1968:64. As a mnemonic we 
suggest taking the meanings of the characters as 
they stand – on trust, one might say.
Mnemonic: TRUST THE WORDS A PERSON 
SAYS – THAT’S MY BELIEF

184  The 200 Fourth Grade Characters
清潔  SEIKETSU　cleanliness
清浄  SEIJŌ/SHŌJŌ　purity
清水  shimizu*　spring water
静止  SEISHI　stillness
静けさ  shizukesa　quietude
静脈  JŌMYAKU　vein
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵 ‘water’ 42, 
and 青 45 (‘green/blue’) as phonetic with as-
sociated sense ‘clear, not cloudy (of liquids)’, to 
give ‘clear water’ and by extension the general-
ized sense ‘clear, pure’. KJ1970:593; YK1976:302; 
OT1968:588.
Mnemonic: BLUE WATER IS PURE AND CLEAN
associated sense ‘beautiful’, to give ‘beautiful 
green/blue color’, and ‘quiet, calm’ is treated as a 
loan usage (Katō, Yamada). Alternatively, it is 争 
that is treated as semantic, and 青 as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘stop’, to give ‘stop con-
fl ict’, and hence ‘quiet,calm’ (Ogawa). Mizukami 
lists both views. MS1995:v2:1428-9; KJ1970:653; 
YK1976:306.
Mnemonic: CONFLICT QUIETENED BY SIGHT 
OF CALMING GREEN – ALL CALM
SEI, SHŌ, kiyoi/meru
pure, clean
11 strokes
SEI, JŌ, shizuka/maru
quiet, calm
14 strokes
清
静
L3
L3
547
548
Bronze 
; seal 
. Interpretations diff er. One 
analysis takes 青 45 ‘green/blue’ as semantic, 
and 争 558 (‘confl ict’, qv) as phonetic with 
出席 SHUSSEKI　attendance
欠席 KESSEKI　absence
空席 KŪSEKI　empty seat
面積 MENSEKI　dimensions
積雪 SEKISETSU　snow depth
積もり tsumori　intention
At the seal stage, the phonetic was changed 
to an abbreviated form of 庶 (‘various’ 1480) 
as phonetic, again with associated sense 
‘spread out below’, with 巾 ‘cloth, fabric’. 
The latter element is considered to have 
been used because the rush mat was bound 
with fabric. MS1995:v1:440-41; KJ1970:612; 
YK1976:308-9. Suggest taking the graph as 
‘building’ 广 (see 127), twenty-one (2 x 十 [35] 
‘ten’ with 一 ‘one’ [1] = 21), and 巾 ‘cloth’. 
Mnemonic: BUILDING WITH TWENTY-ONE 
CLOTH SEATS
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 禾 87 ‘grain’, and責 
751 (‘blame’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘gather, accumulate’, to give ‘accumulate 
grain’, and then generalized in meaning to 
‘accumulate, pile up’ and other related senses 
such as ‘contents’, ‘product (in mathematics)’. 
MS1995:v2:970-71; OT1968:737; KJ1970:614; 
YK1976:309. 
Mnemonic: TAKE BLAME FOR PILE-UP OF 
GRAIN
SEKI
seat, place
10 strokes
SEKI, tsumu/moru
product, pile
16 strokes
席
積
L3
L3
549
550
OBI 
; seal 
. The OBI form is a pictograph 
of a mat made of rushes or similar. There 
were then later forms with either the rush 
mat or 巾 1232 ‘cloth, fabric’, enclosed within 
厂 (cliff) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘spread out below’, to give ‘mat to spread out’. 

The 200 Fourth Grade Characters  185
骨折  KOSSETSU　broken bone 
折り目  orime　fold, crease
折り紙  origami　origami
give ‘cut/break up vegetation’, and by extension 
‘break, bend’ in general. At seal script stage, 
the vegetation element was changed to 扌 34 
‘hand’ in error due to similarity in early shapes 
for ‘vegetation’ and ‘hand’. The use (Japanese 
only) of 折 ori for ‘occasion’ is a kun-based 
phonetic loan. OT1968:450; YK1976:310-11; 
MS1995:v1:550-51. 
Mnemonic: HAND-AX CAN BREAK OR BEND
SETSU, ori, oru/reru 
bend, break, occasion
7 strokes
折
L3
551
OBI 
; seal 
. OBI forms show 斤 1233 ‘ax’, 
pointing to an element of vegetation (see 53) to 
調節 CHŌSETSU　adjustment
関節 KANSETSU　joint
節約 SETSUYAKU　thrift
with associated sense ‘cut’, to give ‘bamboo 
cut in sections’ or  ‘bamboo joint’, and then 
generalized to ‘section, joint’. ‘Section’ came 
to encompass a range of abstract senses such 
as a written or musical passage, or to refer to 
time (‘period’, ‘season’). ‘Cut/cut off ’ also links 
semantically to ‘restrain’, which is another 
meaning of 節. MS1995:v2:990-91; KJ1970:617-
18; YK1976:312-13; OT1968:753.
Mnemonic: BAMBOO HAS JOINTS, NAMELY 
SECTIONS  
SETSU, SECHI, fushi
section, restrain, tune, 
period, joint
13 strokes
節
L3
552
Bronze ; seal 
. Has ⺮ 58 ‘bamboo’, and 
卽/即 1650 (person kneeling before large 
food container, now ‘namely’) as phonetic 
説明 SETSUMEI　explanation
小説 SHŌSETSU　novel
学説 GAKUSETSU　theory
Yamada and Shirakawa take 
 semantically as 
‘shaman who invokes the gods’; Katō, however, 
sees 
 here as phonetic with associated sense 
‘set up, establish’. Resultant overall mean-
ing of 説 based on the above is ‘disseminate/
set out ideas through language’. YK1976:313; 
SS1984:513; KJ1970:602-3. Suggest 
 as ‘elder 
brother’ 兄 114 with 八 ‘eight’ 70, often used to 
show dispersal, as here.
Mnemonic: ELDER BROTHER DISPERSES 
WORDS, PREACHING AWAY
SETSU, toku
preach, explain
14 strokes
説
L4
553
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Traditional form 
has 兌 on right. Views vary. Has 言 118 ‘words, 
speech’, and NJK 
/兌 (shaman – one who 
invokes and disseminates to the gods the will 
of humans) as either semantic or phonetic. 
浅薄 SENPAKU　shallowness
浅瀬 asase　shallows
浅黄 asagi　light yellow
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵 42 ‘water’, 
and 戔 (‘two halberds; fi ght, injure’ – see 545) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘few, little’, 
to give ‘little water’, and hence ‘shallow’. ‘Light 
(in color)’ is an extended sense. KJ1970:760-61; 
YK1976:316; OT1968:575; TA1965:569. 
Mnemonic: SHALLOW WATER – JUST DEPTH 
OF TWO HALBERDS 
SEN, asai 
shallow, light
9 strokes
浅
L3
554

186  The 200 Fourth Grade Characters
当選   TŌSEN　election
選手   SENSHU　player
選び出す erabidasu　pick out, select
‘continue walking’. Ogawa, alternatively, treats
巽 as both semantic and phonetic, meaning 
‘arrange properly’, to give original meaning 
‘select, arrange, and send’ for 選. With Ogawa’s 
treatment, ‘choose’ is a selectively extended 
sense, while Katō and Yamada take it as a loan 
usage. KJ1970:625; YK1976:320; OT1968:1014. 
We suggest taking 己 as 866 ‘self’ in its original 
meaning of ‘twisting threads’ (x 2), with 共 484 
‘together’, plus ⻌ movement. 
Mnemonic: CHOOSE TO MOVE TOGETHER 
LIKE TWO TWISTED THREADS 
SEN, erabu, yoru
choose
15 strokes
選
L3
556
大戦 TAISEN　major war
戦場 SENJŌ　battleground
作戦 SAKUSEN　strategy
shield with trappings; now means ‘simple’); 單
here is widely taken as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘fi ght’, thus ‘fi ght with halberds’, 
then generalized sense ‘fi ght; war’, but given 
its original meaning (in either sense), it may 
have had a semantic role too. MS1995:v1:542-3; 
KJ1970:625; YK1970:319; OT1968:396,190; 
SS1984:522; MR2007:237.  
Mnemonic: FIGHT IN WAR WITH SIMPLE 
HALBERD 
SEN, tatakau, ikusa
fi ght, war
13 strokes
戦
L3
555
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 戰. OBI form has 
two halberds 戔 (halberds > ‘fi ght, injure’, see 
545), bronze onwards one 戈, with單/単 569 
(usually seen as forked weapon, but possibly 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional form 
; Interpretations vary.  Has 辶/⻌ 85 ‘go, walk’, 
and 巽 (CO, ‘arrange items on table in order’) 
as phonetic with associated sense taken by 
Katō and Yamada as ‘continue afterwards’ > 
当然   TŌZEN　rightly
天然   TENNEN　nature
然るべき  shikarubeki　proper, due
elements for ‘fi eld’ with several plows and dogs, 
the ‘dog’ element being taken as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘fi eld/drainage ditch’ (CO 畎). 
Because at the bronze stage the elements for 
‘plow’ and ‘dog’ were of similar shape, bronze 
stage ‘plow’ was misinterpreted and carried 
over into seal script as ‘dog’. In due course, the 
graph 然 was borrowed for its sound value to 
represent other linguistic forms having abstract 
meanings such as ‘in such a manner, thus’. 
Usage in abstract senses came to predomi-
nate, and so to distinguish 然 when used in its 
original meaning ‘burn’, 火 was added to create 
the new graph 燃 (786, ‘burn’). YK1976:322; 
KJ1970:633,103; MS1995:802-3,1070-72; 
OT1968:621; QX2000:329. Though etymologi-
cally incorrect, we suggest taking 
 as ‘dog 
meat’ (犬 19 ‘dog’ and 月 ‘meat’ 209), and 灬 8 
‘burn, fl ames’.
Mnemonic: DULY EAT BURNT DOG MEAT, AS 
IS PROPER, BUT
ZEN, NEN, shikaru,
shikashi
duly, thus, but, so, 
proper
12 strokes
然
L3
557
Bronze ; seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). 
Interpretation disputed. Analysis based on 
early forms gives 灬 (火) 8 ‘fl ames, fi re’, with 
 as phonetic with associated sense taken by 
Yamada and Ogawa as ‘fl ames, burn’, result-
ing in the overall meaning ‘burn/burn fi ercely’. 
Katō cautions against taking the top left-hand 
element in 然 as ‘meat’ (the meaning it has in 有 
423, for example), pointing to OBI and bronze 
forms for 
 which depict a plow (or plows), not 
a piece of meat; those forms are complicated 
in shape, the most complicated having the 

The 200 Fourth Grade Characters  187
戦争   SENSŌ　war
競争者  KYŌSŌSHA　competitor
言い争い iiarasoi　quarrel
arm with fl exed muscles. The seal form again 
has a hand, reaching for someone else’s hand 
holding an object. Typically taken to originally 
mean ‘restrain someone’, with ‘quarrel’ as an 
extended sense, but could equally be taken 
to mean ‘quarrel’ directly. MS1995:v2:818-9; 
KJ1970:653; YK1976:324; QX2000:156. We sug-
gest taking the modern graph as a bent old 
man 
 41 and   
 as a hand holding a stick.
Mnemonic: VIE WITH BENT OLD MAN WITH 
STICK IN HIS HAND
SŌ, arasou
confl ict, vie
6 strokes
争
L3
558
船倉 SENSŌ　ship’s hold
倉皇 SŌKŌ　in great haste
倉荷 kurani　warehouse goods
OBI 
; bronze 
; seal 
. Has 
 (roof 
cover), and 
/  (OBI form shows meaning to 
be ‘open a door with hand’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘fragrant grain’, giving overall 
meaning ‘barn, warehouse’. KJ1970:347-8; 
YK1976:327-8; MS1995:v1:74-5. Suggest taking 
the modern graph as cover 
 , 
 120 variant 
‘door’, and 口 22 ‘entrance’. 
Mnemonic: WAREHOUSE HAS COVER AND 
ENTRANCE WITH DOOR 
SŌ, kura 
warehouse,
sudden
10 strokes
倉
L1
559
OBI ; bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 
; OBI 
forms have what appears to be two opposing 
hands and an object, while bronze forms diff er 
in having a hand restraining another person’s 
帰巣  KISŌ　homing
巣箱  subako　nesting box
巣立つ sudatsu　leave nest/home
Katō treats top element as pictograph of 
container – in this case wine strainer or press – 
but here acting as phonetic (corresponding to 
later 甾) and having associated sense ‘gather, 
collect’, to give ‘birds gather and settle on a 
tree’. As things are collected in a container, the 
top element may be taken as both semantic 
and phonetic if Katō is followed. OT1968:508; 
SS1984:542; KJ1970:432. Suggest take as 果 454 
‘fruit tree’ with three sticks on top.
Mnemonic: THREE STICKS ATOP FRUIT TREE 
FORM NEST
SŌ, su 
nest
11 strokes
巣
L1
560
Bronze ; seal 
; traditional 巢. Etymology 
disputed. One view takes as 木 73 ‘tree’, with 
top element representing a bird’s nest (Ogawa, 
Shirakawa). Seal form suggests this, but the 
one bronze form scholars list has an ordered 
appearance, suggesting an artifi cial object. 
結束  KESSOKU　bond, union
花束  hanataba　bouquet
束の間  tsukanoma　brief moment
it (some bronze forms show several bound 
lengths of wood), so probably this graph 
represents an action, i.e. ‘tie up, bundle up’. 
Thus it seems likely that use of 束 for ‘bundle’ 
(noun) derives from its use for the verb ‘bundle’. 
Ma sees ‘tie up’ as original sense. ‘Govern, 
manage’ may be seen as an extended mean-
ing. KJ1970:647; OT1968:490; SS1984:583; 
MR2007:345. Suggest taking 口 as a box.
Mnemonic: MANAGE TO PUT BOX-LIKE BUN-
DLE UP INTO TREE
SOKU, taba(neru),
tsuka(neru)
bundle, manage
7 strokes
束
L3
561
OBI ; seal . Typically seen as bundle of wood 
tied up, and by extension ‘tie up’. OBI form, 
though, only shows one tree with rope round 

188  The 200 Fourth Grade Characters
側面  SOKUMEN　side, fl ank
右側  migigawa　right side
側仕え  sobazukae　valet
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 亻 41 ‘person’ and 則 
764 (‘mark with knife, engrave’; now means 
‘model’:) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘lean to one side’, to give ‘person leaning to 
one side, lame’; ‘side’ is an extended sense. 
MS1995:v1:76-7; KJ1970:646; YK1976:335.
Mnemonic: BE AT SIDE OF MODEL PERSON
SOKU, -gawa, soba 
side
11 strokes
側
L3
562
続々 
 ZOKUZOKU　successively
連続  RENZOKU　continuity
手続き  tetsuzuki　procedure
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional  續. 
Has 糸 29 ‘thread’, and  206 (‘exchange’)/売 
211 (‘sell’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘join, link’, to give overall meaning ‘join up 
broken thread’; sense extended through gen-
eralization to ‘join up, continue’. YK1976:337; 
KJ1970:46; MS1995:v2:1026-7. 
Mnemonic: CONTINUE TO SELL THREADS
ZOKU, tsuzuku/keru 
continue, series
13 strokes
続
L3
563
卒業 SOTSUGYŌ　graduation
兵卒 HEISOTSU　soldier
卒去 SOKKYO　death
of 卒 is ‘dyed garment’ (Katō, Yamada), and 
senses such as ‘sudden’ and ‘die’ are loan usages. 
In contrast, Shirakawa attributes a ritualistic 
signifi cance, considering ‘die’ to be the main 
meaning of this graph, based on it originally 
showing an upper garment for a dead person, 
with the element 丿 showing a cord for tying; 
a similar type of garment was later worn also 
by low-ranking servants and soldiers. In Shi-
rakawa’s treatment, the sense ‘sudden’ appears 
to be a loan usage. KJ1970:651-2; YK1976:338; 
OT1968:139; MS1995:v1:168-9; SS1984:556.  
Suggest take 十as ‘ten’ 35, 人人 as ‘men, per-
sons’ (see 41), and 亠as ‘top hat’. 
Mnemonic: TEN SOLDIER-MEN IN TOP HATS
SOTSU
soldier, end, die, sud-
den
8 strokes
卒
L3
564
Seal 
. Seal 
 has 衣 444 ‘garment’, with a 
mark 丿. Typically the mark is taken as show-
ing a way of making the garment distinctive 
for use by a particular group, namely slaves or 
low-ranking servants, possibly by using dyes; 
the garment may have been a lightweight one 
to wear on top. In this view, overall meaning 
子孫  SHISON　descendants
孫引き  magobiki　requotation
孫娘  magomusume　granddaughter
join’, and provisional overall meaning ‘those 
who follow after children’, i.e. ‘grandchildren’. 
Mizukami also notes several other proposals: 
fi rstly, 玄 1297 (‘fi ne thread’), noted as one 
possibility by Katō alongside 系, to give ‘those 
who follow after children’ or alternatively 幺 
(‘fi ne thread’ > ‘small’), part of Yamada’s analysis. 
Yamada treats 子 here as both semantic and 
phonetic, meaning ‘come later, follow’, to give 
‘small/young ones who follow children’, i.e. 
‘grandchildren’. MS1995:v1:352-3; KJ1970:652; 
YK1976:339. 
Mnemonic: DESCENDANTS ARE CHILDREN IN 
THREAD-LIKE LINEAGE
SON, mago 
descendants, grand-
children
10 strokes
孫
L3
565
OBI 
; seal 
. Generally taken as 子 27 ‘child, 
off spring’ as semantic, with another element 
interpreted tentatively and variously. Mizukami 
identifi es the second element as 糸 29 ‘thread’, 
which later becomes 系 855 (‘joined threads’), 
with associated sense in either case being ‘link, 

The 200 Fourth Grade Characters  189
地帯 CHITAI　zone
帯地 obiJI　obi material
熱帯 NETTAI　tropics
to wear round the waist with items attached’. 
The curved middle element in the seal form 
(冖 in block script) normally means ‘cover’, 
but in this graph probably indicates ‘wear 
around the waist’. KJ1970:664; YK1976:344-
5; OT1968:317. Suggest taking 
 as 山 26 
‘mountain’ and — as ‘zone’. 
Mnemonic: WEAR CLOTH BELT IN MOUNTAIN 
ZONE
TAI , obi, obiru 
belt, zone, obi, wear
10 strokes
帯
L3
566
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 巾 1232 
‘cloth’, and a top element showing a waistband 
with various items attached, to give ‘belt/sash 
兵隊 HEITAI　soldier
軍隊 GUNTAI　army
部隊 BUTAI　troop
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 
. Has 阝1907 
‘mound, hill’, and /  (CO, originally ‘cut up pig/
boar’) as phonetic with associated sense ‘hang 
down; fall’ (later written 墜, see 1735), to give 
‘fall from a hill’. ‘Group, troops’ are loan usages. 
MS1995:v2:1400-01; KJ1970:663; YK1976:345; 
OT1968:1072. 
Mnemonic: UNIT OF PIG-LIKE SOLDIERS ON 
HILL
TAI
corps, unit
12 strokes
隊
L1
567
発達 HATTATSU　development
達人 TATSUJIN　expert
人達 hitotachi　people
to 
 as phonetic with associated sense ‘pass 
through’, to give ‘road passes through without 
obstacles’; sense extended through generaliza-
tion to ‘go through, reach’. Use for the Japanese 
plural suffi  x ‘-tachi’ is a borrowing. KJ1970:676-
7; YK1976:349; OT1968:1007. Suggest taking 羊 
426 ‘sheep’, and 土 as ‘ground’ 64.
Mnemonic: SHEEP MOVE OVER GROUND TO 
ATTAIN GOAL
TATSU, -tachi 
attain, plural suffi  x
12 strokes
達
L3
568
Bronze  seal 
. Has ⻌ ‘go, move’ 85, and 
 
(‘lamb is born’), which later changed shape 
単位 TAN’I　unit, denomination
単純 TANJUN　simple
単独 TANDOKU　solo
roundish or oblong shape at or near the point 
where the two prongs meet is probably to 
hold them fi rmly in place.  Overall meaning – if 
the fi rst analysis above is followed – is ‘sharp 
two-pronged weapon’. The meanings ‘one; 
simple’ are loan usages. MS1995:v1:240-41; 
KJ1970:681-2; YK1976:350-51; SS1984:579; 
BK1956:58-9. Suggest 
 as ‘ten’ 十 35 and 
‘fi eld’ 田 63, with three strokes a ‘triple’.
Mnemonic: START WITH SINGLE UNIT OF TEN 
FIELDS, THEN TRIPLE – SIMPLE!
TAN  
simple, single, unit
9 strokes
単
L3
569
OBI ; seal 
; traditional 單. Typically taken as 
depicting a two-pronged thrusting weapon for 
stabbing an opponent or possibly wild animals 
as prey, though Shirakawa interprets as a shield 
with embellishments, and Karlgren tentatively 
takes as a cicada (later 蝉). The purpose of the 

190  The 200 Fourth Grade Characters
放置  HŌCHI　leaving as is
置き物  okimono　ornament
置き場  okiba　repository
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 网 ‘net’ (as 
modern component, usually 罒), and 直 192 
(‘direct, upright’) as semantic and phonetic, 
meaning ‘set up, put up’. The resultant mean-
ing is ‘set up a net (to catch birds, etc.)’, then 
extended (generalized) to ‘set up, place’. 
KJ1970:690; YK1976:357; OT1968:796.
Mnemonic: SET UP NET BY PUTTING IT IN 
PLACE DIRECTLY UPRIGHT 
CHI, oku  
put, place, set up
13 strokes
置
L3
570
仲裁  CHŪSAI　mediation
仲人  nakōdo*　go-between
仲良く  nakayoku　cordially
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 亻 41 ‘person’, 
and 中 49 (‘middle’) as semantic and phonetic, 
meaning ‘one who is between his elder and 
younger brother (s)’; by extension, mean-
ing generalized to ‘one who stands between 
two others’. YK1976:360; MS1995:v1:50-51; 
OT1968:50; AS2007:621.
Mnemonic: PERSON IN MIDDLE MAKES FOR 
GOOD RELATIONSHIP
CHŪ, naka
relationship
6 strokes
仲
L3
571
貯金  CHOKIN　savings
貯蔵  CHOZŌ 　storage
貯水槽 CHOSUISŌ　water-tank
兆候 CHŌKŌ　sign
前兆 ZENCHŌ 　omen
億兆 OKUCHŌ　the masses
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 貝 10 ‘shell currency’, and 
宁 (‘frame for winding and storing thread’) as 
semantic and phonetic, meaning ‘accumulate 
and store’, to give ‘accumulate and store shell 
currency’; later generalized to ‘accumulate, 
save’. KJ1970:702; MS1995:v2:1236-7, v1:358-9; 
YK1976:363. Suggest taking 宁 as roof 宀 30 
and 丁 367 ‘exact’. 
Mnemonic: STORED SHELL-MONEY FITS 
EXACTLY UNDER ROOF
was believed to be response of the gods. Turtle 
shells and shoulder bones of deer, etc. were 
used as convenient relatively fl at surfaces for 
writing at that time, and some three thousand 
years later provide evidence of the earliest 
known stage of Chinese writing. Some seal 
forms have 卜 (‘divination cracks’ > ‘divination’: 
see 96) added. Because 兆 originally showed 
a shell used for divination, it acquired the 
extended sense ‘sign, omen’. ‘Trillion’ is simply 
loan usage. KJ1970:301; MS1995:v1:92-3, 172-3; 
YK1976:364.
Mnemonic: CRACKED BACK-TO-BACK 
TURTLE-SHELLS SHOW BILLION OMENS
CHO, takuwaeru
store, save
12 strokes
CHŌ, kizashi/su
sign, omen, trillion
6 strokes
貯
兆
L3
L3
572
573
OBI 
; seal 
. Pictograph showing cracks on 
turtle shell heated for divination, an impor-
tant ritual and predictive tool for the Shang 
rulers. Long curved line in OBI divides the two 
main parts of such a text, which was in parallel 
questions. Based on pattern of cracks when the 
shell was heated, diviners would predict what 

The 200 Fourth Grade Characters  191
腸線 CHŌSEN　(cat) gut
腸炎 CHŌEN 　enteritis
大腸 DAICHŌ　large intestine
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 月 (肉) 209 
‘fl esh’, and 昜 161 (CO, ‘sun rises high’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘long’, to give 
‘long body part’, i.e. ‘intestines’. KJ1970:880; 
YK1976:368; OT1968:825.
Mnemonic: FLESHY INTESTINES EXPOSED TO 
RISING SUN
CHŌ, harawata
intestine(s)
13 strokes
腸
L1
574
最低 SAITEI　lowest
低利 TEIRI 　low interest rate
低落 TEIRAKU　decline
live lower down, servants’, as opposed to the 
nobility; adherents of the other view (Ogawa, 
Tōdō) take 低 to mean ‘short person’. In both 
cases, ‘short, low’ is an extended sense general-
ized from original meaning. Mizukami lists both 
views for the element 氐. KJ1970:713-4; 
YK1976:372; TA1965:749-52; OT1968:55; 
MS1995:v2:724-6. Suggest taking 氏 as ‘clan’ 
with bottom line beneath, and 亻 41 as ‘persons, 
people’.
Mnemonic: PEOPLE OF THAT CLAN ARE VERY 
LOW – BOTTOM-LINE IN FACT
TEI, hikui
low
7 strokes
低
L4
575
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Analyses vary. 
Has 亻41 ‘person’, and disputed element 氐 (in-
terpreted as either ‘base of small hill’, or ‘spoon 
touching bottom of plate’ > ‘down low’, ‘scrape’) 
as semantic and phonetic (see 氏 522 ‘clan’). 
Former view (Katō, Yamada) gives ‘those who 
海底 KAITEI　sea-bed
奥底 OKUsoko　depths
底流 TEIRYŪ　under-current
ing ‘dwelling at foot of hill’ (see 575). Yamada 
takes ‘lowest part, bottom’ as loan usage, but 
it can alternatively be seen as extended sense 
through generalization. Ogawa takes 氐 diff er-
ently, as phonetic only with associated sense 
‘stop, stay’; in this view, ‘bottom’ is loan use. 
KJ1970:713; YK1976:373; OT1968:327-8. As 575, 
use ‘clan’ 氏 and ‘bottom line’.
Mnemonic: THAT BOTTOM-LINE CLAN IS 
NOW BASED IN A BUILDING
TEI, soko
bottom, base
8 strokes
底
L3
576
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 广 127 
‘house, building’, and 氐 (either ‘base of small 
hill’, or ‘spoon touching bottom of plate’ > 
‘down low’) as semantic and phonetic, mean-
停止  TEISHI　stoppage
停車所 TEISHAJO　station
停電  TEIDEN　power cut
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 亻 41 ‘per-
son’, and 亭 1745 (‘tall/turreted house’ or ‘inn to 
lodge’) as semantic and phonetic, to give ‘stay 
at a house’; by extension, ‘stay, stop’ in general. 
KJ1970:715; YK1976:374; OT1968:75.
Mnemonic: PERSON STAYS AT TALL INN
TEI
stop
11 strokes
停
L3
577

192  The 200 Fourth Grade Characters
目的  MOKUTEKI　aim, purpose
理想的 RISŌTEKI　ideal
的外れ matohazure　off -target
‘bright sunlight’. Block script has this graph with 
白 69 ‘white’, not 日, and 的 is treated in Kangxi 
zidian as a later variant form of 旳; the meaning 
range ‘white, bright’ for 白 may have led to this 
change between seal and block script. Katō and 
Yamada suggest the meaning ‘target’ derives 
from targets having been white. Meanings such 
as ‘-like’ (to form adjectives) and – in Chinese – 
for other grammatical elements represent loan 
usage. KJ1970:720; YK1976:375; OT1968:687; 
AS2007:631.
Mnemonic: WHITE LADLE MAKES GOOD TARGET
TEKI, mato
target, -like, adjectival 
suffi  x
8 strokes
的
L3
578
Seal ; late graph (Shuowen). Seal form has 日 66 
‘sun’, and 勺 (‘ladle; traditional unit of measure’, in 
Jōyō kanji List 1981, excluded 2010) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘white, bright’, to give 
辞典 JITEN　dictionary
典拠 TENKYO　authority
典型 TENKEI　model, type
Ogawa takes the text on the stand as a precious 
book, thereby giving extended senses such 
as ‘code, rule; model’, while Yamada and Katō 
see the extended senses as related to other 
near-homophones meaning ‘place, put’. Though 
earliest form for 典 itself is bronze, there are 
many OBI occurrences for upper element 冊 
884 (‘bound volume’). OT1968:98; KJ1970:726; 
YK1976:378; MS1995:v1:108-9; AS2007:211,498. 
Mnemonic: LOOSELY BOUND WRITING-
TABLETS ON DESK ARE CODE OF RULES
TEN, nori
code, rule, precedent
8 strokes
典
L1
579
Bronze 
; seal . Bronze form has upper ele-
ment showing strips of early writing material 
(turtle shell) bound together as a volume, placed 
on top of lower element which is a stand/desk. 
伝説   DENSETSU　legend
伝記   DENKI　biography
伝え聞く  tsutaekiku　hear a rumor
sense interpreted variously as ‘replace what pre-
cedes; relay runner’ (Katō, Yamada, Mizukami), or 
‘move (something) elsewhere/transfer to some-
one else’ (Ogawa), or – a further alternative listed 
by Mizukami – ‘move/move (something) with a 
rolling motion’. Despite the diff erences, any one 
of these analyses still leads to ‘convey, transmit’ 
as an extended sense. KJ1970:630; YK1976:381; 
MS1995:v1:80-81; OT1968:50. Suggest 云 as ‘two’ 
二 65 and ム as noses.
Mnemonic: TWO PERSONS NOSE-TO-NOSE 
TRANSMITTING SOMETHING
DEN, tsutaeru/waru
convey, transmit
6 strokes
伝
L3
580
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional 傳. Has 亻 41 ‘person’, 
and 專 925 (traditional form of modern 専 ‘sole, 
main’; originally pictograph of hand holding 
device with string wound round); here, this latter 
element functions as phonetic with associated 
生徒  SEITO　pupil
徒歩者 TOHOSHA　pedestrian
徒花  adabana　wasted eff ort
with associated sense ‘tread/step’ reinforcing 
辵, thus ‘walk along a road’. 徒 seems to have 
acquired the extended sense ‘foot-soldiers’ at an 
early period, no doubt along with ‘follower, com-
panion, apprentice’. ‘Futile’ might perhaps refer 
to those unable to keep up, including even in a 
metaphoric sense. MS1995:1280-83; KJ1970:730, 
YK1976:382; OT1968:351. Take  as 走 179 ‘run’ 
with 彳 131 as ‘go, road’.
Mnemonic: FOLLOWER RUNS FUTILELY 
ALONG THE ROAD
TO, ada, itazura
follower, futile
10 strokes
徒
L3
581
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 辵 (‘foot, footprint’, com-
prising 彳 as abbreviation of 行 131 ‘crossroads, 
go’ with 止 143 ‘foot/stop/move’) ‘tread/step 
along a road’, and 土 64 (‘ground’) as phonetic 

The 200 Fourth Grade Characters  193
努力  DORYOKU　eff ort 
努力家 DORYOKUKA　hard worker
努めて  tsutomete　as best one can
Seal ; late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 奴 1773 
‘slave’, as semantic and phonetic, meaning ’do 
hard/dirty work’, reinforced by 力 78 ‘strength/
eff ort’, giving ‘work like slave’; then ‘work hard, 
make eff orts’. KJ1970:739-41; YK1976:383; 
OT1965:125; AS2007:404-5.
Mnemonic: TRY WITH SLAVE-LIKE EFFORT
DO, tsutomeru
endeavor, try
7 strokes
努
L3
582
灯台 TŌDAI　lighthouse 
電灯 DENTŌ　electric light
灯心 TŌSHIN　lamp wick
list 鐙 as the earlier graph for what later came 
to be written 燈; according to Yamada, 鐙 later 
came to mean ‘stirrups’ (‘metal for climbing up 
with’), and at that point the left-hand element 
in the graph for ‘light, lamp’ was changed from 
金 16 ‘metal’ to 火. Kangxi zidian classifi es 灯 as 
a popular variant form for 燈; Ogawa interprets 
丁 here as phonetic with associated sense ‘red’. 
YK1976:385; KJ1970:733; OT1968:616,628; 
ZY2009:681,659. Take 丁 as 367 ‘nail’.
Mnemonic: BURNING NAIL GIVES OFF LIGHT!?
TŌ, hi
light, lamp
6 strokes
灯
L3
583
Late, post-Shuowen graph; traditional 燈. Has 火 
8 ‘fl ame, fi re’, and 登 382 (‘climb’) taken as either 
a semantic element meaning ‘rise’ (Yamada),or 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘burn’ (Yamada, 
Ogawa), to give ‘light, lamp’. Katō and Yamada 
講堂   KŌDŌ　auditorium 
食堂   SHOKUDŌ　dining hall
堂々たる  DŌDŌtaru　stately, grand
労働  RŌDŌ　labor 
働き手  hatarakite　hard worker
働き口  hatarakiguchi　job available
‘esteem’) as semantic and phonetic, meaning 
‘high, tall’. Originally, thought to have normally 
denoted a site with earth piled up high with 
a building set on top; appears to have come 
to denote a very substantial building. Note: 
Mizukami gives one bronze form which he 
equates with 堂. KJ1970:668; YK1976:392; 
MS1995:v1:272-3,400-01.
Mnemonic: GRAND HALL IS BUILT, MOREOVER, 
ON SOLID GROUND
A graph devised in Japan (kokuji) – see 
Introduction. Has 亻 41 ‘person’, and 動 384 
‘move’, thence to ‘work’. The on reading DŌ was 
created by analogy on the basis of that for 動. 
YK1976:393; KJ1970:704.
Mnemonic: WORKING PEOPLE ON THE MOVE
DŌ
hall, temple
11 strokes
DŌ, hataraku
work
13 strokes
堂
働
L4
L4
584
585
Seal 
; arguably a late graph (Shuowen). Has  
土 64 ‘ground’, and 尚 1491 (smoke rising from 
high-up window, now meaning ‘moreover’, 
特徴 TOKUCHŌ　characteristic 
特長 TOKUCHŌ　forte
独特 DOKUTOKU　uniqueness
alternatively ‘stand upright’, to give ‘stud bull’ 
(Tōdō, Ogawa). Bulls were often taken for sacri-
fi cial purposes, and the ones selected tended to 
be of the highest quality, hence the sense ‘spe-
cial’; Shirakawa also quotes an early passage 
in which 特 has the meaning ‘special’, this 
time with reference to people. KJ1970:481-2; 
YK1976:394; TA1965:88-90; SS1984:659.
Mnemonic: BULL AT THE TEMPLE MEANS 
SOMETHING SPECIAL
TOKU
special
10 strokes
特
L4
586
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 牜 108 ‘ox, 
cow’, and 寺 149 (‘temple’) as phonetic. The 
phonetic is taken as associated sense ‘single 
young male’, to give ‘bull’ (Katō, Yamada), or 

194  The 200 Fourth Grade Characters
得点  TOKUTEN　points, score
所得  SHOTOKU　income
有り得る ariuru　possible
‘obtain wealth on the road’. The modern sense 
‘gain’ is a generalization of the original mean-
ing; ‘potential’ can be seen as an extended 
sense. By the seal stage, the component 貝 
was being rendered through error as 見 20 
‘see’. Then at the clerical script stage, 見/貝 
was commonly abbreviated to 目 or 日, and 
this carried through to the block script as 得. 
QX2000:187-8; KJ1970:743,579; YK1976:395; 
MS1995:v1:488-9,192; SK1984:294-70. Take 
right-hand elements as 日 66 ‘day’, ‘one’ 一 1, 
and ‘hand/measure’ 寸.
Mnemonic: MEASURE POTENTIAL GAINS IN 
MOVEMENT OVER ONE DAY
TOKU, eru, uru
gain, potential
11 strokes
得
L3
587
OBI 
; seal 
. Corresponding OBI and bronze 
forms often lack the element 彳 131 ‘road, go’, 
and have only 貝 10 (‘shell, shell-currency’) 
with 又 2003/ 寸 920 (both meaning ‘hand’). 
Early forms of these two graphs were very 
similar, and often 又 was changed to 寸 (Qiu), 
also meaning ‘measure’, thus ‘obtain wealth’. 
Addition of 彳 changed the meaning to 
有毒  YŪDOKU　poisonous
気の毒  KInoDOKU　sorry, pity
毒蛇  DOKUhebi　venomous snake
Seal ; late graph (Shuowen). Has 屮 53 ‘plant’, 
and 毐 (indecent act) as phonetic with as-
sociated sense ‘harm’, to give ‘plants to harm 
people’, thus ‘poison’. KJ1970:742-3; YK1976:396; 
OT1968:548. Take as 
 / 母 222 ‘mother’ and 
 as variant of 生 44 ‘life’.
Mnemonic: MOTHER LIVES ON DESPITE 
POISON
DOKU
poison
8 strokes
毒
L3
588
熱心 NESSHIN　enthusiasm
熱帯 NETTAI　tropics
耐熱 TAINETSU　heat resistant
念力   NENRIKI　will-power
念入りな　 NENiri na　careful
念仏   NENBUTSU　Buddhist prayer
fermenting wine’, later generalized in meaning to 
‘hot vapor/hot’ and combining with火/灬 to give 
‘heat; burn’. Another interpretation takes 埶 as 
semantic and phonetic, meaning ‘power, energy’, 
regarding it as the original way of writing 勢 747 
‘power’, giving ‘heat to burn things’ (Ogawa). 
KJ1970:354-5; YK1976:402-3; OT1968:626. We 
suggest taking top left element  as ‘mounds of 
earth’ (see 627), and 丸 101 as ‘circle/round’.
Mnemonic: EARTHEN MOUNDS ROUND FIRE 
BECOME HOT
Bronze form 
; seal form . Has 心 164 ‘heart, 
mind’, and 今 138 (originally a roof or other 
covering, modern meaning ‘now’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘keep fi rmly’, to give ‘keep 
fi rmly in the mind’, and so ‘think’, sometimes 
with a profound or religious connotation. 
KJ1970:749-50; MS1995:v1:502-3; YK1976:404; 
OT1968:362.
Mnemonic: NOW THE HEART IS THOUGHT TO 
BE A CONCERN
NETSU, atsui
heat
15 strokes
NEN
thought, concern
8 strokes
熱
念
L3
L3
589
590
Seal 
. Has 火/灬 8 ‘fl ames, fi re’, and 
 (later 埶) 
(‘kneel on the ground and plant tree’: see 495). 
The latter element is taken in one analysis as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘rising heat from 

The 200 Fourth Grade Characters  195
敗戦 HAISEN　lost battle
敗走 HAISŌ　rout, fl ight
敗北 HAIBOKU　defeat
OBI form 
; seal form 
. Has 攵 (攴) 112 ‘strike, 
beat’, and 貝10 ‘(shell/money’), as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘destroy/be destroyed’, 
and hence ‘be defeated’. MS1995:v1:578-9; 
KJ1970:755-6; YK1976:411.
Mnemonic: SHELL ‘DEFEATED’ BY STRIKING 
HAND
HAI, yaburu/reru
defeat
11 strokes
敗
L3
591
梅花 BAIKA　plum blossom
梅酒 umeSHU　plum wine
梅雨 BAIU/tsuyu*　rainy season
pregnant/give birth’. The connection with child-
birth derives from the sour fruit of the plum 
having been used as an eff ective antidote to 
morning-sickness. Ume is offi  cially classifi ed as 
a native Japanese word, but is in all likelihood 
an early Chinese loan into Japanese, i.e. an SJ 
word (also in this category is 210 uma ‘horse’). 
MS1995:v1:670-71; TA1965:166-8; OT1968:506. 
Mnemonic: EVERY TREE SHOULD BE A PLUM 
TREE
BAI, ume
plum
10 strokes
梅
L1
592
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 木 73 ‘tree, wood’, and 
毎 225 (originally ‘mother wearing hairpins’ 
or ‘abundant young vegetation’, now means 
‘every’) as phonetic with associated sense ‘be 
博士  HAKASE*　Dr (academic)
博徒  BAKUTO　gambler
博物館 HAKUBUTSUKAN　museum
phones), and 尃 (CO, ‘spread out’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘big’, thus ‘collect/bring 
together/pick up on a large scale’. ‘Extensive’ is a 
generalised sense; ‘gain; gamble’ are extended 
senses. Distinguish 尃 from 専 925 ‘exclusive’. 
MS1995:v1:170-72; YK1976:413; AS2007:462-3; 
TA1965:796-9; KJ1970:772.  Suggest taking 尃 
as ‘exclusive’ 専 with extra point (at top right).  
Mnemonic: GAIN TEN EXCLUSIVE POINTS BY 
EXTENSIVE GAMBLING
HAKU, BAKU
extensive, spread, 
gain, gamble
12 strokes
博
L1
593
Bronze 
; seal 
. Left part is 十 35 ‘ten’ in a 
loan usage meaning ‘pick up, collect’ (in early 
Chinese 拾 321 (qv) and 十 were near-homo-
御飯 GOHAN　rice, food
昼飯 hirumeshi　lunch
飯田 Iida*　a surname
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 食 163 ‘food’, and 反 
393 (‘oppose’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘eat’ (Katō, Yamada) or ‘divide up’ (Mi-
zukami), giving sense ‘eat’, and by extension 
what is eaten. Initially ‘cooked rice or mil-
let’ (Schuessler), then cooked rice (as staple 
food) or food in general. MS1995: v2:1456-7; 
KJ1970:786; YK1976:419; AS2007:230. 
Mnemonic: OPPOSED TO EATING COOKED 
RICE?
HAN, meshi
cooked rice, food
12 strokes
飯
L4
594

196  The 200 Fourth Grade Characters
飛行機  HIKŌKI　aeroplane
飛語   HIGO　wild rumor
飛び出す tobidasu　jump out
OBI 
; seal 
. Pictograph of a bird with 
wings spread in fl ight, to denote ‘rise up high’, 
and so ‘fl y’. Mizukami tentatively identifi es a 
corresponding OBI form, taking it as possibly 
representing a distant view of birds in fl ight. 
MS1995:v2:1452-3; KJ1970:797; YK1976:423. 
Suggest taking  as tall reeds 
Mnemonic: TWO LONG-BEAKED CRANES 
FLYING THROUGH TALL REEDS
HI, tobu
fl y
9 strokes
飛
L3
595
費用  HIYŌ　costs
消費者 SHŌHISHA　consumer
生活費 SEIKATSUHI　living costs
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 貝 10 ‘shell currency’, 
and 弗 (CO, originally, undo cords binding 
something) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘not, not have’ (Mizukami also lists second 
analysis as ‘disperse, divide’), to give ‘lose/
disperse shell currency’, thus ‘spend’/‘costs’. 
MS1995:v2:1238-9,468-9; KJ1970:833; 
YK1976:424.
Mnemonic: UNWIND AND SPEND MONEY
HI, tsuiyasu
spend, cost
12 strokes
費
L3
596
必要 HITSUYŌ　necessity
必死 HISSHI　desperation
必然 HITSUZEN　inevitability
sense ‘necessarily’ is regarded as an extended 
usage based on the perception of certainty 
and reliability of such a weapon handle. 
Clerical script forms exhibit shapes transitional 
between the seal form on the one hand and 
block script on the other. MS1995:v1:494-6; 
KJ1970:805-6; YK1976:425-6; SK1984:302. We 
suggest taking the modern graph as  心 164 
‘heart’, with long extra stroke through middle ノ  
(take as lance).
Mnemonic: LANCE THROUGH THE HEART 
NECESSARILY HAS CONSEQUENCES
HITSU, kanarazu
necessarily
5 strokes
必
L3
597
Bronze ; seal 
. Has 戈  ‘halberd’ (see e.g. 545), 
and an element made of a shape like 八 to rep-
resent not ‘eight’ (70) but two lengths of bam-
boo which were fi rmly bound to the handle of 
a weapon such as a halberd to strengthen it, to 
give ‘reinforced weapon handle’. The abstract 
票決 HYŌKETSU　vote
投票 TŌHYŌ　voting
伝票 DENPYŌ　chit, slip
‘fl y, fl y up’, to give ‘sparks fl y up’.  Shirakawa 
agrees with latter meaning, but links graph 
to the ritual burning of a corpse (cremation).  
Tōdō includes 票 – together with 標 599 – 
in his word-family ‘rise lightly’. The modern 
senses ‘vote’, ‘sign’, ‘ticket’ seem to be loan 
usages. KJ1970:845-6; YK1976:428; OT1968:723; 
SS1984:725-6; TA1965:275-7. Take 
 as 西 169 
‘west’ plus 示 723 ‘show’. 
Mnemonic: VOTE SHOWS WEST ON TOP
HYŌ
vote, label, sign
11 strokes
票
L1
598
Seal ; late graph (Shuowen). As the seal form 
shows, originally has 火 8 ‘fl ames, fi re’, and up-
per element as phonetic with associated sense 

The 200 Fourth Grade Characters  197
標準  HYŌJUN　standard
里程標 RITEIHYŌ　milestone
標識  HYŌSHIKI　signal
of treetops’ (Katō, Yamada, Ogawa). Yamada 
takes ‘sign, mark’ as a loan usage, but Tōdō 
treats as an extended use, meaning a signboard 
placed high up, as does Shirakawa. KJ1970:846-
7; YK1976:428-9; OT1968:524; TA1965:275-7; 
SS1984:727. As in 598, we suggest taking 
 as 
西 169 ‘west’ plus 示 723 ‘show’, not forgetting 
木 ‘tree’.
Mnemonic: THERE’S A SIGNPOST BY THAT 
TREE, SHOWING WEST
HYŌ , shirushi
sign(post), mark
15 strokes
標
L3
599
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 木 73 ‘tree, 
wood’, and 票 598 qv as phonetic with associat-
ed sense typically taken as ‘topmost tree branch-
es; twigs’, to give ‘slender treetop branches, tips 
不明  FUMEI　unclear
不平  FUHEI　complaint
不気味 BUKIMI　weird
bud), but adopted at a very early period (OBI) 
as a loan for a grammatical function word for 
‘not’, and this became the predominant usage. 
MS1995:v1:8-9; KJ1970:824; YK1976:430-31. 
Suggest taking 一 as one stroke, with three 
down-strokes.
Mnemonic: STRIKE ONCE, THEN THRICE 
MORE FOR EMPHATIC ‘NO’
FU, BU
not, un-, dis-
4 strokes
不
L4
600
OBI ; seal 
. Originally, a pictograph of a calyx 
(protective layer around the base of a fl ower 
人夫   NINPU　laborer 
加藤夫人 KATŌ FUJIN　Mrs Katō
夫婦   FŪFU　married couple
originally to be a big male). The top horizontal 
stroke represents a hairpin, a sign that the 
male had reached adulthood; ‘husband’ is an 
extended sense. MS1995:v1:296-7; KJ1970:813; 
YK1976:431. Suggest basing mnemonic on 大 
56 ‘big’.
Mnemonic: HUSBAND IS A BIG MAN WITH A 
PIN THROUGH HIS HEAD!?
FU, FŪ, otto
husband, man
4 strokes
夫
L3
601
OBI 
; seal 
. Shows an adult male (on 
basis of usage in OBI texts, Katō considers 
付着   FUCHAKU　adhesion
付き合う  tsukiau　to associate
名付ける  nazukeru　to name
2003 (‘hand’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘attach’, to give ‘put a hand on someone 
from behind’. In the seal stage, 寸 920 ‘hand’, 
became standard. ‘Give, transfer’, as a type of 
movement from one person to another, is an 
extended sense. MS1995:v1:46-7; KJ1970:822-3; 
YK1976:432.
Mnemonic: PERSON HAS A HAND ATTACHED
FU, tsuku/keru 
attach, apply
5 strokes
付
L3
602
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 亻 41 ‘person’, and 
in most bronze forms the equivalent of 又
政府  SEIFU　government
府県  FUKEN 　prefectures
京都府 KYŌTO-FU　Kyōto Pref.
gathered together’, meaning a storehouse. Later, 
this took on the more restricted sense of a build-
ing to store documents and the like, and so ‘gov-
ernment offi  ce’. By further extension, came to 
mean an administrative area under government 
control such as an urban prefecture or the seat 
of government. KJ1970:823; MS1995:v1:452-3; 
YK1976:432-3; OT1968:328.
Mnemonic: LARGE BUILDING ATTACHED TO 
GOVT CENTER
FU
government center, 
urban prefecture
8 strokes
府
L3
603
Seal 
. Has 广 127 ’roof, building’, and 付 602 
(‘attach’) as phonetic with associated sense ‘col-
lect, gather’, to give ‘building where things are 

198  The 200 Fourth Grade Characters
副業  FUKUGYŌ　side-job
副詞  FUKUSHI 　adverb
副領事 FUKURYŌJI　vice-consul
花粉 KAFUN　pollen
粉々 
konagona 　fragments
麦粉 mugiko　wheat fl our
such as sacrifi cial animal. ‘Divide in two’ evolved 
as an extended sense, and by Han times one 
of the two divided parts, referred to as 副, had 
acquired the meaning ‘secondary’, hence sense 
range ‘deputy, vice-, sub’. Mizukami lists one OBI 
form that he equates with 副. MS1995:v1:134-5; 
KJ1970:828; YK1976:437. Suggest take as 一 1 
‘single’, 口 22 ‘entrance’, and 田 63 ‘fi eld’.
Mnemonic: DEPUTY IS CUT DOWN AT SINGLE 
ENTRANCE TO FIELD
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 米 220 ‘rice’, 
and 分 218 (‘divide’) as phonetic with associat-
ed sense ‘break up’, to mean small particles pro-
duced during processing of the rice grain, i.e. 
rice fl our or rice powder (in ancient times, the 
powder was used for make-up), and later ‘fl our’ 
or ‘powder’ in general. KJ1970:256; YK1976:440; 
TA1965:730; OT1968:761.
Mnemonic: DIVIDING UP RICE CREATES A LOT 
OF POWDER
FUKU
deputy, vice-
11 strokes
FUN, kona, ko 
powder
10 strokes
副
粉
L3
L3
604
605
Seal 
. Has 刂 198 ‘knife’, and 畐 (CO, ‘wide-
necked jar’, see 409) as phonetic with associat-
ed sense ‘open up’, to give ‘open up with a knife’, 
兵士 HEISHI　soldier
歩兵 HOHEI　infantry
兵器 HEIKI　weapon
adze to strike and make timber fl at where cut 
with an ax. Extended senses include ‘strike 
an enemy’, ‘weapon’ (already from Western 
Zhou period [11th century – 771 BC]), ‘soldier’ 
(someone with weapon), ‘battle’. KJ1970:836; 
MS1995:v1:102-3; YK1976:443-4; AS2007:168. 
Suggest taking top element as ‘ax’ 斤 1233 and 
lower element as ‘table’.
Mnemonic: SOLDIER TAKES UP AX FROM 
TABLE AS A WEAPON
HEI, HYŌ
soldier
7 strokes
兵
L3
606
OBI 
; seal 
. OBI form shows two hands 
holding adze (tool similar to an ax, but with 
blade at right angles to handle), meaning use 
別名 BETSUMEI　alias
特別 TOKUBETSU　special
別れ wakare　parting
a pictograph of where the base of the skull 
and the top vertebra meet (occipital bone) 
(Mizukami), or as ‘bone (in general)’ (Ogawa), 
to give ‘separate meat from skull/bone with 
a knife’, with this leading to the extended 
general meaning of ‘separate’. It was also used 
in early Chinese for a near-homophone mean-
ing ‘to be diff erent’, and thus ‘special’ may be 
regarded as a loan usage. The left-hand side 
of 別, which is noticeably diff erent in shape 
in block script from the seal form of 冎 , ap-
pears to result from cursivized equivalents 
BETSU, wakareru
diverge, split, diff er, 
special
7 strokes
別
L4
607
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Consists of 刂198 
‘knife’, with 冎. The latter element is interpreted 
variously as ‘skull, cranium’ (Yamada), or as 

The 200 Fourth Grade Characters  199
found in the clerical script. Mizukami lists one 
OBI form which he treats as 別. KJ1970:848; 
YK1976:445; OT1968:114; MS1995:v1:108-9, 
130-31; AS2007:167; SK1984:94. This is a dif-
fi cult graph in terms of mnemonics, but we 
suggest taking the left part as an 口 22 ‘open-
ing’ with 
 as ‘special’ variant of 力 78 ‘strength’.
Mnemonic: USING KNIFE TO SPLIT OPENING 
NEEDS SPECIAL STRENGTH
辺境 HENKYŌ　frontier
近辺 KINPEN　vicinity
川辺 kawabe　riverside
as ‘boundary’. Yamada posits a more distant 
meaning, i.e. ‘(spatial) ends of the earth’, which 
links to the original meaning he attributes to . 
Overall original meaning of 邊 is ‘walk along 
boundary’, later modifi ed to indicate just the 
noun ‘boundary’ and extended to ‘vicinity, 
area’ (including ‘vicinity’ in the sense of ap-
proximation). MS1995:v2:1312-3; YK1976:446; 
KJ1970:851-2; OT1968:992. We suggest taking 
the modern graph as movement ⻌ 85 and 刀 
198 ‘knife/cut’.
Mnemonic: MOVEMENT CUTS THROUGH 
BOUNDARY
HEN, atari, be 
vicinity, boundary
5 strokes
辺
L3
608
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 邊. Has 辶/ ⻌85 
‘walk, go’ (replaces bronze stage 彳 [‘road/go’ 
131, same meaning]), and  (original meaning: 
‘cannot see’ [Yamada], or ‘both sides of the nose, 
nostrils’ [Katō; Ogawa also takes as ‘sides’]) as 
phonetic with associated sense typically taken 
変成   HENSEI　metamorphosis
大変   TAIHEN　very
変わり者  kawarimono　eccentric
便利 BENRI　convenient
便所 BENJO (vulgar)　toilet
郵便 YŪBIN　post, mail
‘change’. ‘Strange’ may be seen as an extended 
sense. Mizukami lists a few bronze forms which 
he takes as equivalents of 變. In the modern 
abbreviated shape 変, bottom element is 
攵 in a variant 3-stroke shape (which is not 
夂 ‘descending foot’: det. 34).  KJ1970:898; 
YK1976:446-7; MS1995:v2:1214-5; OT1968:444. 
Suggest taking upper part as variant of 赤 48 
‘red’ (i.e. sort of red) and, though incorrect 
etymologically, 夂 as cross-legs. 
Mnemonic: CHANGE TO A STRANGE SORT OF 
RED WHILE CROSS-LEGGED
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 亻 41 ‘per-
son’, and 更 1323 (‘change’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘servant; use a servant’, and 
by extension ‘convenient, comfortable; service, 
mail’. The meaning ‘bodily waste’ appears to 
be a further euphemistic extension (cf. British 
English ‘public convenience’ in the sense ‘public 
toilet or restroom’). OT1968:66; YK1976:448-9. 
Mnemonic: CHANGE OF MAILMAN LEADS TO 
CONVENIENT SERVICE
HEN, kaeru/waru
change, strange
9 strokes
BEN, BIN, tayori
convenience,
mail, service
9 strokes
変
便
L3
L4
609
610
Seal 
; traditional 變. Has 攵 (攴) 112 ‘strike’, 
and  (CO, original meaning: ‘thread becomes 
tangled’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘knock over and turn into something diff er-
ent’. Subsequently the sense ‘strike/knock over’ 
was omitted, to give the generalized meaning 

200  The 200 Fourth Grade Characters
小包 kozutsumi　parcel
包囲 HŌI　encircle
包帯 HŌTAI　bandaging
OBI 
; seal . 勹 (originally ‘person bent 
forward enclosing something’), with 己, which 
in traditional form for this graph is 巳 ‘ser-
pent’ (see 458), but originally here depicted 
an infant still in the womb, giving overall 
meaning ‘be pregnant’, and by extension 
‘enclose’. YK1976:452; MS1995:v1:144-6,148-9; 
KJ1970:761-2.
Mnemonic: SERPENT-LIKE EMBRYO 
ENVELOPED IN WOMB
HŌ, tsutsumu
wrap, envelop
5 strokes
包
L3
611
法学 HŌGAKU　jurisprudence
文法 BUNPŌ　grammar
不法 FUHŌ　illegal
ox and head of a deer [Shirakawa takes it as a 
sacred sheep]) over 去 as phonetic, and early 
Chinese sound values suggest he is correct.  
Mizukami lists alternative analysis (Tōdō) which 
has whole graph as enclosing the surroundings 
of the above creature with water to prevent its 
escape. Core meaning of the graph seems to 
be imposing a framework, leading to abstract 
senses such as ‘method, rule, law’. YK1976:454; 
MS1995:v2:792-4; KJ1970:765-8; TA1965:869. 
Suggest take 去 as ‘leave’ 276. 
Mnemonic: THE LAW REQUIRES THAT WE 
LEAVE WATER
HŌ, HATSU
law
8 strokes
法
L3
612
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 灋. Has 氵42 
‘water’, and  [hereafter ‘r.h’] as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘surround, enclose’, to give ‘en-
close water so it cannot fl ow away’; Katō argues 
it is inappropriate to analyze r.h by dividing 
into 
 (orig. a mythical animal with body of an 
失望  SHITSUBŌ　despair
願望  GANMŌ　wish
望み手 nozomite　aspirant
by positing ‘full moon’ as a meaning deriving 
from ‘the thing that is gazed at from afar’. In the 
bronze script, 望 was typically written with 月 
18 ‘moon’ added at the upper right. Finally, at 
times in bronze, and commonly in seal script, 臣 
was replaced by 亡, a change explained by Qiu 
as being because the shapes of 臣 and 亡 were 
– originally – rather similar. Use of the element 
亡 here became predominant, thereby leading 
to the shape望, and this is the immediate  pre-
decessor of the modern form 望, which is the 
result of minor regularization in shape. ‘Hope’ 
may be regarded as an extended sense deriving 
from ‘gaze (with contemplation)’. QX2000:194-5; 
AS2007:508-9; MS1995:v1:638-9; KJ1970:130-
31. As a mnemonic, we suggest taking as 王 5 
‘king’, 月 18 ‘moon’, and 亡 985 as ‘die/death’.
Mnemonic: KING GAZES AT MOON, WISHING 
FOR DEATH
BŌ, MŌ, nozomu, 
nozomashii
wish, hope, gaze
11 strokes
望
L3
613
OBI ; bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 望. One of 
the more complex graphs in terms of its evolu-
tion. OBI form typically consists of 𦣠, taken as 
a person with an exaggeratedly large eye (臣 
543) standing on tiptoe on the ground (CO, 𦣠), 
to represent ‘gaze into the distance’ and also 
‘full moon’. It is not clear whether these two 
senses were essentially a refl ection of the same 
underlying word, or whether they were two 
separate words (homophones or near-hom-
ophones). Schuessler suggests they may be 
the same word, and reconciles the two senses 

The 200 Fourth Grade Characters  201
牧場  BOKUJŌ　pasture
放牧  HŌBOKU　grazing
牧場鳥 makibatori　meadowlark
BOKU, maki
pasture
8 strokes
牧
L1
614
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 牛 108 ‘cow’, and 攵 (攴) 
112 as semantic and phonetic, meaning ‘beat 
with stick’, to give ‘herd cattle with a stick’, and 
by extension ‘graze animals’ and also the land 
where they graze, i.e. ‘pasture’. KJ1970:864; 
YK1976:460; OT1968:636.  
Mnemonic: HAND WITH STICK MAKES COW 
GO INTO PASTURE
週末  SHŪMATSU　weekend
末っ子  suekko*　youngest child
始末  SHIMATSU　managing
MATSU, BATSU, sue
end, tip
5 strokes
末
L3
615
to signify small branches at the top of a tree and 
equivalent originally to 未), but while Mizukami 
and Ma do not recognize any OBI forms, Katō 
and Yamada list what they take to be OBI forms 
for末, and consider that originally, at least, there 
was no diff erence in shape between 末 and 
未. The upper horizontal stroke of 末 is taken 
to focus attention on the top part of the tree, 
signifying ‘tip, end’ in a physical sense and by 
extension the abstract sense also, i.e. ‘end; last, 
fi nal’. MS1995:v1:644-5; KJ1970:868; YK1976:462-
3; QX2000:183; AS2007:389; TA1965:667-70.
Mnemonic: TIP OF TREE HAS BIG END
Seal 
. Scholarly opinion is divided over wheth-
er OBI forms for this graph exist, and whether 
there were originally separate graphs for 末 
and the similarly-shaped 未 617 (qv, originally, 
‘tree with luxuriant growth’). There is general 
agreement that the graph 末 shows branches 
growing out from a tree (though Tōdō takes it 
満月 
MANGETSU　full moon
満足 MANZOKU　satisfaction
不満 FUMAN　dissatisfaction
MAN, michiru/tasu
full, fi ll
12 strokes
満
L3
616
Seal 
; traditional 滿; late graph (Shuowen). 
Has 氵42 ‘water’ and 
/
 (originally meant 
‘join two halves of a gourd’) as semantic and 
phonetic meaning ‘fi ll right up’, to give ‘fi ll 
container till water overfl ows’, then by extension 
‘full’. KJ1970:202; OT1968:597; YK1976:463. We 
suggest 
 as 艹 53 ‘grass’ and 両 434 ‘both’ (qv, 
also involving a gourd). 
Mnemonic: BOTH GRASS AND WATER CAN BE FILLING
未来 MIRAI　future
未知 MICHI　unknown
未々 
madamada　still not
MI, mada
immature, not yet
5 strokes
未
L3
617
interprets the graph as ‘branches still growing/
immature’, while Tōdō includes in a word-
family ‘small, not clearly visible’ and explains 
as ‘small upper branches not clearly visible; 
these alternative views would result in ‘not 
yet’ being an extended sense. While not clear 
which of the above views is the one to follow, 
it was a common practice in the early script 
to borrow graphs for their sound value to 
represent grammatical function words, as in 
the case of 其 ‘winnowing basket’ borrowed for 
another word indicating probability/futurity. 
MS1995:v1:644-5; KJ1970:949; YK1976:464; 
AS2007:512; TA1965:732-6. We suggest taking 
the graph literally.
Mnemonic: GROWTH OF IMMATURE TREE 
WITH SMALL TIP NOT YET FINISHED 
OBI 
; seal 
. OBI forms typically have several 
extra upper strokes compared with 木 73 ‘tree’, 
representing luxuriant growth, though some 
occurrences still appear identical in shape to 
木. However, they are consistently written with 
additional upper strokes from bronze onwards. 
Appears to have been borrowed at a very early 
stage (OBI) for its sound value, to represent an 
abstract grammatical function word meaning 
‘not yet’. Note, though, that there are several 
alternative analyses: one given in Mizukami 

202  The 200 Fourth Grade Characters
脈管 MYAKKAN　blood vessel
鉱脈 KŌMYAKU　ore-vein
山脈 SANMYAKU　mountain range
because it was the one given in Shuowen, and 
is the main form given for this graph in the 
authoritative Kangxi zidian, which lists a third 
form, 脉 (月 ‘fl esh, meat’, with 永 644 ‘long’), 
as a variant of 脈. Extended usage is seen, for 
instance in ‘coal vein’, and in the sense ‘pulse’. 
KJ1970:751; YK1976:465; OT1968:822. We sug-
gest taking  as a variant of 川 50 ‘river, fl ow’, 
but with the specifi c meaning of ‘tributary’, and 
月 as ‘fl esh’. 
Mnemonic: VEINS ARE TRIBUTARIES FLOWING 
THROUGH ONE’S FLESH
MYAKU
vein, pulse
10 strokes
脈
L1
618
Seal forms 
 , 
; late graph (Shuowen). The 
fi rst seal form has 血 288 ‘blood’, and 
 mean-
ing ‘tributary’ (see also 派 965) as semantic and 
phonetic; the second has 月 209 ‘fl esh, meat’, 
with 
. Both forms give the meaning ‘vein’, but 
the second came to predominate, probably 
国民  KOKUMIN　a nation/people
民間  MINKAN　privately owned
民主的 MINSHUTEKI　democratic
MIN, tami
populace, people
5 strokes
民
L4
619
gimlet view is adopted, but extended sense if 
the view of blinding as punishment is taken, on 
the basis that the ordinary people were ignorant, 
or ‘blind’ fi guratively speaking, i.e. ignorant. 
Incidentally, 民 is one of those graphs which for 
a certain period were modifi ed by omitting a 
stroke when writing (thus 
 here). This was due 
to a taboo relating to the emperor of the time, in 
this case Tang Taizong (r.763-779), because this 
graph was used for his given name 世民 Shimin. 
YK1976:465; MS1995:v2:726-7; OT1968:551; 
QX2000:301. We suggest a mnemonic based on 
the similar shaped 氏 522, ‘clan’, but with a more 
substantial top element.
Mnemonic: THE POPULACE IS MORE 
SUBSTANTIAL THAN A CLAN
Bronze 
; seal 
. Analyses diverge. The com-
mentators referred to each give two possible 
interpretations: either i] a pictograph of a gimlet 
(tool for drilling holes in wood), or ii] depic-
tion of the eye of a person (criminal or slave) 
being pierced with a needle to blind them as a 
punishment. Some of the bronze forms suggest 
the latter assessment may well be correct. ‘The 
ordinary people, populace’ is a loan usage if the 
無料  MURYŌ　no charge/fee
無事  BUJI　safe, unscathed
無くなる nakunaru　disappear, go
nally had the sense ‘dancing’, was borrowed to 
conveniently represent another word of similar 
pronunciation meaning ‘not have’. In some 
bronze forms (and consistently later), we fi nd 
舛 (feet pointing diff erent ways 336) added to 
further clarify the sense ‘dance’, while a diff erent 
element (corresponding to modern 亡 985, now 
meaning ‘die’ or disappear’ but originally show-
ing someone hiding in a corner and meaning: 
‘cannot be seen’) was added to the predecessor 
of 無 at the seal stage. Shapes close to 無 itself, 
which is somewhat simpler than the seal equiva-
lent, were already well-established in the clerical 
script. QX2000:186-7; YK1976:466-7; OT1968:621; 
AS2007:518; SK1984:467-8. We suggest taking 
the lower part as 灬 8 ‘fi re’ and the upper part as 
a bound wheat-sheaf. 
Mnemonic: BOUND WHEATSHEAF BURNED, 
NOW ALL GONE
MU, BU, nai/shi
not, none, cease to be
12 strokes
無
L3
620
Bronze 
; seal 
. Originally, in OBI and some 
bronze forms, this graph had the same shape as 
what later became 舞 1920 (person with long 
decorative sleeves, shown with feet pointed 
away from each other; ‘dance’). Taken to depict 
a person dancing with what appear to be long 
decorative sleeves, or what Qiu identifi es as 
oxtails or similar hanging down. While Qiu’s 
suggestion might seem bizarre initially, he does 
note a passage in the Spring and Autumn Annals 
(compiled ca. 239BC) which describes dancing 
while holding oxtails. This graph, which origi-

The 200 Fourth Grade Characters  203
約束  YAKUSOKU　promise
節約  SETSUYAKU　economize
約十人 YAKUJŪNIN　ca.10 people
(in some cases leaving noticeable marks)’. 
By extension, it acquired meanings such as 
‘reduce, contract, bring together’, and then 
abstract meanings such as ‘make agreement’ 
and ‘summarise’. (One notes the similar use of 
the fi gurative concept/term ‘binding’ in English 
with regard to agreements and promises.) The 
latter sense of ‘summarise’ involves removal of 
non-essential points or items, thereby perhaps 
generating the meaning ‘approximately’. Early 
(post-OBI) senses listed by Schuessler include 
‘abbreviate, condense, essential’. OT1968:768; 
MS1995:v2:1004,v1:146-7; KJ1970:874; 
YK1976:475.  
Mnemonic: BINDING PROMISE TO PUT 
THREADS ON THE LADLE
YAKU
promise, approx.,
summarise
9 strokes
約
L3
621
Seal 
. This graph has 糸 29 ‘thread, cord’, and 
勺. The latter was formerly in the Jōyō kanji 
List, but was one of the fi ve characters to be 
withdrawn from it in the changes in 2010. It 
originally depicted wine or soup being ladled 
into a container such as a half-gourd, but here 
it acts as a phonetic with associated meaning 
‘bind, fasten’, to give ‘fasten tightly with cord 
勇者  YŪSHA　hero
勇気  YŪKI　courage
勇み足 isamiashi　rashness
YŪ, isamu/mashii
brave, spirited
9 strokes
勇
L3
622
Bronze 
; seal 
. The bronze form has 戈 
’halberd’ (see for example 545) over 用 235 
(originally, pen for animals; later ‘use’); Mizukami 
takes it as ‘strength to use a halberd’, while Katō 
says the meaning is unclear. In the seal forms, 
戈 still occurs, but Shuowen main heading has 
力 78 ‘strength’, with 甬 (see 193: now means 
‘go through’ but original meaning disputed, 
though Mizukami takes it as ‘shape of round 
fl ower-bud’) as phonetic with associated 
sense generally agreed to be ‘gush out’, to give 
‘strength gushes out’, and hence ‘courage’. By 
about the 6th century AD, the time the block 
script was widely established in use in place 
of the clerical script (see Introduction), the 
lower part of the phonetic element was slightly 
abbreviated in shape, resulting in the form 
in use today (勇). MS1995:v1:138-40, v2:868-
9; KJ1970:885-6; YK1976:478; OT1968:127; 
QX2000:142-7; FC1977:112. We suggest taking 
the modern form as ‘bent fi gure’ マ with 男 57 
‘man’.  
Mnemonic: BENT OLD MAN IS STILL BRAVE 
AND SPIRITED
不必要 FUHITSUYŌ　unnecessary
要点  YŌTEN　gist
重要  JŪYŌ　importance 
‘west’), as abbreviated form of 票 598 (‘sign’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘light’ or ‘tight-
en’ (Mizukami). Lower part of seal form has not 
女 but a shape to represent two legs. Despite 
varied analysis, consensus is that the graph’s 
meaning is ‘waist’ (later written 腰 2054); by 
extension, ‘tie a waistband’ or ‘central part’, 
hence ‘pivotal, vital’. KJ1970:87; YK1976:483; 
OT1968:912; SS1984:847; MS1995:v2:1174-5. To 
simplify, we suggest 
 as west(ern), and lower 
part as woman.
Mnemonic: A WESTERN HAS VITAL NEED FOR 
WOMAN IN PIVOTAL ROLE
YŌ, iru, kaname
need, vital, pivot
9 strokes
要
L3
623
Bronze ; seal 
. Some bronze forms (as here) 
have 女 37 ‘woman’ as lower element; analy-
ses of upper part diff er. Seal form is taken as 
backbone with hipbones on either side (Katō, 
Yamada), or as two hands enclosing waist 
(Ogawa), or as hipbones and pelvis (Shirakawa), 
or yet again as 襾 (‘stopper, plug’) (not 西169 

204  The 200 Fourth Grade Characters
養成  YŌSEI　training
栄養士 EIYŌSHI　dietician
教養  KYŌYŌ　culture
just sheep). This accounts for seal form, but not 
earlier forms (OBI, bronze), which clearly have
攴 (攵) 112 ‘hit (with stick)’; this latter distinc-
tion is noted by Yamada, and also Ma; Ma takes 
OBI form as originally meaning ‘herd sheep’. 
Script regularization has resulted in minor 
modifi cations.YK1976:485-6; OT1968:1116; 
MS1995:v2:1458-9; MR2007:322-3. Suggest tak-
ing 
 (variant of sheep 羊), and 食 ‘food’.
Mnemonic: SUPPORT REARING SHEEP FOR 
FOOD
YŌ, yashinau
support, rear
15 strokes
養
L1
624
OBI 
; seal . Typically taken as 食 163 ‘food’, 
with 羊 426 (‘sheep’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘provide, off er’, to give ‘provide food’ 
and hence ‘raise, bring up’ (generalized, not 
浴室  YOKUSHITSU　bathroom
日光浴  NIKKŌYOKU　sunbathing
水浴び mizuabi　bathing
Seal 
. Has 氵42 water, with 谷 135 (‘valley’) 
as phonetic with sense ‘scatter water’ > ‘scatter 
water over oneself’, i.e. ‘bathe’. Mizukami takes 
some OBI forms as same shape as OBI forms 
for 温 257. KJ1970:888-9; MS1995:v2:756-7; 
YK1976:486; OT1968:581.
Mnemonic: BATHE IN THE WATER IN THE 
VALLEY 
YOKU, abiru
bathe
10 strokes
浴
L3
625
利益  RIEKI　profi t, gain
利用  RIYŌ　utilization
利き目  kikime　effi  cacy 
nally, ‘damage with a blade’]) which is usually 
interpreted as meaning ‘plow’. OBI type i] gives 
the meaning ‘cut/harvest grains with a knife’ 
(Ma, Shirakawa); type ii] gives ‘cultivate grain 
crops by working the soil with a plow’ (Yamada, 
Ogawa). Senses such as ‘effi  cient’ and ‘gain’ 
represent extended usage. MS1995:v1:128-9; 
YK1976:490-91; MR2007:303; SS1984:869; 
OT1968:114.
Mnemonic: EFFICIENT KNIFE CUTS GRAIN 
FOR PROFIT
RI, kiku
profi t, gain, effi  ciency
7 strokes
利
L3
626
OBI 
; seal 
. OBI forms have 禾  87 ‘grain’, and 
a second – later predominant –element some-
times occuring as i] 刀/刂198 ‘knife/cut’, but 
more commonly as ii] slightly more complex 
element (Mizukami  takes to be 刅 [origi-
陸軍 RIKUGUN　army
上陸 JŌRIKU　landing
大陸 TAIRIKU　continent
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 阝1907 ‘hill, piled-up 
earth’, and 坴 (CO, ‘large clods of earth’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘be lined up, 
continue’, to give ‘continuous elevated land’. 
MS1995:v2:1398-9; OT1968:1071; YK1976:493; 
SS1984:874.
Mnemonic: HILLS AND EARTHEN MOUNDS 
INDICATE LAND
RIKU
land
11 strokes
陸
L3
627

The 200 Fourth Grade Characters  205
良心 RYŌSHIN　conscience
改良 KAIRYŌ　improvement
良さ 
yosa　worth, quality
form. The shape then evolved further through 
clerical script into its block script form. Katō 
takes receptacle as vessel normally used for 
food; Ogawa sees it as sieve. Former view 
treats sense ‘good’ as a loan usage; latter view 
sees it as extended usage. KJ1970:537-9; 
MS1995:v2:1102-3; YK1976:497; OT1968:839; 
SK1984:613. Suggest taking 良 as 食163 ‘food/
eat’ minus the lid 
.
Mnemonic: TAKES LID OFF FOOD – LOOKS 
GOOD!
RYŌ, yoi
good
7 strokes
良
L3
628
OBI ; bronze ; seal . OBI forms depict some 
sort of receptacle for pouring material in to 
measure, then letting it out. The simplest 
bronze form diff ers a little in shape, but shows 
the same in essence as OBI, as does the seal 
原料 GENRYŌ　raw materials
料金 RYŌKIN　charge, fee
料理 RYŌRI　cooking
The element 斗 here is better taken as semantic 
(Ogawa, Shirakawa) rather than phonetic, as 
the historical pronunciations in early Chinese 
are not very supportive of a phonetic role. 
Etymologically similar to 科 87 ‘course, section’, 
but 科 became associated with ‘class, degree’ 
at an early period. OT1968:448; SS1984:883; 
AS2007:628,357; MS1995:v1:592; KJ1970:731; 
YK1976:498; TA1965:254.
Mnemonic: RICE IS MEASURED – FOR A 
CHARGE
RYŌ
materials, measure, 
charge
10 strokes
料
L4
629
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 米 220 ‘rice’, and 斗 
1766 (originally ‘ladle [for measuring]’), to give 
‘measure rice’, later generalised to just ‘measure’. 
‘Charge’ may be regarded as an extended sense. 
重量 JŪRYŌ　heavy weight
分量 BUNRYŌ　quantity
量的 RYŌTEKI　quantitative
sense  (Ogawa). Shirakawa, though, sees top 
part as opening at top of sack to pour grain in, 
and lower part in the original sense ‘sack’. Some 
variation in analysis, but overall sense is taken 
uniformly as ‘measure’ (originally rice, later 
general); by extension, ‘quantity’. KJ1970:537; 
YK1976:498; MS1995:v2:1356-7; OT1968:1033; 
SS1984:885. Take as  里 238 as ‘village’, 日 66 
‘day’ and 一 1 ‘one’.
Mnemonic: VILLAGE GETS MEASURED QUAN-
TITY FOR ONE DAY
RYŌ, hakaru
measure, quantity
12 strokes
量
L3
630
OBI ; seal 
. Upper part of older forms is 
usually taken to depict top of receptacle 
for measuring, with 重 326 (originally ‘sack’, 
‘heavy’) meaning ‘measure’ either as  associated 
phonetic sense (Katō, Yamada) or as extended 
車輪  SHARIN　vehicle wheel 
三輪車 SANRINSHA　tricycle
輪投げ wanage　quoits
semantic, meaning ‘round’ (Katō, Yamada), or 
as phonetic meaning ‘lined up’ (Ogawa, Tōdō); 
in Tōdō’s word-family ‘same things lined up’. 
Both analyses refer to spokes of a cart/chariot 
wheel, extended to wheel itself. KJ1970:911-12; 
YK1976:500; OT1968:986; TA1965:686-9. We 
suggest 侖 as ‘capped’ 
 ‘wheels’ 冊.
Mnemonic: VEHICLE HAS ALIGNED WHEELS, 
MOREOVER CAPPED
RIN, wa
wheel, hoop
15 strokes
輪
L3
631
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 車33 
‘vehicle’, and 侖 (CO, orig aligned bundle of 
wooden writing slips: see 冊 884) taken as 

206  The 200 Fourth Grade Characters
種類 SHURUI　sort, kind
分類 BUNRUI 　classifi cation
類似 RUIJI　resemblance
as phonetic with associated sense ‘raccoon’, to 
give original meaning ‘raccoon-like creature’ 
(Katō, Yamada). The senses ‘similar; variety, sort’ 
are loan usages.  Shirakawa, by contrast, seeks 
to give a ritualistic interpretation to the origin 
of the graph 類, arguing that rice (米 220) and 
dogs (犬) were off ered to the gods. KJ1970:914; 
YK1976:501; MS1995:1444-5; SS1984:895. Sug-
gest taking 頁 103 ‘head’, 米 220 ‘rice’, and 大 
56 ‘big’.
Mnemonic: VARIETY OF RICE WITH BIG HEAD
RUI 
resemble, sort, variety
18 strokes
類
L3
632
Seal ; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 類. 
Usually taken as 犬 19 ‘dog’, with 卥 (CO, origi-
nally, ‘foolish head’; by extension ‘diffi  cult to 
distinguish’, then ‘similar, look alike’ [Mizukami]) 
令状  REIJŌ　warrant
命令法 MEIREIHŌ 　imperative
司令官 SHIREIKAN　commander
represent two separate words: one as described 
above, the other a diff erent but probably 
related word also meaning ‘order’ and later ‘life’ 
also (subsequently written as 命 416). This is 
one of a small number of graphs in modern 
Japanese script the handwritten shape of which 
diff ers somewhat from the printed equivalent. 
MS1995:v1:46-7,224-5; KJ1970:177; YK1976:501; 
AS2007:361,387. Suggest taking 
 as cap, and 
lower part as kneeling person.
Mnemonic: KNEELING PERSON ORDERED TO 
PUT ON CAP – IT’S THE RULE
REI, RYŌ
order, rule
5 strokes
令
L3
633
OBI ; seal 
. OBI form has lower element 
‘person kneeling’, and upper element 
 with 
associated sense ‘shout loudly’, to give ‘sum-
mon a subordinate/retainer’, and by exten-
sion ‘order’. In Shang times and early into the 
fi rst millennium BC, this graph was used to 
冷蔵  REIZŌ　refrigeration
冷静  REISEI 　cool-headed
冷え性  hieSHŌ　sensitive to cold
例外  REIGAI　exception
前例  ZENREI 　precedent
例えば  tatoeba　for example
Seal ; late graph (Shuowen). Has ice 冫401, 
and 令 633 (‘rule’) as phonetic, but associated 
sense disputed. 令 is taken either as i] ‘shiver’ 
(Katō, Yamada), or as ii] ‘clear’ (Ogawa, Tōdō); i] 
gives ‘coldness of ice to make a person shiver’, 
while ii] gives ‘clear/bright cold’ or ‘ice which 
is clear/transparent’. KJ1970:915; YK1976:502; 
OT1968:915; TA1965:475-7.
Mnemonic: ICE RULES IN FREEZING COLD
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 亻41 ‘person’, 
and 列 437 (‘line’) as semantic and phonetic, 
meaning ‘lined up’, to give ‘people lined up’. Lin-
ing up involves a degree of organization and ar-
rangement, and this appears to have given rise 
to extended senses such as ‘usage/precedent’ 
and ‘example/likening’. KJ1970:922; YK1976:502; 
OT1968:62.
Mnemonic: PEOPLE IN LINE ARE AN EXAMPLE 
OF FOLLOWING PRECEDENT
REI, sameru/masu,
tsumetai, hieru/yasu
freeze, cold
7 strokes
REI, tatoeru 
example, liken, prec-
edent
8 strokes
冷
例
L3
L3
634
635

The 200 Fourth Grade Characters  207
歴史家 REKISHIKA　historian
経歴  KEIREKI　career to date
履歴書 RIREKISHO　CV, resumé
and put in order’) as phonetic, again meaning 
‘lined up at intervals’. Overall meaning is ‘walk/
move at set intervals’, esp. of heavenly bod-
ies (for movement of sun, a separate graph 曆 
[2112 ‘calendar’] was devised at seal stage). By 
the Western Zhou period (11th century – 771 
BC) the graph 歷 was used to mean ‘series’; 
extending to ‘history; path’. Suggest 厂 as cliff , 
止 in usual meaning of ‘stop’, and 林 as ‘for-
est’ 79. MS1995:v1:706-7,186-7; KJ1970:921; 
OT1968:540; YK1976:503.
Mnemonic: THROUGHOUT HISTORY, FORESTS 
HAVE STOPPED AT CLIFFS
REKI
history, path
14 strokes
歴
L3
636
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional 歷. OBI has 止 143 
‘footprint’ (Mizukami and Ogawa take as ‘walk’), 
and 秝 (CO, orig two grain stalks) giving ‘place 
(seedlings) at set intervals’. Seal form also has
止, but with 厤 (a CO, 厂 abbrev. of 石 47 
‘stone’, with 秝 as phonetic with sense ‘grind, 
polish’, giving ‘grind with whetstone’, or ‘polish 
連絡船  RENRAKUSEN　ferry
連中   RENJŪ　party, group
連れ合い tsureai　partner, companion
together. However, Ogawa takes ⻌ with 車 as 
abbrev of 輦 (CO) as semantic and phonetic, 
meaning ‘men pull a vehicle’. Tōdō includes 連
in his word-family ‘be linked up’, and sees it as 
denoting vehicles moving together. ‘Be linked 
together (in a row)’ is an extended mean-
ing. KJ1970:924-6; YK1976:504; OT1968:1002; 
TA1965:552-4.
Mnemonic: ACCOMPANIED BY ROW OF 
MOVING VEHICLES
REN, tsureru
accompany, row
10 strokes
連
L3
637
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Views vary. One 
is 車 33 ‘vehicle’, and ⻌ 85 ‘go’ as semantic and 
phonetic, giving ‘vehicle moves (slowly)’ (Katō, 
Yamada); this may refer to multiple vehicles 
老人 RŌJIN 　old person
老練 RŌREN　veteran
老齢 RŌREI　old age
with the long established practice in premod-
ern Japan of obasute (姨捨 ‘abandoning granny’ 
and, less commonly, oyasute (親捨 ‘abandon-
ing one’s parents’), typically taking them up a 
remote hill and leaving them there. Even in the 
heyday of Confucianism in the 7th century, the 
Japanese poet Yamanoue Okura bewailed the 
disrespect and callous treatment meted out to 
the elderly: “With staff s at their waists, they tot-
ter along the road. Laughed at here, and hated 
there. This is the way of the world.” There are still 
a number of place-names called Obasute (such 
as in Nagano Prefecture). MS1995:v2:1048-9; 
KJ1970:891; OT1968:805; YK1976:505. As with 
130, we suggest taking 耂 (which is actually 
nicknamed the ‘old man’ determinative) as 
‘entering the ground’ (see ‘ground’ 土 64), and 
the lower element as an old man slumped on 
the ground (see 化 258).
Mnemonic: OLD MAN SLUMPS TO THE 
GROUND IN WHICH HE’LL BE BURIED
RŌ, oiru, fukeru
aged, old
6 strokes
老
L3
638
OBI 
; seal 
. The OBI forms show an aged 
and fragile person with bent back and often 
with long hair, leaning on a stick, to give ‘old 
person (with stick for support)’. In some bronze 
occurrences and in the seal form, the element 
for ‘stick’ is distorted in shape. OBI forms for 
老 are virtually indistinguishable from those 
for the separate graph 考 (the latter graph also 
originally meant ‘old person’, but subsequently 
borrowed for ‘consider’; see 130). On a socio-
cultural note, Confucianism is said to have  
instilled a respect for the elderly in both China 
and Japan – in theory. In practice, it is diffi  cult 
to reconcile universal respect for the elderly 

208  The 200 Fourth Grade Characters
労働者 RŌDŌSHA　laborer
苦労  KURŌ　hardship
過労  KARŌ　overwork
記録 KIROKU　record
実録 JITSUROKU　true record
録音 ROKUON　sound recording
being extended to ‘work’ in general.  Shirakawa, 
alternatively, looks to a ritualistic interpretation, 
linking it to sacred fl ames used to purify agricul-
tural implements at the beginning and end of 
the season. Mizukami lists a number of bronze 
forms which he equates to 労. KJ1970:81; 
YK1976:506; SS1984:913; MS1995:v1:142-3. As 
a mnemonic we suggest taking the three short 
strokes on top of roof 冖 as 
 an ornate roof 
(see also 学 11), and 力 as ‘eff ort’.
Mnemonic: TOIL WITH EFFORT UNDER OR-
NATE ROOF
through’; overall meaning is that which exudes 
from copper, i.e. ‘verdigris’ (Katō, Yamada). Oga-
wa takes 彔 as phonetic with associated sense 
‘shine’, to give ‘shine with a metal color’. Either 
way, the sense ‘record’ is just a loan usage, but 
the verdigris interpretation is more compel-
ling (see 緑 435 ‘green’ also). KJ1970:931-2; 
YK1976:507; OT1968:1046. As a mnemonic 
we suggest associating this graph with ‘green’, 
as they have the same right hand part in the 
modern form.
Mnemonic: RECORD BY INSCRIBING ON 
GREEN METAL
RŌ
labor, toil
7 strokes
ROKU
record, inscribe
16 strokes
労
録
L3
L3
639
640
Seal 
; traditional 勞. Perhaps most convinc-
ingly taken as 力 78 ‘strength, eff ort’ and 
 
as an abbreviation of 螢 (NJK, ‘fi refl y’) with 
semantic and phonetic function, meaning 
‘small fl ame’, to give ‘work by the light of small 
fl ames’, i.e. ‘night work’ (Katō, Yamada), this then 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 錄. 
Has 金 16 ‘metal’ (in ancient China, typically 
referred to bronze or copper), and 彔 (CO, 
originally a pictograph showing liquid [prob-
ably wine] being strained and dripping down) 
as semantic and phonetic, meaning ‘ooze, soak 

The 185 Fifth Grade Characters  209
THE 185 FIFTH GRADE CHARACTERS
圧力  ATSURYOKU　pressure
電圧  DEN’ATSU　voltage
圧倒的 ATTŌTEKI　overwhelming
‘press down’, to give ‘press down and cover 
with earth’; later this became more general-
ized in meaning as ‘press down, pressure’. The 
element 土 was added at the seal stage to 
create this graph so as to diff erentiate clearly 
the meaning ‘press down’ from other mean-
ings of 厭. KJ1970:105; YK1976:50; OT1968:210; 
MS1995:v1:186-9, v2:840-41; TA1965:853-9; 
AS2007:550; QX2000:267. As a mnemonic we 
suggest taking 厂 as a cliff .
Mnemonic: EARTH UNDER A CLIFF IS UNDER 
PRESSURE
ATSU
pressure
5 strokes
圧
L3
641
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 壓. 
The graph comprises 土 64 ‘earth, soil’, and 
厭 (CO, analyzed as ‘cover’, ‘oppress’, ‘press’, or 
‘sated with oppressive feeling [from overeat-
ing]’, ‘weary’) as phonetic with associated sense 
移動  IDŌ　movement
移民  IMIN　migrants
移り気  utsurigi　fi ckle
meaning ‘grain plants swaying in the breeze’. 
Commentators generally regard ‘move’ as a loan 
usage, but the original sense of 移 already in-
volves some degree of  movement. On the basis 
of the early Chinese sound values, it seems 
likely that 多 is serving here as an abbrevia-
tion for 迻 (CO, ‘walk with a swaying motion’). 
‘Transfer’ is an extended meaning. KJ1970:17-
18; YK1976:55; OT1968:733; MS1995:v2:1286; 
AS2007:566.
Mnemonic: TRANSFER MANY RICE PLANTS
I, utsuru/su
transfer, move
11 strokes
移
L3
642
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). The graph com-
prises 禾 87 ‘grain’, and 多 180 (‘many, numer-
ous’) as a phonetic with an associated sense 
of ‘sway (in the breeze)’, to give the original 
原因 GEN’IN　cause
死因 SHIIN　cause of death
因果 INGA　karma, destiny
Ma, by contrast, takes the graph as originally 
showing a prisoner in confi nement, while 
Ogawa interprets it as a person with limbs 
outstretched, sleeping on a mattress. Gu takes 
it to be not a person on the mat/mattress, 
but a pattern, i.e. a patterned mat/mattress, 
and considers the OBI form to be the same as 
that for 席 549 (‘seat’ qv); if the corresponding 
OBI forms for 因 and 席 have been correctly 
identifi ed, then there are cases of identical form 
as Gu suggests, but at the same time there 
are occurrences between the two with some 
variation.’ KJ1970:62; YK1976:60; OT1968:202; 
MR2007:346; MS1995:v1:252-3. We suggest that 
the easiest mnemonic is a big man within an 
enclosure.
Mnemonic: ENCLOSED BIG MAN HAS CAUSE 
TO DEPEND ON OTHERS
IN, yoru
cause, depend on,
be based on
6 strokes
因
L3
643
OBI 
; seal 
. Interpretations vary. One 
analysis takes the graph as 大 56 (‘big’ [person 
with limbs extended], here treated simply as 
‘person’), and 囗, an element meaning ‘enclo-
sure’ (see 84), to give ‘live in someone else’s 
house’; and then by extension, other senses 
such as ‘rely on’, ‘cause’ (Katō, Yamada). Katō 
suggests that 大 also has a phonetic role with 
an associated sense ‘stay’, ‘visit’, though this 
may be questioned based on pronunciations. 

210  The 185 Fifth Grade Characters
永遠 EIEN　eternity
永続 EIZOKU　perpetuity
永住 EIJŪ　permanent residence
into the predecessor of 派 965 ‘faction’. In other 
words, what was one original graph with fl uctu-
ating forms was subsequently refi ned in use so 
as to represent two separate words which were 
now distinguished in shape for greater clarity. 
The extended sense ‘long’ (from river fl owing 
long) was used for ‘long time, eternal’ already 
from the Western Zhou period (11th century 
– 771 BC). MS1995:v2:728-9; QX2000:206; 
KJ1970:77-8; YK1976:64; AS2007:577. For a 
mnemonic we suggest association with 水 42 
‘water’ and/or 氷 401 ‘ice’, from which this graph 
should be distinguished.
Mnemonic: WATER HAS LOOKED ICY FOR A 
LONG TIME
EI, nagai
long, lasting
5 strokes
永
L3
644
OBI forms , 
; seal 
. The graph is a pic-
tograph showing tributaries connected to a 
main river. Both left- and right-facing forms 
occur, and in the ancient script in principle the 
diff erent orientation did not indicate diff erence 
of meaning. By the seal script stage, however, 
the left-facing form had evolved into the 
predecessor of 永, and the right-facing version 
経営 KEIEI　management
営業 EIGYŌ　business
営所 EISHO　barracks
zukami lists several alternative interpretations 
of what 
 represents here, but still with the 
sense ‘surround’. ‘Barracks’ may be regarded as 
an extended sense. ‘Perform, conduct’ is treated 
as loan usage by Yamada; Schuessler notes ‘lay 
out, plan, build’ as early meanings. KJ1970:82, 
79-80; YK1976:66; OT1968:187; MS1995:v2:812-
3,v1:222; AS2007:576. As a mnemonic we 
suggest taking the upper element 
 as an 
ornate roof (see also 学 11), and taking the 
linked squares as rooms within a bigger build-
ing. Alternatively, given the phonetic use of 呂 
in the term 風呂 furo (bath) and consequent 
associations, a mnemonic could be based on 
the furo.
Mnemonic: CONDUCT BUSINESS IN 
ORNATELY ROOFED BARRACK-ROOMS
Or: CONDUCT BUSINESS IN BATH IN 
ORNATELY ROOFED BARRACKS
EI, itonamu
conduct, barracks
12 strokes
営
L3
645
Seal 
; traditional 營. Analyses diff er in relative-
ly minor ways. One element is 呂, in outward 
form corresponding to a NJK graph meaning 
‘spine’ (in which two individual vertebrae are 
depicted, with the linking stroke fi rst added 
only at the seal stage), but regarded as having 
a diff erent sense here, i.e. ‘complex of linked 
buildings (or possibly rooms), palace’. This 
combines with the disputed upper element 
. 
Katō takes 
 as the old form of 螢 (‘fi refl y’; 
modern 蛍 1263), here serving as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘surround’, to give ‘complex of 
buildings surrounded by fence/walls’. Yamada 
and Ogawa agree with this interpretation. Mi-
衛生 EISEI　hygiene
守衛 SHUEI　guard
自衛 
JIEI　self-defense
ments, but often consisted of just 韋 (originally, 
footprints/walk/move around a specifi ed area) 
alone. The seal form has 帀 (originally, bend, 
go round, unable to advance, by extension 
‘surround, enclose’) added (to 衛). KJ1970:11; 
YK1976:67; MS1995:v2:1162-3,v1434-5; 
OT1968:899; MR2007:249. As a mnemonic we 
suggest taking 韋 in association with what is 
probably its most frequent occurrence, in 違 
1024 ‘diff er’.
Mnemonic: GO AROUND DIFFERENTLY IN 
ORDER TO KEEP GUARD
EI
guard, protect
16 strokes
衛
L1
646
OBI ; bronze 
; seal 
. Has 行 131 ‘cross-
roads; go’, and 韋 as semantic and phonetic, 
meaning ‘walk round and round’ (see 446), 
to give ‘walk round and keep watch’. OBI and 
bronze forms sometimes had both these ele-

The 185 Fifth Grade Characters  211
貿易 BŌEKI　trade
易者 EKISHA　fortune-teller
安易 AN’I　easy-going
ingly, Gu and Schuessler take the OBI form 
as signifying liquid being moved from one 
vessel into another. Schuessler also treats 易 
as representing two separate words in early 
Chinese: originally a word for ‘change’, then 
borrowed to write a near-homophone mean-
ing ‘be easy, at ease’. The meaning ‘divination’ 
may be an extended one based on interpre-
tation of changes. The diversity of views on 
易 is noted by Ma. KJ1970:96; YK1976:67-8; 
OT1968:460; MS1995:v1:610-11; MR2007:413; 
AS2007:566,569; GY2008:1438;. We suggest 
taking 日 as 日 66 ‘sun’ and 勿 as lizard’s body 
with four legs.
Mnemonic: LIZARD’S BODY AND LEGS 
CHANGE EASILY IN SUN – HOW DIVINE!
EKI, I, yasui, yasashii
easy, change, divina-
tion
8 strokes
易
L3
647
OBI 
; seal . Interpretations diverge. In one 
analysis, early forms (OBI, bronze) are taken as 
a pictograph of a lizard, with a second ele-
ment 彡 (determinative no. 59) to indicate 
the characteristic of lizards to change colors 
(Katō, Yamada), or the sun’s rays refl ected off  
a lizard’s skin (Ogawa). Yamada takes ‘change’ 
and ‘easy’ as extended senses. More convinc-
有益 YŪEKI　profi table
益々 
masumasu　increasingly
利益 RIEKI　profi t
EKI, YAKU, masu
gain, profi t, benefi t
10 strokes
益
L1
648
OBI ; seal 
. The OBI forms show deep 
bowl 皿 300 full to brim with liquid; taken to 
mean ‘overfl ow’. Meanings such as ‘abundant, 
add, gain’ are extended. MS1995:v2:904-5; 
MR2007:317; OT1968:691; YK1976:68; 
KJ1970:88. Suggest taking 
 as laden table.
Mnemonic: BOWL AND LADEN TABLE ARE 
SIGNS OF PROFIT AND GAINS
液体 EKITAI　liquid
液化 EKIKA　liquefaction
血液 KETSUEKI　blood pressure
ated sense either as ‘soak, ooze through’ (Katō, 
Yamada), or ‘(continue) at intervals’ (Ogawa, 
Tōdō) – the latter giving ‘water which gradu-
ally drips down’; sense became generalized to 
‘liquid’. KJ1970:89-90; YK1976:68; OT1968:584; 
TA1965:336; AS2007:562.
Mnemonic: NEED FOR LIQUID, SUCH AS 
WATER, AT NIGHT
EKI
liquid
11 strokes
液
L3
649
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵 42 ‘water’, 
and 夜 232 (‘night’) as phonetic with associ-
演出 ENSHUTSU　production
出演 SHUTSUEN　performance
演説 ENZETSU　speech, address
associated sense ‘extend, pull out’, to give ‘long 
river, long river current’; sense generalized to 
‘extend’. Shirakawa sees senses such as ‘act, 
perform’ as arising from fi gurative usage in 
relation to activities requiring a fl owing perfor-
mance, such as dance and drama. OT1968:603; 
MS1995:v2:776-7,v1:376-7; KJ1970:110-11; YK 
1975:71; SS1984:60. We suggest associating 
this graph with 黄 133 ‘fl aming arrow’/ ‘yellow’, 
replacing 艹 53 ‘grass’ with 宀 30 ‘roof/building’.
Mnemonic: PERFORM ACT IN YELLOW 
BUILDING BESIDE RIVER
EN, ENjiru
act, perform
14 strokes
演
L3
650
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 氵42 ‘water’, and 寅 (NJK 
meaning a zodiac sign, but originally [OBI], 
pictograph of arrow, or occasionally arrow 
with two hands, to mean ‘straight arrow’ or 
‘straighten a [bent] arrow’) as phonetic with 

212  The 185 Fifth Grade Characters
応答 ŌTŌ　response
反応 HANNŌ*　reaction
応用 ŌYŌ　practical application
was then added as determinative to clearly 
indicate ‘respond (in one’s mind)’, though at this 
stage also the shape of the upper element as 
phonetic was changed to 疒 404 ‘sickness’ or 
another similar shape (the variation is of limited 
signifi cance as it serves here only as phonetic). 
Katō considers this change was made in error 
due to misinterpretation of the bronze shape. 
The traditional shape shows subsequently a 
further minor change was made in the shape 
of the upper element, as phonetic, to 广. All in 
all, a challenging etymology. KJ1970:112,883-4; 
MS1995:v1:528-9; v2:886-8; OT1968:358. Take 
广 as 127 ‘house, building’.
Mnemonic: MY HEART RESPONDS TO THIS 
BUILDING
Ō, Ōjiru, kotaeru
respond, react
7 strokes
応
L3
651
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 應. The bronze 
form has 隹 324 ‘short-tailed bird, bird’ and a 
second (partially enclosing) element similar in 
shape to 𠂋, taken by Katō as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘strike’, giving ‘bird of prey, 
hawk’ (later written 鷹, with 鳥 190 ‘bird’). To 
judge from Schuessler, this graph appears to 
have been borrowed at the bronze stage to 
write a near-homophone meaning ‘(to) face, 
respond’. At the seal stage, 心 164 ‘heart, mind’ 
往復 ŌFUKU　round trip 
往事 ŌJI　things past
往来 ŌRAI　comings and goings
桜桃 ŌTŌ　cherry fruit
桜色 sakurairo　cherry pink
桜肉 sakuraNIKU　horsemeat
zukami, Tōdō) or ‘go away’ (Katō), generalised to 
‘go’. Bronze and seal forms show some degrada-
tion of shape, and seal form also saw addition 
of 彳 131 ‘go’ as determinative. Further variation 
resulted in 往. ‘Gone, past’ may be seen as 
extended senses. As a mnemonic, take right-
hand side as 主 315 ‘master’. MS1995:v1:482-
3,702-3,v2:866-7; TA1965:413-15; KJ1970:933-4; 
AS2007:508.
Mnemonic: MASTER GOES AWAY
賏 as both phonetic and semantic, giving 
‘woman wearing necklace’, and by extension 
‘surround’ (here ‘neck’), seeing ‘baby’ as loan 
usage. Both analyses have associated mean-
ing ‘small’, signifi cance being that in ancient 
China both peach and cherry were prized as 
fruits, and there are early references (noted by 
Katō) to cherry fruit being called ‘small peach’. 
Note: the graph 桜 and word sakura normally 
refer to fl owering rather than fruiting cherry. 
KJ1970:83,3; MS1995:v1:346-7; OT1968:264,502; 
SS1984:65. Take top right as three petals.
Mnemonic: THREE PETALS FROM CHERRY 
TREE FALL ON WOMAN
Ō
go, gone, past
8 strokes
Ō, sakura
cherry
10 strokes
往
桜
L1
L1
652
653
OBI 
; seal 
. At OBI stage, had 止 143 ‘foot-
print’ over 王 5 (‘king’), the latter as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘walk around blindly’ (Mi-
Seal 
; traditional 櫻; late graph, fi rst listed 
in 6th century Yupian. Has 木 73 ‘tree’, and 
element 嬰 (sense and function disputed). Mi-
zukami and Katō analyze 嬰 as 女 37 ‘woman’, 
with 賏 (CO, ‘necklace’, from 貝 10 ‘shell’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘small, young’ 
(Mizukami takes ‘surround, add’ as loan usages), 
to give ‘baby girl’. Ogawa takes 嬰 as 女 with 

The 185 Fifth Grade Characters  213
恩人   ONJIN　benefactor
恩知らず  ONshirazu　ingrate
恩返し   ONgaeshi　return favor
可能   KANŌ　possible
可決   KAKETSU　approval
言う可き  iubeki　should say
仮説 KASETSU　hypothesis
仮に 
kari ni　provisionally
仮病 KEBYŌ　feigned illness 
Seal ; late graph (Shuowen). Has 心 164 ‘heart’, 
and 因 643 (‘rely on’) as phonetic with as-
sociated sense ‘grieving heart’, to give ‘heart 
which grieves for others’, and by extension 
‘benevolent towards, take pity, favor, kindness’. 
KJ1970:62; YK1976:75-6; OT1968:366.
Mnemonic: A HEART THAT RELIES ON KINDNESS
as an extended sense. However, Qiu takes 
 as 
originally showing not waterweed but some-
thing carried over the shoulder, specifi cally an 
ax handle (later written 柯; see 何 86 also), and 
Schuessler agrees, considering the function of 
口 here was to indicate that ‘ax handle’ was only 
to be ‘mouthed’, i.e., to be read as phonetic loan 
for the near-homophone of abstract meaning 
(‘can, permit’). MS1995:v1:204-5; YK1976:78; 
KJ1970:121; OT1968:159; QX2000:224; 
AS2007:275. Suggest taking 
 as a variant of 
丁 367 ‘exact’.
Mnemonic: SAY EXACTLY WHAT CAN AND 
SHOULD BE APPROVED
but both Shirakawa and Tōdō also support this. 
Tōdō includes 叚 (and 假) in a word-family 
meaning ‘cover something underneath’, an 
interpretation which gives credible support 
for the sense ‘wear a mask’.  Abstract meanings 
such as ‘imitation, provisional, temporary’ may 
be seen as extended senses. The element 亻 41 
‘person’ was added at the seal stage, with no 
signifi cant change of meaning. The substitu-
tion of 反 for 叚 to create 仮 can be traced 
back to Han period cursivized clerical script 
forms. KJ1970:120; MS1995:v1:182-4,198-201; 
YK1976:79; OT1968:48; SS1984:71; TA1965:381-
3; SK1984:62-3. We suggest taking 反 as the 
same-shaped 反 393 ‘oppose’.
Mnemonic: PERSON OPPOSED TO EVEN  
TEMPORARY FALSEHOOD
ON
favor, kindness
10 strokes
KA, -beki/ku/shi
approve, can, should
5 strokes
KA, KE, kari
temporary, false
6 strokes
恩
可
仮
L1
L3
L3
654
655
656
OBI ; seal 
. Has 口 22 ‘mouth; say’, and 
enclosure element 
 (meaning disputed). 
Usually taken as 丂 (‘fl oating waterweed’, 130) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘permit, 
allow’ (Mizukami considers possibly through a 
convoluted process, fi guratively refl ecting the 
irregular shape of the waterweed), to give ‘(ver-
bally) permit’. In this analysis, ‘can’ may be taken 
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 假. Originally, 
this graph was written 叚. Bronze form consists 
of i] two hands, with ii] an additional element 
厂 (usually taken as ‘cliff ’ or ‘cave dwelling’) 
with two short horizontal strokes or dots 
inside. There is some divergence in analysis. 
One element is often taken as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘false, deception; substitute’, 
to give the overall sense ‘wear a mask’ (Katō, 
Mizukami, Yamada, Ogawa). The basis for the 
inclusion of ‘mask’ here may not seem clear, 

214  The 185 Fifth Grade Characters
価値 KACHI　value
価格 KAKAKU　price
物価 BUKKA　price of goods 
河口 KAKŌ　rivermouth
河豚 fugu*　globefi sh
河馬 KABA　hippopotamus 
通過   TSŪKA　passage
過去形  KAKOKEI　past tense
言い過ぎ iisugi　exaggeration 
trade’) as semantic and phonetic meaning ‘busi-
ness of buying and selling’, to give ‘someone 
who buys and sells, merchant’. By extension, 
the graph acquired related or extended other 
meanings such as ‘price, worth’. KJ1970:116; 
YK1976:80; OT1968:58,911,957; SS1984:72. As 
a mnemonic we suggest taking the right-hand 
part of the modern graph as 西 169 ‘west’, with 
亻 41 ‘person’. 
Mnemonic: PERSON FROM WEST HAS VALUE
(CO, ‘fl oating aquatic waterweed’ 130). Gu, for 
his part, takes the original meaning of 河 as ‘the 
Yellow River’, then by extension the generalized 
sense ‘river’. The basis for this proposal is prob-
ably that the Shang dynasty culture evolved 
in the Yellow River valley. Schuessler lists both 
‘river’ and ‘Yellow River’ as meanings for 河 
in OBI texts. By the seal stage, the structure 
of 河 had stabilized in line with the fi rst OBI 
form above as 氵 42 ‘water’, and 可 655 (‘can, 
should’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘bend’. KJ1970:123; YK1976:81; GY2008:709; 
AS2007:274; OT1968:564; MS1995:v2:740-
41,v1:52-3,204-06; AS2007:274-5; MR2007:435. 
As a mnemonic we suggest taking the elements 
as ‘water’ and ‘can’.
Mnemonic: WATER CAN FORM RIVER
phonetic with associated sense ‘many, much’, to 
give ‘go a long way/too far’ (Mizukami takes as 
‘much latitude/margin’, to give ‘walk to a desti-
nation along an easy road’). OBI forms are listed 
by Mizukami, all of slightly diff erent structure. 
KJ1970:312; YK1976:83; MS1995:v2:1298-1300; 
OT1968:1005. Suggest taking right-hand ele-
ment as a ‘topless’ tower (see 高 132, ‘tall’).
Mnemonic: GOING TO PASS BY TOPLESS 
TOWER IS EXCEEDINGLY ERRONEOUS
KA, atai
price, value, worth
8 strokes
KA, kawa
river
8 strokes
KA, sugiru/gosu, 
-sugi, ayamachi
pass, exceed, error
12 strokes
価
河
過
L3
L3
L3
657
658
659
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 價. 
The graph has 亻 41 ‘person’ and 賈 (NJK, itself 
comprising 襾 ‘stopper, cover’, and 貝 10 ‘shell 
currency, valuables’, meaning ‘store goods, 
OBI 
; seal 
. OBI forms vary. Tōdō takes 
the one given here as comprising left-hand 
element representing fl owing water, and right-
hand as symbol signifying ‘curved, bent’, giving 
‘river’; he includes 河 in his word-family ‘bent 
(at ninety degrees)’ along with 何 (modern 
meaning: ‘what?’ 86, q.v.), the original mean-
ing of which was ‘carry on the back’. Other OBI 
forms for 河 are virtually indistinguishable from 
some of those listed by Mizukami for 何. Ma, 
alternatively, takes the phonetic in 河to be 丂 
Seal 
. Has ⻌ 85 ‘walk, go’, and 咼 (origi-
nally, either ‘distorted mouth shape’ [Katō] or 
‘smooth-moving body joints’ [Mizukami]) as 

The 185 Fifth Grade Characters  215
賀詞  GASHI　congratulations
年賀状 NENGAJŌ　New Year card
祝賀  SHUKUGA　celebration 
不愉快 FUYUKAI　unpleasant
快楽  KAIRAKU　pleasure
快活  KAIKATSU　cheerful 
解説 KAISETSU　commentary
理解 RIKAI　understanding
分解 BUNKAI　dismantling 
資格  SHIKAKU　qualifi cations
性格  SEIKAKU　personality
所有格 SHOYŪKAKU　genitive case 
is 嘉 (NJK meaning ‘excellent, consider fi ne’), 
and Schuessler links the two also, noting that 
‘congratulate’ already stood as an early mean-
ing for 賀, a consideration which perhaps leads 
Mizukami also to attribute an overall meaning 
‘express joy and add (gifts) on top’. Mizukami 
sees ‘be pleased’ as an extended (generalized) 
sense; ‘praise, congratulate’ are also deriva-
tive meanings. TA1965:583-6; AS2007:300; 
MS1995:v2:1234-5.
Mnemonic: CONGRATULATIONS ON ADDING 
TO YOUR SHELL-MONEY
archer’s hand pulling bowstring, thus opening 
up front of body, and so ‘open’) as semantic 
and phonetic meaning ‘open’, thus ‘one’s heart 
opens’, and ‘be pleased, pleasant’. KJ1970:367; 
YK1976:88; OT1968:360. Suggest taking 夬 as 
man with back-pack.
Mnemonic: BACK-PACKER’S HEART IS 
ALWAYS PLEASANT AND CHEERFUL
up an ox/cow’, then more generally ‘divide, take 
apart’. Ma, alternatively, takes 角 as semantic. It 
may be both semantic and phonetic. Seal form 
has diff erent composition, with 刀 198 ‘knife’, to 
give ‘cut up’; already used in generalized sense 
at an early period, not necessarily ‘cut up an 
ox’. Schuessler treats ‘understand’ as a sepa-
rate word related to that for ‘divide up’, rather 
than an extended sense. MS1995:v2:1182-3; 
MR2007:306; KJ1970:150; YK1976:92.
Mnemonic: SOLVE PROBLEM BY CUTTING 
OFF COW’S HORN
with associated sense ‘high, tall and straight’, 
to give ‘a tree straight and tall’. Katō notes 
there are few examples of actual use in this 
sense, but that it was used (as a loan graph) 
from Han times for ‘standard’, which appears 
to have become a more dominant sense. 
MS1995:v1:664-5; KJ1970:193-4; YK1976:96. 
Mnemonic: EACH TREE MEETS A STANDARD
GA
congratulations
12 strokes
KAI, kokoroyoi
pleasant, cheerful
7 strokes
KAI, GE, toku
unravel, explain, 
solve, loosen
13 strokes
KAKU, KŌ
standard, status
10 strokes
賀
快
解
格
L1
L3
L3
L3
660
661
662
663
Bronze ; seal . Has 貝 10 ‘shell, currency, 
valuable item’, and 加 453 (‘add’) as phonetic 
with associated sense which Tōdō takes to 
be ‘add on top’, regarding the likely original 
meaning of 賀 as ‘pile gifts up high’. The graph
賀 is in Tōdō’s word-family ‘add on top’, as also 
OBI 
; seal 
. OBI has 牛 108 ‘ox, cow’, and 
element showing two hands round a third 
element – the pictographic stage of 角 97 
‘horn’. This is commonly taken as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘divide up, split’, giving ‘divide 
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 木 73 ‘tree’, and 各 462 
(originally ‘come down’; now ‘each’) as phonetic 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 忄 164 ‘heart, 
mind’, and 夬 (CO [see 289], possibly originally 

216  The 185 Fifth Grade Characters
正確 SEIKAKU　precise
確認 KAKUNIN　confi rmation
確実 KAKUJITSU　reliable 
金額 KINGAKU　sum of money
額面 GAKUMEN　face value
額際 hitaigiwa　hairline 
刊行 KANKŌ　publication
日刊 
NIKKAN　daily issue
発刊 HAKKAN　book launch 
stone’, later just ‘hard’ (Katō, Yamada, Ogawa). 
Shirakawa explains link between ‘fl y high’ and 
‘hard’ by 隺 showing a bird (隹 324) trying to fl y 
higher but fi rmly confi ned, representing some-
thing ‘hard’. Tōdō sees the bird as a crane, the 
NJK graph for which is 鶴 (隺, with 鳥190 ‘bird’). 
SS1984:105,108; KJ1970:195-6; YK1976:97; 
OT1968:714; TA1965:265. Suggest 
 as ‘strange’ 
roof.
Mnemonic: ASCERTAIN THAT BIRD IS UNDER 
A STRANGE BUT FIRM ROOF
forehead, but in ancient China (and in various 
periods in Japanese history also), the hairline 
was shaved so as to move hair further up the 
forehead, and /or trimming it at the sides, leav-
ing a ‘desirable/fashionable’ framing of the fore-
head. Alternatively there is an interpretation of 
the phonetic element as having an associated 
sense of ‘wide, broad’, to denote the broad part 
of the face, again giving the meaning ‘forehead’ 
(Ogawa). ‘Frame’ is an extended sense related 
to the borders of the hairline, and ‘plaque’ may 
represent a further extension, whereas ‘amount 
/sum’ appears to be a loan usage. KJ1970:192; 
YK1976:98; OT1968:1106; AS2007:253,334. 
Mnemonic: EACH VISITOR’S FOREHEAD 
LOOKS LIKE A FRAMED PLAQUE
but owing to its convenient simplicity it has 
over the centuries been borrowed extensively. 
Its modern meaning is ‘dry’.) The process of 
engraving woodblocks to produce texts and 
illustrated material on a large scale that was 
developed during the fi rst millennium AD in 
China subsequently led to the meaning ‘print, 
publish’. YK1976:100; KJ1970:204; TA1965:601-
06; OT1968:111; AS2007:331. As a mnemonic 
we suggest taking 干 in its current meaning of 
‘dry’, with 刂 as ‘sword’. 
Mnemonic: PUBLISH BOOK ON HOW TO KEEP 
ENGRAVED SWORD DRY
KAKU,
tashika/kameru
fi rm, ascertain
15 strokes
GAKU, hitai
sum, forehead, frame, 
plaque
18 strokes
KAN
publish, engrave
5 strokes
確
額
刊
L3
L3
L3
664
665
666
Seal 
; late graph (post-Shuowen). Has 石 47 
‘stone’, and 隺 (CO ‘fl y high; high’) as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘hard’, to give ‘hard 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 頁103 ‘head’, 
and 客 270 (‘visitor’) or alternatively 各 (‘each’ 
462) – both having similar pronunciation at that 
time – as a phonetic with an associated sense 
‘shave off  the head hair’, to indicate that part of 
the face framed by the borders of the hair when 
shaved, i.e. ‘forehead’ (Katō, Yamada). Normally 
one would not associate shaving with the 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 刂 (刀) 
198 ‘knife, blade, cut, sword’, and 干 840 as 
phonetic with an associated sense of ‘dig out, 
carve out’ (Katō, Yamada), or ‘cut and make 
level’ (Tōdō, Ogawa). (Originally, 干 depicted a 
forked thrusting weapon with a hand-guard; 

The 185 Fifth Grade Characters  217
幹線 KANSEN　trunk line
幹部 KANBU　leaders
幹事 KANJI　manager 
習慣   SHŪKAN　habit, custom
慣例   KANREI　convention
世慣れた yonareta　worldly-wise 
Shirakawa, by contrast, interprets as a fl agpole 
topped with a good luck symbol and banner 
(Ogawa also says ‘fl agpole’), and follows the 
Shuowen view in regarding two such fl agpoles 
being used for fence-building. Qiu considers 
that the element 倝 in its variant form was 
poorly recognized as a phonetic, a point which 
no doubt led to substitution of 干 (modern 
meaning ‘dry’: see 840) as phonetic instead, 
creating 幹 originally as a popular variant of 
榦. Either interpretation of 倝 still leads to 
the basic sense ‘rising high’, which together 
with 木 gives ‘tree/pole rising high’, and hence 
‘trunk, main part’. DJ2009:v2:469; KJ1970:102; 
MS1995:v1:70-71; YK1976:104; OT1968:324; 
ZY2009:v1:30,v2:526; QX2000:170. As a mne-
monic we suggest taking  as 日 66 ‘sun’ rising 
through ‘plants’ 艹 53.
Mnemonic: PERSON DRIES TRUNK AS SUN 
RISES THROUGH PLANTS
late’. For 遦, Katō suggests original meaning 
‘conduct by accumulating (actions)’, and for 摜 
‘become profi cient using hands’. For 慣, listed 
in Yupian (6th century), Yamada suggests taking 
as ‘become profi cient by accumulating in the 
mind’. Not clear, though, whether these graph 
variations refl ected actual meaning diff er-
ences. KJ1970:337; YK1976:105; TA1965:640-42; 
DJ2009:v1:142,v3:986; AS2007:266. We suggest 
taking elements 貫 1148 ‘pierce’, 貝 10 ‘shell-
money’, and 忄 164 ‘heart, mind’.
Mnemonic: BECOME USED TO HAVING HEART 
PIERCED OVER SHELL-MONEY
KAN, miki
trunk, main
13 strokes
KAN, nareru
become used to
14 strokes
幹
慣
L1
L3
667
668
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Interpretations 
diff er somewhat. The original form in Shuowen 
is 榦, where the meaning is given as wooden 
posts standing fi rmly in the ground at each end 
when building a fence; the graph comprises 木 
73 ‘tree’, with the element 倝 (disputed sense 
as phonetic here) in the variant form 
, which 
shows 人 41 ‘person’, in one of its modifi ed 
shapes as 𠆢. 倝 (or the variant), which is often 
taken as originally meaning ‘sun rising up’ (Mi-
zukami, Katō, Yamada), is taken by Katō and 
Yamada as a phonetic with associated sense 
‘base, stem’, to give ‘trunk/stem (rising up)’; 
Seal form A (遦) 
; seal form B (摜) 
; 慣 itself 
is a late variant. 遦 (CO; has ⻌ ’walk along road, 
go’ 85) and 摜 (CO; has 扌 ‘hand’ 34) are both 
defi ned in Shuowen as ‘familiar with’ or ‘custom’. 
In both graphs, the element 貫 (‘pierce’ 1148) 
is phonetic with associated sense ‘accumu-
双眼鏡 SŌGANKYŌ　binoculars
肉眼  NIKUGAN　naked eye
血眼  chimanako　bloodshot eyes 
ing an early Chinese (Late Han) word for ‘knob, 
bulge’, and a related near-homophone of that 
for ‘eyeball, eye’. Ogawa has a diff erent view, 
taking 艮 as having associated sense ‘division’, 
to mean ‘eye cavity’ – presumably ‘eye socket’. 
Despite divergence in analysis, all scholars take 
眼 as coming to mean ‘eye’ as a general term, 
like 目 76, though the two graphs are diff erenti-
ated in modern written Japanese (and Chinese). 
KJ1970:215-6; YK1976:108-9; AS2007:555; 
OT1968:700. Take 艮 as variant ‘good’ 良 628.
Mnemonic: KEEP A GOOD EYE OPEN
GAN, manako
eye
11 strokes
眼
L1
669
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Views vary. Most 
scholars take 目 76 ‘eye’, and 艮 281 (NJK ‘stop’, 
originally ‘hostility’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘round’, to give ‘eyeball’, and also 
‘eye’ (Katō, Yamada); this view is supported by 
Schuessler, who sees the graph 眼 as represent-

218  The 185 Fifth Grade Characters
基本 KIHON　basis, standard
基金 KIKIN　fund, foundation
基地 KICHI　base (army etc.)s 
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 土 64 ‘earth, soil’, and 
其 269 (originally winnowing basket, showing 
a basket on a stand, now meaning ‘that’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘platform to 
put things on’, to give ‘platform to pile up earth 
on’; sense generalized to ‘base, foundation’. 
MS1995:v1:270-71; KJ1970:239; YK1976:114.
Mnemonic: WINNOWING DEVICE IS BASED 
ON FIRM GROUND
KI, moto, motozuku
base
11 strokes
基
L3
670
寄与   KIYO　contribution
寄せ波  yosenami　surf
立ち寄る  tachiyoru　‘drop in’, visit
semantic and phonetic, meaning ‘stand on 
one leg’ (Yamada), or as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘rely on’ (Katō, Ogawa). In either 
case, the overall meaning is taken to be ‘stay 
temporarily at someone else’s house’. In Tōdō’s 
word-family indicating ‘bent’ (‘be bent at ninety 
degrees’). YK1976:114; KJ1970:123; OT1968:280; 
TA1965:578-82.  
Mnemonic: APPROACH STRANGE DWELLING 
FOR A VISIT
KI, yoru/seru
approach, send, visit 
11 strokes
寄
L3
671
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 宀 30 ‘roof, 
dwelling’, and 奇 1174 (originally person 
standing on one leg; now ‘strange’) either as 
規則  KISOKU　rule
定規  JŌGI　rule(r), measure
大規模 DAIKIBO　large-scale
that for ‘husband, man’ – in the measure sense 
‘width of four fi ngers’, later written with the 
‘hand’ determinative 扌 34 as 扶 (another 
meaning is ‘support, assist’, which is the one 
that has been retained through into modern 
Japanese: see 扶 1905). 夫 combines with 見 
20 (‘see’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘round’, to give ‘a round measure’, i.e. ‘compass’. 
‘Standard’ is an extended sense. YK1976:115; 
KJ1970:237; AS2007:239-40. 
Mnemonic: HUSBAND SEEN AS STANDARD 
TO BE MEASURED BY
KI
standard,
measure
11 strokes
規
L3
672
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 夫 601 
‘husband, man’, here not in its modern 
sense but instead representing another 
word – homophonous in early Chinese with 
技術 GIJUTSU　technique
技師 GISHI　technician
演技 ENGI　acting skills
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 扌 34 ‘hand’, 
here reinforcing 支 717 (originally hand holding 
piece of bamboo, taken as meaning ‘separate, 
split off ’, with modern meaning ‘support’ seen 
as loan usage [Katō, Yamada]) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘work with the hands’, to give 
‘make things with the hands’, and by exten-
sion ‘craft, skill’. KJ1970:243; YK1976:118-9; 
OT1968:402.
Mnemonic: SUPPORT WORK-HANDS SKILLED 
IN CRAFT
GI, waza
craft, skill 
7 strokes
技
L3
673

The 185 Fifth Grade Characters  219
主義 SHUGI　principle, ism/-ism
義理 GIRI　justice
意義 IGI　signifi cance
netic with associated sense ‘dance, rite’, to give 
‘beautiful dance/rite’. Ogawa explains this as a 
dance performed before/for the gods, mean-
ing fi tting behavior and hence ‘the correct way’. 
Shirakawa, though, takes the two elements in 
this graph literally as ‘sheep’ and ‘saw’, mean-
ing sacrifi ce a sheep; such a sheep would be 
a fi ne specimen, leading to the sense ‘correct’. 
MS1995:v2:1042-3; OT1968:799; KJ1970:142; 
SS1984:162.
Mnemonic: I MYSELF, AND MY SHEEP, STAND 
FOR RIGHTEOUSNESS
GI
righteousness 
13 strokes
義
L1
674
OBI 
; seal 
. Widely taken as comprising 羊 
426 ‘sheep’ in slightly abbreviated form, itself an 
abbreviation of 美 398 ‘beautiful’ (q.v.), and 我 
833 (originally a weapon such as halberd [545], 
battle-ax, or saw, modern sense ‘I, self’) as pho-
逆行 GYAKKŌ　retrogression
逆説 GYAKUSETSU　paradox
反逆 HANGYAKU　treason
tree without leaves, and Yamada and Katō take 
屰 as in error). Despite divergences, right-
hand phonetic is taken as associated sense 
‘meet, greet’, giving ‘go out to meet/greet’. 
‘Contrary, oppose’ are seen as loan usages. 
SS1984:169; MS1995 ref.:v1:414-5; KJ1970:361-
2; MS1995:v2:1288-9; YK1976:121; QX2000:185; 
Mnemonic: FUNNY UPSIDE-DOWN MAN 
MOVES IN REVERSE
GYAKU, sakarau
reverse, oppose 
9 strokes
逆
L3
675
OBI 
; seal 
. Has ⻌ ’walk/go’ 85, and 屰 
(may originally show a person upside-down, 
though Mizukami notes alternative as winter 
永久  EIKYŪ　permanence
久遠  KUON*　eternity
久し振り hisashiburi　after long time
Seal 
. Has 人 41 ‘person’, and a stroke similar 
to 乀 typically taken to mean ‘hold back’, giving 
‘stop, stand still’; by extension ‘be late’, and then 
‘long time’. Gu, however, takes it as person with 
bundle of traditional Chinese herbs placed be-
hind, for moxibustion; in this view, ‘long time’ is 
a loan use. KJ1970:258; YK1976:122; OT1968:24; 
GY2008:37. 
Mnemonic: STOOPING PERSON PROPPED UP 
FOR A LONG TIME
KYŪ, KU, hisashii
long time, lasting
3 strokes
久
L3
676
旧友 KYŪYŪ　old friend
旧派 KYŪHA　‘old school’
旧式 KYŪSHIKI　old style
The sense ‘old’ is loan usage. Note: the 
distinction above between the two graphs with 
meaningful variation in the shape of the ele-
ments艹/⻀ is a subtle one normally not sup-
ported in modern computerized fonts, and not 
always consistently even in pre-modern char-
acter dictionaries in China: graphs in the 艹 53 
(‘plants’) section in the late 17th century Zheng-
zitong (a predecessor to Kangxi zidian) provide 
some examples of this. MS1995:v2:1094-5; 
OT1968:1080; YK1976:123; MR2007:293; 
ZY2009:v3:1087; AS2007:321. Suggest taking 丨
as ‘one’ and 日 as ‘day’ 66.
Mnemonic: ONE DAY OLD
KYŪ
old, past
5 strokes
旧
L3
677
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional 舊. Has CO 
, 
generally taken by commentators as a type of 
crested or horned owl (distinguished from CO 
萑, a separate graph meaning a type of plant), 
and 臼 (originally, pictograph of a mortar [re-
ceptacle for crushing or grinding]) as phonetic, 
serving here as onomatopoeic for a bird cry. 

220  The 185 Fifth Grade Characters
居住 KYOJŪ　dwelling
住居 JŪKYO　dwelling
居所 idokoro　whereabouts
Bronze ; seal 
. Has 尸 256 taken either as 
a corpse laid out on its side, or a person lying 
on their side (Katō takes as indicating sub-
mission), and 古 121 (‘old’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘crouch down’ or ‘sit’, to give 
‘crouch’ or ‘sit down’. Since this involves not 
moving, by extension ‘stay, reside’. YK1976:128-
9; KJ1970:266,452-3;  MS1995:v1:408-9,404-5. 
Suggest taking 尸 as slumped person.
Mnemonic: OLD PERSON SLUMPED IN 
RESIDENCE
KYO, iru, oru
be, reside 
8 strokes
居
L3
678
許可 KYOKA　permission
特許 TOKKYO　patent
手許 temoto　at hand
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 言 118 ‘words; speak’, 
and 午 122 (‘noon’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘allow, permit’, to give ‘listen to an-
other’s words’, and by extension ‘allow, permit’. 
MS1995:v2:1186-7; KJ1970:265-6; YK1976:129.
Mnemonic: PERMIT SPEECH AT NOON
KYO, yurusu, moto
permit, forgive, place, 
home
11 strokes
許
L3
679
国境  KOKKYŌ　frontier 
境内  KEIDAI　precinct
境界線 KYŌKAISEN　boundary line
境) to NJK 彊, an older, more intricate graph 
(representing a near-homophone originally 
meaning ‘strong bow’ and then just ‘strong’) 
which was itself loaned for ‘boundary’, a sense 
subsequently refl ected in the modifi ed CO 
graph 疆, which has 土 added). KJ1970:272; 
YK1976:134; OT1968:223; MS1995:v2:982-
3,v1:472-3; AS2007:319,307. We suggest taking 
竟 as its components 音 6 ‘sound’ and 儿 41 
‘(bent) legs/person’.
Mnemonic: THE SOUND OF LEGS ON 
GROUND AT BORDER
KYŌ, KEI, sakai
boundary, border
14 strokes 
境
L3
680
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 土 64 ‘earth, 
ground’, and 竟 (NJK, originally, ‘music piece 
ends’, now just ‘end, fi nish’) as semantic and 
phonetic meaning ‘boundary’, to give ‘bound-
ary of land’. Katō links 竟 (and by extension, 
平均  HEIKIN　average
均等  KINTŌ　uniformity
不均衡 FUKINKŌ　imbalance
legs, or as repetition sign for coiling], or bent, 
encircling arm with two strokes meaning 
‘arrange’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘arrange, bring under control’, and 土 64 
‘ground’, thus ‘arrange, cultivate fi elds and make 
level’, then by extension generalized to ‘level, 
equal’. MS1995:v1:264-5,146-7; KJ1970:67-8; 
YK1976:139; TA1965:712-22; OT1968:212-3. Take 
two strokes as ‘two’, and 勹 as ‘coil’.
Mnemonic: TWO COILED WORMS ON LEVEL 
GROUND LOOK ALIKE
KIN, hitoshii
average, level,
alike, equal
7 strokes
均
L3
681
Bronze ; seal 
. Has 匀 (analyzed as origi-
nally either coiled reptile or earthworm [with 
two short strokes indicating either short 

The 185 Fifth Grade Characters  221
禁止 KINSHI　prohibition
禁煙 KIN’EN　‘No Smoking’
厳禁 GENKIN　strictly prohibited
sense ‘keep back, restrain’, giving ‘the gods 
restrain’ (Katō, Yamada), and by extension 
‘forbid’, or as semantic, giving ‘sacred area sur-
rounded by forest’ (Tōdō, Shirakawa, Ogawa), 
again giving ‘forbid’ by extension. KJ1970:294; 
YK1976:140-41; TA1965:815-23; SS1984:211; 
OT1968:724.
Mnemonic: ALTAR IS BANNED IN FORBIDDEN 
FOREST
KIN
forbid, ban 
13 strokes
禁
L3
682
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 示 723 ‘altar, 
deity’, and 林 79 ‘forest’. Views diff er on role of 
林. Taken either as phonetic with associated 
字句  JIKU　phraseology 
句切り  KUgiri　punctuation
文句  MONKU　complaint
OBI form ; bronze 
 seal . All forms depict 
things intertwined (Shirakawa). 句 comprises 
口 22 ‘speak, words; mouth’, with a second 
element interpreted as丩as phonetic with as-
KU
phrase, clause
5 strokes
句
L1
683
群集 GUNSHŪ　crowd
魚群 GYOGUN　school of fi sh
群居 GUNKYO　gregariousness
Bronze ; seal 
. Has 羊 426 ‘sheep’, and 君 
285 (‘lord’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘numerous, accumulate’, to give ‘sheep gather 
together’; meaning later generalized to ‘gather 
together; group’. 群 is the form which gained 
popularity in block script during the fi rst millen-
nium AD; before that, the two elements were 
arranged diff erently, as 羣. MS1995:v2:1042-3; 
KJ1970:343; YK1976:145.
Mnemonic: LORD OF THE SHEEP FLOCK
GUN, mure/reru,
muragaru
group, fl ock
13 strokes 
群
L3
684
経済 KEIZAI　economy
経文 KYŌMON　sutras
経過 KEIKA　passage, progress
on loom’; by extension, also abstract senses 
such as ‘connecting thread (fi gurative)’, ‘pass, 
elapse’, ‘longitude’. ‘Thread’ led to extended 
meaning ‘line of reasoning’ (Katō). ‘Law, model’ 
is additional meaning, as is ‘way, path’, the 
latter leading by extension to ‘classic text’ and 
‘sutra’. MS1995:v2:1014-5,v1:424-7; KJ1970:346; 
YK1976:149. Suggest taking 又 as ‘hand’ 2003 
and 土 as ‘ground’ 64.
Mnemonic: GUIDING HAND PASSES THREADS 
TO GROUND
KEI, KYŌ, heru, tatsu
pass, sutra, longitude
11 strokes
経
L3
685
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 經. Has 糸 29 
‘thread’, and 巠 (originally showing vertical 
threads on a loom) as semantic and phonetic, 
meaning ‘straight’, to give ‘vertical threads 
sociated sense ‘stop, rest’ (Mizukami, Katō), or 
as 勹 (Yamada; same associated sense), to give 
‘breaks in language’, and by extension mean-
ings such as ‘clause, phrase’, i.e. a sequence of 
language between breaks.MS1995:v1:206-7; 
KJ1970:279; YK1976:142; SS1984:169-70. Sug-
gest taking 勹 as ‘encircling/wrapping’ (see e.g. 
681). 
Mnemonic: MOUTH WRAPS ITSELF AROUND 
PHRASE

222  The 185 Fifth Grade Characters
潔白 KEPPAKU na　immaculate
潔癖 KEPPEKI na　fastidious
潔く 
isagiyoku　valiantly
(Ogawa says ‘free of defi lement’), and 氵 42 
‘water’ to reinforce 絜, for overall meaning 
‘purify by bathing’; subsequently generalized 
sense ‘clean, pure’.KJ1970:257; YK1976:155; 
OT1968:607; SS1984:250. We suggest taking 糸
as 29 ‘thread’, 刀 as 198 ‘cut’, and 
 as variant of
主 315 ‘master’.
Mnemonic: ODD MASTER CUTS THREADS, 
WASHES THEM CLEAN IN WATER 
KETSU, isagiyoi
clean, pure 
15 strokes
潔
L1
686
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 絜 (CO 
originally meaning ‘correct, proper’) as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘purify by bathing’ 
事件 JIKEN　incident
条件 JŌKEN　condition, terms
件の kudan no　aforementioned
by a rope’; by extension, ‘be pulled/ bound’), 
with 亻 41 ‘person’, to give overall meaning 
‘person who is bound and not free’, i.e. ‘slave’. 
In ancient China, slaves were regarded as no 
more than objects, and hence extended senses 
such as ‘thing’. KJ1970:385-6; YK1976:156; 
MS1995:v2:834-5.
Mnemonic: PERSON LEADING A COW IS A 
SERIOUS MATTER
KEN, kudan
item, matter
6 strokes
件
L3
687
Seal ; seemingly a very late graph (Yupian). 
The element 牛 108 ‘ox, cow’ is taken to be an 
abbreviation for 牽 (NJK, originally ‘lead cow 
旅券  RYOKEN　passport
証券  SHŌKEN　bond
定期券 TEIKIKEN　commuter pass
with associated sense ‘carved wood’ (Katō). Ac-
cording to Katō, ancient contracts were made 
of a piece of wood carved in a certain way and 
then divided into two pieces, which could be 
matched up again to signify conclusion of a 
contract by parties concerned. KJ1970:373; 
OT1968:115; YK1976:156-7;. We suggest taking 
 as 二 65 ‘two’, and 火 8 ‘fi re(s)’.
Mnemonic: START TWO FIRES WITH CUT UP 
TICKETS
KEN 
TICKET, PASS, BOND
8 strokes 
券
L3
688
Seal ; late graph (Shuowen). Has 刀 198 ‘knife/
cut’, and 
 (CO showing hands and grain/rice, 
originally meaning ‘handle rice’) as phonetic 
険悪 KEN’AKU na　dangerous
保険 HOKEN　insurance
険阻 KENSO na　precipitous
with associated sense taken as either ‘gather 
together’ (Katō, Yamada), giving ‘hills/moun-
tains grouped together’, or ‘jagged, pointed, 
steep’ (Tōdō, Ogawa), giving ‘jagged/steep hills/
mountains’, and ‘steep’ as a generalized mean-
ing. Either interpretation leads to ‘dangerous’ as 
an extended meaning. KJ1970:375; TA1965:847-
8; OT1968:1069. We suggest taking  as ‘odd’ 
elder brother 兄 114 under cover/cap 亼.
Mnemonic: ODD ELDER BROTHER DONS CAP 
TO CLIMB STEEP HILL
KEN, kewashii
steep, severe, 
perilous
11 strokes
険
L3
689
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 險. 
Has阝1907 ‘hill, mound’, and 僉 (CO, originally 
‘many people agree’: see 500) as phonetic 

The 185 Fifth Grade Characters  223
検討  KENTŌ　enquiry
探検  TANKEN　exploration
検査員 KENSAIN　inspector
ed sense ‘store away’ (Tōdō says ‘collect togeth-
er/collect and control’: see 500), to give ‘store in 
wooden boxes’. Katō and Yamada take ‘examine’ 
as a loan usage, while Tōdō and Ogawa treat it 
as an extended sense. KJ1970:376; YK1976:159; 
TA1965:842-6; OT1968:510. As in 689, we again 
suggest taking  as ‘odd’ elder brother 兄 114 
under cover/cap 亼. 
Mnemonic: ODD ELDER BROTHER DONS CAP 
TO INVESTIGATE TREE
KEN
investigate 
12 strokes
検
L3
690
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 檢. 
Has 木 73 ‘wood, tree’, and 僉 (CO, originally, 
‘many people agree’) as phonetic with associat-
限度   GENDO　limit
限界   GENKAI　boundary
限りない  kagirinai　boundless
away’]) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘diffi  cult’, to give ‘walking along hilly road is 
diffi  cult’. By extension, ‘cannot move on’, ‘dead 
end’, ‘limit’. KJ1970:386, 410-11; YK1976:163; 
MS1995:v2:1392-4. We suggest taking 艮 liter-
ally as eye over twisted legs, turning round. 
(Distinguish from 良 628 ‘good’.)
Mnemonic: LIMITED BY HILLS, SO TURNING 
TO LOOK AT WAY BACK 
GEN, kagiru/ri
limit(ed)
9 strokes
限
L3
691
発現 HATSUGEN　revelation
現象 GENSHŌ　phenomenon
現実 GENJITSU　reality
‘luster of jade’, with ‘appear’ as a loan usage. 
‘Luster of jade’ is supported by Qiu as original 
meaning for 現, who also treats ‘appear’ as a 
loan usage for this graph. Ogawa, alternatively, 
takes 見 as semantic and phonetic, to give ‘lus-
ter of jade appears’, later generalized to ‘appear 
(before one’s eyes)’. YK1976:163-4; OT1968:657; 
QX2000:342.   
Mnemonic: LOOK AT THE SPOTLESS JADE AP-
PEARING ON DISPLAY
GEN, arawareru/su
appear, display
11 strokes
現
L3
692
Bronze  seal 
. Has 阝 1907 ‘hill, mound’ 
and 艮 (281, originally ‘hostility, turn and stare’ 
[bronze form has ‘eye’ with ‘person turned 
Seal 
; late graph (post-Shuowen). Has 玉15 
‘jade’ in its slightly abbreviated left-hand shape 
(minus the dot), and 見 20 ‘see’. Yamada takes as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘appear’, to give 
減少 GENSHŌ　decrease
加減 KAGEN　extent, state
減税 GENZEI　tax-cut
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 氵 42 water, and 咸 
(NJK, see 264, originally ‘threaten with weapon, 
shouting’ [Mizukami], or ‘shout’ [Katō]) as 
phonetic with associated sense usually taken 
as ‘few; diminish’ (Ogawa says ‘sink, collapse’), 
to give ‘water diminishes’, then just ‘reduce’. 
KJ1970:215,214; OT1968:594; MS1995;V2:764-
6,v1:228-9; YK1976:164.
Mnemonic: THREATEN TO DECREASE WATER
GEN, heru/rasu
decrease, reduce
12 strokes
減
L3
693

224  The 185 Fifth Grade Characters
事故   JIKO　accident
故国   KOKOKU　one’s native land
故伊藤氏 KO-ITŌSHI　late Mr Itō
KO, yue
past, reason
9 strokes
故
L3
694
Seal 
. Has 攵 (攴) 112 ‘beat/hit/force’, and 
古 121 (‘old’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘change’, thus ‘cause to change’, and by 
extension ‘cause’, and – as a result of process of 
change – ‘deceased’ (the sense ‘old’ here may 
also be seen as a sense derived in this way, or 
as 古 serving as both semantic and phonetic). 
MS1995:v1:570-71; KJ1970:392; YK1976:167.
Mnemonic: BEATEN WITH OLD STICK IN THE 
PAST, FOR SOME REASON
個人 KOJIN　individual
個性 KOSEI　individuality
一個 IKKO　one item
KO
individual,
counter-suffi  x
10 strokes
個
L3
695
counter. At some stage the separate graph 個 
was then devised, and used interchangeably 
with 箇. Katō and Yamada see 個 as having 
been devised on the basis of the graph 介 
(originally, ‘scales [of an animal’] > ‘armor; wear 
armor’; see 1094), but this seems debatable. 
The element 亻 41 ‘person’ in 個 explains its ad-
ditional sense ‘individual’. It may be noted here 
that another late graph, 个 (less formal), was 
also devised as a general counter (apparently 
based on one half of the graph 竹 58 ‘bamboo’), 
and is interchangeable with 個. KJ1970:390-91; 
YK1976:167; AS2007:248. We suggest using 固 
501 in its sense of ‘fi rm’.  
Mnemonic: THAT PERSON IS A FIRM 
INDIVIDUAL AND A GOOD COUNTER
Late graph, no seal form. Analyses diverge. 
Katō treats 個 together with 箇 1087 (originally, 
‘bamboo stalk’). There is a seal form for 箇, 
which is thus probably the older graph, and 
this came to be used as a counter fi rstly just for 
bamboo stalks themselves, then for an increas-
ing range of other items, and by the Tang Dy-
nasty (618-907AD) was being used as a general 
弁護士 BENGOSHI　lawyer
保護  HOGO　protection
護衛  GOEI　guard, escort
GO
defend, protect
20 strokes
護
L1
696
of defence (Katō, Yamada); Ogawa takes as 
‘seize’, to give ‘seize on orders’; Tōdō includes 
in a word-family ‘surround with a framework’, 
giving ‘surround with a verbal framework’. While 
diverse, these analyses mostly give ‘defend’ as 
a meaning by extension. KJ1970:395-6,327-8; 
YK1976:171; OT1968:944; TA1965:407-10. Sug-
gest right hand part as 又 2003 ‘hand’, 隹 324 
‘bird’, and 艹 53 ‘grass’.
Mnemonic: WORDY DEFENCE FOR HAND 
SEIZING PROTECTED BIRD IN GRASS
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 言 118 ‘words’, speech’, 
and  (CO, originally ‘measure with hand’) as 
phonetic, analyses of which vary. One inter-
pretation of the phonetic is ‘make go round’ 
or ‘evade’, to give ‘evade with words’ – a type 
効果 KŌKA　eff ect
有効 YŪKŌ na　eff ective 
効き目 kikime　eff ect
KŌ, kiku
eff ect, effi  cacy
8 strokes
効
L3
697
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional 效. Both 效 and 効 
are listed in the authoritative Kangxi zidian, 
with latter noted as a popular form. 效 has 
攵(攴) 112 ‘strike; force’, and 交 128 (‘mix, 
exchange’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘child imitates’, to give ‘force to imitate’ (Katō, 
Yamada); Mizukami lists another associated 

The 185 Fifth Grade Characters  225
sense, i.e. ‘test by comparison’. Later, gener-
alised to ‘imitate, learn’. In modern Japanese, 
the form with 力 78 ‘strength, eff ort’ is the 
offi  cial one; and it may be taken as ‘imitate by 
eff ort’. Yamada regards ‘effi  cacy’ as loan usage. 
MS1995:v1:572-3; YK1976:178; KJ1970:173-4; 
ZY2009:v2:448,v1:77.  
Mnemonic: EXCHANGE OF STRENGTH 
PROVES EFFECTIVE 
分厚 BUatsu na　bulky, thick
厚生 KŌSEI　welfare
厚情 KŌJŌ　kindness
KŌ, atsui
thick, kind
9 strokes
厚
L3
698
132) which is taken as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘pile up’ or ‘build up in thick layers’, to give 
‘cliff s/crags one on top of the other’; by exten-
sion, ‘thick’. KJ1970:281-2; MS1995:v1:184-5; 
YK1976:179. Suggest as 日 66 ‘day’ and 子 27 
‘child’.
Mnemonic: KIND BUT ‘THICK’ CHILD PLAYS 
DAILY BY CLIFF
Bronze 
; seal . Has 厂 ‘cliff , crag’, and element 
representing an inverted watchtower (see e.g. 
耕地  KŌCHI　arable land
耕作  KŌSAKU　farming
耕耘機 KŌUNKI　cultivator
KŌ, tagayasu
till, plow
10 strokes
耕
L3
699
of plow, and 井 1575 (‘well’, q.v.) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘manage the land’, to give 
‘manage the land with a plow’. KJ1970:160; 
YK1976:182; OT1968:807. We suggest taking 
the left hand part as a multi-branched ‘tree’ 木 
73. 
Mnemonic: PLOW AROUND WELL AND 
MULTI-BRANCHED TREE
鉱物 KŌBUTSU　mineral
鉱石 KŌSEKI　ore
炭鉱 TANKŌ　colliery
KŌ
mineral, ore
13 strokes
鉱
L3
700
mineral-bearing rock (ore), and then extended 
to ‘ore’ in general.  In the other similar graph 
礦, which importantly provides the link to the 
modern form, 廣 (traditional form of 広127 
‘wide, extensive’) was substituted – probably 
as a phonetic loan – for 黃 133 based on their 
near-homophony in early Chinese. At a later 
stage, the 石 determinative in 礦 was replaced 
by 金 16 ‘metal’, to give 鑛, which has been sim-
plifi ed in modern Japanese to 鉱. KJ1970:325; 
YK1976:185; OT1968:1039; AS2007:285,266. 
Mnemonic: EXTENSIVE METAL ORE
Late graph, no seal form. Traditional form 鐄. 
Originally written 磺 (CO; a seal form for this 
does exist) or 礦. 磺 has 石 47 ‘stone, rock’, 
and 黃 (traditional form of 黄133 ‘yellow’) as 
semantic and phonetic meaning ‘yellow’, to 
give ‘yellow rock’. Used originally for yellowish 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 耒, a CO the 
bronze form of which is based on pictograph 
構成  KŌSEI　construction 
結構  KEKKŌ　structure, fi ne
心構え  kokorogamae　mental readiness
sense ‘put together and pile up’, giving ‘put 
pieces of timber together and pile up’, i.e. ‘build, 
construct’. Extended use in fi gurative senses 
such as ‘take a posture’, and ‘pose as’. KJ170:404; 
YK1976:185; OT1968:518; MS1995:v1:110-11. 
We suggest taking 冓 as 井 1575 ‘well’ and 再 
706 ‘again’.
Mnemonic: MIND ABOUT WELL BEING BUILT 
OF WOOD AGAIN
KŌ, kamau/eru
build, to mind
14 strokes
構
L3
701
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 木 73 ‘wood, 
tree’, and 冓 (CO ‘pile’, originally two-tiered 
bamboo basket) as phonetic with associated 

226  The 185 Fifth Grade Characters
興味 KYŌMI　interest
復興 FUKKŌ　revival
興奮 KŌFUN　excitement
however, the OBI forms lack the element 口 
22 ‘mouth’, leading him to interpret the center 
element as probably originally being a carrying 
rack (with the hands element), this later being 
modifi ed to 同. Yamada regards ‘interest, excite-
ment’ as loan usage. KJ1970:271; YK1976:135; 
QX2000:189; OT1968:835. We suggest taking 
the lower part as table ands upper part as 
hands and ‘same’ (同, 204). 
Mnemonic: SAME HANDS RAISED AT 
TABLE – HOW INTERESTING
KŌ, KYŌ, okosu/ru
rise, raise, interest
16 strokes
興
L3
702
OBI 
; seal 
. One analysis takes as 同204 
‘same’ – taken here as ‘together’ – with four 
hands holding something up (modern equiva-
lent: NJK 舁 [see also 482]), to give ‘lift up 
together’ (Katō, Yamada). In Qiu’s assessment, 
講義 KŌGI　lecture
講演 KŌEN　speech, address
講師 KŌSHI　lecturer
associated sense ‘reconciliation, harmony’, to 
give ‘reconcile/harmonize words’, and by exten-
sion ‘clarify [misunderstood] meaning’, ‘resolve 
dispute’. KJ1970:404; YK1976:186; SS1984:315. 
As with 構 701 (‘build’, ‘to mind’), we suggest 
taking 冓 as 1575 井 ‘well(s)’ and 再 706 ‘again’.
Mnemonic: THE LECTURE WAS A TALK ABOUT 
WELLS AGAIN
KŌ
lecture
17 strokes
講
L3
703
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 言 118 
‘words; speak; talk’, and 冓 (CO, originally, a 
two-tiered bamboo basket) as phonetic with 
混血  KONKETSU　mixed blood
混乱  KONRAN　confusion
混ぜ物 mazemono　mixture
from the ground’ (Katō, Yamada), echoed by Gu, 
who says ‘water fl ows abundantly’. Spiralling in-
dicated ‘eddy’, then ‘mix’ and ‘confusion’. (Mizu-
kami notes alternative possible analysis of 昆 as 
‘many people gather in the sunlight’, but Katō 
disagrees.) KJ1970:413-4, MS1995:v1:612-3; 
YK1976:192; GY2008:1319. We suggest taking 
日 as ‘sun’ 66 and 比 as ‘compare’ 792.
Mnemonic: COMPARE SUN AND WATER – A 
CONFUSING MIX
KON, majiru/zeru, komu
mix, confusion
11 strokes
混
L3
704
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵 42 ‘water’, 
and 昆 1357 (NJK, originally ‘crawling insect’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘water spirals up 
検査 KENSA　inspection
審査 SHINSA　investigation
査問 SAMON　inquiry
or off ering meat piled up on chopping board) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘diagonal’, to 
give ‘wood cut diagonally’, according to Katō 
and Yamada, who treat the sense ‘examine, 
investigate’ as a loan usage, as does Ogawa 
(though he takes the associated sense of 且 as 
‘put together’, and the overall original meaning 
of 査 as ‘a raft’). The meaning ‘examine, inves-
tigate’ for 査 is noted in  the late 17th century 
Zhengzitong, and that work employs the form 
査, but the early 18th century Kangxi zidian 
SA
investigate
9 strokes
査
L3
705
A late graph, no seal form, but already in use in 
Han times. Consists of 木73 ‘wood, tree’, with 且 
1135 (now meaning ‘furthermore’, but original-
ly, a grave/cairn with earth piled up in a mound, 

The 185 Fifth Grade Characters  227
(original Peking Palace woodblock edition, not 
the modern version) has not this but the slight-
ly diff erent form 查. Etymologically speaking, 
査 appears to be correct, and is standard usage 
in modern Japanese, but 查 is standard in PRC 
Chinese. KJ1970:415; YK1976:193; OT1968:498; 
ZY2009:v2:498; KZ2001:1112/3671. We suggest 
taking the elements as 木 ‘tree/wood’ and 且 
‘cairn’.
Mnemonic: INVESTIGATE A CAIRN UNDER A 
TREE
Or: FURTHERMORE, INVESTIGATE A TREE
再生  SAISEI　regeneration
再刊  SAIKAN　reprint
再来年 SARAINEN　year after next
ond, twice’ (Katō, Yamada, Ogawa). Katō alone 
considers this graph did not exist indepen-
dently at the OBI or bronze stage. Gu looks to 
recognize independent status for 再 from OBI 
onwards, but makes a quite diff erent interpre-
tation as representing two fi sh being carried. 
MS1995:v1:108-9; KJ1970:550; YK1976:195; 
OT1968:100; GY2008:232. We suggest taking 
the graph as a pictograph of exactly what it is – 
an upturned basket.
Mnemonic: UPTURNED BASKET WITH FLAT 
BOARD TO ADD A BASKET AGAIN
SAI, SA, futatabi
again, twice, re-
6 strokes
再
L3
706
OBI 
; seal 
. This graph is generally taken 
as consisting of a lower bamboo basket (as in 
the lower part of 冓 – see 701 and 703), and a 
horizontal stroke 一 on top to represent a fl at 
base for placing an upper basket (a second 
basket). Hence, the extended meanings ‘sec-
災難 SAINAN　calamity
災害 SAIGAI　disaster
火災 KASAI　confl agration
Katō, Yamada: Mizukami also lists ‘stop’ as an 
alternative sense), to give ‘damage/disaster by 
fi re’. The second OBI (corresponding seal form 
also) is 灾, which has 宀 30 ‘roof, building’ over
火 ‘fi re’, to represent ‘house/building fi re’. The 
more familiar modern form 災 is based on 
another form noted in Shuowen, which has 
 
(‘blocked river overfl ows’) over 火, with the 
upper element subsequently changed to 巛 
(‘river current’); resultant overall meaning is 
‘calamity, disaster’. SS1984:335; MS1995:v2:800-
02,v1:422-4; KJ1970:422; YK1976:196.
Mnemonic: FIRE AND FLOWING RIVER ARE 
POTENTIAL CALAMITIES
SAI, wazawai
calamity
7 strokes
災
L1
707
OBI , 
; seal 
, 
. The block script form 
(災) does not represent the mainstream devel-
opment for this graph, and so fi rstly the main 
historical forms will be described. The fi rst OBI 
form for above is taken to correspond to the 
seal form 烖, which is analyzed as 火 8 ‘fi re’, with 
 (variant of halberd – see e.g. 545) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘harm, injure’ (Mizukami, 
後妻 GOSAI　second wife
夫妻 FUSAI　husband and wife
人妻 hitozuma　married woman
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 女37 
‘woman’, and upper part taken as hand hold-
ing three hairpins or broom (see 106, 800). 
MS1995:v1:320-21; YK1976:196; SS1984:336.
Mnemonic: WOMAN HOLDING BROOM IS 
WIFE
SAI, tsuma
wife
8 strokes
妻
L3
708

228  The 185 Fifth Grade Characters
採用 SAIYŌ　adoption
採集 SAISHŪ　collection
採取 SAISHU　harvesting
実際 JISSAI　actuality
国際 KOKUSAI　international
窓際 madogiwa　by the window 
1739 ‘hand, claw’ in its abbreviated form 爫, 
over 木 73 ‘tree’, to give ‘pick fruit from tree’. 
Later generalized to ‘take, gather’ (non-specifi c), 
and a second determinative for ‘hand’, this time
扌 34, was added for further clarity. YK1976:197; 
SS1984:337; QX2000:188.
Mnemonic: GATHER FRUIT FROM TREE WITH 
TWO HANDS
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 阝1907 ‘hill, 
mound’, with 祭 299 (originally ‘present meat 
and wine to the gods’, now ‘festival’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘come together, encoun-
ter’, to give the point where two walls [of earth 
mounded up] join (or Ogawa takes as ‘where 
hills come together’). By extension, senses such 
as ‘edge’, ‘contact, come together’. KJ1970:425; 
YK1976:200; OT1968:1074; MS1995:v2:948-9.
Mnemonic: FESTIVAL AT EDGE OF HILL IS 
QUITE AN OCCASION
SAI, toru
take, gather
11 strokes
SAI, kiwa
occasion, edge, con-
tact
14 strokes
採
際
L3
L3
709
710
No early form for 採, but there is for its pre-
decessor, 
 / 采, viz seal  (Shuowen). Has 爪 
在日 
ZAINICHI　living in Japan
存在 SONZAI　existence
在所 ZAISHO　old country home
added later (bronze stage onwards) for clarity. 
Yamada generally agrees, and posits ‘exist’ as 
an extended meaning on the basis of earth 
and other material blocking the river, dam-
ming its movement, and hence just staying 
or being in the one place. It is not clear how 
the meaning ‘countryside’ came to be associ-
ated with 在, but this is now just a very minor 
sense. MS1995:v1:264-5,548-9; KJ1970:421; 
YK1976:200. Diffi  cult mnemonically for 
 : we 
suggest taking it literally as ‘oddly shaped dam’.
Mnemonic: ODD EARTHERN DAM LOCATED 
NEAR COUNTRYSIDE DWELLING
ZAI, aru
dwell, be located, 
countryside
6 strokes
在
L3
711
Bronze 
; seal 
. The OBI form for 才 (now 
meaning ‘talent’, original meaning possibly 
‘blocked river’ – see 139) is taken by Mizu-
kami and Katō as the original way of writing
在 also, with 土 64 ‘earth, ground’ being 
財産 ZAISAN　wealth
財団 ZAIDAN　fi nancial body
財政 ZAISEI　fi nances
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 貝 10 ‘shell, 
shell currency, money’, and 才 139 (‘talent’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘accumulate’, 
to give ‘accumulate currency’; by extension, 
‘accumulate valuables (in general)’, ‘wealth 
(which has been accumulated)’. KJ1970:422; 
YK1976:201; OT1968:953.
Mnemonic: TALENT FOR MONEY-MATTERS 
LEADS TO WEALTH
ZAI, SAI 
wealth, assets
10 strokes
財
L3
712

The 185 Fifth Grade Characters  229
犯罪  HANZAI　crime
罪悪  ZAIAKU　vice
罪深い tsumibukai　sinful
罪 as part of his standardization and reform of 
the writing system at that period. The replace-
ment graph 罪 originally meant ‘fi shing net’, but 
appears to have been borrowed on the basis of 
having been a near-homophone to 辠. At the 
same time, though, 罪 could be construed as 
罒 (the occurrent shape of the ‘net’ determina-
tive 网 as a top element 570), with 非 794 ‘not; 
wrong, wrongdoing’ (, originally showing bird 
wings spread out), thus giving a supposed 
meaning ‘to net wrongdoing’, and this notion 
would probably have been quite pleasing to 
Shi HuangDi and his advisers. QX2000:313-4; 
MS1995:v2:1274-6; YK1976:201-2.  We suggest a 
variety of mnemonics for the modern graph.  
Mnemonic: NETTING A BIRD IS A CRIME
Or: CRIME IS SPREADING INTO A NETWORK
Or: NETTING WRONGDOERS IS NOT A CRIME 
ZAI, tsumi 
crime, sin
13 strokes
罪
L3
713
Original graph was 辠 (bronze: 
; seal: 
). 
This was the underlying early Chinese word for 
‘crime’, which is analyzed as 辛1535 (now ‘sharp’, 
but originally, ‘needle’; tattooing needle used 
to mark criminals’ foreheads, and by extension 
‘crime’), with 自 150 (originally, ‘nose’; ‘self’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘commit a 
crime; crime’ (Mizukami, Ogawa). During the 
Qin dynasty (221-206 BC), however, the self-
styled First Emperor Shi HuangDi (始皇帝) con-
sidered that the graph 辠 with its very negative 
connotation was too close in shape to the 
graph 皇 ‘emperor’, and so had it changed to 
雑談 ZATSUDAN　chitchat
雑音 ZATSUON　noise, static
雑兵 ZŌHYŌ　‘rank and fi le’
ZATSU, ZŌ
miscellany
14 strokes
雑
L3
714
ment made of various colored cloths gathered 
together’. Subsequently the meaning became 
focused as ‘gather (a variety)’ and the shape 
modifi ed to 雜, which in turn led to the form 
雑 used in modern Japanese writing, probably 
through earlier cursivizing. FC1974:v2:2396; 
KJ1970:432; YK1976:205; OT1968:1078. As a 
mnemonic, we suggest taking the modern 
graph’s three components, 集 bird(s)/gather, 
with 木 73 ‘tree’ and 九 13 ‘nine’. 
Mnemonic: NINE BIRDS GATHERED IN A TREE 
– QUITE A MISCELLANY
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 雜. 
Original way of writing was 襍, consisting of 衤
(衣) 444 ‘(upper) garment, clothing’, and 集 324 
(‘gather, collect’, originally birds gathering in 
a tree) as semantic and phonetic, to give ‘gar-
酸素 SANSO　oxygen
酸性 SANSEI　acidity
塩酸 ENSAN　hydrochloric acid
SAN, sui, suppai
acid, bitter
14 strokes
酸
L1
715
‘pierce, stab’, to give ‘alcohol-like liquid which 
[feels like it] stabs the tongue’; by extension, 
a range of meanings such as ‘sour, wine gone 
bad; vinegar’, ‘acid taste, acid’. KJ1970:60; 
YK1976:209-10; OT1968:1028. We suggest 
taking right hand part as ‘crossed legs’ 夂 (see 
Appendix), and ‘runny nose’ 
.
Mnemonic: BITTER ACID IN JAR CAUSES 
RUNNY NOSE AND CROSSED LEGS 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 酉 318 (NJK, 
orig ‘wine jar’ > ‘wine’), and 夋 (CO, ‘drag feet’; 
see 1470) as phonetic with associated sense 

230  The 185 Fifth Grade Characters
賛成  SANSEI　approval
賛美歌 SANBIKA　hymn
賛辞  SANJI　eulogy
SAN
praise, agree, help
15 strokes
賛
L3
716
present shell currency or valuables’ as a gift 
when meeting one’s lord. As this would facili-
tate the meeting, ‘help’ evolved as an extended 
sense. Yamada proposes ‘praise’ as a further ex-
tension of meaning. KJ1970:441-2; KJ1975:210; 
OT1968:958; ZY2009:v1:52; AS2007:527. We 
suggest taking 
 as ‘two husbands’ 夫 601.
Mnemonic: PRAISE THE TWO HUSBANDS 
WHO SHELLED OUT
Seal 
; traditional 贊. Has 貝 10 ‘shell/currency’, 
and 兟 ‘advance’ (先 51 ‘tip, precede’ reduplicat-
ed; in early Chinese also meant ‘go in front’) as 
semantic and phonetic, meaning ‘put forward/
支店  SHITEN　branch offi  ce
支持  SHIJI　support
支え柱  sasaebashira　prop
SHI, sasaeru 
branch, support
4 strokes
支
L3
717
‘bamboo’ (竹 58), but not all commentators 
are convinced by such precise identifi cation 
(Ogawa, Shirakawa). No doubt because the 
hand is supporting a branch or bamboo stalk, 
Ogawa regards ‘support’ as an extended mean-
ing, and does not follow Yamada’s view that 
‘support’ is a loan usage. In modern usage, 支 
is often used for ‘support’ in a fi gurative sense 
(cf. 枝 719 ‘branch’). KJ1970:460; YK1976:212; 
OT1968:434; SS1984:359.  
Mnemonic: HAND SUPPORTS CROSS-SHAPED 
BRANCH
Seal ; late graph (Shuowen). Represents a 
bamboo stalk or a branch with leaves attached, 
held in the hand; taken to signify pulling the 
branch or stalk away, and hence ‘separate 
(with the hand)’. The Shuowen explanation says 
意志 ISHI　will, intent
志望 SHIBŌ　aspiration
有志 YŪSHI　volunteer
SHI, kokorozasu,
kokorozashi
will, intent
7 strokes
志
L3
718
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 心 164 ‘mind, 
heart’, and 之 (see 143, originally ‘footprint’ 
> ‘go, proceed’) – in a variant shape later 
rendered as 士 ‘warrior’ 521 – as semantic and 
phonetic meaning ‘go’, to give ‘one’s mind goes/
tends towards…’, and hence ‘intend, inten-
tion’. KJ1970:452; OT1968:359; YK1976:218-9; 
AS2007:613. 
Mnemonic: WARRIOR’S HEART SHOWS WILL 
AND INTENT
枝隊  SHITAI　troop detachment
枝角  edazuno　antler
枯れ枝 kareeda　dead branch
SHI, eda 
branch
8 strokes
枝
L3
719
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 木 73 ‘tree’, 
with 支 717 (originally branch/bamboo held in 
hand; later ‘support’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘become separated’, to give ‘branch 
separated from tree’; sense then generalized 
to ‘branch’, usually in physical sense in mod-
ern Japanese usage. KJ1970:460; OT1968:493; 
SS1984:366; TA1965:493-5,464.  
Mnemonic: TREE SUPPORTS BRANCH

The 185 Fifth Grade Characters  231
教師 KYŌSHI　teacher 
師表 SHIHYŌ　paragon
師団 SHIDAN　army division
SHI 
teacher, model, army
10 strokes
師
L3
720
see 646) was added as phonetic with associated 
sense of ‘hillock’ (Katō), and this new graph 師 
was used initially alongside  to mean ‘hillock 
where troops are stationed’. Later, for clarity, 師 
came to be used exclusively for ‘army, troops’, 
and  for ‘hillock’. Yamada regards ‘teacher’ as 
a loan usage for 師, but Schuessler treats it 
as a semantic progression from ‘army, troops’ 
to ‘captain (of an army)’ and then ‘master/
teacher’. KJ1970:469,656-8,450-51; YK1976:222; 
GY2008:255; OT1968:25; AS2007:461. Suggest 
taking 帀 as 巾 799 ‘cloth’ and 一 1 ‘one/a’.  
Mnemonic: MODEL TEACHER HAS A CLOTH 
OVER BUTTOCKS
OBI  ( ); bronze 
; seal 
. Views vary. Katō 
and Yamada take   as ‘buttocks’ (see 465). 
Gu sees it as a bow (弓 107), but this seems 
unlikely. Based on shape appears to have 
been borrowed for ‘hillock’. Troops were often 
stationed on such hillocks, leading by extension 
to ‘troops, army’. In bronze, 帀 (CO ‘go round’: 
資本 SHIHON　capital 
資料 SHIRYŌ　materials
資金 SHIKIN　funds
Seal ; late graph (Shuowen). Has 貝 10 ‘shell/
currency’, and 次 308 (‘next, follow’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘possess’ (Katō, Yamada) 
or ‘arrange’ (Ogawa, Tōdō), to give ‘possess 
currency/assets’. KJ1970:479; YK1976:225; 
OT1968:957; TA1965:774.
Mnemonic: NEXT SHELL IS A VALUABLE ASSET
SHI
capital, assets
13 strokes
資
L3
721
飼育  SHIIKU　rearing, breeding
飼い主 kainushi　pet owner
飼い犬 kaiinu　pet dog
two separate words (near-homophones) 
in early Chinese. Katō takes 飤as consist-
ing of 食, with 人 ‘person’ as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘give’ (thus ‘give to eat’), 
though alternatively it may be fair to take 
in its semantic function (Tōdō treats in this 
way), to give ‘feed a person’, even though Qiu 
notes 飤 was used originally for both people 
and animals. Later, the graph 飼 appeared, 
featuring 司 524 ‘administer, control’ as 
semantic and phonetic, to give ‘control feed-
ing’. SS1984:376; KJ1970:459; AS2007:463; 
QX2000:223, 335; TA1965:83; OT1968:1116. 
Mnemonic: REARING ANIMALS NEEDS FOOD 
AND CONTROL
SHI, kau
rear animals
13 strokes
飼
L1
722
Late, post-Shuowen graph; Shirakawa be-
lieves it dates from Tang Dynasty (618-907 
AD) at earliest. The CO graph 飤 (meaning 
‘eat’) with 人 41 ‘person’ on the right in-
stead of 司 524 is seen as the predecessor 
of 飼, from bronze script onwards. Initially, 
it seems, 食 163 ‘eat’ was used for both ‘eat’ 
and ‘give to eat, feed’, though these were 

232  The 185 Fifth Grade Characters
暗示 ANJI　hint
展示 TENJI　display
示し 
shimeshi　discipline
sloping strokes are taken to indicate blood 
from a sacrifi ce, or ritual wine used for cleans-
ing an off ering. Despite some divergence on 
points of detail, there is agreement on the basic 
meaning of this graph as an altar. ‘Show’ may be 
an extended sense, related to outcome of the 
ritual involved. MS1995:v2:936-7; YK1976:226; 
KJ1970:446-7; GY2008:132; OT1968:717; 
AS2007:467.
Mnemonic: DROPS FROM ALTAR SHOW 
SACRIFICE
JI, SHI, shimesu
show, indicate
5 strokes
示
L3
723
OBI forms 
, 
; seal 
. Originally a picto-
gram of an altar (also shown as 礻) for sacrifi ce 
to the gods. Theories about the shorter top 
horizontal line vary, and include a sacrifi ce, an 
ancestral tablet, or a deity image. The two lower 
類似品 RUIJIHIN　imitation
似非  ese-*　sham, phoney
似合う  niau　be suited
[i.e. ‘farmer], but see 以 443) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘same appearance’, to give ‘a 
person’s appearance is the same as another’s’, 
hence ‘resemble’. KJ1970:479,13; YK1976:229; 
MS1995:v1:54-5; OT1968:151. Mnemonically 
challenging, but we suggest taking the right 
hand and left hand elements as persons, and 
the central element as a plow.
Mnemonic: TWO PERSONS AND SOMETHING 
RESEMBLING A PLOW
JI, niru
resemble
7 strokes
似
L3
724
Bronze 
; seal 
. Seal form has 亻 41 ‘person’, 
and  or 厶 (not to be confused with katakana 
ム) (originally possibly a person with a plow 
常識  JŌSHIKI　common sense
意識  ISHIKI　awareness
知識人 CHISHIKIJIN　intellectual
of fi nding out information, thereby leading to 
the extended meaning ‘fi nd out, know’. Mizu-
kami, by contrast, proposes as OBI equivalent 
for 識 not OBI (A) above but OBI (B), though 
this is perhaps best regarded as a tentative 
correspondence, as it does look rather more 
like a fl at surface held up by two hands rather 
than by a stake or branch, and the latter is the 
interpretation made by Gu, who lists OBI (B) as 
instead being the earliest predecessor not of 
識 but of 謝 (see 728). Katō notes that 識 is one 
of those graphs which historically has given 
rise to numerous diff erent interpretations. 
MS1995:v2:1210-11,v1:540-41; KJ1970:310; 
YK1976:233-4; GY2008:513,1514; OT1968:943. 
As a mnemonic, we suggest taking the modern 
graph as 言 118 ‘words’, 音 6 ‘sound’, and 戈 545 
‘halberd’.
Mnemonic: HAVE KNOWLEDGE OF A WORD 
SOUNDING LIKE ‘HALBERD’
SHIKI
knowledge
19 strokes
識
L3
725
OBI form A (戠) 
; OBI form B 
; seal 
. 
Typically taken to be 言 118 ‘words, language’ 
added as determinative at the seal stage to 
the older CO graph 戠, which is usually taken 
as ‘cut branch/stake thrust into the ground’ 
(later written 樴; Mizukami regards 戈 ‘halberd’ 
[see 545] as an error for 弋 311 ‘stake’); 戠 then 
functions in 識 as semantic and phonetic with 
the meaning ‘fl ag, marker’, to give ‘fl ag/marker 
with text attached to stake set into the ground’. 
This, it is thought, was a device to convey 
orders or directions to those coming from afar, 
and from their perspective provided a means 

The 185 Fifth Grade Characters  233
品質 HINSHITSU　quality
質屋 SHICHIya　pawnshop
人質 hitoJICHI　hostage
pawning. Mizukami, however, lists a credible 
alternative analysis which takes 斦 semantically 
as representing two equal things, signifying 
one asset (an object of value) equal to an-
other (its equivalent in money). Assessment 
of the quality of items accepted for pawning 
was – and still remains – an important consid-
eration in pawnbroking, and so ‘quality’ can 
justifi ably be regarded as an extended sense. 
MS1995:v2:1244-6; KJ1970:487; YK1976:235-6.
Mnemonic: PAWN TWO QUALITY 
AXES – NEED TO ‘SHELL OUT’ TO REDEEM
SHITSU, SHICHI, CHI
quality, pawn
15 strokes
質
L4
726
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 貝 10 ‘shell currency, 
shell’, and 斦 ‘two curved-handle axes’ (see 
1233) taken typically as phonetic with an 
associated sense ‘correspond, equivalent’, to 
give ‘[item] equivalent to money’, i.e. article for 
宿舎 SHUKUSHA　lodgings
舎営 SHAEI　billeting
田舎 inaka*　countryside
(Katō, Yamada). The same overall meaning is 
reached by another analysis (Tōdō, Ogawa), 
which diff ers in taking the lower element not 
as 口 ‘mouth (etc.)’, but as 囗 ‘enclosure’ (see 
e.g. 84); this view then takes the latter element 
as indicating ‘place’, to give ‘place to relax’. This 
latter interpretation follows that in Shuowen, 
which often based script analysis on the seal 
forms, and the seal form here would seem to 
permit analysis as ‘enclosure, place’. However, 
the older forms (bronze) clearly have ‘mouth’, 
and so the former analysis seems more ap-
propriate. KJ1970:882; YK1976:238; TA1965:339; 
OT1968:175; AS2007:456. We suggest taking 
the elements of the modern form as cover 𠆢, 
土 64 ‘earth’, and 口 22 ‘opening’.
Mnemonic: HOUSE COVERED IN EARTH WITH 
JUST A SMALL OPENING
SHA
house, quarters
8 strokes
舎
L1
727
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 舍. Interpreta-
tions diff er. One view takes the lower part as 
consisting of 口 22 ‘mouth’, a graph also used 
for actions performed with the mouth, and here 
taken as ‘breathe’. The second element is 余 
820 (here in an abbreviated shape; now means 
‘ample’ but originally meant a roof supported 
on a pillar, indicating a light building structure 
such as a summerhouse) as phonetic with an 
associated sense ‘be at leisure, relax’; by exten-
sion, 舎 came to be used in the sense ‘stay for 
the night’, and then ‘place where people stay’ 
謝罪 SHAZAI　apology
謝礼 SHAREI　remuneration
感謝 KANSHA　gratitude
holding up a mat taken away when departing 
government offi  ce, presumably with words 
of thanks (the same OBI form is interpreted 
diff erently by Mizukami, who sees it as an early 
predecessor of 識 – see 725). Gu’s interpretation 
involving a mat would appear to be reinforced 
by the OBI forms which Mizukami lists for 席 
549 ‘seat’ (originally, pictograms of a mat, and 
interpreted in that way by Mizukami himself). 
MS1995:v2:1210-11,v1:440-41; KJ1970:490-91; 
YK1976:240; OT1968:941; GY2008:1514. As a 
mnemonic we suggest using the English slang 
term, ‘shoot off ’, meaning depart (in some 
haste).
Mnemonic: WORDS OF APOLOGY AND 
THANKS AS ONE ‘SHOOTS OFF’
SHA, ayamaru
apologize, thank
17 strokes
謝
L1
728
OBI 
; seal 
. Seal form has 言 118 ‘words; 
speak’, and 射 893 (‘shoot arrow’) as phonetic 
with associated sense typically taken as ‘depart’ 
(possibly with a semantic link also, with regard 
to an arrow leaving a bow), to give ‘words of 
farewell’. The meaning is considered to be 
extended to ‘words of thanks’ in the context 
of leaving after receiving a gift. Gu also makes 
this link, though he also proposes the above 
OBI equivalent, interpreting it as two hands 

234  The 185 Fifth Grade Characters
授業 JUGYŌ　tuition
授与 JUYO　confer
教授 KYŌJU　tuition, professor
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). In early Chinese a 
word meaning ‘give’ was written with the graph 
受 319 ‘receive’ (see OBI form for 319); in that 
early period the two words concerned, ‘give’ 
and ‘receive’, which were near-homophones, 
were distinguished in written texts on the basis 
of context. At the seal script stage, however, 
JU, sazukeru
teach, confer
11 strokes
授
L3
729
the ‘hand’ determinative 扌 (手) 34 was added 
to the near-homophone meaning ‘give’ so as 
to aid clarity. With regard to the case of 授, 
the phonetic element 受 is more appropri-
ately taken as ‘hand over’ (Katō) rather than 
‘receive’ (Yamada). The meaning ‘teaching’ 
is an extended sense, with regard to confer-
ring knowledge.  KJ1970:507-8; AS2007:470; 
QX2000:189; YK1976:247. As a mnemonic, we 
suggest making use of three hands.
Mnemonic: ‘THIRD-HAND’ BATON IS USED 
FOR TEACHING
Or: TEACHER’S EXTRA HAND CONFERS BATON
修理 SHŪRI　repair
修正 SHŪSEI　amendment
修業 SHŪGYŌ　study
with associated sense ‘sweep away’, to give 
‘brush off  dirt and make attractive’. The basic 
meaning of putting something in good order 
led to extended senses such as ‘complete, mas-
ter, repair’. MS1995:v1:72-3,568-9; KJ1970:512; 
YK1976:251-2; OT1968:344. Take elements as 
亻 41 ‘person’, ‘stick’丨, 攵 112 ‘beat’, and three 
strokes 彡.
Mnemonic: PERSON PRACTICES BEATING 
WITH THREE STROKES OF STICK
SHŪ, SHU, osameru
practice, master
10 strokes
修
L3
730
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 彡 115 (determinative 
no. 59, taken variously as ‘color, luster’, ‘brush 
pattern’, or ‘writing brush hairs’), and 攸 (CO, 
originally ‘remove dirt’ [Mizukami]) as phonetic 
前述 ZENJUTSU no　the said
述語 JUTSUGO　predicate
叙述 JOJUTSU　description
as semantic and phonetic, meaning ‘adhere 
to path’. Katō and Ogawa see link to ‘relate, 
mention’ through relating/following what 
others have said/written. MS1995:v2:1284-6; 
YK1976:260; KJ1970:526-7; OT1968:995. Sug-
gest taking 
 as ‘odd tree’ 木 73.
Mnemonic: RELATE HOW ONE WENT TO AN 
ODD TREE
JUTSU, noberu
relate, state
8 strokes
述
L3
731
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has ⻌ 85 ‘walk, go’, and 朮 
(CO, originally hand with sticky grains) taken 
技術 GIJUTSU　technique
芸術 GEIJUTSU　art, the arts
手術 SHUJUTSU　surgery
ing’ (Katō, Yamada). Senses such as ‘means, 
method’ are seen as extended usage from 
following a path. This graph and 述 731 ‘relate’ 
are treated by Schuessler as representing the 
same basic word in early Chinese, and Tōdō 
also includes in the same word-family (‘follow a 
route’). OT1968:898; TA1965:682-6; KJ1970:527; 
YK1976:261; AS2007:473. As with 731, we sug-
gest taking 
 as ‘odd tree’.
Mnemonic: GO AROUND ODD TREE BY 
MEANS OF SPECIAL TECHNIQUE
JUTSU, sube
technique, means
11 strokes
術
L3
732
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 行 131 ‘go’ 
and 朮 (originally hand with sticky grains: see 
also 731) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘follow’ (Ogawa, Tōdō) or ‘bend, winding’ (Katō, 
Yamada), to give basic meaning ‘path’, or ‘wind-

The 185 Fifth Grade Characters  235
準備  JUNBI　preparation
水準  SUIJUN　standard, level
準決勝 JUNKESSHŌ　semifi nal
surface of water’; later, meaning was general-
ised to ‘level’. Extended meanings ‘conform’ and 
‘quasi-’ are based on keeping to or being close 
to a level or standard. 凖 (with 冫 401 ‘ice’ not 
‘water’) is a variant form but now with separate 
status (see 1475). KJ1970:529; TA1965:682; 
YK1976:263. Suggest taking 隼 as 十 35 ‘ten’ 
and 隹 324 ‘bird’.
Mnemonic: TEN BIRDS ON WATER, ALL AT 
SAME LEVEL
JUN
level, conform, quasi-
13 strokes
準
L3
733
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵 42 ‘water’, 
and 隼 (CO, ‘hawk’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘pull a rope straight’, giving ‘level 
序文 JOBUN　preface
序列 JORETSU　order, sequence
序数 JOSŪ　ordinal number
ing shuttle’, modern meaning ‘prior, already’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘external 
wall’, to give ‘(external) house walls’. ‘Beginning’ 
may perhaps be a derived sense (what is there 
fi rst, before roof and internal walls added); 
‘order’, though, is regarded as a loan usage. 
KJ1970:552; YK1976:267; OT1968:327.
Mnemonic: BUILDING ALREADY BEGINNING 
TO SHOW ORDER
JO, tsuide
beginning, order
7 strokes
序
L1
734
Seal ; late graph (Shuowen). Has 广 127 
‘building, roof’, and 予 425 (originally ‘weav-
招待  SHŌTAI　invitation
招集  SHŌSHŪ　convocation
手招く  temaneku　beckon
as phonetic with associated sense taken as  ‘call 
(out to someone)’ (Katō, Yamada, Ogawa).  Al-
ternatively, taken as ‘bend’, a meaning listed by 
Tōdō, based on 刀 198 ‘knife’ as phonetic in 召, 
where it signifi es ‘bend, bent’, based on curved 
shape of knife, to signify calling someone over 
with hand movement, i.e. ‘beckon’. KJ1970:608; 
YK1976:269; OT1968:407; TA1965:245-6.
Mnemonic: INVITE BY SUMMONING WITH 
HAND
SHŌ, maneku
invite, summon
8 strokes
招
L3
735
Seal ; late graph (Shuowen). Has 扌 34 ‘hand’, 
and 召 1486 (originally bending to face up-
wards and calling out, now means ‘summon’) 
承知  SHŌCHI　consent
承認  SHŌNIN　recognition
継承者 KEISHŌSHA　successor
represent a verb which, to give it its modern 
form, is uketamawaru ‘receive (from a superior)’, 
often to denote a verbal reference such as 
orders, and also historically as a polite verbal 
suffi  x. This background of use for 承 probably 
goes some way towards accounting for its 
additional senses in modern Japanese such as 
‘hear’ and ‘know’. KJ1970:547-8; OT1968:403,19; 
YK1976:269; AS2007:185. Suggest taking the 
graph as a whole, involving 子 27 ‘child’ and 水 
42 ‘water’, with the extra cross-strokes taken as 
bristles.
Mnemonic: BE INFORMED ABOUT A BRISTLY 
WATER-BABY
Or: KNOW THAT WHEN BABY IS IN WATER, IT 
CAN GET BRISTLY
SHŌ, uketamawaru
receive, hear, know, be 
informed
8 strokes
承
L3
736
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). It comprises 手 
34 ‘hand’, and 丞 (NJK, helping someone up, ‘lift 
up, help’) as semantic and phonetic, mean-
ing ‘raise up’, to give ‘lift up with the hands’, or 
‘receive with hands held up’. Use of this graph 
seems to have related to ‘raise up’ and also 
‘receive’ in a physical sense in early Chinese, 
and it came to be used in Japanese from quite 
an early stage with the latter meaning to 

236  The 185 Fifth Grade Characters
証人 SHŌNIN　witness
論証 RONSHŌ　demonstration
証明 SHŌMEI　proof
words, report facts clearly, prove’. The (origi-
nally) separate graph 証 once represented a 
near-homophone meaning ‘remonstrate’, but 
over time the simpler graph 証 came to be used 
in place of 證, a choice made offi  cial in Japan in 
1946. OT1968:924-5; AS2007:612; QX2000:313. 
We suggest taking the modern form as 言 118 
‘words’ with 正 43 ‘correct’.
Mnemonic: CORRECT WORDS ARE PROOF
Or: PROOF THAT ONE’S WORDS 
ARE CORRECT
SHŌ
proof
12 strokes
証
L1
737
Seal forms 
 (證), 
 (証). These are late graphs 
(Shuowen), the traditional form being 證. The 
traditional form consists of 言 118 ‘words; 
speak’, with 登 382 (‘climb’) as phonetic with an 
associated sense of ‘clarify’, to give ‘clarify with 
無条件 MUJŌKEN　unconditional
条約  JŌYAKU　treaty, level
条例  JŌREI　rules, regulations
(from trunk)’, and the extended sense ‘branch 
off , diverge’.  Schuessler notes that in Han times 
this graph came to be used in an extended 
sense as a counter for long slender objects, and 
this included many documents which were 
written on slender wooden or bamboo strips; 
by further extension became a counter for 
‘matters, items of business’. MS1995:v1:668-70; 
KJ1970:716; KJ1975:278; AS2007:579. Suggest 
taking the upper part as ‘crossed legs’.
Mnemonic: ITEM ABOUT SITTING 
CROSS-LEGGED UP A TREE
JŌ
clause, item, line
7 strokes
条
L3
738
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 條. Has 木 73 
‘tree, wood’, and 攸 (see 730, originally, ‘remove 
dirt’ [Mizukami]) as phonetic with associated 
sense taken as ‘small’ (Katō, Yamada) or ‘long 
and slender, extended out’ (Mizukami, Ogawa). 
Either interpretation gives ‘branch grown out 
状態  JŌTAI　situation
現状  GENJŌ　status quo
招待状 SHŌTAIJŌ　written invite
earthen walls) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘shape, appearance’, giving ‘appearance of 
a dog’; then generalized to ‘appearance, form, 
condition’; then extended to ‘written report on 
condition’ thus, ‘document, letter’. KJ1970:434; 
MS1995:v2:824-5; YK1976:278-9; OT1968:640. 
Suggest taking丬as table toppled on edge.
Mnemonic: DOG KNOCKS TABLE 
OVER – BOTH NOW IN BAD CONDITION
JŌ
condition, letter
7 strokes
状
L3
739
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
狀. Has 犬 19 ‘dog’, and 爿 (taken originally 
as a stand or bed, or boards used in building 
非常 HIJŌ　emergency
常例 JŌREI　common practice
日常 
NICHIJŌ　commonplace
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 巾 1232 
‘cloth’, and 尚 1491 (originally smoke rising 
from aperture in roof, now ‘furthermore’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘long, trailing’ 
> ‘long piece of cloth’. The sense was gener-
alised to ‘long’, then used with reference to 
time, meaning ‘long (in duration)’, ‘unchanging’. 
KJ1970:545; YK1976:280; OT1968:318.
Mnemonic: FURTHERMORE, AS ALWAYS, IT’S 
THE USUAL CLOTH
JŌ, tsune
usual, always
11 strokes
常
L3
740

The 185 Fifth Grade Characters  237
同情   DŌJŌ　sympathy
情勢   JŌSEI　situation
情けない nasakenai　wretched
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 忄 164 
‘heart, mind’, and 青 45 (‘blue, green’) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken as 
JŌ, SEI, nasake
feeling, pity, 
circumstances
11 strokes
情
L3
741
‘earnestly seek’, to give ‘earnestly seek from 
the heart’(Katō, Yamada), or with associated 
sense ‘pure’, giving ‘untarnished beautiful 
heart’(Ogawa). Either interpretation then 
gives the generalized sense ‘heart’. Schuessler 
notes the related sense ‘feelings’, and also early 
use meaning ‘proper nature, circumstances’. 
KJ1970:593; YK1976:280-81; OT1968:375; 
AS2007:433. 
Mnemonic: HEART MADE BLUE THROUGH 
FEELING PITY
織機  SHOKKI　loom
組織的 SOSHIKITEKI　systematic
織物  orimono　textiles
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen).  Has 糸 29 
‘thread’, and 戠 (CO, original meaning ‘cut 
branch/ stake thrust into ground’: see 725) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘straight’, to 
give ‘set thread on loom straight’ (Ogawa sees 
it as vertical thread); by extension, ‘weave’. 
KJ1970:558; YK1976:283; OT1968:791. Suggest 
halberd 戈 as giant needle, 音 as ‘sound’ 6.
Mnemonic: THE SOUND OF A HALBERD 
WEAVING THREADS!?
SHOKU, SHIKI, oru 
weave
18 strokes
織
L1
742
職人 SHOKUNIN　artisan
職業 SHOKUGYŌ　profession
無職 MUSHOKU　jobless
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 耳 31 ‘ear’; here 
considered to signify not ‘ear’, but by analogy 
‘something attached next to’), and 戠 (CO, ‘cut 
branch/stake thrust into the ground’: see 725) 
SHOKU 
employment, job
18 strokes
職
L3
743
as semantic and phonetic, giving ‘fl ag/banner 
attached to stake thrust into the ground’. Mer-
chants would each set up their own banner to 
indicate their particular line of trade (Katō takes 
to include offi  cials also), and on this basis there 
evolved the extended sense ‘job, occupation’ 
for this graph. MS1995:v2:1060-62; KJ1970:309-
10; YK1976:284. Suggest halberd 戈 as lance, 音 
as ‘sound/noise’ 6.
Mnemonic: JOB AS LANCER LEAVES NOISE IN 
EARS
制度 SEIDO　system
制止 SEISHI　restraint
強制 KYŌSEI　compulsion
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has  in block script, which 
old forms show to be a variant of 未 617 (‘not 
yet’) used in its original sense of ‘tree with 
luxuriant growth’ (Mizukami and Katō take as 
SEI 
system, control
8 strokes
制
L3
744
‘old tree’ ready for cutting down and using), and
刂 198 ‘knife, blade’, to give ‘cut down tree with 
a blade’. A carpenter would cut down a big tree 
systematically, from ‘cut down’ in that context 
the extended sense ‘judge, decide’ evolved. 
MS1995:v1:126-7; KJ1970:597-8; YK1976:300. 
Suggest  as combination of 牛 108 ‘cow’ and 
巾1232 ‘cloth’.
Mnemonic: CUTTING CLOTH FOR COW 
REQUIRES SYSTEMATIC CONTROL

238  The 185 Fifth Grade Characters
男性 DANSEI　male
性的 SEITEKI　sexual
性分 SHŌBUN　disposition
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 忄 164 
‘heart, mind’, and 生 44 (originally, ‘plant grow-
ing’, now ‘birth’), taken as phonetic with associ-
ated sense i] ‘innate’ (Mizukami, Ogawa), to give 
SEI, SHŌ 
nature, sex
8 strokes
性
L3
745
‘innate feelings, one’s nature, temperament’, 
or with associated sense ii] ‘give birth’ (Katō, 
Yamada). In the case of  i], ‘sex’ may be seen as 
extended sense from ‘innate’, and ‘gender’ as an 
extension from ‘sex’, while with ii] the element 
生 serves both a semantic and phonetic role. 
MS1995:v1:502-3; OT1968:365; KJ1970:597; 
YK1976:300. 
Mnemonic: ONE’S NATURE IS THE HEART 
ONE IS BORN WITH
政治家 SEIJIKA　politician
行政  GYŌSEI　administration
政府  SEIFU　government
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 攵 (攴) 112 ‘hit; force’, 
and 正 43 ‘correct’. One view takes 正 as seman-
tic and phonetic, to give ‘make correct’ (Tōdō, 
Ogawa), but another view treats 正 as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘vanquish’, to give 
SEI, SHŌ 
government
9 strokes
政
L3
746
‘vanquish with weapons’ (Yamada, Katō). Both 
views give ‘control’ then ‘govern’ as extended 
sense, and both are based on a passage in 
Analects of Confucius (Lun Yu), but Katō argues 
that the interpretation of 政 as ‘make correct’ is 
one which, while it suited the ruling class of the 
period, is etymologically fl awed. TA1965:460-
65; OT1968:438; KJ1970:600; YK1976:301-2; 
MS1995:v1:568-9. 
Mnemonic: GOVERNMENT FORCES 
CORRECTNESS
勢力  SEIRYOKU　power
大勢  ōZEI　multitude
勢いよく ikioiyoku　vigorously
Seal 
. Has 力 78 ‘strength, eff ort’, and 埶 
(originally ‘plant tree, shrub’: see 495) as seman-
tic and phonetic (same meaning), to give ‘put 
eff ort into planting’; as planting involved great 
SEI, ikioi 
power, force
13 strokes
勢
L3
747
eff ort, the meaning was extended to ‘vigor’. 
Subsequently, so as to distinguish the two 
meanings, the determinative 艹 53 ‘plants’ was 
added to 埶 for ‘plant with eff ort’, while 力 was 
added for ‘vigor’, ‘force’, giving 勢, after which 
埶 fell into disuse. See also 藝 495 (traditional 
form of 芸 ‘art, skill’). KJ1970:354; YK1976:303; 
QX2000:329-30; AS2007:570-71. Take 坴 as 627 
‘mounds of earth’, and 丸 as ‘round’ 101.  
Mnemonic: STRONG POWER FORCES UP 
ROUND MOUNDS OF EARTH
精神的 SEISHINTEKI　mental
精力  SEIRYOKU　vitality
不精  BUSHŌ　indolence
SEI, SHŌ
spirit, vitality,
refi ne, detail
14 strokes
精
L3
748
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 米 220 
‘rice’, and 青 45 ‘green, blue, fresh’ as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘clean’, to give ‘rice 
polished clean’ (Ogawa), or ‘select and clean 
rice’ (Katō, Yamada). The process of cleaning 
rice involved refi ning, hence ‘refi ne’. ‘Essence, 
spirit’ may be seen as an extended sense – that 
which remains after refi ning – and by further 
extension to ‘vitality’. OT1968:763; KJ1970:596; 
YK1976:305.
Mnemonic: REFINED GREEN RICE FILLS ONE 
WITH VITALITY AND SPIRIT

The 185 Fifth Grade Characters  239
製造  SEIZŌ　manufacture
製品  SEIHIN　manufactured item
日本製  NIHONSEI　made in Japan
SEI
manufacture
14 strokes
製
L3
749
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 衣 444 
‘clothing, cloth’, and 制 744 (‘system, control’; 
originally, ‘cut tree systematically with blade in-
struments’) as semantic and phonetic for ‘cut’, to 
give ‘cut cloth and make a garment’. Sense was 
then generalized to ‘make (an item)’, not just 
clothing.  KJ1970:598; YK1976:305; OT1968:907.
Mnemonic: SYSTEM FOR MANUFACTURING 
CLOTHING. 
税金  ZEIKIN　tax
関税  KANZEI　customs duty
所得税 SHOTOKUZEI　income tax
ZEI
tax, tithe
12 strokes
税
L3
750
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 禾 87 ‘grain’, 
and /兌 (NJK, originally person, looking up 
and speaking) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘divide and take’, to give ‘take enough 
harvested grain for tax’; later generalised to ‘tax, 
tithe’. YK1976:306-7; OT1968:733; KJ1970:602-3; 
Suggest  as ‘elder brother’ 兄 114 with 八 70, 
here ‘away’.
Mnemonic: ELDER BROTHER GIVES AWAY 
GRAIN TAX  
責任 SEKININ　responsibility
自責 
JISEKI　self-reproach
責務 SEKIMU　duty
SEKI, semeru
liability, blame
11 strokes
責
L3
751
OBI ; seal 
. Has 貝 10 ‘shell/currency,’ and 
朿 883 (NJK, usually taken as ‘thorn’, but note 
corresponding OBI forms look like artefact with 
barb-like tip); latter element is usually taken 
as phonetic with assoc sense ‘count up and 
request’ > ‘money is requested’ from debtor; Mi-
zukami notes alternative view that takes 朿 as 
both semantic and phonetic, to give ‘harass (the 
debtor) like stabbing with a thorn’. Calling debt-
or to account may have given rise to ‘blame’ as 
extended sense. Schuessler also notes meaning 
‘hold responsible’. MS1995:v2:1232-4,v1:644-5; 
KJ1970:614; YK1976:309; AS2007:602. Modern 
form has variant of 生 44 ‘life’ as top element, 
but we suggest ‘odd’ variant of 主 315 ‘master’.
Mnemonic: BLAME ODD MASTER WITH 
MONEY WHO HAS MANY LIABILITIES
成績 SEISEKI　result
業績 GYŌSEKI　achievements
紡績 BŌSEKI　spinning
SEKI 
achievement, spin
17 strokes
績
L3
752
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 糸 29 
‘thread’ (Katō and Yamada consider ‘thread’ 
here to be hemp thread), and 責 751 (originally, 
‘money requested’; ‘liability’, now ‘blame’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘link, join up’ 
(Katō, Yamada), to give ‘join up thread; spin’. 
Ogawa takes the associated sense of 責 as ‘ac-
cumulate’, giving ‘accumulate thread’ – a little 
awkward but helps explain ‘achievements’ as 
an extended sense. KJ1970:614; YK1976:310; 
OT1968:790.   
Mnemonic: BLAME THREADS FOR POOR 
ACHIEVEMENTS IN SPINNING

240  The 185 Fifth Grade Characters
面接 MENSETSU　interview
接続 SETSUZOKU　connection
接木 tsugiki　graft (of trees)
SETSU, tsugu
contact, join
11 strokes
接
L3
753
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 扌 34 ‘hand’, 
and 妾 (NJK, ‘concubine’; derives from 女 37 
woman, and 立 as abbreviation of 辛 1535 
[tattooing needle used on criminals and slaves, 
設置 SETCHI　establishment
設計 SEKKEI　design
設立 SETSURITSU　founding
SETSU, mōkeru 
establish, build
11 strokes
設
L3
754
OBI 
; seal 
. OBI form for 殳 170 (‘strike with 
weapon’) has hand holding object such as a 
club or mallet, held next to a wedge, to give 
now ‘sharp’]) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘take’, to give ‘take the hand’; by extension, ‘mix/
mingle with’, and hence ‘contact’. Tōdō includes 
in a word-family ‘slender point; slender point 
thrusts in’, giving a clear original sexual conno-
tation. TA1965:848-51; KJ1970:623; YK1976:311. 
Suggest taking 妾 as 女 37 ‘woman standing’ 
立 77.
Mnemonic: JOIN HANDS WITH STANDING 
WOMAN 
‘construct, establish’. Seal form onwards with 言 
118 ‘words, speak’ is widely taken as an error; 
likely due to misinterpretation of  certain older 
forms of 言 which include a wedge-shaped 
component. MS1995:v2:1184-5; KJ1970:618-9; 
YK1976:311; OT1968:545. Take 殳 as ‘hand hold-
ing tool/weapon’.
Mnemonic: BUILD WITH WORDS, DESPITE 
HAMMER IN HAND
舌戦   ZESSEN　war of words
弁舌   BENZETSU　eloquence
舌足らず  shitatarazu　lisping
ZETSU, shita 
tongue
6 strokes
舌
L1
755
OBI 
, 
; seal 
. One view sees this graph 
as having no bronze or seal forms, analysing 
as 口 22 ‘mouth’, with 干 840 (originally forked 
weapon, now ‘dry’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘include’ (used for 含 1167 ‘include’, 
in early Chinese a near-homophone), to give 
‘contained in mouth’, i.e. tongue (Katō, Yamada). 
Qiu, though, looks to identify OBI forms for 
舌, as does Mizukami. Qiu takes the OBI forms 
as 口 ‘mouth’ with another element which he 
sees as the tongue itself (short strokes either 
side of this in some instances may depict 
saliva). KJ1970:620; QX2000:195;  YK1976:313; 
MS1995:v2:1096-7. Suggest taking the upper 
part as 千 49 ‘a thousand’. 
Mnemonic: A THOUSAND MOUTHS, A 
THOUSAND TONGUES
絶望  ZETSUBŌ　despair
絶対的 ZETTAITEKI　absolute
絶えず  taezu　unceasingly
ZETSU, taeru, tatsu 
cease, sever, end
12 strokes
絶
L3
756
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional form has 刀 198 
(‘knife’) at top right. The OBI form shows 
threads hanging down, with horizontal strokes 
to represent cutting through the threads. The 
seal form has 糸 29 ‘thread’ and 刀, with 卩 41 
(originally a person kneeling) as a phonetic with 
an associated sense typically taken as ‘cut’, to 
give ‘cut thread with knife’. The sense was then 
generalized to ‘cut, sever’, and by extension 
‘end’. OT1968:778; KJ1970:346-7; YK1976:314; 
MS1995:v2:1012-3. We suggest taking the right-
hand part as 色 162 ‘color’.
Mnemonic: SEVER COLORFUL THREADS 
Or: CEASE MAKING COLORED THREADS

The 185 Fifth Grade Characters  241
小銭  kozeni　small change
金銭  KINSEN　money
さい銭  SAISEN　off ertory
SEN, zeni 
sen, coin, money
14 strokes
銭
L1
757
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 金 16 
‘metal/gold’ (in ancient China, often used for 
‘bronze’), and 戔 545 (two halberds > ‘fi ght, 
injure’) as phonetic with associated sense ‘tip 
is scraped away’, to give ‘metal implement 
with tip/edge scraped away’; taken to signify 
tools – often agricultural implements – such as 
spades, hoes, or knives. The connection with 
coinage and money is that, dating from the fi rst 
millennium BC in China, there have survived 
examples of metal currency (separate from 
shell currency) actually in the shape of small 
knives or spades, and featuring short inscrip-
tions; Qiu suggests that before the beginning 
of the formal use of money, spades probably 
served as a kind of currency in trade relations. 
In Japan, a new monetary system was adopted 
offi  cially in 1871. The main unit in this decimal 
system was the yen, so called because the yen 
coins were round (円 4 ‘round, yen’), unlike the 
earlier oblong coins. As a lesser monetary unit, 
the ‘sen’ was adopted (one-hundredth of a yen); 
sen coins are no longer legal as currency, but 
the sen is still used sometimes in fi nancial trans-
actions. KJ1970:626; YK1976:319; QX2000:258-9. 
We suggest for the fi rst mnemonic taking 金 in 
its meaning of ‘gold’, and for the second,‘ money.
Mnemonic: TWO GOLD HALBERDS REDUCED 
TO MERE SEN COIN 
Or: HAVE ENOUGH MONEY IN SEN COINS TO 
BUY TWO HALBERDS
祖先  SOSEN　ancestors
先祖  SENZO　ancestors
祖父母 SOFUBO　grandparents
SO 
ancestor
9 strokes
祖
L3
758
OBI 
; bronze ; seal . The graph consists of 
礻 (示) 723 ‘off ering table, altar; deity’, with 且 
1135 (originally, a burial mound with piled-up 
earth, or cairn, but now meaning ‘furthermore’) 
taken either as semantic and phonetic mean-
ing ‘pile up, put on top’ (Katō, Yamada), or as 
a phonetic with an associated sense of ‘past, 
beginning’ (Mizukami, Ogawa). Either analysis 
gives the overall meaning ‘shrine to the ances-
tral deity’, later extended to being a general 
term for ‘ancestors’. KJ1970:642; YK1976:323; 
MS1995:v2:946-7; OT1968:721.
Mnemonic: FURTHERMORE, AT THE ALTAR 
ONE WORSHIPS ONE’S ANCESTORS  
元素 GENSO　element 
要素 YŌSO　factor
素足 SUashi　barefoot
SO, SU, moto 
element, base, bare
10 strokes
素
L1
759
Seal 
. The graph consists of 
/糸 29 ‘thread’ 
(‘silk thread’), and  (originally, tree blossoms 
or leaves hanging down); the function and 
meaning of the latter element – which has been 
modifi ed through simplifi cation in the block 
script version – is disputed. One view takes  as 
a phonetic with an associated sense of ‘white’, 
to give ‘white silk’ (Katō, Yamada, Mizukami), or 
‘separate into two’ (Mizukami), to give ‘white silk 
threads hanging separately’. Tōdō, by contrast, 
considers ‘white threads/silk’ to be an extended 
sense, and the original meaning to be ‘the 
original state’. Normally, however, the words 
and meanings represented by individual graphs 
progress from the concrete to the abstract, 
not vice versa, so the fi rst interpretation above 
is probably the one to follow. Yamada gives 
a useful view regarding the overall semantic 
progression for this graph, namely ‘white silk’ 
generalized to ‘white’, then to ‘plain’ and ‘raw 
material’; ‘element’ may be regarded as coming 
within the same semantic spectrum. Mizukami 
looks to identify a corresponding bronze form. 
KJ1970:640; YK1976:323; MS1995:v2:1008-
9,v1:22; TA1965:368-71. We suggest taking the 
upper part of the graph as an ‘odd’ variant of 主 
315 ‘master’.  
Mnemonic: THE ODD MASTER’S BARE 
THREADS HAVE BASIC RAW ELEMENTS 

242  The 185 Fifth Grade Characters
総額   SŌGAKU　total amount
総合   SŌGŌ　synthesis
総理大臣 SŌRIDAIJIN　prime minister
SŌ, subete 
whole, total
14 strokes
総
L3
760
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 總. 
Has 糸 29 ‘thread’, and 恖 (‘restless, hurried’ 
[comprising 心 164 ‘heart, mind’, with 囱 
‘window’ as phonetic with associated sense 
‘restless’]) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘bundle together’, to give ‘put thread into a bun-
dle/ball’, extending to all/total. KJ1970:586-587; 
KJ1975:329-30; OT1968:782; MS1995:v1:510-11. 
We suggest taking 公 as ‘public’ 126.
Mnemonic: THREAD RUNS THROUGH 
FEELINGS OF PUBLIC AS A WHOLE 
造船 ZŌSEN　shipbuilding 
木造 MOKUZŌ　made of wood
人造 JINZŌ　manmade
想像 SŌZŌ　imagination
木像 MOKUZŌ　wooden statue
現像 GENZŌ　developing (fi lm)
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has ⻌ 85 ‘walk, move’, 
and 告 507 (‘proclaim’), typically taken here as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘arrive’, to give 
‘walk and arrive’ (Katō, Yamada, Ogawa); in this 
view, ‘make’ is a loan usage. Schuessler, though, 
regards 告 not as phonetic but as semantic, 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 亻 41 ‘per-
son’, and 象 540 (‘elephant; image’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘state, appearance’, to 
give ‘a person’s appearance; imitate a person; 
later generalized to ‘appearance’. KJ1970:542; 
YK1976:332; OT1968:80.
Mnemonic: IMAGE OF ELEPHANT MAN
ZŌ, tsukuru
make, build
10 strokes
ZŌ
image
14 strokes
造
像
L3
L3
761
762
meaning ‘report’, and takes it as part of an 
original word in early Chinese written with (the 
early equivalent of) 造 meaning ‘go and off er (a 
sacrifi ce)’ or ‘go to court’, actions usually involv-
ing some report. Schuessler also notes a pos-
sible word-family type relationship of the word 
just described with two other early Chinese 
near-homophones meaning ‘proceed, achieve’ 
and ‘do, make, build’, broadly corresponding 
with the fi rst interpretation above. KJ1970:408; 
YK1976:330; OT1968:999; AS2007:601-2.
Mnemonic: MAKE A MOVE TO BUILD AND 
PROCLAIM IT
増大 ZŌDAI　increase
増税 ZŌZEI　tax increase
増幅 ZŌFUKU　amplifi cation
phonetic meaning ‘pile up’, to give ‘pile up earth 
on top of earth’. Sense then generalized to ‘pile 
up, increase’. Pre-seal forms listed by Mizukami 
lack the ‘earth’ determinative. MS1995:v1:278-9; 
KJ1970:319-20; YK1976:332. Suggest taking 
right-hand part as 日 66 ‘day’, 八 70 ‘eight’, and 
田 63 ‘fi eld’.
Mnemonic: BUILD UP EARTH IN FIELD OVER 
EIGHT DAYS 
ZŌ, masu, fueru/yasu
increase, build up
14 strokes
増
L3
763
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 增. 
Has 土 64 ‘earth, ground’, and 曾 93 (originally 
‘two-tiered rice steamer’) as semantic and 

The 185 Fifth Grade Characters  243
規則的 KISOKUTEKI　regular
法則  HŌSOKU　law
原則  GENSOKU　principle
abstract sense ‘rule, standard’. Ogawa suggests 
鼎 in a semantic role to give ‘mark/engrave a 
cauldron’, then make it a ‘standard’ (presumably 
of capacity), but Katō argues very few cauldrons 
were engraved. Tōdō puts into a word-family 
‘stick to, incline towards’ which includes 即 
1650 (originally person kneeling next to food 
piled up in container on stand), and takes the 
graph as a cauldron or cooking pot with a knife 
always close by. The fi rst analysis seems persua-
sive. KJ1970:645-6; YK1976:334; OT1968:117; 
TA1965:121-3. Suggest taking 貝 as 10 ‘money’.
Mnemonic: THERE ARE RULES AND STAND-
ARDS ABOUT CUTTING UP MONEY
SOKU, nori, nottoru
rule, model, standard
9 strokes
則
L3
764
Bronze: 
; seal: 
. Has 刂 198 ‘knife’, and 貝 
(not ‘shell-money’ 10, but abbreviation of earlier 
鼎 ‘cauldron’: see 248), usually taken as phonet-
ic with associated sense ‘damage, mark’, to give 
‘mark/damage with knife’. Wood or bamboo 
was marked with a knife for use as a measuring 
tool; ‘measure, ruler’ was then extended to the 
測定   SOKUTEI　measurement
測地   SOKUCHI　land survey
測り難い  hakarigatai　hard to fi gure
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 氵 42 ‘water’ and 則 
764 (‘rule, standard’) as semantic and phonetic 
(and may be seen as extended sense of 764) 
meaning ‘measure’, thus ‘measure water depth’; 
then generalised to ‘measure’. MS1995:v2:766-8; 
KJ1970:646; OT1968:596.
Mnemonic: MEASURE WATER WITH 
FATHOM-RULE
SOKU, hakaru
measure, fathom
12 strokes
測
L3
765
金属 KINZOKU　metal
付属 FUZOKU　attached
属名 ZOKUMEI　generic name
caterpillar’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘continue’, to give ‘born continuously/succes-
sively from vagina’ and hence ‘blood relatives, 
family’. By extension, ‘connected, belong, same 
type’. KJ1970:337; MS1995:v1:406-8,v2:1148-9; 
KJ1970:558; OT1968:298. Suggest take 尸 as 
‘buttock’, 虫 as ‘insect’ 60, 
 as ‘legs’, and ノ as 
‘head’.
Mnemonic: INSECT WITH BUTTOCK, LEGS 
AND HEAD BELONGS TO A GENUS
ZOKU
belong, genus
12 strokes
属
L1
766
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 屬. 
Has 
, corresponding to seal form of 尾 1888 
(originally showing vagina with hair, later 
‘buttocks’ and ‘animal tail’), and 蜀 (NJK, ‘green 
統率 TŌSOTSU　command
能率 NŌRITSU　effi  ciency
税率 ZEIRITSU　tax-rate
thread; the seal form shows these together 
with some sort of tool or device for making the 
rope. ‘Command’ and ‘rate’ may be regarded 
as loan usages. YK1976:494; KJ1970:526; 
MS1995:v2:850-51. Suggest taking 亠 as top, 
 as 幺 29 ‘short threads’ with bits, and the 
lower element as 十 35 ‘ten’.
Mnemonic: TEN BITS OF SHORT THREADS 
COMMAND TOP RATE
SOTSU, RITSU, hikiiru
rate, command
11 strokes
率
L3
767
OBI 
; seal 
. OBI and bronze forms show 
rope (taken to be hemp rope) and bits of hemp 

244  The 185 Fifth Grade Characters
損失   SONSHITSU　loss
損害高  SONGAIdaka　damages
言損ない iisokonai　slip of tongue
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 扌 34 ‘hand’, 
and 員 248 (‘member, offi  cial’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘take away/take away a part’, 
to give ‘take away with the hand, reduce’. ‘Loss, 
damage’ is an extended sense. KJ1970:652-3; 
YK1976:340; OT1968:426.
Mnemonic: OFFICIAL HAS HAND MISSING – A 
SERIOUS LOSS
SON, sokonau
loss, spoil, miss
13 strokes
損
L3
768
後退 KŌTAI　retreat
退職 TAISHOKU　retirement
退位 TAII　abdication
貸費  TAIHI　loan
貸し金  kashiKIN　loan
貸家  kashiya　house to let
Seal forms include 
, 
. Analyses vary, but 
the most convincing takes the fi rst seal form as 
comprising 彳 131 ‘move, go’, and 日 66 ‘sun’, 
with 夂 ‘foot going down’ (see 213), to give ‘sun 
goes down’, and by extension ‘retreat’. The sec-
Seal 
. Has 貝 10 ‘shell/currency/money’, 
and 代 358 (‘replace’, ‘fee’) as phonetic, taken 
either as ‘give’, meaning ‘give money/valu-
ables’ (Katō, Yamada) or as ‘in turn’, meaning 
‘one person lends and another borrows’ (Tōdō, 
Ogawa). Yamada lists a possible bronze form 
also. KJ1970:889; YK1976:345; TA1965:90-92; 
OT1968:955.
Mnemonic: LOAN IS REPLACEMENT MONEY
TAI, shirizoku/keru
retreat, withdraw
9 strokes
TAI, kasu
lend, loan
12 strokes
退
貸
L3
L4
769
770
ond seal form here has ⻌ 85 ‘move, go’, and this 
refl ects a widely discernible feature in the older 
forms of certain graphs, which exhibit varia-
tion between 彳 and the semantically close ⻌. 
Mizukami looks to identify two possible bronze 
forms for 退. Distinguish 艮 here from the 
same-shaped element ‘stop and stare back’ in 
銀 281 ‘silver’ (though a useful mnemonic), and 
from 良 628 ‘good’. YK1976:344; KJ1970:665; 
MS1995:v1:484-5.
Mnemonic: STOP AND STARE, THEN MOVE 
BACK IN RETREAT
態度 TAIDO　attitude
態勢 TAISEI　position
態々 
wazawaza　purposely
phonetic with associated sense taken as ‘good, 
beautiful’ (Katō, Yamada), to give ‘good/beauti-
ful mind’; the sense ‘appearance, state’ is taken 
as a loan usage by Yamada, but Katō sees it as 
a generalized sense. One of the more diffi  cult 
graphs to analyze satisfactorily. YK1976:345-6; 
KJ1970:662-3.
Mnemonic: ONE WHO IS INTENT HAS AP-
PEARANCE OF ABLE MIND
TAI, waza, zama
appearance, intent
14 strokes
態
L1
771
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 心 164 
‘mind, heart’, and 能 787 (‘ability, can’) as 

The 185 Fifth Grade Characters  245
団子 DANgo　dumpling
布団 FUTON　futon, quilt
団体 DANTAI　group
切断  SETSUDAN　amputation
断言  DANGEN　affi  rmation
断り書き kotowarigaki　proviso
建築   KENCHIKU　building
建築家  KENCHIKUKA　architect
築き直す kizukinaosu　rebuild
shape), and 專 925 (orig. ‘hold spool-shaped 
toy/spool’, now ‘sole’) as semantic and pho-
netic meaning ‘round, make round’, to give 
‘round’. ‘Round’ is still a quite common sense 
in modern Japanese, and ‘group’ is likely just 
an extended sense. KJ1970:685; YK1976;352; 
MS1995:v1:260-61. Modern simplifi ed form 
uses 寸 920 ‘hand’, ‘measure’.
Mnemonic: GROUP HAS MEASURED 
ENCLOSURE ROUND IT
threads’ > generalized sense ‘cut’, then extend-
ed senses as ‘decisive’ and ‘refuse’. The change in 
orientation of left-hand element in traditional 
form seems to have been between seal and 
block script stage. Mizukami also lists what are 
possibly pre-seal forms of 断. MS1995:v1:598-9; 
KJ1970:685;YK1976:353; SK1984:359. Take 米 as 
‘rice’ 220.
Mnemonic: DECISIVELY DECLINE RICE CUT 
WITH AX IN CORNER
strings of musical instrument with bamboo 
plectrum’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘pound, strike downwards’, giving overall 
meaning ‘wooden instrument to pound the 
ground’; by extension, ‘make the earth fi rm’ for 
building on, and by further extension ‘build’. 
MS1995:v2:990-92; YK1976:357-8; KJ1970:277-
8. Suggest taking as 工 125 ‘work’, and 凡 1993 
‘mediocre’.
Mnemonic: BUILDING SHOWS MEDIOCRE 
WORK WITH WOOD AND BAMBOO
DAN, TON
group, body, mass,
ball, round
6 strokes
DAN, kotowaru, tatsu
cut, be decisive, de-
cline, judge
11 strokes
CHIKU, kizuku
build
16 strokes
団
断
築
L3
L3
L3
772
773
774
Bronze ; seal 
; traditional 團. Has 囗 84 
(‘enclosure’, originally probably just  circular 
Seal 
; traditional 斷. Has 斤 1233 ‘ax’, and 
/  (‘short threads’ 29 divided by line) > ‘cut 
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 木 73 ‘wood’ and 筑 
(latter made up of a lower part the bronze 
equivalent of which shows a person with arms 
held out towards an object, together with ⺮ 58 
‘bamboo’ as top element, taken to mean ‘pluck 
主張  SHUCHŌ　assertion
拡張  KAKUCHŌ　expansion
見張る  miharu　be on guard
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 弓 107 ‘bow’, 
and 長 189 (‘long’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘expand’, to give ‘bow expands’ (Mizukami 
also lists ‘long’ as an alternative associated 
sense). Sense then generalized from ‘expand 
outwards’ to ‘stretch’. MS1995:v1:470-72; 
KJ1970:703; YK1976:366.
Mnemonic: DRAW LONGBOW TO FULL 
STRETCH
CHŌ, haru
stretch
11 strokes
張
L3
775

246  The 185 Fifth Grade Characters
提出 TEISHUTSU　presentation
前提 ZENTEI　premise
提灯 CHŌCHIN*　lantern
netic with associated sense ‘hold in the hand 
(something hanging down)’, to give ‘hold, carry’. 
In Tōdō’s word-family ‘straight’, meaning ‘hold 
straight up’ (the object is vertical, so does not 
confl ict signifi cantly with the other interpre-
tation noted above). ‘Off er’ is an extended 
sense. YK1976:374-5; KJ1970:712; OT1968:423; 
TA1965:460-63.
Mnemonic: HOLD PROPERLY IN HAND WHEN 
OFFERING TO CARRY
TEI, CHŌ, sageru
hold, carry, off er
12 strokes
提
L1
776
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 扌 34 
‘hand’, and 是 1574 (originally, pictograph of 
spoon on a hook; now ‘proper, this’) as pho-
程度  TEIDO　degree
過程  KATEI　process
程近い hodochikai　near
phonetic with associated sense ‘show’) as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘put in order’ (Ya-
mada, Katō) or ‘extend straight’ (Ogawa), to give 
‘order, rule, standard’. Katō notes a connection 
with a unit of measure (‘put grain harvest in or-
der by units of volume’). ‘About, approximately’ 
may be a further extension of meaning on the 
basis of being close to a standard. YK1976:375;  
KJ1970:709-10; OT1968:734; MS1995:v1:262-3; 
KZ2001:1877/3671. Take 王 as ‘king’ 5. 
Mnemonic: TO AN EXTENT, GRAIN ENDS UP 
IN KING’S MOUTH
TEI, hodo
extent, about, order
12 strokes
程
L3
777
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Traditional: 程 
has 
 at lower right, not 王 ‘king’. The graph 
has 禾 87 ‘grain’, with 呈 (modern form 呈 1741 
‘express clearly’; itself comprising 口 22 ‘mouth, 
speak’, with 
 [CO ‘stand up straight’, ‘excel’] as 
適当 TEKITŌ　suitable
適性 TEKISEI　aptitude
最適 SAITEKI　optimal
taken as i] ‘emerge’ (Yamada, Katō, Mizukami), 
giving ‘emerge’, or ii] ‘straight’, giving ‘move 
straight ahead’ (Ogawa, Mizukami). Mizukami 
lists an OBI for 適 (lacks determinative ⻌). ‘Suit-
able, fi t’ are loan usages. MS1995:v2:1306-7; 
YK1976:376; KJ1970:720; OT1968:1012,186. We 
suggest taking 啇 as blending of ‘funny’ variant 
of tall tower 高 132 ‘tall’, and 121 古 ‘old’.
Mnemonic: SUITABLY FIT TO GO TO FUNNY 
OLD TOWER
TEKI
suitable, fi t, go
14 strokes
適
L3
778
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has ⻌ 85 ‘go, 
walk’, and 啻 (NJK ‘only’), then later variant 啇 
(CO, ‘origin’) as phonetic with associated sense 
敵意  TEKII　hostility
無敵  MUTEKI　matchless
敵討ち  katakiuchi　vendetta
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 攵 112 
‘strike’, and 啻 (NJK ‘only’), then later variant  
啇 (CO, ‘origin’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘hit/confront equally’, thus ‘those who 
strike each other’. KJ1970:721; YK1976:376; 
OT1968:443; MS1995:v1:584-5; ZY2009:v1:136. 
As in 778, we suggest taking 啇 as blending of 
‘funny’ variant of tall tower 高 132 ‘tall’, and 121 
古 ‘old’.
Mnemonic: STRIKE ENEMY IN FUNNY OLD 
TOWER
TEKI, kataki
match, enemy
15 strokes
敵
L1
779

The 185 Fifth Grade Characters  247
伝統  DENTŌ　tradition
統計  TŌKEI　statistics
大統領 DAITŌRYŌ　president
now ‘fi ll’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘beginning; thread/sequence’ (Ogawa says ‘long 
thread/sequence’), to give ‘beginning; thread/
sequence’. ‘Lineage’ is an extended sense; 
‘control’ is also regarded as an extended sense, 
based on correcting a sequence. KJ1970:747; 
OT1968:779; SS1984:649.
Mnemonic: SUPERVISE LINEAGE FULL OF 
THREADS
TŌ, suberu
supervise, lineage
12 strokes
統
L1
780
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 糸 29 
‘thread’, and 充 1461 (originally, ‘be born; grow’; 
銅像 DŌZŌ　bronze statue
銅貨 DŌKA　bronze coin
青銅 SEIDŌ　bronze
DŌ, akagane
copper
14 strokes
銅
L3
781
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 金 16 ‘metal’, and 同 
204 (‘same’) as phonetic with associated sense 
generally taken as ‘red’ (Mizukami also notes 
alternative interpretations ‘fl ow through’ and 
‘cavity, cave’), to give  ‘red metal’, i.e. ‘copper’. 
MS1995:v2:1366-7; YK1976:394; KJ1970:737; 
GY2008:1257. 
Mnemonic: COPPER IS SAME METAL AS RED 
METAL
指導  SHIDŌ　guidance
主導権 SHUDŌKEN　initiative
伝導  DENDŌ　conduction
Bronze 
; seal: 
. Has 寸 920 ‘hand/meas-
ure’, and 道 205 (‘road’, ‘way’) as phonetic (and 
possibly semantic) with associated sense ‘walk’, 
to give ‘walk while guiding someone by the 
hand’, and hence ‘guide, lead’. YK1976:394; 
MS1995:v1:398-9; KJ1970:671. 
Mnemonic: MEASURED GUIDING HAND 
LEADS THE WAY 
DŌ, michibiku 
guide, lead
15 strokes
導
L3
782
道徳 DŌTOKU　morality
徳義 TOKUGI　integrity
徳利 TOKKURI*　sake bottle
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 德. Has 彳 131 
‘go/move’, and 
 as phonetic with associated 
sense usually taken as ‘climb’, to give ‘climb to a 
high place’ (Yamada, Katō, Mizukami). Mizukami 
notes alternative interpretation of 
 – which is 
seen as abbreviated form of 悳 (直 192 ‘direct, 
upright’, over 心 ‘heart, mind’ 164) – as semantic 
TOKU 
virtue
14 strokes
徳
L1
783
and phonetic, meaning ‘straight/pure heart’; in 
this case, 彳 has the extended sense ‘conduct’. 
Yamada sees ‘morality, virtue’ as loan usage, but 
this seems unnecessary taken as ‘conduct with 
a pure heart’. Interestingly, Qiu notes that at an 
earlier period in China, 
 was used sometimes, 
apparently in error, for 惡 (悪) 241 ‘evil’, the 
opposite sense. Mizukami and Yamada list OBI 
equivalents for 徳, all lacking the 心 ‘heart’ 
element. YK1976:395-6; MS1995:v1:492-3; 
KJ1970:689-90’ QX2000:204-5. Suggest 
 as 
cross 十 and 目 76 ‘eye’.
Mnemonic: CROSS-EYED BUT MOVED BY 
VIRTUOUS FEELINGS

248  The 185 Fifth Grade Characters
英独 EIDOKU　Anglo-German
独立 DOKURITSU　independence
独り言 hitorigoto　soliloquy
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 獨. 
Has 犭(犬) 19 ‘dog’, and NJK 蜀 766 (originally, 
‘green caterpillar’) as phonetic with associated 
DOKU, hitori
alone, Germany
9 strokes
独
L3
784
sense here of ‘fi ght’, to give ‘dogs fi ght, coming 
together as one’, and extended sense ‘(just) one, 
alone’. In written style, 独 is sometimes used 
as an abbreviated way of writing ‘Germany’, as 
in for example 英独 ‘Anglo-German’. In recent 
times 蜀 ‘caterpillar’ has been simplifi ed in this 
graph to 虫 60 ‘insect’. KJ1970:741; YK1976:396-
7; OT1968:642.
Mnemonic: INSECT-RIDDEN GERMAN 
SHEPHERD DOG IS LEFT ALONE
任命 NINMEI　appointment
任意 NIN’I　discretion, option
責任 SEKININ　responsibility
Seal 
. Has 亻 41 ‘person’, and 壬 (‘spool, spin-
dle’: diff erent from similarly-shaped element 
NIN, makaseru 
duty, entrust
6 strokes
任
L3
785
in 777, q.v.) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘bag’, to give ‘carry a load on the back’. ‘Baggage’ 
is an extended sense, and ‘duty’ a further ab-
stracted sense. Yamada looks to identify several 
OBI forms, but Mizukami does not include any. 
YK1976:401-2; KJ1970:567; OT1968:51. We sug-
gest taking 壬 as an ‘odd’ variant of ‘king’ 王 5.
Mnemonic: ODD KING IS PERSON ENTRUST-
ED WITH DUTIES
燃料  NENRYŌ　fuel
燃焼  NENSHŌ　combustion
燃え付く moetsuku　ignite
NEN, moeru/yasu 
burn
16 strokes
燃
L3
786
Seal 
 (然); late graph (post-Shuowen). The 
original graph for this word for ‘burn’ was 然 
557, but when 然 came to be used frequently 
to represent other linguistic forms, a second 
火 8 ‘fi re, fl ames’ was added to clearly indicate 
the meaning ‘burn’. OT1968:628; KJ1970:633; 
QX2000:226-7. Take elements as 犬 19 ‘dog’, 月 
209 ‘meat’, and double fl ames 火/灬.
Mnemonic: DOG MEAT NEEDS TO BE BURNED 
WITH EXTRA FLAMES
可能性 KANŌSEI　possibility
能力  NŌRYOKU　ability
能面  NŌMEN　Noh mask
Bronze 
; seal 
. Etymology disputed. Katō 
and Yamada take as consisting of one element 
in the bronze forms depicting some sort of wild 
animal, with a phonetic element with associat-
ed meaning ‘black’, hence ‘black bear’ (see also 
NŌ, atou 
ability, can, Noh
10 strokes
能
L3
787
熊 1252 ‘bear’). Ogawa, by contrast, regards 
it as totally pictographic in origin, showing a 
wild animal with a tail; Shirakawa also takes it 
to be pictographic, in his view representing an 
aquatic insect. ‘Can’ is a loan usage. In Japa-
nese, senses of this graph include ‘deed, act’ 
‘talented person’ and ‘Noh (drama)’. YK1976:405; 
KJ1970:35; OT1968:822; SS1984:675. Suggest ム 
as nose, 月 as ‘fl esh’ 209, and  as claws.
Mnemonic: ABLE BEAR WITH CLAWS AND 
FLESHY NOSE CAN PERFORM NOH

The 185 Fifth Grade Characters  249
破産  HASAN　bankruptcy
破損  HASON　damage
破れ目  yabureme　(a) tear
HA, yaburu/reru 
break, tear
10 strokes
破
L3
788
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 石 47 ‘stone, 
rock’, and 皮 396 (‘skin, leather’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘small, detailed’, to give 
‘rock is broken into small pieces’; the sense was 
later generalized to ‘break’, and extended to 
‘tear’. YK1976:408; KJ1970:794; OT1968:710.
Mnemonic: TEAR THE SKIN OFF A ROCK!? 
MUST MEAN BREAK IT
犯人 HANNIN　criminal
犯意 HAN’I　criminal intent
犯罪 HANZAI　crime
HAN, okasu 
crime, violate, 
commit, assault
5 strokes
犯
L3
789
判断 HANDAN　judgment
判事 HANJI　judge
判子 HANko　personal seal
HAN, BAN
judge, decide, seal
7 strokes
判
L3
790
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 刂 198 
‘knife/cut’, and 半 214 (‘half’) as semantic 
and phonetic, meaning ‘divide in two’, to give 
‘divide in two physically with knife/cleaver’. 
出版 SHUPPAN　publishing
版画 HANGA　woodcut print
版権 HANKEN　copyright
HAN
print, board
8 strokes
版
L3
791
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 片 980 ‘strip’ 
(orig thin pieces of wood), and 反 393 (‘oppose’, 
‘measure’), as phonetic with associated sense 
‘fl at, thin’, thus ‘fl at/thin board’. In early times 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 犭(犬) 19 
‘dog’, and 㔾 (variant of 卩 41, person kneeling 
or crouching) as phonetic with associated sense 
either ‘harm, injure’, to give ‘dog harms person’ 
(Katō, Yamada), or ‘protrude, jut out’, giving 
‘dog (breaks out and) attacks person’ (Ogawa). 
YK1976:416; KJ1970:789; OT1968:639-40.
Mnemonic: DOG COMMITS CRIME OF 
ASSAULTING SLUMPED PERSON
Later, extended to‘divide’ in general, and fur-
ther senses such as ‘dissect’ and ‘decide, judge’. 
The meaning‘seal’ (Japanese only) seems to 
relate to early practice of dividing important 
documents with seals (similar to signatures 
in the West) such as contracts in two, one 
half for each party. YK1976:417; KJ1970:785; 
OT1968:113. 
Mnemonic: CUT IN HALF – A JUDGMENT 
WITH SOLOMON’S SEAL 
this graph denoted wooden strips/tablets as 
writing material, paper being very expensive. 
Technological development in China in fi rst 
millennium AD saw 版 used to refer to wooden 
blocks engraved with text and/or illustrations 
in woodblock printing, and widely in printing 
terms. See also 板 395 ‘board’. YK1976:418; 
KJ1970:787; OT1968:633.
Mnemonic: OPPOSED THIN BOARDS CAN BE 
USED TO PRINT

250  The 185 Fifth Grade Characters
比例    
HIREI　proportion
比較    
HIKAKU　comparison
比べ物のない 
kurabemono　peerless
 
   
no nai
HI, kuraberu 
compare, ratio
4 strokes
比
L3
792
both represented in written form by one person 
next to another, and as Mizukami points out, 
OBI for these two words were written some-
times facing right, sometimes left; later the 
convention became established to write facing 
right for this graph 比, and ‘follow’ (block script 
从 [the original way of writing 従 – see 902]) 
facing left. YK1976:420; MS1995:v1:720-22,42-3; 
KJ1970:796.
Mnemonic: COMPARE TWO PERSONS 
SITTING NEXT TO EACH OTHER
OBI 
; seal 
. Two people in line. Original 
meaning ‘lined up’ was extended based on 
comparing two similar entities. Originally, early 
Chinese words for ‘lined up’ and ‘follow’ were 
肥料  HIRYŌ　fertilizer
肥満  HIMAN　corpulence
肥え土  koetsuchi　rich soil
HI, koeru/yasu 
fatten, enrich
8 strokes
肥
L1
793
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 月/肉 209 
‘fl esh, meat’, and a right-hand element which 
in the seal form corresponds to 卩 ‘kneeling 
person’ (determinative 26) though Katō and 
Yamada take here as ‘hunchback’. In this graph   
巴 162 serves as phonetic with associated sense 
‘one thing added on top of another’, to give 
‘fl eshy’; by extension, ‘become fat/enriched’. It 
is in Tōdō’s word-family ‘fat, thick’. YK1976:422; 
KJ1970:798; TA1965:730-32. We suggest taking 
the right-hand element as ‘bending body’ 巴
162.
Mnemonic: FLESHY BENDING BODY HAS 
BEEN FATTENED
非人   HININ　‘non-person’ (hist.)
非合理的 HIGŌRITEKI　irrational
非行   HIKŌ　misdemeanor
HI
not, un-, fault
8 strokes
非
L3
794
Bronze 
; seal 
. Depicts outstretched wings 
of a bird in fl ight, but as Katō suggests, prob-
ably just the wings themselves (an approximate 
parallel to this would be 牛 108 ‘cow’, where just 
the head is depicted to represent the whole 
animal). Outstretched wings were then used to 
convey the meaning ‘mutually opposed’, and by 
extension negative senses such as ‘not’, ‘fault’. 
YK1976:422-3; MS1995:v2:1430-31; KJ1970:797. 
Mnemonic: WINGS UNFOLD – SURELY NOT A 
FAULT!? 
設備   SETSUBI　facilities
準備   JUNBI　preparation
備え付け  sonaetsuke　fi xtures/fi ttings
BI, sonaeru/waru 
equip, prepare
12 strokes
備
L3
795
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 亻 41 ‘person’, and CO  
(‘quiver [with arrows]’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘put to one side temporarily’, to give 
‘person who tries to keep something intact (for 
future use)’. Subsequently generalized to ‘keep 
intact’. The basic meaning relates to ‘prepara-
tion’. YK1976:425; MS1995:v1:78-9; KJ1970:805. 
We suggest taking the graph as 亻 41 ‘person’, 
艹 53 ‘grass’, 用 235 ‘use’, and 厂 as a variant roof 
of big building (see 127).  
Mnemonic: PERSON EQUIPS BUILDING WITH 
ROOF USING PREPARED GRASS

The 185 Fifth Grade Characters  251
一俵 IPPYŌ　one bag
米俵 komedawara　rice sack
土俵 DOHYŌ　sandbag, sumo ring
HYŌ, tawara 
sack, bag
10 strokes
俵
L1
796
Seal 
; late graph (Yupian). Has 亻 41 person’, 
and 表 402 (‘surface, list, appear’) as phonetic. 
Most commentators do not give an associated 
sense for 表. One exception is Katō, who refers 
to a light illness quickly recovered from; and 
Yamada, who says ‘move nimbly’, giving an 
overall sense ‘nimble person’, on the basis that 
俵 is perhaps a variant form of another graph 
similar in pronunciation, i.e. 僄, CO meaning 
‘light, nimble’; Katō shares this view. In the Yupian 
dictionary the meaning of 俵 is noted as ‘dis-
tribute’, though Katō notes 俵 was also some-
times used in Han time texts in the sense of 表. 
In Japanese only, 俵 is used exclusively with a 
diff erent meaning, i.e. ‘bag, sack (for rice, etc.)’. 
The word DOHYŌ (土俵) means ‘sumo wrestling 
ring’ as well as ‘bag fi lled with sand (or similar)’, 
but this just refl ects the fact that traditionally 
the ring is formed with sandbags. The explana-
tion for use of 俵 for ‘sack, bag’ in Japanese may 
be that 表 originally referred to an envelop-
ing outer garment, and similarly a bag or sack 
is itself an enveloping cover. YK1976:427-8; 
KJ1970:843-4; SS1984:725; KJ1985:42-3. 
Mnemonic: PERSONS APPEARING ON LIST 
GET A BAG
評価 HYŌKA　appraisal
評判 HYŌBAN　reputation
悪評 AKUHYŌ　notoriety
HYŌ 
criticism,
comment
12 strokes
評
L3
797
Seal 
; late graph. Has 言118 ‘words, speech’, 
and 平 411 (‘fl at, even, calm’) as semantic 
and phonetic, to give ‘fair words’; ‘by exten-
sion, senses such as ‘comment on’ and  ‘judge’. 
YK1976:428; KJ1970:847; OT1968:926. 
Mnemonic: CALM WORDS ARE FAIR 
COMMENTS
貧血  HINKETSU　anaemia
貧困  HINKON　poverty
貧乏人 BINBŌNIN　pauper
HIN, BIN, mazushii
poor, meager
11 strokes
貧
L3
798
Seal: 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 貝 10 ‘shell 
currency, valuables’, and 分 218 as semantic 
and phonetic, meaning ‘divide up, disperse’; 
overall sense is therefore ‘assets are dispersed’, 
i.e. ‘indigent, poor’. YK1976:430; KJ1970:811-12; 
OT1968:954. 
Mnemonic: MONEY DIVIDED, SO NOW POOR 
毛布 MŌFU　blanket
布団 FUTON　quilt, bedding
布地 nunoji　cloth
FU, nuno 
cloth
5 strokes
布
L1
799
Bronze ; seal 
. Has 巾 1232 ‘(piece of) cloth’, 
and 父 216 ‘father’ as semantic and phonetic 
(original sense being ‘strike [with stone ax]’), to 
give ‘cloth made by beating’, i.e. ‘hemp cloth’; 
later, cloth in general. Mizukami also notes the 
alternative interpretation of 父 here as phonet-
ic with associated sense ‘fl at and thin’, to give 
‘fl at, thin cloth’, but the fi rst analysis here seems 
persuasive. YK1976:432; MS1995:v1:436-7; 
KJ1970:814.
Mnemonic: FATHER’S HAND HOLDS BEATEN 
CLOTH 

252  The 185 Fifth Grade Characters
婦人 FUJIN　woman
主婦 SHUFU　housewife
婦長 FUCHŌ　chief nurse
FU
woman, wife
11 strokes
婦
L3
800
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 女 37 ‘woman’, and 帚 
(‘broom’: see 106) as phonetic with associated 
sense either ‘embellish/adorn’, to give ‘embel-
lished female’ (Katō, Yamada), or ‘accompany 
closely’, giving ‘woman who accompanies 
(husband) closely’ (Tōdō). In early texts (esp 
OBI), often written 帚, without the element 女. 
Katō and Tōdō state that in ancient China this 
graph originally meant ‘daughter-in-law’; the 
meaning later becoming more generalized. 
The alternative, more direct interpretation as 
女 ‘woman’ with 帚 ‘broom’ is diffi  cult to rule 
out, given, for instance, the uncertainty of 
whether one of the elements in 妻 708 ‘wife’ 
represents ‘hairpins’ on the one hand or ‘broom’ 
on the other. YK1976:433-4; MS1995:v1:336-7; 
KJ1970:253-4,251.
Mnemonic: WOMAN HOLDING BROOM IN 
HAND IS PROBABLY A WIFE  
富裕  FUYŪ　wealth
富くじ  tomikuji　lottery
富士山 FUJISAN　Mt Fuji
netic with associated sense ‘abundant, full’, to 
give ‘house/household of abundance’; mean-
ing later generalized to ‘abundant, wealthy’. 
KJ1970:827-8; MS1995:v1:382-3; OT1968:281; 
YK1976:434. Suggest taking lower components 
as 一 1, ‘one/single’, 口 22 ‘mouth/entrance’ and 
田 63 ‘fi eld’. 
Mnemonic: HOUSE AT SINGLE ENTRANCE TO 
FIELD GROWS WEALTHY
FU, FŪ, tomi, tomu
wealth, riches 
12 strokes
富
L3
801
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 宀 30 ‘roof, building’, 
and 畐 409 (‘[full] wide-necked jar’) as pho-
武士道 BUSHIDŌ　warrior code
武器  BUKI　weapon
武者  MUSHA　warrior
stride’ (Yamada, Ogawa); in this view, military-
orientated meanings are regarded as loan us-
ages. Mizukami notes the alternative treatment, 
which takes 止 in its other original – and more 
active – sense of ‘foot’ (Shirakawa regards this 
component here as an abbreviation of 歩 221 
‘walk’), combining with 戈 ‘halberd’, to give 
‘advance with halberds’; in this treatment, 
‘warrior’ is an extended meaning. YK1976:434-5; 
OT1968:538; MS1995:v1:704-5; QX2000:155.
Mnemonic: WARRIOR WITH HALBERD STOPS 
BU, MU
military, warrior 
8 strokes
武
L3
802
OBI 
; seal 
. Interpretations diverge. One 
analysis takes 止 143 ‘stop’, here in its original 
sense of ‘footprint’, and the second component 
戈 545 ‘halberd’ (Qiu says ‘dagger-ax’) as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘stride’, giving ‘one 
復活 FUKKATSU　revival
回復 KAIFUKU　recovery
復習 FUKUSHŪ　revision
ing 復, consists of two elements. Scholars are 
divided over whether to take the lower one as 
originally 夊 (Shirakawa, Gu), normally under-
stood as ‘walk slowly, drag the foot’, or as 夂 
‘descending foot’ (Katō [for some occurrences], 
Yamada) (for 夂 and 夊, see Appendix). Despite 
such divergence, this lower ‘foot’ element is 
taken to mean a type of motion.  The upper 
element is typically analysed as a pictograph 
FUKU
again, repeat
12 strokes
復
L3
803
OBI  Bronze ; seal 
. Interpretations vary. 
The OBI form (复), the original way of writ-

The 185 Fifth Grade Characters  253
of two vessels (one upright and the other 
upside-down beneath it), here as semantic and 
phonetic meaning ‘go back’ (or ‘accumulate’), 
giving the overall meaning ‘go back’ (both listed 
by Mizukami). Bronze stage onwards has 彳 
131 ‘go, walk’ added to help clarify meaning. 
Bronze, clerical and early block script occur-
rences for 復 fl uctuate between use of 夊 
and 夂; Kangxi zidian has 夂, which became 
standard. MS1995:v1:488-90; KJ1970:829-30; 
SK1984:299-300; SS1984750-51; GY2008:875; 
KZ2001:776/3671. We suggest taking the ele-
ments as 彳 go, 夂 as ‘crossed legs’, 日 66 ‘sun’, 
and 𠂉 as variant of 人 41 ‘person’.
Mnemonic: PERSON GOES REPEATEDLY TO 
SIT CROSS-LEGGED IN SUN
重複 CHŌFUKU　repetition
複製 FUKUSEI　reproduction
複雑 FUKUZATSU　complexity
late’, to give ‘garment  of several layers, lined 
garment’. Later, the association with garment 
was lost, and ‘accumulate’ became the domi-
nant meaning; ‘duplicate, again’ are extended 
senses. YK1976:439; KJ1970:830; TA1968:237; 
OT1968:908. As with 803, we suggest taking the 
right hand part as 夂 ‘crossed legs’, 日 66 ‘sun’, 
and 𠂉 as variant of 人 41 ‘person’.  
Mnemonic: PERSON SITTING CROSS-LEGGED 
IN SUN WITH DOUBLE CLOTHING! 
FUKU
double, again 
14 strokes
複
L3
804
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 衤/衣 444 
‘garment, clothing’, and 复 (‘go back’, see 803) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘accumu-
仏教 BUKKYŌ　Buddhism
成仏 JŌBUTSU　death
喉仏 nodobotoke　Adam’s apple
(Katō diff ers, saying ‘covered and not clearly 
visible’), to give ‘people indistinguishably 
similar’. The meaning ‘Buddha’ (full way of writ-
ing is 仏陀) is a loan usage; phonetic writings 
for Sanskrit Buddhist terms were employed 
extensively. Buddhism was introduced into Ja-
pan in about the sixth century AD. OT1968:43; 
YK1976:439; KJ1970:832-3. We suggest taking 
ム as a nose. 
Mnemonic: PERSON WITH PROMINENT NOSE  
IS A FRENCH BUDDHIST
BUTSU, FUTSU, 
hotoke
Buddha, France 
4 strokes
仏
L3
805
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 佛. 
Has 亻 41 ‘person’, and 弗 596 (originally ‘cut/
untie two things tied together’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘indistinguishably similar’ 
編集者 HENSHŪSHA　editor
編成  HENSEI　compilation
編み物 amimono　knitted items
in order’, to give ‘bind wooden or bamboo 
document strips into volumes’. By extension, 
books bound in that way; also ‘edit’, ‘knit’. 
YK1976:447; MS1995:v2:1020-21; KJ1970:850-
51; QX2000:199. We suggest taking right-hand 
part as literally 戸 120 ‘door’ and 冊 884 ‘bound 
(writing) tablets’. 
Mnemonic: BOOKS BOUND WITH THREAD 
LEFT AT EDITOR’S DOOR 
HEN, amu
edit, knit, book 
15 strokes
編
L3
806
Seal 
. Has 糸 29 ‘thread’, and 扁 (CO ‘in-
scribed board over gate or door’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘line (something) up 

254  The 185 Fifth Grade Characters
弁当 BENTŌ　packed lunch
弁論 BENRON　debate
弁膜 BENMAKU　valve
ii] 辯 consists of 言 118 ‘words; speak’, with 辡 
as phonetic, here with associated sense taken 
either as ‘divide’, giving ‘analyze divided words 
(between two parties)’ (Yamada), or as ‘dispute 
between two parties’, giving ‘conclude a dispute 
between two parties’ (Katō); sense extended to 
‘speech, oration’.
iii] 瓣 consists of 瓜 ‘melon’ (NJK), and 辡 with 
associated sense ‘divide’, giving ‘contents of 
melon split in two’; subsequently generalised 
to ‘divide into two, divide’, and extended to 
‘discern, discriminate’.
There is also occasional use of 弁 as 辮, with 
thread 糸 29, meaning ‘braid’. YK1976:447-8; 
MS1995:v2:1278-9; KJ1970:853-4; OT1968:335; 
SS1984:777; GY2008:210. Take the modern 
graph as a nose ム and two ‘tens’ (35) 十十  = 
‘twenty’.
Mnemonic: A TALK ABOUT TWENTY 
NOSES – AND A VARIETY OF THINGS!?
BEN
talk, braid, petal, 
know, split, valve
5 strokes
弁
L1
807
Loan for traditional i] 辨 (bronze 
; seal 
 ) ii] 
辯 (seal 
); iii] 瓣 (seal 
). 弁 (originally mean-
ing ‘hands putting on a ceremonial cap’), has 
been borrowed in modern Japanese usage for 
its sound value BEN as a substitute graph for all 
of the above three more complex graphs (and 
indeed a number of others).
i] 辨 consists of 刂 198 ‘knife’, with 辡 (two 
tattooing needles associated with two parties 
taking an oath, and to be used if oath broken 
[Shirakawa]) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘divide’, giving ‘divide by cutting with a knife’; 
later generalized to ‘divide’, and extended to 
‘discern, discriminate’. 
確保 KAKUHO　security
保存 HOZON　preservation
保険 HOKEN　insurance
for the clothes was sometimes changed to two, 
and by the time of the block script this element 
along with the raised arms of the small child 
was corrupted into 木 73 (‘tree/wood’). Later, 
the meaning ‘carry infant on the back’ gave 
rise to extended senses such as ‘be at ease’, 
‘take care of’, ‘maintain’, ‘preserve’. YK1976:450; 
KJ1970:858-9; OT1968:67; AS2007:157. We sug-
gest taking 口 as a box. 
Mnemonic: PERSON PRESERVED IN WOODEN 
BOX
HO, HŌ, tamotsu
preserve, maintain 
9 strokes
保
L3
808
OBI 
; seal 
. Shows ‘person’ 亻 41 with 
infant carried on their back, with one stroke 
(or two) lower down to represent swaddling 
clothes. From the bronze stage, a single stroke 
墓地  BOCHI　graveyard
墓標  BOHYŌ　grave marker
墓参り  hakamairi　grave visit
plants, meaning ‘sunset’; the original way of 
writing 暮 982 ‘sunset’) as phonetic with as-
sociated sense ‘cover’, to give ‘cover (corpse, 
coffi  n) with soil’, and hence ‘grave’. YK1976:451; 
KJ1970:775-6; OT1968:223. We suggest taking 
 as a variant of 大 56 ‘big’, with 艹 53 ‘grass’, 
土 64 ‘earth’ and 日 66 ‘sun’.  
Mnemonic: SUN SHINES ON BIG GRASS-COV-
ERED EARTHEN GRAVE
BO, haka
grave 
13 strokes
墓
L1
809
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 土 64 ‘soil, 
ground, earth’, and 莫 (a graph comprising 日 
66 ‘sun’ surrounded in old forms by multiple 

The 185 Fifth Grade Characters  255
報告 HŌKOKU　report
電報 DENPŌ　telegram
報酬 HŌSHŪ　reward
cuff s’, with 卩 ‘kneeling person’ (see 41), with 
又 2003 (modern meaning‘again’, but here in 
the original sense of ‘hand’); giving ‘capture 
a criminal, make to sit, handcuff  and punish’; 
Katō, in similar vein says ‘convict a criminal’. The 
diff erent proposals for etymology of 報 noted 
above all arrive at the general meaning ‘bring 
a criminal to justice’. Importantly, it should be 
noted that the sense ‘report’ appears to be a 
loan usage.Note that reward is not necessarily 
positive: it may be seen as ‘getting one’s just 
reward/desert’ MS1995:v1:276-7,194-6,300-01; 
YK1976:455; KJ1970:794; SS1984:749. As men-
tioned above, as mnemonic we suggest taking 
幸 as good fortune, with 𠬝 as a hand pushing 
a kneeling person – or, somewhat un-Japanese, 
a hand holding a shepherd’s crook. 
Mnemonic: REWARD FOR REPORTING 
PERSON PUSHED – WHAT GOOD FORTUNE
Or: REWARD FOR HANDING IN SHEPHERD’S 
CROOK – GOOD FORTUNE
HŌ, mukuiru
report, reward 
12 strokes
報
L3
810
Bronze 
; seal 
. Left-hand 幸 295 (‘good 
fortune’) is typically taken as being in error for 
CO 㚔 (the seal form is transitional in shape be-
tween 幸 and 㚔), which is interpreted in ways 
which include i] ‘needle for tattooing criminals/ 
chisel-like instrument used for punishment’ 
(Mizukami); ii] ‘handcuff s’ (Shirakawa); either 
interpretation gives the meaning ’criminal’ for 
㚔. Mizukami lists two analyses for 報: i] 㚔 (幸) 
‘criminal’, with𠬝(itself interpreted variously 
with meanings which include ‘remove by hand’ 
[Katō] or ‘subjugate’ [Shirakawa]) as semantic 
and phonetic, meaning ‘bend down, make 
to submit’, giving ‘make a criminal submit to 
punishment’; ii] 㚔 (幸) in the sense ‘hand-
豊作 HŌSAKU　good harvest
豊富 HŌFU　rich
豊満 HŌMAN　corpulent
壴 (‘vessel with food piled up’, possibly as an 
off ering: see 379), with in some occurrences 丰 
(‘vegetation growing vigorously’) or in other 
occurrences亡 985 (originally, ‘a person hiding’; 
now ‘die, escape’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘full’, giving ‘vessel fi lled with food’; by ex-
tension, ‘abundant’. Katō’s view is similar to that 
of Yamada. In broad terms, the analyses given 
by Mizukami are in line with that of Yamada. 
YK1976:455-6; KJ1970:225-7; SS1984:783; 
OT1968:22; MS1995:v2:1218-21,v1:282-3. We 
suggest taking the top part as 曲 279 ‘bent’ and 
the lower part as 豆 379 ‘food vessel / bean’.
Mnemonic: AN ABUNDANCE OF BENT BEANS
HŌ, yutaka
abundant, rich 
13 strokes
豊
L3
811
OBI 
; seal form i] (豐) 
; seal form ii] (豊) 
; 
traditional 豐. Traditionally – from Shuowen 
on – 豊 and 豐 have been treated as separate 
graphs, but on the basis of the OBI forms (not 
known to the Shuowen compiler) modern com-
mentators tend to regard them as alternative 
realizations of the same graph. Analyses diff er 
to some extent. One view [Yamada] takes as 
予防 YOBŌ　prevention
防水 BŌSUI　waterproof
防衛 BŌEI　defense
‘(terraced) hill/mound on both sides’, i.e. 
‘embankment’; a preventative feature, lead-
ing by extension to ‘prevent’. YK1976:456-7; 
KJ1970:763; OT1968:1064. For further discus-
sion regarding the right-hand forms of 阝 see 
1907. 
Mnemonic: DEFENSIVE TERRACED HILL TO 
ONE SIDE PREVENTS ATTACK
BŌ, fusegu
prevent, defend 
7 strokes
防
L3
812
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Consists of 阝
1907 ’hill, piled-up earth’, with 方 223 (‘side, 
direction’) as semantic and phonetic, to give 

256  The 185 Fifth Grade Characters
貿易業 BŌEKIGYŌ　trading
貿易風 BŌEKIFŪ　trade wind
貿易者 BŌEKISHA　trader
sense ‘exchange’, giving ‘exchange goods with 
currency’. Mizukami also notes the alternative 
interpretation of 卯 favored by Tōdō as pho-
netic with the associated sense ‘seek something 
unreasonably from another’, to give ‘look for 
profi t unreasonably from another’. YK1976:458; 
MS1995:v1:178-9,v2:1238-9; KJ1970:769-70; 
TA1965:241; GY2008:183. We suggest taking 
the components on top as sword 刀 198 and  
 as a symbol of being bent.
Mnemonic: EXCHANGE BENT SWORD FOR 
MONEY IN TRADE DEAL 
BŌ
trade, exchange
12 strokes
貿
L3
813
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 貝 10 ‘shell currency/
money’, and 卯 (NJK ‘hare’ [zodiac sign], see 
also 824 and 2080; originally, ‘horse’s bit and 
fi ttings’ [Katō], or ‘split in two, force open’ 
[Gu, Mizukami]), as phonetic with associated 
暴力  BŌRYOKU　violence
暴露  BAKURO　exposure
暴れ者 abaremono　roughneck
den illness’) (Yamada), are taken as serving as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘expose to the 
sun’, giving the overall sense ‘dry rice by expos-
ing to the sun’; later, the sense was generalized 
to ‘expose to the sun’. Mizukami lists what he 
treats as a bronze equivalent for 暴 which is of 
diff erent structure, being ‘sun’ with an ele-
ment thought to represent an animal, again 
meaning ‘expose to the sun’, in this case as a 
sacrifi ce.   The meaning ‘violence’ is probably 
a loan usage. In the block script form 暴, the 
bottom element is in error for 米. YK1976:458-9; 
MS1995:v1:626-7; QX2000:200-01; KJ1970:776-
7; OT1968:474. We suggest taking the compo-
nents as 日 66 ‘sun’, 共 484 ‘together’, and 氺 as 
‘insuffi  cient water’ (水 42).
Mnemonic: EXPOSED TO VIOLENT SUN 
TOGETHER WITH INSUFFICIENT WATER
BŌ, BAKU, 
abareru/ku 
violence, expose 
15 strokes
暴
L3
814
Seal forms i] 
, ii] 
. Seal forms vary in shape 
(Yamada lists three, including i] and ii]). Amidst 
such variation, the form with 米 220 ‘rice’ is 
considered to be the correct semantic element, 
combining with another component; Qiu notes 
that the form with 米 occurs on Qin dynasty 
(221-206BC) bamboo slips (clerical script). 
Commentators vary in their interpretation of 
the component which is combined with 米, 
but those proposed, which include 曓 (‘sud-
義務  GIMU　duty
事務所 JIMUSHO　offi  ce
職務  SHOKUMU　job duties
thing’) as phonetic with associated sense ‘force 
to do/forced work’, giving overall sense ‘endeav-
or to do compulsory work’; later generalized 
to ‘endeavour’ or ‘allotted work’. Mizukami also 
lists an alternative interpretation of 敄 as hav-
ing the associated sense ‘make progress despite 
obstacles’, to give ‘strain to accomplish diffi  cult 
work’. YK1976:466; MS1995:v1:140-41,570-71; 
KJ1970:863.
Mnemonic: FANCY LANCE FORCES EFFORT IN 
PERFORMING DUTY 
MU, tsutomeru
(perform) duties 
11 strokes
務
L3
815
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 力 78 ‘strength, eff ort’ 
added at seal stage, and CO 敄 (itself compris-
ing 攵 [攴] 112 ‘hit with stick [or similar]’/‘force’, 
with矛 [another form of ‘halberd/lance’] as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘actively do some-

The 185 Fifth Grade Characters  257
夢中 MUCHŪ　absorbed
悪夢 AKUMU　nightmare
夢見る yumemiru　fancy, dream
clearly; dark’, in one view ‘dark night’ (Katō, 
Ogawa; for them ‘dream’ is loan usage). Form 
A includes 宀 30 ‘roof, building’ and 爿 739 
‘bed’, but Qiu feels these were misunderstood 
by Shuowen compiler Xu Shen. Later, top four 
strokes of Form B were written as 艹 53 ‘plants’. 
KJ1970:848; DJ2009:553,601-2; QX2000:230-
31; OT1968:232. Take 艹 as ‘grass’ 53, 
 76 as 
‘eye(s)’, and 冖 as cover. 
Mnemonic: COVER EYES AT NIGHT AND 
DREAM OF GRASS
MU, yume 
dream  
13 strokes
夢
L3
816
Seal form A 
; seal form B . Shuowen has as 
separate entries, seemingly taking them as 
representing same word ‘dream’. Form B, later 
prevailing, has 夕 46 ‘moon, night’ and 
 as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘cannot see 
迷路  MEIRO　maze
迷夢  MEIMU　illusion
迷い子 mayoigo　lost child
Seal 
. Has ⻌(辵) 85 ‘road; walk’, and 米 
220 (‘rice’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘unclear’, to give ‘walk without clear direction, 
become lost’; by extension, ‘become perplexed’. 
Mizukami also lists several proposed OBI 
equivalents. MS1995:v2:1290-91; YK1976:468-9; 
KJ1970:841; OT1968:998. 
Mnemonic: RICE IS LOST – HOW PERPLEXING
MEI, mayou
lost, perplexed
9 strokes
迷
L3
817
木綿  MOMEN*　cotton
綿毛  watage　down, fl uff 
綿菓子 watagashi　candy fl oss
1232 [‘cloth’, originally tucked into belt], and 白 
69 ‘white’ > ‘white [silk] cloth’), with 系 855 (‘join 
fi ne threads’), thus overall sense ‘join white silk 
threads’. In block script form, 糸 29 may be ab-
breviation of 系. Closely related to 綿 is 棉 ‘cot-
ton’ (NJK, originally tree-cotton [木 73 ‘tree’]). 
YK19 76:470-71; KJ1970:872; MS1995:v1:438-9; 
QX2000:300,334.
Mnemonic: WHITE THREADS MAKE COTTON 
CLOTH AND COTTON WOOL
MEN, wata
cotton, 
cotton wool
14 strokes
綿
L3
818
Seal 
; late graph (post-Shuowen). Seal form 
has right and left elements switched. (帛 has 巾 
輸出 YUSHUTSU　export
輸送 YUSŌ　transportation
運輸 UNYU　transportation
giving original sense ‘boat made by scraping 
out inner part of log, leaving outer part’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘move (some-
thing)’; resultant overall meaning is ‘transport 
goods by vehicle’.YK1976:477; KJ1970:881; 
MS1995:v1:100-01; OT1968:987. We suggest 
taking 亼 as cover, 刂 as ‘cut’ 198, and 月 as 
‘meat’ 209. 
Mnemonic: COVERED CART IS 
TRANSPORTING CUT MEAT
YU
transport, send 
16 strokes
輸
L3
819
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 車 33 ‘cart, 
vehicle’, and 兪 (comprising 舟 1450 ‘boat’, with 
element taken as ‘blade for gouging out’ or 
‘cast-off  outer layer of cicada, etc.’ [Mizukami], 

258  The 185 Fifth Grade Characters
余分  YOBUN　excess, surplus
余計  YOKEI　superfl uous
五十余 GOJŪamari　fi fty plus
fi rstly as a way of writing a word for ‘I/me’ in 
early Chinese, and secondly to write another 
word meaning ‘plentiful food’ (see Type ii).
余 Type ii] Used as abbreviation for 餘 (seal: 
). 
Has 食163 ‘food/eat’, with 余 as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘plentiful food’; meaning later 
generalized to ‘be in excess’. YK1976:480-81; 
OT1968:56; MS1995:v1:58-8; KJ1970:881-2. We 
suggest taking 𠆢 as roof, 干 as ‘dry’ 840, with 
two raindrops. 
Mnemonic: ‘DRY’ ROOF LETS IN A FEW 
DROPS ON ME IN EXCESSIVE RAIN!
YO, amari/ru/su
excess, ample, I/me
7 strokes
余
L3
820
Type i] OBI 
; seal 
. Orig pictograph of 
crossbeam held up by pillar, as roof support, 
then by extension ‘summer house’ (umbrella-
shaped building as per graph); by association 
‘relaxation, ease; abundant’. Later borrowed 
預金  YOKIN　deposit
預り人  azukariNIN　trustee 
預り証  azukariSHŌ　receipt
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 頁 103 
‘head’ (considered here to denote ‘facial expres-
sion’), and 予 425 (‘weaving shuttle’, now means 
‘already’) as phonetic with associated sense ‘at 
ease, relaxed’, to give ‘relaxed facial expression’ 
and by extension ‘enjoy’. ‘Deposit’ and ‘look 
after’ are loan usages. YK1976:481; KJ1970:378; 
OT1968:1103.
Mnemonic: ALREADY LOOKING AFTER A 
DEPOSITED HEAD!
YO, azukaru/keru
deposit, 
look after
13 strokes
預
L3
821
美容院 BIYŌIN　beauty salon
内容  NAIYŌ　contents
形容詞 KEIYŌSHI　adjective 
acquiescent actions such as ‘easily accept or as-
sent to’ (Yamada, Katō), a view echoed by Mizu-
kami, who also gives an alternative associated 
sense ‘put something inside something else’, 
with a similar resultant meaning ‘put something 
inside something else’. Ogawa takes 公 or 谷 as 
having the associated sense ‘collect’, to give ‘col-
lect and cover’, and by extension ‘put in’. ‘Shape, 
looks, appearance’ are regarded as loan usages. 
YK1976:483-4; KJ1970:887; MS1995:v1:376-7; 
OT1968:279. 
Mnemonic: VALLEY CONTAINS BUILDING   
YŌ, ireru
contain, looks
10 strokes
容
L3
822
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 宀 30 ‘roof, building’, 
and 公126 (originally, ‘public space’) in bronze 
or 谷 135 (‘valley’) in seal as phonetic with as-
sociated sense interpreted diff erently. One view 
takes as ‘margin, scope, width, latitude’, giving 
‘house which is spacious’, and by extension 
略語 RYAKUGO　abbreviation
略説 RYAKUSETSU　summary
略図 RYAKUZU　sketch
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 田 63 ‘rice-
fi eld’, and 各 462 (‘each, every’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘divide, demarcate’, to 
give ‘divide fi elds, boundaries between fi elds’; 
Ogawa attributes the more general sense 
‘measure land’. ‘Approximately’, ‘outline’, and 
‘abbreviation’ are loan usages. YK1976:494-5; 
KJ1970:194; OT1968:673.
Mnemonic: EACH FIELD HAS ABBREVIATED 
OUTLINE
RYAKU
abbreviate, outline
11 strokes
略
L3
823

The 185 Fifth Grade Characters  259
留学  RYŪGAKU　study abroad
留守番 RUSUBAN　caretaker
留め金  tomegane　a clasp
give ‘attach bridle fi rmly to horse’s bit’. As this 
was to stop a horse, this gave rise to the gener-
alized sense ‘stop’ (Yamada, Katō).  Ogawa, by 
contrast, treats as 田 63 ‘rice-fi eld’, with 卯 (see 
813) as phonetic with associated sense ‘enclose’, 
giving ‘enclose arable land with crops’, and by 
extension ‘stop’. Mizukami lists both analyses. 
YK1976:495-6; KJ1970:770; MS1995:v2:878-9; 
OT1968:671. We suggest taking the upper com-
ponents as sword 刀 198 and 
 as a symbol of 
being bent. 
Mnemonic: SWORD BENT WHILE DIGGING 
FIELD – HAD TO STOP
RYŪ, RU, 
tomaru/meru 
stop, fasten 
10 strokes
留
L3
824
Bronze 
; seal 
. Interpretations diff er. One 
view is to take as 卯 (NJK, here: ‘horse’s bit’ – 
one of several attributed original meanings 
[see 813 and 2080]), with 由 (original meaning 
disputed; possibly ‘wine press’ – see 421) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘metal bit’, to 
領事 RYŌJI　consul
領土 RYŌDO　territory, dominion
要領 YŌRYŌ　gist
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 頁103 ‘head’, 
and 令 633 (‘order, rule over’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘upright’, to give ‘upright part 
of the head’, i.e. ‘neck’. The current meanings 
are perhaps extended senses, based on the 
concept of the head being a chief part and 
derivates from that. YK1976:499; KJ1970:917; 
OT1968:1104; AS2007:318. We suggest taking 
令 in its meaning of ‘rule’. 
Mnemonic: CONTROL REQUIRES THE HEAD 
TO RULE 
RYŌ
control, possess,
chief, territory
 14 strokes
領
L3
825

260  
THE 181 SIXTH GRADE CHARACTERS
異様 IYŌ na　strange
異常 IJŌ　abnormality
異性 ISEI no　heterosexual
dance to drive off  evil spirits, or (Mizukami) 
clan leader/shaman invoking deities. The mask 
wearer looked diff erent from usual, and strange.
YK1976:55; MS1995:v2:880-81; KJ1970:16-17; 
OT1968:672. We suggest taking 田 as ‘fi eld’ 63 
and 共 as ‘together’ 484.
Mnemonic: TOGETHER AGAIN IN DIFFERENT 
FIELD – HOW STRANGE
I, kotonaru
diff er, strange 
11 strokes
異
L3
826
OBI 
; seal 
. Pictograph of person holding 
grotesque mask to face, probably for ritual 
遺伝 IDEN　heredity
遺失 ISHITSU　loss
遺言 YUIGON　will, testament
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has ⻌ 85 ‘road; move’, and 
貴 847 (’precious’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘lose’. Thus ‘lose something on the 
road’, ‘leave behind’. YK1976:56; KJ1970:11; 
MS1995:v2:1306-7; OT1968:1012.
Mnemonic: MOVE ON AND LEAVE 
SOMETHING PRECIOUS
I, YUI
leave, lose, bequeath
15 strokes
遺
L1
827
領域 RYŌIKI　domain, area
地域 CHIIKI　region
区域 KUIKI　limits, zone
戈 545 ‘halberd’, giving ‘defend demarcated 
area with weaponry’. 土 64 ‘ground’ was added 
later, probably to distinguish 或 in the above 
original boundary-related sense from its later 
uses to represent other more abstract words. 
MS1995:v1:536-7; YK1976:56-7; KJ1970:27-8; 
OT1968:217. Suggest taking 口 as entrance, and 
 as one/sole.
Mnemonic: LANCE IN GROUND AT SOLE 
ENTRANCE – OFF-LIMIT AREA 
IKI
area, limits
11 strokes
域
L3
828
Seal 
. Has 或 either i] 
, variant of 畺 
‘boundary’ (see 91), with 弋 311 ‘stake’ (here 
‘marker peg’), thus ‘fi eld boundaries with mark-
er stakes’, or ii] 囗 84/136 ‘enclosed area’ with 
宇宙 UCHŪ　universe
堂宇 DŌU　hall, temple
眉宇 BIU　eyebrows
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 宀 30 ‘roof, build-
ing’, and 于 (‘bent wood’, perhaps for bow) as 
phonetic with associated sense usually taken as 
‘cover (fully)’, giving ‘roof which covers house/
building’. Mizukami lists alternative associated 
phonetic sense, i.e. ‘large and round’, thus ‘large, 
round roof’. YK1976:62; KJ1970:70; MS1995:v1:
360-61. Suggest 于 as peg. 
Mnemonic: ROOF HELD UP BY PEG – THANK 
HEAVEN!
U
eaves, roof, 
heaven
6 strokes
宇
L3
829

The 181 Sixth Grade Characters  261
映画館 EIGAKAN　cinema
反映  HAN’EI　refl ection
夕映え  yūbae　sunset glow
Seal 
; Six Dynasties (ca.222-589AD) period 
or later. Has 日 66 ‘sun’, and 央 254 (‘center’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘shine brightly’, 
giving ‘sun shines and emits light’; by extension, 
‘refl ect’. YK1976:65-6; KJ1970:77; OT1968:464; 
SS1984:43. 
Mnemonic: CENTER OF SUN SHINES BRIGHTLY
EI, utsuru/su, haeru
refl ect, shine
9 strokes
映
L4
830
延長   ENCHŌ　extension
延期   ENKI　postponement
延び延び nobinobi　delay
long way’; later just ‘long’. Regarding 
, Ogawa 
believes at an early stage there was confusion 
over distinction between what were originally 
two similar-shaped graphs, i.e. what is now 夂 
(orig foot facing downwards, meaning ‘come 
down; go’), and what is now 止 ‘stop’; he takes 
the modern 止 element as ‘foot; go’ – not ‘stop’ – 
and so takes 
 as meaning ‘advance’, with 丿 as 
phonetic with associated sense ’extend’, giving 
‘become extended’. Mizukami takes 
 as ‘try ad-
vancing along road but stop en route’, i.e. he takes 
止 as ‘stop’, not as ‘foot/go’; he sees meaning of 
延 as ‘advance a long distance’, later ‘long/extend’.
YK1976:69-70; KJ1970:105; OT1968:334,536,229; 
MS1995:v1:458-9. Suggest taking 丿as drag mark.
Mnemonic: DRAG FEET IN EXTENDED 
MOVEMENT – NEED TO POSTPONE
EN, nobiru/beru/basu
extend, postpone
8 strokes
延
L3
831
Bronze 
 has 彳not 廴; seal: 
. Views diff er. 
From seal form on has 廴 ‘road, go’ (orig variant 
of 彳, itself abbrev of 行 131, meaning ‘go’, but 
treated as separate from 彳 in Shuowen onwards), 
and 止 ‘stop’ 143 here in the alternative mean-
ing ‘move’, plus 丿. Overall meaning taken by 
Katō and Yamada is ‘advance along a road’ (but 
see Ogawa below); 
 then combines with 丿 
(meaning unclear) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘distant, long’, giving overall sense ‘walk a 
沿岸  ENGAN　coast
沿道  ENDŌ　roadside
川沿い kawazoi　riverside
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵 42 
‘water’, and /㕣 (‘hole/cave from which water 
gushes’) as phonetic with associated sense ‘go 
alongside/follow’, thus ‘go alongside the cur-
rent’. YK1976:70; MS1995:v1:204-5; KJ1970:105-
6; OT1968:564. We suggest taking  as ‘eight’ 八 
70 ‘openings’ 口 22.
Mnemonic: GO ALONGSIDE THE WATER, 
THROUGH EIGHT OPENINGS 
EN, sou
go alongside
8 strokes
沿
L1
832
自我 
 JIGA　self
我まま  wagamama　selfi shness
我々 
 wareware　we, us
latter serving as phonetic with associated sense 
‘kill’; overall sense in this analysis is thus ‘kill 
with halberd’. Both views are listed by Mizu-
kami, who treats view i] as appropriate for OBI 
forms, and view ii] for bronze (and presumably 
seal and block script). ‘I, my’ is a loan usage. 
YK1976:85; OT1968:394; MS1995:v1:534-5; 
KJ1970:138. 
Mnemonic: I HAVE DECORATED MY HALBERD 
MYSELF
GA, ware, waga-
I, me, self, my
7 strokes
我
L1
833
OBI 
; seal 
. Views fall into two main 
groups. View i] sees as pictograph of rough 
halberd 545 (Ogawa). View ii] sees it as halberd 
with decorative tassles element attached, the 

262  The 181 Sixth Grade Characters
拡大  KAKUDAI　magnifi cation
拡散  KAKUSAN　dissemination
拡声器 KAKUSEIKI　loudspeaker
Seal 
; traditional 擴. Has 扌 34 ‘hand’, 
and 廣 127 (modern 広 ‘wide, spacious’) as 
semantic and phonetic, giving ‘pull with the 
hand and spread out’. YK1976:95; KJ1970:325; 
OT1968:406.
Mnemonic: SPREAD HANDS WIDE
KAKU
spread
8 strokes
拡
L3
835
革命  KAKUMEI　revolution
革新  KAKUSHIN　reform
革工場 kawaKŌba　tannery
of the bronze forms show a pair of hands also, 
alternatively taken to mean ‘stretched, dried 
hide of an animal’, i.e. ‘leather’. Tōdō is of this 
latter view, 革 being in his word-family ‘stretch 
taut’. Mizukami lists both views. ‘Renew’ may be 
regarded as an extended sense (and by further 
extension ‘reform’), based on the new use for 
the animal hide. KJ1970:474; MS1995:v2:1432-3; 
OT1968:1094; YK1976:95. Diffi  cult in terms of 
mnemonics. We suggest taking the graph as a 
whole as a splayed out (sacrifi ced) animal with 
horns, head, body, long back legs, and tail.
Mnemonic: SPLAYED OUT ANIMAL PROVIDES 
LEATHER: NEED FOR REFORM?
KAKU, kawa
leather, reform
9 strokes
革
L3
836
Bronze 
; seal 
. Typically taken to repre-
sent pictographically a small animal off ered as 
sacrifi ce and left exposed to the elements until 
its bones are bleached white, hence meaning 
‘bleached bones of a small animal; skeleton’. 
Advocates of this view (Katō, Yamada, Ogawa) 
regard ‘leather’ as a loan usage. Because some 
閣下 KAKKA　Your Excellency
内閣 NAIKAKU　Cabinet
閣議 KAKUGI　Cabinet meeting
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 門 231 ‘gate’, 
and 各 462 (originally, ‘descend [and stop]’; 
now ‘each’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘descend and stop’, giving ‘securing bolt’ (verti-
cal bolts used to keep leaves of a gate in place 
without moving). Senses such as ‘mansion, 
chamber, Cabinet’ are loan usages. YK1976:96; 
KJ1970:192-3; OT1968:1059. 
Mnemonic: EACH GATE LEADS TO CABINET
KAKU
cabinet, chamber
14 strokes
閣
L1
837
石灰  SEKKAI　lime
灰色  hai-iro　grey
火山灰 KAZANbai　volcanic ash
interpretations of 又 here diff er. Mizukami takes 
semantically as ‘hand’, giving ‘rake cinders by 
hand’, or ‘ash’. Katō and Yamada take 又 instead 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘use up’, to 
give ‘what is left when fi re dies out’, i.e. ‘ash’. 
Ogawa also takes 又 as phonetic, but with as-
sociated sense ‘black’, giving ‘fi re burns leaving 
something black’, i.e. ‘ash’. We think of ash today 
as grey, but Mizukami notes that originally ash 
color meant ‘black’ (though rather unclear). 
SK1984:131; MS1995:v2:794-5; KJ1970:148-9; 
YK1976:87; OT1968:615. Take 厂 as ‘hillside’.
Mnemonic: HILLSIDE ABLAZE, REDUCED TO 
ASHES
KAI, hai
ashes
6 strokes
灰
L3
834
Bronze ; seal 
; traditional 灰. Has 火 8 
‘fl ames/fi re’, and䗲 taken as variant of 又 2003 
(originally ‘hand’). (䗲 might seem unlikely as a 
variant shape for 又, but clerical forms for 又 do 
exist which are close in shape to, albeit with the 
diagonal going from top left to bottom right). 
All commentators take 火 as ‘fl ames/fi re’, but 

The 181 Sixth Grade Characters  263
分割 BUNKATSU　division
割引 waribiki　discount
割合 wariai　rate
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 刂 198 ‘knife/cut’, and 
害 460 (originally ‘helmet’; later ‘harm, damage’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘open up, 
dissect’, to give ‘cut with knife into small pieces’.
YK1976:99; MS1995:v1:134-5; KJ1970:156; 
OT1968:120.
Mnemonic: AT ANY RATE, WHEN DIVIDING, 
CUT OUT HARMFUL BITS 
KATSU, wari, waru
divide, rate
12 strokes
割
L3
838
切り株 kirikabu　stump
株式 kabuSHIKI　stocks, shares
株主 kabunushi　stockholder
taken as ‘center of tree is red’ (Yamada), or ‘come 
together’ (Ogawa; a reference to where the 
branches of a tree all emanate from); Katō also 
takes as ‘center of tree’. Later used also for ‘tree 
stump’. The meaning ‘stocks, shares (in a compa-
ny)’ seems to be an extended use which refers 
to the central supporting part of a fi rm/com-
pany.YK1976:99-100; AS2007:625; OT1968:505; 
KJ1970:506.
Mnemonic: RED TREE STUMP PROVIDES FIRM 
STOCK
kabu
stock, share,
stump 
10 strokes
株
L1
839
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 木 73 ‘tree, 
wood’, and 朱 1439 (originally ‘tree trunk’, now 
‘vermilion’) as phonetic with associated sense 
干潮   KANCHŌ　ebb tide
干上がる hiagaru　dry up
干し肉   hoshiNIKU　dried meat
guard. The later sense ‘shield’ is considered a 
loan usage (Ogawa suggests instead that this 
occurred through confusion with old forms of 
盾 1474, but there is limited similarity in shape). 
Yamada considers the meaning ‘dry’ refl ects use 
of 干 as a loan graph for the more complex 乾
1145 ‘dry’ (homophonous in early Chinese, as 
in modern Japanese). OT1968:321; YK1976:100; 
MS1995:v1:446-7; KJ1970:202-3; AS2007:248-9.
Mnemonic: FLATTEN FORKED WEAPON FOR 
DRYING THE WASHING 
KAN, hosu, hiru
dry, shield
3 strokes
干
L3
840
OBI 
. Originally depicted a forked weapon, 
possibly made from a tree branch; appears to 
be a simpler version of the weapon originally 
represented by 単 569, possibly with a hand-
第一巻 DAIIKKAN　Volume One
巻物  makimono　scroll
糸巻き  itomaki　bobbin
by hand’: see 688) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘shape into ball, bend, curve’, to give 
overall meaning ‘bent knee’; later generalized 
to ‘bend, wind’. Traditionally in China and Japan, 
books were made by binding into rolls, hence 
the meaning ‘(book) volume’ also. YK1976:102; 
MS1995:v1:176-7; KJ1970:178-9; OT1968:147. 
As with 688, we suggest taking 
 as ‘two’ 二 65, 
‘fi res’ 火 8, and ‘self’ 己 866.
Mnemonic: ROLL ONESELF UP BETWEEN 
TWO FIRES
KAN, maki, maku
roll, reel, volume
9 strokes
巻
L3
841
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
form: 卷. Has 卩 41 ‘person kneeling’ (Katō and 
Yamada take here with extended sense ‘bent 
knee’), and 
 (originally ‘scatter grain seeds 

264  The 181 Sixth Grade Characters
看護婦 KANGOFU　nurse 
看板  KANBAN　signboard
看守  KANSHU　warder
over 目 76 ‘eye’, while the other comprises 目 
‘eye’ with 倝 (‘sun shining high in the sky’: see 
667) as phonetic with associated sense ‘watch 
stealthily’. The interpretation of both forms is 
‘watch with gaze shielded by the hand’ (Katō, 
Yamada), though Ogawa says ‘look into the dis-
tance’. YK1976:102; KJ1970:212-3; OT1968:696.
Mnemonic: PUT HAND ABOVE EYE TO WATCH 
BETTER 
KAN
watch
9 strokes
看
L3
842
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). There are two 
types of seal form. One consists of 手 34 ‘hand’ 
簡単 KANTAN na　simple
書簡 SHOKAN　letter
簡略 KANRYAKU　concision
phonetic with associated sense ‘come apart’, 
giving ‘loose bamboo (writing) strips’; later gen-
eralized to ‘writing strip, tag’, and by extension 
‘book, letter’. Ogawa says associated phonetic 
sense is ‘scrape’, to give ‘(bamboo) strip for writ-
ing’. YK1976:107; MS1995:v2:992-3; OT1968:758; 
KJ1970:218. 
Mnemonic: SIMPLE BRIEF LETTER FOUND IN 
SPACE BETWEEN BAMBOO
KAN
simple, brief, letter
18 strokes
簡
L3
843
Seal 
. Has ⺮ 58 ‘bamboo’, and 閒 (the old 
form of 間 100 ‘space, gap’), typically taken as 
危機 KIKI　crisis
危険 KIKEN　danger
危害 KIGAI　harm
element for ‘kneel/bend’, 㔾 (see 789), which 
is regarded as both semantic and phonetic 
in function. The overall sense ‘kneel/crouch 
down fearfully on top of a cliff /roof’ gives rise 
to ‘dangerous, afraid’ as the extended sense. 
Mizukami also lists a proposed OBI equivalent, 
but the shape is not convincing. YK1976:109-10; 
MS1995:v1:178-9; KJ1970:249-50; OT1968:146. 
We suggest taking 㔾 as fallen fi gure.
Mnemonic: CROUCHING MAN PEERS OVER 
DANGEROUS CLIFF, THEN FALLS
KI, abunai
dangerous
6 strokes
危
L3
844
Seal 
 (Shuowen); 厃 (earlier form of 危) . 
Scholars take 厃 as the simpler form of 危. 厃
depicts a person kneeling or squatting down 
fearfully on top of a cliff  or roof; to this, the 
later, more complex form 危 adds an additional 
机上  KIJŌ na　theoretical
机辺  KIHEN　around the table
事務机 JIMUtsukue　offi  ce desk
Seal: 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 木 73 ‘tree, 
wood’, and NJK 几 (originally, pictograph of ta-
ble or desk) which serves as semantic and pho-
netic. Originally, 机 referred to a type of tree (a 
variety of elm), but was borrowed at an early 
period for ‘desk, table’. YK1976:110; KJ1970:236; 
OT1968:488,107; SS1984:140.
Mnemonic: USE WOODEN TABLE AS DESK
KI, tsukue
desk, table
6 strokes
机
L3
845
発揮  HAKKI　display
指揮者 SHIKISHA　leader
揮発性 KIHATSUSEI　volatility
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 扌 34 ‘hand’, 
and 軍 490 (‘army’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘shake’, giving ‘shake hands (after wash-
ing or similar, not a handshake)’; the meaning 
‘direct, command’ is a loan usage. YK1976:116; 
KJ1970:247; OT1968:422.
Mnemonic: ARMY HAND WIELDS COMMAND, 
IF SHAKILY
KI
command, wield, 
shake
12 strokes
揮
L1
846

The 181 Sixth Grade Characters  265
貴族 KIZOKU　nobility
貴重 KICHŌ na　precious
貴方 KIHŌ/anata*　you
shell currency/valuables up high’. This was then 
generalized to ‘precious’, and by extension to 
‘noble’. Mizukami looks to identify equivalent 
OBI and bronze forms, though these lack the 
element 貝.YK1976:117; MS1995:v2:1234-5; 
KJ1970:245-6; GY2008:855. As a mnemonic we 
suggest taking 貝 in its original meaning of 
shell, and the upper part as a ‘strange’ variant of 
虫 60 ‘insect’.
Mnemonic: STRANGE INSECT EMERGES 
FROM PRECIOUS SHELL
KI, tattoi/bu, tōtoi
precious, revered
12 strokes
貴
L1
847
Seal 
. Has 貝 10 ‘shell, shell currency’, and 
臾 (NJK graph, originally a large basket [for 
carrying soil, etc.]) as a phonetic with an as-
sociated sense of ‘pile up high’, thus giving ‘pile 
質疑 SHITSUGI　questioning
疑問 GIMON　doubt
疑似 GIJI　false
sively at crossroads and unable to proceed (Gu); 
by extension, ‘hesitate, doubt’. The seal form of 
疑 has a diff erent structure, apparently through 
misinterpretation; the right-hand is taken as 
子 27 ‘child’ over 止 143 ‘stop’, with left-hand 
as semantic and phonetic meaning ‘stand still’, 
giving overall meaning ‘child stands still, unable 
to move’. In the case of 𠤗, noted above, at the 
seal stage the stick element was misinterpreted 
as 匕 (stylised version of ‘bent/withered leg/
spoon’). MS1995:v2:886-7,v1:156-7; KJ1970:248; 
GY2008:1741; ZY2009:v1:84-5. As a mnemonic 
for this awkward graph we suggest taking 匕 
and マ as ‘fallen persons’, 矢 as 145 ‘arrow’, and 
the lower right-hand part as 正 43 ‘correct’.
Mnemonic: TWO PEOPLE FELLED BY ONE 
ARROW? I DOUBT THIS IS CORRECT
GI, utagau
doubt, suspect
14 strokes
疑
L3
848
OBI 
 (𠤗); seal 
. The OBI form is listed by 
Mizukami as the ancestral form of two separate 
graphs, i.e. 疑 and 𠤗 (CO; rare graph, with a 
meaning ‘undecided’). The OBI form of 疑 depicts 
a standing fi gure with a head that is interpreted 
as looking round widely; the fi gure holds a stick. 
Some occurrences of the graph also include 
彳 ‘go’ (derived from 行 131, original meaning 
‘crossroads’), and the overall meaning of this 
fuller form is taken as a person standing indeci-
吸収  KYŪSHŪ　absorption
吸血鬼 KYŪKETSUKI　vampire
吸取る  suitoru　soak up
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 口 22 
‘mouth’, and 及 1202 (‘reach, extend’) as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘pull, pull in’ (Ogawa 
says ‘breathe in’), giving ‘pull in breath, inhale; 
suck in’. YK1976:123-4; KJ1970:260; OT1968:165; 
GY2008:262.
Mnemonic: IF YOUR MOUTH CAN REACH IT, 
THEN SUCK IT IN
KYŪ, suu
suck, inhale 
6 strokes
吸
L3
849
提供  TEIKYŌ　off er
供養  KUYŌ　memorial service
供回り  tomomawari　retinue
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 亻 41 
‘person’, and 共 484 (originally, ‘off er up’; ‘all to-
gether’) as semantic and phonetic, giving ‘off er, 
provide’. In terms of etymology and historical 
usage, there is much overlap between 供 and 
共, as noted by Qiu. ‘Companion’ is probably an 
extended meaning. YK1976:131; KJ1970:272-3; 
OT1968:59; QX2000:189.
Mnemonic: COMPANION OFFERS PERSON 
TOGETHERNESS
KYŌ, KU, tomo,
sonaeru
off er, companion
8 strokes
供
L3
850

266  The 181 Sixth Grade Characters
胸部 KYŌBU　thorax 
胸毛 munage 　chest hair
度胸 DOKYŌ　heart, mettle
望郷 BŌKYŌ　homesickness 
郷士 GŌSHI 　squire
郷土 KYŌDO　local
Seal form i] ; seal form ii] (匈) 
. Both are late 
graphs (Shuowen). The second seal form (ii]) is 
given as the main graph, comprising 勹 (‘em-
brace, envelop’: see 611), and 凶 1215 (originally 
‘empty mouth’) as phonetic. 凶 is taken as having 
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional 鄕. The OBI form 
has two people kneeling and facing each other 
over a dining table with abundant food (皀 [CO; 
originally, grain piled up in container > ‘table 
laid with plentiful food’]). Overall original sense 
is thus felt to be ‘two people (host and guest) 
facing each other over table with much food’, 
and hence ‘feast, entertain’. In early Chinese 
there was also a near-homophone meaning 
‘region’ and – in Han times – ‘old home village’. 
At fi rst these two separate words ‘feast, enter-
tain’ and ‘old home village, village’ were written 
with the same graph, but in the seal script they 
came to be written diff erently (at least in some 
contexts): the two kneeling fi gures on either 
side were each modifi ed to 邑 (the one on the 
left as a mirror image), itself consisting of 囗 
(here ‘place, area’) with an element beneath for 
KYŌ, mune, muna-
chest, breast, heart
10 strokes
KYŌ, GŌ
village, rural
11 strokes
胸
郷
L3
L1
851
852
associated sense either ‘empty’, giving ‘empty 
space in the chest for breathing’, generalized 
to ‘chest’ (Katō, Yamada, Tōdō), or ‘be nervous/
excited’, giving ‘feel uneasiness’ (Ogawa). The 
former interpretation seems persuasive. 月 209 
‘fl esh, meat’ was added to what was originally 
just 匈 (Shuowen has 匈 as the main entry head-
ing, noting that it is sometimes written with 月 
added). KJ1970:269; YK1976:132; TA1965:302-7; 
OT1968:132,820; DJ2009:v2:735.
Mnemonic: FLESHY EMBRACING CHEST IS 
LIKE A CONTAINER MARKED ‘X’
‘kneeling person’; this gave ‘place where people 
are’, i.e. ‘region; village’ (see 376), to unambigu-
ously represent the word for ‘region; village’. 
In the modern form 郷, right-hand 阝 is the 
short form of 邑 (as in 376), and the left-hand 
three strokes are just a corrupted shape which 
we fi rst see in this graph at the clerical script 
stage. Separate from this, another graph 饗 
(NJK), made up of 鄕/郷 over 食 163 ‘eat’ was 
devised, and this development allowed ‘feast, 
entertain’ – the original meaning – to be written 
unambiguously. The above should be seen only 
as a tentative account of the etymology of 郷 
because of all the variables in interpretation 
of the diff erent graph shapes involved, 
combined with word etymologies which are 
only provisional in some cases (see Schuessler, 
for instance). YK1976:133-4; KJ1970:180-81; 
MS1995:v2:1332-4,v1:182-3; QX2000:217-8; 
AS2007:533-4. We suggest taking 乡 as ‘odd’ 
threads 幺 29,  as ‘uncovered food’ 食 163, and 
‘village’ 376.
Mnemonic: ODD STRINGY UNCOVERED 
FOOD SERVED IN VILLAGE’
通勤  TSŪKIN　commuting 
勤勉  KINBEN na 　diligent
勤め先  tsutomesaki　work-place
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 勤. 
Has 力 78 ‘strength, eff ort’, and 堇 (‘drought 
deity’; borrowed for ‘smear, paint; clay’; later 
KIN, tsutomeru
work, duties
12 strokes
勤
L3
853
墐) as phonetic with associated sense ‘muscle 
power’ (Yamada, Katō), giving ‘work’, or ‘tighten, 
brace oneself’ (Ogawa), giving ‘exert energy’. 
OT1968:129,217; YK1976:140; KJ1970:294-5; 
MS1995:270-71. Here 艹 is not ‘plant’ 53, but we 
suggest use as such, and take  as 生 44 ‘grow’ 
in (seed-) box 囗.
Mnemonic: WORK DUTIFULLY IN EFFORT TO 
GROW PLANTS IN SEED-BOX

The 181 Sixth Grade Characters  267
筋肉  KINNIKU　muscle
筋道  sujimichi 　logic
筋書き  sujigaki　synopsis
家系 KAKEI　family lineage
系統 KEITŌ 　system, line
系列 KEIRETSU　succession
尊敬 SONKEI　respect
敬語 KEIGO 　polite language
敬い uyamai　reverence
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Typically 
taken as amalgamation in the shapes of i] 肋 
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 敬. Has 攵 112 
‘beat’, and  (originally showing person kneel-
ing/bending) as phonetic or as semantic and 
phonetic. Views as to meaning diff er. One takes 
as ‘restrain oneself’, thus ‘be respectful’ (Mizu-
kami). Another takes as ‘warn, caution’ (Katō, 
Tōdō). This contrast of meanings is because in 
KIN, suji
muscle, sinew, thread, 
sources
12 strokes
KEI
lineage, 
connection
7 strokes
KEI, uyamau
respect
12 strokes
筋
系
敬
L1
L1
L3
854
855
856
(NJK ‘ribs’; originally 力 78 ‘strength, eff ort’ 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘ribs’, with 
月 209 ‘fl esh’), giving ‘ribbed lines’ (Katō), 
‘prominent lines’ (Ogawa), together with ii] 竻 
(CO, ‘lengthwise lines in bamboo’). The basic 
underlying meaning of 筋 is ‘distinct lines’, and 
hence ‘sinew, tendon, muscle’. YK1976:140; 
KJ1970293-4; OT1968:750.
Mnemonic: BAMBOO HAS STRONG FLESHY 
THREAD-LIKE SINEWS
OB: 
; seal 
. Shows two lengths of thread 
joined up by hand, thus ‘join threads’; 
generalised to ‘connect; be attached’. A less 
common alternative analysis is also listed by 
Mizukami, viz. 糸 29 ‘thread’, with 丿 taken 
as meaning ‘extend out’, giving ‘join threads 
up and extend’. ‘Lineage’ is extended sense. 
YK1976:147; KJ1970:358-9; MS1995:v2:1004. 
Mnemonic: LINEAGE IS COMPOSED OF 
TWISTED CONNECTED THREADS
early Chinese the diff erent words concerned 
were near-homophones. It seems likely 敬 orig-
inally meant ‘show respect’, and that it was later 
borrowed for ‘warn’, since originally  showed 
a kneeling fi gure bending forward, and the 
word concerned for ‘warn’ came to be written 
in some cases as 
 (with 亻 41’person’ added). 
MS1995:v1:580-82,v2:1110-12; KJ1970:277; 
YK1976:149; OT1968:441; TA1965:495-7; 
AS2007:317. Take as 艹 53 ‘plant’, and 句 683 
‘phrase’. 
Mnemonic: BEATEN INTO USING RESPECTFUL 
PHRASES ABOUT PLANTS
警官 KEIKAN　police offi  cer
警告 KEIKOKU　warning
警察 KEISATSU　police
KEI
warn, reproach, police
19 strokes
警
L3
857
Seal 
; traditional 警. Has 言 118 ‘words; 
speak’, and 敬/ 敬 856 (‘respect’) as semantic 
and phonetic meaning ‘warn, make 
cautious’, giving ‘warn with words, warn’. 
MS1995:v2:1212-3; OT1968:943; YK1976:150-51. 
Mnemonic: WARNED TO USE RESPECTFUL 
WORDS TO POLICE 

268  The 181 Sixth Grade Characters
劇場 GEKIJŌ　theater
劇的 GEKITEKI 　dramatic
悲劇 HIGEKI　tragedy
感激  KANGEKI　deep emotion
激化  GEKKA 　intensifi cation
激しさ  hageshisa　intensity
穴居人 KEKKYOJIN　troglodyte
穴子  anago　conger eel
穴埋め  anaume　stopgap
GEKI
drama, intense
15 strokes
GEKI, hageshii
agitated, intense
16 strokes
KETSU, ana
hole
5 strokes
劇
激
穴
L3
L1
L1
858
859
860
(刂). Modern scholars typically analyze in terms 
of the version with 力, and this approach is 
followed here. Thus taken as 力 ‘eff ort, strength’, 
with  as phonetic with associated sense 
‘extremely violent, extreme’ (though Ogawa 
interprets as ‘busy’), giving ‘exert oneself to the 
utmost’. YK1976:152; KJ1970:362-3; SS1984:182-
3; OT1968:122. We suggest taking  as tiger  
(‘tiger determinative’: see 297 and 1301) with 
豕 89 ‘pig’.
Mnemonic: TIGER ATTACKS PIG WITH 
SWORD!? WHAT INTENSE DRAMA! 
sociated sense taken as ‘hit hard’ (Ogawa, 
Tōdō), giving ‘waves hit hard’, and by exten-
sion ‘violent’. Katō takes as ‘rise up’, thus 
‘water rises/jumps up’, but the view based on 
‘hit hard’ seems preferable. SS1984:197,247; 
GY2008:1621; KJ1970:359-60; OT1968:609; 
TA1965:267. Take 敫 as 攵 112 ‘strike’, 方 as 223 
‘person’, and 白 69 ‘white’. 
Mnemonic: INTENSELY AGITATED WHITE 
WATER STRIKES PERSON 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). May be picto-
graph of entrance; hence ‘cave’ (often used 
as dwelling in ancient China) (Tōdō, Ogawa, 
Shirakawa). Yamada sees as 宀 30 ‘roof’, here 
‘entrance’, with 八 as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘dig’, thus ‘dug-out dwelling/cave’. 
TA1965:707-10; OT1968:739; SS1984:248; 
YK1976:153. Take 八 as ‘eight’ 70. 
Mnemonic: EIGHT HOLES IN A ROOF 
Seal 
; late graph (later version of Shuowen). 
Has 刂 (刀) 198 ‘sword, cut’, and  (mythical 
beast with tiger’s head) as phonetic with as-
sociated sense ‘extremely violent, extreme’. It is 
felt to be an erroneous variant, which should 
properly have 力 78 ‘strength, eff ort’, not 刀 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵 42 ‘water’, 
and 敫 (CO, original meaning disputed; ‘shining’ 
[Gu], or ‘hit’ [Shirakawa says ‘stimulate spirit of 
deceased by hitting’]) as phonetic with as-
絹布 KENPU　silk cloth
人絹 JINKEN　rayon
絹物 kinumono　silk goods
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 糸 29 
‘thread’, and CO  (orig. insect type) as semantic 
and phonetic with associated sense ‘pale yel-
low’, thus ‘pale yellow silk thread/cloth’; later 
‘silk’. GY2008:427; KJ1970:381; YK1976:160; 
SS1984:262. Take 口 as ‘round’, 月 as ‘meat’ 209. 
Mnemonic: SILK THREADS WRAPPED ROUND 
MEAT
KEN, kinu
silk 
13 strokes
絹
L1
861

The 181 Sixth Grade Characters  269
権利 KENRI　(a) right
権衡 KENKŌ　balance
権化 GONGE　embodiment
instead of 
, a CO graph of 扌34 ‘hand’ with 
 as phonetic with associated sense ‘fi st-sized 
weights’ for scales, giving ‘scales with weights 
for balancing by hand’ (Katō); Ogawa, alterna-
tively, takes the weights as hanging, and sup-
ports this with an illustration of a weight in a 
bell shape which was made for hanging. At fi rst 
weights were made of stone, but later metal. 
The operator of the scales had some discretion 
when weighing items, thus giving extended 
senses such as ‘balance’ and ‘power, author-
ity’. In Japanese, ‘balance’ is now a very minor 
meaning for 権. KJ1970:341-2; YK1976:160; 
OT1968:522. 
Mnemonic: CRESTED BIRD HAS RIGHT TO 
BALANCE IN TREE
KEN, GON
right, authority, 
balance
15 strokes
権
L3
862
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
. 
Has 木 73 ‘tree’, and  468 (‘crested bird’) as 
phonetic with associated sense either as ‘yellow’, 
giving ‘tree with yellow blossoms’ (Yamada), or 
with associated sense unknown, giving ‘a type 
of tree’ (Katō); either way, the precise type of 
tree is not known. Meanings such as ‘author-
ity, right, balance’ represent a loan usage of 権 
憲法 KENPŌ　constitution
憲章 KENSHŌ　charter
憲兵 KENPEI　military police
with associated sense taken either as i] ‘wise’ 
(Ogawa, Yamada) (early sense; Mizukami says 
‘agile, nimble’), or ii] ‘fasten, secure’ (Ogawa); 
Mizukami notes both interpretations. Sense 
i] gives the overall meaning ‘wise mind, wise’, 
making the later sense ‘law, rule’ a loan usage, 
while sense ii] gives ‘fi rmly fasten’, and ‘law, 
rule’ as an extended meaning (i.e. that which 
restrains people). YK1976:161; OT1968:387; 
MS1995:v1:524-5; KJ1970:155. Awkward mne-
monically, but we suggest taking 宀 as ‘cover’ 
30, 
 as variant of ‘life’ 生 44, 
 as ‘eye’ 76, and 
心 as ‘feelings’ 164. 
Mnemonic: CONSTITUTIONAL LAW COVERS 
ALL ONE SEES AND FEELS IN LIFE
KEN
law, constitution 
16 strokes
憲
L1
863
Bronze 
; seal 
. The bronze equivalent, 
which lacks 心 164 ‘heart, feeling’, is taken 
by commentators in a provisional analysis as 
depicting a cap or other type of headgear; 
Katō considers the inclusion of 目 76 ‘eye’ to 
indicate that the headgear covered the eyes 
also, though seems to be alone in this view. 
The seal form has 心 ‘mind’, with 
 as phonetic 
資源 SHIGEN　resources
源泉 GENSEN　source
源氏 GENJI　Minamoto Clan
‘spring, water source’ and ‘plain, highland’ 
respectively, the latter being a loan usage of the 
graph. The water element 氵 was subsequently 
added to 原, giving 源, to enable the word 
for ‘spring’ to be unambiguously represented 
when needed. ‘Source, origin’ would appear to 
be a generalised sense based on ‘spring, water 
source’, though Schuessler suggests a pos-
sible connection with another word which in 
early Chinese was homophonous to 原/源, i.e. 
the word written 元 (GEN) 117, with a mean-
ing ‘origin/source’. YK1976:164; AS2007:593; 
MS1995:v1:188; KJ1970:631-2; QX2000:193,226.
Mnemonic: WATER SOURCE HAS ITS ORIGINS 
ON THE PLAIN
GEN, minamoto
source, origin 
13 strokes
源
L1
864
Bronze 
; seal . Has 氵 42 ‘water’, and 原 119 
‘origin; plain’ (which originally depicted a spring 
gushing out from the foot of a cliff ) as semantic 
and phonetic, giving ‘water source, spring’. Note 
that although these two graphs are diff erenti-
ated in Japanese usage, just the one graph 原 
appears to have served originally in early Chi-
nese to represent in writing two separate words 
(homophones or near-homophones) meaning 

270  The 181 Sixth Grade Characters
厳格 GENKAKU　strictness
厳秘 GENPI　strictly secret
壮厳 SŌGON　solemnity
mountainside’; in this view, the top element 
吅 (CO, ‘call out loudly’) in 嚴 is treated as 
an additional phonetic, also with associated 
sense ‘hole, cave’. Mizukami also takes 吅 in 
the same way, but regards 
 in its entirety 
as meaning ‘cliff ’. Katō broadly agrees, and 
sets out a number of variant forms for 嚴/厳. 
Modern meanings are borrowed. YK1976:165; 
MS1995:v1:248-50; KJ1970:206-7. Suggest tak-
ing 
 as ornate building. 
Mnemonic: BUILDING SEEMS DARINGLY 
ORNATE, YET SEVERELY SOLEMN!
GEN, GON, kibishii,
ogosoka
severe, solemn 
17 strokes
厳
L1
865
Bronze 
; seal ; traditional 嚴. Views di-
verge. Yamada takes it as originally 
, with 厂 
‘cliff ’, and 敢 1152 (‘daring’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘hole, cave’, giving ‘cave in 
自己 
JIKO　self
知己 CHIKI　friend
利己 RIKO　selfi shness
for the twisted end of a length of thread, mean-
ing ‘end of long thread’; borrowed to write 
the word for ‘oneself’. Also, the original way of 
writing what was later written 紀 472 ‘chroni-
cle, start’. The sense ‘you’ for 己 is an uncom-
mon and pejorative usage found in Japanese 
only. YK1976:165; KJ1970:941-2; OT1968:312; 
MS1995:v1:430-31.
Mnemonic: I MYSELF FOLLOW THE THREAD 
KO, KI, onore
I, me, self, you
3 strokes
己
L1
866
OBI 
; seal 
. The widely-held (and most con-
vincing) view takes 己 as originally a pictograph 
呼吸  KOKYŪ　breathing
点呼  TENKO　roll call
呼び物 yobimono　drawcard
leave’ (Ogawa says ‘breathe out’), giving ‘that 
which leaves the mouth’, and so ‘breathe out’ 
and by extension ‘call out, call’. Mizukami also 
notes ‘big’ as a possible associated sense for 
乎, giving ‘big voice which leaves the mouth’. 
YK1976:166-7; OT1968:175; MS1995:v1:18-19, 
224-5; KJ1970:258-9. We suggest taking 乎 as a 
variant of 手 34 ‘hand’.
Mnemonic: HAND BY MOUTH MIGHT HELP 
CALLING, BUT NOT BREATHING!
KO, yobu
call, breathe
8 strokes
呼
L3
867
Seal 
. Has 口 22 ‘mouth’, and 乎 (NJK, 
originally ‘fl oating aquatic plant’ or ‘breath 
exhaled’) as phonetic with associated sense ‘go, 
誤解 GOKAI　misunderstanding
誤判 GOHAN　mistrial 
誤訳 GOYAKU　mistranslation
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 言 118 
‘words; speak’, and 呉 1311 (originally 口 
‘words; speak’, with element for person with 
head bent forward, conveying ‘contrary words’, 
now meaning ‘give’) as semantic and phonetic, 
giving ‘exaggerated/ contrary words’ and by 
extension ‘mistaken, mistake’. YK1976:171; 
KJ1970:394-5; OT1968:930.
Mnemonic: MISTAKEN WORDS GIVEN
GO, ayamaru
mistake, mis- 
14 strokes 
誤
L3
868

The 181 Sixth Grade Characters  271
皇后 KŌGŌ*　empress, queen
后妃 KŌHI　empress, queen
母后 BOKŌ　empress dowager
semantic and phonetic (Yamada, Tōdō, Ogawa). 
Katō says ‘anus’ became a generalized ‘behind’. 
Schuessler sets up two words in early Chinese 
as near-homophones, one meaning ‘behind, 
after’, the other meaning ‘lord, queen’. Even 
bearing in mind the vagaries of the loan graph 
principle, the use of 后 (orig. ‘anus’) for ‘em-
press, queen’ seems surprising, if not puzzling. 
An explanation may be that the original mean-
ing was forgotten. KJ1970:456-7; YK1976:176; 
MS1995:v1:212-3; TA1965:302-5; OT1968:166; 
AS2007:279-80. 
Mnemonic: EMPRESS FOLLOWS BEHIND
KŌ, GO, kisaki
empress, queen, 
behind, later
6 strokes
后
L1
869
OBI 
, 
; seal 
. Note there is in seal script 
a mirror image of this right-facing graph, 
namely 司 524 (‘offi  cial’) which faces left. 后 is 
generally taken as variant of 尸 256 ‘person in 
bent posture/crouching/squatting’ (here, not 
‘corpse’), with 口 22 ‘opening’ (i.e. ‘anus’) as both 
孝子 KŌSHI　dutiful child
孝行 KŌKŌ　fi lial piety
不孝 FUKŌ　fi lial impiety
to whether 子 is semantic or phonetic here, but 
either way overall sense is same, i.e. ‘child makes 
eff orts for old person/parents and ancestors’. 
Yamada alone gives diff erent early forms for 
孝, and so instead of 子 treats 丂 130 (‘fl oating 
plant’) as phonetic with associated sense ‘bend’. 
MS1995:v1:350-51; KJ1970:892-3; OT1968:266; 
TA1965:226-7; GY2008:373; YK1976:177. 
Mnemonic: CHILD SHOWS FILIAL PIETY TO 
OLD PERSON
KŌ
fi lial piety
7 strokes
孝
L1
870
Bronze ; seal 
 Has 耂 638, originally showing 
old person bent over, with long hair, thus mean-
ing ’old person’, and 子 27 ‘child’. Views diff er as 
天皇  TENNŌ*　emperor
皇室  KŌSHITSU　imperial family
皇太子 KŌTAISHI　crown prince
phonetic with associated sense ‘big’, thus ‘big 
ritual mask/cap’; Mizukami broadly agrees, but 
does not mention ‘cap’, instead proposing ‘major 
deity’ as alternative sense to ‘big ritual mask’. 
Ogawa’s approach is diff erent, taking the graph 
as light from fl ames, burning on stand, meaning 
‘shine’ (later 煌). Tōdō looks to identify upper ele-
ment as 自150 (‘nose’; ‘self’), but older (pre-seal) 
forms do not support this view. ‘Ruler’ is a loan 
usage. YK1976:180; MS1995:v2:898-9,1086-7; 
OT1968:687; TA1965:413-5. Suggest taking 白 as 
‘white’ 69, and 王 as ‘king’ 5.
Mnemonic: EMPEROR IS WHITE KING
KŌ, Ō
emperor 
9 strokes
皇
L1
871
Bronze 
; seal 
. Views vary. One takes upper 
element as originally depicting a ritual mask 
(Yamada says mask later changed to type of 
cap) worn to ward off  evil spirits, together with 
a lower element originally believed to represent 
‘stand’/‘platform’. This latter element (written 
王 from seal script on) is taken by Yamada as 
紅葉 KŌYŌ　red leaves
真紅 SHINKU　crimson
紅茶 KŌCHA　brown/black tea
of tool, probably an ax-head, also ‘work’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘pink’. Qiu 
suggests etymology of 紅 is more complex, 
indicating diversity of opinion over etymology. 
Schuessler notes meanings as including ‘pink’ 
and ‘red’. Note that colour spectrum is divided 
arbitrarily in diff erent languages. YK1976:180-
81; QX2000:306; AS2007:278.
Mnemonic: WORK WITH CRIMSON THREADS 
KŌ, KU, kurenai, beni
rouge, crimson
9 strokes
紅
L3
872
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 糸 29 ‘silk 
thread, thread’, and 工 125 (originally a type 

272  The 181 Sixth Grade Characters
降下  KŌKA　descent
降水  KŌSUI　precipitation
乗降り  noriori　getting on and off 
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 阝 1907 ‘hill/terraced 
slope’ (Shirakawa takes as ‘ladder for deities 
to descend’), and 夅, originally showing two 
feet pointing downwards for ‘descend’, thus 
‘descend hill/slope’ > ‘descend’. QX2000:192; 
SS1984:304YK1976:182-3; KJ1970:157; 
MS1995:v2:1394-5; OT1968:1067. Take 夂 as 
‘crosslegged’ 213, and ヰ as ‘well’ 井 1575.)
Mnemonic: DESCEND HILL AND SIT 
CROSS-LEGGED BY WELL 
KŌ, furu, oriru/rosu
fall, descend
10 strokes
降
L3
873
鋼鉄  KŌTETSU　steel
製鋼所 SEIKŌJO　steelworks
鋼色  hagane-iro　steel blue
as abbreviation of 罔 ‘net’ (see also 570), giving 
either ‘long’ (as with a net drawn out), and hence 
‘long ridge of hills’, or ‘high, hard hills/ plateau’ 
(Mizukami). Commentators generally take 岡 
in 鋼 as phonetic with associated sense ‘strong, 
hard’, to give ‘strong metal which cuts through 
things’, and so ‘tempered iron, steel’. YK1976:185-
6; OT1968:1045; SS1984:314.
Mnemonic: METAL IN HILLS IS MADE INTO 
STEEL
KŌ, hagane
steel
16 strokes
鋼
L1
874
A very late graph (Yupian). Has 金 16 ‘metal’, and 
岡 NJK, ‘ridge of hill, hill’; 岡 itself is originally 
made up of 山 26 ‘mountain’ under 
, the latter 
時刻  JIKOKU　time, hour
刻印  KOKUIN　engraved seal
刻み目  kizamime　notch
giving ‘engrave wood with a knife’, though 
cutting up an animal was probably the original 
sense, as Shirakawa suggests. ‘Severe, intense’ is 
treated as an extended meaning by Schuessler. 
Yamada looks to identify several bronze 
forms. YK1976:188; KJ1970:144; OT1968:115; 
SS1984:321; AS2007:334. We suggest taking 亥 
as variant of ‘threads, bindings’ 糸 29. 
Mnemonic: CUT UP A WILD BOAR, BINDINGS 
AND ALL
KOKU, kizamu
chop, mince, engrave, 
harsh
8 strokes
刻
L3
875
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 刂 198 
‘knife, cut’, and 亥 (NJK, ‘wild boar’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘cut into, mark, engrave’, 
穀物 KOKUMOTSU　cereals
穀類 KOKURUI　cereals
穀倉 KOKUSŌ　granary
Seal 
; traditional 穀; a late graph (Shuowen). 
Has 禾 87 ‘grain plant’ (not just ‘rice’; foxtail 
millet was a common grain in ancient China), 
and 
 (CO; originally, percussion instrument 
on wooden stand) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘hard exterior’, giving ‘grain with 
husk intact’. Used to denote grains in general. 
YK1976:190; KJ1970:409; OT1968:735,546; 
AS2007:273. We suggest taking 殳 112 as hand 
holding threshing tool, 士 as ‘samurai’ 521, 冖 
as cover, and ‘grain plant’ 禾 87.
Mnemonic: SAMURAI THRESHES GRAIN THEN 
PUTS IT UNDER COVER
KOKU
grain, cereal
14 strokes
穀
L1
876

The 181 Sixth Grade Characters  273
骨折  KOSSETSU　fracture
露骨  ROKOTSU　bare, frank
骨折る  honeoru　do all one can
Seal . Has 冎 607 (‘occipital bone’), and 
月 209 ‘fl esh’ (here ‘body’), giving ‘skull’; by 
extension, general word for ‘bone’. Mizukami 
gives a proposed OBI equivalent. YK1976:190; 
MS1995:v2:1474-5; KJ1970:328; OT1968:1132.
Mnemonic: FLESHY BODY BELOW 
SHOULDERS, BUT BONY SQUARE HEAD
KOTSU, hone
bone, frame
10 strokes
骨
L3
877
困難  KONNAN　trouble
困苦  KONKU　hardship
困った  komatta　Damn it!
prevent unauthorized entry) (Katō, Yamada). 
Alternatively, seen as 木 ‘tree’ with 囗 ‘confi ning 
enclosure’ to restrain growth (Tōdō, Ogawa). 
With either view, ‘be in diffi  culties’ may be re-
garded as an extended sense, though perhaps 
more convincingly in the latter interpretation. 
KJ1970:412-3; YK1976:191; TA1965:712-21; 
OT1968:204.
Mnemonic: TREE IN DIFFICULTY – TRAPPED 
IN BOX
KON, komaru
be in diffi  culty
7 strokes
困
L3
878
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Interpretations 
diff er. One view takes as consisting of 囗 84 
‘enclosure’, here signifying ‘house’, and 木 73 
‘wood’, giving ‘securing device for gates’ (to 
砂金 SAKIN　gold dust
砂利 JARI*　gravel
砂浜 sunahama　sandy beach
Seal (沙) 
. Note: 砂 is a later graph (post-
Shuowen). The older graph 沙 has 氵 42 ‘water’, 
and 少 160 ‘a few, a little’, giving ‘tiny stone 
particles suspended in water’, i.e. ‘sand’. Later, 
石 47 ‘stone, rock’ was substituted for 氵 ‘water’. 
MS1995:v2:734-5; KJ1970:415-6; YK1976:193. 
Though incorrect, use 少 ‘little’ in the sense of 
‘small’.
Mnemonic: SAND COMPRISES LITTLE STONES
SA, SHA, suna, isago
sand, gravel
9 strokes
砂
L3
879
座席  ZASEKI　seat
銀座  GINZA　the Ginza
座談会 ZADANKAI　symposium
A late, post-Shuowen graph comprising earlier 
坐 (seal form 
), and 广 127 ‘roof, building’. 坐 
itself is made of an upper duplicated element 
which depicts two people 人 41 facing each 
other and kneeling, with 土 64 ‘ground, earth’ 
as semantic and phonetic, meaning ‘sit on the 
ground, sit’ (Katō, Yamada), or ‘a place to sit in a 
house’ (Ogawa). Shirakawa attributes religious 
signifi cance to 土 here, taking it as ‘earth 
deity’. YK1976:194; KJ1970:418; OT1968:329; 
SS1984:334. 
Mnemonic: TWO PEOPLE SITTING ON THE 
GROUND IN A BUILDING
ZA, suwaru
seat, sit, gather
10 strokes
座
L3
880

274  The 181 Sixth Grade Characters
経済学  KEIZAIGAKU　economics
返済   HENSAI　repayment
済まない  sumanai　be improper
Ogawa, while also noting as a river name, take 
齊 as ‘cross over’, thus ‘cross over water’, and 
by extension ‘assist (people)’ and hence ‘ac-
complish, complete’. Another view takes 齊 as 
having associated sense ‘adjust’, to give ‘adjust 
fl ow (water volume) of a river’ so as to even 
out (without fl ooding, etc.; Tōdō), and thus ‘be/
make uniform, settled’. KJ1970:586; TA1965:770-
73; MS1995:v2:1524-5,786-7; OT1968:1171,590; 
SS1984:338. Suggest take  as 文 72 ‘text’ and 
strange ‘moon’ 月 18. 
Mnemonic: TEXT ABOUT STRANGE MOON 
SEEN IN SETTLED WATER 
SAI, SEI, sumu/masu
settle, fi nish
11 strokes
済
L3
881
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
濟. Has 氵 42 ‘water’, and 齊 (orig showing ears 
of grain [Mizukami, Ogawa, Tōdō], or three 
hairpins [Shirakawa]) as phonetic, but views 
diff er over associated and overall senses. Katō 
takes phonetic as ‘clear’, thus ‘river with clear 
water’ (also, river name), but Shirakawa and 
裁判  SAIBAN　trial
裁ち屑  tachikuzu　shreds
裁き 
 sabaki　verdict, judgment
up of 戈 545 [‘halberd’], with 才 139 [‘talent’]) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘damage, 
injure’, giving ‘weapon wound’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘cut off ’, to give ‘cut cloth 
and (judiciously) make garment’. YK1976:199; 
OT1968:904; GY2008:1368.
Mnemonic: JUDGE DECIDES TO CUT CLOTH 
WITH FANCY HALBERD 
SAI, sabaku, tatsu
judge, decide, cut
12 strokes
裁
L1
882
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 衣 444 
‘garment’ (here, ‘cloth’), and 𢦏 (CO; itself made 
政策  SEISAKU　policy
対策  TAISAKU　counterplan
策動家 SAKUDŌKA　schemer
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 竹 58 ‘bamboo’, and NJK 
朿 (‘thorn’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘stab, hit’, thus ‘bamboo for striking (a horse)’, 
i.e. ‘whip’. ‘Plan, policy’, ‘bamboo writing strips’ 
are loan usages. YK1976:203; MS1995:v2:988-
9,v1:644-5; QX2000:268; KJ1970:438.
Mnemonic: PLAN TO FIX DROOPY TREE 
BRANCHES WITH BAMBOO
SAKU
policy, plan, whip
12 strokes
策
L3
883
冊子 SASSHI　booklet
二冊 NISATSU　two volumes
短冊 TANZAKU*　paper strip for poem
OBI 
; seal . Originally pictograph show-
ing turtle/tortoise shells bound together, for 
divination (see Introduction under Oracle 
Bone Script). Later bamboo/wooden strips 
were used. The basic meaning ‘bound volume’ 
remained unchanged, though the more general 
sense ‘document’ also evolved.YK1976:203-4; 
MS1995:v1:108-9; KJ1970:440-41.
Mnemonic: STACKED BOUND TABLETS 
RESEMBLE VOLUMES OF BOOKS
SATSU, SAKU
book, volume
5 strokes
冊
L3
884

The 181 Sixth Grade Characters  275
蚕業 SANGYŌ　sericulture
養蚕 YŌSAN　sericulture
蚕豆 soramame*　broad bean
to indicate burrowing, thus ‘insect that burrows 
(into mulberry leaves)’. The modern Japanese 
graph 蚕 serves as a simplifi ed version of 蠶, but 
is in origin a separate graph meaning ‘earthworm’. 
Note too that middle part of traditional form 蠶 
is 曰 ‘speak’ (orig showing tongue in mouth), a 
determinative slightly diff erent in shape from 
日 66 ‘sun/day’ in traditional printed form, 
though the diff erence is obscured in modern 
Japanese usage, which usually has both as 日. 
KJ1970:441,564; MS1995:v2:1156-7,v1:634-5; 
YK1976:207-8; ZY2009:v3:1140; OT1968:885; 
TA1965:807-11. Take top element as 62 天 
‘heaven’.
Mnemonic: SILKWORM IS A HEAVENLY INSECT
SAN, kaiko
silkworm
10 strokes
蚕
L1
885
OBI 
; seal ; traditional 蠶. OBI form is picto -
graph of silkworm. Seal has 䖵 60 ‘insects’ and 
朁 (曰 NJK ‘speak’, with 兓 [two hairpins] as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘insert’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘produce’ (Katō, 
Ogawa,Yamada), thus ‘insect which produces 
thread’ i.e. ‘silkworm’. Tōdō, however, takes associ-
ated sense as ‘enter narrow space’, and sees it 
至急 SHIKYŪ　emergency
夏至 GESHI　summer solstice
至り 
itari　peak, climax
ground (‘ground’ 土 64). The arrow has reached 
a certain point and stopped, giving the mean-
ing ‘stop’. The arrow has also gone as far as it 
can reach, hence the meaning ‘(maximum) limit’ 
also. YK1976:218; QX2000:191; KJ1970:444-5; 
OT1968:833. 
Mnemonic: ARROW HAS GONE AS FAR IT 
CAN REACH, NOW HEAD IN GROUND
SHI, itaru/ri
go, reach, peak
6 strokes
至
L1
886
私立 SHIRITSU　private
私達 watashitachi　we, us
私事 SHIJI　personal matters
own’; either way, overall sense is ‘grain which 
is one’s own’. The ancient Chinese tax system 
required part of the harvest to be given up 
as tax, and what remained was denoted by 
the graph 私; ‘grain which is one’s own/mine’ 
subsequently became generalised to ‘private, 
I, me’. KJ1970:459-60; OT1968:727; YK1976:219; 
MS1995:v1:188-90; SS1984:357-8. Suggest taking 
厶 as a nose.
Mnemonic: THE GRAIN UNDER MY NOSE IS 
MINE AND PRIVATE 
SHI, wata(ku)shi
I, me, private, personal
7 strokes
私
L4
887
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 禾 87 ‘grain’ 
(not just ‘rice’), and 厶, which based on its OBI 
form is usually taken as corrupted version of 
囗 84 ‘enclosure’ (Katō, Ogawa, Yamada), but 
Mizukami takes 厶 as ‘enclose and make one’s 
姿勢 SHISEI　posture
容姿 YŌSHI　form
姿見 sugatami　full-length mirror
giving ‘woman of well-groomed and beautiful 
appearance’, later generalized to ‘appearance’ 
(Tōdō, Ogawa). Another view posits a more 
convoluted progression of meaning, i.e. 次 with 
associated sense ‘captivating appearance’, giving 
‘a woman’s captivating attitude/demeanor’, then 
changing back to ‘appearance’ (Katō, Yamada). 
TA1965:774-5; OT1968:257-8; YK1976:221; 
KJ1970:468.
Mnemonic: NEXT WOMAN HAS A GOOD FIGURE
SHI, sugata
form, fi gure
9 strokes
姿
L1
888
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 女 37 
‘woman, female’, and 次 308 (‘next’) as phonetic 
with divergent analysis of the associated sense. 
One view takes it as ‘well-ordered, well arranged’, 
OBI ; seal 
. Originally shows arrow shot from 
a bow and come to rest sticking up out of the 

276  The 181 Sixth Grade Characters
視力 SHIRYOKU　eyesight
視覚 SHIKAKU　vision
無視 MUSHI　ignore
was originally 目 76 ‘eye’, and 示 723 (‘show’, 
‘altar’) as phonetic with associated sense ‘stop’, 
giving ‘stop eye movement and watch/keep 
watching’. Yamada gives the OBI form with 目 
‘eye’, yet analyzes – presumably inadvertently 
– as 見 ‘see’. KJ1970:447-8; MS1995:v2:1178-9; 
MR2007:398; YK1976:223. 
Mnemonic: LOOK TO SEE WHAT’S ON SHOW 
AT THE ALTAR
SHI, miru
see, look, regard
11 strokes
視
L1
889
動詞 DŌSHI　verb
歌詞 KASHI　lyrics
詞書 kotobagaki　foreword
‘help, assist’, giving ‘helper word’, i.e. ‘grammati-
cal particle/function word’ (Katō). Tōdō takes as 
‘embellish, add modifi cation’, giving ‘modifying 
word’, while Yamada regards sense as ‘inherit, 
follow’, to give ‘word to use as a link’, i.e. ‘gram-
matical particle/function word’. The specifi c 
senses noted above were later generalized to 
just ‘word’. KJ1970:458; TA1965:78; YK1976:224. 
Mnemonic: PARTS OF SPEECH ARE USED BY 
ADMINISTRATORS
SHI, kotoba
word, part of speech
12 strokes
詞
L3
890
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 言 118 
‘words, speak’, and 司 524 (‘offi  cial’, ‘adminis-
ter’) as phonetic with divergent analyses. One 
commentator takes associated sense of 司 as 
OBI 
; seal 
. The seal form onwards 
has 見 20 ‘see’, but the OBI form shows it 
本誌  HONSHI　this publication
雑誌  ZASSHI　magazine
週刊誌 SHŪKANSHI　a weekly
associated sense ‘make a note, write down’, 
and 言 118 ‘words; speak’, giving ‘record, write 
down’. TA1965:83-5; YK1976:225-6; OT1968:931. 
We suggest taking 志 as 士 521 ‘samurai’ and 心 
164 ‘heart/feelings’.
Mnemonic: JOURNAL RECORDS SAMURAI’S 
WORDS ABOUT FEELINGS
SHI
record, journal
14 strokes
誌
L3
891
Seal 
; fi rst appears in a later version of 
Shuowen. Has 志 718 (‘intend’) as phonetic with 
磁石 JISHAKU　magnet
磁器 JIKI　porcelain
磁力 JIRYOKU　magnetism
that links mother and child. Subsequently, 石 47 
‘stone, rock’ was added to 慈 so as to unambigu-
ously represent the word ‘magnet’, and as a 
further development after that, 心 164 (‘heart, 
mind, feelings’) was omitted, resulting in 磁. 
The associated sense of the right-hand element 
of 磁, which serves as a phonetic, is typically 
(and best) taken as ‘attract’, giving ‘stone which 
attracts’. ‘Porcelain’ is a substitute usage of 磁 in 
place of 瓷 (NJK; ‘porcelain’). Regarding historical 
fl uctuation between 玆 and 茲 as the right-hand 
element, see opening comments on 滋 1416; see 
also Note in 慈 1417. KJ1970:33-5; QX2000:331; 
MS1995:v2:1116; TA1965:111-14; AS2007:633
Mnemonic: ROCK HAS MYSTERIOUS 
MAGNETIC THREADS
JI
magnet, porcelain
14 strokes
磁
L1
892
A late graph (Yupian); the traditional form has 
right-hand 玆 (NJK; original meaning ‘threads 
dyed twice’) or 茲 (NJK; original meaning: 
‘abundant vegetation shoots’). In early China, the 
graph 慈 1417 ‘kind, aff ection’ was borrowed for 
its sound value as a convenient means of writing 
the homophonous/near-homophonous word 
for ‘magnet, magnetic’. According to Qiu, there 
was also a semantic link: the ancients likened the 
way a magnet attracts iron to the bond of caring 

The 181 Sixth Grade Characters  277
注射器 CHŪSHAKI　syringe
射倒す  itaosu　shoot down
射撃場 SHAGEKIJŌ　rifl e range
with 寸 920 ‘measure’, which was originally a 
pictograph of a hand. YK1976:239; OT1968:287; 
MS1995:v2:932-3,1264-5,v1:466-7; KJ1970:581-
2. In terms of historical accuracy it should be 
noted that, while the sword seems to have 
acquired a glamor of sorts, it was nowhere near 
as effi  cient as projectile weapons. Before the 
development of gunpowder-based projectile 
weapons (around the 9th century in China, later 
elsewhere) the bow and arrow were preferred 
overwhelmingly over the sword around the 
world. Even the samurai with their ‘state of 
the art swords’ were killed mostly by arrow, as 
recent archeological fi ndings have indicated.
Mnemonic: HAND SHOOTS MEASURED AR-
ROW INTO BODY
SHA, iru
shoot
10 strokes
射
L1
893
OBI 
; seal 
. OBI and bronze forms show an 
arrow positioned in a bow, ready for shooting, 
in some occurrences with a hand added also, 
giving ‘shoot an arrow’. The seal form, on the 
other hand, has 身 339 ‘body’ instead of a pic-
tographic element for ‘bow’. The change, which 
is diffi  cult to explain satisfactorily, appears to 
be the result of error at the seal form stage. 
The substituted element 身 ‘body’ combines 
喜捨  KISHA　charity
捨て子  sutego　foundling
捨置く  suteoku　leave alone
(‘house’, orig probably ‘breathe lightly’ > ‘place 
to relax’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘let go, release’ > ‘discard, cast aside’; 扌 ‘hand’ 
was added to indicate clearly the mean-
ing ‘abandon’. YK1976:239-40; OT1968:418; 
MS1995:v2:1096-7; QX2000:356; KJ1970:491.
Mnemonic: FIND ABANDONED HAND IN 
ONE’S HOUSE!
SHA, suteru
abandon
11 strokes
捨
L1
894
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); bronze (舍) 
; 
traditional 捨. Has 扌 34 ‘hand’, and 舍 727 
尺度 SHAKUDO　scale, gauge
尺八 SHAKUHACHI　fl ute
尺地 SEKICHI　strip of land
device. Upper part, distorted, represents part 
of arm (Yamada and Katō say elbow). Later 
used as unit of measure, approx 30 cm (larger 
than handspan), and by extension ‘measure’. 
Mizukami lists bronze form. YK1976:240-41; 
OT1968:294; MS1995:v1:406-7; KJ1970:580. 
Suggest ‘topless’ door 戸 120 and prop 乀 .
Mnemonic: MEASURE PROP FOR FOOT OF 
TOPLESS DOOR
SHAKU, SEKI
measure, foot
4 strokes
尺
L1
895
Seal 
. Lower part represents thumb spread 
out from the four fi ngers to make span of a 
hand, which was used as a basic measuring 
若年  JAKUNEN　youth 
若者  wakamono　youth
若しくは moshikuwa　or else
nal pair of raised hands having been changed 
to (misinterpreted as) 艹 53 ‘vegetation’. One 
view takes 若 as 口 ‘speak’, with 
 as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘soft, weak, supple’, giving 
‘speak in compliant/submissive manner’ (Katō, 
Yamada). Another view treats instead as 艹 
‘vegetation’ with 右 2 (‘right’) in its original sense 
‘hand’, giving ‘pick soft young leaves’ (Tōdō). Both 
views are noted by Mizukami. ‘If’ is a loan usage. 
YK1976:242; MS1995:v2:1112-3; OT1968:176; 
KJ1970:676,498.
Mnemonic: PLANTS ON RIGHT ARE YOUNG
JAKU, wakai, moshi
young, if
8 strokes
若
L3
896
OBI (
) 
; seal 
. Views diverge. OBI form 
has just a raised pair of hands, and an element 
taken as dishevelled hair, together interpreted 
as meaning a shamaness dancing while shaking 
her hair wildly. Seal form on has 口 22 ‘mouth, 
speak’ added to 
, which itself refl ects the origi-

278  The 181 Sixth Grade Characters
樹脂 JUSHI　resin
樹立 JURITSU　founding
樹皮 JUHI　bark
be mentioned that OBI forms for 樹 in some 
occurrences have a diff erent graph for ‘hand’ in 
place of 寸, i.e. 又 (modern sense ‘again’ 2003; 
originally ‘hand’, sometimes taken to denote 
‘right hand’), or 力 78 (originally a pictograph 
showing what is probably an arm and hand; 
‘strength, eff ort’). Katō and Mizukami, though, 
treat 樹 diff erently: Katō takes 樹 (including 
the alternative shapes with 寸 replaced by 又 
or 力) as consisting of 木 ‘tree’, with寸/又/力, 
and 豆 as phonetic with associated sense ‘set/
stand upright’, giving ‘plant vegetation by 
hand’. Yamada accounts for the middle-top el-
ement (modern 士) as originally representing 
shoots of vegetation emerging. TA1965:281-4; 
OT1968:525; MS1995:v1:688-9; KJ1970:227-8; 
YK1976:247-8. We suggest taking the central 
elements as 十 35 ‘ten’ and 豆 379 ‘bean ‘. 
Mnemonic: MEASURE TEN BEANS NEXT TO 
STANDING TREE 
JU, ki
tree, stand
16 strokes
樹
L1
897
OBI forms 
, 
; seal 
. OBI forms have 木 
73 ‘tree’, and other elements regarding which 
analyses diff er. Tōdō and Ogawa take as 尌, 
which they interpret as depicting a large drum 
being set up (by hand [寸 920 ‘measure’, origi-
nally pictograph of a hand]) on a stand (see 
also 473), and by extension ‘set upright’ (尌 ap-
pears to be analyzed here as including 豆 379 
[originally, pictograph of a round vessel stand-
ing on a stem; in Tōdō’s word-family ‘stand up-
right’; ‘beans; miniature’]); combining with the 
left-hand element 木, the overall sense is ‘plant 
trees (and by extension other plants)’. It should 
収入 SHŪNYŪ　salary
収益 SHŪEKI　gains
収容 SHŪYŌ　capacity
associated sense taken variously as ‘see/watch 
over’ or ‘draw together’ (both listed by Mizuka-
mi), ‘search exhaustively’  (Yamada), or ‘super-
vise’ (Katō). The overall sense is felt to be ‘search 
for and capture’ (Yamada, Katō, Mizukami); 
Mizukami also lists ‘bring together that which 
is separate/scattered’ as an alternative mean-
ing.MS1995:v1:566-7,12-13; KJ1970:511-12; 
YK1976:248-9; OT1968:154. We suggest taking 
丩 as a pitchfork.
Mnemonic: HAND OBTAINS PITCHFORK 
FROM SUPPLY STORE
SHŪ, osameru/maru
obtain, supply, store
4 strokes
収
L3
898
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
收. Has 又, which here is not 又 2003 ‘again’ 
(originally ‘hand’), but a corruption of 攵 (攴) 
112 ‘hit with stick (or similar); compel’, and 丩 
‘intertwine’ (originally, pictograph of inter-
twined vines, string or similar) as phonetic with 
宗教 SHŪKYŌ　religion
宗家 SŌKE　main family
宗派 SHŪHA　sect
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 宀 30 ‘roof, building’, 
and 示 723 (‘altar’/‘show’), typically taken as 
semantic and phonetic with meaning ‘altar’, 
giving ‘(main) building where a deity is’; by 
extension, ‘religion’. KJ1970:644; YK1976:250; 
MS1995:v1:366-7; OT1968:274.  
Mnemonic: BUILDING WITH ALTAR IS MAIN 
CENTER OF RELIGION
SHŪ, SŌ 
religion, main
8 strokes
宗
L1
899

The 181 Sixth Grade Characters  279
成就   JŌJU　accomplishment
に就いて  nitsuite　regarding, about
就職   SHŪSHOKU　getting a job
one’s place’ (Katō, Yamada), or ‘come together’ 
(Ogawa), in either case taken as meaning ‘live 
on a high hill’. In ancient China the nobility lived 
on elevated ground where possible, and those 
of more humble origin lower down. ‘Proceed 
to/reach’ may be seen as extended senses, 
and ‘get/achieve’ a loan usage. KJ1970:512; 
YK1976:253; MS1995:v1:404-5,402. Suggest 
take 尤 as ‘crippled’ dog (犬 19). 
Mnemonic: TAKE UP ISSUE REGARDING 
CRIPPLED DOGS IN THE CAPITAL 
SHŪ, JU, tsuku
take up, achieve, 
regarding, reach 
12 strokes
就
L1
900
Bronze ; seal 
. Has 京 110 ‘capital’ (orig. 
tall building atop hill or mound), and 尤 NJK 
(‘excel’ )as phonetic with associated sense ‘take 
公衆  KŌSHŪ　public
大衆  TAISHŪ　the masses
合衆国 GASSHŪKOKU　USA
OBI forms 
, 
; bronze 
; seal 
. OBI forms 
have three people (may be taken to mean ‘many 
people’) under an element corresponding in 
shape in some occurrences to 日 66 ‘sun/day’, 
while in others it appears to be 囗 ‘enclosure/
area’ 84. Gu takes the overall meaning as ‘many 
people working under the sun’, while Ogawa 
SHŪ, SHU
multitude, mass
12 strokes
衆
L1
901
takes the top element as ‘area’, and takes the 
graph to mean ‘many people assembled’. Katō 
and Yamada take the top element as ‘eye’, and 
assert that here it means ‘head’, giving ‘many 
people’, but there seems limited basis for the 
‘eye’ interpretation when the OBI forms are 
borne in mind. Despite diversity of analysis, in 
all cases the common core of meaning is ‘many 
people’, the sense then being generalized to 
‘many’. GY2008:298; OT1968:896; KJ1970:510; 
YK1976:254. MS1995:v2:922-3. Suggest taking 
lower half as ‘odd people’, and upper as ‘eye with lash’.
Mnemonic: ODD PEOPLE MASSED UNDER 
WATCHFUL EYE WITH LASH
従業員 JŪGYŌIN　employee
従者  JŪSHA 　follower
従って  shitagatte　accordingly
OBI 
; bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 從. 
OBI stage 彳 131 ‘go, walk’ with 从 (one 
person following another – see 41) giving 
JŪ, shitagau
follow, comply
10 strokes
従
L1
902
‘follow’, changed in bronze to 辶 (辵) 85, also 
meaning ‘go, walk’. Overall sense is ‘follow 
after’, and by extension ‘comply’. YK1976:256; 
MS1995:v1:486-7; OT1968:350; KJ1970:516. 
We suggest taking 彳 as its original mean-
ing, namely a road, and the right-hand side as 
variant of 正 43 ‘correct’ (i.e. here, ‘more or less 
correct’) with 丷 as a variant of 八 70 ‘eight’. 
Mnemonic: COMPLIANTLY FOLLOW EIGHT 
ROADS MORE OR LESS CORRECTLY
縦線  JŪSEN　vertical line
放縦  HŌJŪ　self-indulgence
縦書き  tategaki　vertical script
Seal 
; late graph (post-Shuowen); traditional 
form: 縱. Has 糸 29 ‘thread’, and 從 902 (‘fol-
low’) as phonetic with associated sense either 
i] ‘loosen’, giving ‘loosen something tied with 
JŪ, tate
vertical, selfi sh
16 strokes
縦
L1
903
thread’ (Yamada) or ‘extend vertically’ (Tōdō), 
or ii] ‘stick out’, giving ‘threads which stick out 
vertically’ (Ogawa). Yamada’s interpretation 
results in ‘vertical’ as a loan usage (as also Katō), 
while in other analyses it is a generalized sense. 
The lesser meanings of ‘wayward’, ‘selfi shness’ 
are extensions related to the idea of looseness 
(Katō). YK1976:257; TA1965:301; OT1968:787; 
KJ1985:488.
Mnemonic: THE THREADS TO FOLLOW ARE 
THE VERTICAL ONES

280  The 181 Sixth Grade Characters
縮小   SHUKUSHŌ　reduction
短縮   TANSHUKU　contraction
縮み止め chijimidome　shrinkproof
成熟 SEIJUKU　maturity
半熟 HANJUKU　half-boiled 
熟練 JUKUREN 　mastery
OBI (孰) 
; seal 
. 熟, a graph with a convo-
luted etymology, is a later version of 孰 (an 
NJK graph now meaning ‘who, which, where?’) 
to which 灬 8 ‘fi re’ was added as a determina-
tive for clarity after 孰 itself came to be bor-
rowed as a convenient way of writing another 
word, a homophone/near-homophone in 
early Chinese meaning ‘who?’. For 孰, the OBI 
form has a fi gure working with hands, taken 
by Mizukami as 丮 (CO, OBI form of 丮 shows 
person kneeling with arms held out in front, 
taken to mean ‘person working in kneeling 
posture’), with CO 亯, which looks (OBI) like 
a large lidded cooking pot of some kind, 
meaning 亯 ‘boil, cook’ (taken by Mizukami 
SHUKU,
chijimu/meru
shrink, reduce
17 strokes
JUKU
ripe, mature, cooked
15 strokes
縮
熟
L1
L3
904
905
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 糸 29 
‘thread’, and 宿 327 (‘lodge’) as phonetic with 
associated sense taken as either i] ‘untangle’, 
giving ‘untangle thread’ (Tōdō, Yamada), or ii] 
‘shrink’, giving ‘thread/cloth shrinks’ (Ogawa). In 
analysis i], ‘shrink’ is a loan usage. TA1965:211; 
YK1976:258-9; OT1968:789.
Mnemonic: REDUCED TO THREAD-BARE 
LODGINGS
and Katō as originally pictograph of fortifi ed 
structure/town, but Katō notes actual usage is 
in the sense of ‘boil, cook’), giving ‘make soft 
by cooking’. Bronze forms have these same 
elements, with 女 37 ‘woman’. The seal form 
involves further change: the ‘person’ element 
is clearly ‘person working while kneeling’ (丮), 
combining with 亯 over 羊 426 (‘[well-cooked] 
sheep [as off ering]’). The shape 熟 just begins 
to be seen at clerical script stage (with 丮 
modifi ed to 丸, 亯 over 羊 changed to 享, and 
‘fi re’ determinative added). Note: 亯 is felt by 
several scholars (Katō, Qiu) to be old form of 
享 1218 ‘receive’; note also there is an NJK 
graph 烹 meaning to boil or cook. SK1974:470; 
YK1976:259; MS1995:v1:354-5,12-14,v2:1044-5; 
KJ1970:524-5,281; QX2000:129. Take elements 
as lid 亠 ‘mouth’ 口 22, ‘child’ 子 27, ‘fi re’ 灬 8, 
and ‘round’ 丸 101.
Mnemonic: MATURE CHILD PUTS ROUND LID 
OVER MOUTH OF FIREPIT
純粋 JUNSUI　purity
純毛 JUNMŌ　pure wool 
純益 JUN’EKI 　net profi t
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 糸 29 ‘thread’, and 屯 
1806 (originally vegetation shoots thrusting 
up from the ground, now means army camp) 
as phonetic with associated sense taken as i] 
JUN
pure
10 strokes
純
L3
906
‘excellent’, giving ‘beautiful impurity-free raw 
silk’ (Yamada, Katō), or ii] ‘thick; impurity-free’, 
giving ‘(silk) cloth with tufted edges hanging 
down heavily’ (the tufts were white, and hence 
the extended sense ‘color without impuri-
ties’); interpretations i] and ii] are both given 
by Mizukami also. YK1976:262; KJ1970:528; 
MS1995:v2:1006-7,v1:414-5. Suggest taking 屯
as thin variant of ‘hair’ 毛 230.
Mnemonic: PURE THREADS SEEM LIKE THIN 
HAIR

The 181 Sixth Grade Characters  281
処理 SHORI　management
処置 SHOCHI　measures 
処々 
SHOSHO　here and there
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 處. Interpreta-
tions vary. One view takes 処 as ‘sit on stool, 
rest’ (几’stool, rest’, with 夂 [‘descending foot’, 
see Appendix] as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘sit’), with 虍 (originally, pictograph of ti-
ger head: see 297 and 1301) as additional pho-
netic with associated sense ‘sit’ (Yamada). Gu, al-
ternatively, takes 虍 as here meaning ‘(wearing) 
tiger-skin cap’. Mizukami’s treatment includes 
i] a possible OBI equivalent interpreted as a 
foot going inside, giving ‘go inside and rest’; ii] 
bronze forms taken as a person leaning against 
a rest, with 虍 ‘as semantic’ (sic), but appears to 
be in error for ‘as phonetic’; iii] a seal form com-
prising 夂 ‘foot’, with 几 ‘stool, rest’; Mizukami 
SHO
deal with, place
5 strokes
処
L3
907
regards ‘be’ and ‘place’ as extended meanings. 
Both Mizukami and Katō treat 處, 処, and a 
third form 凥 (Mizukami interprets the latter 
as ‘sit on stool’ or ‘lean against armrest’, and as 
comprising 尸 256 [normally ‘person lying’ or 
‘squatting’ or ‘corpse’] here as a variant shape 
for ‘person’, with 几 ‘rest, stool’) all as alternative 
forms of the same graph. Ogawa alone consid-
ers 処 to be the original way of writing 處, but 
Katō suggests the more complex forms may 
be earlier (except for Mizukami’s proposed OBI 
equivalent noted above). It is unclear as to how 
the present meanings came about, though in 
one view sitting down in a given place might 
perhaps indicate sitting in judgment to deal 
with a situation. YK1976:263-4; GY2008:184; 
MS1995:v1:118-20,v1:414-5; KJ1970:533-4; 
OT1968:107. We suggest taking the graph as 
sitting cross-legged on a stool.
Mnemonic: SIT CROSS-LEGGED ON STOOL TO 
DEAL WITH THE SITUATION
署名  SHOMEI　signature
署員  SHOIN　offi  cial (person) 
警察署 KEISATSUSHO　police station
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 罒 (网) 570 
‘net’, and 者 314 (‘person’) as phonetic with 
SHO
govt offi  ce, sign
13 strokes
署
L3
908
associated sense ‘set up, place’, giving ‘set up a 
net to catch birds and animals’. To catch these, 
there were beaters or assistants, each with their 
own role, and so by extension ‘role’, ‘post of 
duty’, and by further extension ‘government of-
fi ce’. ‘Sign, record’ are regarded as loan usages. 
YK1976:265; KJ1970: 496; OT1968:796.
Mnemonic: PERSON IS NETTED AND SIGNS 
UP FOR GOVERNMENT OFFICE
諸島 SHOTŌ　archipelago
諸君 SHOKUN　everyone
諸手 morote　both hands
SHO, moro 
various, many
15 strokes
諸
L3
909
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 言 118 
‘words; speak’, and 者 314 (originally, fi rewood 
piled up in container; ‘person’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘many, numerous’, giving 
‘many words, eloquent’. Later generalized to 
‘many’ and by extension ‘various’. Mizukami lists 
bronze forms, all of which lack 言. YK1976:266; 
KJ1970:495-6; OT1968:934; MS1995:v2:1206-7.  
Mnemonic: PERSON’S WORDS ARE MANY 
AND VARIED

282  The 181 Sixth Grade Characters
除去 JOKYO　removal
免除 MENJO　exemption
掃除 SŌJI　cleaning
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 阝(阜) 1907 
‘hill, terraced slope, steps’, and 余 820 (‘excess’) 
JO, JI, nozoku
exclude, remove
10 strokes
除
L3
910
as phonetic, taken as with associated sense 
either i] ‘order, arrange’, giving ‘well-arranged 
earthen steps’ (Katō, Yamada), or ii] ‘build-
ing’, taken on basis of Shuowen to give ‘palace 
steps’ (Gu, Tōdō). YK1976:267-8; KJ1970:883; 
GY2008:962; TA1965:339.
Mnemonic: SURPLUS TERRACES HAVE TO BE 
REMOVED, EXCLUDING NONE
将来 SHŌRAI　future
将軍 SHŌGUN　generalissimo
将に 
masa ni　about to
to 寸 920 (‘hand’, ‘unit of measure’), with little if 
any change of overall meaning, which is ‘off er 
up meat’. ‘Lead, command’ is considered to be 
either a loan usage (Katō, Yamada), or an ex-
tended sense based on the person making the 
off ering being someone of status, hence ‘lead; 
leader’. Also used in early Chinese as a con-
venient loan for a grammatical function word 
meaning ‘be about to’, then also in Japanese. 
YK1976:271; KJ1970:582; AS2007:306. Suggest 
taking 丬as a table on its edge, and ⺤ as reach-
ing hand. 
Mnemonic: TWO HANDS ABOUT TO PUT 
TABLE ON EDGE, UNDER COMMAND
SHŌ, masa
command, 
about to
10 strokes
将
L3
911
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 將. Bronze forms 
show one or two hands, with 月 (肉) 209 ‘meat, 
fl esh’, with 爿 (originally, pictograph of a bed 
– see 739) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘raise up’, giving ‘off er up meat’. Seal form has as 
above, but the ‘hand’ component is equivalent 
死傷者  SHISHŌSHA　casualties
傷害   SHŌGAI　injury
傷付ける  kizutsukeru　to wound
as phonetic with associated sense ‘wound, 
injure’, giving ‘person suff ers wound’, then gen-
eralized to ‘wound, injure’. Gu follows Shuowen 
in regarding  as an abbreviation for  with 矢 
145 ‘arrow’ as left-hand determinative, mean-
ing ‘arrow wound’. OT1968:78 YK1976:276; 
KJ1970:542-3; GY2008:283. Take both 亻 and 𠂉 
as persons.
Mnemonic: WOUNDED PERSONS EXPOSED 
TO RAYS OF RISING SUN
SHŌ, kizu, itami/mu/
meru
wound, hurt
13 strokes
傷
L1
912
Seal ; late graph (Shuowen). Has 亻 41’person’, 
and  (seemingly a variant of 昜 161 ‘sun rises’) 
障害   SHŌGAI　impediment
障子   SHŌJI　shoji screen
差し障る  sashisawaru　hinder
either ‘prevent and support’ (Yamada) or ‘put up 
against’ (Tōdō), giving ‘mound/hill to prevent/
separate’, or ‘fence (to separate)’ (Ogawa), giving 
‘prevent with a surrounding hedge’. Schuessler 
gives the meaning as ‘dike, dam up’. All the 
above interpretations give ‘prevent, hinder’ as 
a generalized sense. YK1976:276; OT1968:1074; 
TA1965:352; AS2007:607. 
Mnemonic: WRITE CHAPTER ABOUT HILL AS 
BEING A HINDRANCE
SHŌ, sawaru
hinder, block 
14 strokes
障
L1
913
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 阝 1907 ‘hill, 
terraced slope’, and 章 334 (‘badge, chapter’) 
as phonetic with associated sense taken as 

The 181 Sixth Grade Characters  283
城下町 JŌKAmachi　castle-town
姫路城 HimejiJŌ　Himeji Castle
城跡  shiroato　castle ruins
‘pile up’, to give a structure built by succes-
sively piling up earth, i.e. ‘wall, city wall’ (Katō, 
Yamada). Mizukami lists several alternative (but 
similar) interpretations of 成, i.e. the associated 
sense as ‘gather together in one place’, giv-
ing ‘pile up earth and gather citizenry in one 
place’, and ‘pound and make fi rm’, giving ‘place 
built by pounding earth’; used in Japanese 
to mean ‘castle’. YK1976:279; KJ1970:595-6; 
MS1995:v1:270-71.
Mnemonic: CASTLE CONSISTS OF EARTH!
JŌ, shiro
castle 
9 strokes
城
L3
914
Bronze forms 
, 
; seal 
. Bronze forms 
vary, but some already have the structure 土 
‘earth, ground’ 64, with 成 545 (‘become, make, 
consist’) as phonetic with associated sense 
蒸気   JŌKI　steam
蒸留   JŌRYŪ　distillation
蒸し暑い  mushiatsui　humid
while Mizukami, in his entry for 烝 (the pre-
decessor of 蒸), treats ‘steam’ as an extended 
sense based on steaming that which is above 
a fi re. Note: 烝 comprises 灬 8 ‘fi re, fl ames’, 
with 丞 [originally, ‘help someone up out of 
a pit’ > ‘help, assist’] as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘raise up high’, giving ‘fl ames rise 
up’. YK1976:281; GY2008:1554; MS1995:v2:798-
9,v1:10-11; AS2007:612. Suggest take 丞 as 一 
hot plate and 氶 as a combination of ‘water’ 水 
42 and armless baby 子 > 了, to give ‘armless 
water-baby’ (!)
Mnemonic: GRASS-COVERED ARMLESS 
WATER-BABY STEAMS ON FIERY HOTPLATE
JŌ, musu/reru
steam 
13 strokes
蒸
L3
915
Late graph (Shuowen). Comprises 艹 53 ‘plants, 
grass’, with 烝 (CO, ‘fl ames rise up’; see Note 
below) as semantic and phonetic, meaning 
‘burn’, to give ‘hemp stalks’. Hemp stalks were 
what remained after the hemp fi bre was 
removed, and were used as a fuel; Schuessler 
says ‘brushwood (as fi rewood)’. By extension, 
‘burn’. Yamada treats ‘steam’ as a loan usage, 
方針 HŌSHIN　policy, line
針路 SHINRO　course
針金 harigane　wire
Seal 
; late graph (post-Shuowen). Has 金 
16 ‘metal’, and 十 35 ‘ten’ as semantic and 
phonetic, meaning ‘needle’ > ‘metal needle’. 
YK1976:288; OT1968:1036; MS1995:v1:164-5. 
Mnemonic: TEN METAL NEEDLES POINTING 
THE WAY
SHIN, hari
needle, pointer
10 strokes
針
L3
916
仁愛 JIN’AI　benevolence
仁者 JINSHA　a humanitarian
仁王 NIŌ　Deva king
as extended sense based on ‘person with load’. 
Mizukami extends range of 二 to encompass 
‘carry; be pregnant’, overall meaning ‘be preg-
nant, carry a load’. Ogawa, by contrast, takes 
二 as having associated sense ‘be kind to, love’. 
Schuessler gives the sense ‘act like a human 
being’, which he considers a later meaning.
YK1976:291-2; MS1995:v1:42-3; KJ1970:39-40; 
OT1968:43; AS2007:440.
Mnemonic: TWO PEOPLE SHOWING 
HUMANITY 
JIN, NI
benevolent, humanity
4 strokes
仁
L1
917
OBI 
; seal 
. Views vary. Has 亻 41 ‘person’ 
(Yamada takes as ‘hunchback’, based on certain 
old forms), with 二 65 (‘two’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘baggage, load’, thus 
‘person with baggage’; Katō takes ‘hunchback’ 

284  The 181 Sixth Grade Characters
垂直   SUICHOKU　verticality
雨垂れ  amadare　raindrops
垂れ飾り  tarekazari　pendant
semantic progression ‘far end (of a place)’ > 
‘border, frontier’. Mizukami takes as ‘ends of the 
earth, where the sky hangs down’, a meaning 
perhaps related to ancient Chinese concepts 
of the Earth. ‘Hang down’ is a generalized 
sense. MS1995:v1:266-7,22-4; YK1976:293; 
ZY2009:v1:8; KJ1970:577; AS2007:196-7. Sug-
gest remembering graph by likening it to ‘ride’ 
乗 336 (from which distinguish), with 土 and 
minus lower strokes. 
Mnemonic: LOOKS LIKE RIDING ON TOP BUT 
HANGING DOWN TO THE GROUND 
SUI, tareru/rasu
suspend, hang 
8 strokes 
垂
L1
918
Seal 
. Has 土 64 ‘earth, ground’, and 
 𠂹
(originally pictograph of blossoms and leaves 
hanging down; Kangxi zidian quotes Yupian, 
which treats as an old form of 垂) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘hang down’, giving ‘land 
in remote regions’. Schuessler suggests the 
推理  SUIRI　reasoning
推薦者 SUISENSHA　referee
推進機 SUISHINKI　propeller
phonetic with associated sense ‘push away’, 
giving ‘push away with the hand’. Katō regards 
‘guess, infer’ as a loan usage, but Schuessler 
says ‘push away, push, extend’, and on the basis 
of the latter ‘guess, infer’ could alternatively be 
considered an extended sense. YK1976:293; 
KJ1970:664; OT1968:419; AS2007:502. 
Mnemonic: PUSH BIRD WITH HAND
SUI, osu
infer, push
11 strokes
推
L1
919
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 扌 34 ‘hand’, 
and 隹 324 (originally, pictograph of bird) as 
寸法 SUNPŌ　measure, plan
一寸 ISSUN　one inch
寸分 SUNBUN　a little
stroke is typically taken as signifying one unit 
of measure (i.e. one ‘sun’) back from the wrist, 
giving ‘wrist pulse’ and by extension ‘measure’ 
(Yamada, Ogawa). Schuessler gives the mean-
ings as ‘thumb; inch’, and lists ‘measure’ as a loan 
writing for a near-homophone of that mean-
ing. YK1976:294-5; OT1968:285; KJ1970:579; 
AS2007:200.
Mnemonic:  PULSE MEASURED AS ONE INCH 
FROM HAND
SUN
measure, inch
3 strokes
寸
L1
920
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Analyses vary. 
Seal form shows a pictograph for hand, to-
gether with horizontal stroke underneath. This 
全盛期  ZENSEIKI　‘golden age’
大盛り   ōmori　big helping
燃え盛る  moesakaru　fl are up
SEI, JŌ, moru, sakaru/n 
prosper, heap, serve
11 strokes
盛
L1
921
Bronze 
; Seal 
. Has 皿 300 ‘food vessel, 
bowl, dish’, and 成 545 (‘become, make, con-
sist’) as phonetic with associated sense ‘pile up’, 
giving ‘pile up food in vessel (as an off ering)’. 
Later generalised to ‘pile up’, and extended in 
meaning to ‘prosper’. KJ1970:595; OT1968:691; 
TA1965:474.  
Mnemonic: SERVE HEAPED DISHES WHEN 
ONE BECOMES PROSPEROUS

The 181 Sixth Grade Characters  285
聖書 SEISHO　bible
聖人 SEIJIN 　saint
神聖 SHINSEI　sanctity
誠意 SEII　sincerity
誠実 SEIJITSU 　honesty
誠に 
makoto ni　truly
OBI 
; bronze 
; traditional 
. Has 耳 31 
‘ear’, and 口 22 ‘mouth, opening’, with – in 
the traditional form – 
 (originally person 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 言 118 
‘words, speak’, and 成 545 (‘become, make, con-
sist’) as phonetic with associated sense taken 
as i] ‘lie on top of one another in layers, pile up’, 
SEI, hijiri
saint, sage, sacred
13 strokes
SEI, makoto
sincerity
13 strokes
聖
誠
L1
L1
922
923
standing tall on the ground) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘pass through’ or ‘hear’, giving 
‘ear cavity is open and able to hear voices of 
the deities not audible to ordinary people’; by 
extension, ‘a sage’, ‘wise’. In the modern graph 
聖, 
 has been regularized in shape to 
 5 
‘king’. YK1976:304; MS1995:v2:1058-9,v1:262-3; 
KJ1970:599-600. Suggest taking 口 as ‘hole’.
Mnemonic: SAINTLY KING’S EAR-HOLE IS 
SACRED
and then presumed to mean ‘words and heart 
coincide’ (Katō, Yamada), or ii] ‘bring together’, 
giving ‘words come together’, taken as ‘words 
and conduct coincide’ (Tōdō), or iii] ‘strictly ob-
serve’, giving ‘strictly observe what one says and 
not diverge from it’ (Ogawa ). These interpreta-
tions appear to be based on a short entry for 
誠 in Shuowen. YK1976:304-5; KJ1970:211-12; 
OT1968:929; TA1965:470-74.
Mnemonic: WORDS BECOME SINCERE
宣伝  SENDEN　propaganda
宣告  SENKOKU　verdict
宣教師 SENKYŌSHI　missionary
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 宀 30 ‘roof, building’, and 
亘 (a graphic symbol originally used to denote 
‘go round, revolve’; Yamada says ‘whirlpool’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘surround; 
round’, to give ‘house/building with surround-
SEN
promulgate, state
9 strokes
宣
L1
924
ing fence/wall’. In ancient China, it was normal 
for houses to have an encircling wall, and so 
the emphasis on encircling wall in this graph 
is considered to denote a building to confi ne 
people within, i.e. a prison. ‘State, mention’ 
is a loan usage. YK1976:315-6; OT1968:277; 
MS1995:v1:370-71,30-31; KJ1970:401; 
QX2000:238. Suggest taking lower part as ‘two’ 
二 65 and ‘days’ 日 66. 
Mnemonic: STATE THAT ROOF WILL BE 
FINISHED IN TWO DAYS
専門 SENMON　specialty
専用 SEN’YŌ　exclusive use
専制 SENSEI　despotism
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional 專. Has 叀 ‘spool, 
bobbin, top for spinning’ (CO; originally a 
pictograph), and 又 2003 ‘hand’ (changed to 寸
920 ‘hand; measure’ in seal form), and usually 
SEN, moppa(ra)
exclusive, sole
9 strokes
専
L3
925
taken as a child holding a spool-shaped toy 
in the hand (Mizukami, Yamada, Katō). This 
interpretation lends itself to ‘keep (something) 
for oneself, monopolise’ as an extended mean-
ing. Ogawa takes it in a slightly diff erent sense, 
meaning ‘wind thread on a spool’. YK1976:316; 
MS1995:v1:396-7; KJ1970:629; OT1968:286. We 
suggest taking the upper part as ‘ten’ 十 35, 
‘fi elds’ 田 63, with 寸 920 as ‘measure’. 
Mnemonic: EXCLUSIVE SOLE POSSESSION OF 
TEN FIELDS

286  The 181 Sixth Grade Characters
温泉 ONSEN　hot springs
泉水 SENSUI　fountain
源泉 GENSEN　source
洗礼  SENREI　baptism
洗濯  SENTAKU　(the) washing
手洗い tearai　toilet, washroom
SEN, izumi
spring, source
9 strokes
SEN, arau
wash
9 strokes
泉
洗
L3
L4
926
927
OBI 
; seal 
. Originally, a pictograph 
depicting water coming out of a cave or from 
between rocks; in other words, ‘a spring’. 
YK1976:318; MS1995:v2:742-3; KJ1970:631; 
QX2000:175. Suggest taking upper part as 白 
69 ‘white’ and lower as 水 42 ‘water’. 
Mnemonic: SPRING PRODUCES WHITE WATER
Seal 
. Has 氵 42 ‘water’, and 先 51 (‘tip’, 
‘point’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘barefoot’, giving ‘pour water on bare feet’; 
Yamada regards ‘wash’ as a loan usage, but it 
seems more appropriate to take it as a general-
ized sense based on a more specifi c original 
meaning. YK1976:317; MS1995:v2:748-50; 
KJ1970:627-8.
Mnemonic: WASH TIP IN WATER
染色  SENSHOKU　dyeing
染物  somemono　dyed goods
染込む shimikomu　soak into
SEN, someru/maru, 
shimiru
dye, soak
9 strokes
染
L1
928
this analysis, ‘dye (fabrics)’ is seen as extended 
sense through using a similar process, hanging 
cloth in a dye solution (Katō, Yamada). Tōdō 
analyzes as 氵 ‘water’ with 杂, as variant form 
of 簋, a CO denoting square container with a 
round inside, used to hold dye solution. Ogawa 
takes as 木 73 ‘tree’, with CO 氿 ‘oozing liquid’ > 
‘dye from vegetation’. YK1976:317; OT1968:575; 
TA1965:840-41; KJ1970:628-9. Suggest take 
elements as 氵 42 ‘water’, 木 73 ‘tree’, and 九 13 
‘nine’. 
Mnemonic: SOAK NINE TREES IN WATER TO 
GET DYE 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Views vary. 
One takes as 氵 42 ‘water, liquid’, and 朵 (CO, 
vegetation or blossoms hanging on tree) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘dangle in salty 
medium’, giving ‘soak (meat) in salty solution’; in 
善意  ZEN’I　good faith
親善  SHINZEN　friendship
善後策 ZENGOSAKU　remedy
ZEN, yoi
good, virtuous
12 strokes
善
L3
929
‘a good argument/dialog’. Sometimes in seal 
written with 口 22 ‘mouth; speak’ instead of 誩, 
then in the clerical script 口became stand-
ard. Later, the meaning of 善 was general-
ized to ‘good’ by dropping ‘argument/dialog’.
YK1976:322; MS1995:v2:1212-3; KJ1970:634-5; 
SK1984:157-8. Suggest take as ‘sheep’ 羊 426, 
‘one’ 一 1, ‘small’ 小 38, and ‘mouth’ 口 22 .
Mnemonic: VIRTUOUS SHEEP HAS ONE 
SMALL BUT GOOD MOUTH
Bronze 
. Bronze and Shuowen seal forms have 
誩 487 ‘argue’, and 羊 426 (‘sheep’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘good, splendid’, giving 

The 181 Sixth Grade Characters  287
伴奏  BANSŌ　accompaniment
奏楽堂 SŌGAKUDŌ　concert hall
奏上  SŌJŌ　report to ruler
SŌ, kanaderu
play instrument, 
report to ruler
9 strokes
奏
L1
930
mal, cut open and off ered as a sacrifi ce to the 
gods (Katō, Yamada, Mizukami), while others 
see it as an off ering in the form of luxuriant veg-
etation (Ogawa) or grains (Gu) – perhaps the 
more likely. ‘Report to ruler’ is probably extend-
ed meaning, and ‘play instrument’ borrowed. 
YK1976:325-6; KJ1970:777; MS1995:v1:302-4; 
GY2008:171; OT1968:249. Suggest lower part as 
‘heaven’ 天 62 and ‘two’ 二 65 ‘big men’ 大 56.
Mnemonic: TWO BIG MEN PLAY HEAVENLY 
MUSIC TO RULER
OBI ; seal . In some cases OBI through to seal 
forms have two hands as an element. The other 
element is open to interpretation, some taking 
it as representing a bleached skeleton of an ani-
窓口  madoguchi　(clerk’s) window
出窓  demado　bay/bow window
同窓生 DŌSŌSEI　fellow pupil
創造  SŌZŌ　imagination
創立者 SŌRITSUSHA　founder
銃創  JŪSŌ　bullet wound
Seal forms 
, ; late graph (Shuowen). Origi-
nally pictograph of simple shape depicting a 
lattice window; later, 穴 860 ‘hole, cave’ was 
Bronze  (刅 [original graph later modifi ed to 
創]); seal forms 
, . Original graph has 刀/
刂198 ‘knife, sword, cut’, with ハ, a shape here 
considered to be an abbreviation or error for 
SŌ, mado
window
11 strokes
SŌ, hajimeru
start, wound
12 strokes
窓
創
L3
L1
931
932
added as a reinforcing determinative, resulting 
in 窗. The seal form in Shuowen is equivalent 
to 窻, which has 心 164 ‘heart, feeling’ added, 
but there is no satisfactory explanation of the 
role of 心 as yet. YK1976:328; OT1968:742; 
MS1995:v2:976-7; KJ1970:586. Suggest taking 
as ‘hole’ 穴, ‘feeling’ 心, and ‘nose’ ム .
Mnemonic: FEELING NOSEY ABOUT HOLE IN 
WINDOW
a four-stroke criss-cross shape element (felt 
to represent window lattice) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘wound, injure’, giving ‘wound 
with knife’; later, the element ハ was replaced 
by 倉 559 (warehouse) as phonetic, with 
same associated sense. ‘Start’ is a borrowed 
meaning. MS1995:v1:122-3; YK1976:328-9; 
KJ1970:592,588-9.
Mnemonic: THE WOUND STARTED WITH A 
KNIFE-CUT IN THE WAREHOUSE
装置 SŌCHI　device
衣装 ISHŌ　clothing
変装 HENSŌ　disguise
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 裝. 
Has 衣 444 ‘clothing’, and 壮/壯1628 (‘manly, 
strong’) as phonetic with associated sense 
SŌ, SHŌ, yosoou
wear, clothing,
equipment, adorn
12 strokes
装
L3
933
taken as either i] ‘wrap clothing away’, giving 
‘put away, prepare’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘long and 
slender/narrow’, giving ‘wear a long garment’ 
(Tōdō). The association with clothing appears 
to have given rise to the extended sense ‘gear/
equipment’. ‘Adorn’ is a loan usage. OT1968:904; 
TA1965:378-80; DJ2009:v2:682. Suggest taking 
the components of 壮, i.e. ‘bed’ 丬 739 and 
‘samurai’ 士 521. 
Mnemonic: SAMURAI WEARS MANLY 
CLOTHING AND EQUIPMENT IN BED

288  The 181 Sixth Grade Characters
下層   KASŌ　lower classes
層雲   SŌUN　stratus cloud
高層ビル  KŌSŌBIRU　skyscraper
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Traditional form 
has 曾 as lower element. Has 尸, here not its 
usual ‘corpse, prone person’, but as abbreviation 
of 屋 meaning ‘roof, building’ (see 屋 256), and 
SŌ
stratum, layer
14 strokes
層
L3
934
曾 93 (orig. pictograph of double steamer) as 
semantic and phonetic, meaning ‘be piled up’, 
giving ‘building of two (or more) storeys’; later, 
sense was generalized to ‘pile up; layer’. Ogawa 
sees 尸 as an error for the diff erent element 广 
‘building’ (e.g. 127). YK1976:329; KJ1970:320; 
OT1968:299. Suggest 尸 as ‘corpse’ 256, 丷 as 
variant of ‘eight’ 八 70, ‘fi eld’ 田 63, and ‘day’ 日 
66. 
Mnemonic: LAYERS OF CORPSES PILE UP IN 
FIELD OVER EIGHT DAYS
操縦士  SŌJŪSHI　pilot
節操   SESSŌ　integrity
操り人形  ayatsuriNINGYŌ　puppet
蔵書 ZŌSHO　one’s library
蔵匿 ZŌTOKU　harboring
酒蔵 sakagura　wine-cellar
Late graph. Has 扌34 ‘hand’, and 
 (CO, mouths 
on top of tree in 
 are taken as birds’ mouths, 
representing birds chirping or singing noisily, 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
藏. Has 艹 53 ‘plants’, and 臧 (interpreted 
in one view as ‘slave punished’, comprising 
‘slave’ 臣 543 with 戕 ‘wound’) as phonetic 
SŌ, misao, ayatsuru
handle, chastity
16 strokes
ZŌ, kura
store(house),
hide, keep, harbor
15 strokes
操
蔵
L3
L3
935
936
hence an early meaning ‘noisy’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘hold fi rmly’ > overall 
meaning ‘hold fi rmly’. By extension in fi gura-
tive sense, ‘maintain intention and not change 
conduct’, i.e. ‘chastity’, as well as ‘handle/control’. 
YK1976:330; KJ1970:435. Take 
 as three boxes 
品 405 and 木 73 ‘wood’. 
Mnemonic: THREE WOODEN BOXES TAKE 
SOME HANDLING
with associated. sense taken as i] ‘cover over 
to avoid people’s gaze’ (Katō, Yamada), or 
ii] ‘put away’ (Ogawa), in either case giving 
‘cover/hide under plants’, and by extension 
‘store away; storehouse’. Qiu, though, consid-
ers 藏 originally denoted a type of plant, and 
treats ‘store away’ as a loan use. KJ1970:434; 
OT1968:871; YK1976:332-3; QX2000:341-2; 
MS1995:v2:1084-6. Take 臣 as ‘slave’ 543 and 戊 
as ‘halberd’ 545.
Mnemonic: HIDE SLAVE WITH HALBERD 
UNDER PLANTS IN STOREHOUSE 
臓器  ZŌKI　intestines
内臓  NAIZŌ　viscera
心臓学 SHINZŌGAKU　cardiology
ZŌ, harawata
entrails, viscera
19 strokes
臓
L3
937
Late graph (late edition of Shuowen); traditional 
臟. Has 月/肉 209 ‘fl esh, body’, and 藏 936 
(’store’) as semantic and phonetic, meaning 
‘store’, thus ‘body components stored away’, i.e. 
‘internal organs, viscera, entrails’. YK1976:333; 
OT1968:829; QX2000:342. 
Mnemonic: ENTRAILS ARE STORED IN THE 
BODY

The 181 Sixth Grade Characters  289
生存者 SEIZONSHA　survivor
存在  SONZAI　existence
存じる  ZONjiru　know, think
SON, ZON
exist, know, think
6 strokes
存
L3
938
senses ‘not move’ > ‘stay, exist’. Ogawa treats 
 
as ‘exist’ and 子 as abbreviation of 孫 565 (‘de-
scendants’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘put in order’ extending to ‘exist, be’, but is unper-
suasive. It is felt there is a link between 存 and 
在 both as graphs and words in early Chinese, 
but uncertainty over the etymology of the graph 
在 hampers our understanding of that for 存. 
‘Know, think’ seem to be extended or borrowed 
meanings. Suggest taking elements as hand 
holding stick 
, with 子 27 ‘child’. YK1976:338; 
KJ1970:421; OT1968:266; AS2007:200. 
Mnemonic: THINKING CHILD WITH STICK IN 
HAND KNOWS HE EXISTS
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 
 (see 在
711), taken with possible meaning ‘blocked 
river’ or ‘be/ exist’ (its precursor quite likely 才
139 [now meaning ‘talent’ q.v.]), and 子 27 ‘child’, 
widely taken as phonetic with associated sense 
‘piled high’, thus ‘river blocked with piled soil’ 
(Katō, Yamada). Yamada also proposes extended 
尊重  SONCHŌ　respect
尊大な  SONDAI na　arrogant
尊厳  SONGEN　dignity
自宅 
JITAKU　one’s own home
宅地 TAKUCHI　housing-land
お宅 oTAKU　your home, you
SON, tattoi/bu, tōtoi
value, respect
12 strokes
TAKU
house, home
6 strokes
尊
宅
L3
L3
939
940
The two hands became stylised to 廾, then com-
monly changed to a one-hand representation 
寸 920. Original meaning is felt to be ‘off er wine’ 
– Ma says ‘respectfully off er’ – then by exten-
sion the wine jars. Ogawa takes ‘respect’ as an 
extended sense based on off ering to the deities, 
but Katō feels it is loan usage. See also 酒 318 
sake. YK1976:339-40; KJ1970:652; MR2007:523; 
OT1968:289.
Mnemonic: HAND HOLDS VALUED 
WINE-BOTTLE WITH FANCY STOPPER
ing above ground, with root below) as phonetic 
with assoc. sense ‘open’ > ‘open up a dwell-
ing’ – in ancient China caves were often used 
as dwellings. ‘Root’ may also indicate a base. 
YK1976:349; KJ1970:674-5; MS1995:v1:362-3. 
Take 乇 as 七 ‘seven’ 32 with ‘top’.
Mnemonic: SEVEN ROOMED HOUSE WITH 
ROOF ON TOP
OBI ; seal 
; traditional 尊. OBI, bronze, and 
seal forms show two hands off ering wine jar to 
the deities; the jar has stopper / lid, shown in tra-
ditional form by the top two downward strokes. 
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 宀 30 ‘roof, building’, with 
乇 (orig. pictograph of sprouting plant emerg-
担当  TANTŌ　responsibility
担い手 ninaite　bearer
負担  FUTAN　burden
determinative was changed from 亻 ’person’ to
扌 34 ‘hand’, giving 擔, which can be seen as a 
variant form: the authoritative Kangxi zidian of 
1716 lists 擔 as ‘the same as 儋’. The modern form 
担, which is treated as the abbreviated version 
of 擔, is originally a graph of diff erent meaning 
(‘strike, hit’) pressed into service as a substitute 
for the more complicated graph. YK1976:350; 
KJ1970:250; OT1968:408; ZY2009:v2:436,395. 
Suggest take right-hand part as ‘one’ 一 1 ‘day’ 日 66. 
Mnemonic: CARRY BURDEN IN HAND FOR 
ONE WHOLE DAY
TAN, katsugu, ninau
carry, bear
8 strokes
担
L3
941
Seal (orig 儋) ; late graph (Shuowen). Tradi-
tional form of 担 is 擔. Scholars agree that the 
original form of 擔 is 儋, i.e. 亻 41 ‘person’, with 
詹 as phonetic with associated sense ‘carry on 
the back’. In a later seal version, the left-hand 

290  The 181 Sixth Grade Characters
探知   TANCHI　detection
探究   TANKYŪ　investigation
探り出す  saguridasu　search out
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 扌 34 
‘hand’, and what is interpreted as CO 
 (Kato, 
Yamada) or CO 
 (Ogawa), as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘put hand in, search’, giving 
‘look for’. YK1976:351; KJ1970:679; OT1968:420; 
TA1968:789-92. Suggest ‘tree’ 木 73 and variant 
of ‘hole’ 穴 860. 
Mnemonic: HAND PROBES HOLE IN TREE
TAN, saguru, sagasu
search, probe
11 strokes
探
L3
942
誕生日  TANJŌBI　birthday 
降誕  KŌTAN　nativity
虚誕  KYOTAN　falsehood
‘extend’, giving ‘words extend out/are excessive’, 
deceit’. While this is the original meaning, the 
graph occurs more commonly in early usage 
as a loan for ‘give birth’, according to Tōdō, 
but Schuessler does not list ‘give birth’ among 
the early Chinese meanings. OT1968:935; 
TA1965:534-5; AS2007:553-4.
Mnemonic: USE STRETCHED WORDS TO 
DECEIVE ABOUT A BIRTH
TAN
birth, deceive 
15 strokes
誕
L3
943
Seal: 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 言 118 
‘words; speak’, and 延 831 (’extend, stretch, 
postpone’) as semantic and phonetic, meaning 
段階 DANKAI　step, grade
階段 KAIDAN　stairs 
段々 
DANDAN　gradually
‘tip, extremity’ [< growing tip of plant]) as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘hit, strike (down-
wards)’, giving ‘hit (something) downwards’. 
Meanings such as ‘division, step’ represent 
loan usage. Note: bronze occurrences of 耑 
include the element corresponding in shape 
to . YK1976:353; MS1995:v1:714-5,v2:1054-5; 
OT1968:545,807; KJ1970:686. Suggest taking  
as steps cut in a cliff -face. 
Mnemonic: STRIKE CLIFF-FACE TO MAKE STEPS
DAN
step, grade 
9 strokes
段
L3
944
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 殳 170 ‘hit/strike with 
weapon’ (Katō follows Shuowen here and says 
‘whip of bundled bamboo’, while Ogawa says 
‘hit with club’), and  as abbreviation of 耑 (CO, 
暖房 DANBŌ　heater
暖流 DANRYŪ　warm current
暖冬 DANTŌ　mild winter
Initially the determinative for this graph was 火 
8 ‘fi re, fl ames’, but later a variant evolved with 日 
66 ‘sun’; 火/日 combined with 爰 as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘warm’. 煖 gives ‘warmth 
of a fi re’, and 暖 gives ‘warmth of the sun’; over 
time, the latter became the standard form. 
YK1976:354; KJ1970:685-6; OT1968:473,631. 
Suggest taking the right-side part as three 
hands (in a variety of forms)
Mnemonic: THREE HANDS WARMING IN THE SUN
DAN, atatakai/meru
warm 
13 strokes
暖
L3
945
Seal (煖) 
; late graph (Shuowen); 暖 has 爰 
(CO; ‘ceremonial disc’ [OBI equivalent originally 
shows hand pulling disc or similar]) as the 
right-hand element in the traditional form. 

The 181 Sixth Grade Characters  291
価値観 KACHIKAN　one’s values
値段  neDAN　price
値引  nebiki　discount 
associated sense taken as i] ‘be equal to, cor-
respond to’ (Katō, Yamada), giving ‘two people 
are equal’, or ii] ‘upright, stand (something) 
upright’ (Ogawa, Tōdō). In either case, ‘price, 
value’ is loan usage. YK1976:356-7; KJ1970:691; 
OT1968:71; TA1965:88-90. 
Mnemonic: UPRIGHT PERSON HAS FIXED 
PRICE – GOOD VALUE
CHI, atai, ne
price, value
10 strokes
値
L3
946
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 亻 41 ‘person’, 
and 直 192 (‘upright; fi x’) as phonetic with 
宇宙船 UCHŪSEN　spaceship
宙返り  CHŪgaeri　somersault
宙乗り  CHŪnori　aerial stunt
or strainer; now means ‘reason’) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken provisionally as 
‘cover’, giving ‘roof covering’ (Yamada, Katō), or 
‘space beneath roof, extensive space’ (Ogawa); 
by extension, ‘space, the heavens’. Mizukami 
looks to identify OBI equivalents. YK1976:361; 
MS1995:v1:366-7; KJ1970:698-9; OT1968:275. 
Mnemonic: REASON FOR SPACE UNDER 
ROOF IS FOR AIR
CHŪ
space, sky, air
8 strokes
宙
L3
947
Seal 
. Has 宀 30 ‘roof, building’, and 由 421 
(originally, probably depicted a wine sieve 
忠実 CHŪJITSU na　loyal
忠誠 CHŪSEI　fi delity
忠告 CHŪKOKU　advice
taken variously as i] ‘empty, cavity’ (Katō, 
Yamada), or ii] ‘fi ll up’ (Ogawa), or iii] ‘consistent 
and harmonised’ (Tōdō). Interestingly, i] and 
ii] are both taken to give essentially the same 
overall meaning ‘devote one’s whole heart (to)’; 
in the case of iii], ‘extensively unblemished 
heart’. KJ1970:700; YK1976:361; OT1968:361; 
TA1965:185.
Mnemonic: LOYALTY AND DEVOTION AT 
CENTER OF ONE’S HEART
CHŪ
loyalty, devotion 
8 strokes 
忠
L1
948
Bronze  seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 心 
164 ‘heart, mind’, and 中 59 (‘middle, inside, 
center’) as phonetic with associated sense 
著者 CHOSHA　author
著名 CHOMEI　eminence
名著 MEICHO　masterpiece
Introduction] there was alternation between 
竹 58 ‘bamboo’ and 艹 53 ‘plant’ as determina-
tive). 者 314 (modern meaning ‘person’) serves 
here as phonetic with associated sense ‘put 
between’, thus ‘bamboo to put things between’. 
In modern Japanese, meanings of 著 such as 
‘write a book’, ‘notable’, are loan usages. See too 
着 364 ‘wear, arrive’. YK1976:363; KJ1970:495; 
OT1968:859; QX2000:323-4. 
Mnemonic: PERSON WITH PLANT ON HEAD 
IS NOTED FOR WRITING BOOKS
CHO, ichijirushii, 
arawasu
noted, write book
11 strokes
著
L3
949
Late, post-Shuowen graph. Originally vari-
ant popular form of NJK 箸 ‘chopsticks’ (Qiu 
notes that in Han dynasty clerical script [see 

292  The 181 Sixth Grade Characters
官庁  KANCHŌ　government offi  ce
庁令  CHŌREI　ordinance
防衛庁 BŌEICHŌ　Defense Agency
mouth, meaning ‘listen to someone’s words’, 
here as semantic and phonetic meaning 
‘listen and discriminate well’; overall meaning 
is ‘a building associated with careful enquiry 
(into weighty matters)’, and so ‘government 
offi  ce’. Modern form uses 丁 367 (originally 
‘nail’). YK1976:364; KJ1970:710; OT1968:327; 
QX2000:195-6. 
Mnemonic: GOVERNMENT OFICE IS A NAILED 
UP BUILDING
CHŌ
government offi  ce
5 strokes
庁
L3
950
Late graph (Six Dynasties or later); traditional 
form 廳. Has 广 127 ‘roof, building’, and 聽 
‘listen intently’; Qiu notes that in OBI texts 聽 
was generally written 𦔻, showing ear next to 
頂点 CHŌTEN　apex
頂上 CHŌJŌ　summit
頂戴 CHŌDAI　receiving, please
homophones and near-homophones existed 
for ‘top of the head’ and ‘mountain top’; in 
similar fashion in Japanese, itadaki can mean 
‘mountain top’ or ‘top of the head’, though the 
latter sense is relatively uncommon in modern 
Japanese. An extended sense in Japanese is 
‘reverently accept’, from the traditional custom 
of raising a gift received to the head in thanks. 
The idea of receiving something has further 
extended to the meaning ‘please do something 
for me’. YK1976:366; OT1968:1100; GY2008:601; 
AS2007:211.
Mnemonic: RECEIVE NAIL THROUGH TOP OF 
HEAD!
CHŌ, itadaki, itadaku
crown, top, receive, 
have 
11 strokes
頂
L3
951
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 頁 103 
‘head’, and 丁 367 (originally pictograph of 
nail) as phonetic with associated sense ‘highest 
point’, giving ‘top of the head’; generalized to 
mean highest point, and hence ‘peak, sum-
mit’. According to Schuessler, in early Chinese 
潮流 CHŌRYŪ　tide, current
潮水  shiomizu　seawater
潮時 shiodoki　opportunity
CHŌ, shio
tide, seawater 
15 strokes
潮
L1
952
Bronze form A (朝 191 ‘morning’) 
, 
; bronze 
form B ( ) , 
; seal form .  (CO) and 朝 are 
in origin the same graph, as explained below. 
Initially the word in early Chinese for ‘(morning) 
tide’, a near-homophone of that for ‘morning’ 
(朝 191, q.v.) was written using the graph 朝. 
Then sometimes in bronze texts ‘morning tide, 
tide’ was written instead as in bronze form B 
above, which combines氵42 ‘water’ as determi-
native with right-hand 屮  ‘(single) plant, plant 
shoot’ above and below 日 66 ‘sun’ (equivalent 
to𠦝). This right-hand side serves as semantic 
and phonetic with associated sense ‘rise up’, 
giving the overall meaning ‘tide’. Bronze form B 
was then essentially retained as the seal form. 
At the clerical script stage, we fi nd an example 
of 潮, which has 月added on the right, and this 
fuller form became widely adopted in block 
script. The right-hand side in bronze form B 
and in the seal form above (𠦝) may in fact 
represent the original form of 朝191. Views 
diverge signifi cantly, as do also some of the 
graph shapes; the above account is tenta-
tive. YK1976:368; MS1995:v2:762-3,v1:640-41; 
OT1968:609; AS2007:607; SK1984:391,612; 
GY2008:1843.
 
Mnemonic: SEAWATER RISES WITH 
MORNING TIDE 

The 181 Sixth Grade Characters  293
賃金 CHINGIN　wages
運賃 UNCHIN　fare, freight
家賃 yaCHIN　house rent
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 貝 10 ‘shell currency, 
valuables’, and 任 785 (‘duty, entrust’) as se-
mantic and phonetic, meaning ‘baggage, carry 
baggage’, to give ‘money for transporting bag-
gage’; later generalized to ‘payment for work’. 
YK1976:370; KJ1970:570; MS1995:v2:1240-41; 
OT1968:957. 
Mnemonic: ENTRUST VALUABLE 
WAGES – FOR A FEE
CHIN
wages, fee
13 strokes
賃
L3
953
頭痛 ZUTSŪ　headache
痛手 itade　bad wound
痛切 TSŪSETSU na　poignant
stamping the ground surface down and jump-
ing up [Mizukami]) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘pain as if stabbed’ (Ogawa), or ‘wound 
penetrates inside’ (Yamada, Katō); overall sense 
is ‘pain of sickness’, later generalized sense ‘pain’. 
YK1976:371; OT1968:679; MS1995:v2:870-71; 
KJ1970:735-6. Suggest associating 甬 with 通 
193 (‘pass [through]’). 
Mnemonic: PAIN PASSES THROUGH SICK 
PERSON 
TSŪ, itai/mu/meru
pain, painful
12 strokes
痛
L3
954
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 疒 404 
‘sickbed/sickness’, and 甬 193 (interpretations 
include this as originally depicting a type of 
instrument [Ogawa; later, 筩], or a person 
発展  HATTEN　development
展覧会 TENRANKAI　exhibition
展望  TENBŌ　outlook
as phonetic with associated sense taken as 
i] ‘bend’, giving ‘person with bent back’, i.e. 
‘hunchback’ (Katō, Yamada), or ii] ‘roll (over), 
tumble’, giving ‘turn in one’s sleep’ (Ogawa). 
Either analysis results in senses such as ‘lay 
(something) out, extend’ as loan usages. 
YK1976:379-80; KJ1970:728; OT1968:297. We 
suggest taking the top part as slumped person
尸, middle part as 艹 53 ‘grass’, and lower part 
as ‘short’ clothing 
. 
Mnemonic: SLUMPED PERSON IN SHORTS 
SPREAD OUT ON GRASS
TEN
expand, spread, 
display 
10 strokes
展
L3
955
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 尸 256 (here) 
‘person lying down’, and 
 (as abbreviation of 
a more complex form with 衣 444 meaning a 
type of garment [Yamada says ‘red garment’] ) 
討議   TŌGI　debate
討ち入る  uchiiru　raid
討伐   TŌBATSU　subjugation
giving ‘charge verbally’, i.e. ‘charge (someone) 
with an off ence’. Ogawa sees 寸 as an abbrevia-
tion here for 肘 (NJK ‘elbow’) with associated 
sense ‘capture’. ‘Attack (physically)’ can be seen 
as loan usage. Katō notes that in early times the 
elements corresponding to 寸 and 手 34 ‘hand’ 
were often used without distinction in mean-
ing. YK1976:387-8; OT1968:923; KJ1970:673.
Mnemonic: ATTACK AND DEFEAT WITH 
MEASURED WORDS 
TŌ, utsu
attack, to defeat 
10 strokes
討
L1
956
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 言 118 
‘words, speak’, and 寸 920 (‘hand; measure’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘charge, accuse’, 

294  The 181 Sixth Grade Characters
政党  SEITŌ　political party
労働党 RŌDŌTŌ　Labor Party
党派  TŌHA　faction
‘cover’, giving ‘sun and moon covered in black, 
with no light’ (Katō, Yamada), or ii] ‘obstruct’, 
giving ‘obstructed and not clear’ (Ogawa). Either 
analysis could refer to a lattice roof-opening 
blackened with soot. ‘Party, (like-minded) 
companions’ are loan usage. YK1976:387; 
KJ1970:671-2; OT1968:90. Take 
 as ornate 
roof, 兄 as ‘elder brother’ 114. 
Mnemonic: ELDER BROTHER’S PARTY MEETS 
UNDER ORNATE ROOF 
TŌ
party, faction
10 strokes
党
L3
957
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
黨. Has 黑 137 ‘black’, and 尚 1491 (orig. smoke 
rising from roof aperture; now ‘furthermore’) 
as phonetic with associated sense taken as i] 
砂糖 SATŌ　sugar
糖衣 TŌI　sugar coating
糖分 TŌBUN　sugar content
‘remove husk on grain’]) as phonetic with asso-
ciated sense ‘spread out’ (Ogawa), or ‘dry using 
heat’ (Katō), giving ‘food items made using 
rice fl our (spread out)’, and then more spe-
cifi cally ‘sweet items’, ‘sugar’. OT1968:764,327; 
YK1976:390; MS1995:v1:230-31; KJ1970:666. 唐 
is also used to represent Tang China, helpful for 
mnemonics.
Mnemonic: RICE FROM TANG CHINA IS AS 
SWEET AS SUGAR
TŌ
sugar
16 strokes
糖
L1
958
Seal 
; late graph (later Shuowen edition). Has 
米 220 ‘rice’, and 唐 (orig. ‘incoherent, absurd’, 
itself comprising 口 22 ‘speak, words’, with 庚 
[CO, here, slightly modifi ed in shape; meaning 
届け書   todokeSHO　report
届け出る  todokederu　give notice
行き届く  yukitodoku　be attentive
and round’) serving as phonetic with associated 
sense taken either as i] ‘move backwards’ or ‘leg 
impediment’, giving ‘move backwards, cannot 
move freely’ (Yamada, Katō), or ii] ‘collapse’, giv-
ing ‘physically enervated’ (Ogawa). Schuessler 
notes early Chinese meanings that include 
‘end up, arrive’, which appear to be loan usages; 
‘deliver’, which may perhaps be regarded as an 
extended sense from ‘end up, arrive’, is a mean-
ing for 届 used only in Japanese. YK1976:397; 
KJ1970:153-4; OT1968:295; AS2007:314. We sug-
gest taking 尸 as a corpse, and 由 as ‘reason’ 421. 
Mnemonic: DELIVER CORPSE AND REPORT REASON
todokeru/ku
deliver, report
8 strokes
届
L3
959
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional form: 
屆. The graph has 尸 256 ‘person lying down/
slumped’ (possibly but not necessarily a ‘corpse’), 
and 凷 (CO, ‘lump of hard soil’, made up of 土 
64 ‘earth, ground’, with 凵 [originally, ‘basket’] 
as a phonetic with an associated sense ‘hard 
難民  NANMIN　refugees
難儀  NANGI　trouble
見難い migatai　hard to see
sense ‘golden, yellow’, in eff ect giving 黃 / 黄 a 
semantic function also. At the clerical script stage, 
the form with 隹 became predominant. Overall 
meaning is ‘bird with golden/ yellow plumage’, 
but beyond that the identity of the bird is not 
known. The meaning ‘diffi  cult, trouble’ is consid-
ered to be a loan usage. MS1995:v2:1498-1500; 
YK1976:399; GY2008:1186; KJ1970:748; 
SK1984:771. As a mnemonic we suggest making 
use of the kanji for Han China, namely 漢 – which 
of course is part of the term kanji 漢字 – along 
with the water determinative 氵 42. 
Mnemonic: BIRDS ARE IN TROUBLE IN 
WATERLESS HAN CHINA
NAN, muzukashii, katai
diffi  cult, trouble
18 strokes
難
L3
960
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 難. The bronze 
and seal forms given here both feature 隹 324 
‘short-tailed bird, bird’, but this graph also occurs 
in both bronze and seal alternatively with 鳥 190 
‘bird’ instead. Either ‘bird’ element combines with 
one of a small range of elements as phonetic; 
these include 黃 (黄 133 ‘yellow’) in bronze and  
(CO, possibly ‘burn sacrifi ce’), both with associated 

The 181 Sixth Grade Characters  295
牛乳 GYŪNYŪ　(cow’s) milk
乳酸 NYŪSAN　lactic acid
乳房 NYŪBŌ/chibusa　breasts
treated by some (Katō, Yamada) as a loan usage, 
but can perhaps be regarded as an extended 
sense, as also ‘breasts’. Ogawa tentatively gives 
an alternative interpretation relating to an 
ancient belief, referred to in the Shuowen entry 
for 孔, which links swallows to birth, but the fi rst 
analysis above is probably the one to follow. 
YK1976:401; KJ1970:508; SS1984:670; OT1968:28. 
Note that 乚 is a cavity not a breast, though use-
ful as a mnemonic. Thus we suggest ‘child’ 子 27 
and 乚 ‘breast’ and ‘hand’ 爫. 
Mnemonic: MOTHER’S HAND PUTS CHILD TO 
BREAST SWOLLEN WITH MILK
NYŪ, chichi, chi
breasts, milk
8 strokes
乳
L3
961
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Typically taken as 
爫 (compact shape of 爪 1739, ‘claw, talon’ used 
in compound graphs), here meaning ‘hand’, and 
孔 1316 ‘orifi ce, hole’ (originally ‘vaginal orifi ce’), 
giving ‘baby emerges from vaginal orifi ce and 
is received by hand’, i.e. ‘be born’. ‘Breast milk’ is 
認識 NINSHIKI　cognition
認可 NINKA　approval
認印 mitomeIN　private seal
A late graph (post-Shuowen). Has 言 118 ‘words; 
speak’, and 忍 1825 (‘endure’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘allow, permit’, to give 
‘give verbal approval’. YK1976:402; KJ1970:569; 
OT1968:932. Suggest taking 忍 as ‘blade’ 刃 
1549 and ‘heart’ 心 164. 
Mnemonic: WORDS OF APPRECIATION AS 
BLADE ENTERS HEART!?
NIN, mitomeru
recognize, 
appreciate
14 strokes
認
L3
962
納税  NŌZEI　tax payment
納屋  NAya　shed, barn
出納簿 SUITŌBO*　accounts book
sense ‘become wet’, giving ‘wet thread’; mean-
ings such as ‘obtain; supply’ tend to be regarded 
as loan usages, though Tōdō notes an example 
of early classical usage of 納 in Chinese in the 
sense ‘bring inside’, a point echoed by Schuessler. 
YK1976:404-5; KJ1970:665; OT1968:770; 
TA1965:803; AS2007:446. 
Mnemonic: SUPPLY OF THREADS ARE 
STORED INSIDE, EASILY OBTAINED
NŌ, NA, NATSU, TŌ, 
osameru
obtain, supply, store
10 strokes
納
L1
963
頭脳  ZUNŌ　brain
首脳  SHUNŌ　leader
脳障害 NŌSHŌGAI　brain injury
based on the bent shape – borrowed for ‘ladle, 
spoon’ [Katō]; not to be confused with 七 32 
‘seven’) as phonetic with associated sense ‘fat, 
grease’, giving ‘fatty matter in the cranium’, i.e. 
‘brain’ (Katō, Yamada). Alternatively, left side of 
seal form is taken as 人 41 ‘person’ (Shirakawa). 
Later, 匕 was replaced by 月 (肉) 209 ‘fl esh, 
meat’. SS1984:675; YK1976:405; KJ1970:673-
4,796; OT1968:823. We suggest taking 月 as 
body, and  as ‘brain box’ with hairs on top. 
Mnemonic: THE BODY’S BRAIN-BOX IS 
MARKED WITH A CROSS, HAIRS ON TOP
NŌ
brain
11 strokes
脳
L3
964
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 腦. For 
‘brain’, Shuowen has 匘, consisting of 𡿺, origi-
nally a pictograph for ‘brain’ or ‘head, cranium’, 
with 匕 (the modern shape; originally, picto-
graph for ‘withered leg’ and – by extension, 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 糸 29 ‘thread’, 
and 内 207 (‘inside’) as phonetic with associated 

296  The 181 Sixth Grade Characters
派遣  HAKEN　despatch
立派  RIPPA na　splendid
田中派 TanakaHA　Tanaka Faction
of the same graph without a distinction in 
meaning. Later, though, the convention arose 
of employing the left-facing shape of  as 
the way to write 永 644 ‘long, lasting’ (q.v.), 
and the right-facing shape 
 for ‘tributary; 
become separated’; later still, the ‘water’ de-
terminative was added to further distinguish 
the latter sense. Ogawa regards the semantic 
progression as being ‘become separated’ > 
‘tributary’, though the normal progression 
for development of graphs is from a concrete 
sense to an abstract sense, not the reverse. 
It would appear that the idea of separation 
has led to the meaning of ‘faction’, in the 
sense of going a different way, and in some 
cases possibly being sent away. See also 脈 
618. YK1976:407; KJ1970:77-8; QX2000:206; 
OT1968:576. 
Mnemonic: A FACTION IS LIKE A TRIBUTARY 
RELATIVE TO A RIVER
HA
faction, send
9 strokes
派
L3
965
OBI 
 (
); seal 
. The OBI form, which lacks 
氵/ 水 42 ‘water’ as a determinative, depicts 
tributaries flowing into a river. Although the 
water flow of a tributary is into a river, not 
from it, still there is an association of diver-
gence in relation to the main river, this prob-
ably leading to the extended sense ‘become 
separated’. Katō notes that at the earliest 
stage there was fluctuation in the direction of 
this graph (either left-facing or right-facing) – 
a feature which as Qiu notes did not as a rule 
indicate two different words were represent-
ed because in the earliest period there was 
fluctuation in the regular and reversed forms 
礼拝 REIHAI　worship
拝見 HAIKEN　inspection, look
拝具 HAIGU　Yours faithfully
phonetic with associated sense typically taken 
as ‘line up, be in a row’, giving ‘hold both hands 
out (in an act of off ering)’; by extension, ‘revere, 
worship’. Ogawa interprets the objects depicted 
in the second element as an off ering of luxuri-
ant vegetation.YK1976:408-9; KJ1970:754; 
MS1995:v1:562-3; OT1968:409. Suggest take 
right element as 8-leaved plant. 
Mnemonic: HAND OFFERS UP EIGHT-LEAVED 
PLANT IN RESPECTFUL WORSHIP
HAI, ogamu
worship, respectful
8 strokes
拝
L3
966
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 扌 34 ‘hand’, and a 
second element (interpretations diff er – Mi-
zukami lists two: animal intestines hung from 
a tree as sacrifi ce, or an off ering held out) as 
背後 HAIGO　background
背中 senaka　back
背信 HAISHIN　betrayal
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 月 209 
‘fl esh, meat’, and 北 224 (‘north’; originally, ‘turn 
the back, oppose’) as semantic and phonetic, 
giving overall meaning ‘the back’. YK1976:409; 
KJ1970:752-3; GY2008:832; OT1968:819; 
AS2007:246. 
Mnemonic: TURN BACK DEFIANTLY ON MEAT 
FROM THE NORTH
HAI, se, sei, somuku/ 
keru
back, stature, defy
9 strokes
背
L3
967

The 181 Sixth Grade Characters  297
肺病 HAIBYŌ　lung disease
肺炎 HAIEN　pneumonia
肺臓 HAIZŌ　lungs
‘lungs’ (Katō, Yamada). An alternative analy-
sis based on the seal form (and the Shuowen 
interpretation) of 市 takes original meaning as 
leaves of a plant opening on opposite sides, 
giving both semantic and phonetic with as-
sociated sense ‘divide in two’, to give ‘organ 
divided in two’ (lungs) (Katō, Ogawa). The fi rst 
analysis above seems preferable; the second 
might apply equally to ‘kidneys’. Suggest taking 
市 as ‘city’ for mnemonic purposes. YK1976:409; 
KJ1970:753,472; TA1965:651; OT1968:820.
Mnemonic: MEAT FROM THE CITY MIGHT 
DAMAGE YOUR LUNGS
HAI
lung(s)
9 strokes
肺
L1
968
Seal ; late graph (Shuowen). Has 月 209 ‘fl esh, 
meat’, and 市 (originally pictograph of plant 
emerging above ground [not 144 ‘market/
city’]), taken in one analysis as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘emerge from within’, to give 
‘body organ from which breath emerges’, i.e. 
俳優 HAIYŪ　actor
俳句 HAIKU　haiku poetry
俳人 HAIJIN　haiku poet
amusing stories and perform song and dance 
routines at banquets; on the basis of such activ-
ities, extended senses evolved such as ‘jest’ for 
俳 (Katō, Yamada). In support of this view is the 
fact that in medieval Europe deformed persons 
were often employed as jesters. Ogawa prefers 
to analyze 非 as phonetic with associated sense 
‘oppose, go against’, giving ‘persons who amuse 
others by doing unusual things’. Yamada looks 
to identify a bronze form for 俳. KJ1970:754-5; 
YK1976:410; OT1968:71.
Mnemonic: AN AMUSING ACTOR IS NOT A 
PERSON!? 
HAI
amusement, actor
10 strokes
俳
L1
969
Seal 
. Analyses diff er. Probably most persua-
sive is that which takes as 亻 41 ‘person’, and 非 
794 (‘not’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘hunchback, ugly’, to give ‘(male) hunchback’. In 
ancient China, the nobles had many dwarf serv-
ants who were hunchbacks, and who would tell 
班長  HANCHŌ　squad leader
救護班 KYŪGOHAN　relief squad
班点  HANTEN　a spot
giving ‘jade tablet marking subservience’ – one 
out of a pair given by the chief ruler (or later, the 
emperor) to individual local nobles or lesser rul-
ers as a symbol of their subservience. Later gen-
eralized to ‘divide’ and ‘distribute’, which involves 
some sort of group structure, so ‘group’ may be 
a further extended sense. Also used now as vari-
ant of 斑 1869 ‘spot’. YK1976:418-9; KJ1970:788; 
MS1995:v2:854-5; AS2007:155.
Mnemonic: SQUAD RECEIVES A CUT OF THE 
JEWELS
HAN
squad, group, 
allot
10 strokes
班
L1
970
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has CO 玨 ‘jade/jewelled 
tablet pair’ (to show lord-vassal relationship), and 
刂 198 ‘knife, cut’, felt here to act as abbrevia-
tion of 分 218 ‘divide’ as semantic and phonetic, 
晩飯  BANmeshi　evening meal
晩夏  BANKA　late summer
今晩は  KONBAN wa　Good evening
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 日 66 ‘sun, 
day’, and 免 2018 (‘avoid, escape’) as phonetic 
BAN
evening, late
12 strokes
晩
L3
971
with associated sense usually taken as ‘disap-
pear, not clearly visible’ (Ogawa says ‘incline 
towards’), giving ‘sun disappears’, i.e. ‘sunset’. 
YK1976:419-20; KJ1970:791; TA1965:735-9; 
OT1968:47.
Mnemonic: THE SUN ‘ESCAPES’ EVERY 
EVENING – A SIGN IT’S GETTING LATE

298  The 181 Sixth Grade Characters
否認   HININ　denial
否定的  HITEITEKI 　negative
否めない inamenai　undeniable
批判 HIHAN　criticism
批評 HIHYŌ 　commentary
批准 HIJUN　ratifi cation
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 口 22 ‘mouth, speak’, 
and 不 600 ‘not’ (q.v.), originally ‘fl ower calyx’, 
but borrowed at early OBI stage for its sound 
to represent a word meaning ‘not’. Loan use of 
a pictograph in this way for its sound value to 
represent another word, in this case one mean-
HI, ina, inamu
no, decline, deny
7 strokes
HI
criticize, strike
7 strokes
否
批
L1
L3
972
973
ing ‘not’, was a common device. Katō asserts that 
不 here does not have a semantic function (a 
function which is attributed to it in Shuowen), 
and defi nes the meaning of 否 as ‘to utter fu 
verbally’, but this simply raises the question of 
what fu means here. A more appropriate analysis 
of 否 treats 不 as phonetic with associated sense 
‘not’, to give literally ‘say no’, or simply ‘not’ > 
‘refuse’ (Mizukami). Schuessler treats 否 and 
不 as originally representing the same word 
in early Chinese, meaning ‘not’. KJ1970: 794-5; 
MS1995:v1:220-222; AS2007:172-3; OT1968:173.
Mnemonic: MOUTH SAYS ‘NO’, IN DENIAL
Seal 
 (
). 批 is a later popular form. 
 has 
扌 34 ‘hand’, and  (tentatively, ‘navel’ [Oga-
wa]), as phonetic with associated sense ‘slap’, 
giving ‘slap with hand’, extended to ‘criticize’. 
YK1976:422; OT1968:405,549; DJ2009:v3:995. 
Suggest 比 as ‘compare’ 792.
Mnemonic: CRITICISM CAN INVOLVE A 
HANDY COMPARISON 
秘密 HIMITSU　secret
極秘 GOKUHI 　top secret 
秘書 HISHO　secretary
Seal 
 (祕). 秘 is a later popular form. 祕 has 示 
723 (originally, ‘off ering table, altar’, now means 
‘show’), with 必 597 (‘necessarily’) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken as ‘hide and not 
HI, himeru
(keep) secret
10 strokes
秘
L1
974
open’ (Yamada), ‘close’ (Ogawa), or ‘stick together 
and not allow movement’ (Tōdō), all signifying 
restriction in movement. Overall sense is ‘matters 
of the gods which are hidden and not clear/
cannot leak outside’; later generalized to ‘hidden 
and not clear’, hence ‘secret’. The modern form 
using 禾 87 ‘grain plant’ as the determinative is 
probably a miscopying. YK1976:423; TA1965:765-
9; OT1968:722; DJ2009:v1:5. 
Mnemonic: RICE PLANT IS NECESSARILY KEPT 
SECRET
腹部  FUKUBU　abdomen
中腹  CHŪFUKU　mid-slope
腹立ち  haradachi　anger
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 月 209 ‘fl esh, 
meat’, and 复 (CO, an upright vessel with another 
one upside-down underneath, and 夊or 夂 
[for further details, see under 復 803; also see 
Note below]) as phonetic in 腹 with associated 
sense either i] ‘thick and abundant’, giving ‘thick 
FUKU, hara
belly, guts
13 strokes
腹
L3
975
and swollen part of the body’ (Yamada), or ii] 
‘cover’, giving ‘fl esh covering the internal organs’ 
(Ogawa), with overall meaning in both analyses 
‘belly, abdomen’. YK1976:438-9; OT1968:825; 
MS1995:v1:286-8,v2:1078-9; OT1968:173. Note: 
traditional form of 腹 has 夂 ‘descending foot’ 
(determinative no. 34), though in some early oc-
currences of this graph it may have been 夊 ‘walk 
slowly, drag foot’; see Appendix. Suggest 复 as 
夂 as crossed legs, 日 66 as ‘sun’, and 𠂉 as variant 
‘person’ 41 人.
Mnemonic: PERSON SITS CROSS-LEGGED IN 
SUN, SHOWING FLESHY BELLY 

The 181 Sixth Grade Characters  299
奮起   FUNKI　stirring
奮闘   FUNTŌ　hard fi ght
奮い立つ furuitatsu　be stirred
並行  HEIKŌ　parallelism
並木  namiki 　line of trees 
月並み  tsukinami 　commonplace
FUN, furuu
be excited, stir
16 strokes
HEI, nami, narabu
row, line, rank with, 
ordinary
8 strokes
奮
並
L1
L3
977
Bronze 
; seal 
. Bronze has 田 63 ‘fi eld, 
ground’, and element made up of 衣 444 
‘garment’ combined with 隹 324 ‘short-tailed 
bird, bird’ acting as semantic and phonetic, 
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional 竝. Two persons 
standing, not moving, giving ‘be lined up/in a 
row’; by extension, ‘ordinary’. MS1995:v2:982-3; 
OT1968:745; SS1984:761. Awkward as a mne-
monic, but suggest two horizontal lines, two 
vertical lines, and four dots.
Mnemonic: TWO LINES UP, TWO CROSS 
ROWS, FOUR DOTS – ORDINARY PATTERN
meaning ‘bird fl ies up’, to give overall sense 
‘bird fl ies up’. The seal form also has 田, but the 
second element is changed to 奞, also mean-
ing ‘bird fl ying’ and with overall sense ‘bird 
fl ies up’. By extension, ‘be animated, roused’. 
MS1995:v1:308-9; ZY2009:v1:199; OT1968:675; 
YK1976:440-41. Suggest taking top element as
大 56 ‘big’.
Mnemonic: BIG BIRD IN FIELD STIRS, FLYING 
OFF EXCITEDLY
976
陛下  HEIKA　Majesty
陛見  HEIKEN　imperial audience
両陛下 RYŌHEIKA　Majesties
HEI
majesty, throne
10 strokes
陛
L1
978
give ‘series of earthen steps’ (Ogawa, Tōdō). 
Katō and Yamada take 阜/阝here as ‘foothold’ 
(treating steps as providing fi rm footing), giving 
‘footholds for climbing a hill’, and from this 
Yamada posits ‘steps to the Imperial Palace’ as 
an extended sense. OT1968:1068; TA1965:768; 
KJ1970:836; YK1976:444. Suggest taking 坒 as 
比 792 ‘compare’ and 土 64 ‘earth’. 
Mnemonic: HIS MAJESTY’S THRONE 
COMPARES TO AN EARTHEN HILL!?
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 阜/阝1907 
‘earthen mound’, and CO 坒 as semantic and 
phonetic, meaning ‘be lined up/in a row’, to 
閉店   HEITEN　store closing
閉口   HEIKŌ　dumbfounded
閉め出す shimedasu　shut out
HEI, tojiru, 
shimaru/meru
close, shut
11 strokes
閉
L3
979
(Tōdō, Yamada). Alternative interpretations are 
off ered by Ogawa, who takes 才 as phonetic 
having associated sense ‘timber’, giving ‘close 
off  entrance with timber’, and Shirakawa, who 
adopts a religious interpretation (才 as seman-
tic, representing a piece of wood with prayer 
receptacle attached). TA1965:770; YK1970:444; 
OT1968:1056; SS1984:763. Suggest taking 才 as 
wooden prop.
Mnemonic: CLOSE GATE WITH WOODEN 
PROP
Bronze 
; seal 
. 門 231 ‘gate, door’, and 
才 139 (modern senses: ‘talent, age’, but see), 
here in the sense ‘obstruct’, giving ‘close gates’ 

300  The 181 Sixth Grade Characters
断片   DANPEN　fragment 
片手   katate　one hand 
片付ける  katazukeru　tidy up
HEN, kata
one side, piece
4 strokes
片
L3
980
Seal ; late graph (Shuowen). Seal form shows 
that 片 represents one side of a tree (see 木 
73) split or cut in half vertically, giving liter-
ally ‘split tree’, and hence ‘one side’. The split 
is probably conceptual, since to achieve this 
with ancient tools would have been extremely 
diffi  cult. QX2000:204; YK1976:445; OT1968:633; 
KJ1970:787.
Mnemonic: ONE SIDE OF A TREE IS SOME PIECE!
補助 HOJO　support
補充 HOJŪ　supplement
補強 HOKYŌ　reinforcement
the alternative view ii] which Mizukami lists, i.e. 
taking the OBI and bronze forms as representing 
a shoot of vegetation (屮) in a fi eld or seedbed. 
Another credible interpretation – iii] – is off ered 
by Shirakawa, who takes the early forms of 甫 
as showing a sapling with a framework sup-
porting the lower part (interestingly, the OBI 
form Shirakawa lists supports the ‘use an ax’ 
interpretation). While there is divergence over 
the original meaning(s) of 甫, there does appear 
to be some agreement over the function of this 
element in 補, i.e. that 甫 here serves as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘add on, patch’. Later, 
the idea of ‘garment’ was lost from 補, leading 
to generalised meanings such as ‘repair’, ‘add 
on’. MS1995:v2:870-71,v1:256-8; YK1976:450; 
KJ1970:857; OT1968:905; SS1984:777. Suggest 
taking right side as ‘use’ 用 235, and ‘needle’ 十 
35, plus point. 
Mnemonic: USE NEEDLE POINT TO MAKE 
GOOD SOME SUPPLEMENTARY CLOTHES
HO, oginau
supplement, make 
good, stopgap
12 strokes
補
L3
981
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); Has 衣 444 ‘gar -
ment’, and NJK 甫; scholars dispute orig. mean-
ing of latter (modern meanings inc ‘begin’). It 
is felt that what is now the one shape 甫 may 
have once represented two separate graphs 
of similar but diff erent shape and meaning 
(Katō, with some support from Mizukami). One 
analysis of 甫 (analysis i]) takes the OBI and 
bronze forms as signifying ‘use an ax’, which 
is the Shuowen interpretation (< 父 originally 
‘hand holding ax’; now ‘father’ 216), over 用 ‘use’ 
(a loan meaning; 235); this is one analysis listed 
by Mizukami, though none of the OBI forms he 
lists actually support this – rather, they support 
暮春   BOSHUN　late spring 
夕暮れ   yūgure　evening
暮らし方  kurashikata　lifestyle
as a result, to represent the word for ‘evening’ 
clearly an extra ‘sun’ 日 66 was added to 莫, 
thereby creating the new graph 暮. Another 
meaning is ‘late’, and either this or ‘evening’ no 
doubt gave rise to ‘end’ as an extended sense. 
The Japanese-only meaning ‘live’ (kurasu) ap-
pears to have evolved through a connection 
with the verb kurasu in early Japanese which 
meant ‘spend time until darkness when the 
sun sets’. QX2000:193,227; OT1968:473,857; 
MS1995:v2:1118-9; KJ1970:776; AS2000:393,
519. Suggest taking 
 as variant of ‘big’ 大 56. 
Mnemonic: LIVE TO SEE SUN SET AMONGST 
BIG PLANTS AT END OF THE DAY
BO, kureru/rasu
live, sunset, end
14 strokes
暮
L3
982
OBI (莫) 
; seal . 莫 809 (q.v.), the original 
way of writing 暮, is made up of the sun 日 66 
setting amongst trees or vegetation 艹/艸 
53; there may be an associated sense for the 
vegetation component (‘cover’), but this is by 
no means universally favored (or necessary) as 
an interpretation. Later, 莫 was borrowed as a 
convenient way to write a near-homophone 
in early Chinese meaning ‘none, nothing’, and 

The 181 Sixth Grade Characters  301
宝石 HŌSEKI　jewel
財宝 ZAIHŌ　riches
子宝 kodakara　treasured children 
(as currency)’, and 缶 1141 (originally, pot with 
lid; modern ‘can, tin’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘store away’, giving ‘valuables stored 
away under a roof’ and hence ‘treasure, pre-
cious’. (Note there is an OBI equivalent, which 
lacks the above phonetic component 缶.) The 
modern form uses 玉 ‘jade’ 15. QX2000:231-2; 
MS1995:v1:390-91; YK1976:453. 
Mnemonic: TREASURE HOUSE CONTAINS 
JEWELS FULL TO THE ROOF
HŌ, takara
treasure 
8 strokes
宝
L1
983
Bronze 
; seal 
; The traditional form 寶 has 
宀 30 ‘roof, dwelling’, 王 (here, not ‘king’ 5 but as 
abbreviation for 玉 15 ‘jade’), with 貝 10 ‘shell 
訪問 HŌMON　visit 
探訪 TANBŌ　inquiry
訪れ otozure　visit, arrival
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 言 118 
‘words; speak’, and 方 223 (‘direction; person’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘widely’, 
giving ‘inquire/consult widely’; ‘visit’ is a loan 
usage. TA1965:443; YK1976:454; AS2007:232.
Mnemonic: VISIT A PERSON TO INQUIRE 
ABOUT WORDS SPOKEN
HŌ, otozureru, tazuneru
visit, inquire 
11 strokes
訪
L3
984
死亡 SHIBŌ　death
亡者 MŌJA　the deceased 
亡命 BŌMEI　exile
OBI 
; seal 
. Typically analyzed as ‘person’ 
(in the modern graph, modifi ed in shape to 亠), 
and a second element 
 which may represent 
‘corner, wall’ (or similar), giving the overall sense 
‘person hides/disappears/escapes’. ‘Lose, die’ 
may be seen as extended senses. YK1976:456; 
OT1968:36; MS1995:v1:34-5.
Mnemonic: DEAD PERSON LOST IN A CORNER
BŌ, MŌ, nai/kunaru
die, lose, escape
3 strokes
亡
L3
985
忘却   BŌKYAKU　forgetfulness
忘恩   BŌON　ingratitude
忘れ勝ち wasuregachi　forgetful
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 心 164 ‘heart, mind’, 
and 亡 985 ‘die, lose’ as semantic and phonetic, 
meaning ‘(something) disappears from the 
mind’, i.e. ‘forget’. KJ1970:771; MS1995:v1:498-9; 
YK1976:456; OT1968:360. 
Mnemonic: ‘DEAD IN ONE’S MIND’ MEANS 
FORGETFULNESS
BŌ, wasureru
forget, leave behind
7 strokes
忘
L3
986
心棒   SHINBŌ　axle, shaft
棒グラフ  BŌGURAFU　bar graph
棒紅   BŌbeni　lipstick
棓 comprises 木 73 ‘wood, tree’, and 咅 389 
(CO ‘spit as sign of refusal’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘big stick’, giving ‘big stick’. 
Later 咅 was replaced by 奉 1954 (‘off er’, 
‘respect’). YK1976:458; KJ1970:759; OT1968:513; 
SS1984:800. Suggest taking 
 as ‘big’ 大 56, 二 
as ‘two’ 65, and 
 as club with two nails. 
Mnemonic: RESPECT DOUBLY BIG WOODEN 
CLUB WITH TWO NAILS THROUGH 
BŌ
pole, bar, club
12 strokes 
棒
L3
987
Seal (棓) 
. Shuowen has 棓 for this graph; 棒 
is a later (post-Shuowen) popular equivalent. 

302  The 181 Sixth Grade Characters
一枚  ICHIMAI　one sheet
二枚舌 NIMAIjita　duplicity 
二枚貝  NIMAIgai　bivalve
the semantic range of 枚 is thought to have 
extended from being a counter for horse whips 
to serve as a counter for various other objects 
too. Shirakawa notes that the bronze forms for 
枚 have not ‘whip’ but ‘ax’, and on this basis he 
takes the original sense as ‘wood cut with an 
ax’. Flat, thin pieces of wood were then denoted 
using this graph, and this gave a basis for using 
it as a counter for other objects of similar shape. 
YK1976:461-2; KJ1970:761; MS1995:v1:656-7; 
SS1984:810. 
Mnemonic: HAND HOLDS THIN FLAT 
WOODEN STICK FOR COUNTING
MAI
counter (for fl at items)
8 strokes
枚
L3
988
OBI 
; bronze 
; seal 
. Has 木 73 ‘wood, 
tree’, and 攵 (攴) 112 ‘strike’ (originally, picto-
graph of hand holding wooden whip or similar), 
typically taken as meaning ‘whip for striking 
horse’ (Katō, Yamada, Mizukami), which is the 
explanation given in Shuowen. In this analysis, 
天幕 TENMAKU　curtain, tent
開幕 KAIMAKU　opening scene
幕府 BAKUFU　Shogunate
with associated sense ‘cover’, giving ‘cloth to 
cover’, and by extension ‘curtain; tent’. The 
military government (Shogunate 1192-1867) 
was known as the ‘tent government’ (幕 府
Bakufu, referring initially to a large tent acting 
as fi eld HQ), and so Shogunate/Bakufu became 
an associated meaning for 幕. YK1976:462; 
OT1968:319; KJ1970:774-5. Suggest taking 莫 
as its original meaning ‘sunset’.
Mnemonic: DRAMATIC VIEW OF SUNSET 
THROUGH CLOTH CURTAIN OF TENT 
MAKU, BAKU
curtain, tent, 
act in drama
13 strokes 
幕
L1
989
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 巾 1232 
‘cloth’, and 莫 809 (originally depicted sun set-
ting amongst trees or vegetation) as phonetic 
密度 MITSUDO　density
密輸 MITSUYU　smuggling
綿密 MENMITSU na　detailed
as phonetic with associated sense taken 
as i) ‘silent’, giving ‘quiet house’ [Katō], or 
as ii) ‘hemmed in’, giving ‘tightly packed’ 
[Yamada, Tōdō]), giving ‘dense mountains’. 
By extension, ‘deep inside’, and then ‘secret’. 
KJ1970:806-9; YK1976:464-5; TA1965:769; 
MS1995:v1:378-9,368-9. 
Mnemonic: A DWELLING IN DENSE 
MOUNTAINS IS NECESSARILY SECRET
MITSU, hisoka
dense, secret
11 strokes
密
L1
990
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 山 26 ‘mountain, hill’, 
and 宓 (CO, itself having 宀 30 ‘roof, dwelling’, 
with 必 597 [modern meaning ‘necessarily’]) 
連盟 RENMEI　federation
同盟 DŌMEI　alliance
加盟 KAMEI　affi  liation
clear’) as phonetic with associated sense ‘drink, 
sip’, giving ‘drink blood from bowl’. In ancient 
China, when nobles met to make an agree-
ment they would drink blood taken from a 
sacrifi cial animal as a pledge ritual. ‘Pledge, 
alliance’ are extended meanings. YK1976:469; 
MS1995:v2:1156-9,900-01; KJ1970:838-9; 
OT1968:692; SS1984:818-9,227.
Mnemonic: BRIGHT ALLIANCE PLEDGED 
OVER BOWL – OF BLOOD? 
MEI
alliance, pledge 
13 strokes
盟
L1
991
OBI 
; bronze 
; seal 
. Early forms have 
皿 300 ‘dish, bowl’ or (rarely) 血 288 ‘blood’, 
beneath 囧 (‘lattice window, opening’ [origi-
nally a pictograph]) or 朙/明 228 (‘bright, 

The 181 Sixth Grade Characters  303
模型 MOKEI　model, mold
模写 MOSHA　copy, copying
規模 KIBO　scale
amongst trees or vegetation) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘law, pattern’, giving ‘wooden 
frame’ for making something (Ogawa says ‘as 
a copy’); ‘model; copy’ are extended senses. 
KJ1970:775; YK1976:471; OT1968:520. Suggest 
taking 莫 as ‘plant’ 艹 53, ‘sun’ 日 66, and ‘big’ 
大 56. 
Mnemonic: PLANT COPIES MODEL TREE AND 
GROWS BIG IN THE SUN 
MO, BO
copy, model, mold 
14 strokes
模
L1
992
Seal 
; late form (Shuowen). Has 木 73 ‘wood, 
tree’, and 莫 809 (originally depicted sun setting 
翻訳  HON’YAKU　translation
通訳  TSŪYAKU　interpreting
言い訳 iiwake　excuse
serve criminals’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘change’ (Ogawa says ‘extract’), giving 
‘change words/language’, and so ‘translate’. 
‘Meaning’ is an associated or extended 
sense. YK1976:475; KJ1970:93-4; SS1984:50; 
OT1968:923. Take right part of modern form as 
person carrying backpack.
Mnemonic: PERSON TRANSLATING CARRIES 
A LOAD OF WORDS IN BACKPACK
YAKU, wake
translation, meaning 
11 strokes
訳
L1
993
Seal 
; traditional 譯; late graph (Shuowen). 
Has 言118 ‘words; speak’, and 睪 (original 
meaning disputed; provisionally, ‘watch/ob-
郵便 YŪBIN　mail, post
郵送 YŪSŌ　mailing
郵袋 YŪTAI　mailbag
as phonetic with associated sense taken either 
as i] ‘fl ag fl uttering /hanging down’, giving ‘fl ag 
with orders, standing in village’ (Katō, Yamada), 
or as ii] ‘remote region’, giving ‘village in remote 
region’, with sense extended to ‘village serv-
ing as relay station’ (Ogawa, Shirakawa). By 
extension, ‘mail’. KJ1970:31; YK1976:478-9; 
OT1968:1022; SS1984:837.
Mnemonic: MAILBAG LEFT DANGLING IN VILLAGE
YŪ
mail, post
11 strokes
郵
L3
994
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has right-hand 
determinative 阝 376 (full form: 邑) ‘village, 
settlement’, and 垂 918 (‘hang down’, ‘dangle’) 
優秀 YŪSHŪ　excellence
優先 YŪSEN　priority
女優 JOYŪ　actress
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 亻 41 ‘per-
son’, and 憂 2045 (‘grief, sorrow’) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken as ‘dance with 
gestures’ (Tōdō and Ogawa also posit the 
sense ‘elegant’), giving ‘dancing person’ and by 
extension ‘actor’. KJ1970:36-7; YK1976:479-80; 
TA1965:229; OT1968:83. 
Mnemonic: GENTLE ACTOR’S SUPERIOR 
DISPLAY OF PERSON’S GRIEF
YŪ, yasashii, sugureru
superior, gentle, actor
17 strokes
優
L3
995
幼児 YŌJI　infant
幼時 YŌJI　infancy
幼子 osanago　infant 
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 力 78 ‘strength’, with 幺 29 
(‘delicate/fi ne thread’; originally, pictograph 
of two fi ne threads intertwined [Mizukami]) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘small, tiny’, 
giving ‘weak in strength’, and by extension 
‘very young’. MS1995:v1:446-9; YK1976:481-2; 
KJ1970:32; OT1968:124. 
Mnemonic: INFANT SHORT ON STRENGTH, 
LIKE DELICATE THREAD
YŌ, osanai
infant, infancy
5 strokes
幼
L3
996

304  The 181 Sixth Grade Characters
欲望   YOKUBŌ　desire 
食欲   SHOKUYOKU　appetite
物欲しげ  monohoshige　wistful
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 欠 496 (orig-
inally, person yawning with mouth open wide; 
‘lack, omit’), and 谷 135 (‘valley’) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken either as i] ‘continu-
ous’ (Katō, Yamada), or ii] ‘about to eat’ (Ogawa), 
in either case giving ‘have mouth open’, and by 
extension ‘appetite’. Later extended to ‘desire’ 
and ‘greed’ in general. KJ1970:888; YK1976:486-
7; OT1968:532. 
Mnemonic: GREEDY PERSON LACKS VALLEY 
SO DESIRES ONE
YOKU, hoshii
desire, greed
11 strokes
欲
L3
997
翌日 
YOKUJITSU　the next day
翌朝 YOKUCHŌ　next morning
翌年 YOKUNEN　the next year
‘wings, feathers’, with 立 77 ‘stand, leave’; the 
latter element being taken in one analysis as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘fl y’ (Yamada), 
but another commentator rejects this, regard-
ing it as having a semantic function here, 
giving ‘raise the wings (in fl ight)’ (Tōdō). ‘Next’ 
appears to be a borrowed meaning, though 
just possibly related to time fl ying. YK1976:487; 
TA1965:87; OT1968:802; FC1974:v2:1772.
Mnemonic: THE WINGS OF TIME FLY 
AWAY – TILL THE NEXT TIME 
YOKU
next (in time)
11 strokes
翌
L3
998
OBI (翊) 
; seal (翊) 
. The more familiar 
shape 翌, with the same components arranged 
diff erently, is a popular form (quite late – ap-
pears to be Tang Dynasty onwards). It has 羽 82 
乱暴  RANBŌ　violence
反乱  HANRAN　rebellion
乱れ足 midareashi　out of step
it is thought to represent a curved knife with 
blades at either end and a handle in the middle; 
here, perhaps rather a blunt instrument to help 
unravel thread. Bronze form B, tentatively iden-
tifi ed by Katō (‘tentatively’, as he describes it as 
‘extremely unusual’) has a fi gure on the right 
which he interprets as ‘deformed, twisted’, and 
a left-hand part as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘be shortened/reduced’, giving an original 
meaning ‘be shortened’. As for the sense ‘dis-
order’, this could have arisen through focusing 
on the graph’s tangled thread rather than the 
act of disentangling (Tōdō), or it could be a 
loan usage. According to Shirakawa, initially  
was used for ‘rebel, disorder’, and 亂 for ‘bring 
to order’, but later this distinction was lost. 
However this came about, the sense ‘disorder’ 
has predominated. TA1965:555-7; OT1968:26-8; 
SS1984:865; KJ1970:895-6; FC1977:21. 
Mnemonic: KNEELING PERSON WITH 
TONGUE OUT MIGHT LEAD TO RIOT
RAN, midareru/su
disorder, riot
7 strokes
乱
L3
999
Bronze form A 
, bronze form B 
; seal 
; 
traditional 亂. The bronze forms are divergent, 
as are the analyses. Bronze form A, which is 
considered to be the ancestral (i.e. original) 
form of 亂, has one hand over and one hand 
beneath some thread, taken to signify ‘unravel 
tangled thread’ (Tōdō, Ogawa, Shirakawa); 
commentators do not say so, but it appears 
that the thread might be tangled on a bob-
bin (the shape in the middle of bronze form A, 
similar to 工 but turned ninety degrees). The 
modern right-hand element 乚 is a variant of 
乙 1072, which as an independent graph has 
been interpreted in various ways, but typically 

The 181 Sixth Grade Characters  305
卵黄 RAN’Ō　egg yolk
産卵 SANRAN　spawning
生卵 namatamago　raw egg
specifi c shape, but speculates to be possibly fi sh 
or insect eggs. The alternative treatment also 
takes as a pictograph, depicting not eggs but 
a pair of treadles on a loom, then borrowed on 
the basis of similarity in shape to represent ‘eggs’ 
(Katō, Yamada). The former view seems tenta-
tive, the latter more persuasive. OT1968:147; 
TA1965:555-6; KJ1970:146; YK1976:489-90. Sug-
gest taking as frog spawn on stalks.
Mnemonic: SPOTTED BLOBS OF SPAWN ON 
TWO UPRIGHT STALKS
RAN, tamago
egg, roe, spawn
7 strokes
卵
L3
1000
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Views diverge. 
Several scholars take as a pictograph – Ogawa 
considers to originally denote frog spawn, and 
by extension ‘egg’; Tōdō is uncertain over the 
御覧 GORAN 　look, try
回覧 KAIRAN　circulation
観覧 KANRAN　inspection
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 覽. 
Has 見 20 ‘see’, and 監 1l59 q.v., orig. ‘look at 
water surface in bowl as mirror’ (but minus 
RAN
see, look
17 strokes
覧
L1
1001
‘bowl’ 皿 300 in modern form), giving ‘super-
vise, watch’, thus ‘see, look’. Based on classical 
Chinese usage, Shirakawa takes 覧 as action of 
high-ranking individuals, but Schuessler feels 
it may just represent a variant of the word rep-
resented by 監 1159. TA1965:807; YK1976:490; 
SS1984:866; AS2007:305-6.
Mnemonic: SUPERVISOR LOOKS, BUT MISSES 
THE BOWL
裏面   RIMEN　inside, back 
裏毛   urake　fl eece lining
裏付ける  urazukeru　back up, support
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 衣 444 ‘garment’, and 
里 238 (‘village’) as phonetic with associated 
sense usually taken as ‘inside’, giving ‘inside/
reverse side of garment’, then generalized to 
RI, ura
reverse, back, inside, 
lining
13 strokes
裏
L3
1002
‘reverse’. Tōdō and Mizukami, though, take 
associated sense of 里 here as ‘fold, crease’, 
and consider that fabric woven with stripes or 
other pattern and folds/creases was often used 
for garment linings, hence ‘back, reverse side’. 
Despite this divergence, all commentators as-
sociate the graph with garment linings, i.e. ‘un-
derside’. YK1976:492; OT1968:906; SS1984:871; 
TA1965:102; MS1995:v2:1168-9. 
Mnemonic: CLOTHING MADE AT REAR OF 
VILLAGE HAS GOOD LINING
法律 HŌRITSU　law 
規律 KIRITSU　discipline
律儀 RICHIGI　integrity 
RITSU, RICHI
law, control
9 strokes
律
L3
1003
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 彳 131 ‘go, walk, move’ 
and 聿 (originally, hand holding writing brush 
> ‘write’, see 159) as phonetic with associated 
sense typically taken as ‘one’, giving ‘one path’, 
and by extension ‘rule, law’. Mizukami also 
gives an alternative, i.e. proposed associated 
sense ‘put in order’, giving ‘well-ordered path’. 
YK1976:494; KJ1970:55; MS1995:v1:484-5.
Mnemonic: MOVING HAND WRITES THE LAW

306  The 181 Sixth Grade Characters
臨時 RINJI　temporary 
臨海 RINKAI　littoral
臨席 RINSEKI　attendance 
明朗  MEIRŌ　bright 
朗報  RŌHŌ　good news
朗読法 RŌDOKUHŌ　elocution 
論文 RONBUN　thesis 
理論 RIRON 　theory
論理 RONRI　logic 
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has NJK 臥 ‘look down’, and 
品 405 (‘goods’), typically taken as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘water’s edge’, giving ‘look down 
from cliff  near water’s edge’, then generalized 
to ‘look down’, and associated meanings such 
as ‘verge on; attend’. Tōdō, however, rejects this 
RIN, nozomu
face, look out on,
verge, attend
18 strokes
RŌ, hogaraka
clear, fi ne, cheerful
10 strokes
RON
argument, opinion
15 strokes
臨
朗
論
L1
L1
L3
1004
1005
1006
analysis on the basis that the early Chinese 
sound value of 品 makes it unlikely as a phonetic 
in 臨, and so interprets it as 臥 with 品, to give 
‘look down (from a platform or similar) on mer-
chandise’ (then presumably generalized to ‘look 
down’, etc.). Given Schuessler’s reconstructed 
sound values for early Chinese, this interpreta-
tion has some merit, and is favored by Ogawa 
too. YK1976:500-01; TA1965:807; OT1968:830; 
KJ1970:132-3; TA1965:807; AS2007: 359,415. 
Suggest taking as 臣 543 ‘fi xed eye’, 𠂉/人 41 
‘person’, and 品 as boxed goods. 
Mnemonic: PERSON FACES BOXED GOODS 
WITH FIXED EYE
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 月 18 ‘moon’, 
and , short form of 良 628 (‘good’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘bright’, to give ‘bright 
moon’. Later generalized to ‘bright’; ‘clear’ and 
‘cheerful’ are extended senses. YK1976:506; 
OT1968:482; KJ1970:894.
Mnemonic: GOOD MOON IS CLEAR AND 
BRIGHT AND CHEERY
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 言 ‘speak; 
words’ 118, and 侖 631 (originally, wooden 
tablets [texts] bound in a roll) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘order, sequence’, giv-
ing ‘discussion which follows sequenced 
order’. YK1976:508; SS1984:889; KJ1970:912; 
OT1968:936. Suggest taking 亼 as a cap.
Mnemonic: THE WORDY ARGUMENT IS 
CAPPED BY A SEQUENCE OF TEXTS

The Remaining 1130 Characters  307
THE REMAINING 1130 CHARACTERS
亜熱帯 ANETTAI　subtropics 
欧亜  ŌA　Eurasia
亜流  ARYŪ　follower 
A
next, sub-, Asia
7 strokes
亜
L1
1007
to a separate room/space (in northern China, 
according to Mizukami). Misinterpreted in early 
times as showing hunchbacks (as for example 
in Shuowen), leading to sense ‘inferior’, though 
in fact this sense is a loan usage, as is ‘come 
after, next’. Also used for ‘Asia’. MS1995:v1:32-3; 
KJ1970:509; OT1968:35.
Mnemonic: THE NEXT FLOOR PLAN, FROM 
ASIA, IS SUB-STANDARD
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional 亞. Originally show-
ing fl oor plan of pit dwelling in ancient China 
with entrances on the four sides, each linked 
悲哀   HIAI　sadness 
哀歌   AIKA　dirge, elegy
物の哀れ mono no aware　pathos 
AI, aware/remu
sorry, pity
9 strokes
哀
L1
1008
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 口 22 ‘mouth, speak 
words’, and 衣 444 (‘garment’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘sad’, giving ‘wail, lament’. 
MS1995:v1:224-6; KJ1970:1; OT1968:179; 
AS2007:149. 
Mnemonic: MOUTH WAILS, CLOTHED IN 
SORROW
挨拶  AISATSU　greeting 
無挨拶 BUAISATSU　impoliteness
挨拶状 AISATSUJŌ　written notice
AI
push open (but used 
only in greeting 
[aisatsu])
10 strokes
挨
L1
1009
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Limited use. 
Has 扌 34 hand, with 矣, orig meaning unclear 
(Tōdō suggests may be original way of writing 
疑 848 ‘doubt’) but borrowed in early Chinese 
to represent a grammatical function word. 
矣 is treated in Shuowen as having a phonetic 
function in 挨, giving overall sense ‘hit on back, 
strike from behind’. Use of 挨 in 挨拶 ‘greeting’ 
is loan usage, only in Japanese; in modern Chi-
nese, core meaning of 挨 is ‘suff er’. TA1965:135-
7; SS1984:7; DJ2009:v3:998. Take ム as nose and  
矢 145 as ‘arrow’.
Mnemonic: HAND PUSHES ARROW UP NOSE 
BY WAY OF GREETING! 
曖昧な  AIMAI na　vague 
曖昧さ  AIMAIsa　vagueness
曖昧屋 AIMAIya　bawdy-house
AI
dark, not clear
17 strokes
曖
L1
1010
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Limited usage, 
usually linked with 昧 1999 ‘dark’. It has 日 
66 ‘sun’, and 愛 441 (‘love’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘darken, be cloudy’, giving 
‘dark’. It is somewhat ironic that the combined 
elements of ‘love’ (albeit phonetically) and ‘sun’ 
should produce a meaning ‘dark’/ ‘not clear’. 
OT1968:475; SS1984:8.
Mnemonic: IT IS NOT CLEAR AS TO WHY 
SUN-LOVERS ARE IN THE DARK

308  The Remaining 1130 Characters
握手  AKUSHU　handshake 
握り屋  nigiriya　miser
握り飯  nigirimeshi　rice-ball
AKU, nigiru
grasp, grip
12 strokes
握
L1
1011
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 扌 34 
‘hand’, and 屋 256 (‘building, dealer, storekeep-
er’) as phonetic with associated sense ‘press 
hard with the hand’, giving ‘grasp in the hand’. 
Also used in the sense of being grasping, avari-
cious. OT1968:422; KJ1970:4.
Mnemonic: GRASP STORE-KEEPER BY THE 
HAND
取り扱い  toriatsukai　handling 
扱き使い kokiatsukau　keep busy 
客扱い  KYAKUatsukai　hospitality
宛名   atena　address 
宛てがう  ategau　provide, supply 
森氏宛  MoriSHI-ate　to Mr Mori
大嵐  ōarashi　tempest 
雪嵐  yukiarashi　snow storm
五十嵐 Igarashi*　a surname
atsukau, koku
treat, handle, thresh
6 strokes
-ate, ateru, ategau, EN
address, provide, 
supply, letter to
8 strokes
arashi, RAN
storm
12 strokes
扱
宛
嵐
L1
L1
L1
1012
1013
1014
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 扌 34 
‘hand’, and 及 1202 (‘reach, extend’) as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘take in, gather’, 
giving ‘take in/gather by hand’. In Japanese, 
has taken on the meaning ‘handle, treat (as)’. 
‘Thresh’ is now a minor meaning in Japanese. 
OT1968:402; KJ1970:433-4; SS1984:172.
Mnemonic: REACH WITH HAND, THEN TREAT 
CAREFULLY
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 宀 30 
‘roof, building’ with 夗 ‘bend over’ (itself 
comprising 卩 41 ‘person bent over’ with 夕 
46 (‘evening’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘round, surround’) as phonetic with 
associated sense taken either as i] ‘bent, 
curved’, giving ‘bent, curved’ (Ogawa, Tōdō), 
or ii] ‘deep inside’, giving ‘deep inside a 
palace’ (Katō). Note: Original meaning of 
宛 is taken by Ogawa as ‘hemispherical 
roof’, but by Tōdō as referring to a per-
son bending over. Present meanings are 
loan usages. OT1968:273; TA1965:611-21; 
MS1995:v1:290-91; KJ1970:92. Suggest take 
㔾 as slumped/sleepy person. 
Mnemonic: SLEEPY PERSON SPENDS NIGHT 
UNDER ROOF, ADDRESS SUPPLIED
Seal 
; late graph (later Shuowen edition). Has 
山 26 ‘mountain, hill’ over 風 217 ‘wind’, giving 
original meaning ‘mist hanging over mountains, 
mist in wooded mountains’. ‘Storm’ evolved as a 
Japanese-only sense. GY2008:439; OT1968:306; 
SS1984:865.
Mnemonic: WIND IN THE MOUNTAINS MEANS 
A STORM

The Remaining 1130 Characters  309
威力   IRYOKU　authority 
威厳   IGEN 　dignity
威し文句  odoshiMONKU　threat 
行為   KŌI　action, act, deed 
所為   SEI*　reason, cause
為過ぎる  shisugiru　overdo 
I, odosu
authority, threaten
9 strokes
I, suru, nasu, tame
do, make, purpose, 
cause, reason 
9 strokes
威
為
L1
L1
1016
1017
respected’, ‘mother-in-law’. (Note the English 
slang expression for a mother-in-law, ‘old 
battle-ax’.) Later, the sense was general-
ized to ‘fear, frightening’, and extended to 
‘threat’. Note: Ogawa interprets the phonetic 
element slightly differently as 戉, another 
graph which refers to another type of battle-
ax. KJ1970:9-10; MS1995:v1:324-5,532-3; 
OT1968:256.
Mnemonic: AUTHORITATIVE WOMAN 
THREATENS WITH A BATTLE-AX
been used in ancient times for heavy construc-
tion work such as the building of palaces. Such 
an analysis is regarded as inappropriate by 
Katō, who treats the meaning ‘make’ as a gener-
alized sense deriving from ‘make a gesture’. 
Schuessler, by contrast, treats ‘make’ (also an-
other related near-homophone ‘for, on behalf 
of, because’) as a near-homophone in early 
Chinese of the word for ‘elephant’, and treats 
the etymology as not clear. It seems a likeli-
hood that ‘make’ is a loan usage of the graph 
象; and the same applies to ‘purpose’, ‘cause’, 
and ‘reason’. MS1995:v2:820-21; KJ1970:19; 
OT1968:631; AS2007:510; WB1994:60-62. Mne-
monically awkward, but we suggest remem-
bering by association with 鳥 190 ‘bird’.  
Mnemonic: DO IT FOR THE PURPOSE OF 
MAKING ODD BIRD FROM ELEPHANT
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 女 ‘woman’ 37, and 
戌 476/545 (‘type of  battle-ax / halberd’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘be afraid/
fearful’, giving ‘woman to be held in awe/
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional 爲. Has 爫 (爪) 1739 
‘claw, talon’, (here, ‘hand’), and 象 540 (‘el-
ephant; image’), taken in one analysis as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘shape, condition’, 
giving ‘gesture, make a gesture; imitate’ (Mizu-
kami, Katō), though the semantic progression 
here seems a little forced. Ogawa, alternatively, 
takes 象 semantically as ‘elephant’, giving ‘tame, 
domesticate’, and Shirakawa also interprets in 
similar vein, arguing that elephants would have 
依頼  IRAI　request 
依前  IZEN　as before 
依こ地  EKOJI　spite, stubbornness 
I, E, yoru
depend, thus
8 strokes
依
L2
1015
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 亻 41 ‘person’, and 衣 444 
(‘garment’) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken as i] ‘draw close, lean on’, giving ‘lean/
depend on’ (Katō, Ogawa), or ii] ‘hide’, giving 
‘rely on (something) to hide behind’ (Tōdō); 
Mizukami lists both interpretations. KJ1970:18-
19; OT1968:57; TA1965:699-701.
Mnemonic: THUS, A PERSON DEPENDS ON 
CLOTHES

310  The Remaining 1130 Characters
萎縮 ISHUKU　atrophy 
萎び IBI　waning, decline 
萎れ shiore　languishing 
I, naeru, shibomu, 
shioreru
droop, wither, wilt 
11 strokes
萎
L1
1020
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 艹 53 
‘vegetation, grass’, and 委 245 (‘entrust’). The 
function of the latter element is taken as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘supple’, and by ex-
tension here as ‘soften, wilt’, giving ‘plants wilt/
wither’. TA1965:618; SS1984:20. Suggest itemize 
elements from 委, namely 女 37 ‘woman’ and 
禾 87 ‘grain plant’. 
Mnemonic: WOMAN ENTRUSTED WITH 
PLANTS AND GRASS, BUT ALL WILTING
偉大 IDAI　grandeur
偉人 IJIN　hero, prodigy
偉物 eraBUTSU　great person
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 亻 41 ‘per-
son’, and 韋 (originally ‘patrol by going round 
an enclosed area’, or ‘avoid, move away from’; 
see 446 and 1024) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘diff erent, unusual, out of the ordinary’ 
(positive connotation), giving ‘unusual/ 
outstanding person’. OT1968:76; SS1984:20; 
KJ1970:8; MS1995:v1:258-9.
Mnemonic: GREAT PERSON DIFFERS FROM 
THE ORDINARY
I, erai
great, grand 
12 strokes
偉
L2
1021
大尉 TAII　captain 
少尉 SHŌI 　ensign
尉官 IKAN　company offi  cer 
I
military rank
11 strokes
尉
L1
1019
cally as ‘buttocks, posterior’, but again giving 
rise to the meaning ‘press down’, in the latter 
analysis as an extended sense (Tōdō). Overall, 
the graph has the original meaning ‘iron’ (the 
hand-held implement; later written 熨). Already 
used in Han dynasty China as the name of a 
military rank (Qiu: ‘company grade military 
offi  cer’). The latter sense appears to be a loan 
usage. KJ1970:8-9; OT1968:288; SS1984:19; 
QX2000:135-6. Suggest take graph as 尸 256 
‘corpse’, 示 723 ‘show’, and 寸 920 ‘hand’.
Mnemonic: HAND SHOWS CORPSE TO BE 
SOLDIER OF RANK
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Seal form 
shows 火 8 ‘fi re’ as lower element, and 寸 920 
‘hand/pulse’, combining with third element 
(represented by fi rst few strokes of the modern 
graph) taken either as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘press down’ (Katō, Ogawa), or semanti-
畏怖   IFU　fear 
畏敬   IKEI　awe
畏縮する  ISHUKU suru　cower 
I, kashikomaru, osoreru
fear, obey, awe
9 strokes
畏
L1
1018
or similar weapon, giving ‘threaten’, and by 
extension ‘be afraid’. The meanings ‘be in awe, 
obey’ are Japanese only. MS1995:v2:876-7; 
OT1968:670; TA1965:710-11. Suggest taking 
upper part as ‘fi eld’ 田 63 and lower as variant 
of ‘clothing’ 衣 444.
Mnemonic: I FEAR THAT IN AWE I OBEYED, 
LEAVING SOME CLOTHES IN A FIELD
OBI 
; seal . OBI form shows a demon-like 
fi gure with a large head holding aloft a club 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  311
椅子  ISU　chair
車椅子 kurumaISU　wheelchair
長椅子 nagaISU　couch
(associated sense unclear), meaning ‘(type of) 
catalpa tree’. The wood was sometimes used 
for musical instruments as well as chairs; chair 
furniture was made in China from the Tang 
Dynasty onwards, initially only for the elite. 
The meaning ‘chair’ evolved by association. 
OT1968:509-10; SS1984:20; DJ2009:v2:453.
Mnemonic: A CHAIR IS A STRANGE WOODEN 
THING
I
chair
12 strokes
椅
L1
1022
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 木 73 
‘wood, tree’, and 奇 1174 (‘strange’) as phonetic 
彙報 IHŌ　bulletin
語彙 GOI　vocabulary
辞彙 JII　dictionary
phonetic with associated sense  ‘round, sur-
round’, giving ‘animal which rolls into a ball’, 
again giving ‘hedgehog’ (Tōdō). Despite the 
diversity, scholars agree original meaning of 
彙 is ‘hedgehog’; the later sense ‘collect’ is an 
extended sense, based on the large number of 
densely-packed spines the animal has, giv-
ing an impression of being collected together. 
OT1968:343; SS1984:21; TA1965:712-9. Suggest 
using 果 454 for its meaning ‘fruit tree’, with head 
part 
 on top.
Mnemonic: HEDGEHOGS ON TOP OF FRUIT 
TREES!? COLLECT AND CLASSIFY! 
I
compile, collect, 
classify
13 strokes
彙
L1 ?
1023
相違  SŌI　diff erence
違反  IHAN　infringement
間違い machigai　mistake
OBI ; seal 
. Has ⻌ 85 ‘walk, go’, and 韋 (origi-
nal sense considered to be either ‘go in diff erent 
directions, move away from’ or ‘patrol by going 
round enclosed area’; see 446 and 1021), here 
as semantic and phonetic with associated sense 
‘move away from’, giving ‘move away from’; ‘be 
diff erent’ is an extended sense. QX2000:192; 
KJ1970:8; MS1995:v2:1298-9,1436-8.
Mnemonic: MOVE AWAY IN A DIFFERENT 
DIRECTION
I, chigau
diff er
13 strokes
違
L2
1024
維持 IJI　upkeep
維新 ISHIN　restoration
繊維 SEN’I　fi ber
associated sense range ‘hold fi rmly, pull, dangle 
and pull’, giving ‘rope for pulling’; in Shuowen, 
further defi ned as the ropes for pulling the 
hood of a cart or carriage. Sense generalized 
to ‘rope’, and by extension ‘tie’, and presum-
ably also ‘strengthen/support’. KJ1970:13; 
MS1995:v2:1016-18; OT1968:780. 
Mnemonic: ROPE THREADED THROUGH BIRD 
HELPS SUPPORT IT
I
rope, tie, support
14 strokes
維
L1
1025
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 糸 29 ‘thread’, and 隹 
324 (‘short-tailed bird, bird’) as phonetic with 
Seal ; late graph (Shuowen).  Analyses vary. One 
takes as originally a pictograph of a hedgehog 
(Ogawa, Shirakawa). Alternatively, it is seen as 
abbreviation of NJK 彖 ‘wild boar; hedgehog’, 
with an abbreviation of 胃 447 (‘stomach’) as 

312  The Remaining 1130 Characters
逸品  IPPIN　fi ne article
逸れ矢 soreya　stray arrow
逸出  ISSHUTSU　escape
now corresponds to 免 2018 ‘avoid, escape’ 
(q.v.), there is no entry for 免 in Shuowen – 
and thus no seal form.  However, a seal-style 
equivalent for A) 免 was created at a later date 
(sometimes done), very close to seal form for B) 
兔 ‘rabbit’ (NJK). Historically, we fi nd variation 
in the shape of the right-hand element of 逸, in 
what seems to be a degree of confused usage 
between shapes A) and B). As is the case with 
兔 ‘rabbit’, historically we fi nd some fl uctuation 
in the shape of graph 1029, though the latter 
now has 逸 as its standard form in modern 
Japanese. MS1995:v2:1296-7; GY2008:1289; 
KJ1970:56-7,730.
Mnemonic: MOVE FAST LIKE A RABBIT AND ESCAPE 
ITSU, soreru/rasu 
escape, go astray fast, 
excel
11 strokes
逸
L1
1029
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 逸. Bronze has 
⻌ 85 ‘go, move’ and stylized depiction of lean-
looking animal, taken as hare/rabbit, thus ‘hare/ 
rabbit escapes’ (Katō cautiously says ‘animal 
escapes’). At seal stage, this animal is very styl-
ized. For the right-hand element of 逸, which 
壱万円 ICHIMAN’EN　10,000 yen
壱千  ISSEN　one thousand
弐拾壱 NIJŪICHI　twenty-one
phonetic with associated sense ‘steamy, moldy’, 
thus ‘wine ferments and jar fi lls up’ (Yamada, Shi-
rakawa, Ogawa). The sense ‘one’ is a loan usage, 
though possibly with a semantic component 
also, according to Qiu. YK1976:58; KJ1970:28-30; 
QX2000:120,275; SS1984:27-8. Suggest as 士 521 
samurai, 匕 prone fi gure, and 冖 cover.
Mnemonic: ONE SAMURAI STANDS 
COVERING PRONE FIGURE 
ICHI
one (formal)
7 strokes
壱
L1
1028
Seal 
; late graph (post-Shuowen); traditional: 
壹. Has 壷 ‘wine jar (bulbous, narrow neck 
opening out at rim)’, and 吉 1196 (’auspicious’) as 
慰問  IMON　consolation
慰安  IAN　comfort
慰み物 nagusamimono　plaything
‘press down’), taken either as phonetic with 
associated sense i] ‘become angry’, giving ‘anger 
pent up in the heart’ (Katō), or ii] ‘press down’, 
giving ‘calm down the heart/feelings’ (Ogawa). 
In the former interpretation, ‘console’ is a loan 
usage. Mizukami looks to list a bronze equiva-
lent. KJ1970:9; OT1968:384; MS1995:v1:522-3.
Mnemonic: THE HEART OF A PERSON WITH 
MILITARY RANK IS COMFORTING Or (see 1019): 
SHOW CORPSE’S HAND TO CONSOLE FEELINGS?!
I, nagusami/mu/meru
comfort, console, 
amusement
15 strokes
慰
L1
1026
Seal 
. Has 心 164 ‘heart, mind, feelings’, and 
尉 1019 (‘military rank’, but originally meant 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 糸 29 
‘thread’, and 韋 446 (original sense ‘move away’ 
or ‘patrol round an area’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘surround’, thus ‘thread that 
surrounds (the vertical thread)’, i.e. ‘horizontal 
woof’. KJ1970:8; TA1965:718; OT1968:786.
Mnemonic: HORIZONTAL WEFT THREAD 
DIFFERS IN DIRECTION TO WARP 
I, nuki
horizontal, weft
16 strokes
緯
L1
1027

The Remaining 1130 Characters  313
茨城県 IbarakiKEN*　Ibaraki Prefecture
茨虫  ibaramushi　rose bug
茨木  Ibaraki　city in Osaka-fu
of writing 茨. Refl ecting the trend in script 
development, from depicting the concrete to 
representing the abstract, it is believed that 
次 was the original way of writing ‘miscanthus’ 
(and similar plants), after which the graph was 
borrowed for its sound value to represent ‘next’, 
with 艹 being added to indicate usage when 
in the sense ‘miscanthus’. Present meanings 
now include ‘thorn, bramble’. MS1995:696-7; 
DJ2009:v1:78;  KJ1970:181-2.  
Mnemonic: THE NEXT PLANT AFTER THATCH 
IS BRIAR
ibara, SHI
thatch, briar, bramble, 
thorn
9 strokes
茨
L1
1030
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 艹 53 ‘plant, 
vegetation’, and 次 308 (‘next’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘arrange’ (or ‘stop’), 
giving ‘arrange plant material (on a roof)’, i.e. 
‘thatch’. 次 is regarded as the original way 
里芋  satoimo　taro
芋貝  imogai　cone shell
焼き芋  yakiimo　baked potato
of curved wood [variant shapes include 亐]) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘big, big 
leaves’, giving ‘taro, sweet potato’ (a plant 
with big, heart-shaped leaves). In modern 
times, sense extended to ‘potato’ in gen-
eral. MS1995:v2:1106-7,28-30; OT1968:842; 
KJ1970:70. Suggest taking 于 as a peg.
Mnemonic: PEG OUT WHERE POTATO PLANTS 
ARE TO BE PUT
imo
potato
6 strokes
芋
L1
1031
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 艹 ‘plant, grass’ 53, 
and 于 (NJK, originally pictograph of artefact 
婚姻  KON’IN　marriage
姻戚  INSEKI　in-laws
姻族閥 INZOKUBATSU　nepotism
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 女 ‘woman’ 
37, and 因 643 ‘depend on, cause’ as semantic 
and phonetic, meaning that which a woman 
depends on, i.e. ‘groom’s family’ and by as-
sociation ‘marriage’. KJ1970:62-3; OT1968:257; 
SS1984:31. Take 大 56 as ‘big man’, and 口 84 
‘enclosure, confi ned’. 
Mnemonic: BIG MAN CONFINED BY WOMAN 
AFTER MARRIAGE
IN
marriage 
9 strokes
姻
L1
1033
咽喉   INKŌ　throat
咽っぽい  museppoi　stuff y
咽頭   INTŌ　pharynx
meaning possibly related to confi nement) 
as phonetic with associated sense taken as i] 
‘drink’, giving ‘drink’, and by extension ‘throat’ 
(Ogawa), or ii] ‘be blocked’, giving ‘choke’ (Tōdō); 
Gu takes ‘be blocked, choke’ as a loan usage. 
OT1968:180; TA1965:787; GY2008:847. Suggest 
take 因 as 大 56 ‘large’ and 口 84 ‘enclosure’, as 
well as ‘cause’. 
Mnemonic: CAUSE OF CHOKING MOUTH IS 
THROAT BEING LARGELY ENCLOSED
IN, musebu/ru/ppoi, 
nodo
throat, choke
9 strokes
咽
L1
1032
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 口 22 ‘mouth; 
speak’, and 因 643 (‘cause, depend on’; orig 

314  The Remaining 1130 Characters
韻文 INBUN　poetry
韻律 INRITSU　rhythm
音韻 ON’IN　phoneme
Seal 
; late graph (later version of Shuowen). 
Has 音 6 ‘sound’, and 員 248 (originally, 
‘round-necked vessel’; now ‘member, offi  cial’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘harmonize; 
rounded, mild’, giving ‘harmonious/mild sound’. 
KJ1970:57; OT1968:1100; SS1984:36. 
Mnemonic: OFFICIAL’S RHYME SOUNDS TO 
HAVE TONE TO IT
IN
rhyme, tone
19 strokes
韻
L1
1037
隠居  INKYO　retirement
隠者  INJA　hermit
隠れ家 kakureGA　refuge
in anguish, lament’) as phonetic with associat-
ed sense ‘hide’, giving ‘hide on a hill’; sense later 
generalized to ‘hide’. Shirakawa, in contrast, 
adopts a characteristically idiosyncratic, ritual-
istic interpretation. OT1968:1074; KJ1970:62; 
ZY2009:v2:363; SS1984:34-5. Suggest take both 
⺤ and 彐 as hands, with 心 164 ‘heart/feelings’. 
Mnemonic: HIDE IN THE HILLS, BOTH HANDS 
ON HEART
IN, kakureru/su
hide
14 strokes
隠
L1
1036
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 隱. Has 
阝 (阜) 1907 ‘hill, piled earth’, and  (CO, ‘be sad/
淫乱 INRAN　lechery
淫欲 IN’YOKU　sexual desire 
多淫 TAIN　lustfulness
interpreted variously, as follows: i] ‘ooze out’; ii] 
‘water soaks in’ (Mizukami lists both i] and ii]); 
iii] ‘put in with some strength/forcefully’; iv] 
‘heavily indulge in’ (Mizukami). All these inter-
pretations are seen to involve a connotation of 
‘excess’. Associated senses i] to iii] above give 
overall meaning ‘water oozes out’, ‘water soaks 
in’, while iv] gives ‘be heavily addicted to evil 
ways’; the latter is probably a later meaning, but 
now main one. KJ1970:64-5; MS1995:v2:756-7; 
OT1968:583; AS2007:573. 
Mnemonic: HANDLING SPINDLE IN WATER 
SEEN AS EXCESSIVELY LEWD
IN, midara na
lewd, indecent, excess 
11 strokes
淫
L1
1034
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵 42 
‘water, liquid’, and 㸒 (itself comprising 爫 [爪 
1739] normally ‘claw’, but here  ‘hand’, with 
壬 777 [spindle] as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘want’, giving ‘take what one wants’ 
[Katō]) taken as phonetic with associated sense 
陰気 INKI　gloom, sadness
陰部 INBU　private parts
陰口 kageguchi　backbiting
‘dark side of a hill’, and hence ‘shade, shadow’. 
By extension, ‘secret’. In Chinese culture, also 
denotes the dark, negative principle (yin) 
in contrast to the bright, positive one (陽 
yang; see 429). Mizukami lists bronze equiva-
lents also. MS1995:v2:1396-7; OT1968:1068; 
TA1965:815-23. Suggest take right side as 今 
138 ‘now’ and NJK 云 ‘say, tell’ (also ‘cloud’: see 
83).
Mnemonic: IN THE DARK SHADOWS OF THE 
HILLS WE CAN NOW TELL SECRETS
IN, kage
shadow, secret, 
negative, dark 
11 strokes
陰
L1
1035
Seal 
. Has 阝 (阜) 1907 ‘hill, piled-up earth’, 
and  (itself the earliest way of writing 陰) as 
semantic and phonetic, meaning ‘dark’, giving 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  315
畝立て  unedate　ridging/furrowing 
畝間  unema　space between ridges
畝折  uneori　ribbed fabric
overall meaning. 久 676 (‘lasting’) is a phonetic 
for hillock. Thus the ‘undulating contour of a 
cultivated fi eld’, and hence ‘ridge’ or ‘furrow’. 
Shape of phonetic became distorted over time 
to combination of 亠 and 久. When read as se 
in Japanese, refers to unit of area, approx 100 
square meters (but in China, 畝 denotes 667 
square meters). MS1995:v2:882-3; KJ1970:857-
8. Take 亠 as ‘hat’, ‘fi eld’ 田 63, and  ‘lasting’ 久 
676. 
Mnemonic: TAKE ONE’S HAT OFF TO LASTING 
WELL-FURROWED FIELD
une, uneru, se 
ridge, furrow
10 strokes
畝
L1
1040
Bronze 
; seal 
. Bronze form has 田 63 ‘fi eld’, 
and 每 225 (original sense possibly ‘abundant 
plants’; now ‘each, every’) as phonetic with as-
sociated sense ‘ridge’, giving ‘fi eld ridge’ (Katō, 
Mizukami); Mizukami takes ‘fi eld’/‘produce’ as 
an alternative associated sense, giving same 
小唄 kouta　ditty, ballad
地唄 JIuta　folk song
長唄 nagauta　song for samisen
This is a late graph (post-Shuowen). Has 口 
22 ‘mouth; speak’, and 貝 10 (‘shell, shell 
currency’), here employed as phonetic purely 
for its sound value to represent an abbreviated 
rendition of a Sanskrit word meaning ‘song to 
extol merits of Buddha’; in Japanese, the mean-
ing has broadened to now incorporate ‘folk 
songs’. OT1968:183; SS1984:685.
Mnemonic: PUTTING A SHELL TO ONE’S 
MOUTH PRODUCES A SONG
uta, BAI
song 
10 strokes 
唄
L1
1038
鬱病 UTSUBYŌ　depression
鬱気 UKKI　gloom, melancholy
陰鬱 IN’UTSU na　cheerless
‘dense (forest)’ (鬱), and the other ‘fragrant herb’ 
(Schuessler). Shirakawa considers form ii] may 
have originally referred to a fragrant herb used 
in scented wine, but that form ii] and 鬱 then 
came to be used interchangeably. This refl ects 
the view of traditional scholarship (Kangxi zidian). 
Mizukami, who gives what he regards as bronze 
equivalents for 鬱 and form ii], lists both with 
substantially overlapping meanings (core mean -
ing: trees and other vegetation growing togeth-
er in very close proximity), and treats ‘fragrant 
herb’ as a loan use of form ii]. The above varia-
tions in form together with diff erences in treat -
ment of the component parts make this a 
challenging graph to analyze. SS1984:40-41; 
MS1995:v2:1480-83; OT1968:530; TA1965:
707-10; DJ2009:v2:492,418-9; KZ2001:361,378; 
AS2007:513,592.
Mnemonic: IT’S DEPRESSING TO FIND A CAN 
IN A GLOOMY FOREST – A DOTTED WINE-VES-
SEL WITH A COVER AND THREE SCRATCHES 
UTSU
melancholy, 
gloom, depression
29 strokes
鬱
L1
1039
Seal form i] (鬱) 
; seal form ii] (
) 
. Both 
occur as traditional forms. Analyses diff er. 
The elements in 鬱 are: 林 79 ‘forest’, 缶 1141 
(originally ‘lidded earthenware pot/jar’, now ‘tin, 
can’), 冖 ‘cover’, 鬯 ‘wine in vessel with fragrant 
herb added’, and 彡 115 ‘adorn’ etc. Instead of 
林, form ii] has ⺽ ‘two hands’. Shuowen defi nes 
鬱 as ‘luxuriant tree growth’, and according to 
Shirakawa, this referred originally to a special 
variety of wine with herbs, packed into jars. The 
Shuowen gives separate treatment to 鬱 and 
the similarly-shaped form ii]. The two graphs 
appear to have represented two homopho-
nous words in early Chinese, one meaning 

316  The Remaining 1130 Characters
鋭利 EIRI na　sharp, keen
鋭角 EIKAKU　acute angle
精鋭 SEIEI　elite, ‘crack’
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
form has 兌 (NJK ‘shaman’ 553) as right-hand 
element. Has 金 16 ‘metal’, and 兌 (analyses 
include ‘open mouth with laughter, glad’ [Gu, 
Schuessler,], and ‘one who pleases the deities’ 
[Ogawa], ‘shaman’ [Katō]) as phonetic with 
associated sense typically taken as ‘sharp, 
small and sharp’, giving ‘sharp edged tool/
EI, surudoi
sharp, keen
15 strokes
鋭
L2
1044
浦和市 Urawa-Shi　Urawa City
浦路  uraji　coastal road
浦里  urazato　coastal village
‘fi rst time’) as phonetic with associated sense 
as i] ‘side’, giving ‘water’s edge’ (Katō), or ii] ‘fl at’, 
giving ‘fl at land next to water’ (Ogawa). Specifi c 
senses ‘inlet, bay’ refl ect Japanese usage rather 
than Chinese (fl at land near ocean or river). 
KJ1970:856; OT1968:580.
Mnemonic: SEE WATER FOR FIRST TIME AT 
COASTAL BAY
ura, HO
bay, inlet, coast
10 strokes
浦
L1
1041
詠歌 EIKA　composition
詠草 EISŌ　poetry draft
詠史 EISHI　epic
Bronze (咏) 
; seal (Shuowen) 
. Bronze 
form has 口 22 ‘speak, mouth’, and 永 644 
(‘long’) as semantic and phonetic, giving ‘speak 
in a drawn-out manner’, as when reading out 
Chinese and Japanese poetry. Shuowen has 詠 
as the entry heading, but with 咏 also noted 
as an alternative form. MS1995:v2:1190-91; 
OT1968:923; KJ1970:78-9. 
Mnemonic: SPEAK FOR LONG TIME WHEN 
RECITING POETRY
EI, yomu
poem, recite, 
compose
12 strokes
詠
L1
1042
影響  EIKYŌ　infl uence 
影像  EIZŌ　shadow, image
影武者 kageMUSHA　warrior’s double 
光 129 (‘light’) became associated with the 
Yang principle (positive, strong, male), and 景 
with the Yin principle (overcast, dark, negative, 
female), and at this point the determinative 
element 彡 (posited meanings vary consider-
ably: ‘light, adorn’ [Ogawa], ‘feathery’ ([Qiu]) was 
added. The possibility of a semantic association 
of ‘shadow’ with ‘light’ (shadow cast by light on 
an object) is noted by Schuessler. SS1984:46; 
KJ1970:83; AS2007:576-7. Suggest taking 彡 as 
streams of rays of sunlight, and 景 as ‘sun’ 日 66 
over ‘capital’ 京 110.
Mnemonic: STREAMING RAYS OF SUNLIGHT 
CAST SHADOWS IN THE CAPITAL
EI, kage
shadow, image, light
15 strokes
影
L1
1043
Seal (景) 
; 影 itself is not included in 
Shuowen, but Shirakawa notes it reported as 
occurring in a Han period stele. Another scholar 
(Katō) accounts as follows for the addition of 
彡 115: originally written 景 494 (‘bright’), com-
prising 日 66 ‘sun’, with 京 110 (‘capital’) as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘light’; later, though, 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵 42 water, 
and NJK 甫 (orig possibly ‘use ax’, now means 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  317
喜悦 KIETSU　joy
悦楽 ETSURAKU　enjoyment
満悦 MAN’ETSU　delight
Schuessler], ‘one who pleases the deities’ 
[Ogawa], ‘shaman’ [Katō]), here as semantic 
and phonetic, giving ‘one’s heart is glad; 
rejoice’. Shirakawa interprets 兌 similarly 
here, i.e. ‘pray to the deities and be in ecstasy’. 
OT1968:371; KJ1970:602; GY2008:491,1141; 
AS2007:219,586; SS1984:52. Take 兄 as ‘elder 
brother’ 114, 丷 as ‘out’ 70.
Mnemonic: ELDER BROTHER GIVES OUT 
FEELINGS OF JOY
ETSU
joy
10 strokes
悦
L1
1046
Late, post-Shuowen graph; traditional form 
has 兌 553 (‘shaman’) as right-hand ele-
ment. Graph has 忄 164 ‘heart, feelings’, with 
兌 (interpretations include ‘be glad’ [Gu, 
優越   YŪETSU　superiority
越境   EKKYŌ　border violation
追い越す oikosu　overtake
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 走 ‘run’ 179, 
and 戉 (‘ax-like weapon’, ‘halberd’, see 476/545) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘leap, leap 
up, straddle’, giving ‘leap up and cross, cross 
over’. KJ1970:96-7; OT1968:967; TA1965:637; 
AS2007:596.
Mnemonic: RUN WITH HALBERD TO CROSS 
THE BORDER
ETSU, koeru/su
cross, exceed, excel
12 strokes
越
L2
1047
item’ (Ogawa, Katō), or – originally – ‘beard of 
wheat’ (Gu). The latter analysis gives ‘sharp’ 
as an extended sense, deriving from the fact 
that a beard of wheat is the bristly material 
surrounding the kernel, and also remind-
ing us that the ancients were so much more 
closely in touch with nature than we are 
today. GY2008:491,1443; AS2007:219,586; 
OT1968:1043; KJ1970:602-4. Suggest 兄 as 
‘elder brother’ 114, 丷 as ‘away’ 70, and 金 as 
‘money’.
Mnemonic: ELDER BROTHER IS ALWAYS SHARP 
WHEN MONEY IS GIVEN AWAY
防疫 BŌEKI　disinfection
悪疫 AKUEKI　plague
検疫 KEN’EKI　quarantine
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 疒 404 
‘sick-bed, sickness’, and ‘strike’ 殳 170, here 
taken as abbreviation of 役 419 (‘role, 
service’) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken as i] ‘go round’, giving ‘sickness which 
goes round’, or ii] ‘disaster, calamity’; either 
view gives overall meaning ‘epidemic’. 
KJ1970:87-8; SS1984:49; OT1968:677. Take 殳 
as ‘strike’. 
Mnemonic: NEED SICK-BED WHEN EPIDEMIC 
STRIKES  
EKI, YAKU
epidemic
9 strokes
疫
L1
1045

318  The Remaining 1130 Characters
拝謁  HAIETSU　audience
謁見  EKKEN　audience
謁見室 EKKENSHITSU　chamber
‘question loudly’ (Gu), thus ‘request’. Katō ac-
counts for the sense ‘audience, meeting with 
someone of high status’ by noting that when 
seeking an audience, a request involved writ-
ing down the name of the audience-seeker, 
which was then presented to the person of 
high status, and this gave rise to ‘audience’ by 
association. MS1995:v1:148-9; GY2008:1336; 
KJ1970:97; OT1968:933. Note 匂here is not 
‘smell’ 1821, though same shape. Take 曰/日 as 
‘day’ 66, 匕 as sitting person, and 勹 corner. 
Mnemonic: PERSON SITTING IN CORNER ALL 
DAY TO SPEAK IN AUDIENCE  
ETSU
audience (with high 
ranking person)
15 strokes
謁
L1
1048
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional form 
has 曷 on right. Has 言 118 ‘speak’, and 曷 (NJK
曰 ‘say, articulate’, with 匃 CO ‘stop and ask’, 
as phonetic having associated sense ‘stop, 
detain’), thus ‘stop and question’ (Ogawa); or 
閲兵 EPPEI　troop review
検閲 KEN’ETSU　censorship
閲覧 ETSURAN　perusal
within the gates’, Ogawa adds ‘horses and vehi-
cles at mausoleum gates’). Katō, alternatively, 
treats 門 here not as ‘gate’ but as an abbrevia-
tion of a more complex element consisting of 
an archaic form of 下 ‘under, go down’ 7 over 
門, which he asserts has the meaning ‘set out, 
arrange’; despite this diff erent analysis of 閲, 
the overall meaning Katō arrives at is similarly 
‘line up and count’. SS1984:52; OT1968:1061; 
KJ1970:602,604; AS2007:184,219; GY2008:491. 
Take 兄 as ‘elder brother’ 114, 丷 as ‘out’ 70.
Mnemonic: ELDER BROTHER GETS OUT OF 
GATE FOR INSPECTION
ETSU
inspection
15 strokes
閲
L1
1049
Widely seen as 門 231 ‘gate’, and 兌 553 (inter-
pretations include ‘be glad’ [Gu, Schuessler], 
‘one who pleases the deities’ [Ogawa], ‘shaman’ 
[Katō]), here as phonetic with associated sense 
‘count’, giving a core meaning ‘line up and 
count’ (Shirakawa adds ‘horses and vehicles 
火炎 KAEN　fl ame, blaze
脳炎 NŌEN　encephalitis
炎天 ENTEN　scorching weather
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 火 8 ‘fi re’ on top of another 
火, taken to denote an intensifi ed sense ‘vigor-
ous fi re; burn vigorously’ (Mizukami, Ogawa), or 
to mean ‘light of fi re rising upward’ (Qiu, Katō). 
The latter is the explanation given in Shuowen. 
MS1995:v2:796-7; OT1968:616; QX2000:199; 
KJ1970:97. 
Mnemonic: TWO FIRES MAKE A LOT OF FLAMES
EN, honō
fl ame
8 strokes
炎
L1
1050
私怨  SHIEN　personal grudge
怨念  ONNEN　grudge, malice
怨み言 uramigoto　grudge
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 心 164 
‘heart, mind’, and CO 夗 (see Note below), 
as phonetic with associated sense taken as 
i] ‘accumulate’, thus ‘feelings are congested 
or ‘unsettled’ (Katō), or ii] ‘bent, crooked’  
thus ‘feelings are distorted’ (Ogawa). Note: 
meanings of 夗/夘 are ‘bend the body over’ 
(Katō), and ‘bend over/fall down’ (the latter is 
EN, ON, urami/mu
grudge, malice
9 strokes
怨
L1
1051

The Remaining 1130 Characters  319
宴会 ENKAI　banquet
宴楽 ENRAKU　revelry
酒宴 SHUEN　drinking bout
thus ‘relax indoors’ (Ogawa); Schuessler also 
says ‘be at ease, rest, feast’. Shirakawa sees 
妟 as original form of 宴, taking 日 66 ‘sun’ 
as jewel related to ritual. A more sexually-
orientated analysis also seems possible 
for this graph. Katō treats the meaning of 
banquet as loan usage, though a case could 
be made for an extended meaning, particu-
larly following Schuessler. KJ1970:99-100; 
OT1968:277; MS1995:v1:372-3; SS1984:53-
4,56; AS2007:556.  
Mnemonic: BANQUET PROVIDED BY WOMAN 
IN RESTFUL SUNNY BUILDING
EN, utage
banquet, rest
10 strokes
宴
L1
1052
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 宀 30 ‘roof, build-
ing’, with CO 妟 (‘woman fl irting captivat-
ingly’ [Katō]) as phonetic with associated 
sense taken either as i] ‘charming, beautiful’, 
thus ‘room made charming and beautiful 
by a woman living there’ (Katō), or ii] ‘relax’, 
才媛  SAIEN　talented woman
愛媛県 EhimeKEN　Ehime Prefecture
媛 
 hime　princess
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
form has NJK 爰 as right-hand element. Has 
女 37 ‘woman’, and 爰 (now means ‘here’ but 
originally ‘pull’; OBI form shows an object being 
pulled from above by 爫/爪 1739 ‘claw’ [here 
‘hand’] and from below by 又 2003 ‘hand’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘beautiful, 
graceful’, thus ‘beautiful woman’. OT1968:260; 
MS1995:v2:818-20; SS1984:55-8; KJ1970:107-8; 
DJ2009:v3:1021.   
Mnemonic: PRINCESS-LIKE WOMAN PULLED 
BY HANDS FROM ABOVE AND BELOW 
EN, hime
princess, young noble 
lady
12 strokes
媛
L1
1053
援助 ENJO　assistance
応援 ŌEN　backing, aid
声援 SEIEN　vocal support
pulled from above by 爫/爪 ‘claw’ 1739 [here 
as ‘hand’] and from below by 又 2003 ‘hand’; 
Katō takes the object as jade disc) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘pull’, giving ‘pull, pull 
up’, and by extension ‘assist’. 援 was originally 
written 爰, with 扌 added later for clarity so as 
to distinguish the meaning from 瑗 ‘jade disc 
for pulling’, which was a symbol of authority. 
OT1968:422; SS1984:58; KJ1970:107-8.  
Mnemonic: THREE HANDS TO HELP
EN
help
12 strokes
援
L1
1054
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional form 
has NJK 爰 as right-hand element (see 1053). 
Has 扌 ‘hand’ 34, and 爰 (‘pull from above 
and below’; OBI form shows an object being 
noted in Mizukami as an extended meaning). 
OT1968:362-3; TA1965:611-21; KJ1970:91-g3; 
MS1995:v1:290-91. Take 㔾 as prone fi gure and 
夕 as ‘evening, night’ 46. 
Mnemonic: PRONE FIGURE HAS A GRUDGE 
IN HIS HEART AT NIGHT

320  The Remaining 1130 Characters
類人猿  RUIJIN’EN　anthropoid
野猿   YAEN　wild monkey
猿真似屋 sarumaneya　copycat
the left-hand form of 犬 ‘dog’ 19 in compound 
graphs, but often used in a wider sense as ‘ani-
mal’, as here. In earlier form 猨, 爰 1053 is both 
semantic and phonetic, meaning ‘pull, pull up’, 
thus ‘animal which pulls itself up (in trees), i.e. 
‘monkey’. 袁 84 (‘long/fl owing garment’) seems 
to have replaced 爰 purely for its phonetic 
function here. DY2009:v3:1098; ZY2009:v2:718; 
SS1984:59; OT1968:901.
Mnemonic: ANIMAL WITH LONG GARMENT IS 
A MONKEY, APING SOMEONE
EN, saru
monkey, ape
13 strokes
猿
L1
1056
Seal (蝯) 
; late graph (Shuowen). The 6th 
century Yupian gives 猨 as the orthodox form 
(main form) of this graph, and notes 猿 as a 
popular form. Later 猿 prevailed and is listed 
as the main form in Kangxi zidian. It has 犭, 
亜鉛 AEN　zinc
黒鉛 KOKUEN　graphite
鉛筆 ENPITSU　pencil
as ‘black tinged with blue’. Katō sees it as ‘white’, 
maintaining that in ancient times lead and tin 
(the latter a whitish alloy) were not well distin-
guished, thus the association between lead and 
white. However, Shuowen itself defi nes ‘lead’ 
and ‘tin’ contrastively, explaining 鉛 ‘lead’ as ‘a 
blue metal’, and NJK 錫 ‘tin’ as ‘a metal between 
silver and lead’. OT1968:1038; KJ1970:106; 
DJ2009:v3:1140-41. Take 㕣 as ‘out’ 八 70 and 
‘holes’ 口 22.
Mnemonic: METAL TAKEN OUT OF HOLES IS LEAD
EN, namari
lead (metal)
13 strokes
鉛
L1
1057
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 金 16 ‘metal’, 
and 㕣/㕣  832 (‘cave/hole from which water 
gushes forth’) as phonetic with associated 
sense taken variously by scholars. Ogawa sees it 
縁側  ENgawa　verandah
縁縫い fuchinui　hemming
縁談  ENDAN　marriage proposal
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional form 
緣. Has 糸 29 ‘thread’, and  (‘boar’ or similar) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘edge’, giving 
‘edge of fabric’. Tōdō includes in word-family 
‘fall down’, thus ‘hanging edge of fabric’, Shi-
rakawa says ‘embroidered edge’. ‘Ties, relations’ 
are extended senses. OT1968:784; TA1965:539-
46; SS1984:60; DJ2009:v3:1067. 
Mnemonic: BOAR TIED WITH THREAD IS 
EDGY ABOUT FATE
EN, fuchi
edge, relations,
ties, fate
15 strokes
縁
L1
1058
煙突 ENTOTSU　chimney
禁煙 KIN’EN　‘no smoking’
煙草 tabako*　tobacco
burner covers and obscures things’, though the 
latter seems speculative. Seal form is taken as 火 
‘fi re’, with 垔 as phonetic with associated sense 
‘obstruct’, construed as ‘fi re burns but air fl ow is 
blocked and fi re smoulders’. Tōdō takes associ-
ated sense instead as ‘obscure, conceal’. In all of 
the above, ‘smoke’ represents a derived sense. 
OT1968:623; MS1995:v2:804-5; KJ1970:107. Sug-
gest take 垔 as 西 169 ‘west’ and 土 64 ‘ground’. 
Mnemonic: FIRE IN THE WESTERN GROUND 
PRODUCES SMOKE 
EN, kemuri, kemui
smoke, ill at ease
13 strokes
煙
L2
1055
OBI (垔) 
; seal 
. Has 火 8 ‘fi re’, and CO 
垔 (originally ‘block’). OBI shows smoke from 
incense burner, taken by Ogawa as ‘produce 
smoke’; Mizukami takes as ‘smoke from incense 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  321
汚染  OSEN　pollution
汚職  OSHOKU　bribery
汚れ物 yogoremono　dirty laundry
made of a curved piece of wood; variants 
include 亐: see also 1031) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘a hollow, cavity’, giving ‘accu-
mulated/stagnant water’. ‘Dirty’ is an extended 
sense, incorporating both physical dirt and ab-
stract in a sense such as ‘dirty’ trick. OT1968:557; 
KJ1970:70-71; TA1965:418-20. Suggest taking 
亐 as twisted peg.
Mnemonic: TWISTED PEG IN THE WATER IS 
PROBABLY DIRTY
O, kegare/ru/su, yogore-
ru/su, kitanai
dirt, dishonor
6 strokes
汚
L2
1060
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen).  Has 氵 42 ‘water’, 
and 于 (NJK originally pictograph of an artefact 
凹面 ŌMEN　concavity
凸凹 dekoboko　unevenness
凹み hekomi　a dent, a hollow
A late graph (Six Dynasties onwards). Pictorial 
representation of a concave shape, meaning 
‘concave, a depression’, with a range of extend-
ed meanings. Contrasts with 凸 1804 ‘convex’. 
OT1968:108; QX2000:54; SS1984:63.
Mnemonic: A CONCAVITY HOLLOWED OUT 
OF A SQUARE
Ō, hekomu, boko
concave, hollow, dip, 
dent, yield to
5 strokes
凹
L1
1061
押収   ŌSHŪ　confi scation
押入れ  oshiire　closet
手押し車  teoshiguruma　wheelbarrow
Seal ; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 扌 34 
‘hand’, and 甲 1318 (‘shell; 1st in series’) as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘press down, press’, 
thus ‘push with hand’. KJ1970:2; OT1968:406; 
TA1965:857. 
Mnemonic: SHELL PUSHED INTO HAND
Ō, osu
push
8 strokes
押
L2
1062
旺盛  ŌSEI　fi ne condition
旺盛な  ŌSEI na　excellent
旺な  sakan na　fl ourishing
Late graph, listed in Yupian with meaning 
given as ‘pale halo around the sun’. Later used 
in sense ‘beautiful’; this is the sense of CO 暀 
(believed to be original way of writing 旺) 
noted in Shuowen. ‘Flourishing’, ‘fi ne’ may be 
extended meanings. SS1984:64; OT1968:461; 
DJ2009:v2:540. Suggest taking 日 66 as ‘day’ 
rather than ‘sun’, and 王 as ‘king’ 5.
Mnemonic: KING FOR A DAY – JUST FINE
Ō, sakan
fl ourishing, beautiful, 
fi ne
8 strokes
旺
L1
1063
艶書 ENSHO　love letter
艶美 ENBI　beauty, charm
艶紙 tsuyagami　glossy paper
pictograph of a lidded container with some-
thing piled up inside). Analyses of the earlier 
form with 盍 vary: Shirakawa says  ‘abundant 
off erings’; Tōdō, in contrast, takes 盍 here as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘totally full’ (in 
this latter case the form 艷, of later provenance 
and listed in Yupian, means ‘abundant good 
looks’ [Ogawa]). OT1968:841,691; SS1984:61.
Mnemonic: ABUNDANCE OF COLOR IS 
CHARMING AND ROMANTIC
EN, tsuya(ppoi)
luster, gloss, romantic, 
charm
19 strokes
艶
L1
1059
Late graph (post-Shuowen). The earlier Shuowen 
equivalent has 豊 811 ‘abundant (grain, etc.)’, 
with not 色 162 ‘color; sex’ but 盍 (CO; originally, 

322  The Remaining 1130 Characters
殴打   ŌDA　blow, assault
殴り込み  nagurikomi　a raid, assault
殴り合う  naguriau　trade blows
Ō, naguru
hit, beat, assault
8 strokes
殴
L1
1065
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 毆. Has 殳 
170 ‘hand holding stick or similar’ (Mizukami 
and Katō say ‘stick made of bound bamboo’), 
and 區 / 区 282 (‘divide things up small, 
small’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘hit, strike’, giving ‘hit with stick (or similar 
weapon)’. MS1995:v1:700-01,162-3; KJ1970:3; 
OT1968:545. Take 区 as ‘section’ 282.
Mnemonic: BEAT WITH A SECTION OF STICK
老翁  RŌŌ　old man
村翁  SON’Ō　village elder
宇田翁 Uda Okina　Old Man Uda
Ō, okina
old man, venerable
10 strokes
翁
L1
1066
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 羽 82 ‘wing, 
feathers’, and 公 126 (‘public, fair’), sometimes 
taken as phonetic with associated sense ‘head, 
neck’, giving ‘bird’s neck/head feathers’ (Ogawa, 
Shirakawa). However, Shirakawa also notes that  
翁 seems to have been used as a loan graph for 
‘old man’ from Han times, echoed by Schuessler 
(‘old man; father’), who also links it to another 
near-homophone in early Chinese meaning ‘male 
of older generation, higher rank to whom respect 
is due’. OT1968:801; SS1984:65; AS2007:515,255.
Mnemonic: VENERABLE OLD MAN RUFFLES 
FEATHERS IN PUBLIC 
奥底 okusoko　inner depths
奥様 okusama　wife (of another)
奥義 ŌGI/okuGI　mysteries
Ō, oku
(deep) inside
12 strokes
奥
L2
1067
under a covered interior’, but Tōdō rejects this 
approach, arguing it is semantic in function (‘scat-
ter rice grains’), here meaning ‘things are stored 
under cover’. Shirakawa’s analysis is ‘place (under 
a roof) to off er up meat’. KJ1970:113; TA1965:227-
30; SS1984:67. ‘Inside’ is now the main meaning. 
Take as 米 220 ‘rice’ under big roof, and 大 56 as 
‘big’. 
Mnemonic: INSIDE BIG-ROOFED BUILDING IS 
BIG STORE OF RICE  
Seal ; late graph (Shuowen). Has 宀 30 ‘roof, 
building’, and 
 (釆 ’scatter seed’ over 廾 ‘two 
hands’), which has various interpretations. Katō 
takes it as phonetic with associated sense ‘warm 
欧州  ŌSHŪ　Europe
欧米  ŌBEI　the West
欧氏官 ŌSHIKAN　Eustachian tube
Ō
Europe
8 strokes
欧
L2
1064
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen);  traditional 
歐. Has 欠 496, ‘open mouth, yawn; lack, be 
missing’ (‘bend over’ is another meaning’), 
with 區 282 (‘divide things up small’, small’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘vomit, 
disgorge’, giving ‘open mouth and vomit’ 
(Katō, Ogawa). Alternatively, Tōdō takes 欠 as 
‘bend over’, giving ‘bend over and vomit’. In 
the early modern period, 歐 was employed for 
its sound value and despite – or because of – 
its negative sense (quite possibly a carry-over 
from the Edo period, or from earlier Chinese 
orthographic usage) to write 歐羅巴 Yōroppa 
‘Europe’, a practice which has provided the 
basis for using 欧 today as a convenient 
one-graph writing in SJ compounds, mean-
ing ‘Europe’. Modern form simplifi es 區 to 区, 
as in 282 (ward, section). MS1995:v1:700-1; 
OT1968:545; KJ1970:3. 
Mnemonic: SECTION OF EUROPE IS MISSING

The Remaining 1130 Characters  323
記憶 KIOKU　memory
追憶 TSUIOKU　reminiscence
憶測 OKUSOKU　speculation
OKU
think, remember
16 strokes
憶
L1
1069
Late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 忄 164 ‘heart, 
mind’, with 意 246 ‘mind, thought’; the latter is 
treated in one analysis as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘be stagnant/blocked’, giving ‘one’s 
mind is stagnant’, i.e. things such as informa-
tion or feelings are stored (Katō). However, in 
origin also had much the same meaning (see 
246), and it appears that 憶 was later devised 
mainly to represent the sense ‘remember’, and 
意 was used more for ‘thought, intention, will’. 
Schuessler treats the words represented by 
these two graphs in early Chinese as near-
homophones (意 : ‘thought, intention, will’, cf. 
憶 : ‘one’s thoughts; to remember’), as does 
Tōdō. KJ1970:17; OT1968:389; BK1957:252; 
AS2007:570; TA1965:135-8.
Mnemonic: A THOUGHT IN THE HEART IS A 
THOUGHT REMEMBERED
臆病者  OKUBYŌmono　coward
臆測   OKUSOKU　speculation
臆面なく  OKUMEN naku　brazenly
OKU
timidity, fear
17 strokes
臆
L1
1070
Seal 
 (
), 
; late graph (Shuowen). Shuowen 
heading has 月 209 ‘fl esh/ meat, body’, and 乙
1072 (‘knife’) as  phonetic (associated sense 
unclear [Gu]); it notes the now standard form 臆 
with 意 246 ‘thought’ as alternative; Tōdō takes 
意 here as having associated sense ‘suppress’, 
giving ‘suppress bodily feelings’. Later used in 
extended senses such as ‘heart, mind, one’s 
thoughts’. ‘Timid, cowardly’ is Japanese-only 
usage. GY2008:1948; OT1968:828.
Mnemonic: THINKING ABOUT FLESH MAKES 
SOME PEOPLE TIMID
憂虞   YŪGU　distress 
不虞   FUGU　unexpected
虞美人草 GUBIJINSŌ　poppy
OBI 
; bronze ;  seal . Has 虍 ‘tiger’ 
297/1301 (here, ‘tiger-like creature’), with 
呉 1311 (‘give’,) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘make up a pair’ or ‘(playfully?) bite each 
other’, giving ‘gentle tiger-like female animal’ 
(Mizukami). The present meaning seems to be 
confusion with 慮 2086 ‘concern’. KJ1985:538; 
MS1995:v2:1140-1; OT1968:882.
Mnemonic: TIGER GIVES ONE FEAR AND ANXIETY
osore, GU
fear, anxiety
13 strokes
虞
L1
1071
岡目  okame　bystander, onlooker
岡山県 OkayamaKEN　Okayama Prefecture
岡本  Okamoto　a surname
oka, KŌ
hill, knoll
8 strokes
岡
L3
1068
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 山 26 ‘mountain, 
hill’, with 
 as variant of 网/罒 570 ‘net’  as 
phonetic with associated sense taken either as 
i] ‘elongated place strung out like a net’, thus 
‘elongated mountain peak’, and by extension 
‘ridge, hill’ (Mizukami, Katō), or ii] ‘swell, rise’, 
thus ‘hill/mountain ridges risen up’ (Ogawa). 
Qiu also notes that when 网 is used as phonet-
ic, it is written 
, as in this graph. KJ1970:159; 
QX2000:181; MS1995:v1:418-9.  For central part 
we suggest using 缶 1141 (‘can’) as ‘strange’ 
variant.
Mnemonic: MANY STRANGE CANS ARE 
NETTED IN THE HILLS

324  The Remaining 1130 Characters
俺等  orera/oira*　we, us
俺お前  ore-omae　slangy intimacy
俺の  ore no　my
ore, EN
I/me (slang term)
10 strokes
俺
L1
1073
卸売り  oroshiuri　wholesale
卸商  oroshiSHŌ　wholesaler
卸値段 oroshineDAN　trade price
[chariot’]); ‘unload’ may be extended sense, 
leading to‘wholesale’. Katō treats the graph 
(seal stage onwards) differently, taking it as 
made up of 止 and ; the latter is an obscure 
element/graph listed in neither Shuowen nor 
Kangxi zidian (and made up of 卩 ‘submis-
sive person’, with 午 122 ‘pestle’ [now ‘noon’] 
here acting as phonetic for ‘confined’), taken 
by Katō provisionally as ‘confined slave’  
and then in extended sense ‘horse groom’; 
combined with 止, this gives his proposed 
original meaning ‘horse groom drives horse’. 
KJ1970:849-50; SS1984:392; GY2008:868. We 
suggest taking 御 1214 ‘honorable’ and re-
moving the 彳 movement determinative 131. 
Mnemonic: WHOLESALE MARKET 
HONORABLE BUT LACKS MOVEMENT
orosu, oroshi
wholesale
9 strokes
卸
L1
1074
OBI 
; seal 
. Views vary. Gu sees OBI form 
as a person kneeling (卩) before some sort 
of device as part of ritual to expel demons. 
In seal form onwards, the role of lower-left 
止 143 (usually ‘stop’, but in some graphs 
can conversely indicate foot actions, hence 
movement) is thought to emphasize move-
ment in the act of expelling. Shirakawa also 
adopts ritualistic approach. Karlgren, Mizuka-
mi and Gu all treat 卸 as early way of writing 
for 御 1214 (q.v.; original meaning: ‘drive 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 亻 41 
‘person’, and NJK 奄 (‘cover’) as phonetic 
(associated sense unclear). Shirakawa sug-
gests that the graph may represent what 
was originally a loanword from the northern 
regions. Mizukami analyzes 奄 based on 
bronze and seal forms as comprising 大 56 
‘big’ (but here meaning ‘cover from above’), 
with 申 338 ‘say’, here meaning ‘grow up-
wards’, giving ‘cover from above something 
growingupwards’. TA1965:56; OT1968:68; 
MS1995:v1:300-01.  
Mnemonic: SAY, BIG GUY, WHAT ABOUT ME?
乙女  otome*　maiden
乙に 
 otsu ni　strangely
甲乙丙  KŌ-OTSU-HEI　ABC
carving (or as weapon), with two blades and an 
intervening handle in the middle. Gu, however, 
takes it as a sprout of vegetation breaking 
through the soil surface. Loan usage for ‘2nd in 
series’, denoting the second of the sequenced 
series of Ten Celestial Stems in traditional Chi-
nese culture. ‘Odd, strange’ is noted by Ogawa 
as a Japanese-only sense. So too is ‘chic, stylish’. 
KJ1970:937-8; OT1968:26; MR2007:513; GY 
2008:443,3.
Mnemonic: QUAINT TWO-BLADED 
IMPLEMENT COMES SECOND IN ORDER
OTSU, ITSU
b, 2nd, quaint, odd
1 stroke
乙
L1
1072
OBI 
; bronze 
; seal 
. The very simple and 
non-distinctive shape makes analysis diffi  -
cult: views include the bent shape of a young 
plant in spring and fi sh entrails, but modern 
scholars tend towards interpreting as a type 
of implement, specifi cally a curved knife for 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  325
佳人  KAJIN　a beauty, belle
絶佳の  ZEKKA no　superb
佳作  KASAKU　a fi ne work
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 亻 41 ‘per-
son’, and NJK 圭 (‘angle’, ‘jewel’ [orig. ‘ceremonial 
jade’]) as phonetic with associated sense ‘smart, 
beautiful, good’, giving ‘splendid, beautiful per-
son’; ‘good’ is a generalized sense. KJ1970:138; 
OT1968:58; SS1984:72-3. We suggest taking 圭 
as double 土 64 ‘ground’.
Mnemonic: GOOD PERSON COVERS TWICE 
THE GROUND
KA
beautiful, good
8 strokes
佳
L1
1076
苛め 
 ijime　bullying
苛立つ iradatsu　be irritated
苛性  KASEI　caustic
phonetic with associated sense taken as i] 
‘small’, giving ‘’small plant’ (Ogawa, Mizu-
kami), or ii] ‘highly stimulatory’, giving ‘plant 
causing highly stimulatory taste when eaten’ 
(another sense listed by Mizukami). Senses 
such as ‘charge (with a crime)’ and ‘cruel’ are 
loan usages. OT1968:847; MS1995:v2:1110-11; 
GY2008:558.
Mnemonic: BULLYING CAN MAKE  PEOPLE 
EAT GRASS
KA, ijimeru, sainamu
torment, bully, harsh, 
chastise
8 strokes
苛
L1
1077
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 艹 53 
‘plant, vegetation’, and 可 655 (‘can do’) as 
架道橋 KADŌKYŌ　overbridge
書架 SHOKA　bookshelf
架空 KAKŪ　aerial, fanciful
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 木 73 ‘wood, 
tree’, and 加 453 (‘add, join’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘build up pieces of wood 
together’, i.e. ‘assemble together, build over’, 
sometimes with a connotation of height. 
KJ1970:116; SS1984:74. Suggest taking 木 73 as 
‘wood’ and 加 453 as ‘add’. 
Mnemonic: ADD WOOD TO BUILD UP SPAN 
OF FRAME
KA, kakaru/keru
build, span, frame
9 strokes
架
L1
1078
穏和  ONWA　moderation
穏当な  ONTŌ na　reasonable
平穏  HEION　calm
Shirakawa asserts there are no actual examples 
of usage of 穩 in the sense ‘trample and collect 
grain’, and rather the sense is always ‘quiet, tran-
quil’. In consequence, Shirakawa interprets the 
seal form of 
 as two hands positioned beside 
(one above, one below) a receptacle used in a 
ritual to conceal a deity, beneath which 心 164 
‘heart, mind’ is positioned as semantic, giving 
‘be respectful/sad’. In analyses i] and ii], ‘gentle’ 
is treated as a loan usage, while Shirakawa 
takes it as an extended sense. KJ1970:61-2; 
OT1968:737; TA1965:699-701; SS1984:69,34.
Mnemonic: HANDS HOLD GRAIN PLANT 
NEXT TO HEART AS TOKEN OF PEACE
ON, odayaka
peace, moderation
16 strokes
穏
L1
1075
Seal 
; in later Shuowen version; traditional 
穩. Has 禾 87 ‘grain plant’ with 
 (‘be sad/re-
spectful when ritualistically hiding a deity’; see 
below) as phonetic with associated sense taken 
in ways which include i] ‘strike/trample, and 
collect’, giving ‘collect grain ears’ (Ogawa, Katō), 
and ii] ‘conceal’, giving ‘conceal collected grain 
(so as not to be prominent)’ (Tōdō). However, 

326  The Remaining 1130 Characters
渦巻き  uzumaki　eddy, vortex
渦線  uzuSEN　spiral line
渦中  KACHŪ　maelstrom
down, distorted’, giving overall meaning ‘water 
dips down’, i.e. ‘eddy, whirlpool’. Note: 咼 has 口 
22 ‘mouth, cavity’, with 冎 as phonetic with as-
sociated sense ‘slanted, distorted’, thus ‘distort-
ed mouth’ (after a seizure [Katō]). OT1968:594; 
KJ1970:311-2; TA1965:628; SS1984:78. Take 咼 
as ‘topless tower’.
Mnemonic: WATER COLLECTS IN TOPLESS 
TOWER, CAUSING WHIRLPOOL
KA, uzu
whirlpool, eddy
12 strokes
渦
L1
1081
Late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 氵 42 water, 
and 咼 659 (‘distorted mouth’) as phonetic with 
associated sense taken as ‘hole/cavity, dipping 
花嫁  hanayome　bride
嫁入り  yomeiri　marriage, wedding
再嫁  SAIKA　remarriage
sense ‘dressed up’, giving ‘woman who is 
dressed up’ (Katō), in either case giving ‘bride, 
go as a bride’. Tōdō includes 嫁 in a word-family 
meaning ‘cover something underneath’; this 
may be taken as in broad agreement with Katō’s 
analysis of the phonetic. Tōdō also regards 
嫁 as representing a word probably derived 
from that underlying 家, a view which is sup-
ported by Schuessler. OT1968:261; KJ1970:125; 
TA1965:381-3; AS2007:300-01.
Mnemonic: WOMAN IN HOUSE IS MARRIED 
BRIDE
KA, yome, totsugu
marry, bride
13 strokes
嫁
L1
1082
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen).  Has 女 37 
‘woman’, and 家 89 ‘house, family’; 家 is taken 
here as i] semantic and phonetic, giving ‘a 
woman gains a house/family to settle down 
in’ (Ogawa), or as ii] phonetic with associated 
華美   KABI　splendor, color
中華   CHŪKA-　Chinese-
華々しい  hanabanashii　brilliant
as original way of writing 華. Seal form has  
 
with 艸 (艹) 53 ‘plants, vegetation’. Qiu says ele-
ment 
 is a corrupted form of 
 that appeared 
from clerical script onwards. Qiu also says that 花 
9 ‘fl ower, blossom’ evolved through substitution 
based on its sound value of 化 258 ‘change’ for 
 in the graph 華. MS1995:v1:78-9; KJ1970:314; 
KJ1970:314-5; QX2000:336-7; SS1984:76-7. Take 
as ‘seven-leaved’ (strokes) plant.
Mnemonic: SHOWY CHINESE PLANT HAS 
SEVEN STROKE-LIKE LEAVES
KA, GE, hana
fl ower, showy, China
10 strokes
華
L1
1079
Bronze 
; seal . Originally pictograph of veg-
etation growing luxuriantly, meaning ‘blossoms 
of plants/trees’. Bronze form has 
 ‘blossoms 
begin to open’, taken by both Mizukami and Katō 
菓子  KASHI　candy, cake
米菓  BEIKA　rice crackers
水菓子 mizugashi　fruit
菓 as simply an expanded version of 果, both 
meaning ‘fruit’. (A similar example given by Qiu 
is 薗 ‘garden’, having same meaning as 園 84 
‘garden’). In modern Japanese, both graphs 
share sense ‘fruit’, but only 菓 is used for ‘con-
fectionery/cakes’. AS2007:269; GY2008:626-7; 
QX2000:228,181-2. Take 木 as ‘tree’ 73 and 田 
as ‘fi eld’ 63.
Mnemonic: TREE PLANTED IN FIELD 
PRODUCES FRUIT – AND CAKES!
KA
cake, candy, fruit
11 strokes
菓
L2
1080
Late post-Shuowen graph. Has 果 454 ‘fruit; 
result’, and 艹 53 ‘plant, vegetation’ added. It 
is not clear that 果 and 菓 ever represented 
two separate words in early Chinese; Qiu treats 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  327
製靴 SEIKA　shoemaking
靴下 kutsushita　sock
長靴 nagagutsu　boot
a foreign loanword into Chinese (Ogawa sug-
gests from the language of the Xiongnu) which 
itself initially denoted long riding boots. In the 
graph 鞾, the phonetic function of the right-
hand element was later taken over by 化 258 
‘change’, quite possibly with a semantic conno-
tation also. In Japanese usage at least, the sense 
became more generalized to ‘shoes, footwear’. 
OT1968:1094; GY2008:1545; SS1984:79.
Mnemonic: CHANGE LEATHER INTO SHOE
KA, kutsu
shoe
13 strokes
靴
L2
1085
Seal (鞾) 
 (included in a later version of 
Shuowen); 靴 is a later version. 鞾 consists of 革 
836 ‘leather’, and 華 1079 (originally, vegetation 
growing luxuriantly) as phonetic, to represent 
寡黙 KAMOKU　silence
寡婦 KAFU/yamome　widow
寡言 KAGEN　reticence
103 (originally pictograph of person with large 
head), and interpreted as meaning ‘person alone 
under a roof’, and by extension ‘few’. Ogawa 
alone prefers to take the element under 宀 as a 
variant of ‘summer’ 夏 88 (with associated sense 
‘one’ here). The seal form has 分 218  ‘divide’ add-
ed, reinforcing the sense ‘divide (one thing)’, ‘few’. 
OT1968:283; MS1995:v1:384-5; KJ1970:312-3. 
Mnemonic: DIVIDING THE HEADS OF HOUSES 
LEAVES FEW
KA
few, minimum, widow, 
minority
14 strokes
寡
L1
1086
Bronze 
; seal 
. The bronze form has 宀 30 
‘roof, dwelling’, and element typically taken as 頁 
休暇  KYŪKA　break, holiday
余暇  YOKA　leisure
暇取る  himadoru　be tardy
phonetic with associated sense taken either as 
i] ‘gap, space’, giving ‘day where there is a gap/
space’, or ii] ‘stay, be’, giving ‘be at home all day in 
leisurely manner’ (Ogawa). In Shirakawa’s view, 
bronze forms of 叚 show one or two hands tak-
ing material (possibly raw jade) from an enclosed 
space. SS1984:78-9,74; KJ1970:121; OT1968:473; 
MS1995:v1:198-200. Take  as variant 殳 170 
‘tool in hand’, and  as variant 戸 120 ‘door’.
Mnemonic: USE TOOL IN HAND TO FIX DOOR 
ON DAY OF LEISURE
KA, hima, itoma
leisure, free time
13 strokes
暇
L1
1083
Bronze (叚) 
; seal (暇) 
; late graph (Shuow-
en). Has 日 66 ‘day’, and 叚 (CO; orig. meaning: 
‘unpolished/blemished jade’ [Shirakawa], or 
‘person wearing mask’ [Katō, Mizukami]) as 
禍福 KAFUKU　ups and downs
災禍 SAIKA　calamity
禍根 KAKON　root of evil
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 礻 723 ‘altar’ 
(by extension ‘deity’), and 咼 659 (‘distorted 
mouth’) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken as i] ‘rebuke; displeased’ (Katō, Tōdō), 
or ii] ‘cruel death’ (Ogawa), both giving same 
overall sense ‘divine punishment’. KJ1970:311-2; 
TA1965:628; OT1968:725. Suggest take 咼 as 
topless tower.
Mnemonic: TOPLESS TOWER HAS ALTAR BUT 
STILL A DISASTER
KA, wazawai
disaster, calamity
13 strokes
禍
L1
1084

328  The Remaining 1130 Characters
毒牙 DOKUGA　poison fangs 
象牙 ZŌGE　ivory
歯牙 SHIGA　teeth
when put together, borrowed to represent 
‘tusk, fang’. Shirakawa, in contrast, chooses 
to interpret the bronze forms (onwards) as 
representing from the outset tusks or fangs 
coming together vertically. The bronze 
forms are, though, more supportive of 
the first analysis above. MS1995:v2:826-8; 
KJ1970:134-6; OT1968:634; SS1984:82. Mne-
monically difficult but suggest taking graph 
as a ‘peg’ 于 (baby talk for ‘tooth’), with ノ as 
a support. 
Mnemonic: WHEN YOUR ‘TOOTHY PEGS’ 
BECOME TUSKS, YOU NEED SUPPORT
GA, GE, kiba 
tusk, fang
4 strokes
牙
L1
1090
Bronze 
; seal 
. The bronze forms are 
typically taken as depicting curved interlock-
ing pieces of wood which made up part of 
the circular outer rim of a wheel; the original 
way of writing 
. Then, on the basis of the 
interlocking nature of these pieces of wood 
箇条書 KAJŌgaki　itemization 
箇所  KASHO　place, point
一箇  IKKO　one item
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has ‘bamboo’ 竹 
58 and 固 501 ‘hard, solid’. Originally, used to 
count lengths of bamboo, then later the con-
notation ‘bamboo’ was dropped, and employed 
widely as a general counter. Often inter-
changed with the counter 個 695. KJ1970:390-
91; AS2007:248; SS1984:80-81. 
Mnemonic: IT’S HARD TO ITEMISE BAMBOO
KA, KO 
item (counter)
14 strokes
箇
L1
1087
稼業  KAGYŌ　one’s trade
稼ぎ手  kasegite　breadwinner
共稼ぎ  tomokasegi　dual income
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 禾 87 ‘grain 
plant’, and 家 89 (‘house’) as phonetic with 
associated sense as i] ‘good’, giving ‘grain which 
is well-developed’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘cover over’, 
giving ‘grain harvested and covered’ (Tōdō). 
The meaning ‘work to earn money’ is extended. 
OT1968:736; TA1965:383.
Mnemonic: HOUSE FULL OF GRAIN 
INDICATES WORK AND MONEY EARNED
KA, kasegu 
work, earn money
15 strokes
稼
L1
1088
蚊針  kabari　fi shing fl y
蚊帳  kaya*　mosquito net
蚊遣り  kayari　smudge fi re
to represent the sound of a mosquito buzzing 
in fl ight, and on the same basis 民 was later 
replaced by 文 72 ‘text’ with the double insect 
䖵 reduced to one, 虫 60. Several other variant 
shapes were also used historically, but need 
not concern us here. OT1968:885; SS1984:759; 
GY2008:1048-9.
Mnemonic: TEXT DESCRIBES MOSQUITO AS 
INSECT THAT GOES ‘BUN’
ka, BUN 
mosquito
10 strokes
蚊
L3
1089
Seal (蟁) 
; late graph (Shuowen). Seal form has  
䖵‘insect’ (general term), and 民 619 (‘people’) 
as phonetic purely for its onomatopoeic value 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  329
飢餓 KIGA　starvation
餓鬼 GAKI　hungry imp; ‘brat’
餓死 GASHI　starving to death
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 食 163 ‘food, 
eat’, and 我 833 (‘I/me’, originally ‘halberd’) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken variously 
as i] ‘wither’ (Katō), ii] ‘starve’ (Ogawa), or iii] 
‘sharp, angular’ (Tōdō), but all giving essentially 
the same overall basic meaning, i.e. ‘withered/
starving/angular body’, in other words ‘starving’. 
KJ1970:142; OT1968:1117; TA1965:591.
Mnemonic: NEED FOOD – I’M STARVING!
GA, ueru
starve
15 strokes
餓
L1
1093
介入 KAINYŪ　intervention
介殻 KAIKAKU　shell
紹介 SHŌKAI　introduction
a diff erent interpretation is appropriate, and 
they are taken as depicting a person wearing 
armor. Meanings such as ‘act as mediator’, ‘seek’, 
‘assist’ are probably loan usages, while ‘shell’ is 
probably extended usage. MS1995:v1:40-41; 
MR2007:227-8; KJ1970:143; TA1965:605; 
OT1968:41. Suggest taking the current graph as 
an arrowhead.  
Mnemonic: SHELL-LIKE ARMOR PROTECTS 
MEDIATOR FROM ARROWHEAD
KAI
mediate, shell
4 strokes
介
L1
1094
OBI 
; seal 
. Sometimes taken as 人 41 ‘per-
son’, with 八 70 ‘divide’ (Tōdō, Ogawa), but this 
is based on the seal form and the Shuowen ex-
planation of same. However, OBI forms suggest 
瓦屋 kawaraya　tiler
煉瓦 RENGA　brick
鬼瓦 onigawara　gargoyle
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Originally a 
pictograph; the simple shape is interpreted as 
a curved earthenware container or utensil, or 
a curved roof tile. ‘(Roof) tile’ tends to be taken 
as extended sense (Ogawa, Schuessler), though 
Shirakawa treats this as orig. meaning. Also 
used for ‘gram’ (in Japanese only). OT1968:663; 
TA1965:618; AS2007:222-3; SS1984:82.
Mnemonic: FANCY CURVED TILE HAS A SPOT 
IN THE MIDDLE
GA, kawara, GURAMU
tile, gram
5 strokes
瓦
L1
1091
優雅 YŪGA　elegance
雅号 GAGŌ　pen-name
雅趣 GASHU　artistry
phonetic – purely onomatopoeic – denoting 
‘crow, mountain crow’. 牙 stands to represent 
the characteristic cawing sound made by such 
birds. As Gu suggests, 雅 is no doubt a variant 
way of writing NJK 鴉 ‘crow’. At a later stage, 
雅 was borrowed for its sound value to write 
another word meaning ‘elegant, refi ned’, now 
its main meaning. OT1968:1077; SS1984:84; 
GY2008:1410-11; KJ1985:650.
Mnemonic: BIRD WITH FANGS IS ELEGANT!?
GA
elegance, ‘taste’
13 strokes
雅
L1
1092
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 隹 324 
‘short-tailed bird, bird’, and 牙 1090 (‘tusk, 
interlocking pieces’ [here, fi ve strokes]) as 

330  The Remaining 1130 Characters
警戒 KEIKAI　caution
破戒 HAKAI　broken oath
戒行 KAIGYŌ　penance
OBI 
; seal 
. The graphs show two hands 
holding up a halberd or similar (Qiu describes 
as ‘dagger-ax’), interpreted as meaning 
‘watch out, holding halberd up with both 
hands’, and hence ‘be on guard, take care’, 
by extension, ‘warn (someone); admonish’. 
MS1995:v1:534-5; OT1968:394; KJ1970:147; 
MR2007:261; AS2007:314.
Mnemonic: TWO-HANDED HALBERD IS A 
SIGN OF COMMAND
KAI, imashimeru
command, warn, 
admonish
7 strokes
戒
L1
1095
怪談  KAIDAN　ghost story
怪物  KAIBUTSU　monster
怪しげ  ayashige　‘dodgy’
of 軽 287 etc; see below) as phonetic with 
associated sense taken as ‘strange, unusual’ 
(Katō) or ‘caution’ (Ogawa), in either case giv-
ing ‘consider suspicious/strange’. Note that 圣 
consists of 又2003 ‘hand’, with 土 64 ‘earth/
dirt’, giving ‘person digging’, thus ‘cultivate 
land, make eff orts’. KJ1970:319; OT1968:363; 
MS1995:v1:262-3. 
Mnemonic: I FEEL SUSPICIOUS OF WEIRD 
PEOPLE WITH DIRT ON THEIR HANDS
KAI, GE, ayashii 
weird, suspicious
8 strokes
怪
L1
1096
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 忄 164 
‘heart, mind, feeling’, and 圣 (CO, ‘cultivate 
land, exert eff ort’, not as per right-hand part 
誘拐   YŪKAI　abduction
拐帯者  KAITAISHA　absconder
誘拐する  YŪKAI suru　kidnap
Very late, post-Shuowen graph, making analysis 
diffi  cult. Provisionally 扌 34  ‘hand’ and 叧 
(taken by Ogawa as variant of 咼 659 ‘distorted 
mouth’) as phonetic with associated sense ‘trap, 
ensnare’, thus ‘trap and catch’, by extension ‘de-
ceive, obtain by fraud’ (Ogawa), or ‘quietly steal’ 
(Tōdō). OT1968:406; TA1965:628; KJ1970:311-2. 
Use 刀 198 ‘sword’, 口 22 ‘mouth’. 
Mnemonic: KIDNAP WITH SWORD AND 
HAND OVER MOUTH  
KAI 
deceive, kidnap, steal
8 strokes
拐
L1
1097
後悔   KŌKAI　regret
悔しさ   kuyashisa　vexation
悔やみ状 kuyamiJŌ　condolence letter
Seal 
. Has 忄164 ‘feelings/heart’, and 每 225 
(‘every’) as phonetic with associated senses 
taken as i] ‘regret’ (Katō), or ii] ‘dark’ (Tōdō), or iii] 
‘inauspicious’ (Ogawa). Overall negativity of the 
phonetic here confi rms overall meaning is ‘re-
gret’. KJ1970:316; MS1995:v1:528-9; TA1965:165; 
OT1968:367.  
Mnemonic: EVERY PERSON HAS FEELINGS OF 
REGRET
KAI, kuyamu/yashii
regret, vexed, feel 
sorry, repent
9 strokes
悔
L1
1098

The Remaining 1130 Characters  331
皆済 KAISAI　full payment
皆無 KAIMU　none at all
皆様 minasama　everyone
as provisional. Mizukami, alternatively, treats 
白 here not as 曰 but as 白, though here not 白 
‘white’ but as an abbreviated form of a diff erent 
graph – possibly 150 自 nose, self– but with 
the meaning ‘open mouth’ rather than nose. 
Despite such divergence, scholars agree the 
upper element is 比 792 ‘compare’ (originally, 
two people lined up).  Combined as 皆, the two 
elements have the meaning ‘people line up and 
exchange words’ or ‘people line up and all say 
something,’later generalized to ‘all’. KJ1970:152; 
OT1968:687; MS1995:v2:898-9,v1:628-9; 
GY2008:831. For convenience, take 白 as ‘white’. 
Mnemonic: EVERYONE LINED UP, ALL IN 
WHITE, FOR COMPARISON.
KAI, min(n)a 
all, everyone
9 strokes
皆
L1
1099
Bronze 
; seal 
. Scholars agree the lower 
element is not 白 69 ‘white’, typically taking it 
as 曰 ‘say’ (NJK orig showing speech emitted 
from mouth)(Katō, Ogawa), though it should 
be noted there is some diff erence in shape be-
tween bronze forms for i] 曰 on the one hand 
and ii] the element corresponding to 白 in 皆 
on the other, so correspondence is best seen 
金塊 KINKAI　gold bullion
血塊 KEKKAI　blood clot
塊茎 KAIKEI　tuber
would give ‘basket for holding earth’, but one 
commentator takes 凵 here as having a pho-
netic role only (Katō). Alternatively, there may 
be the possibility that the earth in the basket 
was often made up of clods, giving ‘clod(s) of 
earth’ as an extended sense. As for 塊, this con-
sists of 土, with 鬼 1179 (‘demon’) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken as i] ‘round, round 
and hard’, giving ‘earth which is round (/ and 
hard)’ (Tōdō, Katō), or ii] ‘big’, giving ‘big 
earth [chunks]’ (Shirakawa). DJ2009:v3:1113; 
KJ1970:153-4; TA1965:719; SS1984:93.
Mnemonic: DEVILISH CLOD OF EARTH
KAI, katamari
lump, clod, mass
13 strokes
塊
L1
1100
Seal forms 
, 
; late graph (Shuowen). While 
both these seal forms are listed in Shuowen, it 
is 凷 that is accorded main heading status, with 
塊 just noted as another equivalent shape. 
凷 consists of 土 64 ‘earth’, and 凵, which is 
originally a pictograph of a container, and this 
楷書  KAISHO　regular script
楷行草 KAIGYŌSŌ　square, 
 
 semi-cursive, cursive (script styles)
Extended meanings include ‘straight, upright’ 
(figurative sense), and ‘model, rule’. It is this 
sense ‘model’ which was utilized to refer to a 
variety of Chinese script, the developmental 
stage known in Japanese as 楷書 kaisho, a 
term which is translated into English vari-
ously as ‘model script’, ‘regular script’, ‘block 
script’, and which is the basis of modern 
script use in the Chinese cultural sphere and 
in Japan. For more on kaisho, see Introduc-
tion. SS1984:93; GY2008:1558; OT1968:513; 
QX2000:147-8. 
Mnemonic: EVERYONE SHOULD USE 
REGULAR SCRIPT, STRAIGHT AS A TREE
KAI
regular / model script
13 strokes
楷
L1
1101
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 木 73 
‘tree, wood’, and 皆 1099 (‘all, everyone’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘harmony, 
order’ (Shirakawa). Originally referred to 
a type of tree, similar to a cypress; a tree 
which grew straight, reflected in the fact it 
produced wood suited to construction and 
the manufacture of wooden artefacts (Gu). 

332  The Remaining 1130 Characters
潰走  KAISŌ　rout, debacle
潰し値  tsubushine　scrap value
暇潰し  himatsubushi　kill time
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵42 
‘water’, with 貴 847 (‘precious’) as phonetic, 
with associated sense ‘be destroyed’. Shuowen 
glosses 潰 as meaning ‘leak’; then to connote 
destructive water force such as dyke or similar 
bursting. Later, generalized to ‘be destroyed/ 
defeated’. DJ2009:v3:901; OT1968:606; 
SS1984:95; TA1965:710; GY2008:1498.
Mnemonic: PRECIOUS WATER CAN BE 
RUINED
KAI, tsubusu/reru
ruin, destroy, be 
destroyed, crush
15 strokes
潰
L1
1102
崩壊  HŌKAI　collapse
壊滅  KAIMETSU　destruction
壊血病 KAIKETSUBYŌ　scurvy
‘destroy/be destroyed’. Note: CO 褱 has 衣 444 
‘garment/clothes’, with second element (middle 
part of 褱 ) which is taken either i] as mean-
ing ‘shed tears’, thus ‘shed tears and conceal in 
one’s clothing’, or ii] as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘keep, retain’, thus ‘keep (something) 
within one’s clothing’, and by extension ‘conceal 
in one’s bosom’ or ‘ embrace’; both analyses 
are listed by Mizukami. MS1995:v1:280-
81,v2:1170-71; KJ1970:322; OT1968:226; 
SS1984:95. Take 
 as 十 35 ‘ten’, and 目 76 ‘eye’. 
Mnemonic: TEN EYES FOCUSSED ON SOILED 
GARMENT – RUINED!
KAI, kowareru/su
break, destroy, ruin
16 strokes
壊
L1
1103
Seal 
; traditional 壞. Has 土 64 ‘earth/soil’, 
and 褱 (see below) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘crumble; destroy’, giving ‘earthen wall 
of fortress/house, etc. is damaged/destroyed’ 
(Mizukami, Katō); Ogawa takes more gener-
ally as ‘earth crumbles’. Later generalized to 
懐中 KAICHŪ-　pocket-
懐手 futokorode　idleness
述懐 JUKKAI　reminiscence
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 懷. Has 忄164 
‘heart/feeling’, with 褱 (see 1103) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘embrace, surround, 
keep’, thus ‘keep/embrace in the heart’, hence 
‘long for, think fondly of’. MS1995:v1:530-31; 
KJ1970:321-2; OT1968:389. 
Mnemonic: FOND FEELINGS FOR GARMENT 
CATCHING THOSE TEN EYES (see 1103)
KAI, futokoro, 
natsukashii
fond, bosom
16 strokes
懐
L1
1104
諧調 KAICHŌ　harmony, euphony
俳諧 HAIKAI　haiku, poetry
諧音 KAION　melody, harmony
Seal 
. Has 言 118 ‘words; speak’ and 皆 
1099 (‘all, everyone’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘be lined up, come together’, giving 
‘voices of many are in unison’; by extension, 
‘soften, moderate’. Mizukami looks to identify a 
corresponding bronze form. MS1995:v2:1204-5; 
GY2008:1335.  
Mnemonic: EVERYONE’S WORDS ARE IN 
HARMONY
KAI
harmony,order
16 strokes
諧
L1
1105

The Remaining 1130 Characters  333
弾劾  DANGAI　impeachment
弾劾者 DANGAISHA　denunciator
劾奏  GAISŌ　reporting off ence
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 力 78 
‘strength, eff ort’, and 亥 875 (NJK, ‘wild animal’, 
probably a boar or pig, but the OBI pictograph 
too simple to interpret defi nitively) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken as ‘investigate, 
pursue’, giving ‘vigorously pursue, thoroughly 
judge (a criminal)’. OT1968:126; KJ1970:149. We 
suggest taking 亥 as ‘broken’ variant of ‘threads, 
bindings’ 糸 29. 
Mnemonic: PUT EFFORT INTO 
INVESTIGATING BROKEN THREADS
GAI
investigate (a 
wrong-doing)
8 strokes
劾
L1
1106
崖崩れ gakekuzure　landslide
断崖  DANGAI　cliff , precipice
懸崖  KENGAI　overhanging cliff 
independent graph (NJK) also meaning ‘cliff , 
precipice’; Ogawa and Tōdō consider that the 
element 圭 1076 (‘ceremonial jade’) also has 
a function in 崖 as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘sloping’. TA1965:504-08; OT1968:304,149. 
Suggest taking 圭 as ‘double’ the ground 土 64 
with 厂 as cliff . 
Mnemonic: IN MOUNTAINS, CLIMBING A 
CLIFF IS LIKE DOUBLE THE GROUND
GAI, gake
cliff , precipice
11 strokes
崖
L1
1107
生涯 SHŌGAI　one’s life
際涯 SAIGAI　limits
天涯 TENGAI　horizon
Seal 
; a late graph (later version of Shuowen). 
Has 氵 42 ‘water’ and NJK 厓 ‘cliff , precipice’, giv-
ing ‘cliff  at water’s edge’; ‘edge’ is an extended 
sense. OT1968:585; SS1984:101. Suggest taking 
圭 as ‘raised earth’ 土 64. 
Mnemonic: CLIFF OF RAISED EARTH STANDS 
AT WATER’S EDGE
GAI
shore, edge
11 strokes
涯
L1
1108
慨嘆 GAITAN　lamentation
感慨 KANGAI　deep emotion
慨然 GAIZEN to　indignantly
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
forms 慨, 慨. Has 忄 ‘heart, mind’ 164, and 
旣/既/既 1177 (‘already’, q.v.)  (originally, ‘eat 
completely, eat one’s fi ll’) as phonetic with asso-
ciated sense taken either as ‘be blocked’, giving 
‘one’s heart is blocked/stifl ed, lament’ (Ogawa, 
Tōdō), or as ‘enraged and arrogant’, giving ‘be 
enraged’ (Katō). In the latter analysis, ‘lament’ 
is presumably to be seen as a loan usage. 
OT1968:383,458; TA1965:702-06; KJ1970:153.
Mnemonic: ALREADY HAVE FEELINGS OF LAMENT
GAI, nageku
lament, deplore
13 strokes
慨
L1
1109
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 山 26 
‘hill, mountain’, and 厓, itself already an 

334  The Remaining 1130 Characters
該博  GAIHAKU　profundity
該当  GAITŌ suru　be relevant
該当者 GAITŌSHA　said person
sense ‘(temporary) agreement (in wartime)’ 
(Katō), or iii] ‘words made tight’, also giving 
‘agreement’ (Tōdō; in his word-family ‘make 
taut, tighten’); Gu, however, takes as ‘carve, 
inscribe’, thus ‘words carved’, suggesting con-
tent of some importance. ‘Relevant, the said …’ 
may be a loan usage. OT1968:926; KJ1970:143; 
TA1965:129-33; GY2008:738. Take 亥 as broken 
threads 糸 29.
Mnemonic: THE SAID BROKEN THREADS ARE 
RELEVANT
GAI
‘the said’, relevant
13 strokes
該
L1
1111
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 言 118 
‘words; say’, and 亥 875 (‘wild animal’) as pho-
netic with associated sense taken variously as i] 
‘all’, thus ‘all take an oath’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘bundle, 
something bound; agreement’, giving original 
概念 GAINEN　general idea
概略 GAIRYAKU　outline
大概 TAIGAI　in general
ready’,) as phonetic with associated sense ‘rub/
rub across, make level’, giving ‘length of wood 
for levelling off ’, used for removing excess from 
top of container for measuring rice (or similar). 
This was an approximate measure, not precise, 
so it acquired the extended sense ‘generally, 
in broad measure’. OT1968:518; KJ1970:152-3; 
TA1965:706.
Mnemonic: ALREADY ROUGHLY MEASURED 
WITH PIECE OF WOOD
GAI, ōmune
roughly, generally
14 strokes
概
L1
1112
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen) (効 [same ele-
ments and overall sense, but diff erent posi-
tions]). Has 木 73 ‘wood, tree’, with 既/旣 1177 
(originally, ‘eat completely, eat one’s fi ll’; now ‘al-
骸骨 GAIKOTSU　skeleton
死骸 SHIGAI　corpse
亡骸 nakigara*　one’s remains
interprets as its carcasse. It came to denote 
a skeleton or bones in general, not just of a 
wild animal. Schuessler suggests a possible 
link between the word represented by 骸 and 
that represented by 核 1116 ‘nucleus, core’. 
OT1968:1132; SS1984:102; AS2007:270. Suggest 
taking 亥 as broken threads 糸 29.
Mnemonic: BONES IN A CORPSE LOOK LIKE 
BROKEN THREADS
GAI, mukuro
body, corpse
16 strokes
骸
L1
1113
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 骨 877 
‘bones’ and 亥 875, a graph typically taken as 
‘wild animal (probably pig or boar)’. Shirakawa 
口蓋  KŌGAI　roof of mouth
蓋物  futamono　covered dish
蓋然性 GAIZENSEI　probability
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 艹 53 ‘plant, grass’, 
and 盍 1059, variant of earlier 𥁋 (‘cover/lid 
over bowl’), thus ‘cover made of vegetation’ 
> ‘roofi ng thatch’; sense later generalized to 
‘cover, lid’. ‘Probably’ is loan usage. OT1968:691; 
MS1995:v2:1126-7; TA1965:597-600; 
OT1968:864. Suggest taking 盍 as 去 276 ‘leave, 
go’, and 皿 300 ‘dish’.
Mnemonic: PROBABLY BETTER TO LEAVE 
GRASS LID ON DISH
GAI, futa, kedashi
lid, probably
13 strokes
蓋
L1
1110

The Remaining 1130 Characters  335
吊し柿  tsurushigaki　dried persimmon
熟柿  JUKUSHI　ripe persimmon
柿板  kokeraita　shingle (roof)
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
form: 柹. Has 木 73 ‘tree, wood’, and  as pho-
netic (associated sense unclear). OT1968:499; 
SS1984:368; TA1965:770-76. Suggest taking 
right hand part as 市 144 ‘city/market’. 
Mnemonic: THERE’S A PERSIMMON TREE IN 
THE MARKET
kaki, kokera, SHI, JI
persimmon, shingle 
(roof)
9 strokes
柿
L1
1115
核心  KAKUSHIN　core, kernel
結核  KEKKAKU　tuberculosis
核兵器 KAKUHEIKI　nuclear weapon
crate made of wood/tree bark’; later borrowed 
for ‘stone, kernel’. Another interpretation, found 
in Erya, a very early Chinese encyclopaedic 
dictionary, takes it as hard casings on a tree, 
i.e. treats the original meaning as ‘stone (of 
peach, etc.), kernel’. OT1968:502; KJ1970:143-4; 
TA1965:132. We suggest taking 亥 as ‘broken/ 
snapped threads’ 糸 29. 
Mnemonic: TREES SNAPPED LIKE THREADS IN 
NUCLEAR BLAST
KAKU
core, nucleus, nuclear
10 strokes
核
L1
1116
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 木 73 
‘wood, tree’, and 亥 875 (‘wild animal’ [prob-
ably a pig or boar]) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘enclose’, giving – in one analysis – ‘box/
貝殻 kaigara　sea shell
甲殻 KŌKAKU　carapace, shell
地殻 CHIKAKU　earth’s crust
bell suspended in mid-air, as a sounding device 
(Mizukami). Another view takes it as a musical 
instrument – again, probably a hard object – on 
a stand (几 ‘stand’ [originally a pictograph]) 
(Ogawa). Later, there was a semantic shift by 
association to hard coverings, e.g. ‘shell, husk’ 
MS1995:v1:714-5; OT1968:546. Suggest taking 
left side as 売 211 ‘sell’.
Mnemonic: STRIKE SOMEONE SELLING 
SHELLS FOR A CRUST
KAKU, kara
shell, husk, crust
11 strokes
殻
L1
1117
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional 殼. Has 殳 170 ‘strike’ 
(originally hand holding stick or similar), with 
left-hand 壳 which in one view represents a 
hard, empty vessel such as a shell or horn or 
垣根   kakine　fence, hedge
生垣   ikegaki　hedge
垣間見る kaimamiru*　peep
not necessarily earth), fence, hedge’. Note: 
亘 depicts a wall or fence; OBI equivalents 
show an encircling shape with either one 
line (perhaps representing an outer bound-
ary, as Tōdō suggests,) or none. OT1968:215; 
MS1995:v1:268-9,30-31; TA1965:611-20; 
SS1984:55. Suggest taking right-hand part as 
‘two’ 二 65 and ‘day’日 66. 
Mnemonic: IT TAKES TWO DAYS TO FENCE 
OFF THE GROUND
kaki
fence, hedge
9 strokes
垣
L1
1114
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 土 64 ‘earth, ground’, 
and 亘 924 (‘go round’) as semantic and 
phonetic, giving ‘encircling earthen wall’; by 
extension, ‘wall (made of various materials, 

336  The Remaining 1130 Characters
比較  HIKAKU　comparison
較量  KŌRYŌ　comparison
比較的 HIKAKUTEKI　comparatively
Bronze 
; seal 
. Bronze and seal forms have 
車 33 ‘vehicle, carriage’, and 爻 ‘mix, cross, join’ 
as semantic and phonetic (爻 was later re-
placed by 交 128 ‘mix, exchange’), thus ‘carriage 
rails’, of help when mounting and dismounting. 
The sense ‘compare’ is probably a loan use, or 
based on comparing rails. OT1968:984,632; 
MS1995:v2:1268-9; KJ1970:171.  
Mnemonic: A MIXTURE OF VEHICLES MAKES 
IT EASY TO COMPARE
KAKU, KŌ, kuraberu
compare
13 strokes
較
L2
1119
隔離 KAKURI　quarantine
間隔 KANKAKU　spacing
隔週 KAKUSHŪ　fortnightly
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 阝 1907 (as 
left-hand element) ‘hill, terraced slopes’, and CO
鬲 (‘three-legged cauldron [with hollow legs]’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘separate’, 
giving ‘separate with terraced slopes/hills’; later 
generalized to simply ‘separate’. OT1968:1073; 
DJ2009:v3:1188; MS1995:v2:1482-3. Suggest 
take 鬲 as lidded pot on stand.
Mnemonic: SEPARATED BY HILL LIKE A 
LIDDED ROUND POT ON A STAND 
KAKU, hedataru/teru
separate, interpose
13 strokes
隔
L1
1120
獲得 KAKUTOKU　acquisition
漁獲 GYOKAKU　fi shing
獲物 emono　prey
giving ‘catch wild prey using dogs (in hunting)’; 
the graph suggests the prey was originally 
just birds. Shirakawa lists bronze forms and 
several OBI forms as predecessors of 獲 (Ma 
also lists OBI); all lack 犭/犬 as determinative.  
KJ1970:328; MS1995:v2:1118-9; OT1968:648; 
MR2007:421. 
Mnemonic: DOG’S LEFT, SO HAVE TO SEIZE 
CRESTED BIRD BY HAND 
KAKU, eru
obtain, gain, seize
16 strokes
獲
L1
1121
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 犭 ‘dog’ 19, 
and 
 ‘catch bird’ 468 (originally, crested bird, 
with 又 2003 ‘hand’) as semantic and phonetic, 
輪郭 RINKAKU　outlines
城郭 JŌKAKU　citadel
遊郭 YŪKAKU　pleasure quarters
viation of a more complex older graph (Katō, 
Qiu). Overall resultant meaning is ‘enclosed 
fortifi ed area’ (included in Tōdō’s word-family 
‘framework/enclose with a framework’), gen-
eralized to ‘enclosure, quarters’. QX2000:129; 
DJ2009:v2:528-9; TA1965:407-09; OT1968:37; 
KJ1970:280-81; MS1995:v2:1314-6; SS1984:105. 
Take 享 as 子 27 ‘child’, cover 亠, and entrance
口 22.
Mnemonic: CHILD COVERS ENTRANCE TO 
VILLAGE ENCLOSURE
KAKU
quarters, enclosure
11 strokes
郭
L1
1118
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 邑 376  ‘in-
habited place, village’ in its common form 阝 as 
right-hand element, and 享 1218 ‘receive, keep’ 
in its original sense ‘fortifi ed city walls’. 享 in the 
sense ‘fortifi ed city walls’ is taken as an abbre-

The Remaining 1130 Characters  337
収穫  SHŪKAKU　harvest
多穫  TAKAKU　good crop
収穫高 SHŪKAKUdaka　yield
Seal 
. This graph has 87 禾 ‘grain (plant)’, and  
 (‘crested bird’, with 又 2003 ‘hand’; see 1121 
and 468) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘grasp fi rmly’, giving ‘take grain and harvest’; 
sense subsequently generalized to ‘take, 
acquire’. MS1995:v2:972-4,1118-9; KJ1970:328; 
OT1968:738. 
Mnemonic: HARVESTING GRAIN IS LIKE 
CATCHING A BIRD IN THE HAND
KAKU
harvest, acquire
18 strokes
穫
L1
1123
山岳  SANGAKU　mountains
岳父  GAKUFU　father-in-law
雲仙岳 UNZENdake　Mt Unzen
cient times, and apparently regarded hilltops 
and mountain tops as sacred. Shuowen notes 
嶽 as the older, orthodox form, and 岳 as the 
more recent graph, but in fact the reverse 
is the case, as the earliest occurrences of 嶽 
are in seal script. 嶽 consists of 山 26, with 獄 
1353 (‘prison’) as a phonetic with the associ-
ated sense of ‘project steeply’, thus giving 
‘steep mountain’, but traditionally – through 
the influence of the treatment in Shuowen 
– 岳 and 嶽 have been treated down to the 
present as alternative forms of the same 
graph, even though this is not actually 
the case. MS1995:v1:420-22; DJ2009:742; 
KJ1970:188; OT1968:302; SS1984:110-11. We 
suggest splitting 岳 into 丘 1203 ‘hill’ and 山 
26 ‘mountain’. 
Mnemonic: A HILL ON TOP OF A MOUNTAIN 
– WHAT AN IMPOSING PEAK!  
GAKU, take
peak, imposing
8 strokes
岳
L1
1124
OBI 
; seal (嶽) 
. The OBI form (岳 only) 
consists of 山 26 ‘mountain, hill’, with an 
upper element that is taken as represent-
ing either i] another mountain or hill (Katō, 
Ogawa), or ii] a sheep’s horns, and hence 
‘sheep’ (Shirakawa; see 羊 426), either way 
giving ‘mountain, mountain peak’ (some-
times thought to refer to five specific peaks 
in China). Interpretation ii] above, involving 
sheep, might appear bizarre, but Shirakawa 
points to a possible connection with the 
Qiang (羌), a nomadic, sheep-herding people 
who inhabited part of western China in an-
威嚇  IKAKU　threat
嚇怒  KAKUDO　fury
威嚇的 IKAKUTEKI　threatening
or ii] ‘oppose, act contrarily’, giving ‘oppose 
verbally’ (Katō). Both analyses indicate verbal 
activity of a negative kind, and this is echoed 
by Shirakawa, who treats 赫 as phonetic in 
an onomatopoeic role, giving ‘rebuke in a 
threatening way’. Schuessler suggests a pos-
sible semantic as well as phonetic function 
for 赫 here, with a progression from ‘glowing 
red, fiery’ to ‘scary’. OT1968:198; KJ1970:187; 
SS1984:109; AS2007:276. 
Mnemonic: SPOKEN THREAT MAKES ONE SEE 
RED TWICE OVER
KAKU, odosu/kasu 
threaten,  menace
17 strokes
嚇
L1
1122
A very late graph (Yupian). Has 口 22 
‘mouth, speak’, and NJK 赫 (‘glowing red, 
fiery’, [double ‘red’ 赤 48] ) as phonetic with 
associated sense taken as i] ‘very angry 
voice’, giving ‘be angry, threaten’ (Ogawa), 

338  The Remaining 1130 Characters
干潟  higata　tidal fl at
潟湖  SEKIKO　lagoon
新潟市 NiigataSHI　Niigata City
phonetic with associated sense taken either as 
i] ‘retreat, draw back’, giving ‘beach at ebb tide’ 
(Shirakawa), or ii] ‘merge into’, giving ‘ground 
where salt is left as residue’, i.e. ‘land on the 
seashore’ (Ogawa). In Japanese only, used in the 
extended senses ‘lagoon, inlet’. GY2008:1456; 
MS1995:v2:1094-5; OT1968:608,835; 
SS1984:507,509. Suggest taking 舃 as variant of 
bird 鳥 190 (with big claws).
Mnemonic: ODD BIRD WITH BIG CLAWS SEEN 
ON WATERS OF LAGOON
kata, SEKI 
beach, lagoon
15 strokes
潟
L1
1127
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 氵 42 ‘water’, 
and 舃 (CO; originally a pictograph denoting a 
type of bird [Mizukami, Gu, Ogawa]; Shirakawa 
interprets – less convincingly – as ‘shoes’) as 
一括  IKKATSU　(en) bloc
括弧  KAKKO　parentheses
包括的 HŌKATSUTEKI　blanket-
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 扌 34 
‘hand’, and 舌 755 ‘tongue’, but note that 舌 is 
a later regularized shape for what at the seal 
script stage was something diff erent, inter-
preted by Katō and Tōdō as meaning ‘close the 
mouth’. The element just described, function-
ing here as semantic and phonetic (with sense 
generalized to ‘close’) then combines with 手 
to give ‘close with the hands’, and hence ‘fasten, 
bind’. KJ1970:197-8; TA1965:624-9; OT1968:411.
Mnemonic: HAND BINDS TONGUE
KATSU, kukuru
bind, wrap, fasten
9 strokes
括
L1
1128
掛かり人  kakaribito　hanger-on
見掛け   mikake　appearance
腰掛ける  koshikakeru　sit
with associated sense ‘hang, suspend’, thus 
‘hang, suspend’. 掛 is considered to be a 
popular equivalent. The alternative element 
NJK 卦 (‘indicate response of the gods through 
divination’) as phonetic has associated sense 
‘link up’ (Katō). KJ1970:323,137-8; OT1968:417; 
DJ2009:v3:1001; SS1984:77. Suggest taking 卦 
as 圭 double ‘earth’ 土 64 and ト as a ‘crack’ (see 
96 外). 
Mnemonic: CRACKED HAND IS CONNECTED 
WITH DOUBLE LOADS OF EARTH
kakeru/karu, kakari
connected, apply, 
cost, hang, depend
11 strokes
掛
L1
1126
Seal (挂) 
; late graph (Shuowen). The older 
form 挂 has 扌 34 ‘hand’, and 圭 461 (originally, 
‘demarcating path between fi elds’) as phonetic 
顎骨 GAKKOTSU　jaw
顎鬚 agohige　chin-beard
顎紐 agohime　chin-strap
correct’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘stick out, project’, giving original meaning 
‘high cheekbones’; Ogawa and Shirakawa 
treat ‘jaw’ as a meaning peculiar to Japanese. 
OT1968:1106,180; SS1984:112; KJ1970:126-7; 
AS2007:224. We suggest taking 咢 as a ‘dou-
bled’ variant of 号 297 ‘number, call, sign’.  
Mnemonic: HEAD WITH DOUBLE CHINS AND 
DOUBLE MOUTHS! ODD SIGNS 
GAKU, ago
jaw, chin
18 strokes
顎
L1
1125
A very late graph (Yupian). Has 頁 103 
‘head’, and CO 咢 (‘quarrel loudly’, ‘quarrel to 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  339
葛藤  KATTŌ　complication
葛粉  kuzuko　arrowroot starch
葛折り  tsuzuraori　meandering
netic with associated sense ‘be bent, twisted’, 
giving ‘plant with tortuously twisted stem’, i.e. a 
type of vine. For this graph the traditional form 
is standard. GY2008:1376; MS1995:v2:1122-4. 
As with 1048, we suggest taking right hand part 
曰/日 as ‘day’ 66, 匕 as slumped/sitting person, 
with 勹 as corner.  
Mnemonic: PERSON SLUMPED IN CORNER 
ALL DAY, TANGLED IN ARROWROOT VINE
KATSU, kuzu, tsuzura
arrowroot, vine
12 strokes
葛
L1
1131
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Also 葛(non-
standard). Has 艹 53 ‘plant’, and /曷 (‘question 
loudly/stop and question’; see 謁 1048) as pho-
円滑  ENKATSU　smoothness
滑石  KASSEKI　talc
上滑り  uwasuberi no　superfi cial
associated sense taken as i] ‘emerge’ (Katō) 
or ii] ‘smooth’ (Shirakawa), both giving ‘water 
emerges easily’, and hence ‘slide; smooth’. Alter-
natively, there is another variation on interpre-
tation of the phonetic, i.e. iii] ‘revolve, go round’, 
taken as ‘go round smoothly’, and hence again 
‘smooth’ (Ogawa). KJ1970:329; SS1984:114; 
OT1968:599. 
Mnemonic: BONES IN WATER END UP 
SMOOTH AND SLIPPERY
KATSU, KOTSU, 
suberu, nameraka
slip, slide, smooth
13 strokes
滑
L1
1132
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵42 
‘water’, and 骨 877 (‘bone’) as phonetic with 
喝さい  KASSAI　applause
恐喝  KYŌKATSU　threat
一喝  IKKATSU　yell, roar
see 謁 1048), giving ‘shout loudly’, and – as a 
consequence – ‘throat becomes dry’, to give 
‘become hoarse’ (the Shuowen  explanation of 
喝 is ‘throat becomes dry’).  The additional 
Japanese meaning ‘scold, rebuke’ may be seen 
as an extended meaning. GY2008:1336; DJ2009:
v1:119. As with 1048, we suggest taking the top 
10 right hand part 曰/日 as ‘day’ 66, 匕 as 
slumped/sitting person, with 勹 as corner.
Mnemonic: PERSON SITTING IN CORNER ALL 
DAY, BEING SHOUTED AT
KATSU
shout, scold
11 strokes
喝
L1
1129
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
form has 曷 as right-hand element. Has 口 22 
‘mouth; speak’, and 曷 as semantic and pho-
netic (‘question loudly/stop and question’; 
渇水 KASSUI　water shortage
渇望 KATSUBŌ　craving
渇き 
kawaki　thirst
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional form has 曷. 
Has氵 42 ‘water’, and /曷 (‘question loudly/
stop and question’; see 謁 1048) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘become sparse, run out’, 
thus ‘water dries up’; by extension ‘be thirsty’. 
MS1995:v2:764-5; KJ1970:357-8; OT1968:585. 
As with 1048, we suggest taking right hand part
曰/日 as ‘day’ 66, 匕 as slumped/sitting person, 
with 勹 as corner. 
Mnemonic: PERSON SLUMPED IN CORNER 
ALL DAY, THIRSTING FOR WATER
KATSU, kawaku 
thirst, parched
11 strokes
渇
L1
1130

340  The Remaining 1130 Characters
且又 katsumata　moreover
尚且 naokatsu　and yet
こう且 KŌSHO　for a while
(Shirakawa, Tōdō, Gu). Given the shape of 
many of the OBI forms (Mizukami gives several 
dozen), however, yet another interpretation de-
serves serious consideration, i.e. that the graph 
originally depicted a phallus, and by extension 
was used for what was later written 祖 758 
‘ancestor’ (Gu, Karlgren). Originally a picto-
graph, 且 was borrowed at an early stage as a 
convenient way of writing several other words 
or grammatical elements with more abstract 
senses, including ‘moreover’, hence its meaning 
in Japanese today. KJ1970:640; OT1968:18; 
SS1984:428; TA1965:364-5; GY2008:158; 
BK1957:31-2; AS2007:306.
Mnemonic: AND FURTHERMORE, THIS CAIRN 
HAS THREE LAYERS AND A BASE
katsu, SHO, SO
furthermore, 
besides, and
5 strokes
且
L1
1135
OBI 
; bronze 
; seal 
. Considered to be 
based on a pictograph, but interpretations vary 
regarding exactly what is depicted. One view 
takes as meat in a tiered vessel, as an off ering 
(Ogawa); another takes as tomb with multiple 
layers of earth piled up in a mound (Katō). 
Alternatively, 且 is seen by others as layers of 
meat on a chopping-board (or stand), as the 
original way of writing NJK 俎 ‘chopping-board’ 
褐色 KASSHOKU　brown
褐炭 KATTAN　lignite
褐夫 KAPPU　ragged beggar
an abbreviation of 葛 1131 ‘vine’, giving original 
meaning ‘garment made of coarse fi ber’ – a 
sense which the above scholars also agree 
with.  The meaning ‘brown’ is an extended 
sense based on the color of such garments. 
GY2008:1766; SS1984:115; OT1968:907. As with 
1048, we suggest taking right hand part 曰/日 
as day 66, 匕 as slumped/sitting person, with 
勹 as corner.
Mnemonic: PERSON IN BROWN CLOTH 
SLUMPED IN CORNER ALL DAY
KATSU
brown, coarse cloth
13 strokes
褐
L1
1133
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 衣 444 
‘garment’, and /曷 (‘stop and question/ques-
tion loudly’; see 謁 1048), taken as phonetic by 
several scholars (Shirakawa, Ogawa; sense not 
specifi ed), but it may alternatively serve here as 
管轄 KANKATSU　jurisdiction
統轄 TŌKATSU　control
直轄 CHOKKATSU　direct control
Seal: 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 車 33 ‘car-
riage/vehicle’, and 害 460 (‘harm, damage’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘stop, prevent’, 
giving original meaning ‘linchpin’ (pin to keep 
carriage wheels in place on axle); by extension, 
‘control’. TA1965:599; OT1968:988.
Mnemonic: VEHICLE DAMAGED – OUT OF CONTROL
KATSU
control, linchpin
17 strokes
轄
L1
1134
茶釜 CHAgama　tea kettle
後釜 atogama　replacement/successor
お釜 okama　male homosexual (slang)
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Seal form is 
listed in Shuowen, but only as an alternative 
way of writing another, more complex graph 
also meaning ‘cauldron, big cooking pot’. 釜 has 
金16 ‘metal’, with 父 216 (‘father’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘big’ (Mizukami) or ‘swell 
up’ (Ogawa). DJ2009:v1:239; MS1995:v2:1484-5; 
OT1968:1037. 
Mnemonic: FATHER IS HOVERING OVER THE 
METAL KETTLE
kama, FU 
kettle, cauldron
10 strokes
釜
L1
1136

The Remaining 1130 Characters  341
甘酒 amazake　sweet sake
甘言 KANGEN　sweet words
甘え 
amae　presuming upon
from the OBI stage. The meaning of ‘presume 
upon’ is an extended meaning of being nice/
sweet to a senior person in return for their 
future help in furthering one’s career or simi-
lar. This ‘amae’ is said to be a feature unique 
to Japan but this is incorrect, with many 
cultures having the same basic presumption. 
OT1968:664; MS1995:v2:864-6; KJ1970:208; 
MR2007:309. Suggest take as something 
being retained/ savored in an ‘odd mouth’ 
(variant of ‘mouth’ 口 22)
Mnemonic: SOMETHING KEPT IN THE MOUTH 
MUST BE SWEET
KAN, amai, amae, 
amaeru, amayakasu
sweet, presume upon 
someone
5 strokes
甘
L2
1139
OBI 
; seal 
. The graph depicts some-
thing being tasted in the mouth, and by 
extension ‘good to eat’; the specifi c taste 
‘sweet’ evolved as the dominant sense. A 
graph which has changed in shape very little 
発汗 HAKKAN　sweating
汗顔 KANGAN　shame
汗水 asemizu　heavy sweat
to excess, pour out all over the place’, giving 
‘sweat’. It does seem somewhat ironic to 
have a character normally meaning ‘dry’ to 
express ‘pour out’, and it may be better to 
think of it in its earlier meaning as ‘weapon’. 
KJ1970:203; OT1968:557; SS1984:117.
Mnemonic: USE DROPS OF SWEAT AS A 
WEAPON!?
Or: DROPLETS OF SWEAT DRY UP
KAN, ase, asebamu
sweat
6 strokes
汗
L2
1140
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵 42 
‘water, liquid’, and 干 840 (‘weapon; dry’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘come out 
鎌入れ kamaire　harvesting
鎌首  kamakubi　gooseneck (pipe)
鎌倉市 KamakuraSHI　Kamakura City
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 金 16 
‘metal’, and 兼 1281 (now ‘combine’, but 
originally showing hand holding two ‘grain 
plants’: see 87) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘curved and sharp’, giving ‘sickle’, and 
possibly also having a semantic relevance. 
DJ2009:v3:1150; OT1968:1049; GY2008:1974. 
Mnemonic: HAND HOLDS TWO GRAIN 
PLANTS CUT WITH METAL SICKLE
kama, REN
sickle
18 strokes
鎌
L1
1137
刈り入れ  kariire　reaping, harvesting
刈り込む  karikomu　cut, clip, shear
草刈機  kusakariKI　lawn mower
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 刂 198 
‘knife, cut’, and CO 乂 ‘shears’ (considered to 
be the original way of writing 刈 ) as semantic 
and phonetic, giving ‘shears’; by extension, 
‘cut grass, reap’. KJ1970:136-7; OT1968:110; 
AS2007:568. 
Mnemonic: CUT CROP WITH SHEARS AND 
KNIFE
karu, KAI, GAI
cut, shear, crop, reap
4 strokes
刈
L1
1138

342  The Remaining 1130 Characters
肝臓  KANZŌ　liver
肝心  KANJIN na　vital, essential
肝っ玉  kimottama　‘guts’, courage
giving ‘bodily part which is essential’; Shirakawa 
seems to support this interpretation. Katō, 
alternatively, looks to take the associated sense 
as ‘dwarf bamboo’, on the basis of the tubular 
shape of the blood vessels linked to the liver, 
giving ‘bodily part with blood vessels shaped 
like dwarf bamboo stems’. In the former analy-
sis, the meaning is perhaps somewhat vague. 
OT1968:816; SS1984:118; KJ1970:204.
Mnemonic: DRIED MEAT TURNS OUT TO BE LIVER 
KAN, kimo
LIVER, COURAGE
7 strokes
肝
L1
1142
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 月 209 
‘fl esh, meat’, and 干 840 (‘dry’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘base, foundation’ (Ogawa), 
王冠 ŌKAN　royal crown 
栄冠 EIKAN　laurels
冠毛 KANMŌ　crest, plume
phonetic in its original sense ‘head’, giving ‘put 
on a cap’, and by extension ‘cap’; Katō has a view 
that diff ers somewhat, taking the associated 
sense of 元 here as ‘tie/bind the hair’, though 
he arrives at essentially the same overall mean-
ing for the graph. TA1965:619; OT1968:101; 
SS1984:119; KJ1970:330. 
Mnemonic: CROWN MEASURED ORIGINALLY 
TO ENSURE IT COVERED HEAD
KAN, kanmuri
crown
9 strokes
冠
L1
1143
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Typically ana-
lyzed as 冖 ‘cover, and 寸 920 ‘hand, measure’, 
and 元 117 (‘origin, source’) as semantic and 
OBI ; seal 
; traditional 罐. Shuowen 
defines 缶 as ‘earthenware vessel’; originally 
used to hold water, then later the sense 
broadened to ‘container’ in general. What 
is treated as the traditional form, in origin 
a separate graph found in a later version of 
Shuowen, is analyzed by Ogawa as 缶 ‘pot, 
container’, with 雚 468 (originally, ‘type of 
crested bird’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘pour water’, giving ‘water container, 
container’. As for modern usage in the sense 
‘tin can’, this is an example of a linguistic 
form and its graph being pressed into ser-
vice for new technology. That is to say, this 
graph meaning ‘water container, container’ 
came to be used for ‘tin can’,in the same 
缶詰め  KANzume　canned goods
缶切り  KANkiri　can opener
汽缶  KIKAN　steam boiler
KAN, kama
can, boiler
6 strokes
缶
L1
1141
way that 車 33 ‘carriage, vehicle’ (originally, 
pulled by humans or oxen, etc.) has been 
adopted in modern times for ‘motor vehicle’. 
Incidentally, there is also the graph 鑵 (post-
Shuowen), listed in Kangxi zidian as mean-
ing ‘container for liquids’ (the same as the 
definition in that dictionary for 罐), and the 
determinative 金 16 ‘metal’ here would seem 
more appropriate for the sense ‘tin can’, but 
it appears not to have been adopted for 
that purpose. Then, in the script reform of 
1981 (the Jōyō kanji List of 1945 characters 
which replaced the earlier [1946] Tōyō kanji 
List of 1850 characters), 罐 was adopted in 
the form 缶; its inclusion in the 1981 List 
reflected the rise in popularity of tinned 
items in Japan in the intervening period. 
DJ2009:v2:428; GY2008:2028; OT1968:795; 
ZY2009:v3:980,v4:1423; CS2000:165-178. We 
suggest taking this graph as 午 122 ‘noon’ 
combined with 山 26 ‘mountain’.
Mnemonic: OPEN CAN FOR NOON PICNIC ON 
MOUNTAIN 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  343
陥没 KANBOTSU　cave-in
欠陥 KEKKAN　defect
陥落 KANRAKU　surrender
KAN, ochiiru
collapse
10 strokes
陥
L1
1144
was added on the left side, giving overall 
sense ‘elevated land caves in’ (Ogawa), or ‘get 
trapped, fall in’ (Schuessler). DJ2009:v3:1185; 
OT1968:1067; AS2007:530. A separate verti-
cal stroke appears to have found its way into 
the modern graph, namely 旧. We suggest 
taking this as 旧 677 ‘old, past’, and 𠂊 as 
person falling. 
Mnemonic: OLD PERSON COLLAPSES ON 
TERRACED SLOPE
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
陷. The OBI form of CO 臽 has the figure of a 
person over a hole, meaning ‘pit, hole’; and at 
the seal stage 阜/阝 1907 ‘hill, terraced slope’ 
勘弁  KANBEN　pardon
勘定  KANJŌ　bill, account
勘違い KANchigai　misjudgment
Seal 
; a late graph (late version of Shuowen). 
Has 力 78 ‘strength, power, eff ort’, and 甚 
1552 (originally ‘sexual relations’, now ‘great, 
extreme’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘endure’, giving ‘bear, endure’. Used for ‘inspect, 
investigate’ at an early period (this sense 
noted in Yupian). KJ1970:209; OT1968:128; 
AS2007:331. 
Mnemonic: ENDURE EXTREME EFFORT TO 
INVESTIGATE
KAN
endure, consider, 
investigate, sense
11 strokes
勘
L1
1146
乾電池 KANDENCHI　dry battery
乾燥機 KANSŌKI　(tumble) drier
乾季  KANKI　dry season
‘curved’; see 1072), and 倝/
 (‘sun shines 
high in the sky’ [Mizukami]) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘strong, which Katō then 
takes as giving an overall sense ‘something 
bent straightens out’. Yet another analysis 
– probably the best – is provided by Tōdō, 
who takes 乙 as ‘twisting’, and 
 as ‘sun 
rises up’ (the bronze and seal forms of 倝/ 
 include the element 日 ‘sun’ 66), giving 
overall sense ‘air rises up in meandering 
fashion’ for 乾. As for the meaning ‘dry’ for 乾, 
Tōdō sees this as semantically related to his 
interpretation of the original meaning of that 
graph; both senses are included in his word-
family ‘rise up’. DJ2009:v3:1200; OT1968:28; 
SS1984:123; GY2008:1198; KJ1970:102-3; 
MS1995:v1:70-71; TA1965:587; AS2007:249. 
Suggest taking 乙 as ‘bent’, 𠂉 as ‘person’, and 
𠦝as ‘sun rising (through plants)’. 
Mnemonic: BENT OLD PERSON FEELS DRY AS 
SUN RISES THROUGH PLANTS
KAN, kawaku
dry
11 strokes
乾
L2
1145
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Interpreta-
tions vary considerably. Ogawa takes it sim-
ply as a variant of CO 倝 (original meaning 
‘sunrise’ [see 幹 667]), which he interprets as 
‘flagpole’, a point on which Shirakawa is in 
basic agreement, though he takes 乙 1072 
here as ‘banner’.  Gu, alternatively, sees it 
as showing a plant breaking out upwards 
through the surface of the ground. Katō does 
not favour the ‘plant’ interpretation, and 
instead takes 乙 as meaning ‘twisted, bent’ 
(though commentators disagree on what 
precisely 乙 originally represented, there 
is substantial support for a core meaning 

344  The Remaining 1130 Characters
堪忍   KANNIN　patience
堪能   TANNŌ　skill
堪え難い taegatai　unendurable
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 土 64 
‘ground’, and 甚 1552 (now ‘extreme’, originally 
‘sexual relations’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘stick out’, giving ‘ground which sticks 
out’, ‘raised ground’.  The later sense ‘endure’ 
now predominates for this graph, Katō sug-
gesting it is a borrowed meaning based on 
KAN, TAN, taeru
endure, withstand
12 strokes
堪
L1
1150
患者  KANJA　patient
患部  KANBU　diseased part
長患い nagawazurai　long illness
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). 心 ‘heart, mind’ 
164, with NJK 串 ‘skewer’ (originally, depicting 
shells [as currency] pierced through middle 
and arranged on string), taken as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘be in distress’, giving ‘be trou-
bled, suff er’ (Mizukami, Ogawa), though Tōdō, 
by contrast, takes literally as ‘pierce the heart’, 
and regards ‘troubled’ as an extended sense. 
MS1995:v1:508-10; OT1968:372,22; TA1965:642; 
BK1957:63-4.
Mnemonic: SKEWER THROUGH THE HEART 
CAUSES SUFFERING
KAN, wazurau
disease, ill, suff er
11 strokes
患
L1
1147
‘pierced shield-like shell currency with string 
through’, with ‘pierce, penetrate’ as an extended 
sense (Tōdō). Katō also takes as 貝 ‘shell cur-
rency’, and 毌 as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘pierce’. Note: 毌 as element in 貫 is not 
to be confused with similar-shaped separate 
graph 母 222 ‘mother’; the two have more 
contrastive shapes in early stages of the script. 
MS1995:v1:718-9; GY2008:768-9; TA1965:640-
42. For mnemonic, suggest take 毌 as 母. 
Mnemonic: MOTHER PIERCED BY SHARP 
SHELL 
貫通 KANTSŪ　penetration
縦貫 JŪKAN　traverse
一貫 IKKAN　consistency; 3.75kg
KAN, tsuranuku
pierce, attain, old 
weight (3.75kg)
11 strokes
貫
L1
1148
Bronze 
; seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 貝 
10 ‘shell (currency)’, with CO 毌 ‘pierce’ (taken as 
originally showing either pierced shell[s] with 
string through [Tōdō; in his view, the original 
way of writing 貫], or a shield [Ogawa]), thus 
喚問  KANMON　legal summons
叫喚  KYŌKAN　a cry
喚き声  wamekigoe　scream, yell
‘menstrual soiling’ [Katō], or ‘give birth’ [Shi-
rakawa, Tōdō]) as phonetic with associated 
sense taken either as i] ‘wail’, giving ‘wail, shout’ 
(Katō), or ii] ‘bring together’, giving ‘shout 
together/collectively’ (Tōdō). MS1995:v1:302; 
KJ1970:332-333; SS1984:120; TA1965:630,647; 
OT1968:188. Take 𠂊 as bent fi gure, 
 thighs, 
大 56 ‘big’, 口 ‘yell’. 
Mnemonic: BENT WOMAN WITH BIG THIGHS 
GIVES BIRTH AND YELLS
KAN, wameku
shout, yell, scream, 
shriek
12 strokes
喚
L1
1149
Seal 
; late graph (later version of Shuowen). 
Has 口 22 ‘mouth; speak’, and CO 奐 (taken as 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  345
換気 KANKI　ventilation
換着 kaegi　spare clothes
交換 KŌKAN　exchange
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). 扌 34 ‘hand’, 
and 奐 1149 (‘menstrual soiling’ [Katō], or 
‘give birth’ [Shirakawa, Tōdō]) as phonetic 
with associated sense either as i] ‘change, 
exchange’ [Katō], or ii] ‘take out, remove’ 
(as with a baby at birth; Shirakawa, Tōdō). 
In latter view ‘exchange’ is presumably loan 
usage or extended sense (Tōdō considers to 
be the latter). KJ1970:332-3; SS1984:120,125; 
TA1965:630. Take 𠂊 as bent figure, 
 
thighs, 大 56 ‘big’.
Mnemonic: BIG THIGHED BENT WOMAN 
HANDS OVER BIRTH-CHILD IN EXCHANGE 
KAN, kaeru
exchange
12 strokes
換
L1
1151
勇敢  YŪKAN　bravery, valor
敢然  KANZEN to　bravely
敢なく  aenaku　tragically
KAN, aete, aenai
daring, tragic
12 strokes
敢
L1
1152
Ogawa takes left element to show long 
hair held over container, thus ‘wash hair’. 
Shirakawa sees 𠭖 as showing hand holding 
ladle pouring fragrant wine in purification 
ritual. The form 敢, which includes攵 112 
‘hit’, seems a graphic corruption. ‘Dare’ is an 
extended sense from ‘take with both hands’; 
‘tragic’ is minor meaning found only in 
Japanese. KJ1970:205-6; MS1995:v1:200-01; 
OT1968:440-41; SS1984:125; DJ2009:v2:335. 
Take left hand part as ‘funny’ ear 耳 31.
Mnemonic: DARING HIT ON FUNNY 
EAR – TRAGIC RESULTS
Bronze (𠭖) 
 ; seal (𠭖) 
.  Views differ.  敢 
is seen as variant diverging from main line 
of development of this graph, represented 
by 𠭖. 𠭖 is taken by several scholars as 
having two hands, with lower left element 
taken as phonetic with associated sense 
‘take’, thus ‘seize, take’ (Katō, Mizukami). 
棺おけ  KANoke　coffi  n, casket
石棺  SEKKAN　sarcophagus
棺台  hitsugiDAI　bier
Seal 
. Has 木 73 ‘wood, tree’, with 官 465 
(‘offi  cial’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘enclose’ or ‘cover’, giving ‘wood to enclose’, 
i.e. ‘coffi  n’. MS1995:v1:672-3; KJ1970:335-6; 
TA1965:611-23; OT1968:510.
Mnemonic: OFFICIAL IS IN WOODEN COFFIN
KAN, hitsugi
coffi  n
12 strokes
棺
L1
1153
connection with 勘 1146, the early meaning 
of which was also ‘endure’. The fact that 堪 and 
勘 represented near-homophones in early 
Chinese supports this view. KJ1970:208-9; 
MS1995:v2:866-7; AS2007:330-31; OT1968:219. 
Mnemonic: EXTREME RAISED GROUND WILL 
ENDURE

346  The Remaining 1130 Characters
閑人 KANJIN/himaJIN　idler
閑散 KANSAN　leisure, quiet
閑静 KANSEI　tranquility
‘obstruct’ and ‘defend’ evolved as extended 
senses. Use of 閑 in the sense ‘leisure’ may have 
been a loan usage for an early Chinese word of 
that meaning which was homophonous with 
the word meaning ‘bar on gate’. GY2008:488; 
OT1968:1058; QX2000:193; SS1984:127; 
AS2007:529.
Mnemonic: MAKE WOODEN GATE IN QUIET 
MOMENT OF LEISURE
KAN
leisure, quiet
12 strokes
閑
L1
1155
勧告 KANKOKU　advice
勧獎 KANSHŌ　encouragement
勧誘 KAN’YŪ　persuasion
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 勸. 
Has 力 78 ‘strength, power, eff ort’, and  468 
(‘crested bird’: q.v.) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘strong’, giving ‘make eff orts to advance’, 
and by extension ‘cause someone to make 
eff orts to advance’, i.e. ‘encourage’. KJ1970:213; 
MS1995:v2:1410-12; OT1968:129. 
Mnemonic: ENCOURAGED BY EFFORTS OF 
CRESTED BIRD 
KAN, susumeru
encourage, advise
13 strokes
勧
L1
1156
借款 SHAKKAN　loan, credit
落款 RAKKAN　signature
款待 KANTAI　hospitality
the left-hand side as an alternative form: it 
may well be that an original 木 as top left-
hand element in one form of this graph later 
became corrupted to 士 (Ogawa takes this 
view). Katō analyzes 款 on the basis of the 
seal form in Shuowen as 欠 in its early sense 
‘(mouth) wide open’, with a left-hand element 
祟 (NJK ‘curse’, meaning given in Shuowen as 
‘calamity initiated by the gods’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘pit, cavity, void’, giving 
‘what a person longs for’. Through association 
with ‘cavity, void’, Katō then takes ‘engrave’ 
(as in the case of inscriptions traditionally 
on artefacts such as bronze bells and ves-
sels) as an extended sense.  Other meanings 
such as ‘friendship’ and ‘clause’ are perhaps 
best seen as loan usages. GY2008:1365,1163; 
KJ1970:305; OT1968:533; DJ2009:v2:704,v1:11; 
AS2007:338. We suggest taking this awkward 
graph as 士 521 ‘samurai’, 示 723 ‘show’, and 
欠 496 ‘lack’, fortunately having an easier 
mnemonic.
Mnemonic: SAMURAI SHOWS LACK OF 
FRIENDSHIP OVER ENGRAVING
KAN
friendship, clause, 
engrave
12 strokes
款
L1
1154
Seal forms 
, 
. This graph has several 
alternative shapes, mostly involving variation 
on the left-hand side (e.g. 欵), with 欠 496 
(initially, pictograph of person with mouth 
open wide; now meaning ‘lack’). In addition, 
Gu lists one form that he treats as the OBI 
predecessor, consisting of left-hand 柰 (NJK, 
originally‘fi rewood on altar’, now meaning 
‘what?’), with right-hand 又 ‘hand’ 2003, 
signifying a ritualistic request to the gods to 
be granted good fortune. Based on the seal 
forms, several other commentators (Katō, 
Ogawa) also take the core meaning of this 
graph/graph group as involving some sort 
of wish (still a meaning in Chinese). Regard-
ing variation in shape, it is worth observing 
that Shuowen notes 款 written with 柰 on 
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 門 231 
‘gate’, and 木 73 ‘wood, tree’, giving original 
sense ‘timber for closing gate, bar on gate’; 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  347
歓迎 KANGEI　welcome
歓楽 KANRAKU　pleasure
交歓 KŌKAN　fraternisation
‘lack’), and  468 (‘crested bird’, q.v.) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken variously as i] ‘eat 
and drink’, giving ‘open the mouth and eat and 
drink’, with ‘rejoice, be happy’ as an extended 
sense (Katō), or ii] ‘do something together/
in unison’, giving ‘join forces and make a stir’ 
(Tōdō), or iii] ‘shout’, giving ‘shout’ (Ogawa).  
KJ1970:340; TA1965:643-6; OT1968:535.
Mnemonic: MERRIMENT IS A GAPING MOUTH 
FULL OF CRESTED BIRD
KAN, yorokobu
rejoice, merry
15 strokes
歓
L1
1158
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); tradition-
al 歡. Has 欠 496 (originally pictograph of 
person with mouth open wide, now means 
監視 KANSHI　observation
総監 SŌKAN　superintendent
監禁 KANKIN　imprisonment
water, thus ‘gaze at one’s refl ection, look from 
above’; by extension, ‘look carefully; keep 
watch’ (Mizukami, Shirakawa), ‘inspect’ (Qiu). 
Note: 臥 comprises 臣 543 (originally, eye with 
large pupil or eyeball, with core meaning ‘look 
at, watch’), with 人/
, which corresponds to 
person bending over, as in the seal form above. 
QX2000:195; MS1995:v2:906-7; KJ1970:132; 
OT1968:692; SS1984:129.
Mnemonic: BENDING PERSON WITH ONE EYE 
WATCHS OVER BOWL
KAN
supervise, watch
15 strokes
監
L1
1159
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 臥 (NJK, ‘bend down’), 
and 皿 ‘bowl’ 300, originally showing person 
bent over gazing at refl ection in surface of 
寛大 KANDAI　liberality
寛容 KAN’YŌ　tolerance
寛恕 KANJO　magnanimity
(CO, ‘plump wild sheep’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘spacious, unconstricted’, to give ‘spa-
cious house’, and by extension ‘magnanimous; 
relax’. KJ1970:340; MS1995:v1:386-8,v2:1120-21; 
OT1968:282. We suggest taking the elements as 
宀 30 ‘building / roof’, 見 20 as ‘see’, and 艹 53 as 
‘grass’. 
Mnemonic: SEE GRASS-ROOFED 
BUILDING – A PLACE TO RELAX
KAN, kutsurogu
magnanimous, relax
13 strokes
寛
L1
1157
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); tradition-
al 
. Has 宀 30 ‘roof, house, building’, and 
 
緩和 KANWA　mitigation
緩流 KANRYŪ　gentle current
緩々 
yuruyuru to　leisurely
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional form 
has right-hand 爰 1053 (CO; originally ‘pull’ 
q.v.). Has 糸 29 ‘thread’, and 爰 as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘loose; lenient, relax’, giving 
‘tie thread loosely’. Listed in Shuowen, though 
not with main entry status. DJ2009:v3:1080-81; 
KJ1970:107-8,333; OT1968:785. 
Mnemonic: HANDS PULL THREADS LOOSE
KAN, yurui/mu/meru
loose, easy, slack
15 strokes
緩
L1
1160
遺憾 IKAN na　regettable
憾恨 KANKON　grudge
憾み urami regret
A late graph (post-Shuowen). Has 感 264 
‘feeling, emotion’, and 忄 164 ‘heart, feeling’. 
Acquired connotations of negative emotion, 
specifi cally ‘regret, resent’. Included in Tōdō’s 
word-family ‘blocked up inside’. SS1984:130; 
TA1965:815-24; OT1968:389. 
Mnemonic: REGRET IS DOUBLY STRONG 
FEELING
KAN, uramu
regret, resent
16 strokes
憾
L1
1161

348  The Remaining 1130 Characters
指環  yubiwa　fi nger ring
環状線 KANJŌSEN　loop line
環境  KANKYŌ  environment
韓国  KANKOKU　South Korea
韓国人 KANKOKUJIN　S.Koreans
日韓 
 NIKKAN Japan-S. Korea
surround’, giving ‘jade disc’ (Mizukami, Ogawa), 
or ii] ‘equal’, giving ‘jade disc with centre hole 
and surrounding jade body of equal width’. Mi-
zukami lists proposed OBI and bronze equiva-
lents also. MS1995:v2:860-61; OT1968:661; 
KJ1970:329. As with 1162, we again suggest 
taking 
 as variant of 哀 1008 ‘pity, sorrow’, 
and ‘eye’ 目 76 as ‘look’. 
Mnemonic: JEWELED RING EVOKES 
SORROWFUL LOOK  
has always served to denote a proper noun; 
early use was as name of ancient state in War-
ring States period China (ca. 403-221BC). ‘South 
Korea’ is the modern meaning. Note: Shuowen 
defi nes meaning of 韓 as ‘(water) well surround’, 
but Shirakawa sees this as loan usage, and 
tentatively takes original meaning as ‘ornate 
halberd with leather grip’. MS1995:v1:70-71; 
SS1984:132,127; TA1965:587; DJ2009:v2:445. 
Take 韋 as ‘diff er’, 𠦝as 日 66 ‘sun’ rising through 
‘plants’ 艹. 
Mnemonic: SOUTH KOREA DIFFERS FROM 
JAPAN, BUT SUN STILL RISES 
KAN, wa
ring, circle
17 strokes
KAN
Korea, S. Korea
18 strokes
環
韓
L2
L1
1163
1164
Seal 
. Has 玉 15 ‘jade, jewel’, and 睘 (‘roll 
eyes in surprise’; see 1162 Note) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken either as i] ‘round, 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 韋 446 
(originally, ‘go in diff erent directions’ or ‘move 
away from’, q.v.), and 倝 667 (𠦝in 韓 is ab-
breviation; sense disputed: ‘sun shines high in 
sky’ [Mizukami, Tōdō] or ‘fl agpole with banner’ 
[Shirakawa]) as phonetic; initial overall sense 
unclear (see Note). According to Shirakawa, 韓 
還元  KANGEN　restoration
生還者 SEIKANSHA　survivor
返還  HENKAN restitution
associated sense ‘go round once, go round 
and return’, giving ‘return’. Mizukami also lists 
what may be OBI equivalents. Note: 睘 has 目
76 ‘eye’, and CO 
 ‘turn round’ as semantic 
and phonetic (Ogawa). MS1995:v2:1310-11; 
OT1968:1015,703. Take 
 as variant of 哀 1008 
‘pity, sorrow’, and ‘eye’ 目 76 as ‘look’.
Mnemonic: RETURN, MOVING WITH 
SORROWFUL LOOK  
KAN
return
16 strokes
還
L1
1162
軍艦 GUNKAN　warship
艦隊 KANTAI　fl eet
艦種 KANSHU warship class
enclosed on all sides by planks (protecting 
against attack)’, and hence ‘warship, military ves-
sel’; 監 here is felt to be an abbreviation of NJK 
檻 ‘enclosure, cage’. Military vessels are known 
to have been used in China from the Three 
Kingdoms period (ca. 220-280AD). KJ1970:133; 
SS1984:134; OT1968:839,528.
Mnemonic: BOAT THAT WATCHES OVER 
OTHERS IS A WARSHIP
KAN
warship
21 strokes
艦
L1
1165
Late graph (Yupian). Has 舟 1450 ‘boat’, and 
監 1159 (‘supervise, watch over’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘enclosure’, giving ‘boat 
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has ⻌ 85 ‘go, move’, and 
CO 睘 (‘roll eyes in surprise’) as phonetic with 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  349
包含  HŌGAN　inclusion
含有量 GAN’YŪRYŌ　content
含めて  fukumete including
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 口 22 
‘mouth’, and 今 138 (‘now’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘cover, hide inside’ (Katō says 
‘store’), giving ‘keep/hide in the mouth’. ‘In-
clude’ is an extended sense. MS1995:v1:216-7; 
OT1968:170; KJ1970:2. 
Mnemonic: NOW CONTAINED IN THE MOUTH 
GAN, fukumu/meru
include, contain
7 strokes
含
L2
1167
玩具  GANGU/omocha*　a toy
愛玩者 AIGANSHA　admirer
玩弄  GANRŌ suru　make sport of
(Shirakawa), ‘throw (something) down/roll 
(something) over’ (Ogawa), but the consen-
sus regarding the original core meaning of 
the graph (except Ogawa) may be summa-
rised as ‘take a piece of jade in the hands’. 
‘Appreciate’, which appears to be an early 
extended sense, is now just a minor sense. 
It is not clear whether ‘play’ is a loan usage 
or an extended sense; Gu takes as the latter. 
TA1965:611-19; SS1984:136; OT1968:655; 
GY2008:542. 
Mnemonic: ORIGINALLY ONE PLAYED WITH 
JEWELS, LIKE TOYS 
GAN, moteasobu
play, toy with, 
appreciate
8 strokes
玩
L1
1168
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 玉 15 
‘jade, jewel’, and 元 117 (‘origin, source’, 
initially ‘large head’) as phonetic. Associated 
sense is taken variously as ‘cup the hands’ 
(Tōdō), ‘pick up’ (Gu), ‘offer up in the hands’ 
年鑑  NENKAN　yearbook
鑑賞  KANSHŌ　appreciation
鑑みて  kangamite in view of
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 監 1159 
(originally ‘water mirror’, now ‘watch,’), and 金 
16 ‘metal’ added later to denote ‘metal mir-
ror’ (in early China, typically made of bronze 
– see 鏡 486). Other meanings for 鑑 such 
as ‘pattern, appreciate’ which evolved later 
may be seen as extended senses. SS1984:134; 
TA1965:846; OT1968:1052; AS2007:305.
Mnemonic: APPRECIATE METAL MIRROR FOR 
WATCHING ONESELF  
KAN, kangamiru
take note, heed, 
appreciate
23 strokes
鑑
L1
1166
頑固  GANKO na　stubborn
頑健  GANKEN　robust health
頑張る  GANbaru persevere
GAN, katakuna
stubborn, dull
13 strokes
頑
L1
1169
with associated sense as ‘not easily controlled’, 
and hence ‘stubborn’ (Shirakawa), or ii] as 
both semantic (‘crown of the head’, and hence 
‘protuberance’) and phonetic, meaning ‘wood 
knot diffi  cult to cut out’, and by extension ‘stu-
pid, stubborn’ (Gu). Katō takes graph as round 
head and ‘stubborn’ as borrowed meaning. 
SS1984:137; GY2008:983; KJ1985:661. 
Mnemonic: A PERSON DULL AND 
STUBBORN-HEADED FROM THE BEGINNING
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 頁 103 
‘head’, and 元 117 (initially showing person 
with large head, giving ‘head’ as early meaning; 
now ‘origin, beginning’) taken as i] as phonetic 

350  The Remaining 1130 Characters
歌舞伎 KABUKI　kabuki 
伎能  GINŌ　talent, skill
伎楽  GIGAKU　ancient mask show
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 亻 41 per-
son’, and 支 (717 ‘branch, support’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘deed, skill’, giving overall 
sense ‘person who has skills/performs’, and 
hence ‘actor’ (Ogawa, Tōdō ); Tōdō regards origi-
nal sense as ‘person who knows handicrafts’. 
This graph 伎 1171 is often interchangeable 
with 技 673, also meaning ‘skill’, but not in the 
case of ‘kabuki’. TA1965:493-5; OT1968:49. 
Mnemonic: PERSON HOLDS CROSS 
IN HAND – A SKILLED ACT 
KI, GI
skill, act, deed
6 strokes
伎
L1
1171
企業 KIGYŌ　(an) enterprise
企画 KIKAKU　plan
企て 
kuwadate plot, scheme
here still has this meaning of standing on 
tiptoe in Chinese). In support of this analysis, 
it seems signifi cant that while the majority of 
the OBI occurrences listed by Mizukami have 
the foot orientated horizontally, several forms 
show the foot slightly raised. Also,Tōdō rejects 
the view of 止 serving as phonetic here on 
the basis of dissimilar pronunciation in early 
Chinese relative to 企. ‘Try, attempt’ is perhaps 
an extended sense, given that standing on 
tiptoe successfully for more than a few mo-
ments involves eff ort and is quite diffi  cult for 
most people; ‘plan, undertake’ may be loan 
usages. KJ1970:243; OT1968:49; QX2000:196 
TA1965:497; SS1984:139. We suggest taking 
𠆢 as person, which it is, and 止 in its modern 
sense of ‘stop’.
Mnemonic: PERSON STOPS AND 
UNDERTAKES TO MAKE A PLAN 
KI, kuwadateru
plan, undertake
6 strokes
企
L1
1170
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 𠆢 ‘person’ (a variant of 
人 41) standing upright, and 止 143 (now 
meaning ‘stop’ but originally depiction of 
person’s foot or footprint;) (all best repre-
sented in the OBI form). 止 here is taken 
in one view as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘stand precariously’, giving ‘unstable 
position on tiptoes’ (Katō).  More typically, 
though, 止 is taken in its original sense of 
‘foot’, representing someone standing with 
the heels raised, i.e. on tiptoes (Ogawa, Tōdō, 
Shirakawa) (the graph 企 under discussion 
岐路 KIRO　forked road
分岐 BUNKI　divergence
多岐 TAKI　many directions
Zhou capital [Katō; Ogawa acknowledges this 
meaning also]), or – a similar but less spe-
cifi c interpretation – ii] ‘be separated’, giving 
‘forked road’ (Ogawa, Tōdō) (perhaps a gener-
alized sense deriving from ‘forked mountain 
road’). For the sense ‘forked road’, there also 
exists the graph 歧, with determinative 止 143 
(originally, ‘foot, footprint’, but can indicate 
motion as well as its modern sense ‘stop’). 
KJ1970:243; OT1968:302; TA1965:495.
Mnemonic: MOUNTAIN PATHS HAVE FORKS, 
LIKE BRANCHES
KI
fork
7 strokes
岐
L1
1172
A late (post-Shuowen) graph. Has 山 26 
‘mountain’, and 支 717 (‘branch, support’) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken as i] 
‘twin peaks’, giving ‘mountain with twin peaks’ 
(specifi cally, ‘Twin Peaks Mountain’ in Shanxi 
Province, close to the site of the ancient 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  351
祈念  KINEN　prayer 
祈願  KIGAN　supplication
祈り合う inoriau　pray together
netic with associated sense ‘curved handle/
pole’). The above treatment fi nds support 
in Schuessler, who lists the early Chinese 
equivalents for ‘pray for’ and ‘banner with 
dragon design and bells’ as two separate but 
homophonous words. Then, at the seal stage, 
the direct predecessor of 祈 gained orthodox 
status with its inclusion and promotion in 
Shuowen. 祈 consists of 礻/示 723 (originally, 
‘off ering table, altar’; now ‘show’), with 斤 
1233 (‘ax’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘request, seek’, giving ‘seek (good fortune) from 
the gods’. MS1995:v2:940-41; MR2007:216; 
KJ1970:101,246-7; OT1968:719; AS2007:420. 
We suggest taking the modern form as ‘altar’ 
and ‘ax’.
Mnemonic: TAKE AN AX TO THE ALTAR FOR 
PRAYER!? 
KI, inoru/ri
pray, prayer, wish
8 strokes
祈
L2
1175
OBI 
; bronze 
; seal 
. A graph with 
what appears to be a convoluted evolution.  
Several commentators (Mizukami, Ma) trace 
its origin back to the OBI stage, which they 
interpret as ‘fl ag/banner with dragon design 
and bells attached’; ‘seek good fortune from 
the gods, pray’ (originally, in time of war) is 
considered to be an early loan usage. In similar 
vein, the bronze form is taken to represent a 
fl ag or banner  mounted on a curved handle 
or pole (單 [traditional form of 単 569 q.v., also 
initially a weapon] here is regarded as pho-
軌道   KIDŌ　track, orbit
無軌道の MUKIDŌ no　wayward
常軌   JŌKI　normal course
either analysis giving ‘concave/curved tracks 
made in the ground by carts’, i.e. ‘wheel tracks’. 
Note: with regard to the English expres-
sion ‘going off -track’, this is usually applied 
to moving away from a central theme in a 
speech or similar, i.e. digressing, but in the 
case of ‘going off  track’ in Japanese, there is a 
greater waywardness, such as erratic behavior. 
MS1995:v2:1266-7; KJ1970:244; OT1968:980. 
Mnemonic: TRACK RUTTED AFTER NINE 
VEHICLES PASS
KI
track, way, rut 
9 strokes
軌
L1
1176
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 車 33 ‘vehicle’, and 九 
13 (‘nine’) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken as i] ‘intervening gap’ (between wheels 
of a cart/carriage) (Katō) or ii] ‘be curved/bent’ 
(Ogawa) (both senses listed by Mizukami), in 
忌中   KICHŪ　in mourning
禁忌   KINKI　taboo
忌み嫌う  imikirau　detest
奇数 KISŪ　odd number
新奇 SHINKI　novelty
奇形 KIKEI　deformity
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 心 164 ‘heart, mind’, 
and 己 866 (‘I, self’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘avoid in one’s heart out of loath-
ing, fi rmly resist’, giving ‘avoid out of loathing; 
abhor, detest; odious; taboo’. Taboos are often 
associated with mourning and this is prob-
ably an extended meaning. MS1995:v1:496-7; 
KJ1970:234; AS2007:234. 
Mnemonic: IN MY HEART, I DETEST MYSELF
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 大 56 ‘big’ 
(originally, pictograph of person standing), 
and 可 655 (‘can; approve’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘bent’, and hence ‘person with 
bent leg, lame’; by extension (Gu): ‘not normal, 
strange’. OT1968:246; TA1965:582; GY2008:58. 
Mnemonic: SOMETHING BIG AND BENT CAN 
BE ODD
KI, imu/mi/mawashii
mourn, abhor, odious, 
detest 
7 strokes
KI
strange, odd
8 strokes
忌
奇
L1
L1
1173
1174

352  The Remaining 1130 Characters
鬼界   KIKAI　realm of the dead
鬼婆   onibaba　hag, witch
鬼ごっこ  onigokko　tag (the game)
OBI 
; seal 
. The OBI forms commonly 
depict a kneeling fi gure wearing a large mask; 
the graph is taken to represent the spirit of a 
deceased person. The element ム was added 
later at the seal stage; its function is not entirely 
clear, but one suggestion is that it was added as 
a phonetic (Katō). OT1968:1139; KJ1970:230-32; 
MS1995:v2:1486-8. Suggest taking the graph as 
a whole as a deviation from ‘think’ 思 147.
Mnemonic: DISTORTED THINKING LEADS TO 
DEVILISH THOUGHTS
KI, oni
devil, demon, ghost 
10 strokes 
鬼
L1
1179
亀頭 KITŌ　penis
亀裂 KIRETSU　crack, fi ssure
海亀 umigame　sea turtle
OBI ; seal 
; traditional 龜. Originally, 
pictograph of a turtle or tortoise seen from 
above or from the side; from the seal stage 
onwards, the side view predominated as the 
basis for this graph. In broad terms, the modern 
simplifi ed form may be said to retain the basic 
profi le of the seal version. MS1995:v2:1530-31; 
MR2007:492; OT1968:1175. We suggest taking 
the pictograph in its whole modern form as a 
mnemonic.
Mnemonic: TURTLE HAS TWO SQUARE 
SHELLS WITH CRACKS, HEAD AND TAIL 
KI, kame
turtle, tortoise
11 strokes
亀
L1
1180
飢餓   KIGA　hunger, starvation
飢え死に  uejini　death by starvation
飢饉   KIKIN　famine
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 食 163 ‘eat’, 
and 几 845 (NJK; originally ‘table, stand’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘sparse, defi -
cient’, thus ‘food is sparse’, and hence ‘be hun-
gry’. DJ2009:v2:425; OT1968:107; TA1965:695-8. 
Mnemonic: FOOD ON THE TABLE, BUT STILL 
STARVING
KI, ueru
starve, hunger
10 strokes
飢
L1
1178
既成  KISEI　ready-made
既婚者 KIKONSHA　married person
既定  KITEI no　established
takes meaning (OBI stage onwards) as ‘to 
complete, have done’ as a marker of complet-
ed action; which would mean ‘already’ is an 
extended sense. The shape  既 is found in the 
calligraphic tradition (which often features 
such variants) from Sui dynasty (581-618) on-
wards. QX2000:195; OT1968:458; KJ1970:183; 
AS2007:298; MS1995:v1:604-6.; FC1976:1022-
4. Take left-side as unlidded food 食 163 and 
right-side as long legged man.
Mnemonic: LONG LEGGED MAN HAS 
ALREADY FINISHED UNLIDDED FOOD
KI, sude (ni)
already, fi nished
10 strokes
既
L1
1177
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional forms 旣, 既. Has 
CO 皀 ‘food vessel piled with food’ and 旡, 
CO graph taken as originally meaning either 
‘choke after eating’ or ‘eat one’s fill’, as se-
mantic and phonetic, thus ‘finish eating’ (Qiu, 
Ogawa) or ‘eat one’s fill’ (Katō).  Schuessler 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  353
将棋 SHŌGI　Japanese chess
棋士 KISHI　shōgi/go player
棋敵 KITEKI　chess opponent
phonetic with associated sense typically tak-
en as ‘square’, giving ‘square piece of wood’, 
hence ‘(Oriental) chess/checkers board’, and 
by extension ‘game board pieces’. Katō, by 
contrast, takes ‘small’ as the associated pho-
netic sense of 其, giving ‘game board pieces’ 
as the direct (not extended) meaning. See 
also 碁 1314. DJ2009:v2:482; TA1965:124-6; 
OT1968:510; SS1984:148; KJ1970:239. 
Mnemonic: MAKE WOODEN CHESS PIECES 
OUT OF WINNOWING BASKET!? 
KI
(oriental) chess
12 strokes
棋
L1
1182
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Originally 
written 棊 (same components, just differently 
arranged). Has 木 73 ‘wood, tree’, with 其 269 
(NJK, originally, pictograph of winnowing 
basket; later borrowed for ‘that’ [pronoun]) as 
放棄  HŌKI　abandonment
棄権  KIKEN　abstention
棄て場  suteba　dumping ground
newly born), winnowing basket (Qiu says 
winnowing basket or dustpan), and a pair of 
hands. This is taken to mean ‘abandon a baby’, 
and sense then generalized to ‘abandon, throw 
away’. As often the case, the elements of the 
OBI graph have undergone extensive styliza-
tion by the block script stage. MR2007:297; 
QX2000:190; GY2008:485. Suggest take whole 
graph as like 葉 428 ‘leaf’.
Mnemonic: ABANDON CHILD, TOSSING AWAY 
LIKE ODD LEAF
KI, suteru
abandon, discard, 
renounce
13 strokes
棄
L1
1183
OBI 
; seal 
. OBI form gives a good indica-
tion of the original meaning. It has elements 
for 子 27 ‘baby’ (inverted in seal form to show 
幾人  ikuNIN　how many people
幾何学 KIKAGAKU　geometry
幾ら 
 ikura　how(/ever) much
‘loom treadle’, again taken as the original 
way of writing 機 476 ‘loom’ (Katō). Alter-
natively, Tōdō interprets 𢇇 not as semantic 
but phonetic in function here, denoting ‘fi ne, 
detailed, small’ (based on the extended sense 
‘small’ of the determinative 幺 ‘part of thread’, 
deriving from it being just the top part of 糸 
29 ‘thread’, i.e.’short thread’), combining with 
戈 545 ‘halberd’ and 人 41 ‘person’, giving ‘hal-
berd blade almost reaches neck of enemy’ (i.e. 
almost kills enemy). Meanings such as ‘how 
much, how many’ are loan usages, refl ecting 
the common device of borrowing a graph 
originally representing a word for a concrete 
object for another of abstract meaning but 
having the same or similar pronunciation.  
OT1968:325; KJ1970:144-5; TA1965:695-7.
Mnemonic: HOW MANY SHORT THREADS 
CAN A HALBERD TRIM?
KI, iku-
how many/much, 
some, several
12 strokes
幾
L1
1181
Bronze 
; seal 
. Interpretations vary. In 
one view, has 𢆶 29 (‘short threads’) as an 
abbreviation of 𢇇‘loom treadle’ (Ogawa), and 
戍 (NJK; ‘protect with weapon/halberd’: see 
545/476)’ as phonetic with associated sense 
not specifi ed by Ogawa (presumably ‘stop, 
prevent’), giving ‘loom treadle’; original way 
of writing 機 in its fi rst sense, i.e. ‘loom’ 476. 
In another analysis, with 𢇇 taken as ‘cord 
attached to loom treadle’, with 戍 as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘fi rmly stop’, giving 

354  The Remaining 1130 Characters
光輝 KŌKI　luster, splendor
輝石 KISEKI　pyroxene
輝き 
kagayaki　light
Seal . The seal form in Shuowen has 火 8 ‘fi re’ 
as determinative, and the entry in that diction-
ary defi nes the graph simply as ‘light’ (光 129). 
The alternative form 輝 is analyzed as 光, 
with 軍 490 (‘army, military’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘surround’, giving ‘light sur-
rounds’. 輝 came into use in Han times, then 
became predominant. SS1984:155; OT1968:985; 
TA1965:712-21.
Mnemonic: ARMY PROVIDES SHINING LIGHT
KI, kagayaku/kashii
shine, sparkle
15 strokes
輝
L1
1186
騎士   KISHI　knight, rider
騎兵   KIHEI　cavalry
一騎打ち IKKIuchi　single combat
Seal 
. Has 馬 210 ‘horse’, and 奇 1174 
(‘strange’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘put on top, go up high’, giving ‘mount a 
horse’. Mizukami lists a proposed bronze 
equivalent. TA1965:583-6; OT1968:1127; 
MS1995:v2:1470-71.
Mnemonic: RIDER ON STRANGE HORSE IS A 
KNIGHT
KI
rider
18 strokes
騎
L1
1187
毀損  KISON　damage, injury
毀棄  KIKI　destruction
毀れ物 kowaremono　fragile item
Bronze 
; seal 
. Views vary. Gu takes 㙯 as 
‘person atop mound of earth’, with abbreviated 
form of CO 毇 ‘pound rice’, thus ‘destroy’. Ogawa 
agrees, but instead of 㙯 he posits 土 64 ‘earth, 
ground’, giving ‘break down clods of earth’, 
and by extension ‘destroy’. Shirakawa diff ers, 
proposing an etymology possibly related to 
human sacrifi ce. SS1984:150; GY2008:1618; 
OT1968:222. Take 殳 170 ‘strike’, 臼 as hands,  
as ‘sloping ground’ 64.
Mnemonic: STRIKING WITH HANDS ON 
SLOPING GROUND IS DESTRUCTIVE 
KI, kowasu/reru
break, damage, 
destruction
13 strokes
毀
L1
1184
畿内 KINAI　Kyōto area
近畿 KINKI　Ōsaka-Kyōto
(no further compounds) 
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 田 63 ‘fi eld’ 
(here in more general sense ‘land, territory’), 
and 幾 1181 (‘how much, how many’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘near, almost’, 
giving original meaning ‘territory close to the 
capital (under direct control of the Emperor)’; 
later, ‘the capital and environs’. DJ2009:v3:1130; 
TA1965:695-7; QX2000:235; OT1968:674. 
Mnemonic: HOW MANY FIELDS ARE THERE IN 
THE CAPITAL AREA?
KI
capital (place)
15 strokes
畿
L1
1185

The Remaining 1130 Characters  355
儀式 GISHIKI　ceremony
儀典 GITEN　rite, ritual
礼儀 REIGI etiquette
Seal 
. Has 人 41 ‘person’, and 義 674 ‘right-
eous’, giving ‘person who is careful in conduct 
or appearance/person who serves as model to 
others’; by extension, ‘exemplar, good conduct, 
ceremony’. Mizukami also lists some bronze 
forms of 義 as proposed equivalents of 儀. 
KJ1970:142-3; MS1995:v1:82-3; OT1968:81. 
Mnemonic: RIGHTEOUS PERSON OBEYS 
RULES IN CEREMONIES
GI
ceremony, rule
15 strokes
儀
L1
1191
適宜 TEKIGI　suitability
便宜 BENGI　convenience 
宜しく yoroshiku　best regards
GI, yoroshii
proper, good
8 strokes
宜
L1
1188
OBI ; seal . In a short entry (宐), Kangxi zidian 
notes 宐 as the original way of writing 宜, but 
otherwise uses the shape 宜, which has long 
served as the orthodox form. OBI and bronze 
forms have outer contour taken as outline of a 
chopping board, on which there is another ele-
ment doubled, showing ‘meat’ (肉/月 209), thus 
‘meat off ering’. The outer contour could perhaps 
be taken to represent cover or roof, and this 
might explain the seal form, which shows 宀 30 
‘roof, building’. Meanings such as ‘proper, proper 
conduct; good’ may be taken as extended 
senses deriving from what was regarded as 
proper conduct in off ering meat to the deities. 
MS1995:v1:362-3; KJ1970:257; OT1968:274; 
TA1965:592; DJ2009:v1:236. Suggest taking as 且 
1135 ‘cairn, furthermore’. 
Mnemonic: FURTHERMORE, CAIRN HAS A 
GOOD AND PROPER ROOF 
偽物  nisemono　forgery
偽善  GIZEN　hypocrisy
偽り者  itsuwarimono　liar
sense ‘change appearance’, giving ‘someone 
changes appearance/changes into someone 
else’ (with negative connotation), and hence 
‘deceive; false’.  Ogawa – perhaps less con-
vincingly – takes 爲/為 diff erently as having 
a semantic role here, giving ‘person does’, 
and ‘deceit’ as an extended sense. KJ1970:19; 
TA1965:607-10; OT1968:73.  
Mnemonic: A PERSON DOES LIE FOR FALSE 
PURPOSES 
GI, nise, itsuwaru
false, lie
11 strokes
偽
L1
1189
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional form 
has 爲 as right-hand element. Comprises 亻 41 
person, and 爲 1017 (‘do; purpose’), the latter 
typically taken as phonetic with associated 
詐欺   SAGI　fraud
欺まん   GIMAN　deception
欺き取る  azamukitoru　defraud
Seal 
. Has 欠 496 (‘yawn, lack’), and 其 269 
(orig winnowing basket) as phonetic, usu-
ally taken with associated sense ‘be weary’, 
thus ‘very weary, yawn’ (Katō). Mizukami lists 
another associated sense for 其, i.e. ‘coerce 
sternly’, thus ‘coerce with stern expression’. 
‘Cheat, deceive’ is loan usage. MS1995:v1:698-9; 
OT1968:534; KJ1970:240.
Mnemonic: LACKS WINNOWING BASKET SO 
RESORT TO CHEATING 
GI, azamuku
cheat, deceive
12 strokes
欺
L1
1190

356  The Remaining 1130 Characters
野菊 noGIKU　aster 
菊花 KIKKA　chrysanthemum 
菊判 KIKUBAN small octavo
‘having shrivelled leaves’, giving ‘plant with 
shrivelled leaves’ (Katō), or ii] ‘round’, giving 
‘plant with round [head/fl ower]’, i.e. ‘chrysan-
themum’ (Ogawa). However, both Katō and 
Shirakawa maintain that in ancient times this 
graph did not refer to the chrysanthemum/ 
an autumn-fl owering plant; according to 
Shirakawa, originally it referred instead to a 
diff erent fl owering plant called Wild Pink or 
Large Pink (Dianthus superbus). Note: 匊 com-
KIKU
chrysanthemum
11 strokes
菊
L1
1195
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 艹 53 
‘plant, vegetation’, and CO 匊 (see Note below) 
as phonetic with associated sense taken as i] 
遊戯的 YŪGITEKI　playful 
戯画  GIGA　caricature
戯言  tawagoto* gibberish
associated sense taken as i] ‘rough, unrefi ned’, 
giving ‘roughly-made halberd, for play’ (Katō), or 
ii] ‘perform a task’, giving ‘military practice before 
battle’ (Ogawa). Clearly the ‘play’ meaning has 
become prominent, including to frolic and fl irt. 
At some point  as phonetic has been replaced 
by 虚 1212 ‘hollow, empty’. KJ1970:256-7; 
OT1968:397. 
Mnemonic: HOLLOW HALBERD USED IN PLAY
GI, tawamureru
play, frolic, joke
15 strokes
戯
L1
1192
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 戲. Latter has 
戈 476/545 ‘halberd’, with  (CO, ‘type of old 
porcelain/pottery vessel’) as phonetic with 
模擬 MOGI　imitation 
擬勢 GISEI　bluff 
擬声 GISEI onomatopoeia
analysis as phonetic with associated senses 
‘doubtful’ or ‘resemble’, the latter giving ‘make 
something to resemble by hand’, and hence 
‘imitate’ (Katō). Another analysis takes 疑 as 
both semantic and phonetic, again giving the 
overall sense ‘imitate’ (Ogawa). KJ1970:248-9; 
OT1968:432. 
Mnemonic: MAKE DOUBTFUL IMITATION BY 
HAND
GI
imitate, model
17 strokes
擬
L1
1193
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 扌34 
‘hand’, and 疑 848 (‘doubt’) taken in one 
犠牲  GISEI　sacrifi ce 
犠牲者 GISEISHA　victim 
犠打  GIDA sacrifi ce hit (baseball)
or more generally ‘animal sacrifi ce’ for 犠 
(Ogawa, Tōdō, Shirakawa). A divergent view is 
off ered by Katō, who maintains that 義 serves 
here as phonetic only, originally with an as-
sociated sense ‘young male (ox)’, which for 
sacrifi cial purposes was of a single color, and 
‘single color’ subsequently came to predomi-
nate as the new associated sense, giving the 
overall sense ‘young ox of a single color’; in 
this interpretation, ‘sacrifi ce’ is an extended 
sense. SS1984:165; OT1968:639; TA1965:592; 
KJ1970:241-2.  
Mnemonic: ONLY A RIGHTEOUS COW CAN BE 
A SACRIFICE
GI
sacrifi ce
17 strokes
犠
L1
1194
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 牛 108 
‘cow, ox’, and 義 674 (later meaning: ‘right-
eous’), which may be taken as both semantic 
and phonetic in function; the original mean-
ing of 義, which includes 我 833 (originally 
‘halberd’, now ‘I, self’) is ‘animal sacrifi ce’. This 
then leads to an overall sense ‘ox sacrifi ce’, 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  357
詰問   KITSUMON　a grilling 
詰まり   tsumari　in short
詰め込む tsumekomu cram
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 言 118 
‘words; speak’, and 吉 1196 (‘auspicious’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘suff er’, to give 
‘question rigorously/ exhaustively’; in Japanese, 
it has acquired the sense ‘pack’. KJ1970:230; 
OT1968:927.
Mnemonic: WORDS PACKED WITH JOY 
KITSU, tsumu/meru/
maru
pack, packed, full
13 strokes
詰
L2
1198
prises 勹 (see 611), a determinative originally 
depicting the side view of a person bending 
over with arms lowered, signifying ‘embrace, 
enclose’, with 米 220 ‘rice’ (here has more 
the sense ‘scattered grains’), giving ‘enclose 
within the hand(s), and by extension ‘scoop 
up’. KJ1970:257; OT1968:858; SS1984:166; 
MS1995:v1:150-51. 
Mnemonic: CHRYSANTHEMUM IS ROUND 
PLANT HOLDING RICE-LIKE PETALS
吉日 
KICHINICHI　lucky day 
吉報 KIPPŌ　good news 
不吉 FUKITSU ill omen
KICHI, KITSU 
good luck, joy
6 strokes
吉
L1
1196
OBI 
; bronze 
; seal 
. Etymology 
disputed. This graph has a range of diff er-
ent early shapes, most of which are taken as 
featuring 口 22 ‘mouth, opening, say’ as one 
component. With regard to the other com-
ponent, one interpretation is to take it as 才 
139 (original meaning uncertain, but hypoth-
eses include ‘river blocked up’, with block, 
obstruct’ as extended sense; q.v.), giving 
‘mouth crammed with food, eat with mouth 
full’. Another view treats the second compo-
nent (in the seal form onwards, regularized 
to 士 521 ‘warrior, male, samurai’) as being 戉 
(‘[type of] halberd’: see 476/545) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘chew, gnaw’, giving 
‘eat with mouth full, eat’. Both the above 
views are listed by Mizukami and Katō. Other 
treatments include another given by Katō, 
taking the second component as depicting 
an arrowhead, here used as a stopper and so 
denoting ‘block, obstruct’, giving overall sense 
‘cavity stopped/blocked’ (‘cavity’ being either 
the mouth or a container). Shirakawa, in more 
idiosyncratic fashion, interprets early forms 
of 吉 as depicting prayer strips crammed into 
a receptacle, giving original sense ‘cram into’. 
‘Happy, auspicious’ is probably an extended 
sense deriving from having plenty to eat. 
KJ1970:229; MS1995:v1:210-11; SS1984:167. 
Suggest taking the modern graph as 士 521 
‘samurai’ and 口 22 ‘mouth’. 
Mnemonic: SAMURAI OPEN MOUTHED WITH 
JOY AFTER GOOD LUCK
喫煙  KITSUEN　smoking 
喫茶店 KISSATEN　cafe
喫する  KISsuru* eat, drink, receive
‘mark with knife, engrave’; now means ‘pledge, 
join’) as phonetic with associated sense ‘chew’, 
to give ‘eat by chewing, eat’; ‘receive’ is an ex-
tended minor sense. KJ1970:258; OT1968:188; 
SS1984:168. We suggest breaking down this 
graph into 大 56 ‘big’, 口 22 ‘mouth’, 刀 198 
‘sword’, and  as variant of 主 315 ‘master’.  
Mnemonic: MASTER SWORD SWALLOWER 
INGESTS ONE TOO BIG FOR MOUTH
KITSU 
ingest, receive
12 strokes
喫
L2
1197
Seal 
; a late graph (later version of Shuowen). 
Has 口 22 ‘mouth, say’, and 契 1258 (originally, 

358  The Remaining 1130 Characters
却下 KYAKKA　rejection 
退却 TAIKYAKU　retreat
返却 HENKYAKU repayment
superior)’, then generalized to just ‘withdraw’. 
Whether by design or in error, left-hand  was 
later replaced by 去 276 ‘go, leave’. ‘On the 
contrary’ (i.e. the opposite of what might be 
expected) may be regarded as an extended 
sense. Note: Katō takes 卻 to mean ‘roof of 
the mouth’, but Tōdō takes as ‘bend at back 
of knee’; in either case, refers to an inwardly-
curving – i.e. concave – part of the body. 
DJ2009:v2:732; KJ1970:361; TA1965:398-400; 
OT1968:146.
Mnemonic: BENDING MAN LEAVES, JUST TO 
BE CONTRARY 
KYAKU, kaette
rather, instead, on the 
contrary
7 strokes
却
L1
1199
Seal (卻) 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Originally,  
卩 41 ‘person kneeling’, with  (see Note be-
low; not to be confused with similar-shaped 
谷 135 ‘valley’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘retreat, withdraw’, giving original sense 
‘withdraw on one’s knees (from presence of a 
脚下 KYAKKA　at one’s feet 
脚立 KYATATSU　step-ladder
三脚 SANKYAKU tripod
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 月 209 ‘meat, 
fl esh, body’, and CO 卻 (‘concave part of the 
body’ – see 却 1199 Note) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘bend back, bend’, giving 
‘shin, back of the leg’, then generalized to ‘leg’; 
also used of furniture legs. TA1965:398-400; 
KJ1970:361; TA1968:822. Take 却 1199’s mod-
ern meaning‘on the contrary’.
Mnemonic: ON THE CONTRARY, A LEG IS A 
VERY MEATY PART
KYAKU, KYA, ashi
leg, foot
11 strokes
脚
L1
1200
虐殺 GYAKUSATSU　massacre
虐待 GYAKUTAI　maltreatment
残虐 ZANGYAKU　cruelty
Bronze ; seal 
. Has 虍 ‘tiger’ 1301, and 
, here as variant of 爪 1739 ‘claw’, giving 
‘tiger sinks claws into prey’; by extension, ‘treat 
savagely; cruel’. MS1995:v2:1138-9; TA1965:267; 
OT1968:880. 
Mnemonic: TIGER’S CLAWS SYMBOLIZE CRUELTY
GYAKU, shiitageru
cruelty, oppress
9 strokes
虐
L1
1201
及第点 KYŪDAITEN　pass mark
追及  TSUIKYŪ　catch up
及び腰 oyobigoshi　a bent back
OBI ; seal . The early forms show a hand 
right behind – or holding – the leg of a person 
in front, to give ‘catch up with, reach’, and by 
extension ‘extend to’, ‘and’. MS1995:v1:192-3; 
KJ1970:259-60; OT1968:152. Suggest 䐅 as digit 
3, and 人 41 person.
Mnemonic: THREE PEOPLE REACH OUT AND 
EXTEND THEMSELVES
KYŪ, oyobi/bu/bosu
reach, extend, and
3 strokes
及
L1
1202

The Remaining 1130 Characters  359
砂丘 SAKYŪ　sand dune
段丘 DANKYŪ　terrace, beach
丘陵 KYŪRYŌ　hillock
ing the ground, beneath 北 224 (‘north’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘bulging 
upwards’, to give ‘hillock’; this interpretation 
involving 北 may be suggested by the seal 
form (and hence favored by Shuowen), but the 
OBI forms suggest otherwise. MS1995:v1:6-7; 
QX2000:175; MR2007:389; SS1984:171; 
TA1965:144; KJ1970:660-61. We suggest take 
upper part as variant ax 斤 1233, and a base-
line/level.
Mnemonic: REDUCE HILL TO LEVEL GROUND 
WITH AX!
KYŪ, oka
hill, hillock 
5 strokes
丘
L1
1203
OBI 
; seal 
. The OBI form points to a likely 
pictographic origin; typically taken as depict-
ing low-lying land with hillocks on two sides 
(in the two-dimensional representation), and 
signifying ‘hillock’. Katō prefers to interpret 
it as 
, i.e. just a horizontal line represent-
老朽  RŌKYŪ　decrepitude
不朽  FUKYŪ　imperishability
朽ち葉  kuchiba　dead leaves
KYŪ, kuchiru
decay, rot 
6 strokes
朽
L1
1204
Bronze 
; seal forms 
 (㱙), 
 ( 朽 ). The 
left-hand element in bronze and the fi rst seal 
form (later 歺/歹), which originally represents 
skeletal remains, came to be used in graphs 
relating to death (e.g. 死 302 ‘die’), bones, or 
major injuries; and here combines with 丂 (CO, 
‘fl oating waterweed’, see 130) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘rot, decay’ (additional senses: 
Mizukami adds ‘twist, bend’, while Ogawa adds 
‘smells’), giving overall basic meaning ‘decayed 
skeletal remains’, and by extension ‘rot, decay’. 
Shuowen lists 木 73 ‘wood/tree’ as an alternative 
to 歺/歹 as the left-hand component, to give 
朽, originally meaning ‘wood rots’ and then like-
wise generalized to ‘rot, decay’. DJ2009:v2:338; 
MS1995:v1:708-10; KJ1970:264,165-6; 
OT1968:488. 
Mnemonic: TWISTED WEED ON ROTTING TREE
臼包隊 KYŪHŌTAI　mortar corps
ひき臼  hikiusu　hand mill, quern
石臼  ishiusu　stone mill, mortar
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Originally 
a pictograph of a mortar, i.e. hand mill – a 
concave receptacle for pounding grain. 
DJ2009:v2:580; GY2008:277; OT1968:834. We 
suggest taking the graph 臼 as a ‘broken day’ 
(日 66 ‘day’), i.e. day-break.
Mnemonic: AT DAY-BREAK ALL HANDS TO 
THE MILL 
KYŪ, usu
mortar, quern,
hand mill
6 strokes
臼
L1
1205
紛糾 FUNKYŪ　complication
糾弾 KYŪDAN　impeachment
糾明 KYŪMEI　examination
OBI form depicts two vines or similar connect-
ing) as semantic and phonetic, giving ‘twist, 
plait’. Some scholars see the meaning ‘examine’ 
as extended, others as borrowed. OT1968:767; 
MS1995:v1:12-3; SS1984:174; AS2007:320. Take 
丩 as pitchfork. 
Mnemonic: PITCHFORK GETS ENTWINED 
WITH THREAD – NEED TO EXAMINE
KYŪ
entwine, examine
9 strokes
糾
L1
1206
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 糸 ‘thread’ 
29, and CO 丩 898 ‘twist, make rope’ (original 

360  The Remaining 1130 Characters
嗅覚   KYŪKAKU　sense of smell
嗅煙草  kagitabako*　snuff 
嗅ぎ出す kagidasu　sniff /ferret out
has come to predominate. In standard modern 
Japanese usage, the semantically transparent 
component 犬 19 ‘dog’ here has been retained, 
but note that in 臭 1452 ‘smell, odor’ when 
used as an independent graph, standard usage 
still favors the semantically opaque 大 56 ‘big’ 
as lower element due to earlier script simplifi ca-
tion. SS1984:177; GY2008:1082; OT1968:192. We 
suggest taking the elements as 自 150, which 
is now used to mean ‘self’ but was originally a 
nose, with ‘big spotted dog’ 犬 19, plus ‘mouth’ 
口 22. 
Mnemonic: BIG SPOTTED SNIFFER DOG HAS 
MOUTH WITH NOSE TO SMELL
KYŪ, kagu
smell, sniff , scent
13 strokes
嗅
L1
1207
Seal form (post-Shuowen) 
. This graph was 
originally written 鼻 399 ‘nose’, with 臭 1452 
‘smell, odor’, giving overall meaning ‘smell’ 
(verb), this being based on dogs being well-
known for their keen sense of smell. Subse-
quently (Six Dynasties period [220-589AD] 
onwards), 口 22 ‘mouth’ was sometimes used as 
determinative in place of 鼻, giving 嗅, which 
窮極 KYŪKYOKU　extremity 
窮屈 KYŪKUTSU　constraint
窮乏 KYŪBŌ　poverty 
deep into (a cave)’ (Tōdō, Ogawa); by extension, 
‘be in diffi  culties/an extreme situation’. Katō 
takes the associated sense of 躬/躳 as ‘extreme’, 
to give ‘innermost part of cave dwelling’. Note: 
躳 is 身 339 ‘body’, with NJK 呂 ‘backbone, 
spine’ (originally pictograph). DJ2009:v2:596; 
TA1965:225-6; KJ1970:264; GY2008:1084; 
OT1968:742 ； SK1984:584. We suggest taking 
the elements as 穴 860 ‘hole’, and further tak-
ing the elements of 躬 into 身 339 (still with a 
meaning of ‘body’) and 弓 as ‘bow’ 107.  
Mnemonic: BODY BOWED IN HOLE – 
EXTREME SUFFERING
KYŪ, kiwameru/maru
extreme, suff er 
15 strokes 
窮
L1
1208
Seal ( 竆 ) 
. Interpretations diverge. Has 穴 
860 ‘cave, hole’, and NJK 躳 ‘body’; at the clerical 
script stage, we fi nd 躬 as an alternative form 
(also NJK), and this latter appears to have later 
gained ascendancy over 躳. One analysis takes 
躳/躬 as phonetic with associated sense ‘bend 
the body over’, giving ‘bend over and enter 
巨人 KYOJIN　giant
巨大 KYODAI na　massive
巨費 KYOHI　huge expense
a fi gure holding what is taken alternatively to 
be a carpenter’s square, with the center part 
(corresponding to the projecting middle part 
of 巨 ) being a handle. Katō disagrees, since the 
only forms he identifi es as bronze equivalents 
of 巨 do not include a person holding the item 
in question, and in shape are quite similar to工 
125 ‘tool/work’, which as an independent graph 
might represent an ax, though this is debatable. 
The seal form, it will be noticed, still has the 
top and bottom lines of the graph projecting 
over to the left, but these were later shortened, 
resulting in the shape familiar to us today 
as 巨. Overall, commentators tend towards 
‘carpenter’s square’ which seems more likely as 
the original meaning. The modern sense ‘huge’ 
is noted by Mizukami as a loan usage. Note: 
KYO
huge, giant
5 strokes
巨
L2
1209
OBI 
; bronze form A 
; bronze form B 
; 
seal 
. Interpretations diverge. One view takes 
it to originally depict the hole in an ax handle 
that is made for the axhead to fi t into (Katō); 
the bronze form A shown is supportive of this 
view, perhaps indicating the point for the hole 
on an ax handle. Some of the bronze equiva-
lents listed by Mizukami and Shirakawa, though 
(such as bronze form B), appear to depict 
something quite diff erent: many of them show 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  361
拒絶 KYOZETSU　refusal
拒否 KYOHI　denial
拒止 KYOSHI　refusal
phonetic with associated sense ‘prevent’, giving 
‘prevent/hold in check (using the hands)’, then 
generalized to ‘prevent, refuse’. 巨 may also 
possibly be seen as a cumbersome tool, giving 
connotations of being an impediment, with 
a resultant extended meaning of resistance. 
KJ1970:268; SS1984:180; OT1968:406. 
Mnemonic: REFUSAL ENFORCED BY HUGE HAND
Or: WHO CAN RESIST SUCH A HUGE HAND?
KYO, kobamu
refuse, resist
8 strokes
拒
L1
1210
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 扌 34 ‘hand’, 
and 巨 1209 (now meaning ‘giant/huge’, but 
originally probably ‘carpenter’s square’) as 
根拠  KONKYO　base, basis
証拠  SHŌKO　proof
拠り所  yoridokoro grounds
KYO, KO, yoru
base, basis
8 strokes
拠
L1
1211
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 據. 
Has 扌34 ‘hand’, with CO 豦 as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘rest on, hold onto’, thus ‘hold 
onto with the hands’, and by extension ‘rely 
on’. Note: 豦 is typically interpreted as depict-
ing a tiger (虍 1301) and boar or wild pig (豕 
89) fi ghting each other. The right-hand part of 
the modern form is based on a cursive style 
which is the same shape as 処 (907 ‘deal with’). 
SS1984:180; TA1965:385; MS1995:v2:1222-4; 
KJ1970:268; GY2008:1582; ZY2009:v2:435. Take 
処 as ‘deal with’.
Mnemonic: DEALING BY HAND SEEMS A 
SOUND BASIS
虚偽   KYOGI　falsehood
虚空   KOKŪ　empty space
虚無主義 KYOMUSHUGI nihilism
距離  KYORI　distance
距骨  KYOKOTSU　anklebone
測距儀 SOKKYOGI range fi nder
‘hillock’, and 虍 1301 (‘tiger’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘big’, thus ‘big hill’. Based on 
early forms of 丘, Tōdō takes 
 to show hil-
locks around a central depression or basin, thus 
giving ‘empty’ as extended sense. Ogawa, how-
ever, treats ‘empty’ as loan usage. OT1968:881; 
TA1965:398-400; MS1995:v1:7-8. Suggest 
 as 
variant of 並 977 ‘line up’.
Mnemonic: EMPTY TIGERS LINED UP IN HOLLOW!
from the rest’, i.e. ‘cockspur’ (Mizukami), or ii] 
‘drive back, repel’, giving ‘part of [cock’s] foot 
which drives back opponents, cockspur’ (Oga-
wa), with ‘repel’ in turn giving ‘distance’ (Katō). 
Shirakawa too treats 巨 here as phonetic, but 
also posits a graphic link, likening the projecting 
horizontal lines in early forms of 巨 to the pro-
jecting nature of a cockspur. MS1995:v2:1262-3; 
OT1968:970; SS1984:182; KJ1985:588.
Mnemonic: HUGE FOOT COVERS DISTANCE
KYO, KO, uro
empty, hollow, dip
11 strokes
虚
L1
1212
KYO
distance, cockspur
12 strokes
距
L1
1213
Seal ; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 虛. Has 
, a minor variation of early form of 丘1203 
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 足 54 ‘foot’, and 巨 1209 
(‘carpenter’s square’, now ‘huge’, see) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken as i] ‘separated’, 
giving ‘part of [cock’s] foot separated/distanced 
distinguish 巨 carefully from the similar-shaped 
臣 543 ‘retainer, minister’, q.v. KJ1970:267; 
MS1995:v1:428-9; SS1984:180; BK1957:43; 
OT1968:309.  
Mnemonic: NOT QUITE A RETAINER, BUT A 
HUGE GIANT WITH STARING EYE

362  The Remaining 1130 Characters
御者 GYOSHA　carter
御用 GOYŌ　your business
制御 SEIGYO control
stop’, a meaning illustrated, for instance, in 御
苑 GYOEN ’Imperial garden’ (i.e. garden with 
strictly-controlled access). The sense ‘man-
age, control’, as in GYOsuru (idem), refl ects a 
generalization of the original sense of 御; note, 
though, that ‘drive/manage horses’ still survives 
as a minor sense, often in historical contexts. 
Note 1: in Katō’s analysis, 
 consists of 卩 
‘kneeling person; submissive’, with 午 (origi-
nally ‘pestle, pounder’; see 1074, 122) as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘confi ned’, giving 
‘confi ned slave’ and by extension ‘horse groom’. 
Note 2: Several commentators (Mizukami, 
Katō) also list bronze forms which include 馬 
‘horse’, which they identify as 馭 and treat as 
an alternative form of 御. Shirakawa, though, 
treats 馭 as a separate graph, not as an alterna-
tive form of 御, and suggests that confusion 
arose at some point between the two because 
of similar pronunciation. MS1995:v1:486-7; 
BK1957:36; KJ1970:849-50; SS1984:185-6.
Mnemonic: HONORABLE BENDING PERSON 
HANDLES PESTLE WHILE MOVING
GYO, GO, o(n)-, mi-
handle, drive, your, 
honorable
12 strokes
御
L2
1214
OBI 
; bronze 
; seal 
. OBI equivalent 
and bronze equivalents vary. The bronze form 
here has 彳131 and 止143 (usually ‘stop’, but 
here denotes movement; 彳and 止 typically 
combine later as 辵 and then ⻌, as in  道 205, 
etc.), and 
, taken by Katō as phonetic with as-
sociated sense ‘look after horses’ to give ‘horse 
groom drives horse’, and by extension in some 
bronze texts ‘drive (a chariot)’. 彳 and 止 fea-
ture in the above bronze form of 御, but in the 
view of Karlgren and also Mizukami they are 
sometimes absent, in which case the bronze 
is just the same in some occurrences as for 卸 
1074 (q.v.). Use of 御 in its more familiar role 
as a respect language prefi x is a loan usage, 
representing an abbreviation of 禦 ‘prevent, 
凶悪 KYŌAKU na　atrocious
凶作 KYŌSAKU　poor harvest
吉凶 KIKKYŌ one’s fortune
絶叫   ZEKKYŌ　scream
叫び声  sakebigoe　a shout, yell
叫び出す sakebidasu cry out
with associated sense ‘empty’, giving ‘mouth 
is empty’, and by extension ‘bad, misfortune’. 
An alternative interpretation takes 凵 as 
representing a hole in the ground, and 
 as a 
person stuck in it, again leading to ‘bad’ as an 
extended sense (this view noted in Mizukami). 
OT1968:108; MS1995:v1:120-21; KJ1970:273.
Mnemonic: X INDICATES BOX IS EMPTY – 
WHAT BAD LUCK
KYŌ
bad luck, disaster
4 strokes
KYŌ, sakebu
shout, yell
6 strokes
凶
叫
L1
L2
1215
1216
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Typically ana-
lyzed as 凵 ‘open container, open mouth’, and 
inner element 
 (seal form) or メ as phonetic 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 口 22 
‘mouth; speak’, and 丩898 (‘intertwine’ as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘loud’ (Ogawa) or 
‘suddenly’ (Katō). The 17th century Zhengzitong 
dictionary treats 叫 as a simplifi ed version of 
嘂, a graph listed in Shuowen and explained as 
‘call out loud’. Note: in standard Japanese usage, 
丩 is three strokes, not two. DJ2009:v1:119,179; 
MS1995:v1:12-13; KJ1970:358; OT1968:165. 
Suggest 丩 as pitchfork. 
Mnemonic: PITCHFORK IN THE MOUTH 
RESULTS IN A YELL 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  363
享受者 KYŌJUSHA　recipient
享有  KYŌYŪ　possession
享楽  KYŌRAKU enjoyment
graph with two watchtowers, one on top, one 
beneath, signifying structures opposite each 
other; this view seems unnecessary, for the 
meaning is the same, whether one watchtower 
or two. Senses such as ‘receive’ are loan usages. 
OT1968:37; QX2000:129,323; KJ1970:281. Take 
子 27 ‘child’, lid 亠, 口 22 ‘mouth’.
Mnemonic: CHILD RECEIVES LID OVER 
MOUTH
KYŌ
receive, have
8 strokes
享
L1
1218
Bronze 
; seal 
. Bronze shows a watchtow-
er atop city walls. Some scholars (Katō, Ogawa) 
take this as abbreviated version of same 
狂人  KYŌJIN　lunatic
狂言  KYŌGEN (dramatic)　farce
狂った  kurutta mad, insane
come twisted’ (Ogawa), ‘insane’ (Katō [Ogawa 
also, as extended sense]), either way giving 
‘uncontrollable dog’, and by extension ‘dog 
goes out of control’, then ‘dog’ was dropped to 
give generalized ‘go wild/insane’. Tōdō’s view 
is based on taking the right-hand element 
 
as originally corresponding to the same ele-
ment in 往 652 ‘go’, on which Qiu is in agree-
ment. TA1965:415; OT1968:640; QX2000:253; 
KJ1970:270-71. Suggest taking right-hand 
element simply as 王 5 ‘king’.
Mnemonic: THE KING IS A MAD DOG! 
KYŌ, kuruu
lunatic, mad
7 strokes
狂
L1
1217
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 犭19 ‘dog’, 
and element 
 (modifi ed from the clerical 
script stage onwards to 王) as phonetic with 
the associated sense taken either as i] ‘walk/
move around randomly’ (Tōdō), or ii] ‘be-
状況  JŌKYŌ　situation
況して  mashite　more so
況や  iwanya* still more/less
海峡 KAIKYŌ　strait(s)
峡谷 KYŌKOKU　ravine, gorge
地峡 CHIKYŌ isthmus
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵42 
‘water’, and 兄 114 (‘elder brother’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘cold’, thus giving ‘cold 
water’. The abstract meanings such as ‘situation’ 
and ‘all the more’ are loan usages. KJ1970:269-
70; OT1968:565.
Mnemonic: WET SITUATION, EVEN MORE SO 
FOR ELDER BROTHER
arms outstretched 大 56 ‘big’, with two smaller 
people (人+ 人, 41) under those outstretched 
arms. It functions as both semantic and 
phonetic, giving ‘that which comes between 
mountains’, i.e. ‘ravine, gorge, pass’. OT1968:303; 
SS1984:193; TA1965:862. We suggest taking the 
right hand element as 夫 601 ‘man, husband’ 
and 丷 as ‘away, out’ 70.
Mnemonic: MAN TRIES TO GET OUT OF 
MOUNTAIN RAVINE
KYŌ, mashite
situation, more so
8 strokes
KYŌ
ravine, gorge, pass
9 strokes
況
峡
L2
L1
1219
1220
A late, post-Shuowen graph; traditional 峽. Has 
山 26 ‘mountain, hill’, and NJK 夾 ‘put between’. 
The latter element comprises one person with 

364  The Remaining 1130 Characters
挟撃  KYŌGEKI　pincer attack
板挟み itabasami　dilemma
挟み虫 hasamimushi　earwig
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 挾. 
Has 扌 34 ‘hand’, and NJK 夾 (‘put between’, ‘un-
der the arms’, see 1220) as semantic and pho-
netic, giving ‘put between, insert’.OT1968:414; 
SS1984:193; TA1965:862. We suggest taking the 
right hand element as 夫 601 ‘man, husband,’ 
and 丷 as ‘away’ 70. 
Mnemonic: MAN SQUEEZED BY HAND CAN’T 
GET AWAY
KYŌ, hasamu/maru
insert, pinch, squeeze
9 strokes
挟
L2
1221
狭義   KYŌGI　narrow meaning
広狭   KŌKYŌ　extent, area
狭苦しい  semakurushii　cramped
(‘hold under arms’, see 1220) is phonetic with 
associated sense ‘held between on both sides’, 
giving ‘blocked on both sides by hills/moun-
tains’; hence, ‘narrow valley’, then generalized 
to ‘narrow, small’. KJ1970:174; QX2000:267. Take 
right hand element as ‘man’ 夫 603 and 丷 as 
‘away’ 70. 
Mnemonic: SMALL MAN NARROWLY GETS 
AWAY FROM DOG 
KYŌ, semai
narrow, small
9 strokes
狭
L2
1222
Seal ( 陜 ) 
. 狹 with 犭 19 ‘dog’ is an error 
for earlier 陜 with 阝 ‘hill, terraced slope’ 1907. 
Qiu states this occurred at an early stage. 夾 
恐怖   KYŌFU　fear
恐英病  KYŌEIBYŌ　Anglophobia
恐れ入る osoreiru　be awed, sorry
ii] ‘empty’, thus ‘feel empty as if a hole in the 
heart’, again giving ‘be afraid’ as extended sense 
(Tōdō), or iii] ‘fearful’, thus ‘be afraid’ (Ogawa). 
Note: 巩 is 丮 ‘hold out hands’ 905, with 工 
125 as phonetic with associated sense ‘em-
brace’, thus ‘embrace with hands’. KJ1970:277; 
MS1995:v1:504-6; TA1965:306; OT1968:368; 
KJ1970:277. Take 工 ‘work’ and 凡 as desk.
Mnemonic: WORK AT DESK GIVES FEELING 
OF FEAR 
KYŌ, osoroshii/reru
fear, awe 
10 strokes
恐
L2
1223
Seal 
. Has 心 164 ‘heart, feeling’, and 巩 
as phonetic with associated sense taken as i] 
‘pierce’, thus ‘feeling as if heart is pierced’, and 
‘be afraid’ as extended sense (Mizukami), or 
恭順 KYŌJUN　obedience
恭敬 KYŌKEI　respect
恭謙 KYŌKEN　deference
the same), though its shape is quite diff erent 
from the seal equivalent. At the seal stage, the 
dragon element has disappeared, and instead 
there is 心 164 ‘heart, feelings’ beneath 共 484 
(orig. hands off ering up an object; now means 
‘together’). Despite the changed composition 
of the seal form onwards, the meaning is essen-
tially the same: ‘act respectfully’. GY2008:992; 
MS1995:v1:504-5; BK1957:304-5; OT1968:368; 
SS1884:194.
Mnemonic: WHEN TOGETHER, FEELINGS 
SHOULD BE RESPECTFUL
KYŌ, uyauyashii
respectful 
10 strokes
恭
L1
1224
OBI ; seal 
. OBI form has hands raised up 
towards an upper element taken as the ‘dragon’ 
of myth and legend, this serving as semantic 
and phonetic, to give ‘venerate with hands 
raised’. Mizukami and Gu propose the OBI 
form above (Karlgren also lists one virtually 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  365
脅迫   KYŌHAKU　threat
脅威   KYŌI　threat, menace
脅かして  odokashite　threateningly 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 月 209 ‘fl esh, 
meat, body’, and 劦 (three bulging arms [see 
力 78], giving ‘combined strength’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘side (of the chest)’ (Katō 
says ‘that which is between the elbows’), thus 
‘side of the chest’; ‘threaten’ is a loan usage. 
MS1995:v1:138-40; KJ1970:360-61; OT1968:821; 
GY2008:680-81. 
Mnemonic: THREE STRONG ARMS THREATEN 
ONE’S BODY
KYŌ, odo(ka)su, 
obiyakasu
threaten, coerce
10 strokes
脅
L1
1225
矯正的  KYŌSEITEKI　corrective
奇矯   KIKYŌ　eccentricity
矯め直す tamenaosu　correct
sense. Since a bent arrow needed straightening 
to fl y true, over time ‘straighten’ evolved as a 
second extended sense, and this has come to 
be the main meaning. Note: bronze forms of 喬 
consist of 高 132 (‘high’; originally tall structure, 
such as watchtower), with curved stroke(s) sig-
nifying ‘curved’. That is, both mean ‘high’ now. 
MS1995:v1:236-7; KJ1970:274-5; SS1984:200; 
TA1965:263. We suggest remembering in as-
sociation with 橋 277 ‘bridge’. 
Mnemonic: STRAIGHTEN ARROW BENT LIKE 
ARCHED BRIDGE 
KYŌ, tameru
straighten,
falsify
17 strokes
矯
L1
1226
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 矢 145 
‘arrow’, and NJK 喬 277 (now ‘high’, originally 
building with curved upper structure, q.v.) as 
semantic and phonetic, meaning ‘curved, bent’, 
thus ‘bent arrow’, and ‘falsify’ as an extended 
悪影響  AKUEIKYŌ　bad infl uence
交響曲  KŌKYŌKYOKU　symphony
響き渡る  hibikiwataru　resound
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional form 
has 鄕 as top element. Has 音 6 ‘sound’, and 
鄕 (郷) (‘village, rural’ 852) as phonetic with 
associated sense taken either as i] ‘air moves’ 
(Tōdō), or ii] ‘spread outwards’ (Ogawa), giving 
‘sound which moves/spreads out’. Katō takes 
郷 itself as ‘spreading sound’. TA1965:401-03; 
OT1968:1100; KJ1985:660.
Mnemonic: SOUND OF VILLAGE FEAST 
ECHOES
KYŌ, hibiku
resound, echo, eff ect
20 strokes
響
L1
1227
驚異   KYŌI　miracle, wonder
驚がく   KYŌGAKU　shock 
驚くべき  odorokubeki　startling 
the body’, thus ‘horse is startled’; later general-
ized to ‘be startled/surprised’. Shirakawa, how-
ever, interprets 敬 as ‘hit to admonish someone 
making spell-like prayer’, with 馬 added, he 
suggests, as an animal easily startled. The for-
mer view seems more persuasive. TA1965:495-
7; OT1968:1130; SS1984:202. 
Mnemonic: A RESPECTFUL HORSE? WHAT A 
SURPRISE!
KYŌ, odoroku/kasu
surprise
22 strokes 
驚
L1
1228
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 馬 210 
‘horse’, and 敬 856 (‘respect’) as phonetic, taken 
in one view with associated sense ‘brace/tense 

366  The Remaining 1130 Characters
仰天   GYŌTEN　amazement
信仰   SHINKŌ　creed, faith
仰々しい  GYŌGYŌshii　grandiose
暁天 GYŌTEN　dawn
通暁 TSŪGYŌ　conversancy
暁星 GYŌSEI　Venus, rarity
Seal ( 卬 ) 
; seal (仰) 
. Older graph 卬 is 
analyzed as ‘person kneeling’ 卩 41 in front of 
someone standing (Mizukami takes as ‘person 
standing up tall’), giving ‘look up at and greet 
(an arriving guest)’. Later graph 仰 has addi-
tional ‘person’ element (亻41); this is believed 
not to represent an extra third person, but a 
way to distinguish it from another similar char-
acter (迎 1273 ‘greet’). MS1995:v1:48-50,176-8; 
KJ1970:179-80; OT1968:50.
Mnemonic: KNEELING PERSON LOOKING UP 
AT OTHERS WITH RESPECT
clear’, i.e. ‘dawn’. 堯 may well also lend a seman-
tic element in the idea of tall, indicating rising 
high. Dawn is also an event. Note: 堯 consists 
of 垚 ‘earth piled up high’, with 兀 ‘person with 
head above others’, giving ‘tall person’, and by 
extension ‘outstanding person’. OT1968:470; 
KJ1970:282; TA1965:266; MS1995:v1:274-5. See 
also 焼 539 ‘burn’, which we suggest taking by 
association to remember 1230. 
Mnemonic: SUN HAS DAWNED, BUT NOT 
QUITE BURNING HEAT
GYŌ, KŌ, aogu, ōse 
look up, respect, state
6 strokes
GYŌ, akatsuki
dawn, light, event
12 strokes
仰
暁
L1
L1
1229
1230
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 曉. 
Has 日 66 ‘sun’, with CO 堯 (‘tall person’) as pho-
netic with associated sense taken as ‘become 
bright, white’, giving ‘light of the sun becomes 
凝視  GYŌSHI　stare
凝り性  koriSHŌ　fastidiousness
凝った  kotta elaborate
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). The seal 
equivalent of 凝 is included in Shuowen, but 
not as a main heading, only as an alternative 
form for 冰 ‘ice’ in popular usage. 凝 has 冫 401 
‘ice’ (originally, pictograph of cracks or irregular-
ities in ice), and 疑 848 (originally ‘child stands 
unsteadily’, now ‘doubt’) as phonetic with asso-
ciated sense ‘remain still’, giving ‘ice forms and 
stays still’. By extension, ‘stiff ; engrossed, fi xed’. 
‘Elaborate’ may relate to patterns of ice-cracks. 
DJ2009:v3:935; KJ1970:248; OT1968:106.
Mnemonic: DOUBT ICE IS STIFF
GYŌ, koru/rasu
stiff , engrossed, fi xed, 
elaborate
16 strokes
凝
L1
1231
巾着 KINCHAKU　purse, pouch
布巾 FUKIN　dishcloth
小巾 kohaba narrow width
OBI 
; seal 
. Originally, pictograph of a 
scrap of cloth with an upper end (symbolized 
by the longer vertical line) to tuck into the belt 
or waist sash. MS1995:v1:434-5; OT1968:313; 
KJ1970:286; MR2007:580.
Mnemonic: A TRIDENT MADE OF CLOTH!?
KIN, haba
cloth, rag, width
3 strokes
巾
L1
1232

The Remaining 1130 Characters  367
細菌  SAIKIN　bacteria
菌類  KINRUI　fungi
保菌者 HOKINSHA germ carrier
手風琴 teFŪKIN　accordion
琴線  KINSEN　heartstrings
琴づめ  kotozume plectrum
thus ‘blotch-like growth in damp, shady places’ 
(Katō), or ii] ‘crowded’, thus ‘crowded plant 
growth’ (Shirakawa). In Shuowen, 菌 is de-
fi ned as ‘mushroom’; ‘fungus, bacterium’ are 
extended sense. Note: CO 囷 (‘granary’) is 囗 
84 ‘enclosure’, with 禾 ‘grain’ 87. QX2000:193; 
KJ1970:295; SS1984:208-9.
Mnemonic: GRAIN PLANT IN ENCLOSURE 
GETS FUNGUS
the lower element 𠆢 changed to 今 138 
(‘now’) as phonetic with associated sense usu-
ally taken as ‘enclose in box shape, enclose’, thus 
‘box-shape musical instrument with strings’, i.e. 
koto. Ogawa, however, takes associated sense 
to be ‘sound’. Mizukami and Ogawa take the 
keyhole-shaped element in seal form, corre-
sponding to 𠆢 in 琴 as abbreviation of later 
今, as phonetic. MS1995:v2:854-5; KJ1970:243; 
SS1984:210; OT1968:658. Take 王 as ‘king’ 5.
Mnemonic: NOW TWO KINGS PLAY THE KOTO
KIN
fungus, bacteria
11 strokes
KIN, koto
koto (oriental harp)
12 strokes
菌
琴
L1
L1
1234
1235
Seal ; late graph (Shuowen). Has 艹 53 ‘plant’, 
with 囷 (‘round granary’) as phonetic with 
associated sense taken as i] ‘shady and damp’, 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Seal form, which 
lacks 
, the bottom two strokes of 琴, shows 
body (bridge) and strings of a koto (Oriental 
harp) stood upright. At the clerical script stage, 
僅々 
 KINKIN　merely, only
僅少  KINSHŌ　few, little
僅少差 KINSHŌSA slight majority
sociated sense ‘a little, scant’, thus ‘person of 
meagre talents’; later generalized to ‘meagre, a 
little’. Note: OBI ancestral form of  has ‘fi re’ as 
bottom element, though less clear in bronze, 
then erroneously changed to 土 ‘earth’ 64 in 
seal. TA1965:695-8; SS1984:210; GY2008:1186; 
WB1994:162; OT1968:217; MS1995:v1:270-71. 
Take 
 as ‘odd’ master 主 315, ‘eye’ 目 76, ‘grass’ 
艹 53.
Mnemonic: ODD MASTER KEEPS EYE ON 
PERSONS IN THE GRASS – ONLY A FEW
KIN, wazuka
few/little, barely
13 strokes
僅
L1
1236
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 亻 41 
‘person’, with CO  (‘burning human sacrifi ce’ 
as rain-making ritual or ‘burning of drought 
god effi  gy’ [Mizukami]) as phonetic with as-
斤量 KINRYŌ　old weight
斤目 KINme　old weight
ふ斤 FUKIN ax
lizard’, giving ‘ax with curved handle’ (Katō). The 
OBI form, though, is of diff erent structure, and 
Qiu convincingly analyzes this as representing 
an ax or adze-like tool about to cut an object 
(Qiu says a tree) in half. In ancient times this 
tool was also used as a convenient measure 
of weight, hence the extended sense ‘unit of 
weight’; in Japan as a traditional unit of weight, 
about 600 grams. KJ1970:285; QX2000:180,55; 
MS1995:v1:594-5; OT1968:449.
Mnemonic: HACKSAW-LIKE AX IS QUITE A WEIGHT
KIN
weight, ax
4 strokes
斤
L1
1233
OBI 
; bronze 
; seal 
. One view, based 
on the bronze form, takes as the curved handle 
of an ax, with the outer element 厂 (‘cliff ’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘curved like a 

368  The Remaining 1130 Characters
唐錦 Kara nishiki　Chinese brocade
錦鯉 nishikigoi　colored carp
錦絵 nishikiE colored print
謹厳  KINGEN　seriousness
謹啓  KINKEI　Dear Sirs
謹んで  tsutsushinde respectfully
dictionary of ca. 200AD, treats 錦 as indicat-
ing this type of fabric is the most valuable, 
just as 金 ‘gold’ is the most valuable metal. 
‘Brocade’, a cloth which does not necessarily 
use silk, is extended sense. Note:  帛 com-
prises 巾 1232 ‘cloth fragment, cloth’, with 
白 69 ‘white’. GY2008:1609; OT1968:320,315; 
MS1995:v1:438-9; TA1965:822.
Mnemonic: GOLD BROCADE ON WHITE 
CLOTH IS SHOWY 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 言 118 
‘words; speak’, and  (‘sacrifi cial burning’: see 
1236) as phonetic with associated sense ‘scant, 
sparse; barely’, giving ‘restrain one’s words, be 
cautious’. Note: for etymology of , see 僅1236. 
OT1968:939; KJ1970:294; TA1965:695-8. For 
explanation of mnemonic, see 1236.
Mnemonic: ODD MASTER USES 
CIRCUMSPECT WORDS WHEN GETTING 
GRASS IN EYE
KIN, nishiki
brocade, showy
16 strokes
KIN, tsutsushimu
circumspect
17 strokes
錦
謹
L1
L1
1238
1239
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has NJK 帛 ‘white 
silk, silk cloth’, with 金 16 ‘gold’ as semantic and 
phonetic, giving ‘silk fabric with gold color’. 
Tōdō, following an explanation in the Shiming 
胸襟 KYŌKIN　bosom, heart
襟度 KINDO　generosity
襟首 erikubi nape of neck
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 衣/衤 444 
‘garment’, and 禁 682 (‘forbid, ban’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘close, shut’, thus ‘garment 
seam’; ‘neckband, collar’ is an extended sense. 
OT1968:910; SS1984:213.  
Mnemonic: COLLARS ARE BANNED GARMENTS
KIN, eri
collar, neck, neckband 
18 strokes
襟
L1
1240
緊張 KINCHŌ　tension
緊急 KINKYŪ　crisis
緊密 KINMITSU compactness
strings/thread straight’ (Gu), ‘pull strings/thread 
tight’ (Ogawa), or ‘bind tight’ (Schuessler). 
‘Tense’ is an extended sense. Note: Shirakawa, 
who similarly gives the meaning of 臤 as ‘to 
destroy an eyeball’, believes it was made part of 
a sacrifi cial ritual when something important 
was being sought from the deities. GY2008:
1036,605; OT1968:785; SS1984:212; AS2007:315. 
We suggest taking the components literally, 
though gruesome.
Mnemonic: HAND PULLS OUT EYEBALL AND 
THREADS IT TIGHT – QUITE TENSE
KIN
tight, compact, tense
15 strokes
緊
L1
1237
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 糸 29 
‘thread/string’, and NJK 臤 (now means ‘hard, 
wise’, but bronze form originally depicted a 
hand [又 2003] pulling out an eyeball [臣 543, 
now meaning ‘minister’]) as semantic and 
phonetic, meaning ‘pull straight’, to give ‘pull 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  369
惧れ   osore　fear, awe
危惧   KIGU　fear, misgivings
危惧の念 KIGU no NEN　apprehension
ated sense ‘look round nervously’(Mizukami, 
Shirakawa), both cases giving same overall 
sense ‘be afraid’. 惧 is a later popular form. 
Note: 瞿 has 䀠 ‘look left and right’, with 隹 
324 ‘short-tailed bird’, thus ‘bird looks round 
nervously’ (Shirakawa). Qiu prefers ‘eagle’s gaze’. 
MS1995:v1:530-31; SS1984:218; GY2008:1328; 
OT1968:392; QX2000:197; DJ2009:v3:850. Sug-
gest 具 as 目 76 ‘eye’ with ‘hands’ 
/
. 
Mnemonic: WHEN FEAR IS IN THE HEART, 
COVER EYES WITH HANDS 
GU, KU, osoreru
fear, awe, risk, 
apprehension
11 strokes
惧
L1
1243
Seal 
; traditional 懼. Has 忄164 ‘heart/mind’ 
and 瞿 (orig ‘bird looks round nervously’; see 
Note below). 瞿 is taken as semantic and pho-
netic (Ogawa,  Gu) or just phonetic with associ-
愚人  GUJIN　fool
愚図る  GUZUru　grumble
愚行  GUKŌ　foolish act
Bronze ; seal 
. Has 心 ‘heart/mind’ 164, and 
CO 禺 (originally showing monkey with large 
head and long tail, now ‘begin’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘circuitous, dull, stiff ’, thus 
‘mind works in roundabout/slow manner’, i.e. 
‘stupid’. MS1995:v1:516-7,v2:958-9; TA1965:313-
5; OT1968:380,727;TA1965:313-5. Take 禺 as 
leggy insect in ‘fi eld’ 田 63.
Mnemonic: LEGGY INSECT IN FIELD GIVES 
FOOLISH FEELING IN HEART
GU, oroka 
foolish
13 strokes
愚
L1
1244
吟詠   GIN’EI　recital
吟味   GINMI　scrutiny
吟遊詩人 GIN’YŪSHIJIN　minstrel
ing is normally emitted with the mouth open, 
a point which brings this interpretation of 
the meaning into question. On the basis of 
usage in early texts, Qiu interprets the original 
meaning of 吟 as ‘close the mouth and remain 
silent’; if this is accepted, senses such as ‘moan, 
sing, recite’ need to be regarded as loan us-
ages. OT1968:170; SS1984:214; KJ1970:176; 
QX2000.
Mnemonic: NOWADAYS ONE RECITES WITH 
MOUTH WIDE OPEN
GIN
recite, sing
7 strokes
吟
L1
1241
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 口 22 
‘mouth’, and 今 138 (‘now’) as phonetic, the 
latter typically interpreted as ‘close, shut’, 
thus giving ‘close mouth and moan’ (Ogawa, 
Shirakawa) or ‘moan’ (Katō). However, moan-
先駆者  SENKUSHA　pioneer
駆り出す  karidasu　fl ush out (hunt)
駆け落ち  kakeochi　elopement
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
驅. Has 馬 210 ‘horse’, and 區 282 (区 ‘ward, 
section’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘hit, strike’, to give ‘whip a horse (and make it 
gallop)’. ‘Urge on/spur on’ as a general use is an 
extended sense. KJ1970:296; OT1968:1124.  
Mnemonic: SPURRED ON HORSE GALLOPS 
THROUGH THE WARD
KU, kakeru, karu
gallop, spur on
14 strokes
駆
L1
1242

370  The Remaining 1130 Characters
一隅 ICHIGŪ　corner, nook
隅石 sumiishi　cornerstone
片隅 katasumi　corner, nook
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has阝(阜) 
1907 ‘hill, terraced slope’, with 禺 (see 1244) 
as phonetic with associated sense taken 
variously, including i] ‘curved’ (Ogawa), ii] 
‘curved; corner or crease’ (Tōdō), iii] ‘something 
resembles something else’ (noted in Mizu-
kami), all giving the overall meaning ‘corner 
shapes or creases/folds in hills’. OT1968:1072; 
TA1965:307-11; MS1995:v2:1400-01. As as 
mnemonic, we again suggest taking 禺 as a 
long-legged insect in a ‘fi eld’ 田 63.
Mnemonic: A LEGGY INSECT IN A CORNER OF 
A HILLSIDE FIELD
GŪ, sumi 
corner, nook
12 strokes
隅
L2
1247
偶然  GŪZEN　by chance
偶像  GŪZŌ　idol, image
配偶者 HAIGŪSHA　spouse
Shuowen defi nes as ‘[image of] person made 
of paulownia wood’. ‘Even number’ may be 
seen as extended sense based on two (original 
and likeness): likewise ‘spouse’. Shirakawa also 
takes 偶 as ‘doll, image made as likeness’, but 
links original sense back to 禺, taking as initially 
showing effi  gy in shape of deity with large 
head. DJ2009:v2:663; OT1968:73; KJ1970:298; 
SS1984:220; GY2008:1100. Use 禺 as leggy 
insect in ‘fi eld’ 田 63.
Mnemonic: BY CHANCE, PERSON 
ENCOUNTERS LEGGY INSECT IN FIELD
GŪ
by chance, doll, 
spouse
11 strokes
偶
L2
1245
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 亻 41 ‘per-
son’, and 禺 (see 1244) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense either as i] ‘product’ (Ogawa), or ii] 
‘together, meet, resemble;’ (Katō), giving ‘effi  gy’. 
奇遇 KIGŪ　chance meeting
待遇 TAIGŪ　reception
不遇 FUGŪ　misfortune
sented near-homophones in early Chinese; 
unfortunately there is no information on these 
two graphs in Tōdō’s work on word-families. 
Based on the etymologies for 1245 and 1246, 
one would expect the term GŪZEN, meaning 
‘by chance’, to be written with 遇, whereas in 
practice (standard usage) it is 偶 which is used. 
OT1968:1006; DJ2009:v1:144; AS2007:407; 
GY2008:1100. Note 1: distinguish this graph in 
use from 偶 1245.  Note 2: a bronze form for 
遇 has been given here, following Mizukami 
and Shirakawa, but the role of the additional 
top element, which seems to be 宀 30 ‘cover-
ing, roof’ is unclear. As as mnemonic, we again 
suggest taking 禺 as a long-legged insect in a 
‘fi eld’ 田 63.
Mnemonic: MEET LEGGY INSECT WHILE 
MOVING THROUGH FIELD
GŪ
meet, receive, treat 
12 strokes
遇
L1
1246
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has ⻌ 85 ‘walk, go’, and 禺 
(see 1244) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘from two directions’, thus ‘(several people) 
meet each other/meet from two directions’. 
Shuowen defi nes the graph as ‘meet by chance’. 
The sense ‘chance encounter’ seems to have 
broadened to include planned meetings too, 
giving rise to ‘receive/ look after (guest, etc.)’ as 
a further extended sense. It is quite likely that 
some confusion arose between usage of this 
graph (遇) and 偶 1245, both of which repre-

The Remaining 1130 Characters  371
洞窟 DŌKUTSU　cave, cavern
巣窟 SŌKUTSU　den, hangout 
魔窟 MAKUTSU　brothel
(Ogawa); Schuessler, though, gives fi rst mean-
ing for 窟 as ‘dig in the ground, underground’. 
Tōdō, for his part, takes this graph as signify-
ing ‘cave/hole hollowed out in a round shape’. 
Perhaps best taken as ‘that which has been dug 
out’ (whether by human endeavor or forces of 
nature). OT1968:742; AS2007:337; TA1965:710; 
GY2008:1665. Note: 窟 is grouped together 
with 堀 (‘moat, ditch, canal’ 1990) by Gu and 
Schuessler.
Mnemonic: CROUCH TO GET INTO CAVE 
KUTSU, iwaya
cave, den
13 strokes
窟
L1
1251
Seal 
; a late graph (Yupian). Later (post-seal) 
form replaces 土 64 ‘earth, ground’ with 穴 860 
‘hole, cave’, and 屈 1249 (‘bend, crouch’) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken as ‘dig’ 
串刺し  kushizashi　skewering
串焼き  kushiyaki　spit roasted
焼き串  yakigushi　skewer, spit
Originally, pictograph of items such as shell 
currency on a cord (Gu, who gives an apparent 
OBI and seal forms, takes the items as being on 
a cord or alternatively a stick). ‘Pierce, pen-
etrate’ is an extended sense, as also is ‘skewer’. 
GY2008:433; SS1984:117-8.
Mnemonic: PIERCE ITEMS WITH A SKEWER 
kushi, KAN
pierce, skewer
7 strokes
串
L2
1248
屈服 KUPPUKU　surrender
不屈 FUKUTSU　unyielding
屈折 KUSSEKI　refraction
talia’/ ‘castrate’. This analysis of 屈 is widely held. 
However, Ogawa takes 出 as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘crush, break’, but Mizukami 
rejects this. The modern meaning ‘bend’ (and 
by extension, ‘subjugate’) according to Qiu 
originated in loan usage of 屈 as a substitute 
for 詘 ‘bend’, a graph disused by Western Han 
times. Shirakawa sees 屈 as wild animal with 
bending tail, but early forms suggest other-
wise. AS2007:435,191,511; QX2000:129-30,389; 
MS1995:v1:408-9; OT1968:296; SS1984:221-2. 
Take 尸 as buttocks.
Mnemonic: PUT OUT BUTTOCKS IN SUB-
MISSIVE CROUCH!?
KUTSU
crouch, bend,
submit
8 strokes
屈
L1
1249
Bronze 
; seal 
.  Has 尸, here not ‘corpse/
bending person’ but an abbreviation of 尾 1888 
(‘tail’), which originally had the sense ‘genitalia’ 
or ‘posterior’ (and by extension, ‘copulate’). 
This combines with 出 36 ‘put out’, meaning 
‘remove’, giving overall meaning ‘remove geni-
発掘   HAKKUTSU　excavation
掘り出す  horidasu　dig out, unearth
採掘   SAIKUTSU　mining
‘dig out, dig’. Katō, however, takes associated 
sense as ‘turn soil with plow’, thus ‘turn soil by 
hand and make hole’. 掘 is given in Shuowen as 
‘dig out’; for the similar-shaped graph 堀 1990 
(‘ditch’), Shuowen gives meaning ‘rabbit digs/
rabbit warren’. Some early texts seem to show 
interchangeability or confusion of usage be-
tween 掘 and 堀. OT1968:417; TA1965:707-10; 
AS2007:337; KJ1970:304-5. 
Mnemonic: CROUCH TO DIG BY HAND
KUTSU, horu
dig
11 strokes
掘
L2
1250
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 扌 34 hand, 
and 屈 1249 (‘crouch’) as phonetic with asso-
ciated sense usually taken as ‘scoop up’, thus 

372  The Remaining 1130 Characters
勲章 KUNSHŌ　medal
殊勲 SHUKUN　great merit
勲位 KUN’I　order of merit
heavy’, i.e. be in abundance (Tōdō explains this 
as being as if human endeavor were to ‘hang 
heavy’ like incense-laden smoke emanating 
from a bouquet of fragrant herbs); either analy-
sis gives same overall sense of ‘much eff ort’. 
Ogawa treats 熏 as serving not as semantic 
in the graph 勲 but as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘gather’ or ‘serve’, which he takes as 
giving the overall sense ‘merit in govt, merit’. 
KJ1970:344; TA1965:625,723-5; OT1968:130; 
MS1995:v2:806-8. Take 重 as 326 ‘heavy’. 
Mnemonic: BURN ONESELF OUT WITH HEAVY 
EFFORT – GREAT MERIT 
KUN
merit 
15 strokes
勲
L1
1254
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional form 
has 
 in top left. Has 力 78 ‘strength/eff ort’, 
and NJK 熏 (‘smolder’; orig signifi ed bouquet 
of fragrant herbs smoldering over fi re 灬 8 
[Ogawa], or smoke rising through upper vent 
[Mizukami]) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken as i] ‘much/many’ (Katō), or ii] ‘hang 
熊手 kumade　garden rake
赤熊 akaguma　brown bear
熊本 Kumamoto　place name
as being the spirit of the fl ames. Shirakawa 
takes a less certain stance, and regards the 
etymology of  熊 as diffi  cult to make clear (he 
alone considers 能 787 as originally not “bear” 
but “aquatic insect”). It should be noted that 
there are indeed bears in Japan, now almost 
entirely confi ned to the northern island of 
Hokkaidō, and there are still on occasion bear 
attacks. The indigenous people of Hokkaidō, 
the Ainu, have traditionally worshipped the 
bear, and until relatively recently their main 
festival involved a bear sacrifi ce. The sacrifi cial 
element has now ceased. Finally, note that 
能 787 itself would have been the original 
way of writing 熊. KJ1970:35-6; OT1968:625; 
MS1995:v2:806-7,1074-5.
Mnemonic: DOES A BEAR HAVE THE ABILITY 
TO MAKE FIRE?
kuma, YŪ
bear
14 strokes
熊
L1
1252
OBI ; bronze 
; seal 
. From seal form 
onwards has 火 8 ‘fi re’ (in variant shape 灬 ), 
and 能 787 (‘can, ability’), typically taken as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘fl ames burn 
brightly’, thus giving ‘light of fi re, fl ames burn 
brightly’. In this view, ‘bear’ is a loan usage 
of 熊. An alternative interpretation of the 
meaning (noted by Mizukami), perhaps on 
the basis of some of the OBI and bronze oc-
currences, is ‘fat of wild animals which burns 
long’, with ‘bear’ as an extended sense on the 
basis that the bear came to be thought of 
繰り糸   kuriito　silk reeling
繰り越す  kurikosu　transfer
繰り返す  kurikaesu　repeat
extension or loan ‘reel thread’. Tōdō takes ex-
tended sense as ‘draw from surface’, thus ‘draw 
off  thread from cocoon surface’. Note: 喿 has 
three mouths 品 22, i.e. ‘many mouths’, with 木 
73 ‘tree’, giving ‘birds settle and sing noisily in 
tree’, then generalized to ‘noisy’. OT1968:793; 
SS1984:550; TA1965:258-60; MS1995:v1:242-3. 
Suggest 喿 as three wooden boxes.
Mnemonic: PUT REELED THREADS INTO 
THREE WOODEN BOXES 
kuru, SŌ
reel, turn
19 strokes
繰
L1
1253
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 糸 29 
‘thread’, and CO 喿 as phonetic with associ-
ated sense in one view as ‘navy blue’, thus 
‘navy silk’ (Ogawa, Shirakawa), then through 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  373
契約 KEIYAKU　contract 
契機 KEIKI　opportunity
契印 KEIIN　joint seal
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 
 / 
 
‘make marks/notches (丯) with knife’ 刀 198, 
by extension ‘make marks for record’, and 大 56 
‘big’, giving ‘make important record/tally/agree-
ment/pledge’. GY2008:215,771; AS2007:423; 
BK1957:86-7; KJ1970:318-9. 
Mnemonic: KNIFE CARVES BIG NOTCHES AS 
RECORD OF PLEDGE
KEI, chigiru
pledge, vow
9 strokes 
契
L1
1258
薫香  KUNKŌ　incense, fragrance
薫ずる  KUNzuru　be/make fragrant
薫風  KUNPŪ　fragrant breeze
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 薰. 
Has 艹 53 ‘plant’, and 熏 (‘smolder’, see 1254) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘fragrance 
hangs heavy’, giving ‘fragrant herb, fragrance; 
be fragrant’. OT1968:873; TA1965:723-5. Take 重 
as ‘heavy’, and 灬 8 ‘burn’. 
Mnemonic: BURNING PLANTS GIVE OUT A 
HEAVY FRAGRANCE
KUN, kaoru/ri
aroma, fragrance
16 strokes
薫
L1
1255
処刑 SHOKEI　punishment 
死刑 SHIKEI　death penalty
刑事 KEIJI　detective, penal case 
it may represent handcuff s. Over time, 井 be-
came modifi ed to 开, resulting in 刑. Scholars 
tend to agree there was originally just one 
underlying word in early Chinese, which later 
came to be distinguished in script as 刑 and 
型. Note: Shuowen treats 
 and 刑 separately, 
defi ning former as ‘punish criminal’, and latter 
as ‘cut off  head with sword’, but Kangxi zidian 
treats 
 as just a variant of 刑. Mizukami lists 
these two graphs separately, but notes them as 
being essentially the same. DJ2009:v2:417,367; 
ZY2009:v1:65; MS1995:v1:124-5; SS1984:226-7; 
TA1965:501-03; AS2007:540. Suggest taking 开 
as neck-brace. 
Mnemonic: PUNISHMENT INVOLVES NECK-
BRACE AND KNIFE! 
KEI
punish(ment)
6 strokes
刑
L1
1256
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 刂 198 ‘knife’, in 
bronze with 井 (or some cases 丼 ), generally 
taken as some kind of framework – whether 
as i] an enclosure such as a cage for confi ning 
prisoners, or as ii] a framework or mold for 
making items as in 型 493 ‘mold, model’. The 
overall sense is taken as ‘infl ict wound with 
knife/punish, and confi ne within enclosure’ 
(Mizukami); Shirakawa suggests 井 originally 
represented a neck-brace, and Tōdō suggests 
球茎  KYŪKEI　bulb
地下茎 CHIKAKEI　root stock
歯茎  haguki　the gums
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 莖. 
Has 艹 53 ‘plant’, and CO 巠 287  (‘threads 
stretched on loom’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘straight’ > ‘straight part of plant’, 
i.e. ‘stalk/stem’. OT1968:848; KJ1970:156; 
MS1995:v1:424-7. Use 又 2003 ‘hand’, 土 64 ‘soil’.
Mnemonic: HAND TAKES PLANT STEM FROM 
THE SOIL 
KEI, kuki
stalk, stem
8 strokes
茎
L1
1257

374  The Remaining 1130 Characters
恵与   KEIYO　bestowal
知恵   CHIE　wisdom 
恵み深い megumibukai　benevolent
as phonetic with associated sense ‘give char-
ity, bestow’, thus ‘give (food, etc.) to others’. 
Another analysis takes 叀 as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘round, surround’, thus ‘a heart 
which embraces feelings of others’ (Tōdō). 
GY2008:578; MS1995:v1:514-5; KJ1970:352-3; 
TA1965:712-5. Take upper part as 十 35 ‘ten’ and 
田 63 ‘fi elds’. 
Mnemonic: KIND-HEARTED PERSON BLESSED 
WITH TEN FIELDS
KEI, E, megumu/mi 
blessing, favor, 
kindness
10 strokes
恵
L1
1259
啓発 KEIHATSU　enlightenment
啓示 KEIJI　revelation
拝啓 HEIKEI　Dear Sir/Madam
又 2003 ‘hand’, in some cases combining with 
just 戸 120 ‘door’ to give ‘open a door’, taken as 
simplest early form of 啓. Most OBI occurrences 
add 口 22 ‘opening’, ‘entrance’, thus ‘open door 
with hand’ (Mizukami). Ogawa, though, takes 
口 as having associated sense ‘teach’ to give 
fi gurative meaning ‘teach and enlighten others’; 
this corresponds to the extended sense. Note: 
启 has 戸/戶  ‘door’, with 口 ‘mouth, opening’ 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘open’, thus 
‘open verbally/by hand’ (Mizukami). KJ1970:348; 
MS1995:v1;232-3,218-9; OT1968:184.
Mnemonic: OPENING DOORS IS A WAY TO 
ENLIGHTENMENT
KEI
open, enlighten
11 strokes
啓
L1
1260
OBI ; bronze 
; seal 
. One view has 攴/攵 
‘hand holding stick’ 112, with 启 as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘open’, thus ‘cause to 
open; open’ (Katō); this seems based only on 
certain bronze and the seal forms, but not 
OBI equivalents. None of the OBI equivalents 
for 啓 (as listed by Mizukami) has 攴; all have 
掲示板 KEIJIBAN　notice board
前掲  ZENKEI　aforementioned 
掲揚  KEIYŌ hoisting
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has扌 34 ‘hand’, 
and 曷 (see 謁 1048) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘hold up high in hand, thus ‘hold 
up high’. ‘Display, print’ are extended senses. 
KJ1970:904; TA1965:583-7; OT1968:417. Take 日 
66 ‘sun’, 匕sitting person, and 勹 cover.
Mnemonic: MAN SITS UNDER HOISTED 
COVER FROM SUN, DISPLAYING HAND
KEI, kakageru
hoist, display, print
11 strokes
掲
L1
1261
渓谷 KEIKOKU　valley, gorge
雪渓 SEKKEI　snowy valley
渓流 KEIRYŪ mountain stream
Seal (谿) 
; a late post-Shuowen graph; tradi-
tional 溪. Traditional form has 氵 42 ‘water’, 
with 奚 (originally, ‘bound slave’: see Note 
below) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘caught, entangled’, taken in one view as giving 
‘mountain stream with (seemingly) no way 
out’, and by extension ‘twisting and turning 
mountain stream’ (Ogawa). Gu, in contrast, 
takes ‘mountain valley/gully’ as the original 
KEI, tani
valley, gorge
11 strokes
渓
L1
1262
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 惠. Has 心 164 
‘heart/mind’, and 叀 (‘spindle’ [orig. pictograph]) 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  375
蛍光  KEIKŌ　fl uorescence
蛍雪  KEISETSU　studying 
蛍狩り  hotarugari catching fi refl ies
of 熒 ‘flicker’ (Schuessler says ‘light of a lamp/
fire’), but cautions against taking 
 as al-
ways functioning as an abbreviation of 熒 in 
later stages of the script. A similar view takes 
 (bronze form) as ‘crossed pine torches’, 
giving ‘insect which flies and emits light’ 
(Shirakawa). Alternatively, the top part of the 
bronze predecessor of 
 is taken as repre-
senting flames or light of fire, but the graph 
as a whole is interpreted as the predecessor 
of 螢 (Katō). QX2000:237,239; AS2007:575; 
SS1984:233-4; KJ1970:79-80. Suggest taking 
top element as ‘ornate cover’, and three short 
strokes as flames.
Mnemonic: A FIREFLY IS AN INSECT 
ORNATELY COVERED WITH ‘FLAMES’
KEI, hotaru
fi refl y
11 strokes
蛍
L1
1263
Bronze 
 (
). Not in Shuowen. Traditional 
form: 螢. Clearly there is 虫 60 ‘insect’, but 
views diverge concerning 
 in this graph. 
According to Qiu there is a bronze form 
equivalent to 
 which once functioned as 
an independent graph, and originally de-
picted burning torches, and this does seem 
a reasonable interpretation of the bronze 
shape. Qiu regards 
 as the ancestral form 
傾向  KEIKŌ　tendency
傾倒  KEITŌ　devotion
傾斜度 KEISHADO gradient 
‘time, period’; see 1356. Note 2: 匕 is taken 
by Mizukami and Katō as originally showing 
a bent, withered leg, and based on shape by 
extension ‘ladle’. Ogawa, though, takes ‘ladle’ 
as orig. meaning, and Gu takes as ‘woman 
kneeling submissively’, while Katō considers 
匕 in 傾/頃 as having only a phonetic role 
with associated sense ‘not straight’, and by 
extension ‘lame’, and that the Shuowen ex-
planation should be seen as ‘head’ represent-
ing ‘body’, thus giving ‘bent body’, but this 
seems debatable. See also Appendix  for 匕 
contrasting with 匕 (‘change’). TA1965:504-
9; GY2008:602,1074,11; MS1995:v1:154-5; 
OT1968:77,132; KJ1970:357,796; AS2007:432. 
Suggest association with ‘change’ 化 258 in 
its original sense ‘fallen person’.
Mnemonic: FALLEN BENT PERSON CHANGES 
INCLINATION OF HEAD
KEI, katamuku/keru
incline, dedicate
13 strokes
傾
L2
1264
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Originally 
written 頃 (see Note below), with 頁 103 
‘head’, and 匕 (originally, pictograph of 
person with bent, withered leg; by exten-
sion, ‘bent’) as semantic and phonetic, 
usually taken as giving ‘incline the head’; 
later generalized to ‘incline/lean’. By seal 
stage, when 頃 was also being borrowed to 
represent several other words, ‘person’ 亻 41 
was added to more clearly indicate ‘lean/in-
cline’, thus 傾. ‘Dedication’ is minor extended 
sense. Note 1: 頃 is now used to write koro 
meaning, and ‘mountain stream’ as an extended 
sense on the basis that most such gullies have 
water running through them. The seal form 
 (CO 谿) ‘valley; mountain stream’ is treated 
separately from 渓 in Shuowen, but Kangxi 
zidian treats both as being the same. Note: 奚 
is made up of 爫 1739 ‘claw’ – sometimes, as 
here, ‘hand’ – with 幺 29 ‘thread’ (here, ‘rope’), 
with 大 56 ‘big’ (here, ‘person’), giving ‘person 
bound with rope’, i.e. ‘(one type of) slave’ (Gu). 
OT1968:585; GY2008:1656,1091; QX2000:264; 
MS1995:v1:304-05; AS2007:526. We suggest 
taking 夫 as ‘man’ 601. 
Mnemonic: MAN PLUCKED BY CLAWS FROM 
WATER IN VALLEY

376  The Remaining 1130 Characters
携帯 KEITAI-　portable
連携 RENKEI　in concert with
提携 TEIKEI cooperation, link
‘sprouting plant’); the lower element 冏 rep-
resents a graphic merging of what in earlier 
stages of the script was written two different 
ways, one being a pictograph of a window, 
the other seen as buttocks and anus/vagina. 
In the graph 雟 under discussion here, Katō 
takes 冏 as representing, basically, buttocks 
and anus (see 333), and by extension – with 
regard to a bird – as ‘tail-end’, with tail feath-
ers fanning out (noting the 儿 shape in 冏 ), 
thus ‘swallow’; Ogawa also takes as ‘swallow’. 
‘Participate’ derives from having one’s hands 
occupied, suggesting getting involved. 
MS1995:v1:254-5,234-5; KJ1970:349-50; 
TA1965:504-8; OT1968:425,1081. Take 乃 as 
plump buttocks.
Mnemonic: CARRY PLUMP-BUTTOCKED BIRD 
IN HAND
KEI, tazusawaru/eru 
carry, participate
13 strokes
携
L1
1265
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
攜. Has 扌 34 ‘hand’ and 雟 (type of bird; 
see Note below) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘let hang down’ (Ogawa says ‘link, 
keep [on rope’ etc.]’), thus ‘hang down from/
carry in the hands’. 携, a popular histori-
cal abbreviated form of 雟, now has official 
status. Note: 雟 is treated by Katō as made 
by 隹 324 ‘bird’, with top element taken not 
as 山 26 ‘mountain/hill’ but as similar-shaped 
屮, representing cranial feathers (not 屮 as 
継続   KEIZOKU 　continuation
継子   mamako　stepchild
継ぎ足し  tsugitashi extension
as follows: i] a horizontal line midway, and 
ii] two short lines bottom right. Katō takes i] 
to signify joined threads, and seems to take 
ii] to show repetition. Shirakawa, however, 
takes  (facing right, as here) as ‘cut threads’, 
as does Gu. Seal form likewise has 糸 29 
‘thread’ added as determinative, giving ‘join 
threads’. By extension ‘follow, patch, inherit’. 
MS1995:v2:1026-7;  KJ1970:346; OT1968:779; 
SS1984:236; GY2008:1173,1311. Take  as 米 
220 ‘rice’ in corner. 
Mnemonic: FOLLOW JOINED THREADS TO 
INHERIT RICE IN CORNER
KEI, tsugu, mama-
inherit, follow,
join, step-, patch
13 strokes
継
L1
1266
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 繼. Originally 
written . Bronze form shows several short 
lengths of thread (or skeins), with other 
components, which some scholars make no 
comment on. These other components are 
参詣 SANKEI　shrine/temple visit
初詣 hatsumōde　New Year shrine visit
造詣 ZŌKEI learning, attainments  
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 言 118 
‘words/speak’, and 旨 1401 (‘gist’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘go to, arrive’ at important 
place such as Court, thus ‘visit respectfully’; 
Shirakawa takes as ‘worship deities’. In Japa-
nese, more used in sense ‘visit a shrine/temple’. 
GY2008:737-8,303,11; SS1984:236; KJ1970:796. 
Take 匕 as sitting person, 日 as ‘day’ 66. 
Mnemonic: PERSON SITS SPEAKING ALL DAY 
IN SHRINE/TEMPLE VISIT
KEI, mōde, mairi
visit to temple/shrine 
13 strokes
詣
L1
1267

The Remaining 1130 Characters  377
慶応大 KEIŌDAI　Keiō University
慶事  KEIJI　happy event
慶兆  KEICHŌ good omen
receive delicious food/hospitality’, thus ‘joy’ 
at receiving this; generalized to just ‘joy’. One 
view identifi es lower part as 夊, one of several 
graphs meaning ‘foot’ (see Appendix), but Qiu 
maintains this is based on a corrupted seal form 
rather than earlier bronze forms. KJ1970:768-9; 
MS1995:v1:522-3; QX2000:213-4; OT1968:331. 
Diffi  cult, but take in association with 愛 441 
‘love’, and 广 127 ‘building’.
Mnemonic: ODD FORM OF LOVE IN THAT 
BUILDING, BUT REJOICE ANYWAY  
KEI, yorokobu
joy, rejoice, 
congratulate
15 strokes
慶
L1
1268
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 心 164 ‘heart, mind’, 
and 廌 (mythical beast said to resemble stag) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘delicious food, 
憧憬  DŌKEI/SHŌKEI　aspiration
憬れ  akogare　yearning
憬れる  akogareru admire, long for
it. Shuowen gives meaning as ‘perceive, be 
aware’, but Shirakawa maintains there are no 
examples of use in this sense in early texts, only 
in the sense ‘be far away’ (Schuessler). Basis 
for ‘adore, yearn’ (Japanese only) is unclear. 
憬 occurs in only one compound, as above. 
GY2008:1846; SS1984:239; OT1968:387. Sug-
gest taking 景 literally as 日 66 ‘sun’ and 京 110 
‘capital’. 
Mnemonic: MY HEART YEARNS TO SEE THE 
SUN OVER THE CAPITAL 
KEI, akogare/reru
yearn, aspire, admire, 
be aware
15 strokes
憬
L1
1269
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 忄164 ‘heart, 
mind’, and 景 494 (‘scene’; ‘bright’) as phonetic. 
Diffi  cult to analyze, and scholars seem to avoid 
稽古  KEIKO　training, practice
下稽古 shitaGEIKO　rehearsal
滑稽  KOKKEI  na comical 
is attributed by Shirakawa to 稽, based on an 
interpretation as 𥝌 ‘tree with tip bent over’, with 
尤 taken as ‘dog sacrifi ce’ (Shirakawa takes OBI 
form of 尤 as depicting an [unspecifi ed] type 
of animal, presumably dog 犬 19), and 旨 1401 
‘gist, tasty’ as the original writing for 詣 1267 ‘re-
spectfully visit’; Shirakawa then takes the overall 
original meaning of 稽 as ‘dog sacrifi ce ritual’, 
with the deity who is revered believed to come 
down to the venue of the ritual, thereby giving 
‘reach’ as an extended sense. Presumably, by 
this explanation, ‘bow low’ is an extended sense 
too, and possibly also related to the ritual, along 
with ‘consideration’. At some point the tree with 
the tip bending right (whereas the regular way 
for the grain plant determinative 禾 is slop-
ing down further to left) acquired the regular 
slope to the left. KJ1970:356-7; OT1968:736; 
MS1995:v1:402-3; SS1984:239-40,832. We sug-
gest taking 禾 87 as ‘grain plant’, 尤 as 犬 19 
‘dog’ with bent leg, 匕 as man sitting, and 日 as 
‘sun’ 66.  
Mnemonic: MAN SITS IN GRAIN PLANTS IN 
SUN CONSIDERING BENT-LEGGED DOG
KIN
consider, stop, reach, 
bow low 
15 strokes
稽
L1
1270
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Interpretations 
vary, and can become quite confusing. One 
interpretation takes the graph as 𥝌 ‘tree with 
tip bent over’, with NJK 耆 (‘grow old, senility’; 
in this analysis, the element 尤 (orig. ‘blame’) in 
稽 is regarded as a miscopying of the element 
耂 [an abbreviation of 老 ‘grow old’ 638]) as 
a phonetic likewise with an associated sense 
‘tree with tip bent over’, giving ‘tree with tip 
bent over’ (Katō); ‘consider’ is presumably to be 
treated as a loan usage. There are several other 
analyses. One of these looks to analyze 稽 as 尤, 
with CO 
 as phonetic with associated sense 
‘be caught/entangled’, giving ‘detain’ (Ogawa). In 
this analysis, ‘plan, consider’ is again presumably 
loan usage. Alternatively, a ritualistic meaning 

378  The Remaining 1130 Characters
Seal 
; a late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 息 
351 ‘rest, repose’, and 舌, which here appears 
to have been originally not 舌 755 ‘tongue’, 
but an element 𠯑 (CO; ‘close the mouth; by 
extension, ‘prevent’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘stop’, giving ‘stop and rest’. The 
explanation regarding substitution of 舌 for 
𠯑 appears to be that confusion arose at the 
graphic level between the two at an early 
juncture (possibly pre-seal stage); variant  
forms for these two which are roughly 
休憩 KYŪKEI　rest, recess
少憩 SHŌKEI　brief rest
憩い ikoi　rest, ‘spell’
KEI, ikou
rest, relax
16 strokes
憩
L1
1271
similar in shape are considered to exist (Gu, 
Mizukami). Another commentator gives a dif-
ferent analysis, taking 憩 as 息 ‘rest, repose’, 
with 舌 as the phonetic with associated 
sense ‘stop’, thus likewise giving ‘stop and 
rest’ as the overall meaning (Ogawa). Note: 
𠯑, which in one view serves here just as 
phonetic, itself comprises 口 22 ‘mouth’, with 
not 氏 522, but a different element (meaning 
knife for carving) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘close, block’, hence ‘close the mouth’ 
(Mizukami). KJ1970:358; MS1995:v1:216-
7,v2:724-5,1096-7; OT1968:387. We suggest 
taking 舌 as ‘tongue’, and also break down 
息 into components 自 150 ‘self/nose’, and 心 
164 ‘heart’.
Mnemonic: HEART, TONGUE AND ONE’S 
NOSE ALL TAKE A REST
歓迎会 KANGEIKAI　reception
迎合  GEIGŌ　ingratiation
迎え酒  mukaezake　‘hair of dog’
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has ⻌ 85 
‘walk, go’, and 卬 1229 ‘look up at (originally, 
towards a person of higher status)’; the latter 
element is taken in one view as semantic and 
phonetic, giving overall meaning ‘go to greet’ 
(Ogawa), an interpretation which in broad 
terms is similar to that of another commentator 
(Shirakawa). OT1968:994; SS1984:243. 
Mnemonic: BOWING PERSON GOES TO GREET 
ANOTHER BOWING PERSON
GEI, mukaeru
greet, welcome, meet
7 strokes
迎
L2
1273
鶏卵 KEIRAN　hen’s egg
鶏舎 KEISHA　hen-house
鶏鳴 KEIMEI　cockcrow
which is kept on a rope, thus giving ‘chicken 
fowl’ (noted by Mizukami), or iii] ‘warn’, giving 
‘bird which lets humans know of the arrival 
of dawn’ (noted by Mizukami). Alternatively, 
奚 is treated as being purely onomatopoeic 
in function, giving ‘bird which makes sound 
like (early Chinese) “ke”’ (noted by Mizukami, 
and also followed by Schuessler). KJ1970:345; 
MS1995:v2:1412-3; AS2007:292. We suggest 
taking 爫 1739 ‘claw/talon’, and 夫 as ‘man’ 
601. 
Mnemonic: BIRD SEIZING MAN IN ITS TALONS 
IS A CHICKEN!?
KEI, niwatori
chicken, hen, cock
19 strokes
鶏
L1
1272
OBI ; seal 
; traditional 鷄. Has 鳥 190 ‘bird’ 
(or in some cases with 隹 324 ‘short-tailed 
bird, bird’ instead, as in the Shuowen seal ver-
sion), and 奚 (‘bound slave’; see 1262) as pho-
netic with associated sense taken variously 
as i] ‘topknot’, giving ‘bird with crest feathers’ 
(Katō), or ii] ‘join up, connect’, giving ‘bird 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  379
隙間  sukima　crevice, opening
空隙  KŪGEKI　gap, opening
手間隙 temahima　labor and time
1907, which is normally ‘hill, terraced slopes’, 
but by way of exception is taken in this graph 
to mean ‘wall undulations’ or similar (Gu, 
Ogawa), again meaning ‘wall cracks/gaps’ and 
generalized to ‘gaps’.  Note: Mizukami asserts 
that based on some early equivalents (bronze)  
𡭴 should, strictly speaking, have been 
rendered into block script with top element 
as  少 160 (‘few’), not 小. MS1995:v1:398-401; 
GY2008:1524; OT1968:1073.  
Mnemonic: SPACES IN THE TERRACES GET 
DOUBLY LITTLE SUN
GEKI, suki, hima
opening, gap, space, 
crack
13 strokes
隙
L1
1275
Bronze  (𡭴); seal 
 (隙). Bronze has 日 66 
‘sun’, and 小 38 ‘small’ above and below, thus 
‘sunlight coming through small cracks/gaps’; 
by extension ‘gaps’ (Mizukami; see also Note 
below). To this, the seal form adds 阝(阜) 
狙撃  SOGEKI　sniping
攻撃  KŌGEKI　attack
盲撃ち  mekurauchi　random fi ring
Katō). Tōdō, alternatively, takes 𣪠 as having a 
semantic role (‘wheel hits against axle securing-
pin’), combining with 手 to give ‘hit with hand’, 
a view shared by Ogawa. Note: the above 
meaning for 毄 is based on Katō’s analysis; the 
口 shape beneath 車 33 ‘vehicle’ represents 
the housing for the axle, and 殳 170 ‘strike’ 
signifi es the friction between axle and hous-
ing. GY2008:131-2; KJ1970:350; TA1965:500; 
OT1968:426.   
Mnemonic: ATTACK VEHICLE BY STRIKING 
WITH HAND
GEKI, utsu
strike,  attack, hit, fi re 
(gun) 
15 strokes
撃
L1
1276
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
擊. One view has 手 34 ‘hand’, and 毄 (‘car-
riage axle grates in its housing’) or its variant 
form 𣪠 as phonetic with associated sense ‘hit, 
strike’, giving overall meaning ‘hit, strike’ (Gu, 
二桁  futaketa　double-digit
桁外れ ketahazure　extraordinary
衣桁  IKŌ　clothes horse
with associated sense taken as either i] ‘side’ 
(Ogawa), or ii] ‘lined up in a column/row’ (Shi-
rakawa), in either sense giving overall meaning 
‘crossbeam, purlin’. Japanese usage only has 
‘column, rod (on abacus)’ as extended sense, 
and ‘number/digit’ as a further extension. 
OT1968:504; GY2008:1006; SS1984:301.
Mnemonic: GO TO FIND A NUMBER OF 
WOODEN BEAMS
keta, KŌ
digit, beam, spar
10 strokes
桁
L1
1277
Seal 
; late graph (Yupian). Has 木 73 ‘wood, 
tree’, and 行 131 (‘go; column’) as phonetic 
鯨油 GEIYU　whale oil
捕鯨 HOGEI　whaling
山鯨 yamakujira　wild boar meat
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). No Shuowen 
entry heading, but noted as variant of 䲔; later, 
鯨 was adopted as standard form (listed as 
such in Zhengzitong). 魚 109 ‘fi sh’, with 京 110  
(‘capital’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘big’, giving ‘big fi sh’, thus ‘whale’. Noted in 
Yupian as ‘king among fi sh’. OT1968:1145; 
SS1984:244-5; GY2008:1899; ZZ1671:v2:1425
Mnemonic: THE WHALE IS A CAPITAL ‘FISH’ 
GEI, kujira
whale
19 strokes
鯨
L1
1274

380  The Remaining 1130 Characters
比肩  HIKEN　rank alongside
肩書き  katagaki　title, degree
肩掛け  katakake　shawl
Seal ; late graph (Shuowen). Has 月 209 
‘fl esh, body’, and 戸, not 戸 120 ‘door’ here 
but regularization of similar element in the 
seal form depicting the shoulder (or shoulder 
joint) and upper arm. KJ1970:372; OT1968:816; 
SS1984:255. Mnemonically, take 戸 as ‘door’.  
Mnemonic: USE FLESHY SHOULDER AGAINST DOOR
KEN, kata
shoulder
8 strokes
肩
L2
1279
倹約 KEN’YAKU　frugality
節倹 SEKKEN　frugality
勤倹 KINKEN　thrift
with CO 
  ‘contest a lawsuit; disagree’; Katō 
differs somewhat regarding identification of 
the latter element, but still agrees broadly 
on meaning. 
 itself is made up of CO 䣱 
‘disagree’, with CO 从 ‘follow’ etc. here taken 
literally as ‘two people’. The modern form has 
a commonly seen abbreviated right-hand 
shape. KJ1970:375; OT1968:69; TA1965:1846; 
GY2008:462,260. Take 㑒 as 亼 cover, and 
 
‘center’ 央 254. 
Mnemonic: FRUGAL MAN COVERS ONLY 
CENTRAL THINGS
KEN
thrifty, frugal
10 strokes
倹
L1
1280
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
儉. Has 亻 41 ‘person’, and CO 僉 (‘bring 
together those who disagree’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘draw tight, be frugal’ 
(Ogawa, Katō), thus ‘frugal person’. Note: in 
one view (Gu), 僉 consists of 亼  ‘lid; join’, 
兼業   KENGYŌ　side business
兼用   KEN’YŌ　dual purpose
し兼ねる  shikaneru　cannot do
verb meaning ‘combine’ (Old Japanese kanu). 
Once the graph 兼 was established as a way 
of writing kanu ‘combine’, it was borrowed as 
a convenient way of writing the separate but 
homophonous verbal suffi  x ‘-kanu’ meaning 
‘cannot bear doing’, and later ‘refrain from do-
ing, unable to do’. Due to changes over time, 
-kanu ‘cannot do’ became kaneru, as in the 
modern language. KJ1970:386; GY2008:1124; 
OT1968:99; JD1967:205.
Mnemonic: HAND UNABLE TO HOLD 
COMBINED RICE PLANTS
KEN, -kaneru
combine, cannot do
10 strokes
兼
L1
1281
Bronze ; seal 
; traditional 兼. Bronze and 
seal forms show hand holding two grain stalks, 
giving extended sense ‘put together, combine’. 
Use of 兼 in the sense ‘unable (to do)’ represents 
Japanese-only usage. Origins of this usage 
go back to use of 兼 to represent a Japanese 
傑作 KESSAKU　masterpiece
傑出 KESSHUTSU suru　excel
傑人 KETSUJIN　outstanding person
with associated sense ‘get out of, emerge’, 
giving ‘person who is high above/surpasses 
others’. Note: 桀 comprises 舛 336 (orig, feet 
pointing both ways), with 木 73 ‘wood’, tree’, 
here denoting a platform or rack. KJ1970:366; 
MS1995:v1:664-6; OT1968:78,836. Take 舛 as 
夕 46 ‘evening’ and variant ‘well’ 井 1575. 
Mnemonic: OUTSTANDING PERSON BUILDS 
ODD WOODEN WELL IN EVENING
KETSU, sugureru
outstanding
13 strokes
傑
L1
1278
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 亻 41 
‘person’, and CO 桀 (‘raised rack [to attach 
bound criminals to for display]’) as phonetic 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  381
拳銃 KENJŪ　hand gun, pistol
鉄拳 TEKKEN　clenched fi st
拳闘 KENTŌ　boxing
could instead be regarded as semantic and 
phonetic) with associated sense ‘lift up’, giving 
‘lift up high, raise’. Meanings such as ‘perform’ 
and ‘together’ are extended senses. The mod-
ern form has 
, which is just an abbreviation 
in shape and not to be taken as meaning 
‘handle rice’ such as in 券 688. KJ1970:268; 
OT1968:411,835; MS1995:v1:562-3,v2:1359-61. 
As with 688 we suggest taking 
 as ‘two’ 二 
65 and ‘fi res’ 火 8. 
Mnemonic: MAN CLENCHES HANDS INTO 
FISTS AS TWO FIRES RAGE
KEN, GEN, kobushi
fi st
10 strokes
拳
L1
1283
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 擧. Has 手 34 
‘hand’, and 與 (originally, depiction of two 
people raising their hands together to lift up 
an object; traditional form of 与 2047 ‘give’), 
generally treated here as phonetic (though 
一軒 IKKEN　one house
軒灯 KENTŌ　porch light
軒先 nokisaki　frontage
tended to other things which project, such 
as eaves (Ogawa). Another analysis treats 干 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘put/rise 
high up’, giving carriage shafts which curve up 
high (Tōdō); Tōdō notes that from Han times 
onwards 軒 was used mainly to mean ‘eaves’. 
Alternatively, this graph is taken to refer 
originally to a covered carriage used by those 
of higher status (Gu); presumably the cover 
projected over. OT1968:981; TA1965:583-8; 
GY2008:413. 
Mnemonic: VEHICLE KEPT DRY UNDER EAVES
KEN, noki
eaves, house-counter 
10 strokes
軒
L2
1284
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 車 33 
‘vehicle’, and 干 840 (originally, type of forked 
weapon; now ‘dry’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense taken in one analysis as ‘stick out, 
project’, giving ‘cart/carriage with projecting 
shafts’, with the semantic range being ex-
剣道 KENDŌ　kendo 
剣舞 KENBU　sword dance
短剣 TANKEN　dagger, dirk
198 ‘knife, sword, blade’ for 金. In turn, the 
alternative traditional forms 劒 and 劔 have 
variants of 刃 1549 ‘blade’ in place of 刀. Variant 
shapes are a very common characteristic of 
the Chinese script as used over the centuries 
in both China and Japan (see Introduction), 
though not so prominent today on account of 
script reforms that have taken place in modern 
times. The range of earlier forms for 剣 is prob-
ably a refl ection of the importance of the sword 
as a weapon in pre-modern China and Japan. 
MS1995:v1:136-7; OT1968:118,110; TA1965:847-
8; SS1984:257. As with 1280, we suggest taking 
㑒 as 亼 cover, and 
 as 央 254 ‘center’. 
Mnemonic: TAKE COVER OFF SWORD-LIKE 
BAYONET AND AIM FOR CENTER
KEN, tsurugi
sword, bayonet 
10 strokes
剣
L2
1282
Bronze  (鐱); seal 
; traditional forms 劍, 劒, 
劔. This graph occurs in a variety of shapes, 
refl ecting a range of constituent elements. The 
bronze form given here consists of 金 16 ‘metal’, 
with 僉 (see 1280) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘pointed, sharp’, giving ‘sharp pointed 
weapon for stabbing’, a defi nition which might 
suggest ‘dagger’, but also encompasses ‘sword’, 
which became the predominant meaning. The 
seal form 劍 also has 僉, but substitutes 刂/刀 

382  The Remaining 1130 Characters
献上 KENJŌ　presentation, gift
献立 KONdate　menu
献身 KENSHIN　dedication
OBI 
; bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 獻. 
The OBI form has 犬 19 ’dog’, with a second 
element which is taken to be a cauldron or 
cooking pot, corresponding to the later 鬲 
(see 1120), and signifying ‘(meat of) dog as 
sacrifi ce to the deities’. At the seal stage, this 
second element had a further component 
added which is interpreted as ‘tiger’ ( 虍 297, 
an abbreviated component based on the 
pictograph of a tiger [1301], representing only 
KEN, KON
dedicate, present
13 strokes 
献
L1
1288
嫌悪  KEN’O　loathing
大嫌い DAIkirai　hateful
嫌味  iyaMI　off ensive
maintained, no doubt to avoid confusion with 
1281. There are quite a number of extended or 
associated meanings, such as ‘disinclination’, 
‘unpleasant’, ‘hatred’, ‘off ensive’, ‘repugnant’ and 
also ‘prejudice’ and so forth – basically a wide 
range of negative feelings. In Chinese it can 
also mean ‘jealousy’ and ‘suspicion’, strongly 
suggesting that – certainly in earlier times – the 
cause of the female’s dissatisfaction involved 
her husband and another woman. TA1965:866; 
SS1984:261; OT1968:261. 
Mnemonic: CANNOT COMBINE WOMEN – 
THAT IS DISTASTEFUL
Or: WOMAN DISLIKES BEING COMBINED 
WITH ANOTHER
KEN, GEN, kirai, iya
dislike(d), hate(d), 
distasteful
13 strokes
嫌
L1
1287
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
form has 兼 as right-hand element. Has 女 
37 ‘woman’, and 兼 1281 (‘combine’, ‘cannot 
do’) as a phonetic with an associated sense 
‘dissatisfi ed’, thus giving ‘woman dissatisfi ed’. 
Later, the ‘woman’ component of the meaning 
was dispensed with, the result being that it 
was generalized to ‘dissatisfi ed; dislike’, but the 
female component of the graph itself was still 
成層圏 SEISŌKEN　stratosphere
圏外  KENGAI　outside bounds
暴風圏 BŌFŪKEN　storm zone
and 卷 (traditional form of 巻 841 ‘roll; bind’) as 
semantic and phonetic, giving ‘round enclo-
sure’ in one interpretation (Ogawa, Shirakawa, 
Gu). One scholar, though, looks to take 卷 as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘block, obstruct’, 
giving ‘enclosure which blocks exit on all sides’ 
(Katō). OT1968:207; SS1984:260; GY2008:1251.
Mnemonic: ROLL AROUND WITHIN 
ENCLOSED ZONE 
KEN
zone, sphere, range
12 strokes
圏
L1
1285
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 圈. 
Typically taken as consisting of 囗 84 ‘enclosure’, 
堅実 KENJITSU na　steadfast
堅固 KENGO na　fi rm, solid
中堅 CHŪKEN　mainstay
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 土 64 
‘earth, ground’, and NJK 臤 ‘hard’ 1237 (q.v. for 
etymology, but originally 又 2003 ‘hand’ and 
543 ‘eye’) as semantic and phonetic, giving ‘hard 
ground’; later generalized to ‘hard’. KJ1970:131-
2; OT1968:220; SS1984:260. 
Mnemonic: HAND THROWS HARD EARTH AT 
STARING EYE
KEN, katai
fi rm, solid, hard
12 strokes
堅
L1
1286

The Remaining 1130 Characters  383
賢者  KENJA　a sage
賢明  KENMEI　wisdom
賢立て  kashikoidate　feigned wisdom
sociated sense ‘numerous’, thus ‘give numer-
ous/plentiful valuables to others’ (Katō, Gu; 
the latter interpretation, according to Katō, is 
based on a passage attributed to Zhuangzi). 
The meaning ‘wisdom/wise’ comes from a 
change from material wealth to wealth of 
knowledge (Katō). OT1968:961; SS1984;264; 
KJ1970:133-4; GY2008:611. Take 臤 as its 
components 又 2003 ‘hand’ and staring eye 
臣 543 ‘retainer’.
Mnemonic: WISE RETAINER STARES HARD AT 
SHELL-MONEY IN HAND
KEN, kashikoi 
wise
16 strokes
賢
L2
1290
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 貝 10 ‘shell, shell cur-
rency, valuables’, and 臤 1237 ‘hard’ (q.v. for 
etymology), taken in one analysis as seman-
tic and phonetic, to give original meaning 
‘hard, good quality shell’ (Ogawa, Shirakawa). 
Alternatively, 臤 is taken as phonetic with as-
派遣   HAKEN　dispatch
小遣   kozukai　pocket money
遣り直す  yarinaosu　re-do
borrowed for the separate but homophonous 
honorifi c form tsukawasu meaning ‘use’ (strictly 
speaking, the Old Japanese equivalents of 
these two verbs, but the principle involved still 
holds). Similarly, the meaning ‘do’ associated 
with 遣 may derive from the fact that the verb 
yaru in Old Japanese meant ‘send, dispatch’, but 
later there evolved yaru meaning ‘do’, as in the 
modern language. Note: 
 is interpreted in 
one analysis as depicting hands putting a bow 
into a grave pit, as part of a funerary ritual (Gu), 
or alternatively as depicting accumulated pos-
sessions piled up (Tōdō) / clods of earth made 
round with the hands into a mound (Katō). 
KJ1970:382-3; MS1995:v2:1302-4; AS2007:425; 
TA1965:606; JD1967:459; OT1968:1011. As with 
貴 847, we suggest taking upper right hand 
part 
 as ‘odd insect’ ( 虫 60 ‘insect’), and sug-
gest lower right 
 as buttocks. 
Mnemonic: DO SEND ME THAT ODD INSECT 
WITH MOVING BUTTOCKS
KEN, tsukau, yaru 
send, use, do, give
13 strokes
遣
L1
1289
Seal 
. Has ⻌ 85 ‘go, move’, and 
 (see Note 
below) as phonetic with associated sense taken 
as i] ‘continue on’ (though possibly with a se-
mantic function also), giving ‘person continues 
walking after another’, i.e. ‘follow’ (Katō), or ii] 
‘take just one part of something accumulated, 
and send/move somewhere else’ (Tōdō). ‘Send 
away, dispatch’ may be seen as an extended 
sense. The meaning ‘give’ is also probably an 
extended sense, deriving from the off ering of 
items in funerary ritual (Schuessler). Ogawa 
notes ‘use’ as a Japanese-only usage, and this 
may be based on 遣 having been employed 
to represent the Japanese verb tsukawasu 
meaning ‘send, dispatch’, and then being 
the head), serving in one view (Gu) as pho-
netic; other scholars, however, take not just 
虍 but the whole complex element  as the 
phonetic, with associated sense ‘raise up high’, 
likewise giving the meaning ‘off er meat of 
dog as sacrifi ce’. Subsequently, the sense was 
generalized to ‘off er up, present’.  The mod-
ern form has ‘south’ 南 208 as the left-hand 
component. GY2008:1555; MS1995:v2:846-7; 
KJ1970:373; OT1968:645.
Mnemonic: SOUTHERN DOG IS DEDICATED
Or: DEDICATED SOUTHERN DOG IS GIVEN 
AS PRESENT

384  The Remaining 1130 Characters
顕著  KENCHO na　noticeable
顕要  KEN’YŌ　prominence
顕微鏡 KENBIKYŌ microscope 
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 顯. Interpreta-
tions diff er. Scholars typically take bronze 
forms as including 頁 103 ‘head’. The left 
element, CO 㬎  ‘bright; appear’ (see Note 2 
below), is usually interpreted as phonetic in 顯, 
with associated sense taken as i] ‘shine’, giving 
‘beautiful decoration worn on the head’, and 
by extension ‘shine brightly’ (Ogawa), or ii] 
‘bend’, giving ‘bent-over body’ (Katō) (‘appear, 
KEN, arawareru
manifest, visible
18 strokes
顕
L1
1294
謙そん  KENSON　humility
謙虚  KENKYO　modesty 
謙譲  KENJŌ humility
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
form has 兼. Has 言 118 ‘words; speak’, and 兼 
1281 ‘combine’/ ‘cannot’ (q.v.) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘cave in’, giving ‘give up one’s 
own intention, concede’, and hence ‘be humble, 
modest’. OT1968:940; TA1965:863-6.  
Mnemonic: COMBINE WORDS IN HUMBLE 
FASHION
KEN, herikudaru
humble, modest
17 strokes
謙
L2
1291
鍵っ子  kagikko　latchkey child
鍵盤  KENBAN　keyboard
鍵穴  kagiana keyhole
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 金 16 
‘metal’, and 建 498 (‘build, erect’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘bind’, giving ‘wedge to 
stop a cart/carriage’. Regarding the later mean-
ing ‘lock’, Shirakawa considers this to derive 
from an intermediate stage involving use of the 
graph 鍵 to denote ‘door/gate bolt’ (otherwise 
written 楗), the sense then being extended 
to ‘lock’ and ‘key’. SS1984:265; OT1968:1047; 
AS2007:305.  
Mnemonic: A BUILDING SHOULD HAVE 
METAL KEY-LOCKS
KEN, kagi
key, lock
17 strokes
鍵
L1
1292
繭ちゅう KENCHŪ　pongee
大繭  ōmayu　double cocoon 
殻繭  karamayu waste cocoon
balanced made by insects with thread’, i.e. 
‘cocoon’. Note: 
 has top element for ram’s 
horns, with two sides balanced, with 宀 30 
(roof, covering) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘symmetrical’ (Katō). KJ1970:199-200; 
OT1968:791; MS1995:v2:1024-5. Take modern 
form for top element as 艹 53 ‘grass’, and 
 as 
double-chambered cocoon.   
Mnemonic: INSECT THREADS DOUBLE 
COCOON UNDER GRASS 
KEN, mayu
cocoon
18 strokes
繭
L1
1293
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 繭. 
Has 糸 29 ‘thread’, and 虫 60 ‘insect’, with CO 
 (‘symmetry of ram’s horns’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘balanced’, giving ‘something 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  385
懸命  KENMEI　eagerness
懸念  KENEN　anxiety
命懸け  inochigake perilous 
and warning, but was borrowed to write a 
near-homophone meaning ‘feel anxious’. Lat-
er, however, 縣 was borrowed again to write 
another word meaning ‘county, administrative 
district’. Later, 心 164 ‘heart, mind’ was added 
to create the new graph 懸 1295 as a means 
of distinguishing in writing the word mean-
ing ‘feel anxious’. OT1968:391; QX2000:330; 
AS2007:546. Take 系 855 ‘connection’. 
Mnemonic: HEART CONNECTED TO 
PREFECTURE – SUCH ATTACHMENT IS A WORRY
KEN, KE, kakaru/keru
attach, worry
20 strokes
懸
L1
1295
Late, post-Shuowen graph; bronze form (縣 
[same as traditional form of 県 291 ‘prefec-
ture’]) 
; seal form (縣) 
. Bronze form of 縣 
(original meaning: ‘suspend’) depicts a head 
hung upside down from a tree as punishment 
幻想 GENSŌ　illusion
幻像 GENZŌ　phantom 
幻術 GENJUTSU magic
GEN, maboroshi
illusion, magic 
4 strokes
幻
L1
1296
Bronze 
; seal 
. One view takes this as a 
depiction of a weaving shuttle reversed (予
425; later written 杼 [NJK]), and links the 
graph to a word-family in early Chinese 
meaning ‘turn around, send back’, giving 
‘return weaving shuttle (on loom)’. This is the 
view of Katō, but taking the graph rather as 
originally showing a shuttle inverted seems 
equally (if not more) valid as an interpreta-
tion, based on comparison of the seal form 
of 幻 with that for 予, and this appears to be 
the view of Ogawa, who takes the original 
meaning as ‘bring out colors in woven fabric’, 
and by extension ‘change’. Mizukami lists two 
alternative meanings: i] ‘push back weaving 
shuttle with left hand’, and ii] ‘ends of fi ne/
short thread (幺 29) move indistinctly and are 
hard to see’. The latter interpretation leads to 
extended meanings such as ‘change, deceive, 
illusion’. KJ1970:378-9; MS1995:v1:448-9,26-7; 
OT1968:324; AS2007:284-5,576. We suggest 
taking  as a hook. 
Mnemonic: A SHORT THREAD BECOMES A 
HOOK!? – A MAGICAL ILLUSION
visible’ is presumably a loan usage for Katō). 
Note 1: there is a minority view that takes the 
right-hand element in 顯 as 見 20 ‘see’ instead 
(or, the shape 頁 is accepted, but taken here 
to mean ‘look at’); this view is not so well 
supported, though, by the occurrent bronze 
shapes for 顯. Note 2: the graph 㬎 itself – 
taken by Ogawa as the original way of writing 
顯, though Mizukami disagrees – is interpreted 
in diff erent ways. It is generally agreed that the 
components are 日 ‘sun’ 66 and 絲 (‘silk thread’; 
the bottom strokes in 㬎 are an abbreviation 
deriving from 絲, and not to be confused with 
fi re 灬/火 8), but while one analysis takes 㬎 
as ‘silk thread drying in the sun’ (Gu), another 
treats as 絲 ‘silk thread’, standing here for ‘silk 
fl oss’, with 日 ‘sun’ as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘tangled’, giving ‘small cocoons left in silk 
fl oss’ (Katō). In the latter interpretation, ‘small’ 
may be taken from the Shuowen defi nition 
of 㬎 as ‘many small things’. OT1968:1106; 
KJ1970:380-81; MS1995:v2:1450-51,1440-
41,v1:624-5; GY2008:840-41; ZY2009:v2:541. 
We suggest taking 业 as ‘odd’ variant of 並 977 
‘line up’.
Mnemonic: ODD LINE-UP OF HEADS VISIBLE 
IN THE SUN

386  The Remaining 1130 Characters
玄妙 GENMYŌ　mystery
玄関 GENKAN　porch 
玄人 kurōto* expert, pro
正弦  SEIGEN　sine (of angle)
弓弦  yumizuru　bowstring 
弦楽器 GENGAKKI stringed instrument
Bronze 
; seal 
. Distinct from 幺 29 (later 
sense: ‘fi ne/delicate threads’, and by exten-
sion ‘fi ne, small’) at the seal stage, but quite 
possibly 玄 and 幺 were the same graph at 
the bronze stage, depicting intertwined silk 
threads. Katō regards the two as originally 
the same, taking the bronze form as depict-
ing two silk threads intertwined, and the seal 
form as a lower part indicating ‘fi ne threads’ 
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 弓 107 
‘bow’, and 玄 1297 (originally, depiction of 
twisted threads, now meaning ‘occult, black’) 
taken in one view as phonetic with associated 
with an upper part representing a cover, 
giving ‘fi ne threads hardly visible’; by exten-
sion, ‘dark, black’, and by further extension 
‘profound’ and by still further extension ‘oc-
cult’. An alternative view takes as the end of a 
fi ne thread (幺) just visible above a line (一), 
giving ‘hang down’ (Tōdō). This too may have 
led to ‘obscure’ and thus similarly to ‘profound’ 
and ‘occult’. Several other commentators see 
the sense ‘black’ deriving from an original 
projected meaning of ‘dyed black thread’ for 
玄 (Gu, Shirakawa). KJ1970:32-3; TA1965:611; 
GY2008:190-91; SS1984:268. 
Mnemonic: TWISTED BLACK THREAD 
SYMBOLISES OCCULT
sense ‘attach, hang’, thus giving ‘attach to both 
ends of bow’, i.e. ‘bowstring’ (Katō). Alterna-
tively, 玄 here is taken as ‘thread’, with both 
semantic and phonetic functions, also giving 
‘bowstring’, a sense which was later general-
ized to ‘string’, encompassing such things as 
strings on musical instruments (Gu, Ogawa). 
KJ1970:388-9; GY2008:748; OT1968:339.  
Mnemonic: BOW HAS STRING OF TWISTED 
BLACK THREAD
舷門 GENMON　gangway 
右舷 UGEN　starboard 
舷窓 GENSŌ porthole
GEN, tsuru
(bow)string 
8 strokes
弦
L1
GEN
occult, black 
5 strokes
玄
L1
1297
1298
GEN, funabata
ship’s side, gunwale 
11 strokes
舷
L1
1299
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 舟 1450 
‘boat’ (originally a pictograph), and 玄 1297 
(originally, depiction of twisted threads, now 
meaning ‘occult, black’) as phonetic, probably 
with associated sense ‘attach, hang’ as with 弦 
1298 ‘strings’, giving ‘boat parts attached/hang-
ing’, i.e. ‘gunwales, sides of a boat’. GY2008:1281; 
OT1968:838. 
Mnemonic: A SHIP WITH BLACK SIDES
二股 futamata　bifurcation, fork 
太股 futomomo　(plump) thigh(s) 
股肱 KOKŌ right-hand man
KO, mata, momo
thigh, crotch 
8 strokes
股
L1
1300
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 月 209 
‘fl esh, body, meat’, and 殳 170 (originally, hand 
holding stick or similar weapon, meaning ‘beat’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘straddle’, 
giving extended sense ‘crutch; thighs’ (Ogawa). 
GY2008:678; OT1968:817,545. 
Mnemonic: BEAT FLESHY THIGHS

The Remaining 1130 Characters  387
虎穴   KOKETSU　tiger’s den
虎の子   toranoko　tiger cub, treasure
虎になる  tora ni naru　get drunk
pictograph type underwent as the Chinese 
script evolved over time. The abbreviated 
form 虍 – as in 虐 1201 ‘cruelty, oppress’, for 
instance – is a stylized representation of just 
the tiger’s head. GY2008:610; MR2007:315-6; 
MS1995:v2:1138-9; OT1968:880. Suggest take 
 as variant of ‘building’ 广 127, 七 as ‘seven’ 
32, and 儿 as legs. 
Mnemonic: IN THAT BUILDING THERE’S A 
DRUNKEN TIGER WITH SEVEN LEGS
KO, tora
tiger, drunkard
8 strokes
虎
L1
1301
OBI form 
; bronze 
; seal 
. Originally, 
pictograph of a tiger. The diff erent older   
stages given here are a good illustration of the 
progressive stylization which graphs of the 
孤児 KOJI　orphan
孤立 KORITSU　isolation
孤独 KODOKU　loneliness
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 子 27 
‘child’, and NJK 瓜 (‘squash, melon, gourd’ 
[originally, pictograph of product of the gourd 
plant family on the vine]) as phonetic with 
associated sense taken as ‘nothing to rely on’ 
(Ogawa) or ‘suddenly separate, lone’ (Katō), 
in either case giving overall a meaning of ‘or-
phan’. KJ1970:394; OT1968:268; QX2000:182;  
MS1995:v2:862. Suggest taking 瓜 as a child’s 
framed swing (as in a park).
Mnemonic: THE CHILD GOING TO THE SWING 
IS AN ORPHAN
KO
orphan, lone
9 strokes
孤
L1
1302
括弧 KAKKO　parentheses
円弧 ENKO　arc (shaped)
弧光 KOKŌ　arc light
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 弓 107 
‘bow’, and NJK 瓜 1302 (‘squash, gourd, 
melon’, q.v.) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘round, rounded’, giving ‘curved bow’; prob-
ably originally referring to a type of bow with a 
particularly pronounced curved profi le; sense 
later generalized and extended to ‘arc shape’. 
GY2008:747; OT1968:340. As with 1302, we sug-
gest taking 瓜 as a child’s framed swing. 
Mnemonic: THAT CHILD’S SWING IS BENT 
LIKE A BOW!
KO
arc, arch, bow
9 strokes
弧
L1
1303
枯死  KOSHI　withering away
冬枯れ fuyugare　winter decay
枯葉  kareha　dead leaf
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 木 73 ‘tree’, 
and 古 121 (‘old’) as phonetic with associated 
sense as i] ‘dry up’, thus ‘tree dries up and is bare’ 
(Ogawa, Tōdō), or ii] ‘leaves fall’, thus giving ‘tree 
loses leaves and is bare’ (Katō). OT1968:498; 
TA1965:385-9; KJ1970:392. 
Mnemonic: OLD TREE HAS BECOME BARE
KO, kareru/rasu
wither, decay
9 strokes
枯
L2
1304

388  The Remaining 1130 Characters
雇用  KOYŌ　employment
雇い人 yatoiNIN　employee, servant
解雇  KAIKO　dismissal
‘hire’. 雇 is already found in the sense ‘employ’ 
in the offi  cial history of the Former Han Dynasty 
(206BC – 8AD)(Schuessler). Another view (Shi-
rakawa) takes 戸 as phonetic, combining with 隹 
to denote a migratory bird, taken in ancient times 
as an important indicator of seasons, for agricul-
ture. Nine such birds are listed in Shuowen under 
the 雇 heading. Either of the above analyses could 
probably generate ‘employ’ as an extension of 
‘bring into one’s home/make use of’, as opposed 
to taking it as a loan usage. MS1995:v2:1408-9; 
AS2007:263; SS1984:279; DJ2009:303. 
Mnemonic: A BIRD AT THE DOOR WANTS TO 
BE EMPLOYED!?
KO, yatou
employ, hire
12 strokes
雇
L2
1305
OBI 
; seal 
.  Has 戸 120 ‘door’, and 隹 324 
‘short-tailed bird, bird’. Analyses diff er over 戸. 
Mizukami takes it as having a semantic function 
(‘door, room, house’), and looks to link it to a word-
family in early Chinese meaning ‘protect, shut/
close, cover over’, giving overall meaning ‘keep 
bird in an enclosure’; by extension, ‘bring others 
into one’s own home’, and by further extension 
誇大  KODAI　exaggeration
誇示  KOJI　ostentation
誇り顔  hokorigao　proud look
curved’, with connotations of ‘big’), thus ‘big’ as 
semantic and phonetic, giving ‘say big words, 
be boastful’. Note: 夸 consists of 大 56 ‘big’, over 
䡡 (original way of writing 于 [curved peg-like 
artefact: see 1031]) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘big’, thus again ‘say big words, boast’. 
TA1965:421; OT1968:927; DJ2009:v1:208.  
Mnemonic: BOAST ABOUT BIG CURVED 
PEG-LIKE ARTEFACT
KO, hokoru
boast, proud
13 strokes
誇
L1
1306
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 言 118 ‘words; 
speak’, and CO 夸 (originally ‘straddle with thighs 
鼓動 KODŌ　drum beating
太鼓 TAIKO　big drum
小鼓 kotsuzumi　hand drum
‘strike a drum’, and also just ‘drum’. An alterna-
tive view is put forward by one commentator 
(Katō), who takes the graph as ‘stick’ – possibly 
‘bamboo stick’ – plus 壴 as phonetic, with the 
latter serving a purely onomatopoeic role, to 
give ‘hit, make a “zoku-zoku” sound’ (note: the 
equivalent in early Chinese would be similar 
to ‘tsok-tsok’); however, this view seems rather 
forced. MS1995:v2:1518-21; GY2008:781,1542; 
OT1968:1169; AS2007:473; SK1984:815. 
Suggest taking the graph as 士 521 ‘samurai’, 
‘topless’ beans’ 
, and ‘beat/strike’ 攴/攵. 
Mnemonic: SAMURAI TOPS BEANS TO THE 
BEAT OF A DRUM  
KO, tsuzumi
drum
13 strokes
鼓
L1
1307
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 壴, generally taken as 
a pictograph of a drum on a stand (with 
decorative elements at the top: see also 
豆 379 [beans] and 811), and 支 717, which 
was substituted (post-OBI and post-bronze, 
probably in error) for 攴 112 ‘hit, strike’ (in 
clerical script occurrences of 鼓, often in its 
alternative form 攵), giving an overall meaning 
禁錮  KINKO　imprisonment
軽禁錮 KEIKINKO　short sentence
重禁錮 JŪKINKO　long sentence
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 金 16 
‘metal’, and 固 501 ‘solid, hard’ as semantic 
and phonetic, giving ‘make solid with (molten) 
metal, stop up’; sense later extended to ‘confi ne’, 
and now only used in that sense. OT1968:1045; 
GY2008:1608; AS2007:261.
Mnemonic: CONFINE BINDINGS TO HARD METAL 
KO
confi ne, bind, plug 
16 strokes
錮
L1
1308

The Remaining 1130 Characters  389
顧慮 KORYO　concern
回顧 KAIKO　retrospection
顧問 KOMON　adviser
‘twist, turn’, to give ‘turn the head round, look 
back’; later, ‘look back’ in fi gurative sense also. 
Mizukami lists what is given as two bronze 
equivalents; these are in the highly embellished 
‘bird script’ subcategory of bronze script, which 
gives individual graphs a delicate, bird-like 
aspect. MS1995:v2:1450-51; OT1968:1108; 
GY2008:1023.
Mnemonic: EMPLOY HEAD TO LOOK BACK
KO, kaerimiru
look back
21 strokes
顧
L1
1309
Seal 
. Has 頁 103 ‘head’, and 雇 1305 
(‘employ’) as phonetic with associated sense 
相互   SŌGO　mutual
互助   GOJO　mutual aid
互い違い tagaichigai　alternately
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Originally, 
pictograph of a device for evenly cross-winding 
rope or thread, giving rise to extended senses 
such as ‘intertwining, mutual’. GY2008:75; 
KJ1970:390; OT1968:34. Suggest taking the 
graph in association with 五 21 ‘fi ve’.
Mnemonic: MUTUALITY CAN BE AWKWARD 
WITH FIVE (OR THEREABOUTS)  
GO, tagai
mutual
4 strokes
互
L2
1310
呉服  GOFUKU　drapery
呉々も  kureguremo　earnestly
呉手  kurete　donor
called Wu in southern China), namely Kure. The 
exact derivation of this word Kure is not clear, 
but it perhaps refl ects the Japanese attempt at 
rendering a dialectal form of the Chinese word 
written as 呉. Subsequently in Japan, the graph 
呉 was borrowed for its sound value to write an 
old Japanese verb kuru meaning ‘give’, equiva-
lent to modern kureru. Note: the Go-on layer of 
Sino-Japanese is older than the generally more 
familiar 漢 音 Kan-on, which represents the 
dominant layer of Sino-Japanese (often popu-
larly referred to collectively as ‘on readings’). 
Go-on has been preserved quite prominently in 
Buddhist terms (such as SETSU [not SATSU] in 殺 
生 SESSHŌ ‘taking of life’, and JŌ [not SEI] in 浄 
土 宗 JŌDO-SHŪ ‘Pure Land sect [of Buddhism]’. 
This was because the Buddhist priesthood 
was resistant to the (at that time) new wave 
of pronunciation which was being brought 
over from China, centered on the language 
of the capital Chang’an, in about the eighth 
century. OT1968:171; AS2007:518; KJ1970:394; 
GY2008:423. We suggest taking the graph as a 
box on a comfortable-looking reclining chair, 
the box containing a gift.
Mnemonic: GIFT BOX FROM WU CHINA ON A 
CHAIR
GO, kureru
give, Wu China
7 strokes
呉
L1
1311
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 吳. Has 口 22 
‘mouth; words, speak’, with (next to) a sec-
ond element representing a fi gure with head 
inclined, as in the bronze and seal forms. The 
graph is interpreted as originally meaning i] 
‘turn away from someone shouting’, giving 
‘noisy’ (Ogawa; Schuessler, in similar vein, says 
‘to shout’); or ii] ‘words which go against what 
is normal’, as the original way of writing 誤 868 
‘mistake’ (Katō); or iii] a dancing fi gure, giving 
‘enjoy’ by extension (later written 娯 ) (Gu). 
Meanings of 呉 include its use as the name of 
an ancient Chinese state at diff erent periods 
(the earliest such being during the Zhou dy-
nasty), and as the name of a region in ancient 
China (Three Kingdoms period). 呉 also has 
Japanese-only uses. One of these is in the term 
呉 音 Go-on, which refers to a layer of Sino-
Japanese (SJ: see Note below). The graph 呉 
(Ch. Wu) was also used to write an old Japanese 
word for China (often equated with a region 

390  The Remaining 1130 Characters
娯楽  GORAKU　pleasure
歓娯  KANGO　pleasure
娯楽品 GORAKUHIN　plaything
‘speak’, giving ‘talk in enjoyable way with a 
woman’, and by extension ‘pleasure’. Another 
view takes 呉 as a fi gure singing and dancing, 
serving in 娯 as semantic and phonetic to give 
overall sense ‘woman singing and dancing’, 
and by extension ‘pleasure’ (Gu). TA1965:430; 
OT1968:258; GY2008:1163. 
Mnemonic: WOMAN GIVES PLEASURE AND 
AMUSEMENT 
GO
pleasure, amusement
10 strokes
娯
L1
1312
悟性 GOSEI　wisdom
覚悟 KAKUGO　mental resolve
悟り 
satori　enlightenment
as i] ‘clear’, giving ‘mind becomes clear’ (Katō, 
Ogawa), or ii] ‘call to mind’, giving ‘something 
occurs to one’ (Tōdō). Note: 吾 consists of 口 
22 ‘mouth; speak’, and 五 21 (‘fi ve’) as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘exchange’, giving 
‘exchange words, converse’ (the original way 
of writing 語 ‘tell, speak’ 124). KJ1970:395; 
OT1968:372; TA1965:427.
Mnemonic: WITH FIVE MOUTHS TALKING, 
ONE CAN PERCEIVE THEIR FEELINGS
GO, satoru
perceive, discern 
10 strokes
悟
L1
1313
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 忄 164 
‘heart, mind’, and 吾 (NJK ‘oneself’; see Note 
below) as phonetic with associated sense taken 
碁石  GOishi　go stone
碁盤  GOBAN　go board
碁打ち  GOuchi　go player
stand’ (historically), giving ‘stand used for playing 
with stones’, and then ‘board game pieces’ by 
extension (Ogawa). The graph 碁 has a parallel 
structure to 棊, which appears in Shuowen as the 
original arrangement of the components used 
for writing 棋 1182 ‘Oriental chess’. While the 
two games are diff erent, note that the one term 
棋 士 KISHI can denote a player of either game. 
OT1968:712; KJ1970:239; DJ2009:v2:482.
Mnemonic: THE GAME ‘GO’ INVOLVES 
STONES AND WINNOWING BASKETS 
GO
go (the game)
13 strokes
碁
L1
1314
Late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 石 47 ‘stone’, and 
其 269 (orig. pictograph of winnowing basket) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken as i] ‘small’, 
giving ‘board game pieces’ (Katō), or ii] ‘square 
勾引 KŌIN　arrest
勾配 KŌBAI　slope
勾留 KŌRYŪ　detention
graph of diffi  cult etymology. Old forms (OBI, 
bronze) listed by Ogawa for 勾 are taken by him 
as originally showing a hook caught on some-
thing, but Mizukami takes a diff erent view, not as 
the predecessor of 勾 but of 丩898, a CO graph 
which he takes as string or vines (or similar) 
intertwined. Shirakawa, on the other hand, treats 
勾 and 句 683 ‘phrase, clause’ as originally having 
been the same graph, as does Gu, who regards 
勾 as a popular variant for 句. Qiu is cautious 
KŌ
bent, slope, capture
4 strokes
勾
L1
1315
OBI and seal forms (丩) 
, 
; OBI and seal 
forms ( 句 ) 
, 
. 勾 itself is a late, post-Shuowen 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 娛. 
Has 女 37 ‘woman’, and 呉 1311 (‘give’), taken 
in one view as phonetic with associated sense 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  391
鼻孔 BIKŌ　nostril
気孔 KIKŌ　pore
孔子 KŌSHI　Confucius
of a mother’s breast and hence ‘hole in nipple’ 
(Ogawa, Gu). Another takes it as ‘bend and go 
through’, i.e. a baby about to be born (Katō; 
also Mizukami), and hence ‘orifi ce of childbirth’. 
Either way, ‘hole’ is the meaning. ‘Confucius’ 
is a phonetic loan. OT1968:265; GY2008:126; 
KJ1970:402; MS1995:v1:348-9. 
Mnemonic: CONFUCIUS SAYS ‘CHILD WHO 
PLAYS WITH HOOK GETS HOLE’ 
KŌ, ana
hole, Confucius
4 strokes
孔
L1
1316
Bronze 
; seal 
. It is clearly 子 27 ‘child’, 
but analyses diff er over the additional stroke in 
the older forms. One view takes it as the curve 
技巧 GIKŌ　skill
巧言 KŌGEN　fl attery
精巧 SEIKŌ　elaborateness
甲虫  KŌCHŪ　beetle
甲種  KŌSHU　‘A Grade’
甲高い  KANdakai　shrill
as phonetic with associated sense ‘bend’, thus 
‘bend and make’ (Ogawa, Tōdō). Another view 
takes 工 as meaning ‘ax’, and 丂 as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘fl at, even’, giving ‘work 
wood with an ax and skilfully make it fl at/even’ 
(Katō). OT1968:310; TA1965:224-5; KJ1970:169-
70; MS1995:v1:2. 
Mnemonic: WORK WITH FLAT FLOATING 
PLANTS REQUIRES SKILL
pretation of the graph as representing scales on 
fi sh or similar, but the fi rst OBI form above is not 
supportive of this). The outer element, similar 
in shape to a square 囗 in OBI is thought to be 
an addition to indicate the profi le of the shell 
or pod, and Gu suggests this may have been 
to avoid confusion. The straight stroke in the 
seal form is considered to represent a sprout 
of vegetation emerging.  In his treatment, Katō 
prefers to give ‘open up’ as the original meaning 
of 甲. ‘High (= ‘shrill’)’, and ‘1st (in a series)’ are 
loan usages. MS1995:v2:872-3; GY2008:165; 
KJ1970:936-7; OT1968:668. We suggest taking 
the upper part of the graph as ‘fi eld’ 田, and 
the continued vertical stroke underneath as 
number. 
Mnemonic: AN ‘A 1’ FIELD.  
KŌ, takumi
skill
5 strokes 
巧
L1
1317
KŌ, KAN, kōra, yoroi 
1st class, armor,
shell, high (voice)
5 strokes 
甲
L1
1318
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). One view takes 
it as 工 125 ‘work’ (originally, tool), and 丂 130 
(originally, pictograph of fl oating aquatic plant,) 
OBI 
, bronze 
; seal 
. The bronze form 
given here, which also serves to represent OBI 
forms of essentially the same shape (except 
that outer enclosure is more angular) is gener-
ally taken to represent the cracks in a seed 
shell/pod that appear as the seed emerges, giv-
ing ‘seed shell/pod’, with ‘shell’ as an extended 
meaning, and ‘armor’ as a further extension of 
meaning. (Mizukami notes an alternative inter-
about interpretation of 勾/句, as these are exam-
ples of graphs for which early source materials 
are inadequate. Present meanings ‘bent’, ‘slope’, 
‘capture’ are all likely derived from not being 
straight and getting caught up. OT1968:131; 
MS1995:v1:12-13; SS1984:286; QX2000:324-7. 
Take ム as nose, and 勹 as bent. 
Mnemonic: BENT NOSE AFTER FALLING 
DOWN SLOPE AND BEING CAPTURED 

392  The Remaining 1130 Characters
炭坑 TANKŌ　coal mine
坑夫 KŌFU　miner
坑道 KŌDŌ　mine shaft
early texts. Katō’s implication is that once this 
substitution became common, 土 64 ‘earth, 
ground, soil’ replaced 阜 (阝) as the determina-
tive, resulting in a graph whose components 
then appeared more logical as a way of writing 
the word for ‘pit, hole’. An alternative interpre-
tation, based on an explanation of 阬 in the 
ancient Chinese encyclopaedic dictionary Erya, 
takes 阝 here in the uncommon sense ‘hollow’, 
thus giving ‘hollowed-out pit’ (Tōdō). Accord-
ing to this interpretation, 亢 is being taken 
as the original way of writing 坑. KJ1970:161; 
TA1965:398-401; OT1968:213; AS2007:250. As 
with 505, we suggest taking 亢 as a desk and 
top, and here 土 in its meaning of ‘soil’.  
Mnemonic: SOILED DESKTOP IS PITTED WITH 
HOLES
KŌ 
mine, pit, hole
7 strokes
坑
L1
1320
Seal ( 阬 ) 
; 坑 itself is a late, post-Shuowen 
graph. Shuowen has 阬, consisting of 阜 (阝) 
1907 ‘hill, terraced slopes’, with 亢 (‘neck / 
throat, high, high spirits’, see 505) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken as ‘high’, giving 
‘high/big hill’. This is the opposite meaning to 
坑, and Katō looks to explain the discrepancy 
on the basis of use of 阬 as a substitute writing 
for another homophonous / near-homopho-
nous CO graph 隍 ‘dry moat’, and by extension 
‘pit, hole’; such substitutions were common in 
抗議 KŌGI　protest
対抗 TAIKŌ　opposition
抗争 KŌSŌ dispute
攻撃者  KŌGEKISHA　aggressor
専攻   SENKŌ　specialty
攻め入る  semeiru invade
alternatively, takes 亢 in one of its meanings as 
‘high’, giving ‘raise up high’, possibly meaning 
‘raise the hands high (to protect the throat)’; 
the original meaning of 亢 is typically taken to 
be ‘neck, throat’; Tōdō takes it more specifi cally 
as ‘carotid artery’. KJ1970:391; TA1965:385-91; 
OT1968:402. As with 505 and 1320, we suggest 
taking 亢 as a desk and top.
Mnemonic: HAND THUMPED ON DESKTOP 
SHOWS OPPOSITION
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 攴/攵 112 ‘strike, hit’, 
and 工 125 (‘work’, originally a type of tool/
square used by carpenters) taken in one 
analysis as semantic and phonetic, giving ‘make 
things using a tool’ (Shirakawa, Ogawa). Anoth-
er analysis takes 工 only as phonetic with as-
KŌ
resist, oppose
7 strokes
抗
L1
1321
KŌ, semeru
attack
7 strokes
攻
L1
1322
Seal ; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 扌 34 ‘hand’, 
and 亢 505 (‘neck / throat, high’) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken typically as ‘defend, 
fend off ’, giving ‘defend with the hands’. Ogawa, 
入り江  irie　inlet, river
江湖  KŌKO　world at large
江戸  Edo　Edo, old Tokyo
set-square) as phonetic, with associated sense 
generally taken as ‘big’, giving ‘big river’. This graph 
can sometimes denote the Yangtze River; also, 
‘river’ in a more generalized sense. In Chinese the 
graph does not have the meaning ‘inlet’, which 
is a Japanese-only meaning. MS1995:v2:730-31; 
KJ1970:406; OT1968:558; AS2007:306. 
Mnemonic: FIND CARPENTER’S SET-SQUARE 
IN WATERS OF INLET
KŌ, e 
inlet, river
6 strokes
江
L1
1319
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 氵 42 ‘water’,  and 工 
125 (‘work’, originally a type of tool such as a 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  393
更新  KŌSHIN　renewal
今更  imasara　now, belatedly
夜更け  yofuke late at night
loose’(i] and ii] both noted in Mizukami). Gu, in 
line with i] above, interprets the original mean-
ing as ‘hand holding stick turns pancake over’. 
Extended senses include ‘anew, again’. Another 
extended sense, ‘grow late’, appears to be 
connected to the traditional use of this graph 
also to denote time during the night, which 
was divided into fi ve periods, each of about 
two hours. MS1995:v1:628-30; GY2008:393; 
OT1968:477. Suggest taking graph as 日 66 ‘day’ 
and as variant of 攵 strike / force.  
Mnemonic: DAY GROWS LATE, FORCING 
CHANGE
KŌ, sara, fukeru/kasu
anew, change, grow 
late, again
7 strokes
更
L2
1323
OBI 
; bronze ; seal 
. These early forms 
have 攴/攵 112 ‘strike’, beneath 丙 1932 
(originally, type of stand), treated in one view as 
phonetic with associated sense of i] ‘turn over, 
change’, thus ‘turn something into something 
else’, i.e. ‘change’, or ii] ‘make fi rm something 
拘束  KŌSOKU　restriction
拘引  KŌIN　arrest
拘らず  kakawarazu regardless
首肯  SHUKŌ　consent
肯定  KŌTEI　affi  rmation
肯定的 KŌTEITEKI affi  rmative
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 扌 34 ‘hand’, 
and 句 683 (‘phrase’; orig. threads or similar in-
tertwined or hooked together) as phonetic with 
associated sense taken as i] ‘stop’, thus ‘stop 
with the hand’ (Katō, Ogawa), or ii] ‘bent’ (like 
a hook, etc.), thus ‘pull and stop’ (Shirakawa). 
KJ1970:279; OT1968:407; SS1984:294. Take 句 
as ‘mouth’ 口 22 with hook.
Mnemonic: SEIZE BY HANDY HOOK IN THE 
MOUTH or SEIZE ONTO A HANDY PHRASE
taken as ‘meat/fl esh/soft tissue attached fi rmly 
to bone’ (Mizukami, Ogawa, Gu); Katō takes as 
‘meat/fl esh attached to skull’. Regarding the 
somewhat diff erent shape 肯, a transitional 
shape between 肎 and 肯 can be found at the 
clerical script stage, with a top element similar 
to 止 but with bottom stroke written like 冖, a 
point which helps us understand the shape of 
the modern form. The meaning ‘consent, agree’ 
is a loan usage; based on usage in a classical 
Chinese text, Shirakawa takes ‘vital’ to be an 
extended sense. OT1968:816; KJ1970:318-9; 
GY2008:609; MS1995:v2:1068-9; SK1984:594; 
SS1984:295. Suggest take 止 as ‘stop’ 143.
Mnemonic: CONSENT TO MEAT STOPPAGE
KŌ, kakawaru
seize, adhere to
8 strokes
拘
L1
1324
KŌ
consent, agree, vital
8 strokes
肯
L2
1325
Bronze and seal forms (肎) 
, 
. Usually 
taken as comprising 月/肉 209 ‘meat, fl esh’ 
under 冖. The latter element, normally a 
determinative meaning ‘cover, roof’, is felt here 
to be an abbreviation of 骨 ‘bone’ or 冎 ‘skull 
and uppermost vertebra’ (see 骨 877). Overall 
original meaning of 肎 (corresponding to the 
original shape of later 肯; explained below) is 
sociated sense ‘hit, strike’, giving ‘hit with whip’ 
(Katō). Katō regards ‘attack’ as a loan usage, 
but this can surely be considered an extended 
sense. Mizukami lists OBI forms, but the shapes 
seem diffi  cult to reconcile with those of the 
bronze forms. SS1984:292; MS1995:v1:566-7; 
KJ1970:406; OT1968:436. 
Mnemonic: ATTACK, STRIKING WITH 
CARPENTER’S SQUARE  

394  The Remaining 1130 Characters
侯爵  KŌSHAKU　marquis
大田侯 ŌtaKŌ　Marquis Ōta
王侯  ŌKŌ royalty
ritual. According to Shirakawa, this ritual was 
performed by persons whose duties extended 
to protecting members of the royal family; for 
this work they were rewarded with fi efs, and 
were treated as members of lower-ranking or 
peripheral nobility, hence the meaning ‘marquis’. 
As can be seen, the treatments of 侯 show con-
siderable diversity, and this appears to refl ect a 
degree of confusion or uncertainty regarding 
the true etymology of this graph in relation to 
, 候 and 矦 (see 候 504). However, amidst the 
diversity of opinion regarding 侯, the view put 
forward by Shirakawa does seem to have some 
merit. OT1968:63; QX2000:47,300; KJ1970:397-8; 
SS1984:296. We suggest taking the graph as 亻 
41 ‘person’, 矢 145 ‘arrow’, and 
 as quiver on 
its side. 
Mnemonic: PERSON WITH ARROW AND 
QUIVER IS A LORD [/ MARQUIS]
KŌ
marquis, lord
9 strokes
侯
L1
1326
Bronze 
; seal . Treatments diff er consider-
ably. Ogawa takes 
 as the original form of 侯, 
consisting of an arrow (矢) and 厂 (normally a 
determinative meaning ‘cliff ’, but here a hang-
ing cloth, as target), giving ‘target’. Qiu likewise 
takes it as an earlier form of 侯. Katō too takes it 
as meaning ‘target’, but as a separate graph from 
侯, not as its predecessor. Shirakawa, in his treat-
ment, discusses 矦, which he sees as an earlier 
form of 侯, takes 厂 as meaning ‘roof’, indicating 
an arrow-shooting ritual of purifi catory signifi -
cance, with the top two strokes of 矦 represent-
ing a person on top of the roof, involved in the 
恒常 KŌJŌ　constancy
恒久 KŌKYŪ　perpetuity
恒例 KŌREI common usage
become the model shape for this graph, but the 
great dictionaries of pre-modern times such as 
Kangxi zidian maintained the more etymologi-
cally appropriate 恆. In modern Japanese usage, 
恒 has been adopted as standard, refl ecting a 
process of shape regularization (亘 is recurrent 
as an element elsewhere in JK graphs, e.g. 宣 
924, whereas 亙 is not). Mizukami also lists a 
proposed OBI equivalent for 恆. Note: 亙 (NJK) 
‘move across’; originally, either crescent moon 
or boat between upper and lower line, indicat-
ing moon moving within fi xed limits, or a boat 
moving within limits. MS1995:v1:506-7,30-33; 
KJ1970:398-400; FC1977:26; ZZ1671:v1:440. As 
with 924 we suggest taking this graph as 亘 as 
‘two’ 二 65 and ‘days’ 日 66.
Mnemonic: FEELINGS CONSTANT OVER TWO DAYS
KŌ, tsune
always, constant
9 strokes
恒
L1
1327
Bronze ; seal 
; traditional 恆. Has 忄 164 
‘heart, feelings’, with 亙 (see Note below) as 
phonetic with associated sense of ‘fi xed and not 
moving’, thus ‘a heart which is fi rm/unwavering’, 
then generalized to ‘constant’. In some early oc-
currences, there seems to have arisen confusion 
between the original shape of 亙 as noted above 
on the one hand, and the separate graph shape 
亘 (see below) ‘go round, revolve’. In calligraphic 
tradition, the brushwritten 恒 seems to have 
洪水  KŌZUI　fl ood
洪積層 KŌSEKISŌ　diluvium 
洪大  KŌDAI na vast
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵 42 
‘water(s)’, and 共 484 (‘together’) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken as ‘big’, thus giv-
ing ‘fl ood’ (Ogawa), and by extension ‘vast, 
great’; Tōdō takes associated sense as either 
‘fall, descend’ or ‘thick’. On a geo-historical 
note, in the Shuowen jiezi of ca.100AD, the 
fi rst dictionary of Chinese characters (total: 
9353) arranged according to a system of 
KŌ
fl ood, vast
9 strokes
洪
L2
1328

The Remaining 1130 Characters  395
荒天 KŌTEN　wild weather
荒地 areCHI　wasteland
荒波 aranami rough sea
wild/desolate’ is an extended sense. Note: 巟 is 
made up of 巛 (variant of 川 50 ‘river’), and 亡 
985 (‘die, lose’) as phonetic with an associated 
sense range ‘completely hidden; distant; ex-
tensive and barren’, thus overall sense ‘watery 
expanse’, with extended senses ‘big river’, ‘over-
fl ow’ (Mizukami). MS1995:v2:1114-6,v1: 424-5; 
OT1968:851; GY2008:791-2.  
Mnemonic: RIVER AND DEAD GRASS IN WILD 
WASTELAND
KŌ, arai, areru/rasu
rough, wild, waste
9 strokes
荒
L2
1329
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 艹 53 ‘plants’, and CO 
巟 (‘watery expanse’; see Note) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘cover completely’, thus 
‘vegetation/weeds cover everything’; ‘become 
郊外 KŌGAI　suburbs
近郊 KINKŌ　suburbs
郊野 KŌYA suburban fi elds
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 阝 376 
(‘village’), and 交 128 ‘mix/cross/exchange’ 
as phonetic with associated sense taken as i] 
‘cross paths’, thus ‘outskirts (of city)’ (Tōdō); or 
ii] ‘fi re festival’, giving ‘place outside city walls 
to conduct fi re festival’ (Ogawa); or iii] ‘having 
a common boundary’ (Gu). Gu follows Shuowen 
defi nition of 郊 as originally denoting areas 
within 100 li of the capital. TA1965:270; 
OT1968:1019; GY2008:696.
Mnemonic: VILLAGE MIXES WITH SUBURBS 
KŌ
suburbs
9 strokes
郊
L2
1330
香水 KŌSUI　perfume
香気 KŌKI　scent, fragrance
色香 iroka　female charms
22 ‘mouth’, thus ‘fragrance from millet in 
mouth’, or ‘wafting aroma of cooked mil-
let’ (based partly on word-family associa-
tion; Mizukami). Gu gives a diff erent view 
of OBI form, taking 口 as ‘bowl/container’. 
OBI forms of 口 and 甘 are close in shape, 
and confusable, with no bronze forms 
for 甘. MS1995:v2:1464-5,1510-11,864-6; 
OT1968:1121; KJ1970:278; GY2008:873.
Mnemonic: SUN BRINGS OUT FRAGRANCE OF 
GRAIN PLANTS 
KŌ, ka, kaori/ru
fragrance, incense
9 strokes
香
L1
1331
OBI ; seal 
. Usually taken as 禾 87 ‘grain’ 
(as abbrev for 黍 NJK ‘millet’), over 甘 1139 
‘sweet;’ thus ‘sweet aroma of millet’, with 日 
66 ‘sun’ taken as variant of 甘 (e.g. Ogawa). 
However, OBI forms have 黍/禾 over 口
determinatives (540 in total) there are a quite 
remarkably frequent number relating to water 
and fl ood(/s). One may surmise that there 
was serious fl ooding around that time, even 
beyond China’s borders, as recorded in docu-
mentation in other countries. OT1968:572; 
TA1965:231,316.  
Mnemonic: WHEN WATERS COME TOGETHER, 
YOU HAVE A VAST FLOOD

396  The Remaining 1130 Characters
控え所   hikaeJO　waiting room
控訴   KŌSO　legal appeal
控え書き  hikaegaki　memo, note
(e.g. a bow); Ogawa takes associated sense as 
‘hang, and bend’, giving a similar overall sense 
‘draw back/in’, as in drawing back a bow, and 
also drawing or pulling in reins of a horse. By 
extension, ‘pull back, refrain’. ‘Wait’ and ‘write 
down’ are meanings found in Japanese usage 
only. KJ1970:401; OT1968:417; SS1984:305; 
GY2008:123.
Mnemonic: REFRAIN, HANDS REACHING FOR 
THE SKY  
KŌ, hikaeru
refrain, wait, write 
down
11 strokes
控
L1
1333
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 扌 34 
‘hand’, and 空 17 (‘sky’) as phonetic with as-
sociated sense ‘pull’, giving ‘pull with the hand’ 
梗概 KŌGAI　outline, summary
梗塞 KŌSOKU　stoppage
桔梗 KIKYŌ　bell-fl ower
in either case referring originally to a thorny 
tree, specifi cally ‘mountain elm’. Meanings 
such as ‘resist, prevent, block’ and ‘trunk/stem, 
branch’ may be seen as extended senses. The 
meaning ‘outline, summary’, as in 梗概 listed 
above, is treated by Gu as an extended sense 
(in eff ect, a further extended sense) based 
on 梗 having ‘trunk and stem’ as meanings. 
OT1968:507; SS1984:305-6; GY2008:1200. 
Mnemonic: ONCE AGAIN, IT’S MOSTLY 
BLOCKED OFF BY A TREE
KŌ, KYŌ
block, mostly,
close (off /up)
11 strokes
梗
L1
1334
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 木 73 ‘tree, 
wood’, and 更 1323 (‘anew, change’, ‘again’) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken either as 
i] ‘thorn’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘make hard’ (Shirakawa), 
喉仏 nodobotoke　Adam’s apple
喉頭 KŌTŌ　larynx
咽喉 INKŌ　throat
by Ogawa as ‘hole, cavity’, giving ‘throat’. 
Schuessler regards the etymology of the early 
Chinese word represented by 喉 as uncertain, 
while Shirakawa treats it as ‘probably onomato-
poeic’ in nature. ‘Vital/key point’ is an extended 
sense. OT1968:189; AS2007:279; GY2008:1424; 
SS1984:306-7. We suggest remembering it 
through ‘marquis’. 
Mnemonic: MARQUIS GETS ARROW 
THROUGH MOUTH INTO THE THROAT
KŌ, nodo
throat, vital
12 strokes
喉
L1
1335
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 口 22 
‘mouth, opening’, and 侯 1326 (‘marquis’, 
q.v.) as phonetic with associated sense taken 
貢献 KŌKEN　contribution
年貢 NENGU　tax, dues
貢物 mitsugimono　tribute
the hands’, giving ‘valuables to off er up to one’s 
lord’, i.e. ‘tribute’. An alternative associated sense 
given for 工 is ‘pass through and advance’, 
giving a specifi c meaning of ‘send produce 
from the regions to the Capital for the Imperial 
Court’ (noted by Mizukami). Mizukami also lists 
possible OBI and bronze equivalents for 貢. 
MS1995:v2:1232-3; KJ1970:406-7; OT1968:953. 
Mnemonic: SHELL-MONEY AND WORK ARE 
FORMS OF TRIBUTE
KŌ, KU, mitsugu
tribute
10 strokes
貢
L1
1332
Seal 
. Has 貝 10 ‘shell (currency), valuables’, 
and 工 125  (‘work’/‘tool’) as phonetic with as-
sociated sense typically taken as ‘off er up with 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  397
硬化 KŌKA　hardening
硬貨 KŌKA　coin
硬水 KŌSUI　hard water
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 石 47 ‘stone’, 
and 更 1323 (‘anew, change, ‘again’) as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘strong’, giving 
‘hard stone’; sense then generalized to ‘hard’. 
KJ1970:162; OT1968:712; GY2008:1397.
Mnemonic: ONCE AGAIN, CHANGE TO STONE 
AND BECOME HARD
KŌ, katai
hard
12 strokes
硬
L2
1337
絞首台  KŌSHUDAI　gallows
絞め殺す  shimekorosu　strangle
絞り出す  shiboridasu　squeeze out
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 糸 29 
‘thread’, and 交 128 ‘cross, exchange’ as se-
mantic and phonetic, giving ‘fasten by en-
twining cord (or similar) around’. TA1965:269; 
KJ1970:174; OT1968:777. 
Mnemonic: ALAS, STRANGLED WITH 
CROSSED THREADS
KŌ, shiboru, shimeru
strangle, wring
12 strokes
絞
L2
1338
項目 KŌMOKU　clause, item
事項 JIKŌ　matters
条項 JŌKŌ　articles
both attribute a semantic element to 工 here, 
denoting a physical connection between, 
or support for, something above and below 
(head and torso); if accepted, this view per-
haps provides a basis for taking other mean-
ings such as ‘clause’ and ‘item’ as extended 
senses, as seen for example in the English 
term ‘header’ in documents. KJ1970:162; 
OT1968:1101; GY2008:780; TA1965:306; 
SS1984:308.
Mnemonic: WORK HEADINGS INCLUDE 
ITEMISED CLAUSES
KŌ, unaji
clause, item, nape
12 strokes
項
L1
1339
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 頁 103 
‘head’, and 工 125 (‘work, tool’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘back, rear’, giving ‘back 
of the head’, and by extension ‘back/nape of 
the neck’. Additionally, Tōdō and Shirakawa 
恐慌  KYŌKŌ　panic, scare
大慌て  ōawate　big fl uster
慌て者  awatemono　scatterbrain
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 忄 164 ‘heart, 
mind’, and 荒 1329 (‘rough, desolate, wild’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘undis-
criminating, vague’, giving original meaning 
‘unaware of oneself, absent-minded’.  Katō is 
of the view that ‘fl ustered, panic’ is a loan use 
of 慌 as substitute for another graph, namely 
惧 1234 (qv) ‘fear, be in awe’; Yupian explains 
the meaning of 慌 as ‘fearful’. KJ1970:323; 
GY2008:1504.
Mnemonic: WILD FEELINGS MAKES ONE 
FLUSTERED
KŌ, awateru/tadashii
be fl ustered
12 strokes
慌
L1
1336

398  The Remaining 1130 Characters
A very late graph (Yupian). Has 酉 ‘wine’ 318 
(originally, pictograph of wine jar), and 孝 
870 (‘fi lial piety’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘foam, froth’, giving ‘fermented wine’ 
(Ogawa). Yupian defi nes 酵 as ‘yeast (for wine-
making)’. ‘Ferment, brew’ is an extended sense. 
OT1968:1027; SS1984:312.
Mnemonic: FILIAL PIETY SHOWN IN THE 
FORM OF WINE FROM FERMENTED YEAST!?
in either case giving ‘straw’. Regarding the 
meaning ‘rough draft/manuscript’, this ap-
pears to be a loan usage, though it may be 
that there was a semantic connection deriving 
from the perception of straw as something 
rough or coarse. The meaning ‘straw’ is now 
eff ectively defunct. KJ1970:164; OT1968:736; 
TA1965:261-3.  
Mnemonic: MANUSCRIPT ABOUT TALL 
GRAIN-PLANTS
(OBI) a pictograph of a two-tiered bamboo 
container or basket(s) (Mizukami), or – in Shi-
rakawa’s interpretation – a spinning device for 
bringing threads together, either way giving 
‘put together, assemble’ as an extended sense. 
See also 701. OT1968:600; MS1995:v1:110-11; 
SS1984:309, 300-301. We suggest taking 井 as 
‘a well’ 1575 and 再 as ‘again, twice’ 706. 
Mnemonic: BUILD WATER CHANNEL TWICE 
FROM WELL 
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 糸 29 
‘thread’, and 岡 1068 (‘hill’) as phonetic with 
associated sense taken in a semantic range sig-
nifying strength, viz. ‘big and strong’ (Ogawa), 
‘thick, fat’ (Katō), ‘hard and straight’ (Tōdō); re-
sultant overall meaning is ‘thick strong rope’, or 
(Tōdō) ‘hard, straight rope/cable’. OT1968:781; 
KJ1970:159; TA1965:385-91.  
Mnemonic: CABLE THREADS UP THE HILL
酵母 KŌBO　yeast
酵素 KŌSO　enzyme
発酵 HAKKŌ　fermentation
KŌ
ferment, yeast
14 strokes
酵
L1
1342
原稿 GENKŌ　manuscript
投稿 TŌKŌ　contributed article
草稿 SŌKŌ　rough draft
KŌ
manuscript,  straw
15 strokes
稿
L1
1343
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen).  Has 禾 87 
‘grain (plant)’, and 高 132 (‘high, tall’) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken as i] ‘rise up high’ 
(Katō, Tōdō), or ii] ‘withered and hard’ (Ogawa), 
下水溝 GESUIKŌ　drain
溝切り  mizokiri　grooving
溝鼠  dobunezumi　sewer rat
KŌ, mizo, dobu
ditch, channel
13 strokes
溝
L1
1340
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵 42 
‘water’, and 冓 ‘(type of) container’ as seman-
tic and phonetic, giving ‘water channel, ditch’. 
Note: 冓 is a CO graph and was originally 
要綱  YŌKŌ　gist
大綱  TAIKŌ　main principles
綱引き  tsunabiki　tug-of-war
KŌ, tsuna
cable, line, principle
14 strokes
綱
L1
1341

The Remaining 1130 Characters  399
購入 KŌNYŪ　purchase
購買 KŌBAI　buying
購読 KŌDOKU　subscription
all means’, giving ‘buy in aggressively’, and 
‘buy’ as the generalized sense (Ogawa). 
Shirakawa, alternatively, takes the associated 
sense of 冓 as ‘bring together’, and consid-
ers the original meaning of 購 as probably 
having been ‘reconciliation, compromise’. See 
also 701. OT1968:962; SS1984:315,300-01; 
DJ2009:v2:511. As with 1340, we suggest tak-
ing 井 as ‘a well’ 1575 and 再 as ‘twice’ 706.  
Mnemonic: BUY A WELL TWICE USING SHELL 
MONEY
KŌ
buy
17 strokes
購
L1
1345
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 貝 10 
‘shell (currency), valuables’, and 冓 (see 溝
1340 Note) as phonetic with associated 
sense taken in one view as ‘exhaustively try 
乞食  koJIKI　beggar, begging
暇乞い itomagoi　farewell visit
雨乞い amagoi　praying for rain
of writing another word (a near-homophone 
in early Chinese) meaning ‘ask for, beg’. Later 
(post-Shuowen period), so as to avoid ambigu-
ity in writing, the corresponding word for ‘ask 
for, beg’ came to be written slightly diff erently, 
resulting in 乞. See also 気 12. QX2000:326; 
MS1995:v2:726-8; AS2007:422-3; GY2008:34; 
OT1968: 27. We suggest taking 𠂉 as ‘person’ 
and 乙 as ‘odd’ 1072. 
Mnemonic: THAT ODD PERSON IS A BEGGAR
kou
beg
3 strokes
乞
L1
1346
OBI and seal forms (气) 
. The graph 气 
‘vapor’, based originally on a pictograph de-
picting some sort of vapor (cloud, or exhaled 
breath), was borrowed as a convenient means 
均衡 KINKŌ　balance
平衡 HEIKŌ　equilibrium
衡器 KŌKI　scales
and which he takes as a variant of another 
CO graph 
 meaning ‘bull gores’. Even if we 
do not accept Katō’s hypothesis of graph 
substitution, interpretation as 角 ‘horn’ plus 
夨 ’tilted head’ (in this case, the bull’s), seems 
satisfactory. Based on the use of a horizontal 
piece of wood as the core component, the 
original meaning ‘crosspiece for bull’s horns’ 
came to be used in extended senses such 
as ‘scales’ and ‘yoke (for draught animals)’. A 
possible connection between 衡 in its original 
sense ’crosspiece’ and 横 255 ‘horizontal, 
side’ in terms of word-family is also noted by 
Schuessler. OT1968:899; MS1995:v2:1162-
3v1:296-7; KJ1970:158-9; AS2007:277-8. We 
suggest taking the central element 𩵋 as ‘big 
stumpy horn(s)’, along with 行 ‘go’. 
Mnemonic: BIG STUMPY HORNS GO ON THE 
SCALES
KŌ, kubiki
scales, yoke
16 strokes
衡
L1
1344
Bronze forms 
, 
; seal 
. Interpretations 
vary. The center part of this graph is taken in 
one view as 𩵋 ‘big horns’ (consisting of 角 
97 ‘horn’ [slightly abbreviated shape] over大 
56 ‘big’), with 行 131 (‘go’, ‘carry out’, ‘line’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘horizontal’ 
(Ogawa), giving ‘wooden crosspiece for bull’s 
horns’ (to prevent goring). This analysis and 
the resultant meaning are essentially the 
same for Katō, except that he notes another 
occurrent shape in bronze for 𩵋 which in-
stead of 大 has CO 夨 ‘fi gure with head tilted’, 

400  The Remaining 1130 Characters
拷問  GŌMON　torture 
拷問台 GŌMONDAI　the rack 
拷器  GŌKI　torture instruments
A very late graph (Yupian). Has 扌 34 ‘hand’, 
and 考 130 (‘consider’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘strike, beat’, giving ‘beat’; acquired 
a connotation of beating a person to force 
a confession. SS1984:317; AS2007:332,336; 
OT1968:412.  
Mnemonic: CONSIDER USING HAND FOR 
TORTURE 
GŌ
torture, hit
9 strokes
拷
L1
1347
剛健 GŌKEN　fortitude
剛毛 GŌMŌ　bristle
剛直 GŌCHOKU　integrity
OBI 
; bronze 
; seal 
. The OBI form has 
刂 198 ‘knife’, and 网 570 (‘net’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘hard’, giving ‘strong, 
hard knife’. Bronze forms vary, but include one 
that has the OBI elements just described, plus 
an element representing a large ax. The seal 
form diff ers again, having 刀, plus 岡 1068 
(‘hill’) as phonetic with associated sense ‘hard’. 
In all these cases, ‘hard’ results as the general-
ized sense. MS1995:v1:132-3; KJ1970:159-60; 
AS2007:250.   
Mnemonic: CUTTING DOWN A HILL TAKES 
STRENGTH
GŌ
strength
10 strokes
剛
L1
1348
傲慢  GŌMAN　pride, arrogance
傲岸  GŌGAN　arrogance
傲然と  GŌZEN to　haughtily
arrogantly’ as an extended sense.  Shirakawa, 
alternatively, looks to interpret both 敖 and 
傲 as having a ritualistic origin. Note: 敖 is 
taken in one view as consisting of 屮 ’shoot 
of vegetation’, plus 攷 (CO ‘hit and bend’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘emerge 
vigorously to a height’, giving ‘sprouts of 
vegetation emerge’ (Katō). Shirakawa offers a 
quite different analysis, interpreting as repre-
senting the corpse of a long-haired old per-
son being ritualistically beaten on a stand. 
OT1968:78,440,435; KJ1970:184; SS1984:318; 
AS2007:151. We suggest taking components 
as 亻 41 ‘person’,  土 64 ‘ground’, 方 223 ‘side’, 
and 攵 112 ‘strike’. 
Mnemonic: HAUGHTY PERSON STRUCK ON 
SIDE AND GOES TO GROUND
GŌ, ogoru
proud, haughty
13 strokes
傲
L1
1349
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has CO 敖 
‘enjoy oneself’ (originally, ‘emerge vigorously 
to a height’; see Note below) as semantic and 
phonetic, and 亻41 ‘person’. Ogawa inter-
prets 亻/人 as having been added to 敖 so as 
to denote mainly ‘enjoy oneself at will’ (our 
italics). If, though, the interpretation of the 
original meaning of 敖 as ‘emerge vigorously 
to a height’ (Katō) is accepted, the addition 
of 亻/人 to create 傲 can be taken as ‘person 
emerges vigorously above others’, giving ‘act 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  401
克己 KOKKI　self-control
克服 KOKUFUKU　subjugation
克明 KOKUMEI diligence
酷使 KOKUSHI　exploitation
残酷 ZANKOKU　cruelty 
酷暑 KOKUSHO intense heat
獄門 GOKUMON　prison gate
地獄 JIGOKU　hell
疑獄 GIGOKU criminal case
OBI ; seal 
. OBI and bronze forms depict a 
fi gure wearing what is taken to be a helmet, 
and possibly also body armor. Being heavy, 
this gave rise to the extended senses ‘endure’, 
and ‘overcome (the weight of protective 
cladding)’, ‘win’. KJ1970:331; MS1995:v1:92-3; 
OT1968:88; TA1965:132. Suggest taking ele-
ments as 古 121 ‘old’ and 儿 as ‘legs’ 41.
Mnemonic: OLD LEGS CAN STILL ENDURE 
AND OVERCOME
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 酉 318 
‘wine’, and 吿/告 507 (‘proclaim’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘brace, draw in’, giving 
‘strong-tasting wine that strikes the taste-buds’; 
sense later generalized to ‘strong-tasting’, 
and ‘severe’. OT1968:1027-8; TA1965:222; 
SS1984:322. 
Mnemonic: SEVERE PROCLAMATION ABOUT 
WINE
Bronze 
; seal 
. Consists of 言 118 
‘words; speak’, with 犾 ‘quarrel’ (originally 
two dogs biting/snarling at each other: 
see 19), giving ‘quarrel’; sense extended to 
‘court’, ‘jail’. MS1995:v2:844-5; OT1968:931; 
GY2008:902.  
Mnemonic: WORDS IN DOG FIGHT LEAD TO 
LITIGATION AND PRISON
KOKU
conquer, endure, 
overcome 
7 strokes
克
L1
1351
KOKU
severe, intense, cruel, 
harsh
14 strokes
酷
L1
1352
GOKU
prison, litigation
14 strokes
獄
L1
1353
豪州 GŌSHŪ　Australia
豪壮 GŌSŌ　splendor
豪雨 GŌU　heavy rain
Seal ; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 豕 89 ‘wild 
pig, boar (or similar)’, and  
 132 (abbreviation 
of 高 ‘tall, high’) as phonetic with associated 
sense taken either as i] ‘coarse animal hair’, giv-
ing ‘porcupine’ (Ogawa; Gu also in agreement), 
or ii] ‘long’, giving ‘boar/wild pig with long mane’ 
(Tōdō).  ‘Bristle’ gives rise to’ brush’. ‘Outstanding/
splendid’ is taken by Gu as an extended sense 
GŌ
strong, splendid, 
Australia, brush
14 strokes
豪
L1
1350
based on the fi erce nature of the porcupine, 
this being perceived as a positive character-
istic, though it seems this might perhaps be 
more understandable if the graph were taken 
as referring to a type of wild pig. Also used 
sometimes in abbreviated written style as a 
single-graph writing meaning ‘Australia’, and in 
the compound writing 豪州 GŌSHŪ ‘Australia’ 
(formerly written 濠州); in the latter case, 
豪 tends to be used today in place of NJK 濠 
(‘moat’). OT1968:950; GY2008:1744; TA1965:264. 
We suggest taking the graph as a combination 
of ‘house’ 家 89 and variant ‘tall’ 高 132.
Mnemonic: AUSTRALIA HAS MANY SPLENDID 
TALL AND STRONG HOUSES

402  The Remaining 1130 Characters
駒下駄 komaGETA　low clogs
駒鳥  komadori　robin
手駒  tegoma shōgi piece
見込み mikomi　prospect
人込み hitogomi　crowd
込め物  komemono stuffi  ng 
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 馬 210 ‘horse’, and 
句 683 (‘phrase, clause’,) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘small’, giving ‘small horse, 
colt’; Gu says original meaning was ‘two-year 
old horse’. ‘Game-board piece’, as in chess, go, 
etc., which represents Japanese-only usage, 
can perhaps be seen as a further extended 
sense. It is unclear as to how its other meanings 
came about. MS1995:v2:1468-9; GY2008:758; 
OT1968:1125. 
Mnemonic: ‘COLT’ IS A PHRASE APPLIED TO 
A HORSE
No early forms, being a kokuji (国字), i.e. a 
graph devised in Japan on the basis of the 
main formational principles underlying the 
vast corpus of graphs devised in China. Con-
sists of ⻌ 85 ‘walk, move’, and 入 67 ‘enter, 
put in’, giving ‘be crowded’ (the result of many 
people entering). OT1968:992.  
Mnemonic: IT GETS CROWDED WHEN PEO-
PLE MOVE TO ENTER
koma
colt, chess piece, 
bridge (violin etc), 
frame (fi lm)
15 strokes
駒
L1
1354
komu/meru
put in, crowded
5 strokes
込
L2
1355
手頃な  tegoro na　convenient 
三時頃 SANJIgoro　about 3 o’clock
近頃  chikagoro nowadays  
probably depicting a bent, withered leg, then 
borrowed for ’ladle, spoon’, plus 頁 103 ‘head’. 
Later, 頃 was borrowed to write time-related 
words such as ‘recently’ and ‘when’, the latter 
providing the basis for its meaning in Japa-
nese. OT1968:1100; GY2008:602; TA1965:508-
9. Suggest taking 匕  as ‘variant’ 七 32 ‘seven’, 
and a diff erent take on ‘head’.
Mnemonic: LET’S HEAD OFF AROUND SEVEN 
O’CLOCK
koro
time, around (time)
11 strokes
頃
L2
1356
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Original 
meaning of the graph 頃 was ‘tilt/incline the 
head’ (傾 1264), consisting of 匕, originally 
昆虫 KONCHŪ　insects 
昆布 KONBU　kelp
後昆 KŌKON descendants  
OBI 
; bronze 
; seal 
. Views diverge. One 
takes the lower element as people gathered 
together 比 792 (originally, two people in 
line; ‘compare’) beneath the ‘sun’ 日 66, giving 
‘people gather beneath the sun’ (Tōdō, Gu). 
Tōdō also takes more specifi cally as ‘people 
gather beneath the sun in a round group’, 
adding ‘round’ on the basis of word-family as-
sociation. Alternatively, it is seen as represent-
KON
multitude, insect, 
descendants
8 strokes
昆
L1
1357

The Remaining 1130 Characters  403
ing the head of an insect, with legs lined up 
underneath, giving ‘crawling insect with many 
legs’ (Ogawa); with this view, the top element 
could alternatively be taken as representing 
the insect’s body, incorporating the eyes. The 
seal form in Shuowen takes the lower element 
in 昆 as depicting two people, but a bronze 
form is more suggestive of legs. Unfortu-
nately, comparison of the OBI form for 昆 with 
OBI forms which include ‘person’亻/ 人 41 
(e.g. 衆 901 ‘multitude’) does not provide us 
with a defi nitive answer on the appropriate 
interpretation of this graph. TA1965:712-22; 
GY2008:615; MS1995:v1:612-3. Suggest taking 
日 in its meaning ‘day’.
Mnemonic: COMPARE DAYS IN TERMS OF 
MULTITUDES OF INSECTS
悔恨  KAIKON　remorse 
遺恨  IKON　grudge
恨み言 uramigoto grievance  
follow/comply’, giving ‘not readily follow/com-
ply; defi ance’; and ‘resent, regret’ presumably 
becomes an extended sense. Tōdō also takes 
艮 as phonetic, but with associated sense 
‘persistently remain’, giving ‘scars remain in 
the heart’, and hence ‘resent, regret’. Note: Mi-
zukami also lists another analysis for 艮 which 
takes as 目 76 ‘eye’ over 刀 198 ‘knife’, mean-
ing i] ‘tattoo (criminal) on rim of eye’ or ii] ‘gaze 
unswervingly at one point’; Tōdō’s view of 恨 
follows ii]. MS1995:v2:914-5; KJ1970:410-11; 
TA1965:706-7. 
Mnemonic: STOP AND STARE WITH FEELINGS 
OF RESENT AND REGRET
KON, uramu
resent, regret
9 strokes
恨
L1
1358
Bronze (㫐) ; seal (恨) 
. Though hard to 
distinguish, the earlier bronze form equivalent 
has an eye facing one way (to the left) and 
the body facing the other way, taken to mean 
‘be antagonistic’. At the seal stage, 忄 164 
‘heart, mind, feelings’ was added. One view 
takes 艮 281 (‘look back’, typically in anger) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘not readily 
結婚  KEKKON　marriage 
婚約  KON’YAKU　engagement 
未婚者 MIKONSHA unmarried person
(as does Schuessler), and treats the seal form 
of 婚 as consisting of 女 ‘woman’, plus 昏 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘phallus, 
genitalia’. Shirakawa, alternatively, takes the 
bronze form as depicting a ladle for wine, 
used in celebrating the marriage ceremony. 
A satisfactory interpretation of this graph is 
elusive. Note: the posited meaning ‘go down’ 
noted above for 氏 may result from 氏 serving 
as an  abbreviation for similarly-shaped氐, 
a CO graph which is itself understood with 
meanings which include i] carving tool for 
gouging or chiselling out the fl at bottom of 
a receptacle, and ii] fl at land at the foot of a 
hill; both these interpretations of 氐 are given 
in Mizukami. GY2008:1347,682; KJ1970:411-
2; MS1995:v2:724-6; SS1984:327,613; 
AS2007:289-90. We suggest taking 氏 in its 
sense of ‘Mister’.  
Mnemonic: WOMAN MARRIES HER ‘MISTER’ 
AS THE SUN GOES DOWN
KON
marriage
11 strokes
婚
L2
1359
Bronze 
; seal 
. Open to various interpre-
tations. One view (Gu) interprets as 女 37 
‘woman’ and 昏 (NJK, meaning ‘dusk, dim, un-
clear’) as semantic and phonetic. Gu takes 昏 
as comprising 氏, here with the meaning ‘base; 
go down’ (as an extended sense of 氏 522 
‘clan, family, mister’, a graph which originally 
depicted a spoon with prong[s] for picking up 
meat or similar, but see Note below) over 日 66 
‘sun’, giving ‘sun goes down’; the sense ‘marry’ 
for 昏 is taken to result as an extended sense 
based on the custom of weddings in ancient 
times being held in the evening. Katō, though, 
dismisses this as a popular misconception 

404  The Remaining 1130 Characters
紺色 KONiro　dark blue 
紺屋 KONya　dyer
紫紺 SHIKON　bluish purple
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 糸 29 
‘thread’, and 甘 1139 (‘sweet’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘including red’ (Katō). 
Shuowen explains 紺 as ‘dark blue tinged with 
red’.KJ1970:223; DJ2009:v3:1063.
Mnemonic: THREADS DYED A SWEET DARK 
BLUE
KON
dark blue, dye
11 strokes
紺
L1
1361
霊魂  REIKON　soul
商魂  SHŌKON　commercial spirit
魂消る  tamageru*　be shocked
開墾  KAIKON　reclamation
墾田  KONDEN　opened fi elds
未開墾 MIKAIKON　uncultivated
haunt [terrorize] the living’), and 云 83 ‘cloud’ 
(later written 雲, also NJK for ‘speak, say’) as 
semantic and phonetic. Shirakawa suggests 
that in ancient times it was probably thought 
that a person’s soul was like a hovering cloud. 
OT1968:1140; GY2008:1539; AS2007:267; 
SS1984:329. 
Mnemonic: IT IS SAID THAT ONE’S SPIRIT IS 
CLOUD-LIKE
iii] ‘boar bites/digs down’, giving ‘dig down into 
the ground’ like a boar’ (Shirakawa). Shirakawa’s 
interpretation has some persuasiveness. ‘Culti-
vate/reclaim (land)’ is the extended sense. Note: 
豸, one of a small number of determinatives for 
wild animals (e.g. as in NJK 豹 HYŌ ‘leopard’) is 
based on a pictograph originally depicting a 
beast with arched back ready to pounce on its 
prey. OT1968:226,950; KJ1970:412; SS1984:329; 
MS1995:v2:1226-7. Suggest using top right ele-
ment 艮 281 ‘stop and stare’.  
Mnemonic: STOP AND STARE AT BOAR 
DIGGING IN SOIL AS IF CULTIVATING IT
KON, tama, tamashii
soul, spirit
14 strokes
魂
L1
1362
KON
cultivate, reclaim
16 strokes
墾
L1
1363
Seal ; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 鬼 1179 
‘soul, spirit, ghost’ (Schuessler has ‘originally: 
the ghost of a deceased who has returned to 
Seal 
; late graph (later version of Shuowen). 
Has 土 64 ‘earth, ground’, and 貇 as phonetic; 
貇 (see Note below) is variant of 豤 (CO, ‘boar 
bites’). Associated sense of 豤/貇 is taken as i] 
‘cut down, cut’, giving ‘open up land’ (for cultiva-
tion; Ogawa), or ii] ‘clay which is hard to dig up’, 
giving ‘land extremely hard to dig up’ (Katō), or 
痕跡 KONSEKI　traces, vestiges
血痕 KEKKON　bloodstain
弾痕 DANKON bullet hole
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 疒 404 
‘illness’ (originally, person lying down on bed), 
and 艮 281 (originally, ‘stop and stare’, ‘be 
antagonistic’, q.v.) as phonetic with associated 
sense taken as either i] place which is hard-
ened’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘steadily remain’ (Tōdō), 
either way giving overall sense ‘birthmark, 
scar’. DJ2009:v2:610; OT1968:679; TA1965:707.  
Mnemonic: ILLNESS LEAVES ITS MARK, AND 
SOME STOP AND STARE AT IT
KON, ato
vestige, scar, mark, 
traces
11 strokes
痕
L1
1360

The Remaining 1130 Characters  405
補佐 HOSA　assistant
佐官 SAKAN　fi eld offi  cer
大佐 TAISA　colonel
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 左 24 ‘left’, in 
an extended sense ‘support, help’, and 亻 41 
‘person’ added, giving overall meaning ‘assist/
one who assists’. KJ1970:416; OT1968:53; 
GY2008:450. 
Mnemonic: PERSON ON THE LEFT IS AN 
ASSISTANT
SA
assist, assistant
7 strokes
佐
L1
1365
無沙汰  BUSATA　neglect to write
沙漠   SABAKU　desert
取り沙汰  toriZATA　gossip, rumor
view, as originally meaning ‘water’s edge’, then 
progressively by extension ‘sandy soil at water’s 
edge’, and ‘sand’. 砂 879 ‘sand’ is a later equiva-
lent graph (noted in Yupian as a popular writ-
ing for 沙 ), in which 石 47 ‘stone’ is substituted 
for 氵 ‘water’. The meanings ‘news, tidings,’ 
are perhaps by association with word-family 
‘scatter(ed)’. KJ1970:415-6; MS1995:v2:734-5; 
GY2008:496-7,815; OT1968:561. 
Mnemonic: THE NEWS IS THAT THERE IS 
LITTLE WATER – NOT GOOD TIDINGS
SA, isago
news, tidings, sand 
grains
7 strokes
沙
L3
1366
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 氵 42 ‘water’, and 少 
160 ‘few, a little’ as semantic and phonetic, giv-
ing ‘small stone particles (suspended) in water’, 
i.e. ‘sand’. Ogawa takes a slightly diff erent 
示唆  SHISA　suggestion, hint
教唆  KYŌSA　incitement
教唆者 KYŌSASHA　abettor
‘urge on verbally, urge on’; often has negative 
connotation. Note: 夋 originally (OBI) has 夊 
‘drag the foot, foot’ (see Appendix), with 允 
(‘tall, slim person’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘walk slowly’, thus ‘walk slowly, walk drag-
ging foot’ (see also 715). KJ1970:418-9,158-9; 
GY2008:1046,1715; MS1995:v1:286-7. As with 
1470, we suggest taking right hand part as 
‘crossed legs’ 夂, and ‘runny nose’ 允. 
Mnemonic: RUNNY NOSE, MOUTH AND 
CROSSED LEGS ARE ENTICING!?
SA, sosonokasu, sosoru
entice, incite
10 strokes
唆
L1
1367
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Shuowen has 嗾, in 
relation to which 唆, devised later, is a popular 
variant. Has 口 22 ‘mouth’, and CO 夋 (see Note 
below) as phonetic with associated sense ‘set 
a dog on (someone or something)’, giving 
懇談 KONDAN　friendly chat
懇願 KONGAN　entreaty
懇情 KONJŌ　kindliness
giving ‘include warm feelings’ (Ogawa), or ii] 
‘reach down’, giving ‘reach down into some-
one’s feelings’ (Shirakawa), or iii] ‘wanting one 
thing’, giving ‘a pure heart’ (Katō; Gu also), 
or iv] ‘in detail’, giving ‘be watchful on points 
of detail’ (Tōdō). OT1968:390; SS1984:330; 
KJ1970:412; GY2008:1158; TA1965:695-9. As 
with 1363, we suggest using the top right ele-
ment 艮 281 as ‘stopping and staring’. 
Mnemonic: BOAR STOPS AND 
STARES – HOPEFULLY IT’S FEELING FRIENDLY!
KON, nengoro na
friendly, cordial, 
courteous, kind 
17 strokes
懇
L1
1364
Seal 
; a late graph (later version of Shuow-
en). Has 心 164 ‘heart, mind, feelings’, and 
貇/豤 1363 (‘boar’ > ‘boar bites/digs’) with 
associated sense taken variously as i] ‘include’, 

406  The Remaining 1130 Characters
鎖国  SAKOKU　closed country 
連鎖  RENSA　desert
鎖止め  kusaridome　sprocket
捻挫 NENZA　sprain, dislocation
挫折 ZASETSU　setback, frustrate
挫傷 ZASHŌ　sprain, fracture
broken up. Alternatively, 𧴪 can be taken as 
‘small shells strung together’, and by extension 
the sound of shells getting broken up (Shi-
rakawa). Based on the interpretation of 𧴪 as 
‘small shells strung together’, Ogawa analyzes 
鎖 as 金 ‘metal’ with 𧴪 as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘put together’, giving ‘chain’ 
made of metal rings joined up. SS1984:334,332; 
OT1968:1048; GY2008:1441,418-9. Suggest tak-
ing 
 as small 小 38. 
Mnemonic: SMALL SHELLS LINKED 
TOGETHER ON A METAL CHAIN
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 扌 34 
‘hand’, and 坐 (CO; original way of writing 座 
880 ‘sit’) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken as ‘crumble, break down’ (Tōdō says ‘snap 
and get shorter’), giving ‘break with the hand’, 
and hence ‘break, crush’; ‘frustrate’ is an ex-
tended sense. TA1965:575-7; MS1995:v1:268-9; 
OT1968:414. As with 880, suggest take 坐 as 
‘two people’ 人 41 sitting on the ‘ground’ 土 64. 
Mnemonic: TWO PEOPLE SITTING ON THE 
GROUND WITH SPRAINED HANDS
SA, kusari
chain, link
18 strokes 
鎖
L1
1369
ZA, kujiku
sprain, wrench, 
frustration
10 strokes 
挫
L1
1370
Seal 
; late graph (later version of Shuowen); 
traditional 鎖. Has 金 16 ‘metal’, and 𧴪 (com-
prising 小 38 [small objects, possibly shells] 
over 貝 10 ‘shell, shell currency’) is taken in 
Shuowen as onomatopoeic to represent the 
sound of shells rubbing together and getting 
喝采  KASSAI　applause
風采  FŪSAI　form, appearance
采の目  SAI no me　dots on dice
times – as here – ‘hand’, and 木 73 ‘tree’, 
giving ‘pick fruit/nuts from a tree’; later, sense 
generalized to ‘take’. It is unclear as to how the 
other meanings have accrued, though Tōdō 
suggests ‘land’ may derive from a term for tax 
collecting on given land using the graph 采. 
MS1995:v2:1354-5; MR2007:339; GY2008:671; 
OT1968:630; TA1965:107-11. To distinguish 
from 採, which appears to have two hands, we 
suggest here to use just one. 
Mnemonic: SINGLE HAND GATHERS FROM TREE
SAI, toru
take, appearance, 
form, land, dice 
8 strokes
采
L2
1371
詐欺師 SAGISHI　swindler
詐取  SASHU　fraud
詐称  SASHŌ　misrepresentation
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 言 118 
‘words; speak’, and 乍 141 (‘make’) as semantic 
and phonetic, giving ‘make up words, deceive 
with words’. ( 乍 originally denoted marks 
made with a cutting instrument; ‘make’ is an 
extended sense.) MS1995:v2:1192-3,v1:18-9; 
KJ1970:437; OT1968:924. 
Mnemonic: MAKE UP WORDS IN DECEITFUL LIE
SA
lie, deceive
12 strokes 
詐
L1
1368
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional 采. See also 菜 509 
and 採 709. Has 爫 (as variant of 爪 1739), 
which is usually ’claw, talon (etc.)’, but some-

The Remaining 1130 Characters  407
盆栽 BONSAI　bonsai
栽培 SAIBAI　cultivation
前栽 SENZAI*　garden
(and ‘plant’ as extended sense). This latter 
view, favored by Tōdō, has an associated sense 
for 𢦏 that is close to its meaning ‘harm with 
weapon’. Note: 𢦏 consists of 戈 ‘halberd’ 545, 
plus 才 139 (etymology uncertain; ‘talent’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘harm, dam-
age’, thus ‘injury caused by halberd (or other 
weapon)’. Judging from the block script shape, 
it is hard to see how or why one element is 
taken as 才, but the OBI form of 𢦏 does show 
some basis for identifying 才 as a component. 
KJ1970:422-3; GY2008:989; TA1965:107-9; 
MS1995:v1:666-7,534-5; OT1968:504. Take top 
left as ‘ten’ 十 35. 
Mnemonic: TEN HALBERDS PLANTED LIKE 
TREES
SAI
planting 
10 strokes
栽
L1
1374
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 木 73 ‘tree, wood’, and 
𢦏 (CO ‘infl ict injury with weapon’; see Note 
below) as phonetic. Views diff er on associated 
sense. One takes 𢦏 as ‘put/stand (something) 
up’, thus ‘put up wooden supports’ (referring 
to ancient method of building earthen walls 
by planting posts in ground as supporting 
framework); ‘plant tree’ is extended sense 
(Katō, Gu). The other main view takes associ-
ated sense of 𢦏 as ‘cut’, thus ‘prune/trim tree’ 
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
碎. Has 石 47 ‘stone’, and 卒 564 (‘soldier; end’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘break up small, 
small’, giving ‘stones get broken up small’; sense 
then generalized to ‘break, smash’. KJ1970:420; 
OT1968:710; TA1965:695; FC1974:v2:1578. 卆 is 
an early calligraphic variant of 卒, so we suggest 
‘nine’ 九 13, and ‘ten’ 十 35. 
Mnemonic: SMASH ROCK INTO NINETEEN 
FRAGMENTS
砕氷船 SAIHYŌSEN　ice-breaker
砕片  SAIHEN　fragment
砕けた  kudaketa　informal
SAI, kudaku/keru
break, smash
9 strokes
砕
L1
1372
主宰者 SHUSAISHA　leader
宰領  SAIRYŌ　management
宰相  SAISHŌ　prime minister
Instead, he sees 辛 as a tool with a curved blade 
for cutting sacrifi cial meat. Most OBI and bronze 
occurrences of 辛 do suggest a straight needle/
blade, but there are some with a curve, and Shi-
rakawa takes the overall original sense of 宰 as 
probably ‘person in charge (of banquets/food)’. 
Tōdō also questions the projected connection 
between this graph and criminals. Ogawa takes 
辛 as having a phonetic role, with associated 
sense ‘take charge of, administer’, thus overall 
meaning ‘person in charge of Imperial Court 
banquets’ and by extension ‘head offi  cial’ for 宰. 
Despite the substantial diff erences of interpreta-
tion, ‘take charge of, administer’ is typically taken 
as the extended generalized meaning of this 
graph. KJ1970:558-9; GY2008:1146; SS1984:336-
7; TA1965:110; OT1968:279. 
Mnemonic: A BUILDING THAT HOUSES A 
NEEDLE-SHARP ADMINISTRATION
SAI
administer
10 strokes
宰
L1
1373
OBI 
; seal 
. Scholars agree 宀 is ‘building’ 
30, but diff er on role of 辛 1535 (‘sharp, bitter’). 
Associated meanings of 辛 include ‘crime/
criminal/slave’, once denoting a large tattooing 
needle with handle, used to tattoo foreheads 
of slaves/criminals as mark of ownership. Thus 
宰 is understood as ‘criminal/slave working in 
building’ (Katō); Gu feels criminals/slaves were 
charged with slaughtering livestock, in line with 
Shuowen. Shirakawa, though, feels it unlikely 
that slaves/criminals were used in positions, 
such as those of offi  cials who were of high sta-
tus, even minister to the emperor ( 宰 輔 SAIHO). 

408  The Remaining 1130 Characters
斎戒 SAIKAI　purifi cation
書斎 SHOSAI　a study/den 
潔斎 KESSAI　abstinence, purify
giving ‘put body and mind in order for worship’. 
Extended senses include ‘purify’, ‘abstain’; also, 
‘a separate place to conduct such activities’, 
giving ‘study’ as a further extended sense. 
Some clerical script occurrences show a trend 
in shape towards 齋, the upper part of which 
seems to have evolved – albeit with a degree 
of distortion – from the earlier component 
made up of the three grain plants. TA1965:773; 
OT1968:723; SK1984:816; MS1995:v2:1524-5. 
Suggest lower part as framed altar, and 文 as 
‘text’ 72. 
Mnemonic: WRITE TEXT ON PURIFICATION 
USING FRAMED ALTAR IN A STUDY
SAI
purify, abstain, 
worship, a study
11 strokes
斎
L1
1376
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 齋. Bronze has 
示 723 (originally pictograph of altar; ‘show’), 
and the early equivalent of 斉 1578 ([tradi-
tional form: 齊] originally depiction of (three) 
grain plants growing together; ‘equal, similar’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘put in order’, 
債務  SAIMU　liabilities
債券  SAIKEN　debenture
債権者 SAIKENSHA　creditor
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 責 751 
‘liability’ (originally, ‘money requested [from 
debtor]’; ‘liability’), and 亻 41 ‘person’ added, 
giving ‘one who owes money’, and by exten-
sion ‘debt’. OT1968:78; GY2008:1072. 
Mnemonic: DEBT THROUGH LOAN IS A 
PERSON’S LIABILITY
SAI
debt, loan
13 strokes
債
L1
1377
主催 SHUSAI　sponsorship
催促 SAISOKU　urging
催眠 SAIMIN　hypnosis
Seal 
 : late graph (Shuowen). Has 亻 41 
‘person’, and 崔 (CO meaning ‘high moun-
tain’) as phonetic with associated sense ‘urge, 
encourage’, giving ‘urge/encourage someone’. 
OT1968:78; DJ2009:v2:660. Take 崔 as 山 26 
‘mountain’ and 隹 324 ‘bird’. 
Mnemonic: PERSON ORGANISES AND MUS-
TERS BIRDS ON MOUNTAIN
SAI, moyoosu
organize, muster
13 strokes 
催
L1
1378
色彩 SHIKISAI　color(ing)
淡彩 TANSAI　light coloring
彩雲 SAIUN　glowing clouds
Seal 
; late graph (later version of Shuowen); 
traditional 彩. Has 彡 115, a determinative 
believed originally to have had a meaning such 
SAI, irodoru
color
11 strokes
彩
L1
1375
as ‘decorative feathers’ or ‘colored feathers’, and 
采/采 1371 (hand gathering from tree) as pho-
netic with associated sense as i] ‘decoration, 
embellishment’, thus ‘beautiful colors/pattern’ 
(Ogawa, Shirakawa), or ii] ‘mixed’, giving ‘deco-
rate using various colors’ (Katō). OT1968:345; 
SS1984:350,337; KJ1970:419-20. We suggest 
taking 彡 as a three-bristled brush.
Mnemonic: THREE BRISTLES PAINT COLOR 
PICTURE OF HAND TAKING FROM TREE

The Remaining 1130 Characters  409
塞栓  SOKUSEN　embolism
穴塞ぎ  anafusagi　stop-gap 
要塞  YŌSAI　fortress
items as tiles or bricks as a means of blocking 
gaps in the walls of a building, and hence by 
extension ‘stop up, block’. The addition of the 
element 土 64 ‘soil, earth, ground’  perhaps 
indicates the use of soil as a means of blocking 
holes. ‘Frontier fort’ is presumably an extended 
sense for 塞, based on the concept of blocking 
foreign barbarians from entering the Middle 
Kingdom. MS1995:v1:388-90; KJ1970:423; 
OT1968:222; DJ2009:v3:1120; TA1965:120. Sug-
gest cover 宀 over combined ‘big’ 大 56 ‘well’ 井 
1575’, plus ‘soil’ 土. 
Mnemonic: BIG COVERED WELL IS BLOCKED 
BY SOIL
SAI, SOKU, fusagu
obstruct, block, stop 
up, plug, fort
13 strokes 
塞
L1
1379
OBI 
; bronze 
; seal 
 ( 塞 ). The OBI and 
bronze forms, which equate in block script 
through simplifi cation to 𡨄, represent the orig-
inal way of writing 塞, made up of 宀 30 ‘roof, 
cover’ over 㠭 ‘tiles’, with two hands beneath 
them. This graph is interpreted as using such 
二歳 NISAI　two years old
歳費 SAIHI　annual expenses
歳暮 SEIBO　year-end gift
sense ‘rotation’ (or ‘end’), thus ‘move through rota-
tion from cold to heat’, i.e. ‘one year’. Note: both 
戌 476 and 戉 1016 may initially have been the 
same graph (Mizukami, Katō, Qiu), representing 
same word. See also 545. MS1995:v1:706-7,531-4; 
KJ1970:600-01; QX2000:35; OT1968:539; 
AS2007:596. Suggest lower left as 示 723 ‘show/
altar’ and top as 止 143 ‘stop/foot’. 
Mnemonic: EVERY YEAR HALBERDS ARE 
PLACED AT FOOT OF ALTAR
SAI, SEI
year
13 strokes 
歳
L2
1380
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 歩 221 ‘walk, move’, and 戌 
or 戉 (orig. both pictographs of weapon such as 
halberd or battle-ax) as phonetic with associated 
積載 SEKISAI　loading
掲載 KEISAI　publication
記載 KISAI　mention
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 車 ‘vehicle’, and 𢦏
(CO, ‘injure with a weapon/halberd’ [see 1374 
Note]) as phonetic with associated sense ‘put 
in place, secure’, giving ‘put load securely (onto 
cart, etc.)’; by extension, ‘put in print, publish’. 
Mizukami lists a proposed OBI equivalent also. 
MS1995:v2:1270-71; OT1968:984; TA1965:110. 
There are a number of variants for halberd, and 
we suggest here a ‘fancy’ halberd.
Mnemonic: VEHICLE CARRIES LOAD OF 
FANCY HALBERDS – PUT IT IN PRINT
SAI, noru/seru
load, carry, publish, 
print
13 strokes
載
L1
1381
埼玉  Saitama　Saitama
埼玉県 SaitamaKEN　Saitama Prefecture
phonetic with associated sense ‘uneven’, giving 
‘(place where) coastline is winding’, i.e. ‘promon-
tory’. The Yupian dictionary lists this graph in 
the variant form 碕 (NJK), with 石 47 ‘stone, 
rock’ instead of土. SS1984:145; GY2008:1179. 
Mnemonic: THE GROUND ON THAT 
PROMONTORY IS STRANGE
(sai), saki
promontory, cape
11 strokes
埼
L1
1382
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 土 64 ‘earth, 
ground’, and 奇 1174 (‘strange, odd’) as 

410  The Remaining 1130 Characters
削除   SAKUJO　deletion
削減   SAKUGEN　reduction
削り取る  kezuritoru　shave off 
little’ over 肉 209 ‘meat, fl esh’ in its variant form 
月]). In this view, the other meaning ‘sheath, 
scabbard’ is seen as a borrowed usage of 削. 
An alternative analysis of this graph takes as 刂 
‘knife, sword’, and 肖 as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘contain’, thus ‘container for knife/
sword’, i.e. ‘sheath, scabbard’ (Katō); in this analy-
sis, conversely, ‘shave/plane, pare’ is seen as the 
borrowed usage. OT1968:117,816; TA1965:255-
7; SS1984:344; KJ1970:607. Suggest taking 肖 as 
small bit 小 of meat 肉/月.
Mnemonic: USE KNIFE TO PARE MEAT INTO 
REDUCED SMALL BITS
SAKU, kezuru
reduce, pare, sheath
19 strokes
削
L1
1385
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 削. 
Has 刂 198 ‘knife, sword, cut’, and 肖 ( = modern 
肖 1490 ‘resemble’), taken in one view as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘make small’, giving 
‘shave/plane, whittle down’ (Ogawa, Tōdō), or in 
similar vein, ‘cut off  meat’ (Shirakawa, taking 肖 
as ‘small piece of meat’ [treating as 小 38 ‘small, 
鉄柵 TESSAKU　iron railing
柵垣 SAKUgaki　fence
柵 
shigarami　weir
OBI 
, seal 
. Has 木 73 ‘wood, tree’, and 冊 
884 (originally, diff erent-sized turtle shells tied 
together after use in divination, for writing on; 
‘book, volume’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘uneven bundles’, giving ‘fence made 
of unequal size bundles of wood.’  ‘Entangle’ 
is an extended meaning. MS1995:v1:658-60; 
OT1968:499; TA1965:483-6. 
Mnemonic: MAKE A FENCE WITH BUNDLES 
OF BOUND WOODEN BOOKS
SAKU, shigarami/mu
fence, stockade, 
entangle, weir
9 strokes
柵
L1
1386
長崎 Nagasaki　Nagasaki
島崎 Shimazaki　a surname
崎く 
KIKU　steep road
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Yupian takes to 
mean ‘uneven mountain road’. Ogawa inter-
prets as 山 26 ‘mountain’, and 奇1174 (‘strange, 
odd’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘stick out prominently’ or ‘winding’, and notes 
‘promontory’ as a Japanese-only usage, as does 
Shirakawa. OT1968:304; SS1984:146.
Mnemonic: THAT ODD MOUNTAIN ON THE 
CAPE LOOKS STEEP
saki, misaki, KI 
cape, steep
11 strokes
崎
L1
1384
薬剤  YAKUZAI　medicine
薬剤師 YAKUZAISHI　pharmacist
緩下剤 KANGEZAI　laxative
form: 齊) as semantic and phonetic, giving ‘cut 
and make even’. Tōdō takes this to refer to the 
ancient practice of cutting tallies of equal shape 
to mark an agreement, as well as to preparing 
equal individual doses of traditional medicines. 
Over time, the medicine-related sense became 
predominant. KJ1970:423; TA1965:770-73; 
OT1968:119.
Mnemonic: MEDICINAL DRUG NEEDS TO BE 
CUT UP IN EQUAL MEASURES
ZAI
medicine, drug
10 strokes
剤
L1
1383
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
劑. The seal form has 刂198 ‘knife, cut’, and the 
equivalent of 斉1578 ‘equal, similar’ (traditional 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  411
搾取   SAKUSHU　exploitation 
圧搾   ASSAKU　pressure
搾り取る  shiboritoru　extract
phonetic, giving ‘apply pressure, press’. Since 
搾 is a kokuji and by defi nition was not brought 
over from China, the graph as a whole has no 
on reading proper to refl ect original Chinese 
pronunciation, but it has assumed the on read-
ing of 窄. OT1968:426; GY2008:1147. We sug-
gest taking the elements as ‘hand’ 扌 34, ‘hole’  
穴 860, and ‘make’ 乍 (see 141 and 1388). 
Mnemonic: MAKE A HOLE BY PRESSING WITH 
HAND
SAKU, shiboru
wring, press
13 strokes
搾
L1
1389
A graph devised in Japan (kokuji; see Introduc-
tion), not in China itself. Has 扌 34 ‘hand’, and 
NJK 窄 ‘narrow; press/coerce’ as semantic and 
錯誤 SAKUGO　mistake
錯覚 SAKKAKU　illusion
倒錯 TŌSAKU　perversion
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 金 16 
‘metal’, and 昔 346 ‘formerly, days of old’ as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘put on top, pile 
up’, thus ‘plate, coat with metal’. TA1965:364-7; 
OT1968:1045; KJ1985:633. 
Mnemonic: IN OLDEN TIMES METALS WERE 
OFTEN MIXED UP
SAKU
mix up, confuse
16 strokes
錯
L1
1390
索引 SAKUIN　index
思索 SHISAKU　speculation
鉄索 TESSAKU　cable
added at bronze stage suggests the work was 
done inside a hut or other such building (Gu).  
索 was borrowed for its sound value in early 
Chinese to write another homophonous word 
meaning ‘search, enquire into’. KJ1970:438-9; 
MS1995:v2:1006-7; AS2007:486,482. Suggest 
upper part as roof with cross (i.e. church), and 
use ‘threads’ 29.
Mnemonic: SEARCH FOR ROPE AND FIND 
THREAD UNDER CHURCH ROOF 
SAKU
rope, search
10 strokes
索
L1
1387
Bronze 
; seal 
. OBI occurrences have 又 
2003 ‘hand’, or two hands, with another ele-
ment representing plant fi bers/threads, giving 
‘twist fi bers and make rope’; 宀 30 ‘roof, cover’ 
酢酸  SAKUSAN　acetic acid
酢の物  su no mono　pickles
酢漬け  suzuke　pickling
increased acidity due to accumulation of time’, 
thus ‘sour wine’ (Mizukami). In either interpreta-
tion, ‘vinegar’ is an extended sense. Note: set-
ting aside minor diff erences in interpretation,乍 
has the original core meaning of cutting into 
wood or other material with an instrument such 
as an ax, giving ‘make’ as an extended sense 
(see also 141). OT1968:1027; MS1995:v2:1348-
9,v1:18-20. 
Mnemonic: VINEGAR IS MADE FROM SOUR 
WINE
L1
1388
SAKU, su, suppai
vinegar, sour
12 strokes
酢
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 酉 318 ‘wine’ (origi-
nally pictograph of wine jar’), and 乍 (‘make’; 
see Note below) as phonetic with associated 
sense taken as i] ‘purse the lips’, giving ‘sour 
wine’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘accumulate’, giving ‘wine of 

412  The Remaining 1130 Characters
挨拶  AISATSU　greeting
不挨拶 BUAISATSU　discourtesy
挨拶状 AISATSUJŌ written notice
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 扌 34 ‘hand’, 
and 𡿪 with associated sense ‘split, break up’ 
(the lower right-hand element is originally 
肉/月 209 ‘fl esh’), giving ‘(device for) applying 
pressure to the hand’, i.e. an instrument of 
torture. By extension, ‘press, apply pressure’. 
Adopted into the expanded Jōyō kanji for writ-
ing the common word 挨拶 AISATSU ‘greeting’; 
use of 拶 in this word represents Japanese-
only loan usage. It is unclear as to how its 
present dictionary meaning of ‘imminence’ 
came about. GY2008:828-9; OT1968:412. We 
suggest taking 巛 as ‘waves’ (for a pun) and 夕 
as ‘evening’ 46.  
Mnemonic: WAVES HAND IN THE EVENING AS 
GREETING
SATSU
imminent (but used 
only in greeting 
[aisatsu])
9 strokes
拶
L1
1393
四季咲き SHIKIzaki　perennial
遅咲き   osozaki　late blooming
咲き残る  sakinokoru stay in bloom
笑 537). Later, 口 22 ‘mouth’ was added as a 
determinative to distinguish in writing when 
‘laugh’ was intended and not ‘thistle’. The 
top element, ⺮ 58 ‘bamboo’, was further 
changed (perhaps in error) resulting in the 
shape 咲, or in printed texts (some having 
slightly different forms) often or typically to 
咲. ‘Bloom’ seems the dominant Japanese us-
age for 咲, though ‘laugh’ is retained in Chi-
nese. KJ1970:85-6; YK1976:272; OT1968:181; 
FC1977:161-2. Take 天 as ‘heaven’ 62, and 丷 
70 as ‘open’.
Mnemonic: HEAVENLY FLOWERS OPEN 
MOUTHS TO BLOSSOM FORTH  
saku
bloom, blossom 
9 strokes
咲
L2
1391
Late, post-Shuowen graph; traditional 咲. 
Initially written 芺, a graph originally mean-
ing ‘thistle’; later sometimes written 笑, and 
borrowed for convenience to write a differ-
ent word that at an earlier stage of Chinese 
was of similar pronunciation and meant ‘act 
coquettishly’, and by extension ‘laugh’ (see 
名刹  MEISATSU　famed temple
刹那  SETSUNA　moment, instant
刹那的 SETSUNATEKI fl eeting
Initially (OBI and bronze), quite probably the 
same graph as 殺 515 ‘kill’ q.v., but diverg-
ing later. For 剎/刹, a ritualistic origin seems 
likely, as Shirakawa suggests. Borrowed in 
Chinese for its sound value to represent a 
Buddhist loanword from Sanskrit with mean-
ings that include ‘pillar’, ‘temple’, hence its 
frequent use in Japanese also in Buddhist 
terms. SS1984:511; ZZ1671:v1:169. Take 㐅 as 
‘crossed’, and 木 as ‘wood’ 73. 
Mnemonic: THERE ARE CROSSED WOODEN 
SWORDS IN THAT TEMPLE
SATSU, SETSU
temple
8 strokes
刹
L1
1392
Late, post-Shuowen graph. Etymology 
uncertain. Has 刂 198 ‘knife’, and 𣏂 or 杀
(old dictionaries and commentators fluctu-
ate between the two), which shows a wild 
animal laid out after being slaughtered. 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  413
撮影   SATSUEI　photography
撮り直す  torinaosu　retake
撮み食い tsumamigui corrupt, ‘graft’
1974 ‘defy, attack’ (traditional form: 冒) over 取 
317 ‘take’, giving ‘seize in the hand, take without 
permission’. Later, the determinative 扌34 ‘hand’ 
was added, resulting in 撮. The kun reading 
tsumamu ‘pinch’ retains some of the original 
meaning of this graph, while the sense ‘take 
(photos)’ represents a Japanese-only usage. 
KJ1970:501-2; OT1968:428.
Mnemonic: PINCHED HAND TAKES THE MOST
SATSU, toru, tsumamu
pluck, pinch, take
15 strokes
撮
L1
1394
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Originally writ-
ten 最 510 (‘most’ q.v.), made up of 冃 (‘cover, 
headgear’), taken here as abbreviation for 冒 
擦過傷  SAKKASHŌ　abrasion
擦れ違う  surechigau　brush past 
擦り込む  surikomu rub in 
A very late post-Shuowen graph. Has 扌34 
‘hand’, and 察 516 (‘judge, realize’) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken as i] ‘rub’ (Katō, 
Shirakawa), or ii] ‘notched, rough’ (Ogawa), in 
either case giving the overall meaning ‘rub, pol-
ish’. According to Katō, the right-hand phonetic 
element 察 is a substitute for earlier 沙 1366 
(both being near-homophones in early Chi-
nese). KJ1970:416; SS1984:349; OT1968:432.
Mnemonic: REALISE ONE’S HAND IS CHAFED
SATSU, suru/reru
rub, chafe, brush
17 strokes
擦
L1
1395
桟橋 SANbashi　jetty 
桟敷 SAjiki*　stand, balcony
桟道 SANDŌ walkway of planks  
giving ‘plank walkway’ (Shirakawa), or ii] ‘long 
and slender’, giving ‘hanging bridge’ (Ogawa). 
Meanings given by Schuessler for this graph 
are somewhat diff erent (‘shed made of inter-
twined branches’ and ‘carriage box made of 
lath or bamboo’), but still there appears to be 
some consistency in the general shape of the 
materials involved. SS1984:351; OT1968:504; 
AS2007:605; MS1995:v1:536-9. 
Mnemonic: FRAME MADE USING TWO 
WOODEN HALBERDS AS SPARS
SAN
spar, beam, frame
10 strokes
桟
L1
1396
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 棧. 
Has 木 73 ‘wood, tree’, and 戔 (‘harm, injure’ 
[original OBI graph has two opposing halberds]: 
see 520/545) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken either as i] ‘small, thin items joined up’, 
惨劇 SANGEKI 　tragedy 
惨殺 ZANSATSU　massacre
悲惨 HISAN misery  
nally, ‘woman adorned with hairpins’; now ‘go, 
attend’) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken either as i] ‘needle, hairpin’ (Katō), or ii] 
‘pierce, penetrate’ (Ogawa), either way giv-
ing overall meaning ‘feel as if stabbed in the 
heart with a needle’. ‘Cruel’ and ‘miserable’ are 
extended meanings. KJ1970:441; OT1968:375; 
MS1995:v1:626-7. 
Mnemonic: CRUELTY ATTENDED BY FEELINGS 
OF MISERY
SAN, ZAN, mugoi, 
mijime 
cruel, miserable
11 strokes
惨
L1
1397
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 慘. 
Has 忄164 ‘heart, feelings’, and 參 517 (origi-

414  The Remaining 1130 Characters
傘下 SANKA-　affi  liated 
雨傘 amagasa　umbrella
日傘 
higasa parasol  
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Based on a 
pictograph of an opened umbrella or parasol. 
OT1968:76; SS1984:352. Suggest 十 as ‘ten’ 35 
plus 人 ’person’ 41 x 4 as ‘four (people)’.
Mnemonic: UMBRELLA COVERS FOURTEEN 
PERSONS!
SAN, kasa
umbrella,parasol
12 strokes
傘
L1
1398
斬り合い  kiriai　crossing swords
斬首   ZANSHU　decapitation 
辻斬り   tsujigiri beheading stranger 
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Analyses 
diverge. One view takes as 車 33 ‘vehicle’ 
and 斤 1233 ‘ax; cut, chop’, to give ‘cut timber 
and make a cart/carriage’ (Gu, Shirakawa). 
Alternatively, analyzed as 斤 ‘ax; cut’ with 車 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘cut off  
(with halberd)’, giving ‘cut off  with ax’ (Katō). 
GY2008:603-4; KJ1970:632.
Mnemonic: CHOPPING UP VEHICLE LEADS TO 
BEHEADING 
ZAN, kiru
kill by sword/ blade, 
behead
11 strokes
斬
L1
1399
暫定的  ZANTEITEKI　tentative 
暫時   ZANJI　short time
暫くして  shibarakushite after a while
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 日 66 
‘day’, and 斬 1399 (‘behead, kill’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘a little’, giving ‘a short 
time; for the moment’. TA1965:853; KJ1970:443; 
OT1968:474; WD1974:367-8.
Mnemonic: THIS DAY, IN A WHILE, I AM TO BE 
BEHEADED – HOW BRIEF IS LIFE
ZAN, shibaraku 
a while, briefl y
15 strokes
暫
L1
1400
旨く 
umaku　smartly, cleverly
旨み umami　fl avor
本旨 HONSHI　main purpose
the mouth and think it good’, i.e. ‘tasty, deli-
cious’. By the seal stage, 甘 was established 
as the lower element, but subsequently this 
was changed in shape to 日 66 ‘day, sun’; at 
that stage, the diff erence in shape between 
甘 and 日 was quite small. The graph 旨 
was borrowed as a convenient way of writ-
ing a homophonous word in early Chinese 
meaning ‘basic idea, gist’. MS1995:v1:608-
9,154-5,v2:864-6; KJ1970:465; SS1984:363; 
AS2007:617. We suggest taking the upper part 
as a sitting person and the lower as sun.
Mnemonic: THE GIST IS THAT THIS PERSON 
THINKS IT’S GOOD TO SIT IN SUN
SHI, mune, umai
good, tasty, gist
6 strokes
旨
L1
1401
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 匕  ‘spoon’ or possibly 
(OBI and bronze stages) 氏 (in its original 
sense ‘pronged spoon’; see 522) over what 
at the OBI stage was typically 口 22 ‘mouth’ 
or – less commonly – 甘 1139 (‘sweet’: original 
sense ‘have something in the mouth and think 
it good’), either way giving ‘put something in 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  415
伺い事 ukagaigoto　inquiry
伺候  SHIKŌ　courtesy call
伺い書 ukagaiSHO　letter of inquiry
‘one who spies’ (Katō, Tōdō).  Most meanings 
of this graph as used in modern Japanese ap-
pear to derive from its original sense ‘watch, 
investigate’. Alternatively, 司 has been taken 
as semantic as well as phonetic in function, 
giving ‘one who is in charge’ (Ogawa); this 
analysis fi nds some support in Schuessler, 
who notes  司 as having a meaning ‘supervi-
sor’ in bronze texts. KJ1970:457-8; TA1965:119; 
OT1968:54; AS2007:477. 
Mnemonic: ADMINISTRATIVE PERSON 
INQUIRES ABOUT VISITING, WE HEAR
SHI, ukagau
visit, seek, ask, hear, 
inquire
7 strokes
伺
L2
1402
Seal 
; a late graph (later version of Shuow-
en). Has 亻 41 ‘person’, and 司 524 (‘adminis-
ter, take charge’) as phonetic with associated 
sense taken as ‘look carefully, spy on’, giving 
名刺  MEISHI　name card
刺身  sashimi　sashimi (raw fi sh)
刺抜き  togenuki　tweezers
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 刂 198 
‘knife, sword; cut’, and NJK 朿 883 ‘thorn’, 
and by extension ‘sharp, pointed weapon’ 
as semantic and phonetic, giving ‘stab and 
wound’. QX2000:182; KJ1970:478; OT1968:116; 
AS2007:199. As with 883, we suggest taking 
朿 as ‘tree with droopy branches’. 
Mnemonic: GET PIERCED BY THORN WHEN 
CUTTING DROOPY TREE BRANCHES
SHI, sasu/saru, toge
pierce, stab, thorn
8 strokes
刺
L2
1403
祉福 SHIFUKU　well-being
福祉 FUKUSHI　welfare
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 礻/示 723 ‘show’ in its 
original sense ‘off ering table, altar’, and 止 
143 ‘stop, stay,’ as semantic and phonetic, 
giving ‘the deity descends and stays, (thus) 
bestowing favor’, hence ‘good fortune’. 
MS1995:v2:940-41; OT1968:719; GY2008:741.
Mnemonic: STAYING AT THE ALTAR BRINGS 
HAPPINESS AND WELL-BEING
SHI
well-being, happiness 
8 strokes
祉
L1
1404
肢体  SHITAI　the limbs
下肢  KASHI　lower limbs
選択肢 SENTAKUSHI　option
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). The main 
heading in Shuowen has 胑, with 肢 listed just 
as an alternative form. 肢 has 月/肉 209 ‘meat, 
fl esh; body’ and 支 717 ‘branch’ as semantic 
and phonetic, giving ‘the limbs’. OT1968:817; 
AS2007:614; SS1984:367.
Mnemonic: LIMBS ARE BRANCHES OF THE BODY
SHI
limb, part 
8 strokes
肢
L1
1405

416  The Remaining 1130 Characters
恣意  SHII　arbitrariness, self-will
恣意的 SHIITEKI　selfi sh, arbitrary
放恣  HŌSHI　self-indulgence
ways, including i] ‘unevenness’, giving ‘, ’uneven-
ness of heart’ (Tōdō), and ii] ‘extravagant’, giving 
‘extravagance of heart’ (Ogawa); both i] and ii], 
therefore, give the meaning ‘wilful, wayward’. 
Another view  takes 次 as being an abbrevi-
ated writing for 姿 888 ‘form, appearance’ as 
semantic and phonetic, giving ‘weak/undisci-
plined spirit’ (Katō). TA1965:774; OT1968:369; 
KJ1970:467-8. 
Mnemonic: NEXT FEELINGS ARE SURE TO BE 
SELFISH AND INDULGENT
SHI, hoshiimama
selfi sh,arbitrary,
Indulgent
10 strokes
恣
L1
1407
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has  心 ‘heart, 
mind, feelings’ 164, and 次 308 (‘next’) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken in several 
脂肪 SHIBŌ　fat
脂気 aburake　greasiness
脂目 yanime　‘gummy’ eyes
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 月/肉
209 ‘meat, fl esh’, and 旨 1401 (‘tasty; gist’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘packed tightly’, 
giving ‘meat dense in nature’, i.e. ‘(animal) fat’. 
OT1968:821; TA1965:747; GY2008:1094.  
Mnemonic: FAT IS TASTY MEAT
SHI, abura, yani
fat, grease, resin
10 strokes
脂
L2
1408
紫煙  SHIEN　tobacco smoke
紫色  murasakiiro　purple
紫外線 SHIGAISEN ultraviolet rays
匕 – bronze form suggesting person unable 
to walk properly (Katō, Mizukami) – plus 止 
143 ‘footprint’ as semantic and phonetic, thus 
‘unable to walk’/ ‘cripple’. Bronze form can also 
be taken as ‘foot’ (止) detached from person, 
also signifying ‘unable to move’ (Ogawa). This 
may lead to ‘stay in this place’, then just ‘this’. 
Ogawa, however, treats ‘this’ as a loan usage. 
MS1995:v2:1010-11,v1:702-3; TA1965:775; 
KJ1970:471; OT1968:774,538; WD1974:720-23. 
Take 匕 as ‘sitting person’, 止 as ‘foot/stop’. 
Mnemonic: PERSON STOPS, SITS, AND TIES 
PURPLE THREAD ON FOOT
SHI, murasaki
purple
12 strokes
紫
L1
1409
Bronze ; seal . Has 糸 29 ‘thread’, and 此 
(NJK ‘this’; see Note below) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘mixed randomly, unevenly’, 
giving ‘thread of (colors) mixed randomly/
unevenly’, here primary color blue mixed 
with red giving secondary color ‘purple’. Note: 
in one view, 此 has modifi ed 人 41 ‘person’ 
施設  SHISETSU　facilities
実施  JISSHI　implementation
施薬所 SEYAKUSHO　charity dispensary
Seal 
. Has CO 
 353 ‘fl agpole, fl ag on pole’, 
and 也 184 (originally, pictograph of a long, 
crawling insect, a snake) as phonetic with as-
sociated sense ‘winding, fl uttering’, giving ‘fl ag 
fl utters’; ‘bestow’ and ‘carry out, perform’ are 
loan usages. Mizukami lists a proposed bronze 
equivalent also. MS1995:v2:600-601,24-5; 
KJ1970:465; OT1968:455. Suggest taking 
 as 
‘side’ 方 223  and 𠂉 as ‘person’ 41.
Mnemonic:  PERSON SHOWS CHARITY TO 
TWISTING CREATURE AT THEIR SIDE
SHI, SE, hodokosu
perform, charity
9 strokes
施
L1
1406

The Remaining 1130 Characters  417
雌雄 SHIYŪ　gender
雌牛 meushi　cow, heifer
雌犬 meinu　bitch
thus ‘female bird’. Other associated senses for 
此 as phonetic in 雌 include ‘matched with (a 
partner)’ (listed by Mizukami). Sense general-
ized to ‘female (of birds, game, etc.)’. Mizukami 
lists proposed OBI and bronze equivalents also. 
KJ1970:265; SS1984:376; MS1995:v2:1408-9. 
Suggest taking 匕 as ‘sitting person’, 止 143 as 
‘stop’.
Mnemonic: FEMALE PERSON STOPS AND 
SITS, AND BIRD COMES ALONG
SHI, mesu, me
female 
14 strokes
雌
L1
1411
Seal 
. Has 隹 324 ‘short-tailed bird, bird’, 
and 此 (NJK ‘this’; see 1409 Note) as phonetic 
with associated sense typically taken as ‘small’, 
giving ‘smaller bird (compared with male)’, 
真摯に   SHINSHI ni　sincerely
真摯敢闘 SHINSHIKANTŌ　hard fi ght
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 手 34 ‘hand’, and 執 1424 
‘take, grasp’ as semantic and phonetic, thus 
‘catch, seize’. Devised to represent a word in 
early Chinese which was closely related to 
that represented by 執. Modern meanings 
of ‘sincere, serious’ are probably loan us-
age. SS1984:377; OT1968:427; AS2007:616; 
GY2008:1029; DJ2009:v3:978. 
Mnemonic: GRASP HANDS AS A SIGN OF 
SINCERITY
SHI
serious, sincere, reach, 
take, hold 
15 strokes
摯
L1
1412
賜暇 SHIKA　furlough
恩賜 ONSHI　imperial gift
賜物 tamamono*　gift, boon
bestow’. At the bronze stage, 貝 10 ‘shell (cur-
rency), valuables’ was added to clarify this ex-
tended meaning (Gu). An alternative view takes 
the element 易 in 賜 as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘push away from oneself’ (Mizukami), 
giving ‘push something one owns towards 
someone else’, and ‘bestow’ as an extended 
sense. GY2008:1438; AS2007:566,569,199; 
MS1995:v2:1244-5.
Mnemonic: BESTOWAL IS EASILY CHANGED 
TO SHELL-MONEY
SHI, tamawaru
bestow
15 strokes
賜
L1
1413
Bronze 
; seal 
. The OBI form has just 易 
647 ‘change; easy’, a graph taken in one view 
as originally signifying liquid being trans-
ferred or changed from one vessel to another 
(Gu, Schuessler), and by extension (Gu) ‘give, 
嗣子 SHISHI　heir
後嗣 KŌSHI　heir
皇嗣 KŌSHI　Crown Prince
the unusual positioning of the 口 element of 
司 in one particular bronze occurrence of 嗣. 
This is noted by Katō, who, along with others, 
takes this graph as 冊 884 ‘bound volumes’ 
with 司 524 ‘regulate’, thus ‘put bamboo writ-
ing strips in continuous order’; by extension, 
‘succeed (someone), inherit’. Mizukami also lists 
proposed OBI equivalents. MS1995:v1:242-4; 
KJ1970:458; OT1968:192; AS2007:564. 
Mnemonic: BOUND VOLUMES ARE 
REGULATED BY HEIR
SHI, tsugu
heir, succeed to
13 strokes
嗣
L1
1410
Bronze 
; seal 
. Bronze forms vary, some 
having 口 22 ‘mouth/opening’ twice, lead-
ing to same in seal form. Reason for doubling 
of 口 in some cases is not clear: it may be an 
extraneous element added under infl uence of 

418  The Remaining 1130 Characters
侍従 JIJŪ　chamberlain
侍女 JIJO　lady-in-waiting
侍僧 JISŌ　acolyte
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 亻 41 
‘person’, plus 寺 149 (‘temple’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘serve, wait upon’ (Tōdō 
says ‘remain in the one place [in attendance]’), 
giving ‘one who serves’. The sense ‘samurai’ 
JI, samurai, haberu
attend upon, serve
8 strokes
侍
L1
1415
(one who attends upon his lord) evolved as an 
additional, Japanese-only usage. KJ1970:480-
81; TA1965:70-71; OT1968:60; AS2007:467. As 
mnemonic, we suggest two approaches: the 
fi rst treating the elements person 亻 and tem-
ple 寺; the second taking the ‘temple’ apart 
and treating the graph as ‘soil, ground’ 土 64 
and ‘hand’ 寸 920. 
Mnemonic: PERSON IN ATTENDANCE AT 
TEMPLE IS A SAMURAI
Or: PERSON SERVING HAS SOILED HANDS !!
滋養 JIYŌ　nourishment
滋味 JIMI　savoriness
滋雨 JIU　welcome rain
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional forms 
, 仁. 
Note similarity in shape has historically 
caused fluctuation (and no doubt confu-
sion) between 茲 (NJK; original meaning: 
‘abundant shoots of vegetation’) and 玆 (NJK; 
original meaning: ‘thread dyed twice’) as the 
right-hand element, both then merging as 兹 
(on this point, see 1417 Note); Zhengzitong 
has 仁 as the heading character, and notes 
 
as an alternative form. Views vary, though all 
JI
luxuriant, rich, 
strengthen
12 strokes
滋
L1
1416
諮じゅん  SHIJUN　consultation
諮問   SHIMON　inquiry
諮問機関 SHIMONKIKAN　advisory body
‘mouth’ but ‘prayer receptacle’, giving (in his 
view) ‘inquire of the deities’. Note 2: In mod-
ern Japanese usage, 諮 is used for hakaru in 
the sense ‘formally inquire’, as at a committee 
meeting. Note 3: In socio-cultural terms the 
Japanese use consultations and seek advice 
a lot more than do Westerners, not normally 
from lawyers (in fact, litigation is relatively 
rare) but from seniors, often a section head 
or manager at their workplace. Doing things 
in the prescribed way is important, and or-
thodoxy is greatly respected, and – perhaps 
on a somewhat defensive note – it also helps 
diffuse responsibility if things go wrong. We 
suggest taking 咨 as ‘next, follow’ 次 308 and 
口 as ‘mouth’, or alternatively ‘opening’. 
Mnemonic: IN AN INQUIRY, ONE MOUTH IS 
OPENED TO SPEAK, THEN THE NEXT
Or: IN CONSULTATION, WORDS FOLLOW 
WORDS – NEED AN OPENING!
SHI, hakaru
consultation, seeking 
advice, inquiry
16 strokes
諮
L1
1414
Seal ( 咨 ) 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has NJK 
咨 (‘inquire’), the original meaning of which 
was ‘sigh, lament’ (Schuessler), but it was 
then used also to represent a separate word 
meaning ‘inquire, initiate discussion’. To 
indicate clearly in writing when the graph 
was being used in the latter sense, 言 118 
‘words; speak’ was added. GY2008:916; 
AS2007:311 SS1984:378,367. Note 1: 咨 
consists of 口 ‘mouth; say’ 22, and 次 308 
(‘next’) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken by Shirakawa as ‘open the mouth and 
lament’, though Shirakawa prefers to take the 
idiosyncratic view of treating 口 here not as 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  419
餌食 eJIKI　food, bait, prey
好餌 KŌJI　tempting off er/bait
鳥餌 torie　bird seed
serves as phonetic with associated sense 
‘soft’ (Ogawa). In the case of 餌, the graph 
thus consists of ⻞/食 163 ‘food; eat’, com-
bining with 耳 as phonetic to give ‘food/
rice softened (by cooking), rice-cakes’. 
Later, a semantic shift took place, giving 
rise to the more specific sense ‘animal feed’. 
OT1968:1116; SS1985:385; GY2008:905; 
DJ2009:v1:241.
Mnemonic: IF YOU WANT FOOD, TRY EATING 
EARS! 
JI, esa, e
food, bait, lure
15 strokes (餌) 
餌
L1
1418
Seal forms i] 
; ii] ( 餌 ) 
. The first seal form 
given here appears in the Shuowen entry 
heading for this graph, with ii] noted as an 
alternative way of writing. In ii], 耳 31 (‘ear’) 
agree that one component is 氵/水 42 ‘water’ 
(occasionally ‘river’). The OBI form has ‘water, 
river’ with 𢆶 ‘fine threads’, which Mizukami 
treats as the original way of writing 茲 
‘abundant shoots of vegetation’, leading to 
his view of 
 as ‘river with luxuriant foliage 
(nearby)’. Another view takes right-hand 
玆 in 仁 as semantic and phonetic with the 
meaning ‘increase’, giving ‘water increases’ 
(Ogawa); Tōdō also regards ‘increase’ as the 
associated sense in this graph. ‘Increase’ thus 
stands as an extended or generalized sense 
regarding the above interpretations of earlier 
forms of 滋. In contrast, another view takes 
right-hand 茲 (seal form onwards) as having 
in 1416 only a phonetic role with associated 
sense unclear, taking the whole graph 滋 to 
represent a river name (in modern Honan 
Province) and taking ‘luxuriant’ as a loan 
usage (Katō); in taking this approach, Katō 
follows the Shuowen, even though he sees 茲 
when functioning as an independent graph to 
have the meaning ‘new shoots of vegetation 
grow luxuriantly’. Other interpretations of 
the convoluted etymology of this graph also 
exist. ZZ1671:v1:681; MS1995:v2:1116-7,772-
3,v1:446-9; TA1965:114; KJ1970:32-4. 
Mnemonic: DOUBLE THREAD OF 
RIVER-WATER BRINGS LUXURIANT GROWTH
慈悲 JIHI　mercy
慈善 JIZEN　charity
慈愛 JIAI　benevolence
zitong has the form with 玆 as the phonetic in 
its entry heading, but notes the way of writing 
the phonetic with 茲 instead as an alterna-
tive for this graph which is historically valid 
also. Note: main heading for this graph in 
Zhengzitong has the uppermost four strokes 
of the phonetic 玆 with the two horizontal 
strokes written as one; from this, it was just a 
small step to take to write the three strokes 
at the top in the same way as in modern 慈. 
MS1995:v1:520-21; KJ1970:34; OT1968:381; 
ZZ1671:453-4.
Mnemonic: DOUBLE THREADS OF LOVE AND 
PITY IN ONE’S HEART 
JI, itsukushimu
love, pity, aff ection
13 strokes 
慈
L1
1417
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 心 164 ‘heart, mind’, 
with phonetic element which, due to similar 
shape historically, shows fl uctuation between 
茲 (NJK; orig meaning: ‘abundant shoots 
of vegetation’) and 玆 (NJK; orig meaning: 
‘thread dyed twice’), but in either case with 
same associated sense ‘raise caringly’. Zheng-

420  The Remaining 1130 Characters
疾患   SHIKKAN　disease
疾走   SHISSŌ suru　scamper
疾っくに  tokku ni quite a while ago
SHITSU
illness, swiftly 
10 strokes
疾
L1
1423
OBI 
; bronze 
; seal 
. The OBI form has 
a person, drawn in a shape similar to 大 56 
‘big’, so that an arrow 矢 145 can be shown 
pointing up into the armpit, to signify ‘wound-
ed by an arrow’ This same shape occurs in 
bronze also; another bronze form (shown 
above), in addition to ‘arrow’, has a pictograph 
鹿皮 shikagawa　deerskin
牡鹿 ojika　buck, stag
馬鹿 BAka　idiot
OBI 
; seal 
. Based on pictograph of stag 
and antlers. GY2008:1298; MR2007:416; 
MS1995:v2:1502-3. Suggest 
 as antlers, 比 
as ‘compare’ 792, 广 as ‘building’ 127.
Mnemonic: DEERS COMPARE ANTLERS 
INSIDE BUILDING 
shika, ROKU, ka
deer
11 strokes 
鹿
L1
1420
御璽 GYOJI　imperial seal
国璽 KOKUJI　seal of state
印璽 INJI　imperial seal
mented by 玉 15 ’jade, precious stone’, later 
came to be used (once more), this time to 
specifi cally denote ‘Imperial seal’ as opposed 
to lesser seals. The element 玉 refl ects the 
widespread (but not exclusive) use of jade 
for Imperial seals; sometimes bronze was 
used instead. Note: 爾 is typically taken to 
be based on pictograph of a spinning device 
for winding thread onto, though Mizukami 
notes an alternative view which takes it as 
a seal with handle having cords attached. 
KJ1970:484-5; DJ2009:v3:1117; OT1968:662; 
MS1995:v2:822-4; OT1968:662.
Mnemonic: JEWELED IMPERIAL SEAL 
INCLUDES FOUR CROSSES
JI
imperial seal
19 strokes 
璽
L1
1419
Seal ( 壐 ) 
. Main entry heading in Shuowen 
has 壐, and the equivalent of 璽 is treated in 
that work as an older writing. 壐 has 土 64 
‘earth’ (here, ‘clay’), and 爾 (NJK, ‘you, so’, etc.; 
see Note below) as phonetic with associated 
sense usually taken as ‘push, press’, thus ‘de-
vice for making impressions’. Seal impression 
was into soft clay. The graph 璽, consisting of 
the same phonetic 爾 as in 壐, but comple-
車軸 SHAJIKU　axle
地軸 CHIJIKU　earth’s axis
軸物 JIKUmono scroll picture
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 車 33 
‘vehicle’, and 由 421 (‘reason, means’) with 
associated sense ‘stick out, project’, giving 
‘center pole projecting out through wheel’, i.e. 
‘axle’. TA1965:188; OT1968:984; GY2008:829; 
DJ2009:v3:1173.
Mnemonic: AXLE IS REASON WHY VEHICLE 
MOVES
JIKU
axle, shaft, scroll 
12 strokes
軸
L1
1421
叱正 SHISSEI　correction
叱咤 SHITTA　scolding, urging
叱責 SHISSEKI reprimand
Seal ; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 口 22 
‘mouth; speak’, and 七 32 (‘seven’) as pho-
netic, serving as onomatopoeic to represent 
clicking sound made with the tongue when 
scolding someone. SS1984:387; OT1968:163; 
DJ2009:v1:117.
Mnemonic: SCOLDED SEVEN TIMES
SHITSU, shikaru
scold, rebuke 
5 strokes
叱
L2
1422

The Remaining 1130 Characters  421
(profi le) for ‘bed’ with a stroke added, taken 
as abbreviated shape to represent ‘person’ 
or ‘quilt’ (ancestral form of 疒 404 ‘sick-bed, 
sickness’), providing what was to become 
the standard for this graph at the seal stage, 
in Shuowen. Other meanings such as ‘swiftly’ 
are probably best regarded as loan usages, 
執筆   SHIPPITSU　writing 
執念   SHŪNEN　tenacity
執り成す  torinasu mediate
outstretched, and the other element as wood-
en handcuff s; OBI forms do seem to support 
this view rather than that which takes instead 
as early equivalent of 鑿, the OBI equivalent 
of which is quite diff erent from that in 執. 
Qiu’s commentary on the block script form 執 
is that the wooden handcuff s were by then 
written as 幸, which happens (by chance) to 
be the same shape as 幸 295 ‘good fortune’, 
and the element 丮 ‘person with outstretched 
arms’ became confused with 丸 101 (‘round’), 
the latter prevailing. The handcuff s view 
has wide support (Qiu, Gu, Ogawa, Tōdō). 
KJ1970:355-6; QX2000:190,187; GY2008:246; 
OT1968:218; MS1995:v1:272-3,v2:1382-3. 
Mnemonic: GOOD FORTUNE IS ROUNDED 
OFF BY TAKING A CAPTIVE 
SHITSU, SHŪ, toru
take, grasp 
11 strokes
執
L1
1424
OBI 
; seal 
. Katō takes one element as 
a person with arms outstretched, signifying 
‘seize, take’, which by the seal stage became 
stylized to a shape approximating 丮 905 
(‘arms outstretched’), along with another 
element seen as the ancestral form of 鑿 (NJK; 
later meaning a gouging instrument, ‘chisel’), 
but here as an instrument of punishment, and 
by extension ‘criminal’; and he gives overall 
meaning as ‘seize a criminal’. Another view of 
執 also takes an element as person with arms 
湿度   SHITSUDO　humidity 
湿地   SHITCHI　marshland 
湿っぽい  shimeppoi damp, dismal
are treated as separate graphs in Shuowen, 
later they became confused, and the river 
name graph 濕 came to be used in the sense 
‘wet’. The simplifi ed 湿 is perhaps based on a 
cursive form of 濕. Note: a historical variant 
once used for 濕 is 漯, with upper element 
日 mistakenly written as 田 63 ‘fi eld’, and 
lower 絲 29 (threads) simplifi ed to 糸, though 
漯 is in essence a separate graph originally 
denoting a river name (diff erent from the 
one referred to by 濕). The variant need 
not concern us here, but it does show the 
complicated historical usage around 濕/湿. 
MS1995:v2:772-3; QX2000:311-2; TA1965:789-
92; KJ1970:518; DJ2009:v3:884,915; 
SK1984:462; FC1974:v1:1352. Take 日 as ‘sun’ 
66, 氵 as ‘damp’, and 业 as ‘steam rising’.
Mnemonic: SUN ON DAMP GROUND MAKES 
STEAM RISE – WHAT HUMIDITY!  
SHITSU, shimeru/su
damp, moist, humid 
12 strokes
湿
L2
1425
Seal 
; traditional 濕. This graph originally 
represented the name of a river, comprising 
氵/水 42 ‘water’, here ‘river’, plus 㬎 as phonet-
ic. Separate from 濕, there was another graph 
溼 meaning ‘wet ground, wet’, comprising 
water 氵 plus 土 64 ‘earth, ground’, plus 
, 
typically taken to mean ‘cut threads’ (Tōdō 
takes instead as threads below horizontal line 
representing surface of water), as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘wet, soak in water’. At 
OBI and bronze stages, the ancestral form 
of 溼 lacked element 土. Though 溼 and 濕 
but may relate to the swift onset of disease 
/ infection. MS1995:v2:890-91,886-8,928-9; 
KJ1970:488-9; MR2007:375; OT1968:677.
Mnemonic: ILLNESS STRIKES AS SWIFTLY AS 
AN ARROW

422  The Remaining 1130 Characters
already included a component indicating 
a liquid; note, though, that the entry 桼 in 
Shuowen does explain this graph as a picto-
graph relating to liquid, meaning ‘tree sap’. 漆 
itself is defi ned in Shuowen as being a river 
name, but this is a later loan use of the graph. 
Lacquerware of an extremely high standard 
was being produced in China as early as 
the Han Dynasty. DJ2009:v3:876,v2:500-01; 
MS1995:v2:776-7; GY2008:1755,1202; 
KJ1970:178; OT1968:603-4. We suggest taking 
 as a multi-branched tree.
Mnemonic: EXTRA WATERY LACQUER FROM 
A MULTI-BRANCHED TREE
Seal 
. Originally written 桼 depicting drop-
lets of liquid (lacquer) dripping down from 
a tree 木 73, signifying ‘lacquer tree’ and by 
extension ‘lacquer’. According to Katō, 氵/水
42 ‘water, liquid’ was added as a determina-
tive at the seal stage because it was no longer 
realized that the lower part of the graph 桼 
嫉妬   SHITTO　jealousy, envy
嫉視   SHISSHI　jealous eye
嫉み深い sonemibukai envious
漆器  SHIKKI　lacquerware
漆黒  SHIKKOKU　jet black
漆塗り  urushinuri lacquering
芝生   shibafu*　lawn
芝居   shibai　show, drama
芝刈り機  shibakariki lawn mower 
Also, however, Shuowen notes an alternative 
form with 女 37 ‘woman’, i.e. 嫉, and over time 
this gained currency to the point where it 
eclipsed 
. The favored form of this graph is a 
reminder that modern viewpoints and values 
are irrelevant to the environment in early 
China in which graphs evolved, and possibly 
at times may even prove to be a hindrance to 
our understanding of the historical realities. 
SS1984:388; OT1968:262; DJ2009:v2:659; 
GY2008:1672; AS2007:294.
Mnemonic: A WOMAN SO JEALOUS SHE 
FALLS ILL
SHITSU, sonemu, 
netamu
jealousy, envy 
13 strokes
嫉
L1
1426
SHITSU, urushi
lacquer, varnish 
14 strokes
漆
L1
1427
shiba
turf, lawn 
6 strokes
芝
L1
1428
Seal (㑵) 
. As the entry heading, Shuowen 
has what today would generally be regarded 
as a graph of more equitable structure than 
嫉, consisting of 亻41 ‘person’, plus 疾 1423 
(‘illness’) with associated sense ‘be jealous, 
hate’, giving ‘person who is jealous/hates’. 
depicted originally (OBI stage) is disputed: 
interpretations include that it represented 
i] vegetation newly emerged above the 
ground, or ii] a foot trying to advance be-
yond a demarcating line. Either way, ‘go’ is 
taken to be an extended sense; in the case 
of ii], initially ‘advance with difficulty’, then 
generalized to ‘advance’, go’; apart from ‘go’, 
this graph is also used as a convenient way of 
writing several grammatical function words. 
SS1984:365; MS1995:v1:18-19; GY2008:228. 
We suggest taking 之 as a zig-zag path.
Mnemonic: ZIG-ZAG PATH CROSSES GRASSY 
LAWN
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 艹 53 
‘plant, vegetation, grass’, and 之 (‘go’; see 
Note below) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘wondrous’, giving ‘wondrous plant’, 
referring originally to a type of mushroom 
considered to promote longevity. ‘Turf, grass’ 
is a Japanese-only sense for this graph. Note: 
之 is based on a pictograph. What exactly it 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  423
斜面   SHAMEN　gradient, slope
斜方形  SHAHŌKEI　rhombus 
斜め継ぎ nanametsugi miter joint
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 斗 1766 
‘ladle, unit of measure’, and 余 820 (‘ample’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘scoop up’, giving 
‘ladle out (water)’; the sense ‘slanting’ is a loan 
usage. KJ1970:4-5; OT1968:449; GY2008:1282. 
Mnemonic: DIAGONAL GIVES AMPLEST 
MEASURE  
SHA, naname
slant, diagonal
11 strokes
斜
L1
1430
煮沸   SHAFUTSU　boiling
生煮え   namanie　undercooked
煮立てる  nitateru　bring to boil
Seal (䰞) . Seal shape is treated in Shuowen as 
an old form with lower element meaning ‘(type 
of) cauldron’, and upper element as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘cook slowly in liquid’, 
giving overall sense ‘cook slowly in liquid’. Later 
this complex graph was modifi ed by retain-
ing 者 as phonetic and adding 火 8  ‘fi re’ in its 
variant form 灬, giving 煮; we fi nd examples 
of 煮 in clerical script onwards. DJ2009:v1:240; 
KJ1970:492-3; MS1995:v2:1482-3; SK1984:469; 
OT1968:620. 
Mnemonic: PERSON BOILS SOMETHING OVER 
FIRE 
SHA, niru/eru/yasu
boil, cook
12 strokes
煮
L1
1431
遮光幕  SHAKŌMAKU　a shade
遮二無二 SHANIMUNI　recklessly
遮断機  SHADANKI　crossing-gate
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has ⻌ 85 
‘go, move’, and 庶 1480 (‘multitude, variety’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘obstruct, 
prevent’, giving ‘obstruct movement’, then 
generalized back to just ‘obstruct, prevent’. 
OT1968:1011; GY2008:1745.
Mnemonic: VARIOUS THINGS CAN OBSTRUCT 
MOVEMENT
SHA, saegiru
obstruct, interrupt
14 strokes
遮
L1
1432
容赦 YŌSHA　forgiveness
赦免 SHAMEN　clemency 
恩赦 ONSHA amnesty  
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 攵/攴 112 ‘hit (with whip/ 
stick)’, and 赤 48 (‘red’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘cast aside’, giving ‘cast aside the idea 
of whipping someone for their crime’, i.e. ‘pardon, 
forgive’. MS1995:v2:1252-3; OT1968:440. 
Mnemonic: BEATEN TILL RED, THEN SHOW 
FORGIVENESS
SHA
forgiveness
11 strokes
赦
L1
1429

424  The Remaining 1130 Characters
酌婦 SHAKUFU　waitress
晩酌 BANSHAKU　‘nightcap’
酌量 SHAKURYŌ　consideration
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 酉 ‘wine’ 318 (wine 
jar with lid), and 勺 ‘ladle; unit of measure’ 
(dropped from Jōyō kanji in 2010) as seman-
tic and phonetic, thus ‘ladle out, draw out’; 
extended to ‘measure, consider’. SS1984:396; 
OT1968:1025; MS1995:v2:1344-5,v1:146-7. 
Mnemonic: CONSIDER DRINKING WINE 
SERVED BY LADLE 
SHAKU, kumu
serve wine, drink, 
ladle, consider
10 strokes
酌
L1
1435
解釈 KAISHAKU　interpretation
釈放 SHAKUHŌ　release
釈明 SHAKUMEI　explanation
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
form: 釋. Widely taken as 釆 215 (hand hold-
ing seeds), with 睪 (‘watch criminals, espy’; 
see Note below) as phonetic with associated 
sense taken as i] ‘distinguish, discriminate’ 
(Mizukami, Katō), thus ‘put in order what 
has been divided up’, or ii] ‘divide’, thus 
‘divide seeds’, extended to ‘release’ (Ogawa). 
SHAKU, tomu
explain, release
11 strokes
釈
L1
1436
蛇口 JAguchi　faucet, tap
蛇行 DAKŌ　meander, zig-zag
蛇皮 hebikawa　snakeskin
write a separate homophonous word mean-
ing ‘others’, 虫 60 ‘insect, worm, snake’ being 
added at seal stage to indicate ‘snake’. Entry 
heading in Shuowen has 它, with 蛇 noted 
in text as variant. GY2008:1248; OT1968:885; 
MS1995:v2:358-9; DJ2009:v3:1106; 
QX:2000:226. Take 它 as sitting person under 
roof.
Mnemonic: PERSON SITS UNDER ROOF, BUT 
ON AN ‘INSECT’ – NO, IT’S A SNAKE! 
JA, DA, hebi
snake, serpent
11 strokes
蛇
L1
1434
Bronze (它) 
; seal forms 
, 
. Originally 
pictograph of snake with large head, likely 
a cobra. Later borrowed for convenience to 
邪道  JADŌ　evil way, heterodoxy
無邪気 MUJAKI (na)　naïve(ty)
風邪  FŪJA/kaze*　a cold
writing a place name. The sense ‘evil’ for 邪 is a 
substitute usage in place of another graph 衺 
(CO) originally meaning ‘diagonal component 
on front of a Chinese gown’, and by extension 
‘not straight, bent’; 衺 was gradually used 
less, and 邪 was often employed in its place 
in this extended sense (Qiu). QX2000:322; 
OT1968:1018; GY2008:253-4; DJ2009:v2:682; 
MS1995:v2:1314-15.
Mnemonic: FANGS ARE BARED IN VILLAGE OF 
WICKEDNESS
JA
wickedness, evil, 
wrong, unjust
8 strokes
邪
L1
1433
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has right-hand 
component 阝 376 ‘village, place where people 
live’, and 牙 1090 (‘fang, tusk’) as phonetic with 
associated sense unknown; originally, used in 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  425
静寂  SEIJAKU　silence
寂寞  SEKIBAKU no　desolate
寂しさ  sabishisa　loneliness
Seal (𡧯) . The Shuowen form has 宀 30 
‘roof; building’, and 尗 (a CO graph noted in 
Kangxi zidian as the original way of writing 
叔 1466 ‘uncle, younger brother’) as phonet-
ic with associated sense ‘quiet, no voice of 
humans’; the phonetic was later changed to 
叔. Original overall meaning is ‘quiet inside 
a house’, generalized to ‘quiet’, and by exten-
sion ‘lonely’. KJ1970:431-2; GY2008:1332,608.
Mnemonic: UNCLE IS LONELY IN QUIET 
BUILDING
JAKU, SEKI, sabi(shii)
quiet, lonely
11 strokes
寂
L1
1438
爵位 SHAKUI　peerage
授爵 JUSHAKU　ennoblement
男爵 DANSHAKU　baron
based on some of the early forms, a vessel 
in the shape of a bird), or ‘hold wine vessel’. 
The corresponding original block script 
equivalent of the seal form is taken to be 𩰣 
(Mizukami). Whether by accident or design, 
the uppermost element in seal has been 
modified in block script to become 爫 319 
‘claw, hand’, and the complex 10-stroke ele-
ment 鬯 has been changed to 㫐 (elsewhere  
㫐 is ‘food vessel’ piled with food [see e.g. 
1177 and 1650]) and then modified to , 
with   as the common handwritten shape. 
At the Imperial Court in ancient China, 
persons of rank were given sacred wine in 
ritual, hence ‘peerage’ as extended sense. 
MS1995:v2:1480-81,v1:192-3; QX2000:76; 
KJ1970:498-9; OT1968:631. We suggest tak-
ing 又 and 寸 as two hands; 罒 as variant 皿 
‘bowl’ 300; and  as simplified form of ‘food, 
eat’ 食 163. 
Mnemonic: PEER’S HANDS CLUTCH FOOD 
BOWL
SHAKU
peerage
17 strokes
爵
L1
1437
OBI 
; seal ; traditional 爵. The OBI forms, 
which are generally considered to depict 
a type of wine vessel, include an upper 
projecting element, perhaps a handle; some 
occurrences show three legs and/or a small 
feature (commonly square-shaped) which 
may be intended to represent a pattern 
or crest. Bronze forms vary in shape; one 
depicts a three-legged vessel and a ‘hand’ 
又 2003 next to it. The seal form is more 
complex, having a wine vessel, plus top ele-
ment (possibly a handle or lid), plus又 (then 
later, 寸 920 instead) ‘hand’, plus 鬯 ‘fragrant 
herb added to wine for the deities/fragrant 
wine for the deities’. The overall meaning 
is taken to be ‘wine vessel’ (in one view, 
Shirakawa, though, takes 釆 as claws of 
wild beast, with 睪 as showing corpse of 
wild beast (top part 罒 ‘net’ taken here as 
showing head).  ‘Explain’ is extended sense. 
Mizukami lists proposed older equivalent 
for 釋/釈. Note: 睪 has 目 76 ‘eye’, plus 幸 
295 ’happiness’ taken either i] as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘espy; look for’, or ii] 
as separate graph from 幸 (though same 
shape), meaning ‘criminal in handcuffs’, ei-
ther way giving sense ‘watch/search for crim-
inals’. MS1995:v2:1354-5,922-4; OT1968:1030; 
KJ1970:95-6; SS1984:396. Suggest modern 
right side 尺 as person 人 41 with backpack, 
釆 as variant of ‘rice’ 米 220. 
Mnemonic: MAN EXPLAINS WHY HE HAS 
RICE IN BACKPACK AND IS RELEASED

426  The Remaining 1130 Characters
朱色 SHUiro　vermilion
朱肉 SHUNIKU　red ink-pad
朱筆 SHUHITSU　red pen, correct
the tree has been cut, showing the newly-cut 
wood which is often reddish in color (Ogawa). 
Shirakawa, alternatively, suggests that the 
blob-like dot might be a way to indicate a 
method for extracting material from a tree 
for making the vermilion color, though it is 
not clear what tree (or shrub) this would be. 
The seal equivalent for 朱 in Shuowen again 
has a thin horizontal stroke, and in clerical 
script we fi nd examples close to the block 
script equivalent with its top left-hand stroke 
丿; no doubt this evolved as a way to help 
distinguish 朱 from other similar graphs such 
as 未 once the top curved stroke of 木 in seal 
changed to a straight horizontal stroke in 
the less embellished clerical script. The sense 
‘bright orange-red, vermilion’ appears to 
refl ect a minor semantic shift. MS1995:646-7; 
SS1984:399-400; OT1968:488; SK1984:395; 
KJ1970:504.  Suggest taking 丿 as a ribbon.
Mnemonic: VERMILION-RED RIBBON IN 
TREETOP
SHU
vermilion, red, 
cinnabar
6 strokes
朱
L1
1439
OBI 
; seal 
. The OBI occurrences comprise 
the pictograph for 木 ‘tree’ 73, plus a centrally-
placed element which is either a thin horizon-
tal stroke 一 or a much shorter, thicker stroke. 
Katō is of the view that the version of this 
graph with the shorter, thickish line (which 
he sees as a blob-like dot) is the original form 
(even though he bases this view on a later, 
bronze equivalent, in which thick strokes 
were more easily executed than when incising 
in OBI on bone with a knife), and serves as 
phonetic, with associated sense ‘inside’, giving 
‘the inside of a tree’. Perhaps more convincing 
is the view that the role of this additional line 
(or blob-like dot) may have been to indicate 
狩猟   SHURYŌ　hunting
狩り犬   kariinu　hunting dog
狩り込み   karikomi　round-up
‘collect and catch’, giving ‘collect together and 
catch wild animals and birds’ (Ogawa), or ii]  
‘surround’, giving ‘chase and catch wild animals 
and birds’ ((Tōdō). Mizukami lists proposed OBI 
and bronze equivalents, though the phonetic 
element (supposedly 守) in these corresponds 
more to 単 instead. OT1968:642; KJ1970:503-
04; MS1995:v2:840-41,v1:360-61. 
Mnemonic: DOG PROTECTS MASTER WHEN 
OUT HUNTING
SHU, karu/ri
hunt
9 strokes
狩
L1
1440
Seal 
. Has 犭/犬 19 ‘dog’ (the variant 犭is 
sometimes used in the sense ‘wild animal 
akin to dog’), and 守 316 (‘guard, protect’) 
as phonetic with associated sense taken as i] 
特殊 TOKUSHU　special
殊勝 SHUSHŌ na　laudable
殊更 kotosara　especially 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 歹 302/520 
‘bone fragment’ (variant of 歺, having 卜 96 
‘bone crack, divining’, over piece of bone: see 
Note below), and 朱 1439 (‘vermilion’ ) as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘cut off , cut’, giving 
‘cut to death, kill’. The variant 歹 rather than 
歺 is common already in clerical script as the 
determinative. Based on usage in an early clas-
sical text, Shirakawa feels ‘outstanding, special’ 
may be an extended sense of 殊. Note: Katō, 
however, takes 歺 as showing top of spine. Qiu 
notes another possible origin of 歹, stating ‘it 
SHU, koto(ni)
(e)special 
10 strokes
殊
L1
1441

The Remaining 1130 Characters  427
fi rst appeared [as independent graph] some-
time between the Song and Yuan dynasties’, 
derived from shape of Tibetan letter read ta, 
based on close cultural contact between Song 
and Yuan dynasties. Note, however, that as a 
determinative in graphs such as 殊 the shape 
歹 was already commonly used as variant of 
歺 from clerical script onwards, such as in texts 
on wooden strips recovered from Juyan, a 
frontier town established ca.104BC in what is 
now part of Inner Mongolia. KJ1970:505,312; 
MS1995:v1:708-9; SS1984:401; SK1984:427-
30; QX2000:170-71; GY2008:69; CS2000:61; 
AS2007:470.
Mnemonic: VERMILION-RED BONES ARE 
SOMETHING SPECIAL 
肉腫  NIKUSHU　sarcoma
腫瘍  SHUYŌ　tumor
腫れ物 haremono　swelling, boil
趣味 SHUMI　hobby, interest, taste
趣意 SHUI　gist, view
趣向 SHUKŌ　plan, scheme, idea
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 月/肉 209 
‘fl esh, body’, and 重 326 ‘heavy’ taken either i] 
as semantic and phonetic (Tōdō, Gu), or ii] as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘collect, gather’ 
(Ogawa), both giving meaning ‘swell up’. 
TA1965:291; GY2008:677; OT1968:825.
Mnemonic: BODY FEELS HEAVY WITH A 
SWELLING TUMOR
based on usage of 趣 in bronze texts, takes 
the original meaning as ‘run, move quickly’ 
(Gu, Shirakawa; Shirakawa also notes ‘take’ as 
another meaning). Schuessler gives the early 
meaning as ‘hasten to’. This latter sense ‘hasten 
towards, tend towards’ is refl ected in the mean-
ings this graph has in Japanese such as ‘ten-
dency, gist’. QX2000:196; MS1995:v2:1258-9; 
KJ1970:503; SS1984:402; GY2008:1779; 
AS2007:635. 
Mnemonic: MY VIEW TENDS TO PROCEED BY 
RUNNING AND CATCHING 
SHU, hareru/rasu
swelling, tumor
13 strokes
腫
L1
1443
SHU, omomuki/ku
gist, tendency, idea, 
proceed,view
15 strokes
趣
L1
1444
Bronze 
; seal 
. One interpretation has 走 
179 ‘run’ (this graph’s meaning in early [not 
modern] Chinese), and 取 317 ‘take, catch, 
grasp’, giving ‘run to catch (wild animal)’ 
(Mizukami, Katō). Another interpretation, 
珠玉 SHUGYOKU　jewel
真珠 SHINJU　pearl
数珠 JUZU*　rosary
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 玉 15 ‘jade, 
precious stone’, and 朱 1439 (‘vermilion’) as 
phonetic with associated sense usually taken 
as ‘round ball’, thus ‘pearl’. Katō’ prefers to take 
the original meaning as ‘jade round in shape’, 
and ‘pearl’ as a loan usage. The majority view 
is probably the one to follow. OT1968:656; 
SS1984:40; GY2008:980; KJ1970:505.
Mnemonic: PEARL IS A VERMILION-RED 
JEWEL?!
SHU
jewel, pearl
10 strokes
珠
L1
1442

428  The Remaining 1130 Characters
寿命 JUMYŌ　life span
長寿 CHŌJU　longevity
米寿 BEIJU　88th birthday
耂, which is semantic, sometimes being written 
(distorted) in a shape corresponding to 士 521 
‘samurai’, and the phonetic element changes in 
a way which is diffi  cult to reconcile with the 
corresponding early equivalents (again, prob-
ably involving some distortion in shape). By 
extension, the original meaning ‘old person, 
old’ came to mean ‘longevity’, ‘auspicious’. 
MS1995:v1:284-5; KJ1970:695-6; OT1968:229. 
Note regarding BEIJU 米寿 : 米 BEI / 220 ‘kome’ 
means ‘rice’, which in itself is seen as a good 
sign. Moreover, it can also be taken as 十 ‘ten’ 
and 八 ‘eight’, multiplied to give eighty, then 
adding variant ‘eight’ 丷, to give a total of 
eighty-eight years, indicating a very long life 
(especially in earlier times), and was celebrated 
as a special occasion. We suggest taking 
 as 
a variant of ‘hand’ 手 34, along with another 
‘hand’ 寸 1920.
Mnemonic: PUT HANDS TOGETHER TO 
CONGRATULATE A LONG LIFE
JU, kotobuki
long life, 
congratulation
7 strokes
寿
L1
1445
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 壽. The bronze 
forms exhibit some variation, but all include 耂 
as abbreviation of 老 638 ‘old person, old’. This 
combines with an element 𢏚 (‘ridges in culti-
vated fi eld’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘long, extends out long’, giving ‘old person who 
lives a long time’. Some bronze occurrences 
also include 寸 1920 ‘hand’, which is common 
as a component in clerical script equivalents. 
The latter are transitional in shape between 
seal and block script equivalents, as is to be ex-
pected, though the actual changes themselves 
are not easily explained. Such changes from 
the seal form include the uppermost element 
呪文 JUMON　spell, curse, magic
呪物 JUBUTSU　fetish
呪符 JUFU　charm, amulet, talisman
JU, norou, majinai
curse, spell, charm, 
magic 
8 strokes
呪
L1
1446
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Initially, the graph 
祝 533 (‘celebrate’), the original meaning of 
which was probably ‘invoke the deities’, was 
used also for ‘pray to the gods for calamity to 
be visited on someone’, i.e. ‘curse’. The separate 
graph 呪 fi rst appeared sometime after the 
Later Han Dynasty, according to Shirakawa. It 
consists of 口 22 ‘mouth; speak’, along with 兄 
– abbreviated from 祝 in its likely original sense 
‘invoke the deities’ – as semantic and phonetic, 
giving ‘invoke the deities’ (with negative conno-
tation), and hence ‘curse’; ‘spell’ may be regard-
ed as extended meaning. In non-standard Japa-
nese usage, 咒 is sometimes encountered as 
a variant form of 呪. GY2008:622; OT1968:176; 
SS1984:403-4. We suggest taking the graph as 
兄 114, (now meaning ‘elder brother’ but also 
having connotations of prayer or incantation) 
comprising ‘mouth, speak’ 口 with ‘legs/person’ 
41 儿, then adding an extra mouth 口. 
Mnemonic: ELDER BROTHER NEEDS TWO 
MOUTHS FOR MAGIC SPELL
Or: ELDER BROTHER CURSES SO MUCH HE 
NEEDS TWO MOUTHS

The Remaining 1130 Characters  429
需要  JUYŌ　demand (economic)
必需品 HITSUJUHIN　necessities
需給  JUKYŪ　supply and demand
form onwards represents a diff erent line of 
development from earlier, at least initially. The 
equivalent in OBI texts has a standing fi gure 
similar in shape to 大 56 ‘big’, accompanied by 
water droplets; this is found in bronze also, but 
more common is a standing fi gure with 雨 ‘rain’ 
above, showing the transitional stage towards 
later 需. Meanings such as ‘seek; demand’ are 
loan usages. MS1995:1420-21; KJ1970:508; 
OT1968:1086. We suggest taking 而 as a rake.
Mnemonic: AFTER THE RAIN THERE IS GREAT 
DEMAND FOR RAKES
JU
need, demand
14 strokes
需
L1
1447
儒教 JUKYŌ　Confucianism
儒者 JUSHA　Confucianist
儒学 JUGAKU　Confucianism
control of various fi elds such as divination, mu-
sic, astronomy, and divination. It is thought that 
shamans in ancient China were often hunch-
backs or others with unusual physical charac-
teristics. Gu agrees that there were persons 
in charge of fi elds such as those mentioned 
above, but makes no reference to dwarf stature 
or the like. The meaning ‘Confucianism’ for 儒 
probably evolved as a specialised extended 
sense. KJ1970:508; GY2008:1892-3.
Mnemonic: A CONFUCIANIST IS A PERSON IN 
GREAT DEMAND 
JU
Confucianism
16 strokes 
儒
L1
1448
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 亻 41 ‘per-
son’, and 1447 需 (‘demand’) as phonetic with 
associated sense taken in one view as ‘weak’, 
giving ‘weak dwarf’. This is the view of Katō, 
who asserts that persons of this type were in 
囚人  SHŪJIN　prisoner
囚役  SHŪEKI　prison labor
死刑囚 SHIKEISHŪ　condemned man
OBI 
; seal 
. Depicts 人 41 ‘person’ inside 
an enclosure 囗 84, which is represented 
fairly consistently in this graph even in OBI 
texts, giving ‘capture; prisoner’. MR2007:346; 
MS1995:v1:250-51; OT1968:45. 
Mnemonic: PERSON CONTAINED WITHIN 
ENCLOSURE IS A PRISONER
SHŪ
prisoner
5 strokes 
囚
L1
1449
舟行  SHŪKŌ　navigation
舟遊び funaasobi　boating
小舟  kobune　little boat
OBI ; seal . Originally, a pictograph of a 
boat. The seal form has an additional com-
ponent, perhaps representing a raised stern. 
GY2008:294; OT1968:837; MS1995:v2:1098-9;. 
Suggest taking the top stroke as (short) moor-
ing rope, the dots as people sitting in it, the 
cross-stroke as oar, and the boat itself of course 
is lacking a stern.
Mnemonic: MOORED STERNLESS BOAT WITH 
TWO PEOPLE AND AN OAR
SHŪ, fune, funa-
boat, ship
6 strokes 
舟
L2
1450
Seal 
. Has 雨 3 ‘rain’, and 而 (NJK; originally, 
depiction of a beard) as phonetic with as-
sociated sense taken either as i] ‘become wet 
with rain and go soft’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘become 
wet’ (Katō), in either case giving overall sense 
‘become wet’. In the case of this graph, the seal 

430  The Remaining 1130 Characters
臭気   SHŪKI　bad smell
俗臭   ZOKUSHŪ　vulgarity
胡散臭い USANkusai suspicious
1207 ‘smell’ (verb). ‘Bad smell, odor’ is an ex-
tended sense, along with ‘suspicious’ (cf. English 
‘fi shy’). Script simplifi cation in 20th century Ja-
pan has led to the lower element 犬 ‘dog’ being 
changed to 大 56 ‘big’, or at least a shape cor-
responding to 大, losing semantic transparency 
in the process. Despite more extensive script 
simplifi cation, 臭. has been retained in PRC us-
age. QX2000:197; KJ1970:262; OT1968:832. Take 
大 as big, 自 as nose.
Mnemonic: BIG NOSE CAN SMELL OUT 
SUSPICIOUS THINGS 
SHŪ, kusai
smell, smack of, 
suspicious 
9 strokes
臭
L1
1452
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional 臭. Has 犬 19 ‘dog’, 
and 自 150 (‘self’), in its original sense ‘nose’, 
giving ‘dog smells with the nose’, based on the 
correct perception that dogs have a very keen 
sense of smell; the original way of writing 嗅 
領袖  RYŌSHŪ　a leader, chief
半袖  HANsode　short sleeves
袖なし  sodenashi sleeveless
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Listed in 
Shuowen, but not with main heading status, 
being noted as a less formal, more popular 
form. Has 衤 444 ‘garment’, and 由 421 (‘rea-
son; means’) with associated sense ‘draw/pull 
out’ (Ogawa), giving ‘sleeve’. DJ2009:v2:676; 
OT1968:903; GY2008:1154.
Mnemonic: THIS GARMENT HAS SLEEVES FOR 
A REASON 
SHŪ, sode
sleeve
10 strokes
袖
L1
1453
秀才 SHŪSAI　genius, prodigy
優秀 YŪSHŪ na　excellent
秀雄 Hideo common male name
graph he bases this judgment on is less cer-
tain. Schuessler gives the meaning of 秀 as ‘to 
fl ower and set ears’ (grain), which follows Karl-
gren. Karlgren considers lower element  ‘may 
originally have depicted the root of  the plant 
(?).’  Note 1: 乃 (NJK, ‘whereupon; possessive 
particle’) is interpreted in various ways, but is 
typically taken as having an original meaning 
such as ‘bent’; this is seen in the interpretation 
as pictograph of ‘hunchback’ (Katō) or ‘bow’ 
(Ogawa), while ‘bend/curve, bend easily’ (like 
an ear and ear-lobe) is an extended sense 
noted in Mizukami. Note 2: 禾 is originally a 
pictograph of a grain plant, but not specifi cal-
ly rice (though occasionally  misinterpreted as 
such). OT1968:729; KJ1970:513; GY2008:445; 
MS1995:v1:16-18; SS1984:406. Take 乃 as 
something bent.
Mnemonic: HEAD OF GRAIN PLANT IS 
BENT – EXCELLENT CROP
SHŪ, hiideru, sugureru
excel(lent) 
7 strokes
秀
L1
1451
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Tends to be 
treated as comprising 禾 87 ‘grain plant’, and 
乃 (see Note 1 below) as phonetic. In one 
analysis, the associated sense for 乃 here is 
taken as ‘extend, stretch out’, giving ‘rice (sic; 
see Note 2) which grows tall’, and – by exten-
sion – ‘outstanding’ (Ogawa). Alternatively, the 
associated sense is taken as ‘emerge’, giving 
‘grain plant with ear of grain emerging’ (Katō; 
Gu is in agreement). Another commentator 
(Shirakawa) prefers to treat 秀 as originally 
a pictograph of a grain plant with an ear of 
grain hanging down, but the status of the 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  431
羞恥  SHŪCHI　shame
羞恥心 SHŪCHISHIN　sense of shame
and phonetic meaning ‘grasp with the hand’, 
giving ‘off er sheep in ritual’. ‘Shame’ is a loan 
usage. Note that 
 is now the same shape 
as in the graph 差 508 ‘diff erence’, though 
separate in evolution. MS1995:v2:1042-3,v1:6-7; 
OT1968:799; MR2007:519.
Mnemonic: SHAME THAT ARIES THE RAM 
AND TAURUS THE BULL ARE DIFFERENT 
SHŪ, hajiru
be ashamed
11 strokes
羞
L1
1454
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 羊 426 ‘sheep, ram’ and 丑 
(NJK, zodiac sign ‘Ox’, originally [OBI] depicts a 
hand with fi ngers bent: see 1711) as semantic 
愁傷  SHŪSHŌ　grief
哀愁  AISHŪ　sorrow
愁い顔 ureigao sad face
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 心 164 
‘heart, feelings’, and 秋156 (‘autumn’) as pho-
netic with associated sense taken either as i] 
‘shrink’, giving ‘forlorn, downhearted’ (Tōdō) or 
‘heart grows smaller through grief’ (Ogawa), 
or ii] ‘grief’, giving ‘grieve, lament’ (Katō). 
TA1965:211; OT1968:381; KJ1970:511.
Mnemonic: AUTUMNAL FEELINGS OF 
SADNESS
SHŪ, urei/eru
grief, sadness
13 strokes
愁
L1
1455
報酬 HŌSHŪ　reward
応酬 ŌSHŪ　response
献酬 KENSHŪ exchange sake cups
graph of a wine jar), and 壽 (or 州 320, ‘prov-
ince’) as phonetic with associated sense ‘give 
out all round/without exception’, thus overall 
meaning ‘(host) gives wine to all without excep-
tion’, and by extension ‘give wine, exchange 
drinking cups’; by further extension, ‘reward’ 
and ‘reply’. DJ2009:v3:1217; MS1995:v2:1352-3; 
TA1965:183. 
Mnemonic: BE REWARDED WITH A TOAST OF 
PROVINCIAL WINE 
SHŪ
reward, reply, toast
13 strokes
酬
L1
1456
醜惡 SHŪAKU　foulness 
醜聞 SHŪBUN　scandal
醜さ 
minikusa ugliness
as phonetic with associated sense ‘bend over, 
shrink’, thus ‘deceased person’s body  bends 
over and joins the ranks of the deities’. Later, 
a semantic shift occurred, resulting in a new 
sense ‘hunchback’, and by extension ‘ugly, bad; 
hate’. MS1995:v2:1350-51; KJ1970:508-9.  
Mnemonic: DEMON DRINK CAN LEAD TO 
UGLY AND SHAMEFUL BEHAVIOR
Or: UGLY DEVIL WITH ALCOHOL
SHŪ, minikui
ugly, shameful
17 strokes
醜
L1
1457
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 鬼 1179 (‘devil, demon’; 
originally depicted crouching fi gure wearing 
death-mask; see 1179), and 酉 318 (‘wine jar’) 
Seal forms 
, 
. Late graph (Shuowen). Main 
heading in Shuowen has 醻, and goes on to 
give 酬 as alternative form in accompanying 
text. Has NJK 酉 318 ‘wine’ (originally, picto-

432  The Remaining 1130 Characters
果汁  KAJŪ　fruit juice
墨汁  BOKUJŪ　India ink
みそ汁  misoshiru miso soup
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵42 ‘wa-
ter’ or sometimes – as here – ‘liquid’, and 十 35 
(‘ten’) as phonetic with associated sense typi-
cally taken as ‘mix in’, giving ‘liquid with ingre-
dients mixed in’ (Shirakawa, Gu, Ogawa). Tōdō, 
alternatively, prefers to interpret the associated 
sense as ‘enter deep into’, giving ‘liquid which 
has sunk to the bottom of a vessel’. SS1984:414; 
GY2008:193; OT1968:557; TA1965:789-94.
Mnemonic: JUICE MIXED WITH TEN DROPS 
OF WATER 
JŪ, shiru
juice, soup, liquid
5 strokes
汁
L1
1460
蹴球   SHŪKYŪ　football 
蹴倒す   ketaosu　kick down/over
飛び蹴り  tobikeri drop-kick
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 足 54 ‘leg, 
foot’, and 就 900 (‘reach, proceed to; regarding’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘quick’, refer-
ring to sudden actions made with the foot, 
giving ‘stamp on, kick’. In Japanese usage, ‘kick’ 
predominates. SS1984:419; GY2008:1989; 
OT1968:976. For 就, as in 900 we suggest taking 
it as 京 110 ‘capital’ and 尤 as ‘crippled dog’ 犬 
19.  
Mnemonic: DOG IN CAPITAL IS CRIPPLED 
AFTER LEG IS KICKED
SHŪ, keru, ke-
kick
19 strokes
蹴
L1
1458
襲来 SHŪRAI　attack
空襲 KŪSHŪ　air raid
世襲 SESHŪ  heredity
cates putting a kimono (or kimono-like cloth-
ing) on a corpse by folding the left side under 
the right side, presumably contrary to that of a 
live person wearing a kimono. In Chinese there 
is still a meaning for this graph of preparing 
for burial. He treats 龍 as a phonetic with an 
associated meaning of ‘wrong way’ or ‘back to 
front’, and treats ‘attack’, ‘pile up’, and ‘inherit’ 
as all being loan usages. Schuessler points to a 
link in early Chinese between a word for ‘habit, 
custom’, and one for for ‘additional robe, cover’ 
which could explain ‘pile up’ and ‘inherit’. 
OBI forms for the upper element 龍(竜) vary 
considerably in shape; the greater part of the 
OBI form given above seems to represent a 
shape for ‘dragon’. Modern form of 襲 1459 
retains the traditional form for 竜 2081 as 
top element. KJ1985:550; MS1995:v2:1172-3; 
QX2000:234; TA1965:798-9; OT1968:910; 
AS2007:524.
Mnemonic: DRAGON ATTACKS PILE OF 
INHERITED CLOTHES 
SHŪ, osou
attack, inherit, pile up
22 strokes
襲
L1
1459
OBI 
; seal 
. Seal form has 衣 444 ‘gar-
ment’, and 龍 (traditional form of 竜 2081 
‘dragon’), the latter serving here as an abbre-
viation of 龖 (‘fl ying dragons’) as a phonetic 
with an associated  sense ‘pile up, pile up 
around’, giving ‘put covers over a corpse’, then 
generalized to ‘cover’; by extension this came 
to mean ‘conceal horses and men’, then by fur-
ther extension to make a surprise attack, then 
generalized to simply ‘attack’. It is unclear as to 
how it came to acquire the meaning of ‘inherit’, 
though it may derive from funeral rites and 
associated conventions. Katō sees the main 
meaning as being the funeral clothing. He is 
quite specifi c in asserting that the graph indi-

The Remaining 1130 Characters  433
充分 JŪBUN　suffi  cient, enough
充実 JŪJITSU　fullness 
充当 JŪTŌ allot, apply
柔道   JŪDŌ　judo
柔弱   NYŪJAKU　weakness 
柔らか物  yawarakamono silks
being in error for 𠫓 (3 strokes). In early 20th 
century Japanese book-printed font, still writ-
ten as 3 strokes (e.g. in Ueda Bannen’s Daijiten 
[1917]), but in modern font modifi ed to look 
as if begins with 亠; the traditional look-up 
determinative for 充 is 儿 (i.e. determinative 
10 [cf. 人/亻 9]). Note 2: Interpretations vary. 
Mizukami interprets the seal form of 儿 as de-
picting the middle part of a mother’s pregnant 
body in side profi le with swollen abdomen. 
Ogawa treats as ‘person’ or ‘person kneeling’. 
The OBI and bronze shapes (as non-independ-
ent element) for 儿 given by Gu, very close to 
those for 人, became more distinctive in seal 
and clerical script; Gu takes as ‘person’. ‘Fill’, 
‘provide’ would seem to be extended mean-
ings. MS1995:v1:88-9,190-91; KJ1970:515; 
GY2008:9-10; OT1968:87; TA1965:194.
Mnemonic: NEWBORN BABY WILL GROW 
INTO FULL PERSON
Or: NEWBORN BABY HAS FULL SET OF LEGS, 
BUT THEY’RE BENT
weak’ (Katō). Another commentator dismisses 
the proposal that 矛 is to be regarded here as 
phonetic, treating it instead as meaning ‘fl ex-
ible wood for use in halberds’, and by exten-
sion ‘fl exible’ (Tōdō). In similar vein, Ogawa 
interprets the seal form as depicting a tree (and 
hence wood), plus branches bending with fruit 
or similar, giving ‘fl exible’ and by extension ‘soft’. 
KJ1970:863; TA1965:201; OT1968:500.
Mnemonic: SOFT WOODEN HALBERD IS WEAK
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). In one view, 
has 𠫓 ‘newborn infant’ (originally, pictograph 
of baby being born [head fi rst and thus up-
side-down]; see Note 1 below), with 儿 (‘per-
son’; a separate graph from ‘person’ 人 : see 41 
and Note 2 below) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘grow’, giving ‘child grows into adult’; by 
extension, ‘be mature/full’ (Katō). Alternatively, 
儿 is taken not as phonetic but semantic in 
function, meaning ‘person’, combining with 𠫓 
as an abbreviation of 育 247 ‘raise, educate’ to 
give the same overall meaning, i.e. ‘child grows 
to adult’ (Ogawa, Tōdō). Note 1: 𠫓 is a stylized 
version of the seal form, which is interpreted 
as infant emerging from the mother’s body 
(the latter represented by a curved stroke 
like 
). Kangxi zidian lists 𠫓 (4 strokes) as 
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Analyses diff er. 
One takes as 木 73 ‘tree, wood’, and 矛 2012 
(‘halberd’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘emerge’, thus ‘newly emerged tree plant is 
渋滞 JŪTAI　delay
渋み shibumi　astringency 
渋々 
shibushibu grudgingly
cates motion as well as stopping) written four 
times, the top two being written upside down 
to convey the meaning ‘not move smoothly’; 
subsequently, 氵 42 ‘water’ was added as deter-
minative to clearly indicate the meaning ‘water 
moves slowly/stagnates’. Then in block script, 
the element 止 written twice upside down in 
this graph was slightly modifi ed in shape, but 
enough to obscure – presumably inadvert-
ently – the fact it was originally 止. By the time 
JŪ, NYŪ, yawarakai
soft, gentle, weak
9 strokes
柔
L2
JŪ, ateru, mitasu
full, fi ll, provide
6 strokes
充
L1
1461
1462
JŪ, shibui/ru
hesitate, astringent
11 strokes
渋
L1
1463
Seal 
; traditional 澁. The Shuowen seal form, 
which lacks the ‘water’ determinative (氵), has 
止 143 ‘stop, (foot, footprint’, sometimes indi-

434  The Remaining 1130 Characters
小銃 SHŌJŪ　small arms
銃剣 JŪKEN　bayonet 
銃火 JŪKA gunfi re
獣医 JŪI　veterinarian
獣的 JŪTEKI　bestial 
鳥獣 CHŌJŪ wildlife
ii] ‘enclose’, giving ‘hole in ax head to fi t handle 
through’ (Ogawa, Gu). Both parts of the ax 
would have had holes to enable them to be 
secured together as one. From sometime in 
the Ming dynasty (1368-1644), 銃 was adopt-
ed to denote early fi rearms. The adaptation 
was perhaps suggested through similarity in 
shape between an ax handle and the hollow 
barrel of a fi rearm. SS1984:416; OT1968:1042; 
GY2008:1262. 
Mnemonic: GUN IS FILLED WITH METAL
mestic animals’. However, the OBI and bronze 
forms of 獣 clearly have the early equivalents 
of 單 and not 嘼, a view which is shared by 
Gu and Ogawa. At the seal stage, we do fi nd 
單 replaced by 嘼, though it may be that this 
change refl ects no more than a regulariza-
tion based on minor variations in shape of 
單 in bronze. ZY2009:v1:145; MS1995:v2:846-
7,v1:240-41; SS1984:416; GY2008:1311; 
OT1968:647. Suggest taking left side of the 
graph as a variant of ‘simple’ 単, plus 口 22 
‘(open) mouth’.  
Mnemonic: OPEN-MOUTHED DOG IS A 
SIMPLE BEAST
JŪ
gun
14 strokes
銃
L1
1464
JŪ, ke(da)mono
beast
16 strokes
獣
L1
1465
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 金 16 ‘metal’, 
and 充 1461 ‘fi ll, full’, which is taken as pho-
netic with associated sense as i] ‘hole, cavity’, 
giving ‘hole made in ax handle’ (Shirakawa), or 
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional 獸. The OBI form 
has 犬 19 ‘dog’, and 單 (originally a two-
pronged thrusting weapon for stabbing; 単 
569 ‘simple’), giving ‘hunt using weaponry 
and dogs’. Several commentators (Mizukami, 
Shirakawa) explain this graph as originally 
consisting of 犬 plus 嘼, which is treated by 
Kangxi zidian as an old form of 畜 1702 ‘do-
叔父  oji*　uncle
叔母  oba*　aunt 
大叔父 ōoji* great-uncle
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 尗, which is typically 
taken as originally depicting an edible plant 
such as taro in the ground (together with that 
part of the plant growing above ground), and 
又 2003 ‘hand’, giving the original meaning 
‘gather taro’, then generalized to ‘harvest’ 
(verb). Note, though, that Shirakawa claims the 
bronze form of 尗 instead depicts the head of 
a halberd. 叔 was later borrowed to represent 
a near-homophone meaning ‘young’, and then 
SHUKU
uncle (younger 
brother of parent)
8 strokes
叔
L1
1466
of Jiyun, a Chinese rhyme dictionary published 
in 1037, the entry for 澀 has 澁 noted as an 
alternative form. The lower right-hand element 
(four strokes) in the modern Japanese form 
渋 is a device which was used occasionally for 
convenience in less formal pre-modern texts to 
represent reduplication of an element; another 
example in the modern script is 摂 1596 (‘take, 
act as proxy’), which is a simplifi ed version of 
traditional 攝. ‘Hesitate’ is an extended sense of 
渋; ‘astringent’ is a loan usage. DJ2009:v1:136; 
OT1968:586; ZY2009:v2:649; GY2008:1138; 
KJ1970:517-8; SS1984:416; TA1965:809. We 
suggest taking the bottom right element as four 
droplets, and 氵 as ‘liquid’.  
Mnemonic: ASTRINGENT DROPLETS MAKES 
ONE HESITATE AND STOP

The Remaining 1130 Characters  435
貞淑 
TEISHUKU　chastity
淑女 SHUKUJO　lady 
私淑 SHISHUKU admiration
粛然 SHUKUZEN to　solemnly
自粛 
JISHUKU　self control 
厳粛 GENSHUKU solemnity
that it is an extended meaning. Note: several 
commentators (Gu, Shirakawa) consider that 
originally in bronze 淑 was written in a shape 
corresponding to the bronze form for 弔 1714 
‘mourn’, but Mizukami and Katō maintain they 
were separate graphs even at that early stage. 
GY2008:1318; KJ1970:521; MS1995:v2:758-
9,v1:466-7; SS1984:418. 
Mnemonic: UNCLE DRINKS PURE WATER
Or: UNCLE IS GRACEFUL IN WATER
Ogawa, alternatively, takes the associated 
sense as ‘quick, rapid’, giving ‘rapid water’, i.e. 
‘rapid current’. Meanings such as ‘be in awe’ are 
generally considered to represent a loan usage. 
However, Gu prefers to regard 聿 here as not 
‘writing brush’ but ‘boat pole’, and suggests 
meanings such as ‘be in awe’ are extended 
senses deriving from a sense of being care-
ful when travelling in a boat over deep water. 
MS1995:v2:1064-6; KJ1970:522-3; OT1968:814; 
GY2008:742. We suggest taking the modern 
graph as variant ‘hand’ (holding stick for pound-
ing) 
, ‘rice’ 米 220, and an open container 
.
Mnemonic: HAND SOLEMNLY POUNDS RICE 
IN OPEN CONTAINER – AWESOME!
SHUKU
pure, graceful
11 strokes
淑
L1
1467
SHUKU
solemn, quiet, be 
awed
11 strokes
粛
L1
1468
Seal 
. Has 氵 42 ‘water’, and 叔 1466 (‘un-
cle’) as phonetic with associated sense ‘clean, 
pure’, giving ‘pure water’ (Katō) or ‘clear deep 
water’ (Mizukami), and taking ‘good, graceful’ 
as a loan usage, though it may be argued 
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 肅. In one view, 
taken as consisting of  (original way of writ-
ing 淵 ‘deep pool’), and 聿 159 ‘writing brush’ 
(originally, pictograph of hand holding writing 
brush) as phonetic with associated sense typi-
cally taken as ‘pale and dark’ or ‘black’, giving 
‘water in pool is pale and dark/black’ (Katō) or 
‘water in pool is deep and clear’ (Mizukami). 
塾生 JUKUSEI　juku student
塾則 JUKUSOKU　juku rules
私塾 SHIJUKU home-based juku
gate’ (Tōdō), or – in similar vein – ‘buildings 
either side of entrance gate’ (Ogawa). The 
main building would have been for a person 
of high status (Gu says ‘palace’). Such rooms 
or buildings were used for education, and so 
by extension ‘private academy’, or in modern 
usage ‘cram school’. As an indicator of socio-cul-
tural values regarding education, the majority 
of students – particularly junior high students 
– spend virtually as many hours in juku than 
they do at school. Most of them attend juku 
on a Saturday, and several nights a week. And 
there is often no consideration for political 
JUKU
juku, private school
14 strokes
塾
L1
1469
Seal ; a late graph (later version of Shuowen). 
Has 土 64 ‘earth, ground’, and 孰 (distortion 
in shape of the seal form, orig. ‘cook’; see Note 
below) as phonetic with associated sense ‘make 
level/even’, interpreted as ‘building with rooms 
having earthen walls either side of entrance 
for ‘uncle younger than one’s parents’ (Mizu-
kami, Tōdō), this latter helping to explain the 
writing 叔父 for ‘uncle’. Mizukami also lists pro-
posed OBI equivalents for 叔. MS1995:v1:198-9; 
KJ1970; TA1965:189; OT1968:155; TA1965:199; 
SS1984:417; AS2007:469. Suggest taking left-
hand element as ‘almost’ walk 歩 221.
Mnemonic: WITH HELPING HAND, YOUNG 
UNCLE CAN ALMOST WALK

436  The Remaining 1130 Characters
俊才 SHUNSAI　genius
俊傑 SHUNKETSU　hero
俊童 SHUNDŌ prodigy
view as consisting of 允 ‘tall slim person’, plus 夂 
‘foot’ (see Appendix), giving ‘stand tall with both 
feet in one spot’ (Tōdō). Alternatively, analysed 
as 夊 ‘foot’, ‘go slowly’, plus 允 as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘advance slowly’, thus ‘drag foot 
and hardly move’ or ‘stand still’ (Katō). See too  酸
715 and 唆 1367. As with 715 and 1367, we sug-
gest taking the right hand part as ‘crossed legs’ 
夂 and an indelicate ‘runny nose’ 允. OT1968:63; 
TA1965:693; KJ1970:59-60.
Mnemonic:   PERSON WITH RUNNY NOSE 
AND CROSSED LEGS IS A GENIUS!
SHUN
excellence, genius
9 strokes
俊
L1
1470
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 亻 41 
‘person’, and CO 夋 (see Note below) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘break out, emerge’, giving 
‘outstanding person’. One commentator (Ogawa) 
takes ‘outstanding person’ as an extended sense 
based on ‘tall person’. Note: 夋 is taken in one 
瞬間  SHUNKAN　moment, instant
一瞬 間 ISSHUNKAN ni　in a fl ash
瞬く間  matatakuma ni　quick as a blink
below) just in a phonetic role with associated 
sense ‘rapid’ (Ogawa). Note: The seal predecessor 
of 舜 is felt to be  ( 
 ), which is taken to mean 
‘red blossoms which appear together but wither 
straightaway’ (noted in Mizukami), or ‘Shun, 
name of a mythical king in antiquity’ (Qiu). Gu 
is in general agreement with Qiu. KJ1970:527-8; 
OT1968:704; MS1995:v2:1098-9; GY2008:1468-9; 
ZY2009:v3:814. We suggest taking 舛 (see 336, 
1278, meaning feet pointing both ways) as夕 46 
‘evening’ and variant ‘well’  井 1575, and 
 as 
hand holding cover. 
Mnemonic: IN THE EVENING, PUT A COVER 
ON THE WELL IN THE BLINK OF AN EYE
OBI  (䀢). Has 目 76 ‘eye’, and a second element 
which changed several times across diff erent 
stages of the script. OBI has 矢 145 ‘arrow’ as 
semantic and phonetic, indicating rapid move-
ment and combining with ‘eye’ to give ‘blink’; the 
sixth century dictionary Yupian lists 䀢 as being 
equivalent to 瞬, which has CO 舜 (see Note 
上旬 JŌJUN　1st third of month
中旬 CHUJŪN　2nd third of month 
下旬 GEJUN　3rd third of month
OBI (勹) 
; seal 
. The OBI form, widely 
considered to be the ancestral form of 旬, is 
given diff erent interpretations (e.g. ‘coiled snake’ 
[Katō], ‘dragon with curled tail’ [Shirakawa]), but 
these have a common semantic theme of ‘coil’ or 
‘go round’; context shows that in OBI texts the 
graph clearly had the sense ‘ten-day cycle’, re-
SHUN, matataku
fl ash, twinkle, blink, 
wink
18 strokes
瞬
L1
1471
JUN
ten day period
6 strokes
旬
L1
1472
correctness: while Western schools typically 
try to keep students’ grades private, many juku 
not only ignore this, after a test they put on the 
blackboard not only the top few performers, 
but also the the worst few performers. Note: 孰 
‘cook’ was later borrowed as a convenient way 
of writing a homophone/ near-homophone 
meaning ‘who?’. For further details, see 熟 905 
‘ripe, mature’. TA1965:179-84; OT1968:223,269; 
GY2008:1745; AS2007:471,457. We suggest tak-
ing the elements as lid/cover 亠, 口 22 ‘hole’, 子 
27 ‘child’, 土 64 ‘ground’, and 丸 101 ‘round’.
Mnemonic: PRIVATE SCHOOL CHILD PUTS 
ROUND COVER ON HOLE IN GROUND

The Remaining 1130 Characters  437
巡査  JUNSA　policeman
巡回  JUNKAI　tour, patrol
一巡り  hitomeguri　one round
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has ⻌ 85 ‘walk, go, move’, 
and 巛, a variant of 川 50 ‘river’. 巛 is taken here 
either semantically as ‘river’, giving ‘go round 
following a set route’ (Ogawa), or as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘see, gaze at’, giving ‘walk 
while looking’ (Katō). ‘Go round’ is treated as 
a loan usage by Katō. MS1995:v1:426-7,422-3; 
KJ1970:528; OT1968:993. 
Mnemonic: MOVING RIVER GOES AROUND 
SHARP BENDS
JUN, meguru
go around
6 strokes
巡
L1
1473
矛盾  MUJUN　contradiction
後ろ盾  ushirodate　backing
盾突く  tatetsuku　oppose
of 目 76 ‘eye’, with a second element representing 
a protective shade, thus ‘eye-shield’; by exten-
sion, ‘shield’ as used in combat. On the basis of 
word-family association, Katō takes as ‘a device 
to hide behind (and look out from)’, by exten-
sion ‘pretext’. MS1995:v2:916-7; OT1968:696; 
SS1984:425; KJ1970:570-71. We suggest taking 
𠂆 as shield, and 
 as ‘ten’ 十 35. 
Mnemonic: TEN EYES ARE SHIELDED
JUN, tate
shield, pretext
9 strokes
盾
L1
1474
Bronze 
; seal 
. For OBI and some bronze oc-
currences, Mizukami lists a pictograph of a shield, 
but in bronze also a compound graph consisting 
批准 HIJUN　ratifi cation
准尉 JUN’I　warrant offi  cer
准拠 JUNKYO　approval
A late graph, probably post-Shuowen. A 
popular variant of 準 733 ‘level; conform’ (q.v.). 
According to Shirakawa, 准 fi rst appeared at 
a period more or less contemporaneous with 
Shuowen, on Han epitaphs. Starting in Chi-
nese offi  cial documents of the Tang and Song 
dynasties onwards, used also in the sense 
‘permit’. In Japanese, the use of 准 as opposed 
to 準 has ended up to some extent being just 
a matter of usage, and care needs to be taken 
in distinguishing the two to refl ect that us-
age.  KJ1970:529; GY2008:1117; OT1968:104; 
SS1984:425,427. As with 733, Suggest take as           
隹 324 ‘bird’, with the ‘ice’ radical 401冫 .
Mnemonic: FREEZE BIRD SO AS TO CONFORM 
AND GET PERMIT
JUN
conform, permit, 
quasi-
10 strokes
准
L1
1475
fl ecting the use in Shang times of a sequence of 
ten (the Ten Stems, used in conjunction with the 
Twelve Branches to make up a recurring cycle of 
sixty to indicate years for dating purposes). At 
the bronze stage, 日 66 ‘day, sun’ was added as 
determinative for clarity; in the resultant graph 
旬,勹 serves as semantic and phonetic, meaning 
‘go round’. Bronze also has a variant form (noted 
in Shuowen) which instead of 勹 has 匀 (‘equal’; 
later 均 681 q.v.), a graph which originally meant 
‘go round’. MS1995:v1:608-10,146-7; KJ1970:67; 
SS1984:425; OT1968:460.
Mnemonic: TEN DAY CYCLE OF CIRCLING SUN

438  The Remaining 1130 Characters
潤滑 JUNKATSU　lubrication
利潤 RIJUN　profi t
潤沢 JUNTAKU　moisture, profi t
cal ritual. However, based on passage in Erya 
(an encyclopaedic dictionary probably dating 
back to ca. 3rd century BC), Shirakawa maintains 
that the phonetic in this graph was originally 
probably not 王 but 壬 785 ‘thread spool’, 
(also here with associated sense ‘excess; big’), 
a graph which at the seal stage was already 
very close in shape to 王, hence the possibility 
of confusion between the two. DJ2009:v3:916; 
MS1995:v2:850-51; GY2008:1136; SS1984:426-
7. Suggest taking 閏 as 門 231 ‘gate’ and ‘ 王 5 
king’.  
Mnemonic: KING AT GATE GETS MOISTENED 
WITH ENRICHING WATER 
JUN
moisten, enrich
15 strokes
潤
L1
1478
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵 42 ‘wa-
ter’, and 閏 (NJK ‘intercalary month’) as phonet-
ic with associated sense ‘exist in excess’, giving 
‘have plentiful liquid’. Note: 閏 has 王 5 (‘king, 
ruler’) as phonetic from seal stage onwards, 
and 閏 has generally been taken as meaning 
the emperor being in his palace for a calendri-
遵守 JUNSHU　conformity
遵法 JUNPŌ　observance of law
遵奉 JUNPŌ suru　obey the law
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
form has 尊 for 尊 939 (‘respect’) on the right. 
Has  ⻌ 85 ‘walk, go’, and 尊 as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘follow closely, follow’, giving 
‘follow, obey’. GY2008:1838,1489; TA1965:693; 
OT1968:1014.
Mnemonic: MOVING OBEDIENTLY 
FOLLOWING RESPECTED WAY
JUN
follow, obey
15 strokes
遵
L1
1479
殉死  JUNSHI　dutiful death
殉教者 JUNKYŌSHA　martyr 
殉職  JUNSHOKU　death at post
A late graph (Yupian).  Has 歹 302/520 ‘bone 
fragment’ or ‘top of spine’, a determinative 
which acquired the frequent connotation 
‘death/serious injury’, and 旬 1472 (‘ten-day pe-
riod’) as phonetic with associated sense ‘follow’, 
giving ‘follow in death’. The practice of follow-
ing one’s lord in death was not uncommon in 
earlier times. OT1968:544; KJ1970:531-2,312; 
SS1984:425-6; MS1995:708-9. 
Mnemonic: DUTIFUL DEATH, BUT JUST 
BONES AFTER TEN DAYS
JUN
dutiful death
10 strokes
殉
L1
1476
循環  JUNKAN　circle, cycle
悪循環 AKUJUNKAN　vicious circle
因循  INJUN　indecision
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 彳 131 
‘road; go, move’, and 盾 1474 (‘shield’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘follow’, giving 
‘follow a route, follow after’; loan usage for ‘go 
round, revolve’ (Mizukami, Katō). Mizukami 
lists a proposed OBI equivalent. OT1968:353; 
MS1995:v1:488-9; GY2008:1464; KJ1970:518-9.
Mnemonic: FOLLOW, MOVING BEHIND SHIELD
JUN
follow
12 strokes
循
L1
1477

The Remaining 1130 Characters  439
庶民 SHOMIN　the masses
庶務 SHOMU　general aff airs
庶子 SHOSHI　illegitimate child
on top of fi re’ (Katō). The objection to this view, 
it could be argued, is that at the top of this 
graph there is not 厂, as in 石, but 广. Since by 
the seal stage the top element in 庶 was being 
written as 广, it was for that reason analysed in 
Shuowen as ‘roof’. It should be noted, though, 
that the distinction between 厂 and 广 was 
not always made at the bronze stage (indeed, 
Mizukami goes so far as to say they were the 
same at that stage), leaving the possibility 
that the top element of this graph in bronze 
may have been erroneously analysed by the 
Shuowen compiler Xu Shen (or possibly earlier) 
as 广 ‘(angled) roof; building’. Note: the shape 
beneath the top element in OBI and some 
bronze occurrences corresponds to 炗, which 
does appear to be a cooking pot over fi re. Yupian 
takes this graph as instead being an old way 
of writing 光 129 ‘bright’, but the basis for this 
is not clear. MS1995:v1:454-5,450-51,v2:932-3; 
DJ2009:V2:752; GY2008:1295; KJ1970:611-12; 
OT1968:619. Take the central part as as a pot 
hanging from a cross-piece.
Mnemonic: THE MASSES ALL HAVE HOUSES 
AND VARIOUS COOKING POTS
SHO
masses, various,
illegitimate, all
11 strokes
庶
L1
1480
OBI 
; bronze 
; seal 
. Analyses diverge. 
One view (Gu) takes the OBI form as represent-
ing a cooking pot over a fi re (炗; see Note 
below) away from the wind beneath a 厂 ‘cliff ’, 
with the top element changing at the seal 
stage to 广 127 ‘roof, building’ to represent 
a simple dwelling, giving ‘cook inside dwell-
ing’. Then, according to Gu, the meaning 
was successively extended to ‘servant’ and 
‘the ordinary people’. Another analysis favors 
division into 灬 8 ‘fi re’ beneath 石 47 ‘stone, 
rock’, and takes the latter with the associated 
sense ‘remove’, to give ‘fumigate and remove 
harmful insects’ (Ogawa), treating senses such 
as ‘various’ as loan usage. Alternatively, 庶 is 
analysed as 灬 ‘fi re’ beneath 石 as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘put, place’, giving ‘place 
一緒 ISSHO　together
端緒 TANSHO　beginning
鼻緒 hanao　clog thong
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 糸 29 
‘thread’, and 者 314 (‘person’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘beginning’, thus ‘beginning 
of length of thread’; by extension, senses such 
as ‘connection’ also. OT1968:782; KJ1970:496; 
GY2008:1351.
Mnemonic: PERSON THREADS CORD FROM 
BEGINNING TO MAKE CONNECTION
SHO, CHO, o
beginning, cord, 
connection, clue
14 strokes
緒
L3
1481
如上 JOJŌ　aforementioned
如実 NYOJITSU　realism
如何 ikaga*　how?
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 口 22 ‘mouth; speak’, and 
女 37 (‘woman’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘obedient, submissive’, thus ‘submissive 
words, submissive’. Commentators are divided 
over whether to regard senses such as ‘be 
like’ and ‘as if’ as extended senses or as loan 
usage based on sound value; the latter seems 
more likely. MS1995:v1:310-12; KJ1970:551-2; 
OT1968:166.
Mnemonic: WOMEN’S MOUTHS ARE 
SIMILAR
JO, NYO, gotoku/ki
similar, equal
6 strokes
如
L1
1482

440  The Remaining 1130 Characters
叙述  JOJUTSU　description
叙情的 JOJŌTEKI　lyrical
叙勲  JOKUN　conferring honor
and by extension ‘set out (views, etc.), relate’; 
the seal form replaces 又 with 攴 ‘hit; compel, 
make to do’, still with essentially the same 
overall sense (‘make to be in order’). Gu, by 
way of exception, takes 余 not as phonetic 
but semantic in function, signifying ‘roof’ 
(regarding original sense of 余 in OBI, relat-
ing to roof structure, see 820), thus overall 
meaning ‘thatch a roof’, and by extension ‘put 
in order’. ‘Confer’ is probably an extension of 
sequencing. KJ1970:552; MS1995:v1:574-6; 
GY2008:891-2; OT1968:155; DJ2009:v1:271. 
Mnemonic: AMPLE DESCRIPTION OF HAND
JO
describe, confer
9 strokes
叙
L1
1483
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional 敍 (also 敘 [ 攵 112 
is a variant of 攴, meaning ‘strike, coerce’]). OBI 
form has 又 2003 ‘hand’, with 余 820 (‘excess’, 
‘ample’), typically taken as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘sequence, put in sequence’, 
giving ‘put in sequence, spread out in order’, 
徐々に  JOJO ni　slowly
徐行  JOKŌ　going slowly 
徐歩  JOHO　walking slowly
Seal 
. Has 彳 131 ‘road; go’, and 余 820 
(‘excess’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘gentle, slow’, giving ‘go slowly’. Mizukami lists 
an ancestral OBI equivalent which lacks 彳 as 
determinative. MS1995:v1:484-5; KJ1970:883; 
OT1968:351. 
Mnemonic: GO EXCESSIVELY SLOWLY
JO, omomuro
slowly, gradually
10 strokes
徐
L1
1484
升目  masume　a measure
二升  NISHŌ　two shō
一升瓶 ISSHŌBIN　1-shō bottle
SHŌ, masu
liquid measure
4 strokes
升
L1
1485
as liquid) in it, and this is retained in bronze 
for 升 (but not 斗 ). The depiction of a ladle 
scooping up liquid gives the meaning ‘scoop 
up’. This may have led to extended sense as 
a unit of liquid measure if the ladle was of 
standard size, otherwise ‘unit of measure’ (in 
Japan today, equivalent to 1.8 litres) needs to 
be seen as a loan use. Katō favors the latter 
view. MS1995:v1:166-7,590-92; KJ1970:536-7; 
OT1968:137. Take 十 35 ‘ten’ and 亻 41 ‘person’.
Mnemonic: LIQUID MEASURE ENOUGH FOR 
TEN PERSONS
OBI 
; seal . Based on OBI forms listed by 
Mizukami, it seems at that stage 升 and 斗 
1766 ‘a measure’ may have been the same 
graph. If so, diff erentiation in shape evolved 
at the bronze stage: OBI forms of both graphs 
show a scoop or ladle with something (seen 
召集 SHŌSHŪ　summons, call
召喚 SHŌKAN　summons
召使 meshitsukai　servant
SHŌ, mesu
summon, partake, 
wear 
5 strokes
召
L2
1486
OBI ; seal 
. Seal onwards has 口 22 ‘mouth, 
speak’, and 刀 198 (‘knife, cut’) as phonetic 
with meaning usually taken as ‘call, invite’, 
thus ‘call out, summon’. Another meaning 
(noted by Mizukami) is ‘bend back and face 
upwards’, thus ‘face upwards and call out’. The 
more complex OBI form (in bronze also), is 
taken to signify orig. ‘wine press made of wil-
low branches’, with ‘call, summon’ a loan  us-

The Remaining 1130 Characters  441
師匠 SHISHŌ　master
巨匠 KYOSHŌ　great master
意匠 ISHŌ　idea, design
SHŌ
craftsman, idea 
6 strokes
匠
L1
1487
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 匸 ‘box’ 
(pictograph), and 斤 1233 ‘ax’, thus ‘ax in box’ 
> ‘carpentry/carpenter’. Some scholars (Tōdō, 
Ogawa) take 匚 as short for 巨 1209, a square 
used by carpenter (probable original meaning 
of 巨 ‘huge’), but overall meaning is unchanged. 
KJ1970:540; GY2008:249; TA1965:376; 
OT1968:134.
Mnemonic: CRAFTSMAN KEEPS AX IN 
BOX – GOOD IDEA
病床  BYŌSHŌ　sickbed
床張り  yukabari　fl ooring
床の間  tokonoma　alcove
with 木 73 ‘wood’. 床 appears in Yupian dic-
tionary, and later in Kangxi zidian, still not 
given offi  cial status but again noted as popu-
lar form. ‘Floor’ and ‘alcove’ are Japanese-only 
senses. Ogawa takes 床 as ‘that which is used 
inside a house 广 127 and made of wood 木, 
hence ‘fl oor’. Gu suggests that as variant of 牀, 
床 may have evolved mistakenly. MS1995:v2:
824-5; GY2008:480-81; ZY2009:v2:304; 
OT1968:327.
Mnemonic: BUILDING HAS WOODEN FLOOR 
AND BED IN ALCOVE
SHŌ, toko, yuka
bed, fl oor, alcove
7 strokes
床
L2
1488
Late post-Shuowen graph. Popular variant of 
牀 ‘bed, couch’. 爿 is originally an OBI picto-
graph profi le view of a stand or couch seem-
ingly stood upright (orientation of OBI graphs 
often diff ered from later), here combining 
age; this complex form was ousted at the seal 
stage by 召. Other senses in Japanese such as 
‘eat, drink; wear’ seem to be loan uses, taking 
sound value of mesu ‘call, summon’ equivalent 
to its meaning in Chinese when fi rst borrowed 
and applying it to a homophonous verb 
meaning ‘eat, drink; wear’.  MS1995:v1:208-9; 
KJ1970:607-8; OT1968:163; AS2007:608; 
JD1970:734.
Mnemonic: CUT MOUTH WHILE PARTAKING 
SO SUMMON HELP 
抄本 SHŌHON　extract 
誌抄 SHISHŌ　selected poems
抄訳 SHŌYAKU　abridged translation
‘stab (object) with metal implement and take’; 
and ‘take by force’ is the meaning for 鈔 given 
in the Yupian dictionary. Another associ-
ated sense of 少 here is ‘join together small 
items such as shells (currency) or precious 
stones’, giving ‘draw in things linked together’ 
(Shirakawa). Ogawa, by contrast, takes the 
associated sense as ‘scoop up’, thus ‘scoop 
up’, and by extension ‘take by force’.  With all 
the above analyses, ‘take’ may be regarded 
as core meaning of 鈔, giving ‘extract’ as ex-
tended sense.  Later, 扌 ‘hand 34’ replaced 金. 
KJ1970:604; SS1984:436; OT1968:403.
Mnemonic: EXTRACT A LITTLE BY HAND
SHŌ
extract, excerpt
7 strokes 
抄
L1
1489
Late post-Shuowen graph. Shuowen itself has 
鈔 (CO; ‘paper money; collected writings’), 
but not 抄, though analysis of 鈔 is helpful to 
our understanding of its later variant 抄. 鈔 
has 金 16 ‘metal’, with 少 160 (‘few, little’) as 
phonetic; views on the associated sense vary. 
Katō sees it as ‘hold/put between’, specifi cally 

442  The Remaining 1130 Characters
肖像  SHŌZŌ　portrait
不肖  FUSHŌ　unlike
肖り者  ayakarimono　lucky person
ably child and parents: then by extension, 
‘resemble’. ‘Lucky’ is a minor meaning which 
appears to be a further semantic extension 
based on a belief of good fortune accruing 
through resembling another – presumably 
fortunate or successful – individual. Mizuka-
mi lists several proposed bronze equivalents. 
MS1995:v2:1068-70; OT1968:816.
Mnemonic: LITTLE ONE IS LIKE PARENTS IN 
BODY AND IN LUCK
SHŌ, ayakaru
resemble, lucky
7 strokes 
肖
L1
1490
Seal 
; traditional 肖. Has 肉 / 月 209 ‘flesh, 
meat; body’, with 小 38 as semantic and 
phonetic, meaning ‘little, small, make small’, 
giving ‘small model (of a person)’, prob-
尚早 SHŌSŌ　prematurity
高尚 KŌSHŌ　loftiness
尚々 
naonao　still more
294 (‘turn, face’), a graph which originally 
signifi ed a window or vent high up, possibly 
north-facing, giving ‘smoke rises up through 
window/vent and disperses’. This meaning 
was later generalized to ‘rise’, and extended to 
‘raise up; esteem’. ‘Furthermore’ is a loan us-
age. The top centre stroke of this graph repre-
sents the fi rst stroke of 向. MS1995:v1:400-01; 
KJ1970:544-5; OT1968:292; TA1965:341. 
Mnemonic: FURTHERMORE, FACING AWAY IS 
A SIGN OF ESTEEM
SHŌ, nao, tattobu
furthermore, raise, 
esteem
8 strokes
尚
L1
1491
Bronze 
; traditional 尙. Has 八 70 (‘eight’; 
originally, ‘split, disperse, away’), typically 
taken as semantic and phonetic (Katō prefers 
instead to take as depicting a vent), with 向 
昇進  SHŌSHIN　promotion
上昇  JŌSHŌ　ascent
昇降機 SHŌKŌKI　elevator
SHŌ, noboru
rise, ascent
8 strokes
昇
L1
1492
Seal 
; a late graph (later version of Shuo-
wen). Has 日 66 ‘sun, day’, and 升 1485 (unit of 
measure) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘rise’, giving ‘sun rises’; later generalized to ‘rise’.
KJ1970:540; OT1968:462; SS1984:438. We sug-
gest taking 升 as ‘ten’ 十 35 and ‘person’ 亻 41.
Mnemonic: SUN RISES OVER TEN PERSONS
沼気 SHŌKI　marsh gas, methane
沼沢 SHŌTAKU　swamp, marsh
沼地 numaCHI　marshland
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵 42 
‘water’ and 召 1486 (‘summon’) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken as i] ‘curve, bend’, 
SHŌ, numa
swamp, marsh 
8 strokes
沼
L1
1493
thus ‘pond of curving shape’ (Tōdō, Ogawa), or 
ii] ‘small’, thus ‘small pond’ (Katō). Tōdō suggests 
focus of curving shape was either bottom or 
edges of a pond.  Shirakawa disputes ‘curve’ 
as an associated sense, and takes meaning of 
沼 to be ‘(natural) pond’, as does Gu. ‘Swamp/
marsh’ seems to be a specifi c meaning in 
Japanese only. TA1965:246; OT1968:566; 
KJ1970:608; SS1984:438; GY2008:717. 
Mnemonic: SUMMON WATERS OF SWAMP

The Remaining 1130 Characters  443
宵月 
 yoizuki　hangover
徹宵  TESSHŌ　all night
宵越し  yoigoshi　overnight
Bronze 
; seal 
; lower part of traditional 
form has 肖 1490 ‘resemble’ not 肖. Analyses 
diff er. One takes it as two components: 宀 
30 ‘roof, dwelling’, and 肖 as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘a little, small, hardly any’, 
thus ‘time of hardly any light inside house’, 
SHŌ, yoi
evening 
10 strokes
宵
L1
1494
hence ‘evening’. Ogawa, by contrast, sees it as 
three elements: 宀 ‘roof; dwelling’, plus 夕 46 
‘evening’, plus 小 38 (‘small’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘dark’, thus ‘evening time 
when dark inside house’; Ogawa also feels 
there was an erroneous change in this graph 
at the seal stage from 夕 to 月 18 ‘moon’, but 
many of the OBI and bronze occurrences 
of these two graphs are hard to tell apart. 
MS1995:v1:376-7; GY2008:1144; OT1968:279.
Mnemonic: SMALL MOON SEEN UNDER 
ROOF IN THE EVENING 
症状  SHŌJŌ　symptoms
炎症  ENSHŌ　infl ammation
恐怖症 KYŌFUSHŌ　phobia
No seal form; a very late graph. Has 疒 ‘sick 
bed’, 404 and 正 43 (‘correct, proper’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘sign, indica-
tion’, giving ‘symptom of illness’. According 
to Shirakawa, the graph is of popular recent 
origin, appearing in relatively late pre-modern 
Chinese texts such as Shuihu zhuan (The Water 
Margin; a 14th century novel); originally, 
for many centuries, 症 was used as a popu-
lar form for 証/證 737 “proof”. KJ1970:489; 
SS1984:440; OT1968:678. 
Mnemonic: PROPER SYMPTONS OF ILLNESS
SHŌ
symptom, illness
10 strokes
症
L1
1495
吉祥  KISSHŌ　good omen
不祥事 FUSHŌJI　ill omen, scandal
発祥地 HASSHŌCHI　cradle, origin
Shirakawa). Mizukami, alternatively, takes the 
associated sense fi rstly as ‘deities appreciate 
good shape’, and by extension ‘auspicious’, 
but adds a cautionary note saying the shape 
and meaning of this graph are not certain. Gu 
takes the associated sense as ‘ritual off ering’. 
Mizukami also lists proposed OBI and bronze 
equivalents. OT1968:723; SS1984:440-41; 
MS1995:v2:948-9; GY2008:1155; KJ1985:447. 
Mnemonic: SHEEP SACRIFICED ON ALTAR TO 
BRING GOOD FORTUNE
SHŌ
good fortune, omen
10 strokes 
祥
L1
1496
Seal 
. Analyses diff er somewhat. Most com-
mentators take 礻/示 723 as ‘altar, deity, show’, 
with 羊 426 (‘sheep’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense taken in one view as ‘auspicious’, 
thus ‘good fortune, auspicious’ (Ogawa, 
称号 SHŌGŌ　title
称賛 SHŌSAN　praise
名称 MEISHŌ　name
Seal 
; traditional form has 爯 as right-hand 
element. Has 禾 87 ‘grain plant’ and 爯 (see 
Note below) ‘lift up by hand’ as semantic and 
phonetic, giving ‘lift up sheaves of grain by 
hand, lift up’. ‘Call out’ is regarded as an ex-
tended sense (Katō, Mizukami); Katō suggests 
there was a verbal component involved when 
SHŌ
praise, name, chant
10 strokes 
称
L1
1497

444  The Remaining 1130 Characters
交渉 KŌSHŌ　negotiations 
干渉 KANSHŌ　interference
渉外 SHŌGAI　public relations
stream’. 水 is common in bronze. Shuowen lists 
two seal forms: the heading has 渉 with an 
extra 水 element on the right, but also notes 
the simpler form 渉, which came to predomi-
nate later. Senses such as ‘liaise, negotiate’ 
are probably based on crossing from one 
side to another. MS1995:v2:778-9,v1:702-3; 
KJ1970:623; OT1968:587. 
Mnemonic: WALK THROUGH WATER TO 
CROSS IN ORDER TO LIAISE
SHŌ
cross (over), liaise
11 strokes 
渉
L1
1498
OBI 
; seal 
. The OBI forms vary, consist-
ing of 川 50 ‘river’ or 氵/ 水 42 ‘water’ (either 
of these complete or abbreviated), and 歩 
221 ‘walk’, thus ‘make ripples crossing a river/
紹介   SHŌKAI　introduction 
紹介者  SHŌKAISHA　introducer
自己紹介 JIKOSHŌKAI　self-introduction
as phonetic with associated sense ‘bend’ or 
‘invite’ (Mizukami). Either way, overall original 
sense is ‘join threads’. By extension, gener-
alized on the basis of bringing two things 
together, giving ‘introduce, inherit’. Mizukami 
lists proposed OBI and bronze equivalents.
GY2008:767; OT1968:775; MS1995:v2:1010-11.
Mnemonic: SUMMONED TO INTRODUCE 
THREADS 
SHŌ
introduce, inherit
11 strokes 
紹
L2
1499
Seal 
. Has 糸 29 ‘thread’, and 召 1486 (‘sum-
mon, partake’) taken either as i] semantic and 
phonetic, meaning ‘join’ (Gu, Ogawa), or ii] 
訴訟   SOSHŌ　litigation
訴訟人  SOSHŌNIN　plaintiff 
訴訟費用 SOSHŌHIYŌ　court costs
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 言 118 ‘words; speak’, 
and 公 126 (originally, ‘freely open up some-
thing enclosed’; ‘public, fair’ – see) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘attack’ (Ogawa says 
‘grow violent’), thus ‘attack someone openly 
with words’, and hence ‘quarrel, litigate’. 
MS1995:v2:1188-9,v1:100-02; TA1965:307; 
OT1968:923. 
Mnemonic: PUBLIC WORDS OF ACCUSATION 
LEAD ONE TO SUE
SHŌ
accuse, sue
11 strokes 
訟
L2
1500
sheaves of grain were lifted and probably also 
counted. ‘Praise’ appears to be considered a 
further extended sense. Mizukami lists OBI 
and bronze equivalents corresponding to 爯. 
Note: The OBI and bronze equivalents of 爯 do 
suggest something in the shape of a sheaf or 
bale. 爯 consists of 爫 319 ‘claw’ or sometimes 
– as here – ‘hand’, plus the lower element 
taken as  either 
 (Katō), or 
, in either case 
treated as phonetic with associated sense 
‘lift up’ and giving overall meaning ‘lift up by 
hand’. The modern form 称 is an abbreviated 
shape based on early (probably Tang Dynasty) 
calligraphic cursive models of this graph. 
KJ1970:549; MS1995:v2:819-20; OT1968:731; 
FC1974:1623-4. We suggest taking 尓 as a 
variant of ‘altar’ 示 723. 
Mnemonic: PRAISING AND CHANTING AT 
ODD ALTAR FOR GOOD GRAIN CROP

The Remaining 1130 Characters  445
掌中 SHŌCHŪ　in one’s hand
車掌 SHASHŌ　conductor
職掌 SHOKUSHŌ　hold offi  ce, duty
hand’ (Tōdō, Ogawa), or ii] ‘take hold of with 
fingers’, thus ‘take hold of something with 
fingers facing down’ (Katō). Based on seal 
form, shape of phonetic should have stayed 
as 尙 in the traditional form, but it seems to 
have changed to 尚 at quite an early period 
(clerical script, then block script). ‘Control’ is 
an extended sense (cf English ‘manipulation’). 
TA1965:351-2; OT1968:418; KJ1970:430-31; 
SK1984:336. 
Mnemonic: FURTHERMORE, PALM OF HAND 
CONTROLS
SHŌ, tanagokoro
control, palm (hand)
12 strokes
掌
L1
1501
水晶 SUISHŌ　crystal, quartz 
晶化 SHŌKA　crystallization
結晶 KESSHŌ　crystallization
shape to 日 66 ‘sun’, but in all cases each ele-
ment is unrelated to ‘sun’ or ‘mouth’, instead 
representing what appears as a small star in 
the sky, so the original meaning of the graph 
is ‘star(s)’; by extension, ‘clear light’, ‘crystal’. 
QX2000:223; MR2007:357; GY2008:1418; 
KJ1970:596. For convenience we suggest 
remembering the graph as ‘three suns’.
Mnemonic: THREE SUNS MAKE IT BRIGHT 
AND CRYSTAL CLEAR. 
SHŌ
crystal, clear, bright
12 strokes
晶
L1
1502
OBI 
; seal 
. Originally a pictograph. 
Some OBI occurrences have three identical 
elements similar in shape to 口 22 ‘mouth’, 
while others have three elements similar in 
焦土  SHŌDO　scorched earth
焦心  SHŌSHIN　impatience
黒焦げ kurokoge　charring
Bronze 
; seal 
. Typically taken as 隹 324 
‘short-tailed bird, bird’ over 灬 8 ‘fi re’, giving 
‘roast bird over fi re’, and by extension ‘burn, get 
burnt’ (Gu, Ogawa, Tōdō). Katō prefers to treat 
隹 here as phonetic with associated sense 
‘burn till black’. ‘Fret’ is perhaps an extended 
meaning, and ‘hasty’ is a Japanese-only mean-
ing. GY2008:1459; TA1965:209; OT1968:620; 
KJ1970:605; MS1995:v2:816-7. 
Mnemonic: BIRD FRETS WHEN HASTILY 
SCORCHED OVER FIRE
SHŌ, kogeru/gasu, 
aseru, jireru
scorch,fret,hasty
12 strokes
焦
L1
1503
硝酸 SHŌSAN　nitric acid 
硝薬 SHŌYAKU　gunpowder 
硝子 garasu*　glass
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Originally used 
to mean a mineral encrustation often called 
‘saltpeter’, i.e. potassium nitrate, employed 
in traditional Chinese medicine for digestion 
and as a laxative. Refl ecting this, the corre-
sponding word in Chinese was at fi rst written 
using the diff erent graph (but same phonetic) 
消 332 (‘extinguish’). Later, the new graph 
硝 was devised, replacing 氵 42 ‘water’ with 
SHŌ
niter, gunpowder
12 strokes
硝
L1
1504
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 手 34 
‘hand’, and 尙 1491 (see 尚 ‘furthermore’) 
as phonetic with associated sense taken 
as i] ‘apply, put against’, thus ‘(that part of) 
hand placed onto something’, i.e. ‘palm of 

446  The Remaining 1130 Characters
化粧  KESHŌ　make-up
化粧品 KESHŌHIN　cosmetics
化粧室 KESHŌSHITSU　powder room
giving shape’, i.e. ‘cosmetic powder’. Tradition-
ally referred to in Japanese as o-shiroi ‘white 
(substance)’. It was not until the 1940s that 
粧 gained offi  cial status in Japan, being at 
that time included for the fi rst time in several 
offi  cial character lists, including the Tōyō 
kanji List of 1946. Note: 妝 consists of 女 37 
‘woman’, plus 爿 1488 as phonetic with as-
sociated sense which Tōdō takes as ‘dress to 
look slender’, to give overall meaning ‘adorn’. 
TA1965:378-80SK1996:1343; SS1984:445; 
ZZ1671:v1:306; OT1968:762. We suggest tak-
ing the right hand part as 广 127 ‘building’ 
and 土 64 ‘ground’.
Mnemonic: ADORN EARTHEN FLOOR OF 
BUILDING WITH RICE
SHŌ
adorn, make-up
12 strokes
粧
L1
1505
A post-Shuowen graph, very late. For many 
centuries, the underlying word was writ-
ten as 妝 (CO; see Note below). In the entry 
for 妝, the early 17th century Zhengzitong 
refers briefl y to 粧, but only to dismiss it as 
an erroneous popular form. 粧 consists of 米 
220 ‘rice’, with 庄(NJK meaning ‘countryside,’ 
‘level’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘build up, give shape to’, thus ‘rice powder for 
詔書 SHŌSHO　imperial edict
詔令 SHŌREI　imperial edict
大詔 TAISHŌ　imperial edict
i] ‘call out and summon others, announce to 
inferiors’ (Mizukami), or ii] ‘inform the deities’ 
(Shirakawa). Ogawa, who takes 召 here as 
semantic and phonetic, meaning ‘call out, 
call’, giving ‘call over and inform’, notes that 
from the Qin Dynasty onwards this graph was 
used to refer to edicts issued by the emperor. 
Mizukami lists a proposed bronze equivalent. 
MS1995:v2:1192-3; SS1984:446; OT1968:925.
Mnemonic: SUMMONED TO HEAR WORDS OF 
IMPERIAL EDICT
SHŌ, mikotonori
imperial edict
12 strokes
詔
L1
1506
Seal 
. Has 言 118 ‘words; speak’, and 召 
1486 (‘summon’) taken in one view as seman-
tic and phonetic (or just phonetic), meaning 
‘call out facing upwards’, and taken to signify 
石 47 ‘rock’. The graph comprises  石 ‘rock, 
stone’, and 肖 1490 (‘resemble’) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken in one analysis 
as ‘absorb, digest’, giving ‘rock mineral to aid 
digestion’, and by extension – based on the 
later use of saltpeter (Song Dynasty onwards) 
– ‘gunpowder’ (Katō). Ogawa, alternatively, 
takes the associated sense of 肖 here as 
‘pointed, sharp’, giving ‘type of mineral with 
crystals’, refl ecting the naturally-occurrent 
state of saltpeter. On a historical note, China 
is credited with the fi rst use of gunpowder. 
Moreover, by the 10th century it had the most 
sophisticated weaponry in the world, includ-
ing explosive rockets, land mines, and fl ame-
throwers. Despite this, they were beaten by 
the Mongols in the 13th century. When the 
Mongols went on to attempt to invade Japan 
in 1274 and 1281 – thwarted on both occa-
sions by typhoons (kamikaze, ‘divine wind’) 
– they took gunpowder-based weaponry, 
such as cannon and grenades. It is a profound 
mystery in Japanese history as to why the 
Japanese did not try to develop their own 
gunpowder-based weaponry, for they could 
easily have retrieved cannons from sunken 
Mongol ships (or, earlier, simply by visiting 
China). Instead, they waited until the arrival 
of Portuguese in 1543, with cumbersome 
arquebuses, which were promptly improved 
by the Japanese. KJ1970:608-9; OT1968:712; 
SS1984:445; GY2008:1397-8.
Mnemonic: SALTPETER RESEMBLES A STONE

The Remaining 1130 Characters  447
奨励  SHŌREI　encouragement
推奨  SUISHŌ　recommendation
奨学金 SHŌGAKUKIN　scholarship
on someone and urge on’, giving generalized 
meaning ‘urge on, encourage’. The Zhengzi-
tong and Kangxi zidian (Peking Palace printed 
edition), though, favor not 犬 ‘dog’ but 大 56 
‘big’, and this latter form (奬) was also favored 
in the fi rst Jōyō kanji List, promulgated in 
1923; later abbreviated to 奨. KJ1970:550-51; 
KZ2001:507/3671; OT1968:250; GY2008:916. 
Mnemonic: URGED ON BY ENCOURAGING 
COMMANDER 
SHŌ
urge, encourage
13 strokes
奨
L1
1507
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional  獎. 
The seal form has 犬 19 ‘dog’, and abbreviation 
of 將 (traditional form of 将 911 ‘command[er]’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘set a dog 
詳細 SHŌSAI　details
未詳 MISHŌ　vague, unclear
詳しく kuwashiku　in detail
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 言 118 
‘words; speak’, and 羊 426 (‘sheep’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘detailed’, giving overall 
meaning taken as either ‘argue/debate in detail’ 
(Ogawa), or ‘surmise in detail’ (Shirakawa). 
OT1968:928; SS1984:447.
Mnemonic: DETAILED TALK ABOUT SHEEP
SHŌ, kuwashii
detailed
13 strokes
詳
L1
1508
表彰 HYŌSHŌ　commendation 
顕彰 KENSHŌ　manifestation
彰徳 SHŌTOKU　public praise
extension ‘tattoos’) taken either as i] phonetic 
with associated sense ‘make clear’, thus ‘clear 
embellishment’ (Katō), or ii] semantic and pho-
netic, meaning ‘markings, pattern’ (Ogawa), to 
give overall sense ‘bright and clear’ (Tōdō). Shi-
rakawa takes both elements as semantic, but 
also – like Katō – leading to the overall sense 
‘clear embellishment’. KJ1970:535; OT1968:346; 
TA1965:347; SS1984:448.
Mnemonic: THREE STROKES IN TATTOO ARE 
A CLEAR EMBELLISHMENT
SHŌ
clear, open, 
embellishment 
14 strokes
彰
L1
1509
Seal 
; Has 彡 (see 115), a determinative 
whose meanings include ‘light/bright, adorn’, 
and 章 334 (‘chapter’; orig ‘tattooing needle’, by 
憧れ akogare　longing, yearning
憧憬 DŌKEI/SHŌKEI　aspiration
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 忄 164 
‘heart, mind, feeling’, with 童 385 (‘child’) as 
phonetic (associated sense unclear). Overall 
meaning is given in Shuowen as ‘thoughts are 
unsettled’. ‘Long for’ may be an extended sense. 
Suggest taking 童 as 立 77 ‘stand’ and 里 as 238 
‘village’. DJ2009:v3:857; OT1968:368.
Mnemonic: CHILD STANDING IN VILLAGE 
HAS A YEARNING FEELING
SHŌ, DŌ, akogareru
yearn, aspire, admire
15 strokes
憧
L1
1510

448  The Remaining 1130 Characters
衝突 SHŌTOTSU　collision
衝動 SHŌDŌ　impulse
折衝 SESSHŌ negotiations
償金 SHŌKIN　reparation
償却 SHŌKYAKU　redemption
弁償 BENSHŌ compensation
‘central point where roads come together’ and 
by extension ‘major road’; ‘collide’ is treated as 
loan usage in this view (Ogawa). Later, center 
element was changed to 重 326 (‘heavy’) as 
phonetic (same associated sense), 重 and 童 
being near-homophones in Late Han times 
(Schuessler). Another view takes earlier 童 as 
phonetic and probably abbreviation for NJK 
撞 ‘strike against’ (Shirakawa). DJ2009:v1:160; 
OT1968:899; SS1984:451; AS2007:500,622.
Mnemonic: COLLISION OF HEAVY OBJECTS 
MOVING THROUGH CROSSROADS
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 亻 41 
‘person’, and 賞 542 (‘prize, praise’) taken in 
one view as phonetic with associated sense 
‘retaliate, repay (negative connotation)’, giving 
likely original meaning ‘pay compensation for 
slave previously received’ and later generalized 
to ‘pay back, recompense’ (Katō). Several other 
scholars take original meaning as ‘atone for’ 
(Ogawa, Shirakawa). KJ1970:540; OT1968:83; 
SS1984:453. 
Mnemonic: PERSON IS RECOMPENSED 
WITH PRIZE
SHŌ
collide, clash 
15 strokes
SHŌ, tsugunau
recompense, redeem 
17 strokes
衝
償
L1
L1
1511
1512
Seal form (with 童 385 as center element): 
 
(Shuowen). Has 彳/行 131 ‘go, move’ (originally 
pictograph of crossroads), and what in seal 
form was 童 (‘child’ 385) taken in one view as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘gather’, thus 
岩礁  GANSHŌ　reef
暗礁  ANSHŌ　hidden reef, snag
珊瑚礁 SANGOSHŌ coral reef
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 石 47 ‘rock, 
stone’, and 焦 1503 (‘burn, scorch’) as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘draw near’, giv-
ing ‘rocks which are near (surface of water)’. 
OT1968:716. 
Mnemonic: SCORCHED ROCK BECOMES A REEF
SHŌ
(hidden) reef 
17 strokes
礁
L1
1513
警鐘  KEISHŌ　alarm bell
釣鐘  tsurigane　hanging bell
鍾乳石 SHŌNYŪSEKI stalactite
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 金 16 ‘metal, 
money’, and 童 385 (‘child’) as phonetic, with 
associated sense ‘strike’ (Mizukami, Ogawa). 
Mizukami then takes the overall meaning 
as ‘metal musical instrument that is struck’, 
while Ogawa says ‘(hanging) bell’, but these 
seemingly different meanings are not neces-
sarily contrastive. Music played an important 
SHŌ, kane
bell
20 strokes
鐘
L1
1514

The Remaining 1130 Characters  449
丈夫 JŌBU　robust, sturdy 
背丈 setake　one’s height 
方丈 HŌJŌ ten feet square
冗談 JŌDAN　joke 
冗長 JŌCHŌ　verbosity
冗語 JŌGO redundant word
measurement varied signifi cantly in the Zhou 
Dynasty, a situation which led the self-styled 
‘First Emperor’ (Shih Huangdi) of the Qin 
Dynasty to standardise weights and measures. 
Ogawa, alternatively, takes original mean-
ing as ‘hand holding a stick’ (later written 
杖, NJK, ‘stick’), as does Gu. Mizukami lists a 
proposed bronze equivalent. MS1995:v1:6-7; 
KJ1970:580-81; EB1974:v23:787.
Mnemonic: HAND HOLDS A STURDY CROSS 
TEN FEET TALL
Or: TEN HAND-SPANS MEASURE AROUND 
TEN FEET
leisure at home’, and Ogawa is in agreement, 
saying ‘person at home without agricultural 
work’; all the above scholars following the 
defi nition of the graph in Shuowen to some 
degree. The original form with 宀 appears 
to have been replaced by semantically close 
冖 ’cover’ after Han times; fl uctuation in the 
lower element continued until 几 (in this graph 
a shape distortion, probably inadvertent) 
predominated, giving the shape 冗 familiar 
in modern Japanese usage. Regarding other 
meanings such as ‘waste, excess’, Katō regards 
these as extended senses based on a person 
being without work and hence unfocused, but 
Ogawa regards as loan usage. DJ2009:v2:590; 
KJ1970:552-3; GY2008:116; OT1968:101; 
MS1995:v1:88-9,40-41. Suggest taking 几 as a 
desk, and 冖 as a cover.
Mnemonic: PUTTING A COVER ON A DESK IS 
SUPERFLUOUS
JŌ
superfl uous
4 strokes
冗
L1
JŌ, take
length, stature, meas-
ure (c. 10 feet)
3 strokes
丈
L1
1515
1516
Seal 
. In one view, analyzed as consisting 
of 又 2003 ‘hand’ (but here to be taken rather 
as ‘handspan’), and 十 35 ‘ten’ as semantic and 
phonetic, giving ‘ten handspans’ (Katō; see 尺 
895). Supposedly a linear measurement unit 
of about ten feet, but some latitude needs to 
be given in interpretation here: standards for 
Seal 
. At seal stage, written with 宀 30 ‘roof; 
building’, plus a lower element interpreted 
as either i] 儿 ‘person’ (a separate graph from 
人 41; see 1461 Note 2), giving 宂, or ii] 人 41 
‘person’. Katō takes the former view, considers 
the meaning in this graph to be ‘weak hunch-
back’ (based on word-family connection), 
giving ‘weak hunchback unoccupied at home 
without work’. The Shuowen seal form of this 
graph does have the lower element written 
with what could be interpreted as representing 
a hump on the back. However, others consider 
it better to take the lower element as just 人 
‘person’. Accordingly, Gu takes it as ‘person at 
part in ancient China, being seen as a har-
monizing influence, and featured percussion 
instruments using bells hung on a frame 
along with other instruments. The impor-
tance of bells is noted by Shirakawa, who 
also gives a detailed labelled sketch of a rep-
resentative ancient bell. MS1995:v2:1376-7; 
OT1968:1050; SS1984:455. We suggest tak-
ing 童 as 立 77 ‘stand’ and 里 238 ‘village’.
Mnemonic: CHILD STANDING IN VILLAGE 
RINGS A METAL BELL
Or: CHILD STANDING IN VILLAGE RINGS A 
BELL FOR MONEY

450  The Remaining 1130 Characters
浄化 JŌKA　purifi cation  
不浄 FUJŌ 　fi lth
浄水 JŌSUI clear water 
剰余 JŌYO　surplus  
余剰 YOJŌ 　surplus
過剰 KAJŌ surplus, excess 
畳句   JŌKU　repeated phrase  
二畳   NIJŌ 　two-mat size  
畳み込む tatamikomu  fold up 
meaning ‘clear, without impurities’ (regarding 
still water as clear, unmuddied). The mean-
ing of 淨 is given in Shuowen as the name of a 
pool near the capital of Lu (a state in ancient 
China). Given this, Katō treats the associated 
sense of 爭 in 淨 as unclear (Ogawa also takes 
this approach), and regards the meaning ‘clear, 
pure’ for 淨 as a borrowed usage in place of 瀞. 
Despite some diff erences, all the above schol-
ars are in agreement in tracing the origins of 
淨/浄 back to 瀞. GY2008:700-701; OT1968:574; 
KJ1970:431. 
Mnemonic: CONFLICT OVER PURE, CLEAR 
WATER
meaning ‘move (something) along’, giving 
‘send/give valuables’; Katō is in general agree-
ment. According to Gu, this referred origi-
nally to giving a dowry, and ‘excess, surplus’ 
evolved as an extended sense. As to the popu-
lar form 剰, Ogawa interprets this as 刂/刀 
198 ‘knife, cut, sword’, with 乗 336 (‘ride, load 
onto’) as phonetic with associated sense ‘ex-
cess’, giving ‘excess which is cut off ’, and hence 
‘surplus, superfl uous’. The meanings ‘besides, 
moreover’ are extended. GY2008:1448-9,1096; 
KJ1970:887; OT1968:119.  
Mnemonic: RIDE WITH SURPLUS SWORD
such mats were probably quite thin and readily 
folded. Later, though, they became much more 
substantial in construction, having a stiff  core 
by tradition made of rice straw covered with 
a woven cover of rush straw. Being of a set 
size (approximately six feet by three, though 
there can be minor variation), with the length 
always twice the width, tatami mats are also 
used as a measure of room size. The abbrevi-
ated modern form 畳, which has lost the short 
vertical stroke from its lower element 宜 and 
two ‘fi elds’, was offi  cially adopted into the Tōyō 
kanji List promulgated in 1946. OT1968:673; 
GY2008:1673; KJ1970:718-9. We suggest taking 
冝 as ‘not quite proper’. Take 田 as ‘fi eld’ 63.
Mnemonic: REPEATEDLY FOLD PILES OF 
PROPER TATAMI MATS IN A FIELD!?
JŌ
pure, clean
9 strokes
JŌ, amatsusae
surplus, besides
11 strokes
JŌ, tatami, tatamu
tatami mat, size,
fold, pile, repeat
12 strokes
浄
剰
畳
L1
L1
L2
1517
1518
1519
Seal 
; traditional 淨. Consists of 氵 42 ‘water’, 
and 爭 (traditional form of 争 558 ‘confl ict’) as 
phonetic, with associated sense disputed. Gu 
and Ogawa regard 淨 as an abbreviation of 瀞; 
both listed in Shuowen; Gu lists a bronze form 
for 瀞. 瀞 consists of 氵 ‘water’, plus 靜 (tradi-
tional form of 静 548 ‘quiet, calm’, see also 558), 
taken here by Gu  as semantic and phonetic, 
Bronze and seal forms (賸): 
, 
. 剰 is 
considered to be a popular form used for 賸, 
which itself comprises 貝 10 ‘shell (currency), 
valuables’, and 朕 (traditional form of 朕 1731 
‘[royal] We’) as semantic and phonetic in 
the sense ‘give’, an extension of the original 
Seal 
; traditional 疊. Has 宜 1188 (‘good, 
proper’), here in its original sense ‘sacrifi cial 
meat piled up’ with emphasis on ‘piled up’, and 
originally 晶 1502 ( ‘bright, clear’; originally, 
depiction of stars in the sky) (later 畾 [CO, 
‘divided fi elds’], regarded here as variant of 晶), 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘many’, thus 
overall meaning ‘pile up, accumulate, repeat’. 
Used in Japanese for the verb tatamu ‘fold over, 
pile up’, and then for tatami ‘mat’. Originally, 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  451
沖縄   Okinawa　Okinawa 
縄張り   nawabari　cordon, ‘patch’  
自縄自縛  JIJŌJIBAKU fall in own trap
土壌 DOJŌ　earth, soil
壌土 JŌDO　loamy soil 
天壌 TENJŌ heaven and earth
令嬢   REIJŌ　young lady
愛嬢   AIJŌ　beloved daughter  
お嬢さん  oJŌSAN young lady
ers’. Note: as an independent graph, 黽 means 
‘frog, toad’. As the phonetic in 繩, Shuowen 
regards it as an abbreviation of 蠅 NJK ‘fl y’, 
though this is academic, since it does serve 
only as phonetic here and has no semantic 
role. OT1968:792; DJ2009:v3:1071,1107; 
GY2008:1353. We suggest taking the right-
hand part of 1520 as two ‘days’ 日 66 and the 
down stroke as cord/rope.
Mnemonic: THREADING ROPE TAKES TWO 
DAYS
ment’, plus a phonetic with associated sense 
‘remove’. Resultant overall sense ‘remove gar-
ment’ is explained in Shuowen, with reference 
to a Han time edict directing the populace 
to remove outer garments and work in the 
fi elds. Abbreviation in shape of right-hand 
element is standard in modern Japanese (see 
e.g. 1522). MS1995:v1:280-81; KJ1970:554; 
O1968:226; GY2008:1952. We suggest taking 
the right-hand part as ‘six’ 六 80, ‘well’ 井 1575, 
and 䠞 as a variant of ‘clothing’ 衣 444. 
Mnemonic: GROUND AROUND SIX WELLS IS 
CLOTHED IN RICH SOIL
basis of one who is in charge of a house-
hold) and then too for ‘girl, young lady’. The 
Shuowen itself explains 孃 as meaning ‘confu-
sion’, or alternatively ‘fat, corpulent’, and on 
the basis of the latter sense Shirakawa takes 
孃 to refer to corpulent females, both moth-
ers and daughters. Katō, however, considers 
this interpretation to be fl awed. In the Tang 
Dynasty, both 嬢 and 娘 appear to have had 
a polite connotation (‘lady’ [Schuessler]). 
OT1968:263; KJ1970:554-5; DJ2009:v3:1027-8; 
SS1984:460; AS2007:401. As with 1521, we 
again suggest taking the right-hand part as 
‘six’ 六 80, ‘well’ 井 1575, and 䠞 as a variant of 
‘clothing’ 衣 444. 
Mnemonic: YOUNG LADY HAS ENOUGH 
CLOTHES TO FILL SIX WELLS!
JŌ 
earth, soil
16 strokes
JŌ 
young lady, daughter
16 strokes
壌
嬢
L2
L1
JŌ, nawa
rope, cord
15 strokes
縄
L1
1520
1521
1522
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
繩. Has 糸 29 ‘thread’, and CO 黽 (see Note 
below) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘become twisted’ (Ogawa), giving ‘twisted fi b-
Seal 
; traditional 壤. Has 土 64 ‘earth, 
ground’, and 襄 (‘remove garment’; see Note 
below) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘soft and fertile, soft’, giving ‘soft and and 
fertile soil’. Mizukami lists a proposed bronze 
equivalent. Note: the seal form corresponding 
to block script 襄 is made up of 衣 444 ‘gar-
Seal 
, a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 孃. 
Has 女 37 ‘woman’, and 襄 (‘remove garment’; 
see 1521 Note) as phonetic with associated 
sense taken in one view as ‘superior’, giving 
original meaning ‘mother’, and then – through 
confusion with the homophonous graph 娘 
2014 ‘young lady, daughter’ – used also for 
‘daughter, girl’ (Ogawa). Katō also takes ‘high, 
lofty’ as one possible associated sense, but 
notes ‘take charge’ as another, again leading 
to the meaning ‘mother’ (probably on the 

452  The Remaining 1130 Characters
錠前 JŌmae　lock
手錠 teJŌ　handcuff s 
錠剤 JŌZAI pill, tablet
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 金 16 
‘metal’, and 定 371 (‘fi x’, ‘decide’) as semantic 
and phonetic, meaning ‘stable, steady’ (Gu), 
giving ‘metal artefact which is stable’, referring 
originally to an ancient bronze ritual food ves-
sel with legs (Ch.: ding). By extension or loan, 
it came to denote metal ingots or other ingot-
shaped items such as ink cakes and tablets. 
‘Lock’ appears to be a Japanese-only sense. 
GY2008:1611; OT1968:1046; www.britishmu-
seum.org/explore/highlights (bronze ding). 
Mnemonic: A LOCK IS A METAL OBJECT THAT 
FIXES THINGS IN PLACE
JŌ 
lock, tablet
16 strokes
錠
L1
1523
譲歩  JŌHO　concession
譲渡  JŌTO　transfer 
親譲り  oyayuzuri patrimony
Seal 
; traditional 讓. Has 言 118 ‘words; 
speak’, and 襄 (‘remove garment’; see 1521 
Note)) as phonetic with associated original 
sense taken either as i] ‘charge, blame’, giving 
‘charge, lay an accusation’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘push 
into’, giving ‘push someone into question-
ing’ (noted by Mizukami). Katō, who arrives 
at a similar overall meaning, i.e. ‘two persons 
blame each other’, regards the later pre-
dominant sense ‘concede, yield’ as a loan use. 
OT1968:945; MS1995:v2:1215-17; KJ1970:553-
4; AS2007:439. As with 1521, and linking in 
with the 1522 mnemonic, we suggest taking 
the right-hand part as 六 80 ‘six’, 井 1575 ‘well’, 
and 䠞 as a variant of 衣 444 ‘clothing’.  
Mnemonic: YIELD TO WORDS – HAND OVER 
CLOTHES FROM SIX WELLS
JŌ, yuzuru 
hand over, yield
20 strokes
譲
L1
1524
醸造   JŌZŌ　brewing
醸成   JŌSEI 　brew, cause
醸し出す  kamoshidasu cause 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 酉 318 
‘wine’, and 襄 (‘remove garment’; see 1521 
Note) as phonetic with associated sense ‘cram, 
pack tightly’, thus overall meaning ‘pack tightly 
and make ferment’. ‘Cause’ is an extended 
meaning. OT1968:1029; TA1965:358-60; 
KJ1970:555. As with 1521, and linking in with 
the 1522 mnemonic, we suggest taking the 
right-hand part as 六 80 ‘six’, 井 1575 ‘well’, and 
䠞 as a variant of 衣 444 ‘clothing’. 
Mnemonic: BREWING ALCOHOL IN SIX WELLS 
CAUSED RUIN TO CLOTHES
JŌ, kamosu 
brew, cause
20 strokes
醸
L1
1525

The Remaining 1130 Characters  453
手拭   tenugui　hand towel/wipe
払拭   FUSSHOKU　sweep away
拭き込む fukikomu wipe, shine, polish
Late, post-Shuowen graph. Has扌34 ‘hand’, 
and 式 311 (‘form, ceremony’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘make clean’, thus ‘clean 
with/by hand’, i.e. ‘wipe’. Some scholars take 
as wipe using some object (Tōdō, Shirakawa). 
OT1968:413; TA1965:74-80; SS1984:463.  
Mnemonic: WIPE HANDS FOR THE CEREMONY 
SHOKU, nuguu, fuku 
wipe, sweep, polish
9 strokes
拭
L1
1526
生殖  SEISHOKU　procreation
利殖  RISHOKU　money making
殖え高  fuedaka increment
装飾  SŌSHOKU　decoration
首飾り  kubikazari 　necklace
飾り物  kazarimono decoration
触手   SHOKUSHU　feeler
接触   SESSHOKU　contact
触れ合う  fureau touch, contact
‘rot, decay’, (Ogawa). ‘Increase’ is seen as a 
loan sense by Katō. Ogawa considers ‘increase’ 
derives from the graph 殖 having been used in-
terchangeably with 植 337 ‘plant’ at one stage 
(both were homophones in Late Han), ‘increase’ 
being an extended sense from ‘plant’. Tōdō, 
like Shirakawa, links these two graphs and the 
underlying words. KJ1970:557; OT1968:544; 
TA1965:89. 
Mnemonic: INCREASED BARE BONES 
DIRECTLY ENRICH GROUND
bronze form. Alternatively, 
 is taken as ‘person 
in front of food vessel’ (𠂉 here is a variant of 
人 41 ‘person’), with 巾 ‘cloth’, thus ‘wipe food 
utensils clean’ (Shirakawa). In the latter inter-
pretation, ‘make nice, decorate’ may be seen as 
an extended sense. Mizukami lists a proposed 
bronze equivalent. Note: The meaning of 
 
is given as ‘provisions’ in Shuowen, and ‘feed’ 
in Yupian. OT1968:319; MS1995:v2:1456-7; 
SS1984:465; ZY2009:v4:1529. 
Mnemonic: PERSON IN FRONT OF FOOD 
VESSEL WEARS DECORATED CLOTH
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 觸. 
Has 角 97 ‘horn’, and 蜀 (see 766, ‘caterpillar; 
Chu [name of ancient Chinese state]’) as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘strike’, thus ‘push/
stab with horn’ (still a meaning in Chinese); by 
successive extensions of meaning, ‘infringe, vio-
late’, ‘touch’. Abbreviation of right-hand element 
蜀 to 虫 60 ‘insect’ appears to be a late modifi -
cation (block script). OT1968:918; TA1965:285; 
GY2008:1633.  
Mnemonic: TOUCH HORNED 
INSECT – UNFORGETTABLE FEEL!
SHOKU, fueru/yasu
increase, enrich
12 strokes
SHOKU, kazaru
decorate
13 strokes
SHOKU, fureru, sawaru
touch, feel 
13 strokes
殖
飾
触
L1
L1
L2
1527
1528
1529
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 歹 ‘bone 
fragment; die’ (see 1441), and 直 192 (‘direct, 
upright’) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken either as i] ‘adhere, be sticky’, thus ‘fl esh 
on corpse rots and goes mushy’ (Katō), or ii] 
Seal 
. Has 巾 1232 ‘cloth’, and 
 (CO; see 
Note below) taken in one view as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘wipe’, giving ‘wipe clean with 
cloth’, and by extension ‘make nice, decorate’ 
(Ogawa, Mizukami). Mizukami lists a proposed 

454  The Remaining 1130 Characters
侮辱 BUJOKU　insult
屈辱 KUTSUJOKU　humiliation
雪辱 SETSUJOKU　vindication
bronze forms show clams with muscle tissue 
outside the shell to enable movement.  辱 
represents a hand holding a clam shell sharp-
ened for cutting vegetation. This etymology is 
clearly seen in the OBI form for 農 386 ‘farm-
ing’, a graph which incorporates 辱. ‘Shame, 
humiliation’ is usually seen as a loan usage, 
but it may refl ect an extended meaning simi-
lar to the English ‘cutting remark’. KJ1970:561-
2,948; MS1995:v2:1280-81; OT1968:288; 
SS1984:466.
Mnemonic: HAND OUT HUMILIATING 
INSULTS AS CUTTING AS A CLAM-SHELL
JOKU, hazukashimeru
insult, humiliate
10 strokes
辱
L1
1531
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 寸 920 
‘hand’ beneath 辰 ‘Dragon’ (fi fth of the Twelve 
Branches used in traditional Chinese culture 
for purposes such as timekeeping). Note that 
‘dragon’ is an early (OBI) loan use of 辰, which 
derives from a pictograph of a large clam 
(bivalve mollusc); Katō considers the OBI and 
尻押し  shirioshi　backing, support
川尻  kawajiri　river mouth
尻尾  shippo*　tail
伸縮  SHINSHUKU　elasticity
追伸  TSUISHIN　postscript
背伸び senobi　stretch on tiptoe
(‘nine’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘hole, orifi ce’, giving ‘anus’ and by extension 
terms such as ‘buttocks’, ‘rear’, ‘end’, ‘bottom’. 
Over time, the meaning of ‘anus’ itself has 
been virtually displaced by these extended 
meanings, and the common term for ‘anus’ 
nowadays is shiri no ana (‘buttock hole’) or 
the medical term 肛 門 (kōmon). KJ1970:457; 
TA1965:225; OT1968:295.
Mnemonic: NINE SLUMPED BODIES HAVE 
NINE PAIRS OF BUTTOCKS
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists of 
亻 41 ‘person’, and 申 338 (‘say, expound’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘stretch, extend’, 
giving ‘person grows’; meaning then general-
ized to ‘stretch, extend’. KJ1970:574; TA1965: 
754-6; OT1968:54;  SS1984:468. 
Mnemonic: PERSON EXTENSIVELY 
STRETCHES OUT WHAT HE HAS TO SAY 
shiri
buttocks, rear, (back)
end, tail
5 strokes
SHIN, nobiru/basu 
stretch, extend
7 strokes
尻
伸
L1
L2
1532
1533
依嘱 ISHOKU　commission
嘱望 SHOKUBŌ　expectation
嘱託 SHOKUTAKU commission
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
囑. Has 口 22 ‘mouth, speak’, and 屬/属 766 
(‘belong; genus’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense taken either as i] ‘instruct verbally’ 
(Ogawa, Tōdō), or ii] ‘make something stick’ 
(Katō), in either case giving the overall mean-
ing ‘instruct verbally, instruct’. OT1968:196; 
TA1965:285; KJ1970:558.
Mnemonic: ENTRUSTED TO SPEAK ABOUT 
WHAT BELONGS
SHOKU
request, entrust 
13 strokes
嘱
L1
1530
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 尸 256 
‘corpse, slumped body’, sometimes – as here 
– in the latter sense ‘(living) body’, and 九 13 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  455
辛苦  SHINKU　hardship
辛味  karaMI　sharp taste 
辛うじて karōjite　barely 
of ownership. Tattooing was also one of the 
ancient Five Punishments, the others being 
cutting off  the nose, cutting off  a foot, castra-
tion, and capital punishment (ancient Chinese 
culture exhibits a fondness for numerical 
categories). The original meaning ‘tattooing 
needle’ (for slaves and criminals) gave rise to 
various extended senses such as ‘crime’, ‘pain-
ful’, ‘bitter, pungent’. The additional meaning 
‘eighth of the ten Heavenly Stems’ (used in the 
traditional Chinese year-counting system) is 
a loan use. MS1995:v2:1274-5; KJ1970:942-3; 
OT1968:989; AS2007:538. We suggest taking 
the graph as 立 77 ‘stand’ and 十 35 ‘ten’.
Mnemonic: STAND ON TEN SHARP NEEDLES 
– A BITTER EXPERIENCE!
SHIN, karai, tsurai
sharp, bitter
7 strokes
辛
L2
1535
OBI 
; seal 
. Originally, pictograph of 
a large needle with sideways projections 
partway down, presumably to make it easier 
to push the needle into the target surface. The 
signifi cance of the top horizontal stroke in OBI 
and seal (changed to near-vertical or vertical 
in block script) is not clear. This graph is widely 
considered to represent a needle for tattooing 
the foreheads of slaves and criminals as a mark 
侵入 SHINNYŪ　invasion
侵害 SHINGAI　violation 
侵略 SHINRYAKU　aggression
OBI 
 (𠬶); seal 
. All OBI forms seem to 
lack 亻 41 ‘person’; some have 
, made up of 
又 2003 ‘hand’ holding 帚 ‘broom’ (NJK, see 
Note below), while some others have these two 
elements plus 牛 108 ‘ox, cow’. Gu interprets 
the latter, more complex OBI type as signifying 
someone holding a broom to make an ox/cow 
move forward slowly and sweep dirt from it (a 
custom he notes as still practised in farming 
villages), and hence ‘sweep clean’; Mizukami 
also lists OBI forms which include the ‘ox, cow’ 
element, though he makes no reference to this 
SHIN, okasu
invade, violate
9 strokes
侵
L1
1536
element. The seal form no longer has 牛, but 
has 亻 41 ‘person’ added; the second element 
 
is taken by several commentators as semantic 
and phonetic to mean ‘sweep away defi le-
ment’, giving overall meaning ‘sweep away 
defi lement and cleanse’, and ‘invade’ as a loan 
use (Mizukami, Katō). Ogawa prefers to regard 
‘invade’ as an extended sense from his pro-
jected original meaning ‘sweep and advance’. 
Note: 帚 was originally (OBI) a pictograph of 
a broom stood bristle-end up, resting against 
some type of support or frame. GY2008:884-
5; MS1995:v1:76-8,436-7; KJ1970:251-2; 
OT1968:64-5. We suggest taking 彐 as hand, 冖 
as a cover, and 又 2003 as another hand.
Mnemonic: INVADED BY PERSONS WITH 
COVERED HANDS
芯地  SHINJI　padding
灯芯  TŌSHIN　lamp wick
芯だし  SHINdashi　centering
A very late, post-Shuowen graph. Consists of 艹 
53 ‘vegetation, plant’, with 心 164 ‘heart’ as se-
mantic and phonetic, giving ‘core/pith of plant 
or vegetation’. Originally referred in particular 
to a type of rush, the oily pith of which can 
be used as a lamp wick, leading to extended 
senses such as ‘wick’ and also to denote the 
central part of items such as in ‘padding (of 
quilt)’, ‘(pencil) lead’. GY2008:384; OT1968:845. 
Mnemonic: THE CORE OF A PLANT IS ITS HEART
SHIN
core, padding, wick, 
pencil lead
7 strokes
芯
L1
1534

456  The Remaining 1130 Characters
唇音 SHIN’ON　labial sound
口唇 KŌSHIN　lips
陰唇 INSHIN　labia
妊娠   NINSHIN　pregnancy
妊娠可能 NINSHINKANŌ　fertile
妊娠中  NINSHINCHŪ　pregnant
脣, there was another graph 唇, having 口 22 
‘mouth; speak’ as determinative as opposed to 
肉. Originally, 唇 meant ‘be startled’, but this 
graph was borrowed from the Later Han period 
with a second meaning, viz. ‘lips’, and the two 
graphs were used interchangeably until the 
Song and Yuan dynasties (Gu). The later Kangxi 
zidian prescribed only 脣 as correct usage for 
the meaning ‘lips’, treating 唇 as erroneous in 
this sense. The form 唇 was offi  cially approved 
in Japan when included in the Jōyō List prom-
ulgated in 1981. GY2008:1016; OT1968:823; 
DJ2009:v1:117; ZY2009:v2:345; SK1996:1356. 
Mnemonic: LIPS SHUT MOUTH LIKE A CLAM 
associated  sense as i] ‘heavy, pregnant’, 
(Ogawa), or ii] ‘shake, move in jumpy man-
ner’ (here unborn child moving in womb), 
(Shirakawa, Gu), or iii] ‘pile up, duplicate’ 
(Katō). Overall meaning is unanimously ‘be 
pregnant’. Schuessler favors interpretation ii]. 
KJ1970:560; OT1968:259; MS1995:v1:330-31; 
SS1984:471; GY2008:1163; AS2007:611.
Mnemonic: FEMALE CLAM IS PREGNANT
SHIN, kuchibiru
lip(s)
10 strokes 
SHIN
pregnancy
10 strokes 
唇
娠
L1
L1
1538
1539
Seal form A ( 脣 ) 
; seal form B ( 唇 ) 
; late 
graphs (both are listed, as separate entries, in 
Shuowen). At the seal stage, the graph meaning 
‘lips’ was written 脣 ( 肉 209 ‘fl esh, meat; body’), 
and 辰 (originally, pictograph of large clam; see 
1531) as phonetic with associated sense ‘shake, 
tremble, move quickly’, giving ‘(part of) body 
which moves quickly’, i.e. ‘lips’. Separate from 
津々 
  SHINSHIN　brimful
津波   tsunami　tidal wave
津々浦々  tsutsuuraura　throughout land
SHIN, tsu
harbor, ferry, 
crossing place
9 strokes
津
L1
1537
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Analyses vary. 
In one view, has 氵/ 水 42 ‘water, liquid’, and 
聿 400 (‘writing brush’), itself as abbreviation 
of 𦘔 (‘writing brush hairs’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘river crossing place’, giving 
overall meaning ‘river crossing place’ (Katō). Gu, 
who takes 𦘔 to be the original way of writing 
津, considers on the basis of the OBI equivalent 
that 𦘔 originally depicted a person crossing 
a river or stream using a pole, and hence ‘river 
crossing place’. Ogawa, alternatively, analyzes 
as 水 ‘water, river’, plus 聿 as phonetic with as-
sociated sense ‘advance’, giving ‘cross river and 
advance, river crossing’, and the means to do so, 
i.e. ‘ferry’. The meaning ‘harbor’ is a Japanese-on-
ly usage. KJ1970:55-6; GY2008:956; OT1968:574. 
We suggest taking 聿 as ‘brush in hand’. 
Mnemonic: CROSSING WATERS OF HARBOR 
BY FERRY, BRUSH IN HAND
振動   SHINDŌ　swing
振り切る  furikiru　shake off 
二年振り  ninenburi　after two years
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 扌 34 
‘hand’, and 辰 (orig. ‘large clam’, see 1531) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘shake, move 
about’, thus ‘shake about’ (Ogawa). Katō, 
however, takes orig meaning ‘open up (a 
clam)’, and ‘move about, shake’ as extended 
sense from clam moving about. Furi ‘pos-
tures (in dance); manner’ derives from kun 
SHIN, furu/ri/ruu 
wave, swing, airs, 
manner, after
10 strokes
振
L1
1540
OBI 
; 
 seal  . Has 女 37 ‘woman’, and 辰 
1531 (orig. ‘large clam’) as phonetic with 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  457
浸食  SHINSHOKU　erosion
浸水  SHINSUI　inundation
水浸し  mizubitashi　fl ooding
soaked in sacred wine, giving ‘ritually cleanse 
a shrine’. The seal script, as the phonetic for 
this graph, has 
, comprising 又 2003 ‘hand’  
beneath 帚 ‘broom’ (NJK), both these being 
beneath 宀 ‘roof, dwelling’ (later simplifi ed at 
block script stage to 𠬶 ); the associated sense 
is taken either as i] ‘insert, put in’ (Ogawa), or 
ii] ‘soak’ (Katō), in either case giving overall 
meaning ‘soak in water/liquid’. GY2008:1137; 
SS1984:472; OT1968:578; KJ1970:252. Take 彐 
as hand, 冖 as cover, and 又 as other hand. 
Mnemonic: SOAK HANDS, COVERING THEM 
WITH WATER
SHIN, hitasu/ru
soak, immerse 
10 strokes
浸
L1
1541
OBI 
; seal 
. Gu gives OBI form of water 
droplets with 帚 NJK 1536 ‘broom’  and 宀 
30 ‘roof, building’, which he takes to mean 
‘gradually sweep clean a building’. Based on 
seal equivalent, Shirakawa proposes another 
original meaning, taking 宀 specifi cally as 
‘shrine’ and the broom as one that has been 
紳士  SHINSHI　gentleman
紳士録 SHINSHIROKU　Who’s Who
紳士的 SHINSHITEKI　gentlemanly
that 紳 was used to denote more elaborate 
sashes of a type worn by males of noble 
status, thus giving rise to the extended sense 
‘gentleman’. Mizukami lists several proposed 
bronze equivalents. In Chinese, in addition to 
‘gentleman’, this graph retains meanings of 
‘bind’ and ‘waistband’, whereas ‘sash, belt’ is 
eff ectively redundant in Japanese. SS1984:474; 
MS1995:v2:1010-12; TA1965:756. We suggest 
taking the elements of the modern form 申 
as comprising 日 66 ‘sun’ and a long vertical 
stroke  representing piercing.
Mnemonic: SUN SEEMS PIERCED BY THREAD 
– WHAT CAN A GENTLEMAN SAY?
Or: FINE THREADS ON BELT SAYS HE’S A 
GENTLEMAN
SHIN
gentleman, belt
11 strokes
紳
L1
1542
Seal 
. This graph has 糸 29 ‘thread, cord’, 
together with 申 338 (‘say, expound’) as a 
phonetic with an associated sense taken in 
one analysis as ‘extend, stretch’, this being 
interpreted to give the following overall 
meanings: i] ‘long sash to extend around 
the waist’ (Mizukami, Tōdō), or ii] ‘sash to 
wear to straighten body posture’ (Mizukami). 
Shirakawa, by contrast, takes the associated 
sense as ‘bundle/put together’, thus giving 
‘sash to bring garments together’. It appears 
reading furu ‘shake’, as also the verbal suffix 
-buru ‘pose, put on airs’. Use of 振 for another 
suffix, -buri ‘after (time interval)’, is also loan 
use based on sound value furu. OT1968:414; 
KJ1970:560-61.
Mnemonic: WAVE CLAM IN HAND IN 
SWINGING MANNER
診断 SHINDAN　diagnosis 
診察 SHINSATSU　examination
往診 ŌSHIN　house-call
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 言 
118 ‘words, speak,’, together with 㐱 (CO, 
‘thick/luxuriant hair’, etc; see Note below) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken either 
as i] ‘without gap/omission’, giving ‘make 
a judgement without omission’ (Tōdō), or 
ii] ‘press down’, giving ‘press pulse of sick 
SHIN, miru
diagnose, examine
12 strokes
診
L1
1543

458  The Remaining 1130 Characters
Bronze 
; seal forms include 
; a late graph 
(Shuowen); the traditional form has 爿 (1488, 
and see below), not 丬. Ancestral OBI and 
bronze forms have 宀 30 ‘roof, building’ over 
帚 ‘broom’ 1536, some additionally with 又 
2003 ‘hand’. Shuowen lists a small number 
of different graphs which have been treated 
as ancestral forms of 寝, and the analyses of 
commentators reflect this variation.  Ogawa 
gives a bronze form which he analyses as 
宀 ‘roof, building’ over 
 (‘ritually cleanse’) 
as semantic and phonetic, giving  ‘shrine/
sacred room free from defilement’, being a 
place where in ancient times sick members 
of the nobility slept; by extension, ‘bed-
room’, indicated by the later addition of 爿 
‘frame, bed’. Katō is in agreement in broad 
terms, though not on 爿 as a later addition. 
Mizukami treats one of the forms listed 
by Katō, viz. 𡪢 (listed in Shuowen) as the 
predecessor of 寝, taking 𡪢 as made up of 
宀 ‘roof, building’ over person 亻 41 and 
 as 
phonetic with associated sense taken either 
as i] ‘ritually cleanse person with broom’, 
giving ‘purification building/room for sacred 
ritual’, or ii] ‘gradually enter deep inside’, 
giving ‘place (room) deep inside a house’; by 
extension, ‘place to sleep’. An abbreviated 
shape close to 寝 occurs already in clerical 
script.OT1968:282; KJ1970:252; SK1984:226; 
MS1995:v1:388-9; DJ2009:v2:592,602. We 
suggest taking 丬 as ‘bed on its end’, 宀 ‘roof/ 
building’; 彐 as ‘hand’, 又 as ‘another hand’, 
and 冖 as a ‘cover’.
Mnemonic: SLEEP IN BUILDING, BOTH 
HANDS OUT OF BED-COVER
寝室   SHINSHITSU　bedroom
寝入る   neiru　fall asleep
寝かし物  nekashimono　unsold goods
SHIN, neru/kasu
sleep, lie down
13 strokes
寝
L2
1544
person and check, examine’ (Ogawa). From 
an early stage the concept of examination 
and judgement was narrowed to health. 
Note: 㐱 is comprised of the determinative 
character 彡 (‘feathers’, ‘hairs’, see 115), in 
Tōdō’s view, a pictographic representation of 
long hair, beneath an element which in the 
seal form is 人 41 ‘person’, modified in block 
script to 𠆢. Mizukami also agrees regarding 
the seal stage, but suggests OBI and bronze 
forms might instead depict a person urinat-
ing. This is not particularly significant since 
the dictionary or central meaning of 㐱 is 
unrelated to its associated sense. Mnemoni-
cally, 𠆢 can be taken properly as person, 
or alternatively it could be taken as a cover. 
MS1995:v1:44-6;TA1965:743-6; GY2008:514.
Mnemonic: WORDY DIAGNOSIS WHEN 
PERSON HAS THREE HAIRS EXAMINED  
Or: WORDY DIAGNOSIS IS TO COVER UP 
THOSE THREE HAIRS
慎重   SHINCHŌ　prudence 
謹慎   KINSHIN　good conduct
慎み深い tsutsushimibukai　discreet
Seal 
; traditional 愼. Has 忄 164 ‘heart, mind’, 
with 眞/真 341 (‘truth’) as phonetic with 
associated sense taken either as i] ‘draw in, 
tighten’, giving ‘rein in one’s feelings’ (Katō), 
or ii] ‘be full, extend everywhere’, giving ‘be 
discreet’ (Ogawa). Mizukami notes several 
proposed bronze equivalents. KJ1970:559; 
OT1968:383; MS1995:v1:520-21.
Mnemonic: DISCREETLY REFRAIN FROM 
SHOWING TRUE FEELINGS 
SHIN, tsutsushimu
be discreet, refrain
13 strokes
慎
L1
1545

The Remaining 1130 Characters  459
審議 SHINGI　deliberation
不審 FUSHIN　doubt
審判 SHINPAN　judgment, umpiring
this is supported by Schuessler, who also notes 
a possible link. Ogawa takes the meaning as 
‘separate and clarify matters covered over’. 
Gu interprets the graph (both 宷 and 審) as 
meaning ‘inquire into/examine closely inside a 
room’. The same Shuowen entry also notes the 
form with 番 215 (‘number; guard’) substituted 
for 釆, i.e. 審. Adoption of 番 as the lower ele-
ment as an alternative to 宷 at the seal stage 
may refl ect infl uence of an earlier variant form. 
DJ2009:v1:95; MS1995:v2:1352-4; KJ1970:566; 
AS2007:458; OT1968:284; GY2008:727-8.
Mnemonic: INVESTIGATE NUMBERS UNDER 
COVER OF ROOF, THEN JUDGE 
SHIN
judge, investigate
15 strokes
審
L1
1546
Seal (宷) 
. Entry heading in Shuowen has
宷, comprising 宀 30 ‘roof, building’ over 釆 
215 (orig open hand holding grain or similar 
> ‘divide up, distinguish’), thus ‘clarify matters 
deep inside a house’ (Katō). Katō considers 宀 
here carries the nuance ‘deep inside’ through a 
word-family connection with 深 342 ‘deep’, and 
薪炭  SHINTAN　fuel
薪小屋 takigigoya　woodshed
薪割り  makiwari　woodchopping
fi rewood)’, with 艹 53 ‘plant’ added to highlight 
this sense – and extended sense ‘fi rewood’ – 
when 新 came to be used in loan usage for 
another word meaning ‘new’ (the two were 
homophonous in early Chinese). DJ2009:v1:82; 
KJ1970:575-6; OT1968:872; AS2007:538-9.
Mnemonic: USE NEWLY CHOPPED PLANTS 
AS KINDLING 
SHIN, takigi, maki
fi rewood, kindling 
16 strokes
薪
L1
1548
地震  JISHIN　earthquake
身震い miburui　trembling body
震え声  furuegoe　trembling voice
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has  雨 3 ‘rain’ 
(sometimes more broadly, ‘sky, weather’), with 
辰 1531 (originally clamshell) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘shake’, thus ‘weather that 
makes things shake’ (Mizukami says ‘thunder 
rumbles in heavy rainstorm’); sense then gen-
eralized to ‘shake, tremble’. MS1995:v2:1422-3; 
OT1968:1086; SS1984:477.
Mnemonic: RAIN MAKES CLAM SHAKE AND 
TREMBLE?!
SHIN, furuu/eru 
shake, tremble
15 strokes
震
L2
1547
白刃 HAKUJIN　drawn sword
刃物 hamono　bladed object
両刃 RYŌba　double blade
to a pictograph represent (a word of) diff erent 
meaning, in this case, 刀 198 ‘knife, sword’, plus 
丶 to highlight ‘blade’. The form 刃 occurs early 
in Chinese calligraphic tradition (Northern Wei 
onwards). Note that in many Chinese characters 
刀 means ‘knife’ rather than ‘sword’. Also note that 
the blade here is the inside edge, unlike the ka-
tana. QX2000:183; MS1995:v1:122-3; OT1968:110; 
FC1974:v1:201; KZ2001:237-8/3671; MR2007:305.
Mnemonic: SWORD WITH MARKED BLADE
JIN, ha, yaiba
blade, sword
3 strokes
刃
L1
1549
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional (Kangxi zidian) 刃/ 
刃. One of a small number of characters of the 
‘indicative symbol’ type in which stroke(s) added 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 新 165 
(‘new’) in its orig meaning ‘chop tree (for 

460  The Remaining 1130 Characters
尽力   JINRYOKU　eff ort(s)
尽未来  JINMIRAI　for ever
心尽くし  kokorozukushi　kind eff orts
(‘embers’) as phonetic, but again with the 
same associated sense and overall meaning 
as explained above. A similar view is held by 
Tōdō, who takes 㶳 as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘empty’, and interprets as referring 
to small bits of food left in a bowl after eating, 
again giving ‘run out, use up’ as the overall 
meaning. A further view, noted in Mizukami, 
takes 聿 in the OBI form as phonetic with 
associated meaning ‘small, small bits’, to give 
‘droplets of ink from writing brush all drip 
down into bowl’. The simplifi ed form 尽 ap-
pears to be based on examples of 盡 written 
cursively at the block script stage.KJ1970:566-
7; BK1957:108; OT1968:692; TA1965:780; 
MS1995:908-9,798-800; FC1977:716-7. We 
suggest taking 尺 as person with back-pack 
(see 253, 895) and the two strokes as ‘two’.
Mnemonic: PERSON EXHAUSTED BY 
CARRYING TWO BACK-PACKS 
JIN, tsukiru/kusu
use up, exhaust
6 strokes
尽
L1
1550
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional 盡. The OBI form 
has 聿 159 ‘writing brush, brush’ (itself origi-
nally [OBI] pictograph of hand holding brush) 
over 皿 300 ‘bowl’. In one interpretation, 聿 is 
taken as phonetic with associated sense ‘emp-
ty’, giving ‘wipe inside of bowl clean’ (Katō; 
Karlgren is in agreement ). In his analysis, Katō 
also treats 聿 in this graph as incorporating 
what later came to be written separately as 
𦘔 1537 ‘writing brush hairs’, a view which is 
shared in principle by Ogawa, who takes 𦘔 in 
the extended sense ‘clean with brush’, giving 
‘empty bowl’, and by extension ‘run out, use 
up’. At the seal stage, 聿 was modifi ed to 㶳 
迅速 JINSOKU　rapidity 
迅雷 JINRAI　thunderclap
奮迅 FUNJIN great rage
JIN, hayai
fast, intense
6 strokes
迅
L1
1551
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has ⻌ ‘walk, 
go, move’ 85, and 卂 (‘bird fl ying’ [Gu], or 
‘falcon’ [Shirakawa]). Gu takes 卂 as semantic 
and phonetic, giving ‘rapid’ as an extended 
sense from ‘bird fl ying’ (Ogawa is in agree-
ment). Shirakawa follows a diff erent interpre-
tation and takes this element as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘rapid’, giving ‘move rapidly’ 
as the original sense. GY2008:340; SS1984:480; 
OT1968:993. We suggest taking 
 as ‘canopy’ 
and 十 35 as ‘ten’.
Mnemonic: MOVE FAST TO PUT UP TEN 
CANOPIES – INTENSE WORK
甚大 JINDAI na　immense 
甚六 JINROKU　dunce
幸甚 KŌJIN very glad
JIN, hanahada(shii)
great(ly),extreme
9 strokes
甚
L1
1552
Bronze 
; seal 
. The upper element in 
bronze is typically taken as 甘 1139 (‘sweet’; 
originally, depiction of something being 
tasted in the mouth). Bronze occurrences of 甚 
show some fl uctuation in shape of the lower 
part, leading to variation in interpretation. 
Katō takes as 匹 1893 (‘match/equal; counter 
for certain animals’; originally, depicted two 
similar lengths/rolls of cloth next to each 
other) in the extended sense ‘union of man 
and woman’, combining with 甘 as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘enjoy’, to give original 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  461
陣頭 JINTŌ　lead, van (army) 
陣地 JINCHI　position
陣痛 JINTSŪ labor pains 
JIN
(army) camp, position
10 strokes
陣
L1
1553
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Considered to 
be derived from 陳 1732 ‘arrange; explain’, 
the original meaning of which is probably 
best taken as ‘evenly pile up mounds of earth’ 
(Tōdō), and by extension ‘set out, display’. The 
determinative 阝 when positioned on the left 
also in itself often indicates piles of earth, as 
well as ‘mound’ and ‘hill’ (262). Qiu points out 
that if the two final strokes of 陳 are written 
as one (when the graph is written cursively), 
the resultant shape is 陣, and this was then 
adopted in place of 陳 to clearly represent 
the word ‘battle array’. This view of 陣 evolv-
ing from 陳 through cursivization is also 
supported by Gu. Qiu also notes that because 
vehicles played an important part in ancient 
warfare, there is a semantic connection also 
in the substitution of 車 33 ‘vehicle’ in this 
graph in place of the phonetic 東 201 (‘east’). 
‘(Military) position, camp’ are extended sens-
es. QX2000:327-8; GY2008:342-3; TA1965:757-
9; MS1995:v2:1396-8; FC1977:1082-3.
Mnemonic: VEHICLES AND EARTHEN 
MOUNDS INDICATE ARMY CAMP 
overall meaning ‘enjoy union’, with ‘extreme’ 
treated as an extended sense based on the 
associated sensation of extreme pleasure. 
Ogawa, by contrast, takes the bronze form of 
甚 very diff erently as depicting a pot on top 
of a cooking stove, giving ‘cooking stove’, and 
regarding ‘extreme’ as a loan use. Alternatively 
again, Gu takes the graph as 甘 ‘taste some-
thing in the mouth’ over what he considers to 
be a ladle, giving ‘ladle something good to eat 
into the mouth’. At the seal stage, the lower 
element, the way of writing for which varied 
somewhat in bronze, came to be written in 
a shape very close to 匹, leading to it in fact 
being interpreted as 匹 in Shuowen. In the 
modern form, the strokes of 甘 have been 
joined to the lower element 匹. KJ1970:208-
9; MS1995:v2:866-7,v1:160-61; OT1968:665; 
GY2008:1157. 
Mnemonic: SWEETLY MATCHED COUPLE 
GREATLY IN LOVE
尋問   JINMON　questioning 
尋常   JINJŌ　commonplace
尋ね出す tazunedasu seek out  
JIN, tazuneru, hiro 
inquire, seek, a 
fathom
12 strokes
尋
L1
1554
OBI ; seal 
. The OBI form shows a person 
with arms stretched out against a flat surface, 
giving ‘stretch out the arms’; by extension, 
the length represented when arms stretched 
out’. The English word ‘fathom’ originally 
also derives from outstretched arms (later 
standardized to six feet). (Tōdō includes 尋 in 
word-family ‘get deep inside’, giving extended 
sense ‘inquire’.) At the seal stage, the early 
Chinese word concerned is written employ-
ing the elements 右 2 ‘right’ (originally, ‘hand, 
right hand’), plus 左 24 ‘left’ (originally, ‘left 
hand’), together with 彡 (‘writing brush hairs’, 
see 115 and 517) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘extend the arms’, giving overall mean-
ing ‘stretch out the arms’, and then ‘length 
span of outstretched arms’. When it came 
to the clerical script, the element 彡 was 
already being omitted, thus resulting in 尋. 
MS1995:v1:396-7; DJ2009:v1:260; KJ1970:581; 
OT1968:288; SK1984:235; TA1965:789-93. We 
suggest taking 彐 as one hand, 寸 as another 
hand 920, 口 as ‘opening’ 22, and 工 125 ‘work’. 
Mnemonic: INQUIRE ABOUT OPENING FOR 
WORKING HANDS

462  The Remaining 1130 Characters
腎石 JINSEKI　kidney stone
肝腎 KANJIN　main, vital
腎臓 JINZŌ kidney  
須磨  SUMA　Suma (place name)  
必須  HISSU　essential, compulsory
恵比須 EBISU god of wealth  
鼓吹   KOSUI　advocacy 
吹雪   fubuki*　snowstorm
吹き倒す fukitaosu blow down  
JIN 
kidney
13 strokes
SU, subeka(raku) 
should, necessary
15 strokes
SUI, fuku 
blow, exhale
7 strokes
腎
須
吹
L1
L1
L2
1555
1556
1557
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 肉/月 
209 ‘fl esh, meat; body’, and 臤 1237 (CO,‘pluck 
out eye [as punishment]’) as phonetic.  Associ-
ated sense of 臤 here is regarded as unclear, 
but possibly ‘remove’, giving ‘bodily part 
which removes (waste fl uid)’. Shuowen ex-
plains as being where (bodily) fl uid is stored. 
OT1968:824; GY2008:611. We suggest using 
臣 543 ‘minister, eye’, and 又 2003 ‘hand’. 
Mnemonic: MINISTER PUTS HAND TO HIS 
BODY – KIDNEY TROUBLE 
Bronze 
; seal 
. Originally, pictograph 
of a man’s head/face 頁 103 with wavy lines 
彡 here meaning whiskers of a beard, (see 
also 115 and 517). Borrowed for its sound 
value as a convenient way to write another 
homophonous or near-homophonous word 
in early Chinese meaning ‘must, should’. Mizu-
kami lists several proposed OBI equivalents. 
MS1995:v2:1442-3; GY2008:891; OT1968:1101; 
WD1974:629-31.
Mnemonic: IT’S NECESSARY TO GROW 
WHISKERS ON YOUR FACE
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 口 22 ‘mouth’, and 欠 
496 ‘gap; lack’, the latter in its original core 
meaning of ‘open mouth wide, yawn’, giving 
‘breathe out, breathe out suddenly’ (Ogawa 
says ‘breathe out vigorously’); by extension, 
‘play wind instrument’. MS1995:v1:218-20; 
KJ1970:578; OT1968:173.  
Mnemonic: LACK MOUTH, BUT CAN STILL 
BLOW AND EXHALE
炊事  SUIJI　cooking 
飯炊き  meshitaki　cook, maid
自炊 
 JISUI self-catering  
SUI, taku 
cook, boil
8 strokes
炊
L1
1558
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 火 8 ‘fi re’, 
and 欠 496 (‘lack’) as abbrev of 吹 1557 ‘blow’ 
as semantic and phonetic > ‘blow upon fi re’ to 
make bigger. As fi re is important for cook-
ing, ‘cook’ evolved as extended meaning. 
GY2008:704-5; KJ1970:577; OT1968:617.  
Mnemonic: LACK FIRE BUT COOK 
NONETHELESS!? 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  463
統帥 TŌSUI　supreme command
元帥 GENSUI　fi eld marshal 
将帥 SHŌSUI commander
SUI 
commander
9 strokes
帥
L1
1559
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 巾 1232 ‘cloth’, and 
left-hand element which at seal stage is  
(taken as pictograph of buttocks 370 or hill-
ocks 262) as phonetic, but based on earlier 
bronze form Katō takes this to have initially 
been not  but a similar shape having verti-
cal stroke on left with two down-facing claws 
indicating barbs, thus ‘barbed cane/whip’, 
representing a word that was a near-homo-
phone of that represented by . Either way, 
associated sense of left-hand element is tak-
en by Katō to be ‘wipe’, thus ‘cloth for wiping’, 
i.e. ‘towel’; Ogawa also takes overall meaning 
as ‘towel’, but  takes associated sense (for  ) 
as ‘hang down’. However, another view sees 
left-hand element in bronze form described 
above as indicating person holding in both 
hands an object taken as some sort of fabric 
to present as gift, with 巾 ‘cloth’ added on 
the right as a clarifying determinative (Gu). 
The meaning ‘lead, command’ is a loan 
usage of 帥 to write what was otherwise 
sometimes written 率 767 (‘rate; command’). 
KJ1970:525-6; OT1968:316; GY2008:156; 
BK1957:136. Suggest taking  as ‘hillocks’. 
Mnemonic: COMMANDER CARRIES CLOTH 
BANNER UP HILL
無粋 BUSUI 　inelegant
粋人 SUIJIN　man of taste 
粋狂 SUIKYŌ whim, caprice
SUI, iki 
pure, essence, ‘style’
10 strokes
粋
L1
1560
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 粹. 
Has 米 220 ‘rice’, and 卒 564 (‘end; soldier’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘pound, 
smash’, thus ‘rice well pounded and impurity-
free’; i.e. ‘pure’. The meaning ‘smart, stylish’ 
is Japanese-only usage. The simplifi ed form 
粋 seems to have become popular in the 
Northern Wei Dynasty (387-534). OT1968:761; 
SS1984:484-5; FC1974:v2:1689. Suggest right-
hand as 九 13 ‘nine’ and 十 35 ‘ten’.
Mnemonic: NINETEEN GRAINS OF PURE RICE
衰弱 SUIJAKU　debility
老衰 RŌSUI　senility
盛衰 SEISUI　vicissitudes
Seal 
. The seal form has 衣 444 ‘garment’, 
and a second element between the upper 
and lower parts of 衣 to represent (interwo-
ven) straw or similar pointed downwards, 
giving ‘rain-cape, cape’. Shuowen defi nes as 
‘rain-cape made from vegetation’. Gu alone 
prefers to interpret as incorporating a hat also. 
Mizukami lists a proposed bronze equivalent. 
MS1995:v2:1166-7; OT1968:902; GY2008:1104. 
Suggest 
 as pierced ‘hole’ 口 22.
Mnemonic: CLOTHING WEAKENED AFTER 
HOLE PIERCED IN IT 
SUI, otoroeru
weaken, wane
10 strokes
衰
L1
1561

464  The Remaining 1130 Characters
遂行   SUIKŌ　attainment
未遂   MISUI　attempt(ed)
仕遂げる shitogeru　attain
and phonetic, thus giving ‘(group of) wild 
boar push others aside and move forward’ 
(Katō). In another view, 
 is taken as phonet-
ic with associated sense ‘push forward’, thus 
‘push and move forward’, hence ‘achieve, ac-
complish’ (Ogawa). It is difficult to determine 
whether the meaning ‘finally’ is an extended 
use from ‘achieve’, or a loan use of the graph. 
OT1968:1006; KJ1970:578-9; WD1974:676.
Mnemonic: FINALLY ATTAIN ONE’S GOAL OF 
MOVING EIGHT PIGS
SUI, togeru, tsui (ni)
attain, fi nally
12 strokes
遂
L1
1563
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 遂. Has 辶/⻌ 
85 ‘go, walk, move’ and  豕 89/ 1807 ‘wild 
boar, wild pig’, plus 八 70 ‘eight’, in its original 
sense ‘split’ ‘disperse’, taking 
 as semantic 
麻酔  MASUI　anesthesia 
酔払い yopparai　drunkard 
船酔い funayoi　sea-sickness
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 醉. 
Has 酉 318 ‘wine’ (orig pictograph of wine 
jar), and 卒 564 ‘end, soldier’ as semantic and 
phonetic, thus ‘fi nish drinking all wine off ered’. 
By extension, ‘become intoxicated’; also, ‘feel 
sick’, ‘feel elated’. The form 酔 seems to be 
based on cursivized forms circa Tang Dynasty 
onwards. FC1974:v2:2285-6; OT1968:1026; 
TA1965:694-5; GY2008:1791. Take right-hand 
as 九 13 ‘nine’ and 十 35 ‘ten’. 
Mnemonic: DRUNK AND DIZZY AFTER 
NINETEEN JARS OF WINE 
SUI, you
drunk, dizzy
11 strokes
酔
L1
1562
睡眠 SUIMIN　sleep
熟睡 JUKUSUI　sound sleep
午睡 GOSUI　nap, siesta
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 目 76 
‘eye’ and 垂 918 ‘suspend, hang, droop’. The 
latter element is taken either as semantic and 
phonetic, giving ‘lower eyelids’, and by exten-
sion ‘sleep’ (Ogawa, Gu), or as just phonetic 
with associated sense ‘limp, fl abby’, giving 
‘eyes get tired and go limp’, with ‘sleep’ likewise 
as the meaning by extension (Katō, Tōdō). 
OT1968:701; GY2008:1584; KJ1970:577. 
Mnemonic: DROOPY EYES LEAD TO SLEEP
SUI, nemuru
sleep
13 strokes
睡
L1
1564
穂状 SUIJŌ　spear shape
稲穂 inaho　ear of rice 
穂先 hosaki　spearhead
SUI, ho
ear/spear (of grain)
15 strokes
穂
L1
1565
OBI ; seal form A (
) ; seal form B (穗) 
; 
traditional 穗. The ancestral OBI form of this 
graph exhibits some variation, the form given 
here has 又 2003 ‘hand’ with 刀 198 ‘knife’ 
over 禾 87 ‘grain plant’, interpreted as ‘cut 
grain; grain’ (Ma). At the seal stage, for this 
graph Shuowen has – in seal form A – what 
is considered to be a variant of the above, 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  465
随筆  ZUIHITSU　random notes
随行員 ZUIKŌIN　attendant
随分  ZUIBUN　considerably
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional form: 
隨. Has ⻌ 85 ‘walk, go’, and 隋 (CO ‘shredded 
sacrifi cial meat’) as phonetic with associated 
ZUI
follow 
12 strokes
随
L1
1566
sense ‘follow, accompany’, thus ‘follow behind’ 
(Katō, Ogawa). Tōdō takes the associated sense 
as ‘hang down limp’, but still arrives at the same 
overall meaning (‘hang on, follow from behind’). 
KJ1970:417-8; TA1965:544; OT1968:1007,824; 
BK1957:23. Take right-hand as 有 423 ‘have’, and 
left as 262 ‘hills’.
Mnemonic: HAVE FOLLOWERS AFTER 
MOVING INTO THE HILLS
真髄 SHINZUI　essence
脳髄 NŌZUI　brain
骨髄 KOTSUZUI　bone marrow
ZUI
marrow
19 strokes
髄
L1
1567
Seal (𩪦) 
; traditional (髄) 髓. What is seen as 
seal script predecessor of 髄 has 骨 877 ‘bone’, 
and 隓 (CO ‘destroy, dismantle’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘fat’, thus ‘fat inside bone’ 
(Katō). Later form 髓, the traditional form, 
was once seen as popular equivalent of 𩪦 in 
which the phonetic element 隓 is replaced 
by 遀 (CO of unclear status and meaning); 
Ogawa takes associated sense of 遀 here 
diff erently from the associated sense of 隓 
above, seeing it as ‘linked to inside’, thus overall 
sense ‘centre of bone’. Examples of simpler 
form 髄 date from Northern Wei Dynasty 
(387-534). FC1974:v2:2515; ZY2009:v4:1349; 
GY2008:2017; OT1968:1133; KJ1970:417; 
BK1957:23. Take ⻌ 85 ‘move’ and 有 423 ‘have’, 
plus 骨 877 ‘bone’. 
Mnemonic: WE HAVE MEATY MARROW IN 
OUR BONES SO WE CAN MOVE
consisting in one view of 爫 1739 ‘claw’, but 
here, as sometimes, ‘hand’ over 禾 ‘grain plant’, 
giving ‘pick/gather ears of grain’. In a diver-
gent view, though, this is 禾 combined with 
not 爫 ‘hand/claw’ but 
 (CO; an abbreviated 
form of ‘blossoms hanging from tree/shrub’ 
[originally a pictograph]; see Note below), 
possibly itself  in abbreviated shape here, as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘hang down’, 
giving ‘ears of grain hang down’ (Katō). While 
the entry heading in Shuowen has seal form 
A above ( 
 ), it also notes the alternative 
form with 禾 plus 惠 1259 (traditional form 
of 恵 ‘bless, favor’) as phonetic; ‘hang down’ 
is provisionally taken here as also being the 
associated sense of 惠 / 恵. Occurs in the ab-
breviated form 穂 from the Sui Dynasty (581-
618AD) onwards. MR2007:364; OT1968:737; 
DJ2009:v2:566; MS1995:v1:22-3,v2:964-5; 
KJ1970:579; FC1974:v2:1631. We suggest tak-
ing the right-hand part as ‘ten’ 十 35, ‘fi elds’ 田 
63 and ‘heart’ 心 164. Note: Mizukami notes 
that this CO graph may be an old form for 垂 
918 ‘hang down’. 
Mnemonic: HEARTENED BY (SP)EARS ON 
GRAIN PLANTS IN TEN FIELDS
枢軸 SŪJIKU　axis
枢要 SŪYŌ　importance
中枢 CHŪSŪ　center, pivot
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
樞. Has 木 73 ‘wood, tree’, and 區 282 (‘section, 
ward’) as phonetic with associated sense ‘hinge 
pin, pivot’, giving ‘(wooden) pivot’, and by 
extension ‘main/vital point’. 枢 appears to be a 
late simplifi ed form. KJ1970:504; TA1965:310; 
AS2007:471.
Mnemonic: PIVOT IS IMPORTANT SECTION 
OF WOODEN DOOR
SŪ, toboso
pivot, door
8 strokes 
枢
L1
1568

466  The Remaining 1130 Characters
崇拝 SŪHAI　worship
崇高 SŪKŌ na　sublime, lofty
崇敬 SŪKEI　reverence
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 山 26 
‘mountain’, and 宗 899 (‘religion’) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken in one view as 
‘come together, gather’ or ‘pile up’, giving 
‘mountains come together and pile up’ (Katō). 
Alternatively, 宗 here is taken by Ogawa as 
meaning ‘admired’, giving ‘most admired high 
mountain’. Either way, by extension ‘look up 
high to, revere’. KJ1970:644; OT1968:305; 
AS2007:363. 
Mnemonic: RELIGIOUSLY REVERE LOFTY 
MOUNTAIN
SŪ, agameru
lofty, noble, revere 
11 strokes 
崇
L1
1569
据え置く  sueoku　leave as is
見据える  misueru　gaze, stare
拮据   KIKKYO　hard work
stiff ’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘injury’, to give – in similar 
vein – ‘hand injury’ (Shirakawa) (Gu says ‘hand 
disease’). By contrast, Katō sees the main 
meaning (in Japanese only) as ‘hands being 
busy in a work context’, leading to a variety 
of extended meanings, such as ‘place down’, 
‘set’, and ‘work’. In all cases, hands and their 
activities are core. OT1968:417; SS1984:181; 
GY2008:1224; KJ1985:263.
Mnemonic: HAND IS IN SET PLACE
sueru/waru, KYO 
set, (set in) place, work
11 strokes
据
L1
1570
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists of 
扌/手 64 ‘hand’, with 居 678 (‘reside, be’) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken either 
as i] ‘bent’, giving ‘hand shrinks/becomes 
杉あや  sugiaya　herringbone 
杉垣  sugigaki　cedar hedge
杉並木 suginamiki cedar avenue
sugi
cedar, cryptomeria
7 strokes
杉
L1
1571
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 木 73 ‘tree, 
wood’, and 彡 115 (‘writing brush hairs’) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken as 
‘needle’, giving ‘tree with needle-like leaves’, 
and hence ‘cedar’ (Ogawa). Tōdō takes the 
associated sense as ‘many (needle-like leaves) 
gathered together’, and so ‘cedar’, but this 
interpretation seems to be more speculative. 
OT1968:490; TA1965:811-14.
Mnemonic: CEDAR IS TREE WITH HAIR-LIKE 
LEAVES
山裾  yamasuso　foot of mountain 
裾模様 susoMOYŌ　design on skirt
裾裏  susoura hem lining 
suso, KYO
skirt, hem, cuff 
13 strokes
裾
L1
1572
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 衣/衤 
444 ‘garment’, and 居 678 (‘be, reside’) as pho-
netic with associated sense taken in one view 
as ‘cover what is beneath’, giving ‘(part of) 
garment which covers from outside’ (Tōdō); 
as a hem or cuff presumably involves folding 
the edge of fabric on the outside and fixing 
it onto the underside. This analysis therefore 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  467
浅瀬  asase　shallows 
瀬戸  seto　strait, channel
瀬戸物 setomono porcelain 
se
shallows, rapids
19 strokes
瀬
L1
1573
current’ (Katō, Tōdō), or ii] ‘rub’, giving ‘strong 
current which rushes over rocks’ (Ogawa). In 
early China it was also applied to the name 
of a specific river in Kuangxi. KJ1970:890-91; 
TA1965:551; OT1968:613.  For the middle and 
right-hand elements we suggest taking as 束
561 ‘parcel’ and 頁 103 ‘head’. 
Mnemonic: PUT PARCEL ON YOUR HEAD 
WHEN CROSSING SHALLOWS
Or: RELY ON WATER HAVING SHALLOWS
Seal 
; traditional 賴. This graph consists 
of 氵/ 水 42 water’, and 賴 (traditional form 
of 頼 2067 ‘request, rely’) as phonetic with 
associated sense taken either as i] ‘push 
forward/affect violently’, giving ‘violent rapid 
是正 ZESEI　correction 
是ら 
korera　these 
是非 ZEHI　by all means; right and wrong  
ZE, kore 
proper, this
9 strokes
是
L1
1574
Bronze 
; seal 
. Shuowen interprets 
this graph as consisting of 日 66 ‘sun, day’ 
over 正 43 ‘correct’, but the bronze forms 
are supportive of a different interpreta-
tion, one which takes the upper element 
as ‘ladle, spoon’; 是 is considered to be the 
original way of writing 匙 ‘ladle, spoon’ (CO). 
The shape of the lower element in bronze 
exhibits some variation, in several cases 
rather resembling 止 143 ‘stop’, but another 
occurrence suggests it probably represents 
a triple hook for hanging utensils such as la-
dles on (Yamada). At the clerical script stage 
we find one or two examples wherein the 
lower element 正, which stands as the lower 
element in the seal form of 是, is written with 
what at that stage was the similar-shaped 
疋 ‘leg, foot’ (see Note below), which then 
featured increasingly in block script. Senses 
such as ‘correct; this’ are loan uses. Note: a 
quite widely-held view is that 正, 疋, and 足 
54 (‘leg’) were originally one and the same 
graph (Mizukami, Katō, Yamada). The OBI 
and bronze shapes do provide some support 
for this view, more particularly in the case of 
正 and 足. At the seal stage, the similarity in 
shape between 足 and 疋 is close enough to 
mean confusion between the two was likely 
to occur at times. YK1976:296-7; KJ1970:444; 
MS1995:v1:702-3,v2:884-6,1260-62; SK1984:
370-71; FC1974:v1:1046-7; DJ2009:v1:167,176. 
Suggest taking upper element as ‘sun’ 日 and 
lower element as ‘not quite correct’, being 疋 
rather than 正.
Mnemonic: SUN IS NOT QUITE 
CORRECT – THIS SHOULD BE PROPER
appears to already provide the meaning 
‘hem, cuff’, though Tōdō takes this as a later, 
restricted meaning. In support of taking ‘hem, 
cuff’ as a later sense, on the other hand, is 
the Shuowen entry for 裾, which defines it as 
‘front part of a garment’. In line with this, the 
treatment by Gu also favors taking ‘front part 
of a garment’ as the original meaning, and 
several other meanings such as ‘back of a gar-
ment’ as extended senses. In Chinese only it 
can have a meaning of ‘robe’, which presum-
ably could also be worn by males, whereas 
in Japan it is very much associated with 
females. Nor does the Chinese appear to en-
compass the extended concept of the ‘hem’ 
of a mountain. DJ2009:v2:677; TA1965:385; 
GY2008:1668. As one mnemonic we suggest 
taking 居 as 古 121 ‘old’ and 尸 256 ‘corpse’. 
Mnemonic: AN OLD CORPSE IS STILL 
CLOTHED WITH A SKIRT
Or: WHERE I RESIDE, WE WEAR CLOTHES 
FROM SKIRT TO CUFF

468  The Remaining 1130 Characters
油井 YUSEI　oil well
天井 TENJŌ　ceiling 
井戸 ido well
SEI, SHŌ, i 
a well
4 strokes
井
L1
1575
OBI 
; seal 
. Pictograph representing a 
bird’s eye view of the frame around a well. 
Some bronze occurrences, and the seal form, 
have the modifi ed shape 丼 (see 1812), which 
was commonly used in clerical script, but 
then this reverted to 井 in block script. 丼, 
originally just a variant of 井 ‘well’, and still 
noted as such in Kangxi zidian, has evolved 
in more recent times as a separate graph 
used in Japanese with the reading donburi, a 
word originally meaning ‘ceramic bowl’, but 
now commonly used to refer to food served 
in such a bowl, typically a bowl of rice with 
a topping such as chicken and egg, or eel. 
KJ1970:596; DJ2009:v2:417; OT1968:35,24; 
ZY2009:v1:6; SK1984:32-3; FC1974:v1:51-2.
Mnemonic: WELL HAS SQUARE FRAME
姓名 SEIMEI　surname
改姓 KAISEI　name change 
百姓 HYAKUSHŌ farmer 
SEI, SHŌ
surname
8 strokes
姓
L2
1576
OBI 
; seal 
. Consists of 女 37 ‘woman’, 
with 生 44 ‘give birth, be born’ taken either as 
i] semantic and phonetic, or ii] phonetic only 
(on the basis that 生 originally referred only 
to the emergence of plants, not the birth of 
humans [Katō]), but either way giving ‘same 
blood line’. In ancient China it was only wom-
en who used a family or clan name, hence 
the 女 determinative; later, such a name was 
adopted by men also, but the element 女 
remained. In Japan up until the Meiji Period 
(1868–1912) commoners – particularly farm-
ers/peasants – generally did not use a family 
name, despite the old term hyakushō for 
farmers, which somewhat confusingly means 
literally a ‘hundred family names’. This term 
derives from ancient times in which it was 
applied to a restricted class of elite farmers of 
imperial land, but was subsequently broad-
ened to apply to farmers/peasants in general, 
particularly in the Edo Period (1600-1868). 
KJ1970:596-7; OT1968:256; MS1995:v1:322-3. 
Mnemonic: WOMAN GIVEN SURNAME UPON 
BIRTH
征服 SEIFUKU　subjugation
遠征 ENSEI　expedition
征夷 SEII pacifying barbarians 
SEI
conquer, go afar
8 strokes
征
L1
1577
OBI 
; seal 
. Originally written as just 正 
43 (‘correct, proper’), the OBI form of which 
has a foot pointed upwards towards an ele-
ment shaped like 口 22 (‘mouth; entrance; 
hole’,) which Qiu takes as representing a des-
tination. Since there were two words in early 
Chinese (Late Han) meaning ‘correct’ and 
‘march against’ respectively and these were 
homophones, to clearly distinguish the latter 
in writing the element 彳 131’go/walk along 
a road’ (abbreviated form of 行 [originally, 
‘crossroads’]) was added, resulting in 征. 
Note: 彳 together with an upward-facing foot 
combine to give 辵 ‘walk step-by-step along 
a road’ (full way of writing 辶/⻌ 85). As both 
彳 and 辶/⻌ have much the same meaning, 
early graphs sometimes fluctuate between 
the two. For this reason, in pre-modern texts 
variants such as, for instance, 征 written with 
⻌/辶 as determinative instead of 彳 are 
sometimes encountered. QX2000:191-2,330; 
MS1995:v2:1286-7,v1:702-3; AS2007:612.
Mnemonic: GO PROPERLY ON THE ROAD TO 
CONQUER AFAR

The Remaining 1130 Characters  469
一斉 ISSEI　all together
斉一 SEIITSU　equality  
斉唱 SEISHŌ singing in unison
SEI, hitoshii
equal, similar
8 strokes
斉
L1
1578
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional 齊. OBI form shows 
plants standing together with ears of grain, to 
give ‘make a set, be equal’ as extended senses. 
Bronze equivalents vary, and some are more 
elaborate in shape, resulting in a slightly dif-
ferent seal form. Some clerical script occur-
rences show that the intricate-looking middle 
part of the block script is a regularization in 
shape of the three ears of grain seen in seal 
form and earlier. SK1984:816; OT1968:1171; 
MS1995:v2:1524-5; TA1965:770-72. Suggest 文 
as ‘text’ 72 and 
 as weird ‘moon’ 月 18.
Mnemonic: TEXTS ABOUT  WEIRD MOON ARE 
ALL VERY SIMILAR
犠牲的 GISEITEKI　self-sacrifi cing
犠牲者 GISEISHA　victim  
犠牲  ikenie* live sacrifi ce
SEI
sacrifi ce
9 strokes
牲
L1
1579
OBI 
; bronze 
 seal 
. OBI form has as 
determinative not 牛 108 ‘ox, cow’ but 羊 426 
‘sheep’, plus 生 44 ‘live, birth’, taken in one 
view as phonetic with associated sense ‘pure’, 
thus ‘sheep cleansed for sacrifi ce’ (Mizukami); 
Tōdō, on the other hand, takes 生 as seman-
tic in function, meaning ‘live’, which when 
combined with 牛 as determinative (bronze 
forms onwards) gives ‘live bull for sacrifi ce’. 
Gu and Ogawa treat 生 as both semantic and 
phonetic, thus ‘live bull cleansed/prepared for 
sacrifi ce’. ‘Sacrifi ce’, therefore, is the general-
ized meaning. MS1995:v2:832-4; TA1965:492; 
GY2008:871; OT1968:637.
Mnemonic: SACRIFICE OF LIVE COW
物凄い monosugoi　terrifi c
凄惨  SEISAN na　gruesome
凄文句 sugoMONKU threats
SEI, sugoi/mu, susamajii
horrible, amazing, 
fantastic
10 strokes
凄
L1
1580
Very late graph (Yupian). Has 冫 401 ‘ice’ and 
妻 708 (‘wife’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘cold’, thus original meaning ‘cold ice’. 
Meanings such as ‘terrible, terrific’ and ‘hor-
rible’ are perhaps loan usages. Note that su-
goi, like the English ‘terrific’ and the French 
‘terrible’, can express amazement, including 
in a positive sense, such as ‘great, fantastic’. 
SS1984:497; AS2007:419. 
Mnemonic: ICY WIFE IS AMAZINGLY 
HORRIBLE, YET FANTASTIC!
逝去 SEIKYO　death 
急逝 KYŪSEI　sudden death
長逝 CHŌSEI　death
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has ⻌ 85 ‘move’, 
and 折 551 (‘break’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘remove’ > ‘remove by going’ > ‘pass away, 
die’. GY2008:1027; AS2007:183.
Mnemonic: MOVEMENT BREAKS DOWN 
THROUGH DEATH
SEI, yuku, iku
die, pass away
10 strokes
逝
L1
1581

470  The Remaining 1130 Characters
女婿  JOSEI　son-in-law
花婿  hanamuko　bridegroom
婿入り  mukoiri　move to wife’s family
女 37 ‘woman’ as alternative form, suggesting 
壻 was probably original form. 胥 (CO ‘assist’) 
is phonetic with associated sense ‘intelligent’, 
thus – for 壻 – ‘intelligent/fi ne male’, or – for 
婿 – ‘’intelligent/fi ne male for a woman’; 
later  ‘son-in-law’. DJ2009:v1:32; KJ1970:964; 
OT1968:260. Use 疋 ‘leg’ 1574, and 月 ‘body’ 
209.
Mnemonic: SON-IN-LAW HAS LEGS AND 
BODY OF A WOMAN!
SEI, muko
son-in-law
12 strokes
婿
L1
1582
Seal (壻) ; late graph (Shuowen). Main entry 
heading in Shuowen  has 士 521 ‘male’ as 
determinative, but it notes graph written with 
誓約  SEIYAKU　pledge
宣誓  SENSEI　oath
誓い言 chikaigoto　pledge
This is not convincing, for any agreement 
between two parties surely uses language. A 
more plausible explanation for 誓 is that the 
early Chinese word for ‘agreement, oath’ was 
at fi rst written as just 折, but later to disam-
biguate in writing this word from another – a 
near-homophone meaning ‘bend, break’ – at 
fi rst (bronze) 口 22 (‘mouth; speak’) was added, 
but later changed to 言. Mizukami takes 誓 
as 言 combining with 折 as phonetic with as-
sociated sense ‘promise, agree’ or ‘clearly state’, 
giving ‘make promise in words’. KJ1970:613; 
AS2007:608,468; MS1995:v2:1198-9; 
OT1968:931.
Mnemonic: BROKEN WORD IS ACTUALLY A 
PLEDGE!?
SEI, chikau
pledge, vow, oath
14 strokes
誓
L1
1583
Bronze 
; seal 
.  Has 言 118 ‘words; speak’, 
and 折 551 ‘break’ taken in one view (Katō) as 
semantic and phonetic. When an agreement 
was made in ancient times, a wooden tablet or 
similar was broken in two, each party keeping 
half. Katō notes there is one example in bronze 
of the Chinese word for ‘oath, make an oath’ 
written just as 折, and he explains that ‘for or-
dinary agreements a wooden tally was broken, 
but 誓 meant making agreement with words’. 
請求  SEIKYŪ　request
普請  FUSHIN　construction
請負人 ukeoiNIN　contractor
green”) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken either as i] ‘clear’, thus ‘clear words’ 
(noted in Mizukami), or ii] ‘see’, giving orig 
sense ‘have audience (with one’s lord)’, and 
by extension ‘ask for’ (Ogawa). ‘Undertake’ 
appears to be an associated meaning, as in 
the English ‘bid, tender’. MS1995:v2:1202-3; 
OT1968:934. 
Mnemonic: EXPRESS REQUEST IN BLUE 
WORDS!
SEI, SHIN, kou, ukeru
request, undertake
15 strokes
請
L1
1584
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional form has 
right-hand 靑.  Has 言 118 ‘words; speak’, 
and 靑 (traditional form of 青 45 “blue/
酔い醒め yoizame　sobering up
覚醒   KAKUSEI　awakening
警醒   KEISEI　warning, rousing
Seal 
; late graph (later version of Shuowen). 
Has 酉 318 ‘wine’ (depicting wine jar), and 星 
171 (‘star’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘clear, become clear’, giving ‘sober up, wake up’. 
OT1968:1028; AS2007:432; SS1984:501. 
Mnemonic: SEE STARS AFTER DRINKING WINE 
– NEED TO SOBER UP
SEI, sameru/masu
sober up, wake up
16 strokes
醒
L1
1585

The Remaining 1130 Characters  471
排斥 HAISEKI　boycott
斥候 SEKKŌ　patrol, scout, spy
斥力 SEKIRYOKU　repulsion
away a house/building’ (Ogawa). Alterna-
tively, taken as 斤 1233 ‘ax’ with 丶 added as a 
marker to indicate ‘cut, notch’, giving original 
meaning ‘cut and split with ax’ (Tōdō). As Gu 
points out, though, 斥 does appear to have 
evolved through changes in shape from 
 
through an intermediate stage such as 厈, a 
shape from which it was a relatively small step 
to 斥. Examples of 厈 can be found at the cleri-
cal script stage. OT1968:450; TA1965:353-4; 
GY2008:177; SK1984:357-8. Suggest taking the 
short downstroke as indicating ‘down’. 
Mnemonic: REPELLED BY AX COMING DOWN 
SEKI, shirizokeru
repel, reject
5 strokes
斥
L1
1586
Seal 
. The original way of writing this graph 
is generally taken as 
, which consists of 广 
127 ‘building, house’, and 屰 675 (‘adverse’; 
originally, showing person upside-down) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken in one 
view as ‘strike, repel’, giving ‘remove/clear 
分析 BUNSEKI　analysis
解析 KAISEKI　analysis
析出 SEKISHUTSU　eduction
OBI 
 : seal 
. Consists of 木 73 ‘tree, wood’, 
with 斤 1233 ‘ax’, giving ‘cut/fell tree with ax’; 
Mizukami takes to mean ‘cut up small’. Even if 
it originally meant ‘fell a tree’, to serve a useful 
purpose a tree needs to be cut up, so ‘divide up’ 
stands as an extended sense, and from there 
a further extension to ‘analyze’. MR2007:339; 
MS1995:v1:652-3; OT1968:494. 
Mnemonic: ANALYSE TREE BY CHOPPING 
AND DIVIDING WITH AN AX
SEKI
divide, analyze
8 strokes
析
L1
1587
脊柱 SEKICHŪ　spinal column
脊髄 SEKIZUI　spinal cord
脊丈 setake　height, stature
Seal . Has 肉/月 209 ‘fl esh, meat; body’ under 
, the latter element depicting the spine/
backbone and four vertebrae. ‘Height, stature’ 
appears to be Japanese-only usage. SS1984:
506; GY2008:1119; OT1968:821. Take 人 as 
‘person’ 41, body, and four vertebrae.  
Mnemonic: PERSON’S BODY HEIGHT 
COMPRISES MANY VERTEBRAE
SEKI, se
backbone, height
10 strokes
脊
L1
1588
隻手  SEKISHU　one arm
一隻  ISSEKI　one ship/boat
一隻眼 ISSEKIGAN　sharp eye
OBI 
; seal 
.  Has 隹 324 ‘short-tailed bird, 
bird’, and 又 2003 ‘hand’, giving ‘catch a bird’. 
‘One of a pair’ also evolved as a meaning for 隻. 
There is another graph 雙 ‘catch/have pair of 
birds’ (traditional form of 双 1627 ‘pair, both’), 
which stands in contrast to 隻.  雙 is a later 
graph (seal form onwards). The use of 隻 as 
a counter for ships is perhaps best seen as a 
loan usage. MS1995:v2:1406-7; GY2008:160; 
SS1984:506.
Mnemonic: ONLY ONE BIRD IN THE 
HAND – BETTER OFF COUNTING BOATS!
SEKI
one of pair, ship 
counter
10 strokes
隻
L1
1589

472  The Remaining 1130 Characters
痛惜  TSŪSEKI　deep regret
惜し気  oshiGE　regret
惜別  SEKIBETSU　parting regrets
either as i] ‘painful, stab’, giving ‘painful heart’ 
(Katō, Gu), or ii] ‘make smaller’, giving ‘make the 
heart smaller, feel regret’ (Ogawa). It is possible 
that 昔 may also play a semantic role, namely 
‘past’, for regret is usually felt in relation to 
an event that has already occurred, or if one 
is reluctant to commit an act that has yet to 
occur but one that might later cause regret.  
GY2008:1327; KJ1970:616; OT1968:376. 
Mnemonic: FEELINGS FOR THE PAST ARE 
FULL OF REGRET
SEKI, oshii/shimu
regret, reluctant
11 strokes
惜
L1
1590
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 忄164 
‘heart, mind, feelings’, and 昔 346 (‘olden times, 
past’) as phonetic with associated sense taken 
姻戚 INSEKI　in-laws
縁戚 ENSEKI　distant relative
親戚 SHINSEKI　relatives
they are of relevance in explaining the diff erent 
stages of its graphic evolution. ‘Be in distress’ 
‘sadness’, and ‘relative, kin’ are considered to 
be loan usages. Note: analyses of the original 
meaning of 尗 vary. Gu takes it to denote dig-
ging up a root vegetable with a pointed imple-
ment, refl ecting in broad terms the defi nition 
in Shuowen as ‘bean plant growing’. In contrast, 
Mizukami takes to represent a type of halberd; 
Shirakawa interprets it as depicting the top 
part of a halberd with light refl ected from 
the blade.  In Chinese 尗 is interchangeable 
with 叔 1466 (‘uncle’, q.v.) which has a main 
meaning of ‘uncle’ (and in the Chinese also a 
lesser meaning ‘gather’). FC1974:v1:892,902; 
DJ2009:v2:583; MS1995:v1:532531-3; 
GY2008:1208; OT1968:395; SS1984:506-7.
Mnemonic: REPLACE HAND OF DISTRESSED 
RELATIVE (UNCLE ) WITH HALBERD
SEKI 
relatives, sadness, 
distress
11 strokes
戚
L1
1591
Bronze 
; seal 
. The bronze form has 戈 545 
‘halberd’, while the seal form has 戉 ‘large-
bladed halberd’, changing predominantly to 戊 
‘(type of) halberd’ in block script, combining 
with 尗 (see Note below ) as phonetic with as-
sociated sense ‘small’, giving ‘small-handled hal-
berd’. Since 戈, 戉, and 戊 all represent types of 
halberd, the modest diff erences in shape and 
nuances of meaning inherent in these graphs 
are not signifi cant in explaining the original 
meaning of the compound graph 戚, though 
追跡 TSUISEKI　pursuit
足跡 ashiato　footprint
遺跡 ISEKI　ruins
extension ‘walk’, with 亦 (NJK, originally ‘armpit’, 
now means ‘also’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘continue’, giving ‘footprints which con-
tinue’, and by extension ‘remains’ (Ogawa). Al-
ternatively, in analyzing 迹, Mizukami takes the 
associated sense of 亦 as ‘accumulate’, to give 
the original overall meaning ‘accumulated foot-
prints’ (for 迹 ), which likewise gives ’remains, 
traces’ as an extended sense. DJ2009:v1:140; 
ZY2009:v4:1313; MS1995:v2:1288-89; 
OT1968:972. We suggest taking the right-hand 
element as ‘partly red’ 赤 48. 
Mnemonic: THE REMAINS ARE A PARTLY 
RED FOOT
SEKI, ato
trace, remains
13 strokes
跡
L1
1592
Seal (迹) 
; late graph (Shuowen). The entry 
heading for 迹 (NJK; ‘place where people walk’ > 
‘marks left by people walking’, i.e. ‘footprints’) in 
Shuowen has 蹟 (NJK, also ‘footprint’) as being 
an alternative form. The current graph 跡 1592, 
considered (Kangxi zidian) to be a variant de-
rived from 蹟, consists of 足 54 ‘foot, leg’, and by 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  473
戸籍 KOSEKI　family register
書籍 SHOSEKI　publications
国籍 KOKUSEKI　nationality
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has ⺮ 58 
‘bamboo’, combining with 耤 (CO, ‘plow a fi eld’; 
see Note below) with associated sense taken 
either as i] ’pile up, accumulate, put together’ 
(Ogawa, Tōdō, Shirakawa), giving ‘bamboo 
(writing) strips bound together with leather’, or 
ii] ‘written texts’ (Katō); either way, the resultant 
SEKI 
register
20 strokes
籍
L1
1593
meaning is ‘written texts’, originally on bamboo 
strips bound together. Note: the OBI form of 
耤 is analysed as being either a pictograph of a 
farmer plowing a fi eld, or 耒 699 (‘plow’, based 
on pictograph), with 昔 346 (olden times, past’), 
the latter element itself either as onomatopoeic 
for the sound of a plough as it digs up the soil, 
or as phonetic with associated sense ‘pile up’ 
(MS1995:v2:1054-6). TA1965:364-8; OT1968:759; 
SS1984:510; KJ1970:616. We suggest taking the 
modern form as ‘bamboo’ ⺮ 58, ‘the past’ 昔 
346, and multi-branched ‘tree’ 木/耒 73. 
Mnemonic: REGISTER OF BAMBOO AND 
MULTI-BRANCHED TREES FROM PAST
拙者 SESSHA　I, me (humble)
拙劣 SETSURETSU na　clumsy
拙速 SESSOKU　rough-and-ready
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has扌34 ‘hand’, 
and 出 36 (‘emerge, put out’) as phonetic with 
associated sense taken either as i] ‘collapse, hol-
low’ (Ogawa, Tōdō), or ii] ‘short, inferior’ (Katō), 
either way giving ‘actions with the hand are 
inferior’, i.e. ‘clumsy’. OT1968:407; TA1965:676; 
KJ1970:304-5. 
Mnemonic: PUT OUT A CLUMSY HAND
SETSU, mazui, tsutanai
clumsy, poor
8 strokes
拙
L1
1594
窃盗 SETTŌ　theft
剽窃 HYŌSETSU　plagiarism
窃取 SESSHU　theft
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 竊. 
A diffi  cult graph and analyses are diverse. The 
traditional form corresponds to the seal ver-
sion above. Another seal form, listed by Katō, 
consists alternatively of’ 穴 860 ‘hole’, over 廿, 
which appears to be a reinforcement of ‘hole, 
cave, cavity’, both these being over 米 220 
‘rice’, with overall meaning ‘rice stored in cave/
hole’. This combines with  (see Note below), 
which is taken in one view as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘rob, plunder’, to give ‘plunder 
rice stored in cave’. Gu, alternatively, takes it as 
semantic and phonetic, interpreting the overall 
SETSU, nusumu, hisoka
steal, stealth 
9 strokes
窃
L1
1595
meaning as ‘bore into cave/hole and steal’. A 
further variation is off ered by Qiu, who is sup-
portive of taking as ‘rat makes a hole to bite 
things and steal rice’.  By extension, ‘plunder; 
furtively’. The cumbersome traditional form 竊 
(22 strokes) was already dropped in favor of 
the much simpler 窃, in the fi rst Jōyō Kanji List 
promulgated in 1923. Note: the meaning of  is 
interpreted diff erently as ‘mythical creature with 
large head and tail’ (Mizukami), or ‘(type of) 
insect’ (Gu, Shirakawa), while the view referred 
to by Qiu appears to take as ‘rat’.  KJ1970:619-
20; OT1968:741; GY2008:948; SS1984:513; 
QX2000:230; MS1995:v2:960-61; KZ2007:1914. 
We suggest taking the modern form as ‘hole’ (if 
somewhat fl attened) 穴 860 and ‘cut’ 切 173, 
and in accord with the probable item stolen, 
namely 米 220 ‘rice’. 
Mnemonic: STEALTHILY CUT HOLE TO STEAL 
RICE

474  The Remaining 1130 Characters
仙人 SENNIN　hermit, wizard
酒仙 SHUSEN　hard drinker
水仙 SUISEN　narcissus
独占  DOKUSEN　monopoly
占い者 uranaiSHA　diviner
占めた  shimeta!　Good! Great!
variant of 僊, refl ecting the practice of some 
individuals of going up into the mountains 
(山 26) to live and seek immortality (Gu). 
There are strong connections here with early 
stages of the Chinese philosophy or reli-
gion called Daoism. Note: another seal form 
includes two raised hands lifting something 
giving ‘lift up, lift up and move elsewhere’ 
(Mizukami, Shirakawa). Shirakawa takes the 
object being raised up specifi cally as a corpse. 
DJ2009:v2:663; GY2008:173; MS1995:v1:464-5; 
SS1984:515,520-21.
Mnemonic: PERSON ON HILL IS A HERMIT 
AND WIZARD
see also 外 96), with 口 22 ‘mouth’, here 
‘speak’, giving ‘carry out divination and an-
nounce (outcome), carry out divination and 
inquire (into outcome)’. Alternatively, Shi-
rakawa takes 口 as not ‘mouth; speak’, but as 
depicting a receptacle for prayer texts while 
carrying out the divination; this, however, 
is very much a minority interpretation. ‘Oc-
cupy’ is a borrowed meaning. OT1968:144; 
QX2000:203; MR2007:283; MS1995:v1:172-4.
Mnemonic: OCCUPIED AS A DIVINER, ONE 
GETS TO SPEAK ABOUT CRACKS
SEN 
hermit, wizard
5 strokes 
SEN, uranai/u, shimeru
divine, occupy
5 strokes 
仙
占
L1
L2
1597
1598
Seal form A (僊) 
; seal form B (仙) 
. Seal 
form A consists of 亻 41 ‘person’, combining 
with 䙴 (see Note below) ‘raise up, move’; 
the explanation in Shuowen notes a con-
nection with living a long time. Seal form 
B (仙), defi ned in Shuowen as ‘person in the 
mountains’, is considered to be a late, popular 
OBI form: ; seal form: . Has 卜 ‘carry out 
divination’ (originally, represents cracks on a 
flat surface such as a turtle shell or scapula 
[shoulder blade, here of cattle or similar] 
used in Shang Dynasty divination process: 
摂取 SESSHU　intake
摂政 SESSHŌ　regency/regent
摂生 SESSEI　health care
SETSU
take, act as proxy
13 strokes
摂
L1
1596
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
攝. Has扌34 ‘hand’, and 聶 (CO, ‘whisper’, 
based on reduplication of 耳 31 ‘ear’) as pho-
netic with associated sense taken as either i] 
‘bring together, collect’, giving ‘bring together, 
collect’ (Ogawa, Tōdō), or ii] ‘lift up’, giving ‘lift/
hold up’ (Katō). ‘Take control’ is considered to 
be an extended sense (Katō, Ogawa); and as 
Katō suggests, ‘act in place of’ is probably a 
loan use. Use of the lower right-hand ele-
ment of four strokes in 摂 is not uncommon 
as a convenient reduplicating device used for 
abbreviation in popular forms in pre-modern 
Japanese texts. (see, for example, 渋 1463) 
OT1968:425; TA1965:800; KJ1970:623. We sug-
gest taking the bottom right element as 
 
duplication, here specifi cally four.
Mnemonic: FOUR HANDS AND FOUR 
EARS – WHO’S ACTING AS PROXY?

The Remaining 1130 Characters  475
栓抜き  SENnuki　corkscrew
給水栓 KYŪSUISEN　water tap 
消火栓 SHŌKASEN　hydrant
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Defi ned in Yupian 
as ‘wooden peg’. Has 木 73 ‘wood, tree’, and 全 
347 ‘completely’ (in Tōdō’s word-family ‘make 
complete’), giving ‘piece of wood to make com-
plete’, and hence ‘stopper, bung’ etc. In Japa-
nese usage only, also refers to a type of tall tree 
grown in Hokkaido. TA1965:574-5; OT1968:505; 
GY2008:1006-7.
Mnemonic: WOODEN STOPPER COMPLETELY 
PLUGS THE TAP
SEN 
stopper; plug; tap
10 strokes
栓
L1
1600
旋回 SENKAI　rotation
旋盤 SENBAN　lathe
周旋 SHŪSEN　mediation
The nuance ‘return’ is thought to derive from 
fl ag fl uttering on a pole and in rapid movement 
going back to its original position. Katō notes 
that one OBI occurrence has 彳 131 ‘road; go’ as 
an additional element, and so takes the original 
meaning slightly diff erently as ‘return along 
the road one has travelled’. MS1995:v1:600-
04,v2:884-6; OT1968:676; KJ1970:101-2.
Mnemonic: FLUTTERING FLAG CAUSES LEGS 
TO TURN AROUND
SEN 
rotate, turn
11 strokes
旋
L1
1601
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 疋 1574 ‘leg’, and 
 353 
(‘streamer’, pictograph of fl ag fl uttering on 
pole) as phonetic with associated sense ‘go 
round’, giving ‘return by making legs go round’. 
煎餅  SENBEI　(rice-)cracker
煎茶  SENCHA　green tea
煎り卵  iritamago　scrambled egg
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 火 8 
‘fi re’, and 前 177 (‘before, front’) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken in one view as 
‘make complete’, giving ‘make complete with 
fi re, roast, toast’ (Ogawa, Tōdō). Gu, though, 
takes the original sense as to cook by heating 
with liquid added, probably on the basis of 
later commentary on Shuowen. OT1968:624; 
TA1965:569-72; DJ2009:v3:809; GY2008:1647.
Mnemonic: YOU CAN’T BOIL OR ROAST 
BEFORE LIGHTING A FIRE
SEN, iru
broil, roast, 
boil, infuse, decoct
13 strokes
煎
L1
1602
扇子  SENSU　(folding) fan
扇風機 SENPŪKI　electric fan
扇方  ōgigata　fan-shaped
open and close, in much the same way as 
wings of a bird or insect move up and down 
in fl ight. By extension, on the basis of the back 
and forth motion, ‘fan’. Alternatively, taken as 
戸 combining with 羽 as an abbreviation of 
翅, NJK, another graph also meaning ‘wings’ 
(Katō; same overall meaning as in the preced-
ing view); this latter analysis follows that put 
forward in Shuowen. OT1968:399; TA1965:539; 
KJ1970:627. 
Mnemonic: WINGS OF A DOOR ACT AS FAN
SEN, ōgi, aogu 
fan
10 strokes
扇
L1
1599
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Analyses diff er 
in a minor way. In one view (Ogawa, Tōdō), 
consists of 戸 120 ‘gate, door’ and 羽 82 ‘wings’ 
to signify the leaves of a gate or door which 

476  The Remaining 1130 Characters
詮索 SENSAKU　search, inquiry
詮議 SENGI　discussion, inquiry
所詮 SHOSEN　after all
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 言 118 
‘words; speak’, and 全 347 ‘complete’ as 
semantic and phonetic, giving ‘explain/set 
out in detail’. OT1968:929; TA1965:574-5; 
GY2008:737. 
Mnemonic: WORDY DISCUSSION BUT WITH 
COMPLETE CLARITY
SEN
clarity, discuss, select, 
reason
13 strokes
詮
L1
1605
実践  JISSEN　practice
実践的 JISSENTEKI　practical
践そ 
 SENSO　accession
netic with associated sense taken either as i] 
‘arrange’, giving ‘put one’s feet where others 
have trodden’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘accumulate, 
pile up’, giving ‘put one foot after another’ 
(Shirakawa).  Either way, ‘tread, step’ is the 
resultant meaning; ‘take action’ appears to be 
an extended sense. QX2000:258; OT1968:972; 
TA1965:569-72; SS1984:523.
Mnemonic: FOOT STEPS ON TWO HALBERDS, 
LEADING TO ACTION
SEN, fumu
step, act
13 strokes
践
L1
1606
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
form: 踐. Has 足 54 ‘foot, leg’, and 戔 545 
(‘fi ght, cut to pieces’; the traditional form 
depicts two opposing halberds, q.v.) as pho-
羨望   SENBŌ　envy
羨ましい  urayamashii　enviable
羨む   urayamu　be envious, envy
giving ‘see something delicious and drool’. 
Ogawa proposes taking ‘feel envy/jealousy’ 
as an extended sense. Note: 㳄  consists of 氵 
42 ‘water, liquid’, and 欠 496 (‘lack’; originally, 
pictograph of person kneeling with mouth 
open) as semantic and phonetic, giving 
‘saliva; drool’. Note also that 1603 has both 
aspects, envious and enviable. TA1965:533; 
OT1968:800; MS1995:v2:736-7. 
Mnemonic: ENVIOUS SHEEP LACKS 
WATER – NOT EXACTLY ENVIABLE
SEN, urayamu/mashii
envy, enviable, 
envious
13 strokes
羨
L1
1603
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 羊 426 
‘sheep’, here in the extended sense ‘good to 
eat’, and 㳄 (CO ‘saliva, drool’, see Note below), 
腺熱  SENNETSU　glandular fever
涙腺  RUISEN　tear gland
扁桃腺 HENTŌSEN　the tonsils
The reading SEN is therefore a pseudo-on 
reading, based by analogy on that of 泉 926 
SEN (‘spring’). The graph comprises 月/肉 209 
‘fl esh, meat; body’, with 泉 as semantic and 
phonetic, interpreted either as ‘bodily organ 
which secretes liquid’ (Ogawa,Gu), or ‘bod-
ily organ which has line shape’ (Shirakawa). 
OT1968:826; GY2008:1627; SS1984:523. 
Mnemonic: GLAND IN BODY EXUDES LIQUID 
LIKE A SPRING
SEN
gland
13 strokes
腺
L1
1604
A very late graph; belongs to the kokuji cat-
egory (graph devised in Japan based on the 
formational principles of Chinese characters). 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  477
潜在   SENZAI　latency
潜水   SENSUI　diving
潜り込む  mogurikomu　‘hole up’
shared associated sense here is ‘enter into’, re-
fl ected in the overall meaning taken by these 
scholars, i.e. ‘pass through/under’, with ‘lie 
hidden’ as extended sense. Note: Shirakawa 
interprets 
 as two hairpins over prayer 
receptacle to indicate secretly putting curse 
on someone. TA1965:807-11; KJ1970:564-5; 
OT1968:608; GY2008:1841; SS1984:525. Take 
㚘 as two husbands 夫 601, and ‘sun’ 日 66.
Mnemonic: TWO HUSBANDS DIVE INTO 
SUNLIT WATERS
SEN, hisomu, moguru
dive, lurk, hide
15 strokes
潜
L1
1608
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 潛. 
Has 氵 42 ‘water’, and 
 (see Note below) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken various-
ly as ‘sink’ (Katō), ‘insert’ (Ogawa, Gu), or ‘enter 
confi ned space’ (Tōdō); despite diff erences, 
便箋 BINSEN　stationery
付箋 FUSEN　tag, label
用箋 YŌSEN　blank paper, form
writing)’ (Ogawa); in broadly similar fashion, 
Shirakawa takes associated sense as ‘thin and 
placed on top’, and suggests original mean-
ing may have been ‘title slip’ for a book cover. 
Bamboo strips were important as material 
for writing before invention of paper by the 
Chinese (what Tsien terms ‘true paper’ was 
invented in 105AD). OT1968:755; SS1984:524; 
TT1962:131-37.
Mnemonic: WRITE LETTER TO PAPER ABOUT 
TWO WOODEN HALBERDS
SEN
paper, letter
14 strokes
箋
L1
1607
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has ⺮ 58 
‘bamboo’, and 戔 545 (halberds; ‘fight, cut’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘small, 
shallow’, thus ‘(thin) bamboo strips (for 
変遷 HENSEN　change
遷延 SEN’EN　procrastination
遷化 SENGE　death of dignitary
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has ⻌ 85 ‘go, 
move’, and 䙴 (see Note to 1597) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken as i] ‘move to a 
high place’, thus ‘climb high’ (Katō), or ii] ‘depart’, 
thus ‘move’ (Ogawa). ‘Move’ is the generalized 
sense. OT1968:1014; KJ1970:87. Suggest 覀 as 
‘west’ 169, 己 as ‘self’ 866 and 大 as ‘big’ 56.
Mnemonic: MOVE ONESELF IN BIG SHIFT TO 
WEST – QUITE A CHANGE
SEN, utsuru
shift, move, change 
15 strokes
遷
L1
1609
推薦 SUISEN　recommendation
自薦 
JISEN　self-recommendation
薦骨 SENKOTSU　sacrum
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 艹 53 ‘plant, vegeta-
tion’, and 廌 (originally, depiction of mythical 
beast said to be similar to a stag) taken in one 
interpretation as both semantic and phonetic, 
meaning ‘fi ne vegetation which (such a) crea-
ture would eat’. In this interpretation, ‘off er’ is 
seen as a loan usage (Ogawa). Alternatively, 
廌 is regarded as phonetic with an associated 
SEN, susumeru, komo 
recommend, off er, 
straw mat(ting)
16 strokes
薦
L1
1610

478  The Remaining 1130 Characters
繊維 SEN’I 　fi ber 
繊細 SENSAI na　fi ne, delicate
繊毛 SENMŌ cilia, fi ne hairs
SEN
fi ne, slender
17 strokes
繊
L1
1611
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
纖. Has 糸 29 ‘thread’, and 韱 (CO, ‘wild leek/
chives/garlic’ [plant within the Allium genus]) 
taken in one analysis as both semantic and 
phonetic in the extended sense ‘small, fine’, 
giving ‘many fine threads’ (Ogawa). Another 
analysis prefers to treat 韱 alternatively as 
phonetic in function with associated sense 
‘something sharp [= ‘blade’] thrusts in’, 
though this commentator (Tōdō) notes that 
in the graph 纖 the associated sense is ‘fine, 
slender’. Alternatively, ‘cut up fine’ is taken 
as the associated sense of 韱. The overall 
original meaning of 繊 is ‘fine-textured silk/
fabric’; this then became generalized to ‘fine, 
slender’. OT1968:790; TA1965:848-52. In addi-
tion to thread, we suggest taking  as variant 
of 赤 48 ‘red’ plus one 一, and 戈 as halberd 
(see 545).
Mnemonic: CUT ONE SLENDER RED THREAD 
WITH HALBERD
鮮魚 SENGYO　fresh fi sh 
鮮明 SENMEI na　clear, vivid
朝鮮 CHŌSEN Korea
SEN, azayaka
fresh, vivid, clear
17 strokes
鮮
L1
1612
Bronze 
; seal 
. Interpretations diff er. Ac-
cording to Shuowen, 鮮 referred to a type of fi sh, 
and 羊 426 ‘sheep’ stood here as an abbrevia-
tion for 羴 ‘odor of sheep’; this explanation does 
not necessarily mean, though, that the original 
meaning was a type of fi sh. According to Qiu, 鮮 
was borrowed to write another, more compli-
cated graph 鱻 meaning ‘many fresh fi sh’, and 
possibly by extension on this basis for ‘fresh, 
new’. Alternatively, considered to be 魚 109 ‘fi sh’, 
with 羊 (‘sheep’ as abbreviation for 羴 ‘odor of 
sheep’) as phonetic with associated sense taken 
as ‘live’, and so ‘live fi sh’ (Ogawa), ‘fresh’ being 
regarded as an extended sense. A diff erent 
interpretation, based on historical sound values 
in early Chinese, is that 羊 is not an abbreviation 
of 羴 serving as a phonetic, and that instead 
the right-hand element was – and is – 羊 in its 
semantic  function as ‘sheep’, giving ‘raw fl esh of 
fi sh and sheep’ (Tōdō). At one stage 1612 had a 
minor meaning of ‘few’, which was a loan usage, 
but is now virtually defunct. DJ2009:v3:949; 
QX2000:198; MS1995:v2:1494-6,1044-5; 
OT1968:1144; TA1965:568.  
Mnemonic: SHEEP AND FISH SHOULD BE 
BRIGHT AND FRESH
meaning taken either as i] ‘fi ne, fresh’, giving 
‘fresh vegetation (for ruminants)’ (Katō), or ii] 
‘put in order, arrange’, giving ‘put vegetation 
(or other items) in order and off er’ (Tōdō). The 
meaning ‘recommend’ is an extended sense. 
Note also that a seemingly unrelated meaning 
of this character is that of straw mat or mat-
ting, such as the matting around a sake bottle. 
This meaning would appear to be a loan 
usage, though it may be semantically linked 
with vegetation. OT1968:874; KJ1970:769; 
TA1965:569-71. We suggest taking this dif-
fi cult character as 艹 53 ‘grass/plant’, 广 127 
building and the remainder 
 as a ‘bird’ 鳥 
190 with an ‘odd’ head. 
Mnemonic: BIRD WITH ODD HEAD RECOM-
MENDS STRAW MATTING FOR BUILDING

The Remaining 1130 Characters  479
座禅 ZAZEN　meditation 
禅宗 ZENSHŪ　Zen sect
禅寺 ZENdera Zen temple 
ZEN
Zen, meditation
13 strokes
禅
L1
1613
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
禪. Has 礻/示 723 ‘show, altar’ (originally, pic-
tograph of sacrificial altar’), and 單 (単 569 
‘simple’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘raised earth platform’, giving ‘raised earth 
platform for Emperor’s rituals to Heaven’. 
The meaning ‘Zen’ (Buddhism) is a loan us-
age in which 禪 was borrowed for its sound 
value to represent a loanword into Chinese 
based on Sanskrit dhyāna ‘meditation’, but 
this graph may well have been selected for 
this role partly for semantic reasons also 
on account of its original meaning associ-
ated with ritual. SS1984:532; OT1968:725; 
TA1965:537.
Mnemonic: ZEN ENTAILS SIMPLE 
MEDITATION AT ALTAR
漸次  ZENJI　gradually 
漸進的 ZENSHINTEKI　gradual
東漸  TŌZEN eastward advance
ZEN
gradual advance
14 strokes
漸
L1
1614
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵 42 
‘water’, and 斬 (NJK ‘cut, behead, kill’) as pho-
netic. Shuowen defines 漸 as ‘name of a river’. 
In considering the meaning ‘gradually’, Katō 
proposes a link with another homophonous 
graph listed in Shuowen, viz. 𧽯, which has 走 
179 ‘run’ (Qiu suggests the sense in early Chi-
nese was ‘jog, trot’) as determinative, com-
bining with 斬 as phonetic with associated 
meaning ‘move forward, advance’, to give ‘ad-
vance running at the front’; ‘gradually’ is then 
taken as an extended sense from ‘advance’. 
Another commentator proposes a more 
direct semantic evolution, giving a classical 
reference which supports the meaning ‘(rain) 
gradually soaks through’, and by extension 
‘gradually’ (Shirakawa). DJ2009:v3:879,v1:134; 
ZY2009:v4:1297; QX2000:196; KJ1970:632-3; 
SS1984:532. We suggest taking the elements 
as water 氵, 車 33 ‘vehicle’, and 斤 1233 ‘ax/
chop/cleave’.
Mnemonic: VEHICLE GRADUALLY ADVANCES, 
CLEAVING THROUGH WATER
Or: LOSE YOUR HEAD IN THE WATER DURING 
A GRADUAL ADVANCE
食膳 SHOKUZEN　dining table
配膳 HAIZEN　setting the table
一膳 ICHIZEN bowl and chopsticks
ZEN
food, table, tray, 
chopsticks counter
16 strokes
膳
L1
1615
Bronze 
; seal 
. Consists of 月/肉 209 
‘meat, fl esh’, combined with 善 929 (‘good, 
virtuous’) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken as i] ‘splendid, without blemish, com-
plete’, giving ‘tender meat, food without blem-
ish, array of prepared food’ (Mizukami), ‘fi ne 
food’ (Katō), or ii] ‘plentiful, abundant’, giving 
‘plentiful prepared food’ (Tōdō). ‘Small low 
table, tray’ and ‘set of food on low table/tray’ 
are extended senses, as also is the function 
of acting as counter for chopsticks (in pairs). 
MS1995:v2:1080-81; KJ1970:635; TA1965:528. 
Mnemonic: GOOD MEATY FOOD IS ON THE 
TRAY-TABLE

480  The Remaining 1130 Characters
修繕   SHŪZEN　repair(s)
修繕工  SHŪZENKŌ　repairman
繕い飾る tsukuroikazaru hide error 
ZEN, tsukurou 
repair, mend
18 strokes
繕
L1
1616
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 糸 29 
‘thread’, and 善 929 ‘good’ taken in one view 
as semantic and phonetic, giving ‘make good 
with thread, repair’ (Katō); originally, no 
doubt, with reference to clothing, but then 
in a broader sense. Tōdō, in contrast, takes 
善 here as phonetic with associated sense 
‘more than ample’, giving ‘make good without 
skimping’. KJ1970:635; TA1965:528. 
Mnemonic: MEND WITH GOOD THREAD
狙撃   SOGEKI　shooting, sniping
狙い所  neraidokoro　objective
空巣狙い akisunerai sneak thief 
SO, nerau 
aim
8 strokes
狙
L1
1617
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists of 
犭19 ‘dog’, and 且 1135 (‘furthermore’) as 
phonetic. The original meaning appears to 
have already been uncertain at the time when 
Shuowen was compiled, as that work explains it 
as referring to a type of monkey or possibly 
dog; associated sense of the phonetic is un-
clear. Gu takes as meaning a type of monkey 
which would lie in wait and then attack humans, 
and so ‘lie in wait’ is treated as an extended 
sense; this interpretation, though, is only tenta-
tive. Uncertain, therefore, whether ‘aim’ is an 
extended sense or a loan usage. DJ2009:v3:799; 
GY2008:684. 
Mnemonic: FURTHERMORE, WE AIM AT DOGS
阻止 SOSHI　hindrance
阻害 SOGAI　obstruction
険阻 KENSO na steep 
SO, habamu 
obstruct, hinder
8 strokes
阻
L1
1618
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 阜 262 
(阝) ‘hill, mound’, and 且 1135 (‘furthermore’; 
originally, possibly a pictograph of a layered 
object such as a tomb built with multiple layers 
of earth, or a cairn) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘pile up’, giving ‘mountains piled up high 
on top of one another’ (Ogawa says ‘mountain 
road zigzags steeply’); by extension, ‘sepa-
rate, obstruct’. KJ1970:640-41; TA1965:364-6; 
OT1968:1065.
Mnemonic: FURTHERMORE, A MOUND CAN 
OBSTRUCT AND HINDER
租税  SOZEI　taxes, rates
租借  SOSHAKU　lease
租借権 SOSHAKKEN leasehold 
SO
levy, tithe
10 strokes
租
L1
1619
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 禾 87 
‘grain’, and 且 1135 (‘furthermore’/[piled 
objects]) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘plough’, giving ‘grain from cultivating com-
mon fi elds’, and by extension ‘grain to pay as 
tribute’; later generalized to ‘levy’. OT1968:732; 
KJ1970:642-3; SS1984:534. 
Mnemonic: FURTHERMORE, THERE IS A LEVY 
ON GRAIN

The Remaining 1130 Characters  481
措置 SOCHI 　action, step
措辞 SOJI　phraseology
挙措 KYOSO behavior 
SO
place, dispose
11 strokes
措
L1
1620
phonetic with associated sense generally 
taken as ‘place, pile up’; several commenta-
tors regard ‘cast aside’ as an extended sense 
(Ogawa, Katō), though Tōdō does not support 
this. Schuessler includes both ‘place’ and ‘lay 
aside’ as meanings. OT1968:420; KJ1970:615; 
AS2007:638. 
Mnemonic: HAND FROM THE PAST PLACED 
AT ONE’S DISPOSAL
粗末 SOMATSU　coarseness
粗糖 SOTŌ　raw sugar
粗筋 arasuji　rough outline
objects]) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken as i] ‘scatter’, giving ‘unrefi ned rice, non-
glutinous rice’ (Ogawa; Gu also says ‘unre-
fi ned rice’), or ii] ‘coarse’, giving ‘cracked rice’ 
(Katō). Either analysis still gives the extended 
sense ‘coarse’.OT1968:761; GY2008:1310; 
KJ1970:641.
Mnemonic: FURTHERMORE, THE RICE IS 
COARSE
SO, arai
coarse, rough
11 strokes
粗
L1
1621
疎隔   SOKAKU　alienation
疎開者  SOKAISHA　evacuee
疎々しい  utoutoshii　unfriendly
(‘baby born in fl ow of amniotic fl uid’), and ⺪/疋 
1574 (‘leg’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘pass through’ > ‘baby passes from mother’s 
body and is born’ (Katō, Gu). Ogawa takes as 
‘fl ow passes through’. Modern form has 束 ‘bun-
dle’ 561. ‘Shun, estranged, distant’ are extended 
meanings from parturition. KJ1970:584-5; 
GY2008:1522-3; OT1968:676. 
Mnemonic: SHUNNED FOR HAVING BUNDLES 
ON ONE’S LEGS
SO, utoi/mu
distant, shun, pass, 
estranged
12 strokes
疎
L1
1622
告訴   KOKUSO　legal action
哀訴   AISO　appeal
訴訟事件 SOSHŌJIKEN　lawsuit
SO, uttaeru
sue, appeal
12 strokes
訴
L1
1623
other view 斥 is seen as phonetic with associat-
ed sense ‘go upstream, back’, thus ‘speak about 
something from base up’ (Ogawa). Despite 
some apparent divergence, both interpreta-
tions involve a process of resistance; Ogawa’s 
analysis could equally well be regarded as giv-
ing the overall meaning ‘go verbally against the 
tide’. TA1965:375; OT1968:925. 
Mnemonic: WORDS OF REJECTION LEAD ONE 
TO APPEAL AND SUE
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has扌34 
‘hand’, and 昔 346 (‘in olden times, past’) as 
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 米 220 
‘rice’, and 且 1135 (‘furthermore’/[piled 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 言 118 
‘words; speak’, with 斥 1586 (‘reject’). In one 
view, 斥 has semantic role, giving ‘off er verbal 
resistance’, hence ‘claim against’ (Tōdō). In an-
Seal ( 疏 ) 
; late graph (Shuowen). 疎 evolved 
as popular variant of 疏. 疏 itself has 㐬 432 

482  The Remaining 1130 Characters
塑像  SOZŌ　fi gure, fi gurine
彫塑  CHŌSO　plastic arts
可塑性 KASOSEI　plasticity
‘scrape’, giving ‘fi gure made by scraping away 
clay’ (Ogawa). Both analyses give ‘model’ (in the 
sense ‘likeness’). Note: 朔 has 月 18 ‘moon’, and  
屰 675 (interpreted as meaning either ‘person 
upside down’ or ‘branch without leaves’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘return to point 
of origin’ or ‘go in opposite direction’, giving 
‘moonlight shines again from original posi-
tion’ (Mizukami). KJ1970:640; OT1968:222; 
MS1995:v1:638-9; SS1984:536;. We suggest 
taking 屰 as ‘upside-down’ and 月 18 ‘moon’. 
Mnemonic: EARTHEN MODEL OF 
UPSIDE-DOWN MOON 
SO
model, fi gurine
13 strokes
塑
L1
1624
A very late graph (Song and Yuan dynasties on-
wards). Has 土 64 ‘earth’, here in its occasional 
meaning ‘clay’, and 朔 (‘new moon, fi rst day 
of lunar month’; see Note below) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken as i] ‘model after’, 
giving ‘imitate shape with clay’ (Katō), or ii] 
遡及的 SOKYŪTEKI　retroactive
遡行  SOKŌ　going upstream
遡る 
 sakanoboru　go back/upstream
SO, sakanoboru
go upstream, back
14 strokes (遡)
遡
L1
1625
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). The entry 
heading in Shuowen has 氵 42 ‘water’ as 
determinative, and notes 遡 as an alterna-
tive, which has 辶/⻌ 85 ‘go, walk’ instead. 朔 
(see 1624 Note) is phonetic with associated 
sense ‘return to point of origin, go back’, thus 
‘go upstream’, then generalized to ‘ go back’. 
Today, 溯 is a variant in Japanese. OT1968:600; 
GY1658-9. As with 1624, we suggest taking 屰 
as ‘upside-down’ and 月 18 ‘moon’.
Mnemonic: GO BACK UPSTREAM TO SEE 
UPSIDE-DOWN MOON 
礎石  SOSEKI　foundation stone 
基礎  KISO　basis 
基礎的 KISOTEKI　elementary
Seal 
; late graph (later version of Shuo-
wen). Has 石 47 ‘stone’, and 楚 (see Note) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken as i] 
‘place beneath pillar’, giving ‘stone to place 
beneath pillar’ (Katō, Shirakawa), or ii] ‘be-
ginning’, giving ‘stone which is placed first’ 
(Ogawa); in either case, overall meaning is 
‘foundation stone’, then narrowed to ‘founda-
tion’. Note: 楚 ‘thicket, thorny bush; name of 
SO, ishizue
foundation stone
18 strokes
礎
L1
1626
ancient state in China’ has 林 79 ‘forest, trees’, 
and 1574 疋 (‘leg, foot’) as phonetic with 
associated sense taken as i] ‘thicket’, giving 
‘small shrubs, many small shrubs’ (Katō), or 
ii] ‘separated, scattered’, giving ‘brushwood, 
scattered branches’ (Tōdō; noted in Mizu-
kami also). Schuessler gives meaning of 楚 as 
‘thorny bush/tree’ (also given in Mizukami, as 
extended sense). ‘Chu’ as the name of an an-
cient Chinese state appears to be a loan us-
age. KJ1970:585-6; SS1984:537; OT1968:716; 
MS1995:v1:680-81; AS2007:193. We suggest 
taking 林 as ‘two trees’ 木 73.
Mnemonic: FOUNDATION STONE LAID AT 
FOOT OF TWO TREES 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  483
双方 SŌHŌ　both sides
無双 MUSŌ no　matchless
双子 futago　twins
SŌ, futa-
pair, both
4 strokes
双
L2
1627
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
雙. Has 隹 324 ‘short-tailed bird, bird’ dupli-
cated over 又 2003 ‘hand’, giving ‘two birds 
caught in the hand’, and by extension ‘two, a 
pair’. TA1965:372; GY2008:125; OT1968:152.
Mnemonic: ‘PAIR OF HANDS’ MEANS BOTH 
HANDS
壮大 SŌDAI　grandeur
強壮 KYŌSŌ　robustness
壮者 SŌSHA　man in prime
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 壯. Has 士 521 
‘adult male/samurai’ (or possibly ‘phallus’), and 
爿/丬 1488 (‘bed’) with associated sense ‘big’, 
giving ‘big man’; by extension, ‘vigorous, fl our-
ishing’. MS1995:v1:282-3,v2:824-5; KJ1970:434; 
OT1968:228.
Mnemonic: SAMURAI IS MANLY IN BED  
SŌ 
manly, strong, grand, 
fertile
6 strokes 
壮
L1
1628
荘厳 SŌGON　solemnity, majesty 
荘園 SHŌEN　estate, manor
別荘 BESSŌ　country retreat, villa
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
莊.  Has 艹 53 ‘plants, grass,’, and 壯/壮 1628 
‘vigorous, fl ourishing’ as semantic and 
phonetic, thus ‘vegetation grows luxuriantly’ 
(Katō, Ogawa). Tōdō is in broad agreement, 
but adds connotation ‘well-ordered’. By exten-
sion, ‘countryside’ and then ‘country estate’. 
It is not clear whether ‘solemn, majestic’ is a 
loan usage or extended sense. KJ1970:435; 
OT1968:853; TA1965:378-80. 
Mnemonic: SOLEMN SAMURAI BEDS DOWN 
IN MAJESTIC GRASSY MANOR
SŌ, SHŌ
solemn, majestic, 
estate, manor
9 strokes 
荘
L1
1629
捜査   SŌSA　investigation
捜索   SŌSAKU　search
捜し出す  sagashidasu　seek out
added as a determinative, and this is taken 
by Katō as signifying specifi cally ‘search by 
hand’; this may simply be a case of a determi-
native added redundantly to a graph already 
complete in terms of its constituent elements. 
OT1968:415; MS1995:v1:200-01; KJ1970:643. 
Suggest hand(s) 又 2003, 申 338 (‘expound’) as 
‘stick’ 丨 and ‘fi eld’ 田 63, or alternatively take 申 
as symbol of piercing丨and ‘sun’ 日 66.
Mnemonic: MULTIPLE HANDS SEARCH FOR 
STICK IN FIELD
Or: MULTIPLE HANDS SEARCH FOR A WAY TO 
PIERCE THE SUN
SŌ, sagasu 
search
10 strokes
捜
L2
1630
Seal 
; traditional ( 捜 ) 搜. Seal form has 扌 
34 ‘hand’ and 叟 (NJK, ‘old man’), the latter 
probably a variant of 叜, a graph which occurs 
in OBI onwards. The graph 叜 depicts a hand 
holding fi re (a fl aming torch) inside a house, 
giving the general overall meaning ‘search, 
look for’; the meaning ‘old man’ is a later loan 
usage of 叟. At the seal stage, 扌 ‘hand’ was 

484  The Remaining 1130 Characters
挿入 SŌNYŪ　insertion
挿話 SŌWA　episode
挿絵 sashiE　illustration
resemble each other in shape in seal, but 
more so in block script, hence the potential 
for divergence in interpretation as well as 
confusion in writing. The later shapes  and 
, with a slanted top stroke, are just minor 
variants of 臿. Note: 干 is considered origi-
nally to depict a bifurcated branch; usually 
interpreted as a weapon for stabbing, but 
here appears to represent something slightly 
diff erent but with a broadly similar domestic 
purpose, i.e. a pole with handles for piercing 
or pounding. TA1965:848-51; OT1968:423,834; 
MS1995:v1:446-7; GY2008:1404. We suggest 
taking  as 千 49 ‘thousand’ and 日 66 ‘day’. 
Mnemonic: HAND INSERTS A THOUSAND 
ITEMS A DAY
SŌ, sasu 
insert
10 strokes
挿
L1
1631
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
插. Has 扌 34 ‘hand’ and CO 臿 as semantic 
and phonetic. 臿 is analysed in one view as 
a pounder (干 840 [‘dry; shield’; see Note 
below]) with a mortar (臼 see 677), giving 
‘pierce’ as the original meaning (Tōdō). In 
another analysis, the element combining 
with 干 is not 臼 ‘mortar’ but ⺽ ‘two hands’, 
though in similar vein the meaning is ‘pierce, 
pound’ (Ogawa); these two shapes quite 
桑園 SŌEN　mulberry farm
桑色 kuwairo　light yellow
桑畑 kuwabata　mulberry fi eld
(‘young’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘pliant, fl exible’, giving ‘tree with soft buds 
which appear in spring’. Note: on the basis of 
its bronze and OBI forms, 叒 is interpreted as 
meaning i] ‘big, pliant branches and leaves 
of mulberry tree’, or ii] ‘fl exible shamaness 
performing ritual dance for deities’; a graph 
which also possibly served as the ancestral 
form of 若 at the OBI stage before becom-
ing divergent in shape in bronze (Mizu-
kami). MS1995:v1:666-7,196-7,v2:1112-3; 
KJ1970:427-8; GY2008:1169. We suggest 
taking 又 as ‘hand’ 2003. 
Mnemonic: IT TAKES THREE HANDS TO PICK 
MULBERRIES FROM THE TREE
SŌ, kuwa
mulberry
10 strokes
桑
L1
1632
OBI 
; seal 
. The OBI form is a pictograph 
of a tree with big leaves on bent branches, 
and the seal form also may be regarded as a 
graph having the same structure. Defi ned in 
Shuowen as ‘tree which silkworms feed on’, 
and hence ‘mulberry’. Katō, though, prefers 
to take the seal form not as a pictograph, but 
as comprising 木 73 ‘tree’, combined with 叒 
(see Note below) as an abbreviation of 若 896 
掃除機  SŌJIKI　vacuum cleaner
一掃   ISSŌ　sweeping away
掃き出す hakidasu　sweep out
placed by 扌 34 ‘hand’. The change is diffi  cult 
to date, but it is clear that 掃 was already be-
ing used in Han times. Katō prefers to take 帚 
in 掃 as serving not a semantic but phonetic 
role with associated sense ‘make good, put in 
order’, giving ‘adorn and clean by hand’. The 
fi rst view noted here seems more persuasive. 
DJ2009:v3:1120; QX2000:202; OT1968:420; 
GY2008:1182; FC1974:v1:940-41.
Mnemonic: SWEEP BY HAND USING A 
BROOM
SŌ, haku 
sweep
11 strokes
掃
L2
1633
Seal (埽) 
. Shuowen has 埽, comprising 土 
64 ‘earth, soil’ and 帚 106 ‘broom’  (see) to give 
‘sweep soil/dirt’, and this is generally regarded 
as the ancestral form of 掃, which has 土 re-

The Remaining 1130 Characters  485
法曹 HŌSŌ　lawyer
軍曹 GUNSŌ　sergeant
曹子 ZŌSHI　cadet
201 ‘east’, but regarded here as specifi cally 
signifying bags containing material relevant 
to a court hearing (Shirakawa). Tōdō also takes 
the top part of the older forms of this graph as 
two (unspecifi ed) objects lined up, with over-
all sense ‘come/put together; those who come 
together, equals’ (the element 曰 ‘speak’ does 
not seem to be accounted for in this analysis).  
Examples of the abbreviated form 曹 can be 
found in the clerical script at the same time as 
the original more complicated version. Note 
1: while OBI forms for 㯥 are clearly made up 
of a duplication of 東 ‘east’, opinions vary on 
the meaning. Note 2: OBI occurrences have 
口 22 ‘mouth; speak’ rather than 曰 ‘speak’, 
though this makes little if any diff erence to 
the view of  Mizukami, especially since 口 
and 曰 can both mean ‘speak’. TA1965:216-18; 
MS1995:v1:632-3,628-9,688-90; GY2008:1205; 
SS1984:543; WM1974:52-3. We suggest taking 
this graph as double ‘suns’ 日 66 and a ‘long’ 
version of grass/vegetation 艹. 
Mnemonic: OFFICIAL SAYS DOUBLE SUNS 
MAKE THE GRASS GROW LONG
SŌ, ZŌ
offi  cial, companion
11 strokes
曹
L1
1634
OBI ; seal 
. Views diverge. In one view, the 
OBI has 口 22 ‘mouth, speak’, and 㯥 (tentative 
meaning: ‘sunrise, dawn’ [Mizukami]: see Note 
1 below) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘two persons meet/line up’, giving ‘two people 
speak’, these being a plaintiff  and defendant 
arguing in court; then by extension, ‘an of-
fi cial’, such as one who hears them (Mizukami: 
see Note 2 below). In another view, the OBI 
form is interpreted as 口 22 ‘mouth, speak’, 
combined with the two identical shapes 
above it which are taken to represent lanterns, 
giving the overall meaning ‘a pair, form a pair’ 
(Gu); in this view, ‘plaintiff  and defendant’ are 
seen as making up such a pair. In another 
analysis, 㯥 is taken to represent two tied 
bags, in line with the origin of the graph 東 
曽祖父 SŌSOFU　great grandfather
曽祖母 SŌSOBO　great grandmother
曽遊  SŌYŪ　previous visit
making steam – was added as the bottom ele-
ment, giving ‘steamer’ as the likely meaning. 
Subsequently adopted as a convenient means 
of representing several other homophones 
or near-homophones of abstract mean-
ing (grammatical function words) in early 
Chinese such as ‘once in the past, formerly’. 
OT1968:478; GY2008:1507; MS1995:v1:634-5; 
WD1974:713-5. Suggest taking 丷 70 as ‘go 
away’, 田 63 ‘fi eld’, and 日 66 ‘day’. 
Mnemonic: FORMER DAYS WHEN WE WERE 
ONCE IN THE FIELDS HAVE GONE 
SŌ, SO, katsute 
former(ly), once, 
before, previous
11 strokes
曽
L1
1635
OBI 
; bronze ; seal 
; traditional 曾. Origi-
nally, a pictograph of a sieve or steamer. The 
OBI form may be taken as depicting either, 
but at the bronze stage a pot – probably for 
爽快  SŌKAI na　exhilerating
颯爽  SASSŌ taru　dashing, gallant
爽やか sawayaka na　refreshing
Bronze 
; seal . Interpretations diff er. In 
one view, the graph represents a fi gure 大 56 
‘big’, wearing a beautiful garment with long 
sleeves, giving ‘beautiful’ and by extension 
‘clear’ (Ogawa). Another analysis treats as 大 
‘person’, combined with 爻 (originally ‘crossed 
tally sticks; intertwined’; see Note below) re-
duplicated taken as window lattice-work, sig-
SŌ, sawayaka 
refreshing, clear
11 strokes
爽
L1
1636

486  The Remaining 1130 Characters
喪失 SŌSHITSU　loss, forfeiture
喪服 moFUKU　mourning dress
喪中 moCHŪ　in mourning
interprets 喪 on the basis of the bronze form 
as originally consisting of 亡, plus CO 哭 ‘wail, 
lament, mourn’ (originally, ‘dog howls’); he 
interprets this combination idiosyncratically as 
lining up prayer receptacles (his interpretation 
of 口) and adding a dog sacrifi ce to them, giv-
ing the overall meaning ‘lament the deceased’; 
alternatively, it seems ‘lament the deceased’ 
could be extrapolated from this combination 
of elements simply by taking 哭 in its general-
ized sense ‘lament’ (the bronze forms vary in 
shape: several could be taken as including 
a tree with twisted branches, while several 
others could alternatively represent a dog). 
Proposed OBI equivalents are listed by Mizu-
kami and also Gu. SS1984:544; MS1995:v1:240-
41,230-31,v2:836-7; KJ1970:409-10; 
GY2008:578; AS2007:337; ZY2009:v1:134. 
We suggest taking this graph as ‘ten’ 十 35, 
two boxes 口口, and  as ‘strange’ variant of 
clothes 衣 444.
Mnemonic: MOURN THE LOSS OF TWO 
BOXES OF STRANGE CLOTHES
SŌ, mo 
mourn, loss, death
12 strokes
喪
L1
1637
Bronze ; seal 
. Bronze form has 亡 985 ‘die; 
lose’ (originally, depiction of person hiding), 
together with what in one view is taken as 㖾 
(original way of writing 咢 [CO, ‘quarrel loudly 
to correct someone’]) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘die, disappear’, giving ‘corpse is re-
duced to bleached bones through exposure to 
elements’ (Katō). Alternatively (Gu), the bronze 
form is interpreted as consisting of twisted 
branches of a mulberry tree combined with 㗊 
(‘noisy’) or 品 (same meaning here), signifying 
‘people wailing/lamenting beneath mulberry 
tree’; Gu notes that in ancient times there was 
an association between the mulberry tree and 
the grieving process when someone died. 
Another view is off ered by Shirakawa, who 
痩身  SŌSHIN　slender body
痩せ土 yasetsuchi　barren soil
痩せ形 yasegata　skinny fi gure
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
瘦. Has 疒 404 ‘sick-bed, sickness’, and 叟 (‘old 
man’; see 1630) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘slender’, giving ‘grow thin’. For the mod-
ern form, we suggest 又 2003 ‘hand’ and 申 
338 (‘expound, talk’). OT1968:681; TA1965:206-
12; GY2008:1747.
Mnemonic: HANDY TALK ABOUT SICKNESS 
THAT MAKES YOU THIN
SŌ, yaseru 
become thin
12 strokes
痩
L1
1638
nifying a person looking outside and perceiv-
ing it as bright, giving ‘clear, bright’ (Gu). Katō 
also takes 大 as ‘person’, or rather ‘big person’, 
but rejects the ‘window’ interpretation, re-
garding 爻 reduplicated instead as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘wound, injure’, giving 
‘suff er a wound’. A further view (noted by 
Mizukami) takes 爻 reduplicated as represent-
ing breasts or tattoos, giving the proposed 
meaning ‘pair of breasts/tattoos on a person’. 
Perhaps a weak point with the breasts/tattoos 
proposal, at least as far as breasts are con-
cerned,  is that the elements accompanying 
大 in the OBI (status tentative) and bronze 
occurrences appear to represent something 
other than breasts. Diffi  cult to ascertain what 
was originally represented by this graph. See 
Note below. ‘Refreshing’ is almost certainly an 
extended meaning from ‘clear’. Note: the ele-
ment 爻 reduplicated is perhaps a regulari-
zation of the rather divergent shapes in OBI 
and bronze. OT1968:250; GY2008:1212-13; 
KJ1970:587-8; MS1995:v2:822-3. We suggest 
taking the graph as ‘big person’ 大 56 and the 
crosses as wounds. 
Mnemonic: BIG MAN WITH FOUR WOUNDS 
CLEARLY NEEDS REFRESHING

The Remaining 1130 Characters  487
葬式  SŌSHIKI　funeral
葬儀屋 SŌGIYA　undertaker
葬歌  SŌKA　dirge
a corpse 死 302 on a mat (represented just as 
a horizontal line), with vegetation (艸) above 
and below. In block script, the lower part of 
the graph is modifi ed to 廾, a determinative 
originally showing  two hands facing upward 
and hence meaning ‘off er up’; this change may 
be based on  misinterpretation of the lower 
element 艸 ‘vegetation’, as 艸 and 廾 are of 
similar shape in the seal forms.  GY2008:1375; 
MS1995:v2:1124-5. Take 死 as ‘death’ 302, 廾 as 
‘(long) grass’, and 艹 as ‘grass’ 53. 
Mnemonic: DEATH FOLLOWED BY BURIAL 
SURROUNDED BY GRASS
SŌ, hōmuru
bury
12 strokes
葬
L1
1639
OBI 
; seal 
. OBI forms show some vari-
ation, but a quite common shape is vegeta-
tion on top of a coffi  n with a corpse inside. 
Other OBI forms occurring include a fi gure 
with a stand or frame inside a coffi  n, and 
sometimes the fi gure is omitted – probably an 
abbreviation. In similar fashion, seal form has 
僧院 SŌIN　monastery, temple
高僧 KŌSŌ　high priest
僧職 SŌSHOKU　priesthood
sent a new loanword for ‘Buddhist monk’ into 
Chinese from Sanskrit, based on pronuncia-
tion of fi rst syllable of Sanskrit sangha ‘monk’. 
Has 亻 41 person, and 曾 1635 (‘formerly’) 
used just for its sound value. KJ1970:320; 
SS1984:545; OT1968:79. As with 1635, take 丷 
as ‘away’ 70, 田 63 ‘fi eld’, and 日 66 ‘day’.
Mnemonic: PERSON GOING AWAY DAILY 
FROM FIELD IS A PRIEST 
SŌ
priest
13 strokes
僧
L1
1640
Seal 
; late graph (later version of Shuowen); 
traditional: ᳂. A graph devised upon 
introduction of Buddhism to China to repre-
遭遇   SŌGŪ 　encounter 
遭難   SŌNAN　accident
遭難信号 SŌNANSHINGŌ SOS
SŌ, au
encounter, meet
14 strokes
遭
L1
1641
Seal 
;  late graph (Shuowen). Has ⻌ ’move’ 
85, with 曹 1634 ‘offi  cial’ as semantic (in 
earlier sense ‘come together’ [Schuessler]) and 
phonetic, giving ‘two parties come together 
unexpectedly’, i.e. ‘encounter’. OT1968:1012; 
TA1965:216-18; SS1984:547; AS2007:600.
Mnemonic: ENCOUNTER OFFICIAL ON THE 
MOVE
水槽 SUISŌ　water tank
浴槽 YOKUSŌ　bathtub
歯槽 SHISŌ tooth socket
SŌ
tank, tub, vat
15 strokes
槽
L1
1642
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 木 73 
‘wood, tree’, and 曹 1634 ‘offi  cial’. The latter 
element is taken by one commentator as 
semantic (in earlier sense ‘put together’) and 
phonetic, giving ‘object put together with 
wood’ (Gu). In Shuowen, 槽 is defi ned as ‘trough 
for animal feed’; sense later extended to other 
large wooden containers such as ‘barrel, vat’. 
Ogawa treats the element 曹 here as pho-
netic, though with associated sense unclear. 
GY2008:1786-7; SS1984:548; OT1968:523.
Mnemonic: OFFICIAL HAS A WOODEN TUB

488  The Remaining 1130 Characters
踪跡  SŌSEKI　one’s whereabouts 
失踪  SHISSŌ　disappearance
失踪者 SHISSŌSHA missing person
SŌ
footprint, traces, 
remains
15 strokes
踪
L1
1643
A very late post-Shuowen graph. Originally 
written 蹤, comprising 足 54 ‘foot, leg’, and 從 
(traditional form of 従 ‘follow’ 902) as semantic 
and phonetic, giving ‘footprints, track, remains’. 
Later, the phonetic element was changed to 宗 
899 ‘religion’, resulting in the new form 踪 as 
a popular variant. GY2008:1810; SS1984:455; 
OT1968:976.
Mnemonic: FOOTPRINTS SHOW TRACES OF A 
RELIGION 
乾燥  KANSŌ　dryness
焦燥  SHŌSŌ　impatience
高燥地 KŌSŌCHI high dry ground
SŌ
dry, parch
17 strokes
燥
L2
1644
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 火 8 ‘fi re’, 
and 喿 (CO ‘noisy’; see Note below) as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘water disappears’, 
giving ‘water disappears in presence of fi re’, 
and hence ‘dry’. Note: 喿 consists of 木 73 ‘tree, 
wood’, with 品, here representing not ‘mouths 
of people’ (original sense of 品 405 ‘goods’), 
but more specifi cally – based on the context 
with ‘tree’ – as ‘mouths of birds’, giving ‘birds 
singing/chirping in tree’, i.e. ‘noisy’. KJ1970:435; 
MS1995:v1:242-3. We suggest taking 品 as 
three boxes.  
Mnemonic: DRY THREE WOODEN BOXES BY 
FIRE
Or: THREE MOUTHS IN A PARCHED TREE 
WARN OF FIRE 
霜害   SŌGAI　frost damage
霜夜   shimoyo　frosty night
霜降り肉  shimofuriNIKU marbled beef
SŌ, shimo
frost
17 strokes
霜
L1
1645
Seal 
. Has 雨 3 ‘rain’, here in the closely 
related meaning ‘water vapor’, with 相 348 
(‘mutual’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘divided into columns’ giving ‘frost columns 
formed from water vapor’ (Ogawa), an impres-
sion that might be created in some condi-
tions. Shuowen defi nes this graph as ‘that 
which destroys and creates’, a reference to 
frost destroying some vegetables and fruits 
when it forms. Mizukami lists a proposed OBI 
equivalent. DJ2009:v3:941; OT1968:1088; 
MS1995:v2:1422-4.  
Mnemonic: MUTUAL RELATIONSHIP 
BETWEEN RAIN AND FROST?
騒音  SŌON　cacophony
騒動  SŌDŌ　disturbance
大騒ぎ  ōsawagi uproar, chaos
SŌ, sawagu/gashii
disturbance, noise
18 strokes
騒
L1
1646
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 馬 210 
‘horse’, and 蚤 NJK ‘flea’ acting in one view 
as semantic and phonetic, meaning ‘scratch, 
claw at’, to give ‘horse rakes ground with 
hoof and is noisy/restless’. Gu, alternatively, 
takes 蚤 as signifying ‘restless’, to give either 
‘horse is agitated’, or ‘groom horse with 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  489
comb’. Sense then generalized to ‘distur-
bance, noise’. TA1965:212-4; OT1968:1128; 
GY2008:1529. For the modern ‘dotless’ form 
of flea in this graph, 𧈡, take 又 as ‘hand’ 
2003, and 虫 60 ‘insect’.  
Mnemonic: HAND SLAPS INSECT ON HORSE 
– NOISY DISTURBANCE FOLLOWS 
藻抜け  monuke　cast off  skin
海藻  KAISŌ　seaweed
詞藻  SHISŌ rhetorical fl ourish
SŌ, mo 
waterweed, seaweed
19 strokes
藻
L1
1647
Seal (薻) 
; late graph (Shuowen). Entry 
heading in Shuowen has 薻, but 藻 is noted 
as alternative form, one which later became 
predominant. Has 艹 53 ‘plant, vegetation’, and 
氵42 ‘water’, with 巢 560 (‘nest’) / 喿 (CO ‘noisy’ 
[1644 Note]) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken as i] ‘tangled and string-like’ (Ogawa), 
or ii] ‘fl oat’ (Tōdō), either way giving ‘seaweed, 
duckweed’. DJ2009:v1:86; TA1965:258-60; 
OT1968:878. We suggest taking 喿 as three 
boxes and ‘wood, tree’ 木 73.
Mnemonic: THREE WOODEN BOXES OF 
PLANTS ARE ALL WATERWEED
憎悪   ZŌO　malice, hatred
憎らしい  nikurashii 　hateful
憎み合い nikumiai mutual hatred
ZŌ, nikumu/i/shimi 
hate(ful)
14 strokes
憎
L2
1648
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
憎. Has 忄 164 ‘mind, feelings’, and 曾 1635 
(‘formerly’) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken as i] ‘grow intense/violent’, thus ‘bad 
feeling towards another intensifi es’ (Ogawa), 
or ii] ‘ugly’, thus ‘consider (someone/ some-
thing) ugly in one’s mind’ (Katō); either way, 
‘hateful’. OT1968:386; KJ1970:320. 
Mnemonic: FORMERLY HAD HATEFUL 
FEELINGS
贈与  ZŌYO　presentation
寄贈  KIZŌ/KISŌ　donation
贈り物  okurimono a present, gift 
L2
ZŌ, SŌ, okuru 
present, give
18 strokes
贈
1649
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); tradition-
al 贈. Has 貝 10 ‘shell currency, valuables’, 
and 曾 1635 (‘formerly’) as phonetic with 
associated sense taken as i] ‘send’, thus ‘send 
valuables to another’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘increase’, 
giving ‘increase another’s possessions with 
valuables’; either way, generalized to ‘present, 
give’. OT1968:963; TA1965:111-14.
Mnemonic: FORMERLY ONE USED TO 
PRESENT SHELLS AS GIFTS 

490  The Remaining 1130 Characters
即位 SOKUI 　accession
即刻 SOKKOKU　immediately
即席 SOKUSEKI impromptu 
SOKU, sunawachi
immediate, accession, 
namely
7 strokes
即
L1
1650
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional form A 卽; tradi-
tional form B 
. Traditional form A, which 
reflects early shapes up to and including 
(particularly) seal, has 卩 41 ‘person kneel-
ing’, with 皀 (CO, ‘millet [or similar] piled up 
in receptacle’) as semantic and phonetic, 
thus ‘come in front of millet or other food/
be about to eat’. Kangxi zidian has 卽 as 
orthodox form, and notes 
 (trad form B) 
as a clerical script form, based on a note in 
earlier Jiyun dictionary; in fact, shapes close 
to 即 were already common in clerical script. 
Note: 
 is an archaistic equivalent some-
times favored in older printed texts, though 
not usually supported in modern computer-
ised fonts.  即 is accorded a separate entry 
in Kangxi zidian, which quotes Yupian in 
describing it as the then contemporary way 
of writing trad form B. MS1995:v1:182-3; 
KZ2001:293,294/3671; SK1984:126-7; 
KJ1970:183; QX2000:187; OT1968:147. We 
suggest taking  as ‘uncovered food’ (食 163 
‘food, eat’).  
Mnemonic: PERSON IMMEDIATELY KNEELS 
BEFORE UNCOVERED FOOD
促進 SOKUSHIN 　promotion
催促 SAISOKU　demand
促成 SOKUSEI promotion, growth
SOKU, unagasu
urge, press
9 strokes
促
L1
1651
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 亻 41 
‘person’, and 足 54 ‘foot, leg’ as phonetic with 
associated sense taken in one view as ‘speed 
up’, giving ‘quicken one’s pace and close in 
on someone’, and by extension ‘urge’ (Ogawa; 
Tōdō also notes associated sense as being 
close to ‘quick’). Alternatively, 足 as phonetic 
here is analyzed as having associated sense 
‘shrink, make small’, giving ‘person of short 
stature’, and in this interpretation ‘urge’ is 
regarded as a loan usage (Katō). OT1968:65; 
TA1965:295-8; KJ1970:646-7. 
Mnemonic: PERSON URGED TO PRESS AHEAD 
ON FOOT
把捉  HASOKU　grasp, comprehend
捉え所  toraedokoro　meaning, point  
SOKU, toraeru
seize, capture
10 strokes
捉
L1
1652
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has扌34 ‘hand’, 
and 足 54 (‘foot, leg’) as phonetic with associat-
ed sense taken as ‘bring together and capture’, 
giving ‘capture’. Another view is broadly similar, 
taking the associated sense as ‘fi rmly tighten 
one’s grip and capture’ (Tōdō; in his word-family 
‘make smaller’). OT1968:413; TA1965:295-9.
Mnemonic: SEIZED BY THE FOOT AND THE 
HAND – CAPTURED  

The Remaining 1130 Characters  491
海賊 KAIZOKU 　pirate 
盗賊 TŌZOKU　thief 
賊軍 ZOKUGUN rebel army
ZOKU
rebel, plunder, injure
13 strokes
賊
L1
1654
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 戈 545 ‘halberd’ 
(Qiu translates as ‘dagger-ax’), and 則 764 
(‘rule’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘wound, injure’, thus ‘wound with halberd/
dagger-ax’; meanings such as ‘thief, robber’ 
are extended senses. The right-hand element 
of 賊 refl ects distortion at the block script 
stage. FC1974:v2:2119-20; MS1995:v2:1240-
41,v1:130-32; KJ1970:651; QX2000:254; 
SK1984:686,98. Take 十 35 as ‘ten’ and 貝 10 as 
‘shell-money’. 
Mnemonic: TEN REBELS WITH HALBERDS 
PLUNDER SHELL-MONEY
᰻色 SONSHOKU 　inferiority 
不᰻ FUSON na　arrogant 
謙᰻ KENSON na humble, modest
SON, herikudaru
(be) humble
14 strokes (᰻)
遜
L1
1655
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 辶/⻌ 
85 ‘walk, go’, and 孫 565 (‘descendants, 
grandchildren’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense seen in one view as ‘retreat, be 
humble/compliant’, thus ‘walk in retreat’ 
(Mizukami). Alternatively, the associated 
sense is taken as ‘constricted, small’, thus ‘get 
smaller, shrink’ as overall meaning, which 
is broadly similar to that put forward by 
Mizukami. MS1995:v2:1304-5; TA1965:689-
94; AS2007:486. 
Mnemonic: BE HUMBLE WHEN MOVING IN 
WITH GRANDCHILDREN
俗語 ZOKUGO 　slang
俗化 ZOKKA　vulgarisation
風俗 FŪZOKU customs
ZOKU
worldly, vulgar, 
common
9 strokes
俗
L1
1653
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 亻 41 ‘person’, and 
谷 135 (‘valley’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense taken in one view as ‘continue; 
learn from others’, giving ‘do repeatedly, 
learn from others’ (Katō). Another com-
mentator takes 谷 with the associated 
sense ‘gathering’, giving ‘behavior of many 
people, what many people do’, and hence 
‘customs, practices’ (Ogawa). Alternatively, 
the associated sense is considered to be ‘get 
inside, be immersed’, giving ‘environment in 
which people immerse themselves and live’ 
(noted in Mizukami). KJ1970:650; OT1968:65; 
MS1995:v1:66-7.  
Mnemonic: PEOPLE IN THE VALLEY HAVE 
VULGAR AND WORLDLY CUSTOMS 

492  The Remaining 1130 Characters
淘汰  TŌTA 　selection 
公沙汰 ōyakeZATA　public aff air
沙汰  SATA tidings, news
TA
select, dismiss, 
extravagant
7 strokes
汰
L1
1656
Seal (汏) 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has氵42 
‘water’, and at seal stage was 大 56 ‘big’ (太 
181 ‘fat’ is later variant) as phonetic with 
associated sense seen in one view as ‘select’, 
giving ‘put in water and sort out’ (Ogawa); 
Qiu takes meaning to be ‘wash rice’. Another 
view takes original meaning as ‘bathe’, and 
‘select by washing’ as extended sense (Gu). 
The sense ‘extravagant’ may be loan use of 汰 
‘select’ in place of 泰 1665 (‘big’, ‘extravagant’); 
alternatively, Qiu notes the view that use of 汰 
for ‘extravagant’ may be abbreviated clerical 
script form of 泰 which happened to coincide 
in shape with 汰 as a separate graph mean-
ing ‘select’. ‘Dismiss’ is an extended sense. 
OT1968:561; QX2000:304; GY2008:495,979.
Mnemonic: FAT MAN IN WATER IS SELECTED 
AS EXTRAVAGANT: OTHERS DISMISSED
妥協 DAKYŌ　compromise 
妥当 DATŌ na　appropriate
妥結 DAKETSU agreement
DA
peace, settled
7 strokes
妥
L1
1657
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional 妥 .The OBI form 
has 爫 ‘claw’ 1739 (but here, as sometimes, 
‘hand’) over 女 37 ‘woman’, interpreted in 
one analysis as ‘extend hand and get woman 
to sit’, thus giving ‘set at ease, be at ease’ 
(Ogawa, Gu, Ma). Alternatively, treated as 
女 with 𠂹 (CO; ‘drooping blossoms’ 918: see 
also Note below) as phonetic with associat-
ed sense ‘delicate and slender and beautiful’, 
thus giving ‘woman’s delicate and slender 
and beautiful appearance’ (Katō); with this 
view, ‘peaceful, settled’ could be perhaps be 
regarded as an extended meaning. There is 
also a view among some scholars that the 
upper part of this graph 1657 妥 viz. 爫/𠂹, 
is a miscopying of a ‘grain plant’ 禾 87: that 
is, 妥 is the same character as 委 245, which 
has a present meaning ‘entrust’ but in earlier 
times its meanings included ‘pliant, supple, 
soft’, which clearly relate to ‘peace’ as an ex-
tended meaning (Katō). However, the earlier 
OBI and seal forms do not seem to support 
such an interpretation. Note: 𠂹, which 
occurs from the OBI stage, is assessed by 
Qiu as a graph that most probably merged 
with 垂 918 ‘suspend, hang down’ (occur-
rent from bronze stage). On a historical and 
cultural note, with regard to the esthetics of 
‘beauty’ in early Japan, one cannot assume 
– particularly that of male perceptions of 
female beauty – that they were similar to 
those of the twenty-first century. Women 
with pale complexions were favored over 
darker ones, for the paleness of her skin 
suggested she was an aristocrat who spent 
most of her time indoors, whereas the 
darker complexioned women were assumed 
to have spent considerable time in the sun, 
namely working in the fields. Presently, all 
women who wanted to be noticed applied 
whitening to their faces (note omoshi-
roi – ‘white face’). Blackening of the teeth 
sometimes accompanied this as a supposed 
contrast, but one suspects it was primarily 
to mask poor teeth (even among aristocratic 
women). OT1968:253; GY2008:465,1081; 
MS1995:v1:22-4; MR2007:473; QX2000:364-5; 
KJ1985:456.
Mnemonic: WOMAN GETS 
CLAWED – HARDLY A SIGN OF PEACE
Or: WOMAN’S CLAWS SETTLE THE MATTER

The Remaining 1130 Characters  493
堕落  DARAKU　depravity 
堕胎  DATAI　abortion
堕する  DAsuru lapse, degenerate
DA
degenerate, fall
12 strokes
堕
L1
1659
stroyed’ or ‘earth mounds of city walls crum-
ble/fall’; however, neither he nor Shirakawa 
treat 隓 as the predecessor of 墮. Alternative-
ly, one commentator analyses as 土 64 ‘earth, 
ground’, combined with 隋 (CO, ‘shredded 
sacrifi cial meat’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘crumble’, giving ‘crumble, be destroyed, 
fall’ (Ogawa). Note: 𢀡 is probably the original 
way of writing 隓, and this seems entirely 
plausible in terms of the overall development 
of the Chinese script.  𢀡 in Kangxi zidian 
involves a degree of circularity, but in essence 
does appear to be treating in eff ect as 𢀡 = 
隓. KJ1970:416-7; TA1965:544; GY2008:1344; 
MS1995:v2:1402-03; SS1984:561; OT1968:220; 
ZY2009:v2:285,v4:1461. Suggest taking the 
elements as ‘hill’ 阝 262, ‘have, exist’ 有 423, 
and 土 ‘earth, ground’ 64
Mnemonic: EARTH FALLS BUT HILL STILL 
EXISTS
The origins of this graph are in dispute; 
traditional form: 墮. Several commentators 
equate 墮 with CO 隓 ‘crumble’ (Katō, Gu). The 
latter graph, listed in Shuowen, has 阜/阝 262 
‘hill’ combined with 𢀡 (see Note below) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘destroy, be 
destroyed’, to give ‘city walls are destroyed’ 
(Katō); Katō, Tōdō, and Gu consider 隓 to be 
the earlier way of writing 墮; if this is ac-
cepted, it can be said that 墮 has its origins in 
the seal stage. Not all commentators, though, 
regard 隓 as the original way of writing. Mizu-
kami lists 隓, for which he gives the possible 
meanings ‘hill with a city built on it is de-
惰力 DARYOKU　inertia 
怠惰 TAIDA　laziness 
惰気 DAKI indolence
DA
lazy, inert
12 strokes
惰
L1
1660
fall’, giving ‘motivation crumbles’ (Ogawa); 
Tōdō prefers to take as ‘the body slumps 
down’. The phonetic is alternatively taken with 
associated sense ‘languid, loose’, giving ‘lan-
guid feeling’ (Katō). These are quite minor dif-
ferences of interpretation, all of which lead to 
the meaning ‘lazy’. OT1968:382; TA1965:544; 
KJ1970:417. We suggest taking elements as 
‘feeling(s)’忄, 左 24 as ‘left hand’, and 月 209 
as ‘meat’. 
Mnemonic: FEEL LAZY AND EAT MEAT WITH 
LEFT HAND  
Seal 
 : a late graph (Shuowen). At seal stage 
has 忄 164 ‘heart, mind, feelings’, with either 
隋 (CO, ‘cut meat for off ering’) (in the case of 
the fuller form 憜) or the abbreviated form  
as phonetic with associated sense ‘crumble, 
唾液  DAEKI　saliva 
唾棄  DAKI　spit out, detest
眉唾物 mayutsubamono tall tale
DA, tsuba(ki)
saliva, spit
11 strokes
唾
L1
1658
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 口 22 
‘mouth’, and 垂 918 ‘hang down,’ as seman-
tic and phonetic, thus ‘saliva’. GY2008:1240; 
TA1965:1186; OT1968:186.
Mnemonic: WHAT HANGS DOWN FROM THE 
MOUTH ? – SALIVA 

494  The Remaining 1130 Characters
耐久   TAIKYŪ　endurance 
耐火   TAIKA　fi reproof 
耐え難い taegatai　unbearable
TAI, taeru
endure, bear
9 strokes
耐
L1
1662
(here meaning ‘hold’), and 而 1447 (used for 
some grammatical function words; originally 
pictograph of beard) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘can, able’, thus overall meaning ‘hold 
up, maintain’, and by extension ‘endure, bear’. 
DJ2009:v2:764; OT1968:286; TA1965:74-9. Sug-
gest taking 而 as ‘rake’.
Mnemonic: CAN ONE BEAR TO TAKE UP RAKE 
IN HAND?
怠業   TAIGYŌ　go-slow
怠け者   namakemono　idler 
怠り勝ち  okotarigachi　neglectful
胎児 TAIJI　fetus
受胎 JUTAI　conception
胎盤 TAIBAN　placenta
TAI, okotaru, namakeru
be lazy, neglect
9 strokes
TAI 
womb
9 strokes
怠
胎
L1
L1
1663
1664
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 心 164 
‘heart, feelings’, and 台 183 (‘stand, platform’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘become loose/
slack’, giving ‘the mind is slack’, and hence ‘lazy, 
neglectful’. MS1995:v1:504-05; OT1968:365; 
KJ1970:665. 
Mnemonic: FEEL TOO LAZY TO MOUNT STAND
‘begin’, thus ‘child begins to form inside 
mother’, and hence ‘fetus; be pregnant’ (Mi-
zukami, Tōdō), or ii] ‘indication, sign’, giving 
‘sign of (new) body’, i.e. ‘fetus; be pregnant’ 
(Ogawa). ‘Womb’ is an extended sense. Mizu-
kami lists a proposed bronze equivalent also. 
MS1995:v2:1074-5; TA1965:81; OT1968:819. 
Mnemonic: A WOMB IS A SORT OF FLESHY 
PLATFORM
駄馬 DABA　pack-horse
駄物 DAmono　cheap goods
無駄 MUDA　waste
DA 
pack-horse, poor 
quality
14 strokes
駄
L1
1661
(Ogawa).  Alternatively, Tōdō traces back to a 
word in early Chinese meaning ‘move/transport 
by pulling’. This word was originally written as 
佗, but when horses were used, it came to be 
written either as 駝 or 駄; 駝 later came to be 
used for ‘camel’, leaving 駄 for ‘load a horse; 
packhorse’. Pack-horses do not fi gure promi-
nently in modern Japanese life, but this graph 
is still employed, almost always in words with 
a negative connotation, as refl ected in ‘poor 
quality’. OT1968:1124; TA1965:531. 
Mnemonic: FAT PACK-HORSE OF POOR 
QUALITY
Seal (馱) 
 ; late graph (later version of 
Shuowen). Has 馬 210 ‘horse’, originally 
combined with 大 56 (‘big’) but later 太 181 
(‘fat’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘stack, pile up’, thus ‘load up a horse’, and 
by extension ‘load for a horse; pack-horse’ 
Seal 
. Has 肉 209 ‘flesh, meat’ (here, in the 
sense ‘body’), and 台 183 (‘stand, platform’) 
as phonetic with associated sense taken as i] 
Seal (耏) 
; late graph (Shuowen). Entry 
heading in Shuowen has 耏, but also notes 耐 
as an alternative form. 耐 has 寸 920 ‘hand’ 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  495
泰然 TAIZEN　composure
安泰 ANTAI　peace 
泰西 TAISEI　the West, Occident
‘tranquil, calm’ as an extended sense (Ogawa). 
Yet another meaning put forward for these 
three elements is ‘help out/rescue some-
one who has fallen into water’ (Shirakawa). 
Alternatively, the element 大 here is regarded 
as phonetic in function with associated sense 
’emerge, escape’, giving ‘let (something) slip 
through the fi ngers in water’ (e.g. rice, when 
washing it) or ‘put through sieve’ (Katō). 
Sometimes borrowed on the basis of its sound 
value – more commonly in older texts – to 
write TAI ‘Thailand’. Correct interpretation of 
this graph is elusive. GY2008:979; OT1968:566; 
SS1984:566; KJ1970:661. We suggest taking 
𡗗 as two males 夫 601, and 氺 as ‘sprinkled 
water’ 
Mnemonic: TWO (BIG) THAI MALES CALMLY 
SPRINKLE WATER – HOW SERENE
TAI
calm, serene, big, Thai
10 strokes
泰
L1
1665
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Interpreta-
tions diverge considerably. In one approach, 
taken as 大 56 ‘big’ (but here representing 
‘person [standing]’) combined with ‘both 
hands’ (stylized in block script to 廾 ) and 水 
42 in the variant form 氺, Gu interprets the 
role of the hands as being to sprinkle water, 
thus giving the overall meaning ‘bathe’. An-
other view treats the same three elements as 
having a diff erent overall meaning, viz. ‘make 
waterway bigger and improve fl ow’, and takes 
堆積 TAISEKI　accumulation, pile
堆肥 TAIHI　compost, manure
堆石 TAISEKI　moraine
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 土 64 ‘earth, 
ground’, and 隹 324 (‘short-tailed bird, bird’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘mound 
of piled-up earth’, thus ‘(piece of) ground 
piled up high’ (Ogawa). Gu considers the 
underlying word for ‘mound’ in early Chi-
TAI, uzutakai 
pile(d) high
11 strokes
堆
L1
1666
nese had been written at the seal stage by 
borrowing  (CO ‘pile’), a graph which is 
considered originally (OBI stage) to have 
been a pictograph representing either a 
mound of piled-up earth or alternatively 
the human buttocks. Schuessler suggests a 
possible link between the underlying word 
here for ‘mound’ and that represented by 
the graph 屯 1806 (‘camp, barracks’) in the 
sense ‘hill’. OT1968:218,299; GY2008:1180; 
AS2007:219,503. 
Mnemonic: SHORT-TAILED BIRDS ARE PILED 
ON THE GROUND?!
郵袋  YŪTAI　mailbag
有袋類 YŪTAIRUI　marsupial
手袋  tebukuro　gloves
TAI, fukuro
bag, pouch
11 strokes
袋
L2
1667
Seal 
; late graph (later version of Shuowen) 
The Shuowen xinfu has 帒 as the entry 
heading. This has 巾 1232 ‘cloth, fabric’ and 
代 358 (‘replace’) as phonetic with associated 
meaning ‘wrap round, envelop’, giving ‘cloth 
bag for wrapping things in’; 袋 is also noted, 
though, as an alternative way of writing, with 
衣 ‘garment’ 444 (here in sense ‘cloth’) replac-
ing 巾 ‘cloth’ as determinative. OT1968:903; 
GY2008:1271; SS1984:567. 
Mnemonic: REPLACE BAG OF CLOTHES 

496  The Remaining 1130 Characters
逮捕  TAIHO　arrest
逮捕者 TAIHOSHA　captor 
逮捕状 TAIHOJŌ　arrest warrant
TAI
chase, seize
11 strokes
逮
L1
1668
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has ⻌ 85 ‘move, 
go’, and CO 隶 ‘catch up with, reach’ (see Note 
below) as semantic and phonetic, giving 
‘reach, extend to, arrive’. Note: bronze forms of 
隶 have 又 2003 ‘hand’ reaching a tail (repre-
sented by a tail-like shape, taken as an abbrev 
of what later was to be written as 尾 1888 ‘tail’. 
MS1995:v2:1404-5,v1:406-08; OT1968:1004; 
TA1965:748-9. Take 隶 as 肀 hand seizing 
target, 氺 as (sweat) droplets. 
Mnemonic: MOVE IN THE CHASE, SEIZE 
TARGET BUT GET SWEATY HANDS 
代替  DAITAI　substitution
両替  RYŌgae　money changing 
取替え  torikae　swapping
Greater clarity, albeit provisional, is found in 
one of these (let us call it ‘form B’) in Shuowen 
which has 曰 1048 ‘speak’ instead of 白; form B 
is taken in one view as consisting of 曰 ‘speak’, 
and 竝 as phonetic with associated meaning 
‘stop, desist’, giving ‘say “stop/desist” ’, and 
by extension ‘change’ (Ogawa). The third seal 
form (‘form C’) in Shuowen has 曰 beneath 兟 
(CO, ‘advance’); this may just have evolved as 
a popular variant, as is suggested in the 17th 
century Zhengzitong. Unsurprisingly, the ma-
jority of commentators omit treatment of this 
challenging graph. MS1995:v2:896-7,980-82; 
DJ2009:v3:841,v2:696; OT1968:479; 
ZZ1671:v1:551-2. We suggest taking the up-
per part as two ‘males/husbands’ 夫 601, and 
日 as ‘day’ 66. 
Mnemonic: ONE DAY, ONE HUSBAND/MALE 
WILL BE SWAPPED FOR ANOTHER
TAI, kaeru/waru 
exchange, swap
12 strokes 
替
L2
1669
Seal form A 
. A graph made diffi  cult to ana-
lyse by the fact that while Shuowen has seal 
form A as the entry heading, it also goes on to 
give two other alternative forms; the mean-
ing given in Shuowen is ‘one side goes down’. 
Seal form A itself consists of 竝 (traditional 
form of 並 977 ‘line up’; the top part of 替 is in 
error for 竝 ) over an element/graph which is 
considered to be one which is a homograph 
with 白 ‘white’, i.e. a diff erent graph having the 
same shape as 白 69 ’white’. The seal element/
graph concerned, corresponding to the lower 
part of , namely 
, ‘is of uncertain meaning. 
滞在 TAIZAI　sojourn, stay
停滞 TEITAI　stagnation
滞納 TAINŌ　non-payment
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
滯. Has氵42 ‘water’, and 帶 566 (traditional 
form of 帯 ‘belt, obi; wear’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘stop, stagnate’ (Gu says 
‘become fi rm’), giving ‘water stands still’; later 
generalized in meaning to ‘stop, stagnate’. 
OT1968:601; KJ1970:715; GY2008:494. 
Mnemonic: WATER ON BELT WILL STAGNATE 
Or: USE BELT TO STOP WATER STAGNATING
TAI, todokōru
stop, stagnate
13 strokes
滞
L1
1670

The Remaining 1130 Characters  497
頂戴  CHŌDAI　receive, please
戴き物  itadakimono　gift
戴冠式 TAIKANSHIKI　coronation
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 異 826 
(‘diff er, strange’, originally grotesque mask), 
and 𢦏 (CO; ‘cut off , injure’ [variant halberd]) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘put on top, 
block (by piling up)’, to give ‘put grotesque 
mask on top of face’. Meaning later generalized 
to ‘hold up to the head’, and then senses such 
as ‘respectfully receive (by holding up to head)’. 
OT1968:397; KJ1970:663-4; GY2008:1920; 
DJ2009:v2:380. 
Mnemonic: RECEIVE AND ACCEPT 
STRANGELY DIFFERENT HALBERD
TAI, (DAI), itadaku
receive, accept
17 strokes
戴
L1
1671
清滝  kiyotaki　clear cascade
滝川  takigawa　rapids
華厳滝 Kegondaki　Kegon Falls
‘fall’, thus ‘water falling’ (Shirakawa, Katō; Katō 
also gives meaning ‘rain falling as thick mist’). 
In similar vein, Ogawa takes the associated 
sense as ‘put into’, thus ‘rain falls down into’. 
As for the meaning ‘cascade, waterfall’, Katō 
suggests a word-family link with 涿 (CO) 
and/or 滴 1757 (‘drop, drip’). SS1984:916-7; 
KJ1970:930; OT1968:602-03; MS1995:v2:792-3. 
Mnemonic: WATER-DRAGON IS IN CAS-
CADING WATERFALL
taki
cascade, waterfall
13 strokes
滝
L1
1672
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional 瀧.  Has ‘water’ 
氵 42, and 龍 (traditional form of 竜 2081 
‘dragon’) as phonetic with associated sense 
選択   SENTAKU　choice
採択   SAITAKU　adopt, select
択び出す erabidasu　single out
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 擇. Has 扌 34 
‘hand’, and 睪 ‘select’ (CO; Gu says ‘scout’; see 
Note below) as semantic and phonetic, giving 
‘select by hand’. Note: 睪 has 罒 (here, variant 
of 目 76 ‘eye’), with 幸 295 (‘happiness’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘look for’, thus 
‘look over criminals and select’. MS1995:v1:562-
3,v2:922-4; KJ1970:94; GY2008:600; 
OT1968:403. We suggest taking 尺 as 人 41 
‘person’ with backpack.  
Mnemonic: PERSON SELECTS HANDY 
BACKPACK 
TAKU, erabu
choose, select
7 strokes
択
L1
1673
沢山 TAKUSAN　much, many
恵沢 KEITAKU　benefi ts, blessings
沢地 sawaCHI　swampland, bog
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
澤.  Has 氵 42 ‘water’, and 睪 (see 1673 Note) 
as phonetic with associated sense ’entangled/
linked,’ thus ‘land where aquatic plants are 
entangled, where lake and swampy land come 
together’, i.e. ‘swamp, marsh’. It is unclear as to 
how it acquired the meaning ‘benefi t’, but pos-
sibly through ‘much [water]’. At one stage it also 
TAKU, sawa
swamp, marsh, benefi t
7 strokes
沢
L1
1674

498  The Remaining 1130 Characters
食卓 SHOKUTAKU　dining table
卓球 TAKKYŪ　table tennis
卓越 TAKUETSU　excellence
association ‘lame’ is based on a regional dialect 
form in early Chinese. Accordingly, in another 
analysis the top element is interpreted  simply 
as 人 41 ‘person’, and 早 is taken as phonetic 
with associated sense of ‘jump up (high)’, thus 
giving ‘someone who is by far the best/out-
standing’ (Ogawa, Tōdō). A note of caution is 
sounded by Qiu, who considers that as yet it is 
not possible to explain the structural compo-
sition of this graph. In the meantime, ‘table’ 
is probably best regarded as a loan usage. 
KJ1970:675; MS1995:v1:168-9; OT1968:139; 
TA1965:247-8; QX2000:96. We suggest taking 
the upper element of this graph, 
, as ‘cracks’ 
ト 96, and 早 52 ‘early’.  
Mnemonic: EXCELLENT HIGH-TABLE 
CRACKED AT EARLY STAGE
TAKU
table, excel, high
8 strokes
卓
L1
1675
Bronze 
; seal 
. Interpretations vary. In one 
view, the top element 
 is taken as representing 
a person with a withered leg, combined with 早 
52 (‘quick, early’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘lame, cripple’, giving overall meaning of 
‘lame, cripple’, and by extension ‘high’ on the 
basis of one side of the person’s body being 
higher than the other (Katō). The basis on the 
shape for taking the top element as ‘lame, crip-
ple’ seems quite tenuous, and in addition – 
according to Mizukami – the proposed word 
開拓 KAITAKU　reclamation
拓殖 TAKUSHOKU　colonizing
魚拓 GYOTAKU　fi sh print
in one place’, giving ‘gather things together 
in one place’ (Tōdō), or iii] ‘split open’, giving 
‘cut open’, with ‘open up, reclaim’ treated as 
an extended sense (Ogawa). The first two 
commentators, by contrast, consider ‘open 
up, reclaim’ to be a loan usage. The minor 
meaning ‘rub’ may be extended from ‘clear’. 
KJ1970:613; TA1965:325-30; OT1968:408.  
Mnemonic: HAND CLEARS STONES FROM 
RECLAIMED LAND
TAKU
reclaim, clear, rub
8 strokes
拓
L1
1676
委託 ITAKU　trust, commission
託宣 TAKUSEN　oracle
託送 TAKUSŌ　consignment
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 言 118 
‘words; speak’, and 乇 (CO; ‘plant seedling’ 
[originally, pictograph of a tiny plant with stem 
having emerged up through the ground, and 
root below]) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘put together, gather together’, giving ‘make re-
quest’. ‘Entrust’ is considered to be an extended 
sense. OT1968:921; GY2008:35; TA1965:330. We 
suggest taking 乇 as ‘seven’ 七 32, plus 
 top.  
Mnemonic: COMMITTED SEVEN TOP WORDS 
TO ENTRUSTED REQUEST
TAKU
request, commit, 
entrust 
10 strokes
託
L1
1677
had a meaning ‘glisten’, which appears to have 
been a loan usage. OT1968:561 MS1995:v2:784-5; 
KJ1970:95. As with 1673, we suggest taking 尺 
as 人 41 ‘person’ with backpack. 
Mnemonic: PERSON CARRIES BACKPACK 
THROUGH WATERS OF MARSH
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has扌34 
‘hand’, and 石 47 (‘stone’) as phonetic with 
associated sense taken as i] ‘pick up’, giving 
‘pick up with the hand’ (Katō), or ii] ‘gather 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  499
洗濯  SENTAKU　washing
洗濯機 SENTAKUKI　washing machine
洗濯物 SENTAKUmono　laundry
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 濯. Has 氵 
42 ‘water’, and 翟 (CO ‘pheasant’, from 羽 82 
‘wings’ and 324 ‘bird’) as phonetic with as-
sociated sense taken as i] ‘hit, beat’, giving 
‘beat fabric immersed in water’ (Ogawa), or 
ii] ‘pull out; excel’, giving ‘wash garments (or 
similar) by quickly pulling out of water’ (Mi-
zukami, Tōdō); thus, ‘wash, rinse’. OT1968:612; 
MS1995:v2:786-7; GY2008:1770; TA1965:786-7.  
Mnemonic: BIRD WASHES WINGS IN WATER 
TAKU
wash, rinse
17 strokes
濯
L2
1678
受諾 JUDAKU　acceptance
承諾 SHŌDAKU　consent
快諾 KAIDAKU　ready consent
‘agree’ the determinative 言 118 ‘words, 
speak’ was added, thus 諾. Depending on 
approach taken, 諾 has been taken in one 
view as 言 with 若  ‘follow’ as semantic and 
phonetic (Ogawa), or alternatively as 言 with 
若 just as phonetic with associated sense 
‘soft, pliant’ (Mizukami, Katō), either way giv-
ing ‘agree’. Mizukami also lists proposed OBI 
form. MS1995:v2:1208-9; 1112-3; KJ1970:676; 
OT1968:935; AS2007:447-8; TA1965:357-8.  
Mnemonic: AGREE WITH YOUNGSTER’S 
WORDS, SO CONSENT 
DAKU
consent, agree
15 strokes
諾
L1
1679
Bronze (若) 
 ; seal (諾) 
. Originally writ-
ten as 若 896 (‘young’), i.e. initially 若 was 
used to write words for both ‘young’ and 
‘agree’ (near-homophones in early Chinese). 
As this graph was later borrowed for other 
words too, to indicate clearly the meaning 
濁流  DAKURYŪ　turbid stream
濁音  DAKUON　voiced sound
濁り江  nigorie　muddy creek
Shuowen, taking 濁 as original meaning river 
name, but Katō sees ‘dirty water’ as probable 
original meaning, later used to refer to dirty 
river. Note: 蜀, originally in OBI as 𦉶, showing 
insect with large eyes (罒 76) and long body 
(勹); at bronze stage, 虫 60 ‘insect’ was added 
as determinative. MS1995:v2:782-3, 1148-9; 
KJ1970:741; OT1968:610; GY2008:93.
Mnemonic: TURBID WATER, FULL OF LONG 
BODIED INSECTS WITH BIG EYES
DAKU, nigoru/su
impure, turbid, voiced
16 strokes
濁
L1
1680
Seal 
. Has氵42 ‘water’, and 蜀 (‘caterpillar; 
Shu [name of ancient Chinese state]’; see Note 
below) as phonetic with associated sense ‘dirty, 
polluted’, thus ‘dirty water’. Ogawa follows 
但し書き  tadashigaki　proviso
但し付き  tadashizuki　(on) condition
但馬   Tajima*　place name
Also used in early Chinese for some words 
of abstract meaning such as ‘only’ and ‘but’, 
probably loaned for its sound value, though 
Katō sees ‘only’ as extended sense based on 
use in senses such as ‘empty’ and ‘have noth-
ing’. MS1995:v1:56-7,608-9; TA1965:534-5; 
GY2008:451; OT1968:54; WD1974:204-5.
Mnemonic: PERSON UP AT DAWN: HOWEVER 
… HE’S NAKED!! 
tadashi, TAN
but, however
7 strokes
但
L2
1681
Seal 
. Has 亻 41 ‘person’, and 旦 1687 (‘dawn’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘appear 
on outside, expose the hidden’ > ‘show fl esh’. 

500  The Remaining 1130 Characters
脱衣 DATSUI　undressing
脱皮 DAPPI　emergence
脱出 DASSHUTSU　escape
extended senses. Note: 兌 (兑) is typically taken 
as showing person 儿 41 with mouth 口 22 on 
top, signifying ‘call out, pray’, with ‘eight’ 八/丷 
70 in its other meaning ‘disperse, out, away, off ’; 
taken here as indicating either ‘words directed 
to the deities, pray’ by a shaman (Katō), or ‘man-
ifestation of the spirit of the deities’ (Shirakawa). 
KJ1970:603; MS1995:v1:92-5; OT1968:823; 
SS1984:560; TA1965:548-9. Suggest ‘elder 
brother’ 兄 114, 丷 as ‘off ’, plus ‘body’ 月 .
Mnemonic: ELDER BROTHER TAKES CLOTHES 
OFF BODY AND ESCAPES 
DATSU, nugu
take off , shed, escape
11 strokes
脱
L1
1682
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 月 209 
‘meat, body’, and 兌 (NJK; ‘shaman, one who 
pleases the deities; see Note below) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘come off , remove’, thus 
‘grow thin’. ‘Escape; take off /shed (clothes)’ are 
奪取   DASSHU　seizure
奪回   DAKKAI　recovery
奪い去る ubaisaru　carry off 
tion of 衣 as in the bronze form (Gu). Ogawa, 
for his part, interprets 大 and 隹 as making 
up one compound part of 奪, i.e. 奞 ‘bird fl aps 
its wings’. Despite these various diff erences, 
overall meaning of the seal form is still typi-
cally considered to be ‘bird fl ies off  out of the 
hand’, though Mizukami notes an alternative 
interpretation as ‘’pull out from under the arm 
a bird caught in hunting’. ‘Captivate’ may be 
seen as an extended sense, but views diverge 
as to whether ‘seize, deprive someone of 
something’ should be regarded as an ex-
tended sense or a loan use in relation to ‘bird 
fl ies off ’. It appears to have been at the clerical 
script stage that 又 was replaced by 寸 920, 
also meaning  ‘hand’; the substitution of 寸 
‘hand’ for 又 in this way was not uncommon. 
MS1995:v1:306-7; GY2008:241; KJ1970:678; 
QX2000:76; OT1968:289; ZY2009:v1:199; 
SK1984:195. Take 大 as variant of ‘big’ 大. 
Mnemonic: CAPTIVATING BIG BIRD 
SNATCHED FROM HAND
DATSU, ubau
snatch, capture,
captivate
14 strokes
奪
L1
1683
Bronze 
; seal 
. Bronze has 
 (隹 324 
‘bird’ between upper and lower elements 
of ‘clothing’, here in sense of ‘cover’ 衣 444), 
meaning ‘bird fl ies off /about to fl y off ’; 
beneath 
 there is 又 2003 ‘hand’, giving the 
overall meaning ‘bird fl ies off  out of the hand’ 
(Katō), or ‘covered bird about to fl ap wings 
and escape’ (Gu). The seal form has the three 
elements 隹, 大 56 ‘big’, and又; interpreta-
tions of this combination diff er. In all cases 
隹 is taken as ‘bird’, and 又 as ‘hand’, but in 
one view 大 here is taken as ‘person’ (Tōdō), 
while another analysis takes as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘get loose’ (Katō), and 
alternatively again 大 is taken as an abbrevia-
本棚  HONdana　bookshelf
戸棚  todana　cupboard
棚上げ tanaage　pigeonhole
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 木 73 
‘wood, tree’, and 朋 (‘friend’; see Note below) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘stick close 
together’, giving (a structure such as) ‘cover/ 
shelves made of wood or reeds’ (Tōdō), or 
‘(temporary) bridge’ (Ogawa). Note: at the 
OBI stage, the above graph for ‘friend’ was 
originally ‘shell currency on two strings’, writ-
tana
shelf, trellis
12 strokes
棚
L1
1684

The Remaining 1130 Characters  501
ten with a pictograph showing two strings 
of shell currency; this led to extended senses 
such as ‘pair; cluster together’, though these 
have become defunct in modern times. 
TA1965:155; OT1968:513; MS1995:v1:636-8. 
Take the two shells as 月 18 ‘months’.
Mnemonic: TAKE TWO MONTHS TO PUT UP 
WOODEN BOOKSHELVES!
誰何 SUIKA　Who goes there!?
誰彼 darekare　many people
誰某 taresore　Mr So-and-so
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 言 118 ‘words; speak’, 
and 隹 324 (‘short-tailed bird, bird’) as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘this’ or ‘who?’, 
giving ‘who?’ or ‘anyone, someone’. In modern 
Japanese, ‘who?’ only. MS1995:v2:1202-03; 
WD1974:640-41.
Mnemonic: WHO OWNS THAT TALKING BIRD?  
dare, tare, SUI
who?
15 strokes
誰
L1
1685
丹念  TANNEN　diligence
丹精  TANSEI　assiduity
丹塗り  ninuri　painted red
OBI 
; seal 
. OBI through to seal stages 
depict a pit, with a mark in the middle which 
is taken to represent an excavated red sub-
stance, specifi cally vermilion ore. The shift 
towards the block script shape can be seen 
in some clerical script occurrences. ‘Sincerity’ 
is  a very minor meaning, probably borrowed. 
MS1995:v1:14-16; OT1968:23; KJ1970:682-3; 
SK1984:15. We suggest using 舟 1450 ‘boat’.
Mnemonic: ONLY HALF THE BOAT IS RED 
TAN, ni
red, red earth, sincere
4 strokes
丹
L1
1686
旦夕 TANSEKI　day and night
旦那 DANNA　master, husband
元旦 GANTAN　New Year’s Day
OBI 
; seal 
. OBI and bronze occurrences 
of 旦 vary to some extent, but are taken as 
depicting the sun 日 66 rising out of cloud, 
or refl ected in the sea. The seal form changes 
to show the sun above a line representing 
the horizon. Hence the meaning ‘dawn, early 
morning’. MS1995:v1:608-9; OT1968:459.
Mnemonic: SUN RISES AT DAWN OVER THE 
HORIZON
TAN, DAN
dawn, morning
5 strokes
旦
L1
1687
胆嚢 TANNŌ　gall-bladder
胆石 TANSEKI　gallstone
落胆 RAKUTAN　discouragement
Seal (膽) 
; a late graph (Shuowen); tradi-
tional 膽; 胆 is a later, post-Shuowen graph.  
膽 consists of 肉/月 209 ‘flesh, meat; body’, 
with詹 (CO; ‘talkative’) as phonetic with 
associated sense taken in one view as ‘jar-
shaped’, giving ‘gall-bladder’ (Katō), though 
‘bag-shaped’ might be a better description 
(and see Note below). Alternatively, Ogawa 
takes the associated sense as ‘fill’, likewise 
TAN, kimo
gall-bladder, liver, 
courage
9 strokes
胆
L1
1688

502  The Remaining 1130 Characters
淡水 TANSUI　freshwater
淡色 TANSHOKU　light color
淡雪 awayuki　light snow
OBI 
 : seal 
. Has 氵 42 ‘water’, and 炎 
1050 (‘fi erce fl ames’, [doubled fl ame 火 8]), 
with associated sense taken as i] ‘peaceful, 
calm’ (Mizukami), or ii] ‘few’ (Ogawa), or iii] 
‘weak soup’ (Katō) giving ‘watery/bland soup’; 
by extension, ‘pale (color), weak (fl avor), 
faint’. MS1995:v2:760-61,796-7; OT1968: 591; 
GY2008:1323; KJ1985:371. 
Mnemonic: WATER ON FLAMES MAKES THEM 
PALE AND FAINT
TAN, awai
pale, light, faint
11 strokes
淡
L1
1689
嘆息   TANSOKU　sigh
驚嘆   KYŌTAN　admiration
嘆き叫ぶ nagekisakebu　wail
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 口 22 
‘mouth; speak’, and  (provisional meaning 
understood as ‘drought, starvation’: see also 
265) with associated sense taken either as i] 
‘suff er’, thus ‘become disheartened and sigh’ 
(Ogawa), or ii] ‘swallow, unable to talk’, giving 
‘make lamenting sound’ (Katō), either way giv-
ing ‘lament’. Basis for the minor meaning ‘ad-
mire’ is not clear. DJ2009:v1:119; OT1968:193; 
KJ1970:683. Take  as ‘Han male’ (265). 
Mnemonic: HAN MALE OPENS HIS 
MOUTH – TO LAMENT OR ADMIRE?
TAN, 
nageku/kawashii
lament, admire
13 strokes
嘆
L1
1690
極端 KYOKUTAN　extreme
端正 TANSEI　upright
道端 michibata　roadside
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 立 77 
‘stand’, and 耑 ‘plant growing’ (see Note be-
low), giving original meaning ‘upright’ (Qiu).  
‘Edge, extremity’ are considered extended 
senses (Gu). Ogawa, alternatively, treats 耑 as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘fl at’, giving 
‘stand with good posture’. Note: OBI occur-
rences of 耑 are taken in one view as a pic-
TAN, hashi, hata, ha
extremity, edge, 
upright, tip
14 strokes
端
L1
1691
giving ‘gall-bladder’. Shuowen defines 膽 as 
‘organ which joins the liver’. 胆 is in ori-
gin a different graph from 膽, listed in the 
Guangyun dictionary (early 11th century) as 
originally having another meaning (possibly 
‘saliva’), but 胆 was subsequently borrowed 
to write 膽. Traditionally the gall-bladder 
was perceived to be the seat of courage, 
hence the extended use in that sense. Today, 
胆 can be used in a general, non-technical 
way for either ‘gall-bladder’ or ‘liver’ (see 
Note following). Note: in modern Japanese, 
the medical term for gall-bladder is  胆嚢 
TANNŌ (嚢 is ‘bag’ [NJK]) and that for liver 
is 肝臓 KANZŌ (see 肝 1142), but in popu-
lar everyday usage the native Japanese 
word kimo can refer to either, probably 
reflecting the close relationship between 
the two. Similarly, attempts are made to 
distinguish the use of 胆 and 肝 to write 
kimo meaning ‘liver/gall-bladder’ on the one 
hand and ‘courage’ on the other, but actual 
usage may not adhere to this. KJ1970:251; 
ZZ1671:v2:949 GY2008:896; TA1965:839; 
ZY2009:v3:1017,1040; OT1968:819. We sug-
gest taking 旦 as ‘dawn’ 1687.  
Mnemonic: AT DAWN, GALL-BLADDER AND 
LIVER WILL BE TAKEN FROM BODY

The Remaining 1130 Characters  503
破綻   HATAN　failure, bankruptcy
綻び   hokorobi　open seam, rip
綻ばせる  hokorobaseru　break into smile
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 糸 29 
‘thread’, and 定 371 (‘fi x, establish’) as pho-
netic with associated sense taken either as i] 
‘appear on outside’, giving ‘be ripped and ap-
pear on outside’ (referring to lining of a gar-
ment becoming visible) (Tōdō), or ii] ‘be cut, 
snap’, giving ‘be rent apart/ripped; unravel’ 
(Ogawa). Examples of 綻 are found in clerical 
script onwards. TA1965:534-5; OT1968:782; 
SK1984:571.  
Mnemonic: FIXED THREADS CAN UNRAVEL 
OR BE TORN
TAN, hokorobiru
be torn, rip, come 
apart, unravel 
14 strokes
綻
L1
1692
tograph of a young plant putting out shoots 
above ground and showing roots below, 
giving the meaning ‘pointed shoot of a plant’, 
and by extension, ‘beginning; edge’. This view 
is set out in Mizukami, who also notes another 
interpretation of this graph (put forward by 
Tōdō) as representing edges of cloth hanging 
down, but this is not convincing. QX2000:266; 
MS1995:v2:1054-5; GY2008:1748; OT1968:747. 
Take 山 as ‘mountain’ 26 and 而 as rake. 
Mnemonic: RAKE STANDS UPRIGHT ON 
EXTREME EDGE OF MOUNTAIN
鍛工所 TANKŌJO　smithy
鍛錬  TANREN　forge, train
鍛金  TANKIN　beating gold
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 金 16 
‘metal’, and 段 944 (‘step, grade’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘hit, strike’, giving ‘beat 
and temper heated metal’. OT1968:1048; 
GY2008:1723-4. 
Mnemonic: FORGING METAL IS A STEP IN 
ONE’S TRAINING
TAN, kitaeru 
forge, train
17 strokes
鍛
L1
1693
弾薬  DANYAKU　ammunition
弾力  DANRYOKU　elasticity
弾き手  hikite　player
OBI ; seal 
; traditional 彈. The OBI form 
shows some variation, but more semantically-
explicit occurrences have a small object, taken 
to be a stone for use as a projectile, inside a 
bow. Seal form has 弓107 ‘bow’ and 單/単 569 
(‘simple’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘round ball’, giving ‘bow to project stone mis-
siles’; by extension, ‘hit; pull bowstring; play 
stringed instrument’. ‘Bounce’ and ‘spring’ 
would seem to be extended meanings. 
MS1995:v1:472-3; OT1968:342; KJ1970:682.  
Mnemonic: BULLET SPRINGS FROM SIMPLE 
BOW!?
DAN, hiku, hazumu, 
tama, hajiku 
bullet, spring, play, 
bounce
12 strokes
弾
L1
1694

504  The Remaining 1130 Characters
花壇  KADAN　fl ower bed
壇上  DANJŌ　stage
土壇場 DOTANba　execution platform
Seal 
;  late graph (Shuowen). Has 土 64 
‘earth’, and 亶 (CO ‘granary full of grain’ [Gu]) 
as phonetic with associated sense i] ‘make 
level and fi rm’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘raised’ (Katō), ei-
ther way giving ‘raised area of fl attened earth’. 
Initially used for rituals, later generalized. 
OT1968:226; KJ1970:681; GY2008:1636-7. Take 
as ‘dawn’ 旦 1687, ‘turn’ 回 92, atop 亠. 
Mnemonic: EARTHY SHOW AT DAWN ATOP 
REVOLVING STAGE
DAN, TAN
stage, platform
16 strokes
壇
L1
1695
恥辱 CHIJOKU　disgrace
無恥 MUCHI　shamelessness
赤恥 akahaji　public disgrace
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen).  Has 心 164 
‘heart, feelings’, with 耳 31 (‘ear’) as phonetic 
with associated sense i] ‘shrink’ (Katō, Tōdō), 
or ii] ‘feel shame’ (Ogawa), both giving ‘feel 
shame’. KJ1970:692; TA1965:98-9; OT1968:370; 
SS1984:587.
Mnemonic: ASHAMED TO HAVE HEART 
SMALLER THAN EAR
CHI, haji, 
hajiru/zukashii
(a)shame(d), shy 
10 strokes
恥
L1
1696
一致  ITCHI　unity, accord
致命的 CHIMEITEKI　fatal
送致  SŌCHI　sending
similarly-shaped 攵 (攴 [determinative no. 
66]). The clerical script seems to have been the 
time of transition which saw a change to 攵 
in this graph, no doubt because when 夊 (or 
夂 [‘go down, descend’]) was written cursively 
there was potential for confusion with 攵 (攴) 
‘hit, strike, coerce’. As for the meanings ‘cause 
(to do)’ and ‘do’, it may be that 致 was some-
times used also for a near-homophone in early 
Chinese meaning ‘bring about’, which could ex-
plain the sense ‘do’ as well. MS1995:v2:1092-3; 
KJ1970:445,58-9; SK1984:606-7; GY2008:1032-
3; OT1968:833; AS2007:617-8.
Mnemonic: COERCIVELY SEND SOMEONE, 
WHO DOES ARRIVE
CHI, itasu
do, send, cause 
10 strokes
致
L1
1697
Bronze (致) 
; seal 
. Bronze and seal forms 
have 至 886 ‘reach’, with not 攵 (攴) 112 ‘hit, 
strike’, but what in the bronze form Katō takes 
to be a standing person with heel on the 
ground as a fuller version of 夊 ‘walk slowly/
drag foot’ (see Appendix). Original meaning 
of the graph is taken as ‘send; arrive (from 
afar)’. Later, the foot element was replaced by 
遅刻  CHIKOKU　lateness 
遅々 
 CHICHI　slowly
遅咲き  osozaki　late blooming
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 遲. The bronze 
form has 辶/⻌ 85 ‘go, walk’, with CO 屖, the 
latter taken to mean either ‘tarry, linger’ (Qiu) 
or ‘person crawling cannot move forward’ 
(Mizukami). By the seal stage, however, the 
graph had changed so as to be written 辶 
(as before) but now instead with 犀 (NJK, 
‘slow-moving beast, rhinoceros’: see Note 
CHI, okureru, osoi
tardy, slow, late
12 strokes
遅
L2
1698

The Remaining 1130 Characters  505
白痴 HAKUCHI　idiot
愚痴 GUCHI　idle complaint
痴情 CHIJŌ　infatuation
lacking intelligence’ (Katō), hence ‘foolish’, or 
ii] ‘not advancing’, again giving ‘foolish’ (Oga-
wa). The popular form 痴 replaces 疑 with 知 
186 ‘know’ as semantic and phonetic, giving 
‘illness related to thinking’. Unfortunately, 
beyond saying that 痴 is a post-seal form it 
is diffi  cult to give an indication of the period 
when it evolved. OT1968:680; KJ1970:691-2; 
DJ2009:v2:613. 
Mnemonic: I MAY BE FOOLISH, BUT I KNOW 
I’M ILL
CHI
foolish
13 strokes
痴
L1
1699
Seal (癡) 
; 痴 is a late, post-Shuowen 
equivalent. The seal form has 疒 404 ‘sick-
bed, sickness’ and 疑 848 (‘doubt, suspect’) 
as phonetic with associated sense taken as 
i] ‘slow’, giving ‘illness of someone vague or 
稚魚  CHIGYO　fi sh fry
稚拙  CHISETSU　naivety
幼稚園 YŌCHIEN　kindergarten
‘grain plant not big as yet’, and by extension 
‘very young’ (Ogawa; see Note below). At the 
clerical script stage, examples are found of 
both 稺 and 稚. Kangxi zidian has separate 
entries for both graphs, but treats them as 
essentially being the same. Note: Ogawa 
says ‘rice plant not big as yet’ (mada ōkiku 
naranai ine), but 禾 refers to grain plants in 
general, not just rice plants. OT1968:734; 
ZY2009:v3:875,878; SK1984:542,544.  
Mnemonic: YOUNG BIRD AMONG IMMATURE 
GRAIN PLANTS
CHI
young, immature
13 strokes
稚
L1
1700
稚 is a late, post-Shuowen graph. The seal 
form corresponds to 稺, comprising 禾 87 
‘grain plant’, with 屖 (‘tarry, linger’, etc.) (later 
replaced by 隹 324 ‘short-tailed bird, bird’) as 
phonetic; associated sense is ‘small’, giving 
below); the associated sense of 犀 here is 
taken either as i] ‘become loose’, thus giving 
‘move slowly’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘become blocked’, 
giving ‘move slowly almost as if blocking the 
way’ (noted in Mizukami). Alternatively, 犀 can 
be taken as semantic, combining with 辶 to 
give ‘move slowly like a rhinoceros’ (this view 
noted in Mizukami also). Note: 犀 consists – at 
the seal stage – of 牛 108 ‘ox, cow’ (here, ‘ox/
cow-like beast’), combined with an upper part 
which corresponds to 尾 1888 ‘tail’, but one 
must bear in mind that this does not refl ect 
the earlier composition of 遲 (noted above). 
MS1995:v2:1308-9,v1:412-13; QX2000:254; 
OT1968:1007,638; SS1984:588. We suggest 
taking the right-hand elements as ‘sheep’ 羊 
426 and ‘corpse’ 尸 256.  
Mnemonic: MOVE LIKE A SHEEP’S 
CORPSE – SLOWLY!?
巧緻 KŌCHI　elaborate 
緻密 CHIMITSU　fi ne, exact 
細緻 SAICHI　detailed, minute 
A late, post- Shuowen graph; added to a later 
version of Shuowen by the 10th century scholar 
Xu Xuan. Consists of 糸 29 ‘thread’, combined 
with 致 as phonetic with associated sense 
‘fi ne, detailed’, giving ‘fi ne texture’, and then 
‘fi ne, detailed’. The diff erence in shape be-
tween the phonetic element in this graph – 
originally 致 (with right-hand 夊 or 夂 [see 
CHI 
fi ne, minute, exact 
16 strokes
緻
L1
1701

506  The Remaining 1130 Characters
畜類 CHIKURUI　livestock 
畜生 CHIKUSHŌ　beast, Damn!
畜産 CHIKUSAN　stockbreeding
then written distinctively from the seal script 
stage onwards. Thus analyses diverge. One 
view treats 畜 as having 田 63 ‘fi eld’, with 幺 as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘rest, give rest’, 
giving overall meaning ‘let soil rest from culti-
vation’, and by extension ‘accumulate’ (Ogawa, 
Katō). Alternatively, the top element is taken 
to be 玄 ‘black’, giving ‘grow crops in rich black 
soil’ (Tōdō). MS1995:v2:878-9,648-9,v1:448-9; 
OT1968:671; KJ1970:387-8; TA1965:178. 
Mnemonic: LIVESTOCK IN FIELD ARE FOR 
OCCULT PURPOSES
CHIKU
livestock
10 strokes
畜
L2
1702
Bronze 
; seal 
. It is hard to determine 
whether the top element in 畜 was origi-
nally 玄 or 幺. The shapes of 玄 1297 (‘black, 
occult’) and 幺 29 (‘fi ne thread’), were often 
very similar if not identical in bronze, and 
駆逐  KUCHIKU　driving off 
逐一  CHIKUICHI　one by one
逐語的 CHIKUGOTEKI　literal
OBI 
; seal 
. OBI form has pictograph of 
wild animal varied in shape, but often felt 
to represent wild boar or similar, with an 
element for ‘foot’. At bronze stage, ‘foot’ was 
CHIKU, ou
chase, pursue
10 strokes
逐
L1
1703
changed to ⻌ 85 ‘go, walk’. These combined 
elements are generally taken as ‘follow 
wild boar’, then more generally ‘chase prey, 
chase’. An alternative minority view (noted in 
Mizukami) takes 豕 89 ‘wild pig’ as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘chase’, thus ‘chase 
along path’ or ‘chase and surround prey’, but 
still same generalized meaning, i.e. ‘chase’. 
MS1995:v2:1292-3; MR2007:244; TA1965:178; 
QX2000:192; OT1968:1000; SS1984:591.
Mnemonic: GO IN PURSUIT OF WILD PIG 
貯蓄 CHOCHIKU　savings
蓄電 CHIKUDEN　charging
蓄積 CHIKUSEKI　accumulation
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 艹 53 
‘plants’, and 畜 1702 taken in one view in the 
extended sense ‘accumulate’, giving ‘accumu-
late vegetables (for winter)’ (Tōdō, Ogawa). A 
diff erent view takes 畜 as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘soak skeins in pot of dye’, giving ‘ac-
cumulate’ (color from plant dyes). TA1965:178; 
OT1968:866; SS1984:1591. 
Mnemonic: LIVESTOCK FED ON 
ACCUMULATED PLANTS IN STORE
CHIKU, takuwaeru
accumulate, store 
13 strokes
蓄
L1
1704
Appendix], not 攵 112 ‘strike’) and 致 1697 
(q.v.) – is a subtle one which resulted in 
fl uctuation in the shape of 緻 even in the 
leading dictionaries in Qing dynasty China: 
Zhengzitong gives the printed form of this 
graph as it would be written today, as 緻, 
while the authoritative Kangxi zidian presents 
it in what its scholars saw as the more correct 
form. In the 2010 Jōyō kanji List, though, this 
relatively uncommon graph not included in 
other earlier offi  cial character lists has been 
regularized in shape to 緻, a change which 
avoids an otherwise troublesome fi ne point 
of diff erence. KZ2001:2052/3671; OT1968:786; 
GY2008:1032-3; SS1984:589; ZZ1671:v2:909. 
We suggest taking 致 1697 as ‘do’, with 糸 29 
‘thread’. 
Mnemonic: DO FINE, EXACT THREADWORK

The Remaining 1130 Characters  507
秩序  CHITSUJO　order 
無秩序 MUCHITSUJO　disorder
新秩序 SHINCHITSUJO　new order
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 禾 87 ‘grain 
plant’, and 失 529 (‘lose’) as phonetic with 
associated sense i] ‘fi ll up, accumulate’, giving 
‘accumulate grain plants and make complete/ 
CHITSU
order
10 strokes
秩
L1
1705
replenish’ (Tōdō; see Note below), or ii] ‘join 
up in order’, giving ‘put grain plants in rows’, 
and by extension ‘accumulate’ (Ogawa; see 
Note following). Note: both Tōdō and Ogawa 
say ‘rice plant’ (ine), but 禾 is generally inter-
preted as ‘grain plant’, though Qiu prefers to 
take more specifi cally as ‘foxtail millet’, a grain 
plant grown at an early period in ancient 
China. TA1965:748; OT1968:748; QX2000:176. 
Mnemonic: LOSING GRAIN PLANTS IS OUT 
OF ORDER
窒素 CHISSO　nitrogen
窒死 CHISSHI　asphyxia
窒息 CHISSOKU　suff ocation
CHITSU
block up, plug
11 strokes
窒
L1
1706
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 穴 860 
‘hole, cave’, and 至 886 ‘reach’. Usually taken 
with 至 as phonetic with associated sense ‘be-
come full’, thus ‘hole becomes blocked’, then 
generalized to ‘block, cover, close off ’ (Ogawa). 
OT1968:742; AS2007:617; GY2008:1333.
Mnemonic: REACH INTO HOLE TO PLUG IT
嫡嗣 CHAKUSHI　legitimate heir
廃嫡 HAICHAKU　disinherit
嫡子 CHAKUSHI　legitimate child
CHAKU
legitimate (child)
14 strokes
嫡
L1
1707
Seal 
; late, post-Shuowen form. Has 女 37 
‘woman, female’, and 啻 (NJK ‘say just one 
thing, only’; later replaced by CO 啇 ‘origin’ [see 
778, 779]) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken as i] ‘straight, direct’ (Tōdō), or ii] ‘stand 
facing’ (Ogawa), either way giving ‘original wife’, 
and by extension ‘direct lineage’. Gu also takes 
‘original legal wife’ as original meaning. Alter-
natively, the associated sense is taken as ‘stay 
in one place’, and seen to give original meaning 
as ‘woman’s respectful and compliant attitude’ 
(Katō); in this treatment, Katō regards senses 
such as ‘direct lineage’ as loan usages. The time 
when 啇 replaced 啻 in this graph is hard to es-
tablish. TA1965:462-3; OT1968:262; KJ1970:721; 
GY2008:769; MS1995:v1:238-9; ZY2009:v1:130. 
As 778 / 779, take 啇 as ‘funny tower’.
Mnemonic: WOMAN BESIDE FUNNY TOWER 
IS LEGITIMATE
沖天  CHŪTEN　ascendancy
沖合い okiai　off shore
沖釣り  okizuri　off shore fi shing
CHŪ, oki
open sea, soar
7 strokes
沖
L1
1708
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 氵 42 ‘water’, and 中 59 
‘middle’ as phonetic with associated sense 
taken as i] ‘shake, wobble’ (Katō), or ii] ‘gush/
fl ow out’, giving ‘water gushes out’ (Ogawa). 
The meaning ‘off shore expanse of sea’ is found 
in Japanese only. ‘Soar up’ is a very minor 
meaning. MS1995:v2:736-8; KJ1970:700-01; 
OT1968:561; GY2008:316-7. 
Mnemonic: WATER IN THE MIDDLE OF THE 
SEA MEANS OPEN SEA

508  The Remaining 1130 Characters
抽象 CHŪSHŌ　abstraction
抽出 CHŪSHUTSU　extraction
抽選 CHŪSEN　lottery
Seal form A ( 㨨 ) 
; seal form B ( 抽 ) 
; 
a late graph (Shuowen). The Shuowen entry 
heading has 㨨, and notes 抽 as an alterna-
tive writing. Has 扌 34 ‘hand’, and 留 824 
(‘stop; fasten’; later replaced by 由 421 [‘rea-
son, means’]) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘pick/pull out’, giving ‘pull out (with 
hand)’. DJ2009:v3:993; OT1968:408; 
KJ1970:699.
Mnemonic: THERE’S A REASON FOR PULLING 
YOUR HAND OUT
CHŪ
pull, draw out
8 strokes 
抽
L1
1709
折衷 SETCHŪ　compromise
衷心 CHŪSHIN　true feelings
苦衷 KUCHŪ　anguish 
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 衣 
444 ‘garment’, and 中 59 ‘middle, inside’ 
as semantic and phonetic, giving ‘inside 
garment’, i.e. ‘underwear’. Senses such as 
‘sincere’ and ‘inner feelings’ are best taken 
as loan usages (Qiu, Ogawa), though Shi-
rakawa and Gu take as extended senses. 
OT1968:902; QX2000:273-4; GY2008:1104-5; 
SS1984:595. 
Mnemonic: ONE’S INNER FEELINGS ARE 
INSIDE ONE’S CLOTHES
CHŪ
inner feelings
9 strokes 
衷
L1
1710
焼酎 SHŌCHŪ　low-grade sake 
 
(no other compounds)
CHŪ, sake
sake, wine
10 strokes
酎
L1
1711
Seal 
. Has 酉 318 ‘wine’ (originally, pic-
tograph of wine jar), and 寸 920 (‘hand’) as 
phonetic. The latter element is considered 
to be an abbreviation here; views differ as to 
what it is an abbreviation for. In one treat-
ment, it is taken as abbreviation for 肘 (NJK, 
‘elbow’) with associated sense ‘brew well’ 
(Mizukami, Ogawa). Other proposals for the 
unabbreviated phonetic are 時 151 (‘time’, 
Gu) and 丑 1454 (‘ox’, Shirakawa; see Note 
below). Despite some variation regarding 
the phonetic, commentators agree on the 
overall meaning ‘strong alcohol’; Schuessler 
says ‘spirits with sediment’. In Japan, it 
refers to lower-grade distilled alcohol with 
high alcohol content, made from sweet 
potato or rice wine lees. Mizukami lists a 
proposed bronze equivalent. Note: 丑 was 
originally (OBI) a pictograph of a hand with 
fingers bent, about to grab hold of some-
thing, hence ‘grab with the hand’. It was 
subsequently borrowed to signify ‘Ox’ as 
the second of the Twelve Branches, used in 
traditional Chinese culture for such things 
as marking year dates on a recurrent cycle 
of sixty years. Shirakawa’s proposal is based 
on similarity in shape at the seal stage be-
tween 丑 and 寸. MS1995:v2:1346-7,v1:6-7; 
OT1968:1026; GY2008:1014-15; AS2007:345.
Mnemonic: HAND ON THE WINE 
BOTTLE – IT’S PROBABLY LOW-GRADE SAKE

The Remaining 1130 Characters  509
鋳造 CHŪZŌ　casting 
鋳鉄 CHŪTETSU 　cast iron
鋳型 igata mold
CHŪ, iru
cast, found, mint
15 strokes
鋳
L1
1712
Seal 
; traditional 鑄. Bronze forms vary 
somewhat, and all are diff erent in structure 
from the seal form. The bronze form has 
hands – or more probably pincers – hold-
ing a container upside down over fi re and 
metal, and so readily understood as ‘cast’ 
(Shirakawa); also includes an element which 
appears to be  phonetic with associated sense 
‘red’ (as of molten  metal) (Katō).The seal  form 
鑄 consists of 金 16 ‘metal’, with 壽 (traditional 
form of 寿 1445 ‘long life’) as phonetic with 
associated sense taken as i] ‘melt’, giving 
‘melt and pour metal’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘extend 
everywhere’, giving ‘pour molten metal every-
where within a mold’ (Tōdō); either way, the 
overall meaning is ‘cast metal’. KJ1970:697; 
QX2000:89; AS2007:627; SS1984:596; 
OT1968:1044; TA1965:179-83.
Mnemonic: METAL SHOULD HAVE A LONG 
LIFE IF CAST IN FOUNDRY
駐車 CHŪSHA　parking 
駐在 CHŪZAI 　residence, stay
駐日 
CHŪNICHI resident in Japan
CHŪ
stop, stay
15 strokes
駐
L2
1713
Seal ; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 馬 210 
‘horse’, and 主 315 (‘master; main’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘stand still, stay’, giving 
‘horse stands still’; sense then generalized 
to ‘stop, stay’. OT1968:1125; TA1965:281-4; 
GY2008:758-9.
Mnemonic: MASTER STOPS HORSE AND STAYS
敬弔 KEICHŌ　condolence 
弔問 CHŌMON　sympathy call
弔文 CHŌBUN funeral address
CHŪ, tomurau
mourn
4 strokes
弔
L1
1714
OBI ; seal . Views vary: in one, 弔 is seen as 
a pictograph originally, taken by one scholar 
as showing a snake clinging to a person 
(Ogawa), but by another as a vine hanging 
down from a pole (Tōdō). Katō, by contrast, 
takes 弔 as 人 41 ‘person’, combined with 
虫 60 ‘insect’ (or ‘snake’ 蛇 1434/也 184) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘twisted’, thus 
‘person with twisted body’, or  ‘shrink, small’, 
giving ‘dwarf’. 弔 is seen quite diff erently by 
Shirakawa based on some bronze forms, as 
showing string attached to arrow, signifying 
‘arrow with string attached for catching birds’, 
and seen as the ancestral form of 叔 ‘uncle’ 
1466, not of 弔; this more traditional view is, 
however, dismissed by Mizukami and Katō. 
Tōdō takes ‘deities bestow favor’ as extended 
sense from ‘hang down’, and ‘sympathize 
with others, mourn’ as a further extension, 
while Katō sees latter meaning as loan use of 
弔. OT1968:338; TA1965:197-9; SS1984:600; 
MS1995:v1:466-8,24-5. 
Mnemonic: MOURN MAN CRUSHED LIKE 
STICK BY TWISTING SNAKE

510  The Remaining 1130 Characters
彫刻  CHŌKOKU　carving 
彫像  CHŌZŌ　sculpture
手彫り  tebori hand carving 
CHŌ, horu
carve, sculpture
11 strokes
彫
L1
1716
semantic and phonetic, giving ‘surround with 
decorative carving’ (Ogawa, Tōdō). In another 
analysis, 周 is taken as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘knife’, giving ‘fashion decorative 
elements with knife’ (Katō); based on a short 
passage in Lun Yu (The Analects of Confucius), 
Katō maintains that the original meaning of 
彫 is ‘carve wood with knife’. TA1965:179-83; 
OT1968:345; KJ1970:514.  
Mnemonic: THREE LINES CARVED AROUND 
SCULPTURE
眺望   CHŌBŌ　view, outlook 
眺め 
  nagame　view, scene
眺望絶景 CHŌBŌZEKKEI beauty spot 
CHŌ, nagameru
gaze, look
11 strokes
眺
L1
1717
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 目 76 
‘eye’, and 兆 573 (‘sign, omen’) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken as i] ‘distant’, 
giving ‘look into the distance’ (Ogawa), or 
ii] open’, giving ‘open up the field of vision’ 
(Tōdō). OT1968:700; TA1965:244-5. 
Mnemonic: GAZING EYE LOOKS FOR SIGN 
挑発  CHŌHATSU　provocation 
挑戦  CHŌSEN　challenge
挑戦的 CHŌSENTEKI aggressive
CHŌ, idomu
challenge, defy
9 strokes
挑
L1
1715
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 扌 34 
‘hand’, and 兆 573 (‘sign, omen’) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken in one view as 
‘leap up’, thus ‘raise up high with hands’, giv-
ing ‘challenge, confront’ (Ogawa), presum-
ably taking raised hands as confrontational 
posture. Alternatively, 兆 here is taken as 
associated sense ‘divide in two, open’ (Tōdō), 
though how this relates to ‘challenge’ is not 
clear. OT1968:414; TA1965:243-4.  
Mnemonic: RAISED HANDS ARE A SIGN OF 
CHALLENGE
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 彡 115, 
a determinative taken to signify ‘decora-
tive feathers/features’, combined with 周 
532 ‘encircle, around’, taken in one view as 
釣り場  tsuriba　fi shing spot 
釣魚  CHŌGYO　angling
釣銭  tsuriSEN  change (coin) 
CHŌ, tsuru/ri
fi shing, entice, lure, 
change
11 strokes
釣
L1
1718
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 金 16 
‘metal’, and 勺 ‘scoop up, catch’ (see Note 
below) as semantic and phonetic, giving 
‘scoop up/catch (fish)’. Alternatively, 勺 is 
taken as phonetic with associated sense 
‘pull out’, but still giving essentially the same 
meaning, in this view ‘pull fish out of water’ 
(Tōdō). It is unclear as to how 釣 came to 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  511
貼り出す  haridasu　put up (a notice)
貼り札   harifuda　placard, poster
貼り紙   harigami sticker, poster
超人 CHŌJIN　superman
超過 CHŌKA　excess, surplus
入超 NYŪCHŌ imports excess
CHŌ, haru
affi  x, paste
12 strokes
貼
L1
1719
CHŌ, koeru/su
exceed, cross, super-, 
ultra-
12 strokes
超
L2
1720
early meaning (Ogawa). In Shirakawa’s view, 
however, this represents the later meaning 
as given in Shuowen xinfu. On the basis of 
earlier usage, he takes the original meaning 
as ‘add to, supplement’, and points out that in 
the Tang Dynasty when Imperial edicts were 
amended this was referred to in Chinese as 
貼黄 (tie huang) ‘attach/stick yellow [paper]’. 
OT1968:956; SS1984:604. 
Mnemonic: PASTE NOTICE ABOUT 
DIVINATION USING SHELLS
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 走 
179 ‘run’, and 召 1486 (‘summon; wear’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘leap over’, 
giving ‘leap over’; ‘superior’, ‘ultra-’, and 
‘exceed’ are extended senses. OT1968:967; 
TA1965:246. 
Mnemonic: SUPER-FAST RUNNER 
SUMMONED FOR EXCEEDING LIMIT
Seal 
; a late graph (later version of 
Shuowen). In one analysis, has 貝 10 ‘shell 
currency, valuables’, and 占 1598 (‘divina-
tion’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘store, put aside’, thus ‘give as security’ as the 
跳躍   CHŌYAKU　spring, jump
跳び板  tobiita　springboard
跳ね返る hanekaeru　rebound
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 足 
54 ‘foot, leg’, and 兆 573 (‘sign, omen’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘leap up’, 
thus ‘dance upwards’ (Ogawa). Shirakawa 
considers 兆 also has a semantic function 
here, linking it to the cracks which ran 
along a turtle shell when heated as part of 
the divination process employed in Shang 
times (see 573). OT1968:972; SS1984:604; 
GY2008:1596. 
Mnemonic: LEAPING LEGS ARE AN OMEN
CHŌ, haneru, tobu 
spring, jump, leap 
13 strokes
跳
L1
1721
mean ‘monetary change’. Note: 勺 was origi-
nally (OBI stage) a pictograph of a scoop 
or ladle, giving ‘scoop up’ as an extended 
sense. It was removed as an independ-
ent graph from the Jōyō kanji List in 2010. 
OT1968:1037; GY2008:639; TA1965:247-8; 
MS1995:v1:146-7. 
Mnemonic: FISH WITH LADLE-LIKE METAL 
HOOK

512  The Remaining 1130 Characters
聴講  CHŌKŌ　attending lecture
盗聴  TŌCHŌ　wiretapping
聴診器 CHŌSHINKI　stethoscope
CHŌ, kiku
listen (carefully)
17 strokes
聴
L1
1725
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional 聽. The ancestral 
forms of this graph (OBI and bronze) typi-
cally have 耳 31 ‘ear’ next to 口 22 ‘mouth’ or 
in some OBI occurrences two mouths, giving 
‘listen to’. At seal stage, structure of graph 
changed. CO 𢛳 ‘straight, virtue’ was com-
bined with 耳, and 𡈼 (‘stand up straight/tall; 
象徴 SHŌCHŌ　symbol
徴収 CHŌSHŪ　levy
特徴 TOKUCHŌ　characteristic
sense. Shirakawa looks to attribute a ritu-
alistic, shamanist-orientated derivation to 
this graph. Mizukami lists proposed bronze 
equivalents also. Note: Tōdō, however, takes 
as 王 5 ‘ruler’, and  as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘raise up’, thus ‘ruler elevates/promotes’. 
Most scholars, though, regard as originally 
𡈼, not 王. ‘Summon’, ‘collect’ seem extended 
senses. DJ2009:v2:669; KJ1970:803-04; 
MS1995:v1:490-92; OT1968:355; TA1965:93-5; 
SS1984:604-5. Take 彳 as ‘go’, 山 as ‘mountain’ 
26, 王 5 as ‘king’, and 攵 112 ‘beat/force’.
Mnemonic: SIGN FORCES KING TO GO TO 
MOUNTAIN
CHŌ, shirushi
sign, indication, 
collect, summon
14 strokes
徴
L1
1722
Seal 
; traditional 徵. Has 
 as abbrev of 微 
1890 ‘faint, indistinct’, with 𡈼 (‘stand straight/
tall; sign, indication’; see Note below) with 
associated sense taken in one view as ‘show’, 
thus ‘give hint/subtle indication of will’ (Katō, 
Ogawa), and ‘sign, indication’ as extended 
嘲弄 CHŌRŌ　ridicule
嘲罵 CHŌBA　taunt, insult
自嘲 
JICHŌ　self-scorn
CHŌ, azakeru
ridicule
15 strokes
嘲
L1
1723
Seal 
; late graph (later Shuowen version). 
Has 口 22 ‘mouth’, and 朝 as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘challenge’ ＞ ‘ridicule’. 
OT1968:196; SS1984:606. Now 朝 is ‘morning’ 
朝 191.
Mnemonic: OPEN MOUTH IN THE MORNING, 
BUT ONLY TO RIDICULE 
清澄   SEICHŌ　clear, limpid
澄み切る sumikiru　be clear
澄まし顔  sumashigao　smug look
(Katō). Ogawa, though, takes the phonetic 
登 in 澄 as having associated sense ‘gradually 
becomes clear’, thus ‘cloudy water becomes 
clear’. Katō sees 澄 as a popular form, but 
Shirakawa rejects this proposed lower status 
on the grounds that 澄 was already used in 
Han epitaphs. 澄 best seen as alternative 
form of 澂 that later became predominant.  
DJ2009:v3:899; KJ1970:733; OT1968:608; 
SS1984:606. Use 登 382 ‘climb’.
Mnemonic: WATER CLEARS AS ONE CLIMBS 
UP RIVER 
CHŌ, sumu/masu
clear, settle 
15 strokes
澄
L1
1724
Seal 
; 登 is not in Shuowen form (see below). 
Has 氵 42 ‘water’, and  (Shirakawa treats as 
abbrev of 徴 1722 ‘sign; summon’) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken in one view as 
‘go through’, thus ‘water is see-through/clear’ 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  513
tower above; sign’) was added as phonetic 
with associated sense taken as i] ‘straight, 
hit mark decisively’, giving ‘clearly/care-
fully listen to ’(Mizukami, Tōdō), or ‘question, 
inquire’, thus ‘listen and make correct judge-
ment’ (Ogawa); by extension, ‘comply’. As Qiu 
observes, both  聽 and 聖 922 ‘sage’ were 
generally identical in shape at the OBI stage, 
at least in some occurrences correspond-
ing to 
 (though some occurrences of what 
later evolved as 聖 922 have 人 41 ‘person’ 
as additional element), and the one graph at 
that stage represented two diff erent words of 
similar pronunciation, meaning ‘listen to’ and 
‘sage’. For ‘sage’ (later 聖 ), at seal stage the 
extra element 人 was changed to 𡈼. Much 
variation in shape of 聽 is found in clerical 
script, due in part no doubt to its intricate 
form, but at least one example that includes 
𡈼 can be found. Note: Zhengzitong has what 
looks like 王 in this graph rather than 㙯, and 
Kangxi zidian (Peking Palace printed edi-
tion) has a shape which could be seen as 壬 
(orig pictograph of spinning spool) equally 
well as 𡈼 if not more so, a point highlight-
ing just how fragile the distinction between 
the very similarly-shaped 壬 and 𡈼 was. This 
fi ne distinction verged on the impractical or 
unrealistic to maintain, even in the scholarly 
realm. MS1995:v2:1062-3,1058-9; TA1965:467; 
OT1968:812; QX2000:195-6; ZZ1671:v2:944; 
KZ2001:2140/3671. Take ‘ear’ 耳 31, 罒 as ‘eye’ 
76, 十 ‘ten’ 35, and ‘heart’ 心 164. 
Mnemonic: EAR IS WORTH TEN EYES WHEN 
LISTENING TO HEART
懲罰 CHŌBATSU　punishment
懲戒 CHŌKAI　reprimand
懲悪 CHŌAKU　punishing evil
CHŌ, koriru/rasu
chastise, learn 
18 strokes
懲
L1
1726
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
form has 徵 1722 ‘sign’ as upper element. 
Modern form 心 164 ‘heart, mind’, with 徴 
as phonetic with associated sense taken as 
i] ‘change, renew’, thus ‘reform’ (Katō), or ii] 
‘clarify’, giving ‘fi nd out past wrongs/trans-
gressions’ (Ogawa). The latter analysis leads 
to ‘chastise’ as extended sense. Kangxi zidian 
retains the form with 𡈼 (‘stand up straight/
tall, tower above; sign’) as phonetic, but in 
the modern period this has been modifi ed to 
王 5 ‘king’, on the basis of the latter being a 
similarly-shaped element which is commonly 
occurrent. KJ1970:703; OT1968:390. 
Mnemonic: SIGN THAT CHASTISED HEART 
HAS LEARNED LESSON
勅語 CHOKUGO　imperial edict
勅旨 CHOKUSHI　imperial will
勅任 CHOKUNIN　imp. appointment
‘make to do, manipulate’, thus giving ‘bring 
neatly under control’. This appears to be a 
sound analysis. On the other hand, though, 
another commentator (Katō)  chooses to treat 
柬 as having the same meaning as – in other 
words functioning here as a variant of – 束 
561 (‘bundle, manage’) as phonetic with asso-
ciated sense ‘straight’, giving ‘hit with stick and 
make straight’, in other words, ‘control’. Mizu-
kami likewise treats 柬 in this graph as essen-
tially the same as 束, and lists another result-
ant meaning similar to Katō’s, viz. ‘tighten/
constrict with some force’. Mizukami regards 
CHOKU
imperial (edict) 
9 strokes 
勅
L1
1727
Bronze 
; seal ( 敕 ) 
. The bronze form 
is taken in one view (Gu) as consisting of 柬 
‘divide up’ (CO, in its bronze form, made up of 
the element 八 ‘divide, separate’ [see ‘eight’ 
八 70] within 束 561 ‘bundle’), and 攴 (/攵 ) 
112 ‘hit with stick, strike’ in its extended sense 

514  The Remaining 1130 Characters
進捗   SHINCHOKU　progress
捗々しい  hakabakashii　rapid, active
(no other compounds)
CHOKU, hakadoru
(make) progress
10 strokes
捗
L1
1728
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 扌 34 ‘hand’, 
and 步 (traditional form of 歩 221 ‘walk’), 
which here appears to be an abbreviation for 
陟 (‘climb’) as phonetic (associated sense un-
clear), a proposal which is supported by sound 
values for 陟 as opposed to 步. According to 
Ogawa and Shirakawa, the original mean-
ing of 捗 in Chinese was ‘collect’. Schuessler, 
though, gives ‘promote’ as an additional sense 
for 陟, and this leads to the meaning ‘make 
progress, advance’. OT1968:416; SS1984:609; 
AS2007:619. 
Mnemonic: WALKING ON HANDS, BUT STILL 
MAKING PROGRESS
‘make subjects and the like behave in upright 
manner’ as an extended sense, and by further 
extension ‘edict; warn, punish’. According to 
Katō, in Han times this graph was used in the 
sense of a warning issued by government of-
fi cials; it appears that subsequently it took on 
the more specialized meaning ‘imperial edict’. 
Also in Han times  勅, entailing 攴 ‘strike’ being 
replaced by 力 78 ‘strength, power’, emerged 
as a variant writing. 勅 has been adopted as 
standard in modern Japanese usage, though 
in Chinese usage 敕 has been retained as 
standard. GY2008:1205,811; KJ1970:648-
9; MS1995:v1:576-7; DJ2009:v1:265; 
OT1968:127,498; ZY2009:v2:449,v1:78.
Mnemonic: POWERFUL IMPERIAL EDICTS 
COME IN A BUNDLE
沈没 CHINBOTSU　sinking
沈滞 CHINTAI　stagnation
沈下 CHINKA　subsidence 
see Note below) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘hang down heavily, sink deep’, giving 
‘sink in water’; sense then generalized to 
‘sink’. Note: 冘 originally (OBI stage) depicts 
a person carrying a heavy object such as a 
weapon or agricultural implement, thereby 
giving the meaning ‘heavy’. It also has a 
meaning of ‘doubtful’ in modern Chinese. 
MS1995:v2:738-9,v1:112-3; KJ1970:683-5; 
GY2008:502-3; BK1957:174-5; OT1968:562 
We suggest taking 冘 as man with crooked 
leg and two broken arms. 
Mnemonic: ALAS, HEAVY MAN WITH 
CROOKED LEG AND TWO BROKEN ARMS 
SINKS INTO THE WATER
CHIN,shizumu/meru
sink  
7 strokes
沈
L2
1729
OBI 
; seal 
. The ancestral OBI forms 
vary somewhat; all have 氵/水 42 ‘water’ 
(here, ‘river’), and many occurrences have 
enclosed within the water/river 牛 108 ‘ox/
cow’, signifying an ox/cow being submerged, 
and meaning ‘sink ox/cow into river in ritual 
to river deity’. The structure of this graph 
changed at the bronze stage more consist-
ently to 水, combined with 冘 (CO ‘heavy’; 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  515
珍奇 CHINKI　novel, rare
珍品 CHINPIN　rare item, curio
珍本 CHINPON　rare book
Seal 
. Has 玉 15 ‘jade, precious stone, jewel’, 
and 㐱 (‘thick hair’; see note below) as pho-
netic with associated sense taken either as i] 
‘be full/complete, replenish’, giving ‘fi ne jade/
precious stone without blemish’ (Ogawa), or 
ii] ‘free from impurity’, giving ‘fi ne jade/pre-
cious stone of solid (pure) colour’ (noted in 
Mizukami together with i] above). Mizukami 
CHIN, mezurashii
rare, curious
9 strokes
珍
L2
1730
gives proposed OBI equivalents which have 貝 
10 ‘shell currency’ together with an enclosing 
element of uncertain meaning. Note: OBI and 
bronze occurrences of 㐱 have 人 41 ‘person’ 
combined with 彡 (see 115, 517), an element 
which is interpreted not in its typical determi-
native meaning ‘decorative feathers/features’ 
but as a shape representing thick human 
hair. Note also that as a determinative jade 
玉 almost always drops its dot. OT1968:655; 
MS1995:v2:854-5; GY2008:178-9; BK1957:123-
4. We suggest taking top right as ‘person’ 人 
41, and 彡 as scratches. 
Mnemonic: PERSON HAS CURIOUS AND RARE 
JEWEL WITH THREE SCRATCHES
朕 
CHIN　we 
朕の CHIN no　Our
朕徳 CHINTOKU Our Virtue 
CHIN
(imperial) We 
10 strokes
朕
L1
1731
OBI forms , ; seal ( 𦩎 ) 
; traditional 朕. 
OBI forms have 舟 1450 ‘boat’, combined with
廾 ‘two/both hands’ (stylized representa-
tion) holding 丨 a pole for pounding grain or 
similar. The latter two elements are treated as 
phonetic with associated sense taken in one 
view as ‘continue’ (from action of repeatedly 
raising pounder), giving ‘joins in boat planks/
timbers’ (Katō). Another view sees the action 
of raising (as opposed to lowering) the pole, 
attributing an original meaning ‘turn boat 
upside-down’ (Ogawa). The seal form has the 
right-hand side changed to 灷, an element/
graph interpreted in Yupian as meaning 
‘sparks’, but in 𦩎 this seems to be an errone-
ous rendition into seal script of the pounding 
pole and hands referred to above. Traditional 
and present-day versions of the right side of 
朕 represent variants of 灷; at least one exam-
ple close in shape to modern 朕 can be found 
in clerical script. Note also that as a compo-
nent in compound graphs, 舟 ‘boat’ and 肉/月 
209 ‘meat, body’ were being confused with 
月 18 ‘moon’ due to similar shapes as early as 
clerical script stage (Qiu). The sense (Impe-
rial) ‘We’, 朕, is loan use based on the sound 
value of this graph, or rather – to be precise 
– its ancestral forms; found used in this latter 
sense from the Qin dynasty on. KJ1970:705-6; 
MS1995:v2:1102-03; OT1968:482; SK1984:391; 
ZY2009:v2:660. Take right hand as 天 62 
‘heaven’ and 丷 70 ‘out’.
Mnemonic: OUR IMPERIAL BODY IS OUT OF 
HEAVEN  
陳情 CHINJŌ　petition, appeal
陳列 CHINRETSU　show, display 
開陳 KAICHIN statement
CHIN, noberu
state, show, set out
11 strokes
陳
L1
1732
Bronze 
; seal 
. Bronze has 阜 /阝 262 
‘hill, piled-up earth’, often combined with 𢽬 
(‘set out objects taken from a bag’ [Ogawa; 
Tōdō takes role of 攵 as indicating action]) 
as phonetic with associated sense taken as 
i] ‘surround with earth’, thus ‘hills/mountains 
with central low-lying area’, or ii] ‘set out flat/
evenly’, thus ‘pile up earth evenly in rows’ 

516  The Remaining 1130 Characters
鎮痛剤 CHINTSŪZAI　painkiller
鎮静  CHINSEI　calm, quiet 
文鎮  BUNCHIN paperweight
CHIN, shizumaru/meru
calm, suppress, 
weight
18 strokes
鎮
L1
1733
Seal 
; traditional 鎭. Has 金 16 ‘metal’, 
and 眞 341 (traditional form of 真 ‘true’) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken either 
as i] ‘put, place’, giving ‘metal weight to press 
things down’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘fi ll up, block up’, 
giving ‘metal weight’, and by extension ‘press 
down, suppress’ (Tōdō). Mizukami lists several 
proposed bronze equivalents. OT1968:1049; 
TA1965:743-6.
Mnemonic: CALMLY SUPPRESS WITH TRULY 
HEAVY METAL WEIGHT 
椎茸  shiitake　type of mushroom
椎骨  TSUIKOTSU　vertebra 
無脊椎 MUSEKITSUI invertebrate
墜落 TSUIRAKU　fall
撃墜 GEKITSUI　shooting down 
墜死 TSUISHI falling to death
TSUI, tsuchi, shii
mallet, backbone, 
type of beech, hit
12 strokes
椎
L1
1734
TSUI
fall
15 strokes
墜
L1
1735
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 木 73 
‘wood, tree’, and 隹 324 (‘short-tailed bird, 
bird’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘break’ (Ogawa), giving ‘mallet’. In modern 
Japanese, refers to a variety of tree (J. shii 
[members of beech family including Castano-
psis sieboldii]). This may be loan usage of 椎 
based on its SJ (on) pronunciation (modern 
values: TSUI, SUI). ‘Backbone’ would seem 
to be extended sense. Used for its sound 
value in writing 椎茸 ‘shiitake mushroom 
(Lentinus edodes)’. OT1968:512; SS1984:612; 
GY2008:1388.  
Mnemonic: HIT BACKBONE OF BIRD WITH 
MALLET MADE OF BEECH
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 墜. Has 土 64 
‘earth, ground’, and 隊 567 ‘corps, military 
unit’, used here in its original meaning ‘fall 
from a hill’, giving ‘heavy soil falls from moun-
tain/hill (or similar)’ (Mizukami). Meaning then 
generalized to ‘fall’. AS2007:630; OT1968:225; 
MS1995:v1:278-9.
Mnemonic: MILITARY UNIT FALLS TO THE 
GROUND
(both views listed in Mizukami; ii] is favored 
by Tōdō); by extension, ‘set out’; for more 
detail, see Note below. 陳 is the abbrev form 
(seal stage on). Alternatively, Ogawa takes 
fuller bronze form as originally referring to 
name of ancient Chinese state of Chen, with 
the abbrev form 陳 then later borrowed to 
represent core meaning of 𢽬, i.e. ‘set out’, 
and by extension ‘explain’. See also 陣 1553. 
Note: some bronze forms include 土 ‘earth’ 
64 as third element, taken by Tōdō as clearly 
indicating that which is being made even 
or flat. MS1995:v2:1396-8; OT1968:1069; 
ZY2009:v2:451; TA1965:757-9; AS2007:184. 
Take 東 as ‘east’ 201. 
Mnemonic: STATEMENT SHOWS SET-OUT OF 
EASTERN HILLS 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  517
貝塚  kaizuka　shell mound
塚孔 tsukaana　grave 
宝塚 Takarazuka place-name
tsuka, CHŌ 
mound, tumulus
12 strokes
塚
L1
1736
OBI ; bronze ; seal . Analyses vary. The OBI 
form is treated by one commentator (Gu) as 厂 
‘cliff ’, with 豖 ‘fat castrated pig’ as semantic and 
phonetic in the generalized sense ‘big’, giving 
‘massive/lofty cliff ’; the relationship to the sense 
‘mound’ is not indicated (see Note below). In 
another interpretation, this graph is analysed 
as 豖 taken diff erently as ‘dog sacrifi ce’, 
combined with 冖 ‘cover’ to make 冢, giving 
‘cover dog sacrifi ce with earth’ (Shirakawa); by 
extension, ‘mound, grave’. The seal equivalent 
is explained in Shuowen as ‘high tumulus/burial 
mound’. The direct predecessor of modern 塚 
is 塚, which represents 冢 with 土 64 ‘earth, 
ground’ added as determinative in a reinforc-
ing role. 塚 is of late origin, noted in both 
Zhengzitong and Kangxi zidian as a popular 
writing for 冢. Offi  cial Japanese character 
lists from the Jōyō kanji List of 1923 onwards 
already have the regularized shape 塚. Note: 
Mizukami lists multiple OBI occurrences of 豖, 
which have an animal – quite possibly a pig – 
with an additional stroke low down between 
the legs, which he interprets as meaning ‘hob-
bled pig has diffi  culty walking’. GY2008:1156; 
SS1984:603; MS1995:v2:1222-3; ZZ1671:v1:276; 
ZY2009:v1:180. We suggest taking the modern 
form of this graph as presumed pig (see e.g. 89 
and 1807) 豕 under a cover 冖.
Mnemonic: EARTHEN MOUND COVERS PIG IN 
A TUMULUS
漬物  tsukemono　pickles
茶漬け  chazuke　tea on rice
塩漬け  shiozuke salting
tsukaru/keru, SHI
pickle, soak
14 strokes
漬
L1
1737
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵 42 
‘water, liquid’, and 責 751 (‘liability, blame’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘put/pile up 
on top’ (Ogawa, Katō), giving ‘put water on 
top’, i.e. ‘soak’. ‘Pickle’ is an extended meaning. 
OT1968:603; SS1984:376; KJ1985:380. 
Mnemonic: TAKE BLAME FOR OVER-SOAKED 
WATERY PICKLES
建坪 tatetsubo　fl oor space
五坪 GOtsubo　5 tsubo
坪数 tsuboSŪ area (in tsubo)
tsubo, HEI
tsubo, sq.measure 
8 strokes
坪
L1
1738
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
坪. Has 土 64 ‘earth, ground’ and 平 411 ‘fl at, 
even’, giving ‘fl at piece of land’. In Japanese only, 
used for tsubo, a unit of measure (area) approx 
3.31 square metres. OT1968:215; KJ1970:837.
Mnemonic: TSUBO ARE MEASURED ON FLAT 
GROUND 
爪切り  tsumekiri　nail clippers
爪先  tsumasaki　tip-toe
爪痕  tsumeato a scratch
tsume, tsuma-
claw, nail, talon 
4 strokes
爪
L1
1739
Originally (OBI) a pictograph. Taken in one 
interpretation as depicting either claws or 
talons (Shirakawa), or in another as a hu-
man hand with fi ngers apart, poised to grasp 
something (Mizukami, Gu, Ogawa). Mizukami 
lists several proposed OBI forms, and if these 
are accepted then they do seem to represent 

518  The Remaining 1130 Characters
鶴首 KAKUSHU　stretch neck
鶴嘴 tsuruhashi　pickax
鶴亀 tsurukame congratulations
tsuru, KAKU
crane, stork 
21 strokes
鶴
L1
1740
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 鳥 190 
‘bird’, and CO 隺 664 (‘reach high up, fl y’; see 
Note below) as phonetic with associated 
sense taken as i] ‘(bird) calls/sings/chirps’ 
(Ogawa, Shirakawa), or ii] ‘white’ (Tōdō), either 
way taken as ‘crane’. Regarding i] above, it is 
worth noting that cranes are very vocal birds, 
and at least some varieties have cries which 
carry a long distance. Note: 隺 is explained in 
Shuowen as ‘bird (隹) rising up and wanting 
to go through a boundary’. DJ2009:v2:433; 
OT1968:1155; SS1984:110; TA1965:264-6; 
MS1995:v1:106-7; BK1957:287. Take 隺 as 隹 
‘bird’ 324 and 
 as ‘odd’ claws 爪 1739. 
Mnemonic: BIRD WITH ODD CLAWS 
ALONGSIDE ANOTHER BIRD – A CRANE 
呈上　TEIJŌ　presentation
贈呈　ZŌTEI　donation
進呈　SHINTEI　presentation
words’. Note: the lower element 𡈼 is given in 
Mizukami’s entry heading for 呈 as 壬 (‘spin-
ning spool’), but is clearly an error; this may 
have crept in at the typesetting stage. Modern 
computer fonts for Japanese (and Chinese) 
typically do not support the 𡈼/壬 distinction; 
they support only the latter. (See Appendix.) 
OT1968:173; MS1995:v1:220-21,262-3,282-3; 
KJ1970:708-9. Suggest taking lower part as 
‘king’ 王 5. 
Mnemonic: OFFER PRESENT FOR KING’S 
MOUTH
TEI 
present, off er
7 strokes
呈
L1
1741
Seal form: 
. Traditional form has 口 22 
‘mouth; speak’, and 𡈼 1722 (‘stand up straight 
/ tall; sign, indication’) as phonetic with as-
sociated sense ‘extend in a straight/direct 
manner, show’, giving  ‘show, express clearly in 
a hand rather than a claw. ‘Hand’ is often the 
more appropriate sense in compound graphs, 
where 爪 is usually represented in the modi-
fi ed shape 爫 (see e.g. 採 709 ‘take, gather’). 
The latter two commentators consider ‘claw, 
talon’ etc. to be borrowed usage, but it seems 
better to take as extended sense (if ‘hand’ is 
considered to be what is originally depicted). 
SS1984:538; MS1995:v2:818-9; GY2008:93-4; 
OT1968:630.
Mnemonic: THREE TALONS CLAWING 
廷臣 TEISHIN　courtier
法廷 HŌTEI　law court
宮廷 KYŪTEI　court
Bronze 
; seal 
. The bronze form is inter-
preted as consisting of , taken as represent-
ing the corner of a courtyard, combined with 
an element for ‘person standing upright’ 
(later 𡈼 : see 1722), and another for piled-
up earth supporting a banner for indicating 
offi  cial rank; the overall meaning is taken to 
be ‘offi  cial standing at prescribed position 
in courtyard at Court for Imperial audience’ 
(Mizukami, Katō). Several of the fuller bronze 
occurrences are of a shape which might sup-
TEI
court, govt. offi  ce
7 strokes
廷
L1
1742

The Remaining 1130 Characters  519
抵抗 TEIKŌ　resistance
抵当 TEITŌ　mortgage
大抵 TAITEI　generally
TEI
resist, match
8 strokes
抵
L1
1743
is used in (unspecifi ed) classical Chinese texts 
with slightly diff erent meaning ‘reach up to/
against’. Note: fuller OBI forms corresponding 
to 氐 have an element interpreted as a 
depiction of hillocks, with a horizontal stroke 
underneath, thus ‘fl at land at foot of hillocks’ 
(Mizukami). KJ1970:713; OT1968:408-09; 
TA1965:748; MS1995:724-6. Take 氐 as ‘clan’ 氏 
522 with 一 1 as bottom line.
Mnemonic: BOTTOM-LINE CLAN RESISTS 
WITH HANDS
port such an interpretation, though it does 
seem to push the possible interpretation 
towards the outer limit. It could be that the 
original context in which the bronze forms 
occur might lend support to this analysis. 
Shirakawa, though, takes the bronze form less 
specifi cally, as probably meaning ‘courtyard’. 
The seal form is erroneous in shape, having 
廴, a determinative which functions as an 
abbreviation of 行 131 ‘crossroads; go’ (Katō) 
or – according to Mizukami – has the mean-
ing ‘extend’  with 𡈼 ‘person standing up-
right’ (Shirakawa has this correctly as 𡈼, but 
Mizukami and Katō have the similarly-shaped 
but diff erent 壬 ‘spinning spool’ – possibly an 
error at the typesetting stage). Note, though, 
that even the authoritative Kangzi zidian has 
the form with 壬, not 𡈼. MS1995:v1:458-60; 
KJ1970:710; SS1984:613-4; KZ2001:738/3671. 
We suggest taking 𡈼 as ‘samurai’ 士 521 with 
a hat on. 
Mnemonic: HATTED SAMURAI GOES TO COURT
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 扌 34 
‘hand’, and CO 氐 (see Note below) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘hit/strike against’, thus 
‘push aside with hand’; by extension, ‘resist’. In 
minor variation of interpretation, Tōdō notes 抵 
邸宅 TEITAKU　mansion
邸内 TEINAI　premises
官邸 KANTEI　offi  cial residence
sense taken as i] ‘settle, dwell’ (Ogawa, Katō), 
or ii] ‘low, base’ (Tōdō), both giving ‘house in 
capital for nobles/offi  cials etc from provinces 
to reside’ – but puzzling as nobles preferred 
hills. OT1968:1018; KJ1970:714; TA1965:749-
52. As with 1743, take left side as ‘clan’ 氏 522 
一 1 with bottom line.  
Mnemonic: BOTTOM-LINE CLAN RESIDES IN 
MANSION IN VILLAGE!? 
TEI
mansion, residence
8 strokes
邸
L1
1744
亭主 TEISHU　husband, host
旅亭 RYOTEI　inn
料亭 RYŌTEI　restaurant
TEI
pavilion, inn
9 strokes
亭
L1
1745
phonetic with associated sense taken in one 
view as ‘stay’ (Katō, Ogawa), giving ‘(turreted) 
building where people stay and relax’ such as 
a pavilion; by extension, ‘inn’. Mizukami, who 
gives proposed bronze equivalent, considers 
‘stay’ to be later associated sense, and that 
before that it was ‘stand upright’, thus ‘building 
which stands upright’. KJ1970:715; OT1968:38; 
MS1995:v1:38-9. Take 丁  as ‘nail’ 367. 
Mnemonic: NAIL SUPPORTS TALL PAVILION
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 阝/邑 376 
‘village’, with 氐 (‘fl at land at foot of hillocks’; 
see 1743 Note) as phonetic with associated 
Seal 
. Has 
 as abbrev of 高 132 (‘high, 
tall’ orig pictograph of tall structure such as 
a watchtower), with 丁 367 (‘block; exact’) as 

520  The Remaining 1130 Characters
貞操 
TEISŌ　chastity
不貞 
FUTEI　infi delity
貞女 
TEIJO　chaste woman
OBI 
; bronze 
; seal 
. At OBI stage, 
often written as 鼎 ‘tripod vessel’, i.e. 貞 and 
鼎 appear initially to have been one and the 
same graph. When used not in the sense ‘tri-
pod vessel’ but as a loan for a separate word 
(near-homophone) in early Chinese meaning 
‘perform divination inquiry’, there seems to 
have been a tendency to use a slightly abbrev 
shape for latter sense, as noted by Karlgren 
and suggested also by respective OBI forms 
for 鼎 and 貞 given by Mizukami. As for origi-
nal meaning ‘tripod vessel’, 鼎 is often seen as 
a pictograph showing such vessel, but Boltz 
argues it only looks like this if you already 
know what is being shown. Very rarely, OBI 
forms occur with 卜 96 ‘divination’ as top ele-
ment, giving 鼑 to clarify ‘divination inquiry’. 
From bronze on, the two-element graph is 
TEI 
chaste, virtue
9 strokes
貞
L1
1746
the norm, with proviso that 鼎 is progressively 
abbreviated to 貝. Bronze onwards 鼑/貞 is 
taken as 卜 ‘perform divination inquiry’, with 
lower element 貝, here generally taken as ab-
brev of 鼎 as phonetic with associated sense 
taken as i] ‘ask; summon’ (Katō, Mizukami) 
or ii] ‘understand directly’ (Mizukami), thus 
‘perform divination and inquire of the gods/
the Supreme Being’. ‘Understand directly’ 
seems to indicate some sort of intuitive 
understanding obtained via divinatory pro-
cess. The sense ‘make divination inquiry’ was 
later generalized to ‘ask’. Shirakawa asserts 
that 鼎 serves in this graph not as phonetic 
but as semantic element, refl ecting use of 
tripod vessels in divination, but lacks sup-
port. Mizukami takes ‘correct’ as a loan usage.  
Similarly, Tōdō takes ‘straight, correct’ as loan 
usage; hard to know whether ‘virtue, chastity’ 
is extended sense or further extended sense.
MS1995V2:1230-31,1516-8; BK1957:221-
2; WB1994:56; KJ1970:707; TA1965:465-8; 
SS1984:616. Take 貝 as ‘shell’ 10.
Mnemonic: DIVINATION BY SHELL-CRACKS 
PROVES VIRTUE AND CHASTITY 
帝国   TEIKOKU　empire
帝王   TEIŌ　emperor
帝王切開 TEIŌSEKKAI　Caesarian
OBI 
; seal 
. OBI shows wooden structure 
with supporting cross-timbers, horizontal 
brace and fl at top, an altar for deities; Mizu-
kami suggests it was for rituals of worship 
to Supreme Being (Ch. shangdi), the most 
powerful deity. Some OBI forms have hori-
TEI
emperor
9 strokes
帝
L1
1747
zontal line above altar, as off erings; and is in 
almost all bronze forms, through to seal form, 
later changing from horizontal to diagonal 
or upright. By extension, meaning changed 
from ritual vehicle (altar) to object of worship, 
i.e. Supreme Being, and by further exten-
sion to senses such as ‘ancestor, emperor’. 
MS1995:v1:438-40; KJ1970:711; SS1984:615; 
OT1968:316; FC1974:v1:688-90; AS2007:210. 
Suggest combining 立 77 ‘stand’ and 
 106 
‘broom’. 
Mnemonic: EMPEROR STANDS OVER BROOM

The Remaining 1130 Characters  521
訂正  TEISEI　correction
改訂  KAITEI　revision
改訂版 KAITEIBAN　revised edition
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 言 118 
‘words; speak’, and 丁 367 (‘block; exact’) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken as i] ‘lev-
el, just’, giving ‘fair words’ (Katō), or ii] ‘bring 
together as one, consolidate’, giving ‘con-
solidate words’ (Tōdō), or iii] ‘inquire’, giving 
‘plan fairly’ and by extension ‘correct’ (Ogawa). 
KJ1970:715; TA1965:470-74; OT1968:920. 
Mnemonic: USE EXACT WORDS WHEN 
REVISING AND CORRECTING
TEI
correct, revise 
9 strokes
訂
L1
1748
逓送 TEISŌ　forwarding
逓信 TEISHIN　communications
逓次 TEIJI　in sequence
TEI
relay, in sequence
10 strokes
逓
L1
1749
sociated sense ‘take the place of’, giving ‘go in 
turns’. By extension, ‘send in turns, walk/send 
and change at post station’; sense then gen-
eralized to ‘relay, in sequence’. OT1968:1001; 
KJ1970:712; ZY2009:v3:1130; SS1984:617. 
Diffi  cult mnemonically, but we suggest taking 
right side as 厂 ‘cliff ’, 十 as ‘ten’ 35, and 市 ‘city’ 
144.
Mnemonic: CLIFF MOVES! NEED TO RELAY 
NEWS TO TEN CITIES (IN SEQUENCE)
探偵 TANTEI　detective, detection
内偵 NAITEI　secret inquiry
偵察 TEISATSU　reconnaisance
TEI
spy, inquire, 
investigate
11 strokes
偵
L1
1750
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 亻 41 
‘person’, and 貞 1746 (original meaning 
‘inquire’, as here, though modern meaning 
is ‘chaste, virtue’) as semantic and phonetic, 
giving ‘person who inquires/looks into some-
thing’, and hence ‘investigate’. OT1968:75; 
SS1984:617.
Mnemonic: SPY ON PERSON’S CHASTITY AS 
PART OF INVESTIGATION
防波堤 BŌHATEI　breakwater
堤防  TEIBŌ　levee, dike
突堤  TOTTEI　pier, jetty
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 土 64 
‘earth, ground’, and 是 1574 (‘proper; this’) 
as phonetic with associated sense taken 
as i] ‘stop’, giving ‘piled-up earth to stop 
(water)’, (Ogawa, Shirakawa), or ii] ‘extend 
thinly in even manner’, giving ‘earth which 
extends thinly in even manner’ (Tōdō), either 
way giving ‘embankment’. DJ2009:v3:1117; 
OT1968:220; SS1984:618; TA1965:455-60. 
Mnemonic: USE EARTH PROPERLY TO BUILD 
EMBANKMENT
TEI, tsutsumi
embankment
12 strokes
堤
L1
1751
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 遞. 
Has ⻌ 85 ’go, walk’, and 虒 (‘[mythical] tiger-
like beast with horn’ [Shuowen]; Shirakawa, 
though, says ‘skin a tiger’) as phonetic with as-

522  The Remaining 1130 Characters
艇庫  TEIKO　boathouse 
艦艇  KANTEI　naval vessel
救命艇 KYŪMEITEI　lifeboat
Seal 
; a late graph (late version of Shuowen). 
Has 舟 1450 ‘boat’, and 廷 1742 (‘court’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘small’, giving 
‘small boat’. Semantic range in modern Japa-
nese usage covers both ‘boat’ and ‘ship’, i.e. the 
connotation ‘small’ has been lost. KJ1970:710; 
GY2008:1464-5.
Mnemonic: COURT HAS ITS OWN BOAT
TEI
boat
13 strokes
艇
L1
1752
締約   TEIYAKU　treaty 
締め切り  shimekiri　deadline
締め出し  shimedashi　shut out, lock out
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 糸 29 
‘thread’, and 帝 1747 (‘emperor’) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken as i] ‘bind’ (Katō, 
Shirakawa), or ii] ‘become fi xed’ (Ogawa), or 
iii] ‘bring together at one point’ (Tōdō), all 
giving ‘bind with thread’ as the overall mean-
ing’; sense then generalized to ‘bind, tighten’, 
and again to include ‘shut’. KJ1970:712; 
SS1984:620; OT1968:786; TA1965:470-73. 
Mnemonic: BIND EMPEROR WITH THREAD
TEI, shimeru/maru
bind, tighten, close, 
shut
15 strokes
締
L1
1753
諦観 TEIKAN　resigning oneself
諦め 
akirame　abandonment
(no further compounds)
er’, giving ‘put together a conclusion’). The 
meaning ‘make clear, clarify’ for 諦 was carried 
over into pre-modern Japanese as akiramu; 
following  this, 諦 was later borrowed for 
its sound value to represent a separate verb 
akiramu meaning ‘give up (the idea, etc.), re-
sign oneself to’, leading to modern akirameru. 
In modern Japanese, akirameru is only used 
in the latter sense. OT1968:938; SS1984:620; 
TA1965:470-73. 
Mnemonic: RESIGN ONESELF AFTER HEARING 
EMPEROR’S WORDS
TEI, akirame/meru
resign oneself, 
abandon, clarify
16 strokes
諦
L1
1754
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 言 118 
‘words; speak’, and 帝 1747 (‘emperor’) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken as ‘look 
into, go into detail’, giving ‘make clear, clarify’ 
(Ogawa, Shirakawa) (Tōdō says ‘bring togeth-
泥土 DEIDO　mud, mire
拘泥 KŌDEI　adherence
泥足 doroashi　muddy feet
Seal 
;  late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵 42 ‘water’, 
and 尼 1819 (‘nun, priestess’) as phonetic. Katō 
treats the associated sense as unclear, on the 
basis that 泥 denotes a river name. This is the 
explanation in Shuowen, but another commenta-
tor (Ogawa) takes 尼 as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘be sticky’, giving ‘muddy water, mud’; this 
view is supported by Shirakawa, who takes the 
original meaning to be not a river name but 
‘mud’. KJ1970:724; OT1968:567; SS1984:621. 
Mnemonic: NUN IN MUDDY WATER
DEI, doro, nazumu
mud, adhere
8 strokes
泥
L2
1755

The Remaining 1130 Characters  523
摘要   TEKIYŌ　summary
摘発   TEKIHATSU　disclosure
摘み取る tsumitoru　pluck, pick
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 扌 34 
‘hand’, and 啻 (NJK; ‘say just one thing, only’) 
(later, 啇 [CO, ‘origin’; see 778/9, 1707]) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘bring 
together’, giving ‘pick and bring together’. 
Orig. apparently referred to picking fruit, but 
later more generalized ‘picking’. TA1965:470-
73; GY2008:1706; KJ1970:721; SS1984:623; 
OT1968:427. As with 778/9 and 1707, we sug-
gest taking 啇 as ‘funny’ tower (see 高 132). 
Mnemonic: PLUCK FRUIT BY HAND NEXT TO 
A FUNNY TOWER
TEKI, tsumu/mamu
pluck, extract
14 strokes
摘
L1
1756
滴下 TEKIKA　dripping
水滴 SUITEKI　water droplet
一滴 ITTEKI　one drop
of dripping water (Katō, Ogawa), or ii] as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘come together’, 
denoting water collecting and at times 
dripping down (Tōdō), either way giving 
overall meaning ‘water drips; water droplets’.  
KJ1970:721; OT1968:604-05; TA1965:470-73. As 
with 1756, we suggest taking 啇 as ‘odd’ tower 
(see also 高 132).
Mnemonic: WATER DRIPS AT THE ODD 
TOWER
TEKI, shizuku, shitataru
drip, drop
14 strokes
滴
L2
1757
溺死 DEKISHI　death by drowning
耽溺 TANDEKI　indulgence
溺愛 DEKIAI　infatuation
form of 弱 154 ‘weak’) as phonetic (associated 
sense unclear) to denote a river name. 溺 ap-
pears to have been borrowed at an early stage 
to represent a homophone or near-homo-
phone meaning ‘drown’. We suggest taking it 
as 弱 ‘weak’ 154. OT1968:601; SS1984:1625; 
GY2008:1660. 
Mnemonic: IF WEAK IN THE WATER, YOU 
MIGHT GET DROWNED
DEKI, oboreru/rasu
drown, indulge
13 strokes
溺
L1
1758
迭立 TETSURITSU　alternating
更迭 KŌTETSU　reshuffl  e
迭起 TEKKI　alternate occurrence
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has ⻌ 85 ‘walk 
along a road’, and 失 529 (‘lose’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘take the place of, hand 
over to’, giving ‘walk along road and change 
(messengers)’. KJ1970:722; TA1965:757. 
Mnemonic: LOST WHILE WALKING ALONG 
ROAD, NEED ALTERNATE ROUTE
TETSU
alternate, rotate
8 strokes
迭
L1
1759
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵 ‘water’ 
42, and 啻 (NJK; ‘say just one thing, only’) (later, 
啇 [CO, ‘origin’; see 778/9, 1707]) as phonetic 
taken either i] as onomatopoeic for the sound 
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵 42 
‘water’, and 弱 (which is in fact the traditional 

524  The Remaining 1130 Characters
哲人 TETSUJIN　sage
哲学 TETSUGAKU　philosophy
先哲 SENTETSU　sage of old
164 ‘heart, mind’ as determinative and not 口. 
Mizukami takes  悊 as 心 combined with 折 
as phonetic (same associated sense as above), 
giving ‘decide clearly in one’s mind’; ‘respect’, 
‘fi nd out, clear, perceive, comprehend, wise’ 
are treated as loan senses. Mizukami is not 
as confi dent, though, that 悊 is the ancestral 
form of 哲, suggesting rather that 悊 might 
just have served sometimes as a loan writing 
in place of 哲. Shuowen has 哲 in the main 
heading, with 悊 noted as an alternative form. 
DJ2009:v1:109; MS1995:v1:232-3,510-12; 
OT1968:183; GY2008:1027. 
Mnemonic: SPEECH BROKEN BUT CLEARLY 
STILL WISE AND RESPECTWORTHY
TETSU
wisdom, clarity, per-
ceive, respect
10 strokes
哲
L1
1760
Seal 
. Has 口 22 ‘mouth, speak’, and 折 551 
(‘bend, break’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘cut with ax’ and by extension ‘clearly 
decide’, giving ‘make (appropriate) judge-
ment’, as when decisively cutting trees with ax 
(Mizukami, Ogawa). By contrast, Gu feels 悊 
may be ancestral form (bronze) of 哲, with 心 
徹夜  TETSUYA　all night
徹底的 TETTEITEKI　thorough
貫徹  KANTETSU fulfi llment 
TETSU
go through 
15 strokes
徹
L1
1761
disambiguate the underlying word ‘go through’ 
from what in early Chinese was a homophone, 
a separate word meaning ‘remove’. As for use of 
徹 in the sense ‘remove’ (no longer a meaning), 
this may be a case of the graph sometimes 
being used interchangeably, with similarly-
shaped 撤 1762 ‘remove, withdraw’. Note: most 
scholars view 
 as comprising 鬲 1431 ‘three-
legged cooking pot’ with 又 2003 ‘hand’; and 
based on certain fuller forms of 鬲 in OBI and 
bronze, Mizukami takes the three legs to be 
fi lled with water, to help with the cooking from 
the fi re beneath. Shirakawa has a divergent 
view of 
 as meaning ‘set out (fi lled) cooking 
pots as off ering to the deities’. MS1995:v1:492-
3,v2:1482-3; KJ1970:721-2; GY2008:460; 
BK1957:88; OT1968:356; AS2007:182-3; 
SS1984:627. Take elements as 彳 131 ‘go, road’, 
育 247 ‘educate’, 攵 112 ‘coerce/force’.
Mnemonic: FORCED TO GO THROUGH 
EDUCATION  
OBI (
); 
; seal 
. 
 is a rare graph, not 
listed in Zhengzitong or Kangxi zidian, usually 
taken as ‘remove pot (from above fi re)’ (see 
Note below). It is taken (Mizukami, Katō, Gu) as 
the ancestral form of 徹. Initially, 彳 131 ‘road/
go’ was often lacking. Later 
 was changed 
(Mizukami and Katō say misinterpreted) to 
. 
Then at seal stage, 彳 was added as determi-
native and 
 assumed a phonetic role with 
associated sense taken as i] ‘go through’, giving 
‘road goes/passes through’ (Mizukami, Katō), 
or ii] ‘project, penetrate through’, thus ‘go 
through and move forward’ (Ogawa). Adding 
determinative 彳 can be explained as helping 
撤回 TEKKAI　withdrawal
撤去 TEKKYO　removal
撤収 TESSHŪ removal 
TETSU
remove, withdraw 
15 strokes
撤
L1
1762
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Katō lists the OBI 
form of 
 (for explanation, see 徹 1761 ‘go 
through’) as the ancestral form of this graph, 
which probably was used to represent what 
were in early Chinese two homophonous 
words, one meaning ‘go through’, the other 
meaning ‘remove’. By the time of Shuowen, the 
former word was made potentially unam-

The Remaining 1130 Characters  525
添加  TENKA　annex, addition
添付  TENPU　append
添え木  soegi splint, brace
TEN, sou/eru
accompany, add 
11 strokes
添
L1
1763
Seal (沾): 
. The ancestral form of 添 is 
considered to be 沾, which consists of 氵/水 
42 ‘water’, combined with 占 1598 (‘per-
form divination; occupy’) as phonetic with 
associated sense taken in one view either 
as ‘supply beyond needs’, giving ‘overflow’ 
(Katō), or ii] ‘adhere, stay’, giving ‘become 
moist/wet’ (Ogawa); Shirakawa diverges 
somewhat, treating the overall meaning 
as ‘add to/increase items of food’, though 
this does not explain the presence of the 
element 水. Another different analysis of 沾 
takes 占 as having the associated sense ‘stay 
at one spot/place’, giving ‘cause/drop a stain’ 
(Tōdō) At a later stage (post-Shuowen), 沾 
sometimes came to be written instead as 添 
(see Note below) in popular usage, and the 
latter form subsequently became predomi-
nant for the sense ‘add’. Katō regards ‘add’ 
as an extended sense from ‘overflow, full of 
water’. Note: in relation to 沾, 添 replaces the 
phonetic element 占 here with 忝 (CO; ‘feel 
shame’) as phonetic, both have the same 
sound value in early Chinese. KJ1970:725-6; 
OT1968:567; GY2008:1315; SS1984:629-30; 
TA1965:836-8. We suggest taking 夭 as a ‘big 
man’ 大 56 and ⺗ as an odd variant of 忄/心 
164 ‘heart/feelings’.
Mnemonic: ACCOMPANIED BIG MAN 
WITH BOWED HEAD FEELS ODD – NEEDS 
ADDITIONAL WATER 
biguous in writing through addition of 彳 
131 ‘road, go’ to indicate motion. Sometime 
later, 扌 34 ‘hand’ was added to help indicate 
in writing the homophonous word ‘remove’. 
A diff erent interpretation is put forward by 
Shirakawa, who takes 撤 to mean ‘remove 
cooking pots containing off erings to the 
deities’ (in this connection, see 徹 1761 Note). 
KJ1970:722; SS1984:627; BK1957:88. We sug-
gest taking elements as ‘hand’ 扌 34, 育 247 
‘educate’, 攵 112 coerce/ force. 
Mnemonic: FORCE REMOVAL OF HANDY 
EDUCATION  
充填 JŪTEN　fi lling (tooth etc)
填補 TENPO　making up for
填隙 TENGEKI caulking, fi lling
TEN
fi ll, plug, stop up 
13 strokes
填
L1
1764
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 土 64 
‘soil, ground’, with 眞 341 (traditional form of 
真 ‘truth, essence’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense usually taken as ‘block, fill up’, 
thus ‘fill/block with earth’. This is one of sev-
eral proposed etymologies for 眞 (see 341). 
Shirakawa offers a different view, taking 眞 
in the sense representing the main interpre-
tation, i.e ‘person upside down’ (again, see 
341), thus overall original meaning for 塡 as 
‘ritually bury upside-down a dead person 
who met unfortunate end (through disaster, 
murder, etc.)’. According to Shirakawa, this 
ritual was performed to bring repose to the 
soul of such a person; in the latter view, 
‘fill up, block’ is a generalized sense. Note 
modern simplified form 填. TA1965:743-5; 
OT1968:222; GY2008:1540-41; SS1984:631. 
Mnemonic: FILL A GAP WITH TRUE SOIL

526  The Remaining 1130 Characters
宮殿 KYŪDEN　palace
御殿 GOTEN 　palace
殿様 tonosama lord
DEN, TEN,tono, dono
palace, lord, Mr 
13 strokes
殿
L2
1765
Seal (
) 
; late graph (Shuowen). Views 
diverge. One view treats as 殳 ‘strike’ 170 
(see Note below), with left hand part of 
 
(explained below) taken as phonetic, serving 
as onomatopoeic for the sound of hitting 
something, to give ‘hit something and make 
noise’ (Katō, Ogawa). This view is based on 
traditional explanation in Shuowen. Tōdō 
takes a different view, following instead 
information from the Han Dynasty character 
textbook Jijiupian, which explains 
 as ‘hit 
buttocks of criminal with bamboo whip’. In 
this view, left hand part of 
 represents a 
pair of buttocks seated on a stand or similar 
This seems a reasonable assessment of the 
seal form, and one which results in the more 
specific overall meaning for 
. Later 
 
came to be used to represent other words 
which were homophones or near-homo-
phones such as ‘rear (of army)’ (noted by 
Schuessler) and ‘heavy foundations’. Based 
on the latter sense, 
 came to be used by 
further extension for big buildings with 
heavy foundations such as palaces (Tōdō 
says this meaning evolved from the Qin Dy-
nasty onwards). In texts in the clerical script, 
examples can be found of 
 written in what 
was then a variant form, i.e. 殿; over time, 
this came to be the norm for this graph. 
Note: 殳 has 又 2003 ‘hand’ holding 几, a 
very stylized version of what in OBI occur-
rences of 殳 is a depiction of halberd or simi-
lar. KJ1970:189-90; OT1968:547; TA1965:676-
82; SK1984:431; MS1995:v1:408-10,712-14; 
AS2007:211. Take 尸 as slumped person, and 
共 ‘together’ 484.  
Mnemonic: TOGETHER WITH LORD, STRIKE 
SLUMPED PERSON AT PALACE
北斗星 HOKUTOSEI　Big Dipper
斗酒  TOSHU　kegs of sake
泰斗  TAITO an authority
TO
dipper, measure 
4 strokes
斗
L1
1766
OBI 
; seal 
. Originally (OBI), picto-
graph of scoop or ladle; probably at that 
stage the same graph as 升 1485 (q.v.). 
Distinguished in shape from 升 at least 
from seal stage, eventually resulting in two 
quite distinct forms.  By extension, 斗 came 
to denote a unit of measure – in mod-
ern Japan, ca.18 litres (cf. 升 ca.1.8 liters). 
Other senses such as ‘Big Dipper’ (constel-
lation name) may be seen as loan usages. 
MS1995:v1:590-92,166-7; MM1993:378; 
OT1968:447,137; SS1984:635,435; 
SK1984:354-6,115-6.  
Mnemonic: BIG DIPPER HAS SLOPING CROSS 
AND TWO DOTS!?
吐剤  TOZAI　emetic
吐き気  hakike　nausea
吐息  TOiki gasp, sigh  
TO, haku
disgorge, vomit
6 strokes
吐
L1
1767
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 口 22 
‘mouth, speak’, with 土 64 (‘earth, ground’) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken either as 
i] ‘push out’, giving ‘push out from the mouth’ 
(Katō), or ii] ‘become full, come together in 
one place’, giving ‘that which is pent-up inside 
and close to bursting point is disgorged all 
together’ (Tōdō). Either way, ‘disgorge, vomit’. 
KJ1970:730; TA1965:325-7.  
Mnemonic: DISGORGE VOMIT FROM MOUTH 
TO GROUND

The Remaining 1130 Characters  527
妬心 TOSHIN　jealousy
嫉妬 SHITTO　jealousy, envy
妬み netami jealousy, envy
TO, netamu/mi/mashii
be jealous, envy
8 strokes
妬
L1
1768
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 女 37 
‘woman’, with 石 47 (‘stone’) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken either as i] ‘ob-
struct’, giving ‘woman is obstructive/difficult’ 
(Ogawa), or ii] ‘become full, come together 
at one point’, giving ‘woman experiences 
strong feelings of displeasure’ (Tōdō). These 
do not seem to link clearly to jealousy and 
envy. Perhaps so as to address gender is-
sues, Shirakawa refers also to a high-profile 
case of male jealousy in the Tang Dynasty. 
OT1968:256; TA1965:325-30; SS1984:636.
Mnemonic: JEALOUS WOMAN THROWS STONE
途中 TOCHŪ　along the way
前途 ZENTO　(one’s) future
途端 TOTAN verge, just as/when
TO
road, way
10 strokes
途
L2
1769
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Taken in one 
view as ⻌ 85 ‘move, walk along a road’, with 
余 820 (‘ample’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘step, tread’, giving ‘route people have 
trodden’, i.e. ‘road’ (Katō). 途 is listed in the 
6th century Yupian; before that (OBI onwards), 
涂 was used, a graph which Shuowen treats 
as denoting a river name. 涂 comprises 氵 
42 ‘water’, with 余 as phonetic with as-
sociated sense ‘abundant; extend’, giving 
‘river with abundant flow’, or ‘mud’, giving 
‘muddy river’ (both interpretations listed in 
Mizukami); Mizukami treats ‘road’ as a loan 
usage. Schuessler and Karlgren, though, give 
different meanings for 涂, viz. ‘path along 
bank of a canal; paved path’, in which case 
‘road’ can be seen as an extended sense. 
KJ1970:730; MS1995:v2:754-5; AS2007:501; 
BK1957:39-40.
Mnemonic: ROAD PERMITS AMPLE MOVEMENT 
渡航   TOKŌ　passage, crossing
渡世   TOSEI 　livelihood
言い渡し  iiwatashi (court) sentence
TO, wataru/su
cross, hand over
12 strokes
渡
L2
1770
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has’water’ 
氵/水 42 (or ‘river’), with 度 377 (‘degree, 
times’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘cross, traverse’ (Katō says ‘cross from one 
edge to the other’), thus ‘cross water/river’. 
Ogawa prefers to treat 度 here as both 
semantic and phonetic, based on its initial 
sense of ‘measure with hand’, whereby 
an object was measured by moving the 
hand across it, hence the sense ‘crossing’. 
OT1968:596; KJ1970:612. 
Mnemonic: CROSS WATER BY DEGREES

528  The Remaining 1130 Characters
賭け事  kakegoto　betting, gambling 
賭け金  kakeKIN　stakes, bet 
賭博  TOBAKU　gambling 
奴隷  DOREI　slave
奴ら 
 yatsura　those guys
奴さん  yakkosan　that guy
Seal 
; late graph (late version of Shuowen). 
Has 貝 10 ‘shell currency, valuables’, with 者 
314 (‘person’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘aim for’ (Ogawa), giving ‘do something 
with wealth as the aim’, and hence ‘gamble’. 
OT1968:961; SS1984:638.
Mnemonic: PERSON GAMBLES WITH 
SHELL-MONEY
TO, kake/keru
gamble, bet
16 strokes (賭)
DO, yatsu, yakko
slave, servant, guy
5 strokes
賭
奴
L1
L1
1772
1773
OBI ; seal 
. Views diff er. One takes as 女 37 
‘female’, with 又 2003 ‘hand’, here in the sense 
‘capture’, thus ‘female slave’ (Tōdō, Ogawa). 
However, most OBI forms of 奴 have not 又 
but 力 78 ‘strength; eff ort’, and this combina-
tion is taken in another view as 力 ‘exert eff ort’, 
with 女 as phonetic with associated sense 
‘follow, obey’, giving ‘female slave who follows 
commands and does hard physical work‘ 
(noted in Mizukami [ 女 is apparently taken 
as semantic here also]). Katō gives a similar 
interpretation, but is not gender-specifi c, tak-
ing overall meaning as ‘engage in work’, and 
suggests later 又 may simply be in error for 
力 (see Note below). Note: OBI examples of 奴 
listed by Mizukami (and also by Matsumaru) 
mostly have OBI equivalent of 力 (seen to 
represent downward-facing arm); the change 
to 又 seems to have occurred at the bronze 
stage: all the bronze equivalents of 奴 listed 
by Mizukami have 又 (hand facing upwards). 
The seal form also clearly has 又. TA1965:355-
7; OT1968:251; MS1995:v1:310-11,136-7,192-3; 
MT1993:81,372-3; KJ1970:1739-40. 
Mnemonic: HAND-MAIDEN IS A SLAVE 
怒気  DOKI　anger
怒鳴る  DOnaru　shout, bawl 
怒り狂う ikarikuruu　rage madly
Seal . Has 心 164 ‘heart, feelings’, with 奴 
1773 (‘slave, servant’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense taken as i] ‘strain, stretch, tense’ 
(Mizukami, Katō, Ogawa), or ii] ‘exert extreme 
force’ (Shirakawa), both giving ‘one’s mind be-
comes tense/extreme’ > ‘become angry’. Mizu-
kami lists proposed bronze. MS1995:v1:504-5; 
KJ1970:731; OT1968:365; SS1984:640-41. 
Mnemonic: SLAVE’S FEELINGS ARE OF ANGER
DO, ikaru, okoru
anger, rage
9 strokes
怒
L2
1774
塗装  TOSŌ　painting
塗り物  nurimono　lacquerware 
塗り薬  nurigusuri　ointment 
Seal 
; late graph (late version of Shuow-
en). Has 土 64 ‘earth, ground’, with 涂 (‘mud’, 
see 1769) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken as i] ‘muddy water, mud’ (Katō, Oga-
wa), or ii] ‘extend, spread’ (Tōdō), both giving 
‘paint/smear mud (on walls)’. TA1965:336-9; 
KJ1970:730; OT1968:223. 
Mnemonic: USE MUDDY EARTH FOR PLASTER
TO, nuru 
plaster, coat, paint
13 strokes
塗
L1
1771

The Remaining 1130 Characters  529
到来 TŌRAI　arrival, advent
到達 TŌTATSU　arrival
到底 TŌTEI　absolutely 
TŌ, itaru
go, reach, arrive
8 strokes
到
L2
1775
Bronze 
; seal 
. Bronze has 亻 41 ‘person’, 
with 至 886 ‘reach’ (showing arrow shot and 
landing upside-down, giving original mean-
ing ‘fall over’, later written 倒 1777). Arrow has 
travelled and landed, hence ‘go, arrive’. At seal 
stage, right-hand element changed from 亻 to 
刀 198 ‘sword’; likely due to error as the bronze 
forms of these two graphs had similar shapes. 
MS1995:v1:130-31,40-41,122-3; KJ1970:445-6.
Mnemonic: ON ARRIVAL, REACH FOR 
SWORD
逃亡者 TŌBŌSHA　fugitive
見逃す  minogasu　overlook 
逃げ道 nigemichi　escape route
TŌ, nigeru/gasu, noga-
reru/su
escape, evade, miss
9 strokes
逃
L2
1776
Seal 
. Views diverge. Has ⻌ 85 ‘go’, with 兆 
573 ‘sign, omen’. Here, latter is usually treated 
as phonetic, with associated sense taken as 
i] ‘escape (stealthily)’, leading to generalized 
meaning ‘escape’( Katō), ii] ‘leap up’, giving 
‘leap up and escape’ (Shirakawa), or iii] ‘split 
in two, open’, thus ‘(two entities) move so as 
to split into two’, and ‘escape’ (Tōdō). Ogawa, 
however, takes 兆 here as both semantic and 
phonetic with a meaning ‘move away’, but this 
seems a rather extreme interpretation of the 
original meaning of 兆 ‘sign, omen’, presum-
ably based on a perception of motion when a 
crack is formed. Mizukami also lists proposed 
OBI and bronze forms. KJ1970:703; SS1984:643; 
TA1965:243; MS1995:v2:1290-91. 
Mnemonic: THE OMEN SAYS ‘GO’, SO ESCAPE 
NOW! 
倒産 TŌSAN　bankruptcy
面倒 MENDŌ　trouble 
倒置 TŌCHI　inversion
TŌ, taoreru/su
fall, topple, invert
10 strokes
倒
L2
1777
Seal 
; late graph (late version of Shuowen). 
Has 到 1775 ‘reach, arrive’ (originally showing 
arrow coming to rest upside-down), with 亻 41 
‘person’ added as determinative (in one view) 
to indicate clearly the meaning ‘fall over’ 
(originally written as 到 ) (Ogawa; Gu also).  
Shirakawa prefers to take original meaning of 
倒 as ‘meet, greet’, giving ‘meet/greet someone 
who has arrived’; he does not indicate the 
relationship to ‘fall over’. The former analysis 
is probably the one to follow. OT1968:71; 
GY2008:1074-5; SS1984:643. 
Mnemonic: PERSON ARRIVES THEN FALLS 
OVER

530  The Remaining 1130 Characters
唐人 TŌJIN　Chinese, foreign
唐手 karate　karate
唐歌 karauta　Chinese poem
OBI 
; seal 
. Has lower element inter-
preted in one view as 口 22 ‘mouth’; speak’, 
combined with 庚 ‘7th of the 10 Heavenly 
Stems’ (originally, pictograph of pounder for 
grains; see Note below), the latter element 
then being taken as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘big, big talk’, giving ‘boast, talk 
absurdities’(Mizukami, Katō). In another analy-
sis (Tōdō), 庚 is taken semantically as ‘make 
hard and fi rm’; this gives a provisional mean-
ing ‘speak by opening mouth wide’ and hence 
‘talk exaggeratedly’, i.e. essentially the same 
meaning as the two commentators above. Yet 
another treatment (Ogawa) is quite diff er-
ent: it takes 庚 in the same way as Tōdō, but 
considers fi rstly that the bottom element is 囗 
(normally ‘enclosure’), here indicating ‘place’, 
giving an original meaning ‘embankment, 
dyke’ (later written as 塘 ); secondly, that 
TŌ, Kara
(Tang) China, foreign
10 strokes
唐
L1
1779
subsequently, the original meaning of 唐 was 
forgotten, and the graph came to be used to 
denote the name of the capital of the mythi-
cal Emperor Yao, then later borrowed for ‘big’. 
The diffi  culty with Ogawa’s interpretation is 
that in OBI and bronze occurrences of 唐, the 
bottom element corresponds to the typical 
shape for 口 ‘mouth; speak’, not that for 囗 
84 ‘enclosure; place’. In relation to any of the 
above treatments, use of 唐 in the sense ‘Tang 
(China)’ represents a loan usage, as also does 
‘foreign’. Note: OBI forms of 庚 appear to show 
a pounder set within a stabilizing frame; at the 
bronze stage, occasionally a depiction of two 
hands (left and right) is added lower down, 
an element which was made more promi-
nent at the seal stage at the same time as the 
pounder element was simplifi ed in shape. The 
beginnings of the change in shape towards 
庚 are just discernible in the clerical script. 
MS1995:v1:230-32,450-52,204-05,250-51; 
KJ1970:666; OT1968:183; TA1965:345-8; 
SK1984:270-71. Take 
 as hand holding stick, 
广 127 ‘building’, and 囗 as ‘entrance’. 
Mnemonic: FOREIGN HAND HOLDS STICK AT 
ENTRANCE TO CHINESE BUILDING
白桃  HAKUTŌ　white peach 
桃色  momoiro　peachy pink
桃源境 TŌGENKYŌ　Shangri-La
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 木 73 
‘tree, wood’, with 兆 573 (‘sign, omen’, 
initially pictograph of cracks formed on 
turtle shell or similar in divination), the latter 
element taken in one view as semantic and 
phonetic, giving ‘tree with fruit stones which 
split in two’, i.e. ‘peach’ (Ogawa, Tōdō). Alter-
natively, 兆 is treated here by Katō just as 
TŌ, momo
peach 
10 strokes
桃
L1
1780
凍結  TŌKETSU　freezing
冷凍 剤 REITŌZAI　refrigerant
凍り付く kōritsuku　freeze to
TŌ, kōru, kogoeru 
freeze
10 strokes
凍
L2
1778
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 冫 401 
‘ice’, with 東 201 (‘east’) as phonetic with as-
sociated sense taken as i] ‘pile up, accumulate’, 
thus ‘become covered with thick ice’ (Ogawa), 
or ii] ‘penetrate, pass through’, giving ‘(thick) 
ice forms everywhere’ (Tōdō), or  iii] ‘form 
together’, giving ‘ice solidifi es/forms’ (Katō). 
TA1965:286-9; OT1968:104; KJ1970:732. 
Mnemonic: ICE FORMS IN THE FREEZING EAST

The Remaining 1130 Characters  531
透明   TŌMEI 　transparency
透写   TŌSHA　tracing
透き通る  sukitōru be clear
TŌ, suku/kasu/keru
clear, transparent 
10 strokes
透
L1
1781
sense taken either as i] ‘project, stick out’, 
considered to give ‘walk out in front of oth-
ers’ or ‘leap up’ or ‘go past’ and by extension 
‘penetrate’ (Katō), or ii] ‘dance’, giving ‘dance 
up’, and as loan usage ‘go, pass through; 
be transparent’ (Ogawa). ‘Leading’ may 
also suggest clearing the way. KJ1970:736; 
OT1968:1002. 
Mnemonic: EXCELLENT MOVEMENT CLEARS 
THE WAY 
phonetic, with associated sense ‘beginning’, 
giving ‘tree with fruit used at beginning 
of pregnancy’, reflecting the popularity of 
this fruit in ancient times among pregnant 
women and an association with procreation. 
(Cf. the Japanese legend of Momotarō, the 
Peach Boy.) OT1968:506; TA1965:243-4; 
KJ1970:703. 
Mnemonic: A PEACH TREE IS AN OMEN
哀悼   AITŌ　grief, mourning
追悼   TSUITŌ　mourning
悼むべき itamubeki lamentable
盗用 TŌYŌ　appropriation 
強盗 GŌTŌ　robbery
盗人 nusubito* thief
TŌ, itamu
grieve, mourn
11 strokes
TŌ, nusumu
steal
11 strokes
悼
盗
L1
L2
1782
1783
Seal 
; traditional 盜. Consists of CO 㳄 
‘drool saliva’ (see Note below), combined with 
皿 300 ‘bowl, dish’, interpreted in one view as 
giving ‘drool saliva over bowl of food, wanting 
to take it’ (Mizukami, Katō); by extension, ‘(qui-
etly) take, steal’. Ogawa interprets the original 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen).  Has 忄 164 
‘heart, feelings’, with 卓 1675 (‘table; excel’) 
as phonetic with associated sense taken in 
one view as ‘feel pain’, giving ‘the heart feels 
pain’ (Katō). Alternatively, the associated 
sense of 卓 is taken as ‘come out’, giving 
‘sadness which leaves one feeling exhausted’ 
(Ogawa); the basis for Ogawa’s very specific 
meaning here is not made clear. KJ1970:675-
6; OT1968:376. 
Mnemonic: FEELINGS OF GRIEF OVER LOSS 
OF EXCELLENT TABLE
sense of 盜 slightly diff erently as ‘look at food 
in another’s bowl and feel envious’, but still 
arrives at the same extended sense as above. 
Mizukami lists proposed OBI and bronze 
equivalents for 盗. Note: 㳄 is comprised of 氵 
‘water, liquid’, combined with 欠 496 (original-
ly, depiction of person with mouth wide open; 
‘lack; gap’), hence the meaning ‘drool saliva’. 
MS1995:v2:906-7; KJ1970:669; OT1968:532. 
We suggest taking the modern upper part of 
1783 as ‘next’ 次 308. 
Mnemonic: STEAL A BOWL NEXT
Seal 
; late graph (a later version of 
Shuowen). Has ⻌ 85 ‘move’, with 秀 1451 
(‘excellent’) as phonetic with associated 

532  The Remaining 1130 Characters
陶器 TŌKI　ceramic ware
陶然 TŌZEN　happily drunk
陶冶 TŌYA training, education
TŌ
porcelain, train, 
pottery, happy
11 strokes
陶
L1
1784
Seal 
. Consists of 阜/阝 262 ‘hill, piled-
up earth’, with 匋 (‘bake earthenware’; see 
Note below) as phonetic with associated 
sense taken in one view as ‘(pile up) hill/
mountain on top of a hill/mountain’, giving 
overall sense ‘piled-up hills’ (Ogawa) or 
‘name of double-layered mountain’ (Katō). 
Alternatively, 匋 is taken with associated 
sense ‘spread evenly’, giving overall meaning 
for 陶 as ‘pound piled-up earth and make 
firm’ (Tōdō). Use of 陶 in the sense ‘earthen-
ware, pottery’ appears to be a loan use. It is 
unclear as to the acquisition of very minor 
meanings, namely ‘educate, train’ (which 
may be an extended meaning to train pot-
ters) and ‘happy’. (See example words.) Note: 
匋 is comprised of 缶 1141 ‘(earthenware) 
pot’, combined with 勹 611 ‘enclose’; the 
latter element is taken to be an abbrevia-
tion for i] 炮 NJK ‘(lightly) roast’, giving the 
overall meaning ‘bake earthenware; earthen-
ware’ (noted in Mizukami), or ii] as meaning 
‘spread evenly all across mold’, giving ‘knead 
evenly and make earthenware’ (Tōdō). 
MS1995:v1:150-51,144-6; OT1968:1070; 
KJ1970:667-8; TA1965:179-83. We suggest 
taking 缶 as ‘pot’, 勹 as ‘enclosed’, and 阝 as 
‘piled up earth’. 
Mnemonic: POTS ARE ENCLOSED BY PILED 
UP EARTH
石塔  SEKITŌ　tombstone 
卒塔婆 SOTŌBA*　stupa
五重塔 GOJŪTŌ fi ve-storied pagoda
TŌ
tower, monument
12 strokes
塔
L2
1785
Seal 
; a late graph (later version of 
Shuowen). This graph appears to have been 
devised in the course of the monumental 
task of translating the Buddhist canon from 
Sanskrit into Chinese. As part of this process, 
many Sanskrit Buddhist terms were carried 
across into Chinese as loanwords by adapt-
ing them to the sound system of Chinese, 
very often also with abbreviation of the 
original Sanskrit. In this case, Sanskrit stūpa 
(‘Buddhist shrine’) was reduced to just one 
syllable and represented by 塔, consisting of 
土 64 ‘earth, ground’, with 荅 (CO, original 
meaning ‘red beans’) as phonetic to rep-
resent the Chinese approximation of the 
Sanskrit syllable tū in stūpa. Note: accord-
ing to Katō, these Buddhist shrines were 
originally built using stone, tiles, and earth, 
which would help explain use of 土 as the 
determinative in 塔, but he suggests there 
was also a semantic link between 塔 and 堂 
584 ‘hall, temple’ on the one hand and 墳 
1930 ‘mound, burial mound’ on the other. As 
is often the case, once loanwords have been 
adopted into a language, their meaning can 
change; in this case, changing to encompass 
a different shape such as a pagoda, and 
the use of wood as one of the construction 
materials. KJ1970:666-7; SS1984:647,645; 
OT1968:221. We suggest  taking 荅 as 艹 53 
‘plant’, and 合 134 ‘join, put together’, along 
with 土 ‘earth’ 64.
Mnemonic: PUT PLANTS AND EARTH 
TOGETHER TO MAKE A MONUMENT

The Remaining 1130 Characters  533
搭載  TŌSAI　loading 
搭乗  TŌJŌ　boarding
搭乗券 TŌJŌKEN boarding pass
TŌ
load, board
12 strokes
搭
L1
1786
A very late post-Shuowen graph. Consists of 
扌/手 ‘hand’ 34, combined with 荅 (original 
meaning: ‘red beans’: see 1785) as phonetic 
(associated sense somewhat unclear, though 
Katō states ‘strike with the hand’). Original 
meaning is ‘grasp’ or ‘hold up/support in the 
hand’ (Gu). According to Shirakawa, used in 
early modern times in a range of meanings 
for actions such as ‘hit’ and ‘mix’, and now in 
the sense ‘load, come/go on board’, which he 
maintains reflects earlier usage in military 
jargon but has now been adopted into 
general usage. Katō states that ‘load, board’ 
are borrowed meanings. GY2008:1401; 
SS1984:647; KJ1985:269. We suggest taking 
荅 as ‘plant’ 艹 53, and ‘join, put together’ 合 
134, along with ‘hand’扌/手. 
Mnemonic: HANDS PUT PLANTS TOGETHER 
FOR LOADING
病棟 BYŌTŌ　hospital ward  
棟木 munagi　ridgepole
別棟 BETSUmune outbuilding
TŌ, mune, muna-
ridgepole, building
12 strokes
棟
L1
1787
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists 
of 木 73 ‘wood, tree’, combined with 東 201 
(‘east’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘pierce, penetrate’, giving ‘ridgepole which 
extends to the roof ridgebeam’ (Ogawa), or 
‘framework timber which extends across to 
(framework) extremity’ (Tōdō). In Japanese 
usage only, a counter for houses (-mune). 
OT1968:512; TA1965:286-9; SS1984:647-8. 
Mnemonic: WOOD FROM EAST IS BEST FOR 
BUILDING’S RIDGEPOLE
水痘  SUITŌ　chicken pox
種痘  SHUTŌ　vaccination
天然痘 TENNENTŌ smallpox
TŌ
smallpox
12 strokes
痘
L1
1788
A very late post-Shuowen graph. Consists of 
疒 404 ‘sickbed; illness, disease’, combined 
with 豆 379 ‘bean; miniature’ as semantic and 
phonetic, giving ‘disease producing bean-like 
pustules’, i.e. ‘smallpox’. Note that early Japan 
had serious problems with smallpox as they 
lacked the endemicization that the Chinese 
had (such as exposure to chicken-pox, a 
milder form). In the years 735-737 there was 
a massive smallpox epidemic, which killed up 
to a third of the entire population of Japan. 
GY2008:1481-2; OT1968:679; KJ1970:734-5.  
Mnemonic: SMALLPOX IS A DISEASE WITH 
BEAN-LIKE PUSTULES

534  The Remaining 1130 Characters
円筒  ENTŌ　cylinder
筒抜け  tsutsunuke　directly
筒型  tsutsugata cylindrical
TŌ, tsutsu
tube, cylinder
12 strokes
筒
L2
1789
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists of ⺮ 
58 ‘bamboo’, combined with 同 204 (‘same’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘penetrate, 
pierce; hollow’, giving ‘bamboo tube (with 
joint obstructions removed)’. Katō prefers 
to take it as ‘fl ute’, though this is probably a 
specialized sense. OT1968:751; TA1965:286-9; 
AS2007:499-500; KJ1970:73. 
Mnemonic: BAMBOO IS ALL THE 
SAME – CYLINDRICAL
水稲  SUITŌ　paddy rice 
稲作  inaSAKU 　rice crop
早稲田 Waseda* place-name
TŌ, ine, ina-
rice (plant)
14 strokes
稲
L1
1790
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 稻. Con-
sists of 禾 87 ‘grain plant, grain’, combined 
with CO 舀 (‘ladle out, remove’; see Note 
below) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken either as i] ‘soft, pliant’, giving ‘grain 
softer than millet for pounding’, i.e. ‘rice’ 
(Katō), or ii] ‘knead, work’, giving ‘make 
sticky by working/kneading in a mortar’, 
also considered to mean ‘rice’ (this view 
noted in Mizukami, who also lists proposed 
OBI equivalents). Note: 舀 is interpreted as 
originally depicting 爫 319 ‘hand’ taking 
something small (such as grains, represent-
ed by dot-like shapes) out of 臼 677 ‘mortar’ 
(Qiu). KJ1970:762-3; MS1995:v2:969-70; 
QX2000:189. We suggest taking the lower 
right element 旧 as ‘old’ 677, or as ‘one’ 丨 
‘day’ 日 66.
Mnemonic: HAND PICKS OLD RICE PLANTS
Or: HAND WILL PICK RICE PLANTS ONE DAY
踏破   TŌHA　tramp, travel on foot
足踏み  ashibumi　step, tread, stalemate
踏み込む fumikomu　step into
the ground’, i.e. ‘tread, stamp’ (Katō). Note 1: 
𦐇 is defi ned in Shuowen as ‘fl y vigorously’, 
i.e. fl y with vigorous wing movements. Gu, 
though, maintains that the original mean-
ing is rather ‘wings spread ready for fl ight’. 
Note 2: the seal form of 沓 shows that the 
lower element is not 日 66 ‘sun, day’, but 
曰 1048 ‘speak’, which combines with 水 42 
‘water’, giving ‘talk eloquently’, i.e. words like 
fl owing water. OT1968:974,478; TA1965:796-
8,833; GY2008:1041,769; KJ1970:669; 
DJ2009:v1:170,297. We suggest taking the 
lower right element as ‘sun’. 
Mnemonic: FOOT STEPS ON SUNLIT WATER
Or: TREADING WATER AS THE SUN SHINES
TŌ, fumu/maeru
tread, step on
15 strokes
踏
L1
1791
Seal (蹋) 
. The graph 踏 is a popular 
equivalent of later origin which rose to 
predominance. The seal form consists of 足 
54 ‘foot, leg’, combined with 𦐇 (CO; later 
replaced by 沓) (see Notes below) as pho-
netic with associated sense taken either as 
i] ‘accumulate’, giving ‘accumulate stepping 
action, tread/trample on’ (Ogawa, Tōdō), or 
ii] ‘attach’, giving ‘foot is fi rmly planted on 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  535
謄写  TŌSHA　copy
謄本  TŌHON　manuscript
謄写畿 TŌSHAKI　copy machine
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 謄. 
Has 言 118 ‘words’ (here ‘written’), with 朕 1731 
(royal ‘We’), as phonetic with associated sense 
taken as i] ‘succeed’ (Ogawa) or ii] ‘write’ (Katō), 
thus ‘succeed in copying written 
text’. OT1968:941; KJ1970:736. 
Mnemonic: ‘OUR’ WORDS SHOULD BE 
COPIED
TŌ
copy
17 strokes
謄
L1
1792
藤色 fujiiro　lilac colored
藤棚 fujidana　wisteria trellis
葛藤 KATTŌ　entanglements, discord
Late post-Shuowen graph. Has 艹 53 ‘plant’, 
with 
 (‘rise up, boil’; see Note) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken as i] ‘rope’ > 
‘plant twisted like rope’, i.e. ‘vine’ (Ogawa), or 
ii] ‘alternate; become twisted’ > ‘plant which 
becomes twisted’, i.e. ‘vine; wisteria’ (Tōdō). 
The narrow sense ‘wisteria’ seems a Japa-
nese-only usage. Note: Shirakawa takes 
 
as 氺, variant of 水 42 ‘water’, with 朕 1731 
(‘royal We’; Shirakawa says orig meaning is 
‘offer up’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘rise’. OT1968:876; TA1965:90-92; SS1984:650. 
Mnemonic: ‘WE’ HAVE WATERED THE 
WISTERIA PLANT  
TŌ, fuji
wisteria
18 strokes
藤
L1
1793
闘志  TŌSHI　fi ghting spirit
闘士  TŌSHI　fi ghter
戦闘機 SENTŌKI　fi ghter plane
phonetic with associated sense ‘hit’. Later, 
determinative changed from 鬥 to 門 ‘gate’ 
(seemingly a common transition in clerical 
script; also, 斲 was replaced by 
 as pho-
netic (same associated sense), probably at 
block script stage. Note: 斲 has 斤 1233 ‘ax’, 
with  (CO; ‘large wine vessel’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘cut, strike, shave off’ 
(Mizukami).  originally (seal form) shows 
wine vessel in profile. MS1995:v2:1478-
9,v1:598-9; KJ1970:732-3; OT1968:1138; 
KZ2001:3256/3671,1025/3671; SK1984:802. 
Use ‘bean’ 豆 379, ‘hand’ 寸 920, ‘gate’ 門 231.
Mnemonic: FIGHT IN GATEWAY 
OVER HANDFUL OF BEANS
TŌ, tatakau
fi ght
18 strokes
闘
L1
1794
Seal (鬭) 
; late graph (Shuowen); tradi-
tional: 鬭. Has 鬥, a determinative (not to 
be confused with 門 231 ‘gate’) OBI form 
of which shows two people (or possibly 
two beasts) facing each other or locked 
in fighting), with 斲 (CO, ‘cut tree with ax’; 
see Note below) taken either as i] semantic 
and phonetic (‘cut’) > ‘fight’ (Ogawa), or ii] 

536  The Remaining 1130 Characters
洞窟 DŌKUTSU　cavern, cavity
洞察 DŌSATSU　insight
空洞 KŪDŌ　cave, hollow
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵/水 42 
‘water’, with 同 204 (‘same’) as phonetic with 
associated sense taken in one view as ‘pass 
through’, giving ‘water passes through’, and 
by extension ‘pierce’ (Ogawa, Tōdō); with this 
interpretation, ‘cavity, hollow’ can perhaps be 
seen as a further extended sense based on the 
action of erosion by fl owing water. Alterna-
tively, 同 is taken here with associated sense 
‘tube, hollow’, giving ‘cave where water has 
entered deep into’ (Shirakawa). OT1968:576; 
TA1965:286-9; SS1984:655. 
Mnemonic: SAME WATER PENETRATES 
CAVE 
DŌ, hora
cave, penetrate
9 strokes
洞
L1
1796
胴体  DŌTAI　body, trunk
双胴船 SŌDŌSEN　catamaran
胴回り  DŌmawari　girth
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 月/肉 ‘meat, 
flesh; body’ 209, with 同 204 (‘same’) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken either 
as i] ‘big’ (Katō), or ii] ‘tube-shaped, hollow’ 
(Ogawa, Shirakawa), either way giving ‘large 
intestine, colon’. This is the meaning given 
for 胴 in the 6th century Yupian, but then the 
associated word and graph were also ex-
tended to other tube-shaped or hollow parts 
of the body; over time, ‘torso, trunk’ appears 
to have become the dominant meaning. 
KJ1970:738; OT1968:822; SS1984:655.
Mnemonic: TORSO IS OF SAME FLESH AS 
BODY
DŌ
body, trunk, torso
10 strokes
胴
L1
1797
騰貴 TŌKI　(price) rise 
騰落 TŌRAKU　fl uctuations
暴騰 BŌTŌ　sharp rise
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); tradi-
tional form: 騰. Consists of 馬 210 ‘horse’, 
combined with 朕 1731 (the royal ‘We’) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken either 
as i] ‘take over, succeed to’, giving an original 
meaning ‘relay horse, post horse’, with ‘climb, 
rise up’ as a loan usage (Ogawa), or ii] ‘leap, 
climb’, giving ‘horse leaps up’, then general-
ized to ‘rise, leap’ (Katō, Tōdō). OT1968:1129; 
KJ1970:736; TA1965:93-6. 
Mnemonic: ‘WE’ WILL LEAP ONTO ‘OUR’ 
HORSE
TŌ
rise, leap
20 strokes
騰
L1
1795

The Remaining 1130 Characters  537
瞳孔   DŌKŌ　pupil (eye)
瞳孔散大 DŌKŌSANDAI　dilation
瞳孔縮小 DŌKŌSHUKUSHŌ　miosis
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 目 76 ‘eye’, 
with 童 385 (‘child’) with associated sense 
‘swell up in round shape’ (Ogawa), giving 
‘pupil’. OT1968:703; GY2008:1930. 
Mnemonic: A CHILD IS A PUPIL WITH PUPILS
DŌ, hitomi
pupil (of eye)
17 strokes
瞳
L1
1798
峠道   tōgemichi　pass
碓氷峠  Usui Tōge　Usui Pass
四十の峠 YONJŪ no tōge　midlife crisis
A graph of the kokuji type, i.e. devised in 
Japan based on the formational principles of 
Chinese characters. Consists of 山 26 ‘moun-
tain’, combined with a right-hand side made 
up of 上 39 ‘go up’ and 下 7 ‘go down’, giving 
‘go up and down through mountains’, and 
hence ‘mountain pass’. By extension, ‘high 
point, crisis’. OT1968:303.  
Mnemonic: PASS GOES UP AND DOWN 
MOUNTAIN
tōge
past, crest, crisis
9 strokes
峠
L1
1799
匿名 TOKUMEI　pseudonym
隠匿 INTOKU　concealment
秘匿 HITOKU　concealment
under armpit so no-one can see’ (Katō). In 
another view, taken as 匸 ‘enclosure’, with 若 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘mulberry 
leaves’ or ‘greens’, giving ‘keep things like 
mulberry leaves or greens within enclosure’. 
Alternatively, 匸 is taken as signifying ‘hidden/
remote place’, and 若 in its possible original 
meaning, denoting a shamaness dancing 
wildly, giving the overall meaning ‘pray to the 
deities secretly’ (Shirakawa). All the above in-
terpretations may be taken as leading to ‘hide, 
conceal’ as an extended or generalized sense.
OT1968:134-5; KJ1970:705; SS1984:659.
Mnemonic: YOUNGSTER CONCEALED IN AN 
ENCLOSURE
TOKU
conceal
10 strokes
匿
L1
1800
Bronze  
; seal 
. Analyses diverge. The 
element 匸 1487 (q.v.) is a determinative 
with a meaning which may provisionally be 
taken as ‘enclosure’. In one view, 匿 is treated 
as 匸 representing the meaning ‘hunch the 
body over and enclose (something) with the 
arms’, with 
 or 若 896 (‘young’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘put, place’, giving ‘hide 
督励 TOKUREI　encouragement
監督 KANTOKU　supervision
督促 TOKUSOKU　urging
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists of 
目 76 ‘eye’, combined with 叔 1466 (‘uncle’) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken either 
as i] ‘urge, apply pressure’, giving ‘watch over 
work of others’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘stop, bring to 
rest’, giving ‘bring eyes to rest and watch, 
watch over’ (Katō). OT1968:702; KJ1970:744-5.
Mnemonic: UNCLE’S EYE SUPERVISES
TOKU 
supervise, urge
13 strokes
督
L1
1801

538  The Remaining 1130 Characters
篤志 TOKUSHI　benevolence
危篤 KITOKU　seriously ill
篤と 
TOKU to　seriously
down’, giving ‘horse advances steadily 
putting its hooves down firmly’ (Katō). In 
either interpretation, ‘sincere’ and ‘serious’ 
are taken as loan usages. On a cultural note, 
the two components bamboo and horse, 
pronounced chikuba, refer to a toddler’s 
wooden horse, and the term chikuba no 
tomo 竹 馬 の 友 (now rather dated) means 
‘a friend from early childhood’. OT1968:1126; 
KJ1970:744. 
Mnemonic: A BAMBOO HORSE SIGNIFIES 
SERIOUS SINCERITY
TOKU
sincere, serious
16 strokes
篤
L1
1802
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 馬 210 
‘horse’, combined with ⺮/竹 58 ‘bamboo’ 
as phonetic with associated sense taken 
either as i] ‘crouch, cower’, giving original 
meaning ‘slow horse’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘stamp 
栃木県 TochigiKEN　Tochigi Prefecture
栃粥  tochigayu　chestnut porridge
栃粉  tochikona　chestnut meal
tochi
horse chestnut 
9 strokes
栃
L1
1803
This graph refers to the ‘Japanese horse 
chestnut (Aesculus turbinata)’ or its fruit. A 
graph of the kokuji type, devised in Japan 
using the formational principles of Chinese 
characters. Determinative is 木 73 ‘tree, wood’, 
but etymology of the graph unclear beyond 
that. OT1968:501. We suggest taking the 
right-hand element as cliff  and 万 227 ‘ten 
thousand’.
Mnemonic: THERE ARE TEN THOUSAND 
CHESTNUT TREES ON THE CLIFF
凸凹 dekoboko　unevenness
凸面 TOTSUMEN　convexity
凹凸 ŌTOTSU　unevenness
TOTSU, deko
convex, protrusion
5 strokes
凸
L1
1804
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Pictographic 
representation of a shape with project-
ing middle part, thus conveying ‘convex’. 
Contrasts with 凹 1061 ‘concave’. According 
to Qiu, devised after the Qin and Han dynas-
ties. OT1968:109; QX2000:54,175.
Mnemonic: BOX-SHAPE HAS A PROTRUSION, 
SO IT IS CONVEX
突然   TOTSUZEN　suddenly
突入   TOTSUNYŪ　thrust
突っ込む  tsukkomu　thrust, plunge
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional 突. Consists 
of 穴 860 ‘hole, cave’, and 犬 19 ‘dog’, but 
interpretations vary considerably as to how 
to analyse the two elements. In one view, 
taken as ‘dog rushes out from hole/cave’, and 
by extension ‘project; sudden’ (Ogawa, Gu). 
Ma, though, argues this is an inappropri-
ate analysis, given that OBI forms depict a 
dog facing into a hole, not out from it, and 
considers the graph originally meant ‘sud-
den’. A different approach takes as 穴 ‘hole/
TOTSU, tsuku
thrust, lunge, 
protrude
8 strokes
突
L2
1805

The Remaining 1130 Characters  539
屯営  TON’EI　barracks
駐屯  CHŪTON　posting
屯田兵 TONDENHEI　colonial troops
TON
barracks, camp, post, 
station
4 strokes
屯
L1
1806
OBI 
; seal 
. Pictograph of seedling largely 
curled up but just starting to emerge above 
ground. Katō takes it as a struggling plant, 
and its growth is stopping, extending to stop 
at a place. Other views see ‘stop, encamp’ 
as probable loan usages. MS1995:v1:414-5; 
MR2007:219; OT1968:299; GY2008:72; 
KJ1985:185. Take 屯 as ‘strange hair’ 毛 230.
Mnemonic: HAIR-LIKE SPROUTING PLANT 
FOUND IN CAMP
豚毛  TONMŌ　pig bristle
豚肉  butaNIKU　pork
豚カツ  TONKATSU　pork cutlet
TON, buta
pig, pork
11 strokes
豚
L1
1807
OBI 
; bronze ( 
 ) 
; seal 
. OBI form 
has 豕 ‘wild pig, boar’ 89, with 月/肉 ‘meat, 
fl esh’ 209, taken as ‘plump wild piglet/boar 
(meat) to off er as sacrifi ce’. In bronze, 又 
‘hand’ 2003 was added to signify clearly 
‘off er as sacrifi ce’. At the seal stage, 
  is 
given in the Shuowen entry heading, with 豚 
noted as an alternative form. An occurrence 
with 又 omitted can be found in the clerical 
script. MS1995:v2:1220-21; DJ2009:v2:768-9; 
KJ1970:745-6; GY2008:1285; OT1968:949; 
SK1984:679. 
Mnemonic: MEATY WILD PIG PROVIDES PORK
cave’, and 犬 as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘project’, giving ‘hole which projects a 
short way above ground/roofline (as smoke 
vent)’ (Katō). A further, quite different view 
is put forward by Shirakawa, who takes 穴 
as an abbreviation for NJK 竃 ‘cooking stove’, 
and 犬 as here signifying a dog offered as 
sacrifice, as a ritual to cleanse the stove. 
Note that in modern form the dog has lost 
its spot, thus now ‘big’ 36 大. OT1968:740; 
GY2008:947; MR2007:374; KJ1970:745; 
SS1984:663.
Mnemonic: THRUST INTO BIG HOLE
頓知 TONCHI　quick wit
頓死 TONSHI　sudden death
頓首 TONSHU　bow, kowtow
TON, tomi ni
sudden, quick, bow
13 strokes
頓
L1
1808
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists of 
頁 ‘head’ (see 103), combined with 屯 (‘camp’ 
1806) as phonetic with associated sense ‘come 
up against, come to a halt’, giving ‘bow head to 
the ground’. Other meanings such as ‘sudden’ 
are loan usages. OT1968:1102; SS1984:665. As 
with 1806, we suggest taking 屯 as ‘strange 
hair’ 毛 230.
Mnemonic: BOWING SUDDENLY MAKES HAIR 
ON YOUR HEAD GO STRANGE

540  The Remaining 1130 Characters
貪食 DONSHOKU　voracity
貪欲 DON’YOKU　rapaciousness
貪婪 TANRAN　covetousness, greed
鈍感 DONKAN　insensitivity
鈍才 DONSAI　stupidity
鈍色 nibuiro　dull gray
DON, TAN, musaboru
covet, voracity
11 strokes
貪
L1
1809
DON, nibui
blunt, dull
12 strokes
鈍
L2
1810
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 貝 10 
‘shellfi sh, shell currency’, with 今 138 (‘now’) 
taken as ‘hide away’, giving ‘covet wealth’ 
(Ogawa), or as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘addicted to’ (Katō), giving ‘have ex-
treme attachment to valuables’. KJ1970:685; 
OT1968:954.
Mnemonic: NOW I COVET SHELL CURRENCY
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists 
of 金 16 ‘metal’, combined with 屯 1806 
(‘camp’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘blade which is blunt and rounded’, giving 
‘blunt, dull’; later, ‘dim-witted’ evolved as an 
extended sense. KJ1970:745; OT1968:1038. As 
with 1806, we suggest taking 屯 as ‘strange 
hair’ 毛 230. 
Mnemonic: STRANGE HAIR BLUNTS DULL 
METAL
曇天   DONTEN　cloudy sky
花曇り   hanagumori　hazy spring sky
曇り勝ち  kumorigachi cloudy
DON, kumori/ru
cloud, dim, mar 
16 strokes
曇
L2
1811
Seal 
; late graph (later version of 
Shuowen). Has 日 66 ‘sun’ over 雲 83 ‘cloud’, 
thus ‘sun obscured by clouds below’, 
hence ‘cloudy’. KJ1970:746; GY2008:614; 
OT1968:475.
Mnemonic: SUN IS DIMMED BY CLOUD
親子丼 oyakodonburi　egg + chicken
天丼  TENdon　rice + tempura
丼勘定 DONBURIKANJŌ rough estimate
donburi, DON
donburi (bowl of rice 
with meat or fi sh) 
5 strokes
丼
L1
1812
This graph shape exists in Chinese usage as 
an old variant of 井 1575 ‘well’ (q.v.) or as 
one element in a compound graph such as 
型 493 ‘mold, type’ where it may represent 
a mold or frame. In Japanese, though, 丼 
is best regarded as a separate graph, used 
to represent a Japanese dish (or range of 
dishes) called donburi. This consists of rice 
with ingredients on top which vary but 
include beef, fish, or chicken and which have 
been simmered in a special sauce. The term 
donburi originally referred to the large, deep 
bowl in which this popular food was served, 
but then came to refer to the food itself. 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  541
How, though, did the graph 丼 come to be 
used originally to denote a large, deep bowl 
for food? While not entirely clear, possibly 
there is a connection to a traditional bowl 
cover shape, with the 井 representing raised 
wooden crosspieces on top of the cover. 
Most Japanese commentators refer to 丼 
only as a variant of 井 in its meaning ’well’, 
though Ogawa notes donburi as a Japanese-
only meaning. Note that oyako means ‘parent 
and child’, i.e chicken and egg, and tanin 
(donburi) means ‘strangers’, in this case egg 
and beef. GY2008:57; TA1965:491; OT1968:24.
Mnemonic: SOMETHING’S IN 
THE WELL – LOOKS LIKE A DONBURI
旦那  DANNA　husband, master
那覇  NAHA　city in Okinawa
刹那的 SETSUNATEKI ephemeral
NA
what? which? why? 
7 strokes
那
L1
1813
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 阝/邑 376 
‘village’, with 冄 (CO; ‘head/facial hair hang-
ing down’; originally [OBI] seems to have 
been a pictograph) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense unclear. In Shuowen, defined as 
a barbarian state situated in the western 
border region. Senses such as ‘what? why?’ 
may be seen as loan usages. Sometimes 
also borrowed for its sound value to 
transliterate foreign loanwords (e.g. from 
Sanskrit). MS1995:v1:106-7; OT1968:1017; 
DJ2009:v2:524; SS1984:666. Take  as ‘sword’ 
刀 198 with two notches. 
Mnemonic: WHICH VILLAGE MAKES SWORDS 
WITH TWO NOTCHES, AND WHY? 
奈何 IKAN*　what? how?
奈落 NARAKU　hades, hell
奈良 NARA* Nara City/Prefecture
NA
what? how? 
8 strokes
奈
L1
1814
Seal (柰) 
. Seal stage is usually taken as 
the oldest, having 木 73 ‘tree, wood’ with 
示 723 (‘show’, originally pictograph of of-
fering table/altar) as phonetic (associated 
sense unclear). Shuowen denotes this as a 
type of fruit tree, possibly a variety of apple. 
The change to the shape with 大 56 ‘big’ as 
top element instead of 木 seems to have 
become established at clerical script stage. 
Interrogative senses such as ‘how?’ should 
be seen as loan usages. Gu alone, it seems, 
proposes an OBI equivalent. DJ2009:v2:449; 
OT1968:247; SS1984:666; SK1984:192; 
WD1974:536; GY2008:584-5.
Mnemonic: HOW BIG IS THE ALTAR IN NARA, 
AND WHAT IS IT FOR?
山梨県 YamanashiKEN Yamanashi Pref.
梨園  RIEN　pear orchard, theatrical world
洋梨  YŌnashi Western pears
nashi, RI
pear, pear tree 
11 strokes
梨
L2
1815
Seal (犂) 
; late graph (Shuowen). Seal form 
has 木 73 ‘tree, wood’, with 𥝢 (CO, ‘plow’) as 
phonetic. The Shuowen entry for 梨 treats 𥝢 
here as a variant of 利 626 (‘profi t, gain’ [q.v.]). 
Associated sense of 𥝢/利 is unclear. Change 
in shape from 犂 to 梨 became well estab-
lish at the block script stage. DJ2009:v2:448; 
GY2008:1264; OT1968:509.  
Mnemonic: PROFIT FROM PEAR TREES

542  The Remaining 1130 Characters
謎掛け nazokake　Yamanashi Pref.
謎解き  nazotoki　solving riddles 
謎々  nazonazo Riddle me!
nazo, MEI
riddle, puzzle 
17 strokes (謎)
謎
L1
1816
plexed’. Several scholars take 迷 as phonetic 
(Ogawa, Shirakawa; associated sense un-
clear), but another (Gu) puts forward a cred-
ible analysis by treating 迷 as both semantic 
and phonetic in function, giving ‘word 
which perplexes’, i.e. ‘secret word, slang’. 
OT1968:942; SS1984:820; GY2008:1338. 
Mnemonic: LOST IN A RIDDLE OF PUZZLING 
WORDS 
鍋物 nabemono　food served in pot
土鍋 DOnabe　earthen pot
平鍋 hiranabe pan
nabe, KA
pot, saucepan
17 strokes
鍋
L1
1817
A very late post-Shuowen graph. Has 金 16 
‘metal’, with 咼 (CO, ‘distorted mouth’; see 
Note below) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘hollow shape’, giving ‘metal artefact 
with hollow centre’, i.e. ‘pot, pan’. Note: 咼 
comprises 口 22 ‘mouth’, with 冎 (see also 
877 and 1325) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘distorted’. 冎 is interpreted as 
‘empty skull’ (Katō) or ‘skull and top of 
spine’ (Mizukami). OT1968:1047; SS1984:81; 
MS1995:V1:108-9; KJ1970:328. We suggest 
taking 咼 659 as ‘topless’ tower (see also 
‘high’ 高 132).
Mnemonic: METAL POTS ARE MADE IN 
TOPLESS TOWER
柔軟 JŪNAN　soft, pliable
軟化 NANKA　softening
軟水 NANSUI  soft water
NAN, yawarakai
soft
11 strokes
軟
L2
1818
ing ‘vehicle with wheels wrapped with reeds 
to soften vibrations’ > ‘soft’. Examples of 軟 
are found in clerical script; the element 欠 
may have evolved from a cursivized form of 
而. Note: 11th century Jiyun dictionary has 
耎 (’weak body’) as phonetic instead of 而, 
giving the variant form 輭. DJ2009:v3:1181; 
T1968:982; KJ1970:748,633; SK1984:699: 
FC1974:v2:1787-9. Take 欠 as ‘lack’ 496. 
Mnemonic: VEHICLE LACKS SOFTNESS
尼僧  NISŌ　priestess, nun 
尼寺  amadera　convent
比丘尼 BIKUNI*  Buddhist nun 
NI, ama
nun, priestess
5 strokes
尼
L1
1819
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Analy-
ses diverge. One view takes 尸 as ‘person 
slumped/lying down, corpse’ 256, but here 
‘lame person’, with 匕 (‘bent leg/ladle’ [see 
Appendix]) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘stop’, giving ‘lame person stops’ (Katō). 
In another view, 尸 is taken as meaning just 
‘person’, with 匕 as semantic, serving as ab-
breviation of 比 792 (originally, depiction of 
two people lined up; ‘compare’), giving ‘line 
up’ (Tōdō). Shirakawa, alternatively, takes 
Seal 
; late graph (late version of Shuowen). 
Has 言 118 ‘words’, with 迷 817 ‘lost, per-
Seal (輀) 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 車 
33 ‘vehicle’, with 而 (‘beard’: see Note below) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘soft’, giv-

The Remaining 1130 Characters  543
尼 as depicting one person leaning against 
another, giving ‘intimate’. The meaning ‘nun’ 
reflects the use of 尼 for its sound value to 
write the final syllable of a loanword deriv-
ing from Sanskrit bhiksunī ‘nun’. KJ1970:694; 
TA1965:759-61; SS1984:668-9. Suggest tak-
ing 匕 as sitting figure.
Mnemonic: CORPSE SITTING UP IS THAT OF 
A NUN
弐拾  NIJŪ　twenty
弐千  NISEN　two thousand
弐万円 NIMAN’EN 20,000 yen
NI
two
6 strokes
弐
L1
1820
Bronze (貳) 
; seal (貳) 
. There are various 
shapes or forms for this graph. According to 
Katō, in ancient times counting was done in a 
concrete way by counting objects. One of the 
early ways of writing ‘two’ was 弍, consisting 
of 二 65 ‘two’ combined with 弋 545 ‘weapon 
handle’ or ‘stake’. Bronze forms include one 
with an element for a broad-bladed halberd 
above 二 ‘two’ and what is typically taken to 
be 貝 10 ‘shell (currency), shellfi sh’, the latter 
possibly in a phonetic role with associated 
sense ‘distribute’ or ‘increase’ (Katō), though 
Gu takes that shape to not be 貝 but 鼎 1746 
(‘tripod vessel’). As Gu observes, in the earli-
est stages of the script the two graphs were 
similar in shape (at least in some occurrences), 
leading – in his view – to 鼎 being erroneous-
ly rendered in seal script as 貝. The rationale 
for the top horizontal stroke in 弐 is not fully 
clear, but it may be that 弌, an early variant of 
一 ‘one’, was itself sometimes written in a vari-
ant form with the short horizontal stroke at 
the top left of 弋 instead of the lower left, and 
at a later point in time 二 was added to the 
lower left to indicate ‘two’, thereby resulting 
in the shape 弐. In modern Japanese usage, 
弐 was not offi  cially adopted in place of 貳 
until the promulgation of the Tōyō kanji List 
in 1946. Complex graphs for numerals such 
as 弐 instead of 二 are often used in legal and 
fi nancial documents to prevent fraudulent 
alterations. GY2008:772; MS1995:v1:464-
6,v2:1230-31,1516-18; KJ1970:39; OT1968:1.
Mnemonic: TWO STAKE-LIKE HALBERDS
匂袋  nioibukuro　sachet
匂油  nioiabura　perfumed hair oil
匂菖蒲 nioiSHŌBU　fragrant orris
earlier stage of Japanese as nioi (id.). In 
another view (Mizukami), however, 匂 is felt 
to be an extended sense deriving from the 
independent CO graph 匀 ‘equal, go round, 
extend across’ (and presumably ‘permeate’). 
The former seems more persuasive. Either 
way, 匀 underwent minor shape change 
in Japan, resulting in 匂 evolving as kokuji. 
OT1968:131,1100; MS1995:146-7. Take as 
person sitting in corner. 
Mnemonic: SMELLY PERSON HAS TO SIT IN 
CORNER
niou/i/wasu/waseru
smell
4 strokes
匂
L1
1821
Graph of the kokuji type, i.e. made in Japan. In 
one view (Ogawa), its origins trace back to 韵 
as a variant of 韻 1037 ‘rhyme, tone’, a graph 
the meanings of which include ‘elegance, 
taste, charm’, leading to it being read in an 

544  The Remaining 1130 Characters
虹鱒 nijimasu　rainbow trout
虹彩 KŌSAI　iris (of eye)
虹色 nijiiro　rainbow hues
substantially in shape to 虫 60 ‘insect’, with 
工 125 (‘work’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense taken either as i] ‘pierce, extend 
across’, giving ‘(wondrous) insect/entity 
which extends across/pierces the sky’ (Mi-
zukami, Tōdō), or ii] ‘hang sideways’, giving 
‘seven-colored dragon which hangs across 
the sky’ (Ogawa). Traditionally in Chinese 
culture, dragons are seen as benevolent 
creatures, unlike in the West. GY2008:853; 
MS1995:v2:1144-6; TA1965:302-06.
Mnemonic: INSECTS WORK TO CREATE 
RAINBOWS
niji, KŌ
rainbow
9 strokes
虹
L1
1822
OBI 
; seal 
. One scholar (Gu), sees the 
OBI form as depicting an animal dipping its 
two heads down to drink from a river (possi-
bly the Yellow River). In another view (Mizu-
kami), OBI form is taken as depicting not just 
an animal but more specifically two dragons 
(male and female). The seal form changes 
糖尿病 TŌNYŌBYŌ　diabetes
尿素  NYŌSO　urea
尿意  NYŌI　‘call of nature’
OBI ; seal 
. OBI form graphically depicts 
a figure urinating. Seal form is of differ-
ent structure, having 尸 256 ‘corpse, prone 
figure’, taken here to serve as abbreviation 
for 尾 1888 ‘tail’ (but sometimes ‘private 
parts, genitalia’), with 水 42 ‘water, liq-
uid’, giving ‘liquid from private parts’, i.e. 
‘urine’. MS1995:v1:406-08; GY2008:521; 
KJ1970:800-01. 
Mnemonic: WATER FROM CORPSE IS URINE
NYŌ
urine
7 strokes
尿
L1
1823
妊娠  NINSHIN　pregnancy
妊婦  NINPU　pregnant woman
不妊症 FUNINSHŌ　infertility
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 女 37 ‘woman’, with 
壬 777 (‘spindle’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘swell’ > ‘pregnant’. Katō says at 
bronze stage this graph was used for a clan 
name. KJ1970:568; MS1995:v1:316-7,282-3; 
OT1968:253. 
Mnemonic: WOMAN WITH SPINDLE IS 
PREGNANT 
NIN, haramu
pregnant
7 strokes
妊
L1
1824
忍者   NINJA　ninja
忍耐   NINTAI　endurance
忍び込む shinobikomu　sneak into
Bronze ; seal 
. Has 心 164 ‘heart/mind’, 
with 刃 1549 (‘blade’, q.v.) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘endure’ > ‘endure 
in one’s heart’. ‘Stealth’ may relate to not 
showing feelings.  KJ1970:569; GY2008:532; 
MS1995:v1:498-9,122-3; OT1968:359; 
KZ2001:237-238/3671. 
Mnemonic: ENDURE A STEALTHY BLADE IN 
THE HEART
NIN, shinobu
endure, stealth
7 strokes
忍
L1
1825

The Remaining 1130 Characters  545
安寧 ANNEI　public peace
丁寧 TEINEI　civility, care
寧日 
NEIJITSU　quiet day
宀 ‘house’, with 
 as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘calm, peaceful’, thus ‘house is peaceful 
inside’ (Katō). Shirakawa, alternatively, pro-
poses a diff erent analysis, as signifying a ritual 
of off ering the heart of a wild animal in a bowl 
to soothe ancestral spirits; Ogawa is in broad 
agreement. Other meanings such as ‘prefer-
ably’ are loan uses. Note: OBI equivalents of 
丂 have relatively little by way of curve in 
the bottom stroke. GY2008:v1:195,v2:900-01; 
MS1995:v1:386-7; KJ1970:853; SS1984:672; 
OT1968:283; WD1974:540-42. Take 罒 as eye 
76, 丁 nail 367.
Mnemonic: FEEL PEACEFUL HOME IS 
PREFERABLE TO A NAIL IN THE EYE 
NEI, mushiro
peace, preferably
14 strokes
寧
L1
1826
OBI 
; bronze 
; seal 
. Views vary. OBI form 
has 宀 30 ‘house’, with 皿 300 ‘bowl’, plus 丂; 
the latter normally ‘fl oating aquatic weed’ 130, 
but taken here by Gu as pictograph for ‘shelf’, 
giving overall meaning ‘house with plentiful 
food’ (see Note below). Bronze forms typi-
cally add 心 164 ‘heart, feelings’ as a further 
element. One view takes the bronze form as 
捻挫 NENZA　sprain
捻子 neJI*　screw
捻転 NENTEN　torsion
Seal 
; late graph (later version Shuowen). 
Has 扌 34 ‘hand’, with 念 590 (‘thought, 
concern’) as phonetic with associated sense 
probably ‘firm(ly)’, thus overall meaning 
‘pinch with fingers, twist’. GY2008:1220; 
OT1968:421; SS1984:673-4; AS2007:401. 
Mnemonic: TWISTED HAND IS OF CONCERN 
NEN, nejiru, hineru
twist, screw
11 strokes
捻
L1
1827
粘土   NENDO　clay
粘着   NENCHAKU　adhesion
粘り強い  nebarizuyoi　tenacious
millet’. Later (unclear when), the determi-
native 米 220 ‘rice’ was sometimes used in 
this graph in place of 黍, resulting in 粘, 
though this was long regarded as a popular 
equivalent: Kangxi zidian still treats 粘 as 
a popular form of 黏. ‘Sticky/glutinous’ is a 
generalized sense. KJ1970:624; TA1965:836-
8; KZ2001:1995/3671.
Mnemonic: DIVINE USING STICKY RICE?!  
NEN, nebaru
sticky, glutinous 
11 strokes
粘
L1
1828
苦悩 KUNŌ　distress
悩殺 NŌSATSU　captivation
懊悩 ŌNŌ　torment
Seal 
; traditional forms 㛴, 惱. Seal form 
has 女 37 ‘woman’, with 𡿺 (‘brain’, later writ-
ten 腦 964), taken in one view as abbrevia-
tion for 匘 ‘brain matter, brain’ as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘pain’, giving ‘woman 
feels pain in heart’ (Katō). In another view, 
𡿺 is taken as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘bend softly, soft but circuitous’, giving 
‘something that persists in the mind and 
NŌ, nayamu/masu
worry, distress
10 strokes
悩
L2
1829
Seal (黏) 
. Seal form has NJK 黍 ‘millet’, 
with 占 1598 (‘divination’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘stick/adhere’ > ‘sticky 

546  The Remaining 1130 Characters
濃化  NŌKA　thickening
濃厚  NŌKŌ　rich, intense
油濃い aburakoi　oily, fatty
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵42 ‘liq-
uid’, with 農 386 (‘farming’) as phonetic with 
associated sense taken as i] ‘abundant’ (Katō), 
or ii] ‘wet’ (Ogawa), both giving ‘abundant 
dew’ (濃 often used in this sense in Chinese 
classics). Katō treats ‘thick, abundant’ as 
extended sense and ‘strong (fl avor)’ as further 
extended sense. KJ1970:739; OT1968:611. 
Mnemonic: RICH LIQUIDS AID FARMING 
NŌ, koi
thick, deep, rich
16 strokes
濃
L2
1830
把握 HAAKU　grasp
把住 HAJŪ　retention
把手 totte　handle
view as ‘grasp,’ thus ‘seize with hand’ (Ogawa, 
Gu). In another interpretation, associated 
sense of 巴 here is taken as ‘adhere evenly 
and thinly’, thus ‘apply hand flat against’, 
but this gives slightly different hand action 
and meaning, as Tōdō acknowledges. Use 
as a counter meaning ‘armful, bundle’ is 
extended sense. OT1968:404; GY2008:411; 
MS1995:v1:432-3; TA1965:435-8. Take 巴 as 
snake.
Mnemonic: HAND GRASPS SNAKE
HA, toru
take, grasp, bundle
7 strokes
把
L1
1831
覇権 HAKEN　domination
覇気 HAKI　ambition
制覇 SEIHA　supremacy
element 覀 is not variant of 西 169 ‘west’ 
(see Note 2). ‘Dominance’ is loan use of 覇. 
Note 1: 
 has 雨 3 ‘rain’, here in broader 
sense ‘weather’, with 革 836 (‘leather’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘white’ 
> ‘bones bleached by exposure to ele-
ments’. See 革 836 for link with bleached 
bones. Note 2: 覀 and 襾 (as top element) 
are orig. pictograph of a stopper (Ogawa). 
MS1995:v2:1424-6,1174-5; OT1968:485,911. 
Take 月 as ‘body’ 209, 覀 as ‘west’.
Mnemonic: BODIES IN WESTERNS ARE 
DOMINATED BY LEATHER
HA
domination, rule
19 strokes
覇
L1
1832
won’t go away’ (Tōdō). The associated sense 
of 𡿺 here is alternatively taken as ‘be re-
lated, surround’, giving ‘bad feelings persist’, 
and hence ‘be distressed’ (Ogawa). Later 
(unclear when), the determinative 忄/心 164 
‘heart, mind’ was sometimes substituted for 
女; Kangxi zidian lists both forms as sepa-
rate entries. In modern times  忄 became 
the dominant determinative; the earliest 
Jōyō kanji List (promulgated 1923) has 惱. 
TA1965:249-50; KJ1970:674; OT1968:373. 
Mnemonic: WORRY AND DISTRESS AFFECT 
BOTH HEART AND BRAIN 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 扌 34 
‘hand’, with NJK 巴 (now ‘spiral’, but origi-
nally either ‘snake’ [Gu, Tōdō] or ‘handle’ 
[Shirakawa]) with associated sense in one 
Bronze (霸) 
; seal (霸) 
. Bronze and seal 
forms have 月 18 ‘moon’, with 
 (‘bones 
bleached by elements’; see Note below) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘white’ 
> ‘white light of moon’. Modern form 覇 is 
late origin – Kangxi zidian still has 霸; top 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  547
老婆 RŌBA　old woman
産婆 SANBA　midwife 
鬼婆 onibaba　witch, hag
BA, baba
old woman
11 strokes
婆
L1
1833
Seal (
) . The seal form has 女 37 ‘woman’, 
with 般 1867 (‘general; carry’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘go round and round’, 
giving ‘woman dances round and round’. 
The sense ‘old woman’ represents a loan 
usage. Regarding the later form 婆, which 
has 波 387 (‘wave’) in place of 般 as phonetic 
(same associated sense), an example can 
be found in clerical script. DJ2009:v3:1020; 
KJ1970:784; SS1984:679; SK1984:202.
Mnemonic: ALAS, OLD WOMAN SINKS 
UNDER WAVES 
罵声 BASEI　jeers, boos
罵倒 BATŌ　denunciation
悪罵 AKUBA　vilifi cation, abuse
BA, nonoshiru
insult, abuse
15 strokes
罵
L1
1834
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 网 
‘net’ (top element: 罒 570), with 馬 210 
(‘horse’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘anger’, giving ‘enmesh/enclose in anger’, 
and hence ‘abuse, curse’. KJ1970:423-4; 
TA1965:453; OT1968:796. Suggest taking 罒 
as ‘eye’ 目 76.
Mnemonic: KEEP AN EYE ON THAT 
HORSE – IT’S SUFFERED ABUSE 
Or: HOW DARE YOU INSULT MY ONE-EYED 
HORSE! 
乾杯 KANPAI　a toast, Cheers!
一杯 IPPAI　a cup, full
杯事 sakazukigoto　exchange of cups
Seal (桮) 
. The seal form consists of 木 
73 ‘wood, tree’, combined with 否 972 (‘no, 
deny’) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken in one view as ‘make to curve’, giving 
‘vessel/receptacle made by making wood 
curve’, specifically here ‘wine cup’ (Ogawa). 
Alternatively, the associated sense is taken 
as ‘divide up’, giving ‘wooden item for divid-
ing up wine’ (Katō; Mizukami regards this 
latter interpretation as similarly meaning 
‘wine cup’). At the clerical script stage, 否 
as phonetic was sometimes replaced by 不 
600 (‘not’), with the same associated sense. 
DJ2009:v2:477; OT1968:495; KJ1970:795; 
MS1995:v1:670-71; SK1984:398.
Mnemonic: THIS WINECUP IS NOT MADE OF 
WOOD
HAI, sakazuki
winecup, cup(ful)
8 strokes
杯
L2
1835

548  The Remaining 1130 Characters
排除   HAIJO　removal
排水   HAISUI　drainage
排気ガス  HAIKIGASU　exhaust gas
HAI
reject, expel, 
push away, anti-
11 strokes
排
L1
1836
Seal 
. Consists of 扌 34 ‘hand’, combined 
with 非 794 (originally, depicts bird’s wings 
outstretched; ‘not; fault’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘open to right and left’, 
giving ‘push open with hands’. By extension, 
‘reject’. Mizukami lists proposed OBI equiva-
lents also. MS1995:v1:554-6; KJ1970:755; 
OT1968:421. 
Mnemonic: PUSHED AWAY AND REJECTED, 
NOT WITH HANDS BUT WITH WINGS
廃止 
HAISHI　abolition
廃寺 
HAIJI　abandoned temple
廃り物 
sutarimono　useless object
HAI, sutaru/reru
abandon(ed), 
obsolete
12 strokes
廃
L1
1837
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); tradi-
tional 廢. Consists of 广 127 ‘roof, building’, 
combined with 發 392 (‘discharge, leave; 
start’) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken either as i] ‘stop’, giving ‘house where 
people stop living’ (Katō), or ii] ‘become 
split in two, be destroyed’, giving ‘destroyed 
house’ (Tōdō, Ogawa). 廃 is a late abbrevi-
ated form (block script stage). KJ1970:752; 
TA1965:647-51; OT1968:330. 
Mnemonic: LEAVE BUILDING TO BE 
ABANDONED
我輩 wagaHAI　I, me
先輩 SENPAI　one’s senior
党輩 TŌHAI　companions
HAI
fellow, kin, line, 
companion
15 strokes
輩
1838
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists of 車 
33 ‘vehicle’, combined with 非 794 (originally, 
depicts bird’s wings outstretched; ‘not; fault’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘be lined 
up’, giving ‘vehicles lined up’, originally in a 
battlefi eld context. By extension, ‘companion; 
order, sequence’. KJ1970:755; OT1968:986; 
SS1984:664.
Mnemonic: FELLOW COMPANIONS IN A LINE, 
IF NOT IN VEHICLES
培地  BAICHI　culture (medium)
培養  BAIYŌ　cultivation 
栽培者 SAIBAISHA　grower
BAI, tsuchikau
cultivate, grow
11 strokes
培
L1
1839
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 土 64 
‘ground’, with CO 咅 (‘spit’, ‘split’; see Note 
below) as phonetic with associated sense ‘add 
to, pile up’ (Shirakawa says ‘swell’), thus ‘add 
more soil’. Originally, 培 was interchangeable 
with 陪 1840, meaning ‘increase, add to’ (later 
meaning of 陪 : ‘attend, accompany’), but 
over time, the two graphs came to be distin-
guished. 培 came to be associated with grow-

The Remaining 1130 Characters  549
陪審 BAISHIN　jury
陪従 BAIJŪ　wait upon, accompany
陪臣 BAISHIN　retainer
BAI
attend, accompany
11 strokes
陪
L1
1840
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 阝 262 
‘hill, mound’, with 咅 (‘spit’; see 1839 Note) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘pile up, swell’, 
giving ‘pile earth up high’. Originally, 陪 and 
培 1839 (later: ‘cultivate, grow’) were inter-
changeable, meaning ‘increase, add to’, but 
over time came to be distinguished, 陪 being 
used in extended senses ‘accompany’ and ‘at-
tend’. KJ1970:758; OT1968:1070; SS1984:686; 
AS2007:159. Take 立 as ‘stand’ 77, 口 ‘hole’ 22. 
Mnemonic: ACCOMPANYING ATTENDANT 
STANDS IN HOLE IN HILLSIDE 
媒介 BAIKAI　mediation
媒体 BAITAI 　medium 
触媒 SHOKUBAI catalyst
BAI
intermediary 
12 strokes
媒
L1
1841
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 女 37 
‘woman’, with 某 1973 (‘a certain’) as pho-
netic with associated sense usually taken as 
‘consult, seek opinion’, giving original mean-
ing ‘mediate in marriage alliance’. ‘Intermedi-
ary’ is the generalized sense. A divergent view 
takes 某 as phonetic with associated sense 
‘give birth to child’, thus ‘man and woman 
join and have a child’ (Tōdō). KJ1970:757-8; 
OT1968:261; GY2008:1524-5; TA1965:166-8.
Mnemonic: A CERTAIN WOMAN ACTS AS 
INTERMEDIARY
賠償   BAISHŌ　compensation
賠償金  BAISHŌKIN 　damages 
損害賠償 SONGAIBAISHŌ indemnity
BAI
compensate 
15 strokes
賠
L1
1842
‘return, give back’ (Katō), in either case giving 
the overall meaning ‘make up for loss with 
valuables’. Shirakawa makes a slightly diff erent 
analysis, taking the associated phonetic sense 
as ‘swell up’, giving ‘make up for loss of valu-
ables’. OT1968:960; KJ1970:759; SS1984:686-7. 
As with 1839 and 1840, we suggest taking 立 
as ‘stand’ 77, and 口 ‘hole’ 22. 
Mnemonic: COMPENSATED WITH 
SHELL-MONEY FOR STANDING IN HOLE
ing things, thus ‘grow, cultivate’. Note: In one 
view, 咅 has 口 22 ‘mouth; speak’, with top ele-
ment which is not 立 77 ‘stand’ but a variant of 
不 600 ‘not’, serving as semantic and phonetic, 
giving ‘spit in refusal’, or just ‘spit’ (Katō, Tōdō). 
Shirakawa takes 咅 as originally depicting 
ripe fruit about to split. OT1968:219,178; 
KJ1970:758; TA1965:158; SS1984:686,798. Take 
立 as ‘stand’, 口 ‘hole’.
Mnemonic: STAND IN HOLE IN GROUND TO 
CULTIVATE GROWTH
A very late post-Shuowen graph. Has 貝 10 
‘shell currency, money’, with 咅 (‘spit’; see 
1839 Note) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken either as i] ‘supplement’ (Ogawa), or ii] 

550  The Remaining 1130 Characters
伯爵 HAKUSHAKU　count, earl
伯父 oji* 　uncle 
画伯 GAHAKU master artist
HAKU
count, earl, senior 
fi gure
7 strokes
伯
L1
1843
‘leader, boss’, giving ‘one who becomes leader’ 
(Katō, Ogawa). Another view takes the associ-
ated sense of 白 as ‘senior male’, giving ‘eldest 
among brothers’, or ‘uncle older than one’s 
father’, and by extension ‘leader of various 
lords’ (Tōdō). For latter sense, ‘count’ is a con-
ventional translation-equivalent; Schuessler 
suggests ‘earl’ also. KJ1970:773; OT1968:55; 
TA1965:432-4; AS2007:169.
Mnemonic: THE COUNT IS A WHITE PERSON
拍車 HAKUSHA　spur
拍手 HAKUSHU　hand clapping
拍子 HYŌSHI beat, rhythm 
HAKU, HYŌ
beat, clap, tap
8 strokes
拍
L1
1844
sense ‘stroke; strike lightly’, giving ‘strike (light-
ly)’ (Mizukami, Katō, Ogawa). Shirakawa takes 
the phonetic element 百 (later changed back 
to 白) as purely onomatopoeic in function; 
he notes that the 3rd century AD Chinese dic-
tionaries Shiming and Guangya both use 拍. 
MS1995:v1:552-3; KJ1970:773; OT1968:410; 
SS1984:688. Take 白 as ‘white’ 69. 
Mnemonic: CLAP TILL HANDS TURN WHITE
Bronze ; seal (𢫦) 
. Has 扌 34 ‘hand’, with 
白 69 (‘white’) in bronze as phonetic (changed 
to 百 71 [‘hundred’] in seal) with associated 
宿泊 SHUKUHAKU　lodging
一泊 IPPAKU　overnight stay
泊地 HAKUCHI berth, anchorage
HAKU, tomaru/meru
stay, lodge
8 strokes
泊
L2
1845
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵 42 ‘wa-
ter’, with 白 69 (‘white’) with associated sense 
taken as i] ‘stop’, thus ‘boat stops’ (Katō), or ii] 
‘come up close’, thus ‘water’s edge where boat 
stops’ (Ogawa). Both lead to ‘stop’ as a general-
ized sense. KJ1970:774; OT1968:568.
Mnemonic: STAY IN WHITE WATER
迫害 HAKUGAI　oppression
迫力 HAKURYOKU　force
切迫 SEPPAKU pressure
HAKU, semaru
press, draw near
8 strokes
迫
L1
1846
Seal: 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has ⻌ 85 
‘move, walk along road’, with 白 69 (‘white’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘cling to, come 
close to’ > ‘walk along road and draw near’. By 
extension, ‘urge, put pressure on (someone)’. 
KJ1970:773-4; OT1968:996; TA1965:437. 
Mnemonic: PRESSING MOVEMENT TURNS 
ONE WHITE
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 亻 41 
‘person’, with 白 69 (‘white’) as phonetic with 
associated sense taken in one view as ‘big’ or 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  551
剥奪   HAKUDATSU　deprivation
剥離   HAKURI　peel off 
引き剥ぐ  hikihagu pull off , strip off   
HAKU, hagu/gasu
peel, strip, deprive
10 strokes
剥
L1
1847
or ‘carve’; see Note below) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘separate, split’ (Ogawa). By 
when Shuowen was compiled, 剥 seems to 
have become more dominant, being listed 
in the entry heading, with a form similar to 
the OBI (though it would have occurred in 
a bronze text, as OBI texts were not known 
to Shuowen compiler) listed as alternative. 
Note: OBI and bronze forms of 录 are taken 
as showing either i] wine strained through 
bag to fi lter out sediment (this view listed 
in Mizukami), or ii] wood chips falling from 
wood being carved with chisel (Shirakawa). 
MS1995:v1:132-4,474-5; AS2007:172,157; 
SS1984:919-20; DJ2009:v2:364; GY2008:1157; 
OT1968:119. Take 彐 as hand and  氺  as vari-
ant ‘water/liquid’ 水 42.
Mnemonic: HAND USES KNIFE TO 
PEEL – STRANGE LIQUID DROPLETS EMERGE
OBI ; seal 
. OBI form has 刂/刀 198 ‘knife’, 
with 卜 96 ‘perform divination’ as semantic and 
phonetic. The early Chinese word underly-
ing 卜 was pronounced close to pok, and 
was onomatopoeic for the sound of a bone 
or tortoise shell cracking when heated as 
part of the ancient Shang Dynasty divination 
process. The two elements 刀 and 卜 thus 
combine to give overall meaning ‘sever, split’, 
extending to ‘strip skin off , fl ay’. At the seal 
stage, a diff erent form 剥 emerged, retain-
ing 刀, but with 录 (CO, ‘strain/fi lter [wine]’, 
舶来 HAKURAI　importation
船舶 SENPAKU　shipping
舶用 HAKUYŌ marine-
HAKU
ship, shipping
11 strokes
舶
L1
1848
Very late post-Shuowen graph. Has 舟 1450 
‘boat’, with 白 69 (‘white’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘big’, thus ‘ship, ocean-going 
vessel’. Graph seen from Tang and Song 
dynasties on, showing growth of international 
maritime trade. KJ1970:773; OT1968:838; 
SS1984:690.
Mnemonic: WHITE BOAT USED FOR SHIPPING 
薄着 usugi　light clothes
軽薄 KEIHAKU　frivolity
薄皮 usukawa thin skin
HAKU, usui/meru
thin, weak, shallow, 
light
16 strokes
薄
L2
1849
with similarly-shaped 専 925 (‘exclusive, 
sole’), of which the traditional form 專 is a 
little more distinctive in shape. 溥 has 氵 42 
‘water’ with 尃, the latter taken in one view 
as ‘fi eld of plant seedlings’, and by exten-
sion ‘plant out seedlings’; sense then gen-
eralized to ‘spread’ (Gu), though Shirakawa 
sees it as sapling roots being trussed up/
bound. GY2008:1653,1012; KJ1970:772-
3;  OT1968:874; MS1995:v1:256-8,394-5; 
SS1984:693; AS2007:173. Suggest using ‘sole,’ 
専 (but ‘not quite right’/‘almost’) to represent 
尃, plus water 氵 and plants 艹.
Mnemonic: WEAK WATER-PLANTS ARE 
ALMOST SOLELY IN SHALLOW WATER 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). 艹 53 ‘plants’, 
with 溥 (CO,‘watery expanse; vast’; see Note 
below) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken as i] ‘spread over/cover widely’, thus 
‘grassy plain’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘get close’, thus 
‘densely growing plants’ (Mizukawa, Katō). 
‘Thin’ is a loan usage. Note: right-hand part of 
the phonetic 溥 here is 尃, not to be confused 

552  The Remaining 1130 Characters
漠然 BAKUZEN　vague
漠々 
BAKUBAKU　vast, vague
砂漠 SABAKU desert
BAKU
vague, vast, desert
13 strokes
漠
L1
1850
netic, thus ‘lack of water’ and hence ‘desert’. 
In another view 莫 is taken as phonetic only 
with associated sense ‘vast, expansive’ (Shi-
rakawa), though combined with 氵this would 
seemingly lead to a meaning opposite to that 
proposed by Gu. GY2008:1652; SS1984:693; 
WD1974:525-6. Take as water 氵 42, plants 艹 
53, ‘sun’ 日 66, and ‘big’ 大 56. 
Mnemonic: IN VAST DESERT, BIG PLANTS 
NEED SUN AND WATER 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵42 ‘wa-
ter’, with 莫 ‘not’ (and other negative senses)’ 
(original way of writing 暮 982 ‘sunset’, q.v.), 
taken in one view (Gu) as semantic and pho-
捕縛  HOBAKU　capture
束縛  SOKUBAKU　restraint
縛り首  shibarikubi　hanging
BAKU, shibaru
bind
16 strokes
縛
L1
1851
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 糸 29 
‘thread’, with 尃 (CO, ‘fi eld of plant seedlings’, 
or ‘truss up sapling roots’; see 1849 Note). 
尃 is treated as phonetic with associated 
sense taken as i] ‘stick, attach’ (Ogawa), or ii] 
‘bind’ (Shirakawa, Gu), both giving overall 
meaning ‘bind with thread/cord’. Note: if 尃 
is seen as ‘truss up sapling roots’, its role here 
is both semantic and phonetic. OT1968:788; 
SS1984:693; GY2008:1674. As in 1849 (q.v.) 
take ‘almost sole’.
Mnemonic: THREAD IS USED ALMOST 
SOLELY FOR BINDING
爆発 BAKUHATSU　explosion
爆弾 BAKUDAN　bomb
原爆 GENBAKU　atom bomb
BAKU
burst, explode
19 strokes
爆
L2
1852
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 火 8 ‘fire’, 
with 暴 814 (‘violence’) as phonetic with as-
sociated sense taken in one view as ‘flames 
fly’, giving ‘fireworks burst open’ (Ogawa). 
In similar vein, Tōdō tends towards ‘sparks 
(from fire) fly’ as the original associated 
sense, and sees ‘burn and burst open’ as the 
extended meaning. Another view sees 暴 
as onomatopoeic, and the graph 爆 is taken 
as representing sound of such things as 
firewood or bamboo crackling or popping 
while burning (Katō; Shirakawa is also of this 
view). By extension, ‘explode’. OT1968:629; 
TA1965:278; KJ1970:777-8; SS1984:694. 
Mnemonic: FIRE CAUSES VIOLENT 
EXPLOSION
箸置き  hashioki　rest for chopsticks
火箸  hibashi　tongs
割り箸  waribashi　half-split chopsticks
hashi
chopsticks
15 strokes (箸)
箸
L1
1853
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has ⺮ 58 
‘bamboo’, with 314 者/者 ‘person’. 者 is taken 
in one view as phonetic with associated sense 
‘pick up’, giving ‘(pieces of) bamboo for pick-
ing up food’ (Katō, Ogawa). Gu, however, takes 
者 as both semantic and phonetic, linking it to 
the original meaning indicated by the bronze 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  553
form, which has fi rewood projecting up out 
of a container. Gu thus takes the original 
meaning of 箸 as ‘bamboo fi re brand/torch’, 
and treats the meaning ‘chopsticks’ given in 
Shuowen as an extended sense.  In modern 
times the dot has tended to disappear, as is 
the case with 者. OT1968:756; KJ1970:495; 
GY2008:1727.
Mnemonic: PERSON HAS BAMBOO 
CHOPSTICKS
肌色 hadairo　fl esh color
素肌 suhada　bare skin
肌理 KIme*　texture, grain
hada, KI
skin, texture, grain
6 strokes
肌
L1
1854
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 月 209 
‘flesh, body’, with 几 845 (‘table, desk’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘be tight/
firm’, giving ‘skin to tightly enclose body’ 
(Tōdō; Ogawa). Tōdō also gives an alterna-
tive analysis for 肌, taking 几 as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘small, detailed’, giving 
‘fine-textured skin’. TA1965:784-7,695-8; 
OT1968:815. 
Mnemonic: BODY AT DESK HAS FINE 
TEXTURED SKIN
植木鉢 uekiBACHI　plant pot
鉢巻  HACHImaki　headband
火鉢  hiBACHI hibachi　brazier
HACHI
bowl, pot
13 strokes
鉢
L1
1855
Relatively late graph. Has 金 16 ‘metal’, with 
本 74 (‘root; book’) as phonetic. 本 is taken by 
Tōdō as here having associated sense ‘radiate, 
spread out’, giving ‘metal artefact which radi-
ates/spreads out’, i.e. ‘bowl’. According to Gu, 
鉢 is listed in a later version of Shuowen as a 
variant of 盋 ‘bowl’ (see 300 and 1856). The 
variant 鉢 seems to have gained in favor to 
represent a Sanskrit word originally mean-
ing ‘alms bowl’ for Buddhist monks. Later 
adopted for ‘bowl’ in a more general sense. 
TA1965:654-8; AS2007:169; GY2008:1058.  
Mnemonic: ROOTED IN A METAL BOWL
頭髪 TŌHATSU　head hair
散髪 SANPATSU　haircut
髪型 kamigata　hairstyle
HATSU, kami
hair
14 strokes
髪
L2
1856
Seal 
. Has 髟 ‘long hair’ (NJK; see Note 1 
below), with 犮 (CO, ‘dog leaps up’ [Ogawa] 
or ‘dog wags tail’ [Katō]; see Note 2 below) 
as phonetic with associated sense taken as 
i] ‘grow, emerge’, giving ‘hair grows’(Ogawa, 
Katō), or ii] ‘cover’, giving ‘hair covering the 
head’ (Tōdō). Mizukami also notes a view that 
may be termed a variation of i] above, with 
associated sense ‘spring up, open in random 
way’, giving ‘hair which springs up in random 
way’. Mizukami also lists proposed bronze 
equivalents. Note 1: 髟 is taken as left hand 
side 镸 189 ‘long hair/person with long hair’, 
combined with 彡 115 as meaning ‘complete, 
full/abundant’, giving ‘hair is full/abundant’ 
(Ogawa, Shirakawa). Note 2: Traditional form 
of 髪 has 犮 as lower element, now regular-
ized in shape in a way that corresponds 
to 友 234 (‘friend’). MS1995:v2:1476-8; 
OT1968:1136; KJ1970:370; SS1984:725; 
AS2007:166. 
Mnemonic: MY FRIEND’S HAIR HAS THREE 
LONG STRANDS

554  The Remaining 1130 Characters
伐採 BASSAI　felling
征伐 SEIBATSU　punishment
殺伐 SATSUBATSU　brutality 
BATSU
attack, cut down
6 strokes
伐
L1
1857
OBI 
; seal 
. OBI form (bronze also) 
depicts a person’s head being cut off  with a 
halberd. This is modifi ed at the seal stage by 
making the two elements 亻 41 ‘person’ and 
戈 545 ‘halberd’ separate. Overall meaning is 
‘attack, cut down’. QX2000:190; KJ1970:779; 
MS1995:v1:50-52; MR2007:385-6; OT1968:51.
Mnemonic: PERSON ATTACKED AND CUT 
DOWN WITH HALBERD
抜群   BATSUGUN　preeminence
抜け穴   nukeana　loophole
手抜かり  tenukari　omission 
BATSU, nukeru/karu
extract, omit, 
surpass, mistake
7 strokes
抜
L2
1858
Seal: 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 扌 34 
‘hand’, with 犮 (CO, ‘dog leaps up’ [Ogawa], 
or ‘dog wags tail’ [Katō]; see Note 1 below) 
as phonetic with associated sense taken as i] 
‘pull out, extract’ (Ogawa, Tōdō), giving ‘pull 
out by hand’, or ii] ‘emerge’, likewise giving 
‘cause to come out by hand’ (Katō; see Note 2 
below). It is unclear as to how other meanings 
came about. Note 1: traditional form of 抜 has 
犮 as right-hand element, now regularized in 
shape in a way which corresponds to 友 234 
(‘friend’). Note 2: in early Chinese writing, the 
causative was often left unmarked, needing 
to be inferred from context. Take 友 as ‘friend’.  
KJ1970:371; OT1968:404; TA1968:647-51.  
Mnemonic: EXTRACT FRIEND BY HAND 
AFTER MISTAKE   
罰金   BAKKIN　a fi ne
処罰   SHOBATSU　punishment
罰当たり  BACHIatari no　damned 
財閥 ZAIBATSU　zaibatsu
門閥 MONBATSU　lineage
閥族 BATSUZOKU　clan
BATSU, BACHI
punishment
14 strokes
BATSU
faction, clan, lineage
14 strokes
罰
閥
L1
L1
1859
1860
詈 has 言 118 ‘words, speak’, with 罒 570 (网 
‘net’), taken in one view as abbreviation of 罹 
(NJK ‘catch’ [originally, ‘catch in net’]) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘severe’ (Ogawa). Mizu-
kami and Katō, though, take at face value as ‘net’, 
giving ‘’entrap with words’, and hence ‘verbally 
criticise, abuse’. MS1995:v2:1034-5,1192-3; 
OT1968:122,926; KJ1970:424; AS2007:348.   
Mnemonic: NETTED, THEN PUNISHED WITH 
WORDS AND SWORD
down by halberd]) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense taken as i] ‘stand out’, giving ‘house/
family that stands out from ordinary people’, 
thus ‘fi ne lineage’ (Katō), or ii] ‘achievements, 
distinguished service’, thus ‘house/family of 
multi-generational achievements’ (Shirakawa). 
KJ1970:779; SS1984:698. 
Mnemonic: CLAN MEMBER CUT DOWN AT 
GATE BY HALBERD 
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 刂 198 ‘sword’, with 詈 
‘threaten, abuse’ (see Note below), thus ‘threaten 
with knife’; by extension, ‘blame, punish’. Note: 
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 門 231 ‘gate’ 
(here, by extension, ‘house, family’), with 伐 
1857 (‘attack, cut down’ [originally person cut 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  555
氾濫  HANRAN　fl ood
氾濫原 HANRANGEN　fl ood plain
(no further compounds)
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵 42 ‘wa-
ter’, and 㔾, the latter in one view (Ogawa) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘cover, spread’, 
or as semantic and phonetic meaning ‘cover’ 
(Tōdō); either way, gives ‘spread, overfl ow’. 
OT1968:557; TA1965:868-71. We suggest taking 
㔾 as slumped person.
Mnemonic: SLUMPED FIGURE IN THE WATER 
AFTER DELUGE AND OVERFLOW
HAN
fl ood, deluge,
overfl ow
5 strokes
氾
L1
1861
帆船   HANSEN　sailboat
帆柱   hobashira　mast
帆掛ける  hokakeru　set sail
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 巾 1232 
‘cloth’, with 凡 1993 (‘mediocre’, ‘ordinary’), as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘wind’, giving 
‘cloth to catch wind’ (Shirakawa). In Tōdō’s 
word family meaning ‘cover (with connotation 
“fl at”)’, giving ‘cloth (on boat) which covers/
spreads in fl at manner’, hence ‘sail on boat 
spread out fl at, sail’. SS1984:699; OT1968:314; 
KJ1970:783; TA1965:868-71. 
Mnemonic: MEDIOCRE CLOTH USED FOR 
SAIL
HAN, ho
sail
6 strokes
帆
L1
1862
汎愛   HAN’AI　philanthropy
汎神論  HANSHINRON　pantheism
汎太平洋 HANTAIHEIYŌ　Pan-Pacifi c
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵 42 
‘water’, with 凡 1993 (‘mediocre, ordinary’) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken either 
as i] ‘shake, sway, heave’, giving ‘drift tossed 
about by wind and waves’ (Ogawa), or ii] 
‘cover (with connotation ”fl at”)’, giving ‘ex-
panse of water’, and also ‘fl oat on expanse of 
water’ (Tōdō). Meanings such as ‘everywhere, 
pan-’ represent extended senses. OT1968:559; 
TA1965:868-71. 
Mnemonic: ORDINARY WATER IS EXTENSIVE
HAN
extensive, pan-
6 strokes
汎
L1
1863
同伴者 DŌHANSHA　companion
伴奏者 BANSŌSHA　accompanist
相伴う  aitomonau　accompany
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
伴. Has亻 41 ‘person’, with 
/半 214 (‘half’) 
serving as phonetic with associated sense 
taken as i] ‘corpulent’, giving ‘corpulent/ 
obese person’ (Katō), or – in similar vein – ii] 
‘spread out’, giving ‘large person’ (Tōdō), or 
iii] ‘divide in two’, giving ‘one (person) who is 
half of a pair’ (Tōdō’s alternative interpreta-
HAN, BAN, tomonau
accompany
7 strokes
伴
L1
1864

556  The Remaining 1130 Characters
大阪 Ōsaka　Ōsaka
阪神 HANSHIN　Ōsaka-Kōbe
阪路 HANRO　hilly road
rakawa offers an alternative minority view, 
taking the associated sense as ‘scramble up’, 
and relates the overall meaning to a ladder 
providing a link with the deities. 坂 394, 
a variant form of later provenance which 
substitutes 土 64 ‘earth, ground’ as deter-
minative, is listed in the 11th century Jiyun 
dictionary. See also 坂 394. GY2008:344,368; 
TA1965:658-61; KJ1970:787; SS1984:700; 
OT1968:213.
Mnemonic: SLOPE IS OPPOSED HILL
HAN, saka
slope, incline
7 strokes
阪
L2
1865
tion), or iv] ‘link together’, giving ‘one who 
accompanies’ (Ogawa). In the case of i] and 
ii] above, ‘accompany’ represents a loan 
usage. KJ1970:785; TA1965:654-8,647-52; 
OT1968:56. 
Mnemonic: HALF THE PEOPLE ARE 
ACCOMPANIED 
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 阝 262 
‘hill, mound’, with 反 393 (‘oppose, anti-’) as 
phonetic with associated sense usually tak-
en as ‘sloping, inclined’, giving ‘slope’. Shi-
池畔   CHIHAN　edge of pond
湖畔   KOHAN　lakeside
湖畔詩人 KOHANSHIJIN　Lake Poets
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 田 
63 ‘field’, combined with 半/半 214 (origi-
nal meaning: ‘divide into two’; now ‘half, 
middle’) as semantic and phonetic, giv-
ing ‘boundary ridge/path between fields’. 
OT1968:671; KJ1970:785; TA1965:647-53.
Mnemonic: RIDGE DIVIDES FIELD IN HALF, 
FROM EDGE TO EDGE
HAN
ridge, edge
10 strokes
畔
L1
1866
一般 IPPAN　general(ly)
全般 ZENPAN　the whole
万般 BANPAN　all, everything
combined with 殳 170, a determinative usu-
ally meaning ‘strike with weapon’.  Originally, 
殳 depicts  hand holding a weapon (possibly 
halberd), but is taken here by Katō as pole 
used to propel boat, giving overall meaning 
‘move boat round, go round by boat’; ‘move, 
transport, carry’ may be taken as extended 
senses in this analysis. Another view has the 
element later rendered as 舟 as meaning 盤 
1877 ‘bowl’, and together with 殳  in sense ‘hit 
with stick’ is taken as ‘make a bowl’ (Gu; Shi-
rakawa also notes as possible interpretation). 
KJ1970:783; GY2008:1087; MS1995:v2:1100-
01,v1:564-5,712-3; OT1968:838; SS1984:701-2. 
Mnemonic: GENERALLY ALL HANDS CARRY 
WEAPONS TO STRIKE BOAT 
HAN
all, carry,  general
10 strokes
般
L2
1867
OBI 
; seal 
. Views diverge. One treats as 
攴  ‘hit with whip/stick’ 112, with a second ele-
ment similar in shape to 井 1575 (‘well’, taken 
as ‘frame to enclose soil’, thus ‘fl atten earth 
and make fi rm’ (Ogawa). In this view, senses 
such as ‘move’ are seen as loan uses. An-
other view (Katō) accepts variation in shape 
in OBI and bronze forms, but still feels that 
appropriate interpretation is 舟 1450 ‘boat’, 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  557
販売 HANBAI　selling
市販 SHIHAN　marketing
販路 HANRO　market
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 貝 10 
‘shell/currency’, with 反 393 (‘oppose’) with 
associated sense taken as i] ‘increase, grow 
fat’, thus ‘money increases’ (Katō), or ii] 
‘make come and go’, thus ‘change money 
into goods, and goods into money’ (Ogawa), 
or iii] ‘spread out fl at’, thus ‘lay goods out 
fl at (for trading)’. KJ1970:786; OT1968:954; 
TA1965:656.
Mnemonic: OPPOSE USE OF SHELL-MONEY 
IN TRADE
HAN
sell, trade
11 strokes
販
L2
1868
斑点 HANTEN　spot, speck
母斑 BOHAN　birthmark
斑猫 buchineko　tabby cat
giving ‘mottled pattern/colors’. Later, the 
phonetic element was changed from 辡 to 
玨 (shortened form of 珏 (‘two sets of jade 
discs’: see 15). Note: 辡 has 辛 1535 (‘sharp’) 
duplicated; the original meaning of 辛 being 
‘large tattooing needle’, used on foreheads 
of criminals and slaves to mark ownership. 
Shuowen defines 辡 as ‘criminals in dispute’. 
Distinguish from  班 970. GY2008:1360; 
ZY2009:v3:729,v4:1338; OT1968:447.
Mnemonic: TWO SETS OF ‘SPOTLESS’ JADE 
DISCS HAVE UNEVEN PATTERNS
HAN, buchi, mura, 
madara
spot(ted), uneven
12 strokes
斑
L1
1869
運搬  UNPAN　transportation
搬送  HANSŌ　conveyance
搬送帯 HANSŌTAI　conveyor belt
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 扌 34 ‘hand’ 
added as determinative to 般 1867 ‘carry’ as 
semantic and phonetic, giving ‘move/carry’ 
(by hand)’. Probably 扌 was added to distin-
guish in writing 搬 with the meaning ‘carry 
by hand’ as opposed to other meanings as-
sociated with 般. However, there is consider-
able overlap. KJ1970:784; GY2008:1574.
Mnemonic: CARRYING BY HAND  IS A FORM 
OF TRANSPORT 
HAN
carry, transport
13 strokes
搬
L1
1870
煩雑 HANZATSU　troublesome
煩悩 BONNŌ　carnal passions
煩労 HANRŌ　trouble, pains
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 頁 103 
‘head’, with 火 8 ‘fire’. In one analysis the 火 
element is taken as ‘fever’, giving ‘have fever 
and headache’, and by extension ‘suffer, 
trouble’ (Ogawa). Another scholar (Tōdō) 
also takes original meaning as ‘have fever 
and headache’, following the explanation 
in Shuowen, but treats as coming within a 
HAN, BON, urusai,
wazurau/washii
trouble(/d), annoy
13 strokes
煩
L1
1871
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Origi-
nally written 辬, comprising 文 72 ‘pattern’, 
with 辡 (‘be in dispute’; see Note below) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘mix’, 

558  The Remaining 1130 Characters
頒布 HANPU　distribution
頒行 HANKŌ　distribution
頒白 HANPAKU　graying hair
after a battle for another mnemonic. (In the 
early days of the samurai, heads were indeed 
seen as trophies, so the more heads one could 
take the greater one’s reputation. However, 
the heads were supposed to be cut off  a living 
adversary, but many warriors took the easy way 
and decapitated corpses. Presently sophisti-
cated techniques were put in place to establish 
whether the head was cut off  a living person 
or a corpse, and in the latter case it was seen as 
shameful.)  
Mnemonic: DIVIDED MIND 
Or (post battle): DIVIDE UP HEADS AND 
DISTRIBUTE THEM
HAN, wakatsu
divide, distribute
13 strokes
頒
L1
1872
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). It consists of 
頁 103 ‘head’, combined with 分 218 (‘divide’) 
as a phonetic with an associated sense ‘fat, 
swollen’, thus giving the original meaning 
‘large head’. ‘Divide, distribute’ are loan uses. 
KJ1970:790; OT1968:1103; TA1965:730-32. 
We suggest taking 頁 ‘head’ as ‘mind’ for one 
mnemonic, and the literal collection of heads 
模範  MOHAN　model
規範  KIHAN　standard, norm
範囲内 HAN’INAI　within limits
out on an important trip or mission. While 
the original meaning for 範 noted here may 
seem bizarre from a modern perspective, 
we should bear in mind that superstition 
was a very powerful force in ancient times 
and indeed until the beginnings of modern 
science started to dispel persistent beliefs 
held regarding the supernatural. ‘Frame-
work, model’ and related meanings are loan 
use for 範. Note: the meaning ‘law, pattern’ 
for  笵 is noted in Shuowen. This appears 
to be an extended sense deriving from an 
original meaning ‘bamboo writing tablet’. 
DJ2009:v2:379; KJ1970:789; OT1968:986; 
TA1965:868-71. We suggest taking the lower 
right element 㔾 as slumped person.
Mnemonic: PERSON SLUMPED BESIDE 
BAMBOO MODEL OF VEHICLE – OVER THE LIMIT!
HAN
model, norm, limit
15 strokes
範
L1
1873
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists 
of  車 33 ‘vehicle’, combined with 笵 (CO, 
‘law, pattern’; see Note below) in an ab-
breviated form as phonetic with associated 
sense taken either as i] ‘cook ritual meat’, 
giving ‘conduct meat-cooking ritual to 
purify vehicle’ (Katō), or ii] ‘violate’, giving 
‘as purificatory act run over dog and smear 
vehicle wheels  with blood’ (Ogawa); Tōdō 
also favors the latter overall meaning. This 
ritual was probably performed when setting 
word-family meaning ‘be overturned, col-
lapse’, making ‘troublesome’ an extended 
sense. OT1968:1102; KJ1970:790-91; 
TA1965:662-4.  
Mnemonic: HEAD BEING ON FIRE IS 
ANNOYING AND A SIGN OF TROUBLE

The Remaining 1130 Characters  559
繁盛 HANJŌ　prosperity
繁雑 HANZATSU　complexity
繁殖 HANSHOKU　propagation
‘cord made of intertwined threads’. In another 
treatment (Ogawa, Gu), 㽢 is taken as depict-
ing a woman with hair ornament (每) with 
the tassels of the ornament (represented here 
by 糸) dangling down. Ogawa, who takes 系 
as correct, considers 㽢 was sometimes used 
interchangeably with 蕃 (NJK, ‘grow luxu-
riantly’) and borrowed in that sense; then, 
the shape of 㽢 was changed in error to 糸 
combined with 敏 1903 (‘agile’), resulting in
繁. Mizukami and Katō also take ‘grow luxu-
riantly’ as loan usage. Examples of the form
繁 can be found in clerical script. KJ1970:788; 
SK1984:575; GY2008:1942;OT1968:788;  
MS1995:v2:1002-05,1016-7.
Mnemonic: THOSE AGILE WITH PROFUSION 
OF COMPLEX THREADS GET RICH
HAN, shigeru
profuse, rich, complex
16 strokes
繁
L1
1874
Bronze ; seal 
. Interpretations diverge. As 
Katō points out, while 㽢 has tended to be 
used as the correct way of writing 繁, to judge 
from the bronze form of 㽢 the right-hand 
side seems better taken not as 系 855 ‘line-
age, connection’ but 糸 29 ‘thread’ (Gu is in 
agreement on this point). Accordingly, Katō  
follows 糸 and not 系 in his analysis, taking 
㽢 as 糸 ‘thread’ combined with 每 (traditional 
form of 毎 225 ‘each, every’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘become entangled’, giving 
長州藩 CHŌSHŪHAN　Chōshū Fief
藩主  HANSHU　feudal lord
藩士  HANSHI　clansman, retainer
and the meanings ‘hedge, screen, wall’ are 
now effectively defunct. Note: 潘 comprises 
氵 42 ‘water’ with 番 215 (‘number’) as pho-
netic with associated sense taken either as i] 
‘white’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘spread out in circular 
shape’ (this and i] are both noted in Mizuka-
mi), either way giving ‘cloudy water in which 
rice has been washed’ (associated sense 
ii] here derives from the circular motion of 
water when rice or similar is washed in a 
container). KJ1970:780-81; OT1968:876,609; 
MS1995:v2:780-81; TA1965:653; AS2007:229. 
Mnemonic: THERE ARE A NUMBER OF 
WATER-PLANTS IN THE CLAN’S FIEF
HAN
fi ef, clan
18 strokes
藩
L1
1875
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists of 
艹 53 ‘plants’, combined with 潘 (CO, ‘cloudy 
water in which rice has been washed’; see 
Note below) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘hedge, screen, fence’, giving overall 
meaning ‘hedge, screen, wall’ around a 
house or similar. ‘Fief’ appears to be an ex-
tended sense, and ‘clan’ a further extension, 
蛮人 BANJIN　barbarian
蛮行 BANKŌ　barbarism
野蛮 YABAN　barbarism
Seal 
; traditional 蠻. Consists in one view 
of 虫 60 ‘insect, snake’ used pejoratively, 
combined with 䜌 (CO, ‘tangled thread’ or 
‘unravel tangled thread’; see Note below) 
as phonetic with associated sense taken 
in one view as ‘be in disorder/disarray’, 
giving original meaning ‘ethnic group in 
ancient southern China who worshipped 
BAN
barbarian
12 strokes
蛮
L1
1876

560  The Remaining 1130 Characters
円盤 ENBAN　disc, discus
基盤 KIBAN　base
水盤 SUIBAN　bowl
‘bowl’, with 般 as phonetic taken with associ-
ated sense either as i] ‘wash hands’ (Katō), or ii] 
‘fl at and large’, giving ‘large fl at bowl’ (Ogawa). 
Also used for a larger receptacle for washing, 
i.e. ‘tub’. The determinative was changed again 
at seal stage, this time to 木 73 ‘wood, tree’, 
presumably as a refl ection of the material used, 
as also 鎜, which has the ‘metal’ determina-
tive 金 16. At the block script stage, 盤 came 
back into use, and this is the standard form 
found in modern Japanese texts. KJ1970:783; 
OT1968:693; GY2008:1280; MS1995:v1:684-5; 
QX2000:179. 
Mnemonic: CARRY A BOWL ON A TRAY
BAN
tray, board, bowl, 
plate
15 strokes
盤
L1
1877
OBI 
; bronze 
; seal 
. The OBI form has 口, 
here representing not ‘mouth’ 22 but ‘vessel’, 
combined with 般 1867 (‘carry’; ‘all’) as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘wash hands’, giving 
‘receptacle for water used for handwashing’. At 
the bronze stage, 口 was changed to 皿 300 
妃殿下  HIDENKA　Her Majesty
王妃   ŌHI　queen, empress
皇太子妃 KŌTAISHIHI　crown princess
Ogawa as having the associated meaning 
‘accompany’. Such divergence is noted by 
Mizukami, who takes seal stage 己 as in error 
for 巳. Later, the semantic range of ‘woman 
accompanying husband’, was restricted 
to mean ‘empress, queen (consort)’. Note: 
Katō interprets the element combining 
with 女 originally (bronze stage) to be not 
己 but the lower element occurring in令 
633 (‘order, rule’, q.v.), which depicts a bent 
figure. GY2008:348; SS1984:708; KJ1970:798; 
OT1968:252; MS1995:v1:312-3.   
Mnemonic: WOMAN THINKS HERSELF A 
PRINCESS
HI
queen, princess
6 strokes
妃
L1
1878
Bronze 
; seal 
. Analyses vary. Deter-
minative is 女 37 ‘woman’, but views 
differ over second element, which is seen 
variously including 子 27 ‘child’  (Gu), or 巳 
(‘serpent’ or ‘fetus’) as original way of writing 
祀  ‘worship’ (Shirakawa), or – more typi-
cally – 己 866 (‘I/me, self’, originally ‘end of 
long thread’). The last is seen by Katō and 
snakes’ (Ogawa). In another analysis (Katō), 
䜌 is treated as representing an outsider 
clan name derived from the name of the 
ancestral deity (fire deity) of the ancient 
state of Chu (楚); again, 虫 is considered to 
have been incorporated pejoratively. Both 
analyses treat ‘outsiders, barbarians’ as an 
extended use of 蠻. Mizukami lists proposed 
bronze equivalents also. Note: 䜌 is com-
prised of 絲 ‘fine thread’ (later written in 
abbreviated form as 糸 29 ‘thread’), with 言 
118 (‘words; speak’). Confusingly, depending 
on the associated sense, overall meaning is 
taken as either ‘unravel tangled thread’, or 
‘thread becomes tangled’. Both interpreta-
tions, listed in Mizukami, reflect ambiva-
lence regarding the meaning of 䜌 already 
at the time of compilation of Shuowen. MS19
95:v2:1156-7,1212-13,1012-13; OT1968:887; 
KJ1970:897-8; ZY2009:v4:1253. We suggest 
taking the upper part 亦 – which is actually 
an NJK meaning ‘again’ – as ‘strange red’ (赤 
48), i.e. ‘reddish’. 
Mnemonic: ‘REDDISH  INSECT’ REFERS TO A 
BARBARIAN

The Remaining 1130 Characters  561
彼氏 kareSHI　he, boyfriend
彼女 kanoJO　she, girlfriend
彼岸 HIGAN　equinox, goal
as i] ‘ahead, move forward’, giving ‘move 
forward on road ahead’ (Katō), or ii] ‘be-
come separated’, giving original meaning 
‘depart’ (Ogawa); Ogawa takes senses such 
as ‘that, that person’ as loan uses of 彼; ‘goal’, 
though, is perhaps an extended sense of i] 
above. Mizukami lists a proposed bronze 
form. MS1995:v1:482-3; QX2000:278,341; 
KJ1970:471-2; OT1968:348. 
Mnemonic: BOYFRIEND GOES IN FOR 
LEATHER  
HI, kare, kano, ano
he, that, goal
8 strokes
彼
L2
1879
Seal 
. Has 彳 131 ‘go; road’ added to 
皮 396 ‘leather, hide, skin’ (orig meaning: 
‘remove animal hide with hands’) serving 
as phonetic with associated sense taken 
披見 HIKEN　perusal
披歴 HIREKI　disclosure
披露 HIRŌ　announcement
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 扌 34 
‘hand’, with 皮 396 ‘leather, hide, skin’ (original 
meaning ‘remove animal hide with hands’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘split, cleave’, 
giving ‘open with the hands’. GY2008:599-600; 
OT1968:409; SS1984:709. 
Mnemonic: SKIN ON HAND OPENED UP
HI
open, disclose
8 strokes
披
L1
1880
卑下 HIGE　humility
卑屈 HIKUTSU　baseness
卑近 HIKIN　common
by contrast, takes this graph as originally 
showing a hand holding an oval-shaped 
tool for levelling and pounding earth. 
Ogawa treats ‘low’ as an extended sense, 
as do Gu and Tōdō. ‘Humble; despise’ may 
be seen as extended senses from ‘low’, but 
Shirakawa, sees ‘humble’ as extended sense 
from use of 卑 as a marker of the causative 
(‘make [to do]’). GY2008:661; TA1965:513-6; 
SS1984:710; OT1968:141. Awkward mne-
monically but suggest 田 as ‘field’ 63, and 
‘ten’ 十 35, plus two extra ‘bits’.
Mnemonic: MEAN AND LOWLY PERSON 
PICKS UP BITS FROM TEN FIELDS
HI, iyashii/shimu
humble, lowly, mean, 
despise 
9 strokes
卑
L1
1881
Bronze 
; seal 
. Taken in one view as 
originally showing a hand holding a wine 
vessel with a handle (Tōdō takes the vessel 
to be flattish in shape), giving ‘hold (flattish) 
wine vessel’ (Gu, Tōdō). Shirakawa also sees 
bronze form as showing something flattish, 
but a wine ladle, not a wine vessel. Ogawa, 
疲労  HIRŌ　fatigue
疲れ目  tsukareme　eyestrain
旅疲れ tabizukare　travel fatigue
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 疒 404 
‘sick-bed, sickness’, with 皮 396 (‘leather, 
hide, skin’) as phonetic with associated 
sense taken as i] ‘become tired’, giving 
‘become tired through sickness’ (Ogawa), or 
ii] ‘become weak’, giving ‘weakened physi-
cal strength’ (Katō), or iii] ‘sloping, leaning’, 
HI, tsukareru
tire, exhaustion
10 strokes
疲
L2
1882

562  The Remaining 1130 Characters
被害者 HIGAISHA　victim
被服  HIFUKU　covering, coating
被告人 HIKOKUNIN　defendant
Seal 
. Has 衤/衣444 ‘clothing’, with 皮 396 
(‘leather, hide, skin’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘cover’, thus ‘garment to cover the 
body’. By extension, ‘wear’, then by further 
extension ‘receive, sustain’. TA1965:660; 
SS1984:712; OT1968:903.
Mnemonic: SUSTAINED BY WEARING 
CLOTHES TO COVER SKIN
HI, kōmuru, ōu
sustain, cover, wear, 
receive
10 strokes
被
L2
1883
開扉 KAIHI　door opening
門扉 MONPI　doors of gate
扉絵 tobiraE　frontispiece
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 戸 120 
‘door’, with 非 794 (‘not, fault’; originally 
wings) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken as ‘open’, giving ‘opening doors’ (Oga-
wa), or ii] ‘divide/separate into two’, giving 
‘doors which separate and open to right and 
left’ (Tōdō), or – in much similar vein - iii] ‘line 
up/arranged to right and left’, giving ‘doors 
which move to right and left’ (Shirakawa). 
OT1968:399; TA1965:726-8; SS1984:713. 
Mnemonic: A DOOR IS NOT A DOOR!? MUST 
MAKE THE FRONT PAGE!
HI, tobira
door, front page
12 strokes
扉
L1
1884
碑銘  HIMEI　epitaph
石碑  SEKIHI　tombstone
記念碑 KINENHI　monument
These two proposed etymologies are to some 
extent complementary, as Katō notes the fi rst 
use of such upright stones was as a device to 
see the length of shadows from the sun. Later, 
such stones were used to help lower coffi  ns 
on ropes down into the ground (Shirakawa 
notes this was facilitated by holes bored in the 
stones), and from that practice there also de-
veloped the custom (Han onwards) of record-
ing details of the deceased onto the stones. 
KJ1970:799; OT1968:713; SS1984:715.
Mnemonic: TOMBSTONE IS A HUMBLE STONE    
HI
tombstone, monu-
ment
14 strokes
碑
L1
1885
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 石 47 ‘stone’, 
with 卑 1881 (‘humble’) as phonetic with asso-
ciated sense taken as i] ‘small, short’, thus ‘small 
standing/upright stone’ (Katō), or ii] ‘obstruct’, 
thus ‘stone to obstruct sunlight’ (Ogawa). 
giving ‘(person) leans over and collapses’ 
(through tiredness) (Tōdō). Despite minor 
variation, a broad consensus can be seen 
in interpretation of this graph. OT1968:678; 
KJ1970:794; TA1965:661.  
Mnemonic: SKIN SICKNESS CAN BE 
EXHAUSTING  

The Remaining 1130 Characters  563
罷業   HIGYŌ　stop-work, strike
罷免   HIMEN　dismissal
罷り出る  makarideru　withdraw
‘abandon net previously set up’ (Katō). How-
ever, Shirakawa takes 能 here as showing wild 
animal caught in net, thus meanings such as 
‘tire’ and ‘give up’, but this is at odds with his 
separate analysis of 能 as an independent 
graph, for which he takes the original meaning 
as ‘aquatic insect’. OT1968:796; KJ1970:690-91; 
SS1984:715,675. We suggest taking 能  as a 
bear.
Mnemonic: CEASE WORK AND GO, LEAVING 
BEAR IN NET
HI, makaru
cease, leave, go
15 strokes
罷
L1
1886
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 罒 (网) 570 
‘net’, with 能 787 (‘ability’, see also ‘bear’ 熊 
1252) as phonetic with associated sense taken 
as i] ‘withdraw’, thus original meaning ‘remove 
a net’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘withdraw, abandon’, thus 
回避  KAIHI　avoidance
不可避 FUKAHI　unavoidable
避妊  HININ　contraception
prets the element similar to 辛 to denote a 
curved knife (Gu also takes to be knife for 
punishment), combined with 尸 256 ‘person 
lying stretched out’ here signifying a person in 
side profi le, and a roundish element which he 
takes as a piece of fl esh cut off  from behind. 
The roundish element, similar to 口 22 ‘mouth; 
cavity, orifi ce’ and rare in OBI, becomes more 
common in bronze (typically, rather more 
rounded). In similar vein to Shirakawa there is 
an interpretation of 辟 which involves taking 
the roundish element next to a bending fi gure 
as ‘anus’, combined with 辛 (originally, ‘needle 
for tattooing criminals’, and by extension 
‘penetration’), giving ‘anal penetration’ (again 
as a form of punishment). OT1968:1016; 
TA1965:518; MS1995:v2:1312-13,1276-7; 
KJ1970:841-2; SS1984:510-11,766.  
Mnemonic: MOVE TO AVOID NEEDLE IN THE 
ANUS!!
Or: GO AWAY TO AVOID PUNISHMENT
HI, sakeru
avoid
16 strokes
避
L1
1887
OBI 
; seal 
. OBI form has 彳‘go’, combin-
ing with elements for ‘person’ and ‘needle’ 
(see Note below). At the seal stage, 彳 was 
replaced by ⻌ 85 ‘go, move’ as determinative 
(same meaning), and also by 辟 (NJK, ‘submit 
to punishment’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘lean/move to one side’, giving ‘move to 
one side and avoid’. Note: In one analysis, OBI 
forms of 辟 consist of an element equiva-
lent to 卩 41 ‘kneeling/subservient person’, 
combined with another element considered 
to be similar to 辛 1535 (originally, needle for 
tattooing foreheads of slaves and criminals) 
but diff erent, yet still meaning ‘punishment’ 
(Katō); the overall meaning is ‘submit to 
punishment; punishment’. Shirakawa inter-
尾骨 BIKOTSU　tailbone, coccyx
交尾 KŌBI　copulation
尻尾 shippo*　tail
256 (corpse or slumped fi gure) serving as an 
abbreviation for 尻 1532 ‘buttocks’, combined 
with 毛 230 ‘hair, fur’, to give ‘hair around 
buttocks’, or alternatively ‘female genitalia’. 
‘Copulate’ is an extended sense. SS1984:717; 
KJ1970:800; OT1968:295; MS1995:v1:406-08; 
AS2007:511. 
Mnemonic: TAIL IS HAIR BELOW BUTTOCKS 
Or: CORPSE HAS A HAIRY TAIL
BI, o
tail
7 strokes
尾
L1
1888
OBI ; seal 
. Interpreted as depicting the 
tail of an animal in one view (Shirakawa). 
However, it is more typically considered as 尸 

564  The Remaining 1130 Characters
眉毛 mayuge　eyebrows
眉墨 mayuzumi　eyebrow pencil
愁眉 SHŪBI　worried look
OBI 
; seal 
. OBI and bronze forms de-
pict light hair growth over an eye, or some-
times over 頁103 ‘head’, etc.; some shape 
variation. MS1995:v2:918-19; MR2007:287; 
OT1968:698. Take ‘eye’ 目 76 and 𠃜 as (‘long’ 
ノ) eyebrows 
. 
Mnemonic: LONG EYEBROWS ABOVE THE 
EYES
BI, mayu, MI
eyebrow
9 strokes
眉
L1
1889
微細 BISAI　minuteness
微光 BIKŌ　faint light
微行 BIKŌ　traveling incognito
Seal 
. Has 彳 131 ‘move, walk’, with 
 
‘tiny; faint’ (see Note below), giving ‘walk 
stealthily’. Shirakawa proposes ritualistic 
interpretation involving shamaness. Note: 
Scholars vary in their analysis of 
; several 
are very tentative. Gu takes OBI and bronze 
forms as showing woman combing her long 
hair (攵[攴] 112 is taken here as act of comb-
ing [not its usual coercion]), giving ‘small, 
fine’ as extended sense. MS1995:v1:490-91; 
KJ1970:802-03; GY2008:1053; OT1968:354; 
SS1984:720. Use ‘mountain’ 山 26, ‘table’ 兀, 
and ‘force’ 攵. 
Mnemonic: FORCED TO MOVE  TINY TABLE 
UP MOUNTAIN IN SECRET  
BI
tiny, secretive, faint, 
obscure
13 strokes
微
L1
1890
膝栗毛 hizakurige　go on foot
膝頭  hizagashira　kneecap
膝行  SHIKKŌ　go on one’s knees
examples of this graph close in shape to 膝 
are found. Note: Katō sees 卩 as a distortion 
of the seal shape (see right side of seal form 
above). He also sees 卩 as the original graph 
for ‘knee’, and 厀 to be – unusually – a form 
with 桼 added later as phonetic. Ogawa 
regards not 桼 but the similarly-shaped 
NJK 黍 (‘millet’) as the phonetic (same as-
sociated sense), though in the seal shape 
of 厀 it seems more like 桼. KJ1970:178; 
GY2008:1829; OT1968:827; SK1984:601; 
MS1995:v2:1510-12. Take 氺 as variant ‘wa-
ter’ 水 42, 𠆢 cap, and  木 73 ‘wood’. 
Mnemonic: KNEECAP IS FLESHY AND WATERY – 
MIGHT NEED A WOODEN ONE
hiza, SHITSU
knee, lap
15 strokes
膝
L1
1891
Seal (厀) 
. Seal form has 卩 41 ‘kneeling 
figure’, with what in one view is treated as 
桼 (‘sap, resin’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘bend’, thus ‘joint for bending leg’, i.e. 
‘knee’ (Katō, Gu; see Note below). Shuowen 
has 厀; later, 月 209 ‘flesh, body’ came to be 
used as determinative in place of 卩, hence 
the more familiar 膝. At clerical script stage 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  565
肘突  hijitsuki　elbow rest
肘掛  hijikake　arm of chair
肘関節 hijiKANSETSU　elbow joint
‘flesh, body’, with 寸 920 (‘hand’) best taken 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘grasp’; 
giving the overall meaning ‘that part of 
the arm that bends to hold things close (to 
chest)’, i.e. ‘elbow’. Ogawa prefers to interpret  
寸 here semantically as ‘hand’, but this analy-
sis is not as satisfactory in providing the link 
to ‘elbow’. MS1995:v2:1070-71; SS1984:593-4; 
OT1968:816.  
Mnemonic: ELBOW CONNECTS HAND TO 
BODY
hiji
elbow
7 strokes
肘
L1
1892
OBI ; seal 
. The OBI form depicts a bent 
arm, with a stroke added near the bend of 
the elbow to highlight ‘elbow’. The seal form 
is of different structure, having 月/肉 209 
二匹 NIHIKI　two animals
匹敵 HITTEKI　match
匹夫 HIPPU　ordinary people
to each other’. Regarding the discrepancy 
in the above between one roll of cloth (Gu) 
and two (Katō), Katō asserts that originally 
the practice was for just one continuous 
length of cloth to be rolled from each end, 
producing two shorter rolls. The seal form, 
which lengthens and adds extra curve to the 
bronze shapes, was further modified in block 
script so as to result in the enclosing deter-
minative 匸 (see also 1487), which some-
times has the general meaning ‘box, contain-
er’ in compound graphs. The meanings of 匹 
in early Chinese encompass ‘pair, one of a 
pair’ (leading to ‘match’), counter for horses 
(and subsequently other animals), and unit 
for measuring cloth. The original meaning 
is difficult to unravel, though ‘rear end of 
a horse’ seems unlikely. OT1968:134-135; 
SS1984:721; GY2008:73; MS1995:v1:160-61; 
KJ1970:207-08; AS2007:413. We suggest 
taking this graph in comparison with 四 28 
‘four’, in terms of being a bit short.  
Mnemonic: COUNT MATCHING 
ANIMALS – NOT QUITE FOUR?!
HITSU, HIKI
match, cloth, animal 
counter
4 strokes
匹
L2
1893
Bronze 
; seal 
. Interpretations diverge. 
In one view, depicts rear end of a horse 
(Ogawa), but bronze forms are not really 
supportive of this. Another analysis treats 
as depicting the forelegs and lower front 
bodies of two horses standing side by side, 
meaning ‘horses’ (Shirakawa). Another com-
mentator perceives the bronze forms quite 
differently, as depicting a folded roll of cloth 
stored in a cupboard or cabinet (Gu). Yet 
another analysis (Katō) treats the outer part 
of the bronze form (a form which includes a 
slightly curved inner stroke) as signifying a 
roll of cloth, and one more modestly curved 
stroke as representing a second roll, giving 
the overall meaning ‘two rolls of cloth next 
分泌  BUNPITSU　secretion
泌尿  HINYŌ　urination
泌尿科 HINYŌKA　urology
sense taken either as i] ‘fl ow out continuously’, 
giving ‘water fl ows out uninterruptedly’ (Katō), 
or ii] ‘close, shut’, giving ‘water fl ows out from 
gap once closed’ (Ogawa). Shirakawa suggests 
that 必 serves here as onomatopoeic for the 
sound of water fl owing, but this seems ques-
tionable. KJ1970:806; OT1968:568; SS1984:722. 
Mnemonic: WATER IS NECESSARILY 
SECRETED AND FLOWS
HITSU, HI
fl ow, secrete
8 strokes
泌
L1
1894
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists 
of  氵/水 42 ‘water’, combined with 必 597 
(‘necessarily’) as phonetic with associated 

566  The Remaining 1130 Characters
姫宮  himemiya　princess
姫垣  himegaki　low fence
洋子姫 YŌko Hime　Princess Yōko
extensions of ‘princess’. For the right-hand 
element of this graph quite significant shape 
variation in relation to the seal form can be 
seen from a relatively early period (Northern 
Wei [387-534]), including use of etymologi-
cally unrelated 臣 543 (modern meaning 
‘retainer/minister’ but originally a large 
eye). The graph shape 姫 was eventually 
adopted as standard in the modern period 
as part of the process of shape simplification 
and regularisation (though surprisingly not 
until after the Tōyō kanji List of 1946). Note: 
𦣝 is of disputed etymology and mean-
ing. The bronze forms are thought to orig. 
represent either railings on both sides of 
steps, or the lower jaw/chin (Mizukami), but 
a contrasting view takes the bronze forms 
as depicting a pair of breasts (Shirakawa). 
MS1995:v1:326-7,v2:1084-5; KJ1970:230,127-
30; KZ2001:523/3671;  FC1974:v1:513-4; 
SS1984:15. 
Mnemonic: MINISTER EYES PRETTY LITTLE 
WOMAN – A PRINCESS
hime, KI
princess, lady,
pretty, little
10 strokes
姫
L1
1895
Bronze ; seal (姬) 
; traditional forms 姬, 
姫. Bronze  form is treated as 女 37 ‘woman’, 
with 𦣝 (CO; for meanings, see Note below) 
as phonetic with associated sense taken 
either as i] ‘millet’, giving ‘women of the Zhou 
tribe who cultivate millet’ or (as extended 
sense) ‘Zhou clan which cultivates millet’ 
(Mizukami), or ii] representing a proper 
noun, giving ‘women of the Yi clan in the 
state of Zhou’ (Katō). ‘Lady’ and ‘princess’ ap-
pear to be loan usages in relation to i] above, 
but in analysis ii] Katō takes as extended 
senses since the Zhou clan/state ‘produced 
the Emperor’ (sic). Other meanings such as 
‘pretty’ and perhaps ‘little’ would seem to be 
漂白  HYŌHAKU　bleaching
漂着  HYŌCHAKU　drift ashore
漂流者 HYŌRYŪSHA　castaway
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists 
of 氵/水 42 ‘water’, combined with 票 598 
(‘vote; label’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘float up’ (Tōdō says ‘lightly rise up, 
appear on surface’), giving ‘float on surface’. 
KJ1970:846; OT1968:605; TA1965:275-7.  
Mnemonic: DOES A FLOATING VOTE DRIFT 
ON WATER?
HYŌ, tadayou
fl oat, drift, bob
14 strokes
漂
L1
1896
苗字 MYŌJI　family name
種苗 SHUBYŌ　seedlings
苗木 naegi　sapling
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Comprises 
艹 53 ‘plants, vegetation’ combined with 田 
63 ‘field’, taken as plants starting to grow in 
a field, and hence ‘seedlings’. OT1968:849; 
BK1957:298; TA1965:278-80. 
Mnemonic: PLANTS IN FIELD ARE 
SEEDLINGS
BYŌ, MYŌ, nae
seedling, off spring
8 strokes
苗
L1
1897

The Remaining 1130 Characters  567
描写   BYŌSHA　depiction
点描   TENBYŌ　sketch
描き出す egakidasu　delineate
as i] ‘shape’, giving ‘draw/write shape (of 
something)’, or ii] ‘copy’, giving ‘copy by hand’ 
(Katō). Note: In China, mechanical printing as 
opposed to drawing or writing by hand can 
be dated back with certainty to 868AD in the 
case of printed text, but considerably earlier 
in the case of drawings, albeit on a small 
scale at first. OT1968:421; KJ1970:847. 
Mnemonic: DRAW SEEDLINGS FREEHAND
BYŌ, egaku 
depict, draw, write
11 strokes
描
L1
1898
愛猫   AIBYŌ　pet cat
猫背   nekoze　stoop
シャム猫  SHAMUneko　Siamese cat
serving as onomatopoeic for the miaow-
ing sound made by a cat; Late Han period 
pronunciation of 貓 was mau (Schuessler). The 
form with 犭 (variant of  犬 19 in compound 
graphs, meaning dog or other creature/
beast perceived as approximating to a dog 
in some way) in place of 豸 appears to be 
of late origin; this probably evolved as a 
popular form, but eventually was adopted as 
standard in the modern period. AS2007:375; 
MS1995:v2:1226-7; OT1968:646,950. 
Mnemonic: BEAST AMONG THE SEEDLINGS IS 
A CAT, NOT A DOG
BYŌ, MYŌ, neko 
cat
11 strokes
猫
L2
1899
A late graph (later version of Shuowen). Origi-
nally, this graph was written 貓. The OBI form 
of 豸 1363 is considered to depict a carnivo-
rous wild beast about to pounce on its prey 
(Mizukami, Ogawa). The compound graph 
貓 consists of 豸 combined with 苗 1897 
(‘seedling’). Ogawa takes  苗 here as phonetic, 
海浜 KAIHIN　seashore
浜辺 hamabe　beach, shore
京浜 KEIHIN　Tōkyō-Yokohama
visitor’, q.v.) as phonetic. The associated sense 
is taken either as i] ‘edge’, giving ‘vicinity of 
water, water’s edge’ (Katō), or ii] ‘folds form’, 
giving ‘water’s edge where sand ripples form’ 
(Ogawa), and hence ‘shore, beach’. Finally, the 
standard modern Japanese form 浜, which 
tends to be regarded as a direct abbreviation 
of 濱, was in fact originally a separate graph, 
noted in the 11th century Jiyun dictionary as 
meaning ‘ditch/gully to pull boat into’. 浜 was, 
though, subsequently borrowed in popular 
usage in China as an abbreviated way of writ-
ing 濱, and this convention was adopted in 
Japan also. KJ1970:810-11; GY2008:1910,1133; 
MS1995:v2:790-91; ZY2009:v2:649,652; 
OT1968:579. We suggest taking the right hand 
form 兵 as ‘soldier(s)’ 606.  
Mnemonic: SOLDIERS COME BY WATER AND 
MAKE BEACH LANDING
HIN, hama
beach, shore
10 strokes
浜
L1
1900
Bronze antecedent (瀕) 
; seal (post-Shuow-
en) 
; traditional 濱. The bronze antecedent 
consists of 渉 1498 (‘make ripples crossing 
river/stream’) meaning ‘water/river ripples’, 
combined with頁 103 ‘head’ to give ‘knit one’s 
brow creating wrinkles like water ripples’ 
(Katō), or – in similar vein – ‘hesitate to cross 
stream and knit the brow’ (Gu). Gu treats 
‘approach water’s edge’ and ‘water’s edge’ as 
extended senses, while Katō considers to be 
loan usage. 濱, a later, post-Shuowen graph, 
is analyzed as 氵/水 42 ‘water’, combined 
with 賓 (traditional form of  賓 1901 ‘guest, 
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Consists of 扌 34 
‘hand’, combined with 苗 1897 (‘seedling’) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken either 

568  The Remaining 1130 Characters
主賓  SHUHIN　guest of honor
来賓  RAIHIN　guest, visitor 
迎賓館 GEIHINKAN reception hall
HIN
guest, visitor 
15 strokes
賓
L1
1901
zidian). Ogawa sees it as semantic and 
phonetic meaning ‘guest’, thus ‘valuables for 
guest’ and by extension ‘guest’. Another view 
sees it as possible variant of 家 89 ‘house’ 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘lay out, 
display’, thus ‘display and give valuables’, by 
extension ‘entertain guest’ (Mizukami, Katō). 
OT1968:960; MS1995:v2:1242-3; KJ1970:169; 
AS2007:167. Take 
 as ‘half-built house’.
Mnemonic: A HALF-BUILT HOUSE WELCOMES 
GUESTS WITH SHELL-MONEY
頻繁 HINPAN ni　frequently
頻発 HINPATSU　frequency
頻度 HINDO frequency
HIN
frequency 
17 strokes
頻
L1
1902
Late post-Shuowen graph. Taken as short form 
of 瀕 NJK ‘shore, verge; wrinkles like water 
ripples’ (see 浜 1900). Later, 頻 was borrowed 
for its sound value to represent another 
word meaning ‘frequent’. OT1968:1105,613; 
GY2008:1580. Take as ‘head’ 頁 103, ‘walk’ 歩 
221.
Mnemonic: WALK ON ONE’S HEAD 
FREQUENTLY!?
敏速 BINSOKU　alacrity
鋭敏 EIBIN　sharpness
機敏 KIBIN sharpness
BIN
agile, alert, quick 
10 strokes
敏
L1
1903
this is believed to reflect a shift in mean-
ing to ‘hit in busy fashion’ (Katō). Meanings 
such as ‘alert, quick’ are extended senses. An 
alternative analysis treats 毎 as depicting a 
woman with a hairpin, which combined with 
又 is taken as depicting a woman adjusting 
her hair ornament; overall meaning is then 
held to be ‘woman works busily on ritual 
matters’ (Shirakawa), though this seems to 
involve a jump in semantic progression. 
KJ1970:812; MS1995:v1:578-9; OT1968:439; 
SS1984:439. 
Mnemonic: EVERY STRIKE SHOULD MAKE 
ONE MORE ALERT
OBI 
; seal 
. OBI and bronze forms have 
又 2003 ‘hand’, with 每 (traditional form of 
毎 225 ‘each, every’) as phonetic with as-
sociated sense taken in one view as ‘work 
hard/rapidly’, giving overall sense ‘work 
busily with hands’ (Katō). At seal stage, 又 
was changed to 攴/攵 112 ‘hit, strike’, and 
瓶詰め  BINzume　bottling
花瓶  KABIN　fl ower vase
釣瓶  tsurube* well-bucket
BIN, kame
bottle, jug, jar 
11 strokes
瓶
L1
1904
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 甁 (see also 
Note 2). 缶 ‘pottery/earthenware recepta-
cle’ (originally a pictograph) was the earlier 
determinative in this graph (on right-hand 
side in the bronze form) combining with 幷 
(NJK ’put/join together’; see Note 1 below) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘fl attish, thin 
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 賓. Has 貝 10 
‘shell-money’, or in some bronze forms 鼎 
1746 ‘tripod vessel’ (both symbols of wealth), 
with a second element as phonetic. Views 
differ on 
/
 (rare graph, not in Kangxi 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  569
and fl attish’; overall meaning is ‘fl attish recep-
tacle made of thin pottery’. Subsequently, the 
meaning became more generalized to ’jug, 
bottle’, and the determinative changed to 瓦 
(5 strokes; originally, ‘earthenware object’; 
see 1091). Already in the fi rst Jōyō kanji List 
promulgated in 1923, 瓶 (with abbreviated 
left-hand shape) was adopted as standard. 
Note 1: OBI forms of 幷 (modern 并; distin-
guish from 並 977 ‘row, line’ and from 井 1575 
‘well’) show that it originally depicted two 
fi gures conceptually joined together by a 
horizontal stroke (sometimes two) partway 
up. Note 2: Kangxi zidian lists 
, with 甁 listed 
separately as a variant and noted as a popular 
equivalent. Note 3: The stroke number can 
vary depending on how it is written, but the 
modern standard graph is 11 strokes). 
GY2008:1121; MS1995:v2:1028-9,v1:446-7; 
KZ2001:2082/3671,1635/3671,1633/3671; 
AS2007:415. Diffi  cult mnemonically, but we 
suggest taking the right hand side as ‘tile’, 
which is its modern Japanese meaning, and 
the left hand side as a stylized (or odd) 井 
‘well’.  
Mnemonic: TILES, BOTTLES, JUGS AND JARS 
TAKEN OUT OF STYLISH WELL
Or: FIND JUGS AND JARS AND BOTTLES 
WHILE TILING AN ODD WELL
扶助 FUJO　aid  
扶養 FUYŌ　support
扶育 FUIKU raising children
恐怖症 KYŌFUSHŌ　phobia  
恐怖  KYŌFU　fear 
畏怖  IFU dread, awe
FU
help, support 
7 strokes
扶
L1
1905
FU, kowai
fear, afraid
8 strokes
怖
L2
1906
Bronze 
; seal 
. Consists of 扌 34 
‘hand’, combined with 夫 601 (‘man, hus-
band’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘lend a hand’, giving ‘lend a hand and help, 
help’. KJ1970:813-4; MS1995:v1:550-51; 
OT1968:405. 
Mnemonic: HANDY HUSBAND IS A HELP
Or: MAN GIVES HELPING HAND
Or: HELP SUPPORT A HANDYMAN
Usually taken based on early (OBI/bronze) 
forms as 屮 ‘plant shoot’ with 田 63 ‘field’ > 
‘seedling bed, vegetable field, plant seed-
lings’ (Ogawa, Tōdō, Gu; Shirakawa broadly 
agrees). Mizukami notes different view, tak-
ing as 父 216 (orig hand holding ax; loan use 
for ‘father’) over 用 235 ‘use’ (loan meaning), 
but early forms suggest consensus view is 
better. Either way, ‘beginning, first’ is seen 
as an extended sense, indicating beginning 
stage of horticulture or construction work. 
DJ2009:v3:867; TA1965:435; SS1984:777; 
KJ1970:814; GY2008:392; OT1968:366,667; 
MS1995:v2:870-71.
Mnemonic: FEAR WRAPS HEART LIKE CLOTH
Seal (悑) 
. Shuowen has 悑 as entry head-
ing, with 怖 noted as alternative. Has 忄164 
‘heart’, with 甫 (NJK; see Note below)/布 799 
(‘cloth’) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken as i] ‘hit,’ giving ‘chest palpitates’/‘be 
afraid’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘be afraid’ (Katō). Several 
clerical script occurrences are close in 
shape to 怖. Note: Views on 甫 diverge. 

570  The Remaining 1130 Characters
附属 FUZOKU　affi  liated
寄附 KIFU　contribution
見附 mitsuke castle gate approach
FU, tsuku/keru
attach(/ed)
8 strokes
附
L1
1908
(Katō), or iii] ‘stick/continue close together’, 
giving ‘places where land is put close up 
together’ (noted in Mizukami), or iv] ‘grant, 
bestow’, giving ‘spirits of the dead come 
down and take food with descendants’. Anal-
ysis iii] leads most directly to ‘be attached, 
attach’ as an extended sense. OT1968:1065; 
KJ1970:823; MS1995:v2:1392-3; SS1984:739.
Mnemonic: ONE GETS ATTACHED TO HILLY 
MOUNDS 
阜頭  FUTŌ　wharf
岐阜市 GIFUSHI　Gifu City  
岐阜県 GIFUKEN Gifu Prefecture
FU
hill, mound
8 strokes
阜
L1
1907
pit, with ‘hill, mound’ as an extended sense. 
Another view sees it as showing ladder for 
deities to use for descending and ascend-
ing to Heaven (Shirakawa). We provisionally 
follow ‘hill, mound’ as original meaning, and 
terraced slopes as extended sense. In com-
pound graphs, 阜 262 always occurs as 阝 as 
left-hand element, never right; to be distin-
guished carefully from 阝 376 as right-hand 
element, an abbreviation of 邑 ‘settlement, 
village’, as in 都 ‘capital’, for instance. Regard-
ing change in shape between seal and block 
script, Mizukami suggests lower element 十 
‘ten’ 35 was added – based on word-family 
association – with a meaning ‘collect, gather’; 
some support is to be found for this in Tōdō, 
who includes 十 in word-family ‘pile up 
together’. MS1995:v2:1390-91; OT1968:1063; 
KJ1970:659; MR2007:506; GY2008:661; 
SS1984:739; TA1965:796-9. We suggest taking 
main body as terraces, 十 as ‘ten’, with little 
stick on top.
Mnemonic: HILLY MOUNDS ARE TEN 
TERRACES WITH A LITTLE STICK ON TOP
OBI ; seal . Taken to have been originally 
pictograph, but views diff er as to object 
depicted. One view treats as hills at various 
levels (Mizukami, Ogawa); Ma takes ‘(natu-
rally formed) mounds’. But why are the hills 
(if that is what is they are) standing on end, 
as it were? Katō suggests earliest writing 
of this graph would have been horizontally 
oriented, but was later changed to vertical; 
Ma agrees. This seems reasonable, bearing in 
mind that orientation of graphs in OBI texts 
often fl uctuated. OBI and later forms, though, 
all have vertical orientation. Possibly this 
change occurred at a very early OBI stage, but 
at present we lack evidence. Alternatively, 
Gu takes original meaning as footholds to go 
up and down for access to a cave dwelling or 
Seal 
. Has 阝 262 ‘hill, mound’, with 付 602 
(‘attach’) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken as i] ‘small’, giving ‘small hill’ (Ogawa), 
or ii] ‘small mound’, giving ‘hill, mound’ 
訃音 FUON　news of a death
訃告 FUKOKU　obituary
訃報 FUHŌ report of a death
FU
obituary
9 strokes
訃
L1
1909
A late, post-Shuowen graph; listed in Yupian. 
Consists of 言 118 ‘words, speak’, with 卜 96/ 
1598 (‘perform divination’, see) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘hurry’. According to 
Qiu, originally the graph 赴 1910 ‘proceed to’ 
acquired the extended sense ‘rush to announce 
somebody’s death’, and this latter sense was 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  571
赴任  FUNIN　proceed to new post
赴任地 FUNINCHI　new post
赴援  FUEN go to rescue
FU, omomuku
proceed, go
9 strokes
赴
L1
1910
Seal 
. Has 走 179 ‘run’, with 卜 (‘perform divi-
nation’, see 96/1598) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense taken as i] ‘stick, adhere, get near to’, 
giving ‘hastily go and reach/ arrive’ (Ogawa), or 
ii] ‘announce’, giving ‘run and announce’, or – 
according to Qiu – ‘run and announce some-
body’s death’. This latter meaning later came 
to be represented by 訃 1909, while 赴 came 
to be used in general senses such as ‘proceed’. 
Mizukami lists a proposed OBI equivalent. 
OT1968:966; KJ1970:820; QX2000:333. 
Mnemonic: DIVINATION PROMPTS ONE TO 
PROCEED AT A RUN
浮力 FURYOKU　buoyancy
浮気 uwaki*　inconstancy
浮世 ukiyo　fl eeting world
the male perspective not necessarily with his 
wife but with the courtesans and geisha in the 
notorious pleasure quarters. (Geisha, which 
means ‘talented person’, were in fact all male 
until the middle of the 18th century.) Yoshi-
wara in Edo (early name for Tokyo) was the 
most noted of the pleasure quarters. Ukiyoe, 
which translates as ‘pictures of the fl oating 
world’, are sought after by collectors of art 
work, for they depict scenes from the pleasure 
quarters. When Westerners arrived from the 
mid 19th century, many were shocked by the 
explicitness of these pictures, which were in 
the form of woodblock prints. Note: commen-
tators are agreed that the two constituent 
elements of 孚 are 爫 319/1739 ‘hand, claw’, 
combined with 子 27 ‘child’, but diff er in their 
interpretation. Katō takes as ‘deliver newborn 
baby’, while Gu says ‘suckle infant’, and Ogawa 
interprets somewhat diff erently as ‘seize 
child with hands’, i.e. ‘captive’. KJ1970:821-2; 
OT1968:580,267; TA1965:233-5; GY2008:465. 
Mnemonic: HAND PLUCKS FLOATING CHILD 
FROM WATER
FU, uku/kabu/kaberu
fl oat, fl eeting, 
buoyant, gay
10 strokes
浮
L2
1911
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional 浮. Consists of 氵 
42 ‘water’, combined with 孚 (interpretations 
of the original meaning vary: see Note below) 
as phonetic with associated sense taken as i] 
‘fl oat’ (Katō), or ii] ‘cover’ (Ogawa), or iii] ‘en-
velop’ (Tōdō). Despite these diff erences, the 
resultant overall meaning is much the same: 
namely ‘fl oat on surface’ (Katō), ‘fl oat (so as to 
cover surface)’ (Ogawa), ‘envelop water sur-
face’ (Tōdō). The idea of fl oating, particularly 
in the Edo Period (1600-1868), is related to a 
quasi-fatalistic sense of the brevity and transi-
ence of life, hence the meaning ‘fl eeting’. It is 
also a commentary on socio-cultural values 
regarding pleasure – live for the moment, as it 
were – which included sexual relations, from 
later represented by changing determinative 
from 走 179 (original meaning in Chinese was 
‘run’, in contrast to its common meaning ‘walk, 
go’ in modern Chinese: ‘run’ in Japanese) to 言. 
QX2000:333; OT1968:920.  
Mnemonic: WORDY OBITUARY FOR A DEATH 
DIVINED

572  The Remaining 1130 Characters
切符 KIPPU　ticket
符号 FUGŌ　symbol, code
符合 FUGŌ　agreement
普通 FUTSŪ　ordinary, usual
普遍 FUHEN　universality
普及 FUKYŪ　diff usion 
(historically, a tally stick in the form of a 
bamboo stick/tablet or similar was broken 
in two to mark an agreement between two 
parties). By extension, ‘record, a sign’. Confir-
mation of the close connection between the 
word for ‘adjoin’ and the near-homophone 
‘tally’ in early Chinese is found in Schuessler. 
MS1995:v2:986-7; OT1968:749; TA1965:319-
22; AS2007:244.
Mnemonic: JOIN BAMBOO TALLIES AS A 
SIGN
FU
tally, sign
11 strokes
FU, amaneku
widely,generally
12 strokes
符
普
L2
L2
1912
1913
Bronze 
; seal 
. Consists of ⺮ 58 ‘bam-
boo’, with 付 602 (‘attach’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘join/fit together’, giving 
‘join together two pieces of tally stick’ 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
暜. Has 日 66 ‘sun, day’, with 竝 (traditional 
form of 並 977 ‘row, line’) as phonetic with 
associated sense taken as i] ‘thin, faint’, thus 
‘sunlight is faint’ (Katō) or ii] ‘spread out’, 
thus ‘sunlight extends everywhere’ (Ogawa), 
and ‘widely, generally’ as an extended sense. 
The latter view is supported by Schuessler, 
who details a relevant word-family in early 
Chinese for the phonetic element 竝 here 
which encompasses ‘spread out, be vast; 
extensively’. KJ1970:825-6; OT1968:472; 
AS2007:173. 
Mnemonic: GENERALLY, ONE DAY FOLLOWS 
ANOTHER IN A ROW
腐心 FUSHIN　take pains to
腐敗 FUHAI　decay, rot
腐れ kusare-　wretched, useless
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 肉 209 
‘meat, flesh, body’ with 府 603 (‘govt office’) 
as phonetic with associated sense taken as i] 
‘swollen and disordered’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘de-
cay’ (Katō), both giving ‘meat breaks down, 
goes bad’. OT1968:824; KJ1970:823-4. 
Mnemonic: MEAT IN GOVERNMENT OFFICE 
IS ROTTEN
FU, kusaru/reru
rot(ten), decay, bad
14 strokes
腐
L1
1914
敷設 FUSETSU　laying 
敷物 shikimono　rug
屋敷 yashiki　mansion, residence
FU, shiku
spread, lay
15 strokes
敷
L1
1915
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 攴/攵 112 
‘beat with stick’, with CO 尃 593 ‘spread out 
the fingers’ (see Note below) as semantic 
and phonetic (Ogawa; alternatively, Katō 
treats as phonetic only, with generalized 
meaning ‘spread out’ as associated sense), 
giving ‘beat (something) with stick to spread 
it out’. Left-hand element of 敷 is a vari-
ant of 尃; forms close to 敷 can be found 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  573
at clerical script stage.  Note: 尃 comprises 
寸 920 ‘hand’, with 甫 (probable original 
meaning: ‘seedling bed, vegetable field’; 
see 1906 Note) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘spread the fingers (to measure)’, 
giving ‘spread the four fingers (to measure)’. 
OT1968:443; MS1995:582-3; KJ1970:857; 
SK1984:352. Take left side as variant of 専 
925 ‘exclusive’. 
Mnemonic: BEAT A VARIED EXCLUSIVE 
SPREAD AND LAY IT OUT 
皮膚炎 HIFUEN　dermatitis
皮膚  HIFU　skin
鮫膚  samehada　shagreen, dry skin
FU, hada
skin
15 strokes
膚
L2
1916
Seal ( 臚 ) 
. Shuowen has 臚 as the entry 
heading, and notes 膚 as variant. 臚 consists 
of 月 / 肉 209 ‘fl esh, meat, body’, with 盧 (CO, 
interpretations of meaning vary; see Note 
below) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘spread, cover’, giving ‘fl esh/that which covers 
surface of the body’, i.e. ‘skin’. At the clerical 
script stage, a signifi cant change in shape took 
place, with left-hand 月/肉 commonly omitted 
and the lower element changed to 胃 447 
‘stomach’ (possibly as just a graphic variant). 
Note: occurrent OBI and bronze shapes of 盧 
vary, and interpretations vary in consequence. 
Mizukami and Katō are agreed, though, that 
盧 and 𧆨 are in essence one and the same 
graph, 皿 300 (‘bowl’) being an addition in 
some bronze occurrences. Lower element 
originally had not 田 63 ‘fi eld’, but an element 
of roughly similar shape taken to represent a 
wine container; the upper element in some 
occurrences is 虍 (originally, pictograph of 
tiger’s head – an abbreviation of the fuller 
form 虎 1301 ‘tiger’) serving as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘bend, round, concave’. In 
other occurrences the upper element is seen 
as an inverted container, and so straining 
wine is taken to be one part of the meaning.  
The overall meaning is accordingly taken by 
Mizukami and Katō to be ‘round wine container 
made of willow for strained wine’. Gu, alterna-
tively, interprets the graph as meaning ‘stove’. 
MS1995:v2:1082-3,910-11,1138-9,1140-41; 
KJ1970:824,898-9; DJ2009:v2:344; OT1968:827; 
SK1984:601. We suggest taking the lower part 
of the modern graph as 胃 447 ‘stomach, belly’.   
Mnemonic: SKIN FROM A TIGER’S BELLY
賦課 FUKA　levy, tax
賦詩 FUSHI　writing poetry
月賦 
GEPPU　monthly payment
FU
levy, tribute, ode
15 strokes
賦
L1
1917
Bronze 
; seal 
. Consists of 貝 10 ‘shellfi sh, 
shell currency’, with 武 802 (‘military, warrior’) 
as phonetic with associated sense taken 
either as i] ‘divide’, giving ‘divide up shell cur-
rency/money’ (Katō), or ii] ‘plan’, giving ‘tribute 
planned based on land and population’, and 
by extension ‘divide’ (Ogawa). Note: currency 
in early China included shells strung together, 
and also metal cast in a spade shape; QX2000 
Figure 19 includes several drawings of spade 
currency. KJ1970:820-21; OT1968:961.
Mnemonic: WARRIOR PAYS TRIBUTE IN 
SHELL-MONEY

574  The Remaining 1130 Characters
系譜 KEIFU　genealogy
楽譜 GAKUFU　musical score
年譜 NENPU　chronological record
FU
notation, genealogy
19 strokes
譜
L1
1918
Seal 
; a late graph (later version of Shuowen). 
Consists of 言 118 ‘words; speak’ (here best 
taken as ‘written words, text’), combined with 
普 1913 (‘widely, generally’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘put in order, arrange’, giving 
‘documents with material in set order’. Used for 
a range of document types such as genealo-
gies, chronological lists, and musical scores. 
SS1984:744; OT1968:944.  
Mnemonic: GENEALOGY IS WIDELY SPOKEN 
OF
侮辱 BUJOKU　insult
軽侮 KEIBU　contempt
侮慢 BUMAN　off ence, insult
舞台  BUTAI　stage 
舞子  maiko　dancing girl
振舞い furumai　behavior
OBI 
; seal 
. At the OBI stage, 舞 and 無 
620 ‘not have, not’ were written in the same 
way, originally depicting a dancing fi gure with 
what is interpreted as either holding oxtails 
(Qiu, Ma), or wearing long decorative sleeves 
(Ogawa, Shirakawa), either way giving ‘dance’ 
(possibly in a ritual sense). This graph mean-
BU, anadoru
scorn, despise
8 strokes
侮
L1
1919
BU, mau
dance, fl it
15 strokes
舞
L2
1920
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 侮. Has 亻 41 
‘person’, with 每 (traditional form of 毎 225 
‘each, every’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘ignore, ridicule, despise’, thus ‘ridicule, 
despise’. MS1995:v1:68-9; KJ1970:859; 
SS1984:745; OT1968:61; GY2008:883. 
Mnemonic: DESPISE EVERY PERSON
ing ‘dance’ was later borrowed to represent 
another word of similar pronunciation in early 
Chinese meaning ‘not be, not have, not’, and 
when this loan usage became common, 舛 
1278 (‘feet pointed away from each other’) 
was added to the graph to indicate overtly the 
original meaning ‘dance’. The idea of oxtails is 
not as bizarre as it might seem (see 無 620). 
QX2000:186-7,265; OT1968:837; MR2007:331; 
MS1995:v2:1096-8; SS1984:746-7. Take upper 
part as bound wheatsheaf. 
Mnemonic: DANCING WITH POINTED FEET 
AROUND BOUND WHEATSHEAF
封筒 FŪTŌ　envelope
封鎖 FŪSA　blockade
封建 HŌKEN　feudalism
FŪ, HŌ
close off , fi ef
9 strokes
封
L2
1921
OBI 
; seal 
. OBI and bronze forms vary 
but are broadly similar, showing a sapling, 
in some cases with 又 2003 ‘hand’ as second 
element to indicate planting. In ancient 
China planting trees often indicated a 
boundary, thus overall meaning is ‘plant 
sapling to mark boundary’; Gu considers the 
sapling is being planted on a mound. Mizu-

The Remaining 1130 Characters  575
起伏  KIFUKU　undulations
潜伏  SENPUKU　lurking
伏して  fushite　humbly
FUKU, fusu/seru
bow down, hide, 
crouch, yield
6 strokes
伏
L1
1922
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 亻 41 ‘person’ with 
犬 19 ‘dog’. Views vary. One takes as dog at 
person’s side, and so ‘conceal, hide’ (Ogawa), 
presumably in hunting context. Similarly, 
Tōdō  takes 伏 as meaning ‘dog accompanies 
owner’. In contrast, Gu takes as showing dog 
lying in wait for a chance to attack someone. 
The components are clear, but it is diffi  cult to 
establish the original meaning of this graph. 
OT1968:52; TA1965:153; GY2008:280. 
Mnemonic: PERSON CROUCHES TO HIDE 
FROM DOG
kami notes a different view that sees earth 
piled up to a cone-shaped top (instead of 
sapling), thus ‘cone-shaped altar or mound’, 
also able to indicate boundary. Support is 
found in Schuessler for most of the above 
views (‘mound, raise  earth, boundary em-
bankment’). ‘Shut, close off’ is an extended 
sense. The seal form has 又 changed to 
another graph for ‘hand’, viz. 寸 920; the 
two were not always differentiated in use in 
early texts. KJ1970:860; MS1995:v1:394-5; 
GY2008:777; OT1968:287; AS2007:237. Take 
left side as (double) piled ‘earth’ 土 64.
Mnemonic:  HAND PILES UP EARTH TO 
CLOSE OFF FIEF
覆面 FUKUMEN　mask
転覆 TENPUKU　overturn
覆水 FUKUSUI　spilt water
FUKU, ōu, 
kutsugaeru/su
overturn, cover
18 strokes
覆
L1
1924
Seal 
. Has 覀 ‘stopper, cover’ (originally a 
pictograph; not a variant of similarly-shaped 
西169 ‘west’), combined with 復 803 (‘again, 
repeat’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘wrap, envelop’, giving ‘cover’. ‘Overturn’ is a loan 
usage. MS1995:v2:1176-7; OT1968:913. We sug-
gest taking 覀 as ‘west’. 
Mnemonic: WEST OVERTURNED AGAIN! 
MUST BE COVER STORY!
振幅 SHINPUKU　amplitude
画幅 GAFUKU　picture scroll
横幅 yokohaba　breadth
FUKU, haba
width, scroll
12 strokes
幅
L2
1923
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 巾 1232 
‘piece of cloth’, with 畐 409 (‘bulbous/full wine 
jar’) as phonetic with associated sense taken 
as i] ‘swollen’, thus ‘cloth swollen sideways, 
width’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘full’ or ‘distance between’, 
thus ‘distance from left to right, width’ (Katō). 
KJ1970:828; OT1968:319. Take 畐 as ‘fi eld’ 田 63, 
one 一 1, and ‘entrance’ 口 22.
Mnemonic: ONE CLOTH SPANS WIDTH OF 
ENTRANCE TO FIELD

576  The Remaining 1130 Characters
払底   FUTTEI　shortage
払い戻す haraimodosu　refund
払い出す haraidasu　drive out
FUTSU, harau
pay, rid, sweep away
5 strokes
払
L2
1925
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
拂. Has 扌34 ’hand’, with 弗 (NJK, ‘straighten’; 
see Note below) as phonetic with associated 
sense taken as i] ‘suddenly remove’, giving 
‘push aside with the hand’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘dirt’, 
giving ‘remove dirt by hand’ (Katō). Note: the 
OBI form of 弗 is taken by Gu as depicting bent 
arrows being straightened using cord wrapped 
round them, while Shirakawa takes it to be cord 
wrapped round saplings to bind and keep them 
straight. 弗 was later borrowed as a convenient 
way of representing a grammatical function 
word of negative meaning. In older Japanese 
texts, 弗 is sometimes found used again as a 
loan – in this case on the basis of shape – for 
DORU ‘dollar’. OT1968:401; KJ1970:832; 
GY2008:598; SS1984:202. We suggest taking ム
as a nose.  
Mnemonic: HAND GIVES SWEEPING BLOW TO 
NOSE TO GET PAYMENT
沸点   FUTTEN　boiling point
沸き立つ wakitatsu　seethe
沸き出る  wakideru　gush forth 
FUTSU, waku/kasu
boil, gush
8 strokes
沸
L2
1926
Seal ; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵 42 ‘water’, 
and 弗 (‘straighten’; see 1925 Note) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘emerge suddenly, gush 
out’, giving ‘water gushes out’. Katō sees ‘boil’ 
as loan usage. The change of 弗 to ム, though 
used in 拂/払 1925, was judged too radical for 
this graph in Japan. KJ1970:832; OT1968:568. 
Suggest winding on sticks.
Mnemonic: WATER ‘UNWINDS’ BOUND STICKS 
WHEN IT BOILS 
紛失 FUNSHITSU　loss
紛争 FUNSŌ　dispute
紛々 
FUNPUN　in confusion
FUN, magireru/rasu 
magirawashii
confusion, stray
10 strokes
紛
L1
1927
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 糸 29 
‘thread’, with 分 218 ‘divide, separate’ as se-
mantic and phonetic, giving ‘thread becomes 
separated, tangled thread’; by extension, 
‘be confused’. OT1968:771; TA1965:726-9; 
SS1984:756-7.  
Mnemonic: DIVIDED THREADS GO ASTRAY, 
CAUSING CONFUSION
雰囲気 FUN’IKI　atmosphere, ambience
霧雰  MUFUN　misty air
霜雰  SŌFUN　frosty air
FUN 
atmosphere, air,
ambience, fog
12 strokes
雰
L1
1928
Seal 
. The main heading in Shuowen has 氛, 
comprising 气 ‘vapors, cloud layers’ (original 
way of writing 気12 ‘spirit’), with 分 218 (‘di-
vide’) as phonetic with associated sense ‘dis-
perse’, giving ‘dispersed vapors, atmosphere’, 
and also ‘mist’. 雰 is noted as an alternative 
form, the determinative 气 replaced by 雨 3 
‘rain’, likewise combining with 分 as phonetic. 
DJ2009:v1:31; MS1995:v2:726-8; SS1984:757; 
AS2007:235; OT1968:1085. 
Mnemonic: RAIN DIVIDES THE ATMOSPHERE

The Remaining 1130 Characters  577
噴火  FUNKA　volcanic eruption
噴水  FUNSUI　fountain
噴出す  fukidasu　spurt out
古墳 KOFUN　tumulus
墳墓 FUNBO　tomb
円墳 ENPUN　burial mound
FUN, fuku
emit, spout, gush
15 strokes
噴
L1
1929
FUN
(burial-) tomb
15 strokes
墳
L1
1930
takes 賁 as onomatopoeic, with overall mean-
ing ‘make a noise with the mouth/ through 
the nose’, and regards ‘gush out, exude’ as loan 
usage. Note: 賁 is comprised of 貝 10 ‘shell’ 
combined with 卉 as abbreviation of 奔 1991 
(‘run, bustle’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘gush out, swell up’, giving ‘beautiful large shell’ 
(Mizukami). Schuessler gives the meaning 
‘ardent’ for 賁, and this may be an extended 
sense. OT1968:196; SS1984:757; KJ1970:833; 
MS1995:v2:1240-41,v1:304-5; AS2007:160. Take 
upper right as 3 x ‘ten’ 十 35 = 30.  
Mnemonic: THIRTY SHELLS EMITTED FROM 
OPENING  
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 土 64 ‘earth’, 
with 賁 (see 1929 Note) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘swell up’, giving ‘mound, 
embankment’; usually used of burial mounds. 
KJ1970:833-4; OT1968:226; TA1965:731. Take 賁 
as 3 x ‘ten’ 十 35 = 30 and ‘shell’ 貝 10.
Mnemonic: THIRTY SHELLS FOUND IN 
EARTHEN BURIAL MOUND 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 口 22 
‘mouth/opening’, with 賁 (‘beautiful large 
shell’; see Note below) as phonetic with as-
sociated sense taken in one view as ‘exhale 
suddenly’, giving ‘blow out vigorously’ (Ogawa). 
In similar vein, Shirakawa takes associated 
sense to be ‘emerge on the outside’, and notes 
there tends to be some force involved. Katō 
憤慨 FUNGAI　indignation
憤怒 FUNDO　rage
義憤 GIFUN　righteous indignation
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has ‘heart, feel-
ings’ 忄 164, with 賁 (see 1929 Note) as pho-
netic with associated sense taken as i] ‘gush, 
exude’, thus ‘vent one’s anger’ (Ogawa), or ii] 
‘full’, thus ‘one’s heart is full’ (Katō). Schuessler 
supports latter, positing semantic range ‘swell’ 
to ‘full of annoyance’. OT1968:388; KJ1970:833; 
AS2007:236. Take 賁 as 30 shells.
Mnemonic: THIRTY SHELLS CAUSE 
INDIGNANT FEELINGS
FUN, ikidōru
indignant, angry
15 strokes
憤
L1
1931
丙種  HEISHU　C class/grade
甲乙丙  KŌOTSUHEI　ABC/123
丙 
 hinoe　3rd calendar sign
OBI 
; seal 
. Views diff er, including ‘altar 
for sacrifi ces to deities’ (Ogawa, Katō), ‘tail 
fi n of fi sh’ (Tōdō), and ‘rump, hindquarters’ 
(Matsumaru). As for ‘rump, hindquarters’, some 
bronze forms include rounded strokes and 
do lend themselves to such an interpretation. 
‘Altar for sacrifi ces’, perhaps depicted in side 
HEI, hinoe
C, 3rd
5 strokes
丙
L1
1932

578  The Remaining 1130 Characters
合併 GAPPEI　merger
併用 HEIYŌ　joint use
併発 HEIHATSU　complication
HEI, awaseru
unite, join
8 strokes
併
L1
1933
Seal 
; traditional 倂. Has 亻 41 ‘person’, 
with 幷 (traditional form of 并 NJK ‘put/join 
together’), giving ‘(two persons) lined up/put 
together’ (see 1904 Note 1). Katō and some 
others treat it as variant of 幷/并 with亻added 
as determinative, which no doubt is the case 
(see Note below). The meanings of 并 and 併 
are the same (‘join together’), but in modern 
Japanese texts 併 is used rather than 并. Note: 
Mizukami lists proposed OBI equivalent for 併 
which lacks 亻, identical to OBI equivalents for 
並 977 ‘row, line’). MS1995:v1:74-5,446-7, 
v2:980-81; OT1968:61; KJ1970:836-7. Take 并 as 
stylized ‘well’ 井 1575.  
Mnemonic: UNITE TO GET PERSON OUT OF 
FANCY WELL
横柄 ŌHEI　arrogance
家柄 iegara　family pedigree
長柄 nagae　long handle, spear
OBI ; seal 
. Has 木 73 ‘wood’, with 丙 (‘3rd’, 
1932, q.v.) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘take in hand’, thus ‘wood to take in hand’, i.e. 
‘handle’. Other meanings would seem loan 
usage. OT1968:500; GY2008:801.  
Mnemonic: HANDLE IS MADE OF ‘C’ GRADE 
WOOD
HEI, gara, e
handle, pattern, one’s 
nature
9 strokes
柄
L1
1934
土塀  DOBEI　earthen wall
板塀  itaBEI　board fence
塀越し  HEIgoshi　over a fence 
HEI
fence, wall, screen
12 strokes
塀
L1
1935
A kokuji ‘made in Japan’ graph. Traditional form 
has 屛 as right-hand element, comprising 尸 
256 ‘prone body/corpse’, but here with prob-
able meaning ‘hanging curtain’, combined with 
幷/并 (‘put together’; see 1904 Note 1) as pho-
netic with associated sense taken in one view 
as ‘fl at’, thus ‘fl at curtain/screen’, and ‘hedge/
fence’ as extended sense (Mizukami). Mizukami 
notes another analysis with associated sense 
profi le, would seem the likely original mean-
ing, and Katō gives several forms he believes to 
be OBI, featuring an animal head on projected 
altar along with two hands making the of-
fering; however, textual sources for these are 
not clear: e.g., no such forms are listed in the 
extensive OBI catalogue by Matsumaru and 
Takashima (MT1993). Despite this, ‘altar’ seems 
a strong contender. Mizukami lists this possible 
interpretation with the meaning ‘chopping 
board in form of a stand with legs for ritual 
off erings’. The seal form diff ers in having a top 
horizontal stroke. As Katō suggests, this may be 
to represent the sacrifi ce. The meaning ‘third 
of the Heavenly Stems’ (a traditional Chinese 
ordering system of ten) is a loan use of 丙. 
OT1968:19; KJ1970:939-40; MT1993:164,391-2; 
MS1995:v1:10-11; TA1965:444. Take as 内 207 
‘inside’ and 一 1 ‘one’.
Mnemonic: THIRD ONE INSIDE IS RATED ‘C’

The Remaining 1130 Characters  579
紙幣 SHIHEI　paper money
貨幣 KAHEI　coin, money
幣帛 HEIHAKU　Shintō off erings
HEI, nusa
off erings, money
15 strokes
幣
L1
1936
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
form has 敝 (CO, ‘damaged clothing; be dam-
aged/destroyed’; see Note below)as upper 
element. The graph consists of 巾 1232 ‘(piece 
of) cloth’, combined with 敝 as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘off er up’, giving ‘cloth for 
off ering’. The meaning was later generalized 
to ‘gift’, and by further extension to ‘currency’. 
Prayer off erings to the gods of Shintō shrines 
include in particular cloth, and rope, along with 
cut and folded paper strips, the latter typically 
interwoven into an intricate pattern. It has 
been a tradition to make off erings on particular 
occasions, often (at least originally) specifi c to 
particular localities, such as in some eastern 
parts of Japan (and probably elsewhere) there 
are prayers and off erings to the mountain dei-
ties on New Year’s Day, in this particular case 
bundles of straw being hung in trees. Note: 敝 
consists of 攴/攵 112 ‘strike, cause to do, force’, 
combined with 㡀, a CO ‘rip, tear’ as semantic 
and phonetic, giving ‘tear cloth’; by extension, 
‘damaged clothing; be damaged/destroyed’. 
㡀 is comprised of 巾 ‘cloth’, with the four short 
downward diagonal strokes representing 
rips or tears. MS1995:v1:580-81; KJ1970:837; 
OT1968:320; TA1965:652; SS1984:763. 
Mnemonic: FORCED TO TEAR CLOTH STRIPS 
AS OFFERINGS TO THE SHRINE
弊社 HEISHA　our (humble) fi rm
疲弊 HIHEI　exhaustion
弊害 HEIGAI　evil, abuse
Seal ( 獘 ) 
; 弊 is a late, post-Shuowen graph. 
獘 consists of 犬 19 ‘dog’, with 敝 (‘damaged 
clothing; be damaged/destroyed’; see 1936 
Note) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘become tired, collapse’, giving ‘dog collapses’ 
(probably during hunting). ‘Exhaustion’ is an 
extended sense. Katō takes ‘evil, abuse’ as a 
HEI 
evil, exhaustion, be 
humble
15 strokes
弊
L1
1937
loan usage; HEI- as a prefi x in Japanese (older 
literary style) meaning ‘my/our’ (humble con-
notation) is also probably a loan usage. The 
popular form 弊, with the erroneous lower 
element 廾 (‘hands off ering up’, see e.g. 1639) 
as determinative appears to be a development 
in block script; in clerical script we fi nd another 
example of a divergent writing, this one still 
quite close to 獘 in shape, having 大 56 
‘big’ instead of dog 犬. MS1995:v2:844-5; 
DJ2009:v3:798; KJ1970:838; SK1984:488; 
OT1968:336-7.
Mnemonic: EVILLY FORCED TO TEAR 
MY HUMBLE CLOTH WITH BOTH 
HANDS – EXHAUSTING
taken as ‘avoid’, thus ‘hanging curtain for pri-
vacy’. Ogawa takes 尸 as ‘(living) body, person’, 
with 幷/并 as phonetic with associated sense 
‘withdraw, retreat’, giving overall meaning 
‘retreat’. Presumably 塀 was devised originally 
to denote ‘wall of packed earth’ 土 64, but later 
became generalized to ‘wall, fence, enclosure’. 
MS1995:v1:412-3; OT1968:297. Take 并 as styl-
ised ‘well’ 井 1575. 
Mnemonic: CORPSE FOUND IN FANCY WELL 
SCREENED BY EARTHEN WALL

580  The Remaining 1130 Characters
隠蔽 INPEI　concealment
掩蔽 ENPEI　obscuration
遮蔽 SHAHEI　cover, shelter
煎餅 SENBEI　rice cracker
餅膚 mochihada　smooth white skin
焼餅 yakimochi　toasted rice cake; jealousy
HEI, ōu
cover, conceal
15 strokes
蔽
L1
1938
HEI, mochi
rice cake
15 strokes (餅)
餅
L1
1939
netic with associated sense ‘cover’, giving 
‘vegetation covers’. ‘Cover’ is the generalized 
sense; meanings such as ‘conceal, deceive’ are 
extended senses. OT1968:872; TA1965:658-61; 
AS2007:164. Take the elements as ‘grass’ 艹, 
‘force, coerce’ 攴/攵 (see 112); and 㡀 as ‘torn 
bits of cloth’. 
Mnemonic: FORCED TO TEAR CLOTH TO 
GRASS-LIKE BITS FOR CONCEALMENT
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
form has 幷 1904 q.v. as the right-hand ele-
ment here. Consists of  食 163 ‘food, eat’– here 
with the meaning ‘glutinous rice’ – in its left-
hand variant form ⻞, combined with 幷/并 
(‘put together’; see 1904 Note 1) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘fl at, fl attish’, giving ‘fl at-
tish rice cake’. The handwritten form with 飠 
is 14 strokes. OT1968:1118; TA1965:513-9. We 
suggest taking 并 as stylised ‘well’ 井 1575.
Mnemonic: THERE’S FOOD IN THE FANCY 
WELL – RICE CAKES 
壁画 HEKIGA　mural
岸壁 GANPEKI　rock face
壁紙 kabegami　wallpaper 
HEKI, kabe
wall
16 strokes
壁
L2
1940
companying Note) as phonetic with associat-
ed sense taken either as i] ‘prevent, obstruct’, 
thus giving ‘build up earth and keep wind 
out’ (Ogawa; Shirakawa says ‘avoid’) or ii] 
‘surround, enclose’ (Katō), either way giving 
‘enclose/cut off with earth surround’; overall 
meaning is ‘wall’, now in a general sense. 
OT1968:226; SS1984:767; KJ1970:842-3.
Mnemonic: BUILD EARTHEN WALL AS 
PUNISHMENT
完璧 KANPEKI　perfect, fl awless
(no other current compounds) 
HEKI, tama
jade, splendid, 
precious stone 
18 strokes
璧
L1
1941
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 玉 15 ‘jade, precious 
stone’, with 辟 (‘punishment’; see 1887 Note) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘fl at’, giving 
‘fl at jade disc’ (originally with centre hole). 
‘Splendid’ is extended sense.  OT1968:661-2; 
SS1984:767; TA1965:513-7; GY2008:1981.
Mnemonic: PUNISHED FOR HAVING 
JADE? – A SPLENDID PRECIOUS STONE 
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists of 
‘earth, ground’ 土 64, with 辟 (NJK, ‘submit to 
punishment; punishment’; see 1887 and ac-
Seal 
. Consists of 艹 53 ‘plants, vegetation, 
grass’, combined with 敝 ‘damaged clothing’; 
‘be damaged/destroyed’, see 1936) as pho-

The Remaining 1130 Characters  581
盗癖 TŌHEKI　kleptomania
習癖 SHŪHEKI　habit 
癖毛 kusege kinky/frizzy hair 
軽蔑 KEIBETSU　contempt, scorn
侮蔑 BUBETSU　contempt, scorn 
蔑視 BESSHI look down on, scorn
HEKI, kuse
habit, kink 
18 strokes
癖
L1
1942
BETSU, sagesumu
scorn, despise, 
contempt
14 strokes
蔑
L1
1943
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 疒 404 ‘sick-
ness, sick bed’, with 辟 (‘punishment’: see 1887 
Note) as phonetic with associated sense ‘build 
up’ (Katō), giving ‘foods build up undigested’. 
‘Lean too far and become unbalanced’ (later 
僻); ‘fancifulness, eccentricity, habit’ are loan us-
ages. SS1984:767; KJ1970:843; OT1968:682. 
Mnemonic: SOME KINKY HABITS ARE SICK 
AND NEED PUNISHING
see’, giving ‘cannot see well’ (Tōdō; see Note 
below). By extension, ‘very little’, and by 
further extension ‘hold in very low regard, 
despise’. Note: the weapon element in OBI 
and bronze is difficult to determine with 
certainty, though it does look like either 伐 
or 戈 ‘halberd’ (there are a number of graphs 
to which this interpretation is applicable). 
At the seal stage, 戌 appears to have been 
the one that was adopted as standard in this 
graph, and it seems likely that Tōdō’s analy-
sis relates to the seal stage. MS1995:v1:530-
34,v2:1130-31; KJ1970:848; TA1965:667-70. 
Take 𦭝 as eyebrows, as is original meaning.
Mnemonic: KNIT EYEBROWS IN CONTEMPT 
OVER A HALBERD
OBI ; bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 蔑. OBI 
form has 苜 ‘eyebrows’, here meaning just 
‘eyes’, with – in one analysis – 伐 1857 (‘at-
tack, cut down’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘not have/exist’, giving ‘blind, cannot 
see’ (Katō). In similar vein, the phonetic ele-
ment is taken as 戌 476 (type of halberd,) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘little, cannot 
偏見 HENKEN　prejudice
偏向 HENKŌ　inclination 
偏屈 HENKUTSU bigotry
HEKI, katayoru
incline, bias 
11 strokes
偏
L1
1944
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists 
of 亻 41 ‘person’, combined with 扁 (CO; 
‘inscribed board over gate or door’: see also 
1945) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘one side, lean over’, giving ‘person leaning 
over’; Katō suggests this would have been 
common in ancient times, as a result of 
illness or other occurrences. Meaning later 
generalized to ‘lean over, incline’. OT1968:75; 
KJ1970:851; GY2008:1274. 
Mnemonic: BIASED PERSON INCLINED TO 
LEAVE WRITING TABLETS AT DOOR 

582  The Remaining 1130 Characters
遍在  HENZAI　ubiquity
普遍性 FUHENSEI　universality 
一遍  IPPEN once 
HEN, amaneku
widely, everywhere
12 strokes
遍
L1
1945
Seal (徧) 
; 遍 is a late, post-Shuowen 
form. Shuowen has only 徧, consisting of 
彳 131 ‘go, move, road’, combined with 扁 
(CO; ‘inscribed board over gate or door’: 
see also 1944) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘spread’, giving ‘spread everywhere’. 
遍 appears to be a block script develop-
ment, as clerical script occurrences are all 
徧. DJ2009:157; TA1965:654-7; OT1968:1009; 
SS1984:772-3.  
Mnemonic: MOVE WIDELY, LEAVING WRITING 
TABLETS EVERYWHERE
哺乳  HONYŪ　lactation, suckling
哺乳類 HONYŪRUI　mammals 
哺育  HOIKU suckling, nursing 
捕獲  HOKAKU　seizure
捕鯨  HOGEI　whaling 
捕われ toraware captivity
舗装 HOSŌ　paving
店舗 TENPO　shop, store
薬舗 YAKUHO pharmacy
HO, kukumu
hold in mouth, feed, 
suckle
10 strokes
哺
L1
1946
HO, toraeru/wareru
tsukamaru/maeru
seize, capture(/d)
10 strokes
捕
L2
1947
HO
shop, spread, pave
15 strokes
舗
L1
1948
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists of 
口 22 ‘mouth’, combined with 甫 (NJK; see 補 
981 regarding original meaning of 甫) as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘grab, seize’, giving 
‘put food in mouth’. Meanings such as ‘include; 
nourish’ are extended senses. OT1968:184; 
SS1984:778. Suggest taking 甫 as ‘use’ 用 235, 
‘ten’ 十 35, and a ‘drop’.
Mnemonic: USE MOUTH TEN TIMES TO 
SUCKLE – AND SPILL A DROP
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 扌 34 
‘hand’, with 甫 (NJK; see 補 981 for original 
meaning of 甫) as phonetic with associated 
sense taken as i] ‘seize, grab’ (Ogawa), ii] ‘cover 
and take’ (Katō), or iii] ‘bind’ (Shirakawa); 
in all cases, ‘seizure’ is explicit or implicit. 
OT1968:416; KJ1970:856; SS1984:778. Take 甫 
as ‘use’ 用 235, ‘ten’ 十 35, plus ‘dot’. 
Mnemonic: USE TEN HANDS TO CAPTURE A 
DOT!?
Bronze (鋪) 
; seal (鋪) 
; 舗 is a later, 
post-Shuowen graph. 鋪 has 金 ‘metal’ 16, 
with 甫 (see 補 981 for original meaning of 
甫) as phonetic with associated sense taken 
as i] ‘attach closely’/‘take hold of’ (Mizu-
kami), or ii] ‘spread out, set out’ (Ogawa, 
Shirakawa, Gu; Schuessler also lends sup-
port). Either way, overall sense is ‘attach/set 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  583
募集 BOSHŪ　recruitment
募金 BOKIN　fund raising 
応募 ŌBO response to call
BO, tsunoru
gather, raise, enlist, 
intense
12 strokes
募
L2
1949
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 力 78 
‘strength, eff ort’, with 莫 (‘sunset’; see 809 
and 982) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken as i] ‘seek, look for’, giving ‘seek assidu-
ously’ (Ogawa, Tōdō), or ii] ‘obtain’, giving 
‘endeavor to obtain’ (Katō). Either way it 
results in seeking to gather, giving a number 
of extended senses. OT1968:129; TA1965:449-
53; KJ1970:775. Take 大 as variant ‘big’ 大 56, 
‘grass’ 艹 53, and ‘sun’ 日 66. 
Mnemonic: INTENSE BIG EFFORT TO RAISE 
AND GATHER GRASS WHILE SUN SHINES
out metal fitting’ (on a gate/door to facilitate 
opening and closing). ‘Shop’ seems a later 
meaning, possibly through metal door/gate 
fittings indicating type of trade, then by 
extension the premises. ‘Spread, set out’ is 
seen in words such as 舗装 HOSŌ ‘paving’. 舗 
is a later form replacing 金 with 舍/舎 727 
‘house, quarters’. MS1995:v2:1368-9,1096-7; 
SS1984:779-80; AS2007:173; OT1968:196; 
GY2008:1439. Take 甫 as ‘use’ 用 235, ‘ten’ 十 
35, plus ‘dot’.
Mnemonic: USE TEN DOTTED PAVERS TO 
SPREAD OUT FOR SHOP QUARTERS
慕情 BOJŌ 　longing
敬慕 KEIBO　respect, admiration
愛慕 AIBO love, yearning
簿記 BOKI　book-keeping
名簿 MEIBO　register (of names)
帳簿 CHŌBO register, lease
BO, shitau/washii
yearn, adore, hold 
dear 
14 strokes
BO, HAKU
register, record 
19 strokes
慕
簿
L1
L1
1950
1951
Bronze 
; seal 
. Consists of 心 164 ‘heart, 
mind’ in the abbreviated form ⺗, com-
bined with 莫 (‘sunset’; see 809 and 982) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘seek, look 
for’, giving ‘long for, feel drawn towards’. 
MS1995:v1:522-4; OT1968:384; KJ1970:774. 
We suggest taking 大 as variant ‘big’ 大 56, 
‘grass’ 艹 53, and ‘sun’ 日 66.
Mnemonic: BIG YEARNING IN HEART TO LIE 
ON SUNNY GRASS
says ‘thin bamboo tablets bound together’). 
Bamboo tablets were commonly used as a 
writing material before the invention of paper 
in China (true paper was invented there at the 
beginning of the 2nd century AD), and bound 
together to form volumes. 簿 came to be used 
in a semantically restricted range covering 
bound volumes of a utilitarian nature such as 
record books. OT1968:759; SS1984:782. 
Mnemonic: RECORD WATER SPREADING 
OVER BAMBOO REGISTER 
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Consists of ⺮ 
58 ‘bamboo’, combined with 尃 (CO, ‘spread 
out the fi ngers’; see 1915 Note) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘bind together’, giving 
‘bamboo tablets bound together’ (Shirakawa 

584  The Remaining 1130 Characters
芳香 HŌKŌ　fragrance
芳志 HŌSHI　your kindness 
芳紀 HŌKI girl’s age 
HŌ, kanbashii
fragrant, good, you(/r) 
7 strokes
芳
L1
1952
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists of 艹 
53 ‘plant, vegetation’, combined with 方 223 
(’side, direction’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘emit, spread’, giving ‘fragrance of vege-
tation is emitted/spreads’. MS1995:v2:1110-11; 
TA1965:439; OT1968:845.  
Mnemonic: THE GRASS ON YOUR SIDE HAS A 
GOOD FRAGRANCE
邦画 HŌGA　Japanese painting
連邦 RENPŌ　federation
本邦 HONPŌ our country  
HŌ
country, Japan 
7 strokes
邦
L1
1953
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 阝 376 ‘settlement, 
village’, with 丰 (CO; orig. [OBI] a pictograph 
of luxuriant vegetation) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘plant tree as boundary 
marker’, thus ‘area with established/marked 
boundaries’.  Later used for a very large area, 
viz. ‘state, country’. MS1995:v2:1320-21; 
OT1968:1017. Take  as bent telegraph pole. 
Mnemonic: BENT TELEGRAPH POLES IN 
VILLAGES IN THE COUNTRY OF JAPAN?
奉仕 HŌSHI　(a) service 
奉納 HŌNŌ　off ering
信奉 SHINPŌ faith, belief  
抱括   HŌKATSU　comprehensive
抱懐   HŌKAI　cherish, entertain 
抱き合う  dakiau hug one another
HŌ, BU, tatematsuru
off er, respectful 
8 strokes
奉
L1
1954
HŌ, (i)daku, kakaeru
embrace, hug, hold, 
entertain
8 strokes
抱
L2
1955
is no longer a meaning for this graph. Ex-
tended senses include ‘respectful; serve’. Note: 
The element in bronze showing a pair of hands 
is taken as 収 (orig. sense probably ‘search for 
and capture’; see 898) by Katō and also Qiu, but 
the shape in bronze can alternatively be inter-
preted as 廾 ‘off er up’ (see e.g. 1639) which also 
shows a pair of hands with upward orientation; 
Gu tends towards the latter view, and is even of 
the view that 廾 is the early way of writing 奉. 
QX2000:232; MS1995:v1:302-3,460-61,566-7; 
GY2008:25; OT1968:247; TA1965:319-23; 
AS2007:239. For mnemonic, suggest taking 
 as ‘two’ 二 65 and ‘big’ 大 56, and 
 as club 
with nails through.
Mnemonic: RESPECTFULLY OFFER CLUB WITH 
TWO BIG NAILS THROUGH IT 
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 扌 34 ‘hand’ 
with 包 611 ‘envelop, wrap’, giving ‘envelop 
with the hands/arms’, ‘embrace’ (also abstract). 
OT1968:410; KJ1970:761-2; TA1965:231-4.
Mnemonic: TO EMBRACE IS TO ENVELOP 
WITH THE ARMS  
Bronze 
; seal 
. Bronze shows pair of 
hands (収 or 廾; see Note below) holding 丰 
1953, taken as luxuriant vegetation (Ogawa) 
or as phonetic with associated sense ‘move up’ 
(Tōdō), giving ‘(respectfully) off er up’. At seal 
stage, extra (redundant) hand was added be-
neath, giving block script 奉 (i.e. bottom three 
strokes of 奉 are a variant of 手 34 ‘hand’). 
Depending on perspective of person involved 
in the action, this meant either ‘(respectfully) 
give’ or ‘(respectfully) receive’, though the latter 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  585
気泡  KIHŌ　air bubble
発泡  HAPPŌ　foaming 
泡立つ awadatsu bubble, froth
HŌ, awa
froth, bubble, foam
8 strokes
泡
L1
1956
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists of 
氵 42 ‘water’, combined with 包 611 ‘envelop, 
wrap’ as semantic and phonetic, giving ‘that 
which envelops water surface’, i.e. ‘foam’. 
Tōdō interprets slightly diff erently, includ-
ing in his word-family ‘envelop, swollen up in 
round fashion’, but with essentially the same 
overall meaning. TA1965:231-4; OT1968:570; 
SS1984:786. 
Mnemonic: WATER ENVELOPED IN FROTHY 
BUBBLES OF FOAM
胞子 HŌSHI　spore 
同胞 DŌHŌ　brothers, brethren
細胞 SAIBŌ cell (biology)
HŌ
placenta, womb
9 strokes
胞
L1
1957
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists of 
月 209 ‘fl esh, meat; body’, combined with 包 
611 ‘envelop, wrap’, giving ‘body part that en-
velops infant at birth, placenta’. OT1968:820; 
SS1984:787; TA1965:231-4.
Mnemonic: THE WOMB IS A PART OF THE 
BODY THAT ENVELOPS
俸給 HŌKYŪ　salary, pay
年俸 NENPŌ　annual salary 
俸禄 HŌROKU stipend, pay
模倣   MOHŌ　imitation
模倣者  MOHŌSHA　imitator 
倣い削り  naraikezuri profi ling
HŌ
salary, pay
10 strokes
俸
L1
1958
HŌ, narau
imitate, follow
10 strokes
倣
L1
1959
(Ogawa). Another analysis worth considering 
(based on Schuessler), though, is 奉 being 
used here for ‘receive’ (another of its early 
meanings; see 1954), with 亻 ‘person’ added, 
giving ‘that which a person receives’, i.e. ‘sala-
ry, pay’. OT1968:72; GY2008:1072; AS2007:239. 
As with 1954, we suggest taking 
 as ‘two’ 二 
(65) and ‘big’ 大 (56), and 
 as club with nails 
through.  
Mnemonic: PERSON HAS TO USE CLUB WITH 
TWO BIG NAILS TO GET HIS PAY
(‘side, direction’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘similar’, giving ‘appearance of person is 
similar to that of another’ (Katō, Gu). Ogawa, 
in contrast, regards 倣 as being comprised of 
亻 ‘person’, with 放 414 (‘release’) as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘imitate’, giving 
‘imitate someone’. DJ2009:v2:643; KJ1970:764; 
GY2008:286-7; OT1968:72.  
Mnemonic: RELEASED PERSON MUST IMI-
TATE AND FOLLOW OTHERS
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Consists of 奉 
1954 ‘off er’, combined with 亻 41 ‘person’. 
In one view, 奉 is regarded as semantic and 
phonetic meaning ‘service’, thus ‘help given to 
a person in return for service’, i.e. ‘pay, wages’ 
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Treatments 
diverge. Shuowen has 仿 but not 倣, and Katō 
makes the inference that 倣 is a later variant. 
仿 comprises 亻 41 ‘person’ with 方 223 

586  The Remaining 1130 Characters
主峰  SHUHŌ　main peak
連峰  RENPŌ　mountain range 
峰打ち  mineuchi with back of sword
HŌ, mine
peak, top
10 strokes
峰
L1
1960
夂 ‘foot’, a determinative sometimes taken 
as having the connotation ‘upwards, high’ 
(Mizukami, Katō), with 丰 (see 1953) ‘luxuri-
ant vegetation; (vegetation) thrusts upwards’ 
taken in one view as semantic and phonetic, 
giving ‘thrust upwards’ (this interpretation 
noted in Mizukami). KJ1970:862; OT1968:304; 
TA1965:322; MS1995:v1:284-5. We suggest 
taking 夂 as ‘sit crosslegged’ and 丰 as tel-
egraph pole (also 1953).  
Mnemonic: SIT CROSSLEGGED ON 
TELEGRAPH POLE ON MOUNTAIN PEAK
Seal 
; late graph (later version of Shuowen). 
Has 山 26 ‘mountain’, with 夆 (‘thrust upwards, 
revolt; meet, encounter’; see Note below) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘sharp point/
tip’, thus ‘pointed summit’. Note: 夆 comprises 
砲丸 HŌGAN　cannon ball
鉄砲 TEPPŌ　fi rearms 
大砲 TAIHŌ　big gun, cannon
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Originally written 
礮 (CO, itself a post-Shuowen graph). 砲 has 
石 47 ‘rock/stone’, with 包 611 (‘envelop’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘send fl ying, 
hurl’, thus ‘catapult device to hurl rocks a long 
distance’. Later used for ‘cannon’. 砲 is noted 
in Kangxi zidian as the popular form of 礮. 
ZY2009:v3:857; KJ1970:762; OT1968:711.
Mnemonic: ENVELOPED IN STONES FROM 
CANNON 
HŌ
gun, cannon
10 strokes
砲
L1
1961
崩壊  HŌKAI　collapse
雪崩れ nadare*　avalanche
山崩れ yamakuzure　landslide
蜂蜜  hachiMITSU　honey
蜂起  HŌKI　revolt, uprising
蜂の巣  hachinosu　hive, hornets’ nest
two, be destroyed’, giving ‘mountain crum-
bles’; meaning then generalized to ‘crumble, 
be destroyed’. There is a very minor meaning 
‘die’ (used of emperors) which is an extended 
sense. Note: By extension ‘pair of valuable 
items’, and by further extension ‘friends; 
throng together’. MS1995:v1:418-9,636-8; 
KJ1970:860; OT1968:305. Take 朋 as two 
moons / months 月 18.
Mnemonic: MOUNTAIN CRUMBLES IN JUST 
TWO MONTHS
HŌ, kuzureru/su
crumble, collapse
11 strokes
HŌ, hachi
bee, wasp, hornet
13 strokes
崩
蜂
L1
L1
1962
1963
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
崩. It consists of 山 26 ‘mountain’, combined 
with 朋 (originally [OBI], depiction of multiple 
strings of shell currency; see Note below) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘break/split in 
Seal ( 蠭 ) ; a late graph (Shuowen). The seal 
form has CO 䖵 ‘insect (generic)’, with 逢 (‘meet, 
encounter’; see Note below) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘sharp tip’, interpreted in one 
view as ‘insect with sharp tip’, i.e. ‘bee, wasp’ 
(Ogawa). Tōdō, though, looks to interpret dif-
ferently, as referring to a cone-shaped swarm 
of bees around a queen-bee. In block script, the 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  587
飽和  HŌWA　saturation
飽食  HŌSHOKU　satiation
飽き性  akiSHŌ　fi ckleness
eat’, with 包 / 包 as semantic and phonetic in 
its original meaning ‘swell up’, giving ‘stom-
ach grows through eating’, and by extension 
‘become satiated, tire’. Note: the element 巳 
in 包 – later modifi ed to 己, giving 包 – origi-
nally represented an infant in the womb, not 
a snake; OBI occurrences of the two are very 
similar (if not identical in some cases, with 
meaning distinguished only by context) 
and hence easily confused. OT1968:1116; 
MS1995:v2:1456-8; GY2008:688. 
Mnemonic: TIRED OF WRAPPED FOOD
HŌ, aku/kiru/kasu
tire, satiate
13 strokes
飽
L1
1964
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
form has the older left-hand equivalent of 飠, 
viz. ⻞, combined with a right-hand element 
包 (traditional form of 包 ‘envelop, wrap’ 611) 
(see Note below). Consists of ⻞ 163 ‘food, 
graph has the same structure but is simplifi ed 
in shape to 虫 60 ‘insect’, with 夆 as phonetic 
(same associated sense as explained in 1960 
Note: i.e. sharp, point, tip’). Note: 逢 consists of 
辶/⻌ 85 ‘walk along a road, go’, with 夆 (‘thrust 
upwards, revolt; meet’) as phonetic with as-
sociated sense ‘come together’, giving original 
meaning ‘two people approach and meet/
encounter each other on a road’ (Mizukami). 
OT1968:888; TA1965:319-23; MS1995:v2:1296-7; 
GY2008:1600. As with 1960, we suggest taking 
夂 as ‘sit crosslegged’ and 丰 as telegraph pole. 
Mnemonic: SIT CROSSLEGGED ON TELE-
GRAPH POLE TO GET AWAY FROM BEES AND 
SIMILAR INSECTS!
褒章   HŌSHŌ　medal
褒美   HŌBI　praise, reward
褒め言葉 homekotoba　praise
縫合  HŌGŌ　stitching
縫い物 nuimono　needlework
縫い目  nuime　seam, stitch
HŌ, homeru
praise, reward
15 strokes
褒
L1
1965
HŌ, nuu
sew, stitch
16 strokes
縫
L1
1966
Seal ( 襃 ) 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
form: 襃. Has 衣 444 ‘garment’, with a middle 
element that in seal stage corresponded to 孚 
(‘deliver newborn infant’, etc. – see 1911 Note) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘swell up’, 
thus ‘garment with big exaggerated sleeves’ 
(Ogawa); Tōdō broadly agrees. 褒 seems to 
be block script onwards; Kangxi zidian has 襃. 
Modern form (1923 Jōyō kanji List onwards) 
has 保 808 (‘preserve’) sandwiched between 
‘split garment’. DJ2009:v2;677; OT1968:908; 
TA1965:234; SK1984:647.
Mnemonic: EARN PRAISE FOR PRESERVING 
GARMENT, EVEN IF IT IS SPLIT
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 糸 29 
‘thread’, with 逢 ‘come together’ (see 1963) as 
semantic and phonetic, giving ‘join (fabric) 
with thread’. OT1968:789; TA1965:323. As with 
1960 and 1963, we suggest taking 夂 as ‘sit 
crosslegged’ and 丰 as telegraph pole. 
Mnemonic: SIT CROSSLEGGED ON 
TELEGRAPH POLE, SEWING THREADS

588  The Remaining 1130 Characters
貧乏 BINBŌ　poverty
欠乏 KETSUBŌ　dearth
耐乏 TAIBŌ　austerity
BŌ, toboshii
scarce, destitute
4 strokes
乏
L1
1967
scrutiny raises question marks. Qiu has doubts. 
Shirakawa suggests the graph originally 
showed a corpse laid out face up, but this too 
is doubtful. The graph’s very simplicity makes 
it hard to interpret at present. OT1968:25; 
GY2008:100; QX2000:206; KJ1970:787-8; 
MS1995:v1:20-21,702-3. We suggest a zigzag.
Mnemonic: LIFE OF A DESTITUTE LIKENED TO 
A ZIGZAG PATH
多忙 TABŌ　very busy
繁忙 HANBŌ　pressure of work
忙殺 BŌSATSU　‘work to death’
BŌ, isogashii 
busy
6 strokes
忙
L2
1968
Very late graph. Has 忄 164 ‘heart, mind’, with 
亡 985 (‘die’) as phonetic with associated 
sense taken as i] ‘scatter’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘vague, 
distant’ (Shirakawa), or iii] ‘duties; unsettled’ 
(Katō), thus original meaning ‘feelings are 
unsettled’. Shirakawa notes fi rst used for ‘busy’ 
from Tang and Song dynasties. OT1968360; 
SS1984:795; KJ1970:771-2. 
Mnemonic: HEART DEATH DUE TO BEING 
TOO BUSY
坊主 BŌZU*　priest
坊や BŌya　boy
坊間 BŌKAN　‘around town’
妨害   BŌGAI　obstruction
妨害物  BŌGAIBUTSU　obstacle
妨げ無し  samatagenashi　without a hitch
Seal 
; late graph (later version of Shuowen). 
Has 土 64 ‘earth, ground’, and 方 223 ‘side, 
direction, square’. Taken in one view as se-
mantic and phonetic meaning ‘square’, giving 
‘square-shaped division/plot of land’ (Ogawa). 
A diff erent analysis takes 方 as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘plot of land’ and 土, giving 
‘plot of land’ (Shirakawa); ‘town’ is an extended 
BŌ
priest, boy, town
7 strokes
BŌ, samatageru
hamper, obstruct
7 strokes
坊
妨
L2
L1
1969
1970
large-scale sense. Shirakawa notes that 坊 
was used to denote plots of land – typically 
square – in a city divided up in terms of a 
traditional grid system. In turn, 坊 came to be 
applied in a Buddhist context for the divisions 
of space in a temple (including rooms), and the 
chief priest was known as 坊 主 BŌZU, a term 
which later came to be used as a general word 
meaning ‘(Buddhist) priest’; ‘boy’ seems to be 
a generalized sense deriving from ‘young boy 
priest’. ‘Town’ is now quite rare as a meaning. 
OT1968:214; SS1984:795. 
Mnemonic: BOY-PRIEST LIVES EARTHY LIFE 
‘ON THE SIDE’ IN TOWN 
Seal 
. Has 女 37 ‘woman’, with 方 223 
(‘side, direction’) as phonetic with associated 
sense taken in one view as ‘obstruct’ (Ogawa; 
Tōdō says ‘hold hands out to both sides and 
obstruct’), giving ‘woman who obstructs’ or 
‘one who extends hands to both sides and 
prevents others from approaching a woman’ 
Bronze 
; seal 
. Etymology unclear. Bronze 
and seal forms are often seen as mirror images 
of bronze and seal for 正 43 (‘correct’), but 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  589
女房 NYŌBŌ　wife
房々 
fusafusa　fl eecy
房室 BŌSHITSU　chamber
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 戸 120 
‘door’, here in the sense ‘building’, combined 
with 方 223 (‘side’) as semantic and phonetic 
meaning ‘side’, giving ‘(small) side rooms in a 
building’ (of a communal nature). Extended 
senses include ‘building, house’, and people 
who live there – specifi cally, family members, 
particularly ‘wife’ (Gu). Minor sense ‘tuft, fl eece’ 
may be loan usage. OT1968:398; TA1965:442; 
SS1984:796; GY2008:732-3.
Mnemonic: DOOR TO ONE SIDE LEADS TO 
WIFE’S ROOM
BŌ, fusa
wife, room, tuft
8 strokes
房
L1
1971
脂肪   SHIBŌ　fat
脂肪過多 SHIBŌKATA　obesity
脂肪油  SHIBŌYU　fatty oil
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 月 209 
‘meat, body’, with 方 223 (‘side, direction’) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken as i] 
‘swell up’ (Ogawa), ‘taut and bloated’ (Tōdō), 
giving ‘grow fat/corpulent’, or ii] ‘white’, giving 
‘white fl esh’, i.e. ‘fatty tissue’ (second associ-
ated sense given by Tōdō). OT1968:817; 
TA1965:430-32,439-44.
Mnemonic: FAT IS FOUND AT SIDE OF MEAT
BŌ
fat 
8 strokes
肪
L1
1972
(both interpretations are listed in Mizukami). 
In another analysis, 方 is treated as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘vilify, calumnify’, 
giving ‘woman who vilifies others’ (Katō). 
In either case, sense became generalized 
and not gender-specific, and with ‘obstruct’ 
as the principal meaning. Mizukami lists 
a proposed OBI equivalent. OT1968:253; 
TA1965:443; MS1995:v1:318-9; KJ1970:763. 
Mnemonic: WOMAN AT SIDE CAUSES OB-
STRUCTION
某氏  BŌSHI　a certain man
某所  BŌSHO　a certain place
大田某 Ōta-nanigashi　a certain Mr Ōta
though, treats 某 differently, claiming that 
upper element is not 甘 but 曰 1048 ‘speak’, 
giving a proposed overall meaning relating 
to placing prayer texts to the deities in a 
container on a tree. This view is unconvinc-
ing, as the upper element in bronze and seal 
equivalents of 某 clearly corresponds to 甘, 
not 曰. The consensus view is the one to fol-
low here. The sense ‘a certain …’ is a loan us-
age. OT1968:214; GY2008:783; KJ1970:756-7; 
SS1984:797.
Mnemonic: A CERTAIN SOMEONE IS SWEET 
ON FRUIT FROM TREE
BŌ, BAI, nanigashi
a certain-, some-
9 strokes
某
L1
1973
Bronze 
; seal 
. Usually taken as 木 
73 ‘tree, wood’, with 甘 1139 ‘sweet’ in its 
original meaning ‘put in the mouth’, giving 
‘tree fruit which pregnant women like to 
eat’ on account of its acidity. Ogawa and Gu 
take this as ‘plum’, while Katō sees it in more 
general terms as ‘acidic fruit’. Shirakawa, 

590  The Remaining 1130 Characters
冒険 BŌKEN　adventure
感冒 KANBŌ　a cold, fl u
冒頭 BŌTŌ　opening, start (text etc)
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 
. Has 目 76 
‘eye’, with 冃; the latter element – probably 
originally a pictograph – represents a cover-
ing for the head coming down as far as the 
eyes, hence ‘headgear’.  By extension ‘cover’; 
‘attack’ and ‘risk’ are loan usages. 日 as top 
element in 冒 is a late modification serving 
simply to regularize the shape. KJ1970:771; 
GY2008:841; MS1995:v1:110-11; OT1968:698. 
Take 日 as ‘sun’ 66. 
Mnemonic: DEFY SUN IN THE EYE IN RISKY 
ATTACK
BŌ, okasu
defy, risk, attack
9 strokes
冒
L1
1974
解剖   KAIBŌ　dissection
解剖学  KAIBŌGAKU　anatomy
死体解剖 SHITAIKAIBŌ　autopsy
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen).  Has 刂 198 
‘knife/cut’, with 咅 (‘about to split open’, etc.; 
see 1839 Note) as phonetic with associated 
sense taken as i] ‘be divided into two’ (Ogawa, 
Tōdō), or ii] ‘open up’ (Katō), either way giv-
ing ‘divide, cut up’.OT1968:119; TA1965:158; 
KJ1970:759; SS1984:798. Suggest take 咅 as 
‘stand’ 立 77 and 口 22 as ‘opening/entrance’.
Mnemonic: STAND AT ENTRANCE AND GET 
CUT UP BY KNIFE
BŌ
divide, cut (up) 
10 strokes
剖
L1
1975
紡機  BŌKI　spinning machine
紡毛  BŌMŌ　carded wool
紡績工 BŌSEKIKŌ　spinner
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 糸 29 
‘thread’, with 方 223 (‘side, direction’) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken in one 
view as ‘join together’, giving ‘combine fi bers to 
make thread’ (Ogawa). Alternatively, associ-
ated phonetic sense of 方 here is taken to be 
‘raise up’, referring to the upward movement 
of thread in the spinning process (Shirakawa). 
OT1968:771; SS1984:798-9. 
Mnemonic: SPIN THREADS ON THE SIDE
BŌ, tsumugu
spin (yarn)
10 strokes
紡
L1
1976
傍聴 BŌCHŌ　attendance
傍観 BŌKAN　looking on
傍注 BŌCHŪ　margin notes
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Views diff er. 
One view has 亻 41 ‘person’ with 旁 (NJK, 
originally meaning ‘bring two boats alongside 
each other’, thus ‘person in charge of boats’, 
i.e. ‘boatman’). ‘Side’ is then seen as extended 
sense derived from 旁 (Katō). Alternatively, 旁 
is taken as meaning ‘everywhere, side’, with 亻 
BŌ, katawara
side, beside(s)
12 strokes
傍
L1
1977

The Remaining 1130 Characters  591
帽子 BŌSHI　hat
帽章 BŌSHŌ　cap badge
学帽 GAKUBŌ　school cap
Late, post-Shuowen graph; traditional 帽. Has 
巾 1232 ‘cloth’, with 
 1974 (‘risk, attack’;  
itself originally meant ‘headgear’) as seman-
tic and phonetic meaning ‘cover’, thus ‘hood, 
skullcap’. Later, headwear in general. Katō sug-
gests 帽 was devised to represent the meaning 
‘headgear’once 
 became established to write 
meanings such as ‘risk; attack’. OT1968:319; 
KJ1970:771; TA1965:238; GY2008:1436. Take 日 
as ‘sun’ 66, 目 ‘eye’ 76. 
Mnemonic: WEAR CLOTH CAP TO SHADE 
EYES FROM SUN
BŌ
cap, headgear
12 strokes
帽
L2
1978
全貌 ZENBŌ　full story/picture 
風貌 FŪBŌ　looks, appearance
変貌 HENBŌ　transformation
outer form or appearance, hence the sense 
‘form, appearance’ (Shirakawa). 豸 (1363, 
wide semantic range including ‘predatory 
wild beast’ and ‘crawling insect’) is an ele-
ment added later (Qiu notes that some see 
this as abbreviation of 豹 [NJK, ‘leopard, 
panther’]), apparently with a phonetic func-
tion. OT1968:951; TA1965:280; SS1984:795-6; 
QX2000:299; MS1995:v2:1226-9. Take 白 as 
‘white’ 69.
Mnemonic: PERSON WITH WHITE MASK HAS 
APPEARANCE OF WILD BEAST
BŌ
form, appearance
14 strokes
貌
L1
1979
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Original 
graph is taken to be 皃, showing a person 儿 
41 wearing a face mask (白) (Ogawa, Tōdō). 
In one view, taken as mask for a deceased 
person, the mask representing emphasis on 
膨大  BŌDAI　swelling
膨満  BŌMAN　infl ation (air/gas)
膨脹弁 BŌCHŌBEN　expansion valve
Note:  Based on OBI occurrences of 彭, the 
element 彡 here is best treated as visual 
representation of reverberations from a 
drum (CO 壴 is the stylized shape), not as 
the more common same-shaped element 
彡 as in 形 115 ‘shape, form’ and 彩 1375 
‘color, colorful’. OT1968:828; SS1984:802; 
GY2008:1367,1896,781; MR2007:313-4; 
SS1984:790. Take 壴 as ‘samurai’ 士 521, 
 as 
strange 豆 ‘bean’ 379; and 彡 as ‘hairs’.
Mnemonic: SAMURAI’S BODY SWELLS AFTER 
EATING STRANGE HAIRY BEANS
BŌ, fukuramu/reru
swell, expand
16 strokes
膨
L1
1980
Late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 月 209 
‘meat, body’, with 彭 (‘drum reverberations’; 
see Note below) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘swell up’, giving ‘flesh/stomach 
swells up’; then generalized to ‘swell up’. 
added to indicate meaning of ‘side’ (Ogawa). 
Schuessler confi rms meanings ‘side’ and 
‘everywhere’ for 旁, and ‘side’ may well be the 
extended sense as Katō suggests, but there 
is the question of why亻 ‘person’ would be 
added to denote the meaning ‘side’. The fi rst 
analysis seems more persuasive. KJ1970:764; 
OT1968:77; AS2007:409. Take 旁 as ‘side’ 方 
223 and 
 as ‘stand’ 立 77 strangely.
Mnemonic: PERSON STANDING STRANGELY 
TO THE SIDE

592  The Remaining 1130 Characters
陰謀 INBŌ　plot, intrigue
謀反 MUHON*　insurrection
謀略 BŌRYAKU　stratagem
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 言 118 
‘words; speak’, with 某 1973 (‘a certain…’) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken as i] 
‘look for, try to fi nd’, thus ‘look for the truth in 
someone’s words’ or ‘seek opinion’ (Mizukami, 
Katō), or ii] ‘read (someone’s mind)’, thus ‘plan’ 
(Ogawa). Later the graph acquired a negative 
connotation. MS1995:v2:1208-9; KJ1970:757; 
OT1968:939; AS2007:391. 
Mnemonic: PLOT DEPENDS UPON A CERTAIN 
WORD – GOOD STRATAGEM
BŌ, MU, hakaru, 
hakarigoto
plot, stratagem
16 strokes
謀
L1
1981
頬張る  hōbaru　fi ll one’s cheeks
頬紅  hōbeni　rouge
頬骨  hōbone　cheekbone
both sides of the face’, i.e. ‘cheek(s)’. Note:  
OBI form for 夾 shows two smaller people 
standing either side of big person with arms 
outstretched. Qiu gives original meaning as 
‘on two sides’; extended to ‘put between, in-
sert’ (later written 挟 1221, q.v). QX2000:187; 
SS1984:1100,189; OT1968:246; AS2007:300. 
Take as ‘man’ 夫 601 and  70 丷 as ‘away’. 
Mnemonic: MAN IS BIG-HEADED AND GETS 
AWAY WITH IT – WHAT CHEEK!
hō, hoho, KYŌ
cheek
15 strokes
頬
L1
1982
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
頰 (16 strokes). Has 頁 103 ‘head’ (here 
‘face’), with 夾 ‘on both sides; put between’ 
(see Note below), giving ‘that which is on 
純朴  JUNBOKU　simple, honest
素朴  SOBOKU　plain, simple
朴の木  hō no ki　type of magnolia
giving ‘tree bark’. It seems that another 
word having the same pronunciation in 
early Chinese meaning ‘as yet untouched/
unworked natural tree wood’, once writ-
ten 樸 (NJK), was sometimes written by 
substituting 朴 instead. Used in this way, 
朴 acquired an extended sense from 樸, i.e. 
‘naïve, unsophisticated, artless’. TA1965:317-
9; DJ2009:v2:463,467; GY2008:229-30. 
Mnemonic: MAGNOLIA WOOD SIMPLY 
CRACKS
BOKU, hō 
simple, artless, type of 
magnolia
6 strokes
朴
L1
1983
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 木 73 
‘tree, wood’, with 卜 96 (‘crack’, ‘divination’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘snap, break’, 
親睦 SHINBOKU　friendship
睦言 mutsugoto　lovers’ talk
和睦 WABOKU　reconciliation
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 目 76 
‘eye’, with 坴 627 (CO; ‘earth mound’, ‘clods of 
earth’, see) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken as i] ‘follow’, giving ‘submissive gaze/ 
look’ (Katō), or ii] ‘soften, moderate’, giving – 
in similar vein – ‘softened gaze’ (Ogawa). By 
extension, ‘harmonious, intimate’. KJ1970:45; 
OT1968:702; GY2008:1583. 
Mnemonic: GETTING CLODS OF EARTH IN 
THE EYE IS FRIENDLY!?
BOKU, mutsu(majii)
harmonious,
friendly
13 strokes
睦
L1
1984

The Remaining 1130 Characters  593
公僕 KŌBOKU　public servant
奴僕 DOBOKU　manservant
僕ら 
BOKUra　we / us
a slave. Another analysis, by Katō, is that of 
a slave or servant (often a former prisoner) 
carrying a chamber pot and its contents. In 
ancient China – in fact till quite recently – a 
servant of a noble (including the emperor) 
would regularly take the contents of his 
master’s chamber pot for examination by a 
physician in order to ascertain the master’s 
state of health. (There was also a similar 
practice in medieval Europe.) Given the 
presence of the visual particles in the early 
form, it is more likely that one of the last 
two interpretations, i.e. winnowing or the 
chamber pot, would seem more convincing. 
Whatever the activity, the person concerned 
is of low status, hence senses such as ‘slave, 
servant’, and by further extension ‘I/me 
(humble)’. (In terms of humility, compare 
for example with pre-war English phrases 
such as “I remain your humble/obedient 
servant”.) MS1995:v1:80-82; OT1968:80; 
SS1984:805,803; TA1965:317-9; KJ1985:49. 
This interesting graph is awkward mnemoni-
cally but we suggest taking  as a variant of 
(= odd) 業 278 ‘profession’. 
Mnemonic: I AM A PERSON WITH AN ODD 
PROFESSION – MANSERVANT
BOKU, shimobe
manservant, I/me
14 strokes
僕
L1
1985
OBI 
; seal 
. Interpretations vary. One 
has亻 41 ‘person’ with  (CO; implement 
for striking or gouging) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘hit, strike’. These two ele-
ments are taken as having several different 
overall meanings: ‘rough person who hits 
animals’ (Mizukami), or ‘driver who whips 
horses’ (Ogawa). Alternatively, Shirakawa 
considers it might have originally denoted 
a person who prepares the ground for 
building foundations, but more likely has a 
ritual connotation, taking the OBI form as 
depicting someone wearing a ceremonial 
cap and decorative tail for such a purpose. 
A rather different view is that of Tōdō, who 
takes the OBI form to depict a man with a 
tattooed head (which in itself usually indi-
cates a slave or servant or prisoner) shaking 
grain through a winnowing basket, with a 
tail added to indicate lowly status such as 
筆墨 HITSUBOKU　‘pen and ink’
白墨 HAKUBOKU　chalk
墨絵 sumiE　ink drawing
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
墨. Has 土 64 ‘soil, earth’, with 黒/黑 137 
‘black’ (originally, ‘soot, lampblack’) as seman-
tic and phonetic, giving ‘ink cake (soot and 
soil as main ingredients)’. MS1995:v1:278-9; 
KJ1970:864; OT1968:224; GY2008:1816. 
Mnemonic: BLACK EARTH MAKES GOOD INK
BOKU, sumi
ink, inkstick
14 strokes
墨
L1
1986
打撲 DABOKU　strike, blow
相撲 sumō*　sumo
撲殺 BOKUSATSU　beat to death
against the material concerned. The overall 
original meaning is ‘hit using the hand’, which 
was then generalized to ‘hit, strike, beat’. 
Note: regarding the irregular reading for sumo 
in the example words, the two graphs mean 
‘mutual striking’. KJ1970:773; MS1995:v1:560-61; 
OT1968:430. As with 1985, we suggest taking  
as a variant of (= odd) 業 278 ‘profession’.  
Mnemonic: STRIKING WITH THE HAND IS AN 
ODD PROFESSION – EXCEPT SUMO
BOKU
strike, beat
15 strokes
撲
L1
1987
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists of 手/
扌34 ‘hand’, combined with  (CO; implement 
for striking or gouging) as phonetic, here serv-
ing as onomatopoeic for the sound of impact 

594  The Remaining 1130 Characters
沈没 CHINBOTSU　sinking
日没 
NICHIBOTSU　sunset
没後 BOTSUGO　after death
was then added as a determinative, resulting 
in 沒. Several commentators prefer to ana-
lyse  沒 differently, taking it as consisting of 
氵 ‘water’ combined with 
 as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘sink, disappear’, giving 
‘sink down into whirlpool’ (Katō, Mizukami). 
The connotation ‘go round, whirlpool’ is sup-
ported by the seal form. If the interpretation 
‘sink down into whirlpool’ is followed, ‘sink, 
die, not exist’ may be regarded as extended 
senses. Note: The right-hand element in the 
modern form is 殳, normally a determina-
tive meaning ‘strike (with weapon)’ (170), 
but in 没 this is instead a later, potentially 
confusing regularization in shape of 
 with 
meaning as explained above. GY2008:501; 
OT1968:563; KJ1970:866; SK1984:441; 
MS1995:v2:738-9; SS1984:906. As a mne-
monic we suggest taking 殳 as ‘strike’. 
Mnemonic: STRIKE WATER AND SINK, 
DISAPPEAR, AND DIE
BOTSU, BOSsuru
sink, disappear, die
7 strokes
没
L1
1988
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
form: 沒. Interpretations diverge.  The seal 
form points to the original way of writing 
this graph as corresponding to 𠬸. The top 
element in 𠬸 is an old form of 回 92 ‘go 
round’, with 又 2003 ‘hand’ beneath. This is 
interpreted in one view as ‘put hand into 
water and take something out’ (Gu, Ogawa 
[Ogawa takes to be water swirling round]); 
alternatively, taken as ‘try to pull out person 
drowning’ (Shirakawa). 
 is a later (block 
script) variant of 𠬸, and quite close in shape 
to 殳 as in the modern form 没 (see Note 
below). At the seal stage, 氵/水 42 ‘water’ 
勃起 BOKKI　erection
勃々 
BOTSUBOTSU　energetic
勃発 BOPPATSU　sudden outburst
ated sense ‘emerge suddenly’, thus ‘emerge 
vigorously’; by extension, ‘suddenly’. Note: 
孛 has 子 27 ‘child’, with 
 here as stylized 
equivalent of earlier 𣎵 (‘luxuriant vegeta-
tion’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘emit, put out’. GY2008:204; OT1968:127,267; 
KJ1970:475; TA1965:730; SS1984:807. Take 
 as horned helmet. 
Mnemonic: CHILD WITH HORNED HELMET IS 
SUDDENLY STRONG AND ACTIVE
BOTSU
sudden, active
9 strokes
勃
L1
1989
外堀　sotobori　outer moat
釣堀　tsuribori　fi shing pond
堀川　horikawa　canal
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 土 64 
‘earth, ground’, with 屈 1249 (‘crouch’) as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘hole, cave’, giving 
‘dig hole in ground; hole, cave’. In Japanese, 
has acquired the narrower sense ‘moat, ditch’. 
OT1968:217; AS2007:337. 
Mnemonic: CROUCH IN EARTHEN MOAT
hori, KUTSU
moat, ditch, canal
11 strokes
堀
L1
1990
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 力 78 
‘strength’, with 孛 (‘emergent buds; emit’; 
see Note below) as phonetic with associ-

The Remaining 1130 Characters  595
奔走 HONSŌ　bustle
奔放 HONPŌ　uninhibited
出奔 SHUPPON　absconding
‘vegetation, grass’) acting here as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘hurry’, also giving 
‘run fast’ as overall meaning. Upper part of 
seal form corresponds to 夭 (CO; ‘young, die 
young’), a graph originally showing a figure 
with the added feature of a tilted head, and 
has the lower element 卉, again as phonetic. 
Clerical forms show transitional stage: trend 
is already to have 大 at the top, not 夭, and 
at least one clerical occurrence is almost 
identical to 奔. MS1995:v1:304-5,296-8; 
KJ1970:866-7; SK1984:194; QX2000:196; 
GY2008:134; OT1968:248. Take 大 as ‘big 
(man)’ 53, and three ‘tens’ 十 35.
Mnemonic: THIRTY BIG MEN RUNNING AND 
BUSTLING
HON
run, bustle
8 strokes
奔
L1
1991
Bronze form A ; bronze form B ; seal . 
Bronze forms show some variation. Figure 
in Form A is taken to show  person with 
legs apart to indicate running while waving 
arms, with止 143 ‘stop’ in its original sense 
‘foot’ written three times, giving overall 
meaning ‘run fast’. Bronze form B seems to 
be person standing legs astride, waving, 
beneath which there is not 止 but 卉 (NJK; 
翻訳  HON’YAKU　translation
翻意  HON’I　change of mind
翻って  hirugaette　on second thought
Seal 
; late graph (later version of Shuow-
en). Has 羽 82 ‘wings, plumage’, with 番 215 
(‘turn, number; guard’) as phonetic with 
associated sense taken as i] ‘flap in a flat 
manner’, giving ‘bird flaps wings and flies’ 
(Shirakawa), or ii] ‘return’, here referring to 
a bird returning its wings repeatedly to the 
same point, similarly giving ‘move wings up 
and down and fly’ (Ogawa). By extension, 
‘turn, change’. SS1984:808; OT1968:804.
Mnemonic: WINGS FLAP, CHANGING IN TURN
HON, hirugaeru/su
fl ap, change
18 strokes
翻
L1
1992
平凡 HEIBON　mediocrity
凡戦 BONSEN　dull game
凡人 BONJIN　ordinary person
Katō suggests in OBI/bronze the bowl is 
shown on its side (different orientation can 
be found in OBI and bronze), while Gu takes 
it to be a bowl on legs or a stand. At the 
seal stage, 凡 changed markedly in shape; 
this seems hard to explain as entirely due 
to stylization. Clerical script occurrences 
vary, but the shape 凡 can already be seen. 
QX2000:221; OT1968:107; KJ1970:782; 
GY2008:38; SS1984:808; SK1984:88. Take 几 
as table (see 845) and a scratch.
Mnemonic: IT’S COMMON FOR MEDIOCRE 
TABLES TO HAVE A SCRATCH
BON, HAN, oyoso
mediocre, dull, com-
mon, broadly
3 strokes
凡
L1
1993
OBI 
; seal 
. Simple shape in OBI and 
bronze makes it hard to tell what was meant 
to be originally depicted, and analyses differ 
markedly. Taken variously as a sail (Qiu), 
a frame for putting soil in to pound firm 
(Ogawa), and a bowl (Katō, Gu, Shirakawa). 

596  The Remaining 1130 Characters
盆地  BONCHI　land basin
盆踊り  BONodori　Bon Dance
盆景  BONKEI　tray landscape
used in the sense ‘Bon Festival’ – a lantern 
festival held nationwide in summer in Japan 
(see Note below). Note: The meaning ‘Bon 
Festival’ derives from use of 盆 BON as an 
abbreviation of  盂蘭盆 URABON; this is a 
transliteration of Sanskrit Ullambana, which 
refers to a Buddhist service performed for 
the spirits of the dead. MS1995:v2:904-5; 
OT1968:690; KJ1970:867; GY2008:895.
Mnemonic: I UNDERSTAND THIS DISH WILL 
BE ON TRAY IN BON FESTIVAL
BON
tray, Bon festival
9 strokes
盆
L1
1994
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 皿 300 ‘dish, bowl’, 
with分 218 (‘understand’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘swell up’, giving ‘container 
which is bigger higher up’, and so ‘bowl’, 
usually a big bowl, or ‘basin, tray’. Also 
麻布 asanuno　hemp cloth
麻薬 MAYAKU　narcotics, drugs
麻綱 asazuna　hemp rope
resulting in overall meaning ‘strip fl ax fi bers 
from plant stems with cliff  as shelter’ (Gu). At 
seal stage, 广 127 ‘building’ replaced 厂 (the 
two were not always distinguished in shape 
in bronze); Mizukami and Ogawa treat 广 in 
this graph as an error. In clerical script, the 
familiar shape 麻 appears to prevail. Note: 
𣎳 is felt to be a pictograph of a nettle-like 
fl ax-producing plant. The graph 𣏟, which 
has 𣎳 duplicated, seems to have been 
devised to represent extended sense ‘strip 
off  fl ax fi bers from plant stem’ (Mizukami). 
KJ1970:809-10; GY2008:1295; DJ2009:v2:492; 
MS1995:v2:1510-11,v1:654-5; OT1968:1162; 
SK1984:810. Take 林 as ‘forest’ 79. 
Mnemonic: ‘FOREST’ OF HEMP AND FLAX 
GROWN IN BUILDING
MA, asa
hemp, fl ax
11 strokes
麻
L1
1995
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 麻. Bronze 
form has 厂 ‘cliff ’, with what is taken to be i] 
𣏟 (CO), originally ‘nettle-like fl ax-producing 
plant (Boehmeria nivea), or ’strip off  fl ax fi bers 
from plant stem’ (see Note below), or ii] the 
similarly-shaped CO 𣏕 ‘fl ax plant’. The bronze 
forms seem to suggest i] rather than ii], but 
the distinction in shape is a fi ne one. In one 
view, 厂 serves as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘cloth’, giving ‘fl ax/hemp cloth’ (Katō), 
while another takes it semantically as ‘cliff ’, 
摩擦  MASATSU　friction
摩天楼 MATENRŌ　skyscraper
摩擦音 MASATSUON　fricative
semantic and phonetic in function here, 
giving ‘open up flax-like plant material and 
put between the hands’ (to extract fibers) 
(Katō). The meaning of 摩 was later general-
ized to ‘rub, graze, scrape’. See 磨 1997 also. 
Note: 靡 consists of 麻 (originally written 麻 
[see 麻 1995]) with 非 794 (‘not’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘open up’, to give ‘split 
open flax-like plant material and take out 
small fibers’; by extension, ‘small; scatter’, 
and also loan use for grammatical function 
word. OT1968:428,1162; KJ1970:868; 
WD1974:518-20.
Mnemonic: HAND RUBS HEMP AND GETS A 
GRAZE 
MA, suru
rub, scrape, graze
15 strokes
摩
L1
1996
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 摩. 
Has 手 34 ‘hand’, with 麻/麻1995 (‘nettle-like 
flax-producing plant, flax’) taken in one view 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘make 
small’ (as abbreviation of NJK 靡 ‘divide up, 
make small’; see Note below), giving ‘rub 
with the hands and make small’ (Ogawa). 
Another view takes 麻/麻 ‘flax’ as both 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  597
研磨  KENMA　grinding
磨滅  MAMETSU　wear and tear
靴磨き  kutsumigaki　shoeshine
Seal (䃺): 
. A late graph (Shuowen). Seal 
form has 石 47 ‘stone’, with 靡 (NJK, ‘split 
open; small; scatter’ [see 1996 Note]) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘rub, grind’, 
giving ‘mill grindstone’. By extension, ‘grind, 
polish’. Although originally denoting use of 
a grindstone, this graph and 摩 1996 show a 
degree of interchangeability in meaning and 
use. Already in clerical script, the top ele-
ment 麻 was commonly regularized in shape 
to 麻 1995 (‘hemp, flax’). DJ2009:v2:761; 
OT1968:715; SS1984:809; AS2007:389. 
Mnemonic: POLISH A STONE FOUND UNDER 
HEMP 
MA, migaku
polish, scour, rub
16 strokes
磨
L2
1997
魔女 MAJO　witch, sorceress
邪魔 JAMA　obstacle, in the way
魔羅 MARA (vulgar)　demon, penis
A late graph probably of post-Shuowen 
date.  Evolved during the monumental 
process of translating the Buddhist canon 
from Sanskrit into Chinese, which appears to 
have begun in the 2nd century AD, at first on 
just a small scale. 魔 was devised by taking 
鬼 1179 ‘devil, demon’ and adding 麻 1995 
(‘hemp, flax’) as phonetic for its sound value 
to transliterate from Sanskrit Māra ‘Māra, 
demon who leads humans astray’, then giv-
ing the generalized meaning ‘devil, demon’. 
The meaning ‘penis’ may relate to rites. 
OT1968:1141; KJ1970:868.
Mnemonic: HEMP CAN BE A DEVIL  
MA
demon, devil
21 strokes
魔
L1
1998
曖昧 AIMAI　vague
愚昧 GUMAI　ignorant, stupid
蒙昧 MŌMAI　unenlightened
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has  日 66 ‘sun, day’, with 
未 617 (‘not yet’) taken in one view as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘indistinct, hard to 
see, small’, giving ‘sunlight indistinct/still in-
distinct’, and ‘dark’ as extended sense. Another 
interpretation, based on the bronze forms 
which typically have 未 on top of 日, is ‘luxuri-
ant growth covers/obscures sun’, likewise 
giving ‘dark, not yet light’ as extended sense. 
‘Foolish’ is related to darkness and ignorance. 
OT1968:467; MS1995:v1:618-9; TA1965:732-6; 
GY2008:839. 
Mnemonic: IT IS DARK AND IS STILL NOT DAY 
MAI
dark, foolish
9 strokes
昧
L1
1999

598  The Remaining 1130 Characters
埋葬   MAISŌ　burial
埋め立て  umetate　land reclamation
埋もれ木  umoregi　fossil wood
ing buried as an ancient ritual; likewise giving 
‘bury’ as an extended sense (Gu, Shirakawa). 
Shirakawa takes 貍 (‘badger’, NJK) here as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘bury’. We 
fi nd examples of 埋 (appears to have 貍 as 
phonetic abbreviated to 里 with associated 
sense ‘bury’, combined with 土 64  ‘earth, 
ground’ as determinative) in clerical script 
onwards. Kangxi zidian gives equal status 
to both 薶 and 埋, listing both as separate 
entries. The earliest Jōyō kanji List, which 
appeared in 1923, has 埋. MS1995:v2:1136-7; 
KZ2001:2353/3671,448/3671; GY2008:985; 
SS1984:810; KJ1970:761; Sk1984:172. We 
suggest taking the modern form as 里 238 
‘village’ and 土 64 ‘earth’.  
Mnemonic: VILLAGE BURIED IN EARTH
Or: BURY ME IN THE EARTH OF MY VILLAGE 
(– WHEN I’M DEAD!) 
MAI, 
u[zu]maru/mo[re]ru
bury
10 strokes
埋
L2
2000
OBI ; seal (薶) ; the form 埋 is late (post-
seal). OBI form has 牛 108 ‘ox, cow’ (or oc-
casionally 犬 19 ‘dog’), above 凵 (here) ‘hole 
dug’, typically accompanied also by some 
short vertical strokes, which in one view 
represent ‘underground spring’; overall mean-
ing is taken to be ‘hide beneath vegetation’, 
with ‘bury’ as an extended sense (Mizukami). 
The scenario of an ox hiding in this way is 
not really convincing (though a dog might 
seem more possible). There is an alternative 
interpretation. This involves treating an ox be-
鼓膜 KOMAKU　eardrum
網膜 MŌMAKU　retina 
膜質 MAKUSHITSU　membranous
MAKU
membrane
14 strokes
膜
L1
2001
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists of 
月209 ‘flesh, meat; body’, with 莫 (original 
way of writing 暮 982 ‘sunset’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘envelop’ (Shirakawa 
says ‘curtain, covering’), giving ‘that bodily 
component which envelops’, referring in 
this case not to skin itself but ‘membrane’. 
KJ1970:775; OT1968:826; SS1984:810. We 
suggest two mnemonics, one taking 莫 as 
‘sunset’ (this time with only one sun, as origi-
nally) and the other by its elements. In the 
latter case, we suggest taking 大 as ‘big’ 56, 
日 as ‘sun’ 66, and ‘grass’ 艹 53. 
Mnemonic:  BIG FLESHY MEMBRANE COVERS 
SUNNY GRASS
Or: SUNSET AFFECTS BODY’S MEMBRANES
枕元 makuramoto　bedside
手枕 temakura　use arm for pillow
仮枕 karimakura　a nap, doze
makura, CHIN
pillow
8 strokes
枕
L1
2002
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 木 73 
‘wood, tree’, with 冘 (CO, originally picto-
graph of person carrying heavy object; see 
1729 Note) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘sink into/onto’, giving ‘wooden arte-
fact to sink head down onto’, i.e. ‘headrest, 
pillow’. While in the modern world we think 
of a pillow as something soft, in ancient Chi-
na (and prewar Japan) hard materials such 
as wood and bamboo (and later porcelain) 
appear to have been the norm. TA1965:789-
93; SS1984:609-10; MS1995:v1:112-13. As 
with 1729, we suggest taking 冘 as (heavy) 
man with crooked leg and broken arms.
Mnemonic: MAN WITH CROOKED LEG AND 
BROKEN ARMS HAS WOODEN PILLOW

The Remaining 1130 Characters  599
抹殺 MASSATSU　erasure
抹茶 MATCHA　powdered tea
一抹 ICHIMATSU　a tinge
MATSU
erase, rub, paint
8 strokes
抹
L1
2004
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 扌 34 ‘hand’, 
with 末 615 (‘end, tip/top’ [of tree]) as pho-
netic with associated sense taken as i] ‘erase’, 
giving ‘erase with the hand’ (Gu, Tōdō), or 
ii] ‘rub’, giving ‘rub with the hand’ (Ogawa), 
or iii] ‘powder’ (for ink or paint, etc.), giving 
‘paint, smear’ (Shirakawa).  GY2008:589; 
TA1965:667-70; OT1968:410. 
Mnemonic: HAND TRIES TO ERASE TREETOP 
BY PAINTING OVER IT 
又は   mata wa　or
又と無い  mata to nai　unique
又貸し   matagashi　sublease 
mata
again
2 strokes
又
L1
2003
OBI 
; seal 
. Originated as pictograph 
of right hand seen from one’s own perspec-
tive. Also used at OBI stage by extension 
for ‘right’ (later, 右 2 [q.v.]). In early times 
often substituted by 寸 920 (‘measure, inch’; 
originally depicting ‘hand’ similar in shape to 
又 2003 but with extra stroke underneath), 
reflected in fluctuation between 又 and 寸 
in early occurrences of a given graph (e.g. 
seen in bronze forms for 守 316 ‘protect, 
keep’). This historical practice means care 
is needed when analyzing compound 
graphs that include 又 or 寸 as an element. 
QX2000:76; AS2007:581-2; MS1995:v1:192-3; 
MR2007:267; SK1984:141-2.  
Mnemonic: SHOW ONE’S HAND AGAIN
自慢 
JIMAN　vanity
怠慢 TAIMAN　neglect
慢性 MANSEI　chronic
MAN
lazy, rude, boastful
14 strokes
慢
L1
2005
loose’, giving ‘one’s feelings become loose/
undisciplined’; hence, extended senses such 
as ‘lazy, rude, bragging’. Note: 曼 has 又 2003 
‘hand’, with 冒1974 (‘headgear’) as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘grow, extend’. 
KJ1970:869; OT1968:386; MS1995:v1:632. Take 
曼 as ‘hand’ 又 2003, ‘eye’ 罒 76 (sometimes 
rotated from 目), and ‘sun’ 日 66.
Mnemonic: FEEL LAZY AS HAND SHADES 
EYES FROM SUN
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 忄 164 
‘heart, feelings’, with 曼 (NJK, ‘lengthen by 
pulling by hand’; see Note below) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘grow, extend, become 
漫画  MANGA　manga (comics)
散漫  SANMAN　diff usion
漫ろ言  sozorogoto　rambling words
MAN, sozoro
random, diff use
involuntary
14 strokes
漫
L1
2006
Late, post-Shuowen graph. Listed in Yupian (6th 
century). Has 氵 42 ‘water’, with 曼 (‘lengthen 
by pulling by hand’; see 2005) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken as i] ‘extend, 
spread’, or ii] ‘push forward’. Either way, 
original sense is basically the same, i.e. ‘water 
spreads/pushes forward’; ‘random, diff use’ are 
extended senses. OT1968:605; KJ1970:869. As 
with 2005, take 曼 as ‘hand’ 又 2003, ‘eye’ 罒 76 
(rotated from 目), and ‘sun’ 日 66. 
Mnemonic: HAND INVOLUNTARILY SHADES 
EYES FROM WATERING IN DIFFUSE SUN

600  The Remaining 1130 Characters
魅力 MIRYOKU　charm, appeal
魅惑 MIWAKU　fascination
魅了 
MIRYŌ　charm
MI
bewitch, charm
15 strokes
魅
L1
2007
Seal (鬽) 
; late graph (Shuowen). 鬽 is 
entry heading in Shuowen, but text lists 魅 as 
alternative form. For analysis of 鬽, see Note 
below. 魅 has 鬼 1179 ‘supernatural being, 
demon’, with 未 617 (‘immature’) as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘not visible’, thus 
岬角   KŌKAKU　point, spit
岬湾   KŌWAN　indentations
コッド岬  KODDOmisaki　Cape Cod
misaki, saki, KŌ 
promontory, cape
8 strokes
岬
L1
2008
Late, post-Shuowen graph. Defi ned in Yupian 
dictionary (6th century AD) as ‘mountain side’. 
Has 山 26 ‘mountain’, with 甲 1318 (‘A grade’). 
Ogawa takes ‘side’ as associated sense of 
甲 (here as phonetic), and says 岬 came to 
be used in Japan in the sense ‘promontory’, 
and this new meaning was then adopted 
in Chinese also. GY2008:631; OT1968:303; 
SS1984:293-4. 
Mnemonic: PROMONTORY HAS ‘A GRADE’ 
MOUNTAIN
‘spectral being, ghost’; by extension, ‘enchant, 
bewitch’. Note: 鬽 has 鬼 1179 ‘demon’, here 
likely in its original sense of ‘spirit of dead 
person, supernatural being’, with 彡 115 
‘decorative feathers/colors, embellishment’, 
here taken as ‘long hair’, to give ‘longhaired 
supernatural being’. The ancient Chinese 
historical work Zuo Zhuan chooses to defi ne 
more specifi cally as a four-legged beast with 
human face. KJ1970:868; DJ2009:v2:738-9; 
OT1968:1140.
Mnemonic: BEWITCHED BY CHARMING 
IMMATURE DEMON 
蜂蜜 hachiMITSU　honey
蜜月 
MITSUGETSU　honeymoon
糖蜜 TŌMITSU　syrup
妙案 MYŌAN　great idea
微妙 BIMYŌ　sublety
奇妙 KIMYŌ　odd
MITSU
honey, nectar
14 strokes
蜜
L1
2009
MYŌ
exquisite, strange
7 strokes
妙
L1
2010
produced by bees through a regurgitation 
process). Another treatment takes the as-
sociated sense as ‘delicious smell’, giving 
‘insects’ delicious-smelling (food)’, i.e. ‘honey’ 
(Ogawa). The graph was later abbreviated to 
蜜 by using  虫  ‘insect’ for 䖵, and changing 
the phonetic to 宓 (CO, ‘quiet house’) (same 
associated sense as above). DJ2009:v3:1101; 
KJ1970:807; GY2008:1762; OT1968:889; 
MS1995:v2:1144-5. Suggest elements as 宀 
30 ‘roof/building/hive’, 必 597 ‘necessarily’, 
and 虫 60 ‘insect’.  
Mnemonic: BEES ARE INSECTS THAT 
NECESSARILY NEED HIVE TO MAKE HONEY
Seal 
; traditional 𧖅; late graph (Shuowen). 
Entry heading in Shuowen has a more 
ornate form, comprising 䖵 60 ‘insect(s)’, 
with 鼏 (CO, ‘cauldron lid, wine container 
lid’) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken in one view as ‘saliva’, giving ‘insect 
saliva’, and hence ‘honey’(Katō) (which is 
Late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 女 37 ‘wom-
an’, with 少 160 (‘few, little’) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken in one view as 
‘young’, giving ‘young woman’ (Ogawa, Gu), 
and ‘beauty of young woman, exquisite, el-
egant’ as extended senses. Possibly this led 
by further extension to ‘exceptional, rare, 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  601
睡眠  SUIMIN　sleep
不眠症 FUMINSHŌ insomnia
居眠り  inemuri doze, nap
矛先  hokosaki　main point (also fi g.)
矛盾 
 MUJUN contradiction
矛げき  BŌGEKI halberd, spear
MIN, nemuru/i
sleep, sleepy 
10 strokes
眠
L2
2011
MU, BŌ, hoko
halberd, lance
5 strokes
矛
L1
2012
Seal (瞑) 
; 眠 is a late variant. 瞑 consists 
of 目 76 ‘eye’, with 冥 2015 ‘dark’ as semantic 
and phonetic, giving ‘close eyes’ and by exten-
sion ‘sleep’. Later, 民 619 (‘populace, people’) 
was substituted as phonetic element (Yupian 
[6th century AD] notes 眠 as being the same 
as 瞑). GY2008:1038,1156; MS1995:v1:114-5; 
KJ1970:840; OT1968:102. 
Mnemonic: THE PEOPLE CLOSE THEIR EYES 
IN SLEEP
Bronze ; seal . Simpler bronze forms depict 
a weapon with handle and sharp point, while 
a slightly more involved shape is felt to show 
a weapon such as lance or halberd, with 人 
41 ‘person’ (holding the weapon) as the lower 
element (Katō; Mizukami also notes a view 
broadly in line with this analysis). The more in-
volved shape then provides basis for seal form. 
KJ1970:862; MS1995:v2:928-9; OT1968:705; 
GY2008:212. Diffi  cult mnemonically.
Mnemonic: ANGULAR HALBERD HAS TWO 
POINTS AND A HANDGUARD 
strange’.  An alternative analysis takes 少 as 
phonetic with extended sense ‘indistinct’, 
giving ‘indistinct beauty of woman’ (Katō). 
OT1968:253; GY2008:529; KJ1970:847-8. 
Mnemonic: FEW WOMEN ARE AS EXQUISITE, 
YET AS STRANGE
霧笛 MUTEKI 　foghorn
濃霧 
NŌMU thick fog
朝霧 asagiri morning mist
MU, kiri
mist, fog
19 strokes
霧
L1
2013
Seal (霚) 
; late graph; modern form 霧. 
Seal form has 雨 ‘rain’ 3, with 敄 (CO, ‘effort’; 
originally ‘attack vigorously with halberd/
lance’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘cover’, giving ‘water vapour which covers 
(an area)’, i.e. ‘fog’. At some point, the pho-
netic was changed from敄 to 務 (‘[perform] 
duties’ 815; same associated sense). Katō 
treats 務 as erroneous; Kangxi zidian lists 
only 霧, not 霚. KJ1970:863; OT1968:1089; 
GY2008:969,1571; KZ2001:3073/3671. 
Mnemonic: PERFORM ONE’S DUTIES COME 
RAIN, MIST, OR FOG

602  The Remaining 1130 Characters
小娘  komusume 　young girl
娘子軍 JŌSHIGUN Amazons
一人娘 hitorimusume only daughter
musume, JŌ
young woman, 
daughter
10 strokes
娘
L2
2014
ing which varies somewhat according to 
the commentator: Katō gives ‘girl’; Ogawa 
gives ‘beautiful female/girl’. Schuessler gives 
‘lady’ for both 娘 and 嬢 1522 (‘young lady, 
daughter’, q.v.). ‘Daughter’ is an extended 
sense for 娘. Though sometimes seen as in-
terchangeable in Japanese usage, 嬢 (1522) 
has the more polite connotation of the two, 
similar to the difference in English between 
‘woman’ and ‘lady’. KJ1970:555; OT1968:259; 
SS1984:458; AS2007:401.
Mnemonic: DAUGHTER IS A GOOD YOUNG 
WOMAN – INDEED, A LADY
A late, post-Shuowen graph, considered 
to be a popular variant of 嬢 1522 (q.v.). 
Consists of 女 37 ‘woman, female’, with 良 
628 (‘good’) in one view having a semantic 
and phonetic role, giving the original mean-
冥土  MEIDO　Hades, realm of dead
冥王星 MEIŌSEI Pluto (planet)
冥加  MYŌGA divine protection  
MEI, MYŌ
dark(/ness)
10 strokes
冥
L1
2015
mentator arrives at the same meaning, albeit 
by a different route (Katō). By way of excep-
tion, Shirakawa takes 冥 to be originally a 
pictograph depicting a cover over the face of 
a deceased person, with the bottom element 
representing not hands but cords used for 
tying the cloth over the face. If followed, this 
minority interpretation more readily leads 
to ‘realm of the dead’ as an extended sense. 
GY2008:1156; MS1995:v1:114-5; OT1968:102; 
KJ1970:839-40; SS1984:818. We suggest tak-
ing the elements as 六 ‘six’ 80, as or as a ‘ta-
ble’, plus cover 冖 and ‘sun’ and/or ‘day’ 日 6.
Mnemonic: THE SUN HAS BEEN COVERED 
FOR SIX DAYS – SUCH DARKNESS!
Or: THE SUN IS SHINING ON THE 
TABLE – COVER IT TO MAKE IT DARK
OBI 
; seal 
. Typically interpreted – prob-
ably on the basis of the OBI form – as two 
hands (modified in shape to 六 in block 
script [thus with the same shape as ‘six’ 
六 80]) pulling down a cover 冖 to black 
something out (Gu, Mizukami, Ogawa). The 
element being blacked out is represented by 
a roughly square shape, taken to be either 
the sun 日 66 (Gu, Mizukami), or an area 
(Ogawa). The overall meaning of the graph in 
this view is taken to be ‘dark’. Another com-
銘柄 MEIgara　brand 
墓銘 
BOMEI epitaph
銘茶 MEICHA quality tea 
MEI
inscribe, sign, name, 
quality
14 strokes
銘
L1
2016
Bronze 
; seal 
. Consists of 金 16 ‘metal’, 
combined with 名 75 ‘name’ as semantic 
and phonetic, typically taken to refer to the 
ancient practice of recording biographical 
details of a deceased person on an artefact 
such as a bronze bell or tripod vessel or 
on a tombstone. Katō takes it as signifying 
recording the name of the deceased on a 
flag; this view is based on a passage in the 
Book of Rites (one of the Five Confucian 
Classics), but the graph clearly suggests the 
recording was done on metal (this is not to 
say that the practice of writing on a flag was 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  603
滅亡 METSUBŌ　destruction 
絶滅 
ZETSUMETSU extinction
破滅 HAMETSU destruction
METSU, horobiru/bosu
destroy, perish
13 strokes
滅
L1
2017
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists 
of 氵/水 42 ‘water’, combined with 烕 (CO; 
‘flames die out’; see Note below) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘run out, can no longer 
be seen’, giving ‘water runs out’; by exten-
sion, ‘perish, destroy’. Note: 烕 is comprised 
of 火 8 ‘fire’, with 戌 476 (CO; ‘type of battle-
ax / halberd’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘run out, disappear’, giving ‘flames die 
out’. MS1995:v2:774-5,798-9; KJ1970:870; 
OT1968:602.
Mnemonic: DESTROYED BY HALBERD, FIRE, 
AND WATER
免除 MENJO　exemption 
免税  MENZEI tax-exempt
放免 HŌMEN acquittal
MEN, manukareru
escape, avoid
8 strokes
免
L1
2018
relating to headwear: Gu sees it as depict-
ing a person wearing a ritual mourning cap, 
while Shirakawa considers ‘remove helmet’ 
as a meaning for some of the forms identi-
fied as later 免. ‘Come out’ and ‘avoid’ may be 
regarded as extended senses if ‘deliver new-
born baby’ or ‘remove helmet’ is accepted as 
the original meaning. A complicating factor 
to this graph is what appears to be a degree 
of confused usage involving NJK 兔 ‘rabbit, 
hare’, a graph similar in shape to 免 from the 
seal stage onwards (but not earlier); in this 
connection, see 逸 1029 also. KJ1970:818-20; 
MS1995:v1:94-5; OT1968:89; TA1965:739-41; 
GY2008:470,683; SS1984:820-21. We suggest 
taking 
 as two boxes, and 𠂊 as a crouch-
ing person and 儿 as another person stand-
ing (both escapees). 
Mnemonic: TWO ESCAPEES HIDING BEHIND 
TWO BOXES TO AVOID RECAPTURE
Or: ESCAPE BY RUNNING LIKE A HARE
Bronze 
; seal 
. Analyses diverge. Taken 
in one view as consisting of 儿 41 ‘person’, 
with 
  (interpreted as ‘female genitalia’ or 
‘hindquarters of animal’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘submit’, giving ‘look down 
in submission’ (Katō, Mizukami). This inter-
pretation, though, seems to be based on 
the seal form, and does not sit very well in 
relation to the older bronze forms. Another 
analysis takes 
 literally as ‘female genita-
lia’ or ‘buttocks’, combined with 儿 ‘person’ 
to give ‘deliver newborn baby’ (Ogawa, Tōdō; 
Shirakawa sees this as one valid interpreta-
tion also), and this proposal is more plausi-
ble in terms of the bronze forms. Yet another 
interpretation takes this graph as originally 
not done also). The original meaning of this 
graph was ‘inscription’. ‘Well-known, notable’ 
is seemingly an extended sense deriving 
from the fact that the epitaphs often set out 
accomplishments of distinguished individu-
als and so had at least an implied laudatory 
aspect. In a related semantic extension, it 
is now associated with quality brands in 
merchandising, to the point that it can be 
considered a definite meaning. 名 carries 
out the function of a notable/quality named 
brand, such as in 名物 meibutsu (‘noted 
product’) but it seems that 銘, despite tak-
ing longer to write, has taken over that role 
to a significant extent. MS1995:v2:1366-7; 
OT1968:1043; SS1984:819; GY2008:1260; 
KJ1970:870; AS2007:387.  
Mnemonic: HAVE ONE’S NAME INSCRIBED IN 
METAL – GOOD QUALITY METAL

604  The Remaining 1130 Characters
麺類   MENRUI　noodles 
麺棒   MENBŌ rolling pin
製麺所 SEIMENJO noodle factory 
繁茂 HANMO　thick growth
茂林 
MORIN dense forest
茂み shigemi thicket 
MEN
noodles, wheat, fl our
16 strokes
麺
L1
2019
MO, shigeru
grow thickly
8 strokes
茂
L1
2020
Seal ; a late graph (Shuowen); tradition-
al 麪. Consists of 麥 ‘wheat, barley’ (later 
麦 213, q.v.), with 丏 (CO; original meaning 
uncertain: interpretations include ‘fl oating 
plant’ [Mizukami] and ‘corpse’ [Shirakawa]) as 
phonetic [associated sense unclear]). 麺, now 
the standard form in Japanese, with 面 417 
‘face’ as phonetic, appears to be a late variant. 
OT1968:1161; SS1984:821,774; MS1995:v1:6-8. 
Mnemonic: ON THE FACE OF IT, NOODLES 
ARE MADE FROM WHEAT
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 艹 53 
‘plants’, with 戊 (NJK, ‘[type of] halberd/ 
battle-ax’ 1591; see Note below) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken as i] ‘cover’, giving 
‘plants cover’ (Tōdō, Ogawa), or ii] ‘luxuriant, 
abundant’, giving ‘luxuriant vegetation’ (Gu, 
Katō). Note: Mizukami also lists ‘(type of) 
plane’ as possible meaning for 戊, which was 
originally a pictograph, though the OBI and 
bronze forms do suggest a weapon rather 
than a tool. TA1965:237-8; OT1968:850,392; 
GY2008:560; KJ1970:872; MS1995:v1:532-3. 
Mnemonic: PLANTS GROW THICKLY – HAVE 
TO CUT DOWN WITH HALBERD
妄想 MŌSŌ　delusion
妄言 BŌGEN　harsh words
迷妄 MEIMŌ　fallacy
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 女 37 ‘woman’, with 
亡 985 ‘die, escape’ taken in one view as 
semantic and phonetic meaning ‘hidden, 
not clear’ (see Note below), giving original 
sense ‘unclear on account of woman, unclear 
because bewitched by woman’ (Mizukami, 
Tōdō). Another analysis treats 亡 as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘illogical, unreason-
able’ (Ogawa). Either way, the extended 
sense is ‘random, arbitrary’. Note: early 
meanings for 亡 listed by Schuessler include 
‘lose, disappear’, which lends support to 
the interpretation made by Mizukami and 
Tōdō. MS1995:v1:312-3; TA1965:445-8; 
OT1968:252. 
Mnemonic: IRRATIONAL AND RASH WOMAN 
DIES
MŌ, BŌ, midari
irrational, rash
6 strokes
妄
L1
2021

The Remaining 1130 Characters  605
盲目 MŌMOKU　blindness
文盲 MONMŌ　illiteracy
盲判 mekuraBAN　‘rubber stamp’
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 目 76 ‘eye’, 
with 亡 985 (‘lose, die, disappear, not have’),  
taken in one view as semantic and phonetic, 
giving ‘blind’ (Ogawa). Alternatively, 亡 is 
regarded as phonetic in function with as-
sociated sense ‘hidden’, giving ‘hidden and 
not visible’, with ‘blind’ as an extended sense 
(Tōdō). OT1968:696; TA1965:445-7. 
Mnemonic: DEAD EYES ARE BLIND
MŌ, mekura
blind
8 strokes
盲
L1
2022
消耗 SHŌMŌ　consumption
損耗 SONMŌ　wastage, loss
磨耗 MAMŌ　wear and tear
as ‘grain’ as a general term encompassing 
millet, wheat, and rice, not just rice alone; 
as above, Katō takes in the general sense. 
Another commentator treats 毛 here as 
semantic and phonetic meaning ‘small’, and 
considers it to denote ‘small grains of rice’ 
(sic; Ogawa). As for the change in shape 
to 耗, with the determinative changed 
from 禾 ‘grain’ to 耒 ’plow’ (CO, 699), this 
appears to have been a change made at 
some point in block script. Kangxi zidian 
has entries for both 秏 and 耗; in the entry 
for the former, it is noted that ‘texts nowa-
days all use 耗 ’. KJ1970:172-3; OT1968:808; 
MS1995:v2:960-61,1054-5; SK1984:588; 
DJ2009:v2:565; ZY2009:v3:869,1000;. We sug-
gest taking 耒 as multi-branched tree 木 73.
Mnemonic: MULTIPLE BRANCHES ON TREE 
WASTE AWAY TO LOOK LIKE HAIRS
MŌ
waste, decrease
10 strokes
耗
L1
2023
Seal (秏) 
; a late graph (Shuowen). The 
seal form has 禾 87 ‘grain’ (generic), with 毛 
230 (‘hair, fur’) as phonetic with associated 
sense taken in one view as ‘empty’, giving 
original meaning ‘grain missing, no grain’, 
and by extension ‘empty; run out, use up’ 
(Katō). Shuowen defines 秏 as ‘type of rice’, 
which is how the graph and underlying word 
may have been used around the time of 
compilation of Shuowen, but 禾 is originally 
a pictograph of a grain plant with the head 
leaning down, and is generally understood 
猛烈 MŌRETSU　fi erceness
猛獣 MŌJŪ　fi erce animal
猛者 MOSA*　a stalwart fellow
diff er. In one view, 孟 comprises 子 27 ‘child’, 
with 皿 300 ‘bowl, cover’ taken as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘fi rst’, giving ‘fi rst child’ 
(Mizukami). Alternatively, 皿 is taken as se-
mantic meaning ‘cover’, giving ‘child emerges 
(from beneath cover)/grows’ (Tōdō). Another 
view takes 皿 semantically as a bowl for 
bathing, giving ‘newborn baby’s fi rst bath’, 
and hence ‘fi rst’. Schuessler says ‘eldest (of 
siblings); fi rst’. OT1968:645; GY2008:1291; 
KJ1970:769; MS1995:v1:352-3; TA1965:449-54; 
AS2007:381.  
Mnemonic: FIERCE DOG GETS TO BOWL 
BEFORE BRAVE INFANT
MŌ
fi erce, raging, brave, 
strong
11 strokes
猛
L1
2024
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 犭/犬 19 
‘dog’, with 孟 (‘fi rst child; beginning’; see Note 
below) as phonetic with associated sense ‘vig-
orous, strong, violent’, giving ‘fi erce/violent 
dog’. Meanings such as ‘brave’ are extended 
senses. Note:  analyses of 孟 (NJK, ‘beginning’) 

606  The Remaining 1130 Characters
魚網  GYOMŌ　fi shing net
網戸  amido　screen door
通信網 TSŪSHINMŌ　news network
as phonetic with associated sense ‘mix, 
intertwine’, giving ‘net made of intertwined/
interwoven material’. Later 罔 was borrowed 
for its sound value as a convenient means of 
representing several grammatical function 
words of negative meaning, so to clarify the 
word for ‘net’ in writing 糸 29 ‘thread’ was 
added, resulting in 網. QX2000:181,223,227-
8; KJ1970:782; MS1995:v2:1030-31; 
DJ2009:v2:617; SS1984:822-3; WD1974:759-
61. Suggest taking 罔 as 冂 cover, horns 
, 
and ‘dead’ 亡 985. 
Mnemonic: DEAD HORNED CREATURE 
COVERED BY THREADED NET
MŌ, ami
net, network
14 strokes
網
L1
2025
OBI (网) 
; seal form A (罔) 
; seal form B 
. OBI form (bronze also) is a pictograph of 
a net, probably for catching wild animals or 
fish. Main entry for the graph in Shuowen has 
网 (see 570), but goes on to give 罔 and 網 as 
alternative forms. 罔 comprises 
 (variant of 
网) with 亡 985 (‘lose, disappear, die’) added 
黙殺   MOKUSATSU　give no reply
沈黙   CHINMOKU　silence
黙り込む  damarikomu fall silent
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
form: 默. Has 犬 19 ‘dog’, with 黑 (traditional 
form of 黒 137 ‘black’) as phonetic with asso-
ciated sense ‘nothing, silent’, thus ‘dog which 
is quiet’; by extension, ‘silent’. KJ1970:864-5; 
OT1968:647; TA1965:165; GY2008:1885-6.
Mnemonic: BLACK DOG IS SILENT  
MOKU, damaru
be silent
15 strokes
黙
L1
2026
紋章 MONSHŌ　heraldic crest
指紋 SHIMON　fi ngerprint
波紋 HAMON　ripple
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Originally writ-
ten just as 文 72 (original meaning ‘pattern’; 
now ‘writing, text’). 文 was used increasingly 
to mean ‘writing’, and when the meaning 
‘pattern’ was intended this was indicated by 
adding 糸 29 ‘thread’ as determinative to 
give 紋. In Japanese, 紋 is now typically ‘crest’. 
OT1968:771; SS1984:825; KJ1970:220. 
Mnemonic: THREADS IN CREST FORM 
PATTERN LIKE WRITING 
MON
crest, pattern
10 strokes
紋
L1
2027
冶金  YAKIN　metallurgy
陶冶  TŌYA　training
鍛冶屋 kajiya*　blacksmith
Bronze 
; seal 
. Seal form consists of 冫 
401 ‘ice’, with 台 (‘I, me’; see Note below) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken in one 
approach either as i] ‘grow slack, relax’, or ii] 
‘modify’. Either way, the resultant meaning is 
‘smelt metal’ (in the case of i], by extension, 
and in ii] by indirect extension on the basis 
‘modify metal in the same way as melting 
ice’). Another interpretation, though, takes 
the right-hand element in one of the bronze 
occurrences as a shape representing not ‘ice’ 
YA 
smelt, melt
7 strokes
冶
L1
2028

The Remaining 1130 Characters  607
弥生  Yayoi*　period c400BC-cAD250
弥次馬 yaJIuma　mob, onlookers
沙弥  SHAMI　Buddhist acolyte
‘slacken, loosen’. Senses such as ‘increasingly’ 
are the result of a loan use. The right-hand 
element of 弥 perhaps reflects adaptation 
to block script of a cursified version of this 
graph, with the number of strokes reduced 
through writing cursively. KJ1970:484; 
KZ2001:757-8/3671; OT1968:340. Difficult 
mnemonically, but we suggest taking the 
right-hand part as variant ‘person’ 𠂉  41, 
and ‘small’ 小 38.  
Mnemonic: BOW-MAN HAS INCREASINGLY 
SMALL TARGET – ALL THE MORE 
CHALLENGING
ya, iya, BI, MI 
increasingly, 
all the more
8 strokes
弥
L1
2029
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
彌. The seal form consists of 弓 107 ‘bow’, 
with a variant of 璽 1419 “Imperial seal’ (q.v.) 
minus the dot low down, as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘slacken, loosen’; this gives 
‘unstring a bow’; meaning then extended to 
but ‘fire’. This commentator (Gu) still recog-
nises 冫 ‘ice’ as the determinative in the seal 
form, explaining this as being by analogy 
(melting of ice and smelting metal both 
resulting in liquid states). Note: On the basis 
of sound values and older forms (bronze and 
seal) the phonetic element 台 in 冶 is to be 
taken not as 台 183 ‘stand, platform’ (tradi-
tional form: 臺), but a different graph of the 
same shape meaning ‘(say) I, me’. The latter 
consists of 口 22 ‘mouth; speak’, with 厶 
(interpretations vary, but include ‘make one’s 
own’, or ‘plow’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘I, me’. MS1995:v1:116-8,204-5,188-90; 
OT1968:103; GY2008:487. For mnemonic 
purposes only, we suggest taking here 台 as 
‘platform’, or alternatively ム as nose and 口 
as mouth 22.
Mnemonic: A PLATFORM MADE OF ICE CAN 
EASILY MELT
Or: ICE COVERS NOSE AND MOUTH – 
HOPEFULLY IT WILL MELT SOON!
厄介 YAKKAI　trouble
厄日 
YAKUbi　bad day
災厄 SAIYAKU　calamity
Bronze ; seal 
. Typically treated as 
originally a pictograph of a yoke attached 
to a horse’s neck (Gu, Ogawa, Shirakawa). 
In another view, taken as comprising lower 
element for ‘person kneeling’ (卩 41), and 
厂 (‘cliff’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘protrude’, giving ‘hunchback kneeling’ 
(noted in Mizukami). An alternative treat-
ment takes 厄 as 厂 ‘cliff’, with 㔾; the latter 
element being interpreted as ‘person (non-
upright)’, giving ‘(person) hard-pressed to 
move’ (also noted in Mizukami).  Either way, 
‘disaster, calamity’ is loan usage. GY2008:70; 
OT1968:148; SS1984:826; MS1995:v1:184-5. 
Mnemonic: DISASTER! PERSON HAS FALLEN 
DOWN CLIFF AND CAN’T STAND
YAKU
misfortune, disaster
4 strokes
厄
L1
2030

608  The Remaining 1130 Characters
躍進   YAKUSHIN　rush, dash
飛躍 
  HIYAKU leap
躍り込む  odorikomu rush into
闇市 yamiichi 　black market
闇夜 
AN’YA dark night
夕闇 
yūyami  dusk, twilight
比喩  HIYU 　metaphor, simile 
比喩的 HIYUTEKI fi gurative
換喩 
 KAN’YU  metonymy
YAKU, odoru
leap, dance, rush 
21 strokes
yami, AN
darkness, gloom 
17 strokes
躍
闇
L1
L1
2031
2032
YU, tatoeru
compare, liken 
12 strokes
喩
L1
2033
leap up’. Latter meaning was clarified by 
adding 足, thus 躍. Typically, 翟 here is taken 
as phonetic with the above associated sense, 
but Gu takes as both semantic and phonetic 
in function. TA1965:247-9; OT1968:977; 
MS1995:v2:1048-9; GY2008:1245; AS2007:
497; KJ1970:874. Take 翟 literally as ‘bird’ 隹 
324 and ‘wings’ 羽 82.
Mnemonic: LEAP WITH FEET FLYING LIKE 
BIRD’S WINGS
giving ‘close gate’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘put inside 
and close’, giving ‘put inside gates/entrance 
and close, making it dark’ (Tōdō). Tōdō 
takes ‘dark’ as an extended sense, while 
a noted pre-modern commentator on 
Shuowen (Duan Yucai, 1735-1815) regards 
as a loan use. OT1968:1062; TA1965:815-24; 
DJ2009:v3:967. 
Mnemonic: SOUNDS COME THROUGH GATE 
IN THE DARK GLOOM 
for scraping/gouging out’, but giving the 
same overall meaning. Shirakawa, alterna-
tively again, takes 舟 as ‘bowl’ (presumably 
a meaning extended from ‘hollow out log as 
boat’ [based on a classical Chinese source, but 
Tōdō does not agree]) and the main part of 
the second element as a large surgical needle 
for removing blood and pus, with the ac-
companying single stroke as ‘showing blood 
and pus being transferred into the bowl’. 
The graph (兪) exhibits some variation in 
shape in bronze. OT1968:191; KJ1970:500-01; 
MS1995:v1:100-01; SS1984:829; AS2007:623; 
TA1965:173-4. Diffi  cult mnemonically, but we 
suggest taking 月 209 as ‘meat, body’, with ar-
rows/pointers 巜 pointing to it, 𠓛 as a cover, 
and using 口 not as ‘speak’ but rather as ‘hole’.
Mnemonic: ARROWS POINT TO HOLE IN 
BODY IN NEED OF COVERING – NEVER SEEN 
THE LIKE OF IT! INCOMPARABLE!
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 足 54 
‘leg/foot’, and 翟 236, CO meaning ‘pheasant’ 
but also in word-family meaning ‘rise up, 
Seal 
 a late graph (Shuowen). Consists of 口 
22 ‘mouth; speak’, with 兪 (CO, ‘hollow out log 
as boat’; see Note below) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘transfer, change’, giving 
original meaning ‘instruct’. ‘Speak fi guratively, 
compare’ may perhaps be an extended sense. 
Note: the bronze form of 兪 is interpreted 
in one view as 舟 1450 ‘boat’, with a second 
element which is interpreted as ‘snake/
cicada with cast-off  skin’, giving ‘hollow out 
inner part of log and leave outer part as boat’ 
(Katō). Mizukami notes an alternative view 
which takes the second element as ‘blade 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 門 231 
‘gate, door’, with 音 6 (‘sound’) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken as i] ‘cover’, 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  609
愉快 YUKAI 　pleasure 
愉悦 
YUETSU joy
愉楽 
YURAKU  pleasure
教諭 KYŌYU 　instructor 
説諭 
SETSUYU admonition
諭旨 
YUSHI  offi  cial advice
治癒 CHIYU 　cure 
平癒 
HEIYU recovery
癒合 
YUGŌ  knitting (wound)
YU
joy, pleasure 
12 strokes
愉
L1
2034
YU, satosu
instruct, admonish
16 strokes
諭
L1
2035
YU, iyasu
cure, heal, vent
18 strokes
癒
L1
2036
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional form has 
兪 as right-hand element. Consists of 忄/心 
164 ‘heart, mind, feelings’, with 兪 (CO, 
‘hollow out log as boat’; see 2033 Note) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken either 
as i] ‘clear’, giving ‘one’s heart/mind is clear’ 
(Katō), or ii] ‘pull out, remove’, giving ‘persis-
tent negative feelings are removed’ (noted 
in Mizukami; Ogawa is in broad agree-
ment). ‘Joy, pleasure’ appear to be extended 
senses. KJ1970:880-81; MS1995:v1:518-9; 
OT1968:383. We suggest taking 月 as ‘meat’ 
209, 刂 as ‘cut’ 198, and 𠓛 as a cover.
Mnemonic: FEELINGS OF JOY ABOUT CUT 
MEAT BEING COVERED
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
form has 兪 as right-hand element. Has 言 
118 ‘words, speak’, with 兪 (CO; see 2033 Note) 
as phonetic with associated sense taken as i] 
‘clarify’, giving ‘make clear with words’ (Katō), 
or ii] ‘remove’, giving ‘remove that which is not 
understood’, giving ‘instruct, give guidance’ 
(Ogawa). KJ1970:881; OT1968:939. As with 
2034, we suggest taking 月 as ‘meat’ 209, 刂 as 
‘cut’ 198, and 亼 as a cover.
Mnemonic: VERBALLY ADMONISH AND IN-
STRUCT HOW TO COVER CUT MEAT
phonetic may be taken as a variant of 兪. 
Note: Shirakawa sees 愈 and愉 (traditional 
form of 愉 2034 has 兪) as variants of same 
graph, difference in form of ‘heart/feelings’ 
determinative (心/忄, 164) not significant.  
Mizukami, though, sees 愈 and 愉 as two 
different graphs, but does not elaborate. 
OT1968:682; SS1984:830-31; GY2008:1624; 
MS1995:v1:518-9. Take 月 as ‘meat’ 209, 刂 
as ‘cut’ 198, and 亼 as a cover.
Mnemonic: FEEL ILL OVER COVERED CUT 
MEAT – NEED CURE 
Seal (瘉) 
; late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 
疒 404 ‘sick(bed)’, with 兪 (see 2033 Note) 
(later 愈) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘emerge, quietly leave’, giving ‘emerge from 
illness’, i.e. ‘heal’. In the graph 癒, 愈 as 

610  The Remaining 1130 Characters
幽玄 YŪGEN　mystery 
幽境 
YŪKYŌ lonely place
幽界 
YŪKAI nether world
悠然 YŪZEN　calm  
悠長 
YŪCHŌ leisure
悠久 
YŪKYŪ eternity 
YŪ, kasuka
dark, obscure, faint, 
wretched
9 strokes
幽
L1
2038
YŪ
composed, ample, 
distant, long time
11 strokes
悠
L1
2039
with associated sense ‘black and unclear, 
dim’, giving ‘burning fi re produces smoke and 
blackened eff ect’ (Mizukami, Katō). By exten-
sion, this led on to a whole raft of meanings 
such as ‘dark, profound, dim, obscure, faint, 
wretched, lonely’. It can also have connota-
tions of other-worldiness and mysteriousness. 
MS1995:v1:448-9; KJ1970:33; T1968:324. 
Though the element ‘mountain’ 山 is a result 
of misinterpretation, it is useful as mnemonic.
Mnemonic: FOLLOW FAINT THREADS 
THROUGH DARK AND WRETCHED MOUNTAINS
ner’. Note: 攸 is comprised of 攴 (攵) 112 ‘hit, 
strike’, with left-hand element  interpreted 
as either ‘remove dirt’, giving overall mean-
ing ‘remove dirt’, or ‘water drips down’ (some 
bronze occurrences of 攸 have three short 
vertical strokes instead of one [丨] to the 
right of 亻41 (‘person’), lending support to 
interpretation as ‘water’), giving ‘cleanse body 
by letting water drip onto it’. Both interpreta-
tions are noted in Mizukami. OT1968:373; 
MS1995:v1:512-3,568-9; KJ1970:25-6. We sug-
gest taking the upper part as 亻 41 ‘person’, 丨 
as long stick, and strike 攵.
Mnemonic: STRIKE PERSON WITH LONG 
STICK FOR A LONG TIME, BUT FEELINGS STILL 
COMPOSED
OBI 
; seal 
. Consists of 火 8 ‘fi re’, (misinter-
preted in Shuowen as 山 26 ‘mountain’) with 
 29 (‘very fi ne/barely visible threads’) taken 
either i] as semantic and phonetic, giving 
‘light of fi re is dim’ (Ogawa), or ii] as phonetic 
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists of 
心 164 ‘feelings, heart, mind’, with 攸 (CO, 
‘remove dirt/defi lement’; see Note below’) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken in one 
view as ‘shake, jolt’, giving ‘one’s heart shakes, 
lament’ (Ogawa). This associated sense is 
noted by Mizukami along with another, viz. 
‘continue in tenuous way’, giving ‘feelings 
continue in delicate and unhurried man-
唯一   YUIITSU　sole, unique  
唯今 
  tadaima now; “I’m home”
唯々諾々  IIDAKUDAKU readily
YUI, I, tada
solely, only, merely, 
prompt
11 strokes
唯
L1
2037
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 口 22 ‘mouth’, with 隹 
324 (‘bird’) as phonetic, in one view taken 
with associated sense ‘prompt answer’, seen 
as ‘acknowledgment’ (Mizukami), or ‘agree-
ment’ (Ogawa). Another view treats 隹 ‘bird’ 
as both semantic and phonetic in function, 
giving ‘birds chirp agreement alike/together’ 
(Gu). Later borrowed for similarly pro-
nounced word meaning ‘just, only’. ‘Prompt’ 
is now rare. MS1995:v1:236-7; OT1968:186; 
GY2008:1241.
Mnemonic: SOLE BIRD HAS MOUTH, AND 
ONLY MERELY NEEDS PROMPTING

The Remaining 1130 Characters  611
湧出    YŪSHUTSU　gush(ing)
湧き立つ  wakitatsu  seethe, boil
湧き起こる  wakiokoru arise  
YŪ, waku
boil, seethe, gush
12 strokes
湧
L1
2040
涌, for which there is a seal form in Shuowen 
(see Note below). Note: 涌 is comprised of 
氵 ‘water’, with 甬 (CO, artefact with hollow 
center and a top feature for hanging/attach-
ing; Schuessler says ‘suspension ring at top 
of bell’: see also 193 for a similar shaped 
element) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘project up/out’, giving ‘water bubbles up/
boils’. SS1984:845,646; DJ2009:v3:898; 
GY2008:1138-9; OT1968:598; AS2007:578. 
Mnemonic: HOW BRAVE TO TAKE ON 
SEETHING WATER
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Consists of 
氵/水 42 ‘water’, combined with 勇 622 
(‘brave, valiant’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘project, jut out/up’ (Ogawa), giving 
‘water boils’. The graph appears to equate to 
猶予   YŪYO　delay, postponement
猶子 
  YŪSHI  foster child
猶予期間 YŪYOKIKAN grace period
YŪ, nao
delay, hesitate, still 
more
12 strokes
猶
L1
2041
Chinese as a loan also for its sound value to 
represent a range of grammatical function 
words, including ‘still’. ‘Delay’ is an extended 
meaning from ‘hesitate’. Note: 酋 consists 
of 酉 318 ‘wine jar’, combined with 八 70 
(‘eight’) in its original sense ‘disperse, away, 
off, out’, and taken in one interpretation as 
representing wine about to overflow from a 
wine jar (Gu). Another analysis, by contrast, 
takes the top strokes as indicating wine fra-
grance being emitted, and hence ‘matured 
wine’ (Mizukami, Ogawa). The latter analysis 
leads quite readily to the passage of time as 
an extended sense. MS1995:v2:836-7,1344-5; 
OT1968:646,1024; GY2008:923-4; KJ1970:24; 
QX2000:280; AS2007:580; WD1974:847-9. We 
suggest taking 犭 as ‘beast’. 
Mnemonic: BEAST HESITATES NEAR FUMING 
WINE JAR, CAUSING STILL MORE DELAY 
Bronze 
 seal 
; traditional form (猶) has 
酋 on right. Consists of 犭/犬 19 ‘dog’ (but 
sometimes used to denote other wild ani-
mals/beasts; here, ‘monkey’), with 酋 (‘chief’; 
see Note below) as phonetic with associated 
sense taken either as i] ‘flinch, shrink back’ 
(Ogawa), or ii] ‘hesitant, distrustful’ (Katō), 
either way giving ‘(type of) distrustful mon-
key’; Qiu notes Shuowen definition as ‘kind 
of large (female) ape’. The sense was then 
generalized to ‘doubt, hesitate’; used in early 
裕福   YŪFUKU　opulence
余裕 
  YOYŪ  margin, surplus
富裕階級 FUYŪKAIKYŪ the wealthy
YŪ, yutaka
rich, plentiful
12 strokes
裕
L1
2042
Bronze 
; seal 
. Consists of 衣 444 
‘garment’, with 谷 135 (‘valley’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘leeway, margin, 
abundance’, giving ‘plentiful garments’. The 
meaning was then generalized to ‘leeway, 
abundance’. KJ1970:887-8; OT1968:906; 
AS2007:589,259. 
Mnemonic: PLENTIFUL RICH CLOTHES, 
ENOUGH TO FILL A VALLEY

612  The Remaining 1130 Characters
雄弁 YŪBEN　eloquence
雄大 
YŪDAI  grandeur
雄牛 
o-osu  bull
YŪ, osu, o-
male, powerful
12 strokes
YŪ, sasou
invite, tempt, lead
14 strokes
雄
誘
L1
L1
2043
2044
(Ogawa), or ii] ‘light, vivid colors’, giving ‘bird 
of beautiful colors, male bird’ (Katō), or iii] 
‘make outer frame taut’, giving ‘male bird 
puffs up its frame’ (Tōdō). Note: Seal form of 
厷 has a shape similar to ム, here a picto-
graphic representation of an arm bent at the 
elbow, combined with 又 2003 ‘right hand’ 
(sometimes just ‘hand’). OT1968:1077,817; 
KJ1970:265,397; MS1995:v1:190-91. We sug-
gest taking 厷 literally, as ‘arm and elbow’.  
Mnemonic: POWERFUL MALE BIRD HAS 
ARMS AND ELBOWS!?
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists 
of 隹 324 ‘bird’, combined with 厷 (CO, 
‘arm, elbow’; see Note below) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken as i] ‘bold’, 
‘courageous’, giving ‘bold bird, male bird’ 
誘惑  YŪWAKU　seduction
誘導 
 YŪDŌ  induction
誘い水 sasoimizu  pump-priming
Seal forms 
 (誘), 
; a late graph (Shuowen). 
Shuowen has  as the entry heading, which it 
defi nes as ‘lead on, beguile’ and then goes on 
to note 誘 as an alternative form. One scholar 
(Shirakawa) questions whether Shuowen is 
correct in equating 誘 with . 誘 has 言 118 
‘words; speak’, with 秀 1451 (‘excel’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘put for-
ward, promote’, giving ‘encourage, entice’. 
DJ2009:v2:740; OT1968:933; SS1984:839. 
Mnemonic: EXCELLENT INVITING WORDS 
MAY LEAD TO TEMPTATION
憂愁  YŪSHŪ　grief, gloom
憂え顔  ureegao  sad look
物憂い monoui weary, gloomy
YŪ, uree(/ru), ui
grief, sorrow
15 strokes
憂
L1
2045
associated sense ‘do as one pleases’, thus 
giving original meaning ‘stroll around as one 
pleases’ (Mizukami); ‘lament, grieve’ is loan 
usage in this view. Another analysis takes 
as 頁 ‘head’ combined with 心 ‘heart, mind, 
feelings’ and 夂 ‘drag the foot’ (sic, but this is 
the meaning of similarly-shaped 夊), giving 
‘legs unsteady through worry’ (also noted in 
Mizukami). For the troublesome elements 
夂 and 夊, see Appendix. DJ2009:v3:866; 
MS1995:v1:518-19,524-5; KJ1970:36. We sug-
gest taking the lower part 夂 as crossed legs, 
upper part as variant or ‘strange’ head 
, 
and ‘heart’ 心 in the middle. 
Mnemonic: SIT CROSS-LEGGED, HEAD AND 
HEART FULL OF GRIEF
Or: GRIEF IN THE HEART MAKES HEAD GO 
STRANGE AND LEGS CROSS
Seal (𢝊) ; a late graph (Shuowen). 𢝊 (the 
original form of 憂 in Shuowen) has 心 164 
‘heart, mind, feelings’, with 頁 103 (‘head’) 
as phonetic with associated sense taken 
as i] ‘shrink, flinch’, thus giving ‘one’s heart 
shrinks/flinches’, or ii] ‘thin, flimsy’, giving 
‘one’s heart grows weak with worries’, or iii] 
‘faint, dim, easily sinks’, giving ‘one’s heart 
easily sinks through fear’ (the above inter-
pretations all listed in Mizukami).  In one 
view, the fuller form 憂 is taken as 夂 ‘foot, 
footprint’, combined with 𢝊 as phonetic with 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  613
融和 YŪWA　softening
金融 
KIN’YŪ  fi nance 
融通 
YŪZŪ fi nance, versatility
YŪ, tokeru
dissolve, melt
16 strokes
融
L1
2046
dissolve’ is an extended sense or loan use of 
融. Note: 虫 here may also have an onomato-
poeic connotation for the sound of steam 
escaping (Mizukami, Katō), but the early Chi-
nese values for 虫 are not really supportive 
of this. DJ2009:v1:240; MS1995:v2:1148-9; 
KJ1970:881; AS2007:189,443; TA1965:185-9. 
We suggest taking 鬲 as ‘one’ 一 1 round pot
口, and stand 
 .
Mnemonic: DISSOLVE INSECTS IN ONE 
ROUND POT ON STAND 
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists of 
NJK 鬲 1431 ‘three-legged cauldron (with 
hollow legs)’ with 虫 60 (‘insect’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘rise up’, giving ‘steam 
rises/escapes’. It is not clear whether ‘melt, 
与え主  ataenushi　donor, giver 
関与 
 KAN’YO involvement 
授与式 JUYOSHIKI award ceremony 
L2
YO, ataeru
give, convey, impart, 
involve
3 strokes
与
2047
the centre element was modified to a shape 
similar to 与, an abbreviated form which be-
came popular in the Northern Wei dynasty 
(387-534AD). Raising something up with 
the hands is a time-honored convention 
when presenting a gift, hence the extended 
sense ‘give’; ‘take part’ is also an extended 
sense. Note: Mizukami takes the graph/ele-
ment concerned to be 𤘈, while Katō takes 
it as 
. For 牙 (‘fang[s]/tusk[s]’), see 1090. 
MS1995:v2:1359-61; FC1974:v2:1851-3; 
KJ1970:136; GY2008:27. Despite being one 
of the least stroke number characters, it is 
surprisingly hard to make a mnemonic, but 
if we take the graph as a whole, we might 
see a picture of a person with long legs and 
short arms sitting on a bench or similar, 
waiting for donations; that is, a beggar.
Mnemonic: GIVE TO BEGGAR WITH SHORT 
ARMS AND LONG LEGS SITTING ON BENCH
Bronze 
; seal 
; traditional 與. Mizukami 
gives OBI forms, typically with four hands 
holding – and apparently lifting up – some 
sort of frame. Bronze forms also show four 
hands, and between them what is interpret-
ed by several commentators as a graph/ele-
ment meaning ‘canine teeth’ and by exten-
sion ‘mesh/come together’ (see Note below). 
Gu, though, interprets as hands lifting some-
thing up, with 口 22 ‘mouth, speak’ serving 
to emphasize cooperation and friendship. 
At the seal stage, the element 口 ‘mouth, 
speak’ was omitted, and what remained of 
名誉   MEIYO　honor, fame 
栄誉 
  EIYO honor, fame 
誉れ高い homaretakai renowned  
YO, homare
honor, fame, praise
13 strokes
誉
L1
2048
as i] ‘lift up’, giving ‘praise’ (Tōdō, Ogawa), or 
ii] ‘call out loudly’, giving ‘proclaim someone’s 
fame’ (Katō). The abbreviated shape 誉 ap-
pears to be based on cursivized occurrences 
(calligraphic models of Tang Dynasty onwards) 
of 譽. TA1965:428-9; OT1968:929; KJ1970:136; 
FC1974:v2:2087-8. We suggest taking the up-
per part 
 as ‘laden table’. 
Mnemonic: FAME BRINGS WORDS OF PRAISE 
AND LADEN TABLE
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
form: 譽. Consists of 言 118 ‘words; speak’, with 
與 2047 (traditional form of 与 ‘give, take part’) 
as phonetic with associated sense taken either 

614  The Remaining 1130 Characters
妖婦 YŌFU　enchantress
妖術 
YŌJUTSU  witchcraft
妖雲 
YŌUN ominous cloud  
YO, ayashii
enchanting, ominous
7 strokes
妖
L1
2049
representing a figure with tilted head act-
ing flirtatiously (Mizukami; Katō is in broad 
agreement). Ogawa also takes it to show 
a tilted head, but as an infant with supple 
body, giving ‘young’. 夭 was used in early 
Chinese texts not just for the words with the 
positive meanings just noted, but also for 
words which were near-homophone(s) with 
negative meanings. 女 was added later to 
minimize ambiguity in writing between the 
two. The semantic progression for the group 
of words with negative associations is con-
sidered to be as follows: ‘bend’ > ‘break, cut 
off’ > ’kill prematurely’(later, 殀) (Schuessler). 
DJ2009:v3:1022; ZY2009:v3:1066; OT1968:
254,244; AS2007:559-60; MS1995:v1:296-8; 
KJ1970:84-5. Take 夭 as ‘big man’ 大 56 with 
big head 
. 
Mnemonic: WOMAN ENCHANTS BIG MAN 
WITH BIG HEAD – SEEMS OMINOUS
Seal (𡝩) 
; late graph (Shuowen). Shuowen 
has 女 37 ‘woman’, with 芺 (CO, a bitter-
tasting type of plant) as phonetic; the graph 
is defined in that work as ‘skilful, or “woman 
smiling/laughing” ’. Later form 妖 has 女 
combined with 夭 ‘young, beautiful’ (see 
Note below) taken in one view as semantic 
and phonetic, giving ‘seductive, enticing (fe-
male)’ (Ogawa). Later, also used in negative 
senses such as ‘ominous, unlucky’, possibly 
as a result of interchange or contamina-
tion between 妖 and 夭 (see Note below). 
Note: 夭 is interpreted in one analysis as 
中庸  CHŪYŌ　middle path 
凡庸 
 BON’YŌ  banality
租庸調 SOYŌCHŌ corvee, labor
YO
ordinary, work
11 strokes
庸
L1
2050
庸 Zhongyong (Doctrine of the Mean), in 
which 庸 has the sense ‘level out’, and on 
that basis treats ‘ordinary’ as an extended 
sense. Note: 庚 is taken by Katō as originally 
showing pounding with pestle, involv-
ing repeated raising and lowering, thus 
extended sense ‘repeat, do continuously’. 
Mizukami also notes a view that it shows 
a ‘strong stick having a “Y” shape’, which is 
in line with Katō’s view. KJ1970:884,942; 
MS1995:v1:450-51,454-5,450-52; TA1965:290. 
Take elements as ‘building’ 广 127, 肀 as 
hand holding stick, and 用 ‘use’. 
Mnemonic: HAND USES STICK TO DO 
ORDINARY WORK IN BUILDING
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 庚 (bronze form ; 
originally ‘hold pestle with both hands 
and pound grain’ [NJK; now calendar sign], 
see Note below), with 用 235 ‘use, employ’ 
as semantic and phonetic, giving overall 
meaning ‘work continuously’ (Katō), or 
‘work on grain harvest’ > ‘work’ (Ogawa). 
Tōdō points to title of Confucian classic 中
揚水  YŌSUI　pumping water
揚げ場 ageba　landing place
揚げ物 agemono　fried food
YŌ, ageru
raise, fry
12 strokes
揚
L1
2051
Bronze 
; seal 
. Originally (OBI, bronze) 
consists of 丮 (CO; depiction of a kneeling 
figure doing something with the hands: see 
also 1424), combined with 昜 161 (originally 
‘sun rises’, modern meanings ‘change, easy’, 
see Note below) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘rise/lift up’, giving ‘lift up with the 
hands’. At the seal stage, 丮 was changed to
扌/手34 ‘hand’ Note: the original top ele -

The Remaining 1130 Characters  615
溶液   YŌEKI　(liquid) solution
溶解   YŌKAI　melt, dissolve
溶け合う  tokeau　melt together
YŌ, tokeru/kasu
melt, dissolve
13 strokes
溶
L2
2053
動揺   DŌYŌ　shaking
揺り椅子  yuri-isu　rocking chair
揺れ止め yuredome　stabiliser
YŌ, yuru/reru/ragu
shake, swing, rock
12 strokes
揺
L1
2052
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
搖. Consists of 扌/手 34 ‘hand’, with 䍃 (CO, 
‘bake pottery/earthenware’; see Note below) 
as phonetic with associated sense taken as i] 
‘move without stopping’ (Katō), or ii] ‘shake’ 
(Tōdō), or iii] ‘supple, pliant’ (Ogawa), giv-
ing overall meaning ‘shake, sway’. Note: 䍃 
consists of 缶, originally meaning ‘earthen-
ware vessel’ 缶 1141 (here in 2052 taken as 
representative of pottery/earthenware), with 
月 (肉) 209 ‘meat, flesh’ as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘bake [tiles etc.]’ (Katō; Gu is 
in broad agreement). The modern form has 
a simplification to the upper right element. 
KJ1970:83-4; TA1965:195-6; OT1968:424; 
GY2008:1089-90. We suggest taking 爫 1739 
‘reaching hand, claw’, and 缶 1141 as ‘can’.
Mnemonic: SHAKING HANDS REACH FOR 
CAN – TOO MUCH SWINGING AND ROCKING!
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists of 
氵 water’ 42, with 容 822 (‘contain; appear-
ance’) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken as i] ‘vigorous/extensive’, giving ‘pour 
water into container up to the brim’ (Katō), 
or ii] ‘well up’, giving ‘current/force of water 
is strong’ (Ogawa). The senses ‘melt’ and 
‘dissolve’ appear to represent loan usage 
resulting from earlier interchangeability 
between 溶 with 熔 ‘melt’ and 鎔 ‘smelt/
melt’ (both NJK) (Ogawa, Katō). OT1968:602; 
KJ1970:888. We suggest taking 容 as 宀 30 
‘roof, house’ and 谷 135 ‘valley’. 
Mnemonic: HOUSE DISSOLVES IN VALLEY 
FULL OF WATER 
ment in bronze stage equivalents of 昜 is 
taken in one view to be 日 66 ‘sun’; Katō 
considers the lower elements to be 丂 130 
(‘floating aquatic plant’, q.v.) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘rise’, together with 
彡 115 ‘feathers, colored feathers’, the latter 
representing colored (reflected) rays of the 
sun. According to Katō, the overall meaning 
then becomes ‘colors/brilliance of the risen 
morning sun’; ‘rise up’ is an extended sense.  
Another analysis takes the top part of 昜 as 
‘jade disc/precious stone on a stand’, with 
rays of reflected light (Shirakawa), leading to 
‘raise up (as an offering)’. The meaning ‘fry’ is 
probably loan usage, though it may possibly 
relate to raising some food item from a vat, 
which would suggest an extended mean-
ing. MS1995:v1:558-9,618-9; KJ1970:877-8; 
SS1984:846,849.
Mnemonic:  HAND RAISED TO RISING SUN 
MAY GET FRIED

616  The Remaining 1130 Characters
腫瘍  SHUYŌ　tumor 
潰瘍  KAIYŌ　ulcer
胃潰瘍 IKAIYŌ　stomach ulcer
YŌ
ulcer, boil, tumor, 
carbuncle 
14 strokes
瘍
L1
2055
舞踊  BUYŌ　dance, dancing
踊り子  odoriko　dancing girl
盆踊り  BON odori　Bon Dance
YŌ, odoru 
dance, leap
14 strokes
踊
L2
2056
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 足54 
‘foot, leg’, combined with 甬 (CO, ‘suspension 
ring at top of bell’; see 2040 Note) as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘hit, strike’, giving 
original meaning ‘stamp feet on the ground’. 
Shirakawa suggests this may have been part 
of a funerary ritual, but does not elaborate. 
‘Dance’ may be regarded as an extended 
sense if one follows this view. In similar vein, 
Katō also regards the meaning of the graph 
as ‘feet leaving the ground’, hence ‘dance’. 
OT1968:973; SS1984:852; KJ1985:589-90. We 
suggest taking the elements as 足 ‘leg’, 用 
as ‘use’ 235, and マ as ‘bent knee’ (or ‘bent 
elbow’ for those who ‘do the turkey’).  
Mnemonic: WHEN DANCING, USE YOUR 
LEGS, BENDING YOUR KNEES TO LEAP
Or: WHEN DANCING, LEAP USING YOUR LEGS 
AND ELBOWS !?
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists 
of 疒 404 ‘sick(bed)’, with 昜 161 (‘colors of 
risen morning sun’, etc.; see 2051 Note) as 
phonetic. The commentators below do not 
specify the associated sense, but it may be 
taken as ‘rise, emerge’, giving ‘boil, ulcer, 
tumor’. OT1968:681; SS1984:852.  
Mnemonic: SUNRAYS MAY HELP SOMEONE 
SICK WITH A TUMOR OR ULCER 
窯業  YŌGYŌ　ceramics
窯業家 YŌGYŌKA　ceramist 
乾燥窯 KANSŌgama　drying kiln
YŌ, kama
kiln, oven
15 strokes
窯
L1
2057
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists 
of 穴 860 ‘hole, cave’, combined with 羔 
(NJK, ‘newborn lamb’), taken in one view 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘bake’, 
giving ‘cavity for baking earthenware’, i.e. 
‘kiln, oven’ (Ogawa). The graph 羔 is made 
up of 羊 426 (‘sheep’, slightly abbreviated 
to 
), combined with 灬 (火) 8, ‘fire’  mak-
腰痛 YŌTSŪ　lumbago
腰肉 koshiNIKU　loin meat
物腰 monogoshi　bearing, manner
YŌ, koshi
hip, lower back, 
manner
13 strokes
腰
L2
2054
A late, post-Shuowen graph. For many cen-
turies, the word for ‘waist’ was written as just 
要 623 (‘need, vital’, q.v.), but the latter graph 
acquired extended meanings such as ‘vital, 
important’, and so to then lessen ambiguity 
in writing, 月/肉 209 ‘flesh, meat; body’ was 
added as determinative to clearly show the 
meaning ‘waist’. ‘Bearing, manner’ would 
seem to be extended senses (cf. English 
‘stand straight’) SS1984:851; GY2008:810; 
OT1968:826.
Mnemonic: HIP IS VITAL PART OF BODY 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  617
ing it a distinct possibility that ‘roast a 
lamb’ may have been the original meaning, 
then generalized to ‘roast, bake’, but most 
commentators do not favor this analysis, 
probably in part at least because Shuowen 
defines 羔 as ‘newborn lamb’. Amniotic fluid 
takes its name from the Greek term amnos 
(lamb), and features in some graphs relating 
to human birth (see 432), so it is tempting 
to interpret the four dots in the modern 
form as droplets of amniotic fluid. However, 
the seal form above shows clearly that it is 
definitely the fire determinative. Shirakawa 
supports ‘newborn lamb’ on the basis of 
certain seal forms, the shape of which might 
be interpreted as ‘lamb/sheep standing’. 
Note, though, that Ma and Gu give much 
older OBI forms that clearly have 火 as the 
bottom element. A later popular variant of 
窯 is 窰, with 䍃 ‘bake pottery/earthenware’ 
(CO; see 2052 Note) as the lower element. 
OT1968:743; SS1984:852,302-3; MR2007:294; 
GY2008:1121. We suggest taking 𦍌 as ‘little 
sheep’ (i.e. lamb), along with ‘hole’ 穴 860 as 
‘pit’, and ‘fire’灬 8.
Mnemonic: FIREPIT FOR ROASTING LAMB 
CAN ALSO BE KILN OR OVEN
擁護 YŌGO　protection, help
擁立 YŌRITSU　support
抱擁 HŌYŌ　embrace
YŌ
embrace, protect
16 strokes
擁
L1
2058
Seal (𢹬) 
; a late graph (Shuowen). The 
seal form has扌/手 34 ‘hand’, with 雝 (CO, 
‘bird protects its eggs’; see Note below) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘surround, 
enclose’, giving ‘enclose with the hands/arms, 
embrace’; by extension, ‘protect’. Kangxi zidian 
lists both 𢹬 and 擁, but the 𢹬 entry refers 
the reader to 擁 as the main entry. 雝 as pho-
netic in 
 was later abbreviated to 雍. Note: 
雝 is comprised of 隹324 ‘bird’, with 邕 (CO; 
‘external moat [around city, etc.]’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘enclose, block off ’. 
Mizukami also notes an alternative interpreta-
tion, namely ‘enclose and protect birds’. Either 
way, the overall meaning is still ‘embrace, 
surround’. KJ1970:884; OT1968:431.1078; 
MS1995:v2:1412-3,1318-9; ZY2009:v2:442,436; 
AS2007:577. We suggest taking the graph’s 
elements as ‘hand’ 扌, ‘bird’ 隹, top 亠 , and 乡 
as variant of ‘short thread’, 幺 29.
Mnemonic: HAND PROTECTS BIRD WITH 
THREAD-LIKE CREST ON TOP
謡曲 YŌKYOKU　Noh chant
民謡 MIN’YŌ　folk song
謡本 utaiBON　Noh text
YŌ, utai, utau
Noh chant, song
16 strokes
謡
L1
2059
A late, post-Shuowen graph; traditional 謠. 
Consists of 言 118 ‘words; speak’, with 䍃 (CO, 
‘bake pottery/earthenware’; see 2052 Note) 
as phonetic with associated sense taken as 
i] ‘move up and down’, giving ‘moderate the 
voice’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘wander’, giving ‘sing by 
making voice waver’ (Katō), or iii] ‘extend out 
in narrow manner’, giving ‘sing by extending 
voice out in narrow way’ (Tōdō). Despite these 
minor diff erences of interpretation, the overall 
interpretation of this graph may be summed 
up as ‘sing/chant by modulating the voice’. 
In Japanese, this has taken on a narrower 
meaning, referring specifi cally to chanting of 
texts in Noh drama. Note that, as with 2052, 
the top right element has been simplifi ed. 
OT1968:939; KJ1970:84; TA1965:190-94. Also 
as with 2052, we suggest taking 爫 1739 as 
‘reaching hand, claw’, and 缶 1141 as ‘can’.  
Mnemonic: HAND REACHES FOR CAN, 
SINGING WORDY NOH CHANT

618  The Remaining 1130 Characters
抑止 YOKUSHI　deterrent
抑圧 YOKUATSU　suppression 
抑制 YOKUSEI　restraint 
YOKU, osaeru
restrain, press down
7 strokes
抑
L1
2060
OBI (卬) 
; seal 
. OBI form consists of 
卩 41 ‘person kneeling’, with 爪 1739 ‘claw’ 
(sometimes ‘hand’, as here, later stylized to 
), giving original meaning ‘make someone 
kneel’ and by extension ‘kneeling person 
looks up’: see also 仰 1229, ‘look up, respect’) 
In Katō’s view, originally 卬 and 印 448 (‘seal, 
sign’, q.v.) were the same graph (see Note 
below), though not all scholars agree on this 
(Mizukami treats as two separate graphs). 
The two were clearly differentiated by the 
seal stage. 抑, with扌/手34 ‘hand’ added (in 
effect an extra hand), is noted in Shuowen 
as a popular equivalent, and one which later 
came to predominate. ‘Hold down, press 
down’, close to the original meaning, is typi-
cally regarded as an extended sense. Note: 
The fact that OBI occurrences of 印 have 爪
facing to the right while 爪 is facing to the 
left in some OBI occurrences of 卬 does not 
signify a difference of meaning or differ-
ent graphs, as at that very early stage such 
fluctuation in direction was usually non-
significant (Qiu). MS1995:v1:178-81,v2:818-9; 
GY2008:106,407-8,180; DJ2009:v2:732-3. We 
suggest taking the right-hand part 卬 as a 
person doubly bent.    
Mnemonic: HAND PRESSES DOWN ON 
PERSON TILL DOUBLY BENT
沃土 YOKUDO　fertile land
肥沃 HIYOKU　fertility
沃素 YŌSO　iodine
giving ‘sprinkle/moisten with water’. By 
extension, ‘fertile’. Transition from 芺 to 夭 
(‘young, beautiful’ etc.; see 2049 Note) as 
phonetic (same associated sense) be-
gan to occur at the clerical script stage. 
OT1968:564; GY2008:498; SS1984:857; 
SK1984:441. As with 2049, take 夭 as ‘big 
man’ 大 56 with big head 
. 
Mnemonic: BIG MAN WITH BIG HEAD POURS 
WATER AROUND FOR FERTILITY
YOKU, YŌ
fertility, pour
7 strokes
沃
L1
2061
Seal (𣵽) 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Seal 
form consists of 氵/水 42 ‘water’, with 芺 
2049 (‘[type of] bitter-tasting plant’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘sprinkle’, 
右翼 UYOKU　right wing
翼端 YOKUTAN　wingtip 
翼竜 YOKURYŪ　pterodactyl
thus ‘bird flies with pair (of wings)’. 翼, with 
羽 ( 羽 82 ‘wings’) as top element, is also not-
ed. Clerical script occurrences also have the 
more familiar and less intricate 羽/羽. Kangxi 
zidian lists both forms with 飛 and 羽 as top 
element, as separate entries (form with latter 
is main). MS1995:v2:1452-4; DJ2009:v3:955; 
ZY2009:v4:1528,v3:996; SK1984:585. 
Mnemonic: DIFFERENT WINGS, BUT WINGS 
NONETHELESS
YOKU, tsubasa
wing
17 strokes
翼
L1
2062
Seal (𩙺) 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
form has 羽 as top element. Shuowen has 飛 
595 (‘fly’), with 異 826 (‘differ’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘pair of wings, pair’, 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  619
拉致  RATCHI　abduction
拉丁語 RATENGO*(old writing)　Latin
拉する  RASsuru　drag along, abduct
RA, RATSU, hishigu/
geru
abduct, crush
8 strokes
拉
L1
2063
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 扌 34 
‘hand’, with 立 77 (‘stand’) as phonetic with 
associated sense taken as i] ‘press/push 
against’, giving ‘break, crush’ (Ogawa), or ii] 
‘lined up together’, giving ‘perform action 
with hands working together’ (Tōdō). It is 
unclear whether ‘abduct’ is loan usage or 
extended sense. OT1968:410; TA1965:804-6; 
GY2008:597. 
Mnemonic: CRUSHING HAND ABDUCTS 
STANDING PERSON
裸身  RASHIN　nudity
赤裸々  SEKIRARA　frankness
裸馬  hadakauma　bareback
RA, hadaka
naked, bare
13 strokes
裸
L1
2064
Seal ( 
 ) . Seal form has 衤 444 ‘clothes’, 
with 
 (CO; ‘snail’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘expose’ (Ogawa, Shirakawa), thus 
‘expose skin without garment’, i.e. ‘naked’. 
Shuowen has CO  
 as entry heading, but 
goes on to note 裸 as an alternative form. 
Note: scholars differ regarding historical 
fluctuation in the form of the phonetic ele-
ment in this graph and its interpretation. We 
have taken the broader view. DJ2009:v2:681; 
OT1968:907; GY2008:1667; SS1984:859; 
KJ1970:75-6. Take modern form 果 as 454 
‘fruit, result’.
Mnemonic: PEEL OFF CLOTHES – LIKE SKIN 
OFF FRUIT – AND END UP NAKED
羅列  RARETSU　arranging
羅典語 RATENGO (old writing)　Latin
網羅的 MŌRATEKI　comprehensive
OBI 
; seal 
. The OBI form has 罒/网 
570 ‘net’ combined with 隹 324 ‘bird’, giving 
‘catch bird in net’. The seal form adds 糸 29 
‘thread’ (sometimes also ‘cord’). ‘Bird net’ and 
‘gauze (especially silk gauze)’ are extended 
senses, and so too is ‘include’. Note also that 
2065, like 2063, can be used to indicate 
Latin. GY2008:635; MR2007:376; SS1984:860; 
MS1995:v2:1036-7; AS2007:370. We suggest 
taking the elements as they stand, namely 
罒 ‘net’, 糸 ‘thread/cord’, and 隹 ‘bird’. As an 
alternative, take 罒 as ‘eye’ 76.
Mnemonic: BIRD-NET OF GAUZE THREAD
Or: KEEP AN EYE ON THE GAUZE THREADS 
OF THE BIRD-NET
RA
gauze, net, include
19 strokes
羅
L1
2065

620  The Remaining 1130 Characters
雷雨 RAIU　thunderstorm
雷名 RAIMEI　renown
魚雷 GYORAI　torpedo
信頼   SHINRAI　trust
頼り無い  tayorinai　unreliable
頼み   tanomi　a request
RAI, kaminari
thunder, lightning
13 strokes
RAI, tanomu, tayoru
request, rely
16 strokes
雷
頼
L1
L2
2066
2067
Bronze form A 
; bronze form B ; seal 
; 
traditional 靁. Bronze form A consists of four 
identical shapes linked up, each similar in 
shape to 田 63 ‘field’ but rounded, as is typi-
cally the case with graphs in bronze. These 
are interpreted not as ‘field’ but as represent-
ing ‘sound of thunder’ (Mizukami, Ogawa) or 
‘small drum’ (Katō). Supporting evidence is 
Seal: 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
賴. Usually taken as 貝 10 ‘shell (/currency)’, 
with 剌 (NJK ‘oppose; painful’; see Note 1 
below) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘profit’, giving ‘profit’. Note 1: 剌 has 刂 198 
‘knife’, with 束 561 (‘bundle’) taken as i] 
phonetic with associated sense ‘bent’, thus 
‘knife is bent’ and by extension ‘go against’, 
or ii] semantically as ‘bundle’ (of firewood 
to be found in the depiction in Han dynasty 
tiles of the god of thunder beating a drum 
(Shirakawa). In bronze form B, the forked 
line is taken to represent lightning linking 
up to the elements similar to 田 described 
above; in some occurrences, 雨 3 ‘rain’ is in-
cluded also. Regularization at the seal stage 
led to the rather unwieldy bronze shapes 
beneath 雨 being modified to 畾. Clerical 
script forms tend to fluctuate between 靁 
and 雷. MS1995:v2:1426-8; OT1968:1085; 
KJ1970:890; SS1984:861; DJ2009:v3:937; 
SK1984:772.
Mnemonic: RAIN FALLS ON FIELD AMID 
THUNDER AND LIGHTNING
etc), giving ‘branch being cut for firewood 
springs up/back’; both analyses are listed in 
Mizukami. Note 2: An alternative view of 賴 
(noted by Mizukami) takes seal form right 
side not as 刀 ‘knife’ but as 𠂊 41 ‘person’ 
(both similar in shape at the seal stage) over 
貝, and left side as 朿 (CO, ‘thorn’ as abbrev 
of 刺 1403 ‘stab’) with associated sense as 
‘indiscriminate’, thus ‘put responsibility onto 
others when borrowing and lending money’. 
‘Request, rely’ are extended meanings. 
MS1995:v2:1248-9,v1:132-3; OT1968:962; 
KJ1970:890; GY2008:1563. Take modern 頁 
as ‘head’ 103.
Mnemonic: RELY ON HEAD TO REQUEST A 
BUNDLE
連絡   RENRAKU　contact
絡み合う  karamiau　intertwine
短絡   TANRAKU　short circuit
RAKU, karamu/maru 
entwine, connect
12 strokes
絡
L2
2068
Seal 
. Has 糸 29 ‘thread’, with 各 462 
(‘each, every’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense taken as i] ‘entangled’, thus ‘silk 
thread becomes tangled’ (Katō), or ii] ‘be 
intertwined’, giving ‘wind/twist (something) 
round’ (Ogawa), or iii] ‘link across’, giving ‘link 
two sides with thread’ (Tōdō). KJ1970:193; 
OT1968:779; TA1965:362-4. 
Mnemonic: EACH THREAD IS ENTWINED AND 
THUS CONNECTED

The Remaining 1130 Characters  621
酪農 RAKUNŌ　dairy farming
酪酸 RAKUSAN　butyric acid
乾酪 KANRAKU　cheese
辣腕 RATSUWAN　astute, sharp
辛辣 SHINRATSU　bitter, harsh
悪辣 AKURATSU　unscrupulous
RAKU
dairy produce, whey, 
juice, curd
13 strokes
酪
L1
2069
RATSU
bitter, severe
14 strokes
辣
L1
2070
Seal 
; late graph (later version of Shuow-
en). Has 酉 318 ‘wine jar’ (here indicating 
fermentation), with 各 462 (‘each, every’) 
as phonetic with associated sense taken 
in one analysis as ‘sour’ (Ogawa). Shuowen 
xinfu (Shuowen, Newly Appended) defines 酪 
as ‘milk made into a thick paste’; Shirakawa 
takes this as signifying milk products made 
into a drink or into cheese, and Gu is in 
broad agreement. OT1968:1027; SS1984:864; 
GY2008:1565. 
Mnemonic: EACH JAR OF DAIRY PRODUCE 
CONTAINS CURDS AND WHEY
A very late post-Shuowen graph. Consists of 
辛 1535 ‘sharp, bitter’ (originally pictograph 
of needle), combined with 束 561 (‘bun-
dle’) taken as abbreviation of 剌 (‘oppose; 
painful’; see 2067 Notes), giving ‘very spicy 
(usually bitter)’; and by extension ‘severe’. 
OT1968:991; SS1984:864; GY2008:1748. We 
suggest taking 辛 as a ‘bent needle’. 
Mnemonic: GETTING BUNDLE OF SEVERELY 
BENT NEEDLES IS BITTER BLOW
濫費 RANPI　extravagance
濫用 
RAN’YŌ abuse, misuse
氾濫 
HANRAN inundation
RAN
fl ood, wanton, overdo 
18 strokes
濫
L1
2071
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists of 
氵/水 42 ‘water’, with 監 1159 (‘watch, su-
pervise’) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken as either i] ‘cover’, giving ‘water covers’ 
(Ogawa), or – in similar vein – ii] ‘spread, be 
prevalent/rampant’, giving ‘water spreads’, 
i.e. ‘floods’ (Katō). By extension, ‘excessive, 
overdo, wanton’. OT1968:613; KJ1970:898. 
Mnemonic: WANTON SUPERVISION OF 
FLOODING WATER 
出藍 SHUTSURAN　besting master
藍色 
aiiro indigo color
伽藍 
GARAN Buddhist temple
RAN, ai
indigo 
18 strokes
藍
L1
2072
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists 
of 艹 53 ‘plant, vegetation’, combined with 
監 1159 (‘supervise, watch’) as phonetic 
(associated sense unclear). Shuowen defines 
藍 as a ‘plant to dye things blue’. It refers 
to the plant itself, and by extension its use 
as a dye for the color indigo (dark violet-
blue). The first recorded use of indigo in 

622  The Remaining 1130 Characters
欄干 RANKAN　railing
空欄 
KŪRAN blank space 
欄外 
RANGAI page margin
吏員 RIIN　(an) offi  cial
能吏 
NŌRI able offi  cial 
吏臭 
RISHŪ ‘red tape’
RAN
railing, column, space, 
margin 
20 strokes
RI
offi  cial
6 strokes
欄
吏
L1
L1
2073
2074
sense ‘enclose on four sides’, with overall 
meaning ‘pen (for animals)’ (supported by 
Shirakawa as a minor meaning), and more 
broadly as ‘frame which surrounds’ (Katō). 
Regarding ‘margin, column’ in a written text, 
Shirakawa notes the term 烏糸欄 ushiran 
referred to main text on a page enclosed in 
the traditional way with four lines in a box 
shape, and the space outside the box, i.e. 
the margin space, was termed 欄外 rangai. 
OT1968:529; KJ1970:898; SS1984:867. Take 
modern form as ‘east’ 東 201 and ‘gate/door’ 
門 231.  
Mnemonic: WOODEN COLUMN-LIKE 
RAILINGS LEAVE SPACE AT EASTERN GATE 
work a person was undertaking, conveying 
that meaning; in this connection, see also 事 
309. Minor differentiation in shape between 
the two is seen at the seal stage, reflect-
ing divergence in meaning, with 吏 being 
used for ‘(an) official’. MS1995:v1:214-6; 
QX2000:324-5; OT1968:169; KJ1970:450; 
AS2007:350. Suggest take upper part as ‘ten’ 
十 35 boxes 口 22. 
Mnemonic: OFFICIAL’S HAND HOLDS TEN 
BOXES  
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 欄. 
Has 木 73 ‘tree, wood’, with 闌 (NJK, ‘parti-
tion’), taken in one view semantically to 
give ‘wood for partition’, and by extension 
‘railing’; by further extension, ‘boundary’ 
(Ogawa). Another view takes 闌 slightly 
differently as phonetic with associated 
OBI 
; seal 
. At OBI and bronze stages, 
吏 and 事 309 (‘matter, thing’) were one and 
the same graph, showing a hand (又, 2003) 
holding a banner displaying the type of 
下痢 GERI 　diarrhea
赤痢 
SEKIRI dysentery
疫痢 
EKIRI infant diarrhea
RI
diarrhea
12 strokes
痢
L1
2075
A very late graph (medieval period onwards). 
Has 疒 404 ‘sick(/bed)’, with 利 626 (‘profi t’) as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘quick, rapid’ 
(Katō), giving ‘illness with rapid onset symp-
toms’ – more specifi cally, ‘diarrhea’. OT1968:680; 
KJ1970:489. 
Mnemonic: DIARRHEA CAN BE A PROFITABLE 
SICKNESS!?
Japan was in a Nara temple around 620, and 
for a century or so it was used only by the 
privileged classes. However, from around 
the 9th century it became widely avail-
able through the advent of vat dyeing. It is 
especially favored for its resistance to fading 
and water. In modern times indigo dye has 
been produced synthetically. OT1968:876; 
SS1984:866; GY2008:1547.  
Mnemonic: PRODUCTION OF INDIGO 
PLANTS AND DYES NEEDS SUPERVISON

The Remaining 1130 Characters  623
履歴 RIREKI 　curriculum vitae
履行 
RIKŌ performance
履物 
hakimono footwear
RI, haku
footwear, walk, act
15 strokes
履
L1
2076
here is taken not as phonetic but semantic 
as ‘substitute person for the deceased ’, and 
the whole graph is considered in this view 
originally to have referred to the wearing 
of shoes (made not of wood but of fabric) 
when conducting a ritual (Shirakawa). The 
two similarly-shaped ‘foot’ elements 夂 and 
夊 appear to have given rise to a degree of 
confusion and fluctuation over the centu-
ries, and 履 is a case in point: clerical script 
occurrences predominantly have the ‘foot’ 
element changed from 夊 to 夂 (assum-
ing one accepts that the element here was 
originally 夊), and in terms of overall shape 
the graph was moving towards its modern 
form at that stage. Mizukami lists several 
proposed bronze equivalents. ‘Act’ is prob-
ably an extended sense. MS1995:v1:412-4; 
DJ2009:v2:692; KJ1970:296-7; SS1984:872; 
SK1984:244. We suggest taking elements of 
the modern form as 復 (803 ‘again, repeat’) 
and corpse 尸.
Mnemonic: CORPSE WALKS REPEATEDLY, 
WITH FOOTWEAR – SOME ACT!
Seal (𢔃) 
. Analyses diverge. Leaving aside 
initially the top element 尸 (256 ‘corpse’, 
‘person lying down’: see below), there is 
general agreement regarding the element 
舟 1450 (‘boat’), namely that here it repre-
sents boat-shaped footwear. This combines 
with 彳 131 ‘road; go’, and an element for 
‘foot’ here typically identified by scholars as 
夊, which is often interpreted as ‘drag the 
foot’ (see Appendix). These three elements 
contribute to an overall meaning ‘walk 
(slowly) dragging the feet wearing shoes/
clogs’ (‘wooden shoes’, i.e. ‘clogs’ is favored 
by Katō). The top element 尸 (‘corpse’, also 
meanings including ‘substitute person for 
deceased’ [in a ritual context]) is treated in 
one view as phonetic with associated sense 
‘drag’ (Katō, Mizukami). Alternatively, 尸 
瑠璃  RURI 　lapis lazuli
浄瑠璃 JŌRURI jōruri ballad drama
は璃  HARI glass, crystal
RI
lapis lazuli
15 strokes
璃
L1
2077
according to 6th century Yupian dictionary 
is ‘lapis lazuli’, a deep blue semi-precious 
stone. Originally, 璃 seems to have referred 
to ore of lapis lazuli, then by extension to 
it when refined, then to natural crystal, 
then to early form of glass. GY2008:1678; 
OT1968:727. Awkward. We suggest 亠 as lid, 
凶 as box with contents, and ‘strange insect’ 
 (虫 60).
Mnemonic: LIDDED BOX OF LAPIS 
LAZULI – BUT FULL OF STRANGE INSECTS!
分離  BUNRI　separation 
離陸 
 RIRIKU take-off 
乳離れ chibanare weaning
RI, hanareru/su
separate, leave
19 or 18 strokes
離
L1
2078
Seal 
. Analyses diverge. In one analysis 
the graph is taken as 隹 324 ‘bird’, with 离 
(CO, ‘mountain deity [in beast form]’) as pho-
netic (associated sense unclear), originally 
denoting a type of bird (‘black-naped oriole’ 
[Oriolus chinensis]); and in this view mean-
ings such as ‘become separated’ are seen as 
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 玉 15 ‘jewel’ 
(in abbreviated shape ⺩), with 离 (CO; 
‘mountain deity [in beast form]’) as phonetic 
(associated sense unclear). Overall meaning 

624  The Remaining 1130 Characters
慄然   RITSUZEN　horror, shudder  
戦慄 
  SENRITSU shudder, tremble
恐れ慄く  osoreononuku tremble in fear
糸柳  itoyanagi　weeping willow
花柳界 KARYŪKAI demimonde
川柳  SENRYŪ comic verse
RITSU, ononuku
fear, tremble, shudder, 
horror
13 strokes
RYŪ, yanagi
willow, willowy
9 strokes
慄
柳
L1
L1
2079
2080
based on the OBI forms – as originally a pic-
tograph of a tree with fruit or nuts enclosed 
in a burr, i.e. prickly case, and hence ‘chest-
nut’ (Gu, Shirakawa). Mizukami lists this 
together with several other interpretations. 
OT1968:384; MS1995:v1:668-9; GY2008:1014; 
SS1984:875-6. We suggest taking the right-
hand side as 西 169 ‘west’ and 木 73 ‘tree’, 
with ‘feelings’ 忄 164. 
Mnemonic: EVEN TREES TREMBLE, FEELING 
FEAR AT HORROR IN THE WEST
Or: WESTERN TREES INVOKE FEELINGS OF 
FEAR, CAUSING TREMBLING 
with hanging branches’ (Katō), or iii] ‘grow 
luxuriantly’, giving ‘tree with luxuriant 
branches and leaves’ (noted in Mizukami). 
Note: ‘trappings on horse bit’ is one view, 
based on OBI form of 卯 as originally being a 
pictograph. Another view takes it as cutting 
something like meat in two with a knife, or 
forcing open two leaves of a gate (all three 
views given in Mizukami). TA1965:202-04; 
OT1968:501; MS1995:v1:664-5. Take 卯 as a 
symbol of ‘back-to-back’. 
Mnemonic: WILLOW TREES BACK-TO-BACK?
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Consists of 忄/心 
164 ‘heart, mind, feelings’, with 栗 (NJK, 
‘chestnut tree’; see Note below) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘extremely painful’ 
(Ogawa), giving ‘recoil/flinch with fear’. Note: 
analyses of 栗 include the treatment of it –
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 木 73 ‘tree’, with 卯 813 
(meanings include ‘trappings on horse bit’; 
see Note below) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense taken as i] ‘separate into long 
lines/threads’, giving ‘weeping willow’ (Tōdō, 
Ogawa ), or ii] ‘flow/hang, giving ‘tree type 
loan usage (Ogawa). Another analysis takes 
离 as an abbreviation for 黐 ‘birdlime’, giving 
overall meaning for 離 as ‘bird caught on 
birdlime’; and by extension, ‘remove from 
birdlime’, a meaning which was then gen-
eralized to ‘remove’ (with obvious connota-
tions of separation and leaving) (Shirakawa). 
The above explanation relates to the seal 
form. Mizukami proposes OBI equivalents 
also, though his analysis relates to the seal 
form, and he regards ‘become separated’ 
as a loan use. OT1968:1081; SS1984:873; 
MS1995:v2:1414-15; AS2007:348. As with 
2077, we suggest taking the elements of this 
awkward character as 亠 as a lid, 凶 as a box 
with contents, and ‘strange insect’ 
 (虫 60). 
Mnemonic: SEPARATE BIRD FROM LIDDED 
BOX FULL OF STRANGE INSECTS 
Or: BIRD HAS TO LEAVE BOX FULL OF 
STRANGE INSECTS DUE TO LID

The Remaining 1130 Characters  625
恐竜 KYŌRYŪ　dinosaur
竜神 RYŪJIN　dragon god 
竜巻 tatsumaki　whirlwind
bronze forms but was regularized at seal 
stage. The abbreviated form 竜 may well be 
based on Tang dynasty cursive models. In 
Chinese tradition a dragon is seen as a sym-
bol of goodness and strength, not threaten-
ing and fire-belching as in Western cul-
tures. MS1995:v2:1526-7; QX2000:177,238; 
GY2008:146. Take as ‘stand’ 立 77 and  
 as 
short for electricity 電 197.
Mnemonic: STANDING DRAGON HAS AN 
ELECTRICAL SHORT! 
L1
RYŪ, tatsu
dragon
10 strokes
竜
2081
OBI 
; seal 
; traditional 龍.  Originally 
visualized depiction of dragon with long 
snaking body. Shape varies in OBI and 
粒子 RYŪSHI　particle
一粒 hitotsubu　one grain
粒々 
RYŪRYŪ　assiduously
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 米 220 
‘rice’ (originally [OBI] grains of cereal, not 
necessarily rice; q.v.), with 立 77 (’stand’) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken as i] 
‘scattered’, giving ‘individual (rice) grains’ 
(Ogawa), or ii] ‘be lined up together’, giving 
‘cereal grains of same shape collected to-
gether’, and by extension ‘(individual) grain’ 
(Tōdō, Mizukami). ‘Particle’ is an extended 
sense. OT1968:762; MS1995:v2:998-9; 
TA1965:804-6.
Mnemonic: STAND ALONGSIDE RICE GRAINS 
RYŪ, tsubu
grain, particle
11 strokes
粒
L2
2082
隆盛 RYŪSEI　prosperity 
隆起 RYŪKI　upthrust, bulge
興隆 KŌRYŪ　prosperity, rise
meanings. Quite a diff erent interpretation is 
adopted by Shirakawa, who alone treats 阝 as 
having religious signifi cance meaning ‘ladder 
for deities (to descend and ascend)’, combined 
with 夂 meaning ‘descend’ (see Appendix) and
土 64 ‘earth, ground’, signifying the welcom-
ing of deities down to Earth. Qiu indicates that 
old (e.g. clerical script) forms of 隆 with 土 
‘earth’ in place of 生 do exist, which he takes as 
consisting of 土 combined with 降 as pho-
netic in function. Note that the modern form 
has dropped the short horizontal line on the 
right-side of the traditional form. OT1968:1071; 
GY2008:1345; SS1984:878; QX2000:254. We 
suggest taking 夂 as crossed legs. 
Mnemonic: PROSPER IN LIFE, RISE HIGH, AND 
SIT CROSS-LEGGED ON MOUND 
RYŪ
high, swell, rise, 
prosper
11 strokes
隆
L1
2083
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
隆. Interpretations diff er. In one view, the graph 
consists of 阝(阜) 262 ‘hill, mound’, with 㚅 as 
phonetic with associated sense ‘swell up’, giv-
ing ‘hill swells/rises up’ (Ogawa). Another analy-
sis takes as 生 44 ‘life, birth, grow’, with 降 873 
(‘descend’) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘luxuriant, big’, giving ‘grow luxuriantly’ (Gu).  
Senses such as ‘high; prosper’ are extended 

626  The Remaining 1130 Characters
硫酸  RYŪSAN　sulfuric acid
硫黄  iŌ*　sulfur
硫化銀 RYŪKAGIN　silver sulfi de
be a connection through the fumes given 
off when sulphur, which has quite a low 
melting point, is burnt. This latter possibil-
ity seems to be supported by a point made 
by Qiu to the effect that in Chinese the 
word for ‘sulfur’ was originally written 流
黄 ‘flowing yellow’ (< flowing fumes, and 
yellow color of sulfur). The writing 流黄 was 
later changed to 硫黄, substituting 石 ‘rock, 
mineral’ for 氵/水 42 ‘water’ as determina-
tive, probably for semantic transparency. 
Note: 㐬 originally represented a baby being 
born amidst amniotic fluid, and hence the 
meaning ‘flow out’. OT1968:712; QX2000:339; 
GY2008:1398,1135-6; MS95:v2:778-9.  
Mnemonic: SULFUR IS A ROCK THAT FLOWS, 
WITHOUT WATER
RYŪ
sulfur
12 strokes
硫
L1
2084
A late, post-Shuowen graph. This graph is 
defined in the Jiyun dictionary (11th cen-
tury) in rather general terms as a ‘[type 
of] rock which is not smooth’. Gu regards 
the sense ‘sulfur’ as a loan use. A different 
analysis takes the graph as 石 47 ‘stone/
rock; mineral’, combined with 㐬 ‘flow out’ 
(see 432 and Note below) as semantic and 
phonetic, giving ‘easily melted mineral’ 
(Ogawa). There may however, alternatively, 
伴侶 HANRYO　partner, companion
僧侶 SŌRYO　Buddhist priest
 (no other compounds)
ing ‘companion, friend’. GY2008:654,260-61; 
OT1968:68; SS1984:880. We suggest taking 
the right side as two mouths (speaking) 口 
22 with a link between their comments. Or, 
mouth-to-mouth contact. 
Mnemonic: COMPANIONS TALKING ABOUT A 
LINKED TOPIC
Or: PERSON APPLIES MOUTH-TO-MOUTH AID 
TO HIS COMPANION
Or: MY COMPANION IS A PERSON WITH LOTS 
OF ‘BACKBONE’
RYO, tomo
companion, partner
9 strokes
侶
L1
2085
Seal 
; a late graph (later version of 
Shuowen). Consists of 亻/人 41 ‘person’, 
combined with 呂 2119 (proposed meanings 
include ‘spine’) as phonetic with associated 
sense taken as ‘gather, be side by side’, giv-
虜囚   RYOSHŪ　captive
捕虜   HORYO　prisoner of war 
宣誓俘虜 SENSEIFURYO　parolee
broadly similar analysis, but takes 虍 as hav-
ing a semantic as well as phonetic function 
(‘violent, savage’), and originally meaning 
‘take by force’, with ‘capture’ as an extended 
sense. Note:  OBI occurrences of 毌 ‘pierce, 
penetrate’ are taken in one interpretation 
as representing a shield, or alternatively as 
shells (shell currency) pierced and strung 
together on a length of string (both given in 
Mizukami). It might be tempting to take the 
line through the shield as indicating ‘pierce 
a shield’, but in all cases the line is hori-
zontal  or vertical in relation to the shield, 
RYO, toriko
captive, capture
13 strokes
虜
L1
2086
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 力 78 
‘strength’, combined with 毌 1148 ‘pierce, 
penetrate’ (see Note below), with – in one 
view –  虍 1301 (‘tiger’, q.v.) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘prison’, giving ‘put 
in prison; prisoner’ (Ogawa). Gu makes a 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  627
遠慮 ENRYO　reserve
考慮 KŌRYO　consideration
慮外 RYOGAI　unexpected
‘urn, earthen jar’) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘set out in words, relate’, giving 
‘ponder extensively’ (Ogawa). Another analy-
sis takes the graph as 思 147 ‘think’, with 虍 
1301 (‘tiger’, q.v. 1301) as phonetic with as-
sociated sense ‘count, calculate’, giving ‘con-
sider and count’ as original meaning (Katō). 
GY2008:23,1228; OT1968:387; KJ1970:899.
Mnemonic: THINK CONCERNED THOUGHTS 
ABOUT TIGER
RYO
thought, concern
15 strokes
慮
L1
2087
了解 
RYŌKAI　understood!
了承 
RYŌSHŌ　understanding
終了 
SHŪRYŌ　fi nish
an infant wrapped in swaddling clothes, in 
effect bringing the limbs close to the body.  
Another scholar sees it as string or cord 
that has been tied (Ogawa). A more gen-
eral – and perhaps safer – view of the seal 
form is that it depicts ‘something twisted’ 
(Shirakawa). Its modern meanings would 
seem to be loan usages. KJ1970:920-21; 
GY2008:17; OT1968:29; SS1984:882. Take as 
armless infant (子 27).
Mnemonic: ONE UNDERSTANDS THAT A 
CHILD NEEDS ARMS TO BE COMPLETE
RYŌ
understand, 
fi nish, complete
2 strokes
了
L2
2088
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Shuowen 
takes it to be a pictograph of a child with 
arms withered and twisted, positioned close 
to the body (torso); this view is followed by 
Katō. Similarly, Gu sees it as representing 
suggesting orderly construction rather than 
invasive piercing (in the latter case, one 
would tend to expect a diagonal piercing 
line). N.B. 毌 should be distinguished from 
another graph very similar in shape, viz. 
毋, originally standing for a word meaning 
‘do not violate woman’, then borrowed for 
‘there is none, do not…’. 毌 1148 was more 
distinct in shape in OBI and bronze, while 毋 
‘do not violate woman’ only became distinct 
in shape from 母 222 ‘mother’ from seal 
onwards. MS1995:v1:718-20; OT1968:882; 
GY2008:611,127. For the modern form, we 
suggest taking the lower part as 男 57 male/
man.
Mnemonic: MAN CAPTURES TIGER
Or: (perhaps more likely): TIGER CAPTURES 
MAN
涼味  RYŌMI　coolness
涼み台 suzumiDAI　bench
涼風  suzukaze　cool breeze
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵/水 42 
‘water’, combined with 京 110 (‘capital’) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken either 
as i] ‘clear’, giving ‘clear water’ (Ogawa), or ii] 
‘cold’ giving ‘cold water’ (Katō). Either way, 
‘cool’ is an extended sense. OT1968:592; 
KJ1970:907. 
Mnemonic: WATER IN THE CAPITAL IS COOL
RYŌ, suzumu/shii
cool
11 strokes
涼
L2
2089
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Analyses 
diverge. In one view, it consists of 心 164 
‘heart, mind’, with 𧆨 (Gu equates with CO 瓮 

628  The Remaining 1130 Characters
猟師 RYŌSHI　hunter
猟銃 RYŌJŪ　hunting gun
渉猟 SHŌRYŌ　extensive reading
lect prey together’ (Tōdō, Ogawa), or ii] ‘leap 
high over’, giving ‘dogs leap high chasing 
prey’ (Katō). 猟 is based on cursive equiva-
lents. Note: 巤 is taken as meaning ‘mask for 
frightening demons away’, or ‘animal mane’; 
both are listed by Mizukami. TA1965:842-5; 
MS1995:v1:426-7; OT1968:645; KJ1970:924; 
FC1974:v2:1438. We suggest taking 
 as 
claws, and 𠂡 as variant of ‘use’ 用 235.
Mnemonic: DOG PUTS CLAWS TO USE IN 
HUNTING
RYŌ
hunting
11 strokes
猟
L1
2090
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional獵. 
Has 犭 19 ‘dog’, with 巤 (CO, for meanings 
see Note below) as phonetic with associated 
sense taken as i] ‘collect, gather’, giving ‘col-
陵墓 RYŌBO　imperial tomb
丘陵 KYŪRYŌ　hill, hillock
御陵 GORYŌ　imperial tomb
Note 2 below. Top element is taken in one 
view as 圥 (meaning unclear) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘create folds/creases’, 
giving ‘advance through strenuous effort/ 
making leg muscles stand out’, or ‘cross over 
in (straight) line what is in front, cross over’ 
(Mizukami). Alternatively, top part of seal 
form is taken to be not 圥 but 𡴆, mean-
ing ‘mushroom’ according to Kangxi zidian, 
but Shirakawa prefers to see it as building 
in a sacred place to welcome deities down. 
Combined with 夊, this gives Shirakawa’s 
proposed overall meaning for 夌 as ‘encroach 
and pollute, trample’, reflecting defilement of 
such a sacred place by humans. Note 2: Even 
in the original Peking Palace printed edition 
of Kangxi zidian the difference in shape be-
tween the two determinatives 夂 and 夊 can 
be hard to discern. For further details, see 
Appendix. MS1995:v2:1398-9,v1:286-7,416; 
SS1984:884,882; KZ2001:482-3/3671,486-
8/3671. We suggest taking right side as ‘earth’ 
土 64, ‘eight’ 八 70 and 夂 as crossed legs. 
Mnemonic: EIGHT CROSSED LEGS SIT ON 
EARTH OF IMPERIAL TOMB MOUNDS
RYŌ, misasagi
imperial tomb, mound
11 strokes
陵
L1
2091
Bronze 
; seal 
. In one view, has 阝/阜 262 
‘hill, mound’, with element 夌 (for meanings, 
see Note 1 below) as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘make sinews/creases stand out’, 
giving ‘crease line of ridge on hill/mountain’; 
by extension ‘hill’, and by further extension 
‘burial mound’, narrowed in meaning to ‘Im-
perial tomb’ (Mizukami). Shirakawa, however, 
sees 阜 as representing a ladder for deities 
to descend from and return to the sky; in his 
view, the graph as a whole signifies sacred 
place to welcome deities, later acquiring 
the meaning ‘Imperial tomb’ because it was 
often used for burials. Note 1: based on seal 
form, 夌 is taken by Mizukami as includ-
ing a lower element taken not as 夂 (one of 
several determinatives meaning ‘foot’) but 
as the similarly-shaped 夊 (also ‘foot’): see 
Seal 
. Consists of 亻/人 41 ‘person’, with 尞 
(CO ‘burn’; see Note below) as phonetic with 
associated sense taken as i] ‘work’, giving 
‘person who works alongside’ (Katō), or ii] 
‘place where officials live’, giving ‘colleagues 
who are officials’ (Ogawa), or iii] ‘be linked, 
continue’, giving ‘person who works along-
side in same office’ (noted in Mizukami). 
同僚 DŌRYŌ　colleague
僚友 RYŌYŪ　friend, colleague
官僚 KANRYŌ　offi  cial
RYŌ
colleague, offi  cial
14 strokes
僚
L1
2092

The Remaining 1130 Characters  629
Mizukami). Sense modified (depending on 
interpretation of original meaning) to ‘of-
ficial’, along with ‘colleague’. Mizukami lists 
proposed OBI equivalents. Note: the OBI 
forms of 尞 depict a pile of wood (firewood) 
being burned, giving ‘pile up wood and 
burn’; the sense was then generalized to 
‘burn’. On a cultural note, in ancient China 
aspirants to a position in officialdom, which 
was considered an elite occupation, had to 
sit written examinations largely based on 
the Confucian classics. That is, they earned 
their position through hard work and study 
and merit. By contrast, in early Japan, de-
寮生 RYŌSEI　boarding student
寮歌 RYŌKA　dormitory song 
寮長 RYŌCHŌ　head of hostel
‘colleagues’ (those who share same space). 
Ogawa, however, takes as 宀 combined with 
尞 as phonetic with associated sense ‘plan’, 
giving ‘office for planning government mat-
ters’. Another view (Gu), by contrast, treats 
寮 as a late graph, listed in Yupian (6th cen-
tury), meaning ‘colleague, fellow official’; by 
further extension, ‘(type of) building’. ‘Hostel, 
dormitory’ is the specific sense for this graph 
and ‘colleague’ is now conveyed by 2092. 
KJ1970:918; OT1968:284; GY2008:1847. Take 
尞 as ‘big’ 大 56, 丷 as ‘away’ 八 70, ‘day/sun’ 
日 66, and 小 ‘little’ 38.
Mnemonic: HOSTEL HAS BIG AND LITTLE 
ROOFS TO KEEP SUN AWAY
RYŌ
hostel, dormitory
15 strokes
寮
L2
2093
Analyses differ. In one view (Katō), there is a 
bronze form corresponding to 竂, consisting 
of 穴 860 ‘cave, hole’, taken to have in effect 
the same meaning as 宀 30 ‘roof, building’ 
on the basis that in ancient times people oc-
cupied caves as dwellings; Katō takes 尞 (CO; 
see 2092 Note) here as phonetic with as-
sociated sense ‘gouge out’ and by extension 
‘opening, window’ by further extension, 
医療  IRYŌ　medical treatment
治療師 CHIRYŌSHI　therapist
療養所 RYŌYŌJO　sanitarium
RYŌ
cure, heal
17 strokes
療
L2
2094
Seal (𤻲) 
. Shuowen has 𤻲 in the entry 
heading, and notes 療 as an alternative form. 
Has 疒 404 ‘sick(-bed)’, with 樂 98 (‘music; 
pleasure’; later, 尞 [see 2092 Note]) as pho-
netic with associated sense taken either as i] 
‘assess and put right’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘good’ or 
‘control’, giving ‘treat illness’ (Katō). Accord-
ing to Shirakawa, the earlier form 𤻲 reflects 
an ancient Chinese method of treating 
illness, whereby bells were struck near the 
patient in order to drive out the demons of 
sickness; later, after that practice ceased, the 
phonetic was changed to 尞. DJ2009:v2:613; 
OT1968:682; SS1984:888; KJ1970:919. Take 
尞 as ‘big’ 大 56, 丷 as ‘away’ 八 70, ‘day/sun’ 
日 66, and 小 ‘little’ 38. 
Mnemonic: MAJOR ILLNESS – MAYBE A 
LITTLE SUNSHINE WILL CURE IT AWAY
spite a strong influence from China in a vari-
ety of ways, including various political insti-
tutions and legal frameworks, examinations 
for officials were replaced by recommenda-
tions, and bureaucrats were largely aristo-
crats. KJ1995:918-9; OT1968:81; SS1984:885; 
MS1995:v1:82-3,402-03. Awkward mnemoni-
cally, but we suggest taking the elements on 
the right-side as ‘big’ 大 56, 丷 as ‘away’ 八 
70, ‘day/sun’ 日 66, and 小 ‘little’ 38.
Mnemonic: PERSON AWAY ON BIG DAYS AND 
‘LITTLE DAYS’ IS OFFICIALLY A COLLEAGUE

630  The Remaining 1130 Characters
Late, post-Shuowen graph. In Yupian (6th 
century). Has 目 76 ‘eye’, with 尞 (see 2092 
Note) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘bright’, thus ‘bright/clear pupils (of eyes)’. 
GY2008:1929; OT1968:703. SS1984:888. Take 
尞 as ‘big’ 大 56, 丷 ‘eight’ 70, ‘sun’ 日 66, and 
小 ‘little’ 38.
Mnemonic: MY BIG EYE CLEARLY SEES EIGHT 
OBVIOUS LITTLE SUN-SPOTS
瞭然   RYŌZEN　clear, obvious
不明瞭  FUMEIRYŌ　unclear
一目瞭然 ICHIMOKURYŌZEN　clear
RYŌ
clear, obvious
17 strokes
瞭
L1
2095
糧道 RYŌDŌ　supplies
食糧 SHOKURYŌ　provisions
兵糧 HYŌRŌ　army provisions
RYŌ, RŌ, kate
provisions, food
18 strokes
糧
L1
2096
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Has 米 220 
‘rice’ (originally ‘grain’ [more general sense]), 
with 量 630 (‘measure, quantity’), typically 
taken in one view as phonetic with associat-
ed sense ‘pure, good (quality)’, giving ‘pure/
good quality cereal grain’ (Ogawa, Tōdō). Al-
ternatively, 量 is taken as a sack of fixed size 
for measuring grain, giving ‘provisions of 
fixed amount’ (Shirakawa). Either view leads 
to ‘provisions’ and – as a generalized sense 
– ‘materials’ and ‘measure’. OT1968:765; 
TA1965:360-62; SS1984:888.
Mnemonic: MEASURED QUANTITY OF RICE 
MAKES UP PROVISIONS
厘毛   RINMŌ　a trifl e
二厘   NIRIN　two rin
一分一厘 ICHIBUICHIRIN　tiny bit
A very late post-Shuowen graph. Evolved as 
an abbreviation of 釐 (orig. ‘thresh grain’; see 
Notes below). Since in ancient times taxes 
were collected in kind, especially grain, tax 
amounting to a small percentage may have 
led to ‘tiny’ and ‘regulate’ as extended senses 
(Gu treats as extended senses). The sense 
‘tiny, minute’ was then quantified as a unit 
of measure (different in China and Japan). 
Actual amounts for units of measure often 
varied, depending on the period, but typi-
cally the rin was one tenth of a sen, and a 
RIN
tiny amount, rin (coin)
9 strokes
厘
L1
2097
sen was one hundredth of a yen. Note 1: 釐 
is comprised of 𠩺 (see Note 2) ‘thresh’, com-
bined with 里 238 ‘village’, taken here either 
as i] semantic and phonetic, giving ‘bring 
in harvest’ (Ogawa), or ii] as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘village fields divided up’, 
giving ‘thresh grain, bring in harvest’ (noted 
in Mizukami). Note 2: 𠩺, a CO, consists of 
攵/攴 112 ‘hit, strike’, combined with the re-
mainder of the graph, which on the basis of 
the OBI form is taken as depicting ripe grain 
and ‘person’; at the seal stage, this remainder 
of the graph was modified by changing 人 
41 ‘person’ inappropriately to 厂 (normally 
‘cliff’), perhaps based on a particular bronze 
form. GY2008:812-3; OT1968:149,1033; 
MS1995:v2:1358-9,v1:186-7.
Mnemonic: TINY VILLAGE BELOW CLIFF IS 
VALUED AT A MERE RIN

The Remaining 1130 Characters  631
倫理 RINRI　principles, ethics
人倫 JINRIN　morality 
絶倫 ZETSURIN　peerless 
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists of 
人 41 ‘person’, with 侖 631 (CO, ‘align bound 
bamboo/wooden tablets’; see Note below) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘order’ 
sequence’, giving ‘orderly personal relations’, 
and hence ‘principles, ethics’. Note: 侖 con-
RIN
principles, ethics
10 strokes
倫
L1
2098
sists of 亼 ‘collect, bring together’ (originally, 
pictograph of lid/cover over something 
[Shuowen erroneously analyses as three 
things put together]), over 冊 884 ‘(slim) 
bound volume’, giving ‘(number of slim) vol-
umes bound together in order’. GY2008:98; 
OT1968:72; KJ1970:910-11.
Mnemonic: PERSON ALIGNED ACCORDING 
TO ETHICAL PRINCIPLES 
Or: PERSON PUTS COVER OVER BAMBOO 
TABLETS ABOUT ETHICS
隣室  RINSHITSU　next room
隣接  RINSETSU　adjacency
隣合う  tonariau　adjoin
瑠璃  RURI　lapis lazuli
瑠璃色 RURIiro　azure
浄瑠璃 JŌRURI　Jōruri ballad drama
Seal (鄰) 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Origi-
nally consists of 邑 / 阝 ‘village, settlement’ 
(normally right-hand 阝 376, not left-hand 
262, which signifies ‘hill, mound’ etc.), com-
bined with 粦 (CO; for meanings, see Note 
below) as phonetic with associated sense 
‘lined up, side by side’, giving ‘village/settle-
ment with dwellings arranged side by side’. 
By extension, ‘neighboring’ and ‘adjoin’. It is 
not clear as to when exactly the element 阝 
was relocated. Note: 粦 is taken in one view 
as the modified version of 㷠, consisting of 
炎 1050 ‘flames’, combined with 舛 336 (‘feet 
pointed in opposite directions’) as seman-
tic and phonetic meaning ‘stamp on and 
RIN, tonari
neighbor, adjoin
16 strokes
隣
L1
2099
RU
lapis lazuli
14 strokes
瑠
L1
2100
scatter’; overall meaning: ‘flames scattered 
through stamping’, or ‘flickering flames, will-
o’-the-wisp’ (Mizukami). Alternatively, based 
on one of the bronze forms for 粦, another 
commentator interprets the top element 
differently as 大 56 (‘big’) representing ‘per-
son’, and takes the short dot-like strokes as 
drops of blood dripping down, with overall 
meaning ‘human sacrifice made before 
ladder for deities (to descend and ascend)’ 
(Shirakawa). The latter view is based in part 
on Shirakawa’s idiosyncratic interpreta-
tion of left-hand 阝 (abbreviated form of 阜
1907 when occurring as left-hand element), 
which is usually taken to mean ‘hill, mound, 
etc.’. MS1995:v2:1340-41,v1:808-09,796-7; 
OT1968:1075; TA1965:477-80; SS1984:890-
92. Taking modern form, albeit with an error, 
we suggest 米 ‘rice’ 220, 舛 336 as opposed 
feet/stamp, and ‘mound’ 阝 .
Mnemonic: NEIGHBORS STAMP ON MOUND 
OF RICE! 
Seal (𤥗) 
; a late graph (Shuowen). 
Shuowen has 玉 15 ‘jewel, jade, precious 
stone’ in abbreviated shape , with 丣 (CO; 
‘closed gate’) as phonetic, and defines as 
‘lapis lazuli’. The phonetic element was later 
changed to 㐬 432 (‘flow’) or 留 824 (‘stop; 
fasten’) with associated sense ‘smooth’, 

632  The Remaining 1130 Characters
涙管 RUIKAN　tear duct
涙雨 
namidaame light rain
空涙 
soranamida crocodile tears
RUI, namida
tear(s) 
10 strokes
涙
L2
2101
survives (Katō). Traditional form: 淚. Consists 
of 氵 42 ‘water, liquid’, combined with 戻/戾 
2105 (‘return’) as phonetic with associated 
sense taken either as i] ‘accumulate continu-
ally’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘drip down’, either way 
taken to mean ‘tears’. An interesting variant 
is the semantically more transparent form 
泪 (NJK;  氵 42 ‘water and 目 76 ‘eye’), but is 
rarely used. OT1968:583; KJ1970:917. 
Mnemonic: WATER RETURNS AS TEARS
A late graph, not included in extant versions 
of Shuowen, though it appears to have been 
included in an early version which no longer 
累計 RUIKEI　sum total
累積 
RUISEKI accumulation
係累 
KEIRUI dependents
RUI
accumulate, involve 
11 strokes
累
L1
2102
Seal (纍) 
; a late graph (Shuowen); tra-
ditional 纍. Has 糸 29 ‘thread’, with 畾 (CO; 
orig. form of 靁 ‘thunder’ [雷 2066]) as pho-
netic with associated sense ‘accumulate, fol-
low one after another’, giving ‘join together’. 
‘Involved’ is extended sense. TA1965:688; 
DJ2009:v3:1070; GY2008:1814; OT1968:776. 
Take as ‘field’ 田 63 and ‘thread’ 糸 29.
Mnemonic: THREADS ACCUMULATE IN FIELD 
– NEED TO GET INVOLVED
giving ‘smooth precious stone’. Used in 
combination with 璃 2077, another graph of 
the same or very close meaning, to write 瑠 
璃 ‘lapis lazuli’. DJ2009:v1:30; TA1965:204; 
SS1984:893.
Mnemonic: STOP AND FASTEN PRECIOUS 
LAPIS LAZULI DECORATION
土塁 DORUI　earthwork
敵塁 
TEKIRUI enemy fort 
塁審 
RUISHIN base umpire
RUI
fort, base, baseball 
base
12 strokes
塁
L1
2103
Bronze (壘) 
; seal (壘) 
; traditional 壘. 
Has 土 64 ‘earth, ground’, with 畾 (originally 
form of 靁 ‘thunder’ [雷 2066]) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘pile up, accumulate’ 
(Mizukami adds ‘in orderly manner’). Overall 
meaning is ‘structure made of earth, stones, 
etc. piled up (arranged in orderly way)’, i.e. 
‘fortifications, fortress, base’. OT1968:221; 
KJ1970:914; MS1995:v1:280-81. Take 田 as 63 
field, 
 as four pointers.
Mnemonic: FOUR POINTERS TO EARTHEN 
BASES IN FIELD

The Remaining 1130 Characters  633
精励   SEIREI　diligence
奨励 
  SHŌREI encouragement
励み合う  hagemiau vie
RUI, hagemu/masu
encourage, strive
7 strokes
励
L1
2104
later variant, with 厲 (NJK,‘whetstone’) 
as phonetic in place of 萬; possibly this 
evolved as a folk etymology (i.e. errone-
ous etymology) based on interpreting the 
meaning of 勱 as deriving from sharpening 
one’s efforts. Zhengzitong (1771) treats 勵 
as a popular variant. 勵 was, though, given 
official status in Japan in the first Jōyō kanji 
List of 1923; this was replaced by 励 in the 
Tōyō kanji list of 1946. MS1995:v2:1124-6; 
DJ2009:v3:1135; KJ1970:916-17; TA1965:551; 
KZ2001:268/3671; ZZ1671:v1:180. Take 厂 as 
cliff, and 力 as ‘strongly’.
Mnemonic: STRONGLY ENCOURAGE TO 
CLIMB TEN THOUSAND CLIFFS   
Seal (勱) 
; late graph (Shuowen); tradi-
tional: 勱. Has 力 78 ‘strength, effort’, with 
萬 (traditional equivalent for 万 227 ‘ten 
thousand, myriad’; originally, pictograph 
of scorpion) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘strive’ or similar (Tōdō says ‘apply 
great stimulus’), giving ‘great effort’. There 
is also the form 勵, which seems to be a 
戻し税   modoshiZEI　tax refund
返戻 
  HENREI return
戻しそう  modoshisō feeling sick
RUI, modoru/su
return, reject, vomit 
7 strokes
戻
L2
2105
seems questionable. An alternative proposal 
by Shirakawa takes 戾 as showing a dog bur-
ied beneath an entrance as a preventative 
spell. A further analysis treats it as 犬, with 
戸 as phonetic with associated sense ‘shut 
in’, giving ‘wild/rampaging dog is shut in (by 
entrance)’, and by extension ‘act contrary 
to, go against’ (noted in Mizukami). Etymol-
ogy of this graph is debated; Schuessler has 
‘arrive, reach, settle’ as possible meanings 
for 戻 in a word-family related to 来 237 
‘come’ (as opposed to ‘return’). OT1968:398; 
KJ1970:1917; SS1984:897; MS1995:v1:546-7; 
AS2007:342-3. ‘Dog’ has now been replaced 
by what is in effect ‘big’ 大 56.
Mnemonic: BIG DOOR LETS PEOPLE RETURN, 
OR REJECT THEM IF VOMITING
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
戾. The traditional interpretation (Shuowen) 
is that this graph, comprising 犬 19 ‘dog’ 
with 戸 120 ‘door’, represents a dog twisting 
and turning to get under a door or entrance, 
and this is followed by several scholars 
(Ogawa, Katō). Katō takes ‘go back’ as an 
extended sense deriving from a dog going 
back – i.e. return – to its original shape (pos-
ture) after getting under a door. However, 
this proposed Shuowen-based etymology 
電鈴 DENREI　electric bell
風鈴 
FŪRIN wind chime
鈴木 
Suzuki a surname
REI, RIN, suzu
bell (small), chime 
13 strokes
鈴
L1
2106
Bronze 
; seal 
. Consists of 金 16 ‘metal’, 
combined with 令 633 (‘order, rule’) as pho-
netic, taken either as having an associated 
sense ‘clear and attractive’ (Tōdō), or purely 
as onomatopoeic for a bell sound (Ogawa); 
either way, the overall meaning is ‘metal 
bell’. Note that the Japanese are very fond of 
their wind chimes, heralding a breeze in the 

634  The Remaining 1130 Characters
零時 REIJI　midnight
零下 REIKA　below zero
零細 REISAI　small, tiny
REI, koboreru/su
zero, tiny, spill
13 strokes
零
L1
2107
but Shuowen also lists 霝 separately, with 
the meaning ‘rain, rain falls’. In the case of 
零, 令 633 (‘order, rule’) serves as phonetic 
with associated sense taken either as i] ‘hang 
down’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘clear, something clear 
which drips down’ (noted in Mizukami); 
either way, the overall meaning is ‘rain 
falls’. The meaning ‘small’ is an extended 
sense from raindrops, and ‘zero’ is perhaps 
a further extended sense. DJ2009:v3:938; 
OT1968:1086; MS1995:v2:1420-21; 
KJ1970:72-3; BK1957:222; SS1984:898,900; 
AS2007:361. 
Mnemonic: ORDER ZERO RAIN TO FALL – OR 
MAYBE JUST A TINY BIT
Or: ORDER ZERO SPILLAGE OF RAINWATER
OBI (霝) 
; seal forms 
, 
. OBI stage 
has 霝 only. This consists of 雨 3 ‘rain’, with 
the lower part representing in one view a 
pictographic representation of raindrops 
(Katō). There is, though, a different perspec-
tive which treats the graph as signifying an 
incantation for rain (for Karlgren, 口 redu-
plicated indicates ‘speak, incant’, while for 
Shirakawa, it indicates ‘prayer receptacles’). 
零 is given above as  one of the seal forms, 
幽霊 YŪREI　ghost
悪霊 AKURYŌ　evil spirit
霊屋 tamaya　mausoleum
REI, RYŌ, tama
spirit, soul
15 strokes
霊
L1
2108
巫  ‘shaman/shamaness’, with 霝 (‘rain, rain 
falls’; see 零 2107) as phonetic with as-
sociated sense ‘descend’, taken as giving 
‘shaman/shamaness for whom fearsome 
deity descends’ (also listed in Mizukami, 
with nuance ‘fearsome deity, ghost’ in place 
of ‘deity’). Alternatively, Ogawa takes 霝 as 
semantic in function meaning ‘rain’, giving 
‘shaman/ shamaness prays for rain’. Both 
  and 靈 occur at the clerical script stage; 
霊 is based on cursive forms. On a cultural 
note, Japanese ghosts are traditionally sup-
posed to have no legs. MS1995:v2:860-62; 
DJ2009:v1:30; OT1968:1087; SK1984:773; 
FC1974:v2:2418-20. Take 
 as variant of 並 
977 ‘line up’, along with 雨 3 ‘rain’.
Mnemonic: SPIRITS LINE UP IN THE 
RAIN – HARDY SOULS
Seal 
; traditional 靈. Shuowen has 
 as 
the main entry, and notes 靈 as an alterna-
tive form. Firstly, : this has 王 5 (‘ruler’), 
but here representing 玉 15 (‘jade, pre-
cious stone’; at the seal stage, the two were 
virtually identical in shape), combined with 
霝, taken here in one view as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘descend, come down’, 
giving ‘precious stone used by shaman/
shamaness to bring deities down’ (noted 
in Mizukami). The alternative form 靈 has 
often oppressive summer heat. It does actu-
ally appear to have some soothing acoustic 
effect with regard to enhancing the cool-
ness of the faintest of breezes. OT1968:1041; 
MS1995:v2:1364-5; TA1965:475-7.  
Mnemonic: ORDER METAL BELL TO CHIME
Or: ORDER METAL TO BE MADE INTO A BELL

The Remaining 1130 Characters  635
奴隷  DOREI　slave
奴隷制 DOREISEI　slavery
隷属  REIZOKU　subordination
REI
slave, prisoner
16 strokes
隷
L1
2109
the seal script, came to be known as 隷書 
REISHO (Ch. lishu), usually in English called 
‘clerical script’ or ‘scribe script’. Clerical 
script represents an important stage in the 
historical development of the Chinese script. 
Clerical script occurrences of this graph have 
both 隸 and 隷; historically speaking, the lat-
ter is a variant form, but now the standard in 
Japanese usage. Note: several scholars give a 
pre-seal form, but its status is questionable, 
and so we take the seal form as the correct 
early form (as does Katō). MS1995:v2:1404-5; 
KJ1970:916; QX2000:103-112. Suggest tak-
ing 隶 as 肀 hand seizing, 氺 as (sweat) drop-
lets, and left-hand as 士 ‘samurai’ 521 and 示 
‘show’ 723.
Mnemonic: SAMURAI SHOWS HOW HE 
SEIZED SLAVE DESPITE SWEATY HAND
Seal (隸) ; traditional 隸. Consists of 隶 
‘catch up with’ 1668 (see Note below), with 
柰 (original meaning [provisional]: ‘quince’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘join, 
bind, make into a pair’, giving ‘capture and 
make into slave/servant’ and hence ‘slave, 
prisoner’. Also used in Qin and Han dynasties 
as a term for low-ranking officials in charge 
of prisoners. The script used (though not 
actually devised) by them for administrative 
purposes, significantly abbreviated from 
年齢 NENREI　age, years
妙齢 MYŌREI　youth
高齢 KŌREI　great age
REI
age
17 strokes
齢
L2
2110
easily ascertained by checking their teeth. 
Another scholar (Ogawa) analyses the graph 
differently, taking 齒 as ‘age, years’ (presum-
ably as extended sense), with 令 as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘pass, elapse’, giving 
overall meaning ‘age’. Note that the modern 
form has the simplified version of the graph 
for ‘teeth’, i.e. 歯, with inner shape the same 
as ‘rice’ 米  220.  KJ1970:915; OT1968:1173; 
SS1984:900. We suggest taking the mod-
ern left-hand form(s) as ‘rice’ 米 220 in the 
‘mouth’ 口 22, and 止 143 ‘stop’, and for the 
right-hand retaining 令 as ‘order’ 633. 
Mnemonic: ORDERED TO STOP PUTTING RICE 
IN MOUTH TILL A CERTAIN AGE
Seal 
; a late graph (later version of 
Shuowen); traditional 齡. Consists of 齒 
‘teeth’ (traditional form of 歯 306), com-
bined with 令 633 (‘order, rule’) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken in one view as 
‘count’, giving ‘count teeth and determine 
age’ (Katō); meaning later narrowed to ‘age’. 
Shirakawa notes that the age of cattle is 
麗人 REIJIN　a belle, beauty
美麗 BIREI　beauty
秀麗 SHŪREI　graceful, beautiful
Bronze 
; seal . Consists of 鹿  ‘deer’ (NJK, 
see also 1268 for similar graph)  combined 
with 丽 (‘two identical things’). 丽 is taken 
in one interpretation  as phonetic with as-
sociated sense ‘come/join together’, giving 
‘deer (of type which) converge when they 
see food’ (Mizukami, Katō). Alternatively, 
REI, uruwashii
beautiful
19 strokes
麗
L1
2111

636  The Remaining 1130 Characters
暦年 REKINEN　calendar year
西暦 SEIREKI　Anno Domini
花暦 hanagoyomi　fl oral clock
ment followed by sun and other heavenly 
bodies at regular intervals). Shirakawa, by 
contrast, puts forward several proposed 
bronze forms for 曆/暦 which feature not 
日 ‘sun, day’ but 曰 1048 ‘speak’, which he 
interprets as ‘announce on banner military 
prowess at camp gates’. The form 暦, now 
standard in Japanese usage, evolved as rela-
tively late variant (block script stage). Note: 
秝 (CO; reduplication of 禾 87 ‘grain plant’) is 
taken in one view as ‘arrange grain seedlings 
equidistantly’ or ‘arranged properly’ (Mizu-
kami). Shirakawa, alternatively, takes 秝 to 
represent grain plants placed to mark the 
entrance to a military camp. KJ1970:921; 
OT1968:474; MS1995:v1:186-7,v2:966-7; 
QX2000:357; OT1968:474; SS1984:902-3. 
Take the modern form as ‘history’ 歴 636 
without the element ‘stop’ 止 143, i.e. ‘non-
stop’.
Mnemonic: CALENDAR RECORDS NON-STOP 
HISTORY OF DAYS
REKI, koyomi
calendar, almanac
14 strokes
暦
L1
2112
Seal 
; a late graph (later version of Shuow-
en); traditional 曆. In one view, analyzed as 
consisting of 日 66 ‘sun, day’, with 厤 (CO; 
‘divide up evenly/carefully’ – see 歴 636 ‘his-
tory, path’, and for 秝 see Note below) taken 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘walk 
with regular intervals’, giving ‘sun moves 
with regular intervals’ (Katō). In similar vein, 
Ogawa takes 厤 as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘divide up equally’, to give ‘(device) for 
counting by arranging/setting out days’, i.e. 
‘calendar’. According to Qiu, 曆 was devised 
to represent unambiguously in writing the 
word for‘calendar’, which had until then 
been represented using 歴 636 (path/move-
卑劣  HIRETSU　baseness
劣等感 RETTŌKAN　inferiority complex
劣者  RESSHA　an inferior
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists of 
力 78 ‘strength’ combined with 少 160 ‘few, 
little’, giving in one view ‘strength dimin-
ished, less strength’ (Tōdō, Ogawa). Another 
commentator (Katō) considers ‘bend’ to 
be a connotation, giving ‘bend easily due 
to poor strength’, and by extension ‘weak’. 
Either way, ‘inferior’ is an extended sense. 
TA1965:556; OT1968:125; KJ1970:922-3. 
Mnemonic: ANYTHING THAT HAS LITTLE 
STRENGTH IS INFERIOR
RETSU, otoru
inferiority
6 strokes
劣
L1
2113
丽 is interpreted as representing two horns 
(Ogawa takes to be ‘beautifully embellished 
horns’), thus giving ‘beautiful horns’, and by 
extension ‘beautiful’;  unless there are early 
text references to substantiate it, analysis 
based on embellishment of horns does not 
seem all that convincing. Interpretation as 
‘horns’ (unadorned) is favored by Shirakawa, 
who takes 丽 as the earliest way of writ-
ing 麗. Mizukami treats ‘beautiful’ as a loan 
usage, though a case could be made for 
an extended meaning, and may indeed be 
more likely. MS1995:v2:1506-07; KJ1970:915; 
OT1968:1160; TA1965:480; SS1984:901. We 
suggest taking 丽 as hoof-prints.
Mnemonic: HOOF-PRINTS OF BEAUTIFUL 
DEER

The Remaining 1130 Characters  637
烈火 REKKA　raging fi re 
烈女 RETSUJO　heroine 
烈風 REPPŪ　gale 
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 灬 8 
‘fire’, with 列 437 (‘row’) as phonetic with 
associated sense taken as i] ‘severe, violent’, 
> ‘burn violently’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘erupt, burst 
out’ > ‘fire burns vigorously and explodes’ 
(Katō), or iii] ‘divide up’ > ‘flames divide 
and shoot up’ (Mizukami). ‘Severe/intense’ 
are extensions. OT1968:619; KJ1970:922; 
MS1995:v2:800-01. 
Mnemonic: ROW OF FIERCE FIRES
RETSU
fi erce, intense
10 strokes  
烈
L1
2114
破裂  HARETSU　bursting
分裂  BUNRETSU　splitting
裂け目  sakeme　rip, tear, crack
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 衣 444 
‘garment’, with 列 437 (‘row’; orig ‘cut up’) as 
phonetic with associated sense taken as i] 
‘rip, cut’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘take apart, separate’ 
(Katō) > ‘cut up (when making garment)’. 
Now used for accidental rip. OT1968:905; 
KJ1970:922. 
Mnemonic: ROW OF RIPPED CLOTHES!
RETSU, saku/keru
split, rip, rend
12 strokes
裂
L1
2115
恋愛 REN’AI　love
失恋 SHITSUREN　lost love
恋人 koibito　lover
already has 戀; 恋 is based on cursive forms 
of 戀. Note 1: one bronze form of 䜌 shows 
hand over three skeins of silk thread, seen as 
‘untangle thread’; some bronze/seal forms 
have 絲 ‘silk’ (two skeins of silk thread), with 
言 (‘words’ 118) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘tangled’ > ‘(silk) thread gets tangled’, 
or ‘unravel tangled thread’ (given in Mizu-
kami). Note 2: the associated senses given 
by Ogawa and Tōdō relate to the form of 
this graph with heart 心 164, but have been 
applied here also to earlier equivalent with 
女. DJ2009:v3:1021; MS1995:v2:1212-13; 
FC1974:v1:891; KJ1970:897; TA1965:555-
7; OT1968:371; SK1984:318; AS2007:478. 
QX2000:179. Use 亦 (NJK ‘again’, 1876). 
Mnemonic: MY HEART IS IN LOVE AGAIN 
REN, koi(shii)
love, beloved
10 strokes
恋
L2
2116
Seal (孌) 
; late graph (Shuowen); tradition-
al 戀. Shuowen has only 孌; 戀 is  later vari-
ant. 孌 has 女 37 ‘woman’, with 䜌 (‘unravel 
tangled thread’; see Note 1) as phonetic with 
associated sense taken as i] ‘connected’ > 
‘connected to woman’ (Katō), or ii] ‘entan-
gled’ > ‘entangled with woman’ (Tōdō), or 
iii] ‘draw’ > ‘drawn towards woman’ (Ogawa) 
(see Note 2). For 戀, meanings are adjusted 
to i] ‘heart connected’, or ii] ‘heart entan-
gled’, or iii] ‘heart drawn to’. Clerical script 
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists of 广 
127 ‘roof, building’, with 兼 1281 (‘combine’) 
as phonetic with associated sense taken as i] 
‘angular’ (Ogawa), giving ‘corner’, or ii] ‘lean, 
incline’, also giving ‘corner’ (Shirakawa), or – in 
similar vein – iii] ‘steep’, giving ‘steep (side)’ 
(Katō). ‘Honest’ and ‘cheap’ are loan uses of 廉. 
OT1968:331; SS1984:906; KJ1970:926
Mnemonic: NOT MANY CORNERS IN CHEAP 
BUILDING
廉直  RENCHOKU　integrity
廉価  RENKA　cheap price
破廉恥 HARENCHI　impudence
REN
honest, cheap, corner
13 strokes
廉
L1
2117

638  The Remaining 1130 Characters
錬金術 RENKINJUTSU　alchemy
錬成  RENSEI　training
錬り金  nerigane　tempered steel
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
鍊. Consists of 金 16 ‘metal’ (Katō takes as 
‘ore’), combined with 柬 438 (CO, ‘select’; 
q.v.) as phonetic with associated sense 
taken either as i] ‘soften’, giving ‘soften and 
forge metal’ (Ogawa), or ii] ‘liquify’, giving 
‘ore liquifies’ (Katō)’ or iii] ‘process, treat’, 
giving ‘treat metal (by heating)’ (Shirakawa). 
OT1968:1046; KJ1970:926-7; SS1984:908. 
Take right side as ‘east’ 東 201.
Mnemonic: GO EAST FOR TRAINING IN 
METAL REFINING
REN, neru
refi ne, train, drill
16 strokes
錬
L1
2118
風呂  FURO　furo bath
呂律  RORETSU*　articulation
伊呂波 I-RO-HA　Japanese ‘ABC’
OBI 
; seal 
. Etymology disputed, all 
depending on how the shape of this graph 
is interpreted. 呂 is explained in Shuowen as 
‘spine, vertebrae’, and Mizukami and Ogawa 
follow this. Shirakawa, though, considers 
‘ingots’ to be the correct original mean-
ing. Gu takes it to be ‘(palace) rooms’, with 
‘backbone’ as a meaning which evolved 
on the basis of the definition in Shuowen. 
MS1995:v1:222-3; OT1968:174; SS1984:880; 
GY2008:260-61. 
Mnemonic: BACKBONE HAS CONNECTED 
SQUARE BONES
RO, RYO
backbone, tone
7 strokes
呂
L2
2119
囲炉裏 IRORI　fi reside, hearth
暖炉  DANRO　hearth, stove
原子炉 GENSHIRO　nuclear reactor
Seal (鑪) 
; traditional 爐. According to 
Katō, one of the manuscripts of Shuowen 
notes 爐 as popular equivalent of 鑪. 鑪 
has 金 16 ‘metal’, with 盧 (NJK, ‘container’; 
see Note below) taken either as semantic 
and phonetic meaning ‘box’, giving ‘hearth; 
brazier’ (Ogawa), or as phonetic with associ-
ated sense ‘be/put in’, giving ‘brazier’ (Katō). 
By extension, ‘furnace’. Note: 盧 is treated by 
Mizukami and Katō as identical to 𧆭, mean-
ing ‘container’; Gu takes 𧆭 as ‘earthen jar’. 
GY2008:1228; OT1968:617; KJ1970:899-900; 
MS1995:v2:910-11. Take modern form as ‘fire’ 
火 8 and ‘door’ 戸 120.
Mnemonic: FURNACE HAS FIRE-DOOR
RO
furnace, hearth
8 strokes
炉
L1
2120

The Remaining 1130 Characters  639
賄賂 WAIRO　bribe, bribery 
(no further compounds)
RO, mainai
bribe, bribery
13 strokes
賂
L1
2121
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 貝 10 
‘shell (currency)’, with 各 462 (‘each, every’) 
as phonetic with associated sense ‘stop, 
leave as is’ (Katō). According to Katō, in an-
cient times gifts were brought to court and 
laid out as tribute, and the original meaning 
of this graph is ‘present/set out gifts’. Shi-
rakawa agrees this was the original meaning. 
‘Bribe’ evolved at an early juncture as an 
extended sense. KJ1970:193; SS1984:910.
Mnemonic: USE EACH AND EVERY SHELL AS 
A BRIBE
露出 ROSHUTSU　exposure
夜露 yotsuyu　evening dew 
露店 ROTEN　street stall
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 雨 3 
‘rain’, with 路 439 (‘road’) as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘condense’, giving ‘weather 
element that condenses’ – in this case a ref-
erence to rain-like ‘dew’. Gu suggests ‘expose’ 
is an extended sense based on dew forming 
outside where there is no obstruction to 
stop it forming; perhaps best seen as tenta-
tive. ‘Small’ may be extended sense from 
droplet. Also used in Japanese (written style) 
for its sound value for ‘Russia’. KJ1970:191; 
AS2007:366; GY2008:2015-16. 
Mnemonic: ‘RAIN’ ON SMALL RUSSIAN ROAD 
REVEALED TO BE DEW
RO, RŌ, tsuyu
dew, reveal, small, 
Russia
21 strokes
露
L1
2122
愚弄 GURŌ　ridicule
玩弄 GANRŌ　toying with
翻弄 HONRŌ　trifl ing with
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has the shape 王, here 
standing for 玉 15 ‘jade, precious stone’ 
(q.v.), with 廾 ‘both hands’ (see e.g. 1639). 
廾 is typically taken as semantic in function 
here, giving ‘fondle/handle jade disc’ (Mizu-
kami takes to be disc of translucent stone 
similar to lapis lazuli). An alternative view 
(followed by Katō) takes 廾 as phonetic with 
associated sense ‘rub, smoothe’, but still 
giving the same overall meaning. Mizukami 
and Gu treat ‘play, amuse oneself’ as extend-
ed senses. ‘Ridicule’ may also be extended 
sense. MS1995:v1:462-3; GY2008:361; 
KJ1970:442-3. Take 廾 as twenty (two ‘tens’ 
十 35).  
Mnemonic: AMUSE ONESELF PLAYING WITH 
TWENTY JADE DISCS – RIDICULOUS!
RŌ, moteasobu, ijiru
play, ridicule, amuse 
oneself
7 strokes
弄
L1
2123

640  The Remaining 1130 Characters
新郎  SHINRŌ　bridegroom
野郎  YARŌ　guy, fellow
女郎屋 JORŌya　brothel
sense unclear). Originally used to denote a 
village in the ancient Chinese state of Lu. 
The meaning ‘male’ derives from use of un-
derlying word by women in ancient China to 
refer to husband, later becoming extended 
in meaning. In Japanese, typically occurs as 
a suffix in some male given names (e.g. 太郎 
Tarō). KJ1970:539-40; TA1965:361. Take  as 
‘variant ‘good’ 良. 
Mnemonic: HUSBAND IS MAN FROM GOOD 
VILLAGE 
RŌ
man, husband
9 strokes
郎
L1
2124
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 
form has 良 as left-hand element. Graph 
has 阝 376 ‘village’  as right-hand element, 
with 良 628 (‘good’) as phonetic (associated 
浪人 RŌNIN　masterless samurai
波浪 HARŌ　waves, surge
浪費 RŌHI　waste
says ‘pale, bluish white’), giving ‘clear/blu-
ish white water’. Originally denoted a river 
name in ancient China (lower reaches of 
the Han River [a tributary of the Yangtze]). 
Katō treats its modern meanings as loan 
usage, but ‘wave’ and ‘drift’ may be felt to be 
extended senses. OT1968:583; KJ1970:894; 
TA1965:360-62.
Mnemonic: DRIFT ON WAVES ON STRETCH 
OF GOOD WATER
RŌ, nami
wave, drift, waste
10 strokes
浪
L1
2125
廊下 RŌKA　corridor
画廊 GARŌ　picture gallery
歩廊 HORŌ　arcade, corridor
Seal 
; late graph (later version of Shuowen). 
Has 广 127 ‘building’, with 郎 2124 (‘male’) 
as phonetic with associated sense taken as i] 
‘empty’, thus ‘empty area beneath lean-to roof’ 
(Katō),  or ii] ‘surround, enclose’, giving ‘structure 
lower down around building to conduct formal 
matters’. Gu takes to mean walls on both sides 
of a hall or similar building. Relative to the 
above, ‘corridor’ is extended sense. KJ1970:894; 
OT1968:331; GY2008:1297.
Mnemonic: HUSBAND (NAMED TARŌ) IS IN A 
CORRIDOR IN THAT BUILDING
RŌ
corridor, walkway
12 strokes
廊
L1
2126
望楼 BŌRŌ　watchtower
高楼 KŌRŌ　tall building
鐘楼 SHŌRŌ　bell tower, belfry
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen); traditional 樓. 
Has 木 73 ‘wood,’, with 婁 (meanings include 
‘shamaness’; see Note below) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘accumulate’, giving 
‘wooden building with multiple storeys’ 
(Katō takes more modestly as ‘two-storey 
wooden structure’). Note: NJK 婁 is taken 
in one view as 女 37 ‘woman’, with 
 as 
RŌ
tower
13 strokes
楼
L1
2127
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Has 氵 42 
‘water’, with 良 628 (‘good’) as phonetic 
with associated sense taken as ‘clear’ (Katō 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  641
phonetic with associated sense ‘shama-
ness, consult with shamaness’ (apparently a 
hunchback shamaness). Mizukami also notes 
a different view of 婁 as meaning ‘capture 
and link women together’. Schuessler gives 
original sense of 婁 as ‘mound’, and also 
notes possible link with ‘hunchbacked’. 
OT1968:517; KJ1970:928-9; AS2007:364; 
MS1995:v1:336-8. Take top right element in 
modern form as rice 米 220.
Mnemonic: WOMAN PREPARES RICE IN 
WOODEN TOWER
漏電  RŌDEN　short circuit
漏出  RŌSHUTSU　leakage
雨漏り  amamori　leak in roof
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen). Original 
form was 屚, with water 氵42 added later as 
determinative. 屚 has 尸 256 (often ‘corpse’), 
but here meaning ‘roof’, with 雨 3 ‘rain’, 
thus ‘rain leaks through roof’, giving ‘leak’ 
generally. Shuowen defines 漏 as ‘clepsydra’ 
(water-clock), which is an extended sense 
based on dripping of water being a simple 
means of measuring time. GY2008:1759-60; 
MS1995:v1:412-3; OT1968:606. Take 尸 as 
‘corpse’. 
Mnemonic: RAINWATER LEAKS ON CORPSE
RŌ, moru/reru/rasu
leak
14 strokes
漏
L1
2128
引き籠もり  hikikomori　staying at home
鳥籠    torikago　bird cage
籠球    RŌKYŪ　basketball
Seal 
; late graph (Shuowen).  Has ⺮ 58 
‘bamboo’, with 龍 (traditional form of 竜 
2081 ‘dragon’) as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘cram/stuff in’, giving ‘bamboo basket 
to cram things into’. ‘Staying at home’ is an 
extended sense. OT1968:760; GY2008:266-7. 
Mnemonic: TRADITIONAL DRAGON STAYS AT 
HOME IN A BAMBOO CAGE
RŌ, kago, komoru
stay at home, basket, 
cage
22 strokes
籠
L1
2129
山麓 SANROKU　foot of mountain
(no further compounds)
OBI 
; seal 
. Has 林 79 ‘forest’, with 鹿 
2111 ‘deer’ as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘continue a long way, continue’, giving 
‘forest which stretches (right) down to base 
of mountain’. Shuowen defines graph as ‘of-
ficial in charge of mountain and forest’, but 
this is an extended sense. MS1995:v2:1506-7; 
OT1968:529; GY2008:1985.
Mnemonic: THERE ARE DEER IN THE FOREST 
AT THE FOOT OF THE MOUNTAIN
ROKU, fumoto
foot of mountain
19 strokes
麓
L1
2130

642  The Remaining 1130 Characters
賄賂  WAIRO　bribe, bribery
収賄  SHŪWAI　taking a bribe
賄い費 makanaiHI　charge for board
WAI, makanau
bribe, provide, board
13 strokes
賄
L1
2131
taken as i] ‘force on (someone)’ or ‘make a gift’, 
thus ‘make a gift of money’ (Katō), or ii] ‘put 
forward’, thus ‘make gift of valuables’ (Ogawa), 
or iii] ‘keep, store’, giving ‘valuables which 
are stored’ (Tōdō). A negative connotation 
evolved later from the basic meaning ‘provide’, 
leading to the sense ‘bribe’. KJ1970:933; 
OT1968:958; TA1968:139-43; GY2008:1056.
Mnemonic: PROVIDE SHELL-MONEY FOR 
BRIBES
脇の下  wakinoshita　armpit
脇目  wakime　side glance
脇息  KYŌSOKU　armrest
waki, KYŌ
side, armpit, fl ank
10 strokes
脇
L1
2132
between elbows’, i.e. ‘side (of torso)’, and by 
extension ‘armpit’. A further extended sense 
is ‘threaten’, based on the concept of being 
enclosed on both sides, and to represent 
this meaning unambiguously there later 
arose the convention of writing the constitu-
ent elements differently, as 脅1225 (q.v.). 
The meaning of ‘threaten’ for 2132 is no 
longer in use. KJ1970:360; GY2008:680-81; 
TA1965:860-62.
Mnemonic: BODY HAS TRIPLE STRENGTH AT 
SIDES AND ARMPITS
迷惑  MEIWAKU　trouble
惑星  WAKUSEI　planet
戸惑い tomadoi　confusion
WAKU, madou
be confused
12 strokes
惑
L1
2133
Bronze 
; seal 
. Has 心 164 ‘heart, mind, 
feelings’, with 戓 (CO; ‘defend defined area 
with arms’ [see 國/国 136 ‘country, state’, and 
‘area’ 域 828]) as phonetic, with associated 
sense as i] ‘doubt’, giving ‘feel doubt and 
indecision’ (Katō), or ii] ‘be confined’, giving 
‘feel constrained’ (Tōdō). MS1995:v1:514-5; 
KJ1970:934; TA1965:139-43.  
Mnemonic: HAVE CONFUSED FEELINGS AT 
STAKED-OUT AREA 
枠組  wakugumi　framework
枠無し  wakunashi　frameless
枠内  wakuNAI　within limits 
waku
frame, spindle
8 strokes
枠
L1
2134
A graph devised in Japan (kokuji) based on 
formational principles of Chinese characters. 
Has 木 ‘wood’ 73, with 卆 ‘frame for winding 
thread’ (see 1372), thus ‘wooden thread-
winding frame’; sense generalized to ‘frame’. 
OT1968:496. Take 卆 as ‘nine’ 九13 and ‘ten’ 
十 35.
Mnemonic: FRAME MADE FROM NINETEEN 
PIECES OF WOOD
Seal (脅) 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Shuo-
wen has 脅, consisting of 月 209 (‘flesh, 
meat; body’), with 劦 (‘combined strength, 
put together’ [< 力 ‘strength’ 78]) as phonet-
ic with associated sense ‘hold between, in-
sert between’, giving ‘either side of stomach 
Seal 
; a late graph (Shuowen). Consists 
of 貝10 ‘shellfi sh, shell money’, with 有 423 
(‘have’) as phonetic with associated sense 

The Remaining 1130 Characters  643
港湾  KŌWAN　harbor
湾入  WANNYŪ　inlet
東京湾 TŌKYŌWAN　Tokyo Bay
WAN
bay, gulf
12 strokes
湾
L2
2135
A late, post-Shuowen graph; traditional form: 
灣. Consists of 氵 42  ‘water’, with 彎 ‘bend (a 
bow)’ (see note below) as semantic and pho-
netic, giving ‘water’s edge bent like a bow’, 
i.e. ‘bay’. Note: CO 彎 is comprised of 弓 107 
‘bow’, with 䜌 as phonetic with associated 
sense ‘bend’.  KJ1970:934-5; OT1968:598; 
AS2007:506. We suggest using 亦 1876 (NJK 
meaning ‘again’).
Mnemonic: THE WATERS OF A BOW-SHAPED 
BAY AGAIN
腕章 WANSHŌ　armband
手腕 SHUWAN　ability
細腕 hosoude　thin arms, slender means
WAN, ude
arm, ability
12 strokes
腕
L2
2136
unsatisfactory as a way of paraphrasing ‘arm’, 
but it does correspond to Tōdō’s interpreta-
tion (echoed by Schuessler) as ‘wrist’. While 
there are differences of interpretation as 
to which part of the arm was originally 
denoted, the graph has clearly been used to 
refer to the arm or some part of it. Note: 宛 
is comprised of 宀 30 ‘roof, building, cover’, 
with 夗 (‘lie in bent-up position’) as phonetic 
with associated sense ‘rounded, bent’, giv-
ing ‘stoop, bend’. KJ1970:934; OT1968:825; 
AS2007:583; TA1965:611-21; GY2008:186. 
Mnemonic: ABILITY TO LIE WITH BODY AND 
ARM IN BENT POSITION UNDER ROOF
A late, post-Shuowen graph. Has 月 209 
‘flesh, meat; body’, with 宛 (NJK ‘stoop, bend 
over’; see Note below) as phonetic with as-
sociated sense taken in one view as ‘straight 
and short’, giving ‘forearm’ (Katō).  Another 
commentator (Ogawa) takes the associated 
sense as i] ‘bend’, giving ‘part (of body) to 
move by bending hand’ (sic); this would be 


READINGS INDEX
&
STROKE COUNT

646  
A
A 
亜 1007
abareru 
暴 814
abiru 
浴 625
abunai 
危 844
abura 
油 422
abura 
脂 1408
ada 
徒 581
aete 
敢 1152
agameru 
崇 1569
agaru 
上 
39
ageru 
挙 482
ageru 
揚 2051
ago 
顎 1125
ai- 
相 348
AI 
愛 441
AI 
哀 1008
AI 
挨 1009
AI 
曖 1010
ai 
藍 2072
aida 
間 100
aji 
味 415
ajiwau 
味 415
akagane 
銅 781
akai 
赤   48
akarui 
明 228
akatsuki 
暁 1230
akeru 
明 228
akeru 
開 261
aki 
秋 156
akinau 
商 333
akirameru 
諦 1754
akogareru 
憬 1269
akogareru 
憧 1510
aku 
空 
17
AKU 
悪 241
AKU 
握 1011
aku 
飽 1964
ama- 
雨 
3
ama- 
天 
62
ama 
尼 1819
amaeru 
甘 1139
amai 
甘 1139
amaneku 
普 1913
amaneku 
遍 1945
amaru 
余 820
amatsusae 
剰 1518
ame 
雨 
3
ami 
網 2025
amu 
編 806
AN 
安 242
AN 
暗 243
AN 
案 442
AN 
闇 2032
ana 
穴 860
ana 
孔 1316
anadoru 
侮 1919
ane 
姉 146
ani 
兄 114
ano 
彼 1879
aogu 
仰 1229
aogu 
扇 1599
aoi 
青 
45
arai 
荒 1329
arai 
粗 1621
arashi 
嵐 1014
arasou 
争 558
arata 
新 165
aratameru 
改 458
arau 
洗 927
arawareru 
現 692
arawareru 
顕 1294
arawasu 
表 402
arawasu 
著 949
areru 
荒 1329
aru 
有 423
aru 
在 711
aruku 
歩 221
asa 
朝 191
asa 
麻 1995
asai 
浅 554
ase 
汗 1140
aseru 
焦 1503
ashi 
足 
54
ashi 
脚 1200
asobu 
遊 424
ataeru 
与 2047
Readings Index

Readings Index  647
atai 
価 657
atai 
値 946
atama 
頭 203
atarashii 
新 165
atari 
辺 608
ataru 
当 200
atatakai 
温 257
atatakai 
暖 945
-ate 
宛 1013
ategau 
宛 1013
ateru 
宛 1013
ateru 
充 1461
ato 
後 123
ato 
痕 1360
ato 
跡 1592
atou 
能 787
ATSU 
圧 641
atsui 
暑 329
atsui 
熱 589
atsui 
厚 698
atsukau 
扱 1012
atsumaru 
集 324
au 
会 
93
au 
合 134
au 
遭 1641
awa 
泡 1956
awai 
淡 1689
aware 
哀 1008
awaremu 
哀 1008
awaseru 
合 134
awaseru 
併 1933
awateru 
慌 1336
ayakaru 
肖 1490
ayamachi 
過 659
ayamaru 
謝 728
ayamaru 
誤 868
ayashii 
怪 1096
ayashii 
妖 2049
ayatsuru 
操 935
ayaui 
危 844
ayumu 
歩 221
azakeru 
嘲 1723
azamuku 
欺 1190
azayaka 
鮮 1612
aze 
畔 1866
azukaru 
預 821
azuma 
東 201
B
ba 
場 161
BA 
馬 210
BA 
婆 1833
BA 
罵 1834
baba 
婆 1833
BACHI 
罰 1859
BAI 
売 211
BAI 
買 212
BAI 
倍 389
BAI 
梅 592
BAI 
唄 1038
BAI  
培 1839
BAI 
陪 1840
BAI 
媒 1841
BAI 
賠 1842
BAI 
某 1973
bakeru 
化 258
BAKU 
麦 213
BAKU 
博 593
BAKU 
暴 814
BAKU 
幕 989
BAKU 
漠 1850
BAKU 
縛 1851
BAKU 
爆 1852
BAN 
番 215
BAN 
万 227
BAN 
板 395
BAN 
判 790
BAN 
晩 971
BAN 
伴 1864
BAN 
蛮 1876
BAN 
盤 1877
BATSU 
末 615
BATSU 
伐 1857
BATSU 
抜 1858
BATSU 
罰 1859
BATSU 
閥 1860
be 
辺 608
BEI 
米 220
-beki 
可 655
beku 
可 655
BEN 
勉 413
BEN 
便 610
BEN 
弁 807
beni 
紅 872
BETSU 
別 607
BETSU 
蔑 1943
BI 
美 398
BI 
鼻 399
BI 
備 795
BI 
尾 1888
BI 
眉 1889
BI 
微 1890
BI 
弥 2029
BIN 
便 610
BIN 
貧 798
BIN 
敏 1903
BIN 
瓶 1904
BO 
母 222
BO 
墓 809
BO 
暮 982
BO 
模 992
BO 
募 1949
BO 
慕 1950
BO 
簿 1951
BŌ 
望 613
BŌ 
防 812
BŌ 
貿 813

648  Readings Index
BŌ 
暴 814
BŌ 
亡 985
BŌ 
忘 986
BŌ 
棒 987
BŌ 
乏 1967
BŌ 
忙 1968
BŌ 
坊 1969
BŌ 
妨 1970
BŌ 
房 1971
BŌ 
肪 1972
BŌ 
某 1973
BŌ 
冒 1974
BŌ 
剖 1975
BŌ 
紡 1976
BŌ 
傍 1977
BŌ 
帽 1978
BŌ 
貌 1979
BŌ 
膨 1980
BŌ 
謀 1981
BŌ 
矛 2012
BŌ 
妄 2021
boko 
凹 1061
BOKU 
木 
73
BOKU 
牧 614
BOKU 
朴 1983
BOKU 
睦 1984
BOKU 
僕 1985
BOKU 
墨 1986
BOKU 
撲 1987
BON 
煩 1871
BON 
凡 1993
BON 
盆 1994
BOTSU 
没 1988
BOTSU 
勃 1989
BU 
分 218
BU 
歩 221
BU 
部 407
BU 
不 600
BU 
無 620
BU 
武 802 
BU 
侮 1919
BU 
舞 1920
BU 
奉 1954
buchi 
斑 1869
BUN 
文 
72
BUN 
分 218
BUN 
聞 219
BUN 
蚊 1089
buta 
豚 1807
BUTSU 
物 410
BUTSU 
仏 805
BYŌ 
秒 403
BYŌ 
病 404
BYŌ 
平 411
BYŌ 
苗 1897
BYŌ 
描 1898
BYŌ 
猫 1899
C
CHA 
茶 187
CHAKU 
着 364
CHAKU 
嫡 1707
chi 
千 
49
CHI 
地 184
CHI 
池 185
CHI 
知 186
chi 
血 288
CHI 
治 527
CHI 
置 570
CHI 
質 726
CHI 
値 946
chi 
乳 961
CHI 
恥 1696
CHI 
致 1697
CHI 
遅 1698
CHI 
痴 1699
CHI 
稚 1700
CHI 
緻 1701
chichi 
父 216
chichi 
乳 961
chigau 
違 1024
chigiru 
契 1258
chiisai 
小 
38
chijimu 
縮 904
chikai 
近 113
chikara 
力 
78
chikau 
誓 1583
CHIKU 
竹 
58
CHIKU 
築 774
CHIKU 
畜 1702
CHIKU 
逐 1703
CHIKU 
蓄 1704
CHIN 
賃 953
CHIN 
沈 1729
CHIN 
珍 1730
CHIN 
朕 1731
CHIN 
陳 1732
CHIN 
鎮 1733
CHIN 
枕 2002
chiru 
散 519
CHITSU 
秩 1705
CHITSU 
窒 1706
CHO 
貯 572
CHO 
著 949
CHO 
緒 1481
CHŌ 
町 
61
CHŌ 
長 189
CHŌ 
鳥 190
CHŌ 
朝 191
CHŌ 
重 326
CHŌ 
丁 367
CHŌ 
帳 368
CHŌ 
調 369
CHŌ 
兆 573
CHŌ 
腸 574
CHŌ 
張 775
CHŌ 
提 776

Readings Index  649
CHŌ 
庁 950
CHŌ 
頂 951
CHŌ 
潮 952
CHŌ 
弔 1714
CHŌ 
挑 1715
CHŌ 
彫 1716
CHŌ 
眺 1717
CHŌ 
釣 1718
CHŌ 
貼 1719
CHŌ 
超 1720
CHŌ 
跳 1721
CHŌ 
徴 1722
CHŌ 
嘲 1723
CHŌ 
澄 1724
CHŌ 
聴 1725
CHŌ 
懲 1726
CHŌ 
塚 1736
CHOKU 
直 192
CHOKU 
勅 1727
CHOKU 
捗 1728
CHŪ 
中 
59
CHŪ 
虫 
60
CHŪ 
昼 188
CHŪ 
注 365
CHŪ 
柱 366
CHŪ 
仲 571
CHŪ 
宙 947
CHŪ 
忠 948
CHŪ 
沖 1708
CHŪ 
抽 1709
CHŪ 
衷 1710
CHŪ 
酎 1711
CHŪ 
鋳 1712
CHŪ 
駐 1713
D
DA 
打 355
DA 
蛇 1434
DA 
妥 1657
DA 
唾 1658
DA 
堕 1659
DA 
惰 1660
DA 
駄 1661
DAI 
大 
56
DAI 
台 183
DAI 
弟 194
DAI 
內 207
DAI 
代 358
DAI 
第 359
DAI 
題 360
DAKU 
諾 1679
DAKU 
濁 1680
daku 
抱 1955
damaru 
黙 2026
DAN 
男 
57
DAN 
談 363
DAN 
団 772
DAN 
断 773
DAN 
段 944
DAN 
暖 945
DAN 
旦 1687
DAN 
弾 1694
DAN 
壇 1695
dare 
誰 1685
dasu 
出 
36
DATSU 
脱 1682
DATSU 
奪 1683
DE 
弟 194
DEI 
泥 1755
DEKI 
溺 1758
deko 
凸 1804
DEN 
田 
63
DEN 
電 197
DEN 
伝 580
DEN 
殿 1765
deru 
出 
36
DO 
土 
64
DO 
度 377
DO 
努 582
DO 
奴 1773
DO 
怒 1774
DŌ 
同 204
DŌ 
道 205
DŌ 
動 384
DŌ 
童 385
DŌ 
堂 584
DŌ 
働 585
DŌ 
銅 781
DŌ 
導 782
DŌ 
憧 1510
DŌ 
洞 1796
DŌ 
胴 1797
DŌ 
瞳 1798
dobu 
溝 1340
DOKU 
読 206
DOKU 
毒 588
DOKU 
独 784
DON 
貪 1809
DON 
鈍 1810
DON 
曇 1811
DON 
丼 1812
donburi 
丼 1812
dono 
殿 1765
doro 
泥 1755
E
E 
会 
93
E 
絵 
95
-e 
重 326
E 
依 1015
E 
恵 1259
e 
江 1319
e 
餌 1418
e 
柄 1934
eda 
枝 719
egaku 
描 1898
EI 
泳 252

650  Readings Index
EI 
英 449
EI 
栄 450
EI 
永 644
EI 
営 645
EI 
衛 646
EI 
映 830
EI 
詠 1042
EI 
影 1043
EI 
鋭 1044
EKI 
駅 253
EKI 
役 419
EKI 
易 647
EKI 
益 648
EKI 
液 649
EKI 
疫 1045
emu 
笑 537
EN 
円 
4
EN 
園 
84
EN 
遠 
85
EN 
塩 451
EN 
演 650
EN 
延 831
EN 
沿 832
EN 
宛 1013
EN 
炎 1050
EN 
怨 1051
EN 
宴 1052
EN 
媛 1053
EN 
援 1054
EN 
煙 1055
EN 
猿 1056
EN 
鉛 1057
EN 
縁 1058
EN 
艶 1059
EN 
俺 1073
erabu 
選 556
erabu 
択 1673
erai 
偉 1021
eri 
襟 1240
eru 
得 587
eru 
獲 1121
esa 
餌 1418
ETSU 
悦 1046
ETSU 
越 1047
ETSU 
謁 1048
ETSU 
閲 1049
F
FU 
父 216
FU 
風 217
FU 
負 406
FU 
不 600
FU  
夫 601
FU 
付 602
FU 
府 603
FU 
布 799
FU 
婦 800
FU 
富 801
FU    
扶 1905   
FU 
怖 1906
FU 
阜 1907
FU  
附 1908
FU 
訃 1909
FU 
赴 1910
FU 
浮 1911
FU 
符 1912
FU 
普 1913
FU 
腐 1914
FU 
敷 1915
FU 
膚 1916
FU 
賦 1917
FU 
譜 1918
FŪ 
風 217
FŪ 
夫 601
FŪ 
富 801
FŪ 
封 1921
fuchi 
縁 1058
fuda 
札 513
fude 
筆 400
fue 
笛 373
fueru 
増 763
fueru 
殖 1527
fuji 
藤 1793
fukai 
深 342
fukeru 
老 638
fukeru 
更 1323
FUKU 
服 408
FUKU 
福 409
FUKU 
副 604
FUKU 
復 803
FUKU 
複 804
FUKU 
腹 975
fuku 
拭 1526
fuku 
吹 1557
FUKU 
伏 1922
FUKU 
幅 1923
FUKU 
覆 1924
fuku 
噴 1929
fukumu 
含 1167
fukumu 
哺 1946
fukuramu 
膨 1980
fukuro 
袋 1667
fumi 
文 
72
fumoto 
麓 2130
fumu 
践 1606
fumu 
踏 1791
FUN 
分 218
FUN 
粉 605
FUN 
奮 976
FUN 
紛 1927
FUN 
雰 1928
FUN 
噴 1929
FUN 
墳 1930
FUN 
憤 1931
funa- 
船 175
funa- 
舟 1450
funabata 
舷 1299

Readings Index  651
fune 
船 175
fune 
舟 1450
fureru 
触 1529
furu 
降 873
furu 
振 1540
furui 
古 121
furuu 
奮 976
furuu 
震 1547
fusa 
房 1971
fusagu 
塞 1379
fusegu 
防 812
fushi 
節 552
fusu 
伏 1922
futa- 
二 
65
futa 
蓋 1110
futa- 
双 1627
futatabi 
再 706
futoi 
太 181
futokoro 
懐 1104
FUTSU 
仏 805
FUTSU 
払 1925
FUTSU 
沸 1926
fuyasa 
増 763
fuyu 
冬 199
G
GA 
画 
91
GA 
芽 457
GA 
賀 660
GA 
我 833
GA 
牙 1090
GA 
瓦 1091
GA 
雅 1092
GA 
餓 1093
GAI 
外 
96
GAI 
害 460
GAI 
街 461
GAI 
劾 1106
GAI 
崖 1107
GAI 
涯 1108
GAI 
慨 1109
GAI 
蓋 1110
GAI 
該 1111
GAI 
概 1112
GAI 
骸 1113
gake 
崖 1107
GAKU 
学 
11
GAKU 
楽 
98
GAKU 
額 665
GAKU 
岳 1124
GAKU 
顎 1125
GAN 
丸 101
GAN 
岩 102
GAN 
顔 103
GAN 
元 117
GAN 
岸 267
GAN 
願 469
GAN 
眼 669
GAN 
含 1167
GAN 
玩 1168
GAN 
頑 1169
gara 
柄 1934
GATSU 
月 
18
-gawa 
側 562
GE 
下 
7
GE 
夏 
88
GE 
外 
96
GE 
解 662
GE 
華 1079
GE 
牙 1090
GE 
怪 1096
GEI 
芸 495
GEI 
迎 1273
GEI 
鯨 1274
GEKI 
劇 858
GEKI 
激 859
GEKI 
隙 1275
GEKI 
撃 1276
GEN 
元 117
GEN 
言 118
GEN 
原 119
GEN 
限 691
GEN 
現 692
GEN 
減 693
GEN 
源 864
GEN 
厳 865
GEN 
拳 1283
GEN 
嫌 1287
GEN 
幻 1296
GEN 
玄 1297
GEN 
弦 1298
GEN 
舷 1299
GETSU 
月 
18
GI  
議 477
GI  
技 673
GI 
義 674
GI  
疑 848
GI 
伎 1171
GI 
宜 1188
GI 
偽 1189
GI  
欺 1190
GI 
儀 1191
GI 
戯 1192
GI 
擬 1193
GI 
犠 1194
GIN 
銀 281
GIN 
吟 1241
GO 
五 
21
GO 
午 122
GO 
後 123
GO 
語 124
GO 
期 269
GO 
護 696
GO 
誤 868
GO 
后 869
GO 
御 1214
GO 
互 1310

652  Readings Index
GO 
呉 1311
GO 
娯 1312
GO 
悟 1313
GO 
碁 1314
GŌ 
強 111
GŌ 
合 134
GŌ 
業 278
GŌ 
号 297
GŌ 
郷 852
GŌ 
拷 1347
GŌ 
剛 1348
GŌ 
傲 1349
GŌ 
豪 1350
GOKU 
極 488
GOKU 
獄 1353
GON 
言 118
GON 
権 862
GON 
厳 865
-goto 
毎 225
gotoku 
如 1482
GU 
具 284
GU 
虞 1071
GU 
惧 1243
GU 
愚 1244
GŪ 
宮 274
GŪ  
偶 1245
GŪ 
遇 1246
GŪ 
隅 1247
GUN 
軍 490
GUN 
郡 491
GUN 
群 684
GYAKU 
逆 675
GYAKU 
虐 1201
GYO 
魚 109
GYO 
漁 483
GYO 
御 1214
GYŌ 
形 115
GYŌ 
行 131
GYŌ 
業 278
GYŌ 
仰 1229
GYŌ 
暁 1230
GYŌ 
凝 1231
GYOKU 
玉 
15
GYŪ 
牛 108
H
ha 
羽 
82
ha 
歯 306
HA 
波 387
ha 
葉 428
HA 
破 788
HA 
派 965
ha 
刃 1549
ha 
端 1691
HA 
把 1831
HA 
覇 1832
haba 
巾 1232
haba 
幅 1923
habamu 
阻 1618
haberu 
侍 1415
habuku 
省 546
HACHI 
八 
70
HACHI 
鉢 1855
hachi 
蜂 1963
hada 
肌 1854
hada 
膚 1916
hadaka 
裸 2064
haeru 
栄 450
haeru 
映 830
hagane 
鋼 874
hagasu 
剥 1847
hagemu 
励 2104
hageshii 
激 859
haha 
母 222
HAI 
配 388
HAI 
敗 591
hai 
灰 834
HAI 
拝 966
HAI 
背 967
HAI 
肺 968
HAI 
俳 969
HAI 
杯 1835
HAI 
排 1836
HAI 
廃 1837
HAI 
輩 1838
hairu 
入 
67
haji 
羞 1454
haji 
恥 1696
hajiku 
弾 1694
hajimaru 
始 304
hajime 
初 535
hajimeru 
創 932
hajiru 
羞 1454
haka 
墓 809
hakadoru 
捗 1728
hakarigoto 
謀 1981
hakaru 
計 116
hakaru 
図 167
hakaru 
量 630
hakaru 
測 765
hakaru 
諮 1414
hakaru 
謀 1981
hako 
箱 390
hakobu 
運 251
HAKU 
白 
69
HAKU 
博 593
haku 
掃 1633
haku 
吐 1767
HAKU 
伯 1843
HAKU 
拍 1844
HAKU 
泊 1845
HAKU 
迫 1846
HAKU 
剥 1847
HAKU 
舶 1848
HAKU 
薄 1849  
haku 
履 2076
hama 
浜 1900

Readings Index  653
HAN 
半 214
HAN 
反 393
HAN 
坂 394
HAN 
板 395
HAN 
飯 594
HAN 
犯 789
HAN 
判 790
HAN 
版 791
HAN 
班 970
HAN 
氾 1861
HAN 
帆 1862
HAN 
汎 1863
HAN 
伴 1864
HAN 
阪 1865
HAN 
畔 1866
HAN 
般 1867
HAN 
販 1868
HAN 
斑 1869
HAN 
搬 1870
HAN 
煩 1871
HAN 
頒 1872
HAN 
範 1873
HAN 
繁 1874
HAN 
藩 1875
HAN 
凡 1993
hana 
花 
9
hana 
鼻 399
hana 
華 1079
hanahada(shii) 甚 1552
hanareru 
離 2078
hanasu 
話 240
hanasu 
放 414
hane 
羽 
82
haneru 
跳 1721
hara 
原 119
hara 
腹 975
haramu 
妊 1824
harau 
払 1925
harawata 
腸 574
harawata 
臓 937
hareru 
晴 172
hareru 
腫 1443
hari 
針 916
haru 
春 158
haru 
張 775
haru 
貼 1719
hasamu 
挟 1221
hashi 
橋 277
hashi 
端 1691
hashi 
箸 1853
hashira 
柱 366
hashiru 
走 179
hata 
畑 391
hata 
旗 474
hata 
機 476
hata 
端 1691
hatake 
畑 391
hataraku 
働 584
hatasu 
果 454
hate 
果 454
HATSU 
発 392
HATSU 
法 612
hatsu- 
初 535
HATSU 
鉢 1855
HATSU 
髪 1856
hayai 
早 
52
hayai 
速 352
hayai 
迅 1551
hayashi 
林 
79
hazukashimeru 辱 1531
hazumu 
弾 1694
hazusu 
外 
96
hebi 
蛇 1434
hedataru 
隔 1120
HEI 
平 411
HEI 
兵 606
HEI 
並 977
HEI 
陛 978
HEI 
閉 979
HEI 
坪 1738
HEI 
丙 1932
HEI 
併 1933
HEI 
柄 1934
HEI 
塀 1935
HEI 
幣 1936
HEI 
弊 1937
HEI 
蔽 1938
HEI 
餅 1939
HEKI 
壁 1940
HEKI 
璧 1941
HEKI 
癖 1942
hekomu 
凹 1061
HEN 
返 412
HEN 
辺 608
HEN 
変 609
HEN 
編 806
HEN 
片 980
HEN 
偏 1944
HEN 
遍 1945
herikudaru 
謙 1291
herikudaru 
遜 1655
heru 
経 685
heru 
減 693
hi　 
火 
8
hi 
日   66
HI 
皮 396
HI 
悲 397
hi 
陽 429
hi 
灯 583
HI 
飛 595
HI 
費 596
HI 
比 792
HI 
肥 793
HI 
非 794
HI 
否 972
HI 
批 973
HI 
秘 974

654  Readings Index
HI 
妃 1878
HI 
彼 1879
HI 
披 1880
HI 
卑 1881
HI 
疲 1882
HI 
被 1883
HI 
扉 1884
HI 
碑 1885
HI 
罷 1886
HI 
避 1887
HI 
泌 1894
hibiku 
響 1227
hidari 
左 
24
hieru 
冷 634
higashi 
東 201
hiideru 
秀 1451
hiji 
肘 1892
hijiri 
聖 922
hikaeru 
控 1333
hikari 
光 129
hikaru 
光 129
HIKI 
匹 1893
hikiiru 
率 767
hiku 
引 
81
hiku 
弾 1694
hikui 
低 575
hima 
暇 1083
hima 
隙 1275
hime 
媛 1053
hime 
姫 1895
himeru 
秘 974
HIN 
品 405
HIN 
貧 798
HIN 
浜 1900
HIN 
賓 1901
HIN 
頻 1902
hineru 
捻 1827
hinoe 
丙 1932
hiraku 
開 261
hiratai 
平 411
hiro 
尋 1554
hiroi  
広 127
hirou 
拾 321
hiru 
昼 188
hiru 
干 840
hirugaeru 
翻 1992
hisashii 
久 676
hishigeru 
拉 2063
hishigu 
拉 2063
hisoka 
密 990
hisoka 
窃 1595
hisomu 
潜 1608
hitai 
額 665
hitasu 
浸 1541
hito- 
一 
1
hito 
人 
41
hitomi 
瞳 1798
hitori 
独 784
hitoshii 
等 383
hitoshii 
均 681
hitoshii 
斉 1578
HITSU 
筆 400
HITSU 
必 597
HITSU 
匹 1893
HITSU 
泌 1894
hitsugi 
棺 1153
hitsuji 
羊 426
hiza 
膝 1891
HO 
歩 221
HO 
保 808
HO 
補 981
HO 
浦 1041
ho 
穂 1565
ho 
帆 1862
HO 
哺 1946
HO 
捕 1947
HO 
舗 1948
HŌ 
方 223
HŌ 
放 414
HŌ 
包 611
HŌ 
法 612
HŌ 
保 808
HŌ 
報 810
HŌ 
豊 811
HŌ 
宝 983
HŌ 
訪 984
HŌ 
封 1921
HŌ 
芳 1952
HŌ 
邦 1953
HŌ 
奉 1954
HŌ 
抱 1955
HŌ 
泡 1956
HŌ 
胞 1957
HŌ 
俸 1958
HŌ 
倣 1959
HŌ 
峰 1960
HŌ 
砲 1961
HŌ 
崩 1962
HŌ 
蜂 1963
HŌ 
飽 1964
HŌ 
褒 1965
HŌ 
縫 1966
hō 
頬 1982
hō 
朴 1983
hodo 
程 777
hodokosu 
施 1406
hogaraka 
朗 1005
hoho 
頬 1982
hoka  
外 
96
hoka 
他 354
hoko 
矛 2012
hokorobiru 
綻 1692
hokoru 
誇 1306
HOKU 
北 224
homare 
誉 2048
homeru 
褒 1965
hōmuru 
葬 1639

Readings Index  655
HON 
本 
74
HON 
奔 1991
HON 
翻 1992
hone 
骨 877
honō 
炎 1050
hora 
洞 1796
hori 
堀 1990
horobiru 
滅 2017
horu 
掘 1250
horu 
彫 1716
hoshi 
星 171
hoshii 
欲 997
hoshiimama 
恣 1407
hosoi 
細 140
hosu 
干 840
hotaru 
蛍 1263
hotoke 
仏 805
HOTSU 
発 392
HYAKU 
百 
71
HYŌ 
氷 401
HYŌ  
表 402
HYŌ  
票 598
HYŌ  
標 599
HYŌ 
兵 606
HYŌ 
俵 796
HYŌ 
評 797
HYŌ  
拍 1844
HYŌ  
漂 1896
I
I  
医 244
I  
委 245
I  
意 246
I  
以 443
I  
衣 444
I 
位 445
I 
囲 446
I 
胃 447
I 
移 642
I 
易 647
I 
異 826
I  
遺 827
I 
依 1015
I 
威 1016
I 
為 1017
I 
畏 1018
I 
尉 1019
I 
萎 1020
I 
偉 1021
I 
椅 1022
I 
彙 1023
I 
違 1024
I 
維 1025
I 
慰 1026
I 
緯 1027
i 
井 1575
I 
唯 2037
ibara 
茨 1030
ICHI 
一 
1
ichi 
市 144
ICHI 
壱 1028
ichijirushii 
著 949
idaku 
抱 1955
idomu 
挑 1715
ie 
家 
89
ijimeru 
苛 1077
ijiru 
弄 2123
ikaru 
怒 1774
ike 
池 185
iki 
息 351
IKI 
域 828
iki 
粋 1560
ikidōru 
憤 1931
ikioi 
勢 747
ikiru 
生 
44
ikou 
憩 1271
iku 
行 131
IKU 
育 247
iku- 
幾 1181
iku 
逝 1581
ikusa 
戦 555
ima 
今 138
imashimeru 
戒 1095
imawashii 
忌 1173
imo 
芋 1031
imōto 
妹 226
imu 
忌 1173
IN　 
音 
6
IN 
引 
81
IN 
員 248
IN 
院 249
IN 
飲 250
IN 
印 448
IN 
因 643
IN 
咽 1032
IN 
姻 1033
IN 
淫 1034
IN 
陰 1035
IN 
隠 1036
IN  
韻 1037
ina 
否 972
ina 
稲 1790
inamu 
否 972
ine 
稲 1790
inochi 
命 416
inoru 
祈 1175
inu 
犬 
19
ireru 
入 
67
ireru 
容 822
iro 
色 162
irodoru 
彩 1375
iru 
要 623
iru 
居 678
iru 
射 893
iru 
煎 1602
iru 
鋳 1712
isagiyoi 
潔 686

656  Readings Index
isago 
砂 879
isago 
沙 1366
isamashii 
勇 622
ishi 
石 
47
ishizue 
礎 1626
isogashii 
忙 1968
isogu 
急 272
ita 
板 395
itadaki 
頂 951
itadaku 
頂 951
itadaku 
戴 1671
itai 
痛 954
itamu 
傷 912
itamu 
悼 1782
itaru 
至 886
itaru 
到 1775
itasu 
致 1697
itazura 
徒 581
ito 
糸 
29
itoma 
暇 1083 
itonamu 
営 645
ITSU 
一 
1
itsu- 
五 
21
ITSU 
逸 1029
ITSU 
乙 1072
itsukushimu 
慈 1417
itsuwaru 
偽 1189
iu 
言 118
iwa 
岩 102
iwau 
祝 533
iwaya 
窟 1251
iya 
嫌 1287
iya 
弥 2029
iyashii 
卑 1881
iyasu 
医 244
iyasu 
癒 2036
izumi 
泉 926
J
JA 
邪 1433
JA 
蛇 1434
JAKU 
弱 154
JAKU 
若 896
JAKU 
寂 1438
JI 
字 
30
JI 
耳 
31
JI 
寺 149
JI 
自 150
JI  
時 151
JI 
地 184
JI 
仕 301
JI 
次 308
JI 
事 309
JI 
持 310
JI  
児 526
JI 
治 527
-ji 
路 439
JI 
辞 528
JI 
示 723
JI 
似 724
JI 
磁 892
JI 
除 910
JI 
柿 1115
JI 
侍 1415
JI 
滋 1416
JI 
慈 1417
JI 
餌 1418
JI 
璽 1419
JIKI 
直 192
JIKU 
軸 1421
JIN 
人 
41
JIN 
神 340
JIN  
臣 543
JIN  
仁 917
JIN  
刃 1549
JIN 
尽 1550
JIN 
迅 1551
JIN 
甚 1552
JIN 
陣 1553
JIN 
尋 1554
JIN 
腎 1555
jireru 
焦 1503
JITSU 
日 
66
JITSU 
実 312
JO 
女 
37
JO  
助 330
JO 
序 734 
JO  
除 910
JO  
如 1482
JO  
叙 1483
JO  
徐 1484
JŌ 
上 
39
JŌ 
場 161
JŌ  
乗 336
JŌ  
定 371
JŌ  
成 545
JŌ  
静 548
JŌ  
条 738
JŌ  
状 739
JŌ  
常 740
JŌ 
情 741
JŌ 
城 914
JŌ 
蒸 915
JŌ 
盛 921
JŌ 
丈 1515
JŌ 
冗 1516
JŌ 
浄 1517
JŌ 
剰 1518
JŌ 
畳 1519
JŌ 
縄 1520
JŌ 
壌 1521
JŌ 
嬢 1522
JŌ 
錠 1523
JŌ 
譲 1524
JŌ 
醸 1525
JŌ 
娘 2014

Readings Index  657
JOKU 
辱 1531
JU 
受 319
JU 
授 729
JU 
樹 897
JU 
就 900
JU 
寿 1445
JU 
呪 1446
JU 
需 1447
JU 
儒 1448
JŪ 
十 
35
JŪ 
拾 321
JŪ 
住 325
JŪ 
重 326
JŪ 
従 902
JŪ 
縦 903
JŪ 
汁 1460
JŪ 
充 1461
JŪ 
柔 1462
JŪ 
渋 1463
JŪ 
銃 1464
JŪ 
獣 1465
JUKU 
熟 905
JUKU 
塾 1469
JUN 
順 534
JUN 
準 733
JUN 
純 906
JUN 
旬 1472
JUN 
巡 1473
JUN 
盾 1474
JUN 
准 1475
JUN 
殉 1476
JUN 
循 1477
JUN 
潤 1478
JUN 
遵 1479
JUTSU 
述 731
JUTSU 
術 732
K
KA 
下 
7
KA 
火 
8
KA 
花 
9
KA 
何 
86
-ka 
日 
66
KA 
科 
87
KA  
夏 
88
KA 
家 
89
KA  
歌 
90
KA 
合 134
KA 
化 258
KA 
荷 259
KA 
加 453
KA 
果 454
KA 
貨 455
KA 
課 456
KA 
可 655
KA 
仮 656
KA 
価 657
KA 
河 658
KA 
過 659
KA 
佳 1076
KA 
苛 1077
KA 
架 1078
KA 
華 1079
KA 
菓 1080
KA 
渦 1081
KA 
嫁 1082
KA 
暇 1083
KA 
禍 1084
KA 
靴 1085
KA 
寡 1086
KA 
箇 1087
KA 
稼 1088
ka 
蚊 1089
ka 
香 1331
ka 
鹿 1420
KA 
鍋 1817
kabe 
壁 1940
kabu 
株 839
kado 
角 
97
kado 
門 231
kaerimiru 
省 546
kaerimiru 
顧 1309
kaeru 
帰 106
kaeru 
換 1151
kaeru 
替 1669
kaesu 
返 412
kaette 
却 1199
kagami 
鏡 486
kagayaku 
輝 1186
kage 
陰 1035
kage 
影 1043
kagi 
鍵 1292
kagiru 
限 691
kago 
籠 2129
kagu 
嗅 1207
kai 
貝 
10
KAI 
回 
92
KAI 
会 
93
KAI 
海 
94
KAI 
絵 
95
KAI 
界 260
KAI 
開 261
KAI 
階 262
KAI 
改 458
KAI 
械 459
KAI 
街 461
KAI 
快 661
KAI 
解 662
KAI 
灰 834
KAI 
介 1094
KAI 
戒 1095
KAI 
怪 1096
KAI 
拐 1097
KAI 
悔 1098
KAI 
皆 1099
KAI 
塊 1100
KAI 
楷 1101

658  Readings Index
KAI 
潰 1102
KAI 
壊 1103
KAI 
懐 1104
KAI 
諧 1105
kaiko 
蚕 885
kakaeru 
抱 1955
kakageru 
掲 1261
kakari 
係 286
kakari 
掛 1126
kakaru 
架 1078
kakaru 
懸 1295
kakawaru 
拘 1324
kakeru 
掛 1126
kakeru 
駆 1242
kakeru 
賭 1772
kaki 
垣 1114
kaki 
柿 1115
kakomu 
囲 446
KAKU 
画 
91
kaku 
書 159
KAKU 
角 
97
KAKU 
客 270
KAKU 
各 462
KAKU 
覚 463
kaku 
欠 496 
KAKU 
格 663
KAKU 
確 664
KAKU 
拡 835
KAKU 
革 836
KAKU 
閣 837
KAKU 
核 1116
KAKU 
殻 1117
KAKU 
郭 1118
KAKU 
較 1119
KAKU 
隔 1120
KAKU 
獲 1121
KAKU 
嚇 1122
KAKU 
穫 1123
KAKU 
鶴 1740
kakureru 
隠 1036
kama 
釜 1136
kama 
鎌 1137
kama 
缶 1141
kama 
窯 2057
kamau 
構 701
kame 
亀 1180
kame 
瓶 1904
kami 
上 
39
kami 
紙 148
kami 
神 340
kami 
髪 1856
kaminari 
雷 2066
kamosu 
醸 1525
KAN 
間 100
KAN 
寒 263
KAN 
感 264
KAN 
漢 265
KAN 
館 266
KAN 
完 464
KAN 
官 465
KAN 
管 466
KAN 
関 467
KAN 
観 468
KAN 
刊 666
KAN 
幹 667
KAN 
慣 668
KAN 
干 840
KAN 
巻 841
KAN 
看 842
KAN 
簡 843
KAN 
甘 1139
KAN 
汗 1140
KAN 
缶 1141
KAN 
肝 1142
KAN 
冠 1143
KAN 
陥 1144
KAN 
乾 1145
KAN 
勘 1146
KAN 
患 1147
KAN 
貫 1148
KAN 
喚 1149
KAN 
堪 1150
KAN 
換 1151
KAN 
敢 1152
KAN 
棺 1153
KAN 
款 1154
KAN 
閑 1155
KAN 
勧 1156
KAN 
寛 1157
KAN 
歓 1158
KAN 
監 1159
KAN 
緩 1160
KAN 
憾 1161
KAN 
還 1162
KAN 
環 1163
KAN 
韓 1164
KAN 
艦 1165
KAN 
鑑 1166
KAN 
串 1248
KAN 
甲 1318
kanaderu 
奏 930
kaname 
要 623
kanarazu 
必 597
kanashii 
悲 397
kanbashii 
芳 1952
kane 
金 
16
kane 
鐘 1514
-kaneru 
兼 1281
kanete 
予 425
kangaeru 
考 130
kangamiru 
鑑 1166
kanmuri 
冠 1143
kano 
彼 1879
kao 
顔 103
kaori 
薫 1255
kaoru 
香 1331
kara 
空 
17

Readings Index  659
kara 
殻 1117
kara 
唐 1779
karada 
体 182
karai 
辛 1535
karamu 
絡 2068
kare 
彼 1879
kareru 
枯 1304
kari 
仮 656
kariru 
借 530
karu 
刈 1138
karu 
駆 1242
karu 
狩 1440
karui 
軽 287
kasa 
傘 1398
kasanaru 
重 326
kasegu 
稼 1088
kashikoi 
賢 1290
kashikomaru 
畏 1018
kashira 
頭 203
kasu 
貸 770
kasuka 
幽 2038
kata 
方 223
kata 
型 493
kata 
片 980
kata 
潟 1127
kata 
肩 1279
kata(chi) 
形 115
katai 
固 501
katai 
難 960
katai 
堅 1286
katai 
硬 1337
kataki 
敵 779
katakuna 
頑 1169
katamari 
塊 1100
katamuku 
傾 1264
katana 
刀 198
kataru 
語 124
katawara 
傍 1977
katayoru 
偏 1944
kate 
糧 2096
KATSU 
活 
99
katsu 
勝 335
KATSU 
割 838
KATSU 
括 1128
KATSU 
喝 1129
KATSU 
渇 1130
KATSU  
葛 1131
KATSU 
滑 1132
KATSU 
褐 1133
KATSU 
轄 1134
katsu 
且 1135
katsugu 
担 941
katsute 
曽 1635
kau 
買 212
kau 
飼 722
kawa 
川   50
kawa 
皮 396
kawa 
河 658
kawa 
革 836
kawaku 
渇 1130
kawaku 
乾 1145
kawara 
瓦 1091
kawaru 
代 358
kawaru 
変 609
kawasu 
交  128
kayou 
通 193
kazaru 
飾 1528
kaze 
風 217
kazoeru 
数 168
kazu 
数 168
KE 
気 
12
KE 
家 
89
ke 
毛 230
KE 
化 258
KE 
希 470
KE 
景 494
KE 
仮 656
KE 
懸 1295
ke- 
蹴 1458
ke(da)mono 
獣 1465
kedashi 
蓋 1110
kegareru 
汚 1060
KEI 
京 110
KEI 
兄 114
KEI 
形 115
KEI 
計 116
KEI 
係 286
KEI 
軽 287
KEI 
競 487
KEI 
径 492
KEI 
型 493
KEI 
景 494
KEI 
境 680
KEI 
経 685
KEI 
系 855
KEI 
敬 856
KEI 
警 857
KEI 
刑 1256
KEI 
茎 1257
KEI 
契 1258
KEI 
恵 1259
KEI 
啓 1260
KEI 
掲 1261
KEI 
渓 1262
KEI 
蛍 1263
KEI 
傾 1264
KEI 
携 1265
KEI 
継 1266
KEI 
詣 1267
KEI 
慶 1268
KEI 
憬 1269
KEI 
稽 1270
KEI 
憩 1271
KEI 
鶏 1272
kemui 
煙 1055
kemuri 
煙 1055
KEN 
犬 
19

660  Readings Index
KEN 
見 
20
KEN 
間 100
KEN 
研 290
KEN 
県 291
KEN 
建 498
KEN 
健 499
KEN 
験 500
KEN 
件 687
KEN 
券 688
KEN 
険 689
KEN 
検 690
KEN 
絹 861
KEN 
権 862
KEN 
憲 863
KEN 
肩 1279
KEN 
倹 1280
KEN 
兼 1281
KEN 
剣 1282
KEN 
拳 1283
KEN 
軒 1284
KEN 
圏 1285
KEN 
堅 1286
KEN 
嫌 1287
KEN 
献 1288
KEN 
遣 1289
KEN 
賢 1290
KEN 
謙 1291
KEN 
鍵 1292
KEN 
繭 1293
KEN 
顕 1294
KEN 
懸 1295
keru 
蹴 1458
kesu 
消 332
keta 
桁 1277
KETSU 
血 288
KETSU 
決 289
KETSU 
欠 496
KETSU 
結 497
KETSU 
潔 686
KETSU 
穴 860
KETSU 
傑 1278
kewashii 
険 689
kezuru 
削 1385
KI 
気 
12
ki  
木 
73
KI  
汽 104
KI 
記 105
KI  
帰 106
KI 
起 268
KI 
期 269
KI 
希 470
KI 
季 471
KI 
紀 472
KI 
喜 473
KI 
旗 474
KI 
器 475
KI 
機 476
KI 
基 670
KI 
寄 671
KI 
規 672
KI 
危 844
KI 
机 845
KI 
揮 846
KI 
貴 847
KI 
己 866
ki 
樹 897
KI 
企 1170
KI 
伎 1171
KI 
岐 1172
KI 
忌 1173
KI 
奇 1174
KI 
祈 1175
KI 
軌 1176
KI 
既 1177
KI 
飢 1178
KI 
鬼 1179
KI 
亀 1180
KI 
幾 1181
KI 
棋 1182
KI 
棄 1183
KI 
毀 1184
KI 
畿 1185
KI 
輝 1186
KI 
騎 1187
KI 
崎 1384
KI 
肌 1854
KI 
姫 1895
ki 
黄 133
kiba 
牙 1090
kibishii 
厳 865
KICHI 
吉 1196
kieru 
消 332
kiku 
聞 219
kiku 
利 626
kiku 
効 697
KIKU 
菊 1195
kiku 
聴 1725
kimaru 
決 289
kimi 
君 285
kimo 
肝 1142
kimo 
胆 1688
KIN 
金 
16
KIN 
近 113
KIN  
今 138
KIN 
均 681
KIN 
禁 682
KIN 
勤 853
KIN 
筋 854
KIN 
巾 1232
KIN 
斤 1233
KIN 
菌 1234
KIN 
琴 1235
KIN 
僅 1236
KIN 
緊 1237
KIN 
錦 1238
KIN 
謹 1239
KIN 
襟 1240

Readings Index  661
kinu 
絹 861
kirau 
嫌 1287
kiri 
霧 2013
kiru 
切 173
kiru 
着 364
kiru 
斬 1399
kisaki 
后 869
kishi 
岸 267
kisou 
競 487
kita 
北 224
kitaeru 
鍛 1693
kitanai 
汚 1060
KITSU 
吉 1196
KITSU  
喫 1197
KITSU 
詰 1198
kiwa 
際 710
kiwameru 
究 271
kiwameru 
極 488
kiwameru 
窮 1208
kiyoi 
清 547
kizamu 
刻 875
kizasu 
兆 573
kizu 
傷 912
kizuku 
築 774
ko 
子 
27
ko- 
小 
38
ko- 
木 
73
KO 
戸 120
KO 
古 121
KO 
去 276
KO 
庫 292
KO 
湖 293
KO 
固 501
ko 
児 526
ko 
粉 605
KO 
故 694
KO 
個 695
KO 
己 866
KO 
呼 867
KO 
箇 1087
KO 
拠 1211
KO 
虚 1212
KO 
股 1300
KO 
虎 1301
KO 
孤 1302
KO 
弧 1303
KO 
枯 1304
KO 
雇 1305
KO 
誇 1306
KO 
鼓 1307
KO 
錮 1308
KO 
顧 1309
KŌ 
口   22
KŌ 
校   23
KŌ 
後 123
KŌ 
工 125
KŌ 
公 126
KŌ 
広 127
KŌ 
交 128
KŌ 
光 129
KŌ 
考 130
KŌ 
行 131
KŌ 
高 132
KŌ 
黄 133
KŌ 
向 294
KŌ 
幸 295
KŌ 
港 296
KŌ 
功 502
KŌ 
好 503
KŌ 
候 504
KŌ 
航 505
KŌ 
康 506
KŌ 
格 663
KŌ 
効 697
KŌ 
厚 698
KŌ 
耕 699
KŌ 
鉱 700
KŌ 
構 701
KŌ 
興 702
KŌ 
講 703
KŌ 
后 869
KŌ 
孝 870
KŌ 
皇 871
KŌ 
紅 872
KŌ 
降 873
KŌ 
鋼 874
KŌ 
岡 1068
KŌ 
較 1119
KŌ 
仰 1229
KŌ 
桁 1277
KŌ 
勾 1315
KŌ 
孔 1316
KŌ 
巧 1317
KŌ 
甲 1318
KŌ 
江 1319
KŌ 
坑 1320
KŌ 
抗 1321
KŌ 
攻 1322
KŌ 
更 1323
KŌ 
拘 1324
KŌ 
肯 1325
KŌ 
侯 1326
KŌ 
恒 1327
KŌ 
洪 1328
KŌ 
荒 1329
KŌ 
郊 1330
KŌ 
香 1331
KŌ 
貢 1332
KŌ 
控 1333
KŌ 
梗 1334
KŌ 
喉 1335
KŌ 
慌 1336
KŌ 
硬 1337
KŌ 
絞 1338
KŌ 
項 1339
KŌ 
溝 1340
KŌ 
綱 1341

662  Readings Index
KŌ 
酵 1342
KŌ 
稿 1343
KŌ 
衡 1344
KŌ 
購 1345
KŌ 
虹 1822
KŌ 
岬 2008
kobamu 
拒 1210
koboreru 
零 2107
kobushi 
拳 1283
koe 
声 170
koeru 
肥 793
koeru   
越 1047 
koeru 
超 1720
kogeru 
焦 1503
kogoeru 
凍 1778
koi 
濃 1830
koi 
恋 2116
koishii 
恋 2116
kokera 
杮 1115
kokono- 
九   13
kokoro 
心 164
kokoromiru 
試 525
kokoroyoi 
快 661
kokorozashi 
志 718
KOKU 
谷 135
KOKU 
国 136
KOKU 
黒 137
KOKU 
告 507
KOKU 
刻 875
KOKU 
穀 876
koku 
扱 1012
KOKU 
克 1351
KOKU 
酷 1352
koma 
駒 1354
komakai 
細 140
komaru 
困 878
kome 
米 220
komo 
薦 1610
komori 
籠 2129
komu 
混 704
komu 
込 1355
kōmuru 
被 1883
KON 
金   16
KON 
今 138
KON 
根 298
KON 
建 498
KON 
混 704
KON 
困 878
KON 
献 1288
KON 
昆 1357
KON 
恨 1358
KON 
婚 1359
KON 
痕 1360
KON 
紺 1361
KON 
魂 1362
KON 
墾 1363
KON 
懇 1364
kona 
粉 605
konomu 
好 503
kōra 
甲 1318
kore 
是 1574
kōri 
氷 401
kōri 
郡 491
koriru 
懲 1726
koro 
頃 1356
korogaru 
転 375
koromo 
衣 444
korosu 
殺 515
koru 
凝 1231
kōru 
凍 1778
koshi 
腰 2054
kotaeru 
答 202
kotaeru 
応 651
koto 
言 118
koto 
事 309
koto 
琴 1235
koto 
殊 1441
kotoba 
詞 890
kotobuki 
寿 1445
kotonaru 
異 826
kotowaru 
断 773
KOTSU 
骨 877
KOTSU 
滑 1132
kou 
乞 1346
kou 
請 1584
kowai 
怖 1906
kowareru 
壊 1103
kowareru 
毀 1184
koyomi 
暦 2112
kozotte 
挙 482
KU 
九   13
KU 
口   22
KU 
工 125
KU 
宮 274
KU 
区 282
KU 
苦 283
KU 
功 502
KU 
久 676
KU 
句 683
KU 
供 850
KU 
紅 872
KU 
駆 1242
KU 
惧 1243
KU 
貢 1332
KŪ 
空 
17
kubaru 
配 388
kubi 
首 155
kubiki 
衡 1344
kuchi 
口   22
kuchibiru 
唇 1538
kuchiru 
朽 1204
kuda 
管 466
kudaku 
砕 1372
kudan 
件 687
kudasaru 
下     7
kujiku 
挫 1370
kujira 
鯨 1274

Readings Index  663
kuki 
茎 1257
kukuru 
括 1128
kuma 
熊 1252
kumi 
組 178
kumo 
雲   83
kumoru 
曇 1811
kumu 
組 178
kumu 
酌 1435
KUN 
君 285
KUN 
訓 489
KUN 
勲 1254
KUN 
薫 1255
kuni 
国 136
kura 
倉 559
kura 
蔵 936
kuraberu 
比 792
kuraberu 
較 1119
kurai 
暗 243
kurai 
位 445
kurenai 
紅 872
kureru 
暮 982
kureru 
呉 1311
kurogane 
鉄 374
kuroi 
黒 137
kuru 
来 237
kuru 
繰 1253
kuruma 
車 
33
kurushii 
苦 283
kuruu 
狂 1217
kusa 
草   53
kusai 
臭 1452
kusari 
鎖 1369
kusaru 
腐 1914
kuse 
癖 1942
kushi 
串 1248
kusuri 
薬 420
kutsu 
靴 1085
KUTSU 
屈 1249
KUTSU 
掘 1250
KUTSU 
窟 1251
kutsugaeru 
覆 1924
kutsurogu 
寛 1157
kuu 
食 163
kuwa 
桑 1632
kuwadateru 
企 1170
kuwaeru 
加 453
kuwashii 
詳 1508
kuyamu 
悔 1098
kuyashii 
悔 1098
kuzu 
葛 1131
kuzureru 
崩 1962
KYA 
脚 1200
KYAKU 
客 270
KYAKU 
却 1199
KYAKU 
脚 1200
KYO 
去 276
KYO 
挙 482
KYO 
居 678
KYO 
許 679
KYO 
巨 1209
KYO 
拒 1210
KYO 
拠 1211
KYO 
虚 1212
KYO 
距 1213
KYO 
据 1570
KYO 
裾 1572
KYŌ 
京 110
KYŌ 
強 111
KYŌ 
教 112
KYŌ 
兄 114
KYŌ 
橋 277
KYŌ 
共 484
KYŌ 
協 485
KYŌ 
鏡 486
KYŌ 
競 487
KYŌ 
境 680
KYŌ 
経 685
KYŌ 
興 702
KYŌ 
供 850
KYŌ 
胸 851
KYŌ 
郷 852
KYŌ 
凶 1215
KYŌ 
叫 1216
KYŌ 
狂 1217
KYŌ 
享 1218
KYŌ 
況 1219
KYŌ 
峡 1220
KYŌ 
挟 1221
KYŌ 
狭 1222
KYŌ 
恐 1223
KYŌ 
恭 1224
KYŌ 
脅 1225
KYŌ 
矯 1226
KYŌ 
響 1227
KYŌ 
驚 1228
KYŌ 
梗 1334 
KYŌ 
頰 1982
KYŌ 
脇 2132
KYOKU 
曲 279
KYOKU 
局 280
KYOKU 
極 488
KYŪ 
九 
13
KYŪ 
休 
14
KYŪ 
弓 107
KYŪ 
究 271
KYŪ 
急 272
KYŪ 
級 273
KYŪ 
宮 274
KYŪ 
球 275
KYŪ 
求 478
KYŪ 
泣 479
KYŪ 
救 480
KYŪ 
給 481
KYŪ 
久 676
KYŪ 
旧 677
KYŪ 
吸 849
KYŪ 
及 1202

664  Readings Index
KYŪ 
丘 1203
KYŪ 
朽 1204
KYŪ 
臼 1205
KYŪ 
糾 1206
KYŪ 
嗅 1207
KYŪ 
窮 1208
M
ma 
目 
76
ma 
間 100
ma 
馬 210
ma 
真 341
MA 
麻 1995
MA 
摩 1996
MA 
磨 1997
MA 
魔 1998
maboroshi 
幻 1296
machi 
町 
61
machi 
街 461
mada 
未 617
madara 
斑 1869
mado 
窓 931
madou 
惑 2133
mae 
前 177
magaru 
曲 279
magireru 
紛 1927
mago 
孫 565
MAI 
米 220
MAI 
毎 225
MAI 
妹 226
MAI 
枚 988
MAI 
昧 1999
MAI 
埋 2000
mainai 
賂 2121
mairi 
詣 1267
mairu 
参 517
majinai 
呪 1446
majiru 
交 128
majiru 
混 704
makanau 
賄 2131
makaru 
罷 1886
makaseru 
任 785
makeru 
負 406
maki 
牧 614
maki 
巻 841
maki 
薪 1548
makoto 
誠 923
maku 
巻 841
MAKU 
幕 989
MAKU 
膜 2001
makura 
枕 2002
mama- 
継 1266
mame 
豆 379
mamoru 
守 316
MAN 
万 227
MAN 
満 616
MAN 
慢 2005
MAN 
漫 2006
manabu　 
学 
11
manako 
眼 669
maneku 
招 735
manukareru 
免 2018
maru 
丸 101
marui 
円 
4
marui 
丸 101
masa 
正 
43
masa 
将 911
masaru 
勝 335
mashite 
況 1219
masu 
益 648
masu 
増 763
masu 
升 1485
mata 
股 1300
mata 
又 2003
matataku 
瞬 1471
mato 
的 578
matsu 
待 357
matsu 
松 536
MATSU 
末 615
MATSU 
抹 2004
matsuri 
祭 299
mattaku 
全 347
mau 
舞 1920
mawari 
周 532
mawaru 
回 
92
mayou 
迷 817
mayu 
繭 1293
mayu 
眉 1889
mazui 
拙 1594
mazushii 
貧 798
me 
女 
37
me 
目 
76
me 
芽 457
me 
雌 1411
megumu 
恵 1259
meguru 
巡 1473
MEI 
名 
75
MEI 
明 228
MEI 
鳴 229
MEI 
命 416
MEI 
迷 817
MEI 
盟 991
MEI 
謎 1816
MEI 
冥 2015
MEI 
銘 2016
mekura 
盲 2022
MEN 
面 417
MEN 
綿 818
MEN 
免 2018
MEN 
麺 2019
meshi 
飯 594
mesu 
雌 1411
mesu 
召 1486
METSU 
滅 2017
mezurashii 
珍 1730
mi- 
三 
25
mi 
実 312

Readings Index  665
mi 
身 339
MI 
味 415
MI 
未 617
mi- 
御 1214
MI 
眉 1889
MI 
魅 2007
MI 
弥 2029
michi 
道 205
michibiku 
導 782
michiru 
満 616
midara 
淫 1034
midareru 
乱 999
midari 
妄 2021
midori 
緑 435
migaku 
磨 1997
migi 
右 
2
mijikai 
短 362
mijime 
惨 1397
miki 
幹 667
mikotonori 
詔 1506
mimi 
耳 
31
MIN 
民 619
MIN 
眠 2011
mina 
皆 1099
minami 
南 208
minamoto 
源 864
minato 
港 296
mine 
峰 1960
minikui 
醜 1457
minna 
皆 1099
minoru 
実 312
miru 
見 
20
miru 
視 889
miru 
診 1543
misaki 
崎 1384
misaki 
岬 2008
misao 
操 935
misasagi 
陵 2091
mise 
店 195
mitasu 
充 1461
mitomeru 
認 962
MITSU 
密 990
MITSU 
蜜 2009
mitsugu 
貢 1332
miya 
宮 274
miyako 
都 376
mizo 
溝 1340
mizu 
水 
42
mizukara 
自 150
mizuumi 
湖 293
MO 
模 992
mo 
喪 1637
mo 
藻 1647
MO 
茂 2020
MŌ 
毛 230
MŌ 
望 613
MŌ 
亡 985
MŌ 
妄 2021
MŌ 
盲 2022
MŌ 
耗 2023
MŌ 
猛 2024
MŌ 
網 2025
mochi 
餅 1939
mochiiru 
用 235
mōde 
詣 1267
modoru 
戻 2105
moeru 
燃 786
moguru 
潜 1608
mōkeru 
設 754
MOKU 
木 
73
MOKU 
目 
76
MOKU 
黙 2026
momo 
股 1300
momo 
桃 1780
MON 
文 
72
MON 
聞 219
MON 
門 231
MON 
問 418
MON 
紋 2027
mono 
者 314
mono 
物 410
moppara 
専 925
mori 
森 
40
moro 
諸 909
moru 
盛 921
moru 
漏 2128
moshi 
若 896
mōsu 
申 338
moteasobu 
玩 1168
moteasobu 
弄 2123
moto 
下 
7
moto 
本 
74
moto 
元 117
moto 
基 670
moto 
許 679
moto 
素 759
motomeru 
求 478
motozuku 
基 670
motsu 
持 310
MOTSU 
物 410
motte 
以 443
mottomo 
最 510
moyoosu 
催 1378
mu-  
六 
80
MU 
無 620
MU 
武 802
MU 
務 815
MU 
夢 816
MU 
謀 1981
MU 
矛 2012
MU 
霧 2013
mugi 
麦 213
mugoi 
惨 1397
mukaeru 
迎 1273
mukashi 
昔 346
muko 
婿 1582
muku 
向 294

666  Readings Index
mukuiru 
報 810
mukuro 
骸 1113
muna- 
胸 851
muna- 
棟 1787
munashii 
虚 1212
mune 
胸 851
mune 
旨 1401
mune 
棟 1787
mura 
村 
55
mura 
斑 1869
murasaki 
紫 1409
mure 
群 684
muro 
室 152
musaboru 
貪 1809
musebu 
咽 1032
mushi 
虫 
60
mushiro 
寧 1826
musu 
蒸 915
musubu 
結 497
musume 
娘 2014
mutsumajii 
睦 1984
muzukashii 
難 960
MYAKU 
脈 618
MYŌ 
名 
75
MYŌ 
明 228
MYŌ 
命 416
MYŌ 
苗 1897
MYŌ 
妙 2010
MYŌ 
冥 2015
MYŌ 
猫 1899
N
na 
名 
75
na 
菜 509
NA 
納 963
NA 
那 1813
NA 
奈 1814
nabe 
鍋 1817
nado 
等 383
nae 
苗 1897
naeru 
萎 1020
nagai 
長 189
nagai 
永 644
nagameru 
眺 1717
nagareru 
流 432
nageku 
慨 1109
nageku 
嘆 1690
nageru 
投 378
nagoyaka 
和 440
naguru 
殴 1065
nagusamu 
慰 1026
NAI 
内 207
nai 
無 620
nai 
亡 985
naka 
中   59
naka 
仲 571
nakaba 
半 214
naku 
鳴 229
naku 
泣 479
nakunaru 
亡 985
nama 
生   44
namakeru 
怠 1663
namari 
鉛 1057
nameraka 
滑 1132
nami 
波 387
nami 
並 977
nami 
浪 2125
namida 
涙 2101
NAN 
男   57
NAN 
南 208
NAN 
難 960
NAN 
軟 1818
nana- 
七 
32
naname 
斜 1430
nani 
何 
86
nanigashi 
某 1973
nao 
尚 1491
nao 
猶 2041
naoru 
直 192
naosu 
治 527
narabu 
並 977
narau 
習 323
narau 
倣 1959
nareru 
慣 668
naru 
鳴 229
naru 
成 545
nasake 
情 741
nashi 
梨 1815
nasu 
為 1017
natsu 
夏 
88
NATSU 
納 963
natsukashii 
懐 1104
nawa  
縄 1520
nayamu 
悩 1829
nazo 
謎 1816
nazumu 
泥 1755
ne　 
音     6
ne 
根 298
ne 
値 946
nebaru 
粘 1828
negau 
願 469
NEI 
寧 1826
nejiru 
捻 1827
neko 
猫 1899
nemui 
眠 2011
nemuru 
睡 1564
NEN 
年 
68
NEN 
然 557
NEN 
念 590
NEN 
燃 786
NEN 
捻 1827
NEN 
粘 1828
nengoro 
懇 1364
nerau 
狙 1617
neru 
練 438
neru 
寝 1544
neru 
錬 2118

Readings Index  667
netamu 
嫉 1426
netamu 
妬 1768
NETSU 
熱 589
NI 
二 
65
ni 
荷 259
NI 
児 526
NI 
仁 917
ni 
丹 1686
NI 
尼 1819
NI 
弐 1820
nibui 
鈍 1810
NICHI 
日 
66
nigai 
苦 283
nigeru 
逃 1776
nigiru 
握 1011
nigoru 
濁 1680
nii 
新 165
niji 
虹 1822
NIKU 
肉 209
nikumu 
憎 1648
NIN 
人 
41
NIN 
任 785
NIN 
認 962
NIN 
妊 1824
NIN 
忍 1825
ninau 
担 941
nioi 
匂 1821
niru 
似 724
niru 
煮 1431
nise 
偽 1189
nishi 
西 169
nishiki 
錦 1238
niwa 
庭 372
niwatori 
鶏 1272
no 
野 233
NŌ 
農 386
NŌ 
能 787
NŌ 
納 963
NŌ 
脳 964
NŌ 
悩 1829
NŌ 
濃 1830
noberu 
述 731
noberu 
陳 1732
nobiru 
延 831
nobiru 
伸 1533
noboru 
上   39
noboru 
登 382
noboru 
昇 1492
nochi 
後 123
nodo 
咽 1032
nodo  
喉 1335
nogareru 
逃 1776
noki 
軒 1284
nokoru 
残 520
nomu 
飲 250
nonoshiru 
罵 1834
nori 
典 579
nori 
則 764
norou 
呪 1446
noru 
乗 336
noseru 
載 1381
nottoru 
則 764
nozoku 
除 910
nozomu 
望 613
nozomu 
臨 1004
nugu 
脱 1682
nuguu 
拭 1526
nukaru 
抜 1858
numa 
沼 1493
nuno 
布 799
nuru 
塗 1771
nusa 
幣 1936
nushi 
主 315
nusumu 
窃 1595
nusumu 
盗 1783
nuu 
縫 1966
NYO 
女 
37
NYO 
如 1482
NYŌ 
女 
37
NYŌ 
尿 1823
NYŪ 
入 
67
NYŪ 
乳 961
NYŪ 
柔 1462
O
o- 
小 
38
O 
悪 241
O 
和 440
O 
汚 1060
o 
緒 1481
o 
尾 1888
o- 
雄 2043
Ō 
王 
5
Ō 
大 
56
Ō 
黄 133
Ō 
央 254
Ō 
横 255
Ō 
応 651
Ō 
往 652
Ō 
桜 653
Ō 
皇 871
Ō 
凹 1061
Ō 
押 1062
Ō 
旺 1063
Ō 
欧 1064
Ō 
殴 1065
Ō 
翁 1066
Ō 
奥 1067
obi 
帯 566
obiru 
帯 566
obiyakasu 
脅 1225
oboeru 
覚 463
oboreru 
溺 1758
ochiiru 
陥 1144
ochiru 
落 431
odayaka 
穏 1075
odokasu 
嚇 1122

668  Readings Index
odokasu 
脅 1225
oeru 
終 322
odoroku 
驚 1228
odoru 
躍 2031
odoru 
踊 2056
odosu 
威 1016
odosu 
嚇 1122
odosu 
脅 1225
oeru 
終 322
ogamu 
拝 966
ōgi 
扇 1599
oginau 
補 981
ogoru 
傲 1349
ogosoka 
厳 865
ōi 
多 180
oiru 
老 638
ōjiru 
応 651
oka 
岡 1068
oka 
丘 1203
okasu 
犯 789
okasu 
侵 1536
okasu 
冒 1974
oki 
沖 1708
ōkii 
大   56
okina 
翁 1066
okiru 
起 268
okonau 
行 131
okoru 
起 268
okoru 
興 702
okoru 
怒 1774
okotaru 
怠 1663
OKU 
屋 256
OKU 
億 452
oku 
置 570
oku 
奥 1067
OKU 
憶 1069
OKU 
臆 1070
okureru 
後 123
okureru 
遅 1698
okuru 
送 349
okuru 
贈 1649
omo 
主 315
omo 
面 417
omoi 
重 326
omomuki 
趣 1444
omomuku 
赴 1910
omomuro 
徐 1484
omote 
表 402
omote 
面 417
omou 
思 147
ōmune 
概 1112
ON 
音 
6
ON 
温 257
ON 
恩 654
ON 
怨 1051
ON 
穏 1075
on- 
御 1214
onaji 
同 204
oni 
鬼 1179
onna 
女 
37
ono(-ono) 
各 462
ononuku 
慄 2079
onore 
己 866
ore 
俺 1073
ori 
折 551
oriru 
下 
7
oriru 
降 873
oroka 
愚 1244
oroshi 
卸 1074
orosu 
卸 1074
oru 
折 551
oru 
居 678
oru 
織 742
osaeru 
抑 2060
osameru 
治 527
osameru 
修 730
osameru 
収 898
osameru 
納 963
osanai 
幼 996
ōse 
仰 1229
oshieru 
教 112
oshimu 
惜 1590
osoi 
遅 1698
osore 
虞 1071
osoreru 
畏 1018
osoreru 
恐 1223
osoreru 
惧 1243
osou 
襲 1459
osu 
推 919
osu 
押 1062
osu 
雄 2043
oto 
音 
6
otoko 
男 
57
otoroeru 
衰 1561
otoru 
劣 2113
otōto 
弟 194
otozureru 
訪 984
OTSU 
乙 1072
otto 
夫 601
ou 
追 370
ou 
負 406
ou 
逐 1703
ou 
被 1883
ōu 
覆 1924
ōu 
蔽 1938
owaru 
終 322
oya 
親 166
ōyake 
公 126
oyobu 
及 1202
oyogu 
泳 252
oyoso 
凡 1993
R
RA 
拉 2063
RA 
裸 2064
RA 
羅 2065
RAI 
来 237

Readings Index  669
RAI 
雷 2066
RAI 
頼 2067
RAKU 
楽 
98
RAKU 
落 431
RAKU 
絡 2068
RAKU 
酪 2069
RAN 
乱 999
RAN 
卵 1000
RAN 
覧 1001
RAN 
嵐 1014
RAN 
濫 2071
RAN 
藍 2072
RAN 
欄 2073
RATSU 
拉 2063
RATSU 
辣 2070
REI 
礼 436
REI 
令 633
REI 
冷 634
REI 
例 635
REI 
励 2104
REI 
戻 2105
REI 
鈴 2106
REI 
零 2107
REI 
霊 2108
REI 
隷 2109
REI 
齢 2110
REI 
麗 2111
REKI 
歴 636
REKI 
暦 2112
REN 
練 438
REN 
連 637
REN 
恋 2116
REN 
廉 2117
REN  
錬 2118
RETSU 
列 437
RETSU 
劣 2113
RETSU 
烈 2114
RETSU 
裂 2115
RI 
里 238
RI 
理 239
RI 
利 626
RI 
裏 1002
RI 
梨 1815
RI 
吏 2074
RI 
痢 2075
RI 
履 2076
RI 
璃 2077
RI 
離 2078
RICHI 
律 1003
RIKI 
力 
78
RIKU 
陸 627
RIN 
林   79
RIN 
輪 631
RIN 
臨 1004
RIN 
厘 2097
RIN 
倫 2098
RIN 
隣 2099
RIN 
鈴 2106
RITSU 
立 
77
RITSU 
率 767
RITSU 
律 1003
RITSU 
慄 2079
RO 
路 439
RO 
呂 2119
RO 
炉 2120
RO 
賂 2121
RO 
露 2122
RŌ 
老 638
RŌ  
労 639
RŌ 
朗 1005
RŌ 
糧 2096
RŌ 
露 2122
RŌ 
弄 2123
RŌ 
郎 2124
RŌ 
浪 2125
RŌ 
廊 2126
RŌ 
楼 2127
RŌ 
漏 2128
RŌ 
籠 2129
ROKU 
六 
80
ROKU 
緑 435
ROKU 
録 640
ROKU 
鹿 1420
ROKU 
麓 2130
RON 
論 1006
RU 
留 824
RU 
瑠 2100
RUI 
類 632
RUI 
涙 2101
RUI 
累 2102
RUI 
塁 2103
RYAKU 
略 823
RYO 
旅 433
RYO 
侶 2085
RYO 
虜 2086
RYO 
慮 2087
RYO 
呂 2119
RYŌ 
両 434
RYŌ 
漁 483
RYŌ 
良 628
RYŌ 
料 629
RYŌ 
量 630
RYŌ 
令 633
RYŌ 
領 825
RYŌ 
了 2088
RYŌ 
涼 2089
RYŌ 
猟 2090
RYŌ 
陵 2091
RYŌ 
僚 2092
RYŌ 
寮 2093
RYŌ 
療 2094
RYŌ 
瞭 2095
RYŌ 
糧 2096
RYŌ 
霊 2108
RYOKU 
力 
78
RYOKU 
緑 435
RYŪ 
流 432

670  Readings Index
RYŪ 
留 824
RYŪ 
柳 2080
RYŪ 
竜 2081
RYŪ 
粒 2082
RYŪ 
隆 2083
RYŪ 
硫 2084
S
SA 
左 
24
SA 
作 141
SA 
茶 187
SA 
差 508
SA 
査 705
SA 
再 706
SA 
砂 879
SA 
佐 1365
SA 
沙 1366
SA 
唆 1367
SA 
詐 1368
SA 
鎖 1369
sabaku 
裁 882
sabi 
寂 1438
sabishii 
寂 1438
sachi 
幸 295
sadameru 
定 371
saegiru 
遮 1432
sagaru 
下 
7
sagasu 
探 942
sagasu 
捜 1630
sageru 
提 776
sagesumu 
蔑 1943
saguru 
探 942
SAI 
才 139
SAI 
細 140
SAI 
西 169
SAI 
切 173
SAI 
祭 299
SAI 
菜 509
SAI 
最 510
SAI 
再 706
SAI 
災 707
SAI 
妻 708
SAI 
採 709
SAI 
際 710
SAI 
財 712
SAI 
済 881
SAI 
裁 882
SAI 
采 1371
SAI 
砕 1372
SAI 
宰 1373
SAI 
栽 1374
SAI 
彩 1375
SAI 
斎 1376
SAI 
債 1377
SAI 
催 1378
SAI 
塞 1379
SAI 
歳 1380
SAI 
載 1381
sai 
埼 1382
sainamu 
苛 1077
saiwai 
幸 295
saka- 
酒 318
saka 
坂 394
saka 
阪 1865
sakaeru 
栄 450
sakai 
境 680
sakan 
旺 1063
sakana 
魚 109
sakanoboru 
遡 1625
sakarau 
逆 675
sakaru 
盛 921
sakazuki 
杯 1835
sake 
酒 318
sake 
酎 1711
sakebu 
叫 1216
sakeru 
避 1887
sakeru 
裂 2115
saki 
先 
51
saki 
埼 1382
saki 
崎 1384
saki 
岬 2008
SAKU 
作 141
SAKU 
昨 512
SAKU 
策 883
SAKU 
冊 884
SAKU 
削 1385
SAKU 
柵 1386
SAKU 
索 1387
SAKU 
酢 1388
SAKU 
搾 1389
SAKU 
錯 1390
saku 
咲 1391
sakura 
桜 653
sama 
様 430
samatageru 
妨 1970
sameru 
覚 463
sameru 
冷 634
sameru 
醒 1585
samui 
寒 263
samurai 
士 521
samurai 
侍 1415
SAN 
三   25
SAN 
山  26　
SAN 
算 142
SAN 
参 517
SAN 
産 518
SAN 
散 519
SAN 
酸 715
SAN 
賛 716
SAN 
蚕 885
SAN 
桟 1396
SAN 
惨 1397
SAN 
傘 1398
sara 
皿 300
sara 
更 1323
saru 
去 276
saru 
猿 1056

Readings Index  671
sasaeru 
支 717
sasou 
誘 2044
sasu 
指 305
sasu 
差 508
sasu 
刺 1403
sasu 
挿 1631
sato 
里 238
satoru 
悟 1313
satosu 
諭 2035
SATSU 
札 513
SATSU  
刷 514
SATSU 
殺 515
SATSU 
察 516
SATSU 
冊 884
SATSU 
刹 1392
SATSU 
拶 1393
SATSU 
撮 1394
SATSU 
擦 1395
sawa 
沢 1674
sawagu 
騒 1646
sawaru 
障 913
sawaru 
触 1529
sawayaka 
爽 1636
sazukeru 
授 729
SE 
世 344
se 
背 967
se 
畝 1040
SE 
施 1406
se 
瀬 1573
se 
脊 1588
SECHI 
節 552
SEI 
正 
43
SEI 
生 
44
SEI 
青 
45
SEI 
西 169
SEI 
声 170
SEI 
星 171
SEI 
晴 172
SEI 
世 344
SEI 
整 345
SEI 
成 545
SEI 
省 546
SEI 
清 547
SEI 
静 548
SEI 
情 741
SEI 
制 744
SEI 
性 745
SEI 
政 746
SEI 
勢 747
SEI 
精 748
SEI 
製 749
SEI 
済 881
SEI 
盛 921
SEI 
聖 922
SEI 
誠 923
sei 
背 967
SEI 
歳 1380
SEI 
井 1575
SEI 
姓 1576
SEI 
征 1577
SEI 
斉 1578
SEI 
牲 1579
SEI 
凄 1580
SEI 
逝 1581
SEI 
婿 1582
SEI 
誓 1583
SEI 
請 1584
SEI 
醒 1585
SEKI 
夕 
46
SEKI 
石 
47
SEKI 
赤 
48
SEKI 
昔 346
seki 
関 467
SEKI 
席 549
SEKI 
積 550
SEKI  
責 751
SEKI 
績 752
SEKI 
尺 895
SEKI 
潟 1127
SEKI 
寂 1438
SEKI 
斥 1586
SEKI 
析 1587
SEKI  
脊 1588
SEKI 
隻 1589
SEKI 
惜 1590
SEKI 
戚 1591
SEKI 
跡 1592
SEKI 
籍 1593
semai 
狭 1222
semaru 
迫 1846
semeru 
責 751
semeru 
攻 1322
SEN 
千 
49
SEN 
川 
50
SEN 
先 
51
SEN 
船 175
SEN 
線 176
SEN 
浅 554
SEN 
戦 555
SEN 
選 556
SEN 
銭 757
SEN 
宣 924
SEN 
専 925
SEN 
泉 926
SEN 
洗 927
SEN 
染 928
SEN 
仙 1597
SEN 
占 1598
SEN 
扇 1599
SEN 
栓 1600
SEN 
旋 1601
SEN 
煎 1602
SEN 
羨 1603
SEN 
腺 1604
SEN 
詮 1605
SEN 
践 1606
SEN 
箋 1607

672  Readings Index
SEN 
潜 1608
SEN 
遷 1609
SEN 
薦 1610
SEN 
繊 1611
SEN 
鮮 1612
seru 
競 487
SETSU 
切 173
SETSU  
雪 174
SETSU 
折 551
SETSU 
節 552
SETSU 
説 553
SETSU 
接 753
SETSU 
設 754
SETSU 
刹 1392
SETSU 
拙 1594
SETSU 
窃 1595
SETSU 
摂 1596
SHA 
車 
33
SHA 
社 153
SHA 
写 313
SHA 
者 314
SHA 
舎 727
SHA 
謝 728
SHA 
砂 879
SHA 
射 893
SHA 
捨 894
SHA 
赦 1429
SHA 
斜 1430
SHA 
煮 1431
SHA 
遮 1432
SHAKU 
石 
47
SHAKU  
赤 
48
SHAKU  
昔 346
SHAKU 
借 530
SHAKU 
尺 895
SHAKU 
酌 1435
SHAKU 
釈 1436
SHAKU 
爵 1437
SHI 
子 
27
SHI 
四 
28
SHI 
糸 
29
SHI 
止 143
SHI 
市 144
SHI 
矢 145
SHI 
姉 146
SHI 
思 147
SHI 
紙 148
SHI 
自 150
SHI 
仕 301
SHI 
死 302
SHI 
使 303
SHI 
始 304
SHI 
指 305
SHI 
歯 306
SHI 
詩 307
SHI 
次 308
SHI 
士 521
SHI 
氏 522
SHI 
史 523
SHI 
司 524
SHI 
試 525
SHI 
支 717
SHI 
志 718
SHI 
枝 719
SHI 
師 720
SHI 
資 721
SHI 
飼 722
SHI 
示 723
SHI 
至 886
SHI 
私 887
SHI 
姿 888
SHI 
視 889
SHI 
詞 890
SHI 
誌 891
SHI 
茨 1030
SHI 
杮 1115
SHI 
旨 1401
SHI 
伺 1402
SHI 
刺 1403
SHI 
祉 1404
SHI 
肢 1405
SHI 
施 1406
SHI 
恣 1407
SHI 
脂 1408
SHI 
紫 1409
SHI 
嗣 1410
SHI 
雌 1411
SHI 
摯 1412
SHI 
賜 1413
SHI 
諮 1414
SHI 
漬 1737
shiawase 
幸 295
shiba 
芝 1428
shibaraku 
暫 1400
shibaru 
縛 1851
shibomu 
萎 1020
shiboru 
絞 1338
shiboru 
搾 1389
shibui 
渋 1463
SHICHI 
七   32
SHICHI 
質 726
shigarami 
柵 1386
shigeru 
繁 1874
shigeru 
茂 2020
shigoku 
扱 1012
shii 
椎 1734
shiiru 
強 111
shiitageru 
虐 1201
shika 
鹿 1420
shikaru 
然 557
shikaru 
叱 1422
SHIKI 
色 162
SHIKI 
式 311
SHIKI 
識 725
SHIKI 
織 742
shiku 
敷 1915
shima 
島 380

Readings Index  673
shimaru 
閉 979
shimeru 
絞 1338
shimeru 
湿 1425
shimeru 
占 1598
shimeru 
締 1753
shimesu 
示 723
shimiru 
染 928
shimo 
下 
7
shimo 
霜 1645
shimobe 
僕 1985
SHIN 
森   40
SHIN 
心 164
SHIN 
新 165
SHIN 
親 166
SHIN 
申 338
SHIN 
身 339
SHIN 
神 340
SHIN 
真 341
SHIN 
深 342
SHIN 
進 343
SHIN 
臣 543
SHIN 
信 544
SHIN 
針 916
SHIN 
伸 1533
SHIN 
芯 1534
SHIN 
辛 1535
SHIN 
侵 1536
SHIN 
津 1537
SHIN 
唇 1538
SHIN 
娠 1539
SHIN 
振 1540
SHIN 
浸 1541
SHIN 
紳 1542
SHIN 
診 1543
SHIN 
寝 1544
SHIN 
慎 1545
SHIN 
審 1546
SHIN 
震 1547
SHIN 
薪 1548
SHIN 
請 1584
shina 
品 405
shinobu 
忍 1825
shinu 
死 302
shio 
塩 451
shio 
潮 952
shioreru 
萎 1020 
shira 
白 
69
shiraberu 
調 369
shiri 
尻 1532
shirizoku 
退 769
shirizokeru 
斥 1586
shiro 
城 914
shirogane 
銀 281
shiroi 
白 
69
shiru 
知 186
shiru 
汁 1460
shirushi 
印 448
shirushi 
標 599
shirushi 
徴 1722
shita 
下 
7
shita 
舌 755
shitagau 
従 902
shitashii 
親 166
shitataru 
滴 1757
shitau 
慕 1950
SHITSU 
室 152
SHITSU 
失 529
SHITSU 
質 726
SHITSU 
叱 1422
SHITSU 
疾 1423
SHITSU 
執 1424
SHITSU 
湿 1425
SHITSU 
嫉 1426
SHITSU 
漆 1427
SHITSU 
膝 1891
shizuka 
静 548
shizuku 
滴 1757
shizumaru 
鎮 1733
shizumu 
沈 1729
SHO 
書 159
SHO 
所 328
SHO 
暑 329
SHO 
初 535
SHO 
処 907
SHO 
署 908
SHO 
諸 909
SHO 
庶 1480
SHO 
緒 1481
SHŌ 
小 
38
SHŌ 
正 
43
SHŌ 
生 
44
SHŌ 
青 
45
SHŌ 
少 160
SHŌ 
声 170
SHŌ 
星 171
SHŌ 
昭 331
SHŌ 
消 332
SHŌ 
商 333
SHŌ 
章 334
SHŌ 
勝 335
SHŌ 
相 348
SHŌ 
松 536
SHŌ 
笑 537
SHŌ 
唱 538
SHŌ 
焼 539
SHŌ 
象 540
SHŌ 
照 541
SHŌ 
賞 542
SHŌ 
省 546
SHŌ 
清 547
SHŌ 
招 735
SHŌ 
承 736
SHŌ 
証 737
SHŌ 
性 745
SHŌ 
政 746
SHŌ 
精 748
SHŌ 
将 911

674  Readings Index
SHŌ 
傷 912
SHŌ 
障 913
SHŌ 
装 933
SHŌ 
升 1485
SHŌ 
召 1486
SHŌ 
匠 1487
SHŌ 
床 1488
SHŌ 
抄 1489
SHŌ 
肖 1490
SHŌ 
尚 1491
SHŌ 
昇 1492
SHŌ 
沼 1493
SHŌ 
宵 1494
SHŌ 
症 1495
SHŌ 
祥 1496
SHŌ 
称 1497
SHŌ 
渉 1498
SHŌ 
紹 1499
SHŌ 
訟 1500
SHŌ 
掌 1501
SHŌ 
晶 1502
SHŌ 
焦 1503
SHŌ 
硝 1504
SHŌ 
粧 1505
SHŌ 
詔 1506
SHŌ 
奨 1507
SHŌ 
詳 1508
SHŌ 
彰 1509
SHŌ 
憧 1510
SHŌ 
衝 1511
SHŌ 
償 1512
SHŌ 
礁 1513
SHŌ 
鐘 1514
SHŌ 
井 1575
SHŌ 
姓 1576
SHŌ 
荘 1629
SHOKU 
色 162
SHOKU 
食 163
SHOKU 
植 337
SHOKU 
織 742
SHOKU 
職 743
SHOKU 
拭 1526
SHOKU 
殖 1527
SHOKU 
飾 1528
SHOKU 
触 1529
SHOKU 
嘱 1530
SHU 
手 
34
SHU 
首 155
SHU 
主 315
SHU 
守 316
SHU 
取 317
SHU 
酒 318
SHU 
種 531
SHU 
修 730
SHU 
衆 901
SHU 
朱 1439
SHU 
狩 1440
SHU 
殊 1441
SHU 
珠 1442
SHU 
腫 1443
SHU 
趣 1444
SHŪ 
秋 156
SHŪ  
週 157
SHŪ 
州 320
SHŪ  
拾 321
SHŪ 
終 322
SHŪ  
習 323
SHŪ  
集 324
SHŪ 
周 532
SHŪ 
祝 533
SHŪ 
修 730
SHŪ 
収 898
SHŪ 
宗 899
SHŪ 
就 900
SHŪ 
衆 901
SHŪ 
執 1424
SHŪ 
囚 1449
SHŪ 
舟 1450
SHŪ 
秀 1451
SHŪ 
臭 1452
SHŪ 
袖 1453
SHŪ 
羞 1454
SHŪ 
愁 1455
SHŪ 
酬 1456
SHŪ 
醜 1457
SHŪ 
蹴 1458
SHŪ 
襲 1459
SHUKU 
宿 327
SHUKU  
祝 533
SHUKU 
縮 904
SHUKU 
叔 1466
SHUKU 
淑 1467
SHUKU 
粛 1468
SHUN 
春 158
SHUN 
俊 1470
SHUN 
瞬 1471
SHUN 
旬 1472
SHUTSU 
出 
36
SO 
組 178
SO 
想 350
SO 
祖 758
SO 
素 759
SO 
狙 1617
SO 
阻 1618
SO 
租 1619
SO 
措 1620
SO 
粗 1621
SO 
疎 1622
SO 
訴 1623
SO 
塑 1624
SO 
遡 1625
SO 
礎 1626
SO 
曽 1635
SŌ 
早 
52
SŌ 
草 
53
SŌ  
走 179
SŌ 
相 348

Readings Index  675
SŌ 
送 349
SŌ 
想 350
SŌ 
争 558
SŌ 
倉 559
SŌ 
巣 560
SŌ 
総 760
SŌ 
宗 899
SŌ 
奏 930
SŌ 
窓 931
SŌ 
創 932
SŌ 
装 933
SŌ 
層 934
SŌ 
操 935
SŌ 
繰 1253
SŌ 
双 1627
SŌ 
壮 1628
SŌ 
荘 1629
SŌ 
捜 1630
SŌ 
挿 1631
SŌ 
桑1632 
SŌ 
掃 1633
SŌ 
曹 1634
SŌ 
曽 1635
SŌ 
爽 1636
SŌ 
喪 1637
SŌ 
痩 1638
SŌ 
葬 1639
SŌ 
僧 1640
SŌ 
遭 1641
SŌ 
槽 1642
SŌ 
踪 1643
SŌ 
燥 1644
SŌ 
霜 1645
SŌ 
騒 1646
SŌ 
藻 1647
SŌ 
贈 1649
soba 
側 562
sodatsu 
育 247
sode 
袖 1453
soko 
底 576
sokonau 
損 768
SOKU 
足   54
SOKU 
息 351
SOKU 
速 352
SOKU 
束 561
SOKU 
側 562
SOKU 
則 764
SOKU 
測 765
SOKU 
塞 1379
SOKU 
即 1650
SOKU 
促 1651
SOKU 
捉 1652
somaru 
染 928
somuku 
背 967
SON 
村 
55
SON 
孫 565
SON 
損 768
SON 
存 938
SON 
尊 939
SON 
遜 1655
sonaeru 
具 284
sonaeru 
備 795
sonaeru 
供 850
sonemu 
嫉 1426
sono 
園 
84
sora 
空 
17
soreru 
逸 1029
sōrō 
候 504
soru 
反 393
sosogu 
注 365
sosonokasu 
唆 1367
sosoru 
唆 1367
soto 
外 
96
SOTSU 
卒 564
SOTSU 
率 767
sou 
沿 832
sou 
添 1763
sozoro 
漫 2006
SU 
子 
27
SU 
守 316
su 
州 320
su 
巣 560
SU 
素 759
su 
酢 1388
SU 
須 1556
SŪ 
数 168
SŪ 
枢 1568
SŪ 
崇 1569
sube 
術 732
suberu 
統 780
suberu 
滑 1132
subete 
総 760
sudeni 
既 1177
sue 
末 615
sueru 
据 1570
sugata 
姿 888
sugi 
過 659
sugi 
杉 1571
sugiru 
過 659
sugoi 
凄 1580
sugu 
直 192
sugureru 
優 995
sugureru 
傑 1278
sugureru 
秀 1451
SUI 
水 
42
SUI 
酸 715
SUI 
垂 918
SUI 
推 919
SUI 
吹 1557
SUI 
炊 1558
SUI 
帥 1559
SUI 
粋 1560
SUI 
衰 1561
SUI 
酔 1562
SUI 
遂 1563
SUI 
睡 1564
SUI 
穂 1565

676  Readings Index
SUI 
誰 1685
suji 
筋 854
suki 
好 503
suki 
隙 1275
sukoshi 
少 160
sukoyaka 
健 499
suku 
透 1781
sukunai 
少 160
sukuu 
救 480
sumi 
炭 361
sumi 
隅 1247
sumi 
墨 1986
sumiyaka 
速 352
sumu 
住 325
sumu 
済 881
sumu 
澄 1724
SUN 
寸 920
suna 
砂 879
sunawachi 
即 1650
suppai 
酸 715
suppai 
酢 1388
suru 
刷 514
suru 
為 1017
suru 
擦 1395
suru 
摩 1996
surudoi 
鋭 1044
susamajii 
凄 1580
suso 
裾 1572
susumeru 
勧 1156
susumeru 
薦 1610
susumu 
進 343
sutaru 
廃 1837
suteru 
捨 894
suteru 
棄 1183
suu 
吸 849
suwaru 
座 880
suzu 
鈴 2106
suzushii 
涼 2089
T
ta 
田   63
TA 
多 180
TA 
太 181
TA 
他 354
TA 
汰 1656
taba 
束 561
tabaneru 
束 561
taberu 
食 163
tabi 
度 377
tabi 
旅 433
-tachi 
達 568
tada 
唯 2037
tadachi 
直 192
tadashi 
但 1681
tadashii 
正 
43
tadayou 
漂 1896
taeru 
絶 756
taeru 
堪 1150
taeru 
耐 1662
tagai 
互 1310
tagayasu 
耕 699
TAI 
大 
56
TAI  
太 181
TAI 
体 182
TAI 
台 183
TAI 
対 356
TAI 
待 357
TAI 
代 358
TAI 
帯 566
TAI 
隊 567
TAI 
退 769
TAI 
貸 770
TAI 
態 771
TAI 
耐 1662
TAI 
怠 1663
TAI 
胎 1664
TAI 
泰 1665
TAI 
堆 1666
TAI 
袋 1667
TAI 
逮 1668
TAI 
替 1669
TAI 
滞 1670
TAI 
戴 1671
taira 
平 411
taka 
高 132
takai 
高 132
takara 
宝 983
take 
竹 
58
take 
岳 1124
take 
丈 1515
taki 
滝 1672
takigi 
薪 1548
TAKU 
度 377
TAKU 
宅 940
TAKU 
択 1673
taku 
炊 1558
TAKU 
沢 1674
TAKU 
卓 1675
TAKU 
拓 1676
TAKU 
託 1677
TAKU 
濯 1678
takumi 
巧 1317
takumi 
匠 1487
takuwaeru 
貯 572
takuwaeru 
蓄 1704
tama 
玉 
15
tama 
球 275
tama 
魂 1362
tama 
弾 1694
tama 
璧 1941
tama 
霊 2108
tamago 
卵 1000
tamashii 
魂 1362
tamau 
給 481
tamawaru 
賜 1413
tame 
為 1017
tameru 
矯 1226

Readings Index  677
tamesu 
試 525
tami 
民 619
tamotsu 
保 808
TAN 
炭 361
TAN 
短 362
TAN 
反 393
TAN 
単 569
TAN 
担 941
TAN 
探 942
TAN 
誕 943
TAN 
堪 1150
TAN 
但 1681
TAN 
丹 1686
TAN 
旦 1687
TAN 
胆 1688
TAN 
淡 1689
TAN 
嘆 1690
TAN 
端 1691
TAN 
綻 1692
TAN 
鍛 1693
TAN 
壇 1695
TAN 
貪 1809
tana 
店 195
tana 
棚 1684
tanagokoro 
掌 1501
tane 
種 530
tani 
谷 135
tani 
渓 1262
tanomu 
頼 2067
tanoshii 
楽 
98
taoreru 
倒 1777
tare 
誰 1685
tareru 
垂 918
tariru 
足 
54
tashika 
確 664
tasukeru 
助 330
tatakau 
戦 555
tatakau 
闘 1794
tatami 
畳 1519
tatamu 
畳 1519
tate 
縦 903
tate 
盾 1474
tatematsuru 
奉 1954
tateru 
建 498
tatoeru 
例 635
tatoeru 
喩 2033
tatsu 
立 
77
TATSU 
達 568
tatsu 
経 685
tatsu 
絶 756
tatsu 
断 773
tatsu 
裁 882
tatsu 
竜 2081
tattobu 
尚 1491
tattoi 
貴 847
tattoi 
尊 939
tawamureru 
戯 1192
tawara 
俵 796
tayori 
便 610
tayoru 
頼 2067
tazuneru 
訪 984
tazuneru 
尋 1554
tazusawaru 
携 1265
te 
手 
34
TEI 
体 182
TEI 
弟 194
TEI 
丁 367
TEI 
定 371
TEI 
庭 372
TEI 
低 575
TEI 
底 576
TEI 
停 577
TEI 
提 776
TEI 
程 777
TEI 
呈 1741
TEI 
廷 1742
TEI 
抵 1743
TEI 
邸 1744
TEI 
亭 1745
TEI 
貞 1746
TEI 
帝 1747
TEI 
訂 1748
TEI 
逓 1749
TEI 
偵 1750
TEI 
堤 1751
TEI 
艇 1752
TEI 
締 1753
TEI 
諦 1754
TEKI 
笛 373
TEKI 
的 578
TEKI 
適 778
TEKI 
敵 779
TEKI 
摘 1756
TEKI 
滴 1757
TEN 
天 
62
TEN 
店 195
TEN 
点 196
TEN 
転 375
TEN 
典 579
TEN 
展 955
TEN 
添 1763
TEN 
填 1764
TEN 
殿 1765
tera 
寺 149
teru 
照 541
TETSU 
鉄 374
TETSU 
迭 1759
TETSU 
哲 1760
TETSU 
徹 1761
TETSU 
撤 1762
TO 
土   64
to 
戸 120
TO 
図 167
TO 
都 376
TO 
登 382
TO 
徒 581
TO 
斗 1766

678  Readings Index
TO 
吐 1767
TO 
妬 1768
TO 
途 1769
TO 
渡 1770
TO 
塗 1771
TO 
賭 1772
tō 
十   35
TŌ 
刀 198
TŌ  
冬 199
TŌ 
当 200
TŌ 
東 201
TŌ 
答 202
TŌ  
頭 203
TŌ 
道 205
TŌ  
投 378
TŌ 
豆 379
TŌ 
島 380
TŌ 
湯 381
TŌ 
登 382
TŌ 
等 383
TŌ 
灯 583
TŌ 
統 780
TŌ 
討 956
TŌ 
党 957
TŌ 
糖 958
TŌ 
納 963
TŌ 
到 1775
TŌ 
逃 1776
TŌ 
倒 1777
TŌ 
凍 1778
TŌ 
唐 1779
TŌ 
桃 1780
TŌ 
透 1781
TŌ 
悼 1782
TŌ 
盗 1783
TŌ 
陶 1784
TŌ 
塔 1785
TŌ 
搭 1786
TŌ 
棟 1787
TŌ 
痘 1788
TŌ 
筒 1789
TŌ 
稲 1790
TŌ 
踏 1791
TŌ 
謄 1792
TŌ 
藤 1793
TŌ 
闘 1794
TŌ 
騰 1795
tobira 
扉 1884
toboshii 
乏 1967
toboso 
枢 1568
tobu 
飛 595
tobu 
跳 1721
tochi 
栃 1803
todokōru 
滞 1670
todoku 
届 959
toge 
刺 1403
tōge 
峠 1799
togeru 
遂 1563
togu 
研 290
tōi 
遠   85
tojiru 
閉 979
tokeru 
融 2046
tokeru 
溶 2053
toki 
時 151
toko 
床 1488
tokoro 
所 328
TOKU 
読 206
toku 
説 553
toku 
解 662
TOKU 
特 586
TOKU 
得 587
TOKU 
徳 783
toku 
釈 1436
TOKU 
匿 1800 
TOKU 
督 1801
TOKU 
篤 1802
tomaru 
止 143
tomaru 
留 824
tomaru 
泊 1845
tomi 
富 801
tomini 
頓 1808
tomo 
友 234
tomo 
共 484
tomo 
供 850
tomo 
侶 2085
tomonau 
伴 1864
tomu 
富 801
tomurau 
弔 1714
TON 
団 772
TON 
屯 1806
TON 
豚 1807
TON 
頓 1808
tonaeru 
唱 538
tonari 
隣 2099
tono 
殿 1765
tora 
虎 1301
toraeru 
捉 1652
toraeru 
捕 1947
tori 
鳥 190
toriko 
虜 2086
toru 
取 317
toru 
採 709
toru 
采 1371
toru 
撮 1394
toru 
執 1424
toru 
把 1831
tōru 
通 193
toshi 
年 
68
tōtoi 
貴 847
tōtoi 
尊 939
totonoeru 
整 345
totonoeru 
調 369
TOTSU 
凸 1804
TOTSU 
突 1805
totsugu 
嫁 1082
tou 
問 418
TSU 
都 376

Readings Index  679
tsu 
津 1537
TSŪ 
通 193
TSŪ 
痛 954
tsubaki 
唾 1658
tsubasa 
翼 2062
tsubo 
坪 1738
tsubu 
粒 2082
tsubusu 
潰 1102
tsuchi 
土 
64
tsuchi 
椎 1734
tsuchikau 
培 1839
tsugeru 
告 507
tsugi 
次 308
tsugu 
次 308
tsugu  
接 753
tsugu 
継 1266
tsugu 
嗣 1410
tsugunau 
償 1512
TSUI 
対 356
TSUI 
追 370
TSUI 
椎 1734
TSUI 
墜 1735
tsuide 
序 734
tsuini 
遂 1563
tsuiyasu 
費 596
tsuka 
束 561
tsuka 
塚 1736
tsukaeru 
仕 301
tsukamaru 
捕 1947
tsukaneru 
束 561
tsukareru 
疲 1882
tsukaru 
漬 1737
tsukasadoru 
司 524
tsukau 
使 303
tsukau 
遣 1289
tsuki　 
月   18
tsukiru 
尽 1550
tsuku 
着 364
tsuku 
付 602
tsuku 
就 900
tsuku 
突 1805
tsuku 
附 1908
tsukue 
机 845
tsukurou 
繕 1616
tsukuru 
作 141
tsukuru 
造 761
tsuma 
妻 708
tsuma- 
爪 1739
tsumamu 
撮 1394
tsumamu 
摘 1756
tsume 
爪 1739
tsumetai 
冷 634
tsumi 
罪 713
tsumu 
積 550
tsumu 
詰 1198
tsumu 
摘 1756
tsumugu 
紡 1976
tsuna 
綱 1341
tsune 
常 740
tsune 
恒 1327
tsuno 
角 
97
tsunoru 
募 1949
tsura 
面 417
tsurai 
辛 1535
tsuraneru 
連 637
tsuranuku 
貫 1148
tsureru 
連 637
tsuru 
弦 1298
tsuru 
釣 1718
tsuru 
鶴 1740
tsurugi 
剣 1282
tsutaeru 
伝 580
tsutanai 
拙 1594
tsutomeru 
努 582
tsutomeru 
務 815
tsutomeru 
勤 853
tsutsu 
筒 1789
tsutsumi 
堤 1751
tsutsumu 
包 611
tsutsushimu 
謹 1239
tsutsushimu 
慎 1545
tsuya 
艶 1059
tsuyoi 
強 111
tsuyu 
露 2122
tsuzuku 
続 563
tsuzumi 
鼓 1307
U
U 
右 
2
U 
雨 
3
U 
羽 
82
U 
有 423
U 
宇 829
ubau 
奪 1683
uchi 
内 207
ude 
腕 2136
ue 
上 
39
ueru 
植 337
ueru 
餓 1093
ueru 
飢 1178
ugoku 
動 384
ui 
憂 2045
uji 
氏 522
ukagau 
伺 1402
ukeru 
受 319
ukeru 
請 1584
uketamawaru 
承 736
uku 
浮 1911
uma 
馬 210
umai 
旨 1401
umareru 
生 
44
umaru 
埋 2000
ume 
梅 592
umi 
海 
94
umu 
生 
44
umu 
産 518
UN 
雲 
83

680  Readings Index
UN 
運 251
unagasu 
促 1651
unaji 
項 1339
une 
畝 1040
uo 
魚 109
ura 
裏 1002
ura 
浦 1041
uramu 
怨 1051
uramu 
憾 1161
uramu 
恨 1358
uranai 
占 1598
urayamu 
羨 1603
ureeru 
愁 1455
ureeru 
憂 2045
uro 
虚 1212
uru 
売 211
uru 
得 587
uruou 
潤 1478
urusai 
煩 1871
urushi 
漆 1427
uruwashii 
麗 2111
ushi 
牛 108
ushinau 
失 529
ushiro 
後 123
usu 
臼 1205
usui 
薄 1849
uta 
歌 
90
uta 
唄 1038
utagau 
疑 848
utage 
宴 1052
utai 
謡 2059
utau 
歌 
90
utau 
謡 2059
utoi 
疎 1622
utsu 
打 355
utsu 
討 956
UTSU 
鬱 1039
utsu 
撃 1276
utsukushii 
美 398
utsuro 
虚 1212
utsuru 
写 313
utsuru 
移 642
utsuru 
映 830
utsuru 
遷 1609
utsuwa 
器 475
uttaeru 
訴 1623
uwa- 
上 
39
uyamau 
敬 856
uyauyashii 
恭 1224
uzu 
渦 1081
uzumaru 
埋 2000
uzutakai 
堆 1666
W
WA 
羽 
82
WA 
話 240
WA 
和 440
wa 
輪 631
wa 
環 1163
waga- 
我 833
WAI 
賄 2131
wakai 
若 896
wakareru 
別 607
wakaru 
分 218
wakatsu 
頒 1872
wake 
訳 993
wakeru 
分 218
waki 
脇 2132
waku 
沸 1926
waku 
湧 2040
WAKU 
惑 2133
waku 
枠 2134
wameku 
喚 1149
WAN 
湾 2135
WAN 
腕 2136
warabe 
童 385
warau 
笑 537
ware 
我 833
wari 
割 838
waru 
割 838
warui 
悪 241
wasureru 
忘 986
wata 
綿 818
watakushi 
私 887
wataru 
渡 1770
watashi 
私 887
waza 
業 278
waza 
技 673
waza 
態 771
wazawai 
災 707
wazawai 
禍 1084
wazuka 
僅 1236
wazurau 
患 1147
wazurau 
煩 1871
Y
ya- 
八 
70
ya 
家 
89
ya 
矢 145
YA 
夜 232
YA 
野 233
ya 
屋 256
YA 
冶 2028
ya 
弥 2029
yabureru 
敗 591
yaburu 
破 788
yado 
宿 327
yadoru 
宿 327
yaiba 
刃 1549
yakko 
奴 1773
YAKU 
役 419
YAKU 
薬 420
yaku 
焼 539
YAKU 
約 621
YAKU 
益 648
YAKU 
訳 993
YAKU 
疫 1045

Readings Index  681
YAKU 
厄 2030
YAKU 
躍 2031
yama 
山 
26
yamai 
病 404
yameru 
辞 528
yami 
闇 2032
yamu 
病 404
yanagi 
柳 2080
yani 
脂 1408
yaru 
遣 1289
yasashii 
易 647
yasashii 
優 995
yaseru 
痩 1638
yashinau 
養 624
yashiro 
社 153
yasui 
安 242
yasui 
易 647
yasumu　 
休 
14
yatou 
雇 1305
yatsu 
奴 1773
yawaragu 
和 440
yawarakai 
柔 1462
yawarakai 
軟 1818
yo- 
四 
28
yo 
夜 232
yo 
世 344
yo 
代 358
YO 
予 425
YO 
余 820
YO 
預 821
YO 
与 2047
YO 
誉 2048
YŌ 
用 235
YŌ  
曜 236
YŌ 
羊 426
YŌ 
洋 427
YŌ 
葉 428
YŌ 
陽 429
YŌ 
様 430
YŌ 
要 623
YŌ 
養 624
YŌ 
容 822
YŌ 
幼 996
YŌ 
妖 2049
YŌ 
庸 2050
YŌ 
揚 2051
YŌ 
揺 2052
YŌ 
溶 2053
YŌ 
腰 2054
YŌ 
瘍 2055
YŌ 
踊 2056
YŌ 
窯 2057
YŌ 
擁 2058
YŌ 
謡 2059
YŌ 
沃 2061
yobu 
呼 867
yogoreru 
汚 1060
yoi 
良 628
yoi 
善 929
yoi 
宵 1494
yoko 
横 255
YOKU 
浴 625
YOKU 
欲 997
YOKU 
翌 998
YOKU 
抑 2060
YOKU 
沃 2061
YOKU 
翼 2062
yome 
嫁 1082
yomu 
読 206
yomu 
詠 1042
yon 
四 
28
yoroi 
甲 1318
yorokobu 
喜 473
yorokobu 
歓 1158
yorokobu 
慶 1268
yoroshii 
宜 1188
yorozu 
万 227
yoru 
夜 232
yoru 
選 556
yoru 
因 643
yoru 
寄 671
yoru 
依 1015
yoru 
拠 1211
yoshi 
由 421
yosoou 
装 933
you 
酔 1562
yowai 
弱 154
yōyaku 
漸 1614
yu 
湯 381
YU 
由 421
YU 
油 422
YU 
遊 424
YU 
輸 819
YU 
喩 2033
YU 
愉 2034
YU 
諭 2035
YU 
癒 2036
YŪ 
右 
2
yū 
夕 
46
YŪ  
友 234
YŪ  
由 421
YŪ 
有 423
YŪ 
遊 424
YŪ 
勇 622
YŪ 
郵 994
YŪ 
優 995
YŪ 
熊 1252
YŪ 
幽 2038
YŪ 
悠 2039
YŪ 
湧 2040
YŪ  
猶 2041
YŪ 
裕 2042
YŪ 
雄 2043
YŪ 
誘 2044
YŪ 
憂 2045
YŪ 
融 2046
yubi 
指 305

682  Readings Index
yudaneru 
委 245
yue 
故 694
YUI 
遺 827
YUI 
唯 2037
yuka 
床 1488
yuki 
雪 174
yuku 
行 131
yuku 
逝 1581
yume 
夢 816
yumi 
弓 107
yureru 
揺 2052
yurui 
緩 1160
yurusu 
許 679
yutaka 
豊 811
yutaka 
裕 2042
yuu 
結 497
yuzuru 
譲 1524
Z
ZA 
座 880
ZA 
挫 1370
ZAI 
材 511
ZAI 
在 711
ZAI 
財 712
ZAI 
罪 713
ZAI 
剤 1383
zama 
態 771
ZAN 
残 520
ZAN 
惨 1397
ZAN 
斬 1399
ZAN 
暫 1400
ZATSU 
雑 714
ZE 
是 1574
ZEI 
税 750
ZEN 
前 177
ZEN 
全 347
ZEN 
然 557
ZEN 
善 929
ZEN 
禅 1613
ZEN 
漸 1614
ZEN 
膳 1615
ZEN 
繕 1616
zeni 
銭 757
ZETSU 
舌 755
ZETSU 
絶 756
ZŌ 
象 540
ZŌ 
雑 714
ZŌ 
造 761
ZŌ 
像 762
ZŌ 
増 763
ZŌ 
蔵 936
ZŌ 
臓 937
ZŌ 
曹 1634
ZŌ 
憎 1648
ZŌ 
贈 1649
ZOKU 
族 353
ZOKU 
続 563
ZOKU 
属 766
ZOKU 
俗 1653
ZOKU 
賊 1654
ZON 
存 938
ZU 
図 167
ZU 
頭 203
ZU 
事 309
ZU 
豆 379
ZUI 
随 1566
ZUI 
髄 1567

  683
1 stroke
一 
1
乙 
1072
2 strokes
九 
13
七 
32
十 
35
人 
41
二 
65
入 
67
八 
70
力 
78
刀 
198
丁 
367
又 
2003
了 
2088
3 strokes
下 
7
口 
22
三 
25
山 
26
子 
27
女 
37
小 
38
上 
39
夕 
46
千 
49
川 
50
大 
56
土 
64
丸 
101
弓 
107
工 
125
才 
139
万 
227
士 
521
久 
676
干 
840
己 
866
寸 
920
亡 
985
及 
1202
巾 
1232
乞 
1346
丈 
1515
刃 
1549
凡 
1993
与 
2047
4 strokes
円 
4
王 
5
火 
8
月 
18
犬 
19
五 
21
手 
34
水 
42
中 
59
天 
62
日 
66
文 
72
木 
73
六 
80
引 
81
牛 
108
元 
117
戸 
120
午 
122
公 
126
今 
138
止 
143
少 
160
心 
164
切 
173
太 
181
内 
207
父 
216
分 
218
方 
223
毛 
230
友 
234
化 
258
区 
282
反 
393
予 
425
欠 
496
氏 
522
不 
600
夫 
601
支 
717
比 
792
仏 
805
尺 
895
収 
898
仁 
917
片 
980
牙 
1090
介 
1094
刈 
1138
凶 
1215
斤 
1233
幻 
1296
互 
1310
勾 
1315
孔 
1316
升 
1485
冗 
1516
井 
1575
双 
1627
丹 
1686
弔 
1714
爪 
1739
斗 
1766
Stroke Count

684  Stroke Count
屯 
1806
匂 
1821
匹 
1893
乏 
1967
厄 
2030
5 strokes
右 
2
玉 
15
左 
24
四 
28
出 
36
正 
43
生 
44
石 
47
田 
63
白 
69
本 
74
目 
76
立 
77
外 
96
兄 
114
古 
115
広 
127
市 
144
矢 
145
台 
183
冬 
199
半 
214
母 
222
北 
224
用 
235
央 
254
去 
276
号 
297
皿 
300
仕 
301
写 
313
主 
315
申 
338
世 
344
他 
354
打 
355
代 
358
皮 
396
氷 
401
平 
411
由 
421
礼 
436
以 
443
加 
453
功 
502
札 
513
史 
523
司 
524
失 
529
必 
597
付 
602
辺 
608
包 
611
末 
615
未 
617
民 
619
令 
633
圧 
641
永 
644
可 
655
刊 
666
旧 
677
句 
683
示 
723
犯 
789
布 
799
弁 
807
穴 
860
冊 
884
処 
907
庁 
950
幼 
996
凹 
1061
瓦 
1091
且 
1135
甘 
1139
丘 
1203
巨 
1209
玄 
1297
巧 
1317
甲 
1318
込 
1355
叱 
1422
囚 
1449
汁 
1460
召 
1486
尻 
1532
斥 
1586
仙 
1597
占 
1598
旦 
1687
奴 
1773
凸 
1804
丼 
1812
尼 
1819
氾 
1861
払 
1925
丙 
1932
矛 
2012
6 strokes
気 
12
休 
14
糸 
29
字 
30
耳 
31
先 
51
早 
52
竹 
58
虫 
60
年 
68
百 
71
名 
75
羽 
82
回 
92
会 
93
交 
128
光 
129
考 
130
行 
131
合 
134
寺 
149
自 
150
色 
162
西 
169
多 
180
地 
184
池 
185
当 
200
同 
204
肉 
209
米 
220
毎 
225
安 
242
曲 
279
血 
288
向 
294
死 
302
次 
308
式 
311
守 
316
州 
320
全 
347
有 
423
羊 
426
両 
434
列 
437
衣 
444
印 
448

Stroke Count  685
各 
462
共 
484
好 
503
成 
545
争 
558
仲 
571
兆 
573
伝 
580
灯 
583
老 
638
因 
643
仮 
656
件 
687
再 
706
在 
711
舌 
755
団 
772
任 
785
宇 
829
灰 
834
危 
844
机 
845
吸 
849
后 
869
至 
886
存 
938
宅 
940
扱 
1012
芋 
1031
汚 
1066
汗 
1140
缶 
1141
企 
1170
伎 
1171
吉 
1196
朽 
1204
臼 
1205
叫 
1216
仰 
1229
刑 
1256
江 
1319
旨 
1401
芝 
1428
朱 
1439
舟 
1450
充 
1461
旬 
1472
巡 
1473
如 
1482
匠 
1487
尽 
1550
迅 
1551
壮 
1628
吐 
1767
弐 
1820
肌 
1854
伐 
1857
帆 
1862
汎 
1863
妃 
1878
伏 
1922
忙 
1968
朴 
1983
妄 
2021
吏 
2074
劣 
2113
7 strokes
花 
9
貝 
10
見 
20
車 
33
赤 
48
足 
54
村 
55
男 
57
町 
61
何 
86
角 
97
汽 
104
近 
113
形 
115
言 
118
谷 
135
作 
141
社 
153
図 
167
声 
170
走 
179
体 
182
弟 
194
売 
211
麦 
213
来 
237
里 
238
医 
244
究 
271
局 
280
君 
285
決 
289
住 
325
助 
330
身 
339
対 
356
投 
378
豆 
379
坂 
394
返 
412
役 
419
位 
445
囲 
446
改 
458
完 
464
希 
470
求 
478
芸 
495
告 
507
材 
511
児 
526
初 
535
臣 
543
折 
551
束 
561
低 
575
努 
582
兵 
606
別 
607
利 
626
良 
628
冷 
634
労 
639
応 
651
快 
661
技 
673
均 
681
災 
707
志 
718
似 
724
序 
734
条 
738
状 
739
判 
790
防 
812
余 
820
我 
833
系 
855
孝 
870
困 
878
私 
887
否 
972
批 
973
忘 
986
乱 
999
卵 
1000
亜 
1007
壱 
1028

686  Stroke Count
戒 
1095
肝 
1142
含 
1167
岐 
1172
忌 
1173
却 
1199
狂 
1217
吟 
1241
串 
1248
迎 
1273
呉 
1311
坑 
1320
抗 
1321
攻 
1322
更 
1323
克 
1351
佐 
1365
沙　 1366
伺 
1402
寿 
1445
秀 
1451
床 
1488
抄 
1489
肖 
1490
伸 
1533
芯 
1534
辛 
1535
吹 
1557
杉 
1571
即 
1650
沙 
1656
妥 
1657
択 
1673
沢 
1674
但 
1681
沖 
1708
沈 
1729
呈 
1741
廷 
1742
那 
1813
尿 
1823
妊 
1824
忍 
1825
把 
1831
伯 
1843
抜 
1858
伴 
1864
阪 
1865
尾 
1888
肘 
1892
扶 
1905
芳 
1952
邦 
1953
坊 
1969
妨 
1970
没 
1988
妙 
2010
冶 
2028
妖 
2049
抑 
2060
沃 
2061
励 
2104
戻 
2105
呂 
2119
弄 
2123
8 strokes
雨 
3
学 
11
金 
16
空 
17
青 
45
林 
79
画 
91
岩 
102
京 
110
国 
136
姉 
146
知 
186
長 
189
直 
192
店 
195
東 
201
歩 
221
妹 
226
明 
228
門 
231
夜 
232
委 
245
育 
247
泳 
252
岸 
267
苦 
283
具 
284
幸 
295
使 
303
始 
304
事 
309
実 
312
者 
314
取 
317
受 
319
所 
328
昔 
346
注 
365
定 
371
波 
387
板 
395
表 
402
服 
408
物 
410
放 
414
味 
415
命 
416
油 
422
和 
440
英 
449
果 
454
芽 
457
官 
465
季 
471
泣 
479
協 
485
径 
492
固 
501
刷 
514
参 
517
治 
527
周 
532
松 
536
卒 
564
底 
576
的 
578
典 
579
毒 
588
念 
590
府 
603
法 
612
牧 
614
例 
635
易 
647
往 
652
価 
657
河 
658
居 
678
券 
688
効 
697
妻 
708
枝 
719
舎 
727
述 
731
招 
735
承 
736
制 
744
性 
745
版 
791

Stroke Count  687
肥 
793
非 
794
武 
802
延 
831
沿 
832
拡 
835
供 
850
呼 
867
刻 
875
若 
896
宗 
899
垂 
918
担 
941
宙 
947
忠 
948
届 
959
乳 
961
拝 
966
並 
977
宝 
983
枚 
988
宛 
1013
依 
1015
炎 
1050
押 
1062
旺 
1063
欧 
1064
殴 
1065
岡 
1068
佳 
1076
苛 
1077
怪 
1096
拐 
1097
劾 
1106
岳 
1124
玩 
1168
奇 
1174
祈 
1175
宜 
1188
拒 
1210
拠 
1211
享 
1218
況 
1219
屈 
1249
茎 
1257
肩 
1279
弦 
1298
股 
1300
虎 
1301
拘 
1324
肯 
1325
昆 
1357
采 
1371
刹 
1392
刺 
1403
祉 
1404
肢 
1405
侍 
1415
邪 
1433
呪 
1446
叔 
1466
尚 
1491
昇 
1492
沼 
1493
炊 
1558
枢 
1568
姓 
1576
征 
1577
斉 
1578
析 
1587
拙 
1594
狙 
1617
阻 
1618
卓 
1675
拓 
1676
抽 
1709
坪 
1738
抵 
1743
邸 
1744
泥 
1755
迭 
1759
妬 
1768
到 
1775
突 
1805
奈 
1814
杯 
1835
拍 
1844
泊 
1845
迫 
1846
彼 
1879
披 
1880
泌 
1894
苗 
1897
怖 
1906
阜 
1907
附 
1908
侮 
1919
沸 
1926
併 
1933
奉 
1954
抱 
1955
泡 
1956
房 
1971
肪 
1972
奔 
1991
枕 
2002
抹 
2004
岬 
2008
免 
2018
茂 
2020
盲 
2022
弥 
2029
拉 
2063
炉 
2120
枠 
2134
9 strokes
音 
6
草 
53
科 
87
海 
94
活 
99
計 
116
後 
123
思 
147
室 
152
首 
155
秋 
156
春 
158
食 
163
星 
171
前 
177
茶 
187
昼 
188
点 
196
南 
208
風 
217
屋 
256
界 
260
客 
270
急 
272
級 
273
係 
286
研 
290
県 
291
指 
305
持 
310
拾 
321
重 
326
昭 
331
乗 
336
神 
340
相 
348
送 
349
待 
357

688  Stroke Count
炭 
361
柱 
366
追 
370
度 
377
畑 
391
発 
392
美 
398
秒 
403
品 
405
負 
406
面 
417
洋 
427
胃 
447
栄 
450
紀 
472
軍 
490
型 
493
建 
498
昨 
512
祝 
533
信 
544
省 
546
浅 
554
単 
569
飛 
595
変 
609
便 
610
約 
621
勇 
622
要 
623
逆 
675
限 
691
故 
694
厚 
698
査 
705
政 
746
祖 
758
則 
764
退 
769
独 
784
保 
808
迷 
817
映 
830
革 
836
巻 
841
看 
842
皇 
871
紅 
872
砂 
879
姿 
888
城 
914
宣 
924
専 
925
泉 
926
洗 
927
染 
928
奏 
930
段 
944
派 
965
背 
967
肺 
968
律 
1003
哀 
1008
威 
1016
為 
1017
畏 
1018
茨 
1030
咽 
1032
姻 
1033
疫 
1045
怨 
1051
卸 
1074
架 
1078
悔 
1098
皆 
1099
垣 
1114
柿 
1115
括 
1128
冠 
1143
軌 
1176
虐 
1201
糾 
1206
峡 
1220
挟 
1221
狭 
1222
契 
1258
孤 
1302
弧 
1303
枯 
1304
侯 
1326
恒 
1327
洪 
1328
荒 
1329
郊 
1330
香 
1331
拷 
1347
恨 
1358
砕 
1372
削 
1385
柵 
1386
咲 
1391
拶 
1393
施 
1406
狩 
1440
臭 
1452
柔 
1462
俊 
1470
盾 
1474
叙 
1483
浄 
1517
拭 
1526
侵 
1536
津 
1537
甚 
1552
帥 
1559
是 
1574
牲 
1579
窃 
1595
荘 
1629
促 
1651
俗 
1653
耐 
1662
怠 
1663
胎 
1664
胆 
1688
衷 
1710
挑 
1715
勅 
1727
珍 
1730
亭 
1745
貞 
1746
帝 
1747
訂 
1748
怒 
1774
逃 
1776
洞 
1796
峠 
1799
栃 
1803
虹 
1822
卑 
1881
眉 
1889
訃 
1909
赴 
1910
封 
1921
柄 
1934
胞 
1957
某 
1973
冒 
1974
勃 
1989
盆 
1994
昧 
1999
幽 
2038
柳 
2080
侶 
2085
厘 
2097
郎 
2124

Stroke Count  689
10 strokes
校 
23
夏 
88
家 
89
記 
105
帰 
106
原 
119
高 
132
紙 
148
時 
151
弱 
154
書 
159
通 
193
馬 
210
員 
248
院 
249
荷 
259
起 
268
宮 
274
庫 
292
根 
298
酒 
318
消 
332
真 
341
息 
351
速 
352
庭 
372
島 
380
配 
388
倍 
389
病 
404
勉 
413
流 
432
旅 
433
案 
442
害 
460
挙 
482
訓 
489
郡 
491
候 
504
航 
505
差 
508
殺 
515
残 
520
借 
530
笑 
537
席 
549
倉 
559
孫 
565
帯 
566
徒 
581
特 
586
梅 
592
粉 
605
脈 
618
浴 
625
料 
629
連 
637
益 
648
桜 
653
恩 
654
格 
663
個 
695
耕 
699
財 
712
師 
720
修 
730
素 
759
造 
761
能 
787
破 
788
俵 
796
容 
822
留 
824
株 
839
胸 
851
降 
873
骨 
877
座 
880
蚕 
885
射 
893
従 
902
純 
906
除 
910
将 
911
針 
916
値 
946
展 
955
討 
956
党 
957
納 
963
俳 
969
班 
970
秘 
974
陛 
978
朗 
1005
挨 
1009
唄 
1038
畝 
1040
浦 
1041
悦 
1046
宴 
1052
翁 
1066
俺 
1073
華 
1079
蚊 
1089
核 
1116
釜 
1136
陥 
1144
既 
1177
飢 
1178
鬼 
1179
恐 
1223
恭 
1224
脅 
1225
恵 
1259
桁 
1277
倹 
1280
兼 
1281
剣 
1282
拳 
1283
軒 
1284
娯 
1312
悟 
1313
貢 
1332
剛 
1348
唆 
1367
挫 
1370
宰 
1373
栽 
1374
剤 
1383
索 
1387
桟 
1396
恣 
1407
脂 
1408
疾 
1423
酌 
1435
殊 
1441
珠 
1442
袖 
1453
准 
1475
殉 
1476
徐 
1484
宵 
1494
症 
1495
祥 
1496
称 
1497
辱 
1531
唇 
1538
娠 
1539
振 
1540
浸 
1541
陣 
1553
粋 
1560
衰 
1561
凄 
1580

690  Stroke Count
逝 
1581
脊 
1588
隻 
1589
扇 
1599
栓 
1600
租 
1619
捜 
1630
挿 
1631
桑 
1632
捉 
1652
泰 
1665
託 
1677
恥 
1696
致 
1697
畜 
1702
逐 
1703
秩 
1705
酎 
1711
捗 
1728
朕 
1731
逓 
1749
哲 
1760
途 
1769
倒 
1777
凍 
1778
唐 
1779
桃 
1780
透 
1781
胴 
1797
匿 
1800
悩 
1829
剥 
1847
畔 
1866
般 
1867
疲 
1882
被 
1883
姫 
1895
浜 
1900
敏 
1903
浮 
1911
紛 
1927
哺 
1946
捕 
1947
俸 
1958
倣 
1959
峰 
1960
砲 
1961
剖 
1975
紡 
1976
埋 
2000
眠 
2011
娘 
2014
冥 
2015
耗 
2023
紋 
2027
竜 
2081
倫 
2098
涙 
2101
烈 
2114
恋 
2116
浪 
2125
脇 
2132
11 strokes
魚 
109
強 
111
教 
112
黄 
133
黒 
137
細 
140
週 
157
雪 
174
船 
175
組 
178
鳥 
190
野 
233
理 
239
悪 
241
球 
275
祭 
299
終 
322
習 
323
宿 
327
商 
333
章 
334
深 
342
進 
343
族 
353
第 
359
帳 
368
笛 
373
転 
375
都 
376
動 
384
部 
407
問 
418
貨 
455
械 
459
救 
480
健 
499
康 
506
菜 
509
産 
518
唱 
538
清 
547
巣 
560
側 
562
停 
577
堂 
584
得 
587
敗 
591
票 
598
副 
604
望 
613
陸 
627
移 
642
液 
649
眼 
669
基 
670
寄 
671
規 
672
許 
679
経 
685
険 
689
現 
692
混 
704
採 
709
授 
729
術 
732
常 
740
情 
741
責 
751
接 
753
設 
754
率 
767
断 
773
張 
775
貧 
798
婦 
800
務 
815
略 
823
異 
826
域 
828
郷 
852
済 
881
視 
889
捨 
894
推 
919
盛 
921
窓 
931
探 
942
著 
949
頂 
951
脳 
964
閉 
979
訪 
984

Stroke Count  691
密 
990
訳 
993
郵 
994
欲 
997
翌 
998
尉 
1019
萎 
1020
逸 
1029
淫 
1034
陰 
1035
菓 
1080
崖 
1107
涯 
1108
殻 
1117
郭 
1118
掛 
1126
喝 
1129
渇 
1130
乾 
1145
勘 
1146
患 
1147
貫 
1148
亀 
1180
偽 
1189
菊 
1195
脚 
1200
虚 
1212
菌 
1234
惧 
1243
偶 
1245
掘 
1250
啓 
1260
掲 
1261
渓 
1262
蛍 
1263
舷 
1299
控 
1333
梗 
1334
頃 
1356
婚 
1359
痕 
1360
紺 
1361
彩 
1375
斎 
1376
埼 
1382
崎 
1384
惨 
1397
斬 
1399
鹿 
1420
執 
1424
赦 
1429
斜 
1430
蛇 
1434
釈 
1436
寂 
1438
羞 
1454
渋 
1463
淑 
1467
粛 
1468
庶 
1480
渉 
1498
紹 
1499
訟 
1500
剰 
1518
紳 
1542
酔 
1562
崇 
1569
据 
1570
惜 
1590
戚 
1591
旋 
1601
措 
1620
粗 
1621
掃 
1633
曹 
1634
曽 
1635
爽 
1636
唾 
1658
堆 
1666
袋 
1667
逮 
1668
脱 
1682
淡 
1689
窒 
1706
彫 
1716
眺 
1717
釣 
1718
陳 
1732
偵 
1750
添 
1763
悼 
1782
盗 
1783
陶 
1784
豚 
1807
貪 
1809
梨 
1815
軟 
1818
捻 
1827
粘 
1828
婆 
1833
排 
1836
培 
1839
陪 
1840
舶 
1848
販 
1868
描 
1898
猫 
1899
瓶 
1904
符 
1912
偏 
1944
崩 
1962
堀 
1990
麻 
1995
猛 
2024
唯 
2037
悠 
2039
庸 
2050
粒 
2082
隆 
2083
涼 
2089
猟 
2090
陵 
2091
累 
2102
12 strokes
森 
40
雲 
83
絵 
95
間 
100
場 
161
晴 
172
朝 
191
答 
202
道 
205
買 
212
番 
215
飲 
250
運 
251
温 
257
開 
261
階 
262
寒 
263
期 
269
軽 
287
湖 
293
港 
296
歯 
306
集 
324
暑 
329
勝 
335
植 
337
短 
362
着 
364
湯 
381
登 
382
等 
383

692  Stroke Count
童 
385
悲 
397
筆 
400
遊 
424
葉 
428
陽 
429
落 
431
街 
461
覚 
463
喜 
473
給 
481
極 
488
景 
494
結 
497
最 
510
散 
519
順 
534
焼 
539
象 
540
然 
557
隊 
567
達 
568
貯 
572
博 
593
飯 
594
費 
596
満 
616
無 
620
量 
630
営 
645
過 
659
賀 
660
検 
690
減 
693
証 
737
税 
750
絶 
756
測 
765
属 
766
貸 
770
提 
776
程 
777
統 
780
備 
795
評 
797
富 
801
復 
803
報 
810
貿 
813
割 
838
揮 
846
貴 
847
勤 
853
筋 
854
敬 
856
裁 
882
策 
883
詞 
890
就 
900
衆 
901
善 
929
創 
932
装 
933
尊 
939
痛 
954
晩 
971
補 
981
棒 
987
握 
1011
嵐 
1014
偉 
1021
椅 
1022
詠 
1042
越 
1047
媛 
1053
援 
1054
奥 
1067
渦 
1081
葛 
1131
喚 
1149
堪 
1150
換 
1151
敢 
1152
棺 
1153
款 
1154
閑 
1155
幾 
1181
棋 
1182
欺 
1190
喫 
1197
距 
1213
御 
1214
暁 
1230
琴 
1235
遇 
1246
隅 
1247
圏 
1285
堅 
1286
雇 
1305
喉 
1335
慌 
1336
硬 
1337
絞 
1338
項 
1339
詐 
1368
酢 
1388
傘 
1398
紫 
1409
滋 
1416
軸 
1421
湿 
1425
煮 
1431
循 
1477
掌 
1501
晶 
1502
焦 
1503
硝 
1504
粧 
1505
詔 
1506
畳 
1519
殖 
1527
診 
1543
尋 
1554
須 
1556
遂 
1563
随 
1566
婿 
1582
疎 
1622
訴 
1623
喪 
1637
痩 
1638
葬 
1639
堕 
1659
惰 
1660
替 
1669
棚 
1684
弾 
1694
遅 
1698
貼 
1719
超 
1720
椎 
1734
塚 
1736
堤 
1751
渡 
1770
塔 
1785
搭 
1786
棟 
1787
痘 
1788
筒 
1789
鈍 
1810
廃 
1837
媒 
1841
斑 
1869
蛮 
1876
扉 
1884
普 
1913

Stroke Count  693
幅 
1923
雰 
1928
塀 
1935
遍 
1945
募 
1949
傍 
1977
帽 
1978
喩 
2033
愉 
2034
湧 
2040
猶 
2041
裕 
2042
雄 
2043
揚 
2051
揺 
2052
絡 
2068
痢 
2075
硫 
2084
塁 
2103
裂 
2115
廊 
2126
惑 
2133
湾 
2135
腕 
2136
13 strokes
園 
84
遠 
85
楽 
98
新 
165
数 
168
電 
197
話 
240
暗 
243
意 
246
感 
264
漢 
265
業 
278
詩 
307
想 
350
鉄 
374
農 
386
福 
409
路 
439
愛 
441
塩 
451
試 
525
辞 
528
照 
541
節 
552
戦 
555
続 
563
置 
570
腸 
574
働 
585
解 
662
幹 
667
義 
674
禁 
682
群 
684
鉱 
700
罪 
713
資 
721
飼 
722
準 
733
勢 
747
損 
768
墓 
809
豊 
811
夢 
816
預 
821
絹 
861
源 
864
署 
908
傷 
912
蒸 
915
聖 
922
誠 
923
暖 
945
賃 
953
腹 
975
幕 
989
盟 
991
裏 
1002
彙 
1023
違 
1024
煙 
1055
猿 
1056
鉛 
1057
虞 
1071
嫁 
1082
暇 
1083
禍 
1084
靴 
1085
雅 
1092
塊 
1100
楷 
1101
慨 
1109
蓋 
1110
該 
1111
較 
1119
隔 
1120
滑 
1132
褐 
1133
勧 
1156
寛 
1157
頑 
1169
棄 
1183
毀 
1184
詰 
1198
嗅 
1207
僅 
1236
愚 
1244
窟 
1251
傾 
1264
携 
1265
継 
1266
詣 
1267
隙 
1275
傑 
1278
嫌 
1287
献 
1288
遣 
1289
誇 
1306
鼓 
1307
碁 
1314
溝 
1340
傲 
1349
債 
1377
催 
1378
塞 
1379
歳 
1380
載 
1381
搾 
1389
嗣 
1410
慈 
1417
嫉 
1426
腫 
1443
愁 
1455
酬 
1456
奨 
1507
詳 
1508
飾 
1528
触 
1529
寝 
1544
慎 
1545
腎 
1555
睡 
1564
裾 
1572
跡 
1592
摂 
1596
煎 
1602
羨 
1603
腺 
1604
詮 
1605
践 
1606

694  Stroke Count
禅 
1613
塑 
1624
僧 
1640
賊 
1654
滞 
1670
滝 
1672
嘆 
1690
痴 
1699
稚 
1700
蓄 
1704
跳 
1721
艇 
1752
溺 
1758
填 
1764
殿 
1765
塗 
1771
督 
1801
頓 
1808
漠 
1850
鉢 
1855
搬 
1870
煩 
1871
頒 
1872
微 
1890
蜂 
1963
飽 
1964
睦 
1984
滅 
2017
誉 
2048
溶 
2053
腰 
2054
裸 
2064
雷 
2066
酪 
2069
慄 
2079
虜 
2086
鈴 
2106
零 
2107
廉 
2117
賂 
2121
楼 
2127
賄 
2131
14 strokes
歌 
90
語 
124
算 
142
読 
206
聞 
219
鳴 
229
駅 
253
銀 
281
鼻 
399
様 
430
緑 
435
練 
438
管 
466
関 
467
旗 
474
漁 
483
察 
516
種 
531
静  
548
説  
553
歴 
636
演 
650
慣 
668
境 
680
構 
701
際 
710
雑 
714
酸 
715
精 
748
製 
749
銭 
757
総 
760
像 
762
増 
763
態 
771
適 
778
銅 
781
徳 
783
複 
804
綿 
818
領 
825
閣 
837
疑 
848
誤 
868
穀 
876
誌 
891
磁 
892
障 
913
層 
934
認 
962
暮 
982
模 
992
維 
1025
隠 
1036
寡 
1086
箇 
1087
概 
1112
駆 
1242
熊 
1252
綱 
1341
酵 
1342
豪 
1350
酷 
1352
獄 
1353
魂 
1362
雌 
1411
漆 
1427
遮 
1432
需 
1447
銃 
1464
塾 
1469
緒 
1481
彰 
1509
誓 
1583
箋 
1607
漸 
1614
遡 
1625
遭 
1641
憎 
1648
遜 
1655
駄 
1661
奪 
1683
端 
1691
綻 
1692
嫡 
1707
徴 
1722
漬 
1737
摘 
1756
滴 
1757
稲 
1790
寧 
1826
髪 
1856
罰 
1859
閥 
1860
碑 
1885
漂 
1896
腐 
1914
蔑 
1943
慕 
1950
貌 
1979
僕 
1985
墨 
1986
膜 
2001
慢 
2005
漫 
2006
蜜 
2009
銘 
2016
網 
2025
誘 
2044
瘍 
2055
踊 
2056
辣 
2070

Stroke Count  695
僚 
2092
瑠 
2100
暦 
2112
漏 
2128
15 strokes
線 
176
横 
255
談 
363
調 
369
箱 
390
億 
452
課 
456
器 
475
賞 
542
選 
556
熱 
589
標 
599
養 
624
輪 
631
確 
664
潔 
686
賛 
716
質 
726
敵 
779
導 
782
編 
806
暴 
814
遺 
827
劇 
858
権 
862
熟 
905
諸 
909
蔵 
936
誕 
943
潮 
952
論 
1006
慰 
1026
影 
1043
鋭 
1044
謁 
1048
閲 
1049
縁 
1058
稼 
1088
餓 
1093
潰 
1102
潟 
1127
歓 
1158
監 
1159
緩 
1160
畿 
1185
輝 
1186
儀 
1191
戯 
1192
窮 
1208
緊 
1237
勲 
1254
慶 
1268
憬 
1269
稽 
1270
撃 
1276
稿 
1343
駒 
1354
撮 
1394
暫 
1400
摯 
1412
賜 
1413
餌 
1418
趣 
1444
潤 
1478
遵 
1479
憧 
1510
衝 
1511
縄 
1520
嘱 
1530
審 
1546
震 
1547
穂 
1565
請 
1584
潜 
1608
遷 
1609
槽 
1642
踪 
1643
諾 
1679
誰 
1685
鋳 
1712
駐 
1713
嘲 
1723
澄 
1724
墜 
1735
締 
1753
徹 
1761
撤 
1762
踏 
1791
罵 
1834
輩 
1838
賠 
1842
箸 
1853
範 
1873
盤 
1877
罷 
1886
膝 
1891
賓 
1901
敷 
1915
膚 
1916
賦 
1917
舞 
1920
噴 
1929
墳 
1930
憤 
1931
幣 
1936
弊 
1937
蔽 
1938
餅 
1939
舗 
1948
褒 
1965
頬 
1982
撲 
1987
摩 
1996
魅 
2007
黙 
2026
憂 
2045
窯 
2057
履 
2076
璃 
2077
慮 
2087
寮 
2093
霊 
2108
16 strokes
親 
166
頭 
203
館 
266
橋 
277
整 
345
薬 
420
機 
476
積 
550
録 
640
衛 
646
興 
702
築 
774
燃 
786
輸 
819
激 
859
憲 
863
鋼 
874
樹 
897
縦 
903
操 
935
糖 
958
奮 
976
緯 
1027
憶 
1069
穏 
1075
壊 
1103

696  Stroke Count
懐 
1104
諧 
1105
骸 
1113
獲 
1121
憾 
1161
還 
1162
凝 
1231
錦 
1238
薫 
1255
憩 
1271
賢 
1290
錮 
1308
衡 
1344
墾 
1363
錯 
1390
諮 
1414
儒 
1448
獣 
1465
壌 
1521
嬢 
1522
錠 
1523
薪 
1548
醒 
1585
薦 
1610
膳 
1615
濁 
1680
壇 
1695
緻 
1701
諦 
1754
賭 
1772
篤 
1802
曇 
1811
濃 
1830
薄 
1849
縛 
1851
繁 
1874
避 
1887
壁 
1940
縫 
1966
膨 
1980
謀 
1981
磨 
1997
麺 
2019
諭 
2035
融 
2046
擁 
2058
謡 
2059
頼 
2067
隣 
2099
隷 
2109
鍊 
2118
17 strokes
講 
703
謝 
728
績 
752
厳 
865
縮 
904
優 
995
覧 
1001
曖 
1010
臆 
1070
嚇 
1122
轄 
1134
環 
1163
擬 
1193
犠 
1194
矯 
1226
謹 
1239
謙 
1291
鍵 
1292
購 
1345
懇 
1364
擦 
1395
爵 
1437
醜 
1457
償 
1512
礁 
1513
繊 
1611
鮮 
1612
燥 
1644
霜 
1645
戴 
1671
濯 
1678
鍛 
1693
聴 
1725
謄 
1792
瞳 
1798
謎 
1816
鍋 
1817
頻 
1902
闇 
2032
翼 
2062
療 
2094
瞭 
2095
齢 
2110
18 strokes
顔 
103
曜 
236
題 
360
観 
468
験 
500
類 
632
額 
665
織 
742
職 
743
簡 
843
難 
960
臨 
1004
穫 
1123
顎 
1125
鎌 
1137
韓 
1164
騎 
1187
襟 
1240
繭 
1293
顕 
1294
鎖 
1369
瞬 
1471
繕 
1616
礎 
1626
騒 
1646
贈 
1649
懲 
1726
鎮 
1733
藤 
1793
闘 
1794
藩 
1875
覆 
1924
璧 
1941
癖 
1942
翻 
1992
癒 
2036
濫 
2071
藍 
2072
離 
2078
糧 
2096
19 strokes
願 
469
鏡 
486
識 
725
警 
857
臓 
937
韻 
1037
艶 
1059
繰 
1253
鶏 
1272
鯨 
1274
璽 
1419
蹴 
1458
髄 
1567
瀬 
1573
藻 
1647
覇 
1832

Stroke Count  697
爆 
1852
譜 
1918
簿 
1951
霧 
2013
羅 
2065
麗 
2111
麓 
2130
20 strokes
議 
477
競 
487
護 
696
響 
1227
懸 
1295
鐘 
1514
譲 
1524
醸 
1525
籍 
1593
騰 
1795
欄 
2073
21 strokes
艦 
1165
顧 
1309
鶴 
1740
魔 
1998
躍 
2031
露 
2122
22 strokes
驚 
1228
襲 
1459
籠 
2129
23 strokes
鑑 
1166
29 strokes
鬱 
1039


APPENDIX
&
BIBLIOGRAPHY

700  
Appendix
Similarly Shaped Elements Easily Confused
1.  The Two Determinatives ⼡ and ⼢
 
OBI 
bronze 
seal 
夂 
 
 
 
夊 
 
 
Note: 夂 does not occur at any period as an independent graph, only as an element 
within a compound graph. Th e OBI form above for 夂 (listed by Gu), of very low 
frequency of occurrence, is best regarded as provisional. Th e above table is based on 
information in MS1995:v1:284-5, GY2008:39, and KJ1970:58.  
Th e issue of distinction between 夂 (determinative no. 34 in the traditional system 
of 214) and 夊 (determinative no. 35 in the same system) can be confusing. Th is 
is due partly, no doubt, to similarity in shape. Th ere is also the diffi  culty of clearly 
interpreting the original meanings. Such diffi  culties surrounding 夂 and 夊 are 
perhaps the reason why the diff erence in shape between the two is not maintained 
clearly in the authoritative Kangxi zidian (1716) compiled on Imperial command 
(Peking Palace printed version [early 19th century]), though they are still treated as 
separate determinatives. In the modern period, 夊 was printed for a while in a way 
which helped distinguish it from 夂 (see, for example, the traditional form of 愛 
441 ‘love’), but that distinctiveness has been lost in the standard computerized fonts.

Appendix  701
In this book the general trend in interpretation of these two elements has been 
followed, and so the basic meaning of 夂 (determinative 34) is provisionally taken 
to be ‘descend, come down’, or ‘descending foot’, while 夊 (determinative 35) is taken 
as ‘drag the foot, walk slowly’. 
2.  ⽉ as a Component Shape
Th e characters 肺 ‘lung(s)’ 968, 朕 ‘(Imperial) We’ 1731, and 朗 ‘fi ne, cheerful’ 1005 
all feature the element written in the same shape as 月‘moon’ in modern usage, but 
in these three cases 月 only carries the meaning ‘moon’ in 朗. In 肺, the left -hand 
element is the abbreviated form of 肉 in compound graphs (such as 肺), and in 朕 
the left -hand element is an abbreviation of 舟 ‘boat’ in compound graphs. Accord-
ing to Qiu, the merging and confusion of the shape of these elements in compound 
graphs can be seen as early as the clerical script stage. In the earlier part of the mod-
ern period, distinctions used to be made in the traditional forms of Ming printed 
font to refl ect the earlier usage, but those distinctions were dispensed with through 
the process of script simplifi cation. Th e correct interpretation of 月 in a particular 
case is explained in the individual entries.
3.  壬 as a Component Shape
Th e characters 任 785 ‘duty’ and 廷 1742 ‘court, government offi  ce’ both share 壬 
as a right-hand element in modern texts. In 任, the right-hand element (meaning 
‘spindle’) retains its etymologically correct shape (middle horizontal stroke longer 
than bottom horizontal). In 廷, though, the right-hand was originally slightly diff er-
ent in shape, i.e., 
 (originally meaning ‘person standing on earthen mound’, lead-
ing to the extended sense ‘surpass others’), with the middle horizontal stroke shorter 
than the horizontal stroke beneath it to represent 土 ‘earth’. Just as in the case of 月 
as a component shape (see the immediately preceding section), this subtle distinc-
tion in shape is no longer supported in standard fonts for Japanese: only the shape 
壬 is supported. Explanation regarding the distinction is included in individual en-
tries for relevant graphs. 
4.  ⼔ as a Component Shape
In Japanese usage, the character 化 ‘change’ 258, for example, is written with匕as the 
right-hand element, but the traditional form has 化. Originally, at the OBI stage as 
an independent character 
 was a pictograph of a person upside down, while 匕 
originally depicted a person’s withered/bent leg, or (by analogy based on the shape) 
a ladle. In standard Japanese usage, though, the two shapes have been regularized 
as 匕. Explanation regarding the above distinction is included in individual entries 
for relevant graphs.

702  
Bibliography
Note: Th is list is arranged in alphabetical order which follows the abbreviated for-
mat (author initials followed by year of publication) used in the author references 
found in the main body of this book. Th e works in Japanese are all published in 
Tokyo; works in Chinese are published in Beijing unless shown otherwise.
AS2007 
Schuessler, A., ABC Etymological Dictionary of Old Chinese. University 
of Hawai’i Press, 2007.
BK1957 
Karlgren, B., Grammata Serica Recensa. Reprint, Museum of Far Eastern 
Antiquities, Stockholm, 1972.
CS2000 
Seeley, C., A History of Writing in Japan. Paperback edition, University 
of Hawai’i Press, 2000.
DJ2003 
DeFrancis, J. (ed.), ABC Chinese-English Comprehensive Dictionary. 
University of Hawai’i Press, 2003.
DJ2009 
Xu Shen, Shuowen jiezi. Annotated parallel modern Chinese edition 
[Wenbai duizhao Shuowen jiezi] by Ding Jianxin. 3 vols. + CD. Wanjuan 
chuban gongsi, 2009.
EB1974 
Encyclopedia Britannica (ed.), Encyclopedia Britannica. 15th edition, 29 
vols.
FC1974 
Fushimi Chūkei, Shodō daijiten. 2 vols. Kadokawa shoten, 1974.
FC1977 
Fushimi Chūkei, Shodō jiten. Kadokawa shoten, 1977.
GY2008 
Gu Yankui, Hanzi yuanliu zidian. Yuwen chubanshe, 2008.
HJ1999 
Haig, J., Th e Compact Nelson Japanese-English Character Dictionary. 
Charles E. Tuttle, Tokyo, 1999.
IJ2013 
Ikeda, J. (ed.), A Guide to Reading and Writing Japanese. 4th edition. 
Charles E. Tuttle, 2013, Tokyo.
KH1988 
Henshall, K.G., A Guide to Remembering Japanese Characters. Charles E. 
Tuttle, Tokyo, 1988.
KJ1970 
Katō Jōken, Kanji no kigen. Kadokawa shoten, 1970.
KJ1985 
Katō Jōken, Kanji no kigen. Kadokawa shoten, 1985.

Bibliography  703
KZ2001 
Zhang Yushu et al., Kangxi zidian (1716). Electronic version (CD) of 
Peking Palace 1826 printed edition. Personal Media Co., 2001, Tokyo.
MR1945 
Mathews, R. Mathew’s Chinese-English Dictionary. Rev. ed. Harvard 
University Press, 1945
MR2007 
Ma Rusen, Yinxu jiaguxue. Shanghai daxue chubanshe, 2007, Shanghai.
MS1995 
Mizukami Shizuo, Kōkotsu kinbun jiten. 2 vols. + Supplement (Bekkan). 
Yūzankaku, 1995.
MT1960 
Morohashi Tetsuji, Dai kanwa jiten. 13 vols. Taishūkan, 1960.
MT1993 
Matsumaru Michio & Takashima Ken’ichi (ed.), Kōkotsu moji jishaku 
sōran. Tōkyō daigaku tōyō bunka kenkyūjo, 1993.
OT1968 
Ogawa Tamaki et al., Shinjigen. Kadokawa shoten, 1968.
QX2000 
Qiu Xigui, Chinese Writing. English translation by G.L Mattos and J. 
Norman of Wenzixue gaiyao. Early China Special Monograph Series No. 
4. Th e Society for the Study of Early China and Th e Institute of East 
Asian Studies, University of California, Berkeley, 2000.
SH1991 
Atarashii kokugo hyōki handobukku. Sanseido, 1991.
SK1984 
Sano Kōichi, Mokkan jiten. Yūzankaku, 1984.
SK1996 
Satō Kiyoji (ed.), Kanji hyakka daijiten. Meiji shoin, 1996.
SS1984 
Shirakawa Shizuka, Jitō. Heibonsha, 1984.
TT1962 
Tsien Tsuen-Hsuin, Written on Bamboo and Silk. University of Chicago 
Press, 1962.
TA1965 
Tōdō Akiyasu, Kanji gogen jiten. Gakutōsha, 1965.
WB1994 
Boltz, W.G. Th e Origin and Early Development of the Chinese Writing 
System. American Oriental Series Volume 78. American Oriental Soci-
ety, 1994.
WD1974 Dobson, W.A.C.H., A Dictionary of the Chinese Particles. University of 
Toronto Press, 1974.
WL2010 
Tushuo xishuo hanzi daquanji bianweihui (ed.), Tushuo xishuo hanzi da-
quanji. Zhongguo huaqiao chubanshe, 2010.
WM1974 Wang Meng-Ou, Hanjian wenzi leibian. Taibei, 1974.
WT2003 
Watanabe Toshirō (ed.), Kenkyusha’s New Japanese-English Dictionary. 
5th ed. Kenkyusha, 2003.
YK1976 
Yamada Katsumi, Kanji no gogen. Kadokawa, 1975.
ZY2009 
Zhang Yushu et al., Kangxi zidian (1716). Modern print edition by Ping 
Tao (chief ed.), Xiandai Kangxi zidian. 4 vols. Wanjuan chuban gongsi, 
2009.
ZZ1671 
Zhang Zilie, Zhengzitong (1671). Facsimile edition, 2 vols. Guoji wenhua 
chubanshe, 1996.

ABOUT TUTTLE 
“Books to Span the East and West”
Our core mission at Tuttle Publishing is to create books which bring people 
together one page at a time. Tuttle was founded in 1832 in the small New 
England town of Rutland, Vermont (USA). Our fundamental values remain 
as strong today as they were then—to publish best-in-class books informing 
the English-speaking world about the countries and peoples of Asia. The 
world has become a smaller place today and Asia’s economic, cultural and 
political inﬂ uence has expanded, yet the need for meaningful dialogue and 
information about this diverse region has never been greater. Since 1948, 
Tuttle has been a leader in publishing books on the cultures, arts, cuisines, 
languages and literatures of Asia. Our authors and photographers have won 
numerous awards and Tuttle has published thousands of books on subjects 
ranging from martial arts to paper crafts. We welcome you to explore the 
wealth of information available on Asia at www.tuttlepublishing.com.

